(3) The Islamic Principles in the Sermons of the Farewell Hajj
==============================================================

We have previously proved that the Holy Prophet (S)’s Sermon of
\`Arafat, in the Farewell Hajj, included his prediction of the coming of
the Twelve Imams as well as his recommendations in this regard. Let us
now discuss the contents of the other five sermons; Sermon of Makkah on
the Day of Tarwiyah, Sermon of the Second Day, Sermon of al-Khayf Masjid
on the Day of Nahr and Sermon of Ghadir.

Although narrations have communicated, confusedly, a few reports about
the contents of these sermons, it is possible to infer that the Holy
Prophet (S), through these sermons, provided all the affairs needed by
his people after him. These sermons included statements dealing with the
following five bases:

**1. The basis of the humanitarian equity:**

- The principle of the humanitarian unity among humankind and the
eradication of the racial discrimination.  
 - The principle of good treatment of women and the avoidance of
wronging them.

**2. The basis of the unity of the** ***Ummah*****:**

- The principle of eradicating the traces, practices and regulations of
the pre-Islamic era that are in violation of the Islamic laws.  
 - The principle of Muslims’ fraternity and equity.  
 - The principle of the respect for private ownership and the illegality
of violating Muslims’ properties.  
 - The principle of regarding Muslims’ souls and the illegality of
shedding their blood.  
 - The principle of respecting Muslims’ honors and dignity and the
illegality of abusing each other.  
 - The principle of maintaining properties and souls of those who speak
out the creed of Islam (shahadah).  
 - The principle of sealing Prophethood with the Holy Prophet (S) and
sealing the nations with his *Ummah*.  
 - The principle of the Holy Prophet (S)’s being the witness on his
people in the Hereafter and their joining him on the Divine Pool.  
 - The principle of the necessity of the accuracy in acting and the
admonishing against committing the insignificant actions that lead to
deviation.  
 - The principle of warning against forging lies against the Holy
Prophet (S) and the insistence on investigating whatever is ascribed to
him.

**3. The basis of the unity of the Islamic law -Shari\`ah- and the
Muslims’ culture.**

- The principle of fulfilling the trusts.  
 - The laws of the heritage.  
 - The laws of the blood money and retaliation.  
 - The laws of the rites of the Hajj; “From me, you should learn the
rites.”

**4. The basis of the political affairs and the leadership after the
Holy Prophet (S):**

- The principle of the prediction of the advent of Twelve Imams from the
Ahl al-Bayt.  
 - The principle of the importunate adherence to the Qur’an and the Ahl
al-Bayt—the two weighty things.  
 - The principle of nominating Imam \`Ali (a.s.) as the next leader of
the *Ummah* and the first of the Twelve Imams.  
 - The principle of keeping on performing the obligatory rites and the
compliance with the leaders.  
 - The principle of immortalizing the plot of Quraysh and Kinanah on the
blockade of the Hashimites.  
 - The principle of warning people of Quraysh against playing the tyrant
after the departure of the Holy Prophet (S).  
 - The principle of warning the Sahabah against breaking faith and
struggling on power.

**5. The basis of punishment of the dissenters against the Holy Prophet
(S)’s course:**

- The principle of cursing those who ascribe themselves to other than
their fathers or masters.

To present detailed discussions about these bases and principles is
impossible; therefore, let us refer to some models of these holy sermons
before we refer to the topics and examples related.  
 It is quite clear that the Holy Prophet (S) referred to each of these
bases and principles on many occasions before the Farewell Hajj. As a
matter of fact, they, together with the six sermons, form an inseparably
coalescing topic. The Holy Prophet (S)’s wording is a revelation that
completes and explains each other. In every topic, that wording
formulates a perfect doctrinal and legislative unity that contributes in
the constructing of the divine comprehensive edifice of Islam.

The Humanitarian Equity
-----------------------

This basis is too evident to require any further discussion. Previously,
we have referred to a number of related texts of the Holy Prophet (S)’s
sermons.

Models of the Holy Prophet (S)’s Sermons in the Farewell Hajj
-------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Shu\`bah al-Harrani -died in AH 350- records the following on page
30 of Tuhaf al-\`Uqul:

### The Holy Prophet (S)’s Sermon in the Farewell Hajj

In the Farewell Hajj, The Prophet said:  
 All praise is due to Allah. We praise Him, seek His aid and
forgiveness, and repent to Him. We seek His guard against the evils of
our wrongdoings and ourselves. No one will be able to lead astray those
whom Allah guides and no one will be able to guide those whom Allah
causes to deviate. I declare that there is no god but Allah exclusively
without any associate, and declare that Muhammad is His servant and
messenger.  
 O slaves of Allah, I command you to adhere to piety and urge you to
obey Him. I begin with Allah Who is the source of everything good.  
 O people, listen to what I will say to you. I do not know whether I
will meet you the next year in this situation or not.  
 O people, your souls and honors are as holy as this day in this country
among you up to the day on which you will meet your Lord. Have I
conveyed? O Allah, be the witness.  
 He whom is trusted with a deposit should fulfill his trust. The usury
of Jahiliyah (pre-Islamic era) is revoked. The first usury that I will
revoke is that of al-\`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib.  
 The revenge of the Jahiliyah is revoked. The first revenge that I will
revoke is that of \`Amir ibn Rabi\`ah ibn al-Harith ibn \`Abd
al-Muttalib.  
 The whole traditions of the Jahiliyah are canceled except the custody
–of the Holy House of Allah- and the watering (of the pilgrims).  
 Retaliation is the judge of the premeditated murder. The ruling of
quasi-murder, such as those whom are killed by a stick or a stone
unintentionally, is one hundred camels –to be paid as blood money-. Any
additional number is a part of Jahiliyah.  
 O people, Satan despaired of being obeyed on this land, but he accepted
to be obeyed through your insignificant evildoings.  
 O people, “Postponing (of the sacred month) is only an addition in
unbelief, wherewith those who disbelieve are led astray, violating it
one year and keeping it sacred another, that they may agree in the
number (of months) that Allah has made sacred. 9/37” The time has
rotated as same as the day on which Allah created the heavens and the
earth. “Surely the number of months with Allah is twelve months in
Allah’s ordinance since the day when He created the heavens and the
earth, of these four being sacred; 9/36” three are consecutive and one
is odd. They are Dhu’l-Qa\`dah, Dhu’l-Hijjah, Muharram and Rajab, which
falls between Jumada and Sha\`ban. Have I conveyed? O Allah, be the
witness.  
 O people, your women enjoy obligations that are imposed upon you, and
you enjoy obligations that are imposed upon them. The obligations that
are imposed upon them are that they should never take anybody to your
beds, should never let anybody that you hate enter your houses before
they take your permission and should never commit any evildoing. If they
do so, Allah has permitted you to prevent them, leave them alone in the
sleeping-places and beat them, but not so harmfully. If they desist and
obey you, you should assume their livelihood and clothing adequately.
You have taken them by the trust of Allah and they have been lawful to
you by the Book of Allah. Therefore, fear Allah in the questions
regarding women and advise each other for their good.  
 O people, “the believers are each others’ brothers. 49/10” It is
illicit for anyone to behave in (someone’s) money before he obtains the
owner’s permission. Have I conveyed? O Allah, be the witness.  
 After me, do not return to atheism by killing each other. I have left
among you what will protect you against deviation if you only adhere to.
It is the Book of Allah and my family—my household. O Allah, be the
witness.  
 O people, your Lord is One and your father is one. You all are from
Adam and Adam was created from dust. “The best of you to Allah is the
most Almighty Allah–fearing. 49/13” Except by means of piety, no Arab
person is preferred to a non-Arab. Have I conveyed? The attendant must
convey this to the absent.  
 O people, Allah has constituted the share of every heir. It is illicit
for any testator to will more than one third of the estate. The baby is
for the owner of the bed, and the share of the prostitute is the stone.
The curse of Allah, the angels and all of people be upon those who claim
of being the sons of other than their fathers and those who claim of
being the subjects of other than their masters.[^1] Allah will not
accept from such individuals any excuse or compensation.  
 Peace and Allah’s mercy and blessings be upon you.

The following is quoted from al-Kafi 1/403:  
 … A man from Quraysh related the following: With Sufyan al-Thawri, I
went to Ja\`far ibn Muhammad and found him on his pack animal. Sufyan
addressed to him, “O Abu-\`Abdullah! Would you please relate to us the
Holy Prophet (S)’s Sermon in al-Khayf Masjid?” The Imam apologized since
he had already ridden, and promised he would answer Sufyan’s question as
soon as he would be back. “I adjure you by your kinship to the Messenger
of Allah (a.s.) to relate it to me,” insisted Sufyan. The Imam rode off.
Sufyan asked for a pen and a paper to record the Imam’s wording. The
Imam spoke, “In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is
the sermon of the Holy Prophet (S) addressed in al-Khayf Masjid:  
 Allah may bloom the servants who will listen and understand my words
and convey them to the absent.  
 O people! The witness should carry this to the absent. A bearer of
knowledge may happen to be illiterate and a bearer of knowledge may
happen to carry it to the more knowledgeable.  
 Hearts of Muslims should never act unfaithfully in three matters;
sincere performance of Allah’s duties, giving advice to Muslims’ Imams
and committing to their congruity. Their congruity is binding.  
 The believers are brothers of equal blood. They are one hand against
their enemies. The least among them can bear their situation.”  
 After he had recorded these statements, Sufyan recited them before the
Imam. Hence, Abu-\`Abdullah rode the animal and went.  
 Halfway, I told Sufyan that Abu-\`Abdullah had bound him with an
everlasting duty. “What is that?” asked Sufyan. “It is the three things
in which a Muslim should never act unfaithfully,” I said, “Sincere
performance of Allah’s duties is a clear matter. Regarding giving advice
to Muslims\` Imams, who are those Imams? Are they Muawiyah ibn
Abi-Sufyan, Yazid ibn Muawiyah, Marwan ibn al-Hakam and the other rulers
while even the collective prayers led by them are invalid? About
committing to their congruity, who are those congruous people? Are they
the deferrers who believe that persons who did not perform a single
obligatory prayer and did not fast on a single day and did not perform
the obligatory bathing and demolished the Ka\`bah and married their
mothers are bearing the same degree of faith born by Archangel Gabriel
and Archangel Michael? Or are they the fatalists who believe that
Satan’s desire can be active while Allah’s will cannot be? Or are they
the Harurites who deny \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib and decide his atheism? Or
are they the Jahmites who claim that faith is to know Allah only?”  
 As he became perplexed, Sufyan asked me an explanation of the Holy
Prophet (S)’s saying reported by Abu-\`Abdullah (a.s.). “\`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib, by Allah, is the only Imam before whom we are commissioned to
give advice. And the congruity stands for his household,” I answered.  
 Sufyan tore the paper and asked me to keep it secret.

\`Ali ibn Ibrahim, in Tafsir 1/171, writes down the following:  
 The Holy Prophet (S) performed the Farewell Hajj, which was the tenth
since he immigrated to al-Madinah. In Mina, he delivered the following
speech:  
 “All praise and thanks be to Allah. O people! Listen and understand my
words. I cannot guarantee whether I will meet you the next year. Do you
know which day is the holiest?” “It is this day,” answered people. “Do
you know which month is the holiest?” asked he. “It is this month,”
answered they. “Do you know which land is the holiest?” asked he. “It is
this land,” answered they. “Your souls, estate and honors are as holy
among you as this day in this month on this land until you meet your
Lord Who will examine your deeds. O people! Have I conveyed?” “Yes, you
have,” shouted they. “O Allah! Be the witness,” commented the Holy
Prophet (S). After a while, he added, “Every regulation, heresy, revenge
and debt that was founded in Jahiliyah is under my feet. None is
preferable to another except by criteria of piety. Have I conveyed?”

“Yes, you have,” declared they. “O Allah! Be the witness,” said the Holy
Prophet (S) and then added, “Every usury that was concluded in the
Jahiliyah is now revoked. The first usury I am to revoke is al-\`Abbas
ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib’s. Every item of revenge that was in the Jahiliyah
is now revoked. The first revenge I am to revoke is Rabi\`ah’s. Have I
conveyed?” “Yes, you have,” shouted they. “O Allah! Be the witness,”
said the Holy Prophet (S) and then added, “Satan despaired of being
obeyed on this land, but he has been pleased to be obeyed through your
insignificant acts.

If Satan is obeyed, he is then worshipped. O people! Muslims are
brothers of each other. It is illicit for a Muslim neither to shed the
blood of another Muslim nor to have from his estate unless satisfaction
is obtained. I am ordered to fight people until they say: There is no
god but Allah. As they speak this statement out, they will protect their
souls and estate except in the rightful ways. The Lord will be their
judge. O people! Have I conveyed?” “Yes, you have,” shouted they. “O
Allah! Be the witness,” said the Holy Prophet (S) and added, “O people!
Keep my wording and you will harvest its benefits later on. Perceive my
sayings and you will be prosperous. Break not your faith after me, and
be not unbelievers by beheading each other for sake of worldly affairs.

If you do so, and you will do it, you will find me in a phalanx between
Archangels Gabriel and Michael striking your faces with the sword (For a
while, the Holy Prophet (S) paused, turning to the right. Then, he
continued,) or \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, Allah willing. I am leaving among
you the two things that will enduringly protect you against deviation.
They are the Book of Allah and my people—my household. The Knower of
subtleties—the Aware has informed me that these two things will never
separate until they join me on the Divine Pool. Whoever accedes to them
will be saved and whoever opposes them will perish. Have I conveyed?”
“Yes, you have,” shouted they. “O Allah! Be the witness,” said the Holy
Prophet (S) and added, “Some men among you will be precluded from
joining me on the Divine Pool. I will then say that they are my
companions. I will be answered, ‘You do not know what they committed
after you.’ I will comment: Far away! Far away!”  
 On the last day of Tashriq, Allah revealed the Surah of al-Nasr (No.
110). The Holy Prophet (S) understood that he would leave this life in a
short time. He declared that people should gather in al-Khayf Masjid for
the prayer. When people came there, he addressed, “All praise and thanks
be to Allah. Allah may bloom a servant who will listen to and understand
my words and convey them to the absent.

It happens that a bearer of knowledge be illiterate and a bearer of
knowledge may carry it to a more knowledgeable one. Muslim’s hearts
should never act unfaithfully in three matters; sincere performance of
Allah’s duties, giving advice to Muslims’ Imams and committing to their
congruity. Their congruity is binding. The believers are brothers of
equal blood. The least among them can bear their situation.

They are one hand against their enemies. O people! I am leaving among
you the two weighty things.” “What are the two weighty things, Allah’s
messenger?” wondered people. The Holy Prophet (S) explained, “They are
the Book of Allah and my people—my household. The Knower of
subtleties—the All-aware has informed me that these two will never
separate until they join me on the Divine Pool. Their joining will be
like the joining of the forefingers of my two hands, not the joining of
the forefinger and the next one since a little space may be left.”  
 Some of the Sahabah spoke to each other that Muhammad intended to
dedicate the leadership to his household. Four of them traveled to
Makkah and entered the Ka\`bah where they concluded an agreement on
preventing the Ahl al-Bayt from holding any position of leadership as
soon as Muhammad would be dead or assassinated. Hence, Allah revealed to
His Prophet (S), “Or have they settled an affair? Then, surely, We are
the settlers. Or do they think that We do not hear what they conceal and
their secret discourses? Aye! And our messengers with them write down.
43/79-80”

Al-Bukhari in al-Sahih 5/126 records the following:  
 Abu-Bakrah narrated that the Holy Prophet said, “Time has rotated as
same as the first day on which the Lord created the heavens and the
earth. A year is of twelve months four of which are holy—three are
successive; Dhu’l-Qa\`dah, Dhu’l-Hijjah and Muharram, and the fourth is
Rajab, which falls between Jumada and Sha\`ban. Which month is this?”
“Allah and His Messenger are the most knowledgeable,” we answered. The
Holy Prophet (S) paused for a considerable while that we thought he
would call another name to that month. “Is it not Dhu’l-Hijjah?” asked
he. “Yes, it is,” we replied. “Which land is this?” asked he. “Allah and
His Messenger are the most knowledgeable,” we answered. The Prophet (S)
paused for a considerable while that we thought he would call another
name to it. “Is it not al-Baldah?” asked the Holy Prophet (S). “Yes, it
is,” we replied. “What kind of day is today?” asked the Holy Prophet
(S). “Allah and His Messenger are the most knowledgeable,” we answered.
The Prophetstopped talking for a considerable while that we thought he
would call another name to it. “Is it not the Nahr – immolation- Day?”
asked the Holy Prophet (S). “Yes, it is,” we answered. The Prophetspoke,
“Your souls and estate (Muhammad added that the Holy Prophet (S) might
said, ‘and your honor…’) are as holy among you as this day in this month
on this land. You will meet your Lord and He will examine your deeds.
After me, return not to deviation by beheading each other. The witness
should inform the absent. It may happen that an indirect receiver is
more committed than the direct.”

It is noticeable that the narrator uses ‘deviation’ instead of
‘unbelief’, which was mentioned in the other ways of narration.  
 The following is quoted from al-Bukhari, al-Sahih 1/24:  
 … The Holy Prophetsat on the back of his camel while a man was catching
to its bridle. “What kind of day is today?” asked he. We stopped talking
for a considerable while that we thought that he would call another name
to that day. “Is it not the Nahr Day?” asked he. “Yes, it is,” we
replied. “Which month are we in?” asked he. We stopped talking for a
considerable while that we thought he would call another name to that
month. “Is it not Dhu’l-Hijjah?” asked he. “Yes, it is,” we replied. The
Holy Prophet (S) added, “Your souls, estate and honor are as holy among
you as this day in this month on this land. The witness should inform
the absent. A witness may convey to a more committed one.”

The following is quoted from Muslim, al-Sahih 4/41:  
 …The Holy Prophet (S) descended the mountain and addressed, “Your souls
and estate are as holy among you as this day in this month on this land.
Every affair of the Jahiliyah is being under my feet. Revenge of the
Jahiliyah is revoked. The first revenge that I will revoke is Rabi\`ah
ibn al-Harith’s revenge that is ours. He was suckling in the quarter of
Banu-Sa\`d and the tribe of Hudhayl killed him. Usury of Jahiliyah is
revoked. The first usury I want to revoke is ours, which is al-\`Abbas
ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib’s. Watch your Lord during treating your women. You
have taken them by the trust of Allah. And you have consummated their
privates by the word of Allah. Your rights imposed upon them are that
they should not permit anyone you dislike to sit on your furniture (i.e.
enter your houses). If they do so, you are permitted to beat them not
heavily. Their rights imposed upon you are that you save their alimony
and clothing in an acceptable way. I am leaving among you what will
protect you against deviation as long as you commit yourselves to. It is
the Book of Allah. You will be asked about me. What will you answer?”
“We confess that you have conveyed, accomplished and advised,” shouted
people. As he raised his forefinger to the heavens and shook it towards
people, the Holy Prophet said three times, “O Allah! Be the witness.”

Ibn Majah records the same previous narration with an addition. The
following is recorded by al-Hakim in al-Mustadrak 1/77:  
 The Holy Prophet (S) delivered a speech saying, “O People! I will
precede you to the Divine Pool. It is a pool of a distance as same as
that between Kufah and the Black Stone -of the Ka\`bah-. His vessels are
as many as stars. As some people from my nation will approach, a man
will come out and occlude them from being close to me. Another group
will be occluded, too. None will escape but a few group that are like
scattered animals in a cattle.” “Will I be one of them, Allah’s Prophet
(S)?” asked Abu-Bakr. “No, you will not,” answered the Holy Prophet (S),
“They will be people from the coming generations who will move
backward.”  
 [Al-Hakim comments:] According to the criteria of the two
Shaykhs -Muslim and al-Bukhari-, this is an authentic narration. Yet,
they did not record it. Al-Hajjaj ibn Muhammad has reported it from
al-Layth.

Ibn Majah, in al-Sunan 2/1016, records the following:  
 … \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud narrated that while the Holy Prophet (S) was
on the back of his she-camel in \`Arafat, he said, “Do you realize which
day, month and land are these?” “These are holy day, month and land,”
answered they. “Your estate and souls are as holy among you as this
month, land and day,” said the Holy Prophet (S) and then went on, “I
will precede you to the Divine Pool and I will take pride in you before
the other nations. Blacken not my face. I will save some people and some
will be taken away from me. I will say, ‘O Lord! Those are my
companions.’ But I will be answered: You do not know what they did after
you.” According to Majma\` al-Zawa\`id, this is an authentic report.

Ibn Majah, too, records the following in al-Sunan 2/1300:  
 Title: After Me, Return Not To Atheism By Beheading Each Other:  
 Jarir ibn \`Abdullah narrated that during the Farewell Hajj, the Holy
Prophet (S) asked people to keep silent. He then said, “After me, return
not to atheism by beheading each other.”  
 Ibn \`Umar narrated that the Holy Prophetstated, “Woe is you! After me,
return not to atheism by beheading each other.”  
 Al-Sannaj al-Ahmasi narrated that the Holy Prophetstated, “I will
precede you to the Divine Pool. I will take pride in you among the other
nations. After me, do not fight each other.”  
 According to Majma\` al-Zawa\`id, this is an authentic report with
trustful narrators.

The following is recorded by al-Tirmidhi in al-Sunan 2/62:  
 …Abu-Umamah narrated that during the Farewell Hajj, I heard the Holy
Prophetsaying, “Beware of your duty to Allah and perform the five
–obligatory- prayers and fast in that month –of Ramadan- and defray the
Zakat and comply with your leaders and you will be taken to the Paradise
of your Lord.”  
 Abu-Umamah declared that he had heard this saying from the Holy Prophet
(S) when he was thirty years old.  
 Abu-\`Isa decides this narration as qualified with a rather doubtful
narrator. Others, however, have decided it as authentic.

In al-Musnad by Ahmad ibn Hanbal 5/412, the following is recorded:  
 … A man from the Sahabah narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) was on the
back of his red she-camel when he asked, ‘Do you realize what kind of
day is today?’ ‘It is the Nahr Day,’ answered we. ‘You are true,’
replied the Holy Prophet (S), ‘It is the Grand Hajj Day. Which month is
it?’ ‘It is Dhu’l-Hijjah,’ answered we. ‘You are true,’ commented the
Holy Prophet (S), ‘It is the palatial month of Allah. Do you know which
land is this?’ ‘It is the Holy Precinct,’ answered we. ‘You are true,’
stated the Holy Prophet (S), ‘Your souls and estate are as holy among
you as this day in this month on this land. (Or: as same as the
sanctification of this day, month and land.) I will precede you to the
Divine Pool. I will look at you taking pride among the other nations.
Blacken not my face. You have seen and listened to me. You will be asked
about me. He who deliberately forges lies against me will have sought
himself a place in Hellfire. I will save some people and others will be
taken away from me. I will say: O Lord! They are my companions. But I
will be answered: You do not know what they did after you.

The following is quoted from Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 3/265:  
 Title: Sermons of the Hajj:  
 Abu-Harrah al-Raqqashi narrated the following on the authority of his
uncle: In the middle of the Tashriq days, I was catching the riddle of
the Holy Prophet (S)’s she-camel. He then said, “O people! Do you
realize which day, month and land are these?” “They are holy day, holy
month and holy land,” answered people. “Your souls, estate and honors
are as holy among you as this day in this month on this land until the
day on which you will meet your Lord. Listen to me and you will live.
Wrong not each other. Wrong not each other. Wrong not each other. It is
illicit for any one of you to have from a Muslim’s property unless
satisfaction is obtained. Every blood and estate of Jahiliyah should be
under my feet until the Resurrection Day. The first revenge I want to
revoke is Rabi\`ah ibn Al-Harith ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib who belonged to
us. He was a baby at the tribe of Layth when the tribe of Hudhayl killed
him. Every usury that was in Jahiliyah is revoked. The Exalted Lord has
ordered that the first usury to be revoked is that of al-\`Abbas ibn
\`Abd al-Muttalib who belongs to us. You possess your capital neither
wronging nor wronged. Time has rotated as same as the first day on which
the Lord created the heavens and the earth. ‘Surely, the number of
months with Allah is twelve months in Allah’s ordinance since the day
when He created the heavens and the earth, of these four being sacred.
That is the right reckoning; therefore, wrong not each other during
them.’ After me, return not to atheism by beheading each other. Satan
has despaired of being obeyed by the performers of prayers; but he is
working on creating antagonism among you. Fear Allah as you treat your
women. They are restrained at you. They have rights imposed upon you and
you have rights imposed upon them. The rights imposed upon them are that
they should not permit any one to take your places in your beds and they
are not allowed to permit any one you dislike to enter your houses. If
you expect desertion of a woman, you should admonish, desert in the bed
and then beat ineffectively. Their rights are that you should save their
alimony and clothing. You have taken them by the trust of Allah and you
have consummated their privates by the word of Allah. He who had a trust
should deliver it to the depositor.”  
 The Holy Prophet (S) then opened his hand and said, “Have I conveyed?
Have I conveyed? The witness should inform the absent. An indirect
receiver may be more receptive than a direct hearer.”

Relating this narration, Abu-Dawud mentions the statements of beating
women only while Ahmad (ibn Hanbal) and Abu-Harrah al-Raqqashi record it
completely. Abu-Dawud, however, decides its authenticity and Ibn Mu\`in
considers it as doubtful. One of the narrators is \`Ali ibn Zayd about
whom experts have noted many points of weakness.  
 Abu-Nadrah narrated the following on the authority of a man who heard
the Holy Prophet (S)’s sermon addressed in the middle of the Tashriq
days:  
 The Holy Prophetstated, “O people! Your Lord is One and your father is
one, too. An Arab individual should not be preferred to a non-Arab and a
black should not be preferred to a white except by criteria of piety.
Have I conveyed?” “Yes! The Messenger of Allah has conveyed,” people
shouted. “What kind of day is today?” asked the Holy Prophet (S). “It is
a holy day,” people answered. “Which land is this?” asked the Holy
Prophet (S). “It is a holy land,” people shouted. “Allah the Exalted has
made your souls and estate --the Holy Prophet (S) might have added ‘and
honors’ to his statement-- as holy as this day in this month on this
land. Have I conveyed?” said the Holy Prophet (S). “Yes! The messenger
of Allah has conveyed,” people admitted. “The witness should inform the
absent,” ordered the Holy Prophet (S).

To a series of authentic narrators, Ahmad relates the previous report in
al-Musnad 5/72.  
 Ibn \`Umar narrated that when this Surah was revealed to the Holy
Prophet (S) in Mina in the middle of the Tashriq days, he recognized the
imminence of his death. He rode his animal, al-Qaswa\`, and stood among
people in al-\`Aqabah. A great number of Muslims encompassed him. He
then said, “All praise and thanks be to Allah. O people! Any revenge
that was in Jahiliyah is annulled. The first revenge to be annulled is
the blood of Rabi\`ah ibn al-Harith who belonged to us. The tribe of
Hudhayl killed him when he was a baby at the tribe of Layth. Likewise,
any usury that was concluded in the Jahiliyah is revoked. The first
usury to be revoked is that of al-\`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib who
belongs to us. O people! Time has rotated as same as it was when the
Lord created the heavens and the earth. The number of months with Allah
is twelve, four of which are holy. They are Rajab, which falls between
Jumada and Sha\`ban, then come Dhu’l-Qa\`dah, Dhu’l-Hijjah and Muharram.
That is the right reckoning; therefore, wrong not each other during
them. ‘Postponing of the sacred months is only an addition in unbelief,
wherewith those who disbelieve are led astray, violating it one year and
keeping it sacred another, that they may agree the number of months that
Allah has made sacred.’ They were violating Safar a year and keeping
Muharram sacred the other. That is the postponing of the sacred months.
O people! He who had a trust should deliver it to the depositor. O
people! Satan despaired of being obeyed on this land in the last of time
but he has been pleased to be obeyed in your insignificant deeds. Take
care of your religion against your insignificant deeds. O people! Women
are in your hands. You have taken them by the trust of Allah and
consummated their privates by the word of Allah. You have rights imposed
upon them and they have rights imposed upon you. Within your rights is
that they should not let any one take your places in your beds and they
should not disobey you in acceptable matters. If they do so, then you
have no authority on them. They should enjoy their alimony and clothing
in an acceptable way. If you beat them, you should not injure. It is
illicit for any of you to have from his brother’s property unless
satisfaction is obtained. O people! Among you, I am leaving what will
protect you against deviation if you adhere to. It is the Book of Allah.
You should follow it. O people! What kind of day is today?” “It is a
sacred day,” answered they. “Which land is this?” asked the Holy Prophet
(S). “It is a sacred land,” answered they. “Which month is this?” asked
the Holy Prophet (S). “It is a sacred month,” answered they. “Almighty
Allah has made your souls, estate and honors as sacred as this day in
this month on this land. The witness should inform the absent. There
will be no Prophet (S) after me and there will be no nation after
you.”  
 The Prophet (S) then raised his hands to the heavens and said, “O
Allah! Be the witness.”  
 In the major reference books of Hadith, a part of this report is
recorded. Al-Bazzar also records this narration. However, Musa ibn
\`Ubaydah, the doubtful, is within the series of the narrators.

The following is recorded in Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 3/272:  
 …Al-\`Adda\` ibn Khalid ibn \`Amr ibn \`Amir narrated that in the
Farewell Hajj, he was sitting under the minbar from which the Holy
Prophet said, “All praise and thanks be to Allah. Allah says, ‘O you
men! We have created you of a male and a female, and made you tribes and
families that you may know each other; surely, the most honorable of you
with Allah is the one among you most careful of his duty.’ An Arab
should not be preferred to a non-Arab, a non-Arab should not be
preferred to an Arab, a black should not be preferred to a white and a
white should not be preferred to a black except on criteria of piety. O
people of Quraysh! Do not shoulder the worldly affairs while people
shoulder the Hereafter. I will not avail you in the least before
Allah.”  
 In al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir, a-Tabarani relates this narration to doubtful
narrators. Previously, we have referred to an authentic documentation of
this report.  
 Abu-Qabilah narrated that in the Farewell Hajj, the Holy Prophet (S)
delivered a sermon saying, “There will be no Prophet (S) after me and
there will be no nation after you. Revere your Lord, perform the five
–obligatory- prayers, fast in the month –of Ramadan- and comply with the
leaders and you will enter the Paradise of your Lord.”

The following is quoted from al-Darimi’s al-Sunan 2/47:  
 …The Holy Prophetstated, “Your blood and estate are as holy as this day
in this month on this land. Every matter that was regulated in Jahiliyah
is under my feet. The revenge of Jahiliyah is revoked. The first revenge
I will revoke is the Rabi\`ah ibn Al-Harith’s. The tribe of Hudhayl
killed him when he was a baby at the quarter of Banu-Sa\`d. Usury of
Jahiliyah is revoked. The first usury I will revoke is al-\`Abbas ibn
\`Abd al-Muttalib’s. Watch the Lord during treating your women. You have
taken them by the trust of Allah and consummated their privates by His
word. Your rights imposed upon them are that they should not let anyone
take your places in your beds. If they do, you should beat them, yet
ineffectively. Their rights imposed upon you are that you should save
their alimony and clothing in an acceptable way. You will be asked about
me, what will you answer?” “We acknowledge you have conveyed,
accomplished and advised,” shouted people. The Prophet (S) raised his
forefinger to the heavens and shook it at people saying thrice, “O
Allah! Be the witness.” … etc.

In al-Sunan 2/67, the following is recorded:  
 \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi-Bakrah narrated on the authority of his father
that on that day, the Holy Prophetsat on a camel, or she-camel perhaps,
whose bridle was held by a man and asked, “What kind of day is today?”
We kept silent for a considerable time that we thought he would call
another name to it. “Is it not the Nahr Day?” asserted the Holy Prophet
(S). “Yes, it is,” answered we. “Which month is this?” asked he …etc.

First Basis
-----------

The Holy Prophet (S)’s indications to this basis are too clear to
require explanations. Moreover, many texts regarding the topic have been
already demonstrated.

Second Basis
------------

A preliminary sight at the texts relating the Holy Prophet (S)’s last
sermons gives the impression that the first five principles of this
basis, namely the unity of the *Ummah*, have been the most important, if
not the only, topic of the sermons. Muslims repeated paragraphs of the
Holy Prophet (S)’s sermons dealing with this topic so over again. This
is by the reason that the society in which the Holy Prophet (S) lived
was of an extreme racial discrimination. It was prevailed by laws of
predominance and power. The dominant, whether a ruler, a tribe, a knight
or even a vagrant, is always the right since he could overcome even if
he used means of invasion, assassination, robbery, usurpation or
trickery.

The Islamic legislation repealed all these laws and declared equity of
people before the law. All sorts of abusing the private rights were
prohibited and a concentration on respecting souls, estate and dignity
of people was legislated. This is why they memorized these words in a
way distinguished from the other topics and words. They were highly
admired by these ethics and principles. For faithful Muslims, these
principles formed the radical solution of the issue of invasion and
murder suffered in the pre-Islamic era.

These instructions, formed in a highly eloquent divine and Prophetic
style, had a great influence on the regulations of respecting personal
character, estate and opinion after the Holy Prophet (S)’s decease.
Without these instructions, Muslim society would have been engaged in a
situation extremely worse than what had actually occurred. In the same
manner, the Jahiliyah regulations, regarding association with humanity,
would have floated to the surface anew.

It is noticeable that the Holy Prophet (S)’s immaculate household have
preceded people in the field of regarding the humankind and their legal
freedom. Imam \`Ali (a.s.) was the only ruler, after the Holy Prophet
(S), who did not use martial laws or any exceptional law, even with his
rivals and those who mutinied against him. Moreover, although he was
engaged in three wars that covered the entire period of his ruling, he
did not resort to violence or any exceptional policy.

On the other hand, Abu-Bakr and \`Umar reverted to means of power and
surmounting against Ansar in Saqifah of Banu-Sa\`idah. They were about
to kill Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah. Later on, they attacked the group who
refrained from paying homage to them. The group were gathering in the
Holy Prophet (S)’s house for providing their consolation to his family
and, meanwhile, the Holy Prophet (S)’s body had not been put in the
grave yet when the band threatened them setting the house on fire if
they would insist on confining themselves there and evade swearing
loyalty to the new leader. When the group were late in going out and
leaving the house, that band encompassed the house with firewood and set
the door on fire… etc.

The sixth principle of this basis; the principle of maintaining
properties and souls of those who speak out the creed of Islam
(shahadah; There is no god but Allah), was related in this form:  
 I have been ordered to fight people until they say ‘There is no god but
Allah.’ If they speak it out, they will protect their souls and estate
against me except in lawful states. Allah then will be the Judge.”[^2]  
 As a matter of fact, this principle is of three dimensions:

**First**, anyone who speaks out the creeds of Islam, apart from
religion or nationality, is considered as Muslim whose soul, estate and
honor must be kept in sacredness. Under definite circumstances defined
by the Islamic law, such as falling under the title of ‘the despotic
party’, doing an evil in the land, committing a murder, apostatizing
from Islam, perpetrating adultery or the like offenses, the soul will be
lawfully violated.

**Second**, Jews and Christians are exempted from this rule. They enjoy
special regulations in case of peace or war.

**Third**, the Holy Prophet (S) informed his people that he had
restricted himself to the divine orders of jihad -struggling for the
Lord’s sake-. His mission from this jihad was to complete the revelation
of the Holy Qur’an and to activate the declaration of the two creeds of
Islam. In other words, his calling was to form the general appearance of
this nation. He was not given the orders of fighting the deviate or
those who mislead Muslims, since this sort of fighting is reckoned with
the jihad for the interpretation of the Holy Qur’an. This sort of jihad
came after the Holy Prophet (S)’s departure.

The seventh principle is sealing Prophethood with the Holy Prophet (S)
and sealing the nations with his nation. It is the principle of the
prevalence of Muhammad’s doctrine over the doctrines of the previous
Prophets. It also refutes the misclaims of Prophethood a part of which
emerged during his reign while others came forth thereafter.
Furthermore, this principle grants the *Ummah* the honor of sealing the
Prophets’ nations. It confines it with the responsibility of guiding the
other nations. The Holy Prophet (S) outlined the general strings of
worshipping the Lord, performing the prayers, fasting and complying with
the leaders. It is not unlikely that the reporter related only the
paragraphs he could memorize and that he missed the Holy Prophet (S)’s
reference to others, such as the Zakat and the ritual Hajj.

The most distinguishable point in this principle is that the Holy
Prophet (S) refers to the compliance with the rulers. When Almighty
Allah commands us to comply with a person unconditionally, this will
definitely mean that the person be sinless; in other words, he neither
wrongs any nor says but the truth. Since this instruction is empty of
any conditions or qualifications, it is most surely that he refers to
the Twelve Imams whom are divinely nominated and predicted.

The eighth principle—the Holy Prophet (S) being the witness on his
people in the Hereafter and they will join him on the Divine Pool—is
mentioned in various narrations. Some reporters have mentioned it in the
form of, “I will precede you to the Divine Pool and I will take pride in
you before the other nations. Blacken not my face.” In other narrations,
the following form is recorded: “I will take pride in you among the
other nations. After me, do not fight each other.”  
 This is a unique style persisting that people will join their Prophet
(S) before their Lord and each will be in need for a drink from the
Kawthar Pool. That drink will save against any further thirst and make
the body fit enough to enter Paradise.

This instruction is similar to a father’s saying to his sons, “Fulfill
my will. I am leaving you. You will join me when I will be having a
great fortune. You will be living in poverty. I will surely realize the
persons among you who will keep my will and, similarly, I will realize
the dissidents.”

The ninth principle—the necessity of accuracy in acting and the
admonishing against committing the insignificant actions that lead to
deviation—attracts attentions to a remarkable rule in the individual and
social behaviors. It is the rule that deviation begins with an
insignificant deed or a group of simple deeds seen as meaningless and
unimportant. These deeds will lead to others, until they lead to the
abyss of the worldly or the supernal devastation. This fact is
practicable in both individual and collective situations. A Muslim may
permit himself to gaze at a foreign lady that he likes and gives himself
the license to exchange conversation with her and to participate her in
some acts and, finally, this will lead him to perpetrate the obscenity.

A man may permit himself to befriend a bad man. He neglects the sounds
of his religious consciousness and the advice of his associates until he
will be led to sink in the ocean of wronging people, deviation and
corruption.  
 A nation may overlook assails of their enemies in states of political,
economic or cultural power. This concern will lead the enemies to
predominate and prevail on this nation.  
 A society may overlook an aspect of corruption that first occurs in a
certain point or among a certain group.  
 A society may overlook a law dictatorially issued by the ruler or his
men. This will lead to a comprehensive injustice that drives the society
towards putrescence.

The insignificant sins are those unimportant situations and behaviors
forming the invisible seeds of the giant trees of evil on individual and
social levels. Consequently, reference books of both sects of Muslims
have referred to the Holy Prophet (S)’s many examples on this point:  
 In al-Kafi 2/288, we read the following:  
 Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: The Holy Prophet (S) resided in a
wasteland and asked his companions to fetch firewood. They apologized
that the land had been barren. “Try to find as much as possible,”
ordered the Holy Prophet (S). They fetched a good quantity and provided
the sum before him. As he saw the view, the Holy Prophet (S) commented,
“This is the way how sins gather. Beware of the insignificant sins.
Everything has an observer. The observer of these sins records whatever
they acted and their deeds, and everything is registered in a clear
recording.”[^3]

The previous saying deals with the quantitative accumulation of the
insignificant ill deeds and sins. They show how these deeds change into
a great danger against the lives of individuals and societies.  
 The following sayings deal with the qualitative accumulation of the
insignificant sins in the core and personality of the individuals and
societies:  
 Al-Kulayni, in al-Kafi 2/287, records the following:  
 Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq (a.s.) stated, “Beware of the insignificant sins.
They are unforgivable.” “What are the insignificant sins?” asked the
narrator. The Imam explained, “A man commits a sin and wishes if he had
not committed others.”[^4]

One of the remarkable bases inferred form this instruction is that
Satan, when despairs of controlling a nation through misguiding them in
the grand issues, takes the road of ruining and deviating through the
insignificant deeds. This is the meaning of the Holy Prophet (S)’s
saying, “Satan despaired of being obeyed on this land, but he will be
obeyed in some sins that you deem insignificant. He will be pleased by
them.”[^5]

Satan despaired of demolishing the fortified castle and the handsome
structure of Islam erected by the Holy Prophet (S); therefore, he went
towards prevailing on the individuals to drag a single brick of that
building incessantly. This process resulted in dragging all the
constituents of that great structure.

Another outstanding matter, deduced from \`Ali ibn Ibrahim’s narration,
is that the obedience to Satan in the insignificant sins is adoration to
him. This means that those who create deviance in a society are serving
Satan, not the Lord. As a result, they raise the slogan to changing from
serving the Lord into serving Satan. This is the Holy Prophet (S)’s
saying, “But he is pleased to be obeyed through your insignificant
deeds. If Satan is obeyed, he is then served.”

The Holy Prophet (S)’s declaration that Satan is pleased to be obeyed
through the insignificant sins is an information telling Satan’s
satisfaction for the success progressed in his project of deviating
people. This fact is in conformity with the exegesis of Almighty Allah’s
saying,

***“And certainly Satan found true his conjecture concerning them, so
they follow him, except a party of the believers. 34:20”***

The Ahl al-Bayt regarded people’s struggle on power after the Holy
Prophet (S)’s departure as the most menacing insignificant sin. In Bihar
al-Anwar 28/217, we read the following:  
 Imam al-Baqir (a.s.), through explaining Almighty Allah’s saying,
“Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what the
hands of men have wrought, 30/41” said: By Allah I swear, that
corruption started when Ansar suggested to elect a leader from them and
the people of Quraysh elect another from them.

The tenth principle—warning against forging lies against the Holy
Prophet (S) and the insistence on investigating whatever is attributed
to him—has been mentioned through the narration of Ahmad ibn Hanbal. In
Sunni and Shiite reference books of Hadith, this question is mentioned
importunately meaning that the problem of forging lies against the Holy
Prophet (S) existed during his lifetime. He therefore insisted that this
problem would certainly find a larger scope after his departure and the
number of the fabricators would increase after him.

A deep look in this problem leads to an abhorrent feeling towards such
fabricators since their satanic action defames and deforms Islam and
precludes the next generations from receiving its genuineness. A more
serious matter is the fact that the Holy Prophet (S) was not given the
orders of unmasking and punishing such fabricators for their past or
coming forgery. As an acceptable treatment of this problem, the
procedure of warning them against forging lies and warning people
against receiving such falsification was taken.

It is evident that such a procedure affects only in a quantitative
reduction of the problem. Hence, the Holy Prophet (S)’s recognition of
the problem’s existence and prediction of its continuity and increase
after him are proofs on the fact that he constituted a sufficient
treatment for the problem, by means of divine instructions.

This treatment was the obligation of presenting every text ascribed to
him before the two weighty things that he left in his nation—the Book of
Allah and his household. Any text that contradicts the Book of Allah
must be decided as worthless since the Holy Prophet (S) does never belie
the Holy Qur’an. Correspondingly, every text that contradicts whatever
is asserted by his progeny who are being incessantly with the Holy
Qur’an is worthless, too. The Ahl al-Bayt are perpetually with the Holy
Qur’an since they are the heirs of the Holy Prophet (S) and the
explicators of his knowledge.

Third Basis
-----------

Through various paragraphs of the Holy Prophet (S)’s sermons of the
Farewell Hajj, the principles of this base are mentioned. Previously, we
have referred to the fulfillment of trusts and the laws of heritage,
blood money and the Hajj. At any rate, there were other laws mentioned
in the sermons.  
 In spite of the opposite factors, the main element in the
materialization of the cultural unity of the *Ummah*, disregarding
racial and national difference, was the unity of their creed and
legislation. It is an undeniable fact that Islam could achieve a unity
of conceptions and behavior among people in a form unattainable for all
states and civilizations.

Fourth Basis
------------

- The principle of the prediction of Twelve Imams from the Ahl
al-Bayt.  
 - The principle of the importunate adherence to the Qur’an and the Ahl
al-Bayt; the two weighty things.  
 - The principle of nominating \`Ali as the next leader of this nation
and the first of the Twelve Imams.  
 - The principle of keeping on performing the obligatory rites and the
compliance with the leaders.  
 - The principle of immortalizing the treaty of Quraysh and Kinanah on
blockading the Hashimites.  
 - The principle of warning people of Quraysh against playing the tyrant
after the Holy Prophet (S)’s departure.  
 - The principle of warning the Sahabah against breaking faith and
struggling on power.

Formerly, we have referred to this discussion through the rendition of
the Hadiths regarding the Twelve Imams. During the Farewell Hajj
sermons, the Holy Prophet (S) referred to this point assuredly.  
 It is inadmissible for the sane to accept that the Holy Prophet (S) had
concealed the identity of those divinely nominated Imams, or that he
provided this matter for predicting their coming. These claims have been
originated by people of Quraysh and their hireling narrators.

Shiite reference books of Hadith have attested that the second principle
of the Holy Prophet (S)’s persisting on the adherence to the two weighty
things—the Qur’an and his progeny—relates that he referred to this
matter through the Sermon of Ghadir, the al-Khayf Masjid Sermon and,
presumably, the others. \`Ali ibn Ibrahim’s narration assures this fact.
Comprehensively, Sunni reference books of Hadith have recorded the Holy
Prophet (S)’s assertion on the adherence to the two weighty things
during the Sermon of Ghadir only. They have decided the authenticity of
the reports relating this topic. Al-Tabari compiled a two-volume book in
this regard; he refers to the various series of narrators and ways of
documentation of the sermon involved.  
 Regarding the other sermons of the Farewell Hajj, al-Tirmidhi, in
al-Sunan 5/328, records:  
 Jabir ibn \`Abdullah has narrated that he saw the Holy Prophet (S) on
his she-camel; al-Qaswa\`, on the Day of \`Arafat, addressing, “O
people! I am leaving among you what will constantly protect you against
deviation if only you adhere to; the Book of Allah and my people; my
household.”[^6]

It is also noticeable that a number of Sunni reference books have
recorded the Holy Prophet (S)’s persistence on the adherence to the
Qur’an only, disregarding his household.  
 In Muslim’s al-Sahih 4/41, we read the following:  
 The Holy Prophet said: “…I am leaving among you what will protect you
against deviation as long as you commit yourselves to. It is the Book of
Allah.”[^7]

The following form has been recorded in Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 3/265:  
 The Holy Prophet said, “…O people! I am leaving among you what will
perpetually protect you against deviation if you only adhere to. It is
the Book of Allah. Apply yourselves to its instructions.”

Through a scrutinizing look at the narrations involved, it is easily
understood that the mention of the Ahl al-Bayt has been deleted in such
reports due to the narrators’ oblivion or the firm supervision that the
people of Quraysh imposed upon Hadiths. This is evidenced by the fact
that the same reference books have related the same text completely in
other positions. As a rule, the imperfect should be compared to the
perfect.  
 Muslim, al-Bayhaqi, Ibn Majah and al-Haythami have recorded various
narrations regarding the Holy Prophet (S)’s repetitive importunate
recommendation of the adhering to the Holy Qur’an and his progeny
together.  
 In Muslim’s al-Sahih 7/122, the following is recorded:  
 Zayd ibn Arqam has narrated that in a place called ‘Khumm’ and situated
between Makkah and al-Madinah, the Holy Prophet (S) addressed to us,
“All praise and thanks be to Allah… O people! I am no more than a
mortal. The apostle of my Lord (the angel of death) is about to come to
me and I will respond. I am leaving among you two weighty things. First
is the Book of Allah that contains the guidance and the illumination.
Hold fast on the Book of Allah and adhere to it. Second is my household.
I bind you with the Lord in the question of my household.” He repeated
it thrice.  
 Husayn asked, “O Zayd! Who are his household? Are his women included?”
“Yes, his women are included with his household,” answered Zayd, “But
his household are exclusively those whom are prohibited from receiving
alms.” “Who are they?” wondered Husayn. “They are the sons of \`Ali,
\`Aqil, Ja\`far and \`Abbas,” identified Zayd. “All those are prohibited
from receiving alms?” asked Husayn. “Yes, they all are,” replied
Zayd.[^8]

In Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 1/170, the following is recorded:  
 Zayd ibn Thabit has narrated that the Holy Prophetstated, “I am leaving
among you two successors; the Book of Allah and my household. They will
never leave each other until they join me on the Divine Pool.”[^9]

He has also recorded it on page 162 of part 9 and commentated that Ahmad
recorded it in an acceptable documentation.  
 Abu-Dawud has not referred to a clear narration respecting the two
weighty things; rather, he has written an independent title—‘al-Mahdi’
in al-Sunan 2/309, in which he has recorded the Hadith of the Twelve
Imams and the Holy Prophet (S)’s prediction of the coming of Imam
al-Mahdi who would belong to the offspring of \`Ali and Fatimah (a.s.).
He has also related the Holy Prophet (S)’s saying, “Even if there will
be only a single day from the age of this earth, Allah will send a man
from my household who will fill in it with justice in the same way as it
would be filled in with wrong.”

The following point is provided as evidence on our claim that the Holy
Prophet (S) ordered people, during the Farewell Hajj sermons, to adhere
to his household in addition to the Holy Qur’an. His statements are the
most eloquent since they enjoy unique specifications one of which is
that there are definite expressions dedicated to definite occasions.
This point is common between the Holy Qur’an and the Hadiths. The Holy
Prophet (S)’s expression, ‘…protect you against deviation if only you
adhere to…’ is individually dedicated to the instruction of the
adherence to the Holy Qur’an and his household. He had never used this
expression on any occasion except the recently concerned one. In the
same manner, the expression, ‘I am leaving among you the two weighty
things,’ had never been used in any situation save this.

When the Holy Prophet (S) gave his orders to fetch a pen and a paper so
that he would record a document ‘protecting perpetually against
deviation,’ during his final ailment, people of Quraysh perceived that
he had intended to commit Muslims to the compliance with the Holy Imams
of his progeny in a written form. So, they rejected this order very
frankly and insolently.

In six positions of al-Sahih, al-Bukhari has referred to this incident.
The other reference books of Hadith have reported \`Umar’s taking pride
in playing the greatest role in the process of depriving the Holy
Prophet (S) of recording his will.  
 At any rate, we aim only at attracting the attentions to the point that
the isolating of the Ahl al-Bayt from the Book of Allah, during
reporting some narrations respecting the sermons of the Farewell Hajj,
violates the Prophet (S)’s style and his unequaled expression during his
reference to the adherence to the Book of Allah and his household
together. Al-Tirmidhi, moreover, has related the two together.

In abstract, none can deny the authentic truth that the Holy Prophet (S)
predicted the coming of the Twelve Imams and instructed people to adhere
to the two weighty things and considered his immaculate household—\`Ali,
Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn—as the equals of the Holy Qur’an in the
field of the compliance with them. All these matters were confirmed in
the sermons of the Farewell Hajj. They however may be denied only by
those who intend to be fanatic to the people of Quraysh in the face of
the Exalted Lord and His Prophet (S).

The third principle of this base, which is the declaration of \`Ali’s
religious and political succession, is evident through the Hadith of
Ghadir. We lack enough scope to refer to the numerous documentations and
texts concerning this topic. A great deal of reference books of theology
and Hadith, beginning with al-Tabari’s al-Wilayah and ending with
\`Allamah al-Amini’s al-Ghadir Encyclopedia, have discussed this topic
thoroughly.

The fourth principle, which is the keeping on the performance of the
obligatory rites and the compliance with the leaders, has been discussed
during mentioning paragraphs about the second basis. Al-Fakhr al-Razi,
as well as many others, have admitted that Almighty Allah will never
instruct us to comply with other than sinless people without specifying
conditions; otherwise this will be an instruction of disobedience. This
admission comes through discussing Almighty Allah’s saying, “O ye who
believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority from
among you.” Hence, men in authority intended in the Holy Verse must be
sinless and, similarly, those intended in the Holy Prophet (S)’s sermons
of the Farewell Hajj, as well as other occasions, must be sinless.

The fifth principle aims at immortalizing the treaty of Quraysh and
Kinanah on blockading the Hashimites. This has been recorded in
al-Bukhari’s al-Sahih 5/92:  
 Abu-Hurayrah has narrated that the Holy Prophet said, “Allah willing,
we will reside in al-Khayf, the place where they concluded the treaty of
atheism and swore on it.”

On pages 246 and 194 of parts 4 and 8, al-Bukhari records narrations
concerning the same topic. On page 158 of part 2, he records a narration
with a more evident point:  
 Abu-Hurayrah has narrated that on the Nahr Day, the Holy Prophet (S)
was in Mina when he stated, “Tomorrow, we will reside in al-Khayf of
Banu-Kinanah, where they concluded the treaty of atheism and swore on
it.” He meant al-Muhassab. People of Quraysh and Kinanah had concluded a
treaty against the Hashimites, sons of \`Abd al-Muttalib and sons of
al-Muttalib. They agreed upon abstaining from giving in marriage or
marrying any individual belonging to these houses and abstaining from
selling them anything unless they give up the Holy Prophet (S).

The same narration has been recorded in Muslim’s al-Sahih 4/86 and
Ahmad’s al-Musnad 2/322, 237, 263, 353 and 540. It has been also
recorded in al-Bayhaqi’s al-Sunan 5/160, yet in another form, in which
he comments, “This report is recorded in al-Bukhari’s al-Sahih and
Muslim’s where it is related to al-Awza\`i.”  
 Muslim has actually related it to al-Awza\`i, while al-Bukhari to
Abu-Hurayrah. It seems that al-Bayhaqi has erred in this point or the
report has not been found in the copy of al-Bukhari’s al-Sahih upon
which we depend. In any event, the following addition exists in Muslim’s
report related to al-Awza\`i:  
 “…They should not give in marriage or marry any individual of these
houses and no deal should be concluded between the two parties until
they give up the Holy Prophet (S).”

Furthermore, in the two forms of the report, there is a difference in
the place of the Holy Prophet (S)’s residence. Al-Bukhari mentions that
the Holy Prophet (S) declared that statement while he was in Mina, after
performing the rites of \`Arafat, while al-Tabarani mentions that it
occurred in Makkah, before the commencement of the Hajj rites. The
latter is however more acceptable since it accounts for the Holy Prophet
(S)’s concern in the subject and his caring for concentrating on it in
Muslims’ mentalities. Moreover, he had resided in that place and passed
the night before performing the rites of \`Arafat there when he was in
his way to that mountain.

This matter has been previously mentioned during discussing al-Darimi’s
narration. All the Tashriq days, the Holy Prophet (S) resided in that
place.

In Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 3/250, the following is recorded:  
 Ibn \`Abbas has narrated that one day before the Tarwiyah Day, the Holy
Prophetstated, “Allah willing, we will reside in al-Khayf, the place
where the atheists concluded their treaty and swore on it.”[^10]

The most remarkable point in this discussion is the Holy Prophet (S)’s
purpose beyond reminding people of Quraysh, and Muslims generally, of a
great incident that took place in that place fourteen years ago. People
of Quraysh aimed at burying that incident and making people forget it.
Allah the Exalted and His Messenger have intended to eternalize it in
Muslims’ mentalities and history. The incident as a whole brings
humiliation to people of Quraysh and elevates proudly the Holy Prophet
(S) and the Hashimites. It is a sketch showing the ceaseless efforts of
the despotic Qurayshite chiefs who could achieve unanimity of the clans
and convince the tribes of Kinanah who lodged near the Holy Precinct to
put the Hashimites under a complete blockade—a blockade that lasted for
long years. They practiced a comprehensive economic and social blockade
against the Hashimites for coercing them to give Muhammad, the Holy
Prophet (S), up so that they would be able to kill him or make him
retreat from his Divine Mission.

Those despotic chiefs felt in sublime cheer for achieving a great
success in congregating the clans of Quraysh and Kinanah for that
satanic purpose. Their conference was held in al-Muhassab in al-Khayf of
Banu-Kinanah where they swore, by Lat and \`Uzza,[^11] on the
perseverance on their goals. The document they wrote was signed by
eighty chiefs and celebrities. The next day, they went on applying its
paragraphs. Hence, that blockade lasted for four years and ended a few
days before the Holy Prophet (S)’s immigration to al-Madinah.

The Hashimites, including the unbelieving ones, combined with the Holy
Prophet (S) and tolerated many years of blockade, poverty, harm and
insult in the Col of Abu-Talib. Until Almighty Allah relieved their
suffering by a miracle, none of Muslims participated with them.

The Holy Prophet (S) aimed at opening the new Muslims’ minds on the
history of their religion and the costs of the divine revelation in
order that they may appreciate the value. Besides, he wanted them to pay
attention to the core of Islam and the core of atheism so that they may
discriminate. Another purpose was that he aimed at sending a practical
message to the rest of the despotic chiefs of Quraysh who were still
alive to inform them that they shouldered the offense of that atheism
and shame. Nevertheless, they committed greater sins afterwards; they
did not change their situation until the Holy Prophet (S) gathered them
under the swords of the Hashimites and Ansar on the day of the conquest
of Makkah. Only then, they saved themselves from killing by the
declaration of being Muslims. Thereafter, they planned for prevailing on
the heritage of the Islamic State that had been constructed by Almighty
Allah and His Messenger, against their desires.

Death and the sword of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib were the Lord’s means of
killing a few numbers of the chiefs of that satanic treaty of al-Khayf
conference. A considerable number of them; such as Suhayl ibn \`Amr,
Abu-Sufyan, \`Ikrimah ibn Abi-Jahl, Safwan ibn Umayyah ibn Khalaf, Hakim
ibn Hizam, Suhayb ibn Sinan, Abu’l-A\`war al-Salami and many others were
still alive. They accompanied the Holy Prophet (S) in the Farewell Hajj;
and listened to his statements and could remember their near past; and
were admired by the amnesty that he issued after he had stopped at
submitting them to full evidence. Their extrinsic and hidden behavior,
the induction, the Ahl al-Bayt’s testimony, the course of history—all
these things have proven their delight for the Holy Prophet (S)’s
declaration of his imminent departure. They were preparing for a new
method of blockading the Hashimites in the next stage. Hence, the Holy
Prophet (S) wanted to remind them of their old plan and how the Lord
foiled it and He would for sure foil the coming ones.

The seventh principle of this basis, which is warning people of Quraysh
against playing the tyrant after the departure of the Holy Prophet (S),
is recorded in our reference books of Hadith. It is asserted by the
narration recorded in Majma\` al-Zawa\`id as related to Fahad ibn
al-Bahiri who had listened to the sermon of the \`Arafat Day and
reported from the Holy Prophet (S) his saying:  
 “O people of Quraysh! Do not shoulder the worldly affairs while people
shoulder the Hereafter. I will not avail you in the least before Allah.”

Thanks to Allah, Fahad was a Bedouin; had he belonged to Quraysh or
Kinanah, he would have substituted the Hashimites for people of
Quraysh!  
 The Qurayshite narrators were wont to remove every statement that might
injure or censure people of Quraysh. Therefore, Sunni reference books of
Hadith have been full of such ‘authentic’ reports regarding the Holy
Prophet (S)’s blaming and censuring the Hashimites and sons of \`Abd
al-Muttalib. In like manner, we could see tens of narrations dealing
with the Holy Prophet (S)’s praising people of Quraysh and ordering to
choose leaders from them. All the Holy Prophet (S)’s statements of blame
and censure against people of Quraysh have been changed into statements
of blame and censure against the Hashimites, or have been repealed by
inventing another saying or have been turned into praise for people of
Quraysh!

Fahad ibn al-Bahiri’s narration of the Holy Prophet (S)’s forewarning
people of Quraysh during the sermon of the Farewell Hajj has come in its
proper time and place. People of Quraysh occupied a distinctive location
among the Arabs; they were the leaders of the Arab Peninsula’s
inhabitants during and after the Holy Prophet (S)’s lifetime.
Consequently, any danger that might face the Ahl al-Bayt would certainly
be originated by them. As well, any movement of averting Islam and any
wrongdoing that Muslims may suffer would certainly be originated by
them. Other people would always follow them.

The Holy Prophet (S) is no more than a bearer of the Lord’s Message and
a conveyor of His claim against people. His mission is to warn and
admonish so that he who would perish might perish by clear proof and he
who would live might live by clear proof.  
 The eighth principle of this basis—warning the Sahabah against breaking
faith and struggling on power—has been recorded in all reference books
of Hadith directly and indirectly.

The indirect way of relating this principle is the Holy Prophet (S)’s
saying, “After me, return not to deviation by beheading each other.”  
 In al-Sunan 2/1300, Ibn Majah has dedicated an independent chapter to
the Prophet (S)’s sayings regarding this topic. He has entitled it
‘After Me, Return Not To Deviation By Beheading Each Other.’ He has also
recorded the Holy Prophet (S)’s sayings, “Woe is you! After me, return
not to atheism by beheading each other,” and “Kill not each other after
me,” and the like statements. This foreordains that the matter would
fall after the Holy Prophet (S)’s departure. As a matter of fact, he
frankly foretold them about their struggle on power after him. He used
the maximum degree of eloquence, as well as sympathy, and exercised all
styles of forewarning and admonition so as to convey the Lord’s argument
against them so that they will not provide their unfamiliarity of the
topic when they will be submitted before the Lord.  
 Those admonished people were none but his companions. They were not the
Jews nor the other Arab tribes nor the chiefs of Quraysh exclusively.

The Islamic State by now prevailed on all over the Arab Peninsula and
the Holy Prophet (S)’s anticipation of the struggle for power was not
addressed to the tribes, such as Hawazin and Ghatafan, who willingly or
unwillingly were submitted to Islam, since these tribes had nothing to
do with the leadership of the Islamic State. Supposing they did, they
would not obtain any position unless the Sahabah would permit.  
 Regarding the Jews, they were defeated and a part of them was banished
out of the Arab Peninsula; they therefore had no considerable military
power at that period. Despite the firmness of their trickeries, they
would not thrive unless they would pass by the Sahabah.

The chiefs of Quraysh lacked the dare to demand with a position of
leadership although they had the predominance upon the majority of the
Qurayshite tribes as well as two thousand warriors. That was because of
their having been the Holy Prophet (S)’s ‘released’ individuals whose
souls had already been in the hand of him. This meant that the Holy
Prophet (S) had had the right to kill or enslave them; yet, he chose the
second option and released them afterward. They would have no hope to
hold a position of leadership unless that small number of the Qurayshite
Muhajirun would permit.  
 As a result, the Holy Prophet (S)’s forewarning against the struggle
for power after him is restricted to his companions, Muhajirun and Ansar
exclusively.  
 Here comes the role of the direct forewarning, which lacks personal
names only. It came from the unseen world and, more precisely, from the
Lord, providing the end result of those deviating and deviated
companions.

Almighty Allah commissioned Archangel Gabriel to carry the mission to
the Holy Prophet (S). It showed the coming day on which the Lord will
choose Muhammad (S) for the chiefship of the grand assemblage. Archangel
Gabriel will hand him the pennon of al-Hamd and the Holy Prophet (S)
will deliver it to \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib; the bearer of the Holy Prophet
(S)’s pennon in this world and the Hereafter. The assemblage will be
under the leadership of Muhammad in whom Adam will take pride. He will
thus be called ‘Abu-Muhammad (the father of Muhammad)’ The Lord will
give Muhammad exclusively the right of intercession (Shafa\`ah) and the
Divine Pool of Kawthar. Then, delegations of all the nations will
approach him for seeking intercession. He will intercede and grant the
card of drinking from that Divine Pool whose water will change their
physiological structure so that they will be fit to abide in Paradise
forever. When it will be his companions’ turn, a surprise will occur.
The Lord will disallow the Holy Prophet (S) to intercede for those
individuals whom, subsequently will be deprived of drinking from that
Pool. Then, the angels of anguish will be ordered to take them to
Hellfire. This is the morrow of those companions, communicated by the
ever most true-tongued individual on this earth.

It is indeed a terrible scene. Archangel Gabriel, the honest, carried it
to the Holy Prophetso that he would inform his people, during the
Farewell Hajj, about such a predestined occurrence. It is the gravest
catastrophe for the Sahabah. The reason is that they would cause the
*Ummah* to fall in the greatest catastrophe.

Except the like of scattered animals of cattle, none of them will
escape. This picture has been recorded in the most authentic narrations
reported by the pro-Sahabah. It is an extraordinary expression. Those
scattered animals would be those escaping the cattle. This means that
the entire group of the Sahabah will be in Hellfire and only a few of
them will escape it. Moreover, the Holy Prophet (S) explained that the
Sahabah who should be in Hellfire are of two groups, indicating that
there are two lines taken by two parties of them. This fact has been
proven through the forecited report of al-Hakim who has decided it as
authentic on the criterion of Muslim and al-Bukhari. In this report, he
records:  
 “Another group will be occluded, too. None will escape but a few groups
like the scattered animals in a cattle.”

It is a distressing question, indeed. It is hardly acceptable and
credible, especially for Muslims who have been brought up on the
cherishing for all the Sahabah whom have been described as ‘the best
century’ and ‘the unique generation’ and “My companions are like the
stars; if you follow any of them, you will be guided to the right.”  
 It will be a great shock for such Muslims if they are faced by that
horrible satanic picture of those Sahabah.

Had it been any person other than the Holy Prophet (S) who uttered these
words, they would have regarded him as one of the enemies of Islam
aiming at ruining this religion by means of maligning against the
Sahabah. Yet, the Holy Prophet (S) himself uttered these words and, as
an undeniable reality, he does not speak out of desire. Nevertheless,
people of Quraysh claim that the Holy Prophet (S) might speak in
satisfaction and anger; and his words in anger must not be taken as
evidence. If truth be told, the Holy Prophet (S)’s words are always true
because they are produced by the Divine Revelation of the Lord of the
world! Truth is grievous; and it is not necessary that truths are always
delightful. Similarly, the word of right is not always fitting our
desires.

We can do nothing for the too many narrations demonstrating that the
Sahabah will be degraded, rejected and precluded from approaching the
Divine Pool on the Resurrection Day. These narrations occupy a great
area in the major Sunni reference books of Hadith! Furthermore, they
occupy a greater area in the other reference books of Hadith all of
which confirm that none of those companions will escape from Hellfire
except a few like the scattered animals of a cattle.  
 According to the Arabic-Arabic dictionary of al-Jawhari, the Holy
Prophet (S)’s statement refers to the animals of a cattle that lost
their supervisor.  
 The most remarkable point in this discussion is the realization of the
reason beyond the Holy Prophet (S)’s reference to this topic during the
Farewell Hajj.

Primarily, the reason is that Almighty Allah ordered him to propose this
topic in that time. The Holy Prophet (S) has never spoken out of desire;
and unless Almighty Allah had told him about the future conducts of his
companions, he would not have known anything.

Let us now put the following questions:  
 What would those Sahabah do after the Holy Prophet (S)’s departure?
Would they return to atheism? Would they apostatize from Islam, as the
Prophet (S) describes? Would they misrepresent this religion? Would they
kill each other for power?  
 The answer of our Sunni brethren for all these questions and their
likes is very simple: You must accept what your Prophet (S) had said and
then shut your mouth so as to avoid being Rafidite—rejecter and
protester.  
 Other questions can also be cited: What for did the Lord choose this
sort of warning? What for did He not kill those individuals who would
deviate thereafter or direct His Prophet (S) to kill them or expose them
before Muslims so that they would be avoided?  
 The answer is that the Lord has always made His servants subservient to
His argument and left them to act freely so that ‘he who would perish
might perish by clear proof and he who would live might live by clear
proof.’ Allah, at length,

***‘cannot be questioned concerning what He does and they will be
questioned. 21:23’***

He is the Possessor of His servants and has the right to interrogate
them; He does not make errors; therefore, He is not submitted to
inquiry; He is the most Knowledgeable, and the most knowledgeable must
not be accused by those of lower levels.  
 Another question may be also cited here: What were the results of the
Holy Prophet (S)’s warning? Did Muslims, including the Sahabah, hurry up
towards the Holy Prophet (S) asking for the straight path? Did they ask
him to nominate a man they would follow thereafter so that those
dangerous Sahabah would not lead them astray?  
 The answer is that the Holy Prophet (S) did nominate the two weighty
things for people to follow. He named the Book of Allah and his
household. He also foretold about twelve godly Imams to come after him.

Before and after the Farewell Hajj, the Holy Prophet (S) defined his
household several times. He mentioned them by names; \`Ali, Fatimah,
al-Hasan and al-Husayn (a.s.). Many reports recorded in the reference
books of Hadith have declared that the Holy Prophet (S) had identified
them personally when he covered them with a Yemeni cloak and declared,
“Those are my people; my household.” Sufficed not by these procedures
and declaration, the Holy Prophet (S) caused Muslims to stop under the
hot weather in al-Juhafah in Ghadir Khumm and took \`Ali from the arm to
announce his religious and political succession and leadership. He then
fixed a tent for him so that Muslims would greet him confessing of his
leadership and congratulating on this divinely commissioned position.
The Holy Prophet (S) then ordered his women to congratulate \`Ali, too.
They approached the tent and offered congratulations admitting loyalty
to Imam \`Ali.

In his final ailment, the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to present the
succession of Imam \`Ali in a written form; he asked the attendants to
bring him a pen and a paper so that he would record a document
protecting them from deviation forever. Unfortunately, they rejected
unrelentingly and said, “Well! Thanks, Messenger! We decided to go
astray after you! This decision has been taken with full awareness,
intention and option. We do not want you to record a document obliging
us to obey \`Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and nine individuals from
al-Husayn’s offspring.” Hence, they said shamelessly, “Do not bring him
any pen or paper!” What could the Holy Prophet (S) make more?

Fifth Basis
-----------

This basis stands for the punishment that those who would reject the
instruction of the obligatory adherence to the Holy Imams will
encounter. It will befall in the Hereafter and fit the Holy Prophet
(S)’s responsibility for conveying and witnessing the acts of his
nation. The expression of this punishment is firm and unbending; it came
in the form of a divine decision of cursing and condemning the rejecters
of the Holy Prophet (S)’s instructions regarding his household and
indicated that the repentance of such individuals would never be
accepted and that they would deserve the eternal torment in Hellfire.
Its coming in the last of the Holy Prophet (S)’s sermon might give the
impression indicating its firmness and decisiveness.

The paragraph is cited in the report recorded in Tuhaf al-Uqul, a Shiite
reference book, as well as a good deal of Sunni reference books
asserting that it was mentioned during the Holy Prophet (S)’s sermon in
the Farewell Hajj.

Let us read the following as quoted from Ibn Majah’s al-Sunan 2/905:  
 \`Amr ibn Kharijah narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) was on the back
of his riding animal, while it was breathing heavily due to the hot
weather, when he said:  
 “… Curse of the Lord, the angels and all people be on those who ascribe
themselves to other than their fathers or masters. Allah will not accept
their excuse or compensation.”

Al-Tirmidhi, in al-Sunan 3/293, records the following:  
 Abu-Umamah al-Bahili narrated: I hear the Holy Prophetsaying in the
sermon of the Farewell Hajj:  
 “Ceaseless curse of the Lord be on those who ascribe themselves to
other than their fathers or masters.”

The following is quoted from Ahmad’s al-Musnad 4/239:  
 Amr ibn Kharijah narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) was in Mina riding
his animal, which was breathing heavily due to the hot weather, when he
said:  
 “Curse of the Lord, the angels and all people be on them who ascribe
themselves to other than their fathers or masters as a desire to neglect
them.”

In Ahmad’s al-Musnad 4/187, we read the following:  
 “… Curse of the Lord, the angels and all people be on those who ascribe
themselves to other than their fathers or masters. May Allah not accept
their excuses or compensations.”

Ahmad has related different reports of the same meaning and recorded
them in the same previous pages and the preceding ones. He has also
recorded it on pages 238 and 186. Al-Darimi has recorded it in al-Sunan
2/244 and 344. In Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 5/14, the narration is reported
from Abu-Mas\`ud. Al-Bukhari has recorded the reports in al-Sahih 2/221
and 4/67.  
 The reader may wonder the relationship between the statements involved
and the Holy Prophet (S)’s instruction of the adherence to his
household. The above-mentioned paragraphs emphasize that the Holy
Prophet (S) cursed those who ascribe themselves to other than their
fathers and the slaves who disavow their masters and claim other
masters.

To answer it, we have to cite the following Islamic ruling: A son who
disavows his father and claims another man’s filiation but then regrets
and returns to his real father, his repentance is admissible. In like
manner, a slave who leaves his master and claims slavery of another man
but then repents and returns to his master after a while, his repentance
is legally acceptable.

These rulings oppose the Holy Prophet (S)’s declaration that the divine
curse, in its harshest form, is ceaselessly poured on those who ascribe
themselves to other than their fathers or masters.  
 Such a divine punishment is accepted only in cases of serious excess,
such as apostasy. It is unfit to issue such a judgment against an
ignorant son or slave who disavows his father or master.

Moreover, some reports have assured that the Holy Prophet (S) confirmed
the atheism and apostasy of such individuals, such as those recorded in
al-Bayhaqi’s al-Sunan 8/26, Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 1/97, Kanz al-\`Ummal
5/872 and many others. As an example, the following report is recorded
in Kanz al-\`Ummal 10/324, 326, 327 and 16/255 respectively:  
 “He that disavows his masters is ripping the bind of Islam out of his
neck.”  
 “He that disavows his masters should find himself a place in
Hellfire.”  
 “He that disavows his masters is an atheist.”  
 “He that disavows his masters is as same as he who disbelieves in what
the Lord has revealed to his Messenger.”

These authentic sayings support the fact that such decisive rulings have
nothing to do with those who disavow their fathers or masters unless
‘fathers’ and ‘masters’ indicate something else. It is also supported by
the aforesaid reports and many others in which the Holy Prophet (S) does
not refer to fathers and sons at all; rather he stops at mentioning
masters and their servants. Naturally, a son’s disavowal of his father
is more serious than a slave’s disavowal of his master. Nevertheless,
such reports carry a punishment that is more serious. In addition, it is
supported by the fact that this ruling, in a good number of reports
communicating the Holy Prophet (S)’s sermons of the Farewell Hajj, is
mentioned directly after the reference to the exclusive peculiarity
given to the Ahl al-Bayt; namely, the Khums (one-fifth rate). The Ahl
al-Bayt are prohibited from receiving the alms.  
 In Ahmad’s al-Musnad 4/186, we read the following:  
 The Holy Prophet (S) was riding his animal when he said, “Alms are not
allowed for my household and me; any sum of alms even if it was as much
as this.” Meanwhile, he took a single hair from the back of his animal
and went on, “Allah curse him whoever ascribes himself to other than his
father or master.”

The same report is recorded on page 293 of part 5 of Kanz al-\`Ummal. On
page 235 of part 10 of the same book, the following form is recorded:  
 “…He whoever ascribes himself to other than his master should find him
a place in Hellfire.”

In Shiite reference books of Hadith; the Ahl al-Bayt’s reports, this
statement has been frequently and authentically recorded in the Holy
Prophet (S)’s sermons of the Farewell Hajj. Besides, it is a part of the
Ghadir sermon.  
 In Bihar al-Anwar 37/123, we read the following:  
 Shaykh al-Mufid, in al-Amali, has recorded on the authority of Zayd ibn
Arqam that he said: I heard the Holy Prophetsaying in Ghadir Khumm,
“Alms are not allowed for my household and me. Allah may curse those who
ascribe themselves to other than their fathers or masters. The baby is
to the bed owner while the prostitute’s share is the stones. An heir is
not allowed to make a will. You have heard and seen me. He whoever
forges lies against me must find himself a place in Hellfire. I will be
preceding you to the Divine Pool. I will take pride in you before the
other nations on the Resurrection Day. Blacken not my face. I will save
men from Hellfire and others will be taken from my hands and sent
therein. Allah is my Master and I am the master of each male and female
believer. \`Ali will be the master of anyone who has regarded me as his
master.”[^12]

In al-\`Umdah 344, Ibn al-Bitriq, a Shiite scholar, comments:  
 The narrations recorded in the major reference books of Hadith and
reporting the Holy Prophet (S)’s saying, “Allah may curse those who
ascribe themselves to other than their fathers or masters,” indicate the
insistence on the obligatory adherence to Amir al-Mu\`minin (Commander
of the faithful believers) \`Ali. Supporting this claim clearly is the
most authenticated saying of the Holy Prophet (S), “\`Ali will be the
master of anyone who has regarded me as his master.” The Holy Prophet
(S) then adds, “O Allah! Accede to him who accedes to \`Ali, be the
enemy of him who antagonizes \`Ali, support him who supports \`Ali and
disappoint him who disappoints him.”  
 Hence, \`Ali is being the master of those whose master was the Holy
Prophet (S), that is all the believers. Also \`Umar ibn al-Khattab said
to \`Ali (a.s.) directly after that declaration, “Congratulations! You
have become the master of every male and female believer.” Or, according
to other ways of narration, “You have become my master and the master of
every male and female believer.”  
 Almighty Allah only has the right to select for this position; He, the
Exalted, gave it to His Messenger Muhammad (S) and ordered him to give
it to \`Ali Amir al-Mu\`minin after him. This meaning is supported by
Almighty Allah’s saying, “Only Allah is your Master and His Messenger
and those who believe; those who keep up prayers and pay the Zakat while
they bow. 6/55”[^13]  
 On that account, the Holy Prophet (S)’s saying, “…those who ascribe
themselves to other than their fathers,” stands for those who disavow
loyalty to Imam \`Ali. We can refer this discussion to the Holy Prophet
(S)’s saying, “O \`Ali! You and I are the fathers of this nation.”  
 Curse of the Lord be on those who disobey their fathers.

Sunni and Shiite reference books of Hadith have also recorded that the
aforementioned saying was a part of the script, which was hanged to the
Holy Prophet (S)’s sword and given to \`Ali in heritage. In al-Sahih
4/67, al-Bukhari records this narration. Similarly, Muslim, in al-Sahih
4/115 and 216, records it in various ways of narration. Like many
others, al-Tirmidhi also records it in al-Sunan 3/297. As a matter of
fact, they insist on these narrations since they contained, as they
claim, \`Ali’s confession that the Holy Prophet (S) had not inherited
his household any knowledge except a copy of the Holy Qur’an and that
paper, which had been hanged to his sword. Narrations, however, assure
that the Holy Prophet (S) cursed those who disavow their masters.

In Shiite reference books of Hadith, there is a fourth occasion on which
the Holy Prophet (S) uttered the wording of curse; the Qurayshite
‘released’ individuals moved to al-Madinah and partook the hypocrites in
their efforts against the Ahl al-Bayt. Once, they said, “Regarding his
existence among the Hashimites, Muhammad is just like a date-palm tree
planted in a junkyard.” When he was informed about this saying, the Holy
Prophet (S) ordered \`Ali to ascend the minbar and answer them.  
 In Bihar al-Anwar 38/204, we read the following:  
 Al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah narrated the following on the authority of \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib (a.s.):  
 Once, the Holy Prophetsummoned me and ordered to ascend his minbar and
declare. “Curse of Allah and curse of His archangels and messaged
Prophets and my curse be on him whoever disavows his father or master as
well as him whoever wrongs his wageworker.” As I did, no one commented
except \`Umar ibn al-Khattab. “O Abu’l-Hasan,” said he, “You have
conveyed. But they were ambiguous words.” I was back to the Holy Prophet
(S) to inform about \`Umar’s saying. The Holy Prophet (S) asked me to
convey, “O people! We should never communicate words to you unless we
have their interpretation. I am your father. I am your master. I am your
wageworker.

A narration that is recorded in Furat ibn Ibrahim al-Kufi’s Tafsir 392
proves that the Holy Prophet (S) uttered the same statement on a fifth
occasion:  
 … Fatimah bint (daughter of) al-Husayn narrated on the authority of
al-Husayn ibn \`Ali that he said:  
 When the Holy Prophet (S) was in al-Madinah, some of the Muhajirun
offered him a part of their properties to help in managing any
unexpected matters he might counter. For a while, he nodded his head
down and, finally, refused their offer saying, “I am not ordered to take
anything from your properties.” Soon after that, Archangel Gabriel
descended from the Heavens carrying Almighty Allah’s saying, “Say: I do
not ask for you any reward for it but love my near relatives.” As the
Holy Prophet (S) conveyed this Verse to them, Muhajirun went out
grumbling at this commandment, saying to each other that he had intended
only to submit them to the sons of \`Abd al-Muttalib forever. The Holy
Prophet (S) then summoned \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib and ordered him to ascend
his minbar and address to people, “He that wrongs a wageworker regarding
his wage should seek himself a place in Hellfire. He that disavows his
master should seek himself a place in Hellfire. He that denies his
parents should seek himself a place in Hellfire.”  
 A man stood up and asked for an interpretation for these words. \`Ali
went back to the Holy Prophet (S) and conveyed that man’s request. “Woe
to the people of Quraysh because of the interpretation of these words,”
the Holy Prophet (S) repeated thrice and then said, “\`Ali: Go and tell
them that I am the wageworker the obedience to whom is an order issued
in the Heavens. You and I are the masters of the believers. You and I
are the fathers of the believers.”

The Prophets’ Need For People’s Protection During Conveying The Missions
------------------------------------------------------------------------

During the interpretation of the Verse of \`Ismah,[^14] the
pro-Qurayshite exegetes have committed two fatal mistakes:

**First**, they have misrepresented the actual conception of the
missions of the Prophets including Muhammad (S).

**Second**, they have attempted to conceal the reality of people of
Quraysh after the conquest of Makkah. They have intended to draw the
Verse away from these incidents and tried to persuade Muslims that
people of Quraysh—the polytheists and the center of the devils—all of a
sudden, changed into those pious people who received piety in a period
of a single night and day and went on leading people to Islam and its
right path.

Qur’anic Sense of Conveyance
----------------------------

The Holy Qur’an carries a simple meaning of conveyance; the messengers’
explicating the Divine Mission and leaving the option for people, and
the Lord, not the Prophets, will be the judge. Hence, a number of
principles can be concluded from this deep basis:

**First**, a Prophet (S) is in urgent need to guarantee the right of
free opinions so that he will be able to transmit and convey his Lord’s
mission adequately. This was the Prophets’ preliminary demand from their
nations.

**Second**, their mission is no more than conveyance. Before Prophet
Abraham (a.s.), jihad was not imposed upon the Prophets; yet Almighty
Allah imposed it upon Abraham and the coming Prophets[^15] so as to
remove the obstacles that impeded the process of conveyance or to face
the atheists’ assaults against the believers who chose the true religion
and organized their lives accordingly.

**Third**, no one should be obliged to convert to the ‘new’ religion. It
is quite free for everybody to choose any course. Hence, the law of
guidance and deviation ought to be effective and the capability to do
good and evil ought to be available.

**Fourth**, the purpose of the exercise of conveying the Divine Missions
is to provide to the Lord clear, complete and perfect claims against
people in order that they will not have any excuses when they will be
resurrected for judgment. To provide claims in the divine religions is
an original and perpetual pivot in the tasks of the Prophets. When a
Prophet (S) conveys rulings to people and explicates clearly their
beliefs and duties, he will activate the Lord’s claim and, as a result,
perfect the mission and release himself from any responsibility.

Everyone is individually responsible for his response to the Prophets,
be positive or negative, as well as his acts. A Prophet (S) is not
responsible in this regard at all. Almighty Allah says,

***“Say: Then Allah’s is the conclusive argument; so if He pleased, He
would certainly guide you all. 6:149”***

Let us now cite some proofs, quoted from the Holy Qur’an, on this
discussion:  
 Prophet (S) Noah says to his people,

***“I deliver to you the messages of my Lord and I offer you good advise
and I know from Allah what you do not. 7:62”***

About Prophetshu\`ayb, the Holy Qur’an says,

***“So he turned away from them and said: O my people! I delivered to
you the messages of my Lord and I gave you good advice; how will I then
be sorry for an unbelieving people? 7:93”***

About Prophet (S) Hud, the Holy Qur’an says,

***“But if you turn back, then indeed I have delivered to you the
message with which I have been sent to you, and my Lord will bring
another people in your place, and you cannot do Him any harm; surely my
Lord is the Preserver of all things. 11:57”***

Referring to the common point in the Prophets’ missions, Almighty Allah
says,

***“Is then aught incumbent upon the apostles except a plain delivery of
the message? 16:35”***

***“They said: Our Lord knows that we are most surely messengers to you.
And nothing devolves on us but a clear deliverance of the message.
36:16-7”***

In fact, the concepts of the divine conveyance are too many to be
discussed here. As they are cited from Qur’anic texts and Hadiths, they
form a perfect hypothesis. Almighty Allah describes His religion and
Book as a conveyance;

***“This is a conveyance for people and that they may be warned thereby,
and that they may conceive that He is One Allah and that those possessed
of understanding may mind. 14:52”***

The Holy Qur’an has also been described as a conveyance for the coming
generations who will receive Islam;

***“Say: what is the weightiest in testimony? Say: Allah is witness
between you and me; and this Qur’an has been revealed to me that with it
I may warn you and whomsoever it reaches. 6/19”***

The Lord praised His Prophets for their trust and courage in conveying
His messages in spite of people’s resistance and mockery; “

***Those who deliver the messages of Allah and fear Him, and do not fear
any one but Allah; and Allah is sufficient to take account. 33:39”***

Almighty Allah considers the process of receiving and conveying the
divine revelation as one of the most serious and critical actions that
require distinctive personalities and precise divine guardianship;

***“The Knower of the unseen! So He does not reveal His secrets to any
except to him whom He chooses as an apostle; for surely He makes a guard
to march before him and after him so that He may know that they have
truly delivered the messages of their Lord, and He encompasses what is
with them, and He records the number of all things. 72/26-7”***

The conveyance of our Prophet (S)
---------------------------------

The most interesting point in this regard in the conveyance of Prophet
Muhammad (S) whose mission and responsibility is described by Almighty
Allah as,

***“And obey Allah and obey the Apostle and be cautious; but if you turn
back, then know that only a clear deliverance of the message is
incumbent on Our apostle. 5:92”***

***“Say: Obey Allah and obey the Apostle; but if you turn back, then on
him rests that which is imposed on him and on you rests that which is
imposed on you; and if you obey him, you are on the right way; and
nothing rests on the Apostle but clear deliverance of the message.
24:54”***

***“So, if they submit then indeed they follow the right way; and if
they turn back, then upon you is only the delivery of the message, and
Allah sees the servants. 3/20”***

***“But if they turn aside, We have not sent you as a watcher over them.
On you is only to deliver the message. 42:48”***

Hence, the Lord sent our Prophet (S) on the bases of the divine message
formulation and conveyance with which the Prophets were sent; namely,
the rule of substantiating the Lord’s argument upon people while
avoiding coercing them to admit it. This is the very meaning of Almighty
Allah’s saying,

***“On you is only to deliver the message. 24:54”***

The Holy Prophet (S) also said, “I have been ordered to fight people
until they say ‘There is no god but Allah’ and if they say it, they will
guard their souls and properties against me.”

This coercion stands for submitting the Christians and Jews to live
peacefully with Muslims and submitting the paganists and polytheists to
enter the general frame of Islam. When one obeys, another disobeys, a
third one takes the right path and a fourth deviates, this is Allah’s
concern, since He is the one and only Judge. On that account, the
conveyance of the divine message will naturally be in need for
protection, otherwise people of Quraysh would assassinate him, defame
his promulgation or preclude people from listening to him after they
would have realized the real size of the danger that such a promulgation
causes on their authority and gods. Despite the fact that the secret, as
well as the seen, divine attention to the Prophets is of various forms,
the Lord’s norm about His Messengers is to leave their protection for
the natural factors, yet with a sum of divine attention.

As a matter of fact, there is no single proof on the claim that the Lord
would always guarantee His Prophets’ safety from injuries or
assassination, as well as any sort of harm they mighty counter in their
lifetimes.  
 We have previously referred to reports respecting the continuity of
guarding the Holy Prophet (S) to the end of his honorable life. It is to
add that he asked the Arab clans to guarantee his protection for
conveying his Lord’s Message. Let us listen to this narration recorded
by Ibn Husham, in al-Sirah 2/23:  
 Rabi\`ah ibn \`Abbad narrated the following: I was a young boy when I
accompanied my father in Mina where the Holy Prophet (S) was used to
attending in the quarters of the Arab clans addressing to them, “I am
the messenger of Allah to you. I instruct you to worship Allah alone,
avoid associating others with Him, give up the worship of anything
except Him, believe in me, give me credence and protect me so that I
will be able to carry my Lord’s Message.”[^16]

Moreover, many reports have asserted that the Holy Prophet (S), during
the homage of Ansar, asked them to protect his household and him as same
as they protect their families and souls. In this regard, Ibn Husham, in
al-Sirah 2/38, says:  
 After he had recited some Qur’anic Verses and urged them to embrace
Islam, the Holy Prophet said to Ansar, “I conclude with you the covenant
that you should protect me as same as you protect your sons and women.”
Al-Barra\` ibn Mu\`arwir took the Holy Prophet (S)’s hand and shouted,
“Yes, by Him Who sent you with the right we swear that we will protect
you as same as we protect our people. Confirm your covenant with us,
Allah’s messenger! We are, by Allah, men of wars and heroism. We have
been inheriting so from our great fathers.”[^17]

Accordingly, our claim has been proven; the Holy Prophet (S), following
the previous Prophets’ norms, asked for protection so that he would be
able to carry the divine message. Ansar contributed in this protection.
The Lord gave victory to His Prophet (S) who defeated his enemies—the
polytheists and the Jews and he could prevail on the Arab Peninsula,
Yemen, Bahrain and the Gulf up to the boarders of Syria threatening the
Romans. In AH 10, he was about to depart to the Exalted Associate. He
received Surah of al-Ma\`idah in which he was ordered to convey the
message and that he would be protected against people. What changes
occurred? What made the Divine Revelation order him to convey in the
last stage of the conveyance? What made the Holy Prophet (S) need for
protection against people after he had ruled such a great state?

For scholars, it is unsupposed that the Holy Prophet (S) needed a
physical protection since the Exalted Lord had already willed it would
endure naturally. Hence, the protection intended in this regard should
be mental. Secondly, it is conclusive that the conveyance intended in
the Verse should stand for a remarkable matter that it would be very
much difficult for people to accept. It is also clear that ‘people’
intended in the Verse must have indicated the hypocrites, none else, who
pretended being Muslims, because all the serious matters had been
already conveyed and the mission had nothing else to convey. Besides,
after the revelation of that Verse, the Holy Prophet (S) did not declare
any expected matter.

Consequently, the Verse would be meaningless, Almighty Allah forbid, if
it did not refer to the protection against suspecting the Holy Prophet
(S); some people would doubt him when they would listen to him
nominating his household as the coming political and religious leaders
of this nation. This is the only meaning supporting the general concept
of the Verse. As an interpretation, let us interpret the Verse as
follows:

O Apostle! You are only a conveyor and messenger. You are not
responsible for the coming events or results since this is your Lord’s
affair. Deliver what had been revealed to you from your Lord via
Archangel Gabriel in the matter concerning \`Ali; the matter you have
frequently intended to mention but the hypocrites prevented you. And if
you do it not, then you have neither delivered His message nor
substantiated your Lord’s argument against people. The leadership of
your progeny is not a personal matter, as the hypocrites think. It is a
basic part of this sealing, united epistle. When a part fails, the mass
will fail. Similarly, when a part of the claim fails, the entire claim
will fail. And Allah will protect you from the people; people of Quraysh
who may doubt you after you will convey this matter that is very
difficult for them to admit. This process will be completed peacefully.
Neither interruption nor will apostasy occur; hence, you will be seen as
a perfect conveyor of your Lord’s message and you will complete your
Lord’s argument on your nation as well. However, \`Ali will require to
fight these people for the interpreting the Qur’an in the same way as
you fought them for its revelation. Surely, Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people who will wrong your progeny after you and,
subsequently, will wrong your nation. They will change Allah’s favor
into atheism and drive this nation into combats and collapse.

People of Quraysh; The Reason Beyond The Additional Protection
--------------------------------------------------------------

From the Holy Verse as well as various narrations, we can conclude that
the Holy Prophet (S)’s conveyance of his Lord’s message regarding the
leadership of his progeny might have caused a grave quake in the *Ummah*
and a serious threat against his Prophethood. What are the reason and
circumstances that might have caused such a sweeping catastrophe?
Neither the Arab tribes nor the Jews nor could the Christians have any
opinion or intruded themselves in the matter of the Holy Prophet (S)’s
nominating his progeny as his successors. The only source of danger that
might have precluded this affair was people of Quraysh.

It seemed that the Holy Prophet (S) despaired of carrying on the affair
as he had anticipated that people would apostatize as soon as he would
declare it frankly and formally because of the tribal structure of
Quraysh.

Quraysh; The Root of Villains
-----------------------------

Qurayshite chiefs are the evil face of Ishmael’s offspring; yet, the
Holy Prophet (S) and Abu-Talib, his uncle, doubted those chiefs’
belonging to Prophet Ismayl (a.s.). They joined the intricate characters
of the Jews—their cousins, to the tyranny of the violent chiefs of the
Bedouin tribes. Except the Hashimites and a few others, people of
Quraysh were the source of tyranny and Satanism. Almighty Allah has
compared those chiefs to Pharaoh;

***“Surely We have sent to you an Apostle, a witness against you, as We
sent an apostle to Pharaoh. But Pharaoh disobeyed the apostle, so We
laid on him a violent hold. 73:15-6”***  
 As he was watching the victims of the battle of Badr, the Holy Prophet
said, “Allah may punish you—the evil band badly. You belied me while I
am true-tongued and mistrusted me while I am trustworthy.” As his eyes
fell on the dead body of Abu-Jahl ibn Husham, he said, “This man is more
tyrant than Pharaoh. As Pharaoh despaired of his life, he submitted to
Allah; but when this man despaired of his life, he called forth the
idols—Lat and \`Uzza.”[^18]

Ibn Husham, in al-Sirah 3/207, has recorded the following saying of
Abu-Jahl:  
 Sons of \`Abd-Manaf and we competed on honor; we served food when they
had served it; we fought when they had fought; we gave when they had
given; but when we both had the same scale and became like two
racehorses, they claimed a Prophet (S) receiving revelation from the
heavens among them. How can we ever have such a privilege? Nay, by
Allah; we will never believe him nor will we give credence to him.[^19]

The following is quoted from al-Qummi, Tafsir 1/276:  
 The Holy Prophet (S) addressed to people of Quraysh, “The Lord has sent
me to destroy the kings of this whole world and drag their realms to
you. Respond to what I am calling forth and you will be the kings of the
Arabs, and the non-Arabs will submit to you and you will be kings in
Paradise.” Out of his envy, Abu-Jahl spoke, “O Allah! If Muhammad’s
words are the right of Thee, then rain skyey stones upon us or inflict
painful agony upon us.” He then added, “The Hashimites and we were like
two racehorses; we fought when they had fought and speared when they had
speared and cooked when they had cooked. When they and we were of the
same scale, they claimed a Prophet (S) among them. Nay, we will never
admit such a thing among the Hashimites nor sons of Makhzum.”

In al-Mustatraf 1/58, al-Abshihi records the following:  
 Mocking at a man from Yemen, Muawiyah said, “How ill-minded people your
are! You selected a woman as your leader!”[^20] The Yemeni answered,
“But I know people who are more ill-minded; these are your people! When
the Holy Prophet (S) called you to embrace Islam, you answered, ‘O
Allah! If this is the truth of Thee, then rain us with skyey stones or
inflict painful agony upon us.’ You should have said, ‘O Allah! If this
is the truth of Thee, then guide us to it.”

In al-Sirat al-Mustaqim 3/49, al-Bayadi records the following:  
 Muawiyah once spoke, “Allah favored people of Quraysh in three things;
He says, ‘And warn your near clans,’ ‘Surely, it is a remembrance for
you and your people,’ and ‘For the protection of the Quraysh.” Answering
him, a man from Ansar said, “Slow down, Muawiyah! Allah said, ‘And your
people belied it,’ and you are one of his people, and said, ‘Your people
precluded against it,’ and you are one of those people, and said, ‘My
people deserted this Qur’an,’ and you are one of his people. These are
three for your three. We can add if you add.” Thus, Muawiyah was
ashamed.

When Almighty Allah inflicted years of agony upon Pharaoh and his
people, they asked Prophet (S) Moses to implore to the Lord for
alleviating the anguish they had suffered. Analogously, the Holy Prophet
(S) cursed people of Quraysh and supplicated to Allah to inflict years
of agony upon them and, as a result, the Lord responded; they became
poor and suffered famine until they had to eat \`Alhaz, a mixture of
camel hair and blood. Nevertheless, they neither submitted to their Lord
nor implored to Him. Al-Hakim, in al-Mustadrak 2/394, records the
following:  
 Ibn \`Abbas narrated that Abu-Sufyan came to the Holy Prophet (S) and
said, “O Muhammad! I adjure you by the Lord and the kinship. We have had
to eat \`Alhaz.” Hence, Almighty Allah revealed, ‘And already We
overtook them with chastisement but they were not submissive to the
Lord, nor do they humble themselves. 23/76’

However, this narration has not appealed to the pro-Umayyad scholars
who, consequently, did nothing to interpreting this Verse; rather, they
have claimed the opposite—they claimed that people of Quraysh were
actually submissive to their Lord as they humbled themselves to Him.
Furthermore, they have claimed that the Holy Prophet (S) blessed them.
The following narration, recorded in ibn Kathir’s al-Sirah 6/101, can
serve as an example:  
 When the Holy Prophet (S) execrated people of Quraysh, they suffered
such a harsh year that took everything from them. They had to have
bones, dogs and \`Alhaz. Abu-Sufyan came to the Holy Prophet (S) and
pleased him to supplicate to Allah to relieve their crisis. The Prophet
(S) did, and the crisis was relieved.

The problem is that Ibn Kathir was fond of Abu-Sufyan’s smell. As a
historian, he did realize that Abu-Sufyan’s attendance at the Holy
Prophet (S) occurred only after the Holy Prophet (S) had felt pity for
people of Quraysh and sent them food stuff and some money. He expected
them to submit to the Lord and believe in Him and His Messenger; but
they exploited that mercy and selected Abu-Sufyan as their
representative to the Holy Prophet (S) to offer a plan of reconciliation
that was as same as the plans of reconciliation frequently suggested by
the Israelis nowadays; however, their plan was rejected. As a second
attempt, Abu-Sufyan sought Imam \`Ali and Fatimah al-Zahra\` to
intercede for him; but they rejected, too; therefore, he suggested that
a treaty of reconciliation would be recorded in the names of al-Hasan
and al-Husayn so that they would take pride in it among the Arabs. \`Ali
and Fatimah also rejected and answered that they would never protect
anyone against the Holy Prophet (S).

Clans of Quraysh
----------------

Quraysh was more than twenty clans, namely, sons of Hashim ibn
\`Abd-Manaf, sons of Umayyah ibn \`Abd-Shams, Banu-\`Abd al-Dar ibn
Qusay, sons of Makhzum ibn Yaqazhah ibn Murrah, sons of Zuhrah ibn
Kalab, sons of Asad ibn \`Abd al-\`Uzza, sons of al-Harith ibn Fihr ibn
Malik, sons of \`Amir ibn Lu\`ay, sons of Sahm ibn \`Amr, sons of Jamh
ibn \`Amr, sons of Anmar ibn Bughayd, sons of Taym ibn Murrah ibn Ka\`b,
sons of \`Adi ibn Ka\`b and others.

As a matter of fact, the management and leadership were in the hands of
definite, yet a very few, clans while the rest were only followers. As
he describes the meeting of Dar al-Nidwah (The House of Council), which
was held for discussing the issue of the Holy Prophet (S), Ibn Husham,
in al-Sirah 2/331, records the following:  
 The meeting was attended by the celebrities of Quraysh. \`Utbah ibn
Rabi\`ah, Shaybah ibn Rabi\`ah and Abu-Sufyan ibn Harb represented the
sons of \`Abd-Shams. Tuwaymah ibn \`Adi, Jubayr ibn Mutim and al-Harith
ibn \`Amir ibn Nawfal represented the sons of Nawfal ibn \`Abd-Manaf.
Al-Nadr ibn al-Harith ibn Kildah represented the Banu-\`Abd al-Dar ibn
Qusay. Abu’l-Bukhtari ibn Husham, Z*Ummah* ibn al-Aswad ibn al-Muttalib
and Hakim ibn Huzam represented the sons of Asad ibn \`Abd al-\`Uzza.
Abu-Jahl ibn Husham represented the sons of Makhzum. Nabih ibn al-Hajjaj
and Munabbih his brother represented the sons of Sahm. Umayyah ibn
Khalaf represented the sons of Jamh. Besides, many others were
attendant. Some spoke, “You have clearly seen the acts of this man. I
cannot guarantee that he will not lead his followers against us. You
should decide something in this regard.” As they consulted the matter,
some suggested that they should detain him and wait… etc.

As he refers to those who readied to cover the expenses of the
polytheists’ army during the Battle of Badr, ibn Husham, in al-Sirah
2/488, records the following:  
 The Qurayshites who undertook the expenses of the polytheists’ army
were al-\`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hashim from the Hashimites and
\`Utbah ibn Rabi\`ah ibn \`Abd-Shams from the sons of \`Abd-Shams ibn
\`Abd-Manaf and a-Harith ibn \`Amir ibn Nawfal and Tuwaymah ibn \`Adi
ibn Nawfal from the sons of Nawfal ibn \`Abd-Manaf and Abu’l-Bukhtari
ibn Husham ibn Asad and Hakim ibn Huzam ibn Khuwaylid ibn Asad from the
sons of Asad ibn \`Abd al-\`Uzza and al-Nadr ibn al-Harith ibn Kildah
ibn \`Alqamah ibn \`Abd-Manaf from the sons of Abdul-Dar.

The following is the order of the Qurayshite clans depended by \`Umar
ibn al-Khattab in the records of his government during the distribution
of the imports. Yet, it can help prove the fact that these clans’
structure was intensely complicated and that the Hashimites were always
on the top.  
 We read the following in al-Bayhaqi’s al-Sunan 6/364:  
 When he registered the records of his government, \`Umar decided to
begin with the Hashimites, “I saw the Holy Prophet (S) precede them and
sons of al-Muttalib.” Hence, their names were recorded in the top of the
list and he gave them equally. As he noticed the lineage of sons of
\`Abd-Shams and Nawfal, \`Umar added, “Sons of \`Abd-Shams are the Holy
Prophet (S)’s full brothers while sons of Nawfal are half brothers.
Hence, they should be preceded.” Then, he looked upon sons of Abd
al-\`Uzza and \`Abd al-Dar, “Sons of Asad ibn \`Abd al-\`Uzza are the
Holy Prophet (S)’s maternal relatives. They were within the Mutayyibin.”
\`Umar thus preceded them to Banu-\`Abd al-Dar. Sons of Zuhrah followed
Banu-\`Abd al-Dar, as \`Umar saw. Sons of Taym and Makhzum came next,
“Sons of Taym were a party in the treaty of Fudul. Besides, they were
within the Mutayyibin among whom was the Holy Prophet (S).  
 Finally, they enjoyed favors.” Accordingly, sons of Taym were preceded
to sons of Makhzum. Sons of Sahm, Jamh and \`Adi ibn Ka\`b came
therewith. Some suggested that he should begin with sons of \`Adi. “No,
I should settle myself in its place. Sons of Sahm and we were of the
same rank when Islam came forth. You should choose between sons of Jamh
and Sahm in precedence,” \`Umar decided. Finally, sons of Jamh were
preceded. Sons of Sahm and \`Adi were recorded under the same name. When
they were separated, \`Umar shouted, “Allah is the greatest! Praised be
Allah Who bestowed me my share from His Messenger.” Then came sons of
\`Amir ibn Lu\`ay. Abu-\`Ubaydah ibn \`Abdullah ibn al-Jarrah al-Fihri
objected and blamed \`Umar for preceding all those to him. “Well,
Abu-\`Ubaydah,” said \`Umar, “you may either succumb, like what I had
done, or you should discuss this matter with your people. I will accept
their decision if they precede you to themselves. For me, I will precede
you to sons of \`Adi—my people.”  
 In the reign of Muawiyah, sons of al-Harith ibn Fihr were preceded and
located between sons of \`Abd Manaf and Asad ibn \`Abd al-\`Uzza. In the
reign of a-Mahdi, the \`Abbasid caliph, a quarrel occurred between sons
of Sahm and \`Adi. Therefore, they separated. For their standing,
al-Mahdi preceded sons of \`Adi.

It is generally admissible that the Hashimites were distinctive among
the other Qurayshite clans due to their unique mentality, behavior,
activities and values. It is also evident that the other tribes
respected them exclusively. This was the reason beyond the other
Qurayshite clans’ having envied them. Since the days of Hashim and \`Abd
al-Muttalib, the Hashimites were antagonized. It was Hashim who
constituted the Summer journey to Syria, Palestine and Egypt for people
of Quraysh. He toured in deserts and countries and negotiated the chiefs
and kings of tribes and countries by which their caravans had to pass.
He concluded treaties of nonaggression for conserving safety of people
of Quraysh’s caravans who expressed their delight for this achievement
and took initiative in taking advantage of it. Nevertheless, they envied
Hashim and hoped had that been their own achievement so that they would
have obtained that pride. Hashim however was deceased in Ghaza under
obscure circumstances. Yet, his house was not extinguished. \`Abd
al-Muttalib, his son, could be the master of his people continuing his
father’s achievements. He constituted the Winter journey to Yemen as
well as many treaties of nonaggression with the chiefs and kings of
tribes and countries by which people of Quraysh’s caravans passed. Like
his father, \`Abd al-Muttalib took pride in this act.

From the mental side, the clans of Quraysh noticed that the Hashimites
generally, and \`Abd al-Muttalib particularly, were used to taking pride
in their being Ishmael’s sons and followers of Abraham’s creed, as if
they were the only offspring of Ishmael and Abraham and, in more
concentrating vision, as if they suspected the others’ lineage.
Abu-Talib and the Holy Prophet (S) applied this idea in the most
tangible view. The chasm between the Hashimites and the other Qurayshite
clans increased largely when \`Abd al-Muttalib claimed receiving divine
inspiration via the true coming dreams. Once, he informed his people
that the Lord had ordered him to dig the well of Zamzam, which was
derelict long time ago. When he dug, water sprang anew by the permission
of Allah the Exalted and he could find two golden statues on the form of
gazelle there. \`Abd al-Muttalib adorned the gate of the Holy Ka\`bah
with these two golden statues adding a new feature to him who
exclusively took the task of serving the pilgrims with food. He was
named ‘the waterer of the pilgrims and the Holy Precinct’ due to the
scarcity of water at that time.

When the Abyssinian army were on their way towards the Holy Ka\`bah,
\`Abd al-Muttalib told people that they would never touch it since
Almighty Allah would defeat them. This prophesy came true when Almighty
Allah rained the army of Abyssinia with tiny birds that cast them with
backed stones; hence, He caused them to be like a ruined nest. As if he
was a Prophet (S), or an introducer to a Prophet (S), \`Abd al-Muttalib
legislated a number of laws and regulations. He issued that the ritual
Circumambulation of the Hajj should be seven times. As some of the Arabs
were used to going around the Holy Ka\`bah naked, because they presumed
the profanity of their clothes, \`Abd al-Muttalib prohibited this
practice. He warned people against burying the she-babies alive. He
issued the obligation of fulfilling the vows and respecting the holy
months. He prohibited wines and fornication and constituted a definite
punishment for the perpetrators of such a sin. He banished the notorious
prostitutes out of Makkah, prohibited the marriage of the blood
relations, issued the punishment of cutting the larceners’ hands and
finally constituted unmerciful regulations against the murderers. He
identified one hundred camels to be paid as the blood money of
bloodshed. All the previous regulations and laws are legislated in
Islam.

\`Abd al-Muttalib enjoyed the greatest honor among Quraysh as well as
the other Arab tribes; he therefore was envied excessively by the
Qurayshite chiefs who dragged him to be the other party in a contest for
showing the most honorable by the governance of priests. As a new
property, Almighty Allah caused \`Abd al-Muttalib to overcome twice
increasing his standing and good reputation among people.

The matter that most aroused the Qurayshite chiefs against \`Abd
al-Muttalib was the accident of providing one of his sons as a sacrifice
for the Lord of the Holy Ka\`bah, just like Prophet Abraham (a.s.)—his
forefather. Hence, the Qurayshite chiefs could not enjoy a moment of
relief.

As soon as \`Abd al-Muttalib departed life, Abu-Talib, the son, taking
the place of his father and grandfather, became the chief of his people
as well as the other Arab tribes. He preserved his father’s maxims.
During the reign of Abu-Talib, the grandest dole on the Qurayshite
chiefs took place; Muhammad, Abu-Talib’s nephew, claimed Prophethood and
demanded with believing and complying with him. This dole for the
Qurayshite chiefs expanded when a number of the Hashimites and sons of
al-Muttalib believed in him and Abu-Talib declared his responsibility of
protecting him during the conveyance of his Lord’s message. He also
threatened people of Quraysh a sweeping war if they would touch a single
hair of Muhammad (S). Sparing no efforts in supporting his nephew,
Abu-Talib stood in the face of the cabals managed by the Qurayshite
chiefs. He also composed poems through which he divulged the ill
intentions of the Qurayshite chiefs and suspected their belongingness to
Prophet Ismayl (a.s.). His poems of glorifying Muhammad (S) and
reproaching the Qurayshite chiefs were carried to the other Arab tribes.
Abu-Talib named Abu’l-Hakam, the chief of Banu-Makhzum, as ‘the tiny
ignorant of Makhzum,’ while the Holy Prophet (S) named him
‘Abu-Jahl’ -man of ignorance-.

In spite of their various attempts to incite and threaten Abu-Talib and
his nephew, people of Quraysh failed to achieve any progress in
defeating that divine Prophethood. They then decided to persecute any
Muslim they would catch; therefore, most of Muslims fled to Abyssinia
bringing a new disappointment for the Qurayshite chiefs.  
 Accompanied by sons of Kinanah, the Qurayshite chiefs decided to
besiege the Hashimites. They arrested them in a col for three or four
years. Yet, through a miracle, the Lord undid their blockade. When the
Hashimites lost Abu-Talib, people of Quraysh decided to assassinate
Muhammad (S) since he had lost the protector; but Almighty Allah
disappointed their consensus and ordered His Messenger to move to
Yathrib—the city that most of its people embraced and admitted Islam.

Besides the Jews, the Qurayshite chiefs used all means to instigate or
threat people of al-Madinah to give up the Holy Prophet (S); yet, they
failed because that city, which was situated on the main way of their
economic exchange with Syria and the neighboring territories, complied
with the Holy Prophet (S) from top to bottom.  
 In conclusion, they decided to declare war against that Hashimite
individual; they therefore fought against him in Badr, Uhud and
a-Khandaq; yet, they failed, as usual. They also failed when they used
the Jews, the Romans and the Persians against him.

Unexpectedly, Prophet Muhammad (S) surprised them when he conquered
their capital, Makkah, with great numbers of unbeatable soldiers in AH
8. So, people of Quraysh had to surrender and submit to him. They formed
two lines to watch the parade of the Holy Prophet (S) and his army. The
standard of conquest was raised by \`Abdullah ibn Ruwahah, the young man
from the Yemeni tribe of al-Khazraj. He was shouting with a poem:

O sons of atheists! Clear the way to him

Today, we will strike you for the revelation

So abruptly that your heads will be removed

And friends will be engaged against their revered

My Lord! I do believe in his mission.

Having felt jealous to hear that, \`Umar shouted at the poet, “Son of
Ruwahah! Is it before the Holy Prophet (S) and in Allah’s Precinct you
are poetizing?” But the Holy Prophet (S) intruded, “Leave him alone,
\`Umar! These verses are more piercing than spearheads.”[^21]  
 \`Umar intended to relieve the Qurayshite chiefs’ defeat and to avoid
challenging them in their capital. It is worth mentioning that \`Umar
was the son of that worthless clan of \`Adi and was brought up on
respect for the Qurayshite chiefs. For the Holy Prophet (S), those
despotic chiefs understood nothing other than the prose of swords and
that \`Abdullah ibn Ruwahah’s act had been quite correct and highly
appreciated by Almighty Allah since it was more piercing upon His foes
than spearheads.

Conquest of Makkah Bewilders the Jurisprudents
----------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) had secured people of Quraysh before he gathered
their chiefs in the Holy Mosque under the swords of Allah’s soldiers. He
reminded them of many things; their arrogance, tyranny, belying the
miracles and portents of Allah, dissenting Allah and His Messenger and
persecuting the Hashimites and Muslims in addition to their conflicts
and cabals against Islam and Muslims.

Read the following as quoted from al-Tabari’s Tarikh 2/337:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Qatadah al-Sadusi that the
Holy Prophet (S), during the conquest of Makkah, stood on the gate of
the Holy Ka\`bah and said, “There is no god but Allah, alone with no
associate. He fulfilled His promise, granted victory to His servant and,
alone, defeated the parties (of the polytheists). Any claimed revenge or
property must be under my feet except the custody of the House of Allah
and the watering of the pilgrims. O people of Quraysh! Allah has saved
you from the practices of Jahiliyah and taking pride in the forefathers.
All people belong to Adam and Adam was created from mud. ‘O people! We
have created you from male and female, and We have made you peoples and
tribes so that you will associate each other. The most honorable of you
to Allah is being the most careful of his duty.’ O people of Quraysh and
people of Makkah! What do you expect me to do with you?” “Good! You are
but a generous brother and the son of a generous brother,” answered
they. “Go free! You are released,” responded the Holy Prophet (S).

After they had been within the spoils of war that the Holy Prophet (S)
had the right to possess, people of Quraysh were manumitted and
released. Hence, they are called ‘the released.’

This fact perplexed the pro-Qurayshite jurisprudents. A release occurs
only after capture and enslavement. This proposes that those people were
manumitted by the Holy Prophet (S) who had enslaved them. Accordingly,
they should be the fellows and subjects of his family for good. Their
being Muslims saved them from being sentenced to death penalty only. It
did not cancel their being enslaved; yet, this ruling is dedicated to
them. According to the rulings of jihad and Islamic conquest, such
rulings are inactive. The following is a sketch of the Holy Prophet
(S)’s practices:

Ten thousand Muslims under the Holy Prophet (S)’s leadership surrounded
Makkah. People of Quraysh were too frightened to counter that army. As
an Islamic rule, people of Makkah, if they were Jews or Christians,
should choose one of three; become Muslims, fight against the Muslim
army or defray the tribute (Jizyah) and keep their religion. As they
were polytheists, they had only two choices; either to choose for Islam
or to fight. They however chose for Islam under the menace of swords.
They should have been treated as Muslims, but the Holy Prophetsubmitted
them to the rulings of the prisoners of war and then released them. This
sort of release is unfamiliar for Muslim jurisprudents; a prisoner of
war should be killed, released or compensated. The ruling of the release
without manumission or compensation is dedicated to the people of
Quraysh during the conquest of Makkah.  
 Another jurisprudential unsolved problem comes to the surface; the Holy
Prophet (S)’s decision of excluding, from punishment, everyone who would
stay home, throw his weapon or join Abu-Sufyan’s house did not condition
that such people should declare being Muslims.

The third question the rulings regarding the lands of Makkah about which
there are many probabilities, such as that they are not possessed
because they are within the holy House of Allah, they were conquered and
thus all Muslims have rights in them forever, They had been possessed by
people of Quraysh since they choose for Islam but people purchased some
from their owners later on. In my conception, the lands of Makkah should
be out of possession because they are under the custody of the Holy
Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams, while the Holy Prophet (S)’s decision of
saving the souls of those previously mentioned people was mere salvation
from killing. His amnesty to people of Quraysh means that they will be
always his enslaved individuals who enjoy definite rulings according to
the laws of Islam. He released them in the same way as a master says to
his slaves, ‘Go and do whatever you like.’ However, they, as well as
their progeny, are still decided as slaves of that master and his heirs.
In other words, he did not make them choose either Islam or fighting;
yet, they were compelled to a definite choice and they thus were
overcome and captured.

The Holy Prophet (S) regarded them as Muslims when he ordered them to
take part in the Battle of Hunayn and when he ordered their women to pay
homage to him. On other occasions, they were regarded as polytheists
when their sons and slaves who could find their way out to the Holy
Prophet (S) after the conquest of Makkah were not given back to them:  
 The following is recorded in Nahj al-Balaghah 3/30:  
 Imam \`Ali (a.s.) answered Muawiyah saying:  
 You think that so-and-so and so-and-so are the most distinguished
persons in Islam. You have said such a thing which if it be true, you
have nothing to do with it, but if it be not, then its defect will not
affect you. And what are you to do with the question of who is better
and who is worse, or who is the ruler and who is the ruled. What have
the ‘released’ ones and their sons to do with distinguishing between the
first Muhajirun and determining their position or defining their ranks.
What a pity! The sound of an arrow is being produced by what is not a
real arrow, and he against whom the judgement is to be passed is sitting
in judgement. O man, why do you not see your own lameness and remain
within bounds? And why do not you realize the shortness of your measure
and stay back where destiny has placed you? You have no concern with the
defeat of the defeated or the victory of the victor.

Al-Kulayni, in al-Kafi 3/512, records the following:  
 The lands of those who chose for Islam willingly should be kept in
their hands. Whatever is seized by force should belong to the Imam and
then the decision is his. Thus did the Holy Prophet (S) do to the lands
of Khaybar. When the people of al-Ta\`if became Muslims, they were
imposed to pay the tithe and its half. Makkah was conquered by the Holy
Prophet (S); therefore, its people are his prisoners. He manumitted them
and said, “Go free! You are released.”

Sunni jurisprudents have decided people of Quraysh as Muslims;
therefore, they applied them to the rulings of Muslims, but when they
are asked about the ‘released’ and whether they and their lands are
applied to the rulings of war or not, they claim that such a right is
given exclusively to the Holy Prophet (S)!  
 Let us read the following as quoted from al-Shafi\`i’s Kitab al-Umm
7/382:  
 Al-Awza\`i says that the Holy Prophet (S) conquered Makkah by force and
permitted Muhajirun to occupy their own houses and lands there; yet, he
did not consider them as spoils.  
 Abu-Yusuf says that the Holy Prophet (S) pardoned people of Makkah when
he declared that everyone who would keep himself in his house or join
the Mosque or Abu-Sufyan’s house would be safe. He asked his army not to
kill anybody except certain names or in case of defense. He gathered
them in the Mosque and said, “What do you expect me to do with you?”
“Good. You are the generous brother and the son of that generous
brother,” replied they. “Go free! You are released,” said the Holy
Prophet (S). He thus did not regard any part of their possessions as
spoils. I have already said that the Holy Prophet (S) in this issue is
not like others. His acts should be carefully understood because they
have various meanings.

In other words, the Holy Prophet (S) disregarded the rulings of Islam
when he did not add the lands of Makkah with the spoils of war and did
not enslave its people. He pardoned them and accepted their being
Muslims. This ruling is however valid for the Holy Prophet (S), none
else, and consequently, it is prohibited for any conqueror to imitate
the Holy Prophet (S) in this regard! Thus, they claim that he respected
people of Quraysh when he treated them individually.

Nevertheless, to adopt this opinion, Sunni jurisprudents have to move
this obstacle, which is yet immovable! What about the name of ‘released’
that the Holy Prophetstamped on the necks of people of Quraysh and their
partisans? Actually, it befits the slaves only.

Some Nasibis[^22] have understood that the problem of Quraysh with the
Ahl al-Bayt would enduringly remain unsettled as long as the name of
‘released’ is kept as a mark on their foreheads. This name means that
they have become the slaves of the Holy Prophet (S) and his household
and progeny and that he had only released, not manumitted them from
slavery. Even if they were manumitted, they must be always loyal to the
Holy Prophet (S) and his household. However, Sunni scholars have always
attempted to erase the name of ‘released’ in order that they might
release people of Quraysh from their slavery to the Holy Prophet (S) and
his household. Shaykh Nasir al-Din al-Albani exposes his reluctant
fanaticism to people of Quraysh when he regards the narration involved
as doubtful!  
 In Salsalat al-Ahadith al-Da\`ifah 3/307 al-Albani lists the narration
under number 1163 and comments:  
 This doubtful narration has been recorded in ibn Ishaq’s al-Sirah
4/31-2. Al-Tabari, in Tarikh 3/120, has recorded it, too. As he has
recorded it in al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 4/300-1, Ibn Kathir has not
commented with anything. It is however doubtful and suspended since Ibn
Ishaq has not named the man from whom he received it. In addition, the
narrator is not one of the Sahabah; rather, he has received the report
from the Sahabah’s followers. Hence, the narration is incompletely
transmitted or even unsound.

It seems that al-Albani has not seen the other reference books of Hadith
in which this report has been recorded. Similarly, he could not perceive
that scholars and jurisprudents have dealt with this report as
undeniable fact. We wonder if it was such an extreme historical blemish
or fanaticism to people of Quraysh that made him attempt to deny this
fact. It might be an attempt to save them from that everlasting name of
their slavery to the Holy Prophet (S) and his household.  
 The issue is however too certain and famous to all Muslim schools to be
denied. The name ‘released’ is said exclusively to people of Quraysh and
frequently used in the reference books of Hadith. Moreover, it has had
certain rulings discussed by master jurisprudents.  
 The following is narrated by al-Bukhari, in al-Sahih 5/105-6:  
 Ten thousand warriors in addition to the released were with the Holy
Prophet (S) during the battle of Hunayn; yet, they ran away… etc.

Muslim, in al-Sahih 3/106, has written down the following:  
 The released were with him; yet, they flew and he remained alone…
etc.[^23]

If truth be told, the Hashimites only stood firm and fought with the
Holy Prophet (S) in the Battle of Hunayn.  
 In al-Musnad 4/363 by Ahmad, the following is recorded:  
 The Holy Prophet said: “Muhajirun and Ansar are the friends of each
other. The Qurayshite released ones and the manumitted ones of Thaqif
are the friends of each other until the Resurrection Day.

Al-Hakim, in al-Mustadrak 4/80 and al-Haythami, in Majma\` al-Zawa\`id
10/15 have decided the authenticity of the previous report, which has
been also authenticated by Ibn Qudamah: al-Mughni 7/321, al-Sarkhasi:
al-Mabsut 10/39, Ahmad: al-Musnad 3/279, al-Bayhaqi: al-Sunan 6/306,
8/266 and 9/118 and al-Muttaqi al-Hindi: Kanz al-\`Ummal 12/86 and 5/735
where he records the following:  
 \`Umar stated, “This affair should never be held by the released and
sons of the released. If you will not keep it, do not think that
\`Abdullah ibn Rabi\`ah will be inattentive.”

People of Quraysh After the Conquest of Makkah
----------------------------------------------

The rest of the Qurayshite tyrants and the ‘released’ ones had to be
Muslims. Nevertheless, the feelings of malice and arrogance were
confined in the hiddens of most, if not all, of them. On the other side,
they found a new exit! They claimed that the government of Muhammad
should be theirs since he was that generous man and the son of that
generous man. Similarly, they adhered to the statements that Muhammad’s
nobility and pride were theirs since he was the son of Quraysh.

After all, the Holy Prophet (S) pardoned them and permitted their chiefs
to enter his state; therefore, it is illogical for them to fight or
stand against or leave that government in the hands of the strangers—
the people of the tribes of Aws and Khazraj. Likewise, the question of
Muhammad’s succession can be discussed since it was an internal affair!

It is quite understandable that people of Quraysh directed their efforts
towards the coming stage—after Muhammad’s departure. The most
significant aim they had to treat was precluding him from nominating the
Hashimites for the next leadership. They expressed this trend in a few
words; forbidding the Hashimites from joining the leadership to the
Prophethood. They decided that the position of leadership should be the
share of the Qurayshite clans other than the Hashimites who had already
enjoyed the position of Prophethood restrictively.

Furthermore, many texts and confessions lead to the fact that people of
Quraysh exerted all efforts, on both the external and internal fronts,
so as to implement this plan. Yet, most of them despaired of the Holy
Prophet (S)’s granting them any amount in the leadership because he had
been working practically for preparing his household for this position.
On that account, they plotted for assassinating him. They went on that
as soon as they had an opportunity. The Battle of Hunayn was the
excellent opportunity!

The Qurayshite tyrants have never believed in the Holy Prophet (S).
After they had declared their being Muslims and volunteered to join the
Holy Prophet (S) in his war against the tribes of Hawazin and Ghatafan
in Hunayn, they flew at the initial throw of spears. They were two
thousand warriors while the Holy Prophet (S)’s soldiers were ten
thousand. The Qurayshite tyrants were the main reason beyond the defeat
of Muslims during that battle. They urged the others to flee as exactly
as what had happened during the Battle of Uhud.  
 Predictably, the Hashimites were the only warriors who stood fast with
the Holy Prophet (S). They fought so courageously that they could face
the attack. Only then, a few numbers of the fleeing Muslims returned to
the battlefield and Allah gave them victory.

At the same time as Muslims were fleeing, people of Quraysh plotted a
number of processes aimed at assassinating the Holy Prophet (S), proving
that they had already planned for many things with the enemies.  
 Ibn Kathir who is affectionately fond of people of Quraysh and the
Umayyads, has recorded, in al-Sirah 3/691, the following saying of his
dear, al-Nudayr ibn al-Harith the chief of \`Abd al-Dar.  
 …Al-Nudayr ibn al-Harith ibn Kildah was a famous foe of the Holy
Prophet (S). During the battle of Hunayn, he joined his people who were
still keeping their beliefs. He spoke, “We intended to attack Muhammad
as soon as Hawazin would beat him. But, we could not do it. When we
resided in al-Jarranah, the Prophet (S) called at me while I was still
keeping my beliefs, ‘O al-Nudayr! May I guide you to a practice more
beneficial for you than that you had intended during the Battle of
Hunayn, but the Lord stopped you?’ I came to him so hurriedly. ‘Now, it
is the proper time to understand the infirmity of your previous
intention,’ said the Prophet (S). I confessed, ‘Yes, indeed. I know that
had there been a god other than Allah, he would have influenced. I
declare that there is no god but Allah, alone without associate.’ Then,
the Prophetsupplicated to Allah saying, ‘O Allah, supply him with more
steadfastness.’  
 Since that day, I feel my heart being as firm as a rock. The Prophet
(S) then said, “Praise be to Allah Who guided him.”

It is clearly noticeable that the previous words of this Qurayshite
chief involve his declaration and claim of believing in Allah the
Exalted. A man’s declaration is sufficient evidence. It is also
noticeable that he declared the first creed of Islam only and neglected
the other, which is the declaration of Muhammad’s divine Prophethood. A
claim is not provable unless others testify it.  
 This recognition proves that their pretense to be Muslims on the day of
the conquest of Makkah had been false. Two thousand warriors were under
the commandment of this chief during the Battle of Hunayn while he was
planning for assassinating the Holy Prophet (S).

This indicates that all the warriors were parties in that plot. In
addition, these words reveal that they had actually implemented
processes of assassinating the Holy Prophet (S) but their activities
were failed by the Lord and communicated to the Holy Prophet (S). Other
narrations have attested that the Qurayshite chiefs, during the flight
of Muslims in the Battle of Hunayn, could no longer keep the secret;
therefore, they shouted of their rooted atheism and divulged their
intentions. We read the following from Ibn Husham’s al-Sirah 4/46:  
 … When Muslims fled, some people of Quraysh could no longer hide malice
that disturbed their hearts. Abu-Sufyan ibn Harb shouted, while pieces
of pagans were kept in his bag, “Let them be thrown in the sea.”  
 Jibillah ibn al-Hanbal and Safwan ibn Umayyah, the polytheists,
shouted, “Sorcery has certainly failed!”  
 Shaybah ibn \`Uthman ibn Abi-Talhah, whose brother was killed in the
Battle of Uhud, cried, “Today, I will retaliate upon Muhammad. Today, I
will kill Muhammad.” He, later on, narrated, “I searched for the Prophet
(S) as I intended to kill him. But something strange locked my heart;
therefore, I realized that I would never have the ability to kill him.”

Moreover, Shaybah, a Muslim leader and son of Quraysh (the striving
faithful and Muslim tribe!), confessed that he went around the
Prophetseveral time to kill him.  
 A deep look in the identities, ways of thinking and interests of the
Qurayshite chiefs clearly exposes their hypocrisy and that they had
decided to belie the portents and miracles introduced by Muhammad (S)
and gainsay all the humanitarian values and norms for which he called.
They also decided not to join his religion in any case except when they
would be threatened by swords or when his state would be in their hands.

No single means did they save when they fought the Holy Prophet (S).
Regardless, they had to fail and, finally, were defeated. As a second
stage, they continued plotting cabals and attempting to assassinate him,
but they failed, too. Then, they came to him demanding with a position
of leadership in his state, but they failed, as usual.  
 At length, they claimed that they had the right to be the rulers of his
government since they were his people.  
 In point of fact, such sort of people who predominated on the Islamic
State and precluded the Ahl al-Bayt from the leadership requires a
discerning study.  
 In Manaqib Ali Abi-Talib 2/239, Ibn Shahrashub records:  
 In Tanzih al-Anbiya\` 167, Sharif Al-Murtada comments:  
 As soon as the Holy Prophet (S) nominated \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib for the
next leadership, a group of Qurayshite people came and said, “People
have no long span in Islam. They will not accept to see your cousin
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib be their leader while you were the Prophet (S). You
may issue another decision.” The Holy Prophet (S) replied, “That was not
my decision so that I may cancel. It is the Lord’s decision. It is He
Who ordered me to declare it.” They then suggested, “Well then. You may
add a man from Quraysh to him so that people will be satisfied and your
affairs will be affirmative.” Soon afterwards, Almighty Allah revealed,
“Surely, if you associate, your work would certainly come to naught and
you would certainly be of the losers. 39/65”  
 It has been narrated on the authority of \`Abd al-\`A¨im al-Hasani that
Imam al-Sadiq said, “People of Quraysh were under the leadership of a
man from the tribe of \`Adi when they appeared before the Holy Prophet
(S) and said, “We have abandoned our paganism and followed you. Let us
have a part in the leadership you have given to \`Ali.” Hence, Almighty
Allah revealed, ***“Surely, if you associate, your work would certainly
come to naught and you would certainly be of the losers. 39:65***”

People of Quraysh Gather Around Suhayl Ibn \`Amr
------------------------------------------------

Despite the unfaithful situations shown by people of Quraysh after the
conquest of Makkah, the Holy Prophet (S) put forth efforts for acquiring
their loyalty by dignifying and welcoming them. He donated them the
greatest shares of the spoils and promised to donate more in the future
provided that they would show fidelity and good manners.

Not for their appreciation, the Lord advised His Messenger to use the
illumination of tranquility and benevolence to face the intricacy and
narrow-mindedness of those tyrant people for sake of the coming
generations. Meanwhile, the chiefship of Abu-Sufyan retracted, and he
could keep nothing other than his false fame of combating Muhammad (S).
Abu-Sufyan’s chiefship was fit in wars and trade, not in situations of
peace and political activities. After he had been defeated in the
conquest of Makkah, Abu-Sufyan resided in al-Madinah and asked the Holy
Prophet (S) to appoint him as tax collector.

Suhayl ibn \`Amr was selected as the very thinker and politician who
might regain the ‘glories’ of Quraysh after the military downfall. Not
too long, he became the only pivot around whom people of Quraysh rotated
and the only heir of those chiefs whom were killed by Muhammad and his
Lord. Although he was one of the sons of \`Amir ibn Lu\`ay who were a
grade lower than sons of Ka\`b ibn Lu\`ay, as Ibn Husham asserts in
al-Sirah 2/489, Suhayl ibn \`Amr ibn \`Abd-Shams ibn \`Abd-Widd was a
full-blooded Qurayshite. He had long stories with Muhammad and one of
the chiefs who negotiated Abu-Talib in respect of Muhammad’s
Prophethood. He was also a member in al-Nidwah Conference when they
decided to impose a comprehensive siege upon the Hashimites. He was also
a member of the plot of assassinating the Holy Prophet (S) during his
journey to al-Ta\`if and he participated in the decision of banishing
Muhammad out of Makkah and killing him if he would return. Finally, he
rejected to protect the Holy Prophetso that he would be in Makkah for
conveying his Lord’s messages.[^24]

Furthermore, Suhayl was one of the planners to kill Muhammad (S) after
Abu-Talib’s decease until his Lord saved him through the immigration to
Yathrib and one of those who detained and tortured the earlier Muslims,
including his son Abu-Jandal. He was also one of the commanders of the
polytheists’ army during the Battle of Badr and one of those who
underwent the expenses of the army. He exerted all possible efforts in
burning the Holy Prophet (S)’s heart through practicing misbehaviors;
therefore, Almighty Allah cursed him and ordered His Prophet (S) to
curse and mention him by name in disfavor during his prayers. In
addition to the battles of Uhud and al-Khandaq, Suhayl spent his wealth
on recruiting people against the Holy Prophet (S) during wars.  
 Al-Dhahbi, in Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala\` 1/194, records the following:  
 Suhayl ibn \`Amr, nicknamed Abu-Yazid, was the best speaker of Quraysh
and one of their celebrities. He could escape when he was captured in
the Battle of Badr. In Makkah, he spoke urging people on partaking in
the wars against the Holy Prophet (S). He said, “O sons of Ghalib! Are
you going to let Muhammad and his traitorous followers seize your
caravans? This wealth is for those who lack wealth and this power is for
those who lack power.” However, Suhayl was benevolent, generous and
well-spoken. When the Prophet (S) departed life, Suhayl addressed a
speech similar to that of Abu-Bakr al-Siddiq in al-Madinah. His words
contributed in appeasing people and enhancing Islam.

People of Quraysh selected Suhayl ibn \`Amr to represent them in the
truce of Hudaybiyyah. He protested against writing down ‘the Messenger
of Allah’ as the Holy Prophet (S)’s signature. He signed on it on behalf
of all Qurayshites. Finally, he was one of the leaders of polytheism
about whom Almighty Allah has said, ‘Fight leaders of polytheism. 9/12’
Thus, his false conversion to Islam should never change anything of the
Holy Verses of Almighty Allah.  
 Al-Sanani, in Tafsir 1/242, has recorded the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Qatadah that the Holy Verse,
‘Fight leaders of polytheism. 9/12’ intended Abu-Sufyan ibn Harb,
Umayyah ibn Khalaf, \`Utbah ibn Rabi\`ah, Abu-Jahl and Suhayl ibn \`Amr.

After the conquest of Makkah, Suhayl preferred to stay in Makkah and
refused to move to al-Madinah like most of the released ones. Due to his
arrogance and long history of struggle against the Holy Prophet (S), he
did not dare to ask for a position in the Holy Prophet (S)’s State.
While he rejected the Holy Prophet (S)’s philanthropic present during
the years of desiccation and starvation suffered by people of Quraysh by
virtue of the Holy Prophet (S)’s cursing them, Suhayl accepted the one
hundred camels presented to him as spoils of the Battle of Hunayn.

For the Qurayshite people and their adorers, this long history was as
bright as daylight sun, but for Allah and His Messenger, it was as black
as gloomy night. The (Muslim) Qurayshites voted for Suhayl’s leadership
after the conquest of Makkah for the previous lineage, history and
situations.  
 How miserable the historians are! And woe is the adorers of people of
Quraysh in this regard!

Whereas the Holy Prophet (S) nominated \`Attab ibn Usayd al-Umawi and a
man from Ansar as the rulers of Makkah, people of Quraysh preferred and
complied with Suhayl. This fact is evidenced by the story that as soon
as the Holy Prophet (S) was deceased, people of Quraysh dissented and
relinquished Islam. Although, he was a Qurayshite individual, \`Attab
had to hide himself because he expected that he would be assassinated. A
few days later, they received the tranquil news of the homage to
Abu-Bakr, son of Taym. They calmed down because they realized that none
of the Hashimites would be the leader. This is why Suhayl repeated the
same words of Abu-Bakr who intended to say that whoever worshipped
Muhammad must understand that Muhammad has died. We, the other party, do
not worship Muhammad who was no more than a messenger who carried the
message and passed away. Muhammad was the son of Quraysh and his
authority should be held by his people— people of Quraysh who selected a
leader, namely, Abu-Bakr. You all should thus listen and obey.

As a consequence, Suhayl relieved people of Quraysh by carrying to them
the news that the leadership would be at their hands away from the
Hashimites and Ansar who worshipped Muhammad! Thus, it would not be
necessary for them to apostatize from Islam. Accordingly, people of
Quraysh listened to him and that was the conclusion of the project of
apostasy. Moreover, Suhayl secured \`Attab and ordered him to rule
Makkah in the name of the new Qurayshite, not Hashimite, leader Abu-Bakr
ibn Abi-Qahafah the son of Taym ibn Murrah.[^25]

Suhayl Works for Independence
-----------------------------

After the conquest of Makkah, people of Quraysh directed their
activities towards the orderly political and secret action aimed at
keeping the Ahl al-Bayt away from the leadership and dedicating it to
the other Qurayshites. They understood that any open activities against
the Holy Prophet (S) would be unavailing. They had to face the problem
of the Holy Prophet (S)’s progressive arrangements for bringing \`Ali,
followed by al-Hasan and al-Husayn, to power. Neither \`Ali nor were any
of the Hashimites welcomed by the Qurayshite people. Thereupon, they,
headed by Suhayl ibn \`Amr, planned for practicing a number of bold
procedures with the Holy Prophet (S). They therefore sent him various
messages demanding with repatriating their sons and slaves who had left
Makkah and joined him for learning their religion.

In this regard, Suhayl said, “Today, we are your allies. We came to
terms after we had been engaged in combats. I myself concluded a truce
with you in Hudaybiyyah. Our sons and slaves fled their hometowns and
work places to join you. They lied when they claimed that they aimed at
learning their religion. Besides, we are responsible for teaching them
their religion if they are honest. Accordingly, you should repatriate
them.”

The appeal of the new chief of Quraysh means that people of Quraysh,
even if they had to give up arms and surrender under the shades of
swords, did not recognize the ruler of Makkah assigned by the Holy
Prophet (S); on the contrary, they wanted him to recognize them as an
independent political entity opposing his state and religion.  
 Al-Tirmidhi, in al-Sunan 5/298, records the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Rab\`i ibn Harrash that \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib told us that after the conclusion of the truce of
Hudaybiyyah, some polytheist chiefs and individuals, including Suhayl
ibn \`Amr, said, “O Allah’s Messenger! Some of our sons, brethren and
slaves joined you. They had claimed falsely that they wanted to learn
their religion. They only want to get rid of their jobs. Repatriate them
and we will teach them their religion if they are honest.” The Holy
Prophet (S) answered, “O people of Quraysh! If you keep up such demands,
Almighty Allah will send a man whose heart is filled up with faith to
behead you with his sword for sake of this religion.” They, as well as
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, asked the Holy Prophet (S) to identify that man.
“He is that repairer of the sandal,” the Holy Prophet (S) referred to
\`Ali between whose hands was the sandal of the Holy Prophet (S).

Abu-Dawud, in al-Sunan 1/611, records the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Rab\`i ibn Harrash that \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib said that when some slaves joined the Holy Prophet (S)
before the conclusion of truce of Hudaybiyyah, their masters messaged
the Holy Prophet (S) demanding with repatriating them because their
claims of learning the religion had been false; rather they escaped
their slavery. A number of people around the Holy Prophet (S) attested
that demand and advised him to respond. He angrily said, “O people of
Quraysh! I see that you will never give up such demands unless the Lord
will send a man who will behead you.” Hence, he rejected their demand
and manumitted those slaves.

The reader must be aware that the reference to the truce of Hudaybiyyah
in such reports was one of styles of distorting the facts usually
followed by the pro-Qurayshite reporters. In fact, the incident befell
after the conquest of Makkah. Had it occurred before that, Suhayl would
have demanded the Holy Prophet (S) with respecting the term of
repatriating the individuals who would join him, which was agreed upon
during the truce of Hudaybiyyah.

Secondly, the Holy Prophet (S) would not have shown such an intense rage
if this demand, which would have been so normal since it was specified
as a term of the truce, had been provided before the conquest of Makkah.
Only in situations of wrongdoing would the Holy Prophet (S) be angry.
Thirdly, the released Qurayshites would not have suggested to the Holy
Prophet (S) that they would teach those sons and slaves their religion
if their demand had been issued before the conquest of Makkah and their
conversion to Islam. The suggestion of teaching Islam cannot be said by
other than Muslims or claimers of being Muslims. Finally, some
narrations have confirmed that the incident occurred after the conquest
of Makkah. Al-Hakim, in al-Mustadrak 2/138, records the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Rab\`i ibn Harrash that \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib said that after the Holy Prophet (S) had conquered Makkah,
some Qurayshites said, “O Muhammad! We are your allies and people. Our
slaves joined you not for receiving knowledge of Islam, as they claim,
but for giving up their duties and obligations. Repatriate them.”
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar agreed to that demand when their advice was sought,
but the Holy Prophet said, “O people of Quraysh! Allah will send a man
from among you; his heart will be filled up with faith; he will behead
you for sake of the religion.” As Abu-Bakr and \`Umar expected
themselves to be the intended, the Holy Prophet said, “No, you are not.
He will be the repairer of the sandals in the mosque.” The Prophet (S)
had already given his sandals to \`Ali to repair.[^26]

Al-Hakim, in al-Mustadrak 4/298, has recorded a similar report and
decided its authenticity:  
 After the conquest of Makkah, some people of Quraysh came to the Holy
Prophet (S)… He said, “O people of Quraysh! If you will not keep up your
prayers and defray the zakat, I will send a man who will behead you for
sake of this religion. This man will be whether I or the repairer of the
sandals.” Meanwhile, \`Ali was repairing the Holy Prophet (S)’s
sandals.[^27]  
 Many consequential points can be inferred from this incident:

**First**, people of Quraysh attended in al-Madinah to see the Holy
Prophet (S). They came to Muhammad’s capital and demanded with his
recognition of their political independence. Such an awkward impudence
occurred just after the conquest of Makkah when they were humiliated and
had to accept Islam under the menace of swords after they had been
released in addition to their shameful deeds in the battle of Hunayn. As
al-Hakim and Abu-Dawud have authenticated the narration, people of
Quraysh addressed to the Holy Prophet (S), ‘O Muhammad!’ Al-Tirmidhi,
however, has distorted it into ‘O Allah’s messenger!’ In Ahmad’s
al-Musnad 3/82, we read the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri… that the
Holy Prophet (S)’s sandal was once cut; he therefore gave it to \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib to repair. We stood with the Holy Prophet (S) who then
spoke, “One of you will fight for sake of the interpretation of the
Qur’an in the same way as I have fought for its revelation.” Each one,
including Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, expected himself to be the one intended.
“No,” asserted the Holy Prophet (S), “He will be the repairer of the
sandal.” We thus hurried to \`Ali carrying this good tidings. As if he
had already known it, \`Ali paid no attention.

In Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 9/133, the author has decided the authenticity
and truthfulness of the report and its narrators.  
 The narration maintains that the incident occurred in al-Madinah.

**Second**, people of Quraysh understood that the conquest of Makkah and
their acceptance of Islam as a religion had not been considered as
submission to the Holy Prophet (S) and the Islamic State; rather it was
a form of alliance with him against the tribes that were not included to
his State yet. The Romans and the Persian were the main foes of the Holy
Prophet (S)’s State and people of Quraysh as well. Furthermore, they
felt that they had practically joined that alliance when they fought in
the Holy Prophet (S)’s line against his foes during the Battle of
Hunayn. On that account, it is now his turn to recognize their
independent entity. They began with demanding him to repatriate their
sons and slaves.

**Third**, except the Hashimites, people of Quraysh who had immigrated
with the Holy Prophet (S) agreed to that demand. For instance, Abu-Bakr
ibn Qahafah and \`Umar ibn al-Khattab supported it completely. Yet,
narrations have varied in exposing the scope of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar’s
supporting the Qurayshite demand; some narrations, such as al-Hakim’s
authentic previous one, explain that Abu-Bakr answered, ‘They have said
the truth, Allah’s messenger! Repatriate them,’ and \`Umar repeated the
same thing. Other narrations, such as that recorded in al-Tirmidhi’s
al-Sunan and al-Hakim’s al-Mustadrak 3/122 and Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 9/134
and 5/186, have not referred to Abu-Bakr and \`Umar’s confirmation of
the Qurayshite demand; yet they have mentioned their expectation to be
the party whom will be selected by the Lord and His Messenger for
disciplining people of Quraysh. Smartly, the word ‘men’ was substituted
for the names of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar. Such narrations are recorded in
al-Hakim’s Al-Mustadrak 2/125 and 10/473.  
 Mentioning the two men was totally eradicated in some narrations such
as that recorded in Abu-Dawud’s al-Sunan and the various narrations in
11/613.

**Fourth**, a question should be put forth here: What was the
relationship between Suhayl ibn \`Amr and the two men Abu-Bakr and
\`Umar, and why did they confirm the Qurayshite demand? Another question
should also be put forth: why did the Holy Prophetseek the advice of
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar after he had understood the actual intent of people
of Quraysh? He therefore became angry rejecting their demand and
threatening another war and forewarning its imminent falling.  
 In any case, according to narrations, the chiefship of Quraysh was
represented by those four men of the incident—the Holy Prophet (S),
Suhayl ibn \`Amr al-\`Amiri the polytheists’ chief, Abu-Bakr and \`Umar
the sons of the worthless clans of Quraysh. From the above, we
understand that there was a sort of relationship and earlier arrangement
between the delegation of Quraysh and the two men. Some narrations have
divulged more things—Suhayl and his delegation resided at \`Umar’s house
when they were in al-Madinah, and Abu-Bakr accompanied them to the Holy
Prophet (S) as an intercessor.

**Fifth**, four elements can be assumed from the Holy Prophet (S)’s
reaction in the incident involved:  
 1. Although narrations have not referred to further details about the
incident, the first element that can be concluded is the Holy Prophet
(S)’s anger owing to the awkward impudence of the Qurayshite delegation
as well as the way of their thinking.  
 2. The Holy Prophet (S) despaired of people of Quraysh’s modifying
their courses of tyranny and spreading on the instructions of Islam. He
perceived that the sword would be the only device that may cause them to
adhere to the right. A number of narrations, such as those recorded in
al-Hakim’s al-Mustadrak 2/125, Abu-Dawud’s al-Sunan 1/611, al-Bayhaqi’s
al-Sunan 9/229 and Kanz al-\`Ummal 10/473, have referred evidently to
this point. (The Holy Prophet said, “O people of Quraysh! I see you will
never cease unless the Lord will send a man who will behead you for the
sake of Islam.”) This statement confirms that people of Quraysh will
never submit to Islam except by force.  
 3. The Holy Prophet (S) named \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s.) in threatening
people of Quraysh. They scared this man to death since they suffered the
harshest days of their lifetime on his hands. He, alone, was the killer
of half of the polytheist heroes while the other Muslims, in groups,
killed the second half or even less! The Holy Prophet (S) mentioned
\`Ali indirectly when he referred to the man whom would be sent for
beheading people of Quraysh for sake of the religion. Once, as recorded
in Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 9/133, he expressed, “A man belongs to me or I…”
When Abu-Bakr and \`Umar asked him to name that man, the Holy Prophet
said, “It is I or the repairer of the sandal.”[^28]  
 This saying was aimed at obstructing the Qurayshite uneven hopes since
they would understand that this question might occur as early as
possible. Moreover, they should anticipate a command of invading Makkah
and terminating the tyrants there.

The Holy Prophet (S) proposes to evince \`Ali’s standing; he wanted to
make people of Quraysh know that the man would be one of the Hashimites
whom they still envied and detested. Had the Holy Prophet (S) foretold
that \`Ali would fight people of Quraysh for sake of the interpretation
of the Holy Qur’an twenty-five years later, they would have been sure
that they would have a twenty year period to carry out their plans. In
Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 9/134, an authenticated narration declares that
since the Holy Prophet (S)’s reign, \`Ali (a.s.) had been threatening
people of Quraysh and everybody who would think of apostasy. He swore
that he would fight them to the last moments. The Holy Prophet (S) was
the director of this threat, which was aimed at precluding people of
Quraysh from practicing any process of dissenting Islam:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas that during the
Holy Prophet (S)’s lifetime, \`Ali (a.s.) was used to saying, “Allah the
Powerful and Glorified says, ‘Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the
apostles have already passed away before him; if then he dies or is
killed, will you turn back upon your heels?’ Nay, by Allah! We will
never turn back upon our heels after we have been guided by Allah the
Exalted. By Allah I swear, if Muhammad will die or be killed, I will
definitely fight for the same sake that he has been fighting for until
the last of my life. Nay, by Allah! It is I who is his brother,
successor, cousin and heir. Who then is more meritorious than I am?”

Following the previous narration, the same compiler writes down another
narration in which he exposes that immediately after the conquest of
Makkah, the Holy Prophet (S) menaced people of Quraysh with \`Ali
(a.s.):  
 It has been narrated on the authority of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf that
immediately after the conquest of Makkah, the Holy Prophet (S) went
towards al-Ta\`if… and said, “O people! I will be your leader. I urge
you to be benevolent with my household. You will meet me on the Divine
Pool. By the Prevailing of my soul I utter this oath; if you do not
perform prayers and defray the zakat, I will send upon you a man who
belongs to me. He will behead your warriors and capture your sons.”
People thought that Abu-Bakr or \`Umar had been the intended; the Holy
Prophet (S) took \`Ali from the hand and said, “He will be this man.”

This threat proves evidently the actual intentions of those fresh
Muslims.  
 4. The Holy Prophet (S) has decided those who provided that claim as
atheists. The Holy Prophet (S)’s sayings, “I see you will not stop, O
people of Quraysh…” and the threat with a man who will behead them for
sake of the religion and his anger—all these are evidences on those
people’s atheism. In the first saying, the Holy Prophet (S) meant that
they would not stop their atheism and antagonism against the Lord and
His Messenger. In the latter, his words meant that they would never
follow the religion and that they would not cease their activities
against Islam unless they would be treated by swords.

In case these ‘released’ were Muslims whose properties must be
respected, it should be illegal for the Holy Prophet (S) to violate such
properties. He (a.s.) used to say, “It is illicit for anyone to have
from others’ properties unless their satisfaction is obtained. Your
properties and souls are as holy as… etc.”  
 Jurisprudents have confusedly tried to solve this problem; they said
that it is exclusively given to the Holy Prophet (S). Yet, this is
incorrect because it is illogical.

Consequence of the Incident
---------------------------

Apparently, the incident hindered the Qurayshite people’s attempts to
harvest the Holy Prophet (S)’s recognition of their political
independence in a form of alliance or autonomy in the Islamic State. A
view at the history written with the pens of the pro-Qurayshite authors
will conclude that people of Quraysh, soon after the incident, repented
and accepted Islam so piously and gave alms and manumitted their slaves
and undertook on the ritual Hajj and fasted and offered the prayers…
etc. In contrast, the Holy Prophet said, “I see you will never stop, O
people of Quraysh!”

From the nature of the Qurayshite people in general and their chiefs in
specific, it is understood that they must have kept up their activities
on all possible fronts and could conclude many results. They understood
that the Holy Prophet (S) had still been attentive of their movements
and that it had been a great mistake to think of a political
independence in his State. Thirdly, they recognized that Muhammad—the
leading Hashimite knight—had been unmatched, especially when he was
supported by his cousin—the killer of the Arabs—and people of Aws and
Khazraj who dared, for the first time in their lives, to fight people of
Quraysh and kill a number of their heroes.

The issue of political independence was retracted when a substitute came
forth; people of Quraysh were confident that Muhammad’s State covered
the territories and Muslims were preparing themselves to fight the
Romans and the Persians. Muhammad had promised his followers that they
would defeat these two great powers and Muslims looked forward to
achieving so. On that account, any demand of autonomy would be
meaningless. Hence, it is necessary to move to a new general situation
through industrious political activities and processes of systematic
violence. By such activities could the Quraysh people only seize
Muhammad’s State.

Muhammad, at any rate, is the son of Quraysh and his people are thus
more meritorious than others in receiving his heritage. Neither Ansar
the Yemenis nor can any other tribe protest. Supposing that will be
achieved, there will come one problem that requires treatment in any
price—the Hashimites whom are called ‘the progeny’ or ‘the near of kin,’
and about whom frequent Qur’anic texts have been revealed and many
Hadiths have been said. Muhammad has endowed them exclusively the fifth
of the public treasury.  
 Indeed, that was the conclusion attained by people of Quraysh whom were
released from killing and slavery at the hands of the Holy Prophet (S).
That was their reward for him during his lifetime. All such evil plots
were practiced with the aid of some of the Sahabah.

\`Umar Attests the Tergiversation of the Qurayshites
----------------------------------------------------

We read the following narration in al-Tabari’s Tarikh 3/426:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of al-Hasan al-Basri that \`Umar
once was informed that the Qurayshite chiefs had complained about his
decision of detaining them in al-Madinah unless a permission would be
obtained yet for a limited period. He ascended the minbar and said, “I
describe Islam as a camel. In its emergence, Islam was the like of a one
year old camel. It became two year old, four year old, six year old and,
in the final, it became senile. Nothing but decrease comes after
senility. Islam is going towards senility. People of Quraysh are aiming
at having Allah’s wealth entirely for themselves. This will never occur
as long as son of al-Khattab is alive. I will keep standing on the
entrance of the city for intercepting people of Quraysh from falling in
the fire.”[^29]

This situation includes a number of points:

1. These have been the words of a Qurayshite chief whose tribal loyalty,
for him, was beyond any dispute; he carried the pennon of Quraysh and
called for their succeeding the Holy Prophet (S) in the face of Ansar
and the Hashimites. He also spared no efforts in stripping the
leadership from the Ahl al-Bayt and Ansar. He then served the Qurayshite
chiefs with that pure leadership and they named him ‘the Core of
Quraysh.’

2. These words provide a testimony averring that the Qurayshite
Muhajirun were so deviate that they should be detained in al-Madinah in
order not to mislead Muslims. Having assumed the actuality of the
Qurayshite Muhajirun, it became more evident to understand the hiddens
of the Qurayshite ‘released’ people whom should never cease their
trickeries against Islam unless \`Ali’s sword would play on their heads,
as the Holy Prophet (S) predicted.

3. These words comprise a picture of \`Umar’s imagination about the
short period of Islam and its imminent termination. \`Umar likened Islam
to any political circle that passed on the Arab Peninsula and other
territories and would be vanquished soon. Through various texts, \`Umar
believed that Islam would not last for more ages and believed that other
nations would soon invade Muslim territories, especially Makkah whose
people would desert it and cause it to be ruined. Ka\`b al-Ahbar might
have been the source of such false prophesies.

[^1]: Shaykh Al-Saduq, in his al-Faqih, relates the following narration:
Aban ibn \`Uthman reported that Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) asked Ibrahim
al-Sayqal: ‘Do you know to whom the Holy Prophet (S) referred in
(masters) during the Sermon of the Farewell Hajj?’ ‘No,’ answered
Ibrahim, ‘I do not know.’ The Imam (a.s.) answered,‘(Masters) stands
from the Ahl al-Bayt.’

[^2]: \`Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi has related this form.

[^3]: Also, al-Bayhaqi: al-Sunan 10/188.

[^4]: Also al-Darimi: al-Sunan 2/303, Ahmad: al-Musnad 6/70 and 151 and
Ibn Majah: al-Sunan 2/1417.

[^5]: Ibn Majah: al-Sunan 2/1015.

[^6]: Also, Abu-Tharr, Abu-Sa\`id, Zayd ibn Arqam and Hudhayfah ibn
Usayd. The narration is decided as strange and qualified, but with a
rather doubtful narrator. Sa\`id ibn Sulayman and many other scholars,
however, have related Zayd ibn al-Hasan’s narrations.

[^7]: Also, Abu-Dawud: al-Sunan 1/427 and al-Bayhaqi: Dala\`il
al-Nubuwwah 5/8. Ibn Majah has recorded a similar narration in al-Sunan
2/1025.

[^8]: Also, al-Bayhaqi: al-Sunan 7/30 and 10/114.

[^9]: In al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir, al-Tabarani has recorded this whose
reporters are trustful.

[^10]: In al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir and al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat, al-Tabarani
relates this narration to trustful narrators.

[^11]: The major idols worshipped by the Arab atheists.

[^12]: A similar report has been recorded on page 186 of the same book
and quoted from Bisharat al-Islam.

[^13]: This is a word-for-word translation of the Holy Verse. The
following is its meaning: Only are Allah and His Messenger and the
believer who gave alms while he was in the ritual genuflection of a
prayer your masters.

[^14]: “O Apostle! Deliver what had been revealed to you from your Lord;
and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people. 5/67”

[^15]: Note that all the Prophets who came after Abraham were his
descendants.

[^16]: Also, Al-Tabari’s Tarikh 2/83, al-Ya\`qubi: al-Tarikh 2/36 and
ibn Kathir’s al-Sirah 2/155.

[^17]: Also, al-Tabari’s Tarikh 2/92, Usd al-Ghabah 1/174, \`Uyun
al-Athar 1/217, Ibn Kathir’s al-Sirah 2/198 and Ahmad’s al-Musnad 3461.
As he records it in his Majma’ al-Zawa’id 6/44, al-Haythami comments
that Ahmad and al-Tabarani recorded it. Ahmad has related it to
narrators that are admitted in the most authentic reference books of
Hadith except Ibn Ishaq. In Kanz al-\`Ummal, the same narration has been
reported in 1/328 and 8/29.

[^18]: Sayyid Hashim al-Bahrani: Hilyat al-Abrar 1/127, Shaykh al-Tusi:
al-Amali 1/316 as quoted from al-Majlisi: Bihar al-Anwar 19/272 h. 11
and al-Haythami: Majma’ al-Zawa’id 6/91.

[^19]: Ibn Sayyid al-Nas:\`Uyun al-Athar 1/146 and Ibn Kathir: al-Sirah
1/506.

[^20]: This is an indication to Bilqis (Ethiopian: Makeda) the Queen of
Sheba in Yemen.

[^21]: Al-Bayhaqi: al-Sunan 10/228, al-Tirmidhi: al-Sunan 4/217 and
al-Dhahbi: Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala\` 1/235.

[^22]: Nasibis are those who openly declare the enmity to the Ahl
al-Bayt and their adherents. Addressing to the Shi\`ah, Imam al-Sadiq
defines a Nasibi as the one who shows enmity to the followers of the
Holy Imams.

[^23]: Also, Muslim: al-Sahih 5/196 and Ahmad: al-Musnad 3/190 and 279.

[^24]: Al-Tabari: Tarikh 2/82.

[^25]: After recording this incident, Ibn Husham, in al-Sirah 4/1079,
adds, “Only then did people calm down and \`Attab Bin Usayd appeared.

[^26]: According to the criterion of Muslim, this report is authentic;
yet neither he nor has al-Bukhari recorded it.

[^27]: Also, Kanz al-\`Ummal 13/174.

[^28]: Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi: Kanz al-\`Ummal 7/326.

[^29]: Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi: Kanz al-\`Ummal 13/75 and Ibn Shabbah:
Tarikh al-Madinah 2/779 and 2/401.


