The Verse of Ismah
==================

The Order of the Verse
----------------------

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***And the Jews say: The hand of Allah is tied up! Their hands will be
shackled and they will be cursed for what they say. Nay, both His hands
are spread out, He expends as He pleases; and what has been revealed to
you from your Lord will certainly make many of them increase in
inordinacy and unbelief; and We have put enmity and hatred among them
until the day of resurrection; whenever they kindle a fire for war Allah
puts it out, and they strive to make mischief in the land, and Allah
does not love the mischief makers.***  
***And if the followers of the Book believed and guarded against evil,
We would certainly have covered their evil deeds and We would certainly
have made them enter gardens of bliss.***  
***And if they had kept up the Torah and the Bible and that which was
revealed to them from their Lord, they would certainly have eaten from
above them and from beneath their feet; there is a party of them keeping
to the moderate course, and as for most of them, evil is that which they
do.***  
***O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and
if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people.***  
***Say: O followers of the Book! You follow no good until you keep up
the Torah and the Bible and that which is revealed to you from your
Lord; and surely that which has been revealed to you from your Lord will
make many of them increase in inordinacy and unbelief; grieve not
therefore for the unbelieving people.***  
***Surely those who believe and those who are Jews and the Sabians and
the Christians whoever believes in Allah and the last day and does good-
they will have no fear not will they grieve. Certainly We made a
covenant with the children of Israel and We sent to them apostles;
whenever there came to them an apostle with what that their souls did
not desire, some of them did they call liars and some they
slew.[5:62-70[***

The Place of the Verse
----------------------

If we accept that the Qur’anic order supports the exegesis of a Verse,
two matters should be taken in consideration:

**First**, the Verse lies in Surah of al-Ma\`idah—the seal of the
revealed Surahs and,

**Second**, the Verse comes among others respecting the manners of the
Jews and Christians. Correspondingly, it carries the following meaning
to the Holy Prophet (S): Convey, and fear not the Jews or the
Christians. We will protect you against them. They will be too short to
injure you.

Neither Sunnis nor do the Shi\`ah admit such interpretation. The Verse
thus adds nothing new about the Jews and Christians since the danger
caused by them had been removed before the revelation of the Verse. From
this cause, it is important to understand whether the place of the Verse
has been as original as it was revealed or one of the Sahabah intruded
to put it in this very position. We, the Shi\`ah, deny clearly any
supposition claiming any form of distortion in the Holy Qur’an. Yet,
reports have asserted that some of the Sahabah had pursued personal
inferences in choosing the places of some Verses. Accordingly, the place
of the Verse had been subjectively, if not unintentionally, chosen.

Sunni Scholars’ Opinions
------------------------

The following six opinions are the most common among the various theses
related to the Verse and assumed by Sunni exegetes. Yet, a seventh Sunni
opinion accords the Shi\`ah’s interpretation.

First Opinion
-------------

The Verse was revealed in the preliminary stage of the Holy Prophet
(S)’s Divine Mission. When the Lord ordered him to convey the message,
he hesitated; he abstained or showed drawback. Hence, the Lord loomed
and relieved. Only then, the Holy Prophet (S) conveyed.

This proposes that the Verse was revealed twenty-three years before the
revelation of Surah of al-Ma\`idah.  
 As if he deterred it, al-Shafi\`i (Kitab al-Umm 4/168) uses ‘it is
said’ before the reference to this opinion:  
 …It is said that when Archangel Gabriel first conveyed to the Holy
Prophet (S) the mission of promulgating for the new religion, he
hesitated and feared that people would belie him. Hence, Almighty Allah
revealed, ‘O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed…’

Although many objections are aroused against this claim, we may content
with the following; it is contrary to the order of the Verse. It is also
inadmissible to accept such an accusation of abstinence or hesitation in
carrying the Lord’s Messages so as to avoid accusation of lying or
injury or killing. Qur’anic texts have attested that the Holy Prophet
(S) exerted all possible efforts for conveying his Lord’s mission.

### Al-Shafi\`i’s Indirect Reports

In al-Suyuti’s al-Durr al-Manthur 2/298, we read the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu’l-Shaykh on the authority
of al-Hasan al-Basri that the Holy Prophet said: I felt annoyed when my
Lord ordered me to convey His Message, because I knew that people would
belie me, but He threatened if I decline, He would subdue. That is His
saying: O Apostle! Deliver… etc.”[^1]  
 It has been also narrated on the authority of Ibn Jarir that Ibn Jurayj
said that the Holy Prophet (S) feared people of Quraysh until the
revelation of the Verse, ‘O Apostle… and Allah will protect you from the
people.’ Only then, he was relieved. He said frequently, “Let them
disappoint.”  
 It has been also narrated on the authority of \`Abd ibn Humayd, Ibn
Jarir, Ibn Abi-Hatam and Abu’l-Shaykh on the authority of Mujahid that
when Almighty Allah revealed, ‘…Deliver what has been revealed to you
from your Lord…,’ the Holy Prophet said, ‘O my Lord! I am alone. How
should I behave when people unite against me?’ Then, Almighty Allah
revealed, ‘And if you do it not, then you have not delivered His
message.’[^2]

In al-Nisapuri: al-Wasit 2/208, we read the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of al-Anbari that during his
dwelling in Makkah, the Holy Prophet (S) used to declare only a part of
the Qur’anic texts revealed to him because he anticipated that the
polytheists would injure his companions and him…

The previous reports lack documentation. They are no more than sayings
of al-Hasan al-Basri, Mujahid and their likes. Next, we will prove that
al-Hasan al-Basri aimed at achieving something private through
publicizing such wording and that he cited his saying from the Holy
Prophet (S)’s sermon of Ghadir but he was too coward to report the
truth.

### Indirect Reports Turn into Reliable Opinions

Exegetes have realized that the Verse was revealed in the Holy Prophet
(S)’s last days and realized that the attribution of an incident that
took place on the first days of his mission to the exegesis of the Verse
was no more than words of false scholars of the Umayyad reign or reports
of doubtful documentation. Notwithstanding, they flagrantly took the
Verse twenty-three years back. It is quite odd to see considerate names,
such as al-Zamakhshari and al-Fakhr al-Razi, be among such exegetes.
This is because they attempted to take the Verse away from the Ghadir
declaration of loyalty. In truth, they have had to choose either
connecting the incident to the Verse or adopting the false reports about
the cancellation of the guarding of the Holy Prophet (S). This fable is
however exposed by the sequence of the historical events as well as the
text of the Verse. We read the following in al-Zamakhshari’s al-Kashshaf
1/659:  
 The meaning of Allah’s saying, ‘And Allah will protect you from the
people,’ is that the Lord provides a promise of protecting the Holy
Prophet (S)… against being killed only! It has been narrated that the
Holy Prophet said, ‘I became disturbed when Almighty Allah ordered me to
convey His message to people. He then threatened a punishment if I would
abstain and guaranteed to protect me. Only then, I regained vigor.’[^3]

Al-Razi, in Tafsir 6:12/48-50, records the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of al-Hasan that the Holy Prophet
said, “I became disturbed when my Lord ordered me to convey His message
to people since I realized that people, including the Jews and
Christians, would belie me and that people of Quraysh would threaten me.
When Almighty Allah revealed, ‘O Apostle! Deliver… etc.,’ all my
apprehensions were removed.  
 Regarding Allah’s saying, ‘And Allah will protect you from the people,’
one may ask how it is possible to regard this statement while the Holy
Prophet (S)’s face was scratched during the Battle of Uhud. There are
two answers for this question: First, the Verse stands for the
protection against killing. Second, the Verse was revealed after the
Battle of Uhud.

Al-Razi was not honest in recording al-Hasan’s words. He added the
statement, ‘including the Jews and Christians’ to the narration because
he intended to take the Qurayshite people away from the Verse and
dedicate it to the Jews and Christians. Yet, we should not blame him for
his love for Quraysh generally and his grandfather Abu-Bakr ibn
Abi-Qahafah in particular. We only demand with objective honesty. No
single indication to the Jews or Christians has been shown in the
reference books that comprised al-Hasan’s previous narration. Excelling
at al-Razi and the others, Ibn Kathir records the following in
al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 3/53:  
 It has been narrated in Ibn Abi-Hatam’s book of Tafsir on the authority
of his father on the authority of al-Hasan ibn \`«sa ibn Maysarah
al-Harithi on the authority of \`Abdullah ibn \`Abd al-Quddus on the
authority of al-A\`mash on the authority of al-Minhal ibn \`Amr on the
authority of \`Abdullah ibn al-Harith that \`Ali said, “When Almighty
Allah revealed, ‘And warn your nearest relations,’ the Holy Prophet (S)
asked me to cook a leg of a ewe with some food and a bowl of milk and
then invite Banu-Hashim. I did and they were about forty men… The
Prophet (S) then said, ‘Which one of you will settle my debts and he
will be my successor among my people?’ As he anticipated financial loss,
al-\`Abbas, like the others, kept silent. I had to keep silent as I
revered al-\`Abbas’s having been older than I was. In the second time, I
spoke after I had seen al-\`Abbas kept silent again. I said, ‘I will be
it, Allah’s Messenger!’ The Prophet said, ‘Yes, it is you… etc.’  
 By saying, ‘which one of you will settle my debts and he will be my
successor among my people?’ the Holy Prophet (S) wanted one of them to
settle his debts after his death because he anticipated that he would be
killed as soon as he would convey the Lord’s message to the Arab
polytheists. Therefore, he aimed at nominating his successor who would
guard his family after his decease. Anyhow, Almighty Allah secured His
Messenger when He revealed, ‘O Apostle! Deliver… etc.’[^4]

Ibn Kathir has slipped very much and served his fanaticism extremely; he
cut off the text regarding Allah’s saying, ‘And warn your nearest
relations,’ and erased the Holy Prophet (S)’s having carried out
Almighty Allah’s commandment of nominating a successor. Instead, he
distorted the narration saying that the Holy Prophet (S) asked the
Hashimites for a successor to be the guardian of his family and settle
his debts after he had anticipated that he would be killed by people of
Quraysh. Hence, \`Ali (a.s.) volunteered. But when the Verse was
revealed, such a succession became invalid. Thus, Ibn Kathir,
purposefully, disregards the fact that the Holy Prophet (S) was ordered
to invite his near relatives exclusively to the religion. Neither people
of Quraysh nor were the others included in this invitation. Thereupon,
his anticipation of being killed or injured is mere fabrication.
Furthermore, as much as I could conceive, no one supports Ibn Kathir in
establishing a relationship between the Verse of \`Ismah and the Verse
of warning the near relatives. Besides, he does not refer to the sources
from which he adopted that opinion.

As a matter of fact, for Ibn Kathir, nothing is more important that
misrepresenting and fading the Holy Prophet (S)’s words at his near
relatives as well as nominating \`Ali as his brother, vicegerent and
successor. Meanwhile, he spares no efforts in taking the Verse of
\`Ismah away from Surah of al-Ma\`idah and the Day of Ghadir. The
following is the Holy Prophet (S)’s words, which were cut off by Ibn
Kathir, as quoted from al-Amini’s al-Ghadir 1/207:  
 In order to discriminate the accurate from the deviation, we
hereinafter quote al-Tabari’s words as recorded in his Tarikh 1/207:  
 (The Holy Prophet said) “I have brought forth the good of this world as
well as the Hereafter. The Exalted Lord has ordered me to invite you all
to this matter. Which one of you will support me and will be my brother,
heir and successor?” (\`Ali went on narrating) I was the youngest among
the attendants who utterly refused. I spoke, “I will be that one,
Allah’s messenger! I will be your supporter in this matter.” The Holy
Prophet (S) took me from the neck and declared, “This is my brother,
heir and successor. Listen and comply with him.” The attendants went out
laughing and addressing to my father, “Well, he has ordered you to
listen to and comply with your son!”  
 (Al-Amini: al-Ghadir 2/279) Deciding it as authentic, Abu-Ja\`far
al-Iskafi of Baghdad, a Mu\`tazilite theologist, (died in AH 240) has
recorded the same narration in Naqd al-\`Uthmaniyyah. It has been also
recorded in the following reference books of Hadith: Burhan al-Din:
Anba\` Nujaba\` al-Abna\` 46-8, Ibn al-Athir: al-Kamil 2/24,
Abu’l-Fida\` \`Imad al-Din al-Dimashqi: Tarikh 1/116, Shihab al-Din
al-Khafaji: Sharh al-Shifa 3/37. Cutting off the last statement of the
narration, he records, ‘In al-Bayhaqi: Dala\`il al-Nubuwwah as well as
many other books, this narration is authentically documented, \`Ala\`
al-Din al-Baghdadi al-Khazin: Tafsir 390, Al-Suyuti: Jami\` al-Jawami\`
6/392 as quoted from al-Tabari and 6/397 as quoted for the six most
notable Hadithists—ibn Ishaq, ibn Jarir, ibn Abi-Hatam, ibn Mardawayh,
Abu-Na\`i and al-Bayhaqi and Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah
3/254.

The compiler of al-Ghadir then criticizes those who misrepresented the
narration seeking the Qurayshites’ favor. Al-Tabari, for instance,
intends to make the Holy Prophet (S)’s words about Imam \`Ali obscure;
he records, “The Prophet (S) then said: This is my brother… and so on.”
Ibn Kathir, in al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 3/40 and Tafsir 3/351, follows
al-Tabari.

Second Opinion
--------------

A second Sunni opinion indicates that the Verse was revealed some time
before the immigration to al-Madinah. Since then, the Holy Prophet (S)
dispensed with the guard of Abu-Talib or al-\`Abbas.  
 In Sunni reference books of Hadith, this opinion is commonly accepted;
yet, it is of two sorts of narrations. The earlier shows, whether openly
or suggestively, the time and place of the revelation of the Verse,
which was Makkah, while the latter relates it to the Holy Prophet (S)’s
canceling the guard, without referring directly to the watch practiced
by Abu-Talib or al-\`Abbas. Regardless, we ought to opt for the earlier
since its origin is al-Tirmidhi’s reporting from \`A\`ishah. Like many
others, al-Tirmidhi perceived that \`A\`ishah had meant Makkah. As a
model of the first sort of narration, let us quote the following from
al-Suyuti’s al-Durr al-Manthur 2/298-9:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas that the Holy
Prophet (S) answered those who asked him about the most intense Verse
that was ever revealed to him, and he answered, “During the Hajj season,
I was in Mina when Archangel Gabriel revealed to me Allah’s saying, ‘O
Apostle! Deliver… etc.’ I stood at al-\`Aqabah and shouted, ‘O people!
Whoever supports me in conveying my Lord’s message will be granted
Paradise. O people! If you declare that there is no god but Allah and I
be His messenger, you will be saved and granted Paradise.’ All people,
including women and children, then began to throw me with dust and
stones and spew in my face shouting, ‘You are liar and apostate.’ In
these moments, an inspiration came forth before me and said, ‘It is now
the proper time for you, if you are the Lord’s messenger, to curse your
people in the same way as Prophet (S) Noah cursed his people.’ Instead,
I said, ‘O Allah! Guide my people for they do not know, and support me
by making them respond to Your obedience.’ Then, al-\`Abbas, my uncle,
came and saved me from them.”  
 Al-A\`mash commented that the descendants of al-\`Abbas used to take
pride in that situation.  
 It has been also narrated on the authority of Ibn Mardawayh on the
authority of Jabir ibn \`Abdullah that Abu-Talib used to appoint a guard
for accompanying the Holy Prophet (S) whenever he would go out; but when
Almighty Allah revealed, ‘And Allah will protect you from the people,’
the Holy Prophet said to his uncle, ‘Allah has protected me. I do not
need a guard.’  
 It has been narrated by al-Tabarani, Abu’l-Shaykh, Abu-Na\`im, in
al-Dala\`il, Ibn Mardawayh and Ibn \`Asakir on the authority of Ibn
\`Abbas that the Holy Prophet (S) was guarded; Abu-Talib used to send
men from the Hashimites for guarding him. He then said to his uncle, ‘I
do no longer need those whom you are sending for guarding me.”[^5]

In Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 7/17, we read the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri that
al-\`Abbas, the Holy Prophet (S)’s uncle, was one of those who guarded
him, but when Allah revealed, ‘And Allah will protect you from the
people,’ the guardians stopped.  
 [Al-Tabarani: al-Mu\`jam al-Saghir and al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat. Yet, its
narrator, \`Atiyyah al-\`Awfi, is doubtful.]  
 It has been also narrated on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas that the Holy
Prophet (S) used to be guarded. Abu-Talib, his uncle, used to appoint
men from the Hashimites for guarding him. When Allah revealed, ‘And
Allah will protect you from the people,’ the Holy Prophet said to his
uncle, ‘Almighty Allah has protected me against jinn and people.’  
 [This report is recorded by al-Tabarani. Within its narrators is
al-Nasr ibn \`Abd al-Rahman who is doubtful.]

The second sort of narrations has been originated by the following
report of al-Tirmidhi: al-Sunan 4/317:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of \`A\`ishah that guarding was
practiced on the Holy Prophet (S) until the revelation of Allah’s
saying, ‘And Allah will protect you from the people.’ Hence, he took his
head out of his tent and said, ‘You may leave. The Lord has protected
me.’ [This is a one-way narration. Nevertheless, some narrators have
reported the same from \`Abdullah ibn Shaqiq without referring to
\`A\`ishah.][^6]

Seemingly, \`A\`ishah’s report proposed that the Verse was revealed in
Makkah. Al-Bayhaqi, in al-Sunan 9/8, supports this claim and adds the
forecited saying of al-Shafi\`i in which he claims that the Holy Prophet
(S) was protected against being killed only. In Tafsir 2/4/160,
al-Muraghi records al-Suyuti’s earlier narration as related to Ibn
\`Abbas and al-Tabarani. He then comments: ‘Al-Tirmidhi had narrated
that the Holy Prophet (S) was guarded in Makkah before the revelation of
the Verse.” Notwithstanding, \`A\`ishah’s report does not imply that the
occurrence was in Makkah. It seems that the phrase ‘in Makkah’ was
unintentionally erased from the original copy of al-Tirmidhi’s
narration.  
 About the report of \`A\`ishah, al-Suyuti, in al-Durr al-Manthur 2/291,
records:  
 \`Abd ibn Humayd, al-Tirmidhi, ibn Jarir, Ibn al-Mundhir, ibn
Abi-Hatam, Abu’l-Shaykh, Abu-Na\`im, al-Bayhaqi and ibn Mardawayh have
narrated on the authority of \`A\`ishah that… etc.

Bearing the same indication of \`A\`ishah’s report, al-Suyuti records a
number of narrations some of which hint at the fact that the incident of
the guard took place in al-Madinah.  
 In al-Durr al-Manthur 2/298-9, al-Suyuti records:  
 Al-Tabarani and Ibn Mardawayh have narrated on the authority of
Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri that al-\`Abbas, the Holy Prophet (S)’s uncle, was
one of those who guarded the Holy Prophet (S), but when Almighty Allah
revealed, ‘And Allah will protect you from the people,’ the guardians
stopped.  
 In Dala\`il al-Nubuwwah, Abu-Na\`im has narrated on the authority of
Abu-Dharr that they were always around the Holy Prophet (S) whenever he
went to sleep because he anticipated assassination, but when the Verse,
‘And Allah will protect you from the people’ was revealed, we stopped.

Many exegetes and historians have adopted this opinion. As if they admit
it, al-Zamakhshari, in al-Kashaf 1/659, and al-Razi, in Tafsir 6/12/50,
record the opinion attesting that the Verse was revealed in Makkah. On
that account, they have indicated that the reports of \`A\`ishah,
al-Hasan al-Basri and the others talked about an occurrence that took
place in the early stage of the Holy Prophet (S)’s Mission.[^7]  
 The compiler of al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah has attempted to seize the
relationship between the Verse of \`Ismah and the Holy Prophet (S)’s
guard so as to invent a virtue for Abu-Bakr. On page 327 of part 3, he
records:  
 Before the revelation of Allah’s saying, ‘And Allah will protect you
from the people,’ the Holy Prophet (S) was guarded by a number of
people. The night just before the Battle of Badr, he was guarded by
Sa\`d ibn Maadh. On the day of the Battle, he was guarded by Abu-Bakr
alone. This man kept on unsheathing his sword while the Holy Prophet (S)
was sleeping under the canopy.

Unfortunately, the compiler, by the previous words, has contradicted
himself; if the cancellation of the guard took place before the
immigration to al-Madinah, then the guard of Abu-Bakr and the others
during the Battle of Badr would be ineffective! In addition, it is
dubious to believe that Muslims used canopies during the Battle of Badr.

Finally, al-Hakim has recorded an authentically documented narration
implying that one third of Muslims guarded the Holy Prophet (S) during
the Battle of Badr. This is rational because they settled in the
uncovered low area of the battlefield.  
 Al-Hakim: al-Mustadrak 2/326:  
 It has been narrated that as he was asked about Surah of al-Anfal,
\`Abadah ibn al-Samit said, ‘The Surah regarded us during the Battle of
Badr. We, Muslims, were three groups. The first group was fighting the
foes; the second was gathering the spoils and capturing the prisoners;
and the third was guarding the Holy Prophet (S) near the tent… etc.

The following points prove the invalidity of the opinion of inventing a
relationship between the Verse of \`Ismah and the guard practiced on the
Holy Prophet (S):

(1) The forecited discussion of the first opinion,

(2) The same narrations of the third opinion that claimed that the
cancellation of the guard had occurred in al-Madinah, not Makkah, and

(3) The major reports that support the opinion involved are \`A\`ishah’s
and the report of al-\`Abbas’s having guarded the Holy Prophet (S). The
others are not authenticated. In fact, the purpose of most of such
reports was to disregard Abu-Talib’s role in upholding the Holy Prophet
(S) and to prove that he dispensed with Abu-Talib’s guard in Makkah.

The earliest report aims at giving al-\`Abbas the role of Abu-Talib of
guarding the Holy Prophet (S) in Makkah so as to make al-\`Abbas the
person through whom the Lord protected His Messenger against people.  
 If truth be told, al-\`Abbas, before the immigration to al-Madinah,
played an ordinary role. Like the other Hashimites, he sympathized with
the Holy Prophet (S) and suffered the siege imposed upon them. In
addition, it is unproved that he accepted Islam or immigrated to
al-Madinah like \`Ali and Hamzah. What is known for everybody is that he
was captured during the Battle of Badr and accepted Islam only when he,
as well as the other prisoners, was released. It is to add that
al-Haythami and other scholars have decided the inauthenticity of the
report, which seems to be clearly weak.

Third Opinion
-------------

The third opinion involves that the Verse was revealed in al-Madinah
without a definite date. Al-Suyuti records a number of narrations
showing no specific time for its revelation, though he connects them to
the matter of canceling the guard practiced on the Holy Prophet (S).
Thereabouts, from some of such narrations, it can be understood that the
Verse was revealed in al-Madinah.  
 Al-Durr al-Manthur 298-9:  
 Al-Tabarani and Ibn Mardawayh have narrated the following on the
authority of \`Ismah ibn Malik al-Khatmi:  
 We used to guard the Holy Prophet (S) at nights until the revelation of
Allah’s saying, ‘And Allah will protect you from the people.’  
 Ibn Jarir and Abu’l-Shaykh have narrated on the authority of Sa\`id ibn
Jubayr that when Almighty Allah revealed, ‘And Allah will protect you
from the people,’ the Holy Prophet said, ‘Do not guard me any longer. My
Lord has protected me.’  
 Ibn Jarir and Ibn Mardawayh have narrated on the authority of
\`Abdullah ibn Shaqiq that some of the Sahabah used to guard the Holy
Prophet (S) whenever he went out, but when Almighty Allah revealed, ‘And
Allah will protect you from the people,’ he said, ‘Go to your duties.
Allah has protected me against people.’  
 \`Abd ibn Hamid, Ibn Jarir and Abu’l-Shaykh have narrated on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ka\`b al-Qara¨i that the Sahabah used to guard
the Holy Prophet (S) until the revelation of Almighty Allah’s saying,
‘And Allah will protect you from the people.’ The guard was thus
canceled as the Lord informed His Messenger about protecting him against
people.  
 \`Abd ibn Hamid and Ibn Mardawayh have narrated on the authority of
al-Rabi\` ibn Anas that the Holy Prophet (S) was guarded by his
companions until the revelation of Allah’s saying, ‘O Apostle!
Deliver…etc.’[^8]

Reports respecting the Holy Prophet (S)’s history prove that he sought
the Arab tribes’ protection so that he would convey his Lord’s message.
Ansar paid homage to him on the conditions of protecting his household
and him as same as they protect they families and themselves. These
reports and facts invalidate the claim of the Verse’s revelation in
Makkah. Had the Verse been revealed in Makkah, the Holy Prophet (S)
would not have been in need for such protection and covenant. Reference
books of Hadith, Tafsir and history are filled in with numerous
narrations concerning the guard practiced on the Holy Prophet (S) in
Makkah and al-Madinah, especially during battles. Such guard lasted
until the final hours of his lifetime. The elongated chapters about the
guard practiced on the Holy Prophet (S) and the stories that took place
there prove the invalidity of the opinion under discussion. What is
strange is that the same persons who have recorded such reports and
stories assert that the Holy Prophet (S) had canceled the guard in
Makkah or after the immigration to al-Madinah when the Verse of \`Ismah
was revealed, for nothing more than taking the Verse away from the
incident of Ghadir!

From the previous, we have to reject the reports of the total
cancellation of the guard before the incident of Ghadir. We have cited
al-Hakim’s report relating that the Holy Prophet (S) was guarded by a
third of Muslims during the Battle of Badr.  
 The following report is quoted from Ahmad’s al-Musnad 2/222:  
 A number of the Holy Prophet (S)’s companions guarded him while he was
offering prayers after the midnight just before the Battle of Tabuk.[^9]

The Battle of Tabuk took place in the last year of the Holy Prophet
(S)’s life.  
 Read the following in \`Uyun al-Athar 2/402:  
 During the Battle of Badr, Sa\`d ibn Maadh guarded the Holy Prophet (S)
who slept in his canopy. Muhammad ibn Muslimah was his guard during the
Battle of Uhud. During that of Khandaq, al-Zubayr ibn al-\`Awwam was his
guard. In Khaybar, the Holy Prophet (S) was guarded by Abu-Ayyub
al-Ansari. It is said that he supplicated, ‘O Allah! Protect Abu-Ayyub
for he protected me.’ Bilal, Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas and Dhakwan ibn
\`Abd-Qays guarded the Holy Prophet (S) in Wadi al-Qira. \`Abbad ibn
Bishr was the commander of the Holy Prophet (S)’s guards. When Allah
revealed, ‘And Allah will protect you from the people,’ the guard was
canceled.

As he had to find an answer for the reports telling that the Holy
Prophet (S) was guarded during the Battle of Tabuk, the compiler
interprets ‘guarding’ into ‘waiting’! \`Uyun al-Athar 1/119:  
 Regarding \`Amr ibn Shu\`ayb’s report concerning guarding the Holy
Prophet (S) while he was offering prayers at the night before the Battle
of Tabuk, it seems that they were waiting for him. The guard of the Holy
Prophet (S) was canceled since the revelation of Allah’s saying, ‘And
Allah will protect you from the people,’ which was before the Battle of
Tabuk. Allah, however, is the most knowledgeable.

This interpretation is clearly contrary to the many reports of the guard
practiced on the Holy Prophet (S). At any rate, such reports refute the
claim that the Verse was revealed in Makkah.  
 To sum it up, the claim of the cancellation of the guard practiced on
the Holy Prophet (S) lacks evidence since it contradicts the history of
his life. Besides, the continuation of the guard has been proven through
many facts; the Hashimites guarded the Holy Prophet (S) in Makkah and,
altogether with the rest of his companions, in al-Madinah until the last
days of his lifetime.

In my conception, it seems that the attempts of connecting the Verse of
\`Ismah to the cancellation of the guard denotes the accuracy of the Ahl
al-Bayt’s interpretation that the Verse stands for the protection
against apostasy. From this cause, their dissidents have aimed
importunately at citing the material protection and the cancellation of
the guard as the interpretation of the Verse, which led them to be
engaged in contrast. Nevertheless, they had to disregard the stories
relating the Holy Prophet (S)’s having been guarded and had to overlook
the Column of the Guards[^10] that is still facing them in the Holy
Prophet (S)’s Masjid since AH 9.

Al-Albani, having admitted that the Verse was revealed in Makkah,
refuted al-Hakim’s authenticating \`A\`ishah’s report that he himself
had already authenticated. He then mentioned the report of assassinating
the Holy Prophet (S) as evidence on the authenticity of the previous
report.

Fourth Opinion
--------------

The fourth opinion is that the Verse was revealed in al-Madinah in the
second year of the Holy Prophet (S)’s immigration after the Battle of
Uhud.  
 Al-Suyuti, in al-Durr al-Manthur 2/291, records the following:  
 Ibn Abi-Shaybah and Ibn Jarir have narrated on the authority of
\`Atiyyah ibn Sa\`d that \`Abadah ibn al-Samit, once, came to the Holy
Prophet (S) and said, ‘Allah’s Messenger: I have concluded a covenant of
loyalty with many of the Jews, but I now declare that I disavow such
covenants and declare my loyalty to Allah and His Messenger. \`Abdullah
ibn Ubay was present; he spoke, ‘For me, I fear vicissitudes of time. I
cannot break my covenant with them.’ Hence, the Holy Prophet said to
him, ‘Abu-Habbab: You have appreciated the covenant broken by \`Abadah;
so, you can keep it for yourself alone.’ \`Abdullah then accepted. On
that account, Almighty Allah revealed, ‘O you who believe! Do not take
the Jews and the Christians for friend… and Allah will protect you from
the people.’

The previous discussion of the narrations of the guard is sufficient for
proving the falsehood of this report. In addition, the report was the
words of \`Atiyyah ibn Sa\`d, not the Holy Prophet (S). Finally, the
Verses remarked in the report were 51 to 67 of Surah of al-Ma\`idah
which no single narrator has ever claimed that they were revealed
because of the story of \`Abdullah ibn Ubay’s loyalty to the Jews. At
length, \`Abdullah was deceased before the revelation of Surah of
al-Ma\`idah.

Fifth Opinion
-------------

The fifth opinion is that the Verse was revealed immediately after an
attempt of assassinating the Holy Prophet (S). Contradiction is the
distinctive feature of the reports narrating that assassination; some
narrators have told that the attempt took place during the Battle of
That al-Riqa\` when a person approached the Holy Prophet (S) and asked
for his sword so that he would see carefully. The Holy Prophet (S) gave
him his sword so negligently…etc. Other narrations have mentioned that
the sword was hanged or that the Holy Prophet (S) was inadvertent or
that he was dipping his legs in a well… etc.  
 Al-Suyuti, in al-Durr al-Manthur 2/298-9, records the following:  
 Ibn Abi-Hatam has narrated on the authority of Jabir ibn \`Abdullah
that after the Battle of That al-Riqa\`, the Holy Prophet (S) rested on
a well and dipped his legs therein. Meanwhile, Ghawrath ibn al-Harth
decided to kill him but his companions asked, ‘How will you kill him?’
‘I will ask him to give me his sword and I will kill him then,’ said
Ghawrath. He then approached and said, ‘Muhammad: Give me your sword.’
The Holy Prophet (S) did. As soon as the man held the sword, his hands
began to shiver. ‘Allah has precluded you from what you had intended to
do,’ said the Holy Prophet (S). Hence, Almighty Allah revealed, ‘O
Apostle! Deliver what… etc.’  
 Ibn Jarir has narrated on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ka\`b Al-Qara¨i
that the Holy Prophet (S), once, rested under a tree when a Bedouin man
unsheathed his sword and shouted, ‘Who will protect you against me?’
‘Allah will,’ answered the Holy Prophet (S). Suddenly, the man’s hands
shivered and he could no longer hold the sword. [Others added] He rammed
his head to a tree and his brain was scattered. Hence, Allah revealed,
‘And Allah will protect you from the people.’  
 Ibn Habban and Ibn Mardawayh have reported on the authority of
Abu-Hurayrah that the Holy Prophet (S), once, rested under a tree, which
was the most extensive because we used to select the largest tree for
him during journeys. He hanged his sword to that tree when a man came
and drew the sword shouting, ‘Muhammad! Who will protect you against
me.’ ‘Allah will,’ said the Holy Prophet (S), ‘Put that sword away.’
Hence, Allah revealed, ‘And Allah will protect you from the people.’

Other narrators have reported that a person was arrested because he had
tried to assassinate the Holy Prophet (S). In al-Durr al-Manthur 2/299,
it has been narrated that the Holy Prophet said to the arrested man who
was charged of trying to assassinate him, ‘You should have regarded me!
Even if you had had such an opportunity, Almighty Allah would have
prevented you from doing it.’  
 The inaccuracy of this opinion can be proved through the following
points:

(1) According to ibn Husham, in al-Sirah 3/225, the Battle of That
al-Riqa\` took place in AH 4. Many years after this date, Surah of
al-Ma\`idah was revealed. Some reports of the incident have not defined
a date and others have been logically unacceptable.

(2) The major reference books recording the story of Ghawrath and the
Battle of That al-Riqa\` have not referred to the revelation of the
Verse of \`Ismah; rather most of them have referred to the legislation
of the ritual Prayer of Anticipating Dangers (Salat al-Khawf) and the
practice of more watchful guard on the Holy Prophet (S) even during
prayers.

These two points are sufficient for refuting the claim of the revelation
of the Verse on such occasions.  
 Ibn Husham has mentioned that Almighty Allah’s saying, ‘O you who
believe! Remember Allah’s favor on you when a people had determined to
stretch forth their hands towards you, but He withheld their hands from
you…,’ was revealed on that occasion.[^11] This is also inaccurate since
the Verse is also in Surah of al-Ma\`idah.  
 Al-Bukhari, as well as many others, has mentioned that the Verse was
revealed for the Salat al-Khawf and the practice of more watchful guard
on the Holy Prophet (S) due to that incident:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Jabir ibn \`Abdullah that the
Holy Prophet (S), once, rested under a tree to which he hanged his sword
in his journey back from a campaign in Najd. As each one searched for a
tree to sleep under its shadow, they were waked up by the Holy Prophet
(S)’s loud voice. When they approached, they saw a Bedouin man sitting
before him. The Holy Prophet (S) then said, “While I was sleeping, this
man unsheathed my sword; so I woke up and saw him raising it towards me
saying ‘Who will protect you against me?’ ‘Allah will,’ I answered. The
result then is what you see now.” The Holy Prophet (S), however, did not
punish him.  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-Salamah that Jabir ibn
\`Abdullah reported that in That al-Riqa\`, the Holy Prophet (S) rested
under a large tree that we have left for him. A polytheist came and
unsheathed the Holy Prophet (S)’s sword, which was hanged to the tree
and said, ‘Well, now you should fear me.’ ‘No, I should not,’ answered
the Holy Prophet (S). ‘Who will protect you against me?’ said the man.
‘Allah will,’ answered the Holy Prophet (S). We then came and threatened
that man. Then it was time for a prayer; hence, the Holy Prophet (S) led
a group of us in a two Rak\`ah prayer then the other group came
instead.  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Musaddad on the authority of
Abu-\`Uwanah on the authority of Abu-Bishr that the polytheist man’s
name was Ghawrath ibn al-Harth.[^12]  
 The most acceptable form of Ghawrath’s story can be seen in al-Kulayni:
al-Kafi 8/127:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Aban ibn Taghlib on the
authority of Abu-Basir that Imam Abu-\`Abdullah al-Sadiq (a.s.), once,
narrated that while the Holy Prophet (S) rested under a tree on the edge
of a valley, a torrent came between his companions and him. Hence, the
companions waited for that torrent to stop. Meanwhile, a polytheist man
determined to kill the Holy Prophet (S); he attacked him with his sword
shouting, ‘Who will protect you against me?’ ‘Your and my Lord will,’
answered the Holy Prophet (S). Immediately, Archangel Gabriel knocked
that man down. The Holy Prophet (S) took the sword and sat on his chest
saying, ‘Now, who will protect you against me, Ghawrath?’ ‘Your
benevolence and humanity will,’ said the man. Forthwith, the Holy
Prophet (S) left him. The man stood up shouting, ‘By Allah I swear, you
are better and more benevolent than I am.’

Major reference books of Hadith have not mentioned that the Verse was
revealed during the Battle of That al-Riqa\` or on the occasion of
Ghawrath’s attempt of assassination. Furthermore, it has been clear that
after that incident, the Holy Prophet (S) ordered to guard him more
watchfully even during the prayers.  
 The adopters of this opinion may have understood that the canceling of
the guard meant that the Holy Prophetsuspected the divine protection!

The following opinions of ibn Hajar and al-Qurtubi is a part of their
confusion in inventing a relationship between the Verse of \`Ismah and
Ghawrath’s story. Al-Qurtubi says that the Holy Prophet (S)’s having
being alone during the events of the story proves that he was not
guarded and, as a sequence, the Verse of \`Ismah was already revealed.
Ibn Hajar answers, ‘No, the Verse was revealed on that day; so, the
guards’ job was canceled. Before that, the Holy Prophet (S)’s conviction
was sometimes increasing and in other times decreasing. He took guards
whenever his confidence decreased and canceled it when his confidence
increased. During the events of Ghawrath’s story, the Holy Prophet (S)’s
confidence was considerable; therefore, he was not guarded.’[^13]

Ibn Hajar misses the fact that Surah of al-Ma\`idah was revealed in AH
10 while the Battle of That al-Riqa\` took place in AH 4 and that
Abu-Hurayrah (the reporter of the incident) put his feet, for the first
time, in al-Madinah in AH 7. He also misses that Salat al-Khawf and the
watchful guard were legislated in That al-Riqa\`. However, his one and
only aim was to take the Verse of \`Ismah away from the incidents on
Ghadir Khumm.

The reports confirming that the Holy Prophet (S) was guarded during the
Battle of Tabuk that took place six years after the Battle of That
al-Riqa\` have been already forecited. Through authentic reports, we
have proved that the Holy Prophet (S) was guarded even during the
conquest of Makkah that took place four years after the forecited
incident. Read the following narration as quoted from al-Bukhari:
al-Sahih 5/91:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Husham on the authority of his
father that when people of Quraysh were informed about the Holy Prophet
(S)’s progress towards Makkah, Abu-Sufyan ibn Harb, Hakim ibn Hizam and
Badil ibn Warqa\`… The Holy Prophet (S)’s guards could capture them…
etc.

Sixth Opinion
-------------

The sixth opinion claims that the Verse is generally referring to the
Holy Prophet (S)’s having been ordered to convey the Lord’s message,
lest he should not be regarded as conveyor.  
 The following is quoted from al-Durr al-Manthur 2/299:  
 \`Abd ibn Hamid, Ibn Jarir, Ibn al-Mundhir, Ibn Abi-Hatam and
Abu’l-Shaykh have narrated on the authority of Qatadah that in this
Verse, the Lord acquaints His Messenger that he will protect him against
people and orders him to convey the message… etc.

To great extent, this opinion is similar to the first one. The previous
topics may be enough for refutation. Besides, the reports of this
opinion are not documented and not enough for achieving the condition
therein.

The Opinion Agreeing the Ahl al-Bayt’s Interpretation
-----------------------------------------------------

Let us first refer to the following narrations:  
 Al-Suyuti: al-Durr al-Manthur 2/298:  
 Ibn Abi-Hatam, Ibn Mardawayh and Ibn \`Asakir have narrated on the
authority of Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri that the Verse of \`Ismah was revealed
to the Holy Prophet (S) on the day of Ghadir regarding \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib.  
 Ibn Mardawayh has narrated that Ibn Mas\`ud said, ‘Before the Holy
Prophet (S), we used to recite the Verse in this form, ‘O Apostle!
Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord (i.e. about the
matter that \`Ali being the leader of the believers) and if you do it
not, then you have not delivered His message.’

Abu-Ja\`far al-Iskafi: al-Mi\`yar wa’l-Muwazanah 213:  
 It has been narrated that Jabir ibn \`Abdullah and \`Abdullah ibn
al-\`Abbas said that the Holy Prophet (S) felt some fear when Almighty
Allah ordered him to nominate \`Ali as the next leader and instruct
people to pay homage to him. He anticipated that people would accuse him
of favoring his cousin. Hence, Almighty Allah revealed, ‘O Apostle!
Deliver… etc.’ On that day in Ghadir Khumm, the Holy Prophet (S)
delivered the message to people.

As a footnote, he adds:  
 Al-Suyuti, in al-Durr al-Manthur, records that Ibn Mardawayh and Ibn
\`Asakir have narrated on the authority of Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri that
after the Holy Prophet (S) had nominated \`Ali as the next leader and
asked people to pay him homage, Archangel Gabriel conveyed Almighty
Allah’s saying, ‘This day have I completed your religion for you and
perfected My favor on you… etc.’[^14]

Al-Khatib, al-Hasakani, Ibn \`Asakir, Ibn Kathir, al-Khawarzmi and Ibn
al-Maghazili have narrated that Abu-Hurayrah said, “Whoever observes
fasting on the eighteenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah will be granted the reward of
a sixty-month fasting. It is the day of Ghadir when the Holy Prophet (S)
took \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib from the hand and said, ‘I am the master of the
believers, aren’t I?’ ‘Yes, you are,’ affirmed people. He then declared,
‘Whoever has regarded me as his master must regard \`Ali as his master.’
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab then said to \`Ali, ‘Congratulations son of
Abu-Talib! You have become my master and the master of every Muslim.’
Then, Almighty Allah revealed, ‘This day have I completed your religion
for you and perfected My favor on you… etc.’[^15]

Sayyid al-Tabataba\`i, in Tafsir al-Mizan 6/54, records the following:  
 Al-Tha\`labi in Tafsir has recorded that Ja\`far ibn Muhammad said,
“Almighty Allah’s saying, ‘O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to
you from your Lord,’ refers to \`Ali. Immediately after the revelation
of the Verse, the Holy Prophet (S) took \`Ali from the hand and
declared, “Whoever has regarded me as his master must now regard \`Ali
as his master.”  
 It has been also narrated on the authority of al-Kalbi on the authority
of Abu-Salih on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas that the Verse was revealed
about \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib. Allah ordered the Holy Prophet (S) to
instruct people to pay homage to \`Ali; so, he took him from the arm and
declared, ‘Whoever has regarded me as his master must now regard \`Ali
as his master. O Allah! Be the supporter of him who will support \`Ali
and be the enemy of him who will antagonize \`Ali.”

The following is quoted from \`Allamah al-Amini: al-Ghadir 1/214:  
 The Verse was revealed on the eighteenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah, AH 10, the
year of the Farewell Hajj. When the Holy Prophet (S) resided in Ghadir
Khumm, Archangel Gabriel came to him and said, “Muhammad: Almighty Allah
greets you and says: O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you
(i.e. regarding \`Ali succession) from your Lord; and if you do it not,
then you have not delivered His message, and Allah will protect you from
the people.” The foregoing people who were more than 100,000 individuals
were about to reach al-Juhafah. The Holy Prophet (S) ordered them to
return and ordered the others to halt in that place. He then nominated
\`Ali as the leader of Muslims and told them about the divine revelation
that Almighty Allah would protect him against people. For the Imamiyyah,
this fact is indisputable. Yet, we should provide reports from Sunni
reference books of Hadith as evidences.

Al-Amini, thereafter, refers to thirty Sunni reference books that have
related reports respecting the revelation of the Verse about Imam
\`Ali’s succession. Let us now refer to some of them in brief:

1. Al-Tabari, Abu-Ja\`far Muhammad ibn Jarir (died in AH 310):
al-Wilayah. In this book, he has narrated on the authority of Zayd ibn
Arqam that when the Holy Prophet (S) was back from the Farewell Hajj, he
resided in Ghadir Khumm. It was the first hours of that extremely hot
day when he ordered to sweep a height there and gather people. As soon
as they were before him, he delivered an eloquent sermon saying, ‘The
Lord has revealed to me… etc.

2. Al-Han¨ali, ibn Abi-Hatam Abu-Muhammad al-Razi (died in AH 327)

3. Al-Mahamili, Abu-\`Abdullah (died in AH 330.) In al-Amali, he has
related the report to Ibn \`Abbas.

4. Al-Farisi, Abu-Bakr al-Shirazi (died in AH 407); he has related the
report to ibn \`Abbas.

5. Ibn Mardawayh (AH 323-416); he has related on the authority
Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri that the Verse was revealed on that day in Ghadir
Khumm for declaring the leadership of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib. He has also
recorded that Ibn Mas\`ud said, “In the presence of the Holy Prophet
(S), we used to recite the Verse of \`Ismah as, ‘O Apostle! Deliver what
has been revealed to you from your Lord (i.e. regarding \`Ali being the
leader of the believers) and if you do it not, then you have not
delivered His message.’”

6. Al-Tha\`labi, Abu-Ishaq al-Nisapuri (died in AH 427); he has recorded
the report in al-Kashf wa’l-Bayan.

7. Al-Isfahani, Abu-Na\`im (died in AH 430); he has recorded the report
in Ma Nazala Min al-Qur’an fi Haqq \`Ali (The Qur’anic Verses About
\`Ali).

8. Al-Wahidi, Abu’l-Hasan al-Nisapuri, (died in AH 468); In Asbab
al-Nuzul, he has related the report.

9. Al-Sajistani, Abu-Sa\`id, (died in AH 477); he has narrated the
report in al-Wilayah.

10. Al-Hasakani, al-Hakim Abu’l-Qasim; in Shawahid al-Tanzil li Qawa\`id
al-Tafdil Wa’l-Ta\`wil, he has recorded the report.

11. Ibn \`Asakir, Abu’l-Qasim al-Shafi\`i (died in AH 471); he has
related the report to Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri.

12. Al-Natanzi, Abu’l-Fath; in al-Khasa\`is al-\`Alawiyyah, he has
recorded the report.

13. Al-Razi, Fakhr al-Din al-Shafi\`i (died in AH 606); in al-Tafsir
al-Kabir 3/636, he has recorded that the Verse was revealed for \`Ali.
The Prophet (S) took him from the hand and declared, ‘Whoever has
regarded me as his master must now regard \`Ali as his master.’

14. Al-Nasibi, Abu-Salim al-Shafi\`i (died in AH 652); he has recorded
the report in Matalib al-Sa\`ul 16.

15. Al-Ras\`ani, \`Izz al-Din al-Mawsli al-Hanbali (born in AH 589)

16. Al-Hamawini, Abu-Ishaq, Shaykh al-Islam (died in AH 722); in
Fara\`id al-Simtayn, he has recorded the report on the authority of his
three masters: Sayyid Burhan al-Din Ibrahim ibn \`Umar al-Husayni
al-Madani, Shaykh Majd al-Din \`Abdullah ibn Mahmud al-Mawsli and Badr
al-Din Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn As\`ad al-Bukhari on the authority of
Abu-Hurayrah.

17. Al-Hamadani, \`Ali (died in AH 786); in Mawaddat al-Qurba, he has
recorded that al-Barra\` ibn \`Azib said, “I accompanied the Holy
Prophet (S) in the journey back from the Farewell Hajj. As we reached
Ghadir Khumm, he gathered people, sat to a tree and took \`Ali from the
hand and said, ‘I am preferred to your souls, aren’t I?’ ‘Yes, you are,
Allah’s messenger!’ asserted people. ‘Whoever has regarded me as his
master must now regard \`Ali as his master. O Allah! Be the supporter of
him who will support \`Ali and be the enemy of his who will oppose
\`Ali,’ declared the Holy Prophet (S). \`Umar, May Allah please him, met
\`Ali and said, ‘Congratulations, \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib! You have become
my master and the master of every male and female believer.’ That was
the result of Allah’s saying, ‘O Apostle! Deliver… etc.’

18. Badr al-Din ibn al-\`Ayni al-Hanafi (AH 762-855); in \`Umdat al-Qari
fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari 8/584, he has recorded the report respecting
the Verse on the authority of al-Wahidi.

Wahhabis and the Hadith of Ghadir
---------------------------------

It is strange to find the opinion of the Ahl al-Bayt regarding the
interpretation of the Verse of \`Ismah in Sunni reference books of
Hadith, because it collapses the claims about Imamate and succession of
the Holy Prophet (S) which people of Quraysh and their fans have spared
no efforts in attempting to convince Muslims with. From this cause,
Nasibis are extremely incensed for the existence of the Hadith of Ghadir
on innumerable pages of Sunni reference books of Hadith. They have
always wished had such reports been erased from such books.
Consequently, they have showered insults and accusations at the Shi\`ah
and their scholars for they have always referred to the existence of
such reports in such books. Instead, they should have studied such
reports on the light of the Qur’an and the authentic Hadiths.  
 Al-Albani; in Salsalat al-AHadith al-Sahihah 5/644, has recorded the
following:  
 The Holy Prophet (S) used to be guarded until the revelation Almighty
Allah saying, ‘And Allah will protect you from the people.’ He then took
his head out of the tent and ordered the guards to leave him since he
would be protected by the Lord.  
 Al-Tirmidhi (2/175), Ibn Jarir (6-199) and al-Hakim (2/3) have narrated
the report on the authority of al-Harith ibn \`Ubayd on the authority of
Sa\`id al-Jariri on the authority of \`Abd ibn Shaqiq on the authority
of \`A\`ishah. Al-Tirmidhi, however, has regarded it as strange. Others
have reported it on the authority of the same series except \`A\`ishah.
This is in fact more accurate because al-Harith ibn \`Ubayd who is the
same as Abu-Qudamah al-Iyadi is rather doubtful in affairs regarding his
memorization. About him, al-Hafi¨ says that although he is honest, he
makes mistakes. Some of those to whom al-Tirmidhi had referred, such as
Isma\`il ibn \`Ilyah the trustworthy, contradicted this opinion. Ibn
Jarir has narrated the report on the authority of Isma\`il on the
authority of al-Jariri interruptedly. Hence, the report is actually
interruptedly transmitted and al-Hakim’s having decided its authenticity
as related on the authority of \`A\`ishah is inaccurate although
al-Dhahbi has regarded it as authentic, too. In conclusion, the report
is authentic since it has been testified by the report of Abu-Hurayrah
that the Prophet (S), once, rested under a tree, which was the most
extensive because we used to select the largest tree for him during
journeys. He hanged his sword to that tree when a man came and drew the
sword shouting, ‘Muhammad! Who will protect you against me.’ ‘Allah
will,’ said the Holy Prophet (S), ‘Put that sword away.’ Hence, Allah
revealed, ‘And Allah will protect you from the people.’ According to Ibn
Kathir, al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 6/198, Ibn Habban, in al-Sahih, and Ibn
Mardawayh have recorded the previous narration from two ways of
documentation… etc.  
 It is worth mentioning that the Shi\`ah, depending upon numerous
narrations most of which are incomplete or interruptedly transmitted,
have claimed that the Verse was revealed on that day in Ghadir Khumm for
\`Ali, May Allah please him,. This is however contrary to the forecited
reports. They have cited Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri’s report, which is forged.
I have proven this fact during discussing the report numbered 4922.
Without studying its documentation, \`Abd al-Husayn[^16] the Shiite has
referred to of such narrations in al-Murajaat 38. Since his only purpose
was to enlist any word that may serve his sect, he used to cite any
narration as evidence without paying any attention to its documentation
or discriminatory study. However, the Shi\`ah have adopted the rule that
the end justifies the means.

Beware of this man and his narrations! Moreover, he used to defraud, if
not lie to, the readers; referring to the report that was falsely
ascribed to Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri, for instance, the man has claimed that
a many compilers of Sunni reference books of Hadith, such as al-Wahidi,
have recorded that report. Even the beginners know that al-Wahidi is not
one of the compilers of the four most remarkable Sunni reference books
of Hadith. He is an interpreter of the Holy Qur’an who might have
mentioned authentic and doubtful reports indistinctly. However,
Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri’s report was doubtful because it has been narrated
on the authority of extremely doubtful and neglected narrators.  
 After they had adopted Taqiyyah (pious simulation), the Shi\`ah have
deemed lawful to forge lies against Sunnis in their books and sermons.
This matter is clearly unveiled in al-Khomayni’s book entitled Kashf
al-\`Asrar. It is quite evident that Taqiyyah is the spouse of
fabrication. Accordingly, Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyah, who knew the
Shi\`ah more than anyone else did, said, ‘The Shi\`ah are the biggest
fabricators of all Muslims.’ I myself obviously noticed the fabrication
of some of their scholars, especially \`Abd al-Husayn who has deluded
the readers into imagining that the authenticity of the report is beyond
dispute for the Sunni scholar because of its numerous ways of narration.

Al-Khumayni has been bigger fabricator! On page 149 of the forecited
book, he has claimed the revelation of Verse of \`Ismah on the day of
Ghadir in which the Prophet (S) was ordered to declare the Imamate of
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib. He has ascribed this to Sunni scholars and decided
the unanimity of the Shi\`ah on that matter. Allah may reward that man
as exactly as what he deserves.

Answering al-Albani, we say, first, that the style of insults and
reviling at people, as well as issuing inaccurate judgments, should be
eluded, for it is not rightful for al-Albani to classify the Islamic
groups as to their honesty and dishonesty. Among Sunnis and Shiites,
there are various kinds of people. Yet, Nasibis are excluded for they
are subjected to definite rules. Al-Albani should not forget that he
defended Imam \`Ali (a.s.) and refuted ibn Taymiyah who wronged him and
denied that the Holy Prophet said about him in the famous incident of
Ghadir Khumm, ‘Whoever has regarded me as his master must now regard
\`Ali as his master. O Allah! Be the supporter of him who will support
\`Ali and be the enemy of him who will oppose \`Ali.’ In the same place,
al-Albani, in Salsalat al-AHadith al-Sahihah 5/330, No. 1750, has
decided the authenticity of the forecited Hadith. Ibn Taymiyah would
never be expected to give the Shi\`ah their due since he had wronged
their Imam!  
 On page 344 of the same book, al-Albani adds:  
 As I saw Ibn Taymiyah considering the Hadith[^17] as doubtful in its
first half and untrue in its second, I have had to write down these
pages and prove that the Hadith is authentic. In my conception, the
reason beyond such exaggeration of Ibn Taymiyah was that he used to be
hasty in deciding the inauthenticity of some Hadiths before studying
them! Nevertheless, the Shi\`ah have been completely inaccurate as they
claimed that the Holy Prophet (S) nominated \`Ali as his successor
through such Hadiths. History has proven the falsity of this claim; if
the Holy Prophet (S) had indeed said such a thing, it should have
occurred because the source of his words is the Divine Revelation and
Allah never breaks His promise.

While he criticizes ibn Taymiyah’s hastiness, al-Albani himself jumped
to inaccurate conclusions confusing the legislative instruction with the
divine prediction. Had al-Albani’s words been right, the Hadith that he
already decided as authentic would have been invalid. In other words,
the Holy Prophet (S)’s saying, ‘Whoever has regarded me as his master
must now regard \`Ali as his master,’ which al-Albani has decided as
authentic must have been originated from the Divine Revelation, too.
Hence, such a divine prediction, as al-Albani has decided, should befall
and that \`Ali should be the leader of Muslims who should precede him to
themselves in the same way as they preceded the Holy Prophet (S).
However, this matter did not take place; on the contrary, they attacked
the house of \`Ali and Fatimah two or three days after the Holy Prophet
(S)’s departure and threatened flaming the house if the people there
would not come out and pay homage to the new leader.

Finally, they forced \`Ali to pay homage. All these events are as clear
as the sun. On that account, the Holy Prophet (S)’s saying, ‘\`Ali will
be my successor’ is as same as his saying, ‘Whoever has regarded me as
his master must now regard \`Ali as his master.’ If the earlier is
divine prediction, as al-Albani claims, the latter should be, too! Both
texts refer to a legislative instruction and a guide leading Muslims to
their duties so that any contrary event would not take place.

Secondly, al-Albani has decided the report dedicating the Verse of
\`Ismah to the event of the congregational declaration of loyalty in
Ghadir as inauthentic; has he studied the reports so as to have the
right to say that most of these narrations have been incompletely
transmitted or doubtful? Has he investigated the ways of narrating the
Hadith that was reported by al-Tha\`labi, Abu-Na\`im, al-Wahidi,
Abu-Sa\`id al-Sajistani, al-Hasakani and many others? Has he scrutinized
these ways of narration before he decided that most of them have been
incompletely transmitted or doubtful? Has he found that any of the
narrators are neglected by him? Finally, he committed the same error of
Ibn Taymiyah whom he had criticized!

In any event, al-Albani still has enough time to correct his errors. We
hope that he would write down his notes respecting the discussion of the
exegesis of the Verse of \`Ismah and study, on his own criteria, the
ways of narration and documentation that we have cited provided that he
would not contradict his previous words and avoid deciding a narrator as
doubtful for nothing other than having referred to Imam \`Ali’s merits
while he admits on the other reports relating the merits of Imam \`Ali’s
rivals!

Let us now refer to the ways of documentation quoted from one reference
book, which is Shawahid al-Tanzil li-Qawa\`id al-Tafdil[^18] by al-Hakim
al-Hasakani—\`Abdullah ibn \`Abdullah ibn Ahmad al-\`Amiri al-Qurayshi
the student of al-Hakim al-Nisapuri. On pages 250-7, he writes down:  
 244. Abu-\`Abdullah Al-Daynuri has narrated to us on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Ibrahim al-Sunni on the authority of
\`Abd al-Rahman ibn Hamdan on the authority of Muhammad ibn \`Uthman
al-\`Absi on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Maymun on the
authority of \`Ali ibn \`Abis al-A\`mash on the authority of Abu’l-Jihaf
Dawud ibn Abi-\`Awf on the authority of \`Attiyyah on the authority of
Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidri that the Verse of \`Ismah was revealed about \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib.

245. Al-Hakim Abu-\`Abdullah al-Hafiz has narrated to us on the
authority of \`Ali ibn \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`«sa al-Dahqan in al-Kufah
on the authority of al-Husayn ibn al-Hakam al-Hibri on the authority of
al-Kalbi on the authority of Abu-Salih on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas
that the Verse of \`Ismah was revealed about \`Ali. Immediately after
the revelation, the Holy Prophet (S) carried out the divine order of
conveying. He took \`Ali from the hand and declared, ‘Whoever has
regarded me as his master must now regard \`Ali as his master. O Allah!
Be the supporter of him who will support \`Ali and be the enemy of him
who will oppose him.’

246. A group of people have narrated the same report on the authority of
al-Hibri, and al-Subay\`i in his book of Tafsir has also narrated on the
authority of al-Hibri. Other people have narrated it on the authority of
al-Kalbi. I have compiled a book in ten volumes and entitled Duat
al-Hudat Ila Ada\` Haqq al-Muwalat in which I have referred to the ways
of the documentation of this report in details.

247. Abu-Bakr al-Sukkari has narrated to us on the authority of
Abu-\`Amr al-Muqri on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Sufyan on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Azhar on the authority of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn
\`Amr ibn Jibillah on the authority of \`Umar ibn Na\`im ibn \`Umar ibn
Qays al-Masir on the authority of his grandfather that \`Abdullah ibn
Abi-Awfa, on that day in Ghadir Khumm, heard the Holy Prophet (S)
reciting the Verse of \`Ismah. He then raised his hands so upwardly that
his armpits were seen and said, ‘Whoever has regarded me as his master
must now regard \`Ali as his master. O Allah! Be the supporter of him
who will support \`Ali and be the enemy of him who will oppose \`Ali. O
Allah! Be the witness.’

248. \`Amr ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad has narrated to us on the authority of
Zahir ibn Ahmad on the authority of Abu-Bakr Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Sawli
on the authority of al-Mughirah ibn Muhammad on the authority of \`Ali
ibn Muhammad ibn Sulayman al-Nawfali on the authority of his father that
Ziyad ibn al-Mundhir said: I was present when Abu-Ja\`far Muhammad ibn
\`Ali (Imam al-Baqir), while instructing people, was asked by a man
named \`Uthman al-A\`sha who used to relate al-Hasan al-Basri’s
instructions, ‘Son of Allah’s Messenger: May Allah make my soul your
ransom! Once, al-Hasan recited the Verse of \`Ismah then commented that
it was revealed about somebody whom he had not identified.’ The Imam
said, “He would have told if he had wanted. Nevertheless, he feared
misfortunes! Archangel Gabriel, once, descended to the Holy Prophet (S)
and conveyed that the Lord ordered him to instruct people how to perform
the ritual prayers; so, he carried out.

He then descended and conveyed that the Lord ordered the Holy Prophet
(S) to instruct people how to fast; so, he carried out. He then
descended and conveyed that the Lord ordered the Holy Prophet (S) to
instruct people how to undertake the ritual Hajj; so, he carried out. He
then descended and conveyed that the Lord ordered the Holy Prophet (S)
to lead people to their leader so that the Lord would have His claim
against them perfected. The Holy Prophet said, “My Lord: My people have
still born the customs of Jahiliyah. They are filled in with rivalry and
pride. The man whom I should introduce as their leader has beheaded a
single man, at least, from each house of my people. I anticipate that
they would apostatize from the religion if I declare that.’ Immediately,
Almighty Allah revealed, ‘O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to
you from your Lord; and if you do it not, then you have not delivered
His message (so completely), and Allah will protect you from the people;
surely Allah will not guide the unbelieving people.’ When the Holy
Prophet (S) guaranteed the protection of Almighty Allah, he took \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib from the hand and said, ‘People: Whoever has regarded me
as his master must now regard \`Ali as his master. O Allah! Be the
supporter of him who will support \`Ali and be the enemy of him who will
oppose \`Ali and give victory to him who will support \`Ali and
disappoint him who will disappoint \`Ali and love him who will love
\`Ali and dislike him who will dislike \`Ali.’ Commenting on the
narration, \`Uthman al-A\`sha said, ‘The best thing that I ever gained
during that journey was this narration.’

249. \`Ali ibn Musa ibn Ishaq has narrated to me on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Mas\`ud ibn Muhammad on the authority of Sahl ibn Bahr on
the authority of al-Fadl ibn Shadhan on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Abi-\`Umayr on the authority of \`Umar ibn \`Udhaynah on the authority
of al-Kalbi on the authority of Abu-Salih that Ibn \`Abbas and Jabir ibn
\`Abdullah said that the Holy Prophet (S) anticipated that people would
criticize and revile at him when he would convey his Lord’s instructions
of nominating \`Ali as their next leader. He expected them to accuse him
of favoring his cousin for personal goals. Hence, Almighty Allah
revealed the Verse of \`Ismah. Immediately, the Holy Prophet (S)
declared that \`Ali would be the next leader of Muslims. That was in
Ghadir Khumm.

250. Muhammad ibn al-Qasim ibn Ahmad has narrated to me on the authority
of Abu-Ja\`far Muhammad ibn \`Ali on the authority of his father on the
authority of Sa\`d ibn \`Abdullah on the authority of Ahmad ibn
\`Abdullah al-Barqi on the authority of his father on the authority of
Khalaf ibn \`Ammar al-Asadi on the authority of Abu’l-Hasan al-\`Abdi on
the authority of al-A\`mash on the authority of \`Abayah ibn Rab\`i that
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas (narrating the story of the Holy Prophet (S)’s
Night Ascension) said that Almighty Allah said, ‘I have assigned a
vicegerent for each Prophet (S) and thus you are the Messenger of Allah
and \`Ali is your vicegerent.’

When the Holy Prophet (S) returned to the earth, he disliked telling
people about that divine commission because they had just converted to
Islam. Six days after the incident, Almighty Allah revealed His saying,
‘Then, it may be that you will give up a part of what is revealed to you
and your breast will become straitened by it.’ The Holy Prophet (S)
waited for more eighteen days. Then Almighty Allah revealed to him, ‘O
Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and if
you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah will
protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the unbelieving
people.’ For that reason, he ordered Bilal to declare that people must
gather in Ghadir Khumm the next day. Hence, he said, ‘People: My Lord
has ordered me to convey His Message to you but I feared since I
anticipated that you would belie me. Therefore, He blamed me and
threatened a punishment frequently.’

He then took \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib from the hand and raised it so upwardly
that their armpits were seen and then declared, ‘People: Allah is my
Master and I am your master. Whoever has regarded me as his master must
now regard \`Ali as his master. O Allah! Be the supporter of him who
will support \`Ali and be the enemy of him who will oppose \`Ali and
give victory to him who will support \`Ali and disappoint him who will
disappoint \`Ali.’ soon after that, Almighty Allah revealed, ‘This day
have I perfected your religion for you and completed My favor on you…
etc.’

The Ahl al-Bayt’s Opinion
-------------------------

In al-\`Ayyashi’s book of Tafsir 1/331, we read the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-Salih that Ibn \`Abbas and
Jabir ibn \`Abdullah said that the Holy Prophet (S) anticipated that
people would criticize and revile at him when he would convey his Lord’s
instructions of nominating \`Ali as the next leader. He expected them to
accuse him of favoring his cousin. Hence, Almighty Allah revealed the
Verse of \`Ismah.

In al-Kulayni’s al-Kafi 1/290, we read the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Muhammad ibn Yahya on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Husayn on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Isma\`il ibn Buzay\` on the authority of
Mansur ibn Yunus on the authority of Abu’l-Jarud that Abu-Ja\`far Imam
al-Baqir (a.s.) said, “Almighty Allah has imposed five precepts upon
people, but they carried out four and neglected one. As they were
unaware of the time of offering the ritual prayers, Archangel Gabriel
descended to the Holy Prophet (S) and conveyed the Lord’s orders of
instructing people when to offer the prayers. For the precept of the
zakat, the same thing took place. For the precept of the fasting, on the
tenth of Muharram, the Holy Prophet (S) instructed the people of the
neighboring villages to observe fasting. Later on, Ramadan, the month
lying between Sha\`ban and Shawwal, was identified for the fasting. Then
the rites of the Hajj descended; Archangel Gabriel said to the Holy
Prophet (S), ‘In the same way as you have taught them how to offer
prayers, defray the zakat and observe the fasting, you should now
instruct them how to undertake the Hajj.’  
 Finally, the commandment of the allegiance was revealed. The perfection
of the religion was achieved through the loyalty to the leadership of
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib. The Holy Prophet (S) then narrated, “When the
commandment of the loyalty to \`Ali’s leadership was revealed to me, I
thought that my people, having been fresh Muslims, would accuse me of
favoring my cousin. Forthwith, Almighty Allah threatened a punishment if
I would neglect the conveyance of the matter. He therefore revealed the
Verse of \`Ismah: ‘O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from
your Lord; and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His
message, and Allah will protect you from the people; surely Allah will
not guide the unbelieving people.’  
 Immediately, the Holy Prophet (S) took \`Ali (a.s.) from the hand and
declared, ‘People: Like the other Prophets, I have to respond to my Lord
after He has given me this age. You, as well as I, will be interrogated.
What will your answer be?’ ‘We admit that you have conveyed, advised and
accomplished your mission. May Allah satisfy you with the best reward of
the Messengers,’ acknowledged people. ‘O Allah! Be the witness,’
repeated the Holy Prophet (S) thrice, ‘Muslims: This man shall be your
leader after me. The present must carry this command to the absent.’”

In Bihar al-Anwar 94/300, we read the following:  
 Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Tarazi has narrated in his book on the authority
of \`Abdullah ibn Ja\`far al-Himyari on the authority of Harun ibn
Muslim on the authority of al-Hasan al-Laythi that, once, Abu-\`Abdullah
Ja\`far ibn Muhammad (S) said to the groups of the Shi\`ah and the
adherents of the Ahl al-Bayt who were present before him, ‘Do you know
the day on which the Lord has constructed Islam, revealed the
illumination of the religion and made it –that day- a festivity for our
adherents and us?’ ‘Allah, His Messenger and the son of the Messenger
are the most knowledgeable. Is it the \`Id al-Fitr?’ asked they. ‘No, it
is not,’ answered Abu-\`Abdullah (a.s.). ‘Is it then the \`Id
al-Adha?’[^19] asked they. ‘No,’ answered the Holy Imam, ‘However, these
are two holy and noble days. The day of the illumination of the religion
is holier and nobler.

It is the eighteenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah. On the noontime of that day when
the Holy Prophet (S) arrived in Ghadir Khumm during his journey back
from the Farewell Hajj, Archangel Gabriel descended carrying the Lord’s
instruction of declaring Amir al-Mu\`minin’s succession and leadership.
‘On this very day, you must declare that \`Ali would be the master of
this *Ummah* so that he must be the next leader to whom people should
show loyalty. He will represent you,’ said Archangel Gabriel. ‘Gabriel,
my dear!’ said the Holy Prophet (S), ‘I fear that my companions will
oppose since they have detested \`Ali for he killed their people and
will unveil their hiddens.’ Archangel Gabriel carried the Holy Prophet
(S)’s words and, immediately, came back with Almighty Allah’s saying, ‘O
Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and if
you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah will
protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the unbelieving
people.’ Having been apprehensive and distress, the Holy Prophet (S)
ordered to sweep the place under these trees while his feet were sore
for the heat of the sun. He then ordered Muslims to gather there; so,
they, including Abu-Bakr, \`Umar, \`Uthman and the rest of Muhajirun and
Ansar, approached together before him. He then declared that \`Ali must
be accepted as the coming leader since this was Almighty Allah’s
commission.

Al-Nu\`man al-Maghribi, in Daa\`im al-Islam 1/14, has recorded the
following:  
 It has been narrated that a man, once, said to Abu-Ja\`far Muhammad ibn
\`Ali (Imam al-Baqir) that al-Hasan al-Basri said that the Holy Prophet
(S), once, said, ‘I became distressed and disturbed when Almighty Allah
ordered me to convey a message. I feared that people would belie me, but
the Lord threatened a punishment if I would not do it.’ Abu-Ja\`far
(a.s.) asked the man whether al-Hasan al-Basri had told them about that
message. The man answered negatively. ‘By Allah I swear,’ said the Imam,
‘al-Hasan al-Basri knew that message completely, but he concealed it
deliberately.’ ‘Son of Allah’s Messenger,’ asked the man, ‘May Allah
make my soul your ransom. What was that message?’

Abu-Ja\`far (a.s.) said, ‘The believers did not know how to offer the
prayers that were imposed upon them in Almighty Allah’s Book; therefore,
He directed His Messenger to explain it for them, and the Holy Prophet
(S) did utterly. Similarly, He ordered to defray the zakat, but they did
not know what is that; therefore, the Holy Prophet (S) explained it to
them saying that gold, silver, camels, cows, sheep and the yields are
the things applicable to the zakat. thus, he left nothing unexplored. As
fasting was imposed upon them, people did not know anything about it;
so, the Holy Prophet (S) explained it in details. When the Lord imposed
the ritual Hajj, Almighty Allah directed the Holy Prophet (S) to teach
them how to undertake it. Almighty Allah then ordered people to be loyal
to the Ahl al-Bayt.

In this regard, the Almighty revealed, ‘Only Allah is your master and
His Messenger and those who believe, those who keep up prayers and pay
the Zakat while they bow.’ As He imposed the loyalty to the leadership
of the Ahl al-Bayt, people did not know the sort of that loyalty. Like
the prayer, Zakat, fasting and Hajj, Almighty Allah ordered His
Messenger to explain the meaning of the loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt’s
leadership. This order disturbed the Holy Prophetsince he anticipated
that people would apostatize from the religion and belie him. Hence, he
sought the Lord’s relief and, immediately, Almighty Allah revealed, ‘O
Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and if
you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah will
protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the unbelieving
people.’

After that, he, having been in Ghadir Khumm, declared the obligatory
loyalty to the leadership of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s.) flawlessly and
ordered the present to carry it to the absent. As the divine precepts
were revealed gradually, the obligatory loyalty to the leadership of
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib was the sealing. For this reason, Almighty Allah
revealed, ‘This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed
My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion.’ This means that
the Lord would not reveal any more precept since He has completed
them.  
 It has been narrated that the Holy Prophet said, ‘I enjoin those who
believed in Allah and believed and gave credence to me to adhere to the
leadership of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib since the loyalty to him is as same as
the loyalty to me. This is a binding instruction that I have received
from my Lord Who directed me to carry it to you.’

The first narration has been also recorded in al-Nu\`man al-Maghribi:
Sharh al-Akhbar 1/101. A similar narration has been recorded in the same
book 2/276 in the following form:  
 The Holy Prophet said, ‘Gabriel: My people are fresh Muslims. They have
just left Jahiliyah. I fear that they would return to it.’ Immediately,
Almighty Allah revealed, ‘O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to
you from your Lord; and if you do it not, then you have not delivered
His message, and Allah will protect you from the people; surely Allah
will not guide the unbelieving people.’ Hence, the Holy Prophet (S)
gathered people in Ghadir Khumm and said, ‘People: I became disturbed
for the Lord has ordered me to convey a message to you. But He
threatened a punishment if I would shun. You have known that Almighty
Allah is my Master and that I am the master and the leader of Muslims
and that I should be preceded to their souls, have you not?’ ‘Yes, we
have,’ admitted people. The Holy Prophet (S) thus took \`Ali from the
hand and raised him saying, ‘Whoever has regarded me as his master must
now regard \`Ali as his master, and whoever has regarded me as his
leader must now regard \`Ali as his leader. O Allah! Be the supporter of
him who will support \`Ali and be the enemy of him who will oppose \`Ali
and give victory to him who will support \`Ali and disappoint him who
will disappoint \`Ali and make the right follow \`Ali wherever he goes.’
As a result, the loyalty to \`Ali (a.s.) has been incumbent upon each
male and female Muslim.[^20]

More narrations will be cited in the coming discussion of the Verse of
Ikmal al-Din (the perfection of the religion). Shiite reference books of
Hadith are full of such authenticated narration.

General Remarks Regarding the Other Opinions
--------------------------------------------

### First Remark

Except al-Tirmidhi who has recorded the narration of the guard practiced
on the Holy Prophet (S) and decided it as a one-way strange report, none
of the Sunni Hadithists have referred to the exegesis of Verse of
\`Ismah. Yet, al-Bukhari has mentioned the Verse in two independent
titles—the first is in 5/88 where he has recorded \`A\`ishah’s report
about the necessity of conveying and not concealing the revelation and
the second is in 8/9 where he has recorded al-Zuhri’s report about the
Holy Prophet (S)’s conveyance. In addition, he has recorded two other
reports respecting the Verse of \`Ismah—6/50 and 8/210. In 1/110, Muslim
has recorded a report about the Verse.

As a matter of fact, such negligence does not prove or indicate the
inauthenticity or the dubiety of the report. Numerous are the authentic
reports that have not been recorded in the reference books of Hadith and
more are the inauthentic reports that are found in such reliable books.
The important point is that the compilers of these books of Hadith have
exerted all possible efforts for refuting the Ahl al-Bayt while they
have known for sure that the Verse of \`Ismah represents a proof on the
right of the Ahl al-Bayt. They would have repeatedly narrated and
recorded any report that might refute the Ahl al-Bayt if only they had
any.

It is thus obvious that they have had to avoid refuting the narrations
of the Shi\`ah and the agreeing Sunni ones. As a result, we cannot find
such narrations in the six reliable Sunni reference books of Hadith.

### Second Remark

Except the time of the Farewell Hajj when Surah of al-Ma\`idah was
revealed, the twenty-three years of the Holy Prophet (S)’s mission have
been entirely mentioned in the various Sunni narrations about the Verse
of \`Ismah while, if truth be told, the Verse was revealed during the
excluded period. This fact incites us to conclude that the purpose
beyond the expansion of the narrations and the exclusion of that period
has been to close the eyes before the very period in which the Verse was
revealed.

### Third Remark

For Shiite reference books of Hadith, all the reports that refer to the
revelation of the Verse of \`Ismah bring up assuredly the same reason
and date. On the other hand, Sunni reference books of Hadith assume
various reasons in contrary times that caused their scholars to be
engaged in perplexity regarding the true reason and time. Moreover, some
of such contrary narrations support the Ahl al-Bayt’s narration that is
not accepted by the Qurayshite caliphs and their fans. As a rule, when
all Muslims, including the Ahl al-Bayt, identify a certain reason and
time for the revelation of a Verse while others refer to miscellaneous
reasons and times, it will be surely understandable that the reason
unanimously admitted should be accepted.

Evaluation of The Opposing Opinions On The Light Of The Verse
-------------------------------------------------------------

### (1) The Matter to be Delivered

The meaning of the Verse is still ambiguous unless the verb ‘reveal’
refers to a past incident because it is in the past tense. The past
tense of the verb shows that the Holy Prophet (S) already received a
difficult commandment that he should deliver but he was looking for a
way to convey. Hence, the Verse was revealed to stop the Holy Prophet
(S)’s anticipations and order him to deliver as soon as possible whether
people would admit or not, and relieve him that they would not
apostatize from the religion and that he would be protected against
them. This is the interpretation of the Ahl al-Bayt supported by many
Sunni reports.

### (2) Confirmation of The Case and Its Conditions

It is meaningless to say to somebody that he must convey the messages
that you will give to him, lest he will not convey them! If there is a
definite message to deliver, it will be quite true to say to that
somebody that you will not regard him as conveyor of your previous
messages that he had already carried if he will not carry this important
message.  
 From Tafsir al-Mizan 6/49, the following is quoted:  
 Although the statement of the Verse reveals threat, it insinuates the
importance of the command; if the message would be neglected and would
not be carried to people, the other parts of the religion would be as if
it had not been conveyed. The phrase, ‘If you do it not, then you have
not delivered his message,’ is a conditional clause demonstrating the
importance of the condition since the most important reward relies upon
it completely. It is not an ordinary conditional clause that is usually
used for specifying the result of an unknown matter. For Almighty Allah,
this is inapplicable since He knows the results. The Holy Qur’an does
not have probabilities whether the Holy Prophet (S) will convey or not.

### (3) The Holy Prophet (S)’s Fear

The Holy Prophet (S) anticipated that the divine message would be in
danger. He was too brave to fear assassination or injury because he was
pious, courageous and sinless. Since the first days of the Mission, the
Holy Prophet (S) knew the difficulty of his mission; therefore, he
expected dangers and difficulties. Accordingly, it is illogic to say
that he had hesitated or refrained from conveying the Mission before he
was threatened. He feared that people might retract or object to the
leadership of his household considering the decision as personal.

### (4) The Interpretation of ‘People’

Al-Fakhr al-Razi, in his book of Tafsir 6/12/50, records the
following:  
 Because the Verse (of \`Ismah) ends with ‘surely Allah will not guide
the unbelieving people’ we understand that ‘people’ refers to the
unbelieving ones exclusively.

This opinion is unacceptable; the word ‘people’ cannot be limited to
definite ones because the Verse shows that the Lord will protect His
Messenger against all people. Many indications can be inferred from the
relationship between ‘people’ and ‘the unbelieving ones.’ The meaning
might be that Allah will protect you against the whole people and will
not guide those who intend to hurt you since they are unbelievers. It
also might be that deliver the message and Allah will protect you
against people, and the rejecters who are decided as unbelievers will
not be guided by Allah.  
 The latter indication is more preferable since it is supported by a
Hadith recorded in al-Bukhari’s al-Sahih 8/139:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah that the Holy
Prophet said, ‘My people will be in Paradise saving the rejecters.’ ‘Who
are the rejecters?’ asked people. “Whoever obeys me will be in Paradise
and whoever disobeys will be with the rejecters,’ explained the Holy
Prophet (S).

The comprehensive and logical meaning of ‘people’ fits the source of
injury and danger, which was not dedicated to the unbelievers only. The
Holy Prophet (S) was also antagonized by the hypocrites who lived among
people. We have already shown that the source of danger intended by the
Verse of \`Ismah was, to great extent, the hypocrites. Al-Razi, however,
has aimed at taking the censure away from the Qurayshite hypocrites and
taking the divine commandment away from the leadership of Imam \`Ali.

### (5) The Meaning of Protection Against People

The promised protection intended in the Verse of \`Ismah should suit the
amount of danger that the Holy Prophet (S) expected. It should agree
with the protection against people’s suspecting the Prophethood and
accusing him of favoring and nominating his household for leadership.
One of the most famed sayings that people of Quraysh used to utter was
that Muhammad (S) intended to give both Prophethood and leadership to
the Hashimites exclusively so as to take the other clans of Quraysh away
as if Prophethood and leadership are under his control that he may give
to whomever he wills.

This is the very meaning that suits the amount of danger expected by the
Holy Prophet (S) who, constantly, was thinking of the anticipated
actions that might occur when he would declare the leadership of Imam
\`Ali (a.s.). Unlike the other opinions, the protection intended in the
Verse does not stand for protecting the Holy Prophet (S) against being
assassinated, hurt or injured; rather it guarantees to save the
Prophethood against people of Quraysh. This fact can be proven by the
fact that the Holy Prophet (S)’s guard was not changed after that event.
Likewise, the danger and harm were not changed, but increased!

In abstract, the protection mentioned in the Verse stands for saving the
Holy Prophet (S)’s mission from his people who could rarely accept the
matter and they thus decided to mutiny. Yet, Almighty Allah fulfilled
His promise; on that day in Ghadir Khumm, the Holy Prophet (S) nominated
Imam \`Ali for the leadership and asked people to offer him
congratulations and people did peacefully. Nevertheless, as soon as he
departed this world, they took the Ahl al-Bayt away from the leadership,
set his house on fire and forced him to pay homage to their man.

Two Questions Involving the Verse
---------------------------------

### (1) Using the Verse as Weapon Against Imam \`Ali

Muslims have testified that the Holy Prophet (S) conveyed what he had
received from his Lord perfectly and he suffered what no other Prophet
(S) had ever suffered; yet, Sunnis accuse Shiites of claiming that he
had concealed certain matters citing the Verse of \`Ismah as example.
We, the Shi\`ah, denounce such an accusation thoroughly!  
 Al-Qurtubi, in his book of Tafsir 6/243, records the following:  
 Whoever claims that the Holy Prophet (S) had concealed any revealed
issue has belied the Lord Who says, ‘O Apostle! Deliver what has been
revealed to you from your Lord; and if you do it not, then you have not
delivered His message, and Allah will protect you from the people.’ May
Allah condemn the Rafidites for they claim that the Holy Prophet (S)
concealed matters that people required.

Al-Qastalani, in Irshad al-Sari 7/106, says the following:  
 The Shi\`ah claim that the Holy Prophet (S) concealed some of the
revealed issues for he feared injury.

It seems that the source of this accusation is \`A\`ishah’s famous
saying, ‘Whoever claims that the Holy Prophet (S) concealed anything of
the Lord’s Book has forged big lies against Allah.’ They have recorded
this saying repeatedly so as to belie Imam \`Ali (a.s.) who confirmed
that he had been the Holy Prophet (S)’s successor and that he had with
him the Holy Prophet (S)’s Hadith and heritage other than the Holy
Qur’an. He possessed a comprehensive book that comprised everything that
people would require including the amount of the compensation for a
violated retaliation of a scratch! He also confirmed that the Holy
Prophet (S) had foretold him about the future misfortunes that the Ahl
al-Bayt would face including the attack on his house; so he instructed
him what to do then.

We, the Shi\`ah, believe in the previous claims. Sunni and our reference
books of Hadith have included tens of reports carrying the unique
standing of Imam \`Ali and the special care that the Holy Prophet (S)
used to give him exclusively so as to bring him up, according to a
divine commission, to inherit his knowledge. We also believe that Imam
\`Ali is too pure, divinely purified and honest to say anything but the
truth. Al-Suyuti, in al-Durr al-Manthur 6/260, has recorded the
following:  
 Ibn Jarir, Ibn Abi-Hatam, al-Wahidi, Ibn Mardawayh, Ibn \`Asakir, ibn
al-Najjari have narrated on the authority of Ibn Buraydah that the Holy
Prophet said to \`Ali, ‘Verily, Almighty Allah has ordered me to favor
you and avoid keeping you away from me and to teach you so that you will
perceive; and you will perceive.’ For these words, the Verse, ‘And a
retaining ear will retain it,’ was revealed.  
 Abu-Na\`im, in Hilyat al-Awliya\`, has recorded this narration in which
the Holy Prophet said to \`Ali, ‘You are the retaining ear that
perceives my knowledge.’

Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman, one of Imam \`Ali’s followers, was the keeper of
the Holy Prophet (S)’s secret about distinguishing the hypocrites from
the believers, whereas Imam \`Ali was the keeper of all the secrets and
knowledge of the Holy Prophet (S). All narrators have recorded that the
Holy Prophet (S) foretold Imam \`Ali that he would fight against the
breachers, the unjust and the apostates for sake of the interpretation
of the Holy Qur’an.

It seems that some of the Holy Prophet (S)’s instructions to Imam \`Ali
were known for people; therefore they have the courage to attack his
house and force him to accept the new leader. While Imam \`Ali was so
mighty and courageous that all people feared him, most of those who
attacked his house were too coward to face his sword—Dhu’l-Faqar. Thus,
they were sure that he would not unsheathe his sword and would follow
the Holy Prophet (S)’s instruction even if Fatimah al-Zahra\` would be
beaten so harshly that she would abort her baby. In due course, the
pro-Qurayshite mercenaries and their masters rejected Imam \`Ali’s claim
of receiving the Holy Prophet (S)’s heritage and knowledge and denied
that he had left anything for his family including knowledge, gifts or
properties.

On that account, Abu-Bakr confiscated Fadak, a garden that the Holy
Prophet (S) had endowed to Fatimah al-Zahra\` (a.s.) when Almighty Allah
revealed, ‘And give the near of kin his due.’ The ruling authorities,
taking advantage of \`A\`ishah’s forecited saying, exceeded the limits
when they claimed that anyone who would claim that the Holy Prophet (S)
had instructed him/her in private is surely disbeliever!  
 Read the following as quoted from al-Bukhari’s al-Sahih 1/188:  
 It has been narrated that \`A\`ishah said, ‘Whoever claims that the
Holy Prophet (S) concealed anything of what was revealed to him has
certainly lied. Allah says, ‘O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed
to you…etc.’[^21]

At any rate, such wicked plot has included two flaws regarding the
expansion of the indication to the matter to be conveyed and the parties
of the conveyance as well as a misrepresentation of Imam \`Ali and his
adherents’ claims. First of all, It is untrue that the Holy Prophet (S)
was ordered to convey anything that he would receive from the Lord. His
knowledge received through revelation, inspiration and personal views is
too comprehensive to be carried to people since they, including the
believing ones, are too incompetent to receive it. Secondly, some
instructions were addressed to certain individuals; hence, the Holy
Prophet (S) did not publicize them. In this regard, Almighty Allah says,
‘And speak to them privately effectual words.’

Neither Imam \`Ali nor has any of his followers claimed that the Holy
Prophet (S) had not conveyed the Message perfectly; rather they say that
he (a.s.) took people’s mentalities and intellectual capacities in
consideration during the conveyance of the Message. Imam \`Ali was thus
so receptive that the Holy Prophet (S) conferred him with additional
knowledge. Unlike the opinions of al-Qurtubi and al-Qastalani, this
concept proves that Imam \`Ali, Fatimah al-Zahra\`, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn (a.s.) were more intelligent; therefore, they received more
divine knowledge. Furthermore, Imam \`Ali and his Shi\`ah have confirmed
that the Holy Prophet (S) had conveyed many things about the Ahl al-Bayt
and other topics that the Qurayshite caliphs and their fans have
concealed.

The pro-Qurayshite mercenaries used to wrong and forge lies against Imam
\`Ali. In the same time, they overlook \`Umar’s claim that the Holy
Prophet (S) had not interpreted many Qur’anic texts, such as those
regarding Kalalah and usury.[^22] This is a clear accusation that the
Holy Prophet (S) had not explained the Holy Qur’an adequately.

In abstract, the fact that the Holy Prophet (S) gave special knowledge
to Imam \`Ali does not oppose his carrying out the Lord’s instructions
perfectly because it was Almighty Allah Who, through the Divine
Revelation, ordered him to give Imam \`Ali such knowledge exclusively.
In like manner, it does not stand against Taqiyyah that the Holy Prophet
(S) practiced against definite men of Quraysh and other tribes because
he was ordered to use wisdom, Taqiyyah and indulgence in order to
accomplish the goals of Islam.  
 The following narration is quoted from al-Kafi 2/117:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq that the
Holy Prophet said, ‘My Lord has ordered me to be indulgent with people
in the same way as He has ordered me to perform the divine precepts.’

In Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 8/17, we read the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah that the Holy
Prophet said, ‘Preceded by the belief in Almighty Allah, the acme of
rationality is the willingness to please people.’  
 It has been narrated that Buraydah said, “While I was present before
the Holy Prophet (S), a man from Quraysh came. The Holy Prophet (S)
welcomed him warmly. When the man left, the Holy Prophet (S) asked, ‘Do
you know this man?’ ‘Yes, I do,’ answered I, ‘He is the best of Quraysh
in lineage and wealth. This is my opinion, what about your opinion?’ ‘He
will be worthless on the Judgment Day,’ said the Holy Prophet (S).”

Al-Bukhari has given more than one title to the question of the
willingness to please people. In 7/102, he records:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu’l-Darda\` that he said,
‘Although we smile in the faces of some people, our hearts curse
them.’  
 It has been narrated on the authority of \`Urwah ibn al-Zubayr on the
authority of \`A\`ishah that the Holy Prophet (S), once, said about a
man who had sought permission to visit him, ‘Let him in. He is indeed
the worst of his people.’ He then received him with nice words and
smiling face. When the man left, I asked the Holy Prophet (S) to explain
it to me, and he said, ‘Listen, \`A\`ishah! Verily, the most evil people
are those whom are received nicely so as to avoid their evil.’

### (2) Using the Verse to Refute the Claim that the Holy Prophet (S) was Bewitched

Sunni and Shiite scholars have cited the Verse of \`Ismah as evidence
refuting the claim that the Holy Prophet (S) was bewitched. According to
some narrations, a Jew could take the Holy Prophet (S)’s comb and some
of his hairs and buried them in a well after he had spelled bewitchery
on them. This bewitchery influenced the Holy Prophetso heavily that he
imagined doing some acts until a man or an angel or Archangel Gabriel
led him to that well. He destroyed it after he had been cured. This
false accusation has been related to \`A\`ishah. Al-Bukhari, in al-Sahih
4/68, 7/28-9 and 164 and Muslim, in al-Sahih 7/14 as well as many other
reference books of Hadith have recorded such reports.

All Shiite scholars, as well as a few Sunni ones, have had the courage
to refute this accusation citing the Verse of \`Ismah as one of their
evidences.  
 Al-Tusi, in Tafsir al-Tibyan 1/384, has recorded the following:  
 The reports narrating the fable that the Holy Prophet (S) was bewitched
are inconsiderate and baseless. He has been too elevated to be
bewitched, which is a quality of imperfection making one distrust any
instruction said by such a bewitched man. The Holy Prophet (S) is the
Lord’s argument against people and His choice among His servants and the
selected out of Almighty Allah’s wisdom. He has been saved from
vulgarity and harshness as well as any ill behavior. Except those who
discount the Holy Prophet (S)’s real qualities, none can dare to ascribe
such tainted things to him. Almighty Allah says, ‘And Allah will protect
you against people.’ He has also belied those who said, ‘You are
following but a bewitched man.’

Ibn Idris al-\`Ujali, in al-Sara\`ir 3/534, records the following:  
 Unanimously, we believe that the Holy Prophet (S) was never bewitched.
Our proof is Almighty Allah’s saying, ‘And Allah will protect you
against people.’ Some of the opposite sects believe that he was
bewitched. This is indeed contrary to the Glorified Revelation.

We read the following in al-Majlisi’s Bihar al-Anwar 60/38:  
 Had it been true that the Prophets could be bewitched, the sorcerers
would have injured all the Prophets. This is indeed contrary to Almighty
Allah’s saying, ‘And Allah will protect you from the people,’ ‘And a
magician will not be successful wheresoever he may come from.’ At
length, the atheists who are definitely liars used to accuse the Holy
Prophet (S) of being bewitched.

Al-Nawawi is one of the Sunni scholars who refuted the accusation. In
al-Majmu\` 19/243, he writes down:  
 Reports narrating that the Holy Prophet (S) was bewitched should be
refuted because they support the atheists’ accusing him of bewitchment.
It is also contrary to the Qur’anic texts that belied them.  
 Al-Razi has narrated that al-Qadi (the judge) said that such narrations
are false and must not be accepted since Almighty Allah says, ‘And Allah
will protect you from the people,’ ‘And a magician will not be
successful wheresoever he may come from.’ To believe such narrations
means to doubt the Prophethood. Had that been right, all the Prophets
and pious people should have been influenced by bewitchery.

Al-Razi, in his book of Tafsir 16/32/187, records the following:  
 Majority of Muslims have claimed that the Holy Prophet (S) was
bewitched by a Jew. Be it known to you that the Mu\`tazilite have
refuted this claim, which opposes Almighty Allah’s saying, ‘And Allah
will protect you from the people.’

A few Sunni scholars have adopted such opinions while the majority admit
such fabrications because they have not been accustomed to refute
anything said by \`A\`ishah and al-Bukhari be it true or false.
Likewise, they have never permitted anyone to criticize such reports;
therefore, they have been engaged in tens of problems regarding
monotheism, Prophethood, Shafa\`ah (the intercession), the first
revelation and Waraqah ibn Nawfal, the ‘Handsome Pagans’ that Sulayman
Rushdi betook as a principle for his Satanic Verses, the bewitchment as
well as many others.

The accusation is contrary to the Prophethood of the Holy Prophet (S)
and, according to many Verses, it was originated by the atheists.
However, to cite the Verse of \`Ismah as the refutation of the
accusation is baseless, since it can be claimed that the Verse was
revealed in the last days of the Holy Prophet (S) while the occurrence
took place a long time before that.

To sum it up, Shiite scholars have decided that the protection intended
in the Verse of \`Ismah indicates guarding the Holy Prophet (S) against
the apostasy of the Qurayshite people and Muslims during his lifetime.
Sunni scholars have talked too much about the Verse, yet not as accurate
as possible, as they thought that it indicated protecting the Holy
Prophet (S) against assassination, poisoning, injury or harm. In due
course, they have thought that the Verse is contrary to the reports
relating that his decease was because of a piece of a poisoned meat that
a Jewess had served to him; yet Archangel Gabriel was too late in
informing him about that. Hence, a drop of that poison was the reason
beyond his decease the next year.  
 In al-Shifa 1/317, \`Ayyad says:  
 If one asks how it is possible to accept the narration reporting that
the Holy Prophet (S) was poisoned by a Jewess and Almighty Allah saying,
‘And Allah will protect you from the people,’ we answer that the Verse
was revealed in the year of the Battle of Tabuk while the poisoning
occurred in Khaybar before that date.

Likewise, Sunni scholars could not find an answer to the confusion that
the Holy Prophet (S), according to many narrations, wished to die as
martyr while he knew that Almighty Allah had protected him against
killing.  
 In Ibn Hajar’s Fath al-Bari Fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari 8/2644, we read
the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah that he heard the
Holy Prophetsaying, ‘I swear by Him Who prevails on my soul that I wish
I were killed for sake of Allah.’  
 Some scholars have doubted such Hadith because they deemed the Holy
Prophet (S) far above wishing for martyrdom while he knew for sure that
he was protected against being killed. Ibn al-Tin answered that the
statement might have been said before the revelation of the Verse of
protection (\`Ismah) yet, this answer is inaccurate because the Verse
was revealed during the Holy Prophet (S)’s early residence in al-Madinah
while Abu-Hurayrah, the direct reporter of the statement, arrived there
on the first days of the seventh year in al-Madinah. On the other hand,
to wish for something does not necessarily require the probability of
its occurrence. For instance, it has been narrated that the Holy Prophet
(S), once, said, ‘I wish that (Prophet (S)) Moses had been patient…
etc.’ The Holy Prophet (S) might have aimed for urging Muslims to
practice jihad. This opinion, however, is the most acceptable. Our
master scholar, Ibn al-Mulaqqin, has claimed that Abu-Hurayrah mighty
added ‘I wish’ to the statement of the Holy Prophetic. This opinion
seems to be unsatisfactory.[^23]

Supporting the previous Hadith has been true, the Holy Prophet (S)’s
wish can be real, because the Verse of \`Ismah has guaranteed that
people would not apostatize from the religion during his lifetime. Thus,
it has nothing to do with assassination, injury or harm. On the
contrary, Almighty Allah says, ‘And Muhammad is no more than an apostle;
the apostles have already passed away before him. If he then dies or is
killed, will you turn back upon your heels.’ This Verse indicates that
he would not die normally. The Lord identifies natural death and
assassination as the two sorts that the Holy Prophet (S) would counter.
The only interpretation of Almighty Allah’s having confused the sort of
His Messenger’s death is that He has known that the Holy Prophet (S)
would be killed or the like.

The Story Of Ghadir
-------------------

### The Qurayshites During the Farewell Hajj

We have noticed that the Holy Prophet (S), through his sermons, words
and even behaviors in the Farewell Hajj, emphasized on the present and
future roles of the Ahl al-Bayt foretelling the coming of Twelve Imams
who would represent, along with the Holy Qur’an, the most precious thing
for the *Ummah*. In other words, he confirmed the obligatory compliance
with the Holy Imams in all aspects of life. For instance, the Holy Imams
are forbidden from receiving alms and, in the meanwhile, they should
have the Khums. However, people of Quraysh could not stand the Holy
Prophet (S)’s sermons, words and activities that identified the
preference of Imam \`Ali, Fatimah al-Zahra\`, al-Hasan and al-Husayn.
They understood the situation as if it had been nominating the
Hashimites as the leaders of the *Ummah* and depriving the other clans
of such position since they must keep on acting as released slaves of
the Hashimites.

As expected, Sunni reference books of Hadith have neglected the
Qurayshite chiefs’ reaction towards the Holy Prophet (S)’s sermons that
disturbed people of Quraysh whose chiefs; such as Suhayl ibn \`Amr,
\`Ikrimah ibn Abi-Jahl, Safwan ibn Umayyah ibn Khalaf, Hakim ibn Hizam,
Suhayb ibn Sinan, Abu’l-A\`war al-Salami and the others, were
gloomy-faced while they saw the Holy Prophet (S) paving the way to the
Hashimites’ leadership. Immediately, they acted actively to contact
Muhajirun, not the Hashimites, to find a suitable treatment for such
impending catastrophe!

On the other hand, Shiite reference books of Hadith have mentioned that
such activities began during the conquest of Makkah and expanded during
the Farewell Hajj to attain climax in Mina on the days of Tashriq. The
outcome of the activities was the conclusion of a treaty that the
Shi\`ah call the ‘Accursed Document’ in which they agreed upon depriving
the Hashimites of joining the leadership to the Prophethood. A few
members of that treaty arrived slyly in Makkah and hanged the second
Accursed Document next to the first one inside the Holy Ka\`bah. Unlike
the first treaty due to which the Hashimites were besieged in the col
and was signed in the names of Lat and \`Uzza—the pagans, the new
document proposed a political plan to deprive them of the leadership
after the Holy Prophet (S), but this time, it was signed in the name of
Islam. However, Almighty Allah informed His Messenger about the details
of that document and when he exposed them before the parties of that
wicked treaty, they could hardly control themselves before him. Like the
other Prophets, the Holy Prophet (S)’s mission was no more than
constituting Almighty Allah’s arguments against people and then they are
free to do anything they like.

If we believe what Sunni reference book of Hadith have mentioned about
the noise that was arisen, yet intentionally, whenever the Holy Prophet
(S), during the sermon of \`Arafat, tried to mention the identity of the
Twelve Imams (a.s.), it must have been one of the programmed activities
against the Hashimites and that the Holy Prophet (S) must have
reproached and informed them that he had known the purpose behind such
activities.

### Results of the Farewell Hajj

For people of Quraysh, the Farewell Hajj passed peacefully since the
Holy Prophet (S) did not take any practical step in the course of
nominating the new leader although he spoke very much about the
Hashimites, his progeny, his offspring, Fatimah, the Twelve Imams and
many issues concerning the Ahl al-Bayt. Furthermore, he did not demand
with paying homage to \`Ali— the first Imam of his household.

For the Holy Prophet (S), he believed that he had conveyed his Lord’s
message to the utmost degree. Meanwhile, people of Quraysh could no
longer tolerate the situation or stand any further instructions. If he
demanded with paying homage to \`Ali, they would distrust and accuse him
of establishing a monarchy similar to that of the Romans or the
Persians. Had this occurred, people of Quraysh might have lead a mutiny
in which all the Arabs would participate so as to preclude the kingdom
of the Hashimites beginning with \`Ali and never ending!  
 Reference books of Hadith have actually recorded such statements that
were said by Qurayshite chiefs who, as if they had never accepted Islam,
understood the question as an endless kingship of Muhammad and his
family.

### The Holy Prophet (S) Under Pressure

During the Farewell Hajj and its momentous circumstances, Archangel
Gabriel was carrying the Lord’s commands to the Holy Prophet (S).
Probably, he accompanied him throughout the Hajj season and revealed to
him many instructions including the words of the sermons. In al-Madinah,
the angel said to the Holy Prophet (S), ‘*Muhammad: Almighty Allah
greets you and informs that your departure will be imminent and very
soon, you will come to Him. He therefore orders you to explain the
rulings of the ritual Hajj in the same way as you have explained the
rulings of the prayer, zakat and fasting*.’  
 Carrying out the commandment, the Holy Prophet (S) explained the
rulings and acts of the Hajj emphasizing on the principles of Islam and
the unique standings of the Ahl al-Bayt.

On the final days of the Hajj, Archangel Gabriel descended to say,
‘*Almighty Allah orders you to lead your nation to their leader. Declare
your will, convey to him your knowledge and the Prophets’ heritage and
nominate him before all people, for I should not grasp the soul of any
of My* *Prophets before he perfects the religion and should not leave My
lands without constituting a claim against the creatures*.’

Because of the tense situation of people of Quraysh, the Holy Prophet
(S) began to think of an appropriate way of declaration saying to
himself, ‘My people have just left the customs and tradition of
Jahiliyah. If I now declare that my cousin must be my successor, they
will misthink the matter.’ Hence, he decided to carry out that divine
commandment as soon as he would be back in al-Madinah where he would
prepare for it and seek Ansar’s support.

### The Divine Revelation Stops the Caravan

Having the intention to carry out the divine commandment, the Holy
Prophet (S) left Makkah. On the third day of the journey and five hours
after sunrise, he reached Kura\` al-Ghamim, a place situated between
Makkah and al-Madinah and eight miles away from \`Asfan, where Archangel
Gabriel conveyed to him saying, ‘Muhammad: Almighty Allah greets you and
says: O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord;
and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people.’

The Holy Prophetsubmitted to the Lord, stood as if pinned to the ground
and ordered Muslims whose first rows were about to arrive in al-Juhafah,
a village about two miles away from Kura\` al-Ghamim, to stop. He wanted
to carry out that serious divine commandment in the very place where it
had been revealed to him. ‘Release my camel,’ he ordered, ‘By Allah I
swear that I will not leave this place before I convey my Lord’s
message.’ He also ordered Muslims to be there. He then rode off.
Archangel Gabriel, having been next to him, watched contentedly the Holy
Prophet (S)’s trembling limbs out of fearing of Allah and teary eyes
saying, ‘Has it reached to threat? I will surely carry out Allah’s
order. If they accuse and belie me, this will be less arduous than
countering the distressing punishment in this world and the Hereafter.’

Before he left him, the angel had pointed to a small area of trees to
the right. The Holy Prophet (S) left the angel and directed towards
Ghadir Khumm. Some of those who witnessed the incident narrated, ‘We
heard the Holy Prophet (S) calling us and we, owing to the extremely hot
weather, hastened. We saw him putting a part of his cloak on the head.’

A collective prayer was declared in other than its due time. It was in
fact the time to carry on another obligatory precept, which is paying
homage to the Holy Prophet (S)’s Immaculate Progeny (a.s.). Whatever the
reaction would be, this precept must be conveyed to Muslims. The Lord
has emphasized on the conveyance declaring that was not a personal
question that the Conveyor has the choice to do or not and that the Lord
would protect against any mischievous response. Hence, the Holy Prophet
should carry out the orders.

On that extremely hot day, the Holy Prophet (S) ordered to sweep the
place under these trees where the sermon of the divine leadership would
be delivered. He also ordered to establish an elevated place so that his
eyes would cover all Muslims. Carrying out the orders, they placed
saddles of camels on each other so as to make a minbarlike thing.
Muslims approached the spring -Ghadir-, drank from its water, served
their animals and performed the ritual ablution. Before offering the
prayer, they had surrounded the Holy Prophet (S) to listen to what he
would say. Because the place was too narrow to cover them all, many of
them had to sit in the sun or in the shadow of their animals. Everybody
realized that something that would be declared in the sermon had
happened; something had been revealed so urgently that the Holy Prophet
(S) could not wait two more miles!

According to the reports, the total number of Muslims who participated
in the Farewell Hajj with the Holy Prophet (S) was about 120,000. After
the Hajj, many of them must have left. Nevertheless, thousands of them
took the same way that the Holy Prophet (S) took since they lived in
al-Madinah and the neighboring villages. Approximately, they were
10,000.  
 Documenting people of Quraysh’s efforts to cover up the incident of
Ghadir Khumm, Imam al-Sadiq says, ‘How strange misfortunes \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib had to face! He had ten thousand witnesses; yet he could not
save his right! People usually save their rights by two witnesses
only.’[^24]

Muslims did not have to wait too long; they saw the Holy Prophet (S)
ascending the minbarlike stone and beginning with the Name of Allah. He
modulated an honorable poesy about the glorification and praising of
Almighty Allah. Subsequently, he apologized to the attendants for
driving them to halt in such a poor place and for asking them to listen
to him in such an intolerable weather. He notified that Archangel
Gabriel had come to him in al-Khayf Masjid to carry the Lord’s
commandment of nominating \`Ali as their new divinely commissioned
leader.

He said, “When the commandment of the loyalty to \`Ali’s leadership was
revealed to me, I thought that my people, having been fresh Muslims,
would accuse me of favoring my cousin. Forthwith, Almighty Allah
threatened a punishment if I would neglect the conveyance of the matter.
He therefore revealed ‘O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you
from your Lord; and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His
message, and Allah will protect you from the people; surely Allah will
not guide the unbelieving people.’ There is no god but He Whose timing
is unexpected and injustice is unavailing. I acknowledge my slavery to
Him, testify His godhead and convey what He has revealed to me, lest an
unavoidable catastrophe will strike me and none will save me. People: I
am close on responding the invitation of my Lord. What will you say?”  
 “We all acknowledge that you have perfectly conveyed and advised,” said
people.  
 “Do you acknowledge that there is no god but Allah, Muhammad being His
Messenger, Paradise is true, Hellfire is true and the Resurrection is
true?” asked the Holy Prophet (S).  
 “Yes, we do,” confessed they.  
 Pointing to his chest, he said, “So do I.” He then added, “I will
precede you and you will join me on the Divine Pool the width of which
is as expansive as the distance from Sana\` (Yemen) to Busra (Syria) and
its cups are as many as stars and its water is whiter than silver. Think
how you will regard me in the two weighty things.”  
 “What are the two weighty things?” asked a man.

He answered, “The major weighty thing is Allah’s Book one of whose edges
is in the Lord’s hand while the other is in yours. If you keep it, you
will neither slip nor go astray. The minor weighty thing is my
progeny—my household. I adjure you by Allah not to disregard my
household. I adjure you by Allah not to disregard my household. I adjure
you by Allah not to disregard my household. These weighty things will
never separate each other until they join me on the Divine Pool. I have
implored to my Lord to keep this bond. Precede them not, lest you will
be perished. Shun them not, lest you will go astray. Teach them not for
they are always more knowledgeable than you are. People: Do you know
that Almighty Allah is my Master and I am the master of the believers
and I am preceded to yourselves?”  
 “Yes, we do,” declared people.

The Holy Prophet (S) then asked \`Ali to stand up to his right. He then
raised his hand so highly that the armpits of both were seen. He
declared, “Whoever has regarded me as his master must now regard \`Ali
as his master. O Allah! Be the supporter of him who will support \`Ali
and be the enemy of him who will oppose \`Ali and give victory to him
who will supports \`Ali and disappoint him who will disappoint \`Ali and
turn the right to \`Ali whenever he turns. People: Be it known to you
that Almighty Allah has nominated \`Ali as your leader making the
obedience to him obligatory upon Muhajirun, Ansar, their followers,
Bedouins, urban, non-Arabs, Arabs, masters and slaves—young and old.”  
 “What is the like of the loyalty to \`Ali?” asked a man.  
 “To be loyal to him is to be loyal to me,” said the Holy Prophet (S),
“\`Ali must be preceded to the souls of those whom I was preceded to
their souls.”

Elaborately, the Holy Prophet (S) went on interpreting the ranks of his
infallible progeny and the Twelve Imams saying, “\`Ali, al-Hasan,
al-Husayn and nine individuals from his progeny shall be, respectively,
with the Qur’an and the Qur’an will be with them. They will never leave
the Qur’an and the Qur’an will never leave them until they will join me
on the Divine Pool.”  
 More than once, he called Muslims to witness that he had conveyed the
Lord’s messages, and they did, and he demanded them to carry the message
to those who could not attend that assembly, and they promised to do it.
He then answered the questions of everybody.

As soon as he finished, Archangel Gabriel descended carrying Almighty
Allah’s saying, ‘This day have I perfected for you your religion and
completed My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion.’ The
Holy Prophet (S) thus thanked and praised Almighty Allah for the
perfection of the religion and the completion of the grace and His
satisfaction for the conveyance of the next leadership of \`Ali. Only
then, he left the minbar and ordered to establish a tent in which \`Ali
would sit to receive all Muslims whom would obligatorily congratulate
him for the divinely commissioned leadership. Even the Holy Prophet
(S)’s women were ordered to congratulate.  
 \`Umar ibn al-Khattab was the first to congratulate, ‘Congratulations,
son of Abu-Talib! You have become my master and the master of every male
and female believer.’  
 Seizing the opportunity, Hasan ibn Thabit, the poet, asked the Holy
Prophet (S) to permit him to compose some verses on the occasion.
Blessed be you! Say your verses,’ said the Holy Prophet (S). Hence,
Hasan poetized:

On the day of Ghadir, their Prophet called them

In Khumm; How great the Prophet’s call was!

Saying, Who is you master and leader?

They answered and showed no negligence

Your Lord is our Master and you are our Leader

And none will disobey you in this regard

He said: Stand up \`Ali, for I will appoint you

The Imam and the guide after me

This is the leader of him whose master was I

Hence, be faithful and sincere followers of him

And then he prayed: O Allah! Support his supporter

And be the enemy of him who will oppose \`Ali[^25]

The story of Ghadir reported in Sunni reference books of Hadith is, to
great extent, similar to what Shiite books have reported.[^26] For
instance, read the following report as quoted from Muslim’s al-Sahih
7/122:  
 Yazid ibn Hayyan al-Taymi has narrated that Husayn ibn Sabarah, Muslim
ibn Zayd and I went to Zayd ibn Arqam. After we had sat before him,
Husayn asked, “Zayd, you have really attained great benefaction because
you saw the Holy Prophet (S), listened to his words, participated in his
campaigns and followed him in prayers. Now, Zayd, please narrate to us
what you have heard from the Messenger of Allah.”  
 Zayd spoke, “Son of my brother, I swear by Allah that I have become
old-aged, my days have become very old and have forgotten some of these
narrations that I used to memorize directly from the Messenger of Allah.
You therefore should accept what I will tell you and should not ask me
things over my ability.” He then added, “One day, in a place between
Makkah and al-Madinah called Khumm, the Messenger of Allah delivered a
speech to us. After statements of praising and thanking Almighty Allah
as well as statements of preach and reminding of Him, the Holy Prophet
said, ‘O people, I am no more than an ordinary person and the messenger
of my Lord (i.e. the angel of death) will shortly come to me and then I
will respond. Among you, I have left two weighty things: first, the Book
of Allah that includes right guidance and illumination. Preserve in the
Book of Allah and hold fast on it. Second, my household; remember Allah
concerning my household, remember Allah concerning my household,
remember Allah concerning my household.’  
 Husayn asked again, “Zayd, who are the Holy Prophet (S)’s Household?
Are his wives included with his household?”  
 Zayd answered, “His wives are included with his household, but his
Household are those whom are forbidden to receive alms after him.”  
 Husayn asked, “Who are they?”  
 Zayd answered, “They are the family of ´Ali, the family of ´Aqil, the
family of Ja\`far, and the family of \`Abbas.”[^27]

Al-Hakim, in al-Mustadrak 3/148, records the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Zayd ibn Arqam that the Holy
Prophet said, “I am leaving among you the two weighty things—Allah’s
Book and my household. They will not leave each other until they join me
on the Divine Pool.”  
 Although this report is authentic according to the criteria of Muslim
and al-Bukhari, they have not recorded it in their books.

Although, Muslim and al-Hakim have recorded the same report, al-Hakim
used words carrying that Imamate will persist to the Resurrection Day.  
 Ibn Kathir, in al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 5/408, has had a different
opinion:  
 In his way back to al-Madinah after having clarified the rituals of the
Hajj, the Holy Prophet (S) addressed a remarkable sermon under a tree in
Ghadir Khumm on the eighteenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah. In this sermon, he
demonstrated many things. He also referred to \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib’s
merits—his honesty, decency and close standing to him. By this, the Holy
Prophet (S) removed what many people had born in their hearts against
\`Ali. Abu-Ja\`far al-Tabari was so interested in this sermon that he
compiled a two-volume book in which he mentioned its ways of narration
and different forms. Likewise, Abu’l-Qasim ibn \`Asakir, the grand
scholar, has recorded many narrations appertained to the sermon.

For Ibn Kathir, the matter is no more than an attempt to remove the
malice that some Muslims had against \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib; therefore, he
ordered them to halt in Ghadir Khumm in order to prove \`Ali’s honesty
and innocence. The Holy Prophet (S) mentioned \`Ali’s merits so as to
‘remove what many people had born in their hearts against \`Ali.’ In
this sermon, ‘He demonstrated many things.” That is it.  
 Such a style is expected from an author belonging to the tribe of \`Abd
al-Dar that Imam \`Ali had killed their best knights during the battles
of Islam, but not an author respecting Islam and having any amount of
love for \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib! For this reason, Wahhabis adore Ibn Kathir
and publish his books.

### Al-Juhafah and Ghadir Khumm

Why was the divine commandment revealed on the way to al-Madinah, in the
heart of the desert and in the hottest hours of that day?  
 Almighty Allah wanted to say to His Prophet (S), ‘There is no
difference between Makkah and al-Madinah. Wherever you declare the
leadership of your progeny, people of Quraysh may object and mutiny.
They have always hated your household. Because your mission is to
convey, the place and time are now quite suitable for conveyance. Convey
and I will protect you against people of Quraysh so that you will be
able to fulfill the mission of conveyance. I will withhold their hearts
and mentalities, shut the mouths of their devils and preserve your
Prophethood. Then, I will respite them as they will persecute your
progeny so that My will regarding your *Ummah* and progeny will come to
pass. At that time, I will send al-Mahdi who will fill in the earth with
justice after it was filled in with injustice for I cannot be questioned
concerning what I do and they shall be questioned.

From this cause, another question may be cited: How did the Lord protect
His Prophet (S) against people of Quraysh that none of them attempted to
object? Most of the Qurayshite chiefs were in Makkah; yet, some of them
were in the caravan, which also included some Muhajirun who were loyal
to their clans’ chiefs, not their Prophet (S). How could they say
nothing and control their nerves? How did they testify the Holy Prophet
(S)’s conveyance? How did they promise him to tell the absent about what
occurred there? How did they respond to him and congratulate \`Ali for
that leadership?

To answer, Almighty Allah wanted to preserve the message and constitute
His claim against people. Out of His omnipotence, He caused people of
Quraysh to keep silent in Ghadir Khumm. They took the question as one of
the declarations of the Farewell Hajj said repeatedly by the Holy
Prophet (S) who was still alive; so, when he would die, they would have
another manner. When they tried to speak out and object, the Lord sent
down a backed clay on al-Nadr ibn al-Harith—their spokesman and sent him
to death, and sent down fire on another and, too, sent him to death.
These two sorts of heavenly punishment were enough to make people of
Quraysh stop cutting the road of the Ahl al-Bayt’s leadership.

On the other side, the Holy Prophet (S) found rest for he had conveyed
the Lord’s message utterly and declared the divine commission of
nominating \`Ali for leadership. The matter deserved a celebration. This
time, the process of conveyance was accomplished peacefully, people of
Quraysh did not object, Jabir ibn Samarah was not infected with
temporary deafness when the Holy Prophet said ‘my progeny’ or ‘\`Ali’ or
‘Banu-Hashim’ and no mutiny was shown, unlike the incident of al-Madinah
that took place only four days before the Holy Prophet (S)’s final
departure when they rejected to fetch him a pen and a paper so that he
would record a document protecting them against deviation forever.

According to Shiite narrations, the Holy Prophet (S) ordered them to
congratulate so as to confirm their commitment to the nomination.  
 Sunni reference books of Hadith have reported that Abu-Bakr, the
Qurayshite caliph, felt extremely sorry for he had ordered to attack the
house of \`Ali and Fatimah (a.s.) two or three days after the Holy
Prophet (S)’s departure. In Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 5/202, we read the
following:  
 It has been narrated that \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf said, “I visited
Abu-Bakr in his final ailment… He said, ‘I am not contrite for anything
except three deeds that I wish I had not done… I wish I had not attacked
Fatimah’s house even I would be engaged in a war…’

The story in brief is that when Abu-Bakr became the caliph, he summoned
Imam \`Ali to pay homage, he objected and accused them of betraying the
Holy Prophet (S). Meanwhile, Abu-Bakr was informed that a number of
Ansar and Muhajirun were holding a meeting in Fatimah’s house. \`Umar
suggested that the house should be attacked and the group should be
threatened a burning if they would insist. \`Umar ibn al-Khattab led a
group and attacked the house of Fatimah (a.s.). They surrounded and
placed firewood around the house. Some of those who were in the house
were supporting Imam \`Ali’s situation while the others were there for
offering consolation on the Holy Prophet (S)’s decease. All of them,
however, were threatened burning if they would refuse to come out.
Practically, firewood were set on fire around the house. Because he had
to carry out the Holy Prophet (S)’s instruction, Imam \`Ali did not want
to fight them. Fatimah al-Zahra\` went out so that they would revere her
and go back. On the contrary, she suffered insults and was beaten by the
lash of some of them so heavily that her baby was aborted… etc.

In due course, \`Ali and Fatimah (a.s.) decided to seek Ansar’s support
demanding them to fulfill their pledge to protect the Ahl al-Bayt in the
same way as they protect their families. Imam \`Ali asked Lady Fatimah
al-Zahra\`, the ailing, to ride on an animal while al-Hasan, al-Husayn,
Zaynab and Umm-Kulthum accompanied them passing by the celebrities of
Ansar for two nights. Answering Lady Fatimah, they said, ‘Daughter of
the Holy Prophet (S): Had we heard your words before paying homage to
Abu-Bakr, we would never have accepted anyone save \`Ali.’ Yet, she
answered, ‘My father did not leave any excuse for anyone on that day in
Ghadir Khumm.’[^28]

Lady Fatimah al-Zahra\`’s speech was a copy of her father’s. Indeed, she
was a part of him and too immaculate to speak like ordinary people since
she was godly in creation, thinking, feelings and manners.
Correspondingly, her father said, ‘Very, Allah is satisfied whenever
Fatimah is satisfied and enraged whenever Fatimah is enraged.’ She thus
imitated her father when she refuted Ansar’s excuse showing that their
answer had been political while the divine claim is more elevated,
prevalent and advanced than political games. As Almighty Allah named the
leader of the *Ummah*, no one has the right to choose. All people are
thus required to submit since the claim of their Lord has been
constituted on them.

According to the conception of the divine conveyance, the declaration of
Ghadir was a never-ending divine action while any opposite act can be
effective in political conceptions only. As a matter of fact, the
politically powerful acts are still futile and meaningless even if they
persist for years, centuries, or until the advent of Imam al-Mahdi.

[^1]: Al-Wahidi: Asbab al-Nuzul 1/438.

[^2]: Al-Wahidi: Asbab al-Nuzul 1/139 and al-Tabari: Tafsir 6/198.

[^3]: Al-Nisapuri: al-Wasit 2/208.

[^4]: A similar narration is recorded in al-Sirah 1/460.

[^5]: Al-Tabarani: al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir 11/205.

[^6]: Al-Hakim, in al-Mustadrak 2/313, has reported the same narration
from \`A\`ishah regarding it as authentically documented; yet, Muslim
and al-Bukhari did not record it.

[^7]: Al-Suhayli: al-Rawd al-Anif 2/290, al-Qastalani: Irshad al-Sari
5/86, Ibn al-\`Arabi: Sharh al-Tirmithi 6/11,174, Al-\`Ayni: \`Umdat
al-Qari 7/14,95, Ibn Jazzi: al-Tashil 1/244, al-Nuwayri: Nihayat al-Irab
8/16,196 and 19/18,342, al-Nisapuri: al-Wasit 2/209 and al-Damiri: Hayat
al-Hayawan al-Kubra 1/79.

[^8]: In Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawwarah 1/301, Ibn Shaybah has related
the same report to \`Abdullah ibn Shaqiq and Muhammad ibn Ka\`b
Al-Qarazi. Al-Tabari, in Tafsir 6/199, relates it to \`Abdullah ibn
Shaqiq. For ibn Sa\`d, he also records the report in al-Tabaqat 1/1/113.
Similarly, al-Bayhaqi records it in Dala\`il al-Nubuwwah 2/180.

[^9]: In Kanz al-\`Ummal 12/430, the report is related to \`Abdullah ibn
\`Amr ibn Al-\`As. In Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 10/367, it is decided as
authentic.

[^10]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 4/21.

[^11]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 3/227.

[^12]: Al-Bukhari: al-Sahih 5/53. Also, al-Hakim’s al-Mustadrak 3/29
referring to the legislation of Salat al-Khawf and the practice of guard
that is more watchful on the Holy Prophet (S). He has also decided the
authenticity of the report according to the criteria of Muslim and
al-Bukhari who though did not record it. For Ahmad, he has referred to
Ghawrath’s story in al-Musnad 3/364, 390 with reference to the
legislation of Salat al-Khawf disregarding the revelation of the Verse.
Refer to 4/59 of the same reference book. Except the reference to the
revelation of the Verse, many details of the story have been written
down in al-Haythami’s Majma\` al-Zawa\`id 9/8.

[^13]: Ibn Hajar: Fath al-Bari 8/2752.

[^14]: Al-Hasakani: Shawahid al-Tanzil 1/157 N. 211, Ibn \`Asakir:
Tarikh Dimashq 2/85 Chapter: \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib’s Lifetime, N. 585-6.

[^15]: For more details, see the consecutive works that dealt with the
Hadith of Ghadir, such as Ibn \`Uqdah: al-Risalah, al-Tabari: Hadith
al-Ghadir, al-Darqutni: Hadith al-Ghadir, Al-Dhahbi: Hadith al-Ghadir,
\`Ubaydullah al-Hasakani: Hadith al-Ghadir, Mas\`ud al-Sajistani: Hadith
al-Ghadir. For further information, see al-Amini: Kitab al-Ghadir and
Hamid Husayn al-Lakahnuwi: \`Abaqat al-Anwar as well many reference
books of Hadith.

[^16]: \`Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din al-\`Amili; the compiler of the
famous book of al-Muraja\`at as well as many others.

[^17]: ‘Whoever has regarded me as his master must now regard \`Ali as
his master. O Allah! Be the supporter of him who will support \`Ali and
be the enemy of him who will oppose \`Ali.’

[^18]: Revised by Shaykh Muhammad Baqir al-Mahmudi.

[^19]: \`«d al-Fitr; the feast of breaking the fast is the festival
marking the end of Ramadan and falling on the first day of Shawwal. \`«d
al-Adha; the feast of sacrifice is the festival marking the culmination
of the ritual Hajj season and falling on the tenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah.

[^20]: A similar narration has been recorded in al-Ayyashi’s book of
Tafsir 1/333.

[^21]: The same report has been repeated in al-Bukhari’s 6/50 and 8/210,
Muslim’s 1/10 and al-Tirmidhi’s 4/328… etc.

[^22]: Later on, more light will be focused on these topics.

[^23]: A similar discussion has been recorded in Badr al-Din al-\`Ayni:
\`Umdat al-Qari 14/95.

[^24]: Al-Hurr al-\`Amili: Wasa\`il al-Shi\`ah 18/174.

[^25]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Kamal al-Din wa Tamam al-Ni\`mah 276,
al-Tabrasi: al-Ihtijaj 1/70, al-Nisapuri: Rawdat al-Wa\`izin 98,
Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari: 117.

[^26]: For details, see al-Amini: al-Ghadir.

[^27]: Also, Ahmad ibn Hanbal: al-Musnad 2/366.

[^28]: Shaykh al-Saduq: al-Khisal 1/173.


