The Verse of Sa`il
==================

**In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

***One demanding, demanded the chastisement which must befall. The
unbelievers there is none to avert it. From Allah, the Lord of the ways
of Ascent. (70:1-3)***

Events Stimulated by People of Quraysh
--------------------------------------

To cite the exegesis of the Verse of Sa\`il (the demanding one), it is
necessary to remark a deal of serious events that cropped up during the
last days of the Holy Prophet (S)’s lifetime. Some of them have been
proven to be provoked by people of Quraysh who seem to be the creators
of the others according to many indications putting a finger of
accusation at them.

### First Event

We have already presented that many of the Qurayshite chiefs confessed
that they tried to assassinate the Holy Prophet (S) during the Battle of
Hunayn.

### Second Event

They again attempted to assassinate the Holy Prophet (S) in al-\`Aqabah
when he was back from the Battle of Tabuk. This attempt, given effect by
twenty hypocrites, was planned so properly. The executors knew that the
Holy Prophet (S) would take the mountainside alone that night while the
army would take the other. They planned to waylay aloft that mountain
and as soon as he would reach the narrowest point, they would throw
rocks as many as possible so that they would hit him. Then, they would
run away and hide among Muslims’ groups. They aimed at seizing the Holy
Prophet (S)’s authority while they would show their deepest grief for
him. The Lord, however, respited them. When they were about to throw
rocks, Archangel Gabriel lit that mountain that the Holy Prophet (S)
could see and recognize them. He called them by names. Hudhayfah ibn
al-Yaman and \`Ammar ibn Yasir could also see and recognize them. The
Holy Prophet (S) then made them the witnesses on that plot. The
hypocrites had nothing to do other than descending the mountain as
speedy as possible to hide among Muslims.

Why did the Holy Prophet (S) hide their names?

There is no reason for the Holy Prophet (S)’s having hidden their names
except that they were Qurayshites and celebrities; and to declare their
names would certainly lead to punishing them; and to punish them would
cause danger of apostasy; and to apostatize from Islam would mean that
they would convince some of the Arab tribes to mutiny claiming that
Muhammad (S) had given everything to his relatives and deprived people
of Quraysh and the Arabs; and to arouse such a claim would create an ill
reputation of Islam since it would be said that the Holy Prophet (S)
disputed his believing companions and fought them; and to invent such an
ill reputation would lead to new wars the results of which would not be
better than the earlier ones. Hence, the divine solution is to keep the
matter hidden as long as those men admitted Islam.

Because the narrations that recorded the plot of al-\`Aqabah named
famous Qurayshite personalities, the pro-Quraysh Hadithists have had to
suspect them although most of them have had to regarded Ibn Jumay\` and
the other narrators who mentioned the names of the planners and the
executors of that plot as trustworthy. In addition, Sunni reference
books of Hadith have recorded that Hudhayfah and \`Ammar were frequently
asked by Qurayshite chiefs whether they had seen them on that night with
the executors of the plot or not and that such chiefs attempted to gain
the acquittal of hypocrisy from Hudhayfah and \`Ammar. The same
reference books have also recorded many narrations asserting that people
could identify the hypocrites, after their death, by noticing whether
Hudhayfah would offer the ritual Funeral Prayer for them or not.
Finally, they have narrated that Hudhayfah did not offer the Funeral
Prayer on any of the Qurayshite chiefs!

### Third Event

The story of Surah of Tahrim implies that one of the Holy Prophet (S)’s
wives violated his instructions of concealing the news he had recounted
to her exclusively and, backed by her well-wisher, worked for people of
Quraysh against her husband. The Lord, again, informed His Prophet (S)
about divulging the secret and the Holy Prophet (S) conveyed this divine
information to her as well as her well-wisher who was also one his
wives. Thenceforth, the Holy Qur’an revealed her secret and the
intentions of those for whom she had worked and threatened a punishment
and cited as examples for them the wives of Prophet (S) Noah and Prophet
(S) Lot who were atheists because they had betrayed their husbands and
thus would be in Hellfire.

As usual, the pro-Quraysh Hadithists have distorted the story making it
a simple family affair respecting the wives’ jealousy and some slight
flaws with the Holy Prophet (S)!

They want Muslims to close their eyes before the clear-cut Verses of
Surah of Tahrim that declare the occurrence of a striking danger on the
Holy Prophet (S) and the Divine Mission and the enlisting of a great
army for defying the situation. Almighty Allah says, “If you both turn
to Allah for indeed your hearts are already inclined; and if you back
each other against him, then surely Allah it is Who is his Guardian, and
Gabriel and the believers that do good, and the angels after that are
the aiders. 66/4.”  
 Towards whom were their hearts inclined? For whom did they back each
other against the Holy Prophet (S)? What sort of family affairs was that
which incited such a great army that Almighty Allah uses only in cases
of ultimate emergency?

Ibn \`Abbas used to interpret ‘inclined’ into ‘deviated.’ On that
account, two of the Holy Prophet (S)’s wives needed to renew their
converting to Islam!

### Fourth Event

For a whole month, the Holy Prophet (S) deserted his wives and confined
himself in the house of Mariah the Coptic on the outskirts.
Consequently, rumor has it that he would divorce all his wives.  
 The pro-Quraysh Hadithists have described the matter as a personal
affair although it had preoccupied the Holy Prophet (S), the Divine
Revelation and Muslims. The reason, according to their narrations, was
the usual demands of wives away from the Islamic issues that occupied
the political area to excess and engaged the Qurayshite chiefs in
particular.

### Fifth Event

People of Quraysh worked as hard as possible for offending against \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib’s personality making the Holy Prophet (S) very much angry.
He defended \`Ali and honored his personality in the same way as he had
always done in war, peace, journey and residence. Yet, the matter
increased in the last period of his lifetime when such campaigns against
Imam \`Ali increased causing the Holy Prophet (S) to deliver many
sermons in many instances to declare the merits of Imam \`Ali (a.s.) and
regard anyone who would hurt him as misled and atheist.

The overwhelming story of Buraydah al-Aslami that has found itself a
place in the best regardable pages of each and every Sunni reference
book of Hadith unveils clearly the organized plans that people of
Quraysh executed against Imam \`Ali and due to which the Holy Prophet
(S) reproached everyone who would criticize Imam \`Ali and declaring
that he would be the leader of this *Ummah* after him and anyone who
detests or disobeys him would be indisputably hypocrite. This event
shows how much malice and envy the Qurayshite chiefs bore against Imam
\`Ali (a.s.).

### Sixth Event

The Qurayshite chiefs precluded people from recording the Holy Prophet
(S)’s words and deeds during his lifetime. People used to record the
Holy Qur’an as soon as it was revealed and the Holy Prophet (S) ordered
to put the fresh Qur’anic texts between the minbar and the wall where
papers and ink were available for anyone to record.  
 Imam \`Ali (a.s.) used to write down all the Qur’anic texts and the
Hadiths after the Holy Prophet (S) would order him to write. Others,
such as \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr ibn al-\`As the young Qurayshite, also used
to write down the Hadiths; but some of the Qurayshite chiefs prevented
them from recording the Hadith because they knew that they would face a
horrible hazard if the Hadiths praising the Ahl al-Bayt and the
Hashimites and cursing the Qurayshite chiefs would reach the hands of
the coming generations. Yet, some of such chiefs used to record the
Jewish culture and attend their classes every Saturday![^1]

Sunni reference books of Hadith have confessed that \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr
complained before the Holy Prophet (S) that people of Quraysh warned him
against recording the Hadiths. Abu-Dawud, in al-Sunan 2/176, records the
following:  
 It has been narrated that \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr said, “People of Quraysh
told me not to record every single word said by the Holy Prophetsince he
was an ordinary mortal who may be erring when enraged. I ceased the
recording and told the Holy Prophet (S) about their words. He pointed at
his mouth and said, “Record every thing. By the Prevailing of my soul I
swear that nothing but truth comes out of my mouth.”[^2]

### Seventh Event

An attempt to assassinate the Holy Prophet (S) was planned on his way
back from the Farewell Hajj at Arsha. The details of this plot was
similar to great extent to the plot that was executed after the battle
of Tabuk and, again, the divine revelation unveiled it.

### Eighth Event

People of Quraysh escalated their disapproval of the Holy Prophet (S)’s
activities to direct the leadership of his family. Some of them objected
openly and shamelessly and demanded with positions of leadership for the
other clans of Quraysh. However, the Holy Prophet (S) rejected all such
demands because he had nothing to do about this divine directive.[^3]

### Ninth Event

In his final ailment, the Holy Prophet (S) order to enlist an army to be
joined by all the Qurayshite chiefs except the Hashimites and nominated
Usamah ibn Zayd as the commander. He then ordered Usamah, the young
African Muslim, to advance towards Mu\`tah in Jordan to fight against
the Romans. The Holy Prophet (S), however, wanted to strengthen the
Islamic State and to revenge for the martyrs of the Battle of Mu\`tah.
Yet, these were the open aims, while the actual aims were to take the
opposers of Imam \`Ali’s leadership away from al-Madinah.

Usamah and his army camped out of al-Madinah and the Qurayshite chiefs
showed reluctance to join that army so that they would fail the Holy
Prophet (S)’s plan. They also worked on detaining as great numbers of
the army as possible. Finally, they criticized the Holy Prophet (S) for
nominating Usamah for commandment. Hence, they wanted to interrupt the
course of the army so that they would gain more time. As a reply, the
Holy Prophet (S) delivered a speech emphasizing on expediting the march
of Usamah’s army and declaring that Almighty Allah and he would curse
those who would fall behind.

### Tenth Event

People of Quraysh decided to stop frankly in the face of the Holy
Prophet (S) to preclude him from handing the leadership of the *Ummah*
officially over to the Ahl al-Bayt. \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, the new chief
of Quraysh, volunteered to carry on the decision. In his last hour, the
Holy Prophetsummoned the chiefs of Quraysh and Ansar and asked them to
fetch him a paper and a pen to record for them an official document
saving his nation against deviation forever. As he realized that this
document would mean nominating \`Ali and his household as the only
leaders of the *Ummah*, \`Umar stood in the face of the Holy
Prophetshouting, ‘No, we do not need your document and your security
against deviation. We also do not want your traditions and people.
Allah’s Book is sufficient for us; and it is we, neither you nor your
Ahl al-Bayt, who should interpret it.’

Unfortunately, the attendants, from people of Quraysh and the deceived
Ansar, supported \`Umar and shouted before their Prophet (S), ‘We
support \`Umar’s saying from top to bottom.’ Hence, a discrepancy broke
out while the ailed Prophet (S) was looking. A group supported the Holy
Prophet (S)’s saying and the others supported \`Umar’s. Then the latter
group shouted, ‘Do not give him anything! Let him not record anything.’

It is most likely that Archangel Gabriel was attendant for he used to
visit the Holy Prophet (S) recurrently these days. The Holy Prophet (S)
might have sought his advice and the Archangel instructed him that he
had accomplished his mission completely and the best solution for such a
discrepancy would be to dismiss all of them so as to impede the apostasy
of Quraysh. Hence, the Holy Prophet said, ‘Leave me! It is inappropriate
to issue disputation before a Prophet (S)! And the pains that I am
suffering are easier than what you are dragging me to.’

This story is above dispute because al-Bukhari has recorded it in six
positions of his al-Sahih. Ibn \`Abbas called this incident ‘the
calamity of Thursday.’

### Eleventh Event

Owing to harsh fever, the Holy Prophet (S) fainted for minutes and then
regained his consciousness. That was during his final ailment. He could
understand that some of those around him intended to pour a drug in his
mouth when he fainted. When he regained his consciousness, he ordered
them not to give him any medicine when he would faint. On the contrary,
as soon as he fainted, they poured a medicine in his mouth. As he tried
to vomit it, they forced him to drink. When he regained consciousness,
he reprimanded them and ordered all of them, except the Hashimites, to
have from that medicine. According to narrations, all of them had to
have some of that ‘medicine’.

Reference books of Hadith have called this incident ‘forcing the Holy
Prophet (S) to have the medicine.’ It is important to study this
incident carefully for it might have been an attempt to poison the Holy
Prophet (S)!  
 The presentation of the previous events is the introduction to the
interpretation of the Verse of Sa\`il. As a matter of fact, each event
is worthy of thorough study since the source of all of them was people
of Quraysh taking in consideration their close relationship with the
Jews.

New Preparations after the Day of Ghadir
----------------------------------------

The caravan of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Imam left Ghadir Khumm
towards al-Madinah. While the Holy Prophet (S)’s heart was calmed,
people of Quraysh were so disturbed out of their spite and wickedness
for they would never relax unless they would exercise the painful agony.

During many events in the Farewell Hajj, in Makkah, on \`Arafat, the
three sermons in Mina and the sermon of al-Khayf Masjid, Almighty Allah
protected his Prophet (S) as promised in the Verse of \`Ismah. Finally,
Almighty Allah ordered Muslims to stop in a place under burning midday
so that the Holy Prophet (S) would raise \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib’s hand as
high as possible and declare, ‘This man will be your leader after me.
After him, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and nine Imams from al-Husayn’s offspring
will be your leaders.’ In this very situation, the divine promise of
protection manifested strongly. Almighty Allah shut the mouths of people
of Quraysh so that they would not oppose or object and opened their
mouths with words of agreement only, ‘We admit that you have conveyed
your Lord’s messages completely and have been excellent Messenger. We
will surely obey.’

Afterwards, they hurried to Imam \`Ali’s tent to congratulate him on the
leadership and showed compliments when Almighty Allah revealed, ‘This
day have I perfected for you your religion and completed on you My favor
and chosen for you Islam as a religion.’ They then lent their ears to
Hasan ibn Thabit’s poem describing the Holy Prophet (S)’s conveyance of
the Lord’s instruction of nominating Imam \`Ali for the next
leadership.  
 The ceremonies of offering congratulations to Imam \`Ali lasted to
night and only could darkness stop Muslims’ gathering before his tent
for offering congratulations; therefore, the Holy Prophet (S) had to
pass that night in Ghadir Khumm—Ghadir of Imamate. After the Fajr -dawn-
Prayer, he moved. Other narrations affirm that the Holy Prophet (S) had
to settle for two days there.  
 This was the first divine method of protecting the Holy Prophet (S).
The second method, however, was the divine punishment. Like the Jews
during their Prophet (S)’s reigns, people of Quraysh had to counter the
divine punishment.

Stones from Heaven upon the Spokesmen of Quraysh
------------------------------------------------

Sunni and Shiite reference books of Hadith have named those who objected
to the Holy Prophet (S)’s nominating Imam \`Ali for leadership in Ghadir
Khumm. Yet, some narrations have made clerical errors in some of the
names because such divine punishment fell on more than one occasion.
Those inflicted by heavenly stones or punishment were Jabir ibn al-Nadr
ibn al-Harith ibn Kildah al-\`Abdari, al-Harith ibn al-Nu\`man al-Fihri,
\`Amr ibn \`Utbah al-Makhzumi, al-Nadr ibn al-Harith al-Fihri, al-Harith
ibn \`Amr al-Fihri, al-Nu\`man ibn al-Harith the Jew, al-Nu\`man ibn
al-Mundhir al-Fihri, \`Amr ibn al-Harith al-Fihri, a man from the tribe
of Taym, a Bedouin man and a Bedouin man from Najd who belonged to the
tribe of Ja\`far ibn Kilab ibn Rabi\`ah.

Save the Bedouin and the Jew ones, all the others were from Quraysh for
Ansar had never objected to any privilege that the Holy Prophet (S) gave
to his progeny though they, later on, showed disloyalty to the Ahl
al-Bayt.

The incident in abstract is that one, or more, of those persons
protested against the Holy Prophet (S)’s nominating Imam \`Ali for the
coming leadership and accused him of passing his personal caprices in
the form of divine commandments. Although the Holy Prophet (S) asserted
that the decision had been issued by the Lord, that man was not
convinced. He left the place angrily and asked the Lord to rain him with
a heavenly stone if the matter was indeed His. The Lord inflicted him
with a heavenly stone that killed him or inflicted him with a heavenly
flame that burned him.

From this incident, we understand that the Lord used a threatening style
with people of Quraysh for protecting His Messenger against their
expected apostasy. Consequently, they understood that failure would be
the decisive result of any political combat with the Holy Prophet (S)
and that they should wait until he would die. This incident reveals a
number of issues to be hereinafter presented:

(1) Sunni Reference Books of Hadith Record the Incident
-------------------------------------------------------

Not only have Shiite reference books of Hadith recorded the incident of
the stones from heaven, but also many Sunni reference books have
documented it. Abu-\`Ubayd al-Harawi have been the first to record the
incident in his book entitled Gharib al- Qur’an.  
 Ibn Shahrashub, in Manaqib Ali Abi-Talib 2/240 has recorded the
following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-\`Ubayd, al-Tha\`labi,
al-Naqqash, Sufyan ibn \`Uyaynah, al-Razi, al-Qizwini, al-Nisapuri,
al-Tabrasi and al-Tusi that when the news of the Holy Prophet (S)’s
having conveyed his Lord’s commandment in Ghadir Khumm spread out among
people, al-Harith ibn al-Nu\`man al-Fihri (or Jabir ibn al-Nadr ibn
al-Harith ibn Kildah al-\`Abdari, according to Abu-\`Ubayd’s report)
came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said, “Muhammad: You have ordered us to
declare that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad being his Messenger,
to offer the prayers, to fast, to undertake the Hajj and to pay the
Zakat. All these that we have admitted were not sufficient for you until
you raised your cousin from the arm and preceded him to us saying,
‘\`Ali shall be the master of him who has regarded me as his master.’ Is
this your own desire or was it according to Allah’s instruction?”  
 The Holy Prophet (S) answered, “I swear by Allah the only Lord that it
was certainly Allah’s instruction.” Jabir then turned his face towards
his animal saying, “O Allah! If Muhammad’s words have been true, then
rain us with a heavenly stone or inflict a painful chastisement upon
us.” Before he could reach his animal, the Lord rained him with a stone
that fell on the head and went out from the anus and he thus was killed.
Consequently, Almighty Allah revealed the Verse of Sa\`il.

Some Shiite scholars[^4] have listed more than thirty names of Sunni
scholars who recorded this incident, such as al-Harawi, Abu-\`Ubayd
(died in AH 223), in Gharib al- Qur’an, al-Baghdadi, Abu-Bakr al-Naqqash
al-Mawsili (died in AH 351), in his book of Tafsir, al-Tha\`labi,
Abu-Ishaq al-Nisapuri (died in AH 427), in al-Kashf wa’l-Bayan,
al-Hasakani, al-Hakim Abu’l-Qasim, in Ada\` Haqq al-Muwalat, al-Qurtubi,
Abu-Bakr Yahya (died in AH 567), in his book of Tafsir, Abu’l Mu¨affar,
Shams al-Din—the grandson of Ibn al-Jawzi (died in AH 645), in
al-Tadhkirah, al-Hamawini, Shaykh al-Islam (died in AH 722), in Fara\`id
al-Simtayn, al-\`Imadi, Abu’l-Sa\`ud (died in AH 982), in his book of
Tafsir 8/292, al-Shirbini, Shams al-Din of Cairo (died in AH 977), in
al- Siraj al-Munir 4/364, al-Halabi, Burhan al-Din \`Ali (died in AH
1044), in al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3/302, al-Hafni, Shams al-Din (died in
AH 1181), in Sharh al-Jami\` al-Saghir 2/387 and al-Zarqani, Abu-\`Ali
(died in AH 1122), in Sharh al-Mawahib al-Ludaniyyah.

(2) Surah of Maarij was Revealed in Makkah or al-Madinah
--------------------------------------------------------

The general sense of the Verses of Surah of Maarij, up to Verse 36,
seems to be revealed in al-Madinah for it comprises laws similar to
those mentioned in Surah of al-Nur and Surah of al-Mu\`minun, while the
rest seem to be revealed in Makkah for they refer to questions of belief
and the Hereafter. In due course, it is difficult to discern the place
of its revelation. We should thus regard, yet presumably, the second
part of the Surah as revealed in Makkah and the first in al-Madinah, but
it was preceded thereafter. The text of the Surah is the decisive
criterion.

In Sharh al-Akhbar 1/241, al-Nu\`man has narrated on the authority of
Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) that it was revealed in Makkah to show the manners
of those who dissented the leadership of Imam \`Ali. According to a
narration recorded in Shaykh al-Kulayni’s al-Kafi 5/450, the Surah was
revealed in Makkah. Be it revealed in Makkah or al-Madinah, the
chastisement mentioned in the Verse of Sa\`il refers to the stones of
heaven that were inflicted upon the man who objected to the nomination
of Imam \`Ali as the leader of the *Ummah*. Moreover, the stones that
inflicted al-\`Abdari and al-Fihri and their likes was a part of the
threatening chastisement most of which will be sent down in order to
pave the way for the advent of Imam al-Mahdi.[^5]

(3) Is the Chastisement Worldly or Immortal?
--------------------------------------------

Apart from the various interpretations and narrations of the Surah, it
seems that it refers to the chastisement of the world to come. It is
also empty of any condemn against the demanding one who may be a
suppliant who seeks the falling of such chastisement. For al-Qurtubi,
the ‘demanding one’ in the Verse is Prophet (S) Noah or Prophet Muhammad
(S)! Therefore, it may be asked how Sunni and Shiite scholars have
concluded that the Verse refers to worldly chastisement and the
‘demanding one’ wanted to challenge and belie.

The answer is lexicological. The Arabic item ‘sa\`ala bi’ refers to
asking about a matter in a form of challenge and indicates that the
‘demanding one’ has already heard of such a worldly chastisement from
the Holy Prophet (S) who used to threat and forewarn; therefore, he
demanded with it and the Lord answered him through these Verses. Because
the chastisement of the world to come is more important, the Lord has
emphasized on it without neglecting the worldly one.

The Surah states, ‘*O you who are deriding the chastisement against
which our Messenger forewarned you! Surely whatever he has menaced will
befall, be in this world or the Hereafter. Nothing will guard the
atheists against it. Hence, you are advised to believe in Allah so that
you will avoid that chastisement, which will not inflict the
believers.’*

The second Verse negates the possibility of averting that chastisement
away from the unbelievers. In other words, it will inevitably inflict
the unbelievers for they definitely deserve it and will also inflict
those who pretended to be believers whose repentance may save them from
it.  
 It is not unlikely that ‘the unbelievers’ mentioned in the Verse stands
for those who disbelieve in Almighty Allah’s marvels or graces.

Sunni scholars have fallen in contradiction because they argued that the
chastisement mentioned in the Verse being the Hereafter that will
inflict the unbelievers only and, meanwhile, they argued that it refers
to the worldly chastisement that inflicted al-Nadr ibn al-Harith
al-\`Abdari who was killed during the Battle of Badr. At any rate, they
have always endeavored to make any chastisement mentioned in the Holy
Qur’an stand for the chastisement of the Hereafter and, sometimes, they
dedicated it to the Jews and Christians so as to take it away from
people of Quraysh and the hypocrites and prove that Almighty Allah did
not respond to His Messenger’s invocations against people of Quraysh.
Moreover, they accused the Holy Prophet (S) that he was reproached by
the Lord because he had called down evil upon people of Quraysh![^6]

(4) Sunni Judgment on the Hadith of Stones from Heaven
------------------------------------------------------

Sunni scholars have had different opinions regarding the Hadith; some of
them, like Abu-\`Ubayd, al-Tha\`labi and al-Hamawini, have accepted and
preferred it to the other opinions while others have recorded it
indirectly. A third group have recorded it but preferred the other
opinions. At any rate, all of them have accepted it yet in different
degrees. Hence, Sunni scholars have to accept it because master
scholars, such as Abu-\`Ubayd and Sufyan ibn \`Uyaynah, have admitted
it. Al-Albani, whom is regarded as the leading Hadithist in this age,
has decided the authenticity of any narration that is accepted by two or
three master scholars.

Al-Shawkani, in Fath al-Qadir 5/352, says that the demanding one
intended in the Verse was al-Nadr ibn al-Harith who said, ‘O Allah! If
this is the truth sent from Thee, then rain us with a heavenly stone or
inflict painful chastisement upon us.’ He was killed during the Battle
of Badr. Other scholars have referred to Abu-Jahl or al-Harith ibn
al-Nu\`man al-Fihri.  
 Shams al-Din al-Shirbini, in \`Abaqat al-Anwar 7/398, says that various
opinions have been cited about the demanding one; Ibn \`Abbas says that
he was al-Nadr ibn al-Harith and others say that he was al-Harith ibn
al-Nu\`man.

Abu-\`Ubayd, in Nafahat al-Azhar 7/291, confirms that the Verse was
revealed after the declaration of Ghadir and the demanding one was Jabir
ibn al-Nadr ibn al-Harith ibn Kildah al-\`Abdari  
 Al-Qurtubi, in Tafsir 18/278, presents the various opinions respecting
the interpretation of the Verse of Sa\`il among which is the narration
involved. This is in fact sufficient evidence on the existence of the
Holy Prophet (S)’s declaration of the leadership of Imam \`Ali. Hence,
we, the Shi\`ah, have to appreciate this situation and thank them for it
because they admit our claim.  
 It is thus unanimous that the demand in the Verse actually occurred and
that al-Nadr challenged the Holy Prophet (S) regarding the divinely
commissioned leadership of Imam \`Ali. Yet, the Verse that indicates the
descending of the heavenly stone was revealed together with the Verses
discussing the rulings of spoils, which was revealed after the Battle of
Badr.[^7] On that account, it is irrational to accept that the Lord’s
replication to al-Nadr’s demand was revealed in Makkah while the demand
itself was revealed afterwards in al-Madinah after the demise of
al-Nadr.

The saying of the demanding one –that is, ‘O Allah! If this is being the
right sent from Thee, then rain us with a heavenly stone or inflict
painful chastisement upon us,’- is more applicable to Shiite
interpretation. As a general rule, the general sense of a Verse or a
Hadith must be preserved as much as possible. Hence, the defeats of the
disbelievers in the Battle of Badr and al-Khandaq as well as the other
sorts of punishments, such as the draught, starvations and humility
during the conquest of Makkah, were parts of the chastisement.  
 Correspondingly, it is unnecessary to restrain the scope of the
chastisement to the case of al-Nadr or any other individual incident.

(5) Nasibis’ Opinion About the Hadith
-------------------------------------

Except Ibn Taymiyah and his fans, Nasibis have not refuted the
narration. Muhammad Rashid Rida, in Tafsir al-Manar, also imitates Ibn
Taymiyah who attacked the narration coarsely and blundered blindly
through it. Misusing the name of his master Shaykh Muhammad \`Abduh,
Rashid Rida has been highly influenced by the ideas of Ibn Taymiyah and
Ibn al-Qayyim.

As he, in 6/464, records the narration, he decides it as untrue for
Surah of al-Maarij was revealed in Makkah while the unbelievers who
challenged a chastisement are mentioned in Surah of al-Anfal, which was
revealed after the Battle of Badr and many years before the revelation
of Surah of al-Ma\`idah. It seems that Rashid Rida could find his intent
through Ibn Taymiyah’s criticism of the narration because its
documentation has been too authentic to be refuted. The main point upon
which Ibn Taymiyah and Rida depended in criticizing the narration is
that the Holy Prophet (S) did not return to Makkah after the Farewell
Hajj and that al-Abtuh, the place where the events of the narration took
place, is situated in Makkah. Unintentionally or intentionally, they
both neglected that there is in al-Madinah a famous place also called
al-Abtuh.

The other point they have used is that the Verse that rendered the
unbelievers’ challenge was revealed in al-Madinah while Surah of Maarij
was revealed in Makkah. They have also ignored that the general sense of
the first thirty-six Verses and the narration involved suppose and
indicate that it was revealed in al-Madinah. Even if it was revealed in
Makkah, there is no flaw if we admit that it was revealed more than once
for more explication. Scholars have confirmed that Surah of al-Kawthar
was revealed more than once. Furthermore, it is reasonless to refute the
whole narration even if it is proved that the Verse was not revealed on
that occasion. Finally, Sayyid al-Tabataba\`i, in Tafsir al-Mizan 6/54,
has refuted all the points of criticism aroused by Rashid Rida.
Al-Amini, in al-Ghadir 1/239, and al-Naqawi, in \`Abaqat al-Anwar 7-8,
have also refuted the points of criticism of Ibn Taymiyah through
decisive proofs and overwhelming facts. Yet, it seems suitable to add
the following three points to the topic:

**First**: The narrations is neither baseless nor invented by the
official narrators of the Qurayshite caliphate for it proves the divine
ground of the Imamate of Imam \`Ali and invalidates the authority of
Abu-Bakr. In due course, it is very dangerous to claim that the
narration and its likes were intruded by the Shi\`ah in Sunni reference
books of Hadith for such a claim will devastate the entire structure of
Sunni reference books of Hadith as well as the Qurayshite caliphate.
Finally, it was narrated by the same reporters depended by Sunni
reference books.

**Second**: Matters that are admitted by both Sunnis and Shi\`ah are
more acceptable than others for one can believe a Hadith narrated by
both Sunni and Shiite books while it may be rather difficult to believe
a Hadith about which Muslim scholars have had opposing opinions.

**Third**: When the other qualities of the authenticity of a narration
are present, the discrepancy about the first name of its star becomes
unimportant for many endeavors must have been made to conceal his name
that brought dishonor to his family.

In any event, we prefer that the man was Jabir ibn al-Nadr ibn al-Harith
ibn Kildah al-\`Abdari, not al-Harith ibn al-Nu\`man al-Fihri, for
Abu-\`Ubayd, whom is highly esteemed by Sunni scholars for his
experience and knowledgeability, have recorded this name in his Tafsir.
Jabir was a famous Qurayshite personality; his father was the chief of
Banu-\`Abd al-Dar.

(6) Ways of Narration and Documentation
---------------------------------------

#### A. Ways of narration and documentation of Sunni Reference Books

The first way is the narration of Abu-\`Ubayd in Gharib al- Qur’an and
the second way is the report of al-Tha\`labi on the authority of Sufyan
ibn \`Uyaynah upon which (i.e. the report) many scholars have depended,
such as Sayyid al-Mar\`ashi, in Ihqaq al-Haq 6/358, al-Hamawini, in
Fara\`id al-Simtayn, al-Zarnadi, in Nu¨um Durar al-Simtayn 93, Ibn
al-Sabbagh, in al-Fusul al-Muhimmah 24, \`Abd al-Rahman al-Saffuri, in
Nuzhat al-Majalis 2/209, al-Qurtubi, in Tafsir, Sayyid Jamal al-Din
al-Shirazi, in al-Arba\`un Hadith, \`Abdullah al-Shafi\`i, in Al-Manaqib
205, al-Qanduzi, in Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah 247, al-Amrutsari, in Arjah al
Matalib 568, \`Abd al-Ra\`uf al-Mannawi, in Fayd al-Qadir, Muhammad
Al-Qadiri, Al-Sirat al-sawi, al-Halabi, in Insan al-\`Uyun, Ahmad ibn
al-Fadl Bakthir, in Wasilat al-Amal, Muhammad ibn Isma\`il al-Amir, in
al-Rawdah al-Nadiyyah and Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Kanji, in Kifayat
al-Talib.

#### B. Al-Hasakani’s two ways from Sufyan ibn \`Uyaynah

In Shawahid al-Tanzil 2/381, he records the following:  
 It has been narrated to the authority of Abu-\`Abdullah al-Shirazi on
the authority of Abu-Bakr al-Jarjara\`i on the authority of Abu-Ahmad
al-Basri on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sahl on the authority of Zayd
ibn Isma\`il on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ayyub on the authority of
Sufyan ibn \`Uyaynah on the authority of Ja\`far ibn Muhammad on the
authority of His father on the authority of \`Ali… etc.  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-Bakr al-Subay\`i on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Nasr Abu Ja\`far al-Dab\`i on the
authority of Zayd ibn Isma\`il ibn Sinan on the authority of Shurayh ibn
al-Nu\`man on the authority of Sufyan ibn \`Uyaynah on the authority of
Ja\`far ibn Muhammad on the authority of His father on the authority of
\`Ali… etc.

#### C. Al-Hasakani’s Report from Jabir al-Ju\`fi

In Shawahid al-Tanzil 2/381, he records the following:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Kufi
on the authority of Nasr ibn Muzahim on the authority of \`Amr ibn Shamr
on the authority of Jabir al-Ju\`fi on the authority of Muhammad ibn
\`Ali… etc. Similar narrations have been reported from Hudhayfah, Sa\`d
ibn Abi-Waqqas, Abu-Hurayrah and Ibn \`Abbas.

#### D. Al-Hasakani’s Report from Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman

In Shawahid al-Tanzil 2/381, he records the following:  
 It has been narrated from Abu’l-Hasan al-Fasi on the authority of
Abu’l-Hasan Muhammad ibn Isma\`il al-Hasani on the authority of \`Abd
al-Rahman ibn al-Hasan al-Asadi on the authority of Ibrahim; and it has
been narrated from Abu-Bakr Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Baghdadi on the
authority of Abu-Muhammad \`Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Ja\`far al-Shaybani
on the authority of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hasan al-Asadi on the
authority of Ibrahim ibn al-Hasan al-Kisa\`i on the authority of al-Fadl
ibn Dikkin on the authority of Sufyan ibn Sa\`id on the authority of
Mansur on the authority of Rab\`i on the authority of Hudhayfah ibn
al-Yaman… etc.

#### E. Al-Hasakani’s Report from Abu-Hurayrah

In Shawahid al-Tanzil 2/381, he records the following:  
 It has been narrated from \`Uthman on the authority of Furat ibn
Ibrahim al-Kufi on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Mus\`ab
al-Bujali on the authority of Abu-\`Imarah Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Mahdi
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi-Mi\`shar al-Madani on the authority
of Sa\`id ibn Abi-Sa\`id al-Miqbari on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah…
etc.

### Shiite Reports from Sufyan ibn \`Uyaynah

#### A. Furat’s Reports

Furat ibn Ibrahim al-Kufi, in Tafsir 505, has recorded the following:  
 It has been narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Tabyan on the
authority of al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Kharifi that he asked Sufyan ibn
\`Uyaynah… etc.

#### B. Muhammad ibn al-\`Abbas’s Reports

In Ta\`wil al-Ayat 2/722, the following is recorded:  
 Muhammad ibn al-\`Abbas has narrated on the authority of \`Ali ibn
Muhammad ibn Mukhallad on the authority of al-Hasan ibn al-Qasim on the
authority of \`Umar ibn al-Ahsan on the authority of Adam ibn Hammad on
the authority of Husayn ibn Muhammad that he asked Sufyan ibn \`Uyaynah…
etc.

#### C. Sharif al-Murtada’s Reports

The following is quoted from Madinat al-Maajiz 1/407:  
 Sharif al-Murtada, in \`Uyun al-Mu\`jizat, has recorded that
Abu-\`Abdullah Muhammad ibn Ahmad has narrated on the authority of his
father on the authority of \`Ali ibn Farrukh al-Samman on the authority
of Yahya ibn Zakariyya al-Minqari on the authority of Sufyan ibn
\`Uyaynah on the authority of \`Umar ibn Abi-Sulaym al-\`Isa on the
authority of Ja\`far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq on the authority of his
father… etc.

#### D. Muntajab al-Din al-Razi’s Reports

The following is quoted from al-Arba\`un Hadith 82:  
 It has been narrated from Abu’l-\`Ala\` Zayd ibn \`Ali ibn Mansur
al-Adib and Sayyid Abu-Turab al-Murtada ibn al-Da\`i ibn al-Qasim
al-Hasani on the authority of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Ahmad on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Zayd ibn \`Ali al-Tabari Abu-Talib ibn Abi-Shuja\`
al-Buraydi on the authority of Abu’l-Husayn Zayd ibn Isma\`il al-Hasani
on the authority of Sayyid Abu’l-\`Abbas Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Hasani on
the authority of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hasan al-Khaqani on the
authority of \`Abbas ibn \`«sa on the authority of al-Hasan ibn \`Abd
al-Wahid al-Khazzaz on the authority of al-Hasan ibn \`Ali al-Nakh\`i on
the authority of Rumi ibn Hammad al-Makhariqi that he asked Sufyan ibn
\`Uyaynah… etc.

#### E. Al-Tabrasi’s Reports

The following is quoted from Tafsir al-Mizan 6/58:  
 It has been recorded in Majma\` al-Bayan[^8] that Sayyid Abu’l-Hamd has
narrated on the authority of al-Hakim Abu’l-Qasim al-Hasakani on the
authority of Abu-\`Abdullah al-Shirazi on the authority of Abu-Bakr
al-Jurjani on the authority of Abu-Ahmad al-Basri on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sahl on the authority of Zayd ibn Isma\`il on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Ayyub al-Wasiti on the authority of Sufyan ibn
\`Uyaynah… etc.

### Shiite Reports from Other Narrators

#### A. Al-Kulayni’s Reports

The following is quoted from al-Kafi 1/422:  
 It has been narrated on the authority of \`Ali ibn Ibrahim on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad on the authority of Muhammad ibn Khalid
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sulayman on the authority of his father
on the authority of Abu-Basir on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq… etc.  
 The following is also quoted from al-Kafi 8/75:  
 It has been narrated from a number of our companions on the authority
of Sahl ibn Ziyad on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sulayman on the
authority of his father on the authority of Abu-Basir… etc.

#### B. Furat al-Kufi’s Reports

The following is quoted from Furat’s Tafsir 503:  
 Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Mus\`ab al-Bujali on the authority of
Abu-\`Imarah Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Muhtadi on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Mi\`shar al-Madani on the authority of Sa\`id ibn Abi-Sa\`id
al-Miqbari on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah… etc.  
 Ja\`far ibn Muhammad ibn Bishrawayh al-Qattan has narrated on the
authority of al-Awza\`i on the authority of Sa\`sa\`ah ibn Sawhan and
al-Ahnaf ibn Qays on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas… etc.  
 Abu-Ahmad Yahya ibn \`Ubayd ibn al-Qasim al-Qizwini on the authority of
Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas… etc.

#### C. Muhammad ibn al-\`Abbas’s report

The following is quoted from Ta\`wil al-Ayat 2/722:  
 Ahmad ibn al-Qasim has narrated to us on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad al-Sayyari on the authority of Muhammad ibn Khalid on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Sulayman on the authority of his father on the
authority of Abu-Basir on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq… etc.  
 Muhammad al-Barqi has narrated on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Sulayman on the authority of his father on the authority of Abu-Basir
that Imam al-Sadiq… etc.

#### D. Shaykh al-Saduq’s Reports

The following is quoted from Bihar al-Anwar 33/165:  
 \`Ali ibn \`Abdullah al-Ziyadi has narrated on the authority of Ja\`far
ibn Muhammad al-Duristi on the authority of his father on the authority
of Shaykh al-Saduq on the authority of his father on the authority of
Sa\`d on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu’l-Khattab on
the authority of his father on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sinan on
the authority of Zurarah on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq… etc.

#### E. Al-Bahrani’s Reports

The following is quoted from Madinat al-Maajiz 2/267:  
 \`Allamah al-Hilli, in al-Kashkul, has recorded on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn \`Abd al-Rahman al-Bawardi… etc.

#### F. Ibn Sahrashub’s Report

The following is quoted from Bihar al-Anwar 31/320:  
 It has been recorded in Ibn Shahrashub’s al-Manaqib on the authority of
Abu-Basir on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq… etc.

#### G. \`Ali ibn Ibrahim Al-Qummi’s Report

The following is quoted from \`Ali ibn Ibrahim Al-Qummi’s Tafsir
2/385:  
 It has been narrated from Ahmad ibn Idris on the authority of Muhammad
ibn \`Abdullah on the authority of Muhammad ibn \`Ali on the authority
of \`Ali ibn Hasan on the authority of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir that
Imam al-Rida… etc.

### The Narration is Authentic and the Divine Chastisement Was Repeated

Two results can be obtained from the numerous narrations that recorded
the incidents of the stones from heaven inflicted upon those who
objected against the leadership of Imam \`Ali (a.s.).

**First**, the narrations are qualified according to the criteria of the
authenticity of Hadith. It is thus illogic to accept the claims of the
narrow-minded and the suspicious who allow themselves to say that the
Shi\`ah had fabricated such narrations because the very narrations are
found in the major Sunni reference books of Hadith. However, some Sunni
extremists may claim that these narrations have been reported from the
Holy Imams (a.s.). Our answer is that Sunni scholars have respected the
Holy Imams and depended upon their reports and knowledge and they have
only objected to the narrations that are reported by Shiite ways of
narration. Furthermore, the series of reporting the narrations involved
do not include only Shiite narrators; al-Hasakani, for instance, has
report them to Hudhayfah and Abu-Hurayrah as well as many others.

**Second**, according to the various narrations reporting the incident,
it is clear-cut that there were more than one incident because of the
variety of names, sorts of punishment, places, times and events
mentioned in the narrations.

(7) People of the Befalling Chastisement
----------------------------------------

### The Old Envy and the ‘Blood Lick’

Societies of the Arab Peninsula were tribal and thus struggles, combats
and tribal alliances were common among them. The Alliance of ‘Fudul’ was
the most famed in history. It was established by \`Abd al-Muttalib, the
Holy Prophet (S)’s grandfather, and was also called the Alliance of
Mutayyibin (People of Odor) because the parties swore alliance by
immersing their hands in a vessel of odor made by the daughter of \`Abd
al-Muttalib. The most important terms of that alliance was to protect
the Holy Ka\`bah, prohibit any sort of injustice and support the wronged
until they recover their rights. The Holy Prophet (S) was twenty years
old when he partook in that alliance. Moreover, narrations have stated
that he passed the alliance after Islam. In this regard, he said, ‘I was
boy when I witnessed the Alliance of Mutayyibin with my uncles. I prefer
it to having the best kinds of camels.’[^9]

Th alliance was an answer for an opposite one established by Banu-\`Abd
al-Dar. Some Qurayshite tribes responded and partook in that alliance,
which was called the ‘blood lick’ because its members swore alliance by
licking the blood of a cow slaughtered on that occasion.

Different opinions have been stated about the reason and time of these
alliances. Some narrators have mentioned that they were established
during the building of the Holy Ka\`bah when each tribe wanted to have
the honor of putting the Black Stone in its place. The most acceptable
narration in this regard is that recorded by al-Ya\`qubi who said that
because Banu-\`Abd al-Dar envied \`Abd al-Muttalib, they decided to
conclude an alliance against him.[^10]

### Banu-\`Abd al-Dar; the Standard-Bearers of the Polytheists

Historians have confirmed that Banu-\`Abd al-Dar inherited Dar al-Nidwah
and the Qurayshite standard of wars. Hence, they used to bear the
standards during battles.[^11]  
 Imam \`Ali (a.s.) killed more than ten individuals from the knights of
Banu-\`Abd al-Dar who raised the standard of the polytheists’ army
against the Holy Prophet (S). Yet, other narrations have mentioned that
some of them were killed by Hamzah ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib.[^12]

### Banu- \`Abd al-Dar Give A Lesson in Self-Defense

Historians have recorded that ‘the courageous knights’ of Banu-\`Abd
al-Dar taught people of Quraysh a peculiar lesson in self-defense
against the Hashimites taking advantage of their high morals. Ibn
Kathir, in al-Sirah 3/39, quotes the following narration from Ibn
Husham:  
 In the gravest moments of the Battle of Uhud, the Holy Prophetsat under
Ansar’s standard and ordered \`Ali to march carrying the standard. \`Ali
marched challenging the foes. The bearer of people of Quraysh’s
standard, Talhah ibn Abi-Talhah, accepted the challenge. As the two
warriors stopped between the two armies, \`Ali stroke him so heavily
that he fell to the ground. Suddenly, \`Ali left him and came back! ‘Why
did you not kill him?’ Muslims asked \`Ali. ‘He showed me his anus! I
then realized that Almighty Allah has actually killed him,’ \`Ali
answered. On the Battle of Siffin, Busr ibn Arta\`ah did the same thing
when \`Ali was about to kill him; hence, \`Ali left him out of his high
morals. \`Amr ibn al-\`As also showed his anus during the Battle of
Siffin when \`Ali knocked him down and was about to kill him. \`Ali also
left him. A poet recorded this strange incident… etc.

### Al-Nadr ibn al-Harith; the Chief of Banu-\`Abd al-Dar

Ibn Husham, in al-Sirah 1/195, has recorded the following:  
 Al-Nadr ibn al-Harith was one of the Satanic enemies who used to harm
the Holy Prophet (S). In al-Hirah (Iraq), he learnt the tales of the
Persian kings. Whenever the Holy Prophetsat to remind people of their
Lord and warn against His punishment that befell the past nations,
al-Nadr came to the same place and recounted the tales of the Persian
kings. He asked people to gather around him so that he would tell him
stories better than the sayings of Muhammad! He challenged the Holy
Qur’an and claimed that he would reveal the same thing that was revealed
by Almighty Allah. Ibn Ishaq has narrated on the authority of Ibn
\`Abbas that eight Verses were revealed reproaching al-Nadr and
unveiling his fake claims.[^13]

Al-Nadr was the representative of his clan in the wicked conference that
people of Quraysh held for conspiring with each other against the Holy
Prophet (S).[^14] He was selected as their courier to the Jews seeking
their advice in the issue of the Holy Prophet (S).[^15] He participated
in recording the First Accursed Document against the Hashimites.[^16] He
served food to the warriors who fought against the Holy Prophet (S)
during the Battle of Badr.[^17] He finally was killed during that battle
at the hands of Imam \`Ali.[^18]

### Al-Nudayr; al-Nadr’s Brother and Successor

Reference books of history have stated that other individuals from
Banu-\`Abd al-Dar bore the standard of people of Quraysh after al-Nadr.
Yet, it has not been mentioned whether al-Nudayr succeeded his brother
in bearing the standard and became the chief of Banu-\`Abd al-Dar was
warrior or not. The fans of Quraysh have described him as shrewd man
whom the Holy Prophet (S) gave one hundred camels from the spoils of the
Battle of Hunayn just like the other chiefs of Quraysh so as to make
them accept Islam.[^19]

Many narrations have confirmed that al-Nudayr was one of the Qurayshite
chiefs who plotted for assassinating the Holy Prophet (S) during the
Battle of Hunayn.  
 As usual, the Pro-Quraysh narrators have made al-Nudayr one of the
Muslim celebrities who immigrated to al-Madinah and was martyred during
the Battle of Yarmuk! Likewise, they have changed all the Qurayshite
people whom were plagued into martyrs in the Battle of Yarmuk.[^20]  
 Shiite reference books of Hadith have reported a strange disputation
made by al-Nadr ibn al-Harith al-Fihri with the Holy Prophet (S) in
al-Madinah. It seems that it was al-Nudayr, not al-Nadr, who disputed
the Holy Prophet (S) in al-Madinah after the Farewell Hajj.[^21]

Ibn Husham[^22] has stated that al-Nudayr is called also al-Harith, and
al-Ya\`qubi[^23] has misnamed him al-Harith ibn al-Harith ibn Kildah.
Accordingly, it is probable that they had a third brother named
al-Harith. This might have been the very person whom was cast by a
heavenly thunderbolt or stone because he objected to the Holy Prophet
(S)’s declaration of the leadership of Imam \`Ali. In due course, the
befalling chastisement was inflicted upon three individuals from this
family—the father, during the Battle of Badr, Jabir and al-Harith.
Hence, they should be called the family of the befalling chastisement.

At any rate, the most ascertained matter is that a man objected to the
Holy Prophet (S) and a stone from heaven was inflicted upon him; and
that man, according to al-Tha\`labi, in Tafsir, and many Shiite
reference books of Hadith, was al-Harith ibn al-Nu\`man al-Fihri.
Al-Hasakani, Shaykh al-Kulayni and Ibn Shahrashub have also referred to
this name.

This proves that al-Harith upon whom the heavenly stone was inflicted is
different from the son of \`Abd al-Dar and that another heavenly stone
was inflicted upon Jabir ibn al-Nadr al-\`Abdari.

### The Two Most Licentious of Quraysh

Reference books of Hadith have confirmed that the most evil Qurayshite
tribes that harmed the Holy Prophet (S) were Banu-Umayyah and
Banu’l-Mughirah to whom Abu-Jahl ibn Makhzum belonged. They are
described as the two most licentious. We should add Banu-\`Abd al-Dar to
them.  
 Al-Suyuti, in al-Durr al-Manthur 4/85, has recorded on the authority of
al-Bukhari, in Tarikh, on the authority of Ibn Jarir, Ibn al-Mundhir,
ibn Mardawayh that \`Umar ibn al-Al-Khattab said, “Regarding Almighty
Allah’s saying, ‘Have you not seen those who have changed Allah’s favor
for ungratefulness,’ these are the two most licentious houses of
Quraysh—sons of Umayyah and sons of al-Mughirah. Concerning the latter,
you have completed with them on the Battle of Badr and as to sons of
Umayyah, they are respited for a term.”

This statement seems to be said by the Holy Prophet (S) and repeated by
\`Umar who must thus be asked why he appointed Muawiyah as the governor
of Syria and allowed him to behave as he liked and why he arranged the
matter of caliphate in a way enabling \`Uthman to be the caliph and,
consequently, the Islamic State was completely prevailed by the most
licentious house of Quraysh!

[^1]: An expansive documentation of this fact has been presented in
\`Ali al-Kurani: Tadwin al-Qur\`an.

[^2]: Ahmad: al-Musnad 2/192, 215 and al-Hakim: al-Mustadrak 1/105 and
3/528.

[^3]: Sharif Al-Murtada: Tanzih al-Anbiya\` 167.

[^4]: Sayyid Hamid Husayn al-Lakahnuwi: \`Abaqat al-Anwar, Shaykh
al-Amini: al-Ghadir, al-Mar\`ashi: Ihqaq al-Haq and al-Milani: Nafahat
al-Azhar.

[^5]: \`Ali al-Kurani: Mu\`jam Ahadith al-Imam al-Mahdi 5/458 as quoted
from \`Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi: Tafsir 2/385 and Abu-Zaynab
al-Nu\`mani: al-Ghaybah 272.

[^6]: Al-Bukhari: al-Sahih 5/199, Muslim: al-Sahih 8/129 and al-Fakhr
al-Razi: Tafsir 3/122.

[^7]: Holy Qur\`an: Surah of al-Anfal Verse 32.

[^8]: By Shaykh al-Tabrasi.

[^9]: Ahmad: al-Musnad 1/190 and al-Hakim: al-Mustadrak 2/220.

[^10]: Al-Ya\`qubi: Tarikh 1/248 and 2/17 and Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 1/85.

[^11]: Al-Balathiri: Fath al-Buldan 60.

[^12]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 3/587.

[^13]: Also, al-Sirah 1/239, al-Suyuti: al-Durr al-Manthur 3/181, 5/297
and 6/263 and al-Suyuti: Tafsir al-Jalalayn 540.

[^14]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 1/191 and 2/331 and Al-Tabari: Tarikh 2/98.

[^15]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 1/195 and Ibn Sayyid al-Nas: \`Uyun al-Athar
1/142.

[^16]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 1/234 al-Ya\`qubi: Tarikh 2/31.

[^17]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 2/488 and al-Tabari: Tarikh 2/142.

[^18]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 2/206-7, al-Tabari’s Tarikh 2/157 and 286
and Yaqut al-Hamawi: Mu\`jam al-Buldan 1/94.

[^19]: Al-Tabari: Tarikh 2/358, Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 4/ 929, Ibn Kathir:
3/682 and al-Ya\`qubi: Tarikh.

[^20]: Al-Sam\`ani: al-Ansab 3/110 and Ikmal al-Kamal 1/327.

[^21]: Al-Bahrani: Madinat aul Maajiz; 2/267

[^22]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 2/488.

[^23]: Al-Ya\`qubi: Tarikh 2/63.


