The Divine Help
===============

Hisham, by the help of his personal talent, bravery and special
boldness, used to stand against the opponents of Wilayah and Imamate and
defend the Prophet's chaste household without any fear and anxiety. It
was because of this obstinacy and intrepidity that the caliph had
decided several times to kill him and at last due to anxiety, fear and
serious heart trouble, Hisham sacrificed his life.

Among his bold debates, there is a story which is quoted by Allamah
Mohsen Amin as follows:

One day, Yahya ibn Khaled Barmaki, the minister, asked Hisham in the
presence of the caliph Haroon al Rashid - Tell us, is it possible that a
right cause happens to face opposition from two sides and that the
beliefs of two persons who are quite different to each other (like two
poles) may be right or that both of their opinions may be correct?

Hisham: It is impossible.

Yahya: If two persons have different opinions regarding one and the same
religious matter, is it possible that both of them may be right or both
of them wrong?

Hisham: The reply of this question is also clear according to the
previous answer. It is not possible that both parties may be right. This
sort of thing is impossible and certainly one of them may be right and
the other wrong.

Yahya: (to put Hisham in an awkward position and provoke the wrath of
Haroon he said) So, O' Hisham, when Ali ibn Abi Taleb and Abbas[^1] ibn
Abdul Mutallib had disputes about the inheritance of the post of
caliphate, and put the arbitration before Abubakr\*: Who was right and
who was wrong.

Hisham (He thought to himself that if he would say that Ali was in the
wrong, he would become an infidel and would have exceeded the bounds of
religion. If he would say that Abbas's claim was futile and he was in
the wrong, then Haroon would order immediately to kill him. This was an
unusual problem and till that day this type of discussion had not
happened and he had no ready answer for this question before hand.)

Hisham thought of the sayings of Imam Al-Sadiq (a) who used to say:
"Till you defend our cause by the help of your speech, you will be
favoured by the Holy Spirit." So I became hopeful and understood that I
would not be condemned, insulted or defeated. Suddenly a reply occurred
to me I said: Neither Ali (a) nor Abbas was mistaken and neither of them
was in the wrong. Rather both of them were right and their difference
was not an actual difference and they had no conflict between
themselves, but apparently it seemed like that. Their story is just like
those two angels of the heaven who are mentioned in the Qur'an and they
took their dispute to Hazrat Dawood (a). So which angel was right and
which one had made a mistake? Or would you say that both of them were
wrong? Whatever would be your answer regarding that matter; my answer
would be the same regarding Ali (a) and Abbas.

Yahya: In my opinion, neither of these angels made a mistake rather both
of these angels were right. In fact, they had no dispute and the
exposition of their difference was only to attract the attention of
Hazrat Dawood (a) and to let him know of the Decree of God.

Hisham: Therefore, I would say regarding Ali (a) and Abbas that they had
no dispute concerning the matter of caliphate and in fact both of them
were of one and the same opinion. Their retelling of the dispute was
only to inform the caliph (Abubakr) about his mistake and their action
was similar to the action of those angels.

Yahya gave no answer at all. He was looking at Haroon amazed and
ashamed. The caliph who was very much impressed by Hisham's attractive
speech, applauded and praised him.  
 Â 

[^1]: Abbas was the uncle of the Prophet (s) and the ancestor of all
Abbaside Caliphs including Haroon, and for this reason, this dynasty of
Islamic Caliphate is called Abbasides


