Introduction
============

The mechanical life has taken the blessings away from many things,
especially from time and life. In our days, there is no one who lives a
natural life, and does not leave this world by natural death and does
not make the most of the opportunities available during his short
secular life.

There are very few people who make the most of those opportunities and
use every minute of their time collecting intellectual benefits. Most of
our time is devoted to worldly matters, and opportunities are wasted for
the sake of the material objectives. Most of our thoughts rotate around
the axis of economy. Our general goal is to attain worldly pleasure.
Human feelings have become the captive of desire and personal passion
and everything is at the disposal of human lust!

Really, how the years of life are spent so uselessly and rapidly;
opportunities flee without benefit so swiftly! In the past, when human
beings travelled on horses and camels, Amirul Mu'mineen Ali (a) used to
comment on the importance of time and the lapse of opportunities as
follows: "Make the most of your opportunities as they pass away swiftly
like the pieces of a cloud."

Today human beings are really puzzled when they examine the developments
and speeds of the modern means of transportation. They do not know to
which things in the past to compare these modern developments with. For
this reason the elite and learned men are of the opinion that today,
people do not have sufficient time to read long stories and voluminous
books.

Therefore, the storywriters and biographers try to summarize their
attempts and write as concisely as they can. According to them, the
characteristic of a good story is that it should be short and brief.
People are tired. They have no patience and time, especially for the
study of the accounts of a human life.

The study of the biographies of great heroes and distinguished men and
the study of their time periods and the acknowledgement of the truth and
reality of their features is very necessary for everyone in the present
circumstances.

This is especially true when haste and impatience are epidemic. On the
other hand, it is the cherished wish of every seeker of the real path
and code of life to know about the blazing and glorious heroes of
knowledge and faith. Therefore, it is very necessary to provide short
accounts of the lives of the champions of Islam to our young generation
as models.  
 Â 

The First University of Shi'a
-----------------------------

Undoubtedly, the second half of the second century of Hijra has been a
critical chapter in the history of Islam. At a time when Abbasids and
Umayyads were tearing each other apart like wild beasts to take the
reins of the Islamic dynasty into their own hands and like vultures,
they were attacking each other on the corpse of khilafat, the so-called
Islamic one, the true leaders grasped the suitable opportunity to expand
the realities of Islam and propagate the Qur'anic teachings. Two of our
exalted Imams took the most advantage of these opportunities.

The fifth Imam Hazrat Baqerul Ulum (the analyzer of science) (a) laid
the foundation of a university and prepared the way in such a manner
that all interested people were attracted there and all seekers of
knowledge gathered around to acquire different sciences from all over
the world.

Similarly, our 6th Imam Ja'far b. Muhammad (a) could teach thousands of
capable persons in the different fields of arts and sciences and
introduced the Shi'a Ja'fary sect to the world. Actually he presented
the real outlook of Islam to the people of the world because the
realities of Islam were changed completely during the caliphate of
Umayyads and Marwans. This was due to the improper acts of the caliphs
and the people were bewildered and puzzled.

Numbers of Students
-------------------

Shaikh at-Tusi has mentioned the total number of the followers of Imam
al-Baqer (a) as 484 persons and the total number of the students of Imam
al-Sadiq (a) as 3197 men and 12 women, in his book Rijal (the
biographies of the transmitters of the prophetic traditions). It is
obvious that these numbers refer only to those persons whose names are
individually mentioned in different books or are famous.

Otherwise, there were many others who were not famous or their names
were not mentioned and have been forgotten. The learned men have written
about the numbers of the students and those who flourished under Imam
Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) as two thousand persons, just in the great Mosque of
Kufa alone who used to come and listen to his lectures. Therefore, the
number of students should be more than this in all other centres and
towns.

In fact, each of these liberal men is a burning candle and a shining
star. So to have the knowledge and information about the life of each of
them is a must for every Muslim because their lives are marked by
bravery and chivalry. Undoubtedly, every one can change his mode of life
and can rediscover the real path of life by reading the stories of their
lives.

So our aim is to manifest the biography of the youngest man of this
group of great personalities along with some of his adventurous acts -
the perfect man, the pupil of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) namely Hisham ibn
Hakam. We want to present one of the greatest champions of Islam to the
young generation. Maybe we can learn a lesson from the story of his
continuous efforts in the path to reach the target and his unparalleled
devotion to defending the cause of Wilayah (trusteeship).


