Who is Hisham?
==============

Hisham is one of the best scholars and authorities of Islam. He was
famous for his knowledge and virtue among the learned men of his time.
He was a genius and a gifted improviser and due to his good sense of
taste and capability he used to be victorious over all of his rivals in
debate and speech; the champion who was never defeated, the man whose
tongue was sharper than a sword. Indeed, he is recognized as one of the
greatest champions and the most distinguished supporters of Wilayah
(trusteeship). It was Hisham who originally put the topics of Imamate
and Wilayah (trusteeship) forward on the basis of wisdom and logic; and
he proved himself to be fully competent for this task.

Abu Muhammad or Abul Hakam Hisham ibn Hakam Kendi
-------------------------------------------------

Although most of the writers have written his name as Hisham ibn Hakam
and they know him as the son of "Hakam", an inhabitant of Kufa, in some
of the books written by modern writers,[^1] the name of his father has
been mentioned as Yazid. According to this source Hisham had a brother
who was one of the Hadith relaters.

His brother had two sons and one daughter; and one of those two sons was
very famous in the field of rhetoric. Most of the writers have mentioned
Kufa as Hisham's birthplace; so he is known as Hisham ibn Hakam from
Kufa. Some mention Baghdad and a few name Waset, near Basra as his birth
place. Perhaps this mistake occurred because Hisham passed his early
life in Waset and a part of his life in Baghdad.

There is a dispute regarding his descent also. Some have mentioned him
as "Maula Bani-Kandah"[^2] or "Maula Bani Shayban".[^3] As the term
"Maula" was used for non-Arabs, so it means that he did not belong to an
Arab race. Some think him to be descended from Bani-Khazaya[^4]- the
largest Arab tribe. Then there would be no doubt that he belongs to an
Arab race.

The exact year of the birth of Hisham is also not written in any book,
but we understand from different sources that he was born in Kufa,[^5]
the centre of Iraqi's Shi'as, in the beginning of the second century of
Hijra. He passed a part of his childhood in Waset and grew up there.
Afterwards he lived a few years in Baghdad in the Karkh area where he
was conducting some business.  
 Â 

The Business Activities of Hisham
---------------------------------

It is clear by studying the biography of Hisham that he not only
acquired knowledge, fought for the cause of religion and conducted
campaigns and debates against the infidels and unbelievers in Wilayah
(trusteeship), but also he was active in the business of selling
fabrics. As Hisham himself states: One day while he was busy selling the
Saberi[^6] fabric under a shaded tree, the seventh Imam Musa ibn Ja'far
(a) happened to ride by. He turned his face to me and said, "O Hisham,
selling something in the shadows is similar to cheating, and cheating is
unlawful in Islam."[^7]

[^1]: Hisham ibn Hakam- written by: Ahmad Safai, P.14.

[^2]: "Rejal"- by Abu 'Amr Kashi

[^3]: "One of the Mawalis of Bani Sheiban, and inhabitant of Baghdad".
Al- Fehrist Ibn Nadim.

[^4]: "Hisham ibn al-Hakam" by Abdullah Na'mah, quoted from - Ketab -
Ta'sis al- Shia by Sayyid Sadr.

[^5]: Hisham ibn Hakam - by Ahmad Safai, pg.10.

[^6]: A Kind of delicate and costly silk which was woven in those days
in Sabur, Persia, and it was very difficult to distinguish the complete
characteristics of that cloth in darkness and shadow.

[^7]: Al Fehrist of Ibn Nadim Hassan, a poet during the time of the
Prophet (s) whose odes including "Ghadirieh", are famous.


