The First Meeting of Hisham with Imam (a)
=========================================

Hisham's first meeting and contact with the light of Wilayah, Imam
Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a), happened after an evolution through different
religions and the deep deliberation of the philosophical schools and
also the compilation of his book - Refutation of Aristotle.

It is quoted that he was first introduced to the Imam (a) by his uncle,
Umar ibn Yazid ibn Zebyan.[^1] This meeting was arranged by him. Umar
ibn Yazid, who was himself a follower of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) says:

"From the beginning Hisham, my brother's son was the follower of Jahm
ibn Safvan, one of the leaders of the Mo'atazalah sect and also one of
the followers of the Jahamiyah sect.[^2] He was a young, witty and
impudent person. He had heard about the attributes of the Imam (a). One
day, he requested me to present him to Imam al-Sadiq (a) to have a
discussion with him (Imam (a)). As I was aware that Hisham was bold and
rude, I said:

"I would not do this without his permission."

Then I visited the Imam (a) and asked his permission for Hisham's visit.
The Imam said: "Let him come".

After I went a few steps away from the house of the Imam (a) I
remembered Hisham's audacity and meanness. I said to myself perhaps
Hisham might speak impertinently in the presence of the Imam, so I
returned and said (to the Imam):

"Hisham is such and such."

The Imam said: "O Umar, perhaps you are afraid of the meeting of Hisham
with me."

I became ashamed of myself and understood that I had made a big mistake.
Embarrassed I came out of the Imam's house and told Hisham to go to the
Imam (a).

When Hisham entered, he asked about his own problems and difficult
matters and he received their correct answers.

Then the Imam (a) also asked him a few questions. But as Hisham was
amazed and bewildered (due to this being the first meeting with the Imam
(a)) he asked for a deadline of a few days. He returned after a few days
to the Imam but without any reply to the Imam's questions. He requested
him to reply to those questions. The Imam answered all those questions
and solved his problems. Again the Imam (a) asked a few more questions
which were related to the invalidity of the Jahmiyah sect (until that
very day Hisham was a follower of that sect). Hisham again asked for
more time.

After a few days later, Hisham again asked me (Umar ibn Yazid) to go to
the Imam's (a) residence and obtain permission to see him. When I went
to see him (the Imam (a)) and asked for the permission, the Imam (a)
told me about a place named "'Herah" and said:

"I shall be there tomorrow."

When I went to Hisham and told him about this matter, he became happy.

On the fixed day, Hisham reached there earlier than the Imam (a). Hisham
says:

"While I was waiting there, suddenly Imam al-Sadiq (a) appeared in the
far distance riding on a donkey, in great show. As he came nearer and
nearer, I was impressed more and more by his greatness and splendour.
Then he stopped and waited for me to say something. But I was so
overwhelmed by his splendour that I could not speak a word. I believed
that this formidableness was from God and it was due to the respect and
position which the Imam (a) had before God."

Umar ibn Yazid says:

"This was the very meeting that changed Hisham. He left his previous
sect (religion) and was converted whole-heartedly to the true religion.
From that time on he was always in the presence of the 6th Imam (a)."
[^3]

The late Mamghani writes:

"Hisham asked the Imam (a) about five hundred problems and questions in
his first meeting and received correct answers for all of them. As a
result he was so much enchanted by the divine greatness of the Imam (a)
that as long as he was alive, he was the greatest defender of the
Wilayah of the Ahlul Bayt (the guardianship of the Prophet's household
(a))."[^4]  
 Â 

[^1]: This chapter (the first meeting) is quoted from the book - Rejal
Kashi.

[^2]: The Moatazalah sect is affected by Jahmiyah sect and have accepted
all the teachings of Jaham ibn Safwan except the Problem of Jabr
(compulsion) Jamaluddin Qasemi Damishqi has mentioned the "Moatazalah"
sect as one of the branches of the Jahmiyah sect, in his book (History
of al-Jahmiyah and al-Moatazalah), and has attributed most of the latest
problems of the speculative theologians of Ash'ari to Jahmiyah.

[^3]: Rejal by Kashi.

[^4]: Tanghih al-Maghal by Mamghani; "Usul Kafi" vol.2. Pg. 13: all 500
problems and questions belonged to theological complications.


