The Debate of Hisham with the chief of the Kharajites (Khawarej)
================================================================

Hisham, who was never defeated in debates, was a universal champion and
his fame spread every where. He was always victorious over his opponents
in every debate. Every one was anxious to witness his debates. Haroon,
the most powerful caliph of the time, who was to a certain extent among
the opponents, was also more anxious than others to watch the discussion
and the speech of Hisham.

So one day, he ordered Yahya ibn Khaled, his minister to arrange a
meeting and put Hisham face to face with Abdullah ibn Yazid Abazi,[^1]
the chief of the Kharajites,[^2] who was also one of the famous learned
men of the time. The caliph also sat in a secret place behind the
curtain in such a manner that he was able to listen to their discussions
clearly but they could not see him.

Then the caliph ordered Yahya ibn Khaled Barmaki to ask Abdullah to put
forth his questions to Hisham. Yahya, by the order of Haroon, turned his
face to Abdullah and said: "Put forth your questions to Aba Muhammad,
Hisham." Hisham (by taking this opportunity) said: "The Khawarej have no
right to ask us about anything."

Abdullah -Why is this so?

Hisham - Because you were the people who first believed as we did in the
justice of the man (i.e. Amirul Mu'mineen Ali (a), his Imamate and
virtue, and then separated yourself from us and initiated intrigues and
enmity with him. As we still have the same belief, so your first faith
and agreement is a proof for us; your later opposition and enmity does
not harm us and your arrogation is not accepted as an injury to us. This
is so because the contradiction made after acceptance is not effective,
your witnessing as an enemy of mine is acceptable if it is useful to me
as your enemy. But if it is harmful to me as your enemy it is
unacceptable.

Yahya ibn Khaled - O Hisham, you have almost defeated Abdullah and have
brought him to the verge of defeat at the edge of a cliff. However,
treat him moderately, as the caliph wants you to continue the discussion
with him (although he did not hint at all that the caliph was present
behind the curtain).

Hisham - I am ready for debate, but there is a difficult point. The
point is that it may be possible that our discussion may be lengthy and
reach a place where there may occur some problems and complications and
both of us may not accept the reality due to obstinacy, enmity and the
critical nature of the topic. If it is advisable then appoint someone as
a judge between us so that he may he able to make us return at the time
of our deviation from the right path.

Abdullah - By God, Abu Muhammad (Hisham) has suggested a just proposal.

Hisham - Now, that it is time to appoint a referee; who should be this
referee and a follower of which religion? Should he be one of my
supporters or one of your friends? Should he oppose both of our beliefs
or be opposed to the Muslim community and Islam?

Abdullah - You should select anyone whom you like, because you are a
just man and I am satisfied with your selection.

Hisham - In my opinion it is a difficult task because if that judge
comes from among my supporters then you will not be safe from his party
spirit; and if he comes from among your supporters then I may not be
safe. On the contrary, if he is from among the opponents and against
both of our beliefs, then none of us may be safe from the harm of his
unjustified arbitration. Then it is advisable that one man from each
side oversees our speech; and witnesses our discussion and debate and
arbitrates according to justice and fairness.

Abdullah - Very well, it is a just suggestion and I was also expecting
the same from you.

Then, Hisham turned his face towards Yahya and said: "O Vizir
(minister), be a witness that I have disapproved of his reasoning and
have condemned him and have made him helpless. He has nothing to say
anymore and I also do not need to debate with him."

Haroon shook the curtain and said to Yahya: "What does this Shia
(Mutakallem) theologian say? He is still discussing with Abdullah about
the rules and regulations, and the introduction of the topic. He has not
yet started the actual debate. How he is claiming that he has condemned
him and discarded his religion? Ask Hisham to prove his claim."

Yahya turned his face towards Hisham and said: "Amirul Mu'mineen
(Haroon) orders you to prove the truth of your claim and explain how
have you condemned this learned man and nullified the Kharajite sect?

Hisham - Is it not true that in the beginning these Kharajites were of
the same opinion as we were concerning the matter of Imamate and the
Wilayah of Amirul Mu'mineen (a), until the problem of the arbitration
occurred in the Battle of Siffin? They acted rudely and shamelessly
towards Amirul Mu'mineen (a) and called him an infidel because of the
acceptance of the arbitration although they themselves compelled him
(Hazrat) to accept this matter. Now this learned man who is himself
respectable and reliable among his followers, has accepted the
arbitration and judgement of the two men without any compulsion and
force - one of these two men is my follower who is an infidel according
to his Khawarijite belief and the other is his own supporter. Both of
them have different beliefs and are opposed to each other. Now if he is
right in choosing the arbitration and has chosen the right path, then
there is no cause for him to criticize Amirul Mu'mineen (a) who is more
worthy and wise. And if he has made a mistake then he is himself an
infidel and his wickedness does not harm us. He has given evidence of
his own infidelity. So first it is most necessary to check out his
infidelity and his faith, enabling us to see whether he is himself an
infidel or a Muslim. This is necessary before checking his opinion
regarding the matter of the infidelity of Ali (a).

When the discussion of Hisham reached this point, Haroon became uneasy
because of the clear reasoning and knockout proofs of Hisham. But he was
so enchanted by his speech that he involuntarily applauded him and
ordered to give him a reward. It is to be noted that Hisham was skilful
in the practical sciences, and it is a fact that his discussions and
speeches have been completely based upon intellectual, philosophical and
theological reasoning in addition, as we noticed in the above story, he
has used his own particular technique and has defeated his opponents.  
 Â 

[^1]: In some books, the name of the father of Abdullah has been
recorded as Zayd, which is apparently wrong.

[^2]: Kharajites area group of people who were at first the followers of
Imam Ali (a) and Shias. Then at the Battle of Siffin, due to the
insistence of the army, the problem of arbitration occured. According to
this, one person from Mu'awiyah's side and one person from Imam Ali's
(a) side should be appointed and whatever they announced, all other
people should obey their decision. Contrary to the desire of Amirul
Mu'minin, Abu Musa Ashary was appointed from Ali's side and Amr As from
Mu'awiyah's side was appointed for this purpose. After some time Amr As
cheated him cleverly and cunningly and the story ended in favour of
Mu'awiyah. As a result of this trickery a group came out as opponents
against Ali (a) and said: Ali (a), because you accepted the arbitration
of Mu'awiyah and Amr As who were infidels, we do not accept you anymore.
Their slogan was: "There is no verdict except that of Allah." At last
Ibn Muljim, who was one of them, killed Ali (a).


