Translator's Note
=================

Not a single one of the governments in the 55 Muslim countries today
has implemented an Islamic system of government. Some of these
governments may claim to practice Islam but in reality that is about as
far as they would go in this respect. Of course the Muslim people in
various countries aspire to see a truly Islamic system of government
established. In some countries with a predominantly Muslim population,
Islamist activists have managed to form an effective opposition to the
ruling governments. Such oppositions offer an alternative based on the
teaching of Islam to the status quo.

In some Muslim countries there is conflict between the Muslim activists
who want to see a system of government of their choice, preferably that
based on the teachings of Islam, and others who have imposed their own
system of government.

One of the main causes of these difficulties is the ignorance of
Islam's teachings. On the one hand, when some Muslims attempt to
implement Islam, because of their incorrect and incomplete understanding
of the teachings of Islam, they do not succeed to implement a system
that is intended by Islam. In fact in that way they manage to distort
the picture of Islam.

On the other hand, there is also a systematic stereotyping against
Islam and Muslims and a relentless campaign to distort the image and the
teachings of Islam. As a result, the misconception has developed which
portrays Islam as a system of violence, intolerance, denial of women's
right, and the list goes on. Whereas on the contrary Islam stresses
non-violence, tolerance, safeguarding women's right in particular and
human right in general to an extent that is not available under any
other system in the world today.

In this book the author presents the teachings of Islam in a brief and
simple manner. This book particularly addresses those Islamists who have
created an effective and viable opposition to the ruling system in their
countries. It is also anticipated that this book would outline the
approach that should be taken by those Muslims who are striving to
establish a system of their choice.

When correct teachings of Islam are suitably implemented, this will not
only result in the desired outcome, but it will also show others -
primarily the non-Muslims - the truth about Islam. It is an unfortunate
fact that incorrect and un-Islamic practices by Muslims are usually
reflected as being the 'teachings' of Islam. If one wants to see the
real Islam in action, one should consider the practices of the Messenger
of Allah, Muhammad peace be upon him, when he formed a true Islamic
government. The book outlines the fundamental aspects of government
according to the teachings of Islam, and the policies that a newly
established Islamic government need to take if it were to establish an
Islamic system of government. The book would also serve as a yardstick
for anyone to check the practices of any government that claims to have
implemented an Islamic system of government.

Originally written in Arabic, the title of the book was "If Islam were
to be established in Iraq". The book was translated since it was
considered that its argument is applicable for people who wish to
implement Islam in any other country. In this book, the author
emphasises on some of the most important aspects of government such as:
"System of Consultation for Leadership" that is supported by
constitutional establishments, Multi-party pluralism, Freedoms (such as
freedom of belief, thought, expression, education), Non-Violence,
Revival of the single Muslim Ommah, Economic self-sufficiency, . . . all
within the framework defined by Islam.

The author discusses the issues raised in this brief outline in details
in many of his other books. In his works the author emphasises the
necessity of adherence to all the teachings of Islam as a complete
system and failure to comply with some of the Islamic laws in some
aspects would fail to give the desired outcome in the long run. This is
because the various issues in life are inter-related and the teachings
of Islam are also based on the same system. Therefore any deviations
from the teachings of Islam in one respect would inevitably result in
failing in another.

Islam defines a set of teachings within a framework that is in harmony
with the human nature, as referred to in the Qur'an: " . . . the
original nature according to which Allah fashioned mankind."1 It is for
such reasons that make the Islamic laws dynamic and vigorous since they
are in total harmony with man's needs.

Adherence to Islamic laws can only be beneficial to mankind, while if
he opts out of these laws he would simply lose out. To use an analogy,
if someone refuses to obey the physical laws of nature, he will have to
face the consequences in the short or long term. For example, if he
refuses to accept that boiling water could seriously endanger his
health, and immerses his hand in it, then he would have to face the
consequences of his refusal. The same applies to compliance with Islamic
laws, which affect mankind in various domains, such as personal, social,
political, economical.

Therefore if there are any restrictions in Islamic law, they are in the
same way similar to the requirement to comply with the physical laws of
nature, which are, normally, totally adhered to by mankind. The author
addresses the issue of government as well as other related issues in a
number of his books. For more in depth insight into the teachings of
Islam on the issue of government, the reader is referred to the author's
work some of which are:

Government in Islam,volume 99 of the al-Fiqh series.

The Rights,volume 100 of the al-Fiqh series. Islamic Government,volumes
101-102 of the al-Fiqh. Politics,volumes 105-106 of the al-Fiqh.
Economics,volumes 107-108 of the al-Fiqh. Society,volumes 109-110 of the
al-Fiqh. Peace,volume 135 of the al-Fiqh series. Freedoms,volume 139 of
the al-Fiqh series. Law,volume 140 of the al-Fiqh series. The Path of
Salvation,volume 150 of the al-Fiqh series. Leaders of Islam: the
Prophet of Islam in Makkah and Medina The holy Qur'an: the Greek [^30]:
30.

Towards Islamic Renaissance The Islamic System and Contemporary Systems
This is the Islamic System (of government) Islamic Freedom Basics of
Islamic Government A preview of the Islamic banking A preview of Islamic
Law on Wealth and Labour Consultation in Islam The Means to Awaken the
Muslims The Process of Change to Rescue the Muslims The Salvation of the
Muslims How to Unite the Muslims Towards the Government of 1000 million
Muslims Towards the Government of Islam Islamic System of Government
Islamic System of Government: its Principles, Aims The Islamic
government during the reign of Imam Ali.

To achieve a universal Islamic government The government of the
Messenger of Allah and Imam Ali The Islamic Economy in 50 questions and
answers The Islamic Economy in brief Comparative Islamic Economy Economy
for All Solution to economic problems in the light of Islamic law And
for the first time in the history of the world The New Order for the
World of Faith, Freedom, Welfare, and Peace Justice - the foundation of
government The first Islamic government in the holy city of Medina The
destruction of Islamic governments through the persecution of
(religious) scholars Finally the translator wishes to express his
gratitude to friends and colleagues for their contribution to the task
of translating this book. Words or sentences within brackets ( ), as
well as explanatory footnotes, are added by the translator for
clarification.


**Z. Olyabek
February 2003**


