The Author
==========

Ayatollah al-Udhma Imam Muhammad Shirazi is undoubtedly the most
eminent Marje' or Religious Authority of Muslim world. A charismatic
leader who is known for his high moral values, modesty and spirituality,
Imam Shirazi is a mentor and a source of aspiration to millions of
Muslims; and the means of access to authentic knowledge and teachings of
Islam. He has tirelessly devoted himself, and his entire life, to the
cause of Islam and Muslims in particular, and to that of mankind in
general. He has made extensive contributions in various fields of
learning ranging from Jurisprudence and Theology to Government,
Politics, Economics, Law, Sociology and Human Rights.

Born in Najaf, Iraq, in 1347 AH, 1928 AD, the young Shirazi continued
his studies of different branches of learning under the guidance of
various eminent scholars and specialists, as well as his father, the
renowned Marje' of the time, Ayatollah al-Udhma Mirza Mahdi Shirazi. In
the course of his training he showed an outstanding talent and a
remarkable appetite for learning as well as a tireless commitment to his
work and the cause he believed in. His extraordinary ability, and
effort, earned him the recognition at the age of 25, by the Maraje' and
scholars of the time, of being a Mujtahid, a fully qualified religious
scholar and lawmaker in the sciences of Islamic jurisprudence and law.
He was subsequently able to assume the office of the Marje' at the early
age of 33 in 1380 AH, 1961.

Imam Shirazi is distinguished for his intellectual ability and holistic
vision. He has written various specialized studies that are considered
to be among the most important references in the relevant fields. He has
enriched the world with his staggering contribution of more than 1000
books, treatise and studies on various branches of learning. His works
range from introductory works for the youth to literary and scientific
masterpieces. Deeply rooted in the Holy Qur'an and the teachings of the
Prophet of Islam, his vision and theories cover such areas as
Legislation, Management, Environment, Sociology, Theology, Philosophy,
History Human Rights, Law and Islamic beliefs or doctrine. His work on
Islamic Jurisprudence (the al-Fiqh series) for example constitutes 150
volumes, which run into more than 70,000 pages. Through his original
thoughts and ideas he has championed the causes of issues such as the
family, human rights, freedom of expression, political pluralism,
non-violence, and Shura or consultative system of leadership.

Throughout his life, because of his total dedication to the Teachings
of Islam, and because of his views on various issues, which are based on
those teachings, he came under sustained pressure from the authorities
in Iraq as well as in Iran. His views on, and his call for issues such
as freedom of expression, party political pluralism, peace and
non-violence brought about the wrath of the authorities in Iran. His
uncompromising stance on implementing the teachings of Islam in all
aspects of government including such vital matters as leadership by
consensus or Showral-Foqaha'-al-Maraje' (religious authorities' council
of leadership) attracted the fury of those at the helm.

He was therefore forced into house arrest for more than twenty years.
His staff, followers, and family members were subjected to continued
harassment, arbitrary arrest and torture.

Having spent the entire of his adult life striving for the greater
enlightenment of the Muslims and mankind, Imam Shirazi died in
suspicious circumstances in the holy city of Qum, Iran, on Monday the
2nd Shawwal 1422 AH, 17th December 2001. More than half a million people
attended his funeral procession the following day. Imam Shirazi believed
in the fundamental and elementary nature of freedom in mankind. He used
to call for freedom of expression, political plurality, debate and
discussion, tolerance and forgiveness.

He strongly believed in the consultative system of leadership and calls
for the establishment of the leadership council of religious
authorities. He continuously called for the establishment of the
universal Islamic government to encompass all the Muslim countries.
These and other ideas are discussed in detail in his books of more than
1000.


