Preface
=======

Praise be to the Lord of the worlds and Blessing and Peace be upon the
noblest Messenger of Allah, Muhammad and his amiable and pure progeny,
and the anathema of Allah be upon their enemies.

When Islam was first established (as a system), the most important
factor that attracted people to Islam was the values it upheld and the
respect, facility and help it gave to mankind. For this reason, the
Messenger of Allah, Muhammad - peace be upon him and his infallible
descendants (S)2 - needed only to introduce the concept of Islam and
practice it. This was the secret of Islam's rapid and enormous progress.
In fact, when Makkah surrendered to the Messenger of Allah (S), he
forgave all (those who had fought him).

Along with the rest of the Muslims, he did not reclaim the houses (and
businesses) that had been usurped by the pagans after they had been
forced out of Makkah. Instead they lived in tents they erected in the
desert. Needless to say, until it surrendered to the Messenger of Allah,
Makkah was the capital of the pagans and the idolaters. It was the
centre of the force behind all the hot and cold wars planned and
executed against the Messenger of Allah (S).

Such conduct, in addition to many others, such as non-violence, good
manners, etc. were amongst the best ingredients contributing to the
stability and good reputation of Islam. That is why, to secure the
stability of the capital of paganism after conquering it, the Messenger
of Allah (S) did not have to create an army or a police force, nor other
forms of security forces for Makkah. The people of Makkah turned out to
be its own guardians and assistants by practicing Islam. They turned out
to be some of Islam's greatest supporters after being its staunchest
enemies. The Messenger of Allah (S) appointed only one person from the
people of Makkah to act as its governor and set a limited salary for him
to live on as an ordinary citizen. The It is a mark of piety in Islam to
use this salutation (sall-allah alayhi wa aalih) when mentioning the
name of the holy Prophet Muhammad.

Messenger of Allah, (S), had a similar policy for every district or
tribe that accepted his message. This is in addition to the fact that
the Messenger of Allah, (S), lived simply throughout his sacred life,
before and after his prophet-hood and throughout his life as a
statesman, until he died. Because of his simple life style, people used
to say about him, "He lived amongst us like one of us". He used to be
kind to his enemies in accordance to Allah's recommendation in the holy
Qur'an:

Allah forbids you not, with regard to those who fight you not for
(your) Faith nor drive you out of your homes, from dealing kindly and
justly with them: for Allah loves those who are just.3 Equally he used
to be kind to Muslims in accordance to the statement of Allah in the
Qur'an:

It is part of the Mercy of Allah that you deal gently with them. Had
you been severe or harsh-hearted, they would have broken away from
around you ...4 and Now has come unto you a Messenger from amongst
yourselves: it grieves him that you should perish: he is ardently
anxious over you: to the Believers he is most kind and merciful.5 So,
too, were the policies of Amir\_ol\_Mu'meneen (the Commander of the
Faithful), Imam Ali6.

If, by the will of Allah the Almighty, Islam were to be established
again, the same policies that were adopted by the Messenger of Allah,
(S), must be implemented in government - taking into account The holy
Qur'an: The Tested (Woman) [^60]: 8. The holy Qur'an: The Family of
'Emran [^3]: 159. 5The holy Qur'an: Repentance [^9]: 128. For more details
about the way of life of the noblest Messenger of Allah of Islam (S)
see:

"For the First time in the History of the World", "Aromatic Bouquet",
"The Aromatic Tradition", . . . by the author. 6See "The Islamic
Government During the Reign of Amir\_ul\_Mo'meneen", and "The
Governments of the Messenger of Allah and Amir\_ul\_Mo'meneen" by the
author.

the time factor. It is also necessary for rulers to practice what Imam
Ali peace be upon him (A)7 said: Whoever wants to follow a policy, let
him follow the Tradition of his Prophet (Muhammad (S)) otherwise he
should not feel safe from doom.

Therefore, if the policies of the Messenger of Allah (S) are practiced,
Islam will flourish and Muslims will progress and prosper just as they
did during the time of the Messenger of Allah (S). Otherwise Islam would
not be safe from falling into disrepute and its position waning to an
extent that no Muslim, or anyone who loves the truth, would ever wish to
see. This book, "If Islam were to be established in Iraq" is an outline
of some of the policies adopted from the noble Tradition of the holy
Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (S), taking into account the time factor.

May Allah awaken the rulers to implement the policies of the Messenger
of Allah so that Muslims prosper in this world and in the hereafter;
surely Allah is the Facilitator and the Helper.


Muhammad Shirazi
Holy City of Qum
1st Rabee' II, 1415 Hejri (1995)

It is also a mark of piety to use the salutation alayhi-salam (peace be
upon him) on mentioning one of the prophets or one of the Imams of the
household of the prophet Muhammad.


