Preventing Bloodshed
====================

Bloodshed inevitably leads to the destruction and downfall of a
government. The Messenger of Allah (S) is quoted as saying:

Anyone who aids in the murder of a Muslim, even by uttering a single
word, will arrive on the day of Judgement with the phrase "Despondent
from the Mercy of Allah" written between his eyes. The reverse countdown
to the downfall of a system of government begins when it delves in the
murder and bloodshed of the people.

People cannot tolerate the murder of their sons, brothers, sisters,
fathers, relatives and friends, etc. They will pick its faults and
errors and aim for its downfall. They will denounce its authority and
turn public opinion against the regime. A regime that does not rely on
the backing of the masses loses the mandate for staying in power.

The downfall of a ruler whose hands are stained with the blood of his
subjects, begins with an odd killing here and a murder there, until such
killings accumulate and lead to his downfall. Especially if the regime
was founded upon the murder of individuals under the pretext that one
belongs to a particular rival group, or an opposing political party or a
religious sect. The regime may even attempt to eliminate its opponents
through false accusations such as arms or drug trafficking charges, and
subjecting them to mock show trials under the banner of law, which give
the impression of being legal and protecting the state security. Through
such illusionary practices, the regime aims to strengthen its position
in power. Clearly, this is one of the greatest factors in the downfall
of governments, since a government needs the greatest amount of popular
support and legal authority to survive.

If such support is not at the government's disposal then not only would
it be heading towards a downfall, but also its supporters will
ultimately become part of the opposition.

I have seen many governments, and history shows us many others, that
had the potential to reign hundreds of years, but they survived only a
few years because of their murderous campaign against the people.

The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (S), did not kill even the murderer of
his most beloved uncle Hamzah nor the murderer of his daughter Zaynab
along with her child. This was not because they did not deserve to be
killed, but for reasons mentioned earlier. Also Imam Ali (A) forgave all
the war criminals taken prisoners during the three battles he engaged in
during his reign. Are these not great lessons for those who want to
establish Islam?

If, on the other hand, the (newly established Islamic) government was
compelled to use force in order to implement the rule of law, it is
imperative that that does not surpass imprisonment in the specific
cases, which are very few indeed, and some simple fines. This of course
must be prescribed through the legal and humanitarian courts of law,
which provide all the guarantees necessary to carry out justice.8

In this way, a criminal may be prevented from carrying out activities
without defiling a revolution with blood. Other factors, which weaken a
government, are practices like torturing and terrorising the people,
confiscating their wealth and properties, disseminating false
accusations, or even personal sleaze, slander and scandals, etc.

For more details in this respect see al-Fiqh series, vol. 100, "Rights"
and al- Fiqh series, vols. 101-102, "Islamic Government" by the
author.

**General Amnesty**

It is imperative for the newly established Islamic government to
announce general amnesty for anyone who has committed a crime before the
advent of the Islamic government. This is of utmost importance, from one
viewpoint, and of immense difficulty from another. A general amnesty
gives reassurance to people about (the intentions of) the new
government. In turn, this act would secure their co- operation with the
new government. It would lead to stability and security at a time when
the government direly needs widespread support and co-operation from the
masses. We see that the Messenger of Allah (S) announced amnesty for the
people of Makkah. Similarly, Amir\_ol\_Mu'meneen, Ali (A) pardoned the
people of Basra and the people of Nahrawan when he overcame their
rebellion.

Non-forgiveness will lead to untold difficulties for the new government
as the killing and prosecution will not be confined to one place, but
will spread to larger areas, just as ripples propagate on the surface of
water. In addition, a consequence of not forgiving is confiscation of
wealth. Both killing and confiscation generate enemies who sometimes
manage to topple a new government as we have seen in many countries.

Furthermore, non-forgiveness incites unrest throughout the country.
This results in the loss of the government's valour and reputation and
subsequently in its failure. Allah states in the Qur'an: . . and fall
into no disputes, lest you lose heart and your power depart . . . If the
agencies of the young government become embroiled in killing,
confiscation and animosity, it would provoke its opponents The holy
Qur'an: The Public Estate [^8]: 46.

and encourage them to open old wounds and to engage in activities
against the government. This would lead the government into more and
more troubles, at a time when the new government should be engaged in
tackling the country's old problems and not creating new ones that
prevent it from developing the country. The general amnesty is a
fundamental principle and if there is to be an exception, it is
imperative that measures are taken accordingly as and when absolutely
necessary.

**Good Reputation**

Usually an individual wants to live in a society with a good
reputation. If an individual, whether a public figure such as a leader
or an ordinary person such as a businessman, loses his good reputation,
people would at least distance themselves from the individual, if not
remove him from his position.

Similarly, a group or an organisation has the same fate as an
individual. If a government loses its reputation and people lose their
confidence in it, the government would fall and be replaced by another
one under a democratic system. In an undemocratic system, however, the
government would fall through a popular uprising and suchlike, as we
have seen with despotic regimes throughout history. The use of arms,
secret service and false propaganda would be of little help to save the
government from falling.

Imam Ali (A) said: "The opinion-minded person is doomed." Reason
ensures the continuity of life and if mankind - whether an individual or
a group - replaces reason with dogmatic attitude, sooner or later this
will lead to the destruction of the individual or the group concerned.
It is incumbent, therefore, upon the new Islamic government to ensure
that its good reputation remains untarnished. This may not be possible
unless the government relies on consultative system and remains popular,
humble, of service to the people and adheres to Islamic jurisdiction.
The Muslim masses - who are the overwhelming majority in Muslim
countries - would not tolerate even a civil servant who does not adhere
to Islamic law, let alone a head of state.

The head of state or for that matter, any individual serving in the
government should not assume that he could disregard major or minor
Islamic legislation even covertly since the Almighty has stated:

And say: "Work (righteousness): soon will Allah observe your work, and
His Messenger, and the Believers . . ."10 The holy Qur'an: Repentance
[^9]: 105.

**Action before Slogan**

Decent members of society are generally dismayed by hollow slogans.
More often than not, dishonest and scurrilous individuals use slogans
that are offensive to others. It is therefore important to avoid the use
of any slogans, except when absolutely necessary. Adherence to empty
slogans might be considered to be useful in the short term, but in fact
it is harmful since it distracts the attention and focus from the
essence of deed to mere words. Moreover its effect is temporary and
would not last long.

The slogan of a successful Islamic party used to be: "work and do not
talk." The party thus managed to free its country from the grip of
colonial powers that had lasted more than a century. Some of those who
look at short-term objectives align their policies with slogans, but do
not take any action in line with the slogans. However, responsible
individuals follow the agenda that is logically and rationally planned
and studied.

Imam Sadiq (A) has said, when addressing his followers: "Invite people
(to Islam) without the use of your tongues." 11 'deed' and 'action' is
the measure of life, not just mere 'words'. So Slogans usually
exaggerate facts more than reality, which could prove
counter-productive. For example if you claimed to have established a
hundred organisations (to provide services to the community) whereas in
reality you have only ninety, people would doubt your accomplishment and
deny even the ninety organisations you have established.

However, if you kept a low profile and concentrated your efforts on
your activities and improving your performance, people would trust That
is you should invite them to Islam through your conduct and behaviour.

you and would appreciate your achievement greatly. People trust a
hardworking individual who keeps quiet and credit him with more than his
dues, whereas they tend to suspect the one who boasts about his
activities. They would credit him less than his dues and may even deny
his deed even if he had truly achieved. It is therefore important that
the deed of a person (or an organisation) is more than just words.
Action should not even equal words, let alone be less. Slogan is words
whereas reality is the deed. For this reason, it said that one should be
prepared for his enemy in two situations: First if his adversary
observes him doing something with a worrying outcome. Second if he is
sabre rattling i.e. if he is making claims greater than his capacity and
reality, because this means he is heading in the wrong direction.

One problem with slogans is that it attracts the greed and temptation
of friends whereas the person who makes such claims is more often than
not, unable to fulfil their demands. As a result he loses even their
friendship. Furthermore, slogans provoke the enemy since making great
claims directs the attention (of others) to the person making the claim
and the enemies would assume that he has great resources based on the
claims he makes.

Therefore, on the basis of his claims, friends expect more from him
while foes are provoked to destroy or incapacitate him so that he does
not gain the upper hand.

**Constitution**

The constitution and law in an Islamic system of government differ from
those in democratic countries. The constitution in the Islamic system is
based on the noble Qur'an, the sacred Teachings of the Messenger of
Allah, Muhammad (S), Consensus of religious scholars and Reason.

Unlike the rigidity that the constitution has in some countries, in an
Islamic system of government the constitution varies according to the
continuous legislation that evolves in light of new developments based
on the Teachings of the Qur'an and the Messenger of Allah. The
legislation is inferred by the scholars of the 'Council of Jurists' who
are chosen by people as their religious authorities at regular
intervals, generation after generation.

There have been many circumstances where the 'rigid' constitution
written twenty years before was not in harmony with the developments of
the day, which in turn causes severe fundamental crisis and
socio-political shortfalls. As for the Islamic constitution however, it
is able to cope and proceed with all new developments.

Under the Islamic system, the religious scholars or jurists legislate
on the basis of the Teachings of the noble Qur'an and the holy Messenger
of Allah. The jurists from all schools of Islamic Jurisprudence are the
reference and authority for all Muslims following their own school of
Jurisprudence. Therefore, there is no constitution in Islam, as it is
formally known, but what we have are the four sources: the Book (the
Qur'an), the Sunnah (the Teaching of the Messenger of Allah, Muhammad
(S), Consensus (of the jurists) and Reason.

In fact, the advent of constitution in Muslim countries is only since
the colonial powers entered those countries. It is befitting to note
that Britain, which was behind the creation of constitutions in Iran and
Turkey, does not have a fixed constitution as such, but follows what is
known as a "constitutional understanding".

They introduced the constitution in the Muslim countries in order to
stop the wheel of progress in those countries and hold them back. In
doing so they replaced the four references with restrictive and stagnant
laws, which brought about the shackling of the Islamic society and its
people.

For example the 'Mashroutah' freedom movement in Iran, which was led by
religious scholars, was derailed by the British in order to eliminate
the Russian influence and establish control in Iran to their advantage.
So by introducing the idea of this constitution, which serves their
interests, they brought despots such as the Shah and Ataturk to power in
these two Muslim countries and shackled their religion and their worldly
fortunes.

Such a stagnant constitution will be problematic from both a legal and
rational viewpoint. If we consider a scenario where 100 jurists
legislated a law, but after their death people do have the option to
follow other qualified jurists. What legal or rational justification is
there to adhere to the law, which is considered the constitution, when a
majority of the jurists alive hold an opposite view? Under Islamic
jurisdiction, it is the opinion of the jurists who are alive that must
be followed for issues of 'new developments' and for those who want to
follow a jurist anew.

Rationally, what necessitates a person alive to follow laws legislated
by the dead? If it is argued: because it is in accordance with the Book
and the Sunnah, the reply would be: Why the go between? Let the Muslims
refer (directly) to the Book and Sunnah. It may be asked: What will the
laws be based on? The reply would be, the laws would be based on the
treatises of qualified jurists otherwise known as "Islamic laws"
Journals. Of course the ideal way of implementing that is the creation
of 'Council of Jurists' through election of the jurists by the
nation12.

For detailed discussion on this topic see "Consultation (Shura) in
Islam", "al-Fiqh series, vols. 105-106 'Politics'", "al-Fiqh series,
'The Path of Salvation'" by the author and "Council of the Jurists" by
Murtadha Shirazi.


