Gradual Implementation
======================

The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (S), implemented Islam in a gradual
way even though Islamic Jurisprudence was complete. The noble Qur'an, in
its entirety was first revealed to the Messenger of Allah on a single
occasion and later verse-after-verse in accordance with the events of
the day.

But if it was possible (for us) to implement Islam 'in one go', we
should do so, and we may not resort to the gradual implementation
carried out at the time of the Messenger of Allah (S). The revelation
was complete before the death of the Messenger of Allah, (S), as Allah
the Almighty states:

This day have I perfected your religion for you, completed My favour
upon you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion.13 But I am of
the opinion that the implementation must be gradual if an Islamic
government were to be established in any country, since it would be
impossible to do so otherwise given current circumstances. It is
therefore imperative to adopt a policy of gradual implementation where
possible so that it does not bring about disorder in society, which
could inadvertently result in destruction, harm and other difficulties.
In any case, the possibility of implementation (of any aspect of Islam)
must be studied on the basis of the principle of "priorities".

It is therefore incumbent upon the newly established Islamic government
to create different committees consisting of Muslim jurists and experts
of various fields to define the priorities in the process of
implementation. This is to avoid any disturbance in the economy,
politics, society, management and any other unwelcome outcome. The holy
Qur'an, The Table Spread [^4]: 3.

For example, if it was decided to change the usury-based banking system
to a system based on the Mudahrabah14 system, and the government
announced the annulment of all kinds of interest at once - say in a
week - one of two consequences could follow: Either the government would
ban people from withdrawing their assets from banks in which case it
will result in chaos and disorder and ultimately, the downfall of the
government. Such action is, of course, contrary to the principle "People
have dominion over their wealth".15

Or the government would not ban the people from withdrawing their
assets, in which case it would result in all the wealth and assets being
drained from the country's banks. This in turn would result in the
collapse of the banking system and high inflation that would seriously
harm the poor, the various ongoing projects and people's income. All of
this would reflect upon the stature of the new Islamic government, and
people would begin wondering whether the previous regime was a better
one. This distorts the reputation of Islam in the eye of the people and
leads them to think that the western model is superior to that proposed
by Islam. Similar considerations must be taken into account for other
laws of the country.

Therefore it is important that gradual implementation (of Islamic laws)
is carried out according to detailed studies of the various committees,
which consist of Muslim jurists and experts of respective fields in
co-operation with different organisations.

Mudahrabah is referred to a business investment program where one party
provides the capital and the other the business expertise. The parties
share the profits and losses of the initiative as defined by the
Mudahrabah regulations. M. Shirazi, "Islamic Queries", pages 518-519,
cases 2283- 2289. 15The Messenger of Allah has stated this principle.

**Dynamic Laws**

All the laws of Islam are vigorous and spirited because they are
legislation from a Powerful, Merciful and Wise deity who is Encompassing
and Conversant with all aspects (of mankind) - personal, social, mental
and physical, present and future characteristics . . . Allah the
Almighty states: "O you who believe! Give your response to Allah and His
Messenger, when He calls you to that which will give you life; and know
that Allah comes in between a man and his heart, and that it is He to
Whom you shall (all) be gathered."16 However, some of Islam's laws
appear more vigorous than others, for example:

A. The law of "Bayt\_el\_Maal"17
B. The law of "The dominion of people over their wealth and selves"
C. The law of "Whoever precedes others to something not claimed by
another Muslim, has more right to it."18
D. The law of "The land belongs to Allah and to whoever develops
it."19

It is important for the young Islamic government to pay great attention
and devotion to these laws and plan to earnestly and realistically
implement these laws.

The holy Qur'an: Public Estate [^8]: 24. This may be referred to as the
Central Bank or the Treasury. 18To use an analogy this is similar to say
'first come first serve' basis. 19These principles, in parts B, C, D
have been stated by the Messenger of Allah (S).

A. The law of "Bayt\_el\_Maal" meets the needs of the poor such that
the nation will be content with this policy since the surplus (of
wealth) is distributed amongst the entire nation.

B. The law of "The dominion of people over their wealth and selves"
gives people vast freedoms, which would satisfy various groups of
society and facilitates opportunities to exercise their rights and
activities.

Naturally a human being does not agree to the dominion of others over
himself and their intervention into his affairs. If he realises that the
government provides the opportunity to freely conduct his affairs -
except for the forbidden ones - then he would be satisfied with the
regime and would co-operate with it and its rule. This is why we see
stability, continuation and prosperity of democratic governments whereas
dictatorial governments fall quickly because they create poor and abject
nation that cannot find a way to fulfil its needs.

C. The law of " Precedence" gives people the opportunity to use all of
the earth's resources within the framework of "for you"20

D. The law of "The land belongs to Allah and to whoever develops it" in
association with above law does not leave anyone able to work with any
need.

With the inclusion of the law of Bayt\_el\_Maal to this, there will be
no individual unable to work with a need. The west has implemented some
of these laws and has consequently made significant progress, whereas
Muslims abandoned these laws and the result was their painful decline
and downfall, which is unprecedented in Islamic history. Imam Ali (A)
(addressing the Muslims) said:

"By Allah! By Allah! Let not others precede you in practicing the
teachings of the Qur'an." Therefore it is imperative for the newly
established Islamic government to abide earnestly to these and similar
laws, which would "It is He Who has created for you all things that are
on earth..." - The holy Qur'an: The Heifer [^2]: 29.

please Allah and the Ommah (Islamic community) because such measures
lead to prosperity and perfection. It is also important to revive the
principle of 'Muslim Brotherhood' that allows every Muslim (from any
country) to engage in all activities in the Islamic State which the
Muslims of the country concerned can participate in, such as land
ownership, marriage, business, "precedence" to the permissible21, etc.
For example, if an Islamic government were to be established in Iraq,
and since Iraq is an important centre for Islamic universities and
contains many holy shrines in its cities, anyone who wanted to visit the
holy shrines or to study must be allowed to travel to and stay in Iraq,
similar to the way it used to be since the beginning of Islam. A visitor
and a student should have total freedom to do what they wish within the
Islamic and humanitarian framework.

The permissible is anything that is not forbidden or restricted in
Islam. In Islam there are some restrictions on some aspects and beyond
that, anything, which is not prohibited or restricted, is referred to as
permissible.

**The Penal System**

Order and security are not established unless the guilty are chastised.
Under Islamic jurisdiction the prescribed punishment are grouped in two
categories:

For transgressing the right of Allah, e.g. consumption of alcohol or
committing adultery. For transgressing the right of an individual such
as murder or defamation. Under Islamic jurisdiction, both kinds of
punishments have been prescribed, as mentioned in the book of "The
predefined-penalties and punishment".22 Although the Council of Jurists
must be referred to and consulted with, but in my view if an Islamic
government is established, all punishments in the above two categories
must be deferred to disciplinary (measures) for five years, say.

This deferment could be in the form of disciplinary detention or
something similar so as to serve as a deterrent - as deemed by the
Council of Jurists as well as the experts in the field - who would
determine the form and length of detention. This is to give the
government a chance to establish itself and take control so as to allow
Islam to be implemented from the points of view of aspects such as
economy, society, politics, all of which are related to punishment. Here
a number of issues are taken into consideration:

The Messenger of Allah, (S), did not implement the penal system until
after implementing Islamic rule in the holy city of Medina and he, (S),
is an example23 (to us). The Messenger of

M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh series, vols. 87-88. "You have indeed in the
Messenger of Allah a beautiful pattern (of conduct)" - The holy Qur'an:
The Confederates [^33]: 21. 20 Allah (S) implemented the laws as a
complete and indivisible system.

2. Allah the Almighty states in the noble Qur'an: "Do no mischief on
the earth, after it has been reformed."24 Therefore, before the complete
and total implementation of Islam, there can be no reform!

The principle of "Priorities", which is a principle based on reason and
rationale and is referred to in the noble Qur'an:

"And were it not that mankind might become of one (evil) way of life,
We would provide, for everyone that blasphemes against the Most Gracious
(Allah), silver roofs for their houses, and (silver) stair-ways on which
to go up, . . ."25 (When one wishes to implement a law or a principle
but is confronted with another issue which causes conflict, then, given
the priorities of the circumstances one may have to revise the plan or
even decide to abandon the plan altogether in order to prevent greater
difficulties as can be seen from above Qur'anic verse. A number of other
precedents may be cited, such as:)

The Messenger of Allah (S) on a number of occasions had stated that
"Were it not for the people to say . . ." (This means the Messenger of
Allah (S) would have carried out his intended plan were it not for
another issue which conflicted with his plan and therefore he, (S),
judged that the outcome of his intended plan would be in conflict with
the other issue, hence did not proceed with his plan(s).)

The Messenger of Allah (S) is quoted as saying "Were it not for your
people being recent converts to Islam, I would have demolished the
Ka'bah and rebuilt it with two doors." Imam Ali (A) is quoted as saying:
" . . . one battalion of my army would have been demolished." The holy
Qur'an: The Ramparts [^7]: 56. The holy Qur'an: Adornment [^43]: 33.

Imam Ali (A) ignored those who performed a new kind of prayer despite
the fact the Messenger of Allah, (S), banned it but they remained
undeterred.

The Messenger of Allah (S) did not punish those who deserted the battle
as well as those who had committed various sins. This is so that Islam
is not misunderstood and its reputation not tarnished, amongst other
reasons. (The teaching of Islam regarding punishment of the guilty may
only be carried out if, and only if, all of the preconditions and
criteria of the individual concerned and the circumstances are totally
met. Otherwise the conviction will be null and void and the punishment,
if executed, will constitute a sin and be against the teaching of Islam.
Furthermore this will give the wrong impression of Islam, detrimental to
its pure and true message. As a result, others (Muslims and non-Muslims
alike) would conclude that the teaching of Islam is harsh, inhumane and
incorrect and therefore Islam is incapable of addressing the issues of
human affairs.) Therefore predefined-penalties (Hodud) may not be
executed in enemy land as we discussed, in details, in book series
al-Fiqh, "Jurisprudence Fundamentals"26.

Furthermore we have the principle that "The predefined-penalties are
waived by doubt" and that Islam has laid down comprehensive set of
preconditions and criteria (which must be met before any punishment is
executed) to the extent that some of them prove to be sometimes
inhibitory.

This is because Islam uproots corruption, so that there will be no
poverty, . . . and natural crimes will significantly reduce. The course
of Islamic history is a testimony to this fact. The vast number of
problems and high levels of corruption in Muslim countries that we see
today is due to abandoning Islamic laws, suppressing people's freedoms,
widespread injustice, tyranny, etc.

The penal system, therefore, may not be implemented unless other
Islamic laws are implemented so that a government provides all the
necessities of complete and healthy life for the people. M. Shirazi,
al-Fiqh series, vol. 141.


