Valuing Professionals
=====================

The prophet Joseph said: "I am a good guardian and expert"44.
Professional and technical jobs require reliability for which Joseph
said "good guardian" as well as expertise for which he said, "good
expert".

Therefore it is important that the young Islamic government pays good
attention to experts and professionals in every field of the government.
Loyalty towards the government should not be the only criterion in
appointing staff to a position. Such policies would cause complications
and difficulties. Should this happen, the management of the government
would be in unqualified and incompetent hands, which would subsequently
result in many mistakes and errors. The presence of government loyalists
within its agencies must be balanced with the provision of necessary
expertise in order to safeguard the country and its progress. The
presence of one group without the other would result in the state of the
country resembling that of a bird with one wing.

We have witnessed the destruction caused as a result of such policies
in countries governed by revolutionaries after military coup d'Ã©tat. The
state of destruction was such that people of the country wished the
previous government back. A poet pictures this state of affair in his
poem as:

Would the oppression of Sons of Marwan45 come back to us And would the
justice of Sons of Abbas46 never was The holy Qur'an: Joseph [^12]: 55.
Refers to a tyrant dynasty that began its bloodthirsty rule of the
Islamic State in 685, i.e. 55 years after the death of the Messenger of
Allah Muhammad (S).

In such cases revolutionaries and government loyalists cause more
difficulties by confiscation, imprisonment, executions and making empty
promises - all in a bid to strengthen their positions of power and force
people to accept that they are the best. This way, they enter into
confrontation with the people, subsequently leading to their own
downfall.

It is possible to address the problem of reliability and expertise by
pairing one with the other. Although this could prove difficult, the
difficulty of giving the helm to anyone of them is even greater, and
will have a worse consequence. Clearly, this is not possible in a
despotic regime in which power is centralised because unquestioned power
corrupts and gets corrupted. Refers to the Abbasid dynasty that toppled
the Marwan dynasty around

**Minorities and Political Parties**

The Islamic government coexists with minorities peacefully. Minorities
have rules and laws specific to them, whether they are religious
minorities such as Jews and Christians, or non-religious minorities such
as Buddhists and Brahmans etc. Just as the Messenger of Allah (S)
treated the pagans of Makkah, where he (S) did not force anyone of them
to Islam after the fall of Makkah. As far as the judiciary is concerned,
minorities have the choice of referring to us or to their respective
judiciary and judges. If they refer to us, we shall issue judgements for
or against them according to their jurisdiction or ours.47

For general conducts such as traffic regulations, they must follow the
law of the land, as is the case for every country in the world. They pay
the Jizyah48 tax in exchange for the protection they receive from the
Islamic head of state for their lives, wealth and family, just as
Muslims pay the Khums49 and Zakat50 taxes. In contracts such as For more
details see the al-Fiqh series, vols. 84-85; "The Judiciary", vol. 140;
"The Law", vol. 141; "Jurisprudence Fundamentals" by the author. 48This
is the tax that is paid by the non-Muslims under the Islamic system. The
non-Muslims do not pay either the Khums or the Zakat taxes. They are not
obliged to join the armed forces to defend the Islamic State whereas the
Muslims are. The defence of the non-Muslims' lives, wealth, dignity etc.
is the responsibility of the Islamic State. See M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh
series, vol. 108, "Economics"; pp 41-42.

49Tax of 20% levied on untaxed, superfluous annual income. The taxed
capital is not subjected to future Khums tax. Details in M. Shirazi,
al-Fiqh series, vol. 33, "Khums". 50Tax on nine items when over certain
limit. These items are Wheat, Barley, Dates, Raisins, Gold, Silver,
Camels, Cows, and Sheep. Details in M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh series, vols.
29-32, "Zakat".

Kheraaj51 and Moqasemah52, there is no differential treatment between
Muslims and non-Muslims. Other laws of the country that must be
respected are those such as: not to engage in forbidden practices in
public like consuming alcohol in public, setting up brothels, etc.
Details of these are discussed in the book of "Islamic Government" of
the al-Fiqh series53. Non-Islamic, but nationalist political parties
which aim to develop and prosper the country are allowed to function,
and so too are minorities political parties which aim to function within
their own particular sphere. However, political parties that call for
activities opposing Islam are not allowed to operate.

Every political party is allowed to pursue its activities within the
framework of Islam, regardless of its nationality or sect it belongs to.
Every ethnic group may use their particular language in schools,
newspapers, and mass media. Needless to say, the official international
language for Muslims is the Arabic language, since it is the language of
the holy Qur'an and the sacred Sunnah. However, it is the right of any
language speaking ethnic group to import radio and television station
and printing presses and to publish newspapers and magazines in their
own language. This is the income from letting a particular category of
land. Details in M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh series, vols. 107-108, "Economics".
52This is a kind of a contract where the profits are divided based on
the original investment or number of shares. 53M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh
series, vols. 101-102, "The Islamic Government".

**International Relations**

The countries of the world are categorised into two groups in relation
to the Islamic State, which will be established by the will of Allah:
Islamic countries, Non-Islamic countries.

As for Islamic countries, it must be dealt with in accordance with
Islamic jurisdiction on the basis of one community, Islamic brotherhood
and Islamic freedom. Allah the Almighty states: "And verily this
community of yours is a single community, and I am your Lord therefore
fear Me."54 "Surely the believers are brothers."55 "He releases them
from their heavy burdens and from the yokes that are upon them."56
Therefore, a Muslim from any other country must be treated equally like
any other Muslim citizen of the Islamic State. Unless there was a
definite "Secondary Order"57 such as the laws of the "No Harm",
"Priorities" and "Precedence" where the forerunner takes precedence over
others. However, the "Secondary Order" is applied only in exceptional
circumstances and not as a fundamental principle. It is also on a
temporary basis only, and not a permanent one. I recall about half a
century ago, when there were no concepts such as ID cards and
nationality or citizenship documents and suchlike, Muslims from other
countries, Islamic or non-Islamic, used to come to Iraq. They were
accorded the same status as those of Muslims in The holy Qur'an: the
Believers [^23]: 52.

The holy Qur'an: the Chambers [^49]: 10. 56The holy Qur'an: the Ramparts
[^7]: 157. 57In his other works the author has explained that the
"Secondary Orders" are defined by deputies in consultation with the
Council of Jurists.

Iraq in every respect such as marriage, business, employment,
fraternity, etc. This status quo must be revived in accordance with
Allah's order in the glorious book. A non-Muslim who comes to the
Islamic state will be treated according to the 'Binding' law58, the
'Exchange of Interests' and "Allah forbids you not, with regard to those
who fight you not for (your) Faith nor drive you out of your homes, from
dealing kindly and justly with them: for Allah loves those who are
just."59 This is in addition to the aforementioned exceptional laws such
as the "No Harm" and "Priorities" principles. Some Muslim and non-Muslim
countries might wage war against the young Islamic State. This may be
due to conflicting interests, or due to traditional animosities or other
factors such as enemy designs and conspiracies etc. In all these cases,
the problem must be resolved by the best possible means. This is the
merit that distinguishes a wise government from an immature one. In
fact, just as arrogant and selfishness destroys individuals, they
destroy governments too. The scale of destruction of a government is
faster and more widespread, as the saying goes "If a scholar gets
corrupt, the world would follow" and "A corrupt scholar would corrupt
the world".

Therefore it is imperative that animosity must change to co-operation
at least to a certain extent. If, in the worst-case scenario, it was not
possible (to change animosity to co-operation), and this is a rare
assumption, then it is important to adopt a position of, at least, non-
animosity to avoid a problem.

This principle is based on the teaching of the Messenger of Allah (S)
when said regarding the doctrinal and judicial treatment of the
non-Muslims, "Enjoin on them whatever they have enjoined on themselves".
59The holy Qur'an: the Tested [^60]: 8. **Good Neighbourliness**

One of the most important ingredients of stability for the young
Islamic state is good neighbourliness, and respect for the right of the
neighbour not just in a good way but in the best possible way, as Allah
the Almighty states: "And enjoin your people to hold fast by the best in
the precepts."60 Imam Kaadhum (A) is reported as saying: "Good
neighbourliness is not abstaining from harming (the neighbour), but good
neighbourliness is to persevere with the harm (coming from the
neighbour)."

If a neighbour was a bad one in terms of belief or behaviour, it is
imperative to reform him and invite him (to good) in the best possible
way as Allah the Almighty states in the noble Qur'an: "Invite (all) to
the Way of thy Lord with wisdom and beautiful preaching; and argue with
them in ways that are best and most gracious."61 If good neighbourliness
is important in relation to neighbouring houses in small communities, it
is more so with respect to countries and governments.

The Islamic government must ensure that all its dealings are based on
wisdom and reason with all countries - whether geographically close such
as neighbour countries or distant ones such as all other countries of
the world, Muslim and non-Muslim countries alike. If an opposing country
starts a media campaign of agitation against the young Islamic state, it
is important that the Islamic state keeps its The holy Qur'an: the
Ramparts [^7]: 145.
The holy Qur'an: the Bee [^16]: 125.

kindness and reply "with wisdom and beautiful preaching"62, not with
insult and ridicule. The outcome of that kindness is at least to lessen
the insult. Imam Sajjad (A) said: "O lord have Mercy on Muhammad and his
descendants . . . and help me to tender with sincerity whoever cheated
me, and to reward with kindness whoever abandoned me, and to repay
generously whoever denied me, and to recompense by making bond with
whoever broke off with me, and to praise whoever backbite against me.
Enable me to appreciate the good deed and forgive the bad deed." 63
Accordingly, the Noble Qur'an states: "To forgo is nearest to
righteousness"64

The Messiah Jesus (A) is reported to have said: "If someone slaps your
right cheek turn your left cheek for him." Here he wanted the honour and
comfort of the person being slapped before that of the slapping
individual, because tolerating one slap is easier than putting up with
many which will happen in case a fight erupts between the two. But this
calls for strong nerves and use of reason and deliberation.

Naturally, in any case, the circumstances and priorities must be
considered in line with the recommendations of the council of jurists.
ibid. Extracts from supplications of Imam Sajjad (A) known as "Makaarem
al- Akhlaaq" or "The Noble Ethics". 64The holy Qur'an, the Heifer [^2]:
237.


