Economic Development
====================

Economy is one of the most important aspects which the young Islamic
government must pay attention to, since "He who does not have a
sustenance, does not have the hereafter"65 as reported in the sacred
Tradition of the Messenger of Allah (S). The Messenger of Allah (S) is
also quoted as saying: "Poverty is a shame in both worlds".

Economic independence brings about political independence, whereas
inflation, high prices, and scarcity of income cause disaffection of the
government, which subsequently results in its downfall. The way forward
in order to secure a healthy and developing economy is to execute an
accurate program for the overall economy.

The government must create - and allow others to do so - economic
institutions and think tanks of experts in various sectors of the
economy, such as agriculture, manufacture, trade, import and export,
banking system, etc. The government must ensure that laws related to the
economy are modern, dynamic and in accordance with Islamic
jurisprudence. All of this is within the framework of "free capital" in
the true sense of the word - and legitimate - "You shall have your
capital"66. One who does not earn the means of his sustenance does not
have an honourable life and therefore he may have to ask for handouts
from others, which is a disgrace, or may be forced to steal or cheat to
make ends meet, which is an even worse behaviour. Whereas the individual
who has a source of income can lead a decent life and have an honourable
family which is the nucleus of society and the Almighty desired for
mankind in this world, for which He will reward in the hereafter.

66The holy Qur'an, the Heifer [^2]: 279. The complete verse reads as
follows: "If you do it not (give up usury), take notice of war from
Allah and His Messenger: but if you turn back, you shall have your
capital sums; neither you shall make (anyone) suffer nor shall you be
made to suffer."

All affairs are in the hands of people. The government's role is that
of the regulator only. This is true also for airports, railways,
industries - large and small - hospitals, etc. Freedom should be for all
people to make use of land, since "land belongs to Allah and to whoever
revitalises it". Water, forests and procurement of the permissible such
as fishes and other animals, the various minerals in accordance with the
law of the "Precedence", should be in the hands of people. As Allah the
Almighty has stated: "for you"67. All of this is only achievable within
the framework of the primary Islamic laws and the secondary laws such as
the laws of "no harm" and "priorities" in accordance with their
jurisprudence criteria as described by religious authorities and on the
basis of the consultation with the 'Council of Jurists' and the 'house
of representatives' and the 'committees of experts'. As for what is
practised today, like banning people from procuring the permissible and
denying them their economic freedoms, it is illegal according to Islamic
jurisprudence, and it is one of the greatest dangers to the stability,
prosperity and progress of any Islamic government.

Some of the important cornerstones of economic development are
"self-sufficiency", "reduction of civil servants to absolute minimum",
"free political parties", "industrialising the country ","mass education
and awareness". In this manner, poverty and unemployment will be
eradicated, and everybody will be able to obtain their primary and
secondary requirements.

One of the most important aspects of a healthy economy is to have free
business and free manufacturing sectors in the full meaning of the word,
except in the forbidden dealings, which are very few indeed. Given the
importance of the economy - rationally and in accordance with Islamic
teaching - it would reflect positively on the stature of the government
and, in turn, lead to broad international horizons. Therefore if the
young government achieves a healthy economy, it 67 The holy Qur'an, the
Heifer [^2]: 29, "It is He Who has created for you all things that are on
earth; then He turned to the heaven and made them into seven firmaments.
And of all things He has perfect knowledge."

will set a good standard for others to follow. This is of course good
for the prosperity of the people in this world and the hereafter. The
non-Muslims adopted the policies of Muslims in science, freedom,
technology, etc. even though they lived during the dark Middle Ages, at
a time when Muslims were going through cultural and scientific
renaissance. As a result, non-Muslims progressed formidably while
Muslims abandoned their own advancements and remained underdeveloped and
backward.

**Self-sufficiency**

Amir\_ol\_Mu'meneen, Ali (A), has said, "Become needy to anyone you
wish and you will become his captive". It is obvious that anyone who
needs another person will become dependent upon him and subordinate to
him. One will lead in any way he wishes and if the other refuses to
follow, he will be denied his handout.

The west did not overwhelm and dominate other countries through
military force only, but also through financial handouts to the third
world countries and supplying them with experts, etc. For this reason,
the Messenger of Allah (S), after arriving in the city of Medina, which
in effect became the capital city for Muslims, gave high priority to
self-sufficiency of Muslims so that they would not be subjected to
domination of the Jews of Medina. In a well-known event, the caliph of
the time wanted to give some money to Abu Tharr, may the blessings of
Allah be upon him, but he refused to accept it. The caliph's envoy to
Abu Tharr - who was the caliph's slave and was promised his freedom if
he manages to give the money to Abu Tharr - said to Abu Tharr: "if you
take this money I shall win my freedom". Abu Tharr replied "but I shall
lose mine". A newly established Islamic government must give high
priority to self-sufficiency in various aspects of life ranging from
food, drink and housing to agriculture, manufacture, banking, etc.

This may be addressed through commissioning various high-ranking
committees of experts and professionals and taking a number of steps:

1. The use of agricultural lands and developing animal resources such
as poultry and fish farming etc. and other manufacturing and production
activities, The young Islamic government must concern itself with
industrialising the country through the creation of factories and 2.
manufacturing plants, which in turn would employ substantial number of
workers, the consequent of which is progress towards independence and
self-sufficiency.

Industrialisation must include small local industries as well as large
national ones. For example in Iraq towards the end of the monarchy
rule - when there was a degree of pluralism and free political parties
and some stability - there were some 400 products being manufactured in
the holy city of Karbala.

Furthermore, industrial development is one of the most important
factors, which contribute to the progress of a nation in all different
fields, because manufacturing ability ranks highest amongst all the
cultural, educational, expertise and social fields. Industry facilitates
the provision of the country's needs, brings about self-sufficiency,
reduces unemployment to a minimum, eliminates poverty and destitution
and prevents inflation. All of these in turn play their respective roles
in reducing immorality, theft, illness, drug abuse and other similar
vices. Needless to say, industrial development and progress is only
achieved with the existence of freedom, pluralism, minimum staffing
level, absence of bureaucracy, investment and incentive for investment,
etc. Also, people must be encouraged to create investment and loan
trusts, as well as, Mudahrabah (investment) banks, which would take part
in the industrialisation process and development.

We have previously mentioned that freedom may not exist unless it is
supported by free political parties and constitutional institutions.
Therefore if the government concerned itself with this matter and
started to gradually build the industrial sector, first through setting
up small factories and then, according to circumstances and available
resources, address the issues of heavy industries, in five years the
country would be on the verge of self-sufficiency in the fields of
manufacture and agriculture. This will subsequently lead to self -
sufficiency in other fields.68 The author presents more discussions on
this topic in "The Means to Muslim Renaissance", "The Criteria of
Victory", al-Fiqh series, vols. 107- 108, "Economics".

It can be seen that some of the third world countries spend most of
their expenditure on consumption and completely rely on importing their
consumables from abroad to meet their fundamental and luxury needs.
Therefore they become dependant on and captive of the countries they
rely on. The situation is exacerbated when they borrow from those
(exporting) countries to pay for their imports. However, if they used
the resources to strengthen their economic structure and ability, they
would achieve self-sufficiency.


