Combating Unemployment
======================

One of the causes that contribute to the spread of social vices is
unemployment, which leads the society towards destruction and
disintegration. Unemployment drags the unemployed to moral deprivation,
theft, crime, disease, suicide, ignorance, anarchy, etc. One who does
not have a job sells his body to earn money, or steals for that purpose
or engages in various crimes and even infidelity, the Messenger of Allah
(S) is reported as saying "Poverty leads to infidelity". He is also
quoted as saying, "Poverty is the shame of both worlds".

Abu Tharr is quoted as saying "It surprises me how the poor do not rise
against the rich with their swords!" An example of the aspect which
surprised Abu Tharr has been manifested recently when Communism - which
is the pit of poverty and corruption - came into existence but people
did not tolerate the humility of captivity, poverty and repression
(associated with Communism) for longer than a short period, compared to
the lives of major countries and civilisations. The people relieved
themselves from that misery and brought down the Communist regime.

A destitute person who is unemployed may develop a psychological
complex, which would reflect on the health of the individual since body
and soul affect one another. Furthermore, in many cases, poverty and
unemployment directly cause diseases and illnesses such as lack of
ability and means of receiving medical treatment, stomach ulcer, stroke,
anaemia and all consequences of stress and nervous breakdown. That is
why we read in our supplication: "O' Allah enrich every poor and
destitute (person)."

Also, a poor and destitute person does not have the means to finance
his education and therefore his situation is exacerbated by ignorance
even further. This subsequently gives him the potential to move towards
instigation of anarchy, uprisings, wars, etc. This is the cause in
majority of cases, although unemployment may not always be associated
with poverty and destitution, but we are talking about the majority of
cases.

Therefore it is imperative upon the young Islamic government to plan
effective solutions to eradicate unemployment. This could be through
measure such as: giving freedoms, permissibility of ownership and
revitalisation of land and all that Allah has created for the benefit of
mankind - those which are not already owned by others - on the basis of
the law of "Precedence" within the framework of "for you". Job
opportunities could also be created through encouraging the wealthy to
invest in the production sector in order to create employment for those
without jobs and other similar measures. If some people still remained
without jobs - after all those measures - they must have the provision
to lead an honourable average life until they find a suitable job. This
may be through the support and facilities of the Bayt\_el\_Maal and the
encouragement of philanthropists to take part in this cause to eradicate
deprivation. For this Allah states "And would not encourage the feeding
of the indigent!"69 And He has made this to be one of the causes of
ending up in the hellfire.

The holy Qur'an, The Certain Hour [^69]: 34.

**Civil Service Reform**

It can be argued that the swelling of the civil service is worse than
inflation of the economy or it can be one of its causes. This is because
the inflation of the body of the civil service turns the producers into
consumers and leads to domination of bureaucracy that limits people's
freedoms. In this way the country heads towards deprivation and poverty
after the ruling system takes over the wealth (of the nation) and denies
its people the freedom of work and production. Every surplus civil
servant becomes a burden to the people and a barrier to their
freedoms.

The role of the civil service is to secure the safety and security of
the people as well as their welfare and to guard their interests. The
size of the civil service that would accomplish such tasks adequately
and at the same time not be a burden on the people nor a barrier to
their freedoms is a size just adequate to manage the affairs of the
government and serve its people. The civil service is there to serve the
people and the civil servant has a role similar to that of a teacher or
a driver or a pilot who the society needs.

However, to regard the civil service as a career would not serve the
nation, nor it would protect its interest. It would become a job
opportunity and a source of income, as is the case in many countries
ruled by dictatorship. In those countries the civil service is the great
calamity, since the civil service changes into a bureaucracy, which lays
down laws that hinder the people's affairs and repress their freedoms.
In such a case, the masses are transformed into subordinates to the
civil servants instead of the other way round. The swelling of the civil
service is clearly noticeable in democratic countries too. This is
because they have distanced themselves from the teachings of the
prophets, peace be upon them (pbut). Those countries legislated many
laws, which are in fact harmful to the society from many points of
view.

As for dictatorial regimes, the expansion is far greater. It is
therefore imperative for the newly established Islamic government to
commission working groups to eradicate surplus civil servants and
transfer them to the productive sector.

As for members of staff that are removed from the service - because of
being surplus to requirement since their role had changed to consumption
(of salaries) and repression of freedoms - they must be transferred to a
productive sector. The government must assist them to become productive
elements in the economy or other profession so that they do not face
poverty and unemployment. This may be accomplished through detailed
studies carried out by experts who would base their correct criteria in
accordance with rationale and Islamic jurisdiction.

In my view, if a government seriously and honestly addresses this
issue, there will be none of this massive body of the civil service
except for less than 10% of its current size, which is sufficient for
the government to run the affair of the country. We have presented a
detailed discussion about this matter in some of the works related to
aspects of "Government in Islam"70.

M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh series, vol. 99. See also: "The Islamic Government
during the Reign of Amir\_ol\_Mu'meneen", "The Government of the
Messenger of Allah (S) and Amir\_ol\_Mu'meneen", "The Islamic System of
Government" by the author.

**Simplicity and Provision of Fundamental Necessities**

The implementation of the policy of simplicity in various aspects of
life brings about bliss as well as mental and physical comfort. In
contrast, complicated life styles give an individual nothing but disease
and illness, even though this kind of life style carries with it
material beauty, grandeur and vanity.

For this reason, Islam insists strongly on simplicity in all affairs;
personal, social, through to national and governmental. For example, a
judge takes up a position in a mosque and uses the mosque as his site to
make his judgement where people can clearly see and hear him. People can
look at the details of his judgements and his dealings without any cover
or division, or any guards, pomp, ceremony or any delay in the judgement
or its execution and without any fees or charges. These will give the
people total assurance to the validity of his judgement. People are also
assured that it is not possible for the judge to deprive their rights
nor is it possible for him to favour one group over another. Similarly
simplicity should be adopted in other aspects of life, such as birth,
marriage, death, hospitality, travel, house, shop, and a thousand and
one other things. For example the Messenger of Allah (S) said: "The best
of my nation's women are (those who have the) least dowry". The
Messenger of Allah (S) has also been quoted as saying: "those people are
blessed whose best utensils are clay".

The Messenger of Allah (S) also said: "Make things easy, not
difficult".

The noble Qur'an states: "Allah intends every facility for you; He does
not want to put you to difficulties."71 And the list goes on for
hundreds of Qur'anic verses, traditions as well as policies adopted by
the Messenger of Allah and his infallible progeny, Ahl\_ul\_Bayt, peace
be upon them all. Therefore it is incumbent upon an upcoming Islamic
government to use simplicity in its system of government to the utmost
degree possible and to educate the people upon that policy too. If the
ruling system uses simplicity in its affairs and conducts, then the
people would follow suit, just as the saying goes: "People follow the
religion (way) of their kings." Furthermore, simplicity reduces
ignorance, disease, poverty and various other problems, because
complexity transforms life into an unnatural system, which upsets the
balance of its health and social vitality.

The holy Qur'an, the Heifer [^2]: 185.

**Modesty of Leaders**

It is incumbent upon the leaders in Muslim countries and especially
upon those of an Islamic government who want to implement the teachings
of Islam to adhere to the principle of modesty and abstention from
worldly vanities and be content with essential basic needs of life.
People are attracted by those who abstain from worldly vanities and
comply with their commands. Through their modesty people realise the
honesty of their leaders. As a result their places will be in the
people's hearts . . . In one of the Salutations to Imam Hussain (A) he
is addressed: "your grave is in the heart of whoever loves you." So all
the splendour surrounding the caliphs collapsed and Imam Hussain (A)
remained shining as a star, like a bright sun through history and he
will remain so forever.

Despite the fact that the infallible imams (A) were created in the
highest status of creation, we still read in the salutation of
"Lamentation": " . . . after You (Allah) had preconditioned on them (the
messengers) the asceticism from the vanities and splendour of this
inferior world, and they accepted the conditions and You knew their
honesty, and so You accepted them."

Therefore their asceticism was a precondition by Allah the Almighty to
accept them even though Allah states in the noble Qur'an: "Say: Who has
forbidden the beautiful (gifts) of Allah, which He has produced for His
servants, and the things, clean and pure, (which He has provided) for
sustenance?"72 Furthermore, the modesty of a leader (and the governing
system) saves the country many unnecessary expenses. The wealth and The
holy Qur'an: the Ramparts [^7]: 32.

resources available to the leader does not belong to him, but to the
nation. If the wealth (of a country) was to be passed around between the
rulers and they were to use it as they wish and desire - clearly it
isn't only ruler but the entire ruling elite and their entourage - there
will be none left for the nation. This is clearly observed with despotic
regimes in which the ruling dictators use the nation's wealth for their
own pleasures, desires and fantasies.

The Imam (A) has been quoted describing the Omayyad rulers as: "they
pass around the wealth of Allah73 between themselves." Abu Tharr (may
Allah's mercy be upon him) also described them as: "those who passed
around the wealth of Allah alternatively between themselves." Needless
to say that one's intrinsic abstention together with the consultation
(democratic) process which necessitates the monitoring of rulers by the
nation, plus adherence to the guidelines on conduct and expenditure,
then the leaders would not be in a position to misuse the wealth of the
nation, and therefore meet the needs of the nation. Although it may be
difficult on the body, but abstention from worldly vanities brings about
the comfort for the soul just as it provides great pleasures
unparalleled by the pleasures of the body.

i.e. the public funds.


