Combating Corruption
====================

It is necessary for the Islamic government established in any country
to fight corruption in its various forms, such as social and economic
corruption as well as corruption in various government offices and the
civil service, etc.Corruption causes deterioration and backwardness of
the nation after its confidence in the government is lost.

Corruption at the level of government offices and agencies results from
bribery, favouritism - patronage and nepotism - and procrastination,
which consequently result in wastage of time and wealth. It eventually
causes public dismay and, in many cases, leads to the downfall of the
government. Imam Ali has been quoted as saying: "Four factors contribute
to the downfall of governments: Abandoning the principles, Adhering to
arrogance, Favouring contemptible individuals and Disposing the
praiseworthy".

He has also been quoted as saying: "When contemptible individuals or
the young and inexperienced are put in charge of government affairs, it
will lead to its disintegration and downfall". A prominent figure of the
Omayyad dynasty was asked for the reason the dynasty fell from grace and
government. He replied: "they entrusted major tasks and affairs to the
young and inexperienced and assigned minor tasks to prominent figures.
Neither the young were competent enough to discharge their duties with
respect to the tasks they were assigned, nor the prominent figures
carried out their duties because of their disdain and self-esteem . . .
and between these two the government was lost.

But why did the Omayyads do that? This is because the young are more
susceptible to flattering and obeying orders without questioning whereas
the elders are experienced and appreciate the realities and therefore
criticise when need be. Hence they removed the elders from major
positions and assigned them minor tasks in order to keep them at bay.

This is what we have seen with all despotic regimes, and we saw their
disgraceful fall from power. However, if those governments conducted
their affairs properly they would have survived many times their
lifetime and this is what is expected for the remaining dictators. As
for social and moral corruption, there are issues such as uncontrollable
spread of alcohol consumption, gambling, adultery, homosexuality, fraud,
deception, lie and defamation, etc. As for economic corruption: examples
are deviation from capitalism such as monopoly, the unbalanced control
of the wealth and resources of the nation by a few, improper
distribution of the wealth, in a way that the rich die of indigestion
and the poor of hunger. Imam Ali (A) is quoted as saying:

"Suffice (for you) your disease of indigestion While there are around
you those who yearn for a portion of meal"

**Social Reform**

As part of its program of reform, the Islamic government must address
the issue of social reform. It must amend the sources of deviation and
perversion and direct social perversity towards sound and honourable
practices by providing righteous environments. For example transforming
wine bars and brothels to places of honourable and decent businesses and
extricating those in deviation and helping them to become good and
useful members of the society. This means that one may not be prosecuted
for practices committed in the past. Furthermore, their practices may
not be suspended without providing honourable alternatives, to prevent
them from going back to the same practice again.

The prosecution of those who had, in the past, engaged in such
practices means the government would fall into the circle of revenge,
and we mentioned in a previous section the need for the government to
give general amnesty. On the other hand, if the government bans their
practices and abandons them to their affairs without providing
honourable alternatives, this would cause increased unemployment. At the
same time it would mean a quick return to their previous practices. It
is reported that Imam Ali (A) arranged for a prostitute to get married
(and lead an honourable life).

Of course such a program of reform is regarded as one of the stages of
"Enjoining and forbidding evil". If the government commissioned a
committee to address these issues, it would be possible to rectify them
quickly and without further problems. The same goes for the usury-based
banks. The remedy is to change the current system to that based on
Mudahrabah, and this should be carried out under supervision of a panel
of experts in economy as well as religious scholars. To suspend the
interest-based banking system at the stroke of a pen and without a
careful study and without the provision of a better alternative - such
as regulation of the Mudahrabah etc. - would result in:

Capital drain abroad, which would bring about inflation and its
consequences, People withdrawing their assets from the banks leaving the
banks, which are important mainstay for the government, with
insufficient funds to function. This would in turn result in discontent,
which would subsequently undermine the reputation of the government and
its economic status.

**Justice and Equality**

Justice is to assign something to its rightful situation, whether in
equal ratio or not, and therefore there are a few factors that justice
and equality have in common. For example: a tall and large built person
would require four yards of fabric for his garment while a small built
person would require less than that. Justice is to give each what they
require while this is not equality.

Of course equality must be upheld with respect to general issues such
as the judicial system, fines, job opportunities, education, health and
other similar issues. Injustice and inequality, in their respective
domains, are the most severe kind of oppression. Oppression could be to
oneself or to others and the latter is of greater severity and worse
outcome. People cannot tolerate injustice and inequality as they see
themselves - by their nature and rationale - "equal like the teeth of a
comb" and they see that "there is no merit for an Arab over non-Arab,
nor for a white over a black except for righteousness", as reported in
the traditions.

And these two issues are rational before they are doctrinal. In fact
the Islamic jurisdiction is based on the nature (of mankind) which
itself is based on reason. Allah the Almighty states: "O mankind! We
created you from a single (pair) of a male and a female, and made you
into nations and tribes, that you may know each other. Verily the most
honoured of you in the sight of Allah is (he who is) the most righteous
of you. And Allah has full Knowledge and is well-acquainted (with all
things)."74 And Imam Ali (A) has been attributed the following poem:

The holy Qur'an, the Chambers [^49]: 13.

The people are equal in comparison Their mother is Eve and their father
is Adam Therefore the newly established Islamic government must uphold
this Islamic and humanitarian principle with power and resolve, and
discharge its duty. In this way it will attract the hearts and minds
around to its establishment, which results into more security and more
stability.

This is the end of what we wished to state in this book, and Allah is
the Facilitator and the Supporter. Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of
Honour and Power! He is beyond what they ascribe (to Him)! And peace be
upon the Messengers and Praise to the Lord of the worlds and Blessing of
Allah on Muhammad and his purified descendants.

Muhammad Shirazi
The holy City of Qum
5th Rabee' II 1415 Hejri.


