History and Types of Fast
=========================

Imam al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib, peace be upon them, is quoted on p.
49, Vol. 2 of al-Saduq's book *Man la Yahdaruhu al-Faqih* saying that a
group of Jews once visited the Messenger of Allah (S) and the most
learned man among them asked him about several issues one of which was:
"Why did the Almighty enjoin fast upon your nation during day-time for
thirty days after having required previous nations to fast for a longer
period of time?"

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "When Adam ate of the forbidden fruit,
food remained in his stomach for thirty days; therefore, Allah enjoined
Adam's offspring to spend thirty days suffering from hunger and thirst,
and what they eat during this period of time [during the night] is due
only to His own favor upon them just as it was His favor upon Adam. This
is why Allah enjoined my nation to fast." Then the Messenger of Allah
(S) recited this verse:

***"Fasting is prescribed for you, as it was prescribed for those before
you, so that you may guard (yourselves) against evil. (Fast) for a
certain number of days" (Holy Qur'an, 2:182).***

The Jew, therefore, said, "You have, O Muham­mad, said the truth; so,
what is the reward of one who fasts?" The Prophet (S) answered, "No
believer fasts during the month of Ramadhan seeking nearness to Allah
without the Almighty granting him seven merits:

1) anything *haram* (prohibited) in his body will be compressed and
extracted;

2) he becomes closer to achieving the mercy of Allah;

3) he will have atoned the sin of his father Adam (as);

4) his death agony will be reduced;

5) he will receive an assurance against undergoing the pain of hunger
and thirst on the Day of Resurrection;

6) Allah will grant him a clearance from hell; and

7) Allah will feed him of the good things in Paradise." The Jew said, "O
Muhammad! You have surely said the truth."

This tradition has been recorded on page 378, Chapter 109, of al-Saduq's
book *'Ilal al-Sharai’*.

As regarding its types, these vary. They differ according to the
differences among the creeds, sects, nations and their respective
customs. Its objectives, too, vary, although the most significant of
them and the most outstanding is to purify the body and the soul from
material and non-material venoms. Among its types is one referred to by
the Holy Qur'an as silence and abstention from any vain discourse.

An example is the address of the Almighty to Virgin Mary (as) in which
He commanded her, when confronted by others who resented the birth of
Christ (as), to say:

***"I have surely vowed [to observe] a fast to the Beneficent God, so I
shall not speak to anyone today" (Holy Qur'an, 19:26).***

Muslims have learned from their Lord, the Praised and the Exalted One,
that fast is one of the atonements for: 1) shaving the head during the
pilgrimage (while one is still wearing the *ihram*) due to a valid
excuse such as sickness or a head injury, 2) the inability to offer
sacrifice (I.e., *hadi*), 3) killing an ally by mistake, 4) violating an
oath, 5) hunting while still wearing the *ihram*, 6) in the case of
*zihar*.[^1]

[^1]: "Your back," an Arab during Jahiliyya may say to his wife, "looks
to me like the back of my mother!" Striking such a similitude is called
zihar.


