Optional Fast
=============

Islam encourages the faithful to fast during other months. The author of
*Thawab al-A’mal* traces the *isnad* of one tradition of the Holy
Prophet (S) to Ibn ‘Abbas who cites the Prophet (S) saying, "Whoever
fasts three days during the month of Sha’ban will be elevated seventy
thousand degrees in Paradise of jewels and diamonds, and whoever fasts
nineteen days during the month of Sha’ban will be granted seventy
thousand mansions of jewels and diamonds in Paradise. And whoever fasts
twenty-two days of the month of Sha’ban will be clothed with seventy
outfits of silk and silk brocades."

How do the faithful earn mansions in Paradise and marry those lovely
*huris* besides fasting?

The Messenger of Allah (S) is quoted on p. 177, Vol. 8, of *Bihar
al-Anwar* saying, "When I entered Paradise during my ascension trip
(*israa*), I saw angels building mansions, using one brick of gold and
another of silver. From time to time they would stop. ‘Why do you stop?'
I asked them. ‘We stop till we get paid,' they answered. I asked them,
‘How do you get paid?' ‘We get paid,' they answered, ‘when the believer
(for whom we are building this mansion) says: *Subhan-Allah wal-Hamdu
Lillah wa Allahu Akbar* (Glory to Allah; all Praise is due to Allah, and
Allah is Great).'"

Types of optional fast are recorded and explained in detail in Vol. 94
of al-Majlisi's *Bihar al-Anwar*; refer to this valuable reference for
the number of pages, as well as the *isnad*, of the traditions cited in
the following paragraphs which deal with other types of fast:

1) Fast of Eid al-Ghadir
------------------------

One who fasts during the 18th of Thul-Hijjah will be regarded as though
he had fasted sixty months. Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) has quoted his
forefathers (as) citing the Messenger of Allah (S) saying about Eid
al-Ghadir, "The Day (Eid) of the Ghadir is the greatest of my nation's
Eids; it is the Day on which Allah, the Most Exalted One, ordered me to
nominate my brother Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) as the leader of my nation so
that they may through him receive guidance after me, and it is the Day
when Allah perfected the (Islamic) creed and completed the blessing upon
my nation and accepted Islam as their religion." This tradition is also
stated in al-Saduq's *Amali*. Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) is
quoted on p. 32, Vol. 2, of *Al-Khisal*, as having said, "Eid al-Ghadir
is the greatest Eid; it is the 18th of Thul-Hijjah, and it was a
Friday."

On p. 126, Vol. 2, of *Al-Khisal*, it is stated that Ibn Musa quotes
al-Asdi citing al-Husayn ibn ‘Ubaydullah al-Ash’ari quoting al-Yaqtini
quoting al-Qasim quoting his grandfather quoting al-Mufaddal saying, "I
asked Abu Abdullah (as): ‘How many Eids do Muslims have?' He (as) said,
‘Four.' I said, ‘I know of two Eids (al-Fitr and al-Adha) and Friday...'
He said to me, ‘The greatest and the most honored of all of them is the
18th of Thul-Hijjah, which is the day when the Messenger of Allah (S)
installed the Commander of the Faithful (as) as the people's highest
authority (after him).' I asked him, ‘What should we do on that Day?' He
(as) said, ‘You ought to fast during it to thank and praise Allah,
though He ought to be thanked all the time. The Prophets had required
their *wasis* to fast on the day when the latter are nominated as their
successors and to consider it as an Eid. Whoever fasts during it will be
regarded as having done so in sixty years."

2) Fast of Eid Miladun-Nabi (S)
-------------------------------

Al-Karajki's *Kanz* indicates that anyone who fasts the 17th of Rabi’
al-Awwal, when the Prophet (S) was born, will be regarded as though he
had fasted the whole year.

3) Fasting the First Days of Thul-Hijjah
----------------------------------------

On pp. 121-122, al-Majlisi, in Vol. 94 of his *Bihar al-Anwar*, quotes
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim quoting ‘Uthman ibn Hammad quoting-al-Hassan ibn
Muhammad al-Daqqaq quoting Ishaq ibn Wahab quoting Mansur ibn al-Muhajir
quoting Muhammd ibn al-’Ata quoting ‘Ayesha saying that a young man with
a very beautiful voice used to fast as soon as the crescent of
Thul-Hijjah was sighted, so people raised this issue with the Messenger
of Allah (S) who ordered him to be brought to him.

Having presented himself before the Prophet (S), he was asked by the
Messenger of Allah (S), ‘What makes you fast during these days?' The
young man said, ‘May both my father and mother be sacrificed for your
sake, O Messenger of Allah! These are days to honor the places which
Allah has decreed to be held as sacred, and these are the days for
performing the pilgrimage; (I do so) in the hope that Allah will include
me in the pilgrims' supplications.'

The Messenger of Allah (S) then said, ‘In this case, for each of these
days which you fast you shall receive rewards equivalent to setting one
hundred slaves free in addition to sacrificing a hundred cattle for the
Ka’ba, and providing a hundred horses to transport those who make
*jihad* in defense of Islam. So when it is the Day of Tarwiyah [^1], you
will receive rewards equivalent to setting one thousand slaves free in
addition to sacrificing a thousand cattle for the Ka’ba and a thousand
horses to transport those who make *jihad* in defense of Islam.

On the day of Arafat, you will receive rewards equivalent to setting two
thousand slaves free in addition to sacrificing two thousand heads of
cattle for the Ka’ba and two thousand horses to transport those who go
on *jihad* to defend Islam, in addition to forgiveness of the sins of
sixty past years and sixty ones thereafter.'" This tradition is recorded
on p. 101 of *Thawab al-A’mal wa ‘Iqab al-A’mal* by Shaikh al-Qummi
al-Saduq.

4) Fasting the Day When the Earth was Expanded
----------------------------------------------

Verse 30, Chapter 79 (al-Nazi’at), reads, "And the earth He expanded
thereafter." The Arabic word used with reference to the earth's
expansion is *daha*. On p. 122, Vol. 94, of *Bihar al-Anwar*, and also
on p. 101 of al-Saduq's *Thawab al-A’mal*, Ahmed ibn Idris quotes
al-Ash’ari quoting Ahmed ibn al-Husayn quoting Abu Tahir ibn Hamza
quoting al-Washsha' saying that he, then a young man, was once in the
company of his father when they ate supper with Imam al-Rida (as) on the
25th of Thul-Qi’da.

The Imam (as) told us that that night was the night during which
Prophets Ibrahim and Jesus son of Mary, peace be upon them, were born,
and also when the earth was expanded from underneath the Ka’ba, in
addition to some other attribute relevant to it which I never heard from
anyone else, adding, "Whoever fasts during its day will be regarded as
though he had fasted for full sixty months."

5) Fasting the Day of Arafat
----------------------------

Three books make a reference to such fast: *Bihar al-Anwar* (p. 123,
Vol. 94), *‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rida* (p. 36, Vol. 2), and *‘Ilal al-Sharai’*
(p. 73, Vol. 2). These books cite a tradition narrated by Abu Abdullah
Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) in which the Imam (as) says, "The Messenger of
Allah (S) appointed only (Imam) Ali (as) as his successor, while (Imam)
Ali (as) assigned Imamate to both (his sons) al-Hassan and al-Husayn
(as). When al-Hassan (as) was the Imam, a man entered on the day of
Arafat and saw al-Hassan (as) eating his lunch while al-Husayn (as) was
fasting.

The same man came to see al-Husayn (as) when he became the Imam
following the death of (Imam) al-Hassan (as), also on the Arafat day,
and he saw him eating while his son (Imam) Ali son of al-Husayn
(Zainul-’Abidin [as]) was fasting. The man (apparently quite confused)
asked (Imam) al-Husayn (as), ‘Why is it that I visited al-Hassan (as)
and found him eating while you yourself were fasting, and now I visit
you and find you not fasting (while your son is)?!'

(Imam) al-Husayn (as) said, ‘Al-Hassan was then the Imam; he did not
fast for fear his fast would be regarded as a Sunnah followed by people.
When he died and I became the Imam, I did not want my fast to be
regarded as a Sunnah so people would follow my example.'" What Imam
al-Husayn (as) meant was that to fast on the day of Arafat was very
highly recommended but not obligatory. Had he (as) and his older brother
al-Hassan (as) fasted it, people would have regarded its fast as an
obligation rather than a highly recommended act of worship.

*Bihar al-Anwar* and *‘Ilal al-Sharai’* cite al-Mutawakkil's son quoting
al-Sa’d-Abadi quoting his father quoting Ibn Abu ‘Umayr saying that Abu
Abdullah (Imam al-Sadiq [as]) said, "Fasting the 8th of Thul-Hijjah
suffices to wipe out the sins committed in an entire year, and fasting
the day of Arafat (the next day) suffices to atone for the sins
committed in two years."

The best among Allah's creation, our master Muhammad (S), has described
fast as the cure for the souls and the bodies, saying, "Fast so you may
heal." He has also revealed the fact that everything in this life has a
purification (*zakat*), and that "Fast is the purification (*zakat*) of
bodies," as we are told on p. 59 of al-Saduq's *Amali*.

A Muslim understands the fast to be the setting on equal footing between
the poor and the rich before the Almighty, for if the rich desire
something, they have the means to get it; therefore, the Almighty wished
to establish equality among His servants and to let the rich taste the
pain of hunger so that their hearts may be softened, and to thus make
them compassionate towards the weak and the hungry.

6) Siyam al-Dahr: How to Fast all Your Life
-------------------------------------------

On p. 258, Vol. 1, of *‘Ilal al-Sharai’*, and also on p. 92, Vol. 94, of
*Bihar al-Anwar*, Imam al-Rida (as) was asked why an optional fast is
recommended for the entire year, and he answered by saying that it
served to complement obligatory fast. Then he was asked, "Why is there
an optional fast for one day out of each ten days?" He (as) said, "It is
so because Allah, the Praised and Exalted One, says, ‘Whoever does a
good deed will be rewarded ten-fold' (Surat al-An’am, verse 16);
therefore, one who fasts one day in each ten days will be regarded
(according to this verse) as though he had fasted the whole time."

Salman al-Farisi, may Allah be pleased with him, used to say, "Fasting
three [non-consecutive] days a month equals fasting the whole *dahr*,
the whole time; so, if one can find anything beyond that, let him fast
it!" Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) was asked why a Thursday of the first
tenth days is to be fasted, a Thursday of the last, and a Wednesday
in-between are the designated days for such fast, and his answer was,
"The deeds of each servant of Allah are displayed before Allah on each
Thursday; therefore, He wished that it should be done while such servant
is observing a fast. "Why another Thursday's fast at the end of the
month, then?" the Imam (as) was asked. "It is so because if his deeds
for eight days are displayed while he is fasting is more honorable for
him and better than if he is not fasting.

The reason for choosing a Wednesday in the second (middle) ten days of
the month, according to Imam al-Sadiq (as), is due to the fact that
Allah, the most Honored, the most Sublime, created hell on that day; it
was on it that He annihilated the early generations; it is a day of
continuous bad omen; so, He wished that His servants should shun such a
bad omen by fasting that day."

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) quotes his forefathers (as) saying that the
Messenger of Allah (S) once asked his companions, "Which one of you
fasts the whole time?" Salman al-Farisi, may Allah have mercy on his
soul, said, "I do, O Messenger of Allah!" The Messenger of Allah (S)
asked them, "Which one of you says prayers the whole night?" Salman
al-Farisi, may Allah have mercy on his soul, again said, "I do, O
Messenger of Allah!" The Messenger of Allah (S) asked them, "Which one
of you recites the entire text of the Qur'an every day?" Salman
al-Farisi, may Allah have mercy on his soul, for the third time said, "I
do, O Messenger of Allah!" One of the Prophet's companions became angry
and said, "O Messenger of Allah! Salman is a Persian who wants to brag
and demonstrate his superiority over us, we men of Quraysh.

You asked us, ‘Which one of you fasts the whole time?' and he said he
does so, while he eats most of the time. And you asked us, ‘Which one of
you says prayers the entire night?' and he again said he did so, while
he sleeps most of the night. And you asked us, ‘Which one of you recites
the entire text of the Qur'an every day?' and he for the third time said
that he did so, while most of the time he is silent." The Messenger of
Allah (S) rebuked that man and said, "Keep your silence, so-and-so, for
how far you are from Luqman the Wise! Ask him, and he will explain to
you," whereupon that companion turned to Salman and asked him thus: "O
father of Abdullah! You have claimed that you fast the whole time,
haven't you?"

Salman answered him in the affirmative, so the companion said, "But I
have seen you eating most of the time!" Salman said, "It is not what you
say! I fast three days in every month, and Allah, the most Exalted, the
most Glorified One, says,

***‘Whoever does a good deed will be rewarded ten-fold' (Quran Surat
al-An’am, 6: 16).***

And I join the month of Sha’ban with the month of Ramadhan in my fast,
so it is regarded as though I fast the whole time." The man then asked
him, "But you claim that you spend your entire night offering prayers,
don't you?" Salman answered in the affirmative, whereupon that man said
to him, "How so since most of your night you are in bed?" Salman said,
"It is not as you say. I have heard my beloved Messenger of Allah (S)
say, ‘Whoever remains in a state of *tahara* (purification) during his
sleep will be regarded as though he spent the whole night offering
prayers,' and I do remain *tahir*!"

The man still asked him, "Have you not claimed that you recite the
entire text of the Qur'an every day?" Salman said, "I have." The man
then asked him, "But you spend most of the day silent!" Salman said, "It
is not as you say, but I have heard my beloved Messenger of Allah (S)
telling Ali (as): ‘O father of al-Hassan (as)! Your similitude in my
nation is like that of Surat al-Ikhlas: whoever recites it once is
considered as having recited one third of the entire text of the Qur'an,
and whoever recites it twice is considered as having recited two-thirds
of the Qur'an, while whoever recites it thrice will be regarded as
having recited the entire text of the Qur'an; whoever loves you with his
tongue completes one third of his *iman* (conviction), and whoever loves
you with both his tongue and heart completes two thirds of his *iman*,
whereas whoever loves you with his tongue and heart and assists you with
his hand (I.e. physically with his might and means) perfects his *iman*.

I swear by the One Who sent me with the truth, O Ali! Had all people on
earth loved you as those in the heavens do, nobody would have been
tormented with the Fire,' and I do recite Surat al-Ikhlas thrice daily."
The man then stood up and left as if someone had filled his mouth with a
rock (as the Arabs put it). This incident is recorded on pp. 93-94, Vol.
94, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

In the same reference cited above, Imam al-Sadiq (as) quotes his
forefathers citing the Messenger of Allah (S) saying, "I entered
Paradise [during my ascension, *mi’raj*] and found most of its people to
be those who are not evil, who are wise in spending their wealth, and
who fast three days a month."

Ibn Tareef quotes Ibn ‘Alwan quoting Imam al-Sadiq (as) quoting his
father Imam al-Baqir (as) saying that Ali (as) used to imitate the fast
observed by the Messenger of Allah (S), saying, "The Messenger of Allah
(S) fasted *siyam al-dahr* as long as Allah willed, then he stopped
doing so and observed the fast of his brother Dawood (as) (David): a
day's fast for Allah, and a day for himself (to rest) as long as Allah
willed. Then he stopped doing that, too, and started fasting each Monday
and Thursday for as long as Allah willed. Then he stopped doing even
that and upheld *siyam al-beed* [^2].

Imam Ali (as) concludes his statement by saying that the Messenger of
Allah (S) continued to do so till he passed away. On p. 102, Vol. 94, of
*Bihar al-Anwar*, the author states that Muhammad ibn Yahya has quoted
Hammad ibn ‘Uthman quoting Imam Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq (as) saying, "The
Messenger of Allah (S) died while observing a fast of three days a
month, saying, ‘They equal fasting the whole time, and their fast
removes ill intentions and feelings of hostility.' He (S) was asked,
‘Why were these specific days chosen for such fast?' He (S) answered by
saying, ‘Retribution was inflicted upon nations before us during those
days;' so, the Prophet (S) observed the fast of those ominous days."

The Messenger of Allah (S) is quoted on p. 108, Vol. 94, of *Bihar
al-Anwar* as saying that one who observes the fast of the month of
Ramadhan and follows it by fasting six days during the month of Shawwal
will be rewarded as though he had fasted the entire year.

One may wonder whether offering *sadaqa* (charity) is more rewarding
than fasting. It is. On p. 102, Vol. 94, of *Bihar al-Anwar*, it is
stated that Imam Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq (as) was asked once by Ibrahim
al-Muthanna, one of his followers, "I have found it very hard for me
lately to fast three days a month; so, is there any way I can make it up
by, say, giving one dirham by way of charity for each of these days?"
The Imam (as) answered, "One dirham's charity is even better than
fasting one day."

In the same reference, on p. 106, Salih ibn ‘Uqbah said to Imam Ja’far
al-Sadiq (as), "May my life be sacrificed for your sake! I have grown to
be an old man, and I feel too feeble to observe the fast of these days."
The Imam (as) responded by saying, "Then offer *sadaqa* of one dirham
(cash equivalent in value to 3.12 grams of silver) for each day." The
Imam noticed that the man did not seem to be fully convinced, so he said
to him, "Do you think one *dirham* for each of these days is too little?
Feeding one indigent person is better than the fast of a whole month."

[^1]: This is the 8th of Thul-Hijjah, the day, as recorded on p. 347,
Vol. 14, of the lexicon Lisan al-Arab by Ibn Manzour, when the pilgrims
fill their water bags and prepare to go to Mina.

[^2]: Explanation of the meaning of siyam al-beed, fasting the "white
days," has already been indicated on p. 30 above.


