The Prophet (S) preaching about the Month of Ramadhan
=====================================================

The following incident has been narrated by al-Saduq on pp. 84-85 of his
*Al-Amali* thus:

Muhammad ibn Ibrahim says that Ahmed ibn Muhammad-al-Hamadani says that
Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Fadal quotes his father quoting al-Hassan's father
Imam Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (as) who in turn quotes his father Imam Musa
ibn Ja’far (as) quoting his father the master of martyrs Imam al-Husayn
ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) saying that the Messenger of Allah (S)
delivered a sermon once in which he said:

O people! A month has approached you laden with blessing, mercy and
forgiveness; it is a month which Allah regards as the best of all
months. Its days, in the sight of Allah, are the best of days; its
nights are the best of nights; its hours are the best of hours. It is a
month in which you are invited to be the guests of Allah, and you are
regarded during it as worthy of enjoying Allah's Grace. Your breathing
in it praises the Almighty, and your sleeping adores Him. Your voluntary
acts of worship are accepted, and your pleas are answered.

Ask Allah your Lord, therefore, in sincere intentions and pure hearts to
enable you to fast during it and to recite His Book, for only a wretch
is the one who is deprived of Allah's forgiveness during this great
month. And let your hunger and thirst during it remind you of the hunger
and thirst of the Day of Resurrection. Give alms to the poor and
indigent among you; surround your elderly with respect, and be kind to
your youngsters.

Visit your kin and safeguard your tongues, and do not look at what Allah
has prohibited you from seeing, and do not listen to anything your ears
are forbidden to hear. Be kind to the orphans of others so that your own
orphans will equally receive kindness. Repent your sins to Allah and
raise your hands to Him in supplication during the times of your
prayers, for they are the best times during which the Almighty looks
with mercy to His servants and answers their pleas when they plead to
Him.

O people! Your souls are pawned by your deeds; therefore, release them
by seeking Allah's forgiveness. Your backs are over-burdened by the
weight of your sins; therefore, lighten their burden by prolonging your
prostration. Be informed that the Exalted and Almighty has sworn by His
Dignity not to torture those who perform their prayers and prostrate to
Him, and not to terrify them by the sight of the fire when people are
resurrected for judgment. O people! Whoever among you provides *iftar*
to a believer during this month will receive a reward equal to one who
sets a slave free, and all his past sins will be forgiven.

Having said so, people said to him: "O Messenger of Allah! Not all of us
can do that!" He (S), thereupon, responded by saying,

Shun the fire of hell even by half a date! Shun the fire of hell even by
a drink of water! O People! Whoever among you improves his conduct
during this month will have a safe passage on *al-Sirat al-Mustaqeem]*
(the straight path) when many feet will slip away, and whoever among you
decreases the burdens of his slave (or anyone who works for him) will be
rewarded by Allah decreasing his reckoning. Whoever among you abstains
from harming others will be spared the Wrath of the Almighty when he
meets Him.

Whoever among you affords generosity to an orphan will be rewarded by
Allah being generous to him on the Day of Judgment. Whoever among you
improves the ties with his kin will be rewarded by Allah including him
in His mercy, and whoever among you severs his ties with his kin, Allah
will withhold His mercy from him upon meeting Him. Whoever among you
offers voluntary prayers, Allah will decree a clearance for him from the
torment of the fire.

Whoever among you performs an obligation will receive the reward of one
who has performed seventy obligations in other months. Whoever among you
increases the sending of blessings unto me, Allah will make the balance
of his good deeds weigh heavily when scales will be light. Whoever among
you recites one verse of the Holy Qur'an will receive the blessing of
one who recites the entire Holy Qur'an in another month.

O people! The gates of heaven in this month are kept open; so, pray
Allah your Lord not to close them against you, and the gates of the fire
are kept closed; so, pray Allah your Lord not to open them for you; and
the devils are kept chained; therefore, pray Allah your Lord not to
unleash them against you.

Advising the great *sahabi* Abu Tharr al-Ghifari, may Allah be pleased
with him, regarding the fast being a protection against the fire, he (S)
is quoted saying, "Shall I inform you of a deed which, if you do it,
will keep Satan away from you as much as the distance between the east
of the earth and the west?" People answered, "O yes, indeed, O Messenger
of Allah!" He (S) said, "Fast darkens his (Satan's) face; alms break his
back; the desire to please Allah and the giving of assistance to do good
deeds cut his tail off, and seeking Allah's forgiveness cuts off his
aorta."

Then he added, "For everything there is a purification (*zakat*), and
the purification of bodies is the fast." He (S) is also quoted saying,
"One who fasts is considered to be adoring his Creator even while
sleeping on his bed as long as he does not backbite any Muslim." He (S)
has also said, "There are two merry occasions for anyone who performs
the fast: one when he breaks his fast, and one when he meets his Lord,
the Exalted, the Almighty. I swear by the One Who controls Muham­mad's
life, the excess on the mouth of one who fasts is better in the sight of
Allah than the sweet smell of musk."

He (S) has also said that the Exalted and Almighty has said (in a *Qudsi
hadith*) that all good deeds of a descendant of Adam are His (to reward)
"except the fast, for it is mine, and I shall reward for it. All good
deeds of the son of Adam are rewarded with ten to seven hundred times
except perseverance, for it is mine and I reward for it." So, the
knowledge of the rewards of perseverance is with Allah, and
"perseverance" means fast.

Regarding the interpretation of His saying (in the Holy Qur'an) "... and
seek aid with perseverance," meaning the fast, it is reported that the
person who fasts enjoys the gardens of Paradise and the angels keep
praying for him till he breaks his fast. If a believer stands during a
portion of the night to perform additional optional prayers, then he
wakes up fasting, no sin will be recorded against him.

Whenever he takes one step, it will be recorded as a good deed for him,
and if he dies during daytime, his soul will ascend the heights of
heaven. If he lives to break his fast, the Almighty will consider him
among those who often return to Him for forgiveness. In the book titled
*Thawab al-A’mal*, relying on the authority of Abu Abdullah who quotes
his forefathers, peace be upon all of them, the author, namely Shaikh
al-Qummi al-Saduq, quotes one tradition indicating that the Messenger of
Allah (S) has said, "The sleep of someone fasting is like adoration, and
his breath praises the Almighty."


