Norms of Conduct related to the Fast
====================================

Having come to know the sanctity of this glorious month, the month of
Ramadhan, which is Allah's favorite month in which He revealed the Holy
Qur'an "a guidance to men and clear proofs of the guidance and the
distinction," the month which He decreed that Muslims should fast during
daytime and offer prayers during nighttime, and having come to know some
of its merits, we ought to be familiar with the ethics related to
fasting during this glorious month.

There are certain norms of conduct, preparations, and recommended deeds
related to it which we must not take lightly so that Allah may accept
our fast and prayers and forgive us; He indeed is the oft-Forgiving, the
Most Merciful. The following are the norms of conduct related to the
month of Ramadhan and some highly recommended deeds (*a’mal*) to be
performed during it:

1) Preparations in anticipation of welcoming the advent of the month of
Ramadhan include repentance, cessation of doing anything prohibited, and
the returning of trusts to their owners. One should not bear grudge
against any other Muslim and should try hard to remove existing
hostilities. He should abandon any sin he has been addicted to doing, or
contemplating upon doing, and he should rely on Allah and make the
intention to fast during the month of Ramadhan with sincerity, inwardly
and outwardly.

2) He should exert himself with might and means to obey the Almighty,
abstain from committing anything prohibited, abandon disputes and envy,
avoid hurting people in any way, resort to silence except when praying
to the Almighty, recite the Holy Qur'an and do every good deed he is
able to do.

3) He should lower his gaze and not look at anything Allah has decreed
he should not look at. He must avoid listening to vain talk or anything
that may displease Allah, and avoid the places where things causing
Allah's Wrath may be done, and not to move except in obedience to Allah.

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, as quoted on p. 351, Vol. 94, of
*Bihar al-Anwar*, and also on p. 87, Vol. 4, of Kulayni's *Al-Kafi*,
relying on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Thaqafi, has said,
"To fast is not just to abstain from eating and drinking. Rather, each
of your senses has rights on you related to the fast. When you fast, you
should let your hearing, vision, hair, skin, tongue, stomach and modesty
fast with you, and you should safeguard yourself so that there is a
distinction between the day you fast and the day you do not."

4) On p. 351, Vol. 94, of *Bihar al-Anwar*, it is recorded that the
greatest Prophet Muhammad ibn Abdullah (S) is our role model and leader.
Once he (S) heard a woman cursing one of her neighbors, so he ordered
some food to be brought, then he ordered her to eat it. She told him
that she was fasting, so he asked her, "How can you fast and still curse
your neighbor? Fast is not just abstention from eating and drinking."

He (S) is also quoted saying, "Anyone who fasts during the month of
Ramadhan and protects his modesty and tongue and not hurt anyone, the
Almighty will forgive his sins, the past and the future, and He will
release him from the fire of hell and permit him to enter the eternal
abode of bliss. He will accept his intercession as many times as the
number of sands in the lands of the guilty ones living among the
monotheists."

5) Imam al-Sadiq (as) quotes his ancestors who quote the Commander of
the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib, peace be upon them all, regarding what
things the Messenger of Allah (S) has prohibited, saying, "Anyone who
backbites another Muslim will have voided his own fast and diminished
his *wudu* (ablution), and he will come on the Day of Resurrection
suffering from a smell more foul than that of a cadaver, offending
others waiting for their reckoning. So, if he dies before repenting, he
dies like one who considered everything Allah has prohibited as
permissible."

6) Imam al-Sadiq (as) quotes his forefathers who in turn quote the
Messenger of Allah (S) saying, "Anyone who starts his day fasting and is
cursed and he responds by saying, ‘I am fasting; peace be with you; I
shall not curse you as you have cursed me,' the Almighty will then say,
‘My servant has sought refuge with fast against the evil of one of My
servants. Protect him, therefore, from My fire, and take him into My
garden.'"

7) It is recommended that the fasting person should, if possible, spend
half the daytime sleeping. The Prophet (S) is quoted saying that the
sleep of a fasting person is an act of adoration and his breath praises
the Almighty.


