Invocations at the time of Breaking of the Fast
===============================================

Relying on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq (as), Shaikh al-Saduq, in his
work *Al-Misbah*, quotes the Imam (as) citing his forefathers saying
that the Messenger of Allah (S) used to say the following whenever he
broke his fast: "O Almighty God! For You have we fasted, and with Your
sustenance have we broken our fast; so, accept it from us. Thirst has
dissipated; the veins have become wet, and the reward has been secured
by the Will of Allah."

He (S) is also quoted as saying that if anyone says the following
invocation at the time of breaking his fast, he will come out of his
sins and face the world as he faced it the first time upon his birth: "O
Great One! O Great One! You are Allah; there is no god but You! Forgive
my great sins for none forgives the great sins but You, O Great One!"

The book *Al-Iqbal*, relying on the authority of Imam Zainul-’Abidin,
peace be upon him, states that whoever recites the Qadr chapter at the
time of breaking his fast and at the time of his last meal before
daybreak (I.e., *suhoor*) will be regarded by the Almighty as one who
sheds his own blood (I.e. becomes a martyr) for the cause of Allah.

The Prophet (S) has said the following to Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as):
"O father of al-Hassan! The month of Ramadhan is approaching; so, recite
your invocation before you break your fast for Gabriel has informed me
that the Almighty has said that He would accept the prayers of whoever
recited this invocation during the month of Ramadhan before breaking his
fast, before starting his fast, and before saying his prayers, and He
will answer ten of his pleas, forgive his sins, remove the cause of his
distress, eliminate the reason behind his agony, fulfill his worldly
wishes, help him achieve his objective, count his good deeds among those
of the prophets and the foremost to believe in them, and he will come on
the Day of Resurrection with a face shining like the full moon." The
invocation referred to above may be translated thus:

Lord! You are the Lord of the great light, of the lofty Throne, of the
over-flowing sea, of the great intercession, of the dear light, of the
Torah, of the Gospel, of the Psalms and of the great Qur'an! You are the
Lord of all those in the heavens and those on earth! There is no god in
them other than You, and You are the Mighty One in the heavens and on
earth; there is none mighty in them but You! And You are the King in the
heavens and on earth; there is no king in them other than You!

I beseech You by the greatness of Your great Name and the light of Your
shining greatness, and by Your domain! O Living One, O Sustainer! I
beseech You by the greatness of Your Name which shines upon the heavens
and the earth, and by Your Name whereby the first generations achieved
righteousness and so will the last ones! O Living One before there was
anyone living, and O Living One after everyone else is no longer alive!

There is no god but You! I beseech You to send blessings unto Muhammad
and the progeny of Muhammad and to forgive my sins and ease my affair
and grant me a speedy recovery and keep my feet firm on the path of the
religion of Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and make my deeds
acceptable and grant me the like of what You granted Your sincere
servants and devo­tees! I am a sincere believer in You, and upon You do
I rely and to You do I entrust my fate!

I beseech You to grant me, my family and offspring, all goodness, and to
keep away from us all evil! You are the Compassionate, the ever-Giving,
the Creator of the heavens and the earth! You bestow goodness upon
whomsoever You will and You withhold it from whomsoever You please!
Bless me with Your mercy, for You are the most Merciful of the merciful
ones.

The Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as), used to say
the following whenever he was about to break his fast: "In the Name of
Allah! Lord! To You have we fasted, and with Your sustenance have we
broken our fast! Lord! Accept our deeds, for You hear, and you know."

Imam al-Sadiq (as) has recommended that you say the following every
night during the month of Ramadhan at the time of breaking the fast:
"All praise is due to Allah Who enabled us to fast and provided us with
sustenance so that we may break our fast (therewith). Lord! Accept our
deeds, help us fast, protect us during it, accept it from us an easy
acceptance, and grant us good health and well-being. All praise is due
to Allah Who has enabled us to fast a day of the month of Ramadhan."

According to the author of *Al-Iqbal*, who relies on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abu Qurrah, in a chapter dealing with recommended deeds
during the month of Ramadhan, through the authority of Imam al-Kazim who
quotes his father who quotes his grandfather who quotes Imam al-Hassan
ibn Ali, peace be upon all of these Imams, the invocation of everyone
who fasts during the month of Ramadhan is accepted as soon as he breaks
his fast; so, upon eating the first morsel, he used to say, "In the Name
of Allah! O You Who expands forgiveness, forgive me!

In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful. O You Who expands
forgiveness! I implore You to forgive me!" Whoever says so upon breaking
his fast will be forgiven. Quoting his forefa­thers, peace be upon him
and them, Imam al-Kazim (as) says, "If you enter the evening after
having fasted, and you say the following as soon as you break your fast:
‘Lord! To You have I fasted, and with Your sustenance have I broken my
fast! Upon You have I relied and depended,' you will receive a reward
equal to that of all those who fasted that day."

It is recommended that you ought to perform your prayers before
finishing the *iftar* except when there is someone else waiting to eat,
or if you are more inclined to eat first. In his *Al-Tahtheeb*, Shaikh
al-Saduq quotes Imam al-Baqir (as) saying, "During the month of
Ramadhan, you should perform your prayers, then break your fast, except
if you are with others who are waiting to break theirs; so, do not do
something which they would not be doing but break your fast with them
then perform your prayers; otherwise, perform your prayers first.' So I
asked him why it was so; he answered: ‘You have to select one of two
options: breaking the fast or performing the prayers, and you should
choose the best of them, and the best option is performing the prayers.'
Then he added, ‘If you perform your obligatory prayers while still
fasting, and your prayers conclude your fast, it is surely better for
you.'"

\* In *Mizan al-Hikma*, the Prophet (S) is quoted saying: "The plea of
anyone who fasts is answered when he breaks his fast."

\* It is reported in al-Majlisi's *Bihar al-Anwar* that Imam al-Sadiq
(as) has said that the Messenger of Allah (S) used to say the following
whenever he ate with others: "May those fasting break their fast with
you, and may your food feed those who are devoted to Allah."

\* Both al-Tirmithi and Ibn Majah have quoted the Messenger of Allah (S)
saying, "The supplications of three types of persons will never be
rejected: those who fast till they break their fast, a fair Imam, and
one who is wronged."

\* On p. 53 of his *Amali* (or *Majalis*), the *faqih* and mentor Abu
Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Musa ibn Babawayh al-Qummi
quotes his father saying that Sa’d ibn Abdullah quotes Ahmed ibn
al-Husayn quoting Muhammad ibn Jumhoor, and also Muhammad ibn Ziyad,
citing Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Thaqafi saying that he heard Imam Abu
Ja’far al-Baqir (as) saying,

"The Almighty and Exalted One has angels who are charged with those who
perform the fast. They seek forgiveness for them during each day of the
month of Ramadhan till its end. Every night, they call upon those who
fast, when they break their fast, ‘O servants of Allah! Receive the glad
tidings! You have felt hungry for a short while, so you shall be fed for
quite a long period of time! Blessed are you and yours!' In the last
night of the month of Ramadhan, they call upon them saying, ‘O servants
of Allah! Receive the glad tidings! Allah has indeed forgiven your sins
and accepted your repentance! So see how you shall fare from now on!"


