It is the Month of the Holy Qur’an
==================================

The month of Ramadhan is sacred because it is the month when the Holy
Qur'an was revealed, and because it is the month containing
Lailatul-Qadr. It is, therefore, appropriate to know a little about this
Book, the greatest of all divine revelations, the best revelation the
descendants of Adam (as) have ever received from their Lord.

The Messenger of Allah (S) is quoted on p. 261, Vol. 2, of
al-Zamakhshari's *Rabee’ al-Abrar* as saying, "Allah Almighty read
Surats Ta-Ha and Ya-Sin a thousand years before creating Adam, and when
the angels heard it, they said, ‘Congratulations to those to whom such
speech is revealed, and congratulations to the hearts that memorize it,
and congratulations to the tongues that articulate it.'"

In the same reference, the Messenger of Allah (S) is quoted saying, "The
hearts rust just as iron rusts." He (S) was asked, "O Messenger of
Allah! What removes their rust?" He (S) said, "The recitation of the
Qur'an and the remembrance of death." In one *Qudsi hadith*, the
Almighty has said, "I shall give one who is too preoccupied with his
recitation of the Qur'an to plead to Me the very best of what I give
those who are grateful to Me."

Imam Ali (as) has said, "One who recites the Qur'an while standing
during the prayers will receive a hundred good deeds for each verse he
recites; if he recites it sitting during his prayers, he will receive
fifty good deeds for each verse, and whoever recites it after having
made his *wudu* will receive twenty-five good deeds for each verse, and
one who recites it without *wudu* will receive ten good deeds for each
verse he recites." One day, as al-Zamakhshari tells us on p. 264, Vol.
2, of his *Rabee’ al-Abrar*, the Messenger of Allah (S) was late in
going back home. "What kept you so long from coming home?" Ayesha asked
him.

He (S) said, "It is the recitation of a man whose voice is better (when
reciting the Holy Qur'an) than anyone else I have heard." Then he (S)
stood and listened to him for a good while then said, "He is Salim, a
slave of Abu Huthayfah. Praise to Allah for the presence of people like
him in my nation."

During the month of Ramadhan, Sufyan al-Thawri used to devote his time
to the recitation of the Holy Qur'an, and Malik ibn Anas used to stop
studying and researching *hadith*, abandon the company of scholars, and
concentrate on reciting the Holy Qur'an instead, as we are told on pp.
257-258 of Vol. 2 of al-Zamakhshari's *Rabi’ al-Abrar*. In one of his
sermons, Imam Ali (as) said the following about the Holy Qur'an:

Besides the Holy Qur'an, nobody should complain of needing anything
else. One who is deprived of it cannot be described as having anything
at all; so, seek in it the healing of your ailments, and solicit its
assistance when you encounter a hardship, for it contains a cure for the
worst of ailments: disbelief, hypocrisy, and misguidance. Plead to Allah
through it instead of pleading to any of His creation. Nobody can seek
Allah through anything better than it, and be admonished that it is an
intercessor that will intercede on your behalf, and a speaker that
speaks the truth.

For whomsoever the Holy Qur'an intercedes on the Day of Judgment, he
will surely achieve intercession, and whoever seeks it to testify to his
truthfulness will surely be regarded as a man of truth, for someone
shall call on the Day of Judgment: "Everyone who cultivates is tried by
what he cultivates except those who cultivate the Qur'an;" so be among
those who cultivate and follow it, and make it the means to reach your
Lord. Seek its advice regarding your souls, and compare your views with
those of its own, and seek its help against yielding to your
desires.[^1]

The Imam (as) has also said, "One who recites the Qur'an then dies and
enters the fire is among those who took Allah's signs lightly."

[^1]: Rabee\` al-Abrar fee Nusoos al-Akhbar, pp. 258-259.


