The Significance of the Fast will be realized only at the moment of Death
=========================================================================

One will know how well he observed the fast at the moment he dies; it is
then that prayers will take a form and stand at his right, as he lies in
his grave, and *zakat* on his left, while his benevolence and good
treatment of his parents will look him in the eyes. Everything will be
personified in the life hereafter, starting from the moment of death.
The fast will then be personified as perseverance, the exercise in
patience as one faces thirst and hunger; it will stand not far away,
urging prayers and *zakat* to help the deceased person, telling them
that if they did not, he would.

It is in such dire situation that the true value of fast is
realized\_\_when it is too late for many. And one will feel the profound
pain of regret for not having observed the fast and the prayers as he
should have when questions are put forth to him by the two angels Munkir
and Nakeer who will come to him in the most horrific form, addressing
him in a voice louder than thunder and looking at him with eyes emitting
lightning, asking him one question after another. Nothing can compare
with the agony of death for those with whom Allah is not pleased,
absolutely nothing.

A dying person, as we are told in many books dealing with death and the
hereafter, will encounter agonies the extent of which is known only by
the Almighty. Life, real life, starts at the moment of death... A dying
person is like one awakening from a brief dream. This brief dream is
life as we know it here on earth.

Shaykh al-Ghazali had made a very terse statement in this regard when he
said, on p. 445, Vol. 4, of his book *Al-Ahya*, "Had a servant of Allah
had no more than the agony, the horror, and the torment of the moments
of death, he would have found no joy in his life at all, and he would
not have felt happy for a moment, and he would not have become
indifferent or negligent [with regard to his obligations] in the least."
Prophet Moses (as) was asked by the Almighty how he found death. "I
found it," he said, "like a live bird being fried in a pan; it neither
dies so it can rest, nor does it fly away and be saved."

He also is quoted saying that he found it like a live sheep being
skinned by a butcher. It is during moments like these that a servant of
Allah wishes he had spent his entire life in fast and prayers. Abraham
(Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him), as we are told on p. 79 of Ibrahim
Muhammad al-Jamal's book on life after death, asked the angel of death
(as) to show him how he takes away the soul of a good servant of Allah,
one who has performed his prayers and observed the fast and all other
obligations, so he told him to look the other way. He did, then he
looked at the angel and saw a young man wearing good clothes, smelling
good, and his complexion was radiant.

Ibrahim (as) said, "By Allah! Had a believer enjoyed nothing more than
casting a look at your face, he would have felt contented." Then he
asked him how he took the souls of the disbelievers away. "Look the
other way," said the angel of death to Ibrahim (as). When Ibrahim (as)
looked again, the angel of death appeared to him in human form: a person
as dark as coal with his feet on earth and head in the skies, the
ugliest the eyes can ever see; each hair on his body was a flame of
fire. Ibrahim (as) then said, "By Allah! Had a disbeliever cast one look
at you, it would have sufficed him."


