What is al-Sirat al-Mustaqeem?
==============================

The significance of fast will be realized during a much more critical
time: when the souls are to pass on *al-Sirat al-Mustaqeem*, the
Straight Path, the path regarding which the believers pray Allah to keep
their feet firm as they pass on it, the one mentioned in Surat al-Fatiha
and regarding which they plead to the Almighty at least ten times a day
(twice in each *rek’a*) saying:

***"Guide us to the Straight Path (al-Sirat al-Mustaqeem)" (Holy Qur'an,
Surah Fateha 1:6).***

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as), as recorded on p. 41, Vol. 1, of
Tabatabai's[^1] *Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an*, was asked once about the
meaning of this verse; he said, "It means: Guide us to upholding the
path that leads to Your pleasure, that ends at Your Paradise, that
prohibits us from following our own desires and thus deviate, or follow
our own views and thus perish."

In his *Tafsir*, al-Ayyashi quotes Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) saying that
*al-Sirat al-Mustaqeem* is the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (as).
*Al-Sirat al-Mustaqeem* is referred to in verse 61 of Surat Ya-Sin (Ch.
36), in verse 52 of Surat al-Shura (Ch. 42), in verse 16 of Surat
al-Maaida (Ch. 5), in verses 126 and 161 of Surat al-An’am (Ch. 6), in
verses 70 and 174 of Surat al-Nisaa (Ch. 4), in verse 42 of Surat
al-Hijr (Ch. 15), and in other verses where it is described as the
*Sabeel*, another word for path, leading to the Almighty.

Abdul-Rahman ibn Muhammad al-Hassani quotes Ahmed ibn ‘Eisa ibn Abu
Maryam quoting Muhammad ibn Ahmed al-’Arjami quoting Ali ibn Hatim
al-Minqari quoting al-Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar saying, "I asked Abu Abdullah
(Imam al-Sadiq [as]) about the *Sirat*, and he said, ‘It is the Path to
knowing Allah, the most Exalted, the most Great, and there are two such
paths: one in the life of this world, and one in the life hereafter.

The *Sirat* in this life is the Imam whose obedience is incumbent;
whoever knows him in this life and follows his guidance will be able to
pass on the (other) *Sirat* which is a path over hell in the hereafter,
and whoever does not know him in this life, his feet will slip away from
the *Sirat* in the hereafter so he falls into the fire of hell.'" This
is recorded on pp. 13-14 of *Ma’ani al-Akhbar* and also on p. 66, Vol.
8, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

It is when you come to that *Sirat* that you will find out how well you
performed your fast in the life of this world. Each and every soul has
to pass over *al-Sirat al-Mustaqeem*, the straight path over hell, a
fire more intense in heat than boiling molten brass, with seven bridges
over it the length of each one of which is three thousand years: one
thousand to vertically ascend, one thousand to horizontally cross, and
one thousand to descend.

It is thinner than a human hair, more sharp than the sharpest sword, and
darker than the darkest night inside a tunnel. Each bridge has seven
branches, and each branch is like a long lance with sharp teeth: each
servant of Allah will be confined on each and every one of them and be
asked about all the injunctions the Almighty had required him to perform
during his life on this planet. In the first of such stops he will be
asked about belief and conviction, about *shirk* and hypocrisy. In the
second he will be asked about prayers, what they contain, how to perform
them, and whether he performed them properly and on time.

In the third he will be asked about *zakat*, its types, and whether he
paid it or not. And it is in the fourth one that he will be asked about
the fast... It is then that he will realize whether he upheld this
important obligation or not, whether he offered charity or not, and
whether he regretted and repented during the month of Ramadhan or not.
In the fifth he will be asked about the pilgrimage and *‘umra*, why he
did not perform them, or why he failed to perform them properly, and how
they are to be performed. In the sixth he will be asked about *wudu*
(ablution) and *ghusul*, how he performed them, which one is compulsory
and which one is optional.

Finally, in the seventh, he will be asked about how kind he was to his
parents and kin, and whether he did injustice to any human being. In the
absence of sufficient optional good deeds such as offering charity,
helping a needy Muslim, performing optional prayers or fasts..., etc.,
if one gives the wrong answer to any question in any of these stops, he
will fall into the pit of hell underneath..., as Abdel-Jabbar al-Rubay’I
tells us in his book *Al-Tathkira fi ahwal al-mawt wal akhira*, having
collected such details from various books of *hadith* and *Sunnah*.

He adds saying, on p. 130, that the bridges will be shaken by the weight
of crossing people who will climb on top of one another, causing these
bridges to move like a ship tossed by a wind storm in the midst of the
sea. *al-Sirat* separates Paradise from hell. Only those who cross it
successfully will achieve salvation and bliss. With reference to those
who will fall into hell, the Almighty says:

***Have you not considered those who have changed Allah's favor into
blasphemy and caused their people to fall into the abode of perdition?
(Holy Qur'an, Surah Ibrahim 14:28)***

***To whomsoever My wrath is due, he shall fall therein. (Holy Qur'an
Surah Taha 20:81)***

***Whoever follows My guidance will not lose his way nor fall into
perdition. (Holy Qur'an, Surah Taha 20:123)***

***Nor will his wealth benefit him when he falls headlong (into the pit
of fire) (Holy Qur'an, Surah Layl 92:11).***

If one is found as having been derelict in performing any of his
obligations, the angels questioning him will try to find out whether he
somehow made up with optional good deeds. Once he is cleared, he will be
escorted into Paradise. It is to such stopping and questioning that the
Almighty refers, addressing His angels to

***Stop them, for they must be questioned. (Holy Qur'an, Surah Saffat
37:24)***

On p. 133, Vol. 17, of his *Al-Mizan*, Tabatabai quotes various views
regarding what the questioning will be all about. He isays that some
scholars are of the opinion that they will be asked about the Unity of
Allah, while others believe it will be about the *wilayat* of Imam Ali
(as), but he also concedes that such stopping and questioning will take
place on the *Sirat* over hell.

On p. 107 of al-Saduq's *Al-Amali*, and also on pp. 64-65, Vol. 8, of
al-Majlisi's *Bihar al-Anwar*, al-Waleed quotes al-Saffar quoting Ibn
‘Eisa quoting Muhammad al-Barqi quoting al-Qasim ibn Muhammad al-Jawhari
quoting Ali ibn Abu Hamza quoting Au Busayr quoting Abu Abdullah Imam
Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) saying, "People will pass on different levels on
the *Sirat*, and it is thinner than hair and sharper than the sword.
Some will pass as swiftly as lightning, while others will pass as fast
as a horse, while some of them will crawl on it, some will walk on it,
while some others will pass hanging, so the fire will consume some of
their body parts and leave others."

Imam Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (as) is quoted on p. 65, Vol. 8, of
al-Majlisi's *Bihar al-Anwar* saying, "When the verse saying ‘...and
hell is brought that Day' was revealed, the Messenger of Allah (S) was
asked about what it meant, so he (S) said, ‘The trusted Spirit (Gabriel)
has informed me that when Allah, the One and only God, resurrects all
people and gathers their early generations and the late ones, hell will
be brought by a hundred thousand angels, very stern and mighty angels,
and it will be coming roaring, inhaling and exhaling. The force of its
exhalation is such that had Allah not delayed them for the reckoning, it
would have caused everyone of them to perish.

Then a flame will come out of it and encircle all humans, the good and
the bad, so much so that any servant of Allah, be he an angel or a
prophet, will call out: ‘Save me, O Lord, save me,' except you, O
Prophet of Allah, for you will call out: ‘Save my nation, O Lord, save
my nation!'" Muqatil, ‘Ataa and Ibn Abbas are among the greatest
traditionists in the history of Islam without any contention. They are
the ones who transmitted the *ahadith* of the Messenger of Allah (S) for
all posterity.

All three of them, as stated on p. 67, Vol. 8, of *Bihar al-Anwar*, have
interpreted the verse saying, "The Day when Allah shall not humiliate
the Prophet" to mean: "Allah will not torment the Prophet (that Day, the
Day of Judgment)," and the phrase "and those who believed with him" to
mean that He will not torment Ali ibn Abu Talib, Fatima, al-Hassan,
al-Husayn, peace be upon them, al-Hamza, and Ja’far, Allah be pleased
with them, that "their light runs before them" means "their light shall
illuminate the *Sirat* for Ali and Fatima seventy times more so than
light in the life of this world." Their light will then be before them
as they continue to cross.

The intensity of their light will be indicative of their *iman*,
conviction. Others will follow. "Members of the Ahl al-Bayt (as) of
Muhammad (S) will pass over the *Sirat* like swift lightning. Then they
will be followed by those who will pass like a speedy wind. Then there
will be those who will pass as fast as a racing horse.

Then another group of people will pass in a walking pace followed by
those who will crawl on their hands and bellies, and finally by those
who will crawl on their bellies (with extreme difficulty). Allah will
make it wide for the believers and very narrow for the sinners." Then
these narrators interpret the verse saying "Lord! Complete our light for
us" to mean "complete it for us so that we may be able to pass on the
*Sirat*."

Ibn Shahr Ashub, in his *Manaqib Ali ibn Abu Talib*, comments, as quoted
by al-Majlisi on the same page, saying, "The Commander of the Faithful
(as) will pass in a howdah of green emeralds accompanied by Fatima on a
conveyance of red rubies, and she will be surrounded by seventy thousand
*huris*, as fast as lightning."

On p. 182 of his *Amali*, al-Tusi quotes al-Fahham quoting Muhammad ibn
al-Hashim al-Hashimi quoting Abu Hashim ibn al-Qasim quoting Muhammad
ibn Zakariyya ibn Abdullah quoting Abdullah ibn al-Muthanna quoting
Tumamah ibn Abdullah ibn Anas ibn Malik quoting his father quoting his
grandfather quoting the Prophet (S) saying, "On the Day of Judgement,
the *Sirat* will be spread over hell. None can pass over it except one
who carries a permit admitting the *wilaya* of Ali ibn Abu Talib (as)."

Also with reference to the *Sirat*, Abu Tharr al-Ghifari, may Allah be
pleased with him, is quoted by both al-Majlisi on p. 67, Vol. 8, of his
book *Bihar al-Anwar*, and by al-Kulayni on p. 152, Vol. 2, of his
*Al-Kafi*, as saying, "I have heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say, ‘The
edges of our *Sirat* on the Day of Judgment will be kindness to the kin
and the returning of the trust. When one who is kind to his kin and
faithful to his trust passes (over the *Sirat*), he will make his way to
Paradise, but when one who is unfaithful to the trust and severs his
ties with his kin passes, none of his good deeds will avail him, and the
*Sirat* will hurl him into hell.'"

There are so many references to *noor*, divine light, throughout the
Holy Qur'an, in the *hadith*, and in *du’a*, supplication. It is the
light of guidance whereby the Almighty guides whomseover He pleases both
in the life of this fleeting world and in the hereafter. Such light will
be most sorely needed especially in the life hereafter.

The reader is reminded that the intensity of his light, be it during the
period of the *barzakh*, when most graves will be almost as dark as
hell, during the time when people are judged on the Day of Judgment, or
as one passes over the *Sirat*..., all depends on the depth and
sincerity of his conviction, on his *iman*. No good deeds, no matter how
great, will avail him as will his sincere and deep conviction regarding
the Unity (*Tawhid*) and Justice (*‘Adl*) of the Almighty, the truth
which He revealed to His prophets (*Nubuwwah*), and that we will most
certainly be resurrected and judged (*Ma’ad*), so that one will be
either rewarded or punished.

There will be no sun in the life hereafter, nor will there be
electricity; so, one's own light will be his guiding star. Everything in
the life hereafter will have a light of its own; there will be no
reflection, nor can one walk in the light of another, nor can one be
benevolent and give of his light to another. There will be no giving.
The time of giving is right here; so, it is now your golden chance to
give your all to your Maker, to worship Him and obey Him as He ought to
be worshipped and obeyed\_\_or at least try; pay Him His dues, and be
aware of your responsibilities towards His servants, believing men and
women, and to mankind, your extended family.

Give them of what Allah has given you; pray for them; be kind to them;
think well of them so that they may think well of you; observe the fast
in months other than the month of Ramadhan in order to remind yourself
of the hunger from which others, especially indigent Muslims, suffer,
and give by way of charity. Otherwise, keep everything to yourself,
hoard, treasure, and be damned. Hell is characterized by its darkness,
yet its residents will still be able to see things, and what they will
see will not please them at all. May Allah *Subhanahu wa Ta’ala* keep it
away from us, *Allahomma Aameen*.

Nobody in the entire lengthy history of Arabia (estimated at more than
seven thousand and five hundred years) has ever been known to be more
courageous and daring when combatting his foes than Imam Ali ibn Abu
Talib (as) who was the right hand of the Messenger of Allah (S), the man
who single-handedly uprooted the main gate of the fort of Khaybar, a
gate so heavy it required forty men to close or open it. Ali (as) once
was suffering acutely from an inflammation of the eye, and he was in
extreme pain, screaming, the hero that he was. The Messenger of Allah
(S) visited him and saw him scream, so he asked him whether he was
suffering from an acute pain or whether it was due to his frustration
and agony.

The Imam (as) said, "How intense my pain is! I have never felt such
pain..." whereupon the Prophet (S) said to him, "When the angel of death
comes to take away the soul of a disbeliever, he brings with him a rod
of fire whereby he takes his soul away, whereupon hell itself will
scream because of the intensity of his pain and suffering." Having heard
him, the Imam (as) stood up then sat and said, "O Messenger of Allah!
Please repeat what you have said, for it has made me forget my own
pain."

Then the Imam (as) asked the Messenger of Allah, "Will the soul of any
member of your nation be taken away as you have described?" The Prophet
(S) answered, "Yes! The soul of an unjust ruler, or of one who consumes
the wealth of an orphan, or of one who falsely testifies [will be thus
taken away]." The disbeliever referred to in this tradition is one who
is unfair to Allah, Glory to Him and Exaltation, regarding one of the
commandments which He has required him to uphold, one who does not
recognize the Prophethood of Muhammad (S) and his Sunnah or anything
required by Islam; such is the disbeliever.

You can reduce the agony of your death, or that of your loved one, by
offering charity, fasting, or praying *nafl* prayers; among such prayers
is one in two *rek’ats* in each of which you should recite Surat
al-Fatiha once and al-Ikhlas thrice.

Fasting either a few days or all of the months of Rajab and Sha’ban,
according to your ability, will surely reduce the agony of death and the
pain of loneliness in the grave. If you are truly concerned about these
matters, and you should be, the month of Ramadhan is your golden
opportunity to earn as many blessings as Allah enables you to. It is an
opportunity that may not recur, for nobody knows when his/her turn comes
to die.

We pray the Almighty to enable us to cross over His *Sirat* with
hardship only in the life of this world, and without any hardship in the
life hereafter, to forgive our sins, and to accept our fast and
repentance, *Allahomma Aameen*.

[^1]: His full name is: Muhammad Husayn ibn Sayyid Muhammad ibn Sayyid
Husayn ibn Mirza Ali Asgher al-Tabrizi al-Tabatabai, the judge. He was
born in 1892 in Tabriz and died in Qum in 1981. His 21-Volume exegesis,
Al-Mizan, is only one of his nUmarous works. The edition utilized for
this book was published in 1991 by Al-A\`lami Establishment of Beirut,
Lebanon. Hujjatul-Islam Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, founder of the Bilal
Muslim Mission of Tanzania, has for years been translating this valuable
exegesis into English.


