The early meal of the Month of Ramadhan (Suhoor)
================================================

The Exalted and Praised One has said in His Glorious Book:

***"... and eat and drink till the whiteness of the day becomes distinct
from the blackness of the night at dawn, then com­plete the fast till
nighttime" (Qur’an Surah Baqarah 2:187).***

He has also said,

***"Little did they sleep during the night, and they sought their Lord's
forgiveness in the early hours of the morn" (Holy Qur'an, Surah Dhariyat
51:17-18).***

And the Almighty has also said,

***"Those who persevere, and the truthful, and the obedient (to Allah),
and those who spend (benevolently), and those who ask forgiveness during
the time of the morn" (Holy Qur'an, Surah Ale-Imran 3:17).***

*Suhoor* is the meal comprised of food and water taken before daybreak
by a Muslim who intends to perform the obligation of the fast. It helps
him while abstaining from eating and drinking during daytime. This is
the *suhoor* in its absolute meaning. Its timing has been defined by the
Almighty thus:

***"... and eat and drink till the whiteness of the day becomes distinct
from the blackness of the night at dawn" (Holy Qur'an, Surah Baqarah
2:187).***

This means that *suhoor* can be eaten at any time during the night till
a short time before daybreak. But what about this "short time" defined
before daybreak? Anas ibn Zaid ibn Thabit, may Allah be pleased with
him, once said, "The Prophet (S) ate *suhoor* with us once, after that
he stood for the prayers." He was asked, "What was the length of time
from the *suhoor* till the *athan*?" He answered, "About the time it
takes one to recite fifty Qur'anic verses." This tradition is recorded
by al-Bukhari, Muslim, and Ibn Khuzaymah.

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub quotes Abu Yahya al-San’ani quoting Imam Abu
Abdullah al-Sadiq (as) saying, "If a believer fasts and reads Surat
al-Qadr during the time of his *iftar* and *suhoor*, he will be rewarded
with the rewards due to a martyr." This tradition is recorded on p. 344,
Vol. 94, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

The real meaning of *suhoor* transcends the physical and nutritious
benefits with which it provides the person who observes the fast.
Quoting what the Almighty has said explains the real meaning of
*suhoor*:

***"Little do they sleep during the night, and they seek their Lord's
forgiveness in the early hours of the morn" (Holy Qur'an, Surah Dhariyat
51:17-18).***

He has also said,

***"The patient, and the truthful, and the obedient (to Allah), and
those who spend (benevolently), and those who ask forgiveness during the
time of the morn" (Holy Qur'an, Surah Ale-Imran 3:17).***

The first verse tells us that nighttime is the time for sleep, and the
zenith of times to adore the Almighty and seek His forgiveness is during
the *suhoor* the plural of which is *ashar*. The second verse contains
the definition of the status of those who seek their Lord's forgiveness
during the *ashar* times, a status which is quite lofty and is compared
only to those to whom the Almighty refers as "those who persevere, and
the truthful, and the obedient (to Allah)." We may derive the following
conclusions from the above-quoted verses:

1) The time of *suhoor* has its own status and function which transcends
eating and drinking, which help the fasting person during his daytime
abstention from both, and this function is to wake up during the night
to perform an act of worship.

2) The epic of adoration and the seeking of His forgiveness, which the
Almighty, out of His divine wisdom, has decreed, is during the time of
*ashar*; otherwise, why has He not specified other periods during which
His servants adore Him during the glorious month of Ramadhan?

3) Allah, the Almighty, has granted those who seek His forgiveness
during the times of *ashar* a status which comes out of His blessing,
and He includes them among those whom He describes as "those who
persevere, and the truthful, and the obedient (to Allah)."

Probably one of the greatest blessings of the Almighty is that He has
included those who eat their *suhoor* among those who shall receive His
forgiveness so that they will be the ones freed by the Most Merciful One
from the fire during the month of the Glorious Qur'an. The commander of
the faithful Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib, peace be

upon him, quotes the holy Prophet (S) saying, "Allah, the Praised and
the Exalted, and His angels send blessings unto those who take their
*suhoor* meal and seek His forgiveness; so, let each one of you observe
*suhoor* even by drinking some water."[^1]

Ali ibn Muhammad, quoting al-Nawfali who quotes al-Sukooni who quotes
Ja’far who in turn quotes his forefathers, Allah's blessings and peace
be upon them all, has cited the Messenger of Allah (S) saying, "There is
a great deal of bliss in three things: the congregation­al prayers, the
dish of sopped bread and meat (*thireed*), and the *suhoor*."[^2]

Prophet Muhammad (S), as recorded on pages 1063-1064 of *Sahih
al-Targheeb wal Tarheeb*, has also said, "The best a believer can eat
during the *suhoor* is dates; but if he cannot do so, then let him at
least drink some water."

[^1]: This is also recorded as hadith number 3577 in Sahih al Jami' al
Saghir, and hadith number 1062 in Sahih al-Targheeb wal Tarheeb.

[^2]: This is hadith number 1057 among the hadiths of Sahih al-Targheeb
wal Tarheeb, and hadith number 1045 among the "Series of sahih hadiths."


