Prayer during the Glorious month of Ramadhan
============================================

As regarding prayers during the nights of the month of Ramadhan, these
are documented by al-Kaf’ami in Vol. 2 of his *Misbah*. On pp. 657-660,
he cites al-Shaheed's book on the forty *ahadith* which quotes the
Prophet (S) saying that whoever says his prayers during the first night
(of the month of Ramadhan, reciting the Fatiha once and the chapter of
Tawheed (Unity, Chapter 112) twenty-five times, will receive the rewards
of all those who were foremost in testifying to the truth of Allah's
prophets and those who sacrificed their lives for Allah's cause;
moreover, all his sins will be forgiven, and he will on the Day of
Judgment be among the winners.

Anyone who says his prayers during the second night, repeating the
Fatiha four times and the Qadr twenty times, will have all his sins
forgiven and his sustenance increased, and he will be regarded as one
who followed the Sunnah of the Prophet (S).

Anyone who says his prayers during the third night repeating the Fatiha
ten times and the Chapter of Ikhlas fifty times will be addressed on the
Day of Resurrection and told that Allah has set him free from the fire,
and seven gates of heaven will be opened for him. Whoever spends the
entire night saying optional prayers will have all his sins forgiven.

Anyone who says his prayers during the fourth night reciting the Fatiha
once and the Qadr twenty times, his deeds will be presented before Allah
together with those of His prophets. Whoever says his prayers during the
fifth night making two *rek’ats* while reciting the Fatiha once and the
Chapter of Tawheed fifty times, once he sends salutations unto the
Prophet (S) and his progeny a hundred times, will be beside the Prophet
(S) as he enters Paradise.

Anyone who says his prayers during the sixth night reciting the Fatiha
four times and Tabarak once will be regarded as though he were doing so
during the Night of Destiny (*Lailatul-Qadr*). Whoever says his prayers
during the seventh night reciting the Fatiha once and the Qadr thirteen
times, the Almighty will build him in the Garden of Eden a mansion of
gold and he will be in security from Allah's Wrath till the next year.

Anyone who says his prayers during the eighth night making two *rek’ats*
in which he recites the Fatiha once and the chapter of Tawheed eleven
times, then when he sends salutations unto the Prophet (S) and his
progeny he praises the Almighty a thousand times, the gates of Paradise
will be opened for him to enter from whichever he wishes.

Anyone who says his prayers during the ninth night reciting during the
time from sunset till nighttime the Fatiha once and *ayat* al-Kursi
seven times, sending salutations unto the Prophet (S) and his progeny
fifty times, his deeds will be raised as those of the *siddeeqs*, the
martyrs, and the righteous. Whoever says his prayers during the tenth
night for twenty *rek’ats*, repeating the Fatiha once and the Tawheed
thirty-one times, Allah will expand his sustenance and he will be (on
the Day of Resurrection) among the winners.

Whoever says two *rek’ats* during the eleventh night, reciting the
Fatiha once and Surat al-Kawthar twenty times, all his sins will be
forgiven that day. Whoever says his prayers during the twelfth night
eight times, reciting the Fatiha once and the Qadr thirty times, will be
granted the rewards of those who have thanked Allah as He ought to be
thanked, and he will be regarded on the Day of Resurrection as one of
those who perse­vered.

Whoever says his prayers during the thirteenth night in four *rek’ats*,
reciting the Fatiha once and the Tawheed twenty-five times, will pass on
the right path (*al-Sirat*) as swiftly as lightning. Whoever says his
prayers during the fourteenth night six times, reciting the Fatiha once
and the Zalzala thirty times, Allah will make the hours of death, and
[his being questioned by] both Munkir and Nakeer, easy for him.

Whoever says his prayers during the fifteenth night in four *rek’ats*,
repeating in the first two of them, after reciting the Fatiha, the
chapter of Tawheed a hundred times, and after the Fatiha of the other
two the Tawheed fifty times, will be granted what nobody knows except
Allah. Whoever says his prayers during the sixteenth night in twelve
*rek’ats*, reciting the Fatiha once and the Takathur twelve times will
leave his grave like one whose thirst has been quenched, repeating the
*shahada* till he reaches Paradise and enters it without reckoning.

Whoever says his prayers during the seventeenth night in two *rek’ats*,
reciting in the first one the Fatiha and whatever he wishes after it,
and in the second the Fatiha once and the Tawheed one hundred times,
then, after having sent salutations unto the Prophet (S) and his
progeny, acknowledging the unity of his Lord (I.e., by saying: *La ilaha
illa-Allah!*) a hundred times, will be granted the rewards of performing
the pilgrimage a million times, and the rewards of a million *‘umras*,
and the rewards of a million *ghazwas*. Whoever says his prayers during
the eighteenth night in four *rek’ats* reciting the Fatiha once and the
Kawthar twenty-five times, the angel of death will bring him the glad
tidings that the Almighty is pleased with him.

Whoever says his prayers during the nineteenth night fifty times,
reciting the Fatiha once and the Zalzala fifty times, will be regarded
as though he had performed the pilgrimage and the *‘umra* a hundred
times, and Allah will accept all his deeds. Anyone who performs his
prayers during the twentieth night in eight *rek’ats* reciting whatever
Qur'anic chapters he wishes, his sins will be forgiven. Anyone who says
his prayers during the twenty-first night in eight *rek’ats* reciting
whatever he pleases, the gates of heaven will be opened for him, and his
plea will be answered, and he will have even more rewards from Allah.
Whoever says his prayers during the twenty-second night in eight
*rek’ats*, reciting whatever he pleases, will be regarded as one who
performed both *hajj* and *'umra*.

Anyone who performs his prayers during the twenty-fifth night in eight
*rek’ats*, reciting in each the Fatiha once and the Tawheed ten times,
Allah will grant him the rewards of the pious. Whoever says his prayers
during the twenty-seventh night in four *rek’ats* reciting the Fatiha
once and Tabarak once, but if he does not memorize Tabarak, then let him
recite the Fatiha twenty-five times, he and his parents will be
forgiven.

Anyone who says his prayers during the twenty-eighth night in six
*rek’ats* reciting the Fatiha once and ten times Surat al-Kursi,
al-Kawthar and al-Tawheed, then after he sends salutations unto the
Prophet (S) and his progeny a hundred times, he will surely be forgiven.
Whoever says his prayers during the twenty-ninth night in two *rek’ats*
reciting the Fatiha once and Tawheed twenty times will receive mercy,
and his book of reckoning will be raised to *‘illiyyeen*. Whoever says
his prayers during the thirtieth night in twelve *rek’ats* reciting the
Fatiha once and the Tawheed twenty times, his deeds will be sealed with
mercy from Allah after he sends salutations unto the Prophet (S) and his
progeny a hundred times.


