Which Night is Lailatul-Qadr?
=============================

Is it the 17th or the 19th? Imam Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali-al-Baqir
(as) is quoted in *Bihar al-Anwar* and *Da’aim al-Islam* as having said,
"The 17th night of the month of Ramadhan is when the two parties met,
and the 19th is when the lists of the pilgrims is written down, and the
21st is when successors to the Prophets passed away and Jesus Christ
(as) was raised to heaven and Moses (as) passed away, whereas the 23rd
is hoped to be Lailatul-Qadr."

Both al-’Ayyashi's *Tafsir* and al-Majlisi's *Bihar al-Anwar* quote ‘Amr
ibn Sa’eed saying, "A man from Medina disagreed with me regarding the
night (Lailatul-Qadr) when the two hosts meet, saying that it was the
night of the 17th of the month of Ramadhan, so I went to see Abu
Abdullah (as) and told him about our disagreement, whereupon he (as)
said, ‘The man from Medina did not say the truth; I know that you mean
it is the 19th when the Commander of the Faithful (Imam Ali, as) was
wounded, and it is the same night when Jesus son of Mary (as) was raised
to heavens."

Both references quote Humran quoting Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq
(as) saying, "The destiny referred to as Lailatul-Qadr is the same
destiny referred to in another verse (of Surat al-A’raf) wherein the
most Exalted One says: ‘When their doom is come, they shall not remain
behind in the least, nor will they go before' (Holy Qur'an, 7:34)."

Or is it the 21st or the 23rd? Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ubaydullah, according to
*Majalis al-Shaykh*, as quoted on p. 2, Vol. 94, of *Bihar al-Anwar*,
quotes Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya who in turn quotes his father
saying, "I was in the company of Abu Abdullah (as) when Abu Busayr asked
him, ‘Which night is the one when one is to plead to his Lord whatever
he wishes to plead?' The Imam (as) answered him by saying, ‘Either the
twenty-first or the twenty-third.'

He then asked him (as), ‘What if I have no strength to observe both of
them?' The Imam (as) said, ‘How easy it is to observe them when compared
to your pleas!'" Abu Abdullah (as) is also quoted in the same volume of
*Bihar al-Anwar* saying, "The twenty-third night of the month of
Ramadhan is the one when every weighty matter is decided, when trials,
tribulations, deaths, and means of sustenance and other matters are
determined, and so will whatever Allah decrees to take place for the
entire next year; so, congratulations to anyone who remains awake during
it bowing, prostrating, contemplating upon his sins, weeping on their
account, for if you do all of that, God willing, you will never be
disappointed."

Then he added, "Allah will order an angel to call out during each and
every day of the month of Ramadhan conveying Allah's message to them
thus: ‘Good news, O My servants! I have forgiven your past sins and
permitted some of you to intercede on behalf of the rest on
Lailatul-Qadr except those who break their fast with an intoxicant or
those who bear grudge against another Muslim brother!'" It is narrated
that Allah *Subhanahu wa Ta’ala* wards off evil and sins and all types
of trials on the 25th night from all His servants who fast and grants
them light in their hearing and vision; Paradise is decorated during
Lailatul-Qadr's day and night.

The great Sunni scholar Ibn Abul-Hadid, in his commentary on *Nahjul
Balagha*, cites Ibn Durayd's *Amali* stating that al-Jarmoothi quotes
Ibn al-Muhallabi quoting Ibn al-Kalbi quoting Shaddad ibn Ibrahim
quoting ‘Ubaydullah ibn al-Hassan al-Fahri quoting Ibn ‘Aradah saying,
"The Commander of the Faithful (as) was once asked about Lailatul-Qadr,
and he said, ‘It is not at all improbable that I know which night it is
and deliberately hide such knowledge, and I do not at all doubt that
Allah hid such knowledge from you only out of His love for you, for if
you knew which night it is, you would have honored it and left the
others, and I hope you will not err in its regard."


