Recommended Deeds for each Night of the Last Ten Nights of the Month
====================================================================

These are many; among them is what is recommended by the Prophet (S) who
has said: "Whoever prays two *rek’as* on Lailatul-Qadr and recites the
Fatiha once in each *rek’a* and the Tawheed seven times, then when he
finishes he seeks forgiveness seventy times, then he adds, ‘I seek
Allah's forgiveness and to Him do I repent,' by the time he leaves his
place, Allah will have forgiven him and his parents and sent angels to
record good deeds for him for another year, and He would send angels to
plant trees for him in Paradise and build him mansions and draw rivers,
and he would not leave the life of this world before seeing all what is
in store for him in Paradise."

Another recommended deed is *ghusul* (ceremonial bath) which is highly
recommended and emphasized especially during the last three nights (of
the month), and the best time to take it is after sunset prayers. And
speaking of *ghusul*, it is recommended, as the Prophet of Islam (S) had
himself done, to stay away from women during these most sacred days but
to approach them in the first 20 days.

As a matter of fact, p. 180, Vol. 4, of al-Kulayni's *Al-Kafi*, p. 348,
Vol. 94, of al-Majlisi's *Bihar al-Anwar*, and p. 112, Vol. 2, of Ibn
Babawayh's work *Man la yahduru al-faqih* all suggest that it is highly
recommended to approach women particularly during the first nights of
the month of Ramadhan. These classic books quote the Commander of the
Faithful (as) saying that it is recommended for a believer to cohabit
with his wife (particularly) during the first night of this sacred
month.

Another recommended deed is what is called the "plea by the sanctity of
the Holy Qur'an" which is reported on the authority of both Imams
al-Baqir and al-Sadiq, peace be upon them, who have said, "You must take
the Holy Qur'an during those last three nights of the month of Ramadhan,
open it, then put it on your hands and say: ‘Lord! I plead to You by
Your revealed Book and everything in it, and in it is Your great Name
and the most sublime attributes. I plead to You to send blessings unto
Muhammad (S) and the progeny of Muhammad (S) and to free me from the
bondage of the fire,' then you ask Allah whatever you wish."

Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying, "Take the Holy Qur'an, put it on
your head and say, ‘Lord! By the grace of this Holy Qur'an and to whom
You have revealed it, and by every believer You have praised therein,
and by Your right upon them, for none knows Your right more than You!'

Then you repeat ten times each of the following: ‘By Your Grace, O
Mighty God! By Muhammad, by Ali, by Fatima, by al-Hassan, by al-Hussain,
by Ali ibn al-Hussain, by Muhammad ibn Ali, by Ja’far ibn Muhammad, by
Mousa ibn Ja’far, by Ali ibn Mousa, by Muhammad ibn Ali, by Ali ibn
Muhammad, by al-Hassan ibn Ali, by al-Hujja (al-Mahdi),' then you state
your plea, and Allah will help you attain your objective if He pleases."
Another special invocation quoted from the Prophet (S) says:

"I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, the One and Only God,
without a partner, and that Muhammad (S) is His servant and messenger. I
bear witness that Paradise is right and that the fire is right, and that
the hour is approaching, there is no doubt about it, and that Allah
shall bring life to those in the graves. I further bear witness that the
Lord is my God: there is no partner with Him, nor a son, nor a father,
and I bear witness that He does whatever He pleases and is able to do
everything and is the Doer of what He wills.

He humiliates whomsoever He wills and raises whomsoever He pleases,
Owner of the domain, Sustainer of the servants, the Forgiving, the
Mercy-giving, the Omniscient, the Kind. I bear witness again and again
and again and again and again and again and again that You, Lord, are
exactly so and even more, and that none can describe Your greatness.
Lord! I pray You to send blessings unto Muhammad (S) and the progeny of
Muhammad (S) and to guide me and not to leave me to stray after having
guided me, for You guide whomsoever You please."


