Recommended Deeds for the Twenty-Third Night of the Month of Ramadhan
=====================================================================

All recommended deeds stated above are also recommended for this night
and for all the nights referred to above one of which, according to the
above-quoted traditions, Lailatul-Qadr may as well be. On all these
nights, it is recommended that you perform the *ghusul* twice: once at
the beginning of the night, and once at its end as Imam al-Sadiq, peace
be upon him, is quoted saying. It is also recommended that you read the
Chapter of the Holy Qur'an dealing with the Romans and the one with the
Spider.

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, has told Abu Baseer that whoever
recites both chapters of al-'Ankaboot (Spider) and al-Room (Romans) on
the twenty-third night of the month of Ramadhan will certainly be among
the residents of Paradise without any exception, adding, "... and I do
not fear that Allah will record a sin against me for giving such a
status for these two Chapters." It is also recommended to recite the
Dukhkhan (Smoke) Chapter too.

Imam Ali, peace be upon him, has said, "Everything has a fruit, and the
fruit of the Holy Qur'an is the Qadr Chapter. Everything has a treasure,
and the treasure that removes poverty is the Qadr Chapter. For
everything there is a means whereby it can be attained, and the means of
the weak is the Qadr Chapter. For every hardship there is ease, and the
ease of those suffering from hardship is the Qadr Chapter.

There is a shield against everything evil, and the shield of the
believers is the Qadr Chapter. For everything there is guidance, and the
guidance of the righteous is the Qadr Chapter. There is excellence for
everything, and the excellence of knowledge is the Qadr Chapter. There
is a decoration for everything, and the decoration of the Holy Qur'an is
the Qadr Chapter.

There is a canopy for everything, and the canopy of the devotees is the
Qadr Chapter. There is a glad tiding for everything, and the glad tiding
of the innocent is the Qadr Chapter. There is a Proof (Hujja) for
everything, and the Hujja after the Prophet (S) is the Qadr Chapter;
therefore, believe in it." He (as) was asked how to believe in it, and
he answered, "That it shall occur in each and every year, and that
everything revealed in it is true."

He (as) is also quoted saying, "For anyone who recites the Qadr Chapter,
God Almighty writes down a good deed for every particle of dust where he
sits while reciting it." He (as) is also quoted saying, "It is a good
companion for anyone who wishes to pay off his debt, esteem his creed,
prolong his life-span, and improve his condition. Anyone who recites it
quite often will meet Allah as a *siddeeq* and as a martyr."

The book *Misbah al-Mutahajjid* quotes Muhammad ibn 'Isa, relying on the
authority of the righteous, peace be upon them, says, "You sho­uld
repeat the following invocation on the twenty-third night of the blessed
month of Ramadhan either prostrating, standing up, or sitting down, or
in any other way, and during the entire month and however you can, and
whenever you are faced with hard times.

Having glorified Allah and sent blessings unto the Prophet and his
progeny, peace be upon all of them, you should say, ‘Lord! Be for Your
*wali* Muhammad ibn al-Hassan at this hour and at every hour of the
night and the day a Protector, Guardian, Leader, Supporter, Guide and
Reconnoiterer, till You let him reside in Your earth willingly and grant
him enjoyment therein for a long period of time.

O You Who manages all affairs, Who brings life back to the residents of
the graves, Who permits the oceans to flow and the iron to be pliant for
David, peace be upon him, I pray You to send blessings unto Muhammad and
the progeny of Muhammad,' then you mention your wish, raising your
hands. You may repeat it while you are prostrating, kneel­ing, standing
or sitting, and repeat it on the last night of the nights of the month
of Ramadhan."


