Invocation for the Twenty-Third Night (of the Month of Ramadhan)
================================================================

This is narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S) and it is as follows:

"Praised One, Glorified, Lord of the angels and the Spirit, Praised One,
Glorified, Lord of the angels and the Throne, Praised One, Glorified,
Lord of the heavens and the earth, Praised One, Glorified, Lord of the
oceans and the­moun­tains; Praised One, Glorified, praised by the fish
in the oceans, by the reptiles and the beasts and the hills; Praised
One, Glorified, praised by the angels and those who are near to Him;
Praised One, Glorified, Exalted, Vanquished everything and created
everything in a measure. Praised, Praised, Praised, Praised, Praised,
Praised, Praised! Glorified, Glorified, Glorified, Glorified, Glorified,
Glorified, Glorified! I pray You to send blessings unto Muhammad (S) and
the progeny of Muhammad (S) and to forgive me and have mercy on me, for
You are the One, the Unique."

Then you ought to add the following:

"Lord! I pray You to make my share of every goodness You have sent down
this night, or are sending down this night to be the most generous, of
light whereby You guide, or mercy You spread out, or sus­tenance You
divide, or a tribulation You shun, or an evil you expose, and to write
for me what you write for Your righteous servants who deserve Your
rewards and who deserved security by pleasing You. You affect
retribution. You give without a measure; You are the Generous One! I
pray You to send blessings unto Muhammad (S) and the progeny of Muhammad
(S) and to deal with me mercifully; You are the most Merciful of those
who are merciful unto others."

Then you should say:

"I pray You like one who is poor and helpless, and I invoke You like one
who is poor and humble, and I ask you like one who has submitted
willingly to You and admitted his wrong-doing and whose eyes have
over-flown with tears, who is most helpless, who has no other means, to
grant me this night forgiveness for all my past sins, and to protect me
from sinning for the rest of my life, to grant me pilgri­mage and
*‘umra* this year, to make it pilgrimage purely for the sake of
achiev­ing Your pleasure, and to enable me to al­ways do so, and do not
hinder me from visiting Your House and the grave-site of Your Messenger
Muhammad, Your bles­sings and peace be upon him and his pro­geny.

And I plead You, Lord, not to let me remain in dire need of Your
creatures, of the jinns and of mankind, of the Arabs and of the
non-Arabs, of every being whom You can overpower; for You are on the
right path. Lord! Grant me, Lord, of what­ever You decide and decree of
every des­tined matter on this night, the fate which cannot be avoided
nor can it be altered, to visit Your sacred House among other pilgrims
this year whose pilgrimage You appreciate and whose endeavor is forgiven
and so are their sins, and to pro­long my life-span, to increase my
sus­tenance, and to grant me a dutiful son, for You can do whatever You
will, and You are aware of everything."


