What ought to be repeated every night of the last ten nights of the month
=========================================================================

An annotation on al-Kaf’ami's book *Al-Misbah* contains an invocation
narrated through the authority of Imam al-Sadiq (as). It is recommended
to be repeated on each of the last ten nights of the month. The author
indicates that he (as) used to say the following on each such night:

"Lord! You have said in Your revealed Book: ‘The month of Ramadhan is
that in which the Holy Qur'an was revealed, a guid­ance to men and clear
proofs of the guidance and the distinction,' and You glorified the
sanctity of the month of Ramadhan due to the Holy Qur'an which You
revealed therein, assigning Lailatul-Qadr to it and making it better
than a thousand months. Lord! These are the days of the month of
Ramadhan which have gone by and so have its nights. Lord!

You are more knowledgeable than I, and more aware, of the number of Your
devotees; so, I pray You in whatever Your angels who are close to You,
Your messen­gers, and Your righteous devotees, pray You to send
blessings unto Muhammad (S) and the progeny of Muhammad, and to free me
from the fire, to let me enter into Paradise by Your mercy, and to be
Gracious unto me, to forgive me, to accept my endeavor to be near to
You, to respond to my invocation and to grant me security on the day
when everyone will be terrified, apprehensive of the horrors prepared on
the Day of Judg­ment. Lord!

I seek refuge with Your Glory and Great Prestige not to let the days and
nights of the month of Ramadhan pass away without forgiving me for the
sins for which You intend that I should atone. O Lord, Lord, Lord! I
pray You, You with Whom there is no other god, for there is no god but
You, to be pleased with me in this month, and to be even more pleased
with me if You were pleased with me before. So, be pleased with me,
Lord, for You are the most Merciful of those who are merciful unto
others, O You Who is the One and Only God, the One Independent of any
need, the One Who did not beget nor is He begotten, nor is there ever
the like of Him!"

Then repeat the following at least three times:

"O You Who made the iron pliant to David, peace be upon him! O You Who
removed distress and the great agony from Jacob, peace be upon him! O
You Who removed the distress of Joseph, peace be upon him! I pray You to
send blessings unto Muhammad (S) and the progeny of Muhammad, for You
are Capable of doing so, and not to punish me with the punishment that I
de­serve."


