Zakatul-Fitr (Fitra)
====================

*Zakatul-Fitr* is a mandatory religious tax paid by those who can afford
it at the end of the month of Ramadhan. It depends on the type of major
item of food consumed by the believer during the year. This may be rice,
wheat, barley, dates, etc. In weight, it should be at least three
kilograms of food per person. It is also permissible to pay cash of
equivalent value.

Due to the inflation and rising prices, we suggest that a *fitra* of
$5.50 per person is reasonable. It must be paid by the head of the
family on behalf of his dependents, including servants of both sexes,
and/or dependent relatives who are fed in his house. If a Muslim or even
a non-Muslim guest arrives at someone's house prior to the night
preceding Eidul-Fitr and dines with his host, it is incumbent on the
latter to pay for the former's *fitra*.

If the guest arrives after sunset of the night preceding the Eid,
*fitra* is not obligatory even if he dines with his host. If the guest
who arrives before sunset does not dine, *fitra* is still obligatory on
his host. It is better, however, if both host and guest give *fitra*. If
one's wife is at her parents' house on the night preceding the Eid, her
parents should take out her *fitra*. On the last day of the month of
Ramadhan, if someone arranges a *majlis* which commences after sunset,
and if he treats his guests to *iftar*, he does not have to pay *fitra*
on their behalf.


