Who receives Fitra
==================

*Fitra* should be given to deserving believers whose income is not
sufficient to spend on their families for one year. *Fitra* cannot be
given to one's own dependents. Deserving neighbors and pious persons are
good candidates to receive and enjoy the *fitra*. *Fitra* from Sayyids
(descendants of Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny) can be given to poor Sayyids or non-Sayyids. Fitra
from non-Sayyids cannot be given to Sayyids. If deserving persons are
not easy to find or identify, *fitra* should be sent to places where
such persons can be found, or the amount should be sent to a *mujtahid*
who would do justice in its distribution.

It is absolutely mandatory that the recipient of *fitra* be *â€˜adil*,
I.e., a just and fair person who can be trusted to distribute it
properly, and it is necessary to ensure that *fitra* is not given to
anyone who may in any possibility use it for sinful acts such as
drinking liquors, gambling, etc.

Although it is permissible to send *fitra* to any place, it is better to
distribute it to a deserving person locally. The time for giving *fitra*
is from the night preceding Eidul-Fitr up till noon. If this is not
possible for any reason, the amount of *fitra* must then be set aside
and be distributed when deserving persons are present, or it may be sent
to a *mujtahid* for proper distribution, and it cannot be paid prior to
the time when it becomes due. The best time to pay it is before noon
prayers on Eid al-Fitr.


