Glossary
========

*‘Adil*: fair, just

*‘Adl*: the concept of the justice of God

*Ahadith*: singular of *hadith*, a statement (usually attributed either
to the Prophet [S] or to one of the members of his Progeny [as] or
companions)

*Ahilla*: plural of hilal, crescent

*‘Alim*: scholar, theologian, a highly knowledgeable person

*A’mal*: highly recommended acts of adoration

*‘Arsh:* literally: throne, symbol of the Al­mighty's Authority

*Ashar*: plural of *sahar*, the time immediately preceding daybreak

*Athan*: the call for prayers; *muaththin* is one who performs *athān*.

*Ayat*: verse (from a sacred scripture)

*Barzakh*: the place and time wherein the souls of the dead live a life
of their own prior to the Day of Judgment; see the Holy Qur'an, 23:100.

*Beed*: plural of *abyad*, white

*Dahr*: time, age, eternity

*Dinar*: an Islamic (now Arab) gold currency varying in weight

*Dirham*: an Islamic silver currency weighing approx. 3.12 grams

*Du’a*: supplication, invocation

*Eid*: an Islamic feast, a joyous celebration, a merry occasion

*Faaizeen*: winners

*Fajr*: daybreak

*Faqih*: jurist, one who is knowledgeable in Islamic jurisprudence

*Farasikh*: plural of *farsakh*, parasang (a loan Persian word), a
measure of length (distance). According to *Lisan al-’Arab*, it may be
three to six miles. "It is called so," the author of *Lisan al-’Arab*
goes on, "because one who walks one *farsakh* will have to sit to rest,"
suggesting that the original meaning of the word is: to halt, to come to
a stand still, to rest.

*Fatawa*: plural of *fatwā*, a religious edict or decision

*Fiqh*: the science of Islamic jurisprudence

*Firdaws*: Paradise

*Fitra*: the amount (in cash or kind) paid to the needy at the end of
the month of Ramadhan; see text for more details

*Ghazwa*: a military campaign, invasion

*Ghusul*: ceremonial bath

*Hadith*: (singular:) tradition, a statement made by Prophet Muhammad
(S); its plural is: *ahadith*

*Hadi*: sacrificial animals offered at Mecca's holy precincts

*Hajj*: Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca during the prescribed period

*Halal*: Islamically permissible, admissible, allowed

*Hilal*: crescent, singular of *ahilla*

*Haram*: Islamically prohibitive, inadmissible, forbidden

*Hujja*: proof, argument, authority

*Huri*: heavenly wife with large lovely eyes married to the male
residents of Paradise

*Ihram*: pilgrimage garb, white unwoven cotten shroud worn by pilgrims

*Ijtihad*: the degree one reaches in order to be qualified as a
*mujtahid*, one who is capable of deriving religious decisions on his
own

*‘Illiyeen*: the highest pinnacle of Paradise; see Holy Qur'an, 83:18.

*Imam*: leader of an *ummah*, a group of people (small or big); he may
be the one who leads others in congregational prayers, or a supreme
relgious authority, or one of the Twelve Infallible Imams (as)

*‘Isha*: nighttime, evening

*Isnad*: the method whereby one *hadith* is traced and in the end
attributed to a *muhaddith*, traditionist, one who transmitted it the
first time

*I’tikaf*: the act of remaining most of the time at a mosque for prayers
and supplications

*Iftar*: the time or the meal to break the fast

*Iqamah*: the statements recited immediately before starting the ritual
prayer

*Isnad*: the rendering of a quoted statement to its chain of narrators
and transmitters

*Israa*: night journey; usually a reference to the Prophet's night
journey from Mecca to Jerusalem

*Jahannam*: hell

*Jahiliyya*: pre-Islamic period of ignorance

*Jami’a*: inclusive, universal, university

*Janabah*: uncleanness caused by seminal discharge

*Jannat*: heaven, Paradise, garden, singular of *jannaat*

*Jihad*: a struggle, an effort exerted, or a war waged in defense of
Islam

*Kaffara*: atonement from sin

*Kafir*: infidel, apostate, atheist, one who does not believe in the
existence of the Creator

*Kalima*: synonymous to "shahada," it is a Muslim's declaration of faith
(that is, to testify that there is no god except Allah, and that
Muhammad (S) is the Messenger of Allah), and it is always pronounced in
Arabic

*Kantar*: in Arabic: *qintaar*, avarying weight of 100 *ratls* (rotls);
a *ratl* in Syria is roughly 3.202 kg., whereas in England it is 449.28
grams, and in Lebanon it is 2.566 kg.

*Khums*: one-fifth of one's savings (usually paid by Shi’a Muslims) set
aside from annual income

*Kursi*: literally: chair, symbol of the Almighty's Seat of Judgment and
Authority; see Holy Qur'an, 2:255

*Khutba*: lecture, sermon; a speech delivered on a specific occasion

*Kufr*: apostacy, infidelity, disbelief

*Labbayk:* an exclamation conveying the meaning of "At your service!" or
"Here I am!"

*Ma’ad*: the Return: a reference to the re­turning of the souls to their
new bodies after the period of *barzakh* (see above), and their ultimate
returning to their Maker for judgment; generally, it is used to refer to
death and the life hereafter.

*Majalis*: meetings or gatherings held to com­memmorate certain
religious occasion, mostly applied to those held during the month of
Muharram or to recite the Fatiha for a deceased person; singular of
*majlis*, a place where people sit

*Marji’ taqlid*: the highest theological authority-referee followed

*Mash’ar*: a place where certain rites are to be conducted, a sacred
area or place or precinct

*Mawla*: depending on its usage, it may mean either "master" or "slave,"
or it may mean one who is most fit for a specific position of honor and
prestige. Derived from the adjective *awla* (one who is best qualified),
it means: the person who is best suited to be the religious and temporal
leader of all Muslims.

*Mi’raj*: ascension to heaven

*Mithqal*: a weight equivalent to 24 karats or 4.68 grams

*Mu'min*: believer, one who has *iman*, conviction, true belief

*Mujtahid*: one who acquires the degree of *ijtihad* and thus becomes
capable of deriving religious decisions on his own

*Musnad*: a compilation of traditions (*ahadith*) which are
consecutively and chronologically traced to their transmitters

*Mutawatir*: consecutively reported, traced by a perfect chronological
chain of ascertained narrators of *hadith*

*Nafl*: optional, non-compulsory, supererot­atory, highly recommended
act of worship

*Najasa*: uncleanness, impurity

*Nathr*: One's pledge to do something very good to show appreciation for
the Almighty's favorable response to his supplication and the attainment
of his worldly wish

*Noor*: divine or celestial light

*Nubuwwah*: prophethood, the belief in prophets and their messages

*Qaniteen*: those who are constantly supplicating

*Qaza*: compensatory, making up for a missed rite

*Qibla*: direction towards the Ka’ba, Mecca

*Qiyam*: standing

*Qudsi*: divine, related to the Almighty

*Qunoot*: supplication during prayers

*Rek’at*: prostration (during prayer or a ritual)

*Rukoo’*: kneeling

*Sabeel*: path, way, avenue

*Sadaqa*: (singular:) charity offered voluntarily; its plural is:
*sadaq­aāt*

*Sadeed*: pus collected from bleeding wounds to be served to the sinners
in hell when they ask for water to quench their thirst

*Sahaba*: (singular:) companions of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S); its
plural is: *sahābi*

*Sahabi*: companion (e.g. of the Holy Prophet­), one of the *sahaba*

*Saheefa*: tablet, scroll, parchment, a written document

*Sahih*: literally: authentic, correct, accurate; it is generally used
to refer to the collection, group of collections, or book, of verified
and authenticated *ahadith* of the Holy Prophet (S)

*Shahada*: martyrdom

*Shahr*: month

*Shaikh*: also *syakh*, an honoring title with many meanings; literally,
it means an old man; in Islamic theology and philosophy, however, it is
used to denote a mentor, professor, or schol­ar of a high calibre

*Shari’a*: Islam's legislative system

*Shirk*: polytheism, the belief in the existence of partners with God

*Shubha*: (singular) doubt, suspicion; its plural is: *shubuhat*

*Shura*: the principle of mutual consultation, Islam's form of democracy

*Siddeeq*: one who testifies to the truthfulness of a prophet

*Sirat*: path, highway; same as *Sabeel*

*Siyam*: Islam's norm of fast

*Suhoor*: time or meal taken before daybreak in preparation to fast
during the day

*Sunan*: plural of *sunnah*: a highly commended act of worship or way
whereby a Muslim seeks nearness to Allah

*Tabi’een*: plural of *tabi’*, one who follows and learns from a
*Sahabi*

*Tabi’I*: (singular:) one who accompanied for a good period of time and
learned from a *sahabi*, a companion of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S);
its plural is: *tabi’een*

*Tafsïr*: (singular:) exegesis or explanation of Qur'anic verses; its
plural is: *tafasïr*

*Tahara*: purification, the act of removing *najasa*, uncleanness or
impurity

*Takbeer*: the act of glorifying Allāh by declaring in an audible voice:
"Allaho Akbar!" Allah is Great!

*Taqiyya*: one's way of exerting precaution in order to save his life
when it is in jeopardy, Shi’as' way of trying to survive against the
presence of sure perils

*Taqleed*: the concept of following a *mujtahid* or an authority
recognized as the *a’alam*, the most knowledgeable in Islamics

*Tarwiyah*: The Day of Tarwiyah is the 8th of Thul-Hijjah when the
pilgrims fill their water bags and prepare to go to Mina.

*Tashahhud*: the testimony regarding Allah being the Lord and Muhammad
(S) being His Servant and Messenger; it is the uttering of "Ashhadu an
la ilaha illa-Allah, wa anna Muhammad abdoho wa rasooloh"

*Tashreeq*: the cutting and sun-drying of sacrificed meat

*Tawaf*: circling around a certain sacred site

*Tawatur*: consecutive reporting, the tracing of one particular *hadith*
to its respective chronological chain of narrators

*Tawhid*: the concept of the absolute Unity of God, the belief that God
is One and indivisible, One\_\_and Only One\_\_God

*Tawwabeen*: the penitent ones, those who repented their reluctance to
go to the rescue of Imam Husayn (as) when he was confronted with Yazid's
armies and who enlisted under the military command of al-Mukhtār and
pursued those who massacred Imam Hussain ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) and
killed them

*Thakireen*: those who often mention the Name of the Almighty and
Glorify Him

*Thayyib*: a deflowered woman, a widow or divorcee

*Thireed*: pieces of bread cut and dipped in stew

*‘Ulema*: plural of *‘ālim*, scholar-theologian

*Ummah*: nation, group of people

*‘Umra*: the pilgrimage to Mecca during any time other than the
prescribed (first ten) days of the month of Thul-Hijjah

*Usool*: the basics of jurisprudence

*Waqf*: a piece of property dedicated for the promotion of any
particular good cause

*Wajib*: compulsory, obligatory, binding

*Wali*: person to whom *wilayat* is obligatory

*Wasi*: successor to a prophet

*Wilayat*: supreme authority that combines both temporal and religious
authority

*Wisal*: fasting the last day of every lunar calendar month

*Wudu*: ablution

*Zakat*: Literally, it means "purification;" it is a compulsory 2.5% tax
on one of three categories of wealth: 1) metal coins (gold, silver,
etc.), 2) grain crops (barley, wheat, grain, rice, etc.), and 3) animals
raised for food consumption. *Zakat* is somehow a complicated issue, and
for details, readers are advised to consult books dealing with *fiqh*.
Among its types are: *zakat al-mal* (taxable wealth accumulated during
one full year), and *zakat al-fitr* (a tax to be paid by the head of a
household at the end of the fast of the month of Ramadhan).

*Zihar*: the making of a similitude between the back of one's wife with
that of his mother; I.e. saying that his wife's back looks similar to
his mother's

And surely Allah knows best...


