Fast of the Month of Ramadhan
=============================

The lunar calendar of Islam brings the fast of the month of Ramadhan
eleven days earlier every year. Thus, in a cycle of about thirty-three
years, it passes through all the seasons successively. Fast was first
prescribed on the second of Sha’ban in the second year of Hijrah (the
migration of Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny, from Mecca to Medina, corresponding to 622 A.D.).

On p. 59, of al-Saduq's *Amali* (or *Majalis*), the *faqih* mentor and
author quotes Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn
al-Mughirah al-Kufi as saying that his grandfather al-Hassan ibn Ali
quotes his grandfather Abdullah ibn al-Mughirah quoting Isma’eel ibn Abu
Ziyad quoting Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (as) citing
his forefathers, peace be upon all of them, saying that the Messenger of
Allah (S)[^1] once asked his companions, "Shall I tell you about
something which, if you do it, will distance you from Satan as much as
the distance between the east and the west?"

They said, "O yes! Please do so," whereupon he (S) said, "It is fast. It
darkens his [Satan's] face, while charity breaks his back and the love
for Allah's sake and assisting others in doing good deeds cut off his
tail and seeking Allah's forgiveness splits his spine. For everything
there is a *zakat* (purification), and the *zakat* of the bodies is
fast."

Because the reader will come across the name of Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq
(as)[^2] quite often in this book, we ought to stop here for a moment to
introduce this great personality to those who may not be familiar with
him. Needless to say, the Imam (as) is very well known to Muslims
following the Shi’a Ja’fari Ithna-’Asheri School of Muslim Law; after
all, they derive their *fiqh* from him and regard him as highly as, say,
Hanafis regard Imam Abu Haneefah al-Nu’man, or as the Hanbalis regard
Imam Ahmed ibn Hanbal. But those who are not Shi’as are justified in
wondering how Imam al-Sadiq (as) knew the forthcoming information; so,
let us introduce them to one of the most knowledgeable men who ever
lived on earth:

His full name is Abu Abdullah Ja’far ibn Imam Muhammad al-Baqir ibn Imam
Ali al-Azgher Zaynul-’Abidin ibn Imam Husayn ibn Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib,
of the clan of Banu Hashim, of the tribe of Quraysh, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon all of them and many, many salutations. He was born in
the sacred precincts of Medina on the 17th of Rabee’ al-Awwal of 83
A.H., and he died at the age of 65 after being poisoned by the Abbaside
caliph Abu Ja’far al-Mansur and was buried at Baqee’, Medina. His mother
was a relative of the first caliph Abu Bakr: she was Umm Farwa Fatima
daughter of Abdel-Rahman son of Abu Bakr. His father was Abu Ja’far Imam
Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (as) (57 - 114 A.H.), grandson of Imam Husayn
(as).

If you wish to realize the greatness of Imam al-Sadiq (as), you will see
his praise not only by Sunnis but also by non-Muslims as well,
especially since his contributions to his contemporary intellectual
revolution were invaluable and quite diverse. Not only was he a
theologian, he was also a mathematician, a botanist, and alchemist, a
scientist, and a man of letters.

To quote what Shi’as say about him may be out of place here. Probably
the best compliment the Imam (as) received was from one of his world
famous students: Imam Abu Haneefah al-Nu’man, founder of the major Sunni
sect, the Hanafis, who was one of tens of thousands of scholars who
prided himself in being Abu Abdullah's students. Abu Haneefah said
verbatim: "Lawlal sanatan, la halaka al-Nu’man," which means, "Had it
not been for those couple of years, al-Nu’man would have perished," a
reference to two years which he spent in Baghdad as a student of Imam
al-Sadiq (as) during al-Mansur's caliphate.

In his *Musnad Abu Haneefah*, Abul-Qasim al-Baghghar quotes al-Hasan ibn
Ziyad as saying, "Abu Haneefah was asked once in my presence, ‘Who is
the most outstanding *faqih* you have ever seen?' and he answered by
saying, ‘Ja’far ibn Muhammad. When-al-Mansur brought him [from Medina to
Baghdad], he sent for me and said, ‘O Abu Haneefah! People are enchanted
by Ja’far ibn Muhammad, so you should prepare some of your most
difficult questions for him.' I prepared forty questions for him, then
his [al-Sadiq's] father was brought from Heera. I visited him, greeted
him, and sat at his place of meeting.

Then he turned to him and said, ‘O Abu Abdullah! This is Abu Haneefah.'
'Yes, I know him,' he responded. Then he turned to me and said, ‘Ask Abu
Abdullah some of your questions,' so I kept asking him, and he answered
all my questions, telling me our answers to them as well as those of the
people of Medina..., till I finished asking him all the forty questions
which I had prepared. He fully answered all of them.'" Then Abu Haneefah
said, "Is not one who best knows people's different views the most
knowledgeable among them?"

Where did Imam al-Sadiq (as) get his knowledge from? Let us answer this
question not from the Shi’a but from the Sunni viewpoint in order to
satisfy the curiosity of, and perhaps convince, some skeptical readers
of this book. On p. 221, Vol. 2, of the original Arabic text of
al-Bukhari's *Sahih*, the author makes a reference to one particular
*saheefa*, a parchment type scroll, which was being written by Imam Ali
ibn Abu Talib (as) during the revelation of the Holy Qur'an, I.e.,
during more than two decades, reaching in the end a total length of
seventy yards. As he was writing it, Imam Ali (as) used to tie its
pieces, one at a time, to his sword's scabbard as a protective measure.
This signifies how much he esteemed it.

It consisted of *ahadith* of the Holy Prophet (S), be they his own or
those which he narrated about the Almighty and which he learned from
archangel Gabriel (as), I.e. *Qudsi ahadith*. Al-Bukhari on the said
page quotes al-A’mash quoting Ibrahim al-Tameemi quoting his father
quoting Imam Ali (as) as saying that all they (Ali and his family) had
were "The Book of Allah and this *saheefa* from the Prophet (S)."

On p. 36, Vol. 1, of al-Bukhari's *Sahih*, the author quotes al-Sha’bi]
quoting Abu Juhayfa asking Ali (as), "Do you have any book?" Ali (as)
said, "The Book of Allah, (what we have learned from) some knowledge
bestowed upon a Muslim, and this *saheefa*." "What is written in this
*saheefa*?" asked Abu Juhayfa. Ali (as) said, "It contains reason,
[injunctions such as] the freeing of captives, and that no Muslim should
kill another Muslim."

On p. 143 of *Basair al-Darajat*, Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) is quoted as
saying, "We have the *saheefa*; it is dictated by the Messenger of Allah
(S) and hand-written by Ali (as); nothing permissible or prohibitive
except that it is recorded in it, and nothing people need, nor any
issue, except that it contains it, even the penalty for slightly
scratching one's cheek." Other references to this *saheefa* exist on
pages 67 and 69, Vol. 4, and on p. 144, Vol. 8, of al-Bukhari's *Sahih*,
as well as on p. 115, Vol. 4, of Muslim's *Sahih*. Another name for this
*saheefa* is *al-jami’a*, the book which includes or contains all
knowledge.

In Arabic, a university is call *jami’a*, a place where knowledge and
those who learn it gather, a gathering place of knowledge and
scholarship. If you are fortunate enough to be in possession of a copy
of *Usool al-Kafi* by Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni published in 1990
by Dar al-Ta’aruf of Beirut, Lebanon, read pp. 294-298 of its first
volume to learn numarous details about not only this *saheefa* but also
about Fatima's Mushaf, the copy of the Holy Qur'an kept by Fatima (as)
daughter of the Messenger of Allah (S) many years before Othman ibn
‘Affan asked Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) to help compile the text of the
Holy Qur'an.

There are other references to this "university of knowledge," but we
think this much suffices to let the reader know that the section of this
book dealing with the rewards one receives from reciting a particular
chapter of the Holy Qur'an is derived from one of the most ancient, if
not the very most ancient, books written in the history of Islam.

Fast of the month of Ramadhan is the fourth pillar of Islam. The Arabic
word *shahr* is used for a month due to its being *mushtahir*,
well-known or famous, that is, the knowledge thereof reaches all people,
as we are told by Imam Ibn Manzour, author of *Lisan al-Arab* on p. 432,
Vol. 4. Such knowledge can be attained by sighting its crescent.

As to the reason why it has been called the month of Ramadhan, it is due
to the fact that the Arabs gave the names of the months according to the
times during which they occurred, and to the fact that it so happened
that the month of Ramadhan coincided with the parching days of the
summer. Its root word *ramd*, as the same author tells us on pp.
160-161, Vol. 7, of the same lexicon, means to burn due to excessive
sun-heat reflected on the desert sands. The *ramda* is the burning rock.
This is why it was called the month of Ramadhan.

One may say in Arabic that a man's feet were burnt due to the heat, so
he became *ramad*. It is also said that it was called the month of
Ramadhan because people become *ramad* due to their suffering from the
combination of hunger and thirst during a very hot month. Arab linguists
say that to make something *armad* is to squeeze it between two soft
rocks then to pound it. A person fasting, by analogy, pounds his own
nature between two rocks: hunger and thirst.

According to one of his nUmarous traditions, Prophet Muhammad (S) is
quoted saying, "The month of Ramadhan was named so because it tends to
*ramad* the sins, that is, burn them." The righteous at the dawn of
Islam used to call it *al-midmar*, meaning that it emaciates the souls
and bodies and helps them get rid of the excesses of evils and sins
whereby the souls and bodies were laden. During the life-time of the
Prophet (S), the blessed month of Ramadhan used to be called
*al-marzooq*, the one full of sustenance, due to the abundance of the
blessings of Allah whereby His servants are sustained during it.

In a letter he sent to Jarrah al-Madayini, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub cites
Imam Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq (as) saying, "Fast is not only to abstain
from eating and drinking." Then the Imam (as) quoted Mary (as) mother of
Christ (as), as the Holy Qur'an tells us, saying that she had vowed a
fast for the Most Merciful One. The Imam (as) continued to say, "When
you fast, you should safeguard your tongues, lower your gaze, and you
should neither dispute with nor envy one another." This is recorded on
p. 351, Vol. 94, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

The Imam (as) is also quoted in the same and following page of the said
reference saying, "When you fast, let your hearing and vision abstain
with you from anything unlawful, against everything ugly, and leave
hypocrisy aside, and do not harm those who serve you. Rather, adorn
yourself with the dignity of the fast, and do not make your fasting day
any different from the day when you do not fast."

[^1]: This acronym stands for "peace be upon him and his family."

[^2]: Acronyms for Alahis-Salam, peace be upon him.


