What Breaks the Fast
====================

Any of the following invalidates the fast: eating or drinking, sexual
intercourse, telling lies about Allah and/or His Messenger (S),
immersing the entire head in water, deliberate inhalation of smoke,
remaining in the state of *janabah* (uncleanliness due to seminal
discharge) till dawn, masturbating, taking injections whereby nourishing
liquids reach the stomach, deliberate vomiting, intentionally passing an
object through the throat or any other natural opening... Travelling,
that is, going from your place of residence to a place situated at least
eight *farasikh* (about twenty-seven and a half miles, or fifty miles
according to some scholars) requires you to break your fast and to make
up for it later on in equal number of days missed.

Deliberately breaking the fast requires a *kaffara* (atonement) which is
either the feeding of sixty poor persons, or fasting for sixty
consecutive days for each day missed. If the fast is broken
accidentally, *qaza* (making up) suffices. Every adult and mentally
sound male or female Muslim is required to fast starting twenty minutes
before dawn and till sunset.

Al-Majlisi, on p. 352, Vol. 94, of his *Bihar al-Anwar*, cites a number
of Shi’a scholars saying that they heard Imam Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (as)
saying, "Telling lies breaks the fast, and so does a second look at
another woman, in addition to oppression, be it little or much."

One who misses fasting a number of days during the month of Ramadhan due
to travelling, forgetfulness, ignorance of the fact that those days were
the days of the month of Ramadhan, sickness, menstruation or childbirth,
are required to make up in equal number of days missed. Those who
suffered from temporary insanity or who faint before having the chance
to make the intention to fast, those who are afflicted with an ailment
which causes them to be constantly thirsty and have no hope of healing,
or because of old age that renders them feeble, do not have to make it
up, nor do they have to offer *kaffara*, atonement.

One who falls sick during the month of Ramadhan and a year passes before
being able to fully recover is, of course, not required to make up but
to pay the compensation which is providing the needy and deserving poor,
or providing one such person, with three quarters of a kilogram of food
for each day missed. If one's father dies owing either prayers or fast,
his oldest son is required to make up on his father's behalf, but a son
is not required to make up on behalf of his deceased mother.

Fast is not accepted without the five daily prayers. Exempted from the
fast are children, the mentally retarded, and old men and women who find
it too hard to observe. If they can fast in other months to make up, it
will be best for them. If they cannot make up, then they do not have to
offer *kaffara* either. Women during their menstrual period are not only
exempted from fasting, they are forbidden from fasting, but they will
have to make it up later on. As soon as their period ends, they must
take their *ghusul* (ceremonial bath) and resume the fast. Women
breast-feeding their infants and whose natural milk is not sufficient,
as well as women during their prenatal period may break their fast if it
harms their infants. They, too, have to make up for the fast.


