Is Ali Inferior To Abu Bakr And Umar Even From The Lineage Point Of View?
=========================================================================

This is a question posed by some people. The reply to this is that it is
proved from the books of Ahlul Sunnat that Ali (a.s.) is not inferior to
the two Caliphs from any aspect. The few merits of Ali (a.s.) that the
writer has mentioned so far are sufficient to make Ali (a.s.) the best
of the human beings. If the bigots do not believe it, it is another
matter. The fact is that Ali (a.s.) is superior to everyone of the
Muslim nation. Now, as far as the question of his superior lineage is
concerned, the readers are invited to read on.

We all know that Bani Hashim was a well-known clan, even during the pre-
Islamic age. Its members were famous for their leadership and good
character even beyond their country. Their fame had spread as far as
Shaam and even today, they are very famous. The greatest proof of this
fame is their greatness. On the other hand, the Teem and Adi tribes were
neither famous in the pre- Islamic age nor during the time of the Holy
Prophet (S); and even today they have no fame to their credit. They are
so obscure that only the well-informed people have heard of them. The
average educated people have not even heard of the Teem and Adi clans.
Thus, to compare the lineage of Ali (a.s.) with those of the two
Caliphs, is useless.

Just as in other aspects they are not superior to Ali (a.s.), in the
matter of lineage also, they have no standing before the brother of the
Holy Prophet (S). It is sufficient to say regarding Abu Bakr that he was
from a good family. No one can say anything about the character of this
family. Regarding the family of Umar, I cannot say for sure whether they
have the blood of Hashim bin Abde Manaf.

The book, Kitab Masalik shows that the grandfather of Umar, Nufayl was
born of an Ethiopian slave girl. Her name was Zahaka. She was the slave
girl of Hashim bin Abde Manaf who later entered into the service of
Naufal bin Hashim and Abdul Uzza bin Ribah. This book does not say
whether Nufayl was the son of Naufal bin Hashim or Abdul Uzza. Anyway,
Nufayl in his time, married a woman of Fahem tribe and a son Khattab was
born.[^1] This woman also seems to be the slave girl of Fahem tribe,
because by the principle of ‘slave mother’ (Ummul Walad), at last she
came into the possession Amr bin Nufayl. Allah knows best.

We should know that Kitabe Masalik is the work of Hisham Ibn Sayabal
Kalbi, who was one of the great Sunni scholars and of such caliber that
Ibn Majah and Tirmidhi consider him their teacher and a researcher like
Baghawi has also extensively used his traditions for his Quranic
commentary, Maalimut Tanzil. Ibn Taymiyyah considers him the greatest
authority of genealogy.

Sibte Ibn Jauzi and Ibn Khallikan also have gained a lot from him. This
shows the status of the writer of Kitabe Masalik. Now there remains no
need to express any view on lineage of Umar. Thus, the proposal of Umar
for Umme Kulthum, the daughter of Fatima, was detestable. However, that
is actually with regard to some other Umme Kulthum; it has no connection
with Umme Kulthum binte Fatima.

[^1]: Ref. Ma’rif of Ibn Qutaibah.


