To The Kind Attention Of Muslims
================================

It is learnt from the names of narrators of Ibn Hajar that some
traditionalists lived during the reigns of rulers, who were partisans of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). These people collected traditions on the merits of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) but later they were labeled as Rafzi.[^1]

Then some traditionalists lived during the rule of the tyrant rulers. In
such time, the traditionists fabricated traditions for material benefits
and due the fear of rulers, by this action of theirs, they left no stone
unturned to mislead the people. Today, we have the writings of some
ancient scholars and these are sufficient to find the true religion.

These books show that there are many narrators whose traditions are
accepted by both the sects and there are many scholars of the two sects,
who have continued to include their traditions, considering them
trustworthy. Then there are many traditions having similar matter that
both sects have included in their collections, without any arrangement
and system. There are very few narrators, who are related to a
particular sect. In such a situation, it will not be difficult to sort
out the controversies between the two sects.

If we are impartial, there remains no division of Shia and Sunnis and
the religion of Muhammad (S) will again become illuminated. But to
achieve this aim, it is necessary to forgo egoistic tendencies and using
reason and justice, the Muslims should study the arguments of both the
sects and choose whichever is true. It is a great pity that bigotry has
spoiled the Muslims to such an extent that such a scenario is very much
unlikely.

[^1]: A derogatory term for Shia.


