Zaid Ibn Ali Ibn Husayn, Or Zaid The Martyr
===========================================

Ahlul Sunnat say that Zaid claimed Imamate and fought in the opposition
of the Imam. Thus, according to the principles of Imamite faith, why he
is not deserving of criticism? Apparently, it seems that Shias praise
him, because he is a son of an Imam and is from the Sadaat. Then why do
Shias blame the three Caliphs? They were also relatives of the Prophet.
They are companions and emigrants too.

The reply to this is that the chain of the Imamate of Zaid the martyr,
is not proved from any traditional report. According to reports of both
the sects, it is learnt that he had a good faith. He took up Jihad to
take the revenge of the blood of Husayn (a.s.) and to destroy the
mischief of the enemies. It was same as the mission of Ibrahim and
Mukhtar. This was not an illegal act. And neither Imam Muhammad Baqir
nor Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had prohibited such a fight. Thus, he cannot be
blamed for that. Which devotee of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) would not desire to
revenge the blood of Imam Husayn (a.s.)?

What can be said of Zaid who was seeking the revenge for his own
grandfather? Books say that Zaid fought the war by the permission of
Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and they did not express any sort of
disapproval. If they had not approved, they would not have expressed
such sorrow and anguish on the killing of Zaid. The two Imams have
always prayed for the well-being of Zaid. In the end, the writer wishes
to state that the matter of Zaid has no connection with the matter of
the three Caliphs. The above objection of Ahlul Sunnat is not worth
countering.


