Khalid Bin Walid
================

He had not earned any fame before the Battle of Uhud, but when he fought
against the Muslims in Uhud, he came to be known as a ferocious warrior
of Arabs. In the Battle of Uhud, he was so severe that he came to fight
the Holy Prophet (S) with Abu Sufyan. In that battle, he took some
Meccans and infidels and went atop the Uhud mountain. The Prophet
appointed fifty archers to stop their onslaught, under the leadership of
Abdullah bin Jubair. They were instructed not to leave their position
under any circumstances.

The infidels were defeated and began to flee when the Muslims attacked
them on the plains. The Muslims army began to collect the booty from the
fleeing infidels. The archers also left their position for the booty.
Seeing an opening, Khalid attacked the Muslims from that same mountain
pass and in a few moments, the Muslims were almost routed.

The martyrs of this attack include Hamza, the uncle of the Prophet,
whose martyrdom caused so much sorrow to the Prophet that he could not
forget it till his last moments. Within a few months of this carnage,
Khalid accepted Islam, but he could not get into the good books of the
Prophet. It was not only due to the matter of Uhud, but he was a man of
unprincipled conduct. Otherwise, having such valor, it was only
appropriate that after accepting Islam, he should have become favorite
of the Prophet and all the Muslims. The Holy Prophet (S) had become very
much displeased with him due to his detestable behavior.

After the conquest of Mecca, the Holy Prophet (S) was in Mecca itself
from where he sent Khalid bin Walid to the Yalamlam area, where the Bani
Khuzaimah lived, to invite them towards Islam. We should know that
Khalid was a member of the Bani Makhzum tribe. Bani Khuzaimah and Bani
Makhzum used to fight each other during the days of ignorance. When
Khalid reached there, the Bani Khuzaimah formed ranks and confronted
him.

They said: “We are Muslims; we offer prayers and build the mosque.”
Khalid asked them: “Then why have you formed ranks against me? If you
are Muslims you cannot intend to fight me. You must lay down your arms.”
Bani Khuzaimah complied. But it is a great pity that inspite of their
statement that they were Muslims and had laid down the arms, Khalid had
their hands tied and killed some of them and tried to kill some of them
at night. Umar was with Khalid at that time. He was very angry at this
cruel behavior and openly expressed his dislike.[^1]

When the Holy Prophet (S) learnt of this gory incident, he began to
tremble with the fear of Allah and prayed: “O Allah! I dissociate with
this act of Khalid and I pray for Your refuge.” Soon after that the Holy
Prophet (S) sent Ali (a.s.) with cash and gold, so that he dismisses
Khalid and makes peace with Bani Khuzaimah. Ali (a.s.) did not leave any
stone unturned to carry out the orders of the Prophet since mercifulness
and kindness was complete in him. We should know that no one could have
bravery without having mercy and kindness. Because Khalid did not
possess these qualities he can never be said to be brave. Khalid had
beastliness, which the common people mistake for bravery.

The exemplar of courage is Ali (a.s.). He had such bravery that it is
not possible in anyone except the lions of Allah. Such bravery is
required to work for the religion of Allah and to keep it established.
This courage is for the sake of Allah and not for personal motives. When
the infidel spat on Ali’s face, he got up from his chest at once,
because after this disrespectful act, there was a chance of personal
motive coming in between his slaying. Dear readers, compare this
magnanimous act with the detestable deeds of Khalid against the people
of Bani Khuzaimah. Though he was by nature a cruel person, in addition
to this, he had enmity with Bani Khuzaimah.

Apparently, Khalid was sent to Bani Khuzaimah for a religious purpose by
the Messenger of Allah (S), but on the basis of his tribal animosity, he
committed such acts as none could do. It is very regretful that Khalid
committed the atrocious deeds behind the cover of Islam. Now the people
of justice may compare the behavior of Khalid with that of Ali (a.s.) to
know what is the difference between bravery and ferocity.

I regret comparing Khalid with Ali (a.s.) but I was compelled to do so
when I saw that what an Ahlul Sunnat writer has stated in the marginal
notes to this incident on some book. He says: “If the Imamiyah sing the
praises of Ali’s bravery, we Ahlul Sunnat have Khalid from our side by
the grace of Allah. This Khalid was braver than Ali and not less.” But
this writer says that there was not a bit of bravery in Khalid, he only
had ferocity. Between Khalid and Ali (a.s.) is a difference of black and
white.

The second affair with relation to Islam that is related to Khalid, and
which shows the nature of Khalid, is that during the occupation of
Yemen, when Ali (a.s.) learnt that those tribes who had embraced Islam
around Yemen, had renegaded and were preparing to fight, he went with
his army to confront them. These apostates, influenced by the good
nature and disposition of Ali (a.s.) again entered the fold of Islam.

There is no doubt that the bravery of manners of Ali (a.s.) had been
instrumental in this, but Khalid did not give up his natural evil deeds.
He had an old enmity with Ali (a.s.). Khalid consulted Buraidah
Al-Haseeb and wrote a letter to the Messenger of Allah (S) complaining
about Ali (a.s.). The Prophet was very angry on getting this letter and
told Buraidah: “Have you become a hypocrite? Ali (a.s.) is from me and
is superior to you and your people. Whatever he commands is according to
the command of Allah. Seek refuge from Allah. Otherwise, the enemy of
Ali is my enemy, and my enemy is the enemy of Allah.”

Hearing this, Buraidah was frightened and he said: “I wish, I were
buried before complaining about Ali al-Murtadha’ (a.s.).” After that he
never opposed Ali (a.s.); but the enmity of Khalid remained as it was.
On the basis of this enmity, Ahlul Sunnah call Khalid, ‘His Eminence,
Khalid’. If such people are called His Eminence, then what should be
title of those companions of the Holy Prophet (S) who really possessed
those praiseworthy qualities? The fact is that it is due to their
opposition to Ali (a.s.) that people like Khalid Ibn Walid, Talha,
Zubair and Muawiyah are called ‘His Eminence’. In addition to this,
Ahlul Sunnat have given Khalid the title of ‘Sword of Allah’
(Saifullah).

Only Ahlul Sunnat know how Khalid began to be called by the title of
Saifullah. We have already explained in the foregoing pages that this
title is exclusively for Ali (a.s.) and indeed no one else deserves to
be called thus, because doubtlessly, he was the sword of Allah. His
sword, Zulfiqar, was a sign of his being the ‘Sword of Allah’. From
which principle, which rule, which verse and which prophecy can Khalid
have the right to the title of ‘Sword of Allah’? It is beyond the scope
of investigation. Bravery, and not ferocity is required if one has to be
‘Sword of Allah’.

Another example of his animal behavior is presented below; which shows
his heartlessness, cruelty and selfishness etc. During the Caliphate of
Abu Bakr, the Bani Yarbu tribe refused to pay Zakat. Malik bin Nuwayrah
was the chief of this tribe. This gentleman was a brave warrior, a
cultured person and also a poet. He had met the Holy Prophet (S) and
accepted Islam. The Caliph sent Khalid to collect Zakat from this tribe.
Malik said: “We perform the Prayer, but we shall not pay the Zakat.”
Khalid said: “You have to pray and pay Zakat. Prayers alone are not
accepted.”

In brief, when Malik refused to pay Zakat, Khalid said: “I will slay
you.” After this, the two parties entered into a heated argument.
Abdullah Ibn Umar and Abu Qatadah Ansari were present at that time.
Since the two of them did not like the stance of Khalid they tried to
cool him down, but Khalid disliked their advice.

At last Malik said: “Take me to the Caliph, he will do as he wishes with
me.” Khalid said: “I will slay you.” Thus, Zarar bin Abu Dharr was
ordered to behead Malik. Upon this Malik said pointing to his wife:
“This woman has caused my killing.” Khalid said: “Your apostasy is the
cause of your death.” Malik said: “I am on Islam.”

After this, Khalid ordered Zarar to behead Malik and he was beheaded.
The fact is that Malik’s wife was extremely beautiful. There is no doubt
that Khalid’s selfishness became the cause of Malik’s death. Khalid
should have taken Malik to Abu Bakr according to his wish.

Anyway, after beheading Malik, Khalid at once took his wife to himself.
This shameless incident is composed in the satirical verses by the poets
of that time. When Abu Bakr and Umar learnt of this perplexing incident,
Umar said to Abu Bakr: Khalid has committed adultery. You must stone him
to death. Abu Bakr replied: “I will not do it.” Then he explained his
stand. Umar said: “Khalid has killed a Muslim unjustly. You must take
revenge from Khalid.” But Abu Bakr continued to defend Khalid.

At last, Umar asked that Khalid should be dismissed. Abu Bakr said: “Do
you want me to put the sword to sleep? Khalid is a brave warrior and our
ardent supporter. Do you want that he should be distanced from us?”[^2]
This incident shows that service to religion is different and
selfishness is different. The people of justice may themselves judge the
ethics and behavior of Khalid. The writer does not wish to say anything
else.

[^1]: Tarikh Khamis, Part 2, Pg. 97; Sahih Bukhari; Abul Fida (Pg. 153);
Seerat Ibn Hisham Part 3, Pg. 3-4; Tarikh Tabari, Pg. 1651-1653.

[^2]: Abul Fida


