Objection Against The Counting Of Imams As Counted By Mulla Abdul Rahman Jami
=============================================================================

Mulla Jami writes in Shawahidun Nubuwwah: “Ali, may Allah honor him,
(Karamallaho Wajho) is the first Imam, Hasan is the second Imam, Husayn
is the third Imam, Zainul Aabideen is the fourth Imam, Muhammad Baqir is
the fifth Imam, Ja’far as-Sadiq is the sixth Imam, Moosa Kazim is the
seventh Imam, Moosa ar-Reza is the eighth Imam, Muhammad Taqi is the
ninth Imam, Ali an-Naqi is the tenth Imam, Hasan Askari is the eleventh
Imam and Muhammad Mahdi is the twelfth Imam.”

But this statement of Mulla Jami is proved incorrect according to the
rules of Ahlul Sunnat; consensus and allegiance are necessary for
Caliphate. By getting these, Abu Bakr got Caliphate. That is, he became
the first Caliph or the first Imam. Now, how can His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.) be considered the first Imam? He can only be called the fourth
Caliph and the fourth Imam. And how Imam Hasan be called the second
Imam? Even if he is considered Imam, after Ali (a.s.), he can only be
called the fifth Imam.

Thus, by this rule, if the rest of the Pure Imams are considered Imams,
all their sequence numbers will change. Imam Mahdi (a.j.) will be the
fifteenth, rather than the twelfth Imam. Moreover, from Imam Husayn
(a.s.) onwards to Imam Mahdi (a.j.) none of the Pure Imams is proved as
Imam. Because from the point of view of the principles of Ahlul Sunnat
religion, Caliphate and Imamate cannot be established without consensus
and allegiance. Thus, the numbering of Mulla Jami is incorrect. However,
from the principles of Ahlul Sunnat, Caliphate and Imamate goes to
Muawiyah and successors of Muawiyah and none of Ahlul Sunnat can refute
this.

Those Ahlul Sunnat who believe in the Caliphate and Imamate of Imam
Mahdi (a.j.) seem to be against their own faith. The Caliphs of Ahlul
Sunnat had become Caliphs on the basis of consensus, consultation,
allegiance and force. But in the Caliphate and Imamate of Imam Mahdi
(a.j.), Ahlul Sunnat would be following the rules that Shias consider
necessary for their Imams. That is for one to be a Caliph and the
rightful Imam, appointment by Quran and traditions is necessary. It is a
farce that Ahlul Sunnat consider Caliphate and Imamate of Imam Mahdi
(a.j.) to be divinely ordained.[^1]

They do not believe that it would be based on consensus, consultation
and allegiance.[^2] Another objection that could be laid on Ahlul Sunnat
for considering Imam Mahdi (a.j.) as the twelfth Imam is that the twelve
Imams of Ahlul Sunnah include Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas Caliphs; but
all these Caliphates are over and the figure of twelve is also complete
for them.

In such a position, the only solution is to make Imam Mahdi (a.j.) the
thirteenth Caliph. Thus, the calculation of Mulla Jami is meaningless. O
Ahlul Sunnat people! Look at the best aspects of the principles of your
religion. Your religion seems to be absolutely unpredictable. If the
rules of Imamate of Shias are not followed, neither Ali (a.s.) can be
considered the first Imam, not Imam Mahdi (a.j.) the twelfth. And
neither can we consider other Imams to be real Imams.

[^1]: Ref. Tarikh Ibn Khallikan, Isafur Raghebeen, Futuhaate Makkiya of
Ibnul Arabi

[^2]: Tirmidhi and Abu Dawood


