Speech And Activities Of Muawiyah Ibne Yazeed
=============================================

It is written in Hayatul Haiwan that the son of the accursed Yazeed made
himself aloof from the Caliphate of his father and sat for a long time
on the pulpit. And after praise and glory of Allah he said: “O people! I
am not interested in Caliphate and you consider the material kingdom to
be something great, while I find it detestable and you all find me
detestable too, because I will be involved with you and you would be
involved with me. My grandfather, Muawiyah opposed Ali (a.s.) for this
very Caliphate. His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was rightful and superior. No
companion of the Messenger of Allah (S) was equal to him in any quality.
At last, by deceit, the Caliphate came into the hands of Muawiyah and
then to Yazeed. Yazeed did not deserve the Caliphate. He committed
greater sins and transgressions. By Allah, I am helpless due to lack of
control on myself that I am speaking these words. The love of Ali (a.s.)
is inscribed on my heart.”

The people of Shaam disliked the words of this supporter of Ali (a.s.)
and the one who left the worldly kingdom. They caught hold of him and
buried him alive, by which his soul departed to the spiritual realm.
“Surely we belong to Allah and to Him we shall return.”

The matter of Muawiyah bin Yazeed is beyond comprehension. It shows the
perfect power of the Almighty. The divine law is just. Muawiyah had
obtained Caliphate and kingdom through force, deceit and dishonesty. He
opposed Ali (a.s.) and confronted him. He destroyed the lives of
thousands of Muslims. He painted the battlefield with their blood. In
order to obtain the kingdom, he created thousands of mischiefs.

He continued to torture the followers of Ali (a.s.). He initiated the
system of reciting curse on Ali (a.s.). He left no stone unturned to
exterminate Bani Hashim. He forcibly took away rulership from Imam Hasan
(a.s.) and had him poisoned. He tried his best to obtain allegiance for
Yazeed and did not leave any effort to make his kingdom perpetual.

Anyone who has even the slightest worry about the Hereafter will never
be so busy in acquiring worldly wealth and pelf. He was very much
concerned about gaining personal honor and position and he also wanted
that the kingdom should remain in his family forever. He remained so
busy in all these activities that he did not spare a thought for after
life. The result of all this was that he at last left the temporal world
with a load of answerabilities. After him, his son did not even get this
much time to stay in power. In addition to this, his grandson refused
the kingdom and did not take it even for a day.

Dear readers! Just pay attention to the justice of Allah. The grandson
sat at the very pulpit, from which he used to imprecate Ali (a.s.) and
said: “My grandfather opposed Ali (a.s.) for this very Caliphate. Ali
was rightful and none of the companions of the Holy Prophet (S) were
equal to him.” The fact is that Allah is the true revenger; He takes
revenge from the deniers in this world also.

O readers! See how the grandson of Muawiyah had spoken against him. The
truth verily comes to the lips! This is only seen in the justice of
Allah that the effects of the ugly deeds are seen in this world itself
to some extent. No one could have expected the grandson of Muawiyah to
speak such truth! Later, he said that the love of Ali (a.s.) was
inscribed on his heart. This shows that the love of Ali (a.s.) is not a
voluntary action.


