Types Of Traditions Of The Pure Imams
=====================================

Traditions are of two types, Mutawatir (widely related) and
non-Mutawatir. Mutawatir give knowledge and create certainty and it is
obligatory to act on them and no other tradition is having precedence to
it. There is no inconsistency and contradiction in them. Non-Mutawatir
are of two types: First are those which create knowledge and certainty;
and the tradition which is correct from the aspect of context, has to be
compulsorily acted upon. Contexts are of few types:

Firstly, they should be according to rational proofs, secondly, they
should be in conformity with Quran, either in wordings, meanings, in
general sense or a special evidence. In such circumstances, traditions
are not considered solitary. They become equal in status to Mutawatir.

Thirdly, they should conform the practice of the Prophet either in
meaning, in general sense or according to special proof. Fourth, they
should be in accordance with the consensus of Muslims and even though
they may be solitary according to three rules, but they should be
considered Mutawatir.

The second type of non-Mutawatir are of few types. Firstly, they should
be free from the above-mentioned contexts and there should not be
another contradiction to it. In that case, it is like Mutawatir and when
verdicts are found against it, we must not act upon it. And if an
objectionable tradition is found in this place, we must check the
qualities of narrators, which of them is more just and trustworthy. But
if both the narrators are equal in justice, we must see the narrators of
which tradition are more.

And if narrators of both traditions are same in qualities and number,
and both traditions are free of the above mentioned contexts, it is
obligatory to act upon the one on which a perfect interpretation is
established, and to reject the other solitary reports, on which
interpretation is not possible. And if the interpretation is supported
by merging a tradition or if any cause is found in words or by proof, it
is obligatory to act upon the mentioned tradition; and if both opposing
traditions have scope for different interpretations, one has the choice
to act on whichever one likes.[^1]

[^1]: Ref. Istibsar of Shaykh Abu Jaâ€™far Tusi.


