Types Of Sunni Traditions
=========================

The different kinds of Sunni traditions are described below from the
following books: Such as Lumaat, Sharh Qastalani, Sharh Noodi and Risala
Saiyad Sharif. They are as follows:

(1) Sahih: A tradition whose narration is connected to a sane and
disciplined man and not to a rare cause.

(2) Hasan: It is a tradition, in whose chain of narrators there is no
one of doubtful integrity.

(3) Mutawatir: A tradition so widely related that no doubt remains of
its authenticity.

(4) Zaif: A tradition in which conditions of Sahih and Hasan are not
present.

(5) Muttasil: Its testimonials should be continuous and other
testimonials should be dismissed.

(6) Marfoo: It is connected to the Holy Prophet (S).

(7) Moanan: In whose chain, the narrator has narrated in the style of
‘so and so has related from so and so’.

(8) Moallaq: It is one whose chains are missing.

(9) Mudaraj: It is that in which the words of the narrator are included.

(10) Mashhoor: It is one well known to the scholars of tradition.

(11) Mushahaf: It is that pair of words written alike but with different
vowel- points and due to this, it creates ambiguity.

(12) Musalsal: It is that the link of the tradition reaches to the
Messenger of Allah (S).

(13) Motabar: The tradition should be reliable with difference also.

(14) Mauqoof: It is that in which the narrator gives his or someone’s
explanation.

(15) Maqtoo: Its link should not reach companions of the Prophet’s
companions.

(16) Mursal: In which companions of companions narrate the words of the
Messenger of Allah (S).

(17) Munqata: It is that in which the narrator’s words are omitted.

(18) Muazal: It is that in which two or more chains of narrators are
eliminated.

(19) Shaz: It is that a trustworthy man has narrated it, but it is
opposed to what is related commonly.

(20) Maalal: It is that on account of old age that the narrator has
resorted to conjecture.

(21) Mudassas: It is that in which the faulty narrator is concealed.

(22) Muztarab: It is that in which the difference occurs in tradition.

(23) Maqloob: In which the words of narrators are changed.

(24) Mauzoo: It is that which is fabricated by narrators and attributed
to the Messenger of Allah (S) or some other leader of faith.

It is not concealed from those who are acquainted that the art of
tradition is a very difficult art. No doubt, that Ahlul Sunnat have
become experts in this art.

But the progress of this art has not been harmful to the Imamiyah sect.
Rather, the fact is that if this art had not flourished by the devotion
of Ahlul Sunnat, the Imamiyah sect would have had to face many
difficulties to prove their religion.

Indeed, the books of Ahlul Sunnat are very helpful to Shias to prove
their claims and prove the correctness of Imamiyah faith. The books of
Sunni etc. have become very useful. Writers continuously take advantage
of books of Sunni traditions. It is clear that in this book, the writer
has not depended on books of Imamiyah religion. Whatever is mentioned in
this book is through Sunni efforts.


