Muawiyah and the Derogatory Remarks For His Eminence Ali
========================================================

It is seen from Sharh Ibn Abil Hadid[^1] that Muawiyah persuaded some
companions and Tabein (companions of companions) to forge traditions
criticizing His Eminence, Ali (a.s.). Abu Huraira, Amr Ibn Aas,
Mughaira, Urwah and Zuhri are those who forged such traditions. Urwah
misquoted ‘A’ysha that Ali (a.s.) and Abbas would die without faith and
they belong to the Fire! (Allah forbid!).

In the same way, absurd traditions were forged by others also. May
Allah’s curse be on the liars. Husayn Karabasi is also included among
the enemies of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) and is one who has forged such
traditions. Muawiyah had no way but to seek the help of these false
narrators. There was a great need of such imprecating traditions! In the
same book[^2], it is mentioned that Muawiyah sent letters to his
officers that they should not behave nicely with

Shias and not to trust their testimony. But they should behave nicely
with the followers of Uthman. They should respect those who narrate the
excellence of Uthman, and to send to Muawiyah their names and their
tribe. In this way, traditions of Uthman’s excellence were collected.

According to this command, all officers of Muawiyah narrated the merits
of Uthman and were rewarded for it by Muawiyah and due to these
traditions, they obtained wealth and honor. After that Muawiyah issued
an order that traditions in praise of Abu Bakr and Umar be collected and
those who narrate traditions in praise of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) must
be derided. Muawiyah said that he liked that the narrators of excellence
of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) are punished and that it gladdens his heart.
The order also stated to be strict with Shias of Ali (a.s.) and that
they should narrate the excellence of Uthman, instead of His Eminence,
Ali (a.s.). Then he commanded them to narrate the excellence of Uthman
from the pulpit. Till the time the teachers instructed the boys, girls
and women to narrate the excellence of Uthman and this continued for
many years.

We should ask Abu Shakoor Salmi, the writer of gloss on Aqaid Nasafi, if
this is the dignity of a just and pious Imam that he should encourage
forging of traditions and lies should be attributed to the Messenger of
Allah (S)? It is a fact that when people believe Muawiyah to be Imam and
Yazeed bin Muawiyah to be the sixth Caliph, so if people like Abu
Shakoor are found in religion, it is not surprising!

What a great arrangement to forge and spread traditions in praise of Abu
Bakr, Umar and Uthman! Allah forbid, Allah forbid. It is the greatest
surprise how the traditions in favor of Imam Ali have remained secure?
But no doubt Allah is All- Knowing and All-Seeing and Just. Excellence
of Ali (a.s.) and the Progeny of the Messenger of Allah (S) and the
traditions of the family members of the Holy Prophet (S) are still
present and their names will remain till Judgment Day.

[^1]: Pg. 194

[^2]: Vol. 2, Pg. 8.


