Similarity of Circumstances of the Prophet’s Family with That of Moosa and Isa
==============================================================================

We should know that the religion of Allah is same from Adam (a.s.) to
the Holy Prophet (S), because truth is not changeable. Allah was same at
the time of prophet Adam (a.s.) and is today also and will remain
forever.

Certainly, His commands can change when it is necessary. For instance
the law of war in prophet Moosa’s time was that they killed the subdued
infidels, burnt their houses, destroyed their farms and grains and
destroyed the cattle and other animals. But during the time of the
Messenger of Allah (S), after winning over the infidels, they were not
dealt according to this procedure. It is clear that all these commands
and prohibitions were restricted to a particular place and time.

The religion of Allah remained same but when any community adopted the
wrong path, Allah appointed a new Apostle for them. For example, when
the followers of Prophet Moosa (a.s.) started creating trouble in the
religion of Moosa (a.s.), Allah sent Isa (a.s.), and then the Holy
Prophet (S) arrived to finalize the religion of Islam. And when the
whole world shall be full of oppression and tyranny, Imam Mahdi (a.j.)
will appear in the world.

We should know that resemblance is seen in the affairs of the Holy
Prophet (S) and Prophet Moosa and Isa (a.s.). Just as Moosa (a.s.) was a
Great (Ulul Azm[^1]) prophet. In the same way, the Last Prophet (S) was
also Ulul Azm. Just as the brother of Prophet Moosa (a.s.) was his
helper, His Eminence, Ali (a.s.), the brother of the Prophet, was his
helper. Just as Shabbir and Shabbar were present in the family of
Prophet Moosa (a.s.), in the family of the Messenger of Allah (S), we
had Hasan and Husayn (a.s.). Just as Bani Israel had faith in the
occultation of Uzair (a.s.), the followers of Muhammad believe in the
occultation of Imam Mahdi (a.j.). The Messenger of Allah (S) said for
His Eminence, Ali (a.s.), “Like a sect of the Jews, a sect from my
community would be inimical to Ali (a.s.) and a sect like Isa would
believe Ali (a.s.) to be God.”

It is no secret that there are many similarities between His Eminence,
Ali (a.s.) and Prophet Isa (a.s.). One of the similarities is that from
all the Prophet and Imams, except for His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) and
Prophet Isa (a.s.), no one is believed to be God. Indeed, this is
absolute infidelity but it is like this. In the end it is the statement
of the writer, that just as the Imamate of the twelve Shiite Imams is
proved from the words of Allah and the Prophet (S), in the same way,
their Imamate is also proved from Taurat, Zaboor and Injeel, according
to resemblances the Prophet and his family bear to Moosa (a.s.) and his
family.

Although Ahlul Sunnat extol the merits of the three Caliphs and gloss
over Muawiyah’s errors; and their quarrels for Caliphates etc. are
spread everywhere; these people forge traditions and misconstrue the
meaning of the tradition of Ghadeer. Bani Umayyah Caliphs have been
instrumental in forging traditions in favor of the three Caliphs and
Ahlul Sunnat consider them equal to Quran. Certainly the Jews
disbelieved in Isa (a.s.) and Christians denied the prophecy about the
Holy Prophet (S). In the same way, Ahlul Sunnat denied the Caliphate of
Imam Ali (a.s.).

Thousands of Prophets were sent to proclaim the Caliphate of His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.). But worldly persons did not accept Ali as the
Caliph and Imam after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (S) and
hoisted an Imam of their own choice and decided that it was not
necessary for Allah to appoint an Imam and a Caliph.

It seems that if Sunnis get a chance, they would even appoint a Prophet
of their choice, and if Allah appoints an apostle, they would order him
to go back quietly. They are actually helpless to call their three
Caliphs as apostles, because there are so many forged traditions in
their merits that to consider them less than apostles is against their
traditions. Due to the blind faith that Ahlul Sunnat have towards the
three Caliphs it would not be out of place to refer to them as the
nation of Caliphs.

[^1]: A Prophet who brings a new Shariat.


