Verses Of The Holy Quran Proving The Caliphate Of His Eminence, Ali
===================================================================

We should know that traditions and verses of the Holy Quran prove the
Caliphate of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.). There are so many verses of Quran
that point to the Caliphate of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) that the writer
cannot include all of them in this book. The following is a brief
summary of the verses concerning Imam Ali’s Caliphate:

A verse of the Holy Quran states:

***“Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives”***[^1]

According to commentators of Quran, the near relatives mean Ali, Fatima,
Hasan and Husayn (a.s.).[^2] The Quraish, Bani Hashim, Helpers (Ansar),
Emigrants (Muhajireen) and others are not included in this. Only Ali,
Fatima and Hasnain (a.s.) are included. According to this verse, these
are the four divinely appointed persons, after the Prophet and nobody
else can be more deserving of love.

In such a condition, it seems unlikely that none of them should be
selected as a Caliph and Umar should appoint one who is himself obliged
by Allah to love these four personalities. Such a man would indeed be
inferior to the four. Thus, to appoint such a person as Imam or Caliph
over these excellent persons, informs of a great deviation. Obviously,
Lady Fatima (s.a.), being a woman, cannot become a Caliph or Imam after
the Messenger of Allah (S) and Hasan and Husayn (a.s.) were of a very
young age. So it was necessary for His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) to get the
position of Caliphate. But due to his personal enmity, Umar did not
allow Ali (a.s.) to become a Caliph.

This was doubtlessly, the first mistake of Muslims as the writer has
mentioned previously and it was a mistake due to which Islam had to face
great losses and is still facing them. Divine will is supreme, but
apparently Umar has committed such a mistake that its correction is
impossible till Judgment Day. The verse of Surah Tahrim states:

***“And if you back up each other against him, then surely Allah it is
Who is his Guardian, and Jibraeel and the believers that do
good.”***[^3]

This verse shows that the guardian and helper of the Prophet is Allah,
Jibraeel and ‘the believers that do good’, that is Ali (a.s.). The
writer of Tafseer Majmaul Bayan says on page 423 that ‘believers that do
good’ denotes Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) as stated by Mujahid in the book
of Fasra Ahl-ul-Tanjeel through Sudair Sairafi and Abu Ja’far.

Mujahid says that the Holy Prophet (S) introduced His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.) twice to his community. Once the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Of
whomsoever I am the master, this Ali is also his master.” And when this
verse was revealed, the Prophet held Ali’s hand and said, “O people! He
is the ‘believer who does good’” Asma binte Umais says, “I heard the
Messenger of Allah (S) saying that Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is the
‘righteous believer.”

The writer says, “It is regretful that the ‘righteous believer’ should
not be made Caliph, and instead, Abu Bakr is given this post. Abu Bakr,
who like all Muslims, was inferior to His Eminence, Ali (a.s.),
according to the above statement of Allah. Congratulate Umar for clearly
opposing Allah’s command and making the superior as inferior! Not only
this, he also harassed this superior much and went and burnt down his
wife’s house[^4]; hit the belly of his wife, causing miscarriage.[^5]

Bravo, how a community showed regards to ‘righteous believer’! Without
any doubt, such behavior can neither be justified from the aspect of
reason nor from the aspect of religion, but it seems that Umar did not
accord any precedence to the commands of Allah and Prophet, over his own
discretion. If he had any regard for them, he would not have opposed His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.) so much.

It is a farce that Ahlul Sunnat do not pay any attention to the harms of
such an attitude of Umar. When I was also a Sunni, I also believed that
every action of Umar was worth praise. Praise be to Allah, that He
granted me good sense to know what is right and what is wrong and being
freed from the deceit of priests, I became a true devotee of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).

Today, I love the family of Prophet (S) as much as I hate their enemies.
My Lord! Keep me firm on the love of family members of Prophet (S) and
also on the enmity of the enemies of the Prophet’s progeny. O Allah! I
do not ask for anything except that You keep me firm on faith and love
of the family of Prophet (S) till I die.

***“O you who believe! When you consult the Apostle, then offer
something in charity before your consultation…”***[^6]

Tafseer Maalimut Tanzil, Tafseer Nishapuri, Tafseer Kabir Razi, Tafseer
Muhiyuddin Ibn Arabi, traditions of Mishkat, Chapter of Merits of Ali
(a.s.) and Tirmidhi prove that this verse of Surah Mujadila was revealed
in the honor of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.). Scholars and commentator have
widely related that this verse was in excellence of Imam Ali (a.s.) and
it mentions such excellence as is not related to anyone else.

It is that the Holy Prophet (S) whispered some secrets to Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and kept them confidential by the command of Allah,
which shows such affinity that it is not seen for anyone of the
Prophet’s helpers and companions.

It is obvious that when Allah commanded that whosoever speaks secretly
to the Messenger of Allah (S), he must give alms (Sadaqah), no one was
able to fulfill this condition.

His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) fulfilled the condition inspite of difficult
circumstances due to lack of affluence, and thus this verse was
revealed.

His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) says that “this verse proves my excellence over
all the Muslims, because whatever I did was not accomplished by anyone
else. That is, I gave ten dirhams in alms to be have a confidential
conversation with the Messenger of Allah (S). After that the Almighty
Allah abrogated the above verse after ten days.”

Umar says, “How I wish that Allah had granted me this honor! We should
know that this secret talk took place during the Taif expedition. Only
speaking to Ali (a.s.) in this manner shows that Allah did not consider
anyone else eligible for Imamate. It is a matter of great surprise that
knowing such excellence of Imam Ali (a.s.), Umar did not allow him to
become a Caliph. Rather, he put so many restrictions that Ali (a.s.)
should not become the Caliph even after his (Umar’s) death! Bravo! This
is called ‘confession of excellence’!

We should know that there are many verses in Quran that prove immediate
successorship of Imam Ali (a.s.). Some of them are as follows:

***“And most surely, I am most Forgiving to him who repents and believes
and does good, then continues to follow the right direction.”***[^7]

***“…then as for those in whose hearts there is perversity, they follow
the part of it which is allegorical, seeking to mislead, and seeking to
give in (their own) interpretation, but none knows its interpretation
except Allah, and those who are firmly rooted in knowledge, say: We
believe in it, it is all from our Lord, and none do mind except those
having understanding.”***[^8]

***“Come, let us call our sons and your sons and our women and your
women and our near people and your near people, then let us be earnest
in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the liars.”***[^9]

***“Or do they envy the people for what Allah has given them of His
grace? But indeed We have given to Ibrahim’s children the Book and the
wisdom, and We have given them a grand kingdom.”***[^10]

***“Only Allah is your Wali and His Apostle and those who believe, those
who keep up prayers and pray the poor-rate while they bow.”***[^11]

***“…and that the retaining ear, might retain it.”***[^12]

***“…and if they had referred it to the Apostle and to those in
authority among them, those among them who can search out the knowledge
of it would have known it…”***[^13]

***“He said: Surely I will make you an Imam of men.”***[^14]

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you. O people
of the house! And to purify you a (thorough) purifying.”***[^15]

***“This day have those who disbelieve despaired of your religion, so
fear them not, and fear Me. This day have I perfected for you, your
religion and completed My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a
religion.”***[^16]

***“O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord, and
if you do it not then you have not delivered His message, and Allah will
protect you from the people, surely Allah will not guide the unbelieving
people.”***[^17]

Apart from these, there are many other verses that prove the excellence
of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) over believers and from this aspect the excellence
of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) is proved to all the Muslims. It is a heavy
argument for the Caliphate of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.).

Without any doubt, the superior one always remains superior and in no
circumstances does he become inferior. The inferior can in no case
obtain precedence over the superior. Thus, to consider Abu Bakr as
superior to His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) is impossible from the aspect of
reason as well as Islamic texts.

It was necessary to consider the superiority of Imam Ali (a.s.) to Abu
Bakr at the time of appointing Abu Bakr as Caliph. But his selfish
motives made Umar forget every superiority and inferiority. Making Abu
Bakr a Caliph was a hasty affair; rather under the pretext of Abu Bakr,
he himself became a Caliph.

[^1]: Surah Shura 42:23

[^2]: Ref. Tafseer Baidhawi, Maalimut Tanzeel, Tafseer Muhiyuddin Ibne
Arabi, Kashshaf, Tafseer Nishapuri and Tafseer Kabir Razi, Vol. 7, Pg.
406.

[^3]: Surah Tahrim 66:4

[^4]: Ref. the Biography of Abu Fida.

[^5]: Ref. Al-Milal Wan-Nihal of Shahristani, Pg. 20.

[^6]: Surah Mujadila 58:12

[^7]: Surah Taha 20:82

[^8]: Surah Aale Imran 3:6

[^9]: Surah Aale Imran 3:61

[^10]: Surah Nisa 4:54

[^11]: Surah Maidah 5:55

[^12]: Surah Haqqah 69:12

[^13]: Surah Nisa 4:83

[^14]: Surah Baqarah 2:124

[^15]: Surah Ahzab 33:33

[^16]: Surah Maidah 5:3

[^17]: Surah Maidah 5:67


