What Does Umar’s Behavior Show?
===============================

The abrupt and rude manner in which Umar tore down the command of the
Caliph shows some things; first, there was no respect or honor of the
Caliph in the heart and mind of Umar. Tearing off of the decree of the
Caliph of the time and that too in his presence, makes it obvious that
the one who made such an extraordinary gesture did not accord any
importance to the position of the ruler. The reason of this is also not
secret. Umar knew that Abu Bakr was a Caliph made by him (Umar) and that
without his (Umar’s) help, his Caliphate would not run. Undoubtedly,
this kind of thinking on the part of Umar was not untrue.

In such circumstances, how can the respect of the Caliph get room in the
heart of Umar? This is not mere guessing. Umar definitely was
pressurizing Abu Bakr to such an extent that on one occasion the latter
had to complain saying: “If it is to be like this, what was the use of
making me a Caliph?” Not only this, once it had so happened that Abu
Bakr held Umar’s beard, crying: “May your mother weep over you (may you
die).” Obviously, it is difficult to believe that a patient man like Abu
Bakr will do so to anybody. But when someone crosses limits, even a
patient man loses his patience. Those who have knowledge know that all
these events are recorded in history. Readers may refer at least to the
history of Abdul Fida, Tarikh al Mukhtasar fee Ahwaalil Bashar.

Second, the tearing off of the Caliph’s order shows that the court of
justice was a court of justice only in name. Though Abu Bakr did hear
cases and give decisions but their enactment or repealing was in the
hands of Umar. All this goes to prove that Umar had made Abu Bakr as a
strategic Caliph, while practically it was Umar himself who was the
Caliph. After two years, this concealment no longer remained necessary.

Third, the aforesaid gesture of Umar also shows that Abu Bakr’s court of
justice was not bound by any rules. Apparently, Umar nor anybody else
had any such legal right to annul the Caliph’s order in this way. We
don’t know what was the official post of Umar at the time of the first
Caliphate. If he was a government pleader, then certainly a government
pleader has no such right to tear off the Caliph’s decree in such a
humiliating manner. And if he was holding a post higher than that of the
Caliph of the time in the court of justice, even then this type of
interruption in the dealing of a subordinate court does not appear
appropriate and legal. Fourth, such deeds of Umar make his enmity to
Lady Fatima and His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) quite obvious.

It looks quite clear that from the very beginning, Umar was trying to
assure that Fadak is not restored to Lady Fatima (s.a.) and this enmity
of Umar to Fatima is no secret. Only those who close their eyes cannot
observe this malice and enmity. Fifth, a very ugly kind of harshness
becomes apparent from all these deeds of Umar. Taking this into
consideration, the commentator of Nahjul Balagha writes: “Even if law or
right was not in favor of Lady Fatima, the Caliphate ought to have taken
it into account that Fatima was a grief stricken woman claimant, her
parents had passed away and the demise of her father had made her
extremely gloomy.”

I say that at the time of writing about such sympathetic words, the
commentator forgot that even before the case of Fadak and after the
demise of the Holy Prophet (S) the condolence given to the Lady of
Paradise by the Caliphate was that Umar was sent by Abu Bakr to burn
down the house of this lady[^1] or he had proceeded of his own. When
such a harsh treatment was given soon after the Prophet’s demise, any
sympathetic or mild attitude could not have at all been expected at the
time of Fadak proceedings in the court of law, which was after quite a
long period of time. Why look only at this matter of Fadak?

A look at history shows that the Ummah of the Prophet imagined that it
was unlawful to behave nicely with the holy progeny of Prophet! Even
today, this behavior is no less visible. Only those descendants of Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) (Sadaats) who had left the path of Bani Hashim and entered
the path of Sunni, expect less enmity from the Ummah of the Holy Prophet
(S). Otherwise, those who stayed on the path of their elders are even
today fearing the same bad attitude from the Prophet’s Ummah, which had
begun right from the moment of the demise of the Messenger.

[^1]: Ref. Tarikh Abul Fida


