Matter Of Inheritance
=====================

The Almighty Allah says in the 11th verse of Surah Nisa:

***“After (the payment of) a bequest he may have bequeathed or a debt;
your parents and your children, you know not which of them is the nearer
to you in usefulness; this is an ordinance from Allah: Surely Allah is
Knowing, Wise.”***[^1]  
 According to Quran and traditions, the matter of inheritance is very
important for Muslims. According to the report of Ibn Umar[^2], the Holy
Prophet (S) stated that the most difficult time on a Muslim is that only
two nights are left for his death and he has not prepared his will.

One more tradition on the same topic is found in Sahih Muslim[^3]
related by Ibn Shahab that Imam Noodi says that majority believe that
making a will is recommended and not obligatory. And Dawood and many
others have stated that it is obligatory, when the deceased is
responsible for some right or he is having an entrusted thing of any
person. According to Imam Shafei, the will must be written as a
precautionary measure.

It is mentioned in Ashatul Maat[^4] that according to Jabir the Holy
Prophet (S) stated that if a person has prepared his will before dying,
he has passed away like a martyr and in the way of righteousness. From
Mizan-al-Sharani[^5] we come to know that if a person is religious,
making a will is obligatory on him, otherwise, it is desirable.

From Tarikh Abul Fida[^6], it is clear that at the time of going to the
cave, the Holy Prophet (S) asked His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) to return the
entrusted things to the people that were with him and sleep on his bed.
In Jame Sagir of Suyuti it is mentioned that the Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Ali (a.s.) is from me and I am from Ali (a.s.) and whatever is
obligatory to be fulfilled, cannot be fulfilled by anyone, except me and
Ali (a.s.).” And he also said: “Ali (a.s.) will fulfill my religion.”

In the same book, it is mentioned that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “Every
Prophet had a successor and my successor is Ali (a.s.).” It is
surprising that despite verses and traditions about making wills, the
Prophet himself didn’t leave any will. There is no doubt that the
Prophet wanted to leave a written testament, but Umar said: “We have the
Quran with us,” and did not allow the will to be written.

Ahlul Sunnat may offer lame excuses, but the fact is that Umar knew that
the Holy Prophet (S) was going to appoint His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) as
his successor, as Umar himself confessed after the Caliphate was formed:
“The Prophet (S) wanted to appoint Ali as his successor, but we
prevented him.”

No doubt, the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to write his will for the sake of
religion. If His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) had become his successor, Islam
and Muslims would have been safe from all evils, whose seeds were sown
by Umar in the Islamic world. Indeed, the testament of Imamate was one
of the best things and it was such an exalted thing that since it could
not be realized in the world, Islam had to face thousands of troubles.
So much so, that Islam has not remained the religion of Allah, it has
become the religion of selfish people.

“Surely we belong to Allah and to Him we shall return”

[^1]: 4:11.

[^2]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. 2, Pg. 36

[^3]: Vol. 2, Pg. 38

[^4]: Vol. 3, Pg. 92

[^5]: Pg. 118, Kitabul Wasaya

[^6]: Pg. 132


