Debate Of Good And Evil, Compulsion And Free Will
=================================================

In Mishkat[^1] is mentioned a report of Sahih Muslim that “Allah fixed
the very portion of adultery, which a man will indulge in. There would
be no escape from it. The adultery of the eye is the lustful look and
the adultery of the ears is listening to voluptuous (song or talk) and
the adultery of the tongue is licentious speech and the adultery of the
hand is the lustful grip (embrace) and the adultery of the feet is to
walk (to the place) where he intends to commit adultery and the heart
yearns and desires, which he may or may not put into effect.”

It is clear from this tradition that whatever a man does, he does so
because it is written in his destiny and therefore he should not be
blamed. It means that since it was the will of Allah, what is the
mistake of man and why would Allah be displeased with the people? What
does all this mean? It means that it is Allah’s work, but man is
guilty.[^2]

From another tradition of Mishkat[^3], it is seen that when Allah
creates a man for Paradise, He makes him work, so that he would be
eligible for Paradise and when He creates a man for hell, He makes him
do as hellish people do and then He puts him in hell, therefore it is
proved that a man would not be responsible for his deeds.

According to Ihya-ul-uloom of Ghazzali[^4], good actions of people show
faith in Allah and all worldly affairs appear according to the will of
Allah. And good and evil, profit and loss, Islam and infidelity, good
guidance and deviation, devotion, sin, polytheism and faith are the
commands of Allah and no one can disobey His commands. If Allah wants to
mislead anyone, He misleads him. It is thus clear that whatever is done,
it is by Allah and man does not do anything. What justice is it that man
has to bear punishment?

The writer says that in his opinion, the question of good, evil, free
will and compulsion is beyond human’s sense and though he has read
discussions about it in different languages, but through his
investigation, he hasn’t formed a final opinion. O my Lord! This matter
is beyond my intellect. I believe in whatever is Your command and Your
Prophet’s and the commands of the Infallibles in this matter, and to
follow it, is my duty and I don’t want to argue anything about it.

***“Keep us on the right path. The path of those upon whom Thou hast
bestowed favors. Not (the path) of those upon whom Thy wrath is brought
down, nor of those who go astray.”***[^5]

[^1]: Pg. 12

[^2]: In this matter, a clear and simple faith is enough that Allah has
not created a man like vegetables and minerals. On the contrary, He has
bestowed him power and strength, that a man can do whatever he likes and
he can use his power with the help of Allah’s gift. No doubt that Allah
has given some abilities to man and some He has kept beyond him. For
example, when a man is standing, he is given choice to raise one of his
feet, and he can raise it, but he cannot raise both the feet together
and remain suspended in space. It is clear that a man is helpless in
some matters and therefore he cannot be held answerable in those matters
as it is illogical. His reward and punishment depends only on his work
in which he was given an authority. Readers of the Holy Quran can
understand that Prophet Isa (a.s.) is mentioned to have created living
things and Isa (a.s.) himself has also mentioned about his creation, but
through the power of Allah. Thus a man performs good deeds and bad deeds
but whatever he does, he does not on his own, since he has no personal
power. Whatever he does, he does so by the power that Allah has granted
to him. Therefore, good or bad will be related to man and to blame Allah
for it, is meaningless. Therefore, good or bad, everything is from Allah
and if it means that whatever a man does is from Allah, is entirely
wrong. And if it means that whatever is good or bad in the world are
granted by Allah, then we accept that whatever good is from Allah and
whatever Allah does is all for the best, and evil is out of Allah’s
will, because Allah is Supreme, the Knower and Omnipotent. Therefore, He
does not allow bad deeds. Those who have invented the concept of
compulsion, believe that a man is helpless and whatever Allah wants, He
does. Seeing the senseless and inhuman deeds of their elders, they
attributed all their misdoings to Allah in order to save them from
blame.

[^3]: Pg. 12

[^4]: Pg. 66/67

[^5]: Surah Al Hamd 1:5-7


