Piety Of His Eminence, Ali
==========================

Muhammad bin Qays narrates from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Ali (a.s.)
used to partake simple food like the slaves. His Eminence, Ali (a.s.)
used to buy two shirts and ask his slave to choose one he liked and only
after that, did His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) put on the shirt. He fed the
poor, mutton and leavened bread and himself he subsisted on barely
bread, olive oil and vinegar.

He never chose prosperity and comforts for himself and was always
diligent in the way of Allah. He emancipated several slaves that he had
obtained through the strength of his arms and had brought them up for
the sake of Allah. No deed of any human could supercede his actions. He
used to pray 1000 units of prayers everyday.

Allamah Qaushiji writes in Sharh Tajrid[^1] that he was the most pious
after the Prophet. Despite having the means, he used to lead a life of
recluse and he used to say: “O world! You try to lure me and want to
cheat me. I don’t need any of your pleasures. I have divorced you
thrice. Your pleasure is short-lived and danger is great and your
dominion is ungrateful. By Allah, the world in my sight is like
perspiration in the hand of leprous man.” He used to wear coarse
garments and ate very simple food.

Ibn Rafe says: “One day I came to His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) and saw a bag
containing dry pieces of bread. I asked, ‘O Amirul Mo-mineen! Why have
you kept the mouth of the bag sealed?’ His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) said:
‘So that my children do not mix butter or olive oil in it.’” These
clothes and food were especially for His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) and none
should share them. He used to mend his clothes and shoes from the rind
of dates. He ate meat in very small quantity and used to say: “O people!
Do not make your stomach, a graveyard of animals.”

He was such a worshipper that due to prostration, he had a mark (callus)
on his forehead like the knee of camels. He used to recite many
supererogatory prayers. People pulled out arrows from his body at the
time of prayer and he did not feel the pain due to his concentration and
the same thing happened during his supplications. He was so tolerant
that he knew about Ibn Muljim but did not deprive him from his stipend
and other acts of generosity. In spite of severe enmity, he did not take
revenge from Marwan in the Battle of Jamal and left him alive. In the
same way, he did not take revenge from Saad bin Aas who was his deadly
enemy.

In the Battle of Siffeen, Muawiyah’s forces cut off the water supply
from the army of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.). The people were thirsty. Ali
(a.s.) launched a severe attack and regained control on the river. The
army of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) wanted to stop water supply in
retaliation, but His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) prevented them. Such was the
generosity of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.).

It is learnt from Izalatul Khifa[^2] that Muawiyah asked Zarar to say
something about the qualities of Ali (a.s.). Zarar said: “By Allah, His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was brave, just, learned, clever and wise. He was
horrified of the world, was friendly to the loneliness of the night and
looked at divine working to obtain lessons from it. He dressed like
paupers, but despite that commanded terrific awe. He respected the
people of religion, loved the poor and did not like unlawful matters. He
did not disappoint the weak and helpless. He used to cry in a sad voice
in darkness. He gave up worldly pleasures and said that provisions of
journey are scarce and journey is very long.

Muawiyah cried hearing this and said: “May Allah have mercy on Abul
Hasan, he was doubtlessly, a venerable and a holy man.” The writer feels
highly regretful on Muawiyah that knowing all this, he still made war
against him? O, world! How you have destroyed people! And as long as it
is all right, it will do the same.

Abu Huzail says that he saw His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) wearing an old
coarse shirt and when he pulled the sleeves down, they reached to his
fingertips, but when he left them, they covered only half of his arms.
He did not leave anything pending in distribution of booty and public
treasury and when he started distributing the booty the whole day
passed. He did not keep anything in the house. He gave authority to the
honest and when he found any official guilty of breach of trust, he
guided him through verses of Quran and beseeched to the Almighty that he
has not commanded him injustice.

Abu Umar narrates from Majmaul Samin that: “I saw that when His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.) had distributed war booty, Zakat or Khums, he swept
the ground so that not single grain can stand up to testify against him
on Judgment Day.” It means that he maintained account of each and
everything. Abu Umar narrates that during his Caliphate, His Eminence,
Ali (a.s.) asked: “Is there anyone who would buy this sword of mine? If
I had anything cash in my hand, I would not have sold it.” A man stood
up and said: “I can give you an equivalent loan.”

Ahmad reports that when the Holy Prophet (S) gave his daughter in
marriage to His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) he gave a veil, a carpet, a pillow
of date barks, a grinding stone, a water skin and a pair of socks in her
dowry. Those who spend excessively in marriages must take lesson from
the Prophet’s practice. The Holy Prophet (S) and his family members had
not the slightest concern with worldly pleasures. His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.) drew water from the well and Lady Fatima (s.a.) grinded the corn
everyday.

Ahmad narrates another report from Mujahid that Imam Ali (a.s.) stated:
“One day, when all of us were struck with hunger in Medina, I came out
of the house to look for work. I saw that a woman had collected soil
clods and was searching for water to wet the clods. So we settled on
labor of sixteen dates and drew water from the well for her, but I got
blisters on my hands due to this. After that, I presented the dates to
the Prophet and told him everything. The Holy Prophet (S) partook the
dates with me.”

Lastly, is narrated the report of Muhammad bin Kaab Qarati in which it
is mentioned that Ali (a.s.) said: “I was the standard bearer of the
Prophet and due to hunger my heart was sinking. In such a condition, I
caught hold of my stomach and began to fight. The fact is that if I get
40000 days of such good fortune, I would remain as steadfast.”

Now the people of justice may compare Imam Ali (a.s.) to the fugitives
of Uhud, Khaybar and Hunayn and see the difference between the brave one
and others. Our Master has not earned the titles of ‘the Sword of
Allah’, ‘the Lion of Allah’ and ‘the King of Men’ for nothing. Without
any doubt, there is no warrior like Ali (a.s.) and no sword like
Zulfiqar.

[^1]: Pg. 388

[^2]: Pg. 266


