Causes That Compelled the Imamiyah Sect to Adopt Dissimulation
==============================================================

Although dissimulation is such a natural thing that both Shia and Sunni
and all human beings are needful of it, it was all the more necessary
for the Imamiyah sect, and that is why it became a part of their
religion. If Imamiyah had not resorted to dissimulation, their existence
would not have been possible in the world, due to Bani Umayyah and Bani
Abbas.

On the contrary, the situation of Ahlul Sunnat was such that due to
Caliphate being in their favor, they had no need to resort to
dissimulation and hence it did not become customary among them. The
condition of the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and their followers during
the time of Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas was so perilous that they had to
very strictly follow dissimulation.

If they had not resorted to dissimulation, they would have been
destroyed. How funny that the opponents of Imamiyah regard dissimulation
as hypocrisy and do not pay attention to its necessity, although
dissimulation is such a natural matter that in moral and civilization
matters, no human being has ever been exempt from it. When Shah Abdul
Aziz published his book, Tohfa, in the beginning he mentioned his name
as Ghulam Haleem and that of his father as Qutubuddin Ahmad.

Actually, there was no need of dissimulation and the Shah had no fear of
his life, property and honor. Then also he liked to use the power of
dissimulation. What was the need for the Shah to resort to dissimulation
in such peaceful times? Thus, if Muhammadâ€™s Progeny resorted to
dissimulation during the time of Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas, what was
wrong in it? If they had not acted in that way, it would have been
unjust to both, religion and wisdom.

We should know that the Imamiyah resorted to it not without any reason
as mentioned above. But it had no connection to injustice and falsehood.
If dissimulation is compared to the Ahlul Sunnat theory of validity of
consensus of non-Bani Hashim persons and invalidity of consensus of Bani
Hashim persons, the difference would be obvious. Indeed, this matter was
established to murder the truth, as is proved to all.


