Value Of Dissimulation
======================

The value of dissimulation is that on many occasions, it is a great
self-guard for safety; besides affairs of the world depend on it. If
dissimulation disappears from the world, all the kingdoms would decline
and all relationships would scatter and all kinds of factories would be
abandoned; cities become enclosures and lanes and streets look like
flowing rivers of blood; relationships would be break off and in the
end, human beings would be destroyed from the face of the earth in a
very short time.

We should know that dissimulation is based on a great exigency. It has
full authority in the matter of the world and religion. It has no
concern with any falsehood and it is not based on selfishness. For
example, if anyone says: “You kill so and so person, otherwise, I would
kill you,” In such a situation, one would prefer getting killed than to
kill someone else. According to Shariah, it is not an occasion of
dissimulation and if a person resorts to dissimulation in such a case,
he would become eligible for Hell. In the following discussion, we shall
prove that dissimulation is as lawful in Ahlul Sunnat as it is in Shia
religion.

Allah says:

***“Let not the believers take the unbelievers for friends rather than
believers; and whoever does this, he shall have nothing of (the
guardianship of) Allah, but you should guard yourselves against them,
guarding carefully.”***[^1]

It means that it is not lawful for true believers to have friendship
with infidels, except in the condition of dissimulation. Baidhawi writes
that Yaqoob Qari has recited it as Taqayyah and in times of fear,
friendship with infidels is lawful.[^2]

Allah says:

***“And a believing man of Firon’s people who hid his faith
said…”***[^3]

He was Hizqeel, a cousin of Firon and he concealed his faith from Firon
and his community for a hundred years.[^4] In Seerate Muhammad[^5], in
the incident of Abu Jindal, it is mentioned that Allah has made
dissimulation lawful for Muslims, if they are in danger and the sentence
after that says: The Messenger of Allah (S) allowed one to keep faith in
the heart and lie from the tongue, just like in the incident of Abu
Jindal. In the same way, in this book on page 448, it is mentioned that
the Holy Prophet (S) asked: “O Abu Dharr, what would you do when people
banish you from Medina?”

Abu Dharr replied: “I would fight with my sword.” The Prophet said:
“Don’t do that. It would be better for you to listen to them and obey
them even if they be cruel slaves of Abyssinia.”

In Seerate Nabawiya of Sayyid Ahmad Dahlan[^6], it is mentioned that
when the Quraish infidels of Mecca asked His Eminence, Ali (a.s.),
“Where is Muhammad?” He replied: “I don’t know.” Although he knew that
the Holy Prophet (S) was hiding in the cave. What was it, if not
dissimulation? Let Ahlul Sunnat say it was lying, but the poor Shia can
never attribute falsehood to His Eminence, Ali (a.s.).

Similar situation is described in Tarikh Khamis[^7] when the infidels
asked Abu Bakr about the Prophet, Abu Bakr said: “He is a guide, leading
the way.” No doubt that in this situation, Abu Bakr had also adopted
dissimulation.

In Seeratul Halabiyah[^8], Halabi says that wherever the infidels are
dominant and Muslims are weak they should not curse the idols of
infidels and this order continues till now. According to Seerate
Muhammadiya[^9] and Sahih Bukhari[^10] the Holy Prophet (S) stayed in
Mecca for fifteen years and preached for only four or five years
secretly and in fear, because the infidels rejected the Holy Quran, the
Prophet and Allah the Almighty. That is why, Allah revealed to pray
softly, so that polytheists may not hear, but it was not necessary to
hide from companions, ‘but you must not pray so loudly that infidels
snatch the Quran from you.’

We come to know from the report of Isafur Raghebeen[^11] that when the
Holy Prophet (S) prayed, he prayed in a secluded corner. One day, a
disbeliever found Saad bin Abi Waqqas praying and he condemned and
cursed him. Saad and the polytheist had a fight in which Saad beat up
that disbeliever. Obviously, if they had been cautious as ordered by the
Prophet, this would not have happened.

According to Tirmidhi[^12], people would first come to Prophet Ibrahim
(a.s.) for intercession on Judgment Day but Ibrahim (a.s.) would say: “I
can’t do anything for you, because I have lied three times in my life.”
The fact was that he had to resort to this because of dissimulation.
That is why the Holy Prophet (S) stated that such lies were lawful for
Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) by Shariat.

In Sahih Bukhari[^13], it is quoted from Ibn Abbas that the Holy Prophet
(S) told Miqdad that to hide belief from infidels was the best action of
faith. Such as he was doing in Mecca. It shows that when you feel danger
from infidels you should conceal your faith. Undoubtedly, it is the
proper occasion for dissimulation.

It is related by Huzaifah in Sahih Muslim[^14] that “once I was with the
Prophet when he said: ‘Conceal our Islam.’ I asked: ‘Why do you fear?
There are six or seven hundred people in my tribe.’ The Prophet said:
‘You don’t know, perhaps you may encounter the enemies of Islam alone,
and if such an occasion comes for anyone, it becomes necessary to pray
in a low voice.’”

Qastalani writes that the companions of the Messenger of Allah (S) did
not openly declare Islam and that they prayed secretly, so that they
would not create any trouble. Baidhawi[^15] writes that according to the
verse of Surah Shuara, Prophet Moosa (a.s.) was in dissimulation for
thirty years. Qastalani says in Sharh Bukhari[^16] that lying is
justified to save ones life from unjust people and enemies of religion.

According to Baidhawi[^17], the following verse permits dissimulation:

***“And cast not yourselves to perdition with your own hands…”***[^18]

Tafseer Maalimut Tanzeel also supports Tafseer Baidhawi. But it should
be known that dissimulation was permissible in Islam in the beginning as
it was weak and that now there is no more need for it. Although
according to Imam Sadiq (a.s.): “It (dissimulation) is our religion,
till Judgment Day.” According to Tafseer Jalalain, Tafseer Ibn Abbas,
Tafseer Nishapuri and Tafseer Kabir Razi, dissimulation is permitted
only in times of need. Thus, Shia and Sunni, both consider it necessary,
but it is very regretful that Ahlul Sunnat use it as a means to vilify
the Shias.

[^1]: Surah Aale Imran 3:28

[^2]: Ref. Baidhawi, Pg. 134

[^3]: Surah Momin 40:28

[^4]: Ref. Tafseer Baidhawi and Tafseer Ibn Abbas.

[^5]: Pg. 294

[^6]: Vol. 1, Pg. 384

[^7]: Vol. 1, Pg. 335

[^8]: Vol. 1, Pg. 466

[^9]: Pg. 191

[^10]: Vol. 1, Pg. 351

[^11]: Pg. 15

[^12]: Vol. 2, Pg. 16

[^13]: Vol. 10, Pg. 35

[^14]: Vol. 1, Pg. 84

[^15]: Vol. 2, Pg. 106

[^16]: Vol. 5, Pg. 279

[^17]: Vol. 1, Pg. 99

[^18]: Surah Baqarah 2:195


