Tabarra
=======

The dictionary meaning of Tabarra means ‘to be aloof’. That is to be
aloof from a group or party, but generally it has taken up the meaning
of cursing. Although it has no concern with such affairs, and it was
Muawiyah Ibn Abi Sufyan who started cursing of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.)
and thus all sorts of abusive language and taunting began to be called
as Tabarra. We should know that Shias have no concern with such meaning.

The writer is entirely against the practice initiated by Amir Muawiyah
and such a thing was only necessary for Muawiyah and those desirous of
the religion of Ali Murtadha’ (a.s.) should think about it.

According to Sayyid Ali Muhammad, cursing is abominable. In my view,
whatever the style of curse maybe, it has spoilt the Shiite religion and
followers of Shiite faith should try to reform themselves. Muawiyah
initiated cursing on His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) on some purpose; and that
purpose is not valid for Shias, therefore they should be aloof from it.
The reason of cursing His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was that Muawiyah became
a Caliph after making Imam Hasan (a.s.) abdicate Caliphate.

Muawiyah knew that he had no right to Caliphate. Therefore, if this
cursing would continue, all Muslims of that time would abuse the sons of
His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) also and due to this, his Caliphate would gain
strength. It happened in the same way. Due to curse and abusive
language, Muslims of that time forgot about the progeny of Prophet
Muhammad (S) in a very short time and thought that Muawiyah and Bani
Umayyah were the nearest relatives of the Prophet and not anyone else.

Cursing was made a part of the Friday sermon and as stated previously,
everyone gradually forgot Muhammad’s Progeny. Within 50 years of the
death of Muawiyah, many Muslims forgot His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) and Lady
Fatima (s.a.) completely. Hence a man from them asked a friend: “Who is
this Ali, whom we all curse in the Friday sermons?” His friend replied:
“He was an infidel and deadly enemy of Islam, that is why everyone
curses him.”

In the same way, a person asked another: “Who was Fatima?” The reply
was: “She was a wife of the Prophet.” This was when not much time had
passed after the Messenger of Allah (S) and Muslims of Bani Umayyah
period became unaware of Ali and Fatima; and this was the aim of
Muawiyah. It is clear that the mention of the family of Prophet (S) was
regarded as a crime and using abusive language became customary. As a
result, Muslims of that time considered Bani Umayyah as relatives of
Prophet (S) and those who were really related to the Prophet were
forgotten. It is clear that this political need is not necessary for the
Shias of this time.


