Legal Viewpoint in the Fadak Affair
===================================

It should be remembered that this event of Fadak, like that of the
‘incident of paper’, is an issue of major difference between Shias and
Sunnis. The men of intelligence may opine in their own manner, but I
could not yet understand as to what kind of Prophet’s word were, “There
is no inheritance among us prophets. Whatever we leave behind is
charity,” which goes against both Torah and Quran. The Holy Quran
clearly talks about Prophet Sulaiman’s being an heir of Prophet Dawood
(a.s.). The subject in Taurat is also similar.

For obvious reasons, these words cannot be the words of the Prophet. It
could have been another thing had the Prophet said so in his own case.
His so saying regarding all other messengers appears totally out of
place. Imamiyah scholars say that these words “we do not leave
inheritance” are both against Arab literary usage as well as tradition.
So this cannot be a phrase uttered by the Prophet, because he was one of
the best speakers of Arabic language.

Qadi Shazan seems to be silent in the face of this objection. What else
could he have ever done when he had no reply at all? It was a fake
phrase, because from Sahih Bukhari[^1] it appears that the Prophet had
left ‘his white mule on which he used to ride, his weapons, and the
estate of Fadak’ as his inheritance. Likewise, his leaving behind of
some other things is also known from books like, Isafur Raghebeen
etc.[^2], and all this does not fall in the jurisdiction of the said
phrase, making them non-inheritable because the Prophet’s other things
like headwear etc. were with Imam Husayn (at the time of Karbala’) by
way of inheritance, not as charity (Sadaqah).

Anyway, because of this Fadak event, a jurisprudential difference arose
between Sunnis and Shias and it is that in the matter of testimony, the
witness of a husband in favor of his wife and/or a father’s testimony in
favor of his son/daughter is not acceptable.[^3] Contrary to this, Shias
have accepted such testimony as admissible in law.

Apparently, in this matter, the legal progress of time seems to be in
favor of Shias. Wisdom also says that it is not necessary that a husband
or a father will always lie because of the relationship and a non-
related fellow too, just like a related one, can give false evidence.
How can such persons be declared as unreliable in law merely because of
their relations? The judge should look at the person’s character. To
declare a witness inadmissible merely because of relationship is to kill
justice.

In case of Fadak, the court ought to have seen what kind of a witness
Ali (a.s.) was. Could Ali (a.s.) give a false testimony? Or was it
impossible? To declare him unfit for testimony merely because of
relationship is a matter, which shows only a lack of legal courage. The
court should have admitted the testimony of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.)
because the whole world of that time was aware of his personality.
Everyone knew about the superiority of knowledge and wisdom of Ali
(a.s.) and also knew that Ali would not lie even if two thousand Fadaks
were at stake.

The fact is that both Abu Bakr and Umar were aware of the truthfulness
of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) but Umar did not want that Fadak should be
restored to Lady Fatima. It is natural that one does not have friendship
with one’s enemy or opponent. Umar had an old enmity with Lady Fatima.
In such circumstances, it was not unexpected of Umar to say that Ali’s
testimony did not carry weight. The description of this enmity will be
given in the event of the marriage of Umme Kulthum. Therefore it is not
mentioned here.

[^1]: Vol. 5, Pg. 159.

[^2]: Pg. 10

[^3]: Ref. Sharhe Mawaqif, Naval Kishor Press, Maqsad Raabe az marsad
Raabe, Pg. 735


