Mourning For Imam Husain
========================

Azadari means mourning for Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his relatives and
companions who were martyred in the desert of Karbala’. Mourning is a
precept as well as a practice. An example of practice is to wear black
or green clothes, to construct sarcophagus (Tazia) like Imam Husayn’s
tomb, to construct Husainiyyahs, to install banners, hold meetings to
commemorate Imam Husayn’s martyrdom, feed mourners, distribute food
among poor people, serve the poor and rich with eatables and drinks.

All these are different methods of commemorating the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (a.s.). For example, standards (Alam) are installed in Iran and
in India people make sarcophagus (Tazia). In China, there is no such
thing; there the people go to the forest, make a fire and walk on it.
Mourning for Imam Husayn (a.s.) is such a deed that his believers can
never give it up and enemies of Muhammad’s Progeny can never bear it.

All important religious and secular events are commemorated annually
like the 12th Rabi Awwal etc. Ghazzali prohibited narrating the tragedy
of Husayn (a.s.), because it cast aspersion on Abu Bakr, Umar and
Muawiyah. Abu Hanifah also prohibited celebrating Eid Ghadeer for this
very purpose. But the followers of Muhammad’s Progeny can never give up
the remembrance of the tragedy of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and can never
neglect mourning for him.

Remembrance of a beloved is a natural thing. The demand of friendship is
not forgetfulness. Now the writer would like to write about the custom
of mourning, lamentation and dirge recitation among Ahlul Sunnat.

The book Ashatal Maat[^1] states that when the Holy Prophet (S) passed
away, angels came to express condolence and Allah also did not abstain
from expressing sorrow. That is, Allah also gave condolence to Himself.
We come to know that condolence is a natural thing and it is not out of
Allah’s will. Everyone knows that Prophet Adam (a.s.) also mourned for
his son, Habil’s death and why should he had not have done so, when
mourning is a natural thing?

Hence, if followers of Husayn (a.s.) and other family members of the
Prophet mourn for Imam Husayn (a.s.), it is a necessary thing, and it is
true and appropriate. Lamentation and dirges are included in mourning
and to consider it prohibited is entirely senseless.

In Mishkat[^2] and Sunan Nasai[^3], Abu Huraira states that when anyone
from the family of the Holy Prophet (S) expired, women gathered and
cried bitterly. One day, Umar prevented those women from crying and
drove them out. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “O Umar! Leave them, let them
cry, because the eyes become full of tears in mourning and it also
troubles their hearts and the calamity is also fresh.” Thus, we come to
know that mourning is lawful and why it should not be, when it is
entirely natural?

Umar action shows his temperament, due to which he prevented the ladies
from crying and drove them out. If such a thing had not been according
to nature, why the Prophet allowed it? We should know that weeping in
trouble is not a sin according to the Holy Prophet (S).

Waqidi’s Maghazi Futuh Sham[^4] shows that all those martyred in the
Battle of Uhud were mourned by their women relatives, in a special
gathering arranged by them. When the Holy Prophet (S) knew about it, he
became angry and advised them against it. This shows that mourning for
Imam Husayn (a.s.) is not allowed.

According to Tarikh Khamis[^5], Lady Fatima (s.a.) also sat near the
grave of her father and wept and recited dirges; smelt the dust of grave
and recited the following verse:

“I am overtaken by such a misery. That if this trouble falls on the day,
it would turn into a dark night.”

‘A’ysha also was crying and saying: “Ah! He is dead. He never ate barley
bread to satiation. He sat on palm-leaf mat, instead of a throne. He did
not sleep at night for fear of hell.” Now people of justice should
decide whether lamentation for the tragedy of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
Ahlul Bayt is lawful or not?

In Mishkat, in the chapter of eulogy of Ahlul Bayt[^6], Salmi reports
that Umme Salma says that she saw the Prophet in her dream and that his
head and beard were covered with dust. She asked: “O Messenger of Allah
(S), what has happened to you?” The Prophet replied: “I had gone to the
place of the martyrdom of Husayn (a.s.).”

Another tradition of Mishkat related by Umme Fazl says: “One day, I came
to the Prophet and gave his daughter’s son, Husayn (a.s.) in his arms.
All of a sudden the Prophet’s eyes were filled with tears. I asked the
reason and the Prophet said: ‘Jibraeel has informed me that my son would
be martyred and Jibraeel has given me red dust of his grave.’”

According to the tradition of Seerate Muhammad[^7], when Imam Husayn
(a.s.) was martyred, blood rained from the sky and vessels became full
of blood, the sky became so dark that stars were visible and blood oozed
from beneath the stones. It is also mentioned in this book that blood
rained on every house of Khorasan and Syria.

This shows that the sky and other things were all mourning for Imam
Husayn (a.s.). Shame on such Muslims, who refuse to mourn for Imam
Husayn (a.s.). How amusing that Pir Dastagir writes in Ghaniyatu
Talibeen that “Ashura (10th Mohurrum) is a day of feast and celebration.
We should not mourn this day, because it is of cheerfulness and we
should be happy on this day; Ahlul Sunnat will be rewarded if they do
so.” Ahlul Sunnat should decide whether we should be aggrieved or happy
on the day of Ashura? But since their leader, Ghausul Aazam advises them
to be happy, it is better for them to do so!

Enough in justification of lamentation and elegy is that dirges are
found even in the Sunni book of Madaraj Nubuwwah and also Shah Abdul
Aziz Dehalvi has written them in Sirre Shahadatain. What else can it be
except that lamentation and reciting of dirges is absolutely lawful for
Shias, because when the caravan of the captives of the family of the
Prophet returned to Medina from Syria, Imam Zainul Aabideen (a.s.) asked
Bashir to recite a dirge for the martyrs of Karbala’ and inform the
people of Medina of the return of the family of the Prophet.

Bashir says: “I mounted my horse and was reciting couplets of the dirge
about the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) in a loud voice.” Thus, he
arrived at the mosque of the Messenger of Allah (S) and saw some women
in veils who came out of their houses weeping. All men and women were
wailing and reciting dirges. Why followers of the Imam should not weep
and lament? People will cry in future as people lamented before. But
since Ahlul Sunnat follow Pir Dastagir, they cannot join the mourning of
Imam Husayn (a.s.). Poor people, they are quite helpless. What can they
do?

[^1]: Vol. 4, Pg. 611

[^2]: Pg. 144

[^3]: Vol. 1, Pg. 168

[^4]: Pg. 108

[^5]: Pg. 406

[^6]: Pg. 562

[^7]: Pg. 474


