Mutah (Temporary) Marriage
==========================

Mutah is a kind of marriage (Nikah). The only difference is that one is
periodic and the other is permanent. Its detail is given in the Holy
Quran. Mutah is not compulsory or obligatory but the Holy Quran
considers it lawful. Since no verse of Mutah is found to be abrogated,
Shias believe that it is lawful and they practice it. Non-Shias regard
it unlawful, because Umar Ibn Khattab has decreed it to be illegal.

In his own words: “I prohibit both.” How the statement of the Prophet or
Caliph can abrogate a verse of Quran is beyond the understanding of this
writer.

According to non-Shias, some tradition of the Prophet abrogated the
command of Mutah and that is why the Caliph also instructed thus. The
writer says that it is the same, whether there is some saying of the
Prophet abrogating Mutah or not, neither the statement of the Prophet
can abrogate a verse of Quran nor the saying of Umar. According to Shias
belief, only Allah can abrogate His own command.

Even the Prophet or a descendent of a Prophet cannot abrogate a divine
command. But the same cannot be expected from Ahlul Sunnat according to
whose belief, Umar had the right to abrogate any command of Allah, since
according to Ahlul Sunnat faith most verses were revealed because of
Umar; so if after the passing away of the Prophet, the Caliph abrogates
a command of Allah, what is wrong in it?

By following this faith, it becomes easy to accept the abrogation of the
verse of Mutah, otherwise, apparently the command of Umar for abrogation
of Mutah seems to be absolutely opposed to Islamic texts. This argument
is not acceptable to the writer, because to say that Quranic verses were
revealed according to Umar’s opinion is meaningless. In the view of
intelligent people, Quranic verses were not revealed according to Umar’s
opinion and Umar’s command cannot abrogate the command of Allah.

Ahlul Sunnat believe that Allah sent revelation according to the
Caliph’s wish and this shows that Umar had a share in prophethood, which
means that he was superior to the Prophet. Thus, when the Caliph
disliked something, Allah’s command come down according to his wish and
there was no interference of the Prophet or anyone else. We also come to
know that Muhammad (S) and even Allah felt it necessary to bear in mind
Umar’s likes or dislikes. If it was not so, how can they say that
revelation was sent according to his wish?

Muhammad (S) was a channel to convey divine revelation and preaching of
verses that whatever communications were sent by Allah, he was to bring
them to the believers and without interfering, whether he liked it or
not. It is clear that this is the function of the Messenger of Allah
(S). But revelation was according to Umar’s opinion; and Allah had to
ask Umar about his opinion before sending it, which means that Umar did
not only have a share in prophethood, he also was a partner in godhood.

This belief seems to exceed the faith of Bahrul Uloom Maulavi Abdul
Alaa, which regards Umar only to be the tutor of the Holy Prophet (S).
Bahrul Uloom says that sometime the Prophet was in a position where even
angels could not tread and sometimes he came down to the earthly level
and it was in one of those moments that in the last days, the Messenger
of Allah (S) said:

“Give me pen and paper, so that I may write for you something that you
would never go astray after me.”

Umar understood that it was the moment of his earthliness and therefore
he corrected him. Upon which the Messenger of Allah (S) continued to
repeat: “I seek the refuge of Allah.”

The writer says: When Umar had a share in Quranic revelation, then how
could the personal reformation of Prophet Muhammad (S) be difficult for
the Caliph? But the writer cannot share the Maulavi’s faith, because the
saying of the Holy Prophet (S) does not show that when he said: “Give me
pen and paper…” he had fallen to the level of earthliness, because if it
had been so, he would not have said: “So that you will not go astray
after me.”

It is a statement, which shows that what he was saying was very
important. That is, he wanted to write something, which would save his
followers from going astray. It is clear that such a document cannot be
concerned with his terminal condition. Certainly his thoughts were on
Allah, but Umar could not understand the Prophet’s style and his demand
of intelligence and wisdom, otherwise, he never would have tried to
correct his thinking.

When at last the Prophet said, “I seek the refuge of Allah,” also it was
not due to low thoughts. Rather, it seems that the Prophet was very much
displeased of the people’s disobedience. No doubt, to say, “I seek the
refuge of Allah,” was a demand of nature as his followers and all
Muslims had always obeyed him, but now the condition was such that when
he was in his terminal illness and asking for pen and paper, they were
not prepared to obey him. On the contrary, Umar was also claiming that
the Prophet was talking nonsense, as clear from his statement that: “The
disease has overcome him…”

If the Prophet had not said, “I seek the refuge of Allah,” what else
could he have said? Maulavi Abdul Alaa has, in his justifications,
praised priesthood a lot, but it is regretful that his justifications
have no relation to Nature. Now the people of justice can decide whether
Umar had any share in divine revelation or not? The fact is that Ahlul
Sunnat love the three Caliphs to such an extent that they do not care
for the respect and honor of the Prophet. Allah and the Prophet have
only minor value for them. We are horrified on seeing people like Bahrul
Uloom and other learned Ahlul Sunnat. Although there are many strange
things in the world, but the religion of Ahlul Sunnat is the strangest
of all.

Thus, we should know that Mutah is sanctioned by Quran and it cannot be
abrogated by a statement of the Prophet or a saying of Umar. Research
shows that Mutah is lawful in religion and it was lawful during the time
of the Prophet till the end of Bakr’s tenure. It was only Umar who
decreed it unlawful and from then onwards, Ahlul Sunnat regarded Mutah
unlawful.

There is no doubt that during the time of the Prophet and Abu Bakr,
Mutah was lawful, as Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari says that, “I performed
Mutah during the time of the Messenger of Allah (S) and in the time of
Abu Bakr,” and also in Tirmidhi[^1] it is mentioned that a Syrian asked
Abdullah Ibn Umar that, “Mutah of Hajj was lawful with Umrah, but your
father made it unlawful,” Abdullah replied, “My father made it unlawful
but the Messenger of Allah (S) has made it lawful. Shall I leave the
Sunnah (practice) of the Prophet and obey the commands of my father?”

Now, let us see what Mutah is?

We should know that permanent marriage (Nikah) is a civil contract in
Islam, in the same way, Mutah (Temporary marriage) is also a civil
contract. The difference in temporary or permanent marriage is that
there is no divorce in Mutah and in Nikah, divorce is possible. It means
that Mutah cannot be cancelled within the fixed period of time, as
opposed to Nikah, which can be terminated anytime through divorce.

Since, according to the dictates of reason, Mutah is an unblemished
contract, educated people of the world cannot deny its excellence. For
example an Englishman, who was also a famous jurist of India, complied
with this contract. He was among the friends of the writer. He married a
respectable woman of his own community on contract for thirty years and
his spouse participated in society with other married women.

Since he was not bound by Christian faith and discriminated between the
merits and demerits of a thing, he did not consider such a contract to
be defective. Now the excellence of Mutah is unfolded even among the
people of America and it would not be a surprise if Mutah becomes
customary in the whole world. We should know that both, Mutah and Nikah
are based on the same principle and having the same aim. Both are means
to protect against fornication. Islam has endeavored much to save the
Muslims from fornication.

Islam has allowed four marriages at the same time and also fixed
rational prohibitionary limits. By making Mutah lawful, in addition to
permanent marriage, Allah has made martial relations so easy for the
believers, which cannot be obtained by those who deny Mutah. Lack of
facility in lawful sexual contact is due to the prohibition of Mutah.
And this lack of facility results in fornication.

Rather, it can cause even worse consequences as seen during the time of
Umar. From that time onwards, nothing could replace Mutah as a channel
to save the people from fornication. When the order for prohibition of
Mutah was announced in the Islamic lands, within a very short time,
complaints arrived from Syria that soldiers were indulging in many
inappropriate misdeeds[^2] due to the prohibition of Mutah, which was
not surprising, considering the hot temperament of Arabs! Allah forbid!
That is why, His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) stated
that if Ibn Khattab had not prohibited Mutah, only the most wretched
ones would have indulged in fornication.[^3]

We should know that four marriages are permissible in Islam. This order
is not obligatory nor compulsory; a man can marry one, two, three or
four, or due to some helplessness, he cannot even marry one. Those who
advocate monogamy, should know that if Allah had made it obligatory, the
religion of Islam would have advanced in other countries, but it had no
chance in the land of Arabs.

A community whose males were not at all worried of hunger and thirst
during fasts and who considered the best way to end the fast through
sexual intercourse with the wife, to think that they would be content
with one wife is only madness! Such a community cannot be saved from
fornication through limited sex.

Therefore, the permission of four marriages was not without exigency.
Those who have accepted monogamy and are proud of it, they have no
reason to be proud of as whatever is seen in Paris and London is beyond
imagination. They advocate one wife even she were leprous or sterile!
Indecency is not unexpected from one who is bound like this.

Experience shows that the slogan of one wife is only used to conceal
obscenity. Islam has removed the system of one wife very intelligently
and allowed four wives and to be safe from fornication, has also shown
the easy way of Mutah.

If Mutah is adopted, there would be no need to keep prostitutes on
contract in the army and that wherever the army moves the prostitutes go
along with them! Government is not concerned whether the army personnel
do this lawfully or unlawfully. While the government must assure that
the army should not create disturbance.

It is clear that if the government would not supply prostitutes,
disturbance could be created in the army such as the disturbance created
in the army of Syria when Umar prohibited Mutah. According to the
writer’s view, limited polygamy and Mutah, both are the best ways and
Quran has considered both lawful. Certainly, if one does not consider
fornication wrong, he cannot value these facilities!

One who knows the worth of polygamy and is aware of their necessity and
he knows that fornication is appalling. I am not writing this against
non-Muslims, otherwise, my writing would be in a different style.

Being a Muslim, I am not against Mutah. After it was made unlawful, what
difficulties the Muslims had to bear! Imam Abu Hanifah had to derive the
order that if a man pays an amount of money to fornicate with a woman,
the amount would be lawful for that woman and that man would not be
penalized for adultery. It is clear that if Mutah had not been made
unlawful, Abu Hanifah would not have to formulate this point of law.
Anyhow, whatever the Hanafites may think about this interpretation,
according to the writer, Mutah is much better.

This order may be acceptable to whoremongers but the fact is that it is
very abominable and it destroys the communal and personal respect of
Muslims. In the eyes of the people of justice, such judgment can never
have a religious sanction and a wise man could never follow it. Below,
the writer presents his research about Mutah. Allah, the Almighty says
in Quran:

***“Then as to those whom you profit by, give them their dowries as
appointed.”***[^4]

Baidhawi states that this verse was revealed for Mutah and this order
continued till after three days after the conquest of Mecca and then it
was abrogated but no other verse can be seen that has abrogated this
verse. Hence Noodi[^5] states that Imran bin Husayn says that the Holy
Prophet (S) did not prohibit Mutah as long as he lived and Quran has not
abrogated it.

On the same page, Imran bin Husayn says that “the verse of Mutah was
revealed in Quran and the Prophet allowed Mutah for us, then the verse
was never abrogated and the Prophet also did not prohibit it. But Umar
did whatever he liked.”

It is worth considering that Baidhawi writes about abrogation of this
verse, but he has not mentioned the verse, which has abrogated this
verse of Mutah. If any verse had abrogated the verse of Mutah, he would
have surely pointed it out. The fact is that there is no such verse that
has abrogated the command of Mutah, as clear from the research of Imam
Noodi. Another argument for the abrogation of Mutah is that in the
chapter of ‘Fi-Nasikh and Al Mansukh’ of Tafseer Itqan[^6] we do no see
the abrogated verse of Mutah.

In the same way, Mulla Jeevan Jaunpuri has included the verse of Mutah
among the verses of legislation in his exegesis of Quran. The greatest
argument of non- abrogation of Mutah is that according to Tarikh Ibn
Khallikan[^7], the command of Mutah continued during the time of the
Holy Prophet (S) and the first Caliph. If any verse of Mutah had been
revealed to abrogate Mutah, it would not have remained concealed from
the Prophet. How surprising that Umar was aware of it and the Prophet
and the first Caliph were not. In short, it is confirmed that the verse
of Mutah was not abrogated by any verse.

Some learned Ahlul Sunnat who try to abrogate Mutah through the verses
of Surah Momin and Surah Maarij do not realize that these verses are
Meccan, while the verse of Mutah is from Surah Nisa and it is Medinite.
How can verses of abrogation be revealed before verses of legislation?

Umar had announced from the pulpit that, “Mutah of women and Mutah of
Hajj, both were lawful during the time of the Prophet, but now I
prohibit them.”[^8] According to Tarikhul Khulafa[^9], in the Chapter of
innovations of Umar, it can be seen that it was he that made Mutah
unlawful. Abul Fida has also mentioned it in his history and
Muwattah[^10] also states the same.

Now let us see whether Umar had the right to cancel the command of Mutah
or not, because the Prophet and first Caliph had no right and if they
had this right, surely the Prophet and the Caliph would have ordered as
Umar did. From where did Umar get this discretion? Umar must have
secured this right in the capacity of a jurist.

Thus, Allamah Qaushiji writes in Sharh Tajrid[^11] that Umar went to the
pulpit and made Mutah of women and Mutah of Hajj unlawful and also
cancelled the statement of “Hayya A’laa Khairil A’mal” (Rush to the best
of deeds). He says that it is allowed for the jurist to give a verdict.
Now the question is whether Umar, Abu Bakr or the Prophet had any right
to abrogate a divine command or not?

Certainly, the Holy Prophet (S) had no right to abrogate even a small
verse of Quran. Only Allah had the right to abrogate His command from
Quran as some abrogated commands are seen in the Holy Quran. It is not
possible for any tradition of Prophet to abrogate a verse of Quran, as
clear from the statement of the Prophet that “If our tradition conforms
to Quran, accept it and whatever is opposed to Quran, reject it.”[^12]

When such is the position of a saying of the Prophet, then what is the
value of the words of Abu Bakr and Umar?

No doubt, this jurisprudence of Umar is against the command of Allah and
is not worthy to be followed by Muslims. Now let us see which followers
of the Prophet followed Umar’s command and who were against it?
Followers who accepted the command of Allah about Mutah, that is those
who were against Umar were:

1) Abdullah Ibn Abbas  
 2) Abdullah Ibn Masood  
 3) Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari  
 4) Salma bin Al-Akwa  
 5) Abu Saeed Al-Khudri  
 6) Saeed bin Jubair  
 7) Mujahid  
 8) Abdullah Ibn Umar  
 9) Imran Ibn Al-Husayn  
 10) Akrama, slave of Ibn Abbas and  
 11) Abu Moosa Ashari.

We should know that the purified Imams of the family of the Prophet were
also aloof from Umar’s jurisprudence and followed the command of
Mutah.[^13] From the distinguished companions, only Uthman bin Affan and
Abdullah Ibn Zubair are seen as supporters of Umar’s verdict. Now the
writer states a few more points related to Mutah which are found in
reliable books.

According to Noodi[^14], Ibn Abbas used to certify the legality of Mutah
and Ibn Zubair considered it unlawful. When Abu Nasrah, the narrator
mentioned this before Jabir Ansari, Jabir said: “I did Mutah for a short
period, along with the Prophet’s companions, but Umar became angry and
said: ‘Allah has allowed Mutah in Quran, but if anyone does so, we would
stone him to death.”

The writer says: “O Umar! Who are you? You were ready to stone to death
a follower of Allah? You are not the Lord of the world that you can
abrogate the verse of Holy Quran. Even the Prophet could not do so. How
can the believers of Allah and Prophet interfere in the command of Allah
and His Prophet (S)?” Really, we cannot understand Umar, because he had
a special type of temperament and was very stubborn all the time. He
didn’t like the peace treaty of Hudaibiya, due to which he doubted the
prophethood of the Messenger of Allah (S) and could not hide it.

Obviously, if the treaty had not been signed and there had been fighting
with the infidels of Mecca, they would not have helped the Prophet. Did
the Prophet get his help in the war that he would give his help today?
Well, the abrogation of the command of Mutah informs us of the hot
temperament of Umar.

If it would be that he possessed knowledge of Quran and tradition and
for this reason and had the capability to exercise the judgment there
would have no need to establish committee of jurists whose member was
Zaid Ibn Thabit etc. The biggest argument is that he had no intrinsic
capability like Imam Ali. He was making mistakes in juridical matters
and he could not understand such things even till the end of his life.
With such useless ability, to issue the order of Mutah is a very
surprising matter.

Imam Noodi says that Abu Moosa Ashari used to certify the legality of
Mutah and he supported his view by a tradition of the Prophet. From
Tafseer Nishapuri, one comes to know that even an illegal wife has a
right like a legally married wife. Hence according to this explanation,
the lawfulness of Mutah is proved.

From the Book of Nikah, Pg. 293, we come to know that according to
Hanafite faith, Mutah is invalid but Imam Malik says it is lawful and
Imam Zomur says Mutah is right because due an invalid condition the
marriage does not become invalid. From Tafseer Kashaf it appears that
Ibn Abbas was always convinced of the lawfulness of Mutah and didn’t
revert to its unlawfulness. Noodi[^15] has recorded that Jabir bin
Abdullah Ansari says: “I did Mutah during the time of the Holy Prophet
(S) and in the time of Abu Bakr.”

Tirmidhi[^16] records that a Syrian asked Abdullah Ibn Umar about the
Mutah during Hajj. Ibn Umar replied that Mutah was lawful. The man
raised an objection and said: “Your father made it unlawful.” Ibn Umar
replied: “If my father made it unlawful, the Holy Prophet (S) made it
lawful. Shall I give up the practice of the Prophet and follow my
father’s sayings?”

It is stated in Noodi[^17] that Imran bin Husayn says that “the verse of
Mutah was revealed in the Holy Quran and the Prophet ordered me for
Mutah and no other verse is revealed to abrogate this verse of Mutah and
the Holy Prophet (S) has not made the Mutah unlawful, but Umar declared
it unlawful.” From the research of Qastalani[^18], it seems that Ibn
Abbas made Mutah lawful and said that Mutah was lawful in times of need.
It is also mentioned that Salma bin Al- Akwa says: “We were in the army
and the Holy Prophet (S) came and said: ‘You are allowed to do Mutah’,
therefore all did it.”

Noodi[^19] has recorded that Qadi bin Qalami says that even if time is
not fixed verbally and it is only in mind, then also this marriage is
lawful.

It is also written in the same book that Abu Moosa Ashari used to
consider it lawful. One day a man asked: “Don’t you know that Umar has
made it unlawful in Hajj rites?” Abu Moosa asked about it when he met
Umar and he said: “No doubt, the Holy Prophet (S) and his companions did
Mutah, but I disapproved such a thing in Hajj rites that people enjoy
during the Hajj and bath water should drip from their heads.”

O Allah, be praised, Umar has mentioned this reason for the unlawfulness
of Mutah! Allah provides facilities to believers and Umar regards them
unlawful! Here, Umar himself had taken Allah’s place by force, after
tutoring the Prophet! There is no limit to bad temperament! Even if the
16th part of this temperament had given you bravery, Islam would have
been safe from different kinds of adversities. Bad times arrived for
Islam due to Umar’s temperament. The destruction of the Prophet’s
family, their troubles and dissension in Islamic Ummah etc. All this
came to light only because of Umar.

Whether the bigots believe it or not, Umar is responsible for all the
evils that inflict Islam. The family of the Prophet continued to shed
tears of blood because of Umar and the religion of Muhammad today is not
in fact the religion of Muhammad. Islam seems to be the religion of Umar
or Zaid Ibn Thabit, but it is not the religion of Muhammad.

The religion of Muhammad was limited to Ahlul Bayt but now it is not an
easy task to separate the religion of Muhammad from the religion of
Umar. In the end, I quote a tradition related by Saeed bin Musayyab from
the book of Noodi[^20] that says: Once His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) and
Uthman met in the district of Affan. Ali (a.s.) was asserting that Mutah
was lawful and Uthman claimed that it was unlawful. Ali (a.s.) asked:
“What do you want? Do you want to prohibit something that the Messenger
of Allah (S) had made lawful?”

In the same book, a tradition on this topic is recorded from Abdullah
bin Shafiq, that Uthman considered Mutah unlawful as Umar had prohibited
it and Uthman himself had no power to take a decision on Quranic verses.
It is possible that Marwan or someone else had told him about the
unlawfulness of Mutah; but Imam Ali’s view about the lawfulness of Mutah
is worthy of attention, because none in the Islamic lands was more
perfect in knowledge than His Eminence, Ali (a.s.).

Thus, after investigating all explanations and traditions of Ahlul
Sunnat, we come to know that the unlawfulness of Mutah was only Umar’s
creation and his command was totally against Allah and His Prophet.
People of insight, who are aloof from prejudice, cannot say that Mutah
is unlawful, because the Prophet, Ali (a.s.) and all family members of
the Prophet conform to the command of Allah with regard to Mutah. Wisdom
also dictates that whatever the Prophet and Ali (a.s.) agree upon, must
be the truth; and it is the religion of Allah and all that is against
it, is false.

[^1]: Vol. 1, Pg. 107

[^2]: Sodomy, perhaps.

[^3]: Ref. Tafseer Tabari

[^4]: Surah Nisa 4:24

[^5]: Vol. 1, Pg. 293

[^6]: Vol. 47, Pg. 310

[^7]: Pg. 358

[^8]: Ref. Tafseer Kabir, Vol. 3, Pg. 289.

[^9]: Chapter of Awaliyate Umar, Pg. 136.

[^10]: Pg. 196

[^11]: Pg. 385

[^12]: Ref. Tafseer Kabir, Vol. 3, Pg. 537.

[^13]: Ref. Sharhe Ibn Abil Hadid, Vol. 2, Pg. 90.

[^14]: Pg. 393

[^15]: Vol. 1, Pg. 451

[^16]: Vol. 1, Pg. 107

[^17]: Vol. 1, Pg. 292

[^18]: Vol. 8, Pg. 53

[^19]: Vol. 1, Pg. 54

[^20]: Pg. 104


