First Case Of False Testimony In Islam
======================================

According to the report of Qays bin Hazm, Ibn Abbas, Aamir Shobi and
Habib bin Umair have reported that when the caravan of ‘A’ysha, Talha
and Zubair started from Mecca to Basrah to confront His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.), when they reached Hawwab, the dogs started barking. At that
time, ‘A’ysha ordered them to return from that place. The people asked
her why she wanted to return. She replied that the Holy Prophet (S) had
said that “one of my wives would rebel and the dogs of Hawwab will bark
upon her.” Upon this Zubair said: “Be patient, Hawwab is very far away
from here.” ‘A’ysha asked: “Do you have any witness to support your
statement?” Zubair and Talha bribed fifty Arabs who swore that it was
not Hawwab and ‘A’ysha’s caravan moved towards Basra. We should know
that this was the first instance of false evidence in Islam. This
caravan was marching to Basra to fight with His Eminence, Ali (a.s.). In
this battle, ‘A’ysha was defeated and Zubair and Talha were killed.
Barwan killed Talha and someone else killed Zubair. This battle was
named the Battle of Jamal because ‘A’ysha participated in the battle on
her camel and one of her camels was also killed in the battle. Now the
writer requests attention to the following points:

**(1)** We came to know from this tradition that the Holy Prophet (S)
knew from his foreknowledge of his prophethood that one of his wives
would rebel against his successor, that is, His Eminence, Ali (a.s.);
and he also knew that she would be ‘A’ysha. He also knew that when
‘A’ysha would reach Hawwab, dogs would bark at her caravan. He knew all
these things and they came to be true. Since the Prophet and his
executor have knowledge of the unseen, how can the Prophet’s prediction
be wrong? It happened as the Prophet had stated.

**(2)** ‘A’ysha had heard about her rebellion from the Prophet and the
Holy Prophet (S) told her that its sign will be that dogs would bark at
her at Hawwab. Even though she knew all this, she did not desist from
war with His Eminence, Ali (a.s.). Ahlul Sunnat consider this error of
‘A’ysha as an error of jurisprudence, but it does not seem to be so.
Being informed by the Holy Prophet (S) she did all this knowingly. It
was not a battle against His Eminence, Ali (a.s.), it was a battle
against the Holy Prophet (S) himself.

Anyway, the decision of ‘A’ysha is in Allah’s hands. No one can say,
what would happen and what not, but I want to ask Ahlul Sunnat that when
Pir Dastagir has said that ‘A’ysha was the most prominent woman of the
world, to be most prominent demands that one should fight with Allah and
that no one can become most excellent without it?

**(3)** The statement of Zubair that she was very far from Hawwab was a
white lie. The writer asks: “Is falsehood necessary to be among the
blessed ten?” Allah, the Almighty has made falsehood a greater sin and
has cursed the liars. Quran says:

***“And pray for the curse of Allah on the liars.”***[^1]

Inspite of this, in the view of Ahlul Sunnat, Zubair holds a great
status. Certainly, the religion of Ahlul Sunnat is entirely beyond human
understanding. Allah curses the liars and Ahlul Sunnat think they are
blessed!

**(4)** When evidence was needed, Zubair and Talha bribed fifty Arabs of
the neighboring area who falsely swore that, that place was not Hawwab.
Apparently, Zubair and Talha were from the ten blessed persons of
Paradise and it is highly regretful that they instruct witnesses to give
false evidence. Praise be to Allah! What pure and pious persons are
included among the ten blessed ones of Ahlul Sunnat! If such persons
cannot be heavenly, who can be? Really the religion of Ahlul Sunnat is
beyond the understanding of rational people.

**(5)** In the view of Ahlul Sunnat all these deeds of Zubair and Talha
are errors of jurisprudence and their war with His Eminence, Ali (a.s.)
is also considered as error of jurisprudence. Everything has a limit
after all! Clearly, they fought with Ali (a.s.) and also made ‘A’ysha
fight against him and this is called error of jurisprudence! Indeed, in
order to save them from blame, enemies of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) have
created a nice trick of the error of jurisprudence. How can any
intelligent person accept a religion that is having such illogical
principles?

**(6)** The incident of Hawwab shows that ‘A’ysha remembered the words
of the Holy Prophet (S) and wanted to return, but Zubair lied and bribed
fifty persons to give a false testimony to prevent her. The writer
thinks that it seems if Zubair and Talha would not have been there,
‘A’ysha was not capable to fight His Eminence, Ali (a.s.).

Certainly Zubair was a strange elder! First he was not prepared to swear
allegiance to Abu Bakr after Saqifah and wanted to give it to Imam Ali
(a.s.) and make other people also give allegiance to His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.). But later he claimed revenge for Uthman’s blood and entered the
battlefield to fight against His Eminence, Ali (a.s.). The fact is that
he was not a man of principles and he was a slave of worldly pleasures.
He had no concern with His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) or Abu Bakr, he was only
interested in personal gains and because of it he was killed with his
companion, Talha. Both swore allegiance to Imam Ali (a.s.) but later
broke it and joined ‘A’ysha. They had taken oath at the Imam’s hand
because they thought they would gain something; but after the oath, His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.) put out the lamp and it dawned on them that they
could not benefit from His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) in a legal way. So they
left Ali (a.s.) and joined Muawiyah and ‘A’ysha.

The incident of the lamp is that His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was checking
the accounts of the Public Treasury in the light of a lamp which burnt
the oil bought from public funds. Zubair and Talha came to meet the Imam
for some worldly matter and His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) put out the lamp
and began to speak to them.

They understood from this act of Imam Ali (a.s.) that when he was so
careful about public funds, how can they get anything from him? After
that the two seekers of the world had no option but to break the oath of
allegiance and join the adversaries of Imam Ali (a.s.).

Thus, after paying attention to all these points the writer says that a
religion cannot be said to belong to Allah if it considers such
unprincipled persons as ones who are promised Paradise. Allah has given
sense to human beings to discriminate between good and bad. If a man
does not employ this sense, how can he call himself a human being?

[^1]: Surah Aale Imran 3:61


