A Few Examples of Abu Hanifah’s Analogy
=======================================

**(No. 1)** It is a well known fact that according to Abu Hanifah, the
skin of a dog becomes pure after tanning[^1] and one can pray in it and
if one wants to bind the Quran in it, one could do so. This shows that
Abu Hanifah did not consider a dog to be unclean.

It would have been better if pig skin had also become pure after
tanning. If this were possible, it would have been very useful today.
The best quality of saddles are made only from pigskins, whereas today’s
generation of Muslims are averse to its use.

**(No. 2)** A dog skin dipped in a filthy impurity is allowed for
prayers, as Qaffal prayed wearing such a skin in the presence of Sultan
Mahmood Ghazanvi. This matter was recorded by Imam Yafaee in Miratul
Jinan and Ibn Khallikan has written about it in his book, Wafayatul Ayan
quoting from Mugheesul Khalq of Imamul Harmain, Abu Maali Juwaini. We
should know that this prayer was recited according to the
interpretations of Abu Hanifah’s religion. It is a long story, and since
it is extremely despicable, the writer is not repeating it.

By casting a fleeting glance at all the basic fundamentals of prayers
etc. we come to know that such prayers with its intention and ablution
is the result of Imam’s dependence on personal opinion and analogy.

**(No. 3)** According to Kitabul Hidaya and Sharhe Waqaya, Abu Hanifah
has permitted drinking of fermented beverage of dates and wine prepared
from dry raisins, if one does not become intoxicated.

In the same way, it is mentioned in Fatwa Alamgir that if a person
drinks nine cups of date wine and does not become intoxicated and if he
drinks the tenth cup and becomes intoxicated, he would not be eligible
for the prescribed penalty. Abu Hanifah has also permitted ablution with
date wine.

Obviously, all these verdicts of Abu Hanifah, were due to his dependence
on personal opinion and analogy; and as a matter of fact are against
Quranic laws. Due to such exercise of personal opinion by Abu Hanifah,
some of the followers of his school also consider berry wine
permissible.

**(No. 4)** According to the marginal notes of Sharhe Waqaya, Abu
Hanifah considers the amount paid to a prostitute as lawful for her.

In the same way, it is proved from Fatawa Qadi Khan and Kanzul Daqaiq
that a man who pays for adultery is not liable for punishment.

If such a verdict of Abu Hanifah is right, then all the prostitutes in
the market and their associates are not guilty. If this relationship is
lawful, why Mutah is made unlawful, although it was sanctioned by Quran?

**(No. 5)** According to Abu Hanifah, to carry the meat of a lawful
animal in the pellicle of swine is lawful. Since according to Abu
Hanifah, pig is not impure like a dog, a saddle made from pigskin also
cannot be unlawful. On the contrary, analogy demands that when the
pellicle of a pig can be used, it is meaningless to abstain from using
its skin.

**(No. 6)** It is mentioned in Fatawa Qadi Khan that writing of Quran
with urine, blood or any filthy things is lawful for using it as a cure.

No doubt, it shows a great insult of the Holy Quran.

**(No. 7)** According to Hidaya[^2], if a man marries his mother’s
sister, daughter or any close blood relative purposely and forcibly, he
cannot be penalized for it. Obviously, this verdict resembles the
customs of Magians (Fire worshippers) and has no connection with Islamic
laws.

**(No. 8)** According to Fatawa Alamgiri and Durr Mukhtar, if a man
falsely claims a woman to be his legal wife and produces false witnesses
and wins the case and according to the verdict of Islamic judge, he gets
that woman, she becomes lawful for him in the sight of Allah and people
and that person is not liable for any penalty. In this way, all kinds of
properties, mansions, houses, etc. become legal with the help of false
testimonies. What a strange verdict! Doubtlessly, such jurisprudence
seems to be the greatest source of promoting false claims.

Obviously, all such verdicts are results of analogy and inform about Abu
Hanifah’s astounding capability of jurisprudence.

The writer used to be surprised during the period of his ignorance that
why there was so much enmity between the Wahhabis and followers of
Hanafite faith. Subsequent information showed that the claim of Wahhabis
is based on Quran and traditions, whereas Hanafites totally rely upon
personal opinion and analogy.

Obviously, when a school accords more weightage to personal opinion and
analogy, what relation it can have with a sect that relies only on Quran
and traditions? Therefore, it is not unexpected from Wahhabis to be
aloof from followers of Hanafite religion. But the same thing is not
true for Shafei religion, because Imam Shafei did not rely on personal
opinion and analogy, unlike Abu Hanifah.

In the opinion of the writer, the religion of Wahhabiya is having more
Islamic color than the religion of Hanafites, while Hanafite faith seems
to be more than two-third consisting of new incidents and is unrelated
to the religion of Prophet Muhammad Mustafa (S).

I stop my pen from writing anymore on the topic and this much would
suffice as example. We should know that due to Abu Hanifah’s exercise of
personal judgment and analogy, his sect assumed a strange color and
seems to be superior to the Shiite, Shafei, Hanbali and Maliki Schools.
Such was the innovation of this school that even the two disciples of
Abu Hanifah, Abu Yusuf and Imam Muhammad also gave up his leadership in
about two-third of the matters and according to Ghazzali, mentioned as
in his book, Mankhul, “Abu Hanifah has uprooted the Islamic faith and
created his own new school.”

I remain content on this much only, although I have so much more
information in this matter that it could be made up into a very detailed
book. According to other books, Abu Hanifah relied so much on analogy,
because he had very little knowledge of traditions as stated by
Ghazzali. Ghazzali has also mentioned that Abu Hanifah did not know
about the Islamic law properly. The author will now provide some more
information about the faith and jurisprudence of Abu Hanifah.

[^1]: Ref. Sharhe Waqaya

[^2]: Pg. 496


