Faith And Jurisprudence Of Abu Hanifah
======================================

But before I write more about him, it would be better to peruse the
sayings of some of his followers in his defense, regarding the fact that
he has not written any book on jurisprudence. If he had written such a
book and mentioned such matters, he would have been liable for
condemnation; but since he did not write anything and did not produce
any such book, he is immune from all blame and condemnation.

The reply is that with this statement, the Imamate of Abu Hanifah,
itself vanishes. That is since there is no documents written by him on
any controversial matter, his jurisprudence does not have any value.

Hence, according to whatever records of Hanafite religion that are
available today they are actually attributed to Abu Hanifah, as he
himself had not written any book on the field of knowledge; then how
could all the verdicts be said to be his? In that case, the complete
religion of Abu Hanifah disappears.

All books of the Hanafite religion, such as Hidaya, Sharhe Waqaya,
Fatawa Qadi Khan and Fatawa Alamgiri etc. have been written in vain, and
the fact is that Imam Muhammad, Imam Abu Yusuf and all their elders fall
into a great trouble. In short, with the dismissal of Hanafite religion,
the Imamate of Imam Abu Hanifah and his saintly status also departs.
What a wonderful friendship to the Imam! That in trying to save him from
previous blame, they foolishly destroy his status as the Imam also!

Abu Hanifah was born in the year 80 A.H. or two or three years prior to
it, which is also the year of the birth of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.); and
he died two or three years after the passing away of Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.). Accordingly, he was a proper contemporary of the Holy Imam
(a.s.); and he used to visit Imam Sadiq (a.s.) in a customary way
without in any way agreeing to him in any of the matters. Rather,
because of his status as an opponent, he even challenged Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) sometimes and this was not hidden from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.).
It is a wrong notion that Abu Hanifah obtained the honor to be a student
of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.).

Research shows that neither Abu Hanifah loved Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
nor considered his love to be beneficial for his salvation. The greatest
benefit for Abu Hanifah was in it that he should continue opposing the
Imam of the time and use it as a tool to gain popularity. By chance, Abu
Hanifah got nice opportunities to oppose the Imam of the time. It was
due to the fact that Caliph Mansoor had deep enmity with Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) and he was a mortal enemy of the Imam (a.s.).

Finally, he had the Imam poisoned he passed away from the mortal to the
heavenly world. Mansoor did not want the people to follow the
jurisprudence of the Holy Imam (a.s.); that is why he used to assist in
popularizing the verdicts of Abu Hanifah. It was the common custom of
this irreligious Caliph that he used to impose a fine of a gold coin on
one who made an inquiry about the verdict of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
and rewarded with a gold coin whoever asked about a verdict of Abu
Hanifah.

Obviously, the religion of Abu Hanifah progressed greatly through royal
patronage. Therefore, why he should have lost the opportunity; such
chances do not come always in ones life? Thus, his constant opposition
to the Imam (a.s.) was not unexpected. It is a fact that Abu Hanifah
could not derive any benefit from following the rightful Imam (a.s.),
especially when the Caliph of the time was inimical to the Imam (a.s.).
Abu Hanifah was an unexpected gift for Mansoor. He also, as opposed to
the Imam, used to gladden the heart of the Caliph.

The details regarding Abu Hanifah’s contact with the court of Mansoor is
that when he entered, the Caliph asked him from whom he had obtained his
knowledge. Abu Hanifah replied: “From Umar bin Khattab, Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.) and Abdullah bin Abbas, from their narrators; and lastly he
said that during the reign of Ibn Abbas no one was alike him.” Since
Mansoor himself was also from Bani Abbas, he greatly appreciated the
last sentence. From that day onwards, they became very friendly and the
religion of Abu Hanifah advanced by the day.

This story shows that Abu Hanifah was a very clever man and what was
wrong in his mention about Abdullah Ibn Abbas? To make the Caliph his
disciple in the first attempt, informs of his wisdom; no doubt, he
possessed great acumen. He says that at first he wanted to obtain the
knowledge of the Holy Quran and to learn the Holy Book by heart, but it
did not seem beneficial, so he decided to learn the traditions, but this
also seemed useless. After that he decided to become a grammarian but
could not stand being a tutor.

Later he decided to become a poet, but this profession was also
unprofitable. At last he preferred becoming an expert in Islamic law, as
one can gain most status in the world due to it and one can also be
appointed as a judge; nobles and kings also become dependent on him.
This statement shows that Abu Hanifah was a really sharp guy. He
selected a profession that was very beneficial for him and such a
profession was very beneficial during the time of Arab Caliphs, like
barristers in the present era. A man can become very rich through it.

Thus, Abu Hanifah took up the profession of an Islamic jurisprudent and
scaled the peak of success. Such was the level of his acumen that he did
not even follow the jurisprudence of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.). If he had
shown even the slightest bent to the jurisprudence of the Imam (a.s.),
he would not have achieved the glory, success, power and fame that he
obtained because of opposing the Imam.

Fact is that Abu Hanifah was a very sharp man of his time, so why he
should have acted according to foolish men’s advice and adopted the
discipleship of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.), or why he should have started
following the Holy Imam (a.s.)? If he had done thus, there would have
been a quarrel between Mansoor and Abu Hanifah and he would be
considered guilty. He had no sympathy with Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.), due
to his own profession. If he had any sympathy with Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.), he would not said to Momin Taq in a taunting way: “Your Imam has
died!” Upon which Momin Taq replied:

“But your Imam is given respite till Judgment Day.” There is no need to
mention the ‘Imam’ implied Momin Taq, it is only sufficient to recite
Laa Hawla Wa laa Quwwata illaa billaah… (There is no power and might,
except by Allah…).

Besides Abu Hanifah also did not have much attachment to Imam Ali
Murtadha’ (a.s.), according to the report of Muhammad Ibn Naufal, who
says that “a few of us were sitting when Abu Hanifah arrived.” A topic
of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was being discussed. Abu Hanifah said: “One
must not talk about the Ghadeer tradition; I have forbidden my followers
from it.”

Hashim bin Habib Sairafi became angry and said: “Don’t you know that His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.) himself has asked the companions to testify for
it?” Abu Hanifah replied: “There is doubt about the authenticity of this
report, Shia people think deeply upon it and harass the non-Shias.”

This shows Abu Hanifah had no sympathy for His Eminence, Ali (a.s.)
also. It is surprising that Abu Hanifah should not allow his followers
to accept a tradition regarding which Ali (a.s.) made the companions
testify and the Holy Prophet (S) announced it from the pulpit! In spite
of his opposition to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and Imam Ali Murtadha’
(a.s.), followers of Abu Hanifah claim that he was devoted to Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.)!

Now I shall mention another point related to Abu Hanifah that I learnt
through research. Abdul Qadir Jilani (Piranepir) the most important
saint of Ahlul Sunnat, in his book, Ghaniyatu Talibeen, declares Abu
Hanifah to be expelled from the religion Ahlul Sunnat.

A Sunni writer, Mehboob Subhani states that according to the tradition
of the Prophet: “My community shall divide into seventy-three sects,”
but the fact is that these 73 sects are actually ten sects: (1) Sunni
(2) Khariji (3) Shia (4) Motazela (5) Murjia (6) Mushabbiha (7) Jehmia
(8) Haruriya (9) Bukhariya and (10) Kalabiya. Then writing about the
branches of these sects, he mentions 12 branches of the Murjia sect and
shows Hanafite to be a sub-sect of Murjia; not including it among the
Sunni sects.

Now the readers may note that according to Piranepir, only Sunni
religion is worthy of salvation, hence he considers Abu Hanifah and his
followers as hellish. Since Abu Hanifah and his followers do not exactly
have the same faith as that of Piranepir, and when only Ahlul Sunnat are
delivered of sins, how can Abu Hanifah or any of his followers be
delivered? We should know that only Piranepir has not stated Abu Hanifah
to be a Murjia, other religious leaders have also included Abu Hanifah
among Murjia.

Ibn Qutaibah Dinawari has also mentioned in Ma’rif that Abu Hanifah and
his teacher Hammad bin Abu Sulaiman and his two disciples Qadi Abu Yusuf
and Muhammad bin Hasan were Murjia. Besides, his own disciple, Imam Abu
Yusuf seems to be convinced of his being a Murjia. Rather, on one
occasion Qadi Abu Yusuf has also referred to Abu Hanifah to be a Jehmi
and even accused him to be a Khariji! This statement of Imam Abu Yusuf
is recorded in Tarikh Baghdad.

Undoubtedly, the author found all this extremely astounding during his
research and more astounding are the people of Hanafite religion today,
who can neither relinquish Piranepir nor remain aloof of Abu Hanifah! I
really pity those who present offerings on the eleventh of Rabi II
(death anniversary of Abdul Qadir Jilani), but in spite of it, according
to the statement of Piranepir, they are expelled from Ahlul Sunnat group
and have no right to enter Paradise. The writer was in much perplexity
during his period of research, but Allah the Almighty soon removed his
difficulty, as will be explained in the following pages.


