Important Points Regarding Dreams
=================================

Now we shall mention some points regarding dreams that have religious
and spiritual aspects. We should know that the world of dream is
strange. Everyone can see true dreams, whether one is an ascetic or a
sinner, pious or hypocrite. Such as Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) had seen eleven
stars, the sun and the moon prostrating in his dream; and the ruler of
Egypt saw seven fat and seven feeble cows in his dream. But the
spiritual aspect of dreams is such a matter that no wise and learned men
of any religion can investigate it.

Ancient as well as the modern philosophy is helpless in discovering
their reality, but both agree that they are amazing. Here, I donâ€™t want
to discuss about the actual material of dreams, what I want to state is
that if dreams had not come into existence, some human beings would not
have been able to understand those matters which are not related to the
world of perception.

For instance, we perceive external things with the help of the power of
perception or we can become aware of our internal matters with the help
of our senses. But our external and internal powers cannot perceive in
wakeful condition the feelings of dreams for which there are no words in
any language. In the same way, there are some conditions related to
death, which cannot be understood by any human being.

By the Grace of Allah and favors of Imam Ali (a.s.), the writer
perceived such things through true dreams that had no connection with
the material world and are generally understood only after death.
Obviously, after getting such information, the writer or anyone like him
can never adopt atheism, because after getting such information, one has
to confess about life after death.

Here I cannot write about the personal aspects of my dreams but it is
necessary to say that since there is life after worldly life, the
atheist has no knowledge about it and that is why he denies life after
death. Let people consider him very clever but with regard to the
hereafter, such a man is ignorant. May I be sacrificed for my master,
Ali (a.s.). I was saved from atheism with the help of His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.); otherwise, atheism is becoming powerful by the day. Look at any
community of the world; they are all in search for the well-being of the
world and have no concern of the Hereafter.

Thousands of books are written about management and the writer has read
many books on this subject; but the fact is that if this sinner had not
received guidance from Ali (a.s.). he would not have obtained the
recognition of Allah and the Hereafter. Peace be on one who displays
amazing feats (Mazharul Ajaaib); you saved this worthless slave from
destruction and showed him the right path so that Satan may not make him
fall.


