Helpers Of Judgment On Fadak
============================

Those who had helped to get the aforesaid decision in the matter of
Fadak say that “if Fadak was confiscated illegally from Lady Fatima, why
was it not returned to her during the Caliphate of His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.)? This only shows that Fatima’s claim was unfair.” The reply to
this question is that if the research of Fakhruddin Razi is correct,
during the days of Imam Ali (a.s.) Caliphate, Fadak was in the
possession of Ali (a.s.). What was then he to take back?

The said Imam (Razi) writes: “The first Caliph despite the testimony of
Umme Aiman, did not give Fadak to Lady Fatima and that Umar gave it to
Ali (a.s.) and so it was in the possession of Ali at the time of the
latter’s Caliphate.” This does provide a sort of answer to the one who
raised the question. But in my view, this statement of Fakhruddin Razi
is far from circumstantial evidence. Why would Umar do like that? Fadak
was continuously out of the hands of Muhammad’s Progeny. It was returned
to them for the first time by Caliph Umar bin Abdul Aziz.

Anyway, the writer replies to the questioner that had Lady Fatima been
alive during the days of Ali’s Caliphate he would certainly have given
Fadak to her, because he was certain that the Holy Prophet (S) had
gifted the property to Fatima. Had he not been aware of this fact, he
would not have been produced as a witness by Lady Fatima but when Fatima
was no more, Ali (a.s.) did not pay any attention to the matter of
Fadak. The fact is that Ali (a.s.) was terribly grieved by the demise of
Lady Fatima (s.a.) and his heart was never inclined to renew all the
unpleasant events afresh.

Those who know the conditions of human heart can read more in my
statement. But how can stonehearted, harsh-natured and selfish people
know what sentiments are and what they demand? Moreover, immediately
after his becoming a Caliph, people had started harassing him too much.
Muawiyah misled ‘A’ysha and instigated her to fight against Ali (a.s.),
Zubair and Talha broke allegiance and joined ‘A’ysha. This led to the
Battle of Camel.

Then from Muawiyah’s side, there was a severe uproar and anarchy till
the time of Ali (a.s.) martyrdom. How could he pay any attention to
Fadak, being engaged in all these troubles? The fact is that during the
period of Caliphate, which was a national and a religious affair, he had
no time at all to look at his personal problems in those four years and
five months. Due to these reasons, Fadak, which had gone out of hands of
Ahlul Bayt, remained out of their possession during the Caliphate of Ali
(a.s.) also.


