An Important Letter
===================

We should know that most descendants of the Holy Prophet residing in the
Indian state of Bihar are Rizwiya. A few of them are Zaidiya also but
they are very few. Zaidiya Sayyid are mostly of Imamiyah religion but
they are very few from Rizwiya. Mostly Rizwiya are of Sunni religion.
Those who have obtained the knowledge of Arabic in the usual manner are
mostly of Hanafite religion or non-conformists. Sayyids of the Hanafite
religion are of different kinds. Some are convinced of superiority of
Abu Bakr and Umar and some believe His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) to be most
superior to all the companions of the Holy Prophet (S).

Some Sayyids of Bihar commemorate the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
and some consider it to be polytheism or idolatry. The following letter
is addressed to a relative of mine who follows the Hanafite faith and
who is also a great mourner of Imam Husayn (a.s.). In lineage, he
belongs to the family of Sayyids. His name is Sayyid Muhammad Khalil. He
is a doctor and is very famous in his native place as ‘the Doctor’.

Besides, he was also in the business of saddling as his ancestors were
also in the same line. Besides his mourning assembles, I have hearty
relation with him personally and he had sent me a letter regarding
mourning of Imam Husayn (a.s.). Since I am a well-wisher of his world
and Hereafter, according to my knowledge, I preferred to write to him a
letter as follows, dated 29 December 1913:

“My dear friend, Salaamun Alaikum. After regards, I would like you to
know that I am well and hopeful of your well being. As Allah willed, you
have natural sympathy with the oppressed Imam (a.s.) and this good
fortune is not a voluntary matter; it is entirely in the hands of the
Almighty.

But there can be complete sympathy with Imam Husayn (a.s.) only when a
person knows the whole incident of Karbala’. Mostly the matter worth
consideration is the detail of this incident, as being unaware of the
details, one cannot sympathize with Imam Husayn (a.s.) fully.

I have recently written a book, Misbah-uz-Zulam, to clarify all such
issues. This book will be published very soon and you will come to know
how this incident occurred. I cannot state all the reasons in this
letter, but it is necessary to mention that if one believes in the
validity of the Caliphate of Abu Bakr and Umar, one cannot believe in
the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) to be a true martyrdom and he cannot
claim to be mourning for Imam Husayn (a.s.) sincerely or being
sympathetic to him.

Here it would be worthwhile to quote the statement of Yazeed Ibn
Muawiyah after the incident of Karbala’ when Abdullah Ibn Umar wrote to
him that the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was a serious matter;
Yazeed said: “You fool, I have only walked the path shown by your
father.”

No doubt, it is true. If Saqifah had not occurred, Karbala’ would not
have come into being. Undoubtedly, the incident of Karbala’ is the
natural consequence of Saqifah.

Therefore, one who believes Saqifah to be true, has no right to view
Karbala’ sympathetically. Now, I shall explain how Abu Bakr and Umar
caused the tragedy of Karbala’.

It is clear from the books of Saqifah that Caliphate was given to Abu
Bakr with the help of Umar while His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) and the family
of the Holy Prophet (S), that is Bani Hashim, were removed from power.
So Abu Sufyan, father of Muawiyah came to His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) and
said: “O Ali (a.s.)!

Give me your hand, I want to pledge allegiance to you. How is that
rivals have achieved the Caliphate and you are debarred from your
rights? I am sending Meccan riders to fill the desert of Medina and
destroy the Caliphate of Saqifah.” His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) said: “O Abu
Sufyan, when you were a disbeliever, then also you were involved in
mischief and disturbance and now that you have converted to Islam, you
still want to create mischief and disturbance.” The reply of His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was prudent as will be proved later.

Anyhow, after getting this reply, Abu Sufyan went right away to Abu Bakr
and Umar and spoke to them in an angry tone: “You obtained the Caliphate
and did not care for my rights? I shall destroy your Caliphate just
now.” His tone shook up Abu Bakr and Umar said: “If we treat you fairly,
would you still take such a severe action?”

Abu Sufyan was neither concerned with His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) nor with
Abu Bakr’s Caliphate. He was interested only in personal gain. He said:
“Grant me a share in your Caliphate.” So in order to save the Caliphate,
Abu Bakr and Umar made him the governor of Syria. Since Abu Sufyan
himself could not go to Syria due to old age, he sent his son, Yazeed
bin Abu Sufyan instead. We should know that this appointment from
Caliphate led to the foundation of Bani Umayyah Empire and in a short
time, Umayyads became de facto rulers of Islamic lands.

It is clear that it was on the strength of this affluence that Bani
Umayyah dared to confront His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) and it was for this
reason that His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was martyred and even Imam Hasan
(a.s.) has to abdicate the seat of Caliphate; and Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
martyred in Karbala’.

The fact is that whatever calamities befell the family of the Holy
Prophet (S), they were because of Abu Bakr and Umar and it is clear that
to save their Caliphate, Abu Bakr and Umar made Abu Sufyan’s son,
Governor of Syria, leading to the foundation of Bani Umayyah Empire.

After His Eminence, Ali (a.s.), he remained the Caliph for sixteen
years. After his death, his son, Yazeed Ibn Muawiyah became a ruler and
he almost annihilated the family of the Holy Prophet (S). Without any
doubt, this affluence of Bani Umayyah completely destroyed the family of
the Holy Prophet (S), his companions and even the religion of Islam. The
fact is that during the domination of Bani Umayyah, the religion of
Allah fell into decadence and so much sins and transgression increased
that it did not remain as a true religion of God.

All know that Bani Umayyah was worthy of dislike and that the Holy
Prophet (S) had detested this tribe much and had even cursed it. Allah
has called this clan as ‘the accursed tree’. It is no secret that
Umayyads were the greatest enemies of Islam and the Holy Prophet (S).

As long as the Prophet remained in Mecca, this tribe endeavored for his
destruction and when he migrated to Medina, these people attacked now
and then and fought the battles of Uhud, Badr and Khandaq; and at last
this accursed tribe was routed in the Battle of Hunayn.

In brief, the Holy Prophet (S) subdued Bani Umayyah in a long period of
ten years and these people became so helpless at the time of the
Prophet’s passing away that they did not even have any guts to hold
their head high. But woe to the Caliphate of Saqifah, it gained power
after the Prophet and Abu Sufyan, the chief of Bani Umayyah,
accomplished his aim. Abu Bakr and Umar spoilt the Holy Prophet’s
consistently hard work in a moment, due to which Bani Umayyah became
powerful again. On the contrary, they advanced so much that they became
rulers of the entire Islamic world and a big political religious error
came to light.

On the basis of their affluence, they subjected the family of the
Prophet to very bad circumstances and caused depravity of Islam. This
accursed tribe was always malicious to Islam during the time of the Holy
Prophet (S) and Abu Bakr and Umar made them rulers of Syria, which was
really strange! It is clear that His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) could not
accept the support or allegiance of Abu Sufyan because he knew very well
that this tribe was a great mischief-monger and Allah and the Prophet
were annoyed of it.

How can His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) accept Abu Sufyan’s support knowingly?
If Ali (a.s.) had accepted, he would have had to compensate to Abu
Sufyan in some way, which would be against the policy of the Prophet.
How can His Eminence, Ali (a.s.), who was truly obedient to the Holy
Prophet (S), do anything against his policy? His remaining aloof from
Abu Sufyan was a matter of the world as well as hereafter; he could
never tolerate the support of Abu Sufyan.

Abu Bakr and Umar had to, in any way, save their Caliphate from Bani
Umayyah. It was very difficult to pay attention to both, the Prophet’s
policy or Abu Sufyan’s threat. The fact is that only His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.) and few others cared for the Prophet’s aim. If Abu Bakr and Umar
had been like that, they would not have run away from the battlefields
of Uhud and Hunayn or would not have refused to challenge Amr Ibn Abde
Wudd in the Battle of Khandaq.

In short, the action of Abu Bakr and Umar in making Bani Umayyah the
rulers of Shaam seems very abominable, as a result of which, the members
of the Prophet’s family suffered greatly and they were involved in
various calamities.

Undoubtedly, the tragedy of Karbala’ was also a continuation of this
calamity. It is clear that if the Caliphate of Saqifah had not come into
being, Bani Umayyah would not have achieved glory and Imam Husayn (a.s.)
would not have been martyred in Karbala’. Thus, it is beyond logical
thinking that one should consider himself a mourner of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) and also remain devoted to Abu Bakr and Umar. The mourner of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) can address Abu Bakr and Umar in a loud voice that: “All
these calamities have befallen the family of the Prophet only because of
you.”

Truly, the Caliphate of Abu Bakr and Umar and the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) is as closely connected as cause and effect and both are
inseparable. One is devotion and other is atheism. It is impossible for
a man to recognize both. If he confesses to Caliphate, he cannot have
faith in the martyrdom; and if he believes in martyrdom, he cannot be a
believer in Caliphate. Undoubtedly, a follower of Caliphate has no right
to sympathize with Imam Husayn (a.s.).

One who accepts the Caliphate and weeps on the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) is involved in an absurd action. The truth is that such people
have no right to weep on Imam Husayn (a.s.) and such mourning is of no
use. It is necessary for a mourner of Imam Husayn (a.s.) that he should
purify his heart from the love of Bani Umayyah and their guardians.
Affection of two cannot take place in one heart.

We should also know that one who wants to research about Caliphate,
Imamate and martyrdom, can refer to the book of Misbah-uz-Zulam for all
historical and religious matters. I hope after your close examination,
the book would be printed.

Since you are a mourner of Imam Husayn (a.s.) it is necessary for you to
read the book attentively. I don’t want to argue with people who are
unconnected with the family of the Holy Prophet (S) or are enemies of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). I don’t need to write to an enemy of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).

Well, in the end it is only proper to say that if His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.) had become the Caliph after the passing away of the Messenger of
Allah (S), the incident of Karbala’ would not have come to light. Being
a Caliph, he would not have been a patron of Bani Umayyah; but suppose
His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) had supported Bani Umayyah against the
Prophet’s wish, then the blame of shedding the blood of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), his relatives and companions would have come on His Eminence,
Ali (a.s.), such as, according to sound sense, it lies on Abu Bakr and
Umar. The incident of Karbala’ is a result of Saqifah Caliphate and a
result of Bani Umayyah’s patronage, the credit for which goes only to
Abu Bakr and Umar!

The writer has shown the results of the Caliphate of Saqifah in detail
in his book, Misbah-uz-Zulam. He requests you to read it carefully when
that book is published. The fact is that this Caliphate has created
different kinds of dramas. If it had not come into being, Fadak would
not have been taken away from Lady Fatima (s.a.), her house would not
have been burnt down. Atrocities would not have been committed on His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.) for getting his allegiance. Bani Hashim would not
have been dishonored. Umar would not have hit at the stomach of Lady
Fatima (s.a.), which caused miscarriage and because of it she passed
away from the world very soon.

The Holy Quran collected by His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) would not have been
destroyed. The religion of Zaid bin Thabit would not have gained
popularity instead of that of Imam Ali (a.s.). Bani Umayyah would not
have behaved rudely and would not have gone against His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.). His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) would not have been deposed from
Caliphate. Bani Umayyah could not have removed Imam Hasan (a.s.) from
Caliphate. They could not have martyred Imam Husayn (a.s.), his
relatives and companions in the desert of Karbala’.

They would not have taken as prisoners, the family of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
and would not have taken them to Damascus. Bani Umayyah would not have
tied horses in the Holy Kaaba and would not have behaved rudely with the
companions of the Holy Prophet (S). They would not have promoted wine,
music, fornication and sodomy. They could not have burnt the Holy Quran
and could not have hung it on their flag. They would not have shot
arrows at the Holy Quran. They would not have shed the blood of the
descendants of the Prophet, like it was water. They would not have made
it compulsory to curse His Eminence, Ali (a.s.). Besides such unbecoming
things, the Caliphate of Saqifah created great dissentions in Islam.

The truth is that if the Caliphate of Saqifah would not be there,
different sects would not have come into being and the history of Arabs
would not have been blemished. No doubt, that it was the first mistake
of Islam that His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was excluded from Caliphate. If
His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) had been accepted as Caliph, Bani Umayyah and
Bani Abbas’s political disputes would not have come into being. As a
result, due to the dispute of Bani Hashim, Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas,
Arabian Peninsula would not have been mired in civil war for a long time
till this community lost its reputation to Tartars forever.

This consensus not only caused rivers of blood of Bani Hashim, thousands
of Bani Hashim continued to be killed. In every Caliphate, Bani Hashim
continued to shed their own blood and that of their enemies. It was due
to the fact that they considered themselves rightful for Caliphate and
many Arab people also accepted their claim. Obviously, the history of
Islam seems to be full of revolts of Bani Hashim.

Apparently, all these revolts were to secure the same right that Bani
Hashim had lost in Saqifah because of Umar. All these details are given
in the book of Misbah-uz-Zulam. Those interested may study this book
carefully and decide for themselves what is right and what is wrong? A
study of this book would show that all the atrocities upon the
descendents of the Holy Prophet (S), the incident of Karbala’, martyrdom
of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.), martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
martyrdom of the family members of Prophet (S) are all consequences of
the Caliphate of Saqifah and thus, all liability is upon the people of
Saqifah.

**29th December 1913**  
**Gaya, Bihar, India**


