The Rest of the Fadak Tragedy
=============================

What happened to Fadak thereafter, was that Umar bin Abdul Aziz gave
Fadak to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.). It should be noted that among the
Caliphs of Bani Umayyah, this is the only one who can be said to have
humane qualities. The rest of the Caliphs’ rule was nightmare, or they
were the ones whom humanness had not even touched. When this Caliph,
Umar the second, restored Fadak to Ahlul Bayt, people told him: “You
have taunted the first two Shaykhs (Caliphs).”[^1] In response the
Caliph said: “The two Shaykhs had, by confiscating Fadak, opened a door
of taunts for themselves.”

It should be remembered that Umar bin Abdul Aziz was among the last
Caliphs of Bani Umayyah and it is a fact that he was very justice-loving
among Bani Umayyah and it was because of his good and truth-loving
nature that he restored Fadak to Ahlul Bayt. But in response to his just
nature his community poisoned him. Truthfulness in the matter of Ahlul
Bayt is not an easy thing. Such truth-telling involved a sure risk to
life during the Caliphates of Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas. But now since
the British are ruling[^2], a risk to life is not more felt. Yet various
harms are not totally ruled out.

Anyway, when the Caliphate went out of the hands of Bani Umayyah those
Caliphs of Bani Abbas, who cared for the rights of Ahlul Bayt, like
Mamoon, Motasim and Wathiq, had returned Fadak to the progeny of Lady
Fatima. But then Mutawakkil, the Ahlul Bayt-hater (Nasibi) again
snatched it from Ahlul Bayt and gave it to his barber. But Mutazz once
again restored it to Fatima’s progeny. Then Motaqifa returned it to
Ahlul Bayt but Muktafi again snatched it.

It is written in Sharh Ibn Abil Hadid on Pg. 493 that, “When Umar bin
Abdul Aziz became the Caliph, he returned Fadak to the progeny of Hasan
and according to another narration to the progeny of Zainul Aabideen and
thus Fadak continuously remained in the hands of Bani Fatima but in his
time, Yazeed Aatikaa snatched it.

Thereafter, it remained in the hands of the progeny of Marwan.
Thereafter, Saffah, the Abbasid returned it to Abdullah bin Hasan, but
Abu Ja’far Mansoor again snatched it. Then Mahdi Abbasi returned it to
Bani Fatima. Then Moosa bin Mahdi and his brother Haroon Rashid
confiscated it and it remained in the hands of Abbasids thereafter. Then
Haroon Rashid returned it to Bani Fatima.

[^1]: Ref. the narration of Abul Qadam in Sharh Ibn Abil Hadid, Pg. 306

[^2]: Refers to the period this book was compiled.


