Opponents Make Light of the Fadak Affair
========================================

With a view to lessen the importance of the Fadak affair, the opponents
of Lady Fatima (s.a.) say that the matter of Fadak was never
significant, that it was only an orchard with some date trees etc. and
hence its income was not considerable. One of the recent claimants of
omniscience goes further to assert that the orchard comprised of sixteen
or seventeen date trees and a spring of water and and that its annual
income never exceeded fourteen annas[^1] (very less amount).

Such statements are issued, so that those who have no knowledge may
imagine that the matter of Fadak was insignificant, about which the
people in favor of Fatima (s.a.) are raising so much hue and cry quite
unnecessarily. But those who undertake a deep research, know that Fadak
was a hamlet, which was very fertile and well populated that there were
several orchards and springs in it.

The writings of the author of Rauzatul Safa show that its annual income
was four thousand gold coins. One dirham equals ten rupees. From this
account, its income in those days was about forty thousand rupees per
year. This is what history says. Anyway, it was a considerable amount
and was in no way insignificant. The claim that it was worth only
fourteen annas (less than a rupee) cannot be accepted as authentic for
the following reasons:

Had the annual income of Fadak been only equal to fourteen annas
(sixteen annas made a rupee till the last century AD), its dealing would
not have been as described above, that is how was it that some of the
Caliphs were snatching it away from Muhammad’s Progeny and some were
restoring it to them? All this only goes to show that in the eyes of the
Caliphs of the time, Fadak did have some importance and value!

Caliph Umar bin Abdul Aziz returned Fadak to Muhammad’s Progeny. Had the
matter been so insignificant, as claimed by the opponents of Lady Fatima
(s.a.), it would not have been necessary for a justice-loving Caliph to
attend to it after about a hundred years of confiscation by the first
Caliph. The very words uttered by this truth-loving Caliph: “Abu Bakr
and Umar had themselves opened floodgates of taunts for them by
snatching Fadak” show that Fadak had a significant value and importance.

As a matter of fact, had the value of Fadak been so insignificant as
claimed, then neither the people of Caliph Umar bin Abdul Aziz’s time
would have told him: “You have taunted Abu Bakr and Umar” nor the Caliph
would have replied to them as above. The nature of this dialogue shows
that the significance was such that both the Caliph and the people had
paid attention to it. Doubtlessly, the above events show that even after
the passing of a hundred years, the affair called for attention. That is
why a Caliph of the time had to attend to it and the people also were
alerted by it. It would never have been so, had Fadak been an
insignificant thing.

If Fadak was not a province and if it was merely a small garden having
some trees, then according to nature, such a little garden would not
have lasted from the time of Abu Bakr till the time of Umar bin Abdul
Aziz, especially when no one knows since when had that garden existed!
The opponents of the Leader of the women of both the worlds (Fatima)
should think that if a garden cannot last for such a long time what was
that thing which Caliph Umar, the second, returned to the holy progeny
of the Holy Prophet (S)?

This only shows that Fadak was not merely a garden but was a village,
having several fruit trees and also some springs which was returned by
the wise Caliph to Muhammad’s Progeny. It is also known that after the
time of this just Caliph, some Caliphs used to confiscate it and some
used to restore. So the existence of this thing for such a long time and
its confiscation and restoring also proves that it was not a mere little
garden but that it was a province.

Fadak, which was given by Mutawakkil the Nasibi to his barber, was
surely a province of Fadak. Reason does not allow us to believe that a
Caliph had gifted a garden having only an income of less than a rupee
per annum to his barber of choice. Gifting such a trifling thing to a
man of Caliph’s trust is incomprehensible, especially when that area was
at a distance of about three months’ journey from the capital, Baghdad.
It would have been like not giving at all.

Knowledgeable people know that the Caliphs of Bani Abbas were among the
richest kings of the time, who gave away millions to their well-wishers.
So it is unbelievable that such a Caliph could have confiscated such a
cheap garden at a far off place from the capital from Ahlul Bayt to gift
it to his man of choice. Surely that place was valuable and so the
Caliph gifted it to his man of trust.

It may be noted that the misunderstanding of those who believe that the
garden claimed by Lady Fatima was a garden of only a few trees seems to
be based on an imagination that Fadak was a group of those trees which
were planted by the Holy Prophet (S) himself in the province of Fadak
and their number was not more than ten or eleven. Allamah Ibn Mitham
Bahraini writes on Pg. 20 of Sharh Nahjul Balagha that in Fadak, there
were eleven trees planted by the Holy Prophet (S) himself and those
trees were in the possession of the progeny of Fatima (s.a.) and the
Ahlul Bayt were giving the fruits of these trees to Hajj pilgrims, who
used to recite benedictions on the Prophet (Durood) on receiving these
fruits. But then some gentlemen ordered to cut off those trees and so it
was done. This writer says:

“May my soul be sacrificed for the trees planted by the Holy Prophet (S)
and may thousands of trees of Paradise be sacrificed for those trees.”

In short, it should be understood that Fadak was a fertile land and
never a bunch of fruit trees, as some foolish people have believed. Ibn
Abbas writes in his Tafseer that the Holy Prophet (S) used to distribute
the produce of Fadak among Bani Abdul Muttalib. This proves that Fadak
was yielding much produce. Similarly, narrations in Sahih Bukhari and
Sahih Muslim also show that Fadak was an area near Khaybar and reliable
commentators have written that the Holy Prophet (S) used to distribute
Fadak grain between his near and dear relatives. How astonishing on the
part of those unwise people who have understood that Fadak was a bunch
of merely eleven trees which were planted in Fadak!

[^1]: Indian currency


