Atrocities on Muhammad’s Progeny and how they Bore Them Patiently
=================================================================

O people of justice! Just see what atrocities Muhammad’s Progeny had to
bear after the passing away of Muhammad Mustafa (S). Indeed, the progeny
of no other person has borne such problems as the progeny of the Arabian
Prophet, and that too at the hands of his own nation. This is not a new
opinion presented by this writer, even the companions of the Prophet,
who followed Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) used to see those injustices and say: “We
have not seen anyone inflicted with such atrocities as the household of
the Prophet after his passing away.” Allaahu Akbar (God is the
Greatest)![^1]

Apparently, there is no limit to the atrocities and there were different
types of atrocities, but Muhammad’s Progeny continued to bear them.
Indeed, the patience of Ayyub (a.s.) is nothing in comparison to the
patience of Muhammad’s Progeny. The patience of Imam Husayn (a.s.) in
face of the handiwork of Amir Muawiyah, the patience of the elder
brother of Imam Husayn (a.s.) even after he was poisoned, shows the
caliber of their patience. In the same way, steadfastness of Imam
Husayn, his patience and obedience is seen defeating human aspiration!

It is worth noting that the age of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) was four
years at the time of the tragedy of Karbala’. He accompanied the
prisoners to Damascus and upon the orders of Yazeed Ibn Muawiyah, the
prisoners were exhibited in the bazaars of Damascus, when a Syrian woman
following the custom of that country tried to offer him a loaf of bread,
which she had made the expiation of her son. It was an ancient custom
according to which people used to offer bread loaves to the prisoners
after expiating them over their children.

Even though Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) was only four and he was also
hungry, yet he refused to accept the bread and said: “We are Muhammad’s
Progeny and alms (Sadaqah) is prohibited for us.” O those who value
infallibility of Muhammad’s Progeny, such a differentiation of the
prohibited or lawful is only possible by one who is born an infallible.
This incident clearly shows the difference between true and false Imams.
Reason says that only such an Imam can be the true successor of the
Messenger of Allah (S). Doubtlessly, the Messenger of Allah (S) was
infallible.

O Allah, bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad.

Reason can never accept that the successor of an infallible could be a
fallible person. Those who have considered it possible have, without any
argument, been irrational.

[^1]: Refer to Murujuz Zahab of Masudi, Pg. 166, and Tarikh Kamil of Ibn
Kathir, Vol. 5


