A Glance at the Religious Leadership of Muhammad’s Progeny
==========================================================

Respected readers! Please note that the humble writer has mentioned the
points that show the worldly loss of honor of Muhammad’s Progeny. Now we
shall mention the religious aspects that caused decrease in the respect
of Muhammad’s Progeny, as a result of which, a major part of the Islamic
world remained deprived of their leadership.

There is doubt that worldly dishonor and loss of religious positions did
not in any way cause personal harm to Muhammad’s Progeny. But surprising
are those who were the causes of these misdemeanors towards Muhammad’s
Progeny and still continue to be so. Today, neither the Bani Umayyah
remains not the Bani Abbas and there remains no hope of any benefit from
their past kingdoms, but thousands are still devoted to them, just like
when they were in power. Even today, such people are inimical to the
name of Muhammad’s Progeny as their enemies were in the bygone days.
Even though Husayn (a.s.) is not present, there is no dearth of Shimrs
and Ibn Ziyads.

The condition is such that an Ahlul Sunnat scholar wrote an article in
an Urdu newspaper based on some virtues and merits of Ali (a.s.). This
article caused a lot of consternation among the enemies of Ali (a.s.)
and people wrote letters criticizing this article and wanted to know
since when the writer has adopted Shia religion. They asked him what was
the need to pen such an article? The poor scholar had no reply and he
remained quiet. Anyway, the next issue of that paper carried an
extensive article in praise of Muawiyah. It is a pity that it is no more
the reign of Muawiyah, otherwise, the writer would have received a
handsome reward from the wealth of Shaam (Syria).

This is the extent of malice to Muhammad’s Progeny today; so you can
imagine what it would have been when Bani Umayyah were in power! Now I
request the just people to study the factors that caused decrease in the
religious position of Muhammad’s Progeny. They are as follows:


