Compilation of Quran and Its Harmful Effect On The Religious Leadership Of Bani Hashim
======================================================================================

It seems that the Quran was compiled and collected during the time of
Holy Prophet (S) and its compiler was Ali (a.s.) as apparent from the
traditions of Bukhari, Suyuti and Damiri. He had collected the Quran in
the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (S) and according to the report
of Bukhari, he used to announce that he had the Quran systematically
arranged by the Prophet. However, the matter of Caliphate was decided;
as a result of which the Bani Hashim were distanced from rulership.

Thus, after sometime, it became famous that Ali (a.s.) was busy in
collecting the Quran. Learning of this, Abu Bakr appointed Zaid bin
Thabit and Ubayy Ibn Kaab to collect the Quran. These people did as
ordered by the Caliph.

There is no doubt that Ali (a.s.) had collected the Quran during the
lifetime of the Prophet. The Holy Prophet (S) had himself given the name
and the sequence of the verses of each chapter of the Quran. But what
happened to the Quran collected by Ali (a.s.)? There was no sign of it.
But it is learnt that a copy of the Quran collected by Ali (a.s.)
existed upto the time of Saffah, the Abbasid ruler.[^1] When it survived
till the reign of Saffah, there can be no doubt about its existence
during the time of Abu Bakr, when its collector, Ali (a.s.) was himself
present.

It is surprising that Abu Bakr did not ask for the Quran collected by
Ali (a.s.). What was the use of appointing Zaid bin Thabit? Books of
both the sects show that Abu Bakr did not involve Ali (a.s.) in this
matter at all. He neither asked Ali (a.s.) to collect the Quran, nor did
he take any advice from him. This disregard by the Caliph doubtlessly
created an aspect of decrease in Ali’s status in the people’s view.
People are aware that from the aspect of tradition of the two heavy
things, Ali (a.s.) could not be considered separate from Quran. Even
today, those who believe in the veracity of the Holy Prophet (S)
consider Ali (a.s.) to be with the Quran on the basis of the prophetic
tradition: “The Quran is with Ali and Ali is with the Quran.”

Thus, the action of the Caliph to have the Quran collected by people
other than Ali (a.s.) was a one-sided matter and any matter concerning
the Quran had no one more deserving than Ali (a.s.). In addition to be
the subject of the tradition:

“The Quran is with Ali and Ali is with Quran.”

He was also the gate of knowledge according to the Holy Prophet (S). But
when the Quran collected by him was not give currency, naturally people
began to consider him less important from that aspect of religious
leadership. Indeed, if the Quran collected by him had become popular, he
would have earned great credit and respect among the populace.
Apparently, the matter of gathering the Quran seems to be a secret
affair. But it was one of the strongest causes for the dishonor of Bani
Hashim.

In view of this writer, this incident was the second after the incident
of “we have the Book of Allah”, which brought worldly loss of status for
Bani Hashim. We all know that the matter of collecting the Quran
affected the people of all ages and even today its effects are obvious.
For example, as in past, in this age also, programs of Quranic
recitation are held. The memorizers recite the Quranic verses and the
scholars explain the meaning, quoting the relevant traditions of the
Holy Prophet (S). But not once do they refer to the tradition:

“The Quran is with Ali and Ali is with the Quran.”

But if this Quran had been the one collected by Ali (a.s.), they would
have been compelled to recite the above tradition also. In that case,
the remembrance of the ‘Silent Quran’ would have been accompanied with
the remembrance of ‘Speaking Quran’. The ‘Speaking Quran’ denotes His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.). He has referred to himself as the ‘Speaking
Quran’.[^2] Anyway, if this omission from Quran recitations programs
does not show disrespect of Bani Hashim, what else does? Only those
considered worthy of remembrance are remembered. Who remembers those
unworthy of remembrance?

It would not be out of place to mention a belief of Ahlul Sunnat that
Allah is so angry with Shias that they are not able to memorize the
Quran! Apparently, this implies that Shias never make efforts to
memorize the Quran. I have seen two or three memorizers of Quran. One of
them being the son of Mir Mahdi Husayn Sahab, who recites the Quran
every year in the holy month of Ramadhan at Lodi Qada. The witness of
this is Hafiz Abdul Majeed Khan Sahab who presently resides at Natwal.

There are even some Shia memorizers of Quran (Hafiz) in the
principalities of Rampur, Amroha and Lucknow. Maulana Hafiz Kifayat
Husayn Sahab is ever ready to travel anywhere and recite the Quran for
anyone who so desires. And there were numerous people from Shias who
learnt the Quran by heart.

For example, Asim, Amash, Ibn Abbas, Abul Aswad etc. Even Ahlul Sunnat
consider them excellent Huffaz (pl. of Hafiz = one who knows the Quran
by heart). In short, we can say that it is a stupid notion that Shias
cannot memorize the Quran. Leave alone Shias, Christians, Jews and
atheists could become Hafiz if they strive for it. Indeed, bigotry is
something that makes one blind to truth, and it is the greatest
impediment to research.

[^1]: Ref. Tarikhul Khulafa, Pg. 260

[^2]: Refer Tarikhul Khulafa, Pg. 72


