Second Cause Of The Decrease Of Religious Significance Of Bani Hashim
=====================================================================

The second cause for the decrease of religious significance of Bani
Hashim arose during the Caliphate of Umar Ibn Khattab. During this time,
it became famous that Ali (a.s.) has started practicing religious
jurisprudence (Ijtihaad). Ali (a.s.) began to derive the solution of
religious problems as the circumstances demanded and the Bani Hashim
began to follow his decrees (did Taqlid). And why shouldnâ€™t they, when
they knew that Ali (a.s.) was the gate of knowledge, the expert of Quran
and the flesh, blood, self and soul of the Holy Prophet (S)? And that
his creation and the creation of the Messenger of Allah (S) was from a
single luminosity (Noor).

But when that Caliph learnt of this, he appointed some other people to
derive the laws of Shariah, chief among them were Ibn Masood, Abu Moosa
Ashari and the same Zaid Ibn Thabit. Upon receiving orders from the
Caliph, these gentlemen began to formulate religious decrees and their
rulings came out to be different from those of Ali (a.s.). People other
than Bani Hashim began to follow their decrees, but the Bani Hashim
continued to follow the rulings of their religious and tribal chief, Ali
Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).

From that time, two distinct sects developed among the Muslims. One was
the Alawite sect and another, Farooqi sect. His Eminence, Ali (a.s.)
himself formulated his religious decrees but Umar Ibn Khattab
accomplished this task with the help of his appointed assistants.
Apparently, this did not auger well for Islam. This division bestowed no
benefit on the Islamic religion. Even today we witness disturbances in
the Muslim world due to this division and this shall continue forever.
Anyway, Ali (a.s.) was always busy in solving the problems of Shariah.

However, since he did not have the support of the ruling party, his
followers were limited to the family of the Prophet, i.e. the Bani
Hashim. Doubtlessly, temporal power has a great role in the spread of
religion. The lack of the spread of the religion of Ali (a.s.) was not
unexpected. On the other hand, the Farooqi religion made great strides
and even today this is the religion of the majority of Muslims. There is
no doubt that the Farooqi religion had received a great impetus.

It began during the time of Umar and during his lifetime itself, it
spread to all the Islamic territories. Bani Umayyah adopted this
religion due to their natural inclination towards it and also due to the
exigencies of that time. And after them, most of the Bani Abbas also
adopted this faith. If some persons of Bani Abbas followed the religion
of Ali (a.s.) they are very few and hardly taken into consideration.
Then the great kingdoms followed the religion of Farooq. So much so that
even the last Muslim dynasty of India, i.e. the Mughal Dynasty was
following this religion.

In any case, this controversy with regard to personal exertion
(Ijtihaad) harmed the religious leadership of Ali (a.s.). Because this
completely overshadowed the fact that he was the gate of knowledge.
Being distanced from rulership, he had already become a common member of
the populace. Now these matters decreased his religious significance
too. In my opinion, this was more harmful than the matter of collecting
the Quran. Now we shall present some facts about the Farooqi religion
and the faith of Ali (a.s.), so that uninformed people may gain some
understanding.


