Examples Of Dissociation Of The Two Sects
=========================================

Readers should note that Sahih Bukhari is the great authentic book of
Ahlul Sunnat. The compiler of this book has not even forgetfully related
a tradition of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.), while thousands of traditions
have been recorded from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) elsewhere and hundreds of
scholars have quoted traditions from this praised Imam (a.s.). Also,
Hafiz Shamsuddin has included Imam Sadiq (a.s.) among the weak and
unreliable narrators in his book al-Mughni. He writes that Bukhari has
not related any tradition from him.

Bukhari’s teacher, Yahya Ibn Saeed Al Qattan also says: “I am also
suspicious of Ja’far as-Sadiq. Even Malik never related any tradition
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) till he did not have another narrator of
the same tradition.” The Arabic text of the book Mizanul Etedal is
translated to mean the same. The same behavior was shown to Imam Moosa
Kazim (a.s.) and his respected forefathers.

Asqalani, an influential Sunni scholar, includes Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.)
among the weak narrators and says that the traditions of Imam Moosa
Kazim (a.s.) are unsafe. Regarding Imam Reza (a.s.), Abu Tahir says:
“Imam Reza (a.s.) has narrated weird things from his father; and he used
to doubt and err.”

The same attitude of Ahlul Sunnat scholars continued with Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.). Thus, Ibn Jauzi and Suyuti in their books of traditions,
Ali bin Muhammad Iraqi in his book, Tanzeelatul Shariah and Shaykh
Rehmatulla in Mukhtasar Tanzeelatul Shariah has written that Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.) was [Allah forbid] nothing! (Laisa Beshayyin).

In short, the above research confirms that Ahlul Sunnat scholars were
absolutely aloof from the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). The truth is that
the Imamite and Sunni religion are two streams that flow in the opposite
directions and till the Judgment Day, instead of coming closer they are
moving farther from each other.


