Imams of the Prophet’s Family
=============================

Here it would not be inappropriate to state that although the Imams of
the Prophet’s family were understood by the above method to be
undeserving of being followed, the truth is that they had no equal, not
only in the nation of the Holy Prophet (S) but also in the people of all
the past prophets from the aspect of their knowledge, superiority,
piety, religiousness, truthfulness, modesty, justice, magnanimity,
charity, bravery, worship, forbearance and obedience etc.

These Imams carried the blood of the Prophet (S) in their veins, they
were the life and heart of the Messenger. They are the close confidants
and self of the Prophet. They are his flesh and soul. They were (Allah
forbid) not illiterate and uneducated; each of them was a leader of
faith. Each of them was a capable jurisprudent, and each was a true
leader and guide. They all acted on the knowledge they possessed.
Individually, each of them was a sum of knowledge and action.

They are the Imams (a.s.) that find mention in the Torah. Even today you
can open the Torah and see. The Almighty has given the good news that
twelve princes shall come from the progeny of Ismail (a.s.). These are
the twelve Imams. Indeed, who can be greater princes than they were?
These personalities are the beloveds of the chief of the Prophets. Allah
forbid, if anyone considers them ‘weak’ and ‘Nothing’, it is their whim
and fancy. And they are the Imams that the Almighty and the Prophet
know. Apparently, they were helpless and so oppressed that from Imam Ali
(a.s.) to Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) each were easily martyred but
internally all of them were the brave lions of the religion of Allah.

O Allah! Bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad.


