Important Warning
=================

In the discussion presented above and in other places in this book it is
mentioned that the jurisprudence of the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) was
different from the jurisprudence of scholars of other faiths. Our
readers should know that we had written in this way to follow the
convention and usual manner of writing. The Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
were much higher in status than jurisprudence.

The knowledge of the Imams (a.s.), like the knowledge of the Holy
Prophet (S) is beyond the scope of human understanding. Jurisprudence to
seek solution of religious problems is not allowed for Imams and
Prophets. Rather, it is a sort of insult to say that the Prophet had
practiced jurisprudence. The sciences of the Prophet were religious and
revealed and he was bestowed with divine knowledge. The Almighty had
opened wide, the doors of knowledge for him.

These gentlemen are the cities and doors of knowledge. Neither do they
have to resort to rational arguments nor do they have to make
derivations or take help from analogy. It is sufficient for them to just
refer to the Knowing and the Knowledgeable God. All the religious
problems are solved in no time. He is the Knower of the Unseen and the
divine luminescence.

Jurisprudence is for those who are deprived of the service and presence
of the Prophet and the Imams (a.s.) and the paths of knowledge and
certainty are closed for them. Then even for this there are conditions
and aspects. If those derivations are taken from the Holy Quran and
traditions, they are reliable, but if they are mere conjectures and
analogies, they shall be very far from guidance. Then what can be said
of those in their company? They used to gain benefits of knowledge and
religion from them. Even they had no need to perform jurisprudence. And
why should they need to resort to it when the door of research was open.
They are only needed to ask for the solution of any problem and the
answer was ready.

The moment they posed a question, they got an immediate response. It
would have been an insult to the Holy Imams (a.s.) that while they are
present, people should undertake personal exertions, and not take
advantage of their revealed and divine knowledge. In brief, we can say
that the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) were not at all concerned with
jurisprudence. We have called it jurisprudence because the people of
that time, due to their lack of understanding considered the utterances
of Holy Prophet (S) also as jurisprudence; therefore, we have also used
the same terminology. Otherwise, wherever these words are used in this
book, they denote their divinely bestowed knowledge and the
jurisprudence of religious problems mean the explanation of rules of
religion.


