Examples of Religious Differences Between The Two Sects
=======================================================

Here the writer desires to mention some examples that show that the
method of the Imams of the family of the Messenger (S) was distinct from
the scholars of Ahlul Sunnat. It is common knowledge among the literate
public that Abu Hanifah, Malik and other scholars used analogy (Qiyas)
in deriving the rules of Shariah, while Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) used
to prohibit it. It is apparent that even if in the beginning a faith
observes these principles, it will eventually be filled with
contradictions.

Thus, what we see is that the religion of the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
is very much opposed to the religion of the leaders of Ahlul Sunnat. The
writer of the Sharh (Explanation) of Minhaj writes that the denial of
analogy (Qiyas) is the religion of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) just as acting on
analogy is the religion of Abu Hanifah and other Ahlul Sunnat. Thus, the
statement of this writer clearly shows that the faith of Ahlul Sunnat
and Shias is different from the aspect of analogy.

The second difference is that Mulla Jalal Dawwafi, the writer of Sharh
Aqaid Uzdiya says that the best of the sects is the ‘Successful sect’,
that is the Ashari sect, because this sect acts upon those traditions of
the Messenger of Allah (S) that are related by his companions and unlike
the Motazalite, this sect does not temper traditions by rationality. And
neither does it quote persons other than the companions as Shias have
done, who, due to the belief in their superiority, quote their Imams.
Here the notable point is that the Motazela sect is mentioned to be
different from the Ashaira.

However, both these relate traditions from the companions, unlike Shia
sect which related traditions from non-companions, that is the Imams of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). The writer presents five examples of controversies
from the aspect of actions. One is that Ali (a.s.) mostly considers
legal the selling of slave-girls who have children while the scholars of
Ahlul Sunnat consider it prohibited. Allamah Taftazani writes in Sharh
Mukhtasar Usoole Azudi:

“The companions have differed in the matter of the selling of slave
girls who have borne children. Ali (a.s.) considers it permissible and
it is the religion of Shias and Shias know well the religion of Ali
(a.s.).” Secondly, Thalabi has related that Ali (a.s.) considers the
wiping over the shoes prohibited while Abu Hanifah allows it, as is also
mentioned in the Sharh Waqaya.

Thirdly, Ahlul Sunnat scholars do not allow inheritance to the woman
whose husband had died with the consummation of marriage unlike Ali
(a.s.). Shah Waliullah Muhaddith Dehlavi, the believer of Sunni faith in
his Sharh Mishkat differs with the religion of Ali (a.s.) and says:
“That is the religion of Ali (a.s.) and his Shias and this is the
religion of Ibn Masood, that is why we follow the statement of Ibn
Masood.” It should be clear that the above two examples illustrate that
Ahlul Sunnat differ from the religion of Ali (a.s.).

Ignorant people from Ahlul Sunnat think that their religion is same as
that of Ali (a.s.); it is certainly not so. There is no similarity
between the religion of Ahlul Sunnat and the faith of Ali (a.s.).

Fourthly, rabbit meat is unlawful in the religion of Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.), while Abu Hanifah permitted it. Mulla Jami has mentioned this in
his book Tafhaat. Here it is worth saying that rabbit is prohibited by
Allah in Taurat. Thus, the impermissibility of rabbit is mentioned with
the prohibition of pork. That the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) had
prohibited it does not seem to be without reason. It seems that Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) has taken into consideration the prohibition of the
Almighty and decreed rabbit unlawful.

Fifthly, fishes without scales are prohibited in Imamiyah faith and
Ahlul Sunnat consider them lawful. Please note that this type of fish is
also prohibited in Taurat. It is included in the list that mentions pork
and rabbit meat. Thus, we see that Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) used their
broad knowledge fully while practicing jurisprudence. The title of
Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) as a “judge who judges by the four scrolls” is
very much appropriate. All his successors also are seen to be fully
qualified for this title. And why shouldn’t it be so?


