The Religion of Imamites is The Religion of Ahlul Bayt
======================================================

It is a fact that the religion of the Imamites is same as the religion
of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), and it is absolutely different from the religion
of Ahlul Sunnat. As mentioned by Sharif Zurjani in Sharh Mawaqif:
Initially the Imamites followed the religion of their Imams, but after a
long time controversies developed among them.

The descendants of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) (Sadaat) were indeed initially on
the religion of their Imams, but the passage of time changed their
faiths. Today they follow every type of religion, some are Shias and
some Tafzeeliya, some Sunni, some Wahabi, Khariji, Nasibi, Christian and
some are even atheists. We should know that society and government has a
great influence on religion.

Some Sadaats in India are seen following a religion of other than the
Imamites. This is so, because India mostly had non-Shia rulers. Economic
and monetary factors forced the Sadaat of India to start following the
religion of the rulers and this deprived their families of the religion
of their forefathers. Now these poor people do not even know what
religion their forefathers had followed, or whether their present
religion is new or ancient. The statement of the writer of Al Milal wan
Nihal also proves that the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) had a distinct
religion. And their followers were called Imamites as they also followed
the same faith.

Ibn Kathir, a great Sunni scholar, writes the following in connection
with the Imamite faith in his book Jame al-Usool: “Now we describe the
well known faiths of the Muslims that were followed by the people in
different areas of the world. That is the Shafei, the Hanafite, the
Maliki, the Hanbali and the Imamiyah.” After this, the respected scholar
has named and introduced the founders of each of these faiths. Regarding
the founders of Imamiyah faith, he writes:

“The leader of the Imamiyah in the second century was Ali Ibn Moosa
ar-Reza and in the third century, it was Muhammad Ibn Yaqoob al-Kulaini
and in the fourth century it was Sayyid Murtada Alamul Huda. The
religion of all the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) was same. Thus, whatever was the
religion of Ali Ibn Moosa ar- Reza, it was the same religion of all the
Imams.”


