Religion of Arabs at the time of Prophet Muhammad
=================================================

Three religions were prevalent in Arabia at the time of the arrival of
the Holy Prophet (S). One was the religion of polytheistic Arabs, who
worshipped idols in the worst way. Another was the religion of
Christianity, which was in a very bad condition as it had ceased to be a
divine religion and the third was the religion of Prophet Moosa (a.s.)
(i.e. religion of the Jews) which had also deteriorated like
Christianity. In short, the entire land of Arabia had gone completely
astray. In these circumstances, it was a demand of Divine Mercy that the
Holy Prophet (S) should be appointed by Allah.

But the religion of Muhammad (S) could not spread and grow easily and
many calamities befell the Holy Prophet (S) in Mecca. Bani Umayyah
people were bent on opposing God. They could not kill the Holy Prophet
(S) so long as Abu Talib (r.a.) was alive. But after the death of this
kind and caring uncle, the idol-worshippers made all preparations to
kill the Holy Prophet (S). Among the apostates of Mecca, the greatest
enemies of the Prophet were these very Bani Umayyah.

At last, after suffering many troubles, he left Mecca and migrated to
Medina. The people of Medina gave him a warm welcome and accepted the
Divine religion in large numbers. Against all hopes, Islam gained roots
and flourished in Medina and the people of the native Mecca remained
deprived of this blessing. Strange are the affairs of Allah! How strange
that a deadly enemy like Abu Jahl was from the native place of Mecca!
The Holy Prophet (S) did get refuge and peace in Medina and many
Medinites also became Muslims with a sincere heart, but this flourishing
of Islam became extremely intolerable for Bani Umayyah and other
unbelievers of Mecca.

So Bani Umayyah did everything to harm both the Holy Prophet (S) and the
religion of Allah. Abu Sufyan advanced to Medina many times, accompanied
with an army, and also fought the Muslims of Medina in several battles,
but always failed. Almighty Allah did not allow His religion to be
destroyed.

Finally, Abu Sufyan and other apostates of Mecca became tired and sat
put at home. The Battle of Hunayn shook the Bani Umayyah severely and
made the devil powerless. We should remember that it took ten years for
the Prophet to weaken Bani Umayyah and it was only his military acumen
and intelligence, which controlled such a rebellious tribe. But alas and
again alas! After a little while, Bani Umayyah not only regained their
lost strength but also gradually became the rulers of all the
territories of Islam and it was as a result this, that one of their
rulers caused the massacre, which is now remembered as the Tragedy of
Karbala’.[^1]

It is recorded in history, how Bani Umayyah became powerful once again
and I have recounted those events in my book Kashful Haqaiq Vol. 1[^2]
and will again mention them wherever necessary in this book. But before
I narrate the events of Karbala’, it is necessary to explain the
religious conditions of the Muslims of those days so that the events of
Karbala’ may also be understood easily. This is essential, because
without knowing this, no one can understand the truth about Karbala’.

For instance, one could ask in astonishment: “My God! What is this? When
Husayn (a.s.) was the grandson of the Holy Prophet (S), how and why did
the Muslims killed him so mercilessly?” But when this questioner knows
the facts, his bewilderment will go away and the Karbala’ incident will
appear to him natural according to the law of cause and effect. This is
a world where every happening must have a cause.

[^1]: Refer to books of History

[^2]: This book is now out of stock and perhaps not available anywhere.


