After The Arson
===============

Again we quote from the book Al Imamah was Siyasah. When Umar brought
His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) to Abu Bakr, Ali (a.s.) said: “What if I don’t
give allegiance?” Umar said: “By the One except whom there is no god, in
such a case we shall behead you.”

Ali (a.s.) asked: “Will you kill a slave of Allah and the brother of
Holy Prophet (S)?” Umar said: “Slave of Allah is right, but not the
brother of Holy Prophet (S).” At that time Abu Bakr was silent and he
did not utter a single word. Umar asked Abu Bakr why he did not tell Ali
what he wanted? Abu Bakr said that till Fatima (s.a.) was at the side of
Ali (a.s.), he (Abu Bakr) could not force him for anything. After this,
His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) came to the grave of the Messenger of Allah
(S). He wailed and entreated:

“O son of my uncle! Help me! The people have weakened me too much and
are prepared to slay me.”

The people of justice should understand what effect this statement of
Umar had on the Muslims. All these actions against the Chief of Bani
Hashim, that is Ali (a.s.), the forcible arrest and an open threat to
kill him! All this did not enhance the respect of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).
Here no one objects to this type of action of Umar. The most shocking of
all is the refusal of Umar to acknowledge that Ali (a.s.) was the
brother of Holy Prophet (S). While every person of that time was aware
that Ali (a.s.) was the cousin of the Messenger of Allah (S).

In addition to this, the Holy Prophet (S) had compared him to Prophet
Haroon (a.s.) and also bestowed him the status of brother in the world
and in the hereafter. However, the way Umar dealt with Ali (a.s.) must
have influenced the people to think Ali (a.s.) must be so unrespectable
that Umar cannot bear to call him the brother of the Messenger of Allah
(S). Doubtlessly, this denial cannot in any way enhance the
respectability of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), whatever the intellectuals may
think.


