Inappropriate Titles That Decreased The Respect Of Muhammad’s Progeny
=====================================================================

The fourth example of decrease in the respectability of Muhammad’s
Progeny is given below: It should be clear that in the view of this
writer, one of the causes of insult to Muhammad’s Progeny is the
transferring of the titles of thousand. Farooq Aazam,[^1] Siddiq
Akbar[^2] and Saifullah[^3] which were exclusive for Ali (a.s.). And the
majority of Muslims do not once remember His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) with
these titles. Rather, only one or two from a hundred thousand Muslims
may be aware that these titles belong specially to His Eminence, Ali
(a.s.).

The same is the case with the title of Siddiqa[^4], which was exclusive
for Lady Fatima (s.a.). But the majority Muslims have separated this
title from her. The following matter also tells us of the insult to
Muhammad’s Progeny that the majority Muslims have turned the title of
Imam into such a common appendage that people like Fakhruddin Razi and
Ghazzali are decorated with it, whereas this title is exclusive for the
Imams from the family of the Prophet. If the majority Muslims had valued
Muhammad’s Progeny, they would not have transferred their titles to
ordinary people. But since the majority Muslims are bent on
disrespecting Muhammad’s Progeny, what else would they have done?

If the majority Muslims had valued Muhammad’s Progeny, they would not
have transferred their titles to ordinary people. But since the majority
Muslims are bent on disrespecting Muhammad’s Progeny, what else would
they have done?

[^1]: The great discriminator

[^2]: The great truthful one.

[^3]: Sword of Allah.

[^4]: Truthful lady


