Belief in The Holy Five is The Exclusive Belief Of Shias
========================================================

Now the writer shall discuss the difference between the sects regarding
the five holy personages (Panjetan Paak). We should know that the belief
of the Purified five is the belief of only Shias and Ahlul Sunnat are
not in anyway connected with it. It is so, because Ahlul Sunnat do not
consider the verse of Purification to be restricted to Holy Prophet,
Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husayn (a.s.). Neither do they consider that the
verse of Malediction (Quran 3:16) to be related to Ali and Fatima (s.a.)
specially. They include ‘A’ysha, Zubair and Talha also in the verse of
Purification (Quran 33:33). This makes them more than five. It is
apparent that due to this the belief of five pure ones does not remain
valid.

Some Ahlul Sunnat who seem to be following the belief of Panjetan Paak
are actually unprincipled. That which is not in their religion is
followed by them only on the basis of their ignorance. Who has prevented
such Sunnis from becoming Shias? What is the meaning of having a Shia
belief when one is a Sunni?

It is just like some Sunnis cultivate the belief in 14 infallibles,
while actually the religion of Ahlul Sunnat has no relation to the
belief of 14 infallibles and in the religion of Ahlul Sunnat, there is
no place for the Imams except Ali (a.s.) and Imam Mahdi (a.j.). Since
Ali (a.s.) is the fourth Caliph of Sunnis he is included in the rightly
guided Caliphs.

There are other Imams of Sunnis and according to their belief, Imam
Mahdi will appear just before Judgment Day and reform the world, that is
why he is mentioned in Sunni belief. Otherwise, the other Imams of
Muhammad’s Progeny have neither a place in the list of the twelve
Caliphs of Sunnis nor do they have any place in the belief of Ahlul
Sunnat.

They do not even consider the rulings of the Imams of Ahlul Bayt valid
for their legal problems and also do not accept their views in
jurisprudence. On the other hand, Shias believe that the Imams from Ali
(a.s.) to Imam Mahdi (a.j.) are successors of the Prophet and they do
not consider Caliphate to be divorced from Imamate.


