Caliphate Cannot Be Divorced From Imamate
=========================================

Scholars of Ahlul Sunnat, according to Allamah Damiri, do not separate
Caliphate from Imamate and it is a fact that Caliphate cannot be
divorced from Imamate. It is meaningless to think that Caliphs may be
different from Imams. It is necessary that whoever is the Caliph must
also be the Imam. Abdul Qadir Jilani also in his book Ghaniyatu
Talibeen, on page 196, mentions the Caliphs with the title of ‘Imams’.
Which clearly proves that apart from being Caliphs, these people also
held the position of Imams. Thus, when Ahlul Sunnat do not consider the
Imams of the family of the Prophet from Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.) to
Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) as the Caliphs of the Messenger of Allah (S),
then they cannot even consider them as Imams whose obedience is
compulsory.

The truth is that Ahlul Sunnat have no religious connection with the
Imams from Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.) to Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.).
Whatever religious relationship Ahlul Sunnat have, it is with Abu
Hanifah, Shafei, Malik and Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. That is why from among
Ahlul Sunnat, except for some Sufi people, there would be hardly one or
two people from ten thousand who can recite the names of the 12 Imams of
Ahlul Bayt in a serial order.

It is clear that when these Imams have no connection with religion what
is the use of remembering their names? When they have no religious
standing in the view of non-Imamiyah people it is but natural that the
non-Imamiyah people have nothing to do with them. On the other hand is
the matter of the Imamiyah sect. Here, even the young children know by
heart the names of the twelve Imams (a.s.).

Doubtlessly, it is the need of religion that the names of the Imams are
so faithfully recited by the Imamites. If Ahlul Sunnat had a religious
connection with the Imams of the family of the Prophet they would have
remembered their names in proper order, like the Imamites. Now, before
the writer invites the attention of the readers to the tragedy of
Karbala’ it seems appropriate to explain the conditions of Amirul
Mo-mineen Ali (a.s.).


