Battle Of The Ditch
===================

This battle occurred during the 5th year of Hijrah when the infidels of
Mecca in cooperation with some other tribes and Jews marched to Medina
under the leadership of Abu Sufyan, father of Muawiyah, grandfather of
Yazeed. They laid siege to Medina for some days. In order to defend
Medina from their attack, a ditch was dug up under advice of Salman the
Persian and that is why this battle is called the Battle of the Ditch.
The infidel attackers tried to launch many attacks, but they failed to
gain entry into Medina. This time the infidel army was 10000 strong[^1]
and the enemies of Islam had made elaborate arrangements of warfare. On
the side of Muslims, the ditch was dug up with great efforts.[^2]

But in any case, Amr Ibn Abde Wudd, Khalid bin Amr bin Abde Wudd, Akrama
bin Abu Jahl, and Abdullah bin Mughaira crossed the ditch by spurring
their horses.[^3] The infidels came to the edge of the ditch to watch.
Amr Ibn Abde Wudd came to the Medinan side and challenged the forces of
Islam. Since none of the Muslim soldiers accepted the challenge, they
all remained quiet. Only Ali (a.s.) came out in defense of Islam.
However, the Holy Prophet (S) stopped him and asked the Muslim army, if
there was anyone who could accept the challenge of this infidel, but no
one volunteered.

Seeing this, the Holy Prophet (S) asked what the problem was. On hearing
this, Umar said: “Amr Ibn Wudd and I were together in a caravan that was
going to Shaam. All of the sudden, the caravan was surrounded by a
thousand bandits who began to loot the caravan. On seeing this, Amr Ibn
Abde Wudd took out his sword and slew all the bandits in a few moments.”
That is the reason why no one was prepared to accept his challenge.[^4]

Then the Holy Prophet (S) gave Ali (a.s.) the permission to fight. Ali
(a.s.) was eager for this leave and he was prepared to fight even before
the Prophet had given him the permission. He at once rushed to confront
the infidel. The infidel was huge, strong, ferocious and awesome. He
continued to fight Ali (a.s.) for a long time but was finally killed at
his hands. After his extermination, the Prince of Men sent some other
leaders of the army of infidels to Hell.

When Umar saw that Ali (a.s.) had instilled fear in the breasts of
infidels and none had any courage to face the Muslims, he came to the
field and at once pursued Zarar bin Khattab who had already started
running from Ali (a.s.). When Umar ran after him, he turned to Umar and
gave him a small spear and went on his way. This happened somehow,
otherwise, Umar never risked taking part in any sort of fighting.
Anyway, in this battle also, like the battles of Badr and Uhud, none of
the non-Bani Hashim was killed and neither did they kill anyone. Leave
alone getting killed, none of them, except Umar, as mentioned in the
above incident, even got a bruise.

Only six persons of the Ansar were martyred. From the infidels too,
three people were killed. Doubtlessly, this victory fell to the Muslims
without any fighting and bloodshed. The cause was that the slaying of
Amr Ibn Abde Wudd instilled a great terror in the hearts of the infidels
after which the deniers of Islam fled and they could not gather the
strength to face Muslims.

We should know that the sword of Ali (a.s.) provided the same sort of
service that it had provided in the previous battles. If the Prince of
Men had not subdued Amr Ibn Abde Wudd, the infidels of Mecca would have
attacked and destroyed all Muslims, and Islam would have perished in its
infancy. But the slaying of Amr Ibn Abde Wudd strengthened the arms of
Islam and shattered the backbone of infidelity.

As soon as Amr was killed, the infidel forces were demoralized and there
developed cracks of disunity among the confederates. All of them took to
their heels. We should know that on this juncture, the Holy Prophet (S)
said regarding Ali (a.s.):

“Each strike of Ali on the day of Khandaq is superior to all the good
deeds of my nation put together, till Judgment Day.”

This tradition is available in Madarijun Nubuwwah, Maarijul Nubuwwah,
Kashful Ghumma, Nazalul Abrar, Insaanil Uyoon, Seeratul Ameen - Mamoon,
Rauzatul Ahbab and other books of Ahlul Sunnat. No one denies the
correctness of this tradition. Was the contribution of Ali (a.s.) to the
religion of Allah any less than what it was on the day of Uhud? What can
be said about the unsuccessful.

Thus, the people of justice may themselves conclude, if there is anyone
more superior to Ali (a.s.). Does he deserve to be included among the
four Caliphs? What is the meaning of considering him at par with Abu
Bakr, Umar and Uthman?

The truth is that comparing Ali (a.s.) to other Caliphs or saints of
Allah is a useless act. It is indeed pitiful that in this battle also,
Abu Bakr could not present any feat worthy of mention. Rather, it was
not even clear where Abu Bakr was and in what condition during the
Battle of Khandaq. In spite of his achievements, would Ali (a.s.) still
remain in the category of the Caliphs? What type of justice is it?
Whatever Allah and the Prophet may say, these people continue to harp
upon their old tune.

[^1]: Ref. Tarikh Khamis, Pg. 290; Kamil of Ibn Athir, Vol. 2, Pg. 23.

[^2]: Ref. Tarikh Rusul wal Muluk

[^3]: Ref. Tarikh Khamis, Ibid Pg. 290 – 293; Tarikh Tabari, Pg. 1475.

[^4]: Ref. Maarijun Nubuwwah, Pg. 58; Rauzatus Safa, Vol. 2, Pg. 101.


