Battle of Khaybar
=================

The Battle of Khaybar took place in the 7th year of Hijrah. The
opponents in this battle were the Jews of Khaybar. This battle came
about because the Jews had amassed an army of 10000 and were ready to
attack Medina. Among these 10000 were included some tribes of Jews who
had taken part in hostilities against the Muslims in cooperation with
the Quraish infidels. The less numbered Muslims decided to confront the
large numbered Jews and the Muslims moved to Khaybar. The chief of the
Fort of Khaybar was Marhab; and his brother Harith was a well-known
warrior like Marhab.

Thus, these two brothers were well-known brave warriors and apparently
had no equal. During this engagement, the Holy Prophet (S) was having a
migraine and was therefore in his tent, but the Muslim army launched
attacks for three days yet returned defeated. This continued for three
days and whichever Muslim fighter went to confront the Jews, was killed
by Harith. When two people used to be killed, no one from the Muslim
army had the guts to go further companions for cowardice while his
companions used to hold him responsible.

The Muslim army suffered this degradation for three days. Everyday, it
had become a routine for the Muslim army to go to the battlefield,
attack and suffer defeat and then return to their camps dejected. One
day Abu Bakr took a contingent and attacked Khaybar but he returned
defeated. In the same way, Umar launched an attack twice but both the
times returned completely unsuccessful.[^1] Marhab and Harith pursued
the Muslim army and chased them upto their camps and quite often the
Holy Prophet (S) who was in the tent nearby learnt of these
developments. It seems that Marhab and Harith were great warriors of
their time because Umar could not bear to face them even for a short
while.[^2] Shah Abdul Aziz writes that Umar used to return every time
and blame his companions for cowardice while his companions used to hold
him responsible.[^3]

Thus, the army of Islam was involved in terrible difficulties in this
way and they did not know what to do. The cause of their problems was
that till now, the Holy Prophet (S) had not been able to accompany them
in the battle. Ali (a.s.) had remained behind in Medina due to sore
eyes. That is why he was apparently not fit to participate in the war,
but he came to the army of Allah to contribute to the help of the
Prophet.

Doubtlessly, this is true faith and assistance of Islam! Glory be to
Allah, he could not bear separation from the Prophet, even during an
illness and he was so eager to offer his services that he came from
Medina to the Muslim camps at Khaybar, but due to the severity of the
discomfort, he could not fight for three days. When the army of Islam
was defeated for the third consecutive day, the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“Tomorrow, I will hand over the flag of the Islamic army to a person who
is brave and who does not flee from the battlefield. That is one who is
absolutely courageous and never bolts from the field. One who loves
Allah and the Messenger and Allah and the Messenger love him. He will
not return till Allah does not grant victory at his hands.”

This is what happened. And that prophetic tradition is mentioned in
Sahih Bukhari, Khasais Nasai and Tabari.[^4] But the Holy Prophet (S)
gave the standard to a person who had already been tested in the battles
of Badr, Uhud and Khandaq and one who had till date, continued to save
the religion of Allah from destruction.

Anyway, the next morning the Holy Prophet (S) applied his saliva to the
sore eyes of Ali (a.s.), which cured him completely. He then handed him
the standard and gave permission to initiate the battle. After this, the
Holy Prophet (S) recited the famous words of supplication: “Call Ali,
the one who shows extraordinary wonders of God…” (Naade A’liyyan
maz’haral ajaaibi…)

The valiant warrior rushed to the battlefield, engaged his opponents in
combat and soon dispatched Marhab and Harith to Hellfire, then he
uprooted the gate of Khaybar and conquered the fort. The followers of
Ali (a.s.) should know that such unimaginable feats are not possible
without divine help. Without any doubt, Ali (a.s.) was helped by Allah.
If it had not been so, it would have been impossible for him to perform
such feats. How can a person who lived on barley bread and fasted often,
rout the enemies of Islam time and again? How can he subdue a warrior
like Amr bin Abde Wudd? How can he slay people like Marhab and Harith?
And in addition to that, he uproots the gate weighing 700 mounds, and
then used this gate as a shield to deflect the strikes of the foes.

O people of justice! Do you think such feats are possible without divine
help? It is well known to people who know that the uprooting of the gate
of Khaybar is a historical fact and it is not a work of fiction. It is
recorded in history. Even the historians who are among the opponents of
Islam have recorded this incident in their books.

Washington Irving has recorded this incident in his book on Islamic
history. Thus, it is surprising that people of later generations have
started to consider it fictional and tend to ignore this achievement of
Ali (a.s.). In view of the writer, only such people can deny such
incidents, who have not brought faith in the Messenger of Allah (S),
because when the Holy Prophet (S) had called Ali (a.s.) as, “one who
shows extraordinary wonders” (Mazharul Ajaaib) on the basis of divine
revelation, one who does not accept it to be true, cannot be considered
a Muslim.

In short, in this battle also, Ali (a.s.) offered such incomparable
services to Islam that were not offered by anyone else. Yet, the
opponents of Ali (a.s.) refrain from confessing to the bravery of Ali
(a.s.). While they are bent to make Abu Bakr and Umar the bravest ones
of the companions and the most brave ones of men, as apparent from the
writings of Suyuti. O God! There is indeed something like justice!

Abu Bakr and Umar had no connection with valor and bravery. In such a
condition, neither Abu Bakr nor Umar could be called the bravest ones.
They did not perform any feat during the lifetime of the Prophet, which
can make them eligible to be called the bravest ones. Leave alone being
the bravest ones, how can a person like Ali (a.s.), who never fled from
the battlefield and continued to often rout the enemies of Islam, should
be considered inferior to those who always bolted from battles and did
not even scratch the enemy of Islam. Now the readers are invited to
study the account of the Battle of Hunayn.

[^1]: Ref. Tarikh Khamis

[^2]: Ref. Izalatul Khifa

[^3]: Ref. Tarikh Tabari Pg. 579; Mustadrakul Hakim

[^4]: Pg. 1579


