Battle Of Hunayn
================

This was the last battle fought between the Muslim army and the infidel
Quraish. After the conquest of Mecca, most Arab tribes had accepted the
domination of the Holy Prophet (S), except the tribe of Saqifah and
Hawazin, who confronted the Muslims at Hunayn in large numbers. The
Muslim army was also very large. Because the enemies attacked by deceit,
all of a sudden, the Emigrants and Helpers, both left the Holy Prophet
(S) and fled from the battle.

Only four people remained on the battlefield according to historical
accounts. They were Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Abbas, Abu Sufyan bin Harith bin
Abdul Muttalib and Abdullah Ibn Masood. The names of these four are also
mentioned in other narrations, which shows that there were nine people
who remained steadfast in this battle. In order to stop the people from
fleeing the battlefield, the Prophet called them by titles of ‘People of
Samara’ or ‘People of Tree’. Hearing this, around 100 people from the
Helpers returned and rejoined fighting.

The reason for addressing the people who fled, by these titles is that
most of them were among those who had pledged allegiance to the Holy
Prophet (S) at the tree of Rizwan. The allegiance of Rizwan was
performed when the Messenger of Allah (S) had proceeded to Mecca with
the intention of performing Hajj, but he had to accede to the treaty
with the Meccans.

The allegiance was that the people will support and help the Prophet in
all circumstances and will not desert him, come what may. They will
never turn back from Jihad and shall always be busy in the service of
the Prophet. Since the allegiance of Rizwan occurred under a tree, it is
also known as the allegiance given under the tree. That is why the Holy
Prophet (S) called them by the title of the ‘People of Tree’ so that
they shall be ashamed. It seems that the tree under which allegiance was
given was the tree of Samara.

Thus, when some absconders returned, the fighting restarted. A person by
name of Abu Huroor came out from the ranks of infidels singing a war
song and challenged the Muslims. No one from the Muslim army offered to
confront him. They were awestruck by his courage and strength. But the
Zulfiqar of one who was unconquered, swiftly sent him to the place where
previously Amr bin Abde Wudd, Marhab and Harith had been sent. The
infidels suffered a clear defeat and seventy of them were killed. Forty
of them were alone sent to hellfire by the sword of Ali (a.s.). The rest
were killed by Bani Hashim and the Helpers (Ansar).

The killing of a single infidel by a non-Bani Hashim Emigrant is not
proved from any of the books of history. It is indeed a pity that even
in this battle, the three Caliphs were unable to exhibit any remarkable
feat. Their absconding from the battlefield was nothing unusual. The
account of their flight is mentioned in the tradition of Sahih Bukhari
related from Abu Qatadah: Qatadah says that the Muslims fled and he also
fled.

Qatadah says: “I saw Umar among the absconders and asked him the
condition of the people?” Umar replied: “It is as Allah willed.” After
this, people went to the Messenger of Allah (S). People of justice,
please let us know if any man of perfect faith could flee from the
battlefield? Then how can they be given preference over Ali (a.s.) who
was always steadfast in every battle and in spite of being injured
seriously, he continued to serve the Holy Prophet (S) and the religion
of Allah? All this proves that he possessed a perfect faith. The
repeated absconding of the three Caliphs cannot qualify them to be
successors of the Messenger of Allah (S) after his passing away.

The Messenger of Allah (S) was very brave and valiant person and he did
not recede an inch in any of the battles, because flight from the
battlefield is a dirty thing. The successor of such a brave prophet
should be someone as valiant as Ali (a.s.) and not less.

What was it that qualified Abu Bakr to be appointed the successor of the
Prophet? It is an absolutely surprising thing. None of the three Caliphs
had the right of vicegerency of the Messenger of Allah (S). These
gentlemen never did anything to save Islam from its enemies. They were
ever thoughtful of saving their own skins. The fact is that if Ali
(a.s.) had not been there, Islam would have disappeared a long time ago.
Thus, what is the matter that after the passing away of the Messenger of
Allah (S), Ali (a.s.) is made to obey and submit, and a person like Abu
Bakr who had no connection with any sort of bravery, should be made the
ruler, even though he had no right to be the successor of the Messenger
of Allah (S)?

Please note that in this battle, even the Helpers fled against their
normal practice. Those who participated in the battle were the same who
were put to shame by the Holy Prophet (S). The absconding of non-Bani
Hashim was a regular feature, what is surprising however is the presence
of Abu Sufyan in the battlefield.

The Banu Umayyah who had recently converted to Islam were present in the
battlefield. But they were not fighting. They stood aside and watched
the fighting and laughed at the difficulties suffered by the Muslims. In
this battle, the chief of Bani Umayyah, Abu Sufyan was present. But they
did not help the Messenger of Allah (S) even in a small measure. He
continued to watch the spectacle, laughing in merriment. These were the
new Muslims and it was their first test of having accepted slam. The
fact was that this person had become a Muslim under duress since the
conquest of Mecca. He had accepted Islam only when he had realized that
Islam had become powerful and there was no other way.

If this person had been a true Muslim, he would not have remained a
spectator, laughing at the combat. He would have accompanied the holy
warriors and helped the religion of Allah if he had been a sincere
believer. His behavior shows that inwardly he desired the defeat of
Muslims. If the situation had turned against the Muslims and they had
been routed, he would surely have rushed to the tribes of Saqifah and
Hawazin to congratulate them for their victory.

Indeed, to refer to Bani Umayyah as Muslims is a one-sided affair. The
fact is that Abu Sufyan and his men were hypocrites. They had apparently
become Muslims because they were subjugated. This tribe seems despicable
from all aspects. If this tribe had not been there, the battles of Badr,
Uhud and Khandaq had not occurred. The religion of Islam had spread in
peace and the lives of so many innocent people had not perished. Abu
Sufyan and his people had left no stone unturned to harm Islam. If the
Almighty had not appointed Ali (a.s.) as the defender of Islam, there
would have been no way to protect this faith.

Apart from this, the Bani Umayyah were notorious for their moral
decadence and famous for their evil deeds. It is but natural for every
righteous person to despise this tribe. Thus, it was not without cause
that the Holy Prophet (S) had hated this tribe. Ali (a.s.) was aware of
the Prophet’s dislike of this tribe, and since he obeyed and followed
the Messenger of Allah (S) to perfection, after the passing away of the
Prophet, he never let the Bani Umayyah near him.

Thus, after the Holy Prophet (S) passed away and the matter of Caliphate
was decided, Abu Sufyan came to Ali (a.s.) with a special intention and
said: “O Ali (a.s.)! You remained silent and the affair of Caliphate is
decided? If you want, I can fill the land of Medina with soldiers of
Mecca and overturn the Caliphate.”

Ali (a.s.) said: “You used to create mischief during the days of
Ignorance and now even after becoming a Muslim, you have not given up
your habit.”

Getting this reply Abu Sufyan went on his way, and in whichever
direction he saw gains he went that way. The readers should note how
this reply of Ali (a.s.) informs us of his foresight and hidden wisdom,
because it is well known that Abu Sufyan was the chief of Bani Umayyah.
This tribe had continuously faced failures during the lifetime of the
Prophet and it had also suffered much discomfiture by the sword of Ali
(a.s.), himself, as apparent from the accounts of the battles of Badr,
Uhud, and Khandaq etc.

In such a condition, neither this tribe could be loyal to the Holy
Prophet (S) or to the progeny of the Messenger of Allah (S). If this
tribe had any love for the Holy Prophet (S) would they have remained
mere spectators, laughing at the scene in the Battle of Hunayn?

Thus, Abu Sufyan’s offer to Ali (a.s.) to overthrow the Caliphate was
not based on good intentions. Ali (a.s.) understood that this person
wanted personal gain and benefit his tribe through Ali (a.s.). He had no
sincere intention to benefit Islam or Bani Hashim. Thus, Ali (a.s.)
replied to him the way he did. This reply of Ali (a.s.) shows that Abu
Sufyan was a transgressor and a mischief monger.

Hence, neither Ali (a.s.) could accept his advice nor take his help. So
what else could he have replied?

Also, Ali (a.s.) knew well that the Messenger of Allah (S) despised Bani
Umayyah. Thus, how could he openly cultivate relationship with them? If
Ali (a.s.) had gained proximity and cooperation of Abu Sufyan, it would
have been against the practice and policy of the Holy Prophet (S). The
policy of the Prophet was indeed the best policy, that the evil-doing
tribe of Bani Umayyah should always remain subjugated. This tribe was
subjugated after much struggle and after a long time.

In addition to the above, if Ali (a.s.) had accepted the offer of Abu
Sufyan, he would have been under an obligation to repay this in form of
some position in the Islamic government. In such circumstances, Abu
Sufyan and his tribe would have gained more strength. Thus, by remaining
aloof from Abu Sufyan, Ali (a.s.) saved himself from the two accusations
mentioned in the previous paragraphs and also avoided the blame that he
would have got from the consequences of the rulership of Bani Umayyah
and the tribe which had weakened during the tenure of the Messenger of
Allah (S) would have received a new lease of life. After Abu Sufyan got
a rebuttal from Ali (a.s.), he busied himself in intrigue and finally
obtained the governorship of Syria for his family. He also obtained the
right to 25% of the booty from the conquests that Muslims made in the
surrounding area of Syria.

After getting Syria, Abu Sufyan said that since he had become old and
did not like to leave Mecca, his elder son, Yazeed bin Abu Sufyan should
be appointed as the governor of Syria. This was effected. As soon as
Bani Umayyah gained this rulership, their tribesmen who were lying in a
degraded position, set out for Syria. And in a brief time, they regained
their lost wealth and position and rather, exceeded it. The whole area
of Syria came under the rulership of Bani Umayyah. Bani Umayyah and none
else occupied every low and high governmental post of Syria while the
Bani Hashim were not to be seen anywhere.

This was impossible, because even at the Islamic capital not a single
Bani Hashim had even the lowest post in government. Thus, whatever
reverses Bani Umayyah had suffered during the lifetime of the Prophet
were soon reimbursed by the courtesy of Abu Bakr and Umar. Yazeed Ibn
Abu Sufyan ruled Syria for four years till his death. After him, his
younger brother, Muawiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan was appointed as his successor.
He was an example of his tribe and was more clever and superior to his
brother in every way.

It seems to be out of context to describe the affluence and progress of
Bani Umayyah during the reign of Muawiyah. He continued to rule Syria
for a long time and became so powerful that when Ali (a.s.) became the
Caliph and deposed him from governorship, he refused to be deposed and
took to confront the Caliph of that time. Rather, the Caliph of that
time was so busy with battles that he hardly had time for other
activities demanded by his office.

The tenure of Imam Ali’s Caliphate was four years and some months, after
which Imam Hasan (a.s.) became the Caliph. Imam Hasan (a.s.) had to
abdicate within six months. After this, instead of Medina, Damascus
became the seat of Caliphate. Though Bani Hashim had weakened greatly
after the passing away of the Prophet, the loss of this Caliphate
relegated them to the position of worldly degradation and Bani Umayyah
became most powerful. How astounding that the tribe, which was despised
by the Holy Prophet (S) and one which the Messenger of Allah (S) had
after great efforts weakened and subjugated during his lifetime, should
gain strength immediately after his death. And gradually it should have
gained the rulership of Syria and finally the dominance of all the
Islamic lands.

But as for the Bani Hashim, the clan of the Prophet, the tribe that
every Muslim was obliged to respect, was subjugated and degraded. Thus,
after becoming the Caliph, Muawiyah was always busy in strengthening his
position and he also arranged so that Caliphate should remain in his
family. To this end he made the nomination of his successor just as Abu
Bakr had nominated Umar. And in order to achieve the oath of allegiance
of his wanton son, he left no stone unturned.

The Bani Hashim had become weak, but its two chiefs, that is Imam Hasan
and Imam Husayn (a.s.) were still alive, from whose side Muawiyah was
not content. After sometime, he became content regarding Imam Hasan
(a.s.). That is, he had him poisoned by intrigue. This incident also
occurred in the reign of Muawiyah.

The historian, Abul Fida writes in Tarikhul Mukhtasar fi Ahwaalul Bashar
that regarding the poisoning of Imam Hasan (a.s.), it is said that it
was Muawiyah, who had him poisoned and it is also said that the heir of
Muawiyah, Yazeed had done it. Anyway, whichever is correct, the
poisoning of Imam Hasan (a.s.) removed one chief of Bani Hashim from the
way of Muawiyah.

The writer of Tarikh Khamis says that when Muawiyah received the news of
poisoning of Imam Hasan (a.s.), he rejoiced. Upon this, his wife, Faqhta
said: “O Muawiyah! You rejoice at the death of the Prophet’s son?”
Muawiyah said: “I am not happy because of the death of the Prophet’s
son, but for the contentment that my heart has achieved.”

Doubtlessly, the martyrdom of Imam Hasan (a.s.) had imparted great
comfort to Muawiyah, but still one of the chiefs of Bani Hashim, Imam
Husayn (a.s.) remained; and because he was also brave and valiant like
his father, Muawiyah was fearful of him. But the murder of this Imam
(a.s.) could not be carried out during Muawiyah’s lifetime. Therefore,
it was effected during the reign of his son. Thus, the main cause for
the killings of Bani Hashim was the fresh lease of life that Bani
Umayyah had received.

If it had not been so, the family of the Prophet and Bani Hashim would
not have suffered such calamities. Indeed, Ali (a.s.) had a great
foresight that he paid no heed to the offer of Abu Sufyan. Otherwise,
the tribulations of the Prophet’s family and Bani Hashim would have been
attributed to Ali (a.s.).

It is clear that if Ali (a.s.) had accepted the help of Abu Sufyan, he
would have been obliged to repay it in a substantial way. It would have
become necessary to give Abu Sufyan some official position and this
would have led to the empowerment of Bani Umayyah. In that case also,
they would have carried out all the activities that they subsequently
did. While there would have been no harm to the family of the Prophet
and the Bani Hashim if Abu Sufyan and Bani Umayyah had loved them truly.
But the true colors of their love for Holy Prophet (S) and the Bani
Hashim had already been revealed in the Battle of Hunayn.

The fact is that Abu Sufyan and his tribesmen had been inimical to the
Holy Prophet (S) since ages. The Prophet has not accepted any truck with
Abu Sufyan because of his insincerity. Abu Sufyan had a personal benefit
in it, which Ali (a.s.) had correctly surmised. That is why Ali (a.s.)
repulsed him with an acerbic reply. This compelled Abu Sufyan to go to
Abu Bakr and Umar, and he was finally successful in his machinations.
The fact is that Abu Sufyan was a man of determination. He had thought
that if Ali Ibn Abi Talib’s support was obtained, it would have given
him much respect among the Muslims.

But Ali (a.s.) did not allow any such thing and thus continued on the
practice of Holy Prophet (S). Ali (a.s.) thus remained safe from blame,
which were the consequences of the fresh empowerment of Bani Umayyah,
for which Abu Bakr and Umar are naturally held accountable. In the end,
the writer wishes to state that the senior companions of the Holy
Prophet (S) had performed such deeds that become clear subsequently. One
is that the Holy Prophet (S) was a brave and steadfast Prophet, as an
Ulul Azm Prophet (who brings a new Shariat) should be. He participated
in all the battles and exhibited the quality of an expert military
general. He never receded his steps from a battle and he never showed
any cowardice. He faced many tight corners, but his steadfastness helped
him in such circumstances. He proved that a true prophet (a.s.) is pure
of cowardice and docility. Bravery is the best quality of Prophethood
and Imamate. The Prophet and Imam must never be a coward.

Secondly, to strengthen the roots of Islam, the Almighty Allah had
created Ali (a.s.). That is why his courage was incomparable. Thus, all
the feats that he performed in the battles and military campaigns show
that he was the recipient of divine help and an undefeated warring lion
of Allah, the performer of astounding feats etc. Such achievements he
had that one stroke his was more than all the good deeds of all Allah’s
creatures together.

Doubtlessly, except for him no one has the right to be the Caliph of the
Prophet. A Caliph must be like the Prophet, brave and helpful to the
religion of Allah.

The fact is that Abu Bakr and Umar or rather, the three Caliphs had no
connection with bravery. The two of them used to run away from the
battles, just like the common people fled for the fear of their lives.

Flight from the battlefield was their common habit. Both of them,
rather, all three of them showed such cowardice on the battlefield that
every modest person would prefer not to look at their acts. It is really
astounding how those gentlemen could become so brave that finally they
became Caliphs.

The fact is that during the lifetime of the Prophet, none of them had a
single achievement to their credit in helping or defending Islam. Every
time they were busy in saving their own skins. No feat of theirs was
shown in the battles of Badr, Uhud, Khandaq or Hunayn. But after the
passing away of the Messenger of Allah (S) they occupied with
shamelessness, the position of the Prophet’s vicegerency, which was
rightfully deserved by Ali (a.s.) due to the services he had rendered
with the power of his arms. Their occupying the Caliphate and usurpation
of Ali’s right is one matter.

In addition to this, Abu Bakr and Umar became instrumental in promoting
and empowering a tribe that was detested by the Messenger of Allah (S)
and weakened by him to a great extent on the basis of some hidden
wisdom. That tribe had not a bit of right to gain any benefit from a
successor of the Prophet, because it was deadly inimical to the
Messenger of Allah (S) and the religion of Allah. And it had greatly
harmed the Holy Prophet (S) and the divine faith.

But Abu Bakr and Umar helped this tribe, due to which it became powerful
and consequently wreaked untold havoc upon the family of the Prophet.
The depriving of Ali (a.s.) from Caliphate was a one-sided affair. More
than this, was their empowerment of Bani Umayyah. This caused Islam to
go into the hands of those who knew nothing of faith except their
selfish motives.

(54) The sun returned for Ali (a.s.) just as it had stopped on the
command of Yusha (a.s.). The stopping of the sun due to the prayer of
Yusha (a.s.) is recorded in Taurat. In this way, the coming back of the
sun is proved by correct traditions. In the book of Tahawi, Mushkilate
Hadith, there is a tradition of Asma binte Umais and also in the book
Muntaqa to this effect. Shah Waliullah has also included it in Izalatul
Khifa.

The writer of Tarikh Khamis has also included it in his history. The
denier of this tradition is only Ibn Jauzi. He was a great opponent of
Ali (a.s.), so his denial cannot be regarded authentic. It is obvious
that if the returning of the Sun had not been in connection with Ali
(a.s.), this person would not have considered it unauthentic. But the
denial of the enemies does not in any way harm the status of Ali (a.s.).

Anyway, the incident of the return of the sun is that one day,
revelation was descending on the Holy Prophet (S) and his respected head
was in the lap of Ali (a.s.). It was in that position for such a long
time that the Sun set and the Asr (afternoon) prayer of Ali (a.s.)
lapsed. When the revelation was complete, the Messenger of Allah (S)
asked: “O Ali! Did you perform the Asr prayer?” He replied that he had
performed it only by gestures. Thus, the Holy Prophet (S) said: “O
Allah! Ali was in Your obedience and the obedience of Your Messenger.
Thus, You send back the sun for him.”

Asma binte Umais who is the narrator of this tradition and one who had
been guaranteed Paradise by the Holy Prophet (S) says: “We had indeed
witnessed the setting of the sun and then saw it rising again, and its
light was seen spreading on the earth and the mountains.”

O dear readers, this narration shows a great merit of Ali (a.s.). First
of all, at the time of revelation, the head of the Prophet was in the
lap of Ali (a.s.).

Secondly, when the Holy Prophet (S) prayed for the Sun’s return he said:
“O Allah! Ali (a.s.) was in Your obedience and the obedience of Your
Prophet (S).” Thirdly, the prayer of Ali (a.s.) was considered so
important that the sun was made to rise again for it to be performed.
Here, we remind the readers that the above tradition indicates such a
great significance of Prayers.

Those who being Muslims do not give importance to Prayers, will realize
what a great significance Prayer has. If it had not been so, the Holy
Prophet (S) would not have prayed for the return of the sun. There are
many Muslims who live among Muslims and inherit property like them, but
they consider Prayer a despicable thing. They should read the above
tradition. Not being steadfast in Prayer is one thing but considering it
unimportant is another. Such a person can hardly be called a Muslim. He
is an apostate and atheist. This is for those who call themselves
Muslims and befool the people by their claim.

There is a sect, which calls itself Muslim but denies miracles.
According to them, splitting of the moon, returning of the Sun and the
curing of the leper are all impossible acts. They think that a
supernatural occurrence is impossible. The fact is that these people are
narrow-minded. They have considered only such things possible as are in
the scope of their understanding. Here, the writer shall only discuss
their response with regard to the miracle of the Sun’s return.

People who deny the miracles of the Prophets (S) have always said that
miracle is nothing, because it is an unnatural occurrence. Thus, the
affair, which is unnatural, is impossible. Apparently, this unnatural
occurrence seems to be unacceptable, but this type of statement shows
lack of determination. This can be considered true only if the miracles
of the Prophets (a.s.) could be thought to be beyond the intellectual
capacity of the Prophets (S).

Apparently, the deniers have considered them as such. Although, all the
miracles recorded in books are having an aspect of possibility. None of
them seem intellectually impossible. Not a single miracle has been
related about the Messenger of Allah (S) about which one could find an
excuse of its impossibility by reason. Rather, all the miracles are
against our daily experiences of life. But they are not impossible
theoretically.

For example, none of the Prophets have made a part greater than its
whole. Now if the deniers deny these miracles, it is due to their lack
of understanding. Now we shall explain why the miracle of the Sun’s
return was not illogical. Let any denier of miracle tell us if this
miracle is scientifically or logically impossible. Except that they seem
incompatibility with daily occurrence. That is just as much as the
denier has experience, he will consider only as much possibility of a
miracle. But if the miracles had been identical to daily occurrence, why
they had been called miracles?

Readers should note that the deniers have denied the miracle of the
Sun’s return, because everyday we see the Sun setting in the west but we
do not see it coming back. Because it is against nature that such a
miracle was shown by the Prophet. It seems the deniers had not
distinguished between impossible and irrational occurrences, otherwise,
they would not have expressed such improper views. We should know that
occurrences like rising of the Sun from the west is not an irrational
thing. It is possible for the Sun to return from the west, to stop
midway etc. Such occurrences are not beyond reason. Such things seem
impossible to us, because we don’t know of their reality. If we tell
someone, who has no knowledge of astronomy, that four thousand years
ago, the North Star was not actually the North Star, and that the North
Star of today was the star named Thauban, that person will not consider
our statement correct on the basis of his personal experience.

In the same way, we can present hundreds of such strange facts about the
Universe after which the return of the Sun or its stopping will not seem
a great occurrence. Allah knows, since when this world exists but the
occurrences of the last 400 years are not any lesser astounding. All
these revolutions have an aspect of possibility. Only those consider
them impossible, who have no rational thinking.

Thus, the deniers of the miracle of the sun are not correct in their
views and do not deserve any attention. We should deduce the other
miracles of the Prophet from this basis. And we should know that all the
miracles performed by the Prophets (a.s.) were not beyond possibility.
That is why they cannot be said to be against nature. Although, in the
circle of the experience of deniers it does not seem possible, but this
itself is in conformity to the requirements of a miracle. Because if
there had been scope of such ordinary possibility, a miracle would not
have been a miracle.

(55) Ali (a.s.) had received the titles of Yadullah (hands of Allah) and
Asadullah (Lion of Allah). The reason is that on the night of Ascension
(Meraj), the Holy Prophet (S), at one stage saw a lion. The Messenger of
Allah (S) put his ring in the mouth of that lion. Then at the spot of
Qaba Qausain (Two bows) when a hand appeared, it was wearing that same
ring. When the next morning, after the night of Ascension, the Holy
Prophet (S) saw Ali (a.s.), he saw that he was wearing the same ring.
From that day he was given the titles of ‘the Lion of Allah’ and ‘the
Hands of Allah’. Those who are narrow-minded may ignore this fact, but
it is the true background of those titles of Ali (a.s.).

(56) The Messenger of Allah (S) presented Ali (a.s.), as per the
commands of Allah, the saintly dress of Ascension. The reason behind
this was that he had the same quality of concealing defects. In
recompense of this quality, he was given the dress of Ascension. Why
should Allah had not given him that? Ali (a.s.) had always concealed the
defects of the sinners.

(57) On the night of Ascension, the Holy Prophet (S) saw the following
written on the heaven: There is no god except Allah. Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah (S). Ali is the helper of Muhammad.

(58) Ali (a.s.) was the author of the saying: “Ask me!” Mulla Jami
writes in Shawahid that Ali (a.s.) said in a sermon: “Whatever anyone
desires to inquire may ask me. Except the news of the Arsh (throne). The
knowledge that I have gained is from the saliva that the Messenger of
Allah (S) made me suck.”

(59) Ali (a.s.) said: “I am the slave of Allah, the brother and legatee
of the Messenger of Allah (S).” And also said: “I am the husband of the
chief of ladies, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (S). I am the
chief of the legatees of Prophets and the seal of the legatees of the
Prophet. I am such, that except me, if anyone claims these virtues, the
Almighty will punish him.”

(60) Ali (a.s.) caused a spring to flow from a place near a monastery.
Upon this, the monk asked him if he was a prophet or an angel. Ali
(a.s.) replied that he was the successor of the Prophet of the Last Age.
Upon this, the monk accepted Islam and recited the formula: “I witness
that there is no god except Allah. And I witness that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah (S). And I witness that you are the legatee of the
Messenger of Allah (S).”

The above is also recorded in the Shawahid of Mulla Jami.

(61) That Ali (a.s.) was the legatee of the Messenger of Allah (S) is
also proved from the couplets of Imam Shafei: “Love of Ali is an armor.
Distributor of Hell and Paradise. Truly he is the legatee of Mustafa.
The Imam of men and Jinns.”

(62) Ali (a.s.) was the one who showed the correct path and restrained
from misguidance. Hakim in Mustadrak has recorded a tradition related
from Zaid bin Arqam that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “One who wishes to
live like me and die like me and to stay in the Garden that Allah has
promised me, should love and obey Ali (a.s.) who shall show you the
correct path and never allow you to go astray.”

(63) One who befriends Ali (a.s.) shall go to Paradise and one who
denies him shall go to Hell. In Hakim’s Mustadrak there is a tradition
related by Ammar in which he reports that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “O
Ali! Tuba (Congratulations) for those who love you and testify for you
and Wayl (fie) is for one who angers you and falsifies you.”

(64) It was revealed to the Holy Prophet (S) that Ali (a.s.) is chief of
the believers, Imam of the pious ones and the leader of those who flee
from ignorance? Abdullah Ibn Abbas relates from his father that the Holy
Prophet (S) said: “Three things were revealed upon me regarding Ali
(a.s.). (The same points, mentioned above).”

(65) Looking at the face of Ali (a.s.) is worship. Hakim records in
Mustadrak from Abdullah Ibn Masood that the Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Casting a glance at the face of Ali (a.s.) is an act of worship.”

(66) On Judgment Day, Ali (a.s.) will be the bearer of the heavenly
standard, Liwaul Hamd. Its brilliance will be visible on his head as a
crown.[^1]

(67) Abusing Ali (a.s.) is abusing the Holy Prophet (S). In the book of
Mishkatul Masabih, in the Chapter of the Merits of Ali (a.s.), there is
a tradition narrated by Umme Salma that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “One
who abused Ali (a.s.) is as if he has abused me.”

It is not unexpected for people who are not very familiar with
traditions to be terrified on reading this tradition. He would think
that Ali (a.s.) was really a close confidant of the Holy Prophet (S) and
deserving of respect. He was also a close relative of the Prophet so why
should anyone abuse him. But the fact is that Ali (a.s.) was the target
of abuses for a long time. The Holy Prophet (S) being the Prophet had
known that a time would come when people will abuse Ali (a.s.). That is
why he had made such a statement.

Obviously, who had the courage to abuse Ali (a.s.) during the lifetime
of the Prophet? But after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah
(S), the abusing and imprecation occurred. The one who initiated the
cursing of Ali (a.s.) was Muawiyah. Not only did he curse Ali (a.s.), he
also instigated his followers to perform this ‘good deed’. Thus, the
custom gained popularity during the reign of Muawiyah because he was
considered the rightful Caliph of his time, as is the belief of Ahlul
Sunnat.

It is not an unknown thing that Muawiyah emphasized so much on the
cursing of Ali (a.s.) that when Imam Hasan (a.s.) made a treaty with
him, he included the condition that cursing of Ali (a.s.) will be
stopped by Bani Umayyah, but Muawiyah did not honor it. At last, Imam
Hasan (a.s.) had to propose that imprecation of Ali (a.s.) shall not be
done in his presence. Anyway, whatever may be the view of Muawiyah bin
Abi Sufyan, the followers of today should note that the Holy Prophet (S)
considered the cursing of Ali (a.s.) to be equal to cursing the Prophet
himself as mentioned in the above tradition.

(68) When Ali (a.s.) returned after breaking the idols of Saqifah and
Hawazin, the Holy Prophet (S) expressed his happiness and conferred with
Ali (a.s.) in seclusion for a long time. The conference was so prolonged
that Umar remarked that the Messenger of Allah (S) had that day
conversed with his cousin for a very long time. The Holy Prophet (S)
replied that he himself had nothing to say to Ali (a.s.), but there were
many divine secrets that had to be conveyed to Ali (a.s.).[^2]

The curiosity of Umar was not baseless. In spite of being with Ali
(a.s.) day and night, he was not aware of his high status. In any case,
this secluded conference clearly shows that His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was
the custodian of the secrets of Allah and the Messenger of Allah (S);
and except for him none of the companions had this honor.

(69) Ali (a.s.) was always the recipient of the beneficences of the
Prophet. But in the incident mentioned below, the Holy Prophet (S) made
such a statement about him that it implies that he had appointed Ali
(a.s.) as his successor or it showed his desire that Ali (a.s.) should
be his legatee. People of justice have not but to confess to this fact,
the followers of Caliphate may say whatever they like.

**The First Incident:** Before migration to Medina (Hijrat), the Holy
Prophet (S) invited his clan for a feast. After dinner, he told them
that he has been sent for all the people, but especially for them. And
they had well seen his behavior with them. Now it was incumbent on them
to help him like a brother, but no one volunteered to do so, except Ali
(a.s.) who, in spite of his young age stood up. The Holy Prophet (S)
told him to move aside. The Messenger of Allah (S) repeated this thrice
and every time only Ali al-Murtadha’ (a.s.) arose. Finally, the Holy
Prophet (S) thumped Ali’s shoulders and said:

“I have appointed my cousin as my successor.” The above tradition is
recorded in Khasais of Nasai and Shah Waliullah has written it in his
book Izalatul Khifa with explanation and commentary.

Also, Abul Fida, the historian, has also recorded it in his book
Tarikhul Mukhtasar fi Ahwaalul Bashar. This historian writes that the
Holy Prophet (S) addressed his clan and asked: “Who is it that could be
my brother, my legatee and my successor?” No one responded, except Ali
(a.s.), who happily offered himself to become his brother, helper and
Caliph. Upon this, the Prophet told Ali (a.s.): “You are my brother, my
legatee and my Caliph.”

Please note that the above proves the falsity of the alleged tradition:
“We, the prophets don’t leave inheritance.” And the fact is that it is
unacceptable as it is against nature. The next notable point is that the
time when this occurred, the age of Ali (a.s.) was eleven years only.
Since that time, Ali (a.s.) showed absolute loyalty and helpfulness to
the Holy Prophet (S). He always strove to please the Prophet and he did
not even prefer his life over the safety of the Messenger of Allah (S).

At the time of migration, he slept fearlessly on the bed of the
Messenger of Allah (S) and in every battle he exhibited such valor as
was not found in anyone else. The fact is that he fulfilled the promise
of his childhood steadfastly throughout his life. After the demise of
the Holy Prophet (S) also, he did not accept the cooperation of Bani
Umayyah. The fact is that all his life, he had fulfilled to the maximum,
the saying of the Prophet when he had called him the ‘legatee and
brother’.

**The Second Incident**: On the day of migration, the Holy Prophet (S)
had appointed him on his behalf to restore the trusts placed with him by
Meccans, and especially made Ali (a.s.) sleep on his bed and had him
covered with his covering. His selection for this position seems to be a
significant matter. It was such a serious responsibility that it could
be fulfilled by only the one who had the position of legatee and brother
of the Messenger of Allah (S).

Evidently, this is the matter that indicates the appointment of Ali
(a.s.) to be the legatee of the Holy Prophet (S). In such crucial
circumstances, only such a person can take the place of the Holy Prophet
(S) as one whom Allah has appointed to be the brother, legatee and the
Caliph of the Messenger of Allah (S). Obviously, such a feat cannot be
accomplished without divine help. Thus, Ali (a.s.) was created to
perform this astounding feat. And it was so, because he has been
appointed by divine instructions, the brother, legatee and the Caliph of
the Messenger of Allah (S). This also shows that since he had been
appointed as such by Allah, there was no need for him to be appointed a
Caliph by the people. The Almighty Himself has praised this feat of Ali
(a.s.)[^3]

***“And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah
and Allah is Affectionate to the servants***.”

**The Third Incident:** In the year when the allegiance of Rizwan
occurred, some people of Quraish came to the Holy Prophet (S) to ask for
the return of some slaves. The Holy Prophet (S) told them: “O people of
Quraish! The Almighty will appoint on you a person whose faith He has
already tested. That person will make you follow the religion strictly
and kill some of you.” When the companions asked the Messenger of Allah
(S) about the person he said. “It is the one repairing my sandals.”

At that time, Ali (a.s.) was stitching the sandals of the Messenger of
Allah (S). The statement of the Prophet that he would make them follow
the religion and kill some of them indicates that the Caliph of the
Prophet is having authority in the religion as well as the secular
affairs of the community. This implies that Ali (a.s.) was the true
Caliph appointed by the Messenger of Allah (S). People who misconstrue
meanings may interpret this statement of the Messenger of Allah (S) in
any way they like.

**The Fourth Incident:** The Holy Prophet (S), at the time of announcing
the verses of Surah Baraat under divine instructions, considering Ali
(a.s.) as having position like himself, sent him on this mission and he
delivered the commands of Surah Baraat to the people of Mecca. The
following tradition is mentioned in the books of Elamul Wara and Habibus
Sayr: “But Jibraeel descended with the command that no one will fulfill
this duty except you, yourself or someone who is like you. And the fact
is that Ali is from me and I am from Ali. He is my brother, my legatee,
my successor and my Caliph. After me, he will fulfill my rights in my
family, my people and will promote my religion. And none shall fulfill
my rights except Ali (a.s.).”

Shah Waliullah has also mentioned this incident in Izalatul Khifa. This
clearly proves that Ali (a.s.) was the Caliph of the Prophet and the
executor of religious and secular affairs. What could be clearer than
these words of the Messenger of Allah (S)? The Prophet designated Ali
(a.s.) in his lifetime as his brother, his legatee and his successor and
also said that Ali (a.s.) will manage his religion after him.

But after the demise of the Prophet, the nation did not allow Ali (a.s.)
to be the Caliph. Umar denied that he was the brother of the Prophet.
Abu Bakr attributed a saying to the Holy Prophet (S), which implied that
the Messenger of Allah (S) had no inheritor. What an allegiance they had
given to the Prophet! They disregarded all the sayings of the Messenger
of Allah (S)!

**The Fifth Incident:** One day, the Holy Prophet (S) stated that Ali
(a.s.) was the chief of the Arabs, thus ‘A’ysha narrates in Mustadrak
and Shah Waliullah has recorded it in Izalatul Khifa. ‘A’ysha says that
the Holy Prophet (S) said: “Call for me the chief of the Arabs. ‘A’ysha
asked him if he himself was not the chief of the Arabs? He replied that
he was the chief of the Children of Adam (human beings) and Ali (a.s.)
is the chief of the Arabs.”

Despite being the chief of the Arabs, the people did not allow his
chieftaincy to remain established. They created the turmoil of Saqifah
and did not allow him to become the apparent chief of the community.
What a loyal nation it was of the Messenger of Allah (S) that it could
not even act upon this command of the Holy Prophet (S)!

**The Sixth Incident:** The Holy Prophet (S) had stated that Ali (a.s.)
is the chief of the believers, Imam of the pious and the leader of the
nobles? The Holy Prophet (S) used to speak very highly of Ali (a.s.),
but when did the Ummah cut off his neck, and not denied that Ali (a.s.)
was the brother of the Prophet. It is obvious that any believer cannot
address the chief of the believers in such a rude manner.

**The Seventh Incident**: The Holy Prophet (S) told Ali (a.s.) that
after the Messenger of Allah (S), he was the chief of every believing
man and woman. But after the demise of the Messenger of Allah (S) Umar,
Abu Bakr, Muawiyah, ‘A’ysha, Talha and Zubair did not accept him to be
the chief of the believers. Anyway, this tradition is recorded in
Izalatul Khifa from Abdullah Ibn Abbas. It is as follows: “O Ali! You
are the Guardian (Wali) of all believers after me.” Obviously, the
meaning of Wali is chief and Imam. It cannot be friend or helper etc.
because the words ‘after me’ cannot imply anything else. Even then, the
opponents of Ali (a.s.) do not refrain from deriving inappropriate
meanings. Indeed, bigotry blinds the people.

**The Eighth Incident:** In a great crowd, as commanded by revelation,
the Holy Prophet (S) declared that all the doors opening into the
Prophet’s mosque must be closed except that of Ali (a.s.). This was put
into effect and this caused many people to be jealous. This incident is
mentioned in the book of Jazbul Quloob. And the tradition is seen in
Sahih Bukhari.

In the same way, the Prophet told Ali (a.s.): “Except for you and me,
this mosque is not allowed for anyone in the state of ritual impurity.”
Then the Messenger of Allah (S) gave the example of Moosa (a.s.) that he
was ordered by Allah to construct a mosque where none but he and Haroon
could live. Both these virtues are such that except for Ali (a.s.), it
could not be obtained by anyone else from the non-Ahlul Bayt people.

The second virtue was that Ali (a.s.), like the Holy Prophet (S), even
in the state of ritual impurity could enter the mosque. This proves the
infallibility of Ali (a.s.) because without infallibility, a person
cannot be absolutely pure. Thus, just as the Messenger of Allah (S) was
infallible, in the same way, Ali (a.s.) was also infallible. In this
condition, no one but Ali (a.s.) can be the successor of the Holy
Prophet (S). The successor of an infallible should be infallible too.
This merit also proves that immediate successorship of the Prophet
belonged to Ali (a.s.).

**The Ninth Incident:** The Holy Prophet (S) appointed Ali (a.s.) as his
representative and successor by tying a turban to the head of Ali (a.s.)
and after that he made him sit on a camel and sent him to the infidels.
And also said that even if one person accepts Islam at the hands of Ali
(a.s.), it would be better than the entire world and whatever is in it.
Side by side the Holy Prophet (S) also prayed: “O Allah! Make his tongue
firm and guide his heart.” The Messenger of Allah (S) also said: “Ali is
the most judicious among you!”[^4]

Tying of turban is a sign of appointing as a successor. Till today, only
the turban is tied on the head of one who is appointed as the successor.
The tying of turban to Ali’s head and making him sit on a camel to
depart by the Holy Prophet (S) shows that he alone deserved the position
of the Prophet’s successorship. The truth is also that except for him,
no one was qualified for it.

The Holy Prophet (S) knew that by tying the turban on Ali’s head and
sending him to the enemies of Islam would not be useless, because Ali
(a.s.) will remain steadfast in facing the enemies. He will definitely
not flee from combat. People who value justice should see if the Prophet
has treated anyone of the three Caliphs in this way. When it had already
been proved by past experience that none of them had such ability.

**The Tenth Incident**: When Khalid bin Walid instigated some people to
complain to the Holy Prophet (S) regarding the distribution of Yemen
booty by Ali (a.s.), the Messenger of Allah (S) became infuriated.

The writer of Madarijun Nubuwwah says that the Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Do not think bad of Ali (a.s.), because he is from me and I am from him
and he is your guardian. Of whomsoever I am the master, this Ali is his
master too.” The words of Wali (Guardian) and Maula (Master) clearly
imply the rule that no one from the Muslims can ignore his commands. The
Holy Prophet (S) implied that of whosoever he was the ruler, in the same
way was Ali (a.s.). Thus, whatever is his decision regarding the war
booty, ‘the same would have been my decision. You have no right to
complain against it.’

The obvious meaning of Maula is as mentioned above, but the opponents of
Ali (a.s.) have contrived new connotations to this words, which shows
nothing but the expression of their actual feelings.

Here, it seems appropriate to mention a few things about Khalid Ibn
Walid also only because it is possible that he may not be mentioned in
this book again. Khalid Ibn Walid was a well-known chief of the Bani
Makhzum tribe. The first time Islam encountered him was during the
Battle of Uhud. He had come with Abu Sufyan to confront the army of
Islam and was a brave soldier. He began his activities against the army
of Allah.

The Holy Prophet (S) had posted fifty archers at the mountain pass but
they left their position and indulged in collecting the booty. Khalid
saw the loophole and he descended from the heights and attacked the
Muslims. Due to Khalid’s attack, the Muslims were defeated after having
the upper hand. This also resulted in the martyrdom of Hamza, who was
killed by a javelin thrown by Wahshi, the slave of Hind. After that,
Khalid accepted Islam after a period of time.

At the time of the conquest of Mecca, the Holy Prophet (S) sent Khalid
to confront the Bani Jazima. They accepted Islam and surrendered their
weapons. In spite of their acceptance of Islam, Khalid treated them with
cruelty and killed a number of their men. When the Holy Prophet (S)
heard of this, he began to tremble by the fear of Allah and began to
plead: “O my Lord! I dissociate with this misdeed of Khalid. And I seek
Your refuge.” After this, the Messenger of Allah (S) immediately sent
Ali (a.s.) with a lot of money and gold so that he could remove Khalid
from there and reconcile the people whose kin were slain by Khalid and
that they could be paid blood money.

Thus, Khalid was always inimical to Ali (a.s.) because the latter
differed with him in many decisions. This had finally led Khalid to
instigate people to complain against Ali (a.s.). The result was as
mentioned above. Khalid remained famous as a ferocious warrior even
after the passing away of the Prophet. Those who consider him equal to
or braver than Ali (a.s.) should know that the bravery of Khalid was of
a ferocious, wild kind. While the valor of Ali (a.s.) was never devoid
of mercy and kindness. None is equal to Ali (a.s.) from the aspect of
valor and forbearance. Khalid was so hot tempered that even a hot
tempered person like Umar used to be dissatisfied with him. We don’t
know how Khalid was conferred the title of ‘Sword of Allah’. It was
definitely not gained during the lifetime of the Prophet.

The Messenger of Allah (S) was absolutely not pleased with him. It seems
that during the conquests of Syria etc., the Muslims came to refer to
him with this title. It is well-known that the title of ‘Sword of Allah’
is the exclusive appellation of Ali (a.s.), as the writer has shown in
the foregone discussions. Apparently, it seems that Ahlul Sunnat have
forcibly applied this title to Khalid. In this time also, there are
people who call themselves descendants of Khalid. They are proud to say
that they are the progeny of the ‘Sword of Allah’.

**The Eleventh Incident:** When the Holy Prophet (S) was going to Tabuk,
he appointed Ali (a.s.) as his representative in Medina. This
appointment was a matter of great pride for Ali (a.s.) but the
hypocrites spread the calumny that the Prophet was angry with him; that
is why he had left him in Medina and gone to Tabuk. So Ali (a.s.) asked
the Holy Prophet (S) why he was leaving him as a Caliph on women and
children while he had not been shortcoming in the five previous battles.
Upon this, the Messenger of Allah (S) gave the example of Haroon and
Moosa (a.s.). He said:

“You are to me as Haroon was to Moosa.”

It should be clear that the example is based on an incident when Moosa
had left for the Miqat (place of meeting the Lord), he had appointed
Haroon as his Caliph. The tradition regarding this incident is given
below. Shaykh Abdul Haqq Muhaddith Dehlavi has also quoted it from Sahih
Bukhari and Sahih Muslim: “You are to me as Haroon was to Moosa, except
that there is no Prophet after me.”

Doubtlessly, this tradition tells us a lot of the high position of Ali
(a.s.), but the opponents of Ali (a.s.) claim that there is nothing
special in this tradition, because the Prophet had appointed him the
Caliph on his family and not on all people of Medina. First of all, the
saying of the mischievous people is itself invalid, because when the
Prophet quoted the example of Haroon and Moosa, the Caliphate of Ali
(a.s.) over whole of Medina was proved. Secondly, when he was made the
Caliph on the family of the Prophet, then what was the position of the
common people of Medina? That any excuse could be sought for him being
their Caliph.

It seems that these people do not consider the family and progeny of the
Messenger of Allah (S) to be superior to the common people of Medina.
That is why they are presenting such lame excuses from their side. Glory
be to Allah, what a respect of the Prophet’s family! These people
definitely degrade the Messenger’s kinsfolk by considering them at par
with common people. The fact is that selfishness is a bad habit.

Sayyid Ali Hamadani writes in Mawaddatul Qurba that the Holy Prophet (S)
had repeated the following tradition on ten different occasions: “You
are having the same position to me as Haroon was having with Moosa
(a.s.).” This does not only prove that he was a Caliph for the Prophet’s
family when the Holy Prophet (S) had gone to Tabuk. Rather, it implies
that he was the Caliph of the Messenger of Allah (S). This tradition is
a great proof of the rightfulness of his Caliphate.

The writer of Ittilaaf says that most scholars have accepted this
tradition except Amadi, who was expelled from Syria due to his contorted
beliefs as mentioned by Zahabi in Mizanul Etedal in detail. The best
tradition to prove the appointment of Ali (a.s.) as the Caliph is the
Relation (Manzilah) tradition. Shah Abdul Aziz has written in Tohfa:
“We, Ahlul Sunnat accept this tradition as correct. This tradition
proves the Imamate of Ali (a.s.) in his own time.” After this, the Shah
says: “Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) enemies (Nasibi) have denied this tradition.”
We, Shias also agree to the view of Shah. But the limitation of “in his
own time” is not correct.

Rather, it should be said that this tradition proves the immediate
Caliphate of Ali (a.s.), while such a kind of tradition is not found for
any of the three Caliphs. It is also stated by Nawawi, the commentator
of Sahih Muslim and Ibn Hajar in Fathul Bari and Maqrizi etc. How
beautifully the Shah has limited it to “his own time”! It is as if the
Holy Prophet (S) has missed the phrase. No, the Holy Prophet (S) did not
lay any condition to the acceptance of the Caliphate of Ali (a.s.). He
did not say that after Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman have been Caliphs,
after this Ali (a.s.) must be taken as Caliph.

It is apparent that the Shah has applied this condition only to justify
his Sunni faith. The Holy Prophet (S) never implied it. What a great
selfishness that the Shah is blinded by the look of three Caliphs. He
says that Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) enemies oppose this tradition and he himself
has opposed it after a few lines. It is not a mature behavior; but
selfishness blinds one in discriminating between right and wrong. At
least the respected Shah who had the power to discern truth from
falsehood should not have followed the bigots.

**The Twelfth Incident:** In 10 A.H., the Holy Prophet (S) announced
that he was going for Hajj pilgrimage and whoever wanted to perform Hajj
should come to Medina and accompany him. Upon hearing this news, 120000
people of the Arab tribes gathered in Medina.[^5] And the Holy Prophet
(S) departed to Medina with the great crowd.[^6] Ali (a.s.) was in Yemen
at that time. He also reached Mecca and joined the Holy Prophet (S). The
Holy Prophet (S) fulfilled the rituals of Hajj and also delivered a
brilliant and an eloquent sermon.[^7]

He also said in the sermon that his death was near and the call of the
Almighty may come anytime and he would have to respond. Thus, he was
leaving among them two things: One of them being greater than the other
and they shall not separate from each other till they join him at the
cistern of Kauthar. If the people follow them and remain attached to
them, they shall never go stray, and the two weighty things are the
Quran and Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)

Tirmidhi has related the following tradition from Jabir as follows: On
the day of Arafat, the Holy Prophet (S) said: “Indeed, I leave among you
those that if you hold to them firmly you shall not go astray. They are
the Book of Allah and my progeny.” The Messenger of Allah (S) was
astride his she-camel, Qassa. This tradition is also related from Saad
bin Abi Waqqas. In Tohfa, Shah Abdul Aziz has mentioned it as follows:
“I leave among you two weighty things; if you hold to the two of them
you will not go astray after me. One of them is greater than the other.
The book of Allah and my progeny.”

Shah Waliullah has also quoted the same in Izalatul Khifa an Khilafatul
Khulafa and this tradition is authentic and Mutawatir (related by a
large number of narrators). No one has any objection to it. Anyway, when
the Holy Prophet (S) completed the Hajj rituals, he headed back to
Medina. On the way, he reached a spot named Ghadeer Khumm on the 18th of
Zilhajj at the time for noon prayers. Jibraeel, the trustworthy,
descended with the following command from the Almighty:

***“O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and
if you do it not, then you have not delivered this message, and Allah
will protect you from the people, Surely, Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people.”***[^8]

On receiving this divine command, the Messenger of Allah (S) halted at
that place and gathered all the people again. We should know that this
Ghadeer Khumm was the place from where different roads diverged in
different directions. When the people reached this spot with the
Messenger of Allah (S) they began to go on their respective ways. The
Holy Prophet (S) sent messengers to call back the people who had gone
ahead and waited for those who were following behind.

When the people gathered, the Messenger of Allah (S) led the Noon Prayer
and then got on a platform constructed of four camel saddles. Then he
asked: “Don’t you know that I am better for the believers than they are
for themselves?” All the people replied that they indeed agreed to this.

The writer of Madarijun Nubuwwah explains the meaning of the Prophet’s
words as follows: “That I do not command any of the believers to perform
any such act which is against their well-being and success of the world
and the Hereafter. While the selves of the believers sometimes are prone
to mischief and corruption.” However, the brief and clear meaning of
this statement is that: “Am I not better and higher than the believers?”
There can be no doubt that all the audience replied in one voice that it
was true. Anyway, after this the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“I am leaving among you two important things and one of them is greater
than the other. They are Quran and Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). You must be
careful with regard to them that how you behave with them and how you
fulfill their rights. These two shall not separate from each other after
me, till they meet me at the cistern of Kauthar.”

After this, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Allah is my Master and I
am the master of all believers.” Then he held the hand of Ali (a.s.) and
said: “O Allah! Of whomsoever, I am the master, this Ali is his master
too. O Allah! Befriend one who befriends Ali (a.s.) and be inimical to
one who is inimical to Ali (a.s.). Help one who helps Ali and degrade
one who disrespects Ali (a.s.) and desert one who deserts Ali (a.s.),
and turn the truth to whichever direction Ali (a.s.) turns.”

After this, he commanded Ali (a.s.) to sit in a tent and accept
congratulations of believers for mastership of believers. Thus, the
respected wives of the Prophet went to his tent to congratulate him.[^9]
Abu Bakr and Umar also congratulated him with fervor and said: “You have
become the master of all the believing men and believing women.” Umar
even said: “Congratulations! O Abal Hasan, today you have become my
master and the master of all believing men and women.” All this is true,
but what a pity that Abu Bakr and Umar did not recall their
congratulatory statements in Saqifah. It is unlikely that they had
forgotten these statements.

Rather, the fact is that they had made those statements as matter of
policy without any sincere feelings. If it had been otherwise, Abu Bakr
would not have disregarded Ali (a.s.) within a few days and himself
became the master of believers. Apart from the congratulations, poets
composed panegyrics and couplets in praise of Ali (a.s.). Thus, the most
famous of these panegyrics is one composed by Hassaan bin Thabit. Below
we present the translation of a few couplets of this panegyric:

“On the day of Ghadeer the Messenger of Allah (S) called the people and
gathered them.

It was a voice that all those with hearing capability could hear.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked the people who their chief and master was?
Everyone replied and at that moment did not show blindness.

That Allah is the master of you and us, and you are our ruler and today
no one can disobey you.

The Messenger of Allah (S) made Ali (a.s.) stand up and said: Indeed, I
have appointed you Imam and guide after me.

Thus, all the people should remain his true helpers like slaves.

After stating this the Messenger of Allah (S) prayed and said: O Allah
love those who love Ali (a.s.) and be inimical to one who is inimical to
Ali (a.s.).”

Poor Hassaan did no know that the opponents of Ali (a.s.) will distort
the meaning of Maula. And after the passing away of the Messenger of
Allah (S) how they would make ineffective all the proceedings of Ghadeer
Khumm. The couplets of Hassaan also indicate that the Messenger of Allah
(S) had appointed Ali (a.s.) as the ruler of his people and designated
him as his successor. It was definitely not that the Messenger of Allah
(S) had appointed Ali (a.s.) only as helper and beloved. It is
surprising that those who derive such absurd meanings do not feel
ashamed.

There is no power and strength except by Allah.

Modesty is a part of faith. Why did they act so shamelessly? Thus, after
the sermon of Ghadeer, the following verse was revealed:

***“This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My
favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion.”***[^10]

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, one of the four Imams of Ahlul Sunnat says that after
this verse, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Praise be to Allah for the
perfection of religion and the completion of favor and His pleasure by
my Messengership and the guardianship (Wilayat) of Ali (a.s.) after me.”
We should know that the tradition of Ghadeer is narrated by a large
number of companions, their followers and other traditionists.

Two hundred and fifty Shafei scholars have also recorded the tradition
of Ghadeer Khumm. In addition to them, Allamah Maghribi has composed a
beautiful panegyric (Qasida) in praise of Ali (a.s.) with reference to
Ghadeer Khumm. The incident of Ghadeer seems to be very significant in
the history of Islam and if you study its parts, you will realize an
important point.

It seems that the Messenger of Allah (S) had desired to make some
arrangement in his own lifetime and he definitely did not imply an
insignificant matter. That Ali (a.s.) is the helper and the friend of
believers, as Ibn Hajar and other scholars construe it to mean. If the
Holy Prophet (S) did not mean to say that Ali (a.s.) is appointed the
executor of all religious and seculars, why did the Almighty command the
Messenger of Allah (S) to make such an announcement? Why should Allah
say:

“O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and if
you do it not, then you have not delivered His message; and Allah will
protect you from the people...”

Here the phrase: “Allah will protect you from the people...” is also
worth noting. It seems that the Messenger of Allah (S) was not feeing
safe from mischief mongers and hypocrites and he was expecting trouble
from them. That is why Allah promised him safety. Why, also, did the
Holy Prophet (S) stop the people and made a pulpit of saddles and ask:
“Whether I am not superior for you than yourself?” When they replied in
affirmative, he stated the attachment of the book of Allah and Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.). Then he said that Allah was his master and he was the
master of all believers. Then he caught the hand of Ali (a.s.) and said:

“Of whomsoever I am the Master, this Ali is his master too...”

If the intention of Allah and His Messenger was merely to inform about
the friendship and helpfulness of Ali (a.s.), then indeed no ruler and
leader in the world has performed such a fiasco. Not only this,
afterwards, people came to congratulate Ali (a.s.). Abu Bakr and Umar
congratulated him too.

In the words of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, the Holy Prophet (S) said: “By my
prophethood and by the guardianship (Wilayat) of Ali (a.s.) after me.”
We should know that only one who lacks faith is prone to quote the words
of Allah and the Messenger of Allah (S) without any significance.

Please note that the above incident clearly indicates the immediate
successorship of Ali (a.s.). Though the incident of Tabuk was also
clear, the event of Ghadeer is much more clear. The opponents of Ali
(a.s.) and the bigots may view it in any way they like, but the
followers of Ali (a.s.) consider this, a clear proof of the Imamate of
Ali (a.s.). From all the discussions presented by the writer in the
foregone pages, it is proved that there was no one equal to Ali (a.s.)
from the Ummah of the Messenger of Allah (S).

Rather, there was no one even from the past nations.

All the points mentioned so far are sufficient to prove that in the view
of Allah and the Messenger of Allah (S), Ali (a.s.) was the best and
most superior of all the believers. Though Ali (a.s.) possessed
uncountable merits, his bravery and piety was such that there was none
his equal. His bravery was such that through it, Islam was established.
His steadfastness in the battles and military campaigns was such that
more steadfastness is impossible. To compare him with the three Caliphs,
from the aspect of valor, is meaningless.

Secondly, his worship was such that in the words of the Messenger of
Allah (S), the worship of all the past, present and future people cannot
compete with it. In this way, to compare Ali (a.s.) with the three
Caliphs or any righteous person is useless. These two qualities are
sufficient to prove the superiority of Ali (a.s.), so there is no need
for me to compare Ali (a.s.) to the three Caliphs from the aspect of
other qualities.

These two qualities alone prove the immediate successorship of Ali
(a.s.). Anyone lacking in these two qualities cannot be superior to Ali
(a.s.). And while Ali (a.s.) is there, someone else could not be
appointed as Caliph. Keeping in mind all the qualities of Ali (a.s.);
especially these two virtues, no equitable person will accept anyone
other than him as the successor of the Prophet. Bigotry and falsehood is
another matter!

Readers should note that we have presented here the details about Ali
(a.s.) because there is significant connection between the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) at Karbala’ with the non-appointment of Ali (a.s.) to
the seat of Caliphate. That is, if he had been accepted as the Caliph,
immediately after the passing away of the Holy Prophet (S), Abu Sufyan
and Bani Umayyah had not become strong. They would have remained in the
lowly state, the Messenger of Allah (S) had left them.

The fact is that the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) is a result of the
usurpation of the right of Ali (a.s.). Not only did it cause the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.), it was responsible for the martyrdom of
Ali, Fatima and Hasan (a.s.) and all the calamities that befell the
family of the Messenger of Allah (S). It won’t be long when the
opponents of the Prophet’s family (a.s.) suffer the consequences of
their deeds.

[^1]: Ref. Maarijun Nubuwwah

[^2]: Ref. Maarijun Nubuwwah, Part 4, Pg. 269-270, and also Sahih
Tirmidhi

[^3]: Ref. the 207th verse of Surah Baqarah

[^4]: Refer Shaykh Abdul Haqq Dehlavi’s Maarijun Nubuwwah, Vol. 2, Pg.
229, 230

[^5]: Ref. Maarijun Nubuwwah

[^6]: Tafseer Tabari, Vol. 2, Pg. 58.

[^7]: Tauzihud Dalail of Shahabuddin Ahmad and also Marakatul Arasha, of
Salamatullah

[^8]: Surah Maidah 5:67

[^9]: Tazkeratul Khawas of Sibte Ibn Jawzi; Seerate Rasool of Ibn Ishaq,
Maarijun Nubuwwah; Rauzatul Safa and Habibus Sayr

[^10]: Surah Maidah 5:3


