The Tragedy of Karbala’ Is the Natural Consequence of Some Unnatural Factors
============================================================================

We should know that the tragedy of Karbala’ is the natural consequence
of some unnatural factors that the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) had to face from
the last moments of the Holy Prophet (S). The writer has already shown
in brief, what the tradition of Two Heavy things (Thaqalayn) demanded
and why the change in this command distanced Bani Hashim from rulership,
which caused their worldly leadership to be lost and finally their
religious leadership was also gone.

This reduced their honor to such an extent that they began to be
included among the common people. Thus, after such factors came into
action, a tragedy of the magnitude of the Tragedy of Karbala’ was not
entirely unexpected.

It is a decided matter that if after the Messenger of Allah (S), Ali
(a.s.) had been accepted as the Caliph, the Tragedy of Karbala’ would
never have occurred. Indeed, if he had become the Caliph, he would never
have bestowed official positions and economic concessions to Bani
Umayyah. This is what that seems apparent. Bani Umayyah would have
remained in the basal position in which the Messenger of Allah (S) had
left them.

Doubtlessly, if Ali (a.s.) had been accepted as the successor to the
Holy Prophet (S), he was the one to have conformed to the style and
method of the Holy Prophet (S). It was not possible that Ali (a.s.)
would have deviated from the policy of the Holy Prophet (S). The first
mistake was that the Muslims opposed Bani Hashim. And the second mistake
committed by them was that this opposition made the Bani Umayyah very
strong. Not only were Bani Hashim hurt by this, even the world of Islam
had to bear untold damages, as will be shown by future discussions.

We have already described the process of the empowerment of Bani Umayyah
in the first volume of our book Kashful Haqaiq. But here also, we shall
mention in brief, the account of Bani Umayyah’s rise to power. We should
know that immediately after the formation of Caliphate, Bani Umayyah
were presented with excellent opportunities to gain power, which this
tribe had never even dreamt of. From the beginning of the Caliphate of
Abu Bakr, the Bani Umayyah began to become powerful and within two
years, the Syrian area was populated by the people of this tribe. Each
and every member of this clan shifted from Mecca and Medina to Syria,
and they gained their worldly desires as much as they had craved.

When rulership of Syria was gifted to Abu Sufyan, he did not opt to go
there himself. His son, Yazeed Ibn Abu Sufyan took over the position
gained by his father and departed to Syria. This gentleman was the
governor of Syria for four years: Two years during the Caliphate of Abu
Bakr and two years during the Caliphate of Umar. Yazeed bin Abu Sufyan
was not a very capable person, so his brother Muawiyah used to assist
him in administration.

After the death of Yazeed bin Abi Sufyan, Muawiyah succeeded him as the
governor of Syria. He was very cunning and crafty. Though he had no sort
of religious capability, he possessed extraordinary manipulative power
from the worldly aspect. As soon as he became the governor, the
atmosphere of this country was transformed. In a brief time, Syria
became a powerful and superior part of the Islamic kingdom.

Although Syria was considered to be under the control of Caliphate,
Muawiyah had a free hand to do as he wished. In spite of this, Muawiyah
never acted in a rebellious manner with the Caliphate. Rather, Muawiyah
used to accord great respect and regard to Umar, the second Caliph. And
why shouldn’t he had been so polite, when all that Muawiyah had achieved
was due to the kindness of Umar?

The period of Umar’s Caliphate is said to be ten years but actually it
was twelve because the two-year Caliphate of Abu Bakr was only in name.
During this period of twelve years, Bani Umayyah became rulers and when
the Caliphate of Uthman arrived, even the Caliphate became the property
of Bani Umayyah, because the third Caliph was also from Bani Umayyah. At
this time, the whole Islamic world seemed to be only Bani Umayyah. The
pomp and show of Bani Umayyah at this time was beyond imagination. The
land of Shaam (Syria) was filled with Bani Umayyah. They held all
official positions in government and they were preferred for every post.
This was the position of Bani Umayyah.

Now let us see the condition of Bani Hashim, which denotes the family of
the Prophet. The head of this family at this time was Imam Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.) and there did not remain any honor for Bani Hashim. They
were completely out of power. A member of this clan did not even have a
menial post in government. Bani Hashim had become distanced from public
respect.

Their private economic conditions had also deteriorated due to the loss
of Fadak. With the loss of their worldly position, there did not remain
with them even religious leadership, as we have already explained in the
foregoing pages. Apparently, there remained no sort of superiority for
Bani Hashim and in the near future also there was no hope of any
considerable change in their status. Yes, after the death of Uthman,
somehow Ali (a.s.) was appointed to the Caliphate.

But the Caliphate of Ali (a.s.), which lasted for four years, was mostly
spent in wars. First of all, due to the rebellion of Muawiyah, ‘A’ysha
fought His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) at Jamal with Talha and Zubair. After
this, Muawiyah continuously fought with the Caliph of the age. All these
machinations of Muawiyah and his rebellious activities are considered
‘errors of judgment’. The writer has not understood till today, what
this ‘error of judgment’ is? And if Allah wills, it shall never ever
become clear to him, because a just mind cannot accept such a thing.
This is beyond the comprehension of the writer, because neither this
humble one has the same mentality as Muawiyah, nor has any sort of
interest with his activities.

Anyway, after becoming the Caliph, His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) could not
exalt Bani Umayyah, just as before this the Holy Prophet (S) had never
allowed Bani Umayyah to gain supremacy. It could not be expected from
Ali (a.s.) that he would allow Bani Umayyah to retain their undeserved
power. The same Bani Umayyah, who were merely a tribe during the time of
the Messenger of Allah (S) had now become the Sultans of Islamic
dominions.

Anyhow, the brief Caliphate of Ali (a.s.) ended with his martyrdom. Bani
Hashim could not achieve any official positions during his tenure. After
him, Imam Hasan (a.s.) succeeded to the post of his father. Immediately
after the appointment of Imam Hasan (a.s.) as the Caliph in Kufa,
Muawiyah marched to Kufa with an army 60,000 strong. Imam Hasan (a.s.)
abdicated the Caliphate and Muawiyah became the de facto Caliph. Due to
this achievement of Caliphate, Muawiyah became one of the twelve Caliphs
of Ahlul Sunnat. Thus, Muawiyah got the Caliphate by force and coercion
and this method came to be accepted as a valid method of gaining
Caliphate according to Ahlul Sunnat as is well-known among the educated
people.

After abdication, Imam Hasan (a.s.) became a pensioner of Muawiyah and
returned to Medina to live with his brother, Imam Husayn (a.s.) in a way
that content people live. Although there remained no political value of
Bani Hashim at this time, Muawiyah was not feeling safe from Imam Hasan
and Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Somehow, Imam Hasan (a.s.) was removed from the scene by poison. It is
well known that Muawiyah had got Imam Hasan (a.s.) poisoned. Abul Fida,
the historian says: “Some say it was Muawiyah and some think it was
Yazeed who had done this.” This writer believes it was Muawiyah who had
Imam Hasan (a.s.) poisoned. His son was not capable enough to have Imam
Hasan (a.s.) martyred while he himself sat in Damascus. Yazeed was a
weak person having no determination.

Apart from this, due to his sensual habits, he had no intelligence and
the fact is that he had inherited none of the craftiness and cunning of
Muawiyah. If he had even the slightest awareness, he would not have
forced Imam Husayn (a.s.) to such an extent to give the oath of
allegiance.

Muawiyah would never have employed such forcible methods. He never
demanded allegiance from Imam Husayn (a.s.). Muawiyah just needed the
kingdom to rule and he was not interested in the allegiance of Imam
Hasan (a.s.). If Muawiyah had insisted for allegiance, in spite of his
magnanimity, Imam Hasan (a.s.) would have refused. And then Muawiyah
would have needed the same forcible methods that later became necessary
for his son, Yazeed, against Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Thus, when the news of the martyrdom of Imam Hasan (a.s.) reached
Muawiyah, he was much relieved according to his own admission.[^1] But
Imam Husayn (a.s.) was still alive. This was a great danger that lurked
upon Muawiyah. He used to tell his son that he must not yet consider his
kingdom safe. “Husayn Ibn Ali was yet living. He has the courage of his
father. And till he is alive, you must not feel safe from his side.”
Doubtlessly, these statements of Muawiyah show a great foresight. The
son did not have any such foresight. Anyway, to strengthen the Caliphate
of his son, initially Muawiyah used persuasive methods. And only after
this, he began to take the oath of allegiance of Muslims in favor of his
son.

Thousands of Muslims paid allegiance to Yazeed. Taking allegiance in
Syria was not at all difficult. It was also taken from many people of
Mecca and Medina, but the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet remained aloof from
all this. If Yazeed had any sort of understanding like his father, he
would not have been so severe in obtaining allegiance from Bani Hashim
and would have left them on their own. But this use of force finally led
to the clear refusal of Imam Husayn (a.s.) to give allegiance, and as a
result of which he had to face the tragedy of Karbala’, due to which
Yazeed began to be remembered as an evil Satan even by some Ahlul
Sunnat.

Before we discuss the events of Karbala’, we would like to show how this
incident can be viewed from different points of view. According to our
research, this event has only two aspects: One of its aspects is that
Imam Husayn (a.s.) was on the right and that is why he was martyred
unjustly.

The second view is that (we seek Allah’s refuge) Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
a traitor and his killing was a lawful act on the part of Caliphate,
because the Imam was neither oppressed nor killed a martyr. The sect
which considers Imam Husayn (a.s.) as the oppressed one and a martyr,
rather, it considers this martyrdom to be a part of faith, it is
necessary for the sect to consider Caliphate to be a divinely ordained
office. And it should believe in the infallibility of the successor of
the Prophet. To have a belief opposite to this implies that Husayn
(a.s.) was a traitor and hence his killing should not be considered
martyrdom. Thus, from this aspect, it is only the Imamiyah sect that
believes in the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.).

The non-Imamiyah have no right to consider Imam Husayn (a.s.) an
oppressed one and a martyr. Some non-Imamiyah people in India, who are
seen accepting the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and also some of them
who even participate in Azadari (mourning ceremonies) are actually doing
something against the basic principles of their faith, because according
to their principle, Yazeed was a rightful Caliph and thus Imam Husayn
(a.s.) becomes a traitor. That is why his refusal to give allegiance
cannot make him a martyr.

Doubtlessly, it is only the right of Shias of the family of the Holy
Prophet (S) that they consider Imam Husayn (a.s.) as the rightful
successor of the Prophet, and a martyr. And it befits only them to mourn
the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.). The just people should note that
when infallibility was no longer considered a condition for Caliphate,
then what doubt could there be in Yazeed’s Caliphate? Didn’t Yazeed get
even two people from non-Bani Hashim to fulfill the condition of
consensus? The condition of consensus was most appropriate for Yazeed.
Leave alone two, Yazeed had obtained Caliphate by the consensus of two
hundred thousand people.

Apart from this, the condition of forcible obtaining of Caliphate also
applies to Yazeed. It was that, through which Muawiyah had obtained
Caliphate from Imam Hasan (a.s.). The same condition was applicable to
Yazeed. In addition to this, the condition of appointment by the
predecessor was also in favor of Yazeed. Muawiyah had clearly appointed
Yazeed as his successor.

As we have mentioned above, Muawiyah appointed Yazeed as his successor
and made utmost efforts to obtain allegiance for him. He was also
successful to a large extent. The condition of consultation committee
(Shura) was also in favor of Yazeed. The Caliphate of Uthman was
entrusted only to six people. The whole of Syria was the Shura committee
for Yazeed. Without any doubt, those who do not believe infallibility to
be a necessary condition for Caliphate, consider Yazeed the rightful
Caliph.

The teacher of this writer, Maulavi Sayyid Muhammad Gul Sahab Jalalabadi
had a firm belief in the rightfulness of Yazeed’s Caliphate and his view
was most appropriate, due to which he did not consider the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) to be a martyrdom. In the same way, some other
scholars of the province had the same kind of belief and it is possible
that they still do.

But in Afghanistan there are some Ahlul Sunnat who are very particular
about this belief. In the view of the writer, such people do not deserve
to be criticized, because when infallibility is not a condition of
Caliphate and Yazeed had all the necessary conditions of Caliphate, then
why shouldn’t he be considered a rightful Caliph? It is nothing but
injustice that after having all the conditions of Caliphate, Yazeed
shouldn’t be accepted as Caliph. Even when I did not believe in
infallibility to be a necessary condition of Caliphate, I used to
consider Yazeed a rightful Caliph, and without any doubt, I was right in
having such a stand.

Every scholar that did not accept infallibility as the condition of
Caliphate, considered Yazeed a rightful Caliph. In the view of the
writer, such a stand is worth admiration, because these people are loyal
to their own principles. It seems that Abdullah Ibn Umar also considered
Yazeed a rightful Caliph. If it had not been so, he would neither have
given his allegiance to Yazeed nor encouraged other people to give it.
The son of such a great Caliph, and himself an intelligent man, cannot
commit an evil act!

Indeed, he considered the Caliphate of Yazeed, a valid Caliphate. And
why shouldn’t he have considered it so? When no excuse can be found in
his Caliphate and it had all the necessary conditions. Abdullah indeed
did not consider infallibility as the necessary condition of Caliphate.
If he had thought so, he would have considered unlawful and false the
Caliphate of the three Caliphs and Muawiyah.

However, Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.) considered infallibility to be a
necessary condition of Caliphate. That is why he did not accept Yazeed
as the rightful Caliph and opposed him and he did not even hesitate to
lay down his life.

[^1]: Ref. Tarikh Khamis


