Infallibility and Fallibility of Imam Husayn
============================================

It should be clear that the incident of Karbalaâ€™ is as explained above.
Now you can see it from any point of view that you like. Only those
people consider Imam Husayn (a.s.) as the martyr who consider him
infallible and the rightful successor of the Holy Prophet (S). But those
who do not consider him infallible and the rightful successor of the
Holy Prophet (S) cannot believe that he was a martyr. In such a
situation, they cannot believe that he was oppressed. Thus, to consider
Imam Husayn (a.s.) as a martyr, it is must to believe in his
infallibility and rightful successorship of the Prophet.

It is evident that when infallibility was not accepted as a condition of
Caliphate, what doubt can there be that Yazeed was a rightful Caliph? In
such a situation, what can Imam Husayn (a.s.) be considered, except a
traitor of Caliphate? How can anyone support this traitor and how can
his killing be martyrdom? We are very surprised on those who believe in
the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) but deny his infallibility. It is a
sect that does not keep in view the final outcome. Their mourning the
calamities of Imam Husayn (a.s.) is a meaningless act. Such people may
weep at their own misfortune, but they have no right to weep on Imam
Husayn (a.s.).

There are also some who consider the Holy Prophet (S), the twelve Imams
and Lady Fatima (s.a.) to be infallible. And only Shias perfectly
believe in the guardianship (Wilayat) of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), though Ahlul
Sunnat believe only in the Caliphate. These people consider the three
Caliphs to be rightful, but act according to the practical laws of Ahlul
Sunnat faith. This is a strange sect, which is neither completely Shia
nor Sunni.

They do not understand that if the infallibility of the fourteen
Infallibles is a fact, the Caliphate of the three Caliphs becomes
meaningless. In such a situation, Ali (a.s.) being infallible, becomes
the immediate successor of the Holy Prophet (S). Since even Ahlul Sunnat
did not regard the three Caliphs as infallible, their superiority cannot
be valid in comparison to Ali (a.s.). It is apparent that an infallible
cannot be inferior. Thus, when on the basis of infallibility, Ali (a.s.)
was superior to the three Caliphs, how can the three be regarded as
rightful Caliphs?

It is surprising that one should believe that Ali (a.s.) was infallible
and the three were not, but that in the matter of Caliphate one prefers
the three Caliphs to Ali (a.s.)! Preferring a fallible person to an
infallible one is against reason. It seems to be a very irrational
matter that the successor of an infallible person like the Messenger of
Allah (S), should also be fallible. In this way, the superiority of Abu
Bakr and Umar is completely disproved. Although none of Ahlul Sunnat
oppose this belief of superiority.

Doubtlessly, the Sunni sect that accepts the infallibility of the
fourteen infallibles is a very weak sect. Without any doubt, the
acceptance of infallibility of the Imams entails invalidation of the
three Caliphs. The belief of the infallibility propounded by Shias is
incompatible with the belief of the Caliphate, as followed by Ahlul
Sunnat.

The Sunni sect that confesses to the infallibility of the fourteen
infallibles seems to be devoted to Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) but they hardly
follow the beliefs or practical law of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). They do not
follow even a single practical law of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), their followers
or their scholars. It is indeed a strange thing, that this sect gives
much importance to the guardianship (Wilayat) of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) but
they have no regard even for namesake, to the beliefs or worship acts of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

This sect usually follows the Hanafite School of law but some people of
this sect follow the Shafei School. It is well known that this sect has
got nothing to do with the roots and branches of faith of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) even though they always chant their names and make noise on the
atrocities inflicted upon them.

We should know that a Muslim can either be a Sunni or a Shia but he
cannot follow a religion between the two. The principles of Ahlul Sunnat
religion are distinct from those of Shia faith. Both are faithful to
their principles. But this sect has a strange admixture of both. It
believes in the infallibility of Fourteen Infallibles, but in the matter
of Caliphate, believes like Ahlul Sunnat do. How can these opposite
beliefs find a place in the mind of a single person? It is beyond the
understanding of this writer.


