Piranepir And Sadaat Hasani
===========================

Recently a Sunni has written in his magazine about an amazing miracle of
Pir Dastagir. He says that since he was a Hasani Sayyid, his spiritual
effect is such that all Hasani Sadaat (descendants of Imam Hasan) are
all Sunnis while the Sayyids (descendants) of Husayn (a.s.) are Shia.
When a person is a bigot, he is blind and deaf. First of all, Abdul
Qadir Jilani was not a Sayyid. It is a false claim and also that other
Hasani Sadaat were Sunnis.

It is written in Umdatul Matalib that Pir Dastagir was not a Sayyid and
he never even claimed thus. His sons also did not make such a claim. His
grandson was first to claim it, but he could not prove his claim. Even
if Abdul Qadir had been a Sayyid, he could not have the power to make
anyone Shia or Sunni. Except Allah, no one has the power to make anyone
a believer or infidel. Even the Holy Prophet (S) had no power to
forcibly convert infidels into believers. Just as the Holy Quran says:

“***Surely you cannot guide whom you love***.”[^1]

Such vain thoughts are possible only in such people. If a writer is not
unbiased, he cannot write the truth. The claim that all the past and
present Sadaat Hasani were Sunnis is false. There is nothing to prove
that Hasani Sadaat should only be Sunnis and Husaini Sadaat only Shia.
At present there are many Hasani Sadaat (descendants of Imam Husayn) who
are Shias and many Husaini Sadaat who are Sunnis. The same had been in
the past. Since disunity occurred in Sadaat, they never followed one and
the same religion, as we have proved in the foregoing pages.

There was a tribe that descended from Imam Hasan (a.s.) and resided
outside Medina. They were all Shias, but it seems the writer of Zujarul
Awaam is unaware of this. This tribe still follows Shia religion even
though Sunnis of Medina accuse them of various falsehoods, but they are
not prepared to forgo their ancestral faith. Since they are Shias,
Sunnis of Medina oppress them in various ways. Even the Turkish
government did not accord them any respect. Except for menial and
laborious jobs, these Sadaat do not have any gainful employment. They
live in very difficult conditions, yet they do not wish to go away from
there. If someone offers them Khums money, the Medinites snatch it away
from them and the Turkish authorities are mute witnesses of this. Why do
the heavens not crash at such atrocities on these Sayyids? It is nothing
but the consequence of Umar’s words: “We have the Book of Allah with
us.” Allah says in the Holy Quran:

“***Say, I do not ask from you any recompense except the love of my
family members.***”[^2]

And the Prophet said: “I leave among you two heavy things.” But the
commands of Allah and His Prophet were not obeyed. The statement of ‘We
have the Book of Allah with us’ became more powerful. Now I wish to ask
whether such things have an iota of truth? The fact is that no
miraculous power can make any Sayyid a Shia or Sunni, although it is
very unlikely that a Sayyid should become a Sunni, but when the factors
are such that can make him a Sunni, he becomes a Sunni. There are mainly
three causes that can make a Sayyid, Sunni. They are as follows:

(1) The first cause is ignorance. That is, he doesn’t know what is the
religion of Ali al-Murtadha’ (a.s.) and what is the religion of Zaid Ibn
Thabit. He thinks the religion he is following was the same as the one
his ancestor, Ali (a.s.) had and all Bani Hashim were believing in the
same religion. Most of the time he has this misconception and the truth
is never revealed to him.

But if he learns that the religion of his ancestor was distinct from the
Farooqi religion or that the name of his ancestor has been removed from
Quran, as we have shown above, he would not remain a Sunni for a moment.
The same thing happened to this writer, who after studying the books had
to give up the deviated religion.

(2) The second cause, which is not less powerful than the first one, is
worldly position and power. When Ahlul Sunnat were in power, Shias had
to observe dissimulation (Taqayyah) and thus they pretended to be
Sunnis. Their children and descendants thus became Sunnis and still
continue to be.

(3) The third cause is social influence and education. Usually many
Sayyids at a young age are influenced by Ahlul Sunnat company and
themselves become Sunni. They never give up their ancestral religion
after research and study. It would not be surprising if one day such
people were to become Jews or atheists due to the influence of company.

Similarly, due to education and training, there is a distance from
ancestral religion. A good example is that of Sayyid Mahdi Ali Khan
Sahab, Mohsinul Mulk. He was a Sadaat from a high family. His family
religion was Imamiyah, but he left it and died on the faith of Ahlul
Sunnat. I used to be astonished at his giving up his ancestral religion.
But one day I heard him in a speech at Bankipur and from that day my
astonishment ended. It seemed from his statements that beyond his
grandfather, they were of a famous family. They were leaders of religion
being Sayyids and they also had worldly power. But during the time of
his father, they underwent difficult times. In his own words, they could
not even afford five rupees a month to pay for a tutor.

In such a state of poverty, he was forced to go to Barabanki at the age
of eight, where a royal personage took him under his care. He gained
education and finally got a job under the British. Since he was very
brilliant, he worked hard and soon he rose to a good administrative
position and finally became the Deputy Collector.

Obviously, if the Nawab had continued to live with his family, he
wouldn’t have got the chance to gain such education and to become a
collector. What else could he have done rather than opt for the religion
of the collectors, because he did not get any chance to get religious
training at home? If he had gone under the care of a Padre, he would
have become a Christian. There is no doubt that his family religion was
Shiaism, but he did not get any teaching of Shia faith.

On the other hand he got training in the Hanafite School. The first
impression is the most powerful one, so it was not unexpected from him.
Thus, being a boy from a Shia family, he left his religion. His
relatives used to be very surprised at this, but he did not do anything
unexpected. He followed only the religion whose teachings had been
inculcated in him. And that was also the religion of his benefactor who
had taken him under his care and had done everything to provide him
shelter and education. The Nawab used to remember his benefactor with
gratitude.

It is well known that Nawab Mohsinul Mulk reached the position of
collector and was based in Mirzapur. At that time, other Sunni officers
like Imdad Khan served in the capacity of Deputy Collector. Though he
was not a religious person, the Nawab took care to follow the exigencies
and during his stay in Mirzapur, he wrote his book, Aayatul Bayyinah.
The quality of this book is well known to all those who are well-versed
in Ilmul Kalam (Scholastic Theology). Here we do not wish to evaluate
his book. It is sufficient for us to prove that education and training
in wrong hands can make a boy from a Shia family a Sunni.

[^1]: Surah Qasas 28:56

[^2]: Surah Shura 42:23


