Caliphate is From Allah or Caliphate is From People – Its Connection with Composition of Marsiya (Elegy) Writing
================================================================================================================

It should be clear that Ahlul Sunnat Caliphate includes Imamate and in
fact, Caliphate cannot be separated from Imamate. They consider it as an
affair of people while Shias consider Caliphate as an affair ordained by
Allah. Since Mir Anees[^1] was also a Shia, he also had the same view
regarding Caliphate. That Caliphate which includes Imamate, is an affair
ordained by Allah and in no case can it be an affair decided by the
people.

All the elegies (Marsiya) of Mir were based on this very belief and all
Shia Marsiya writers follow this belief in the past and still are. If
the reader is not aware of this matter that Shia consider Caliphate a
divine affair, which means that the Holy Prophet’s Caliph cannot be
man-made because the Holy Prophet’s Caliph should be like the Holy
Prophet (S), an infallible, this unaware person cannot gain any benefit
from these Marsiya writers. For example if any person is not aware of
the Christian belief of Trinity, he cannot appreciate Milton’s Paradise
Lost.

Thus, the reader of Shia Marsiya must keep this in mind that as per the
belief of Shias from the fourteen divine personalities, the personality
about whom he is reading the Marsiya, is indeed infallible. Allah makes
his infallibility obvious and only Allah has made him infallible, and if
he is from the Twelve Imams, he is the Caliph and Imam from Allah’s
permission and people have not selected him.

It is seen in the writings of Shia Marsiya writers that all these Shia
poets consider Imam Husayn (a.s.) as the rightful Imam and the rightful
successor of the Holy Prophet (S). They all confess to his
infallibility. They consider his military action as Jihad and his
killing as martyrdom. It is obvious that these views have no
compatibility with Sunni faith.

The principles of faith of Ahlul Sunnat state that Imam Husayn (a.s.)
was neither the Caliph of the Holy Prophet (S), nor the Imam of the time
or infallible. His battle against Yazeed was an uprising and that is why
his killing cannot be considered martyrdom. As mentioned by them:
“Husayn engineered an uprising and was killed by the sword of his
grandfather.” It is well-known that this statement was of Pir Dastagir
Abdul Qadir Jilani in Ghaniyatu Talibeen. But it cannot be found in the
printed version of this book.

But there can be no doubt that it is the statement of Abu Bakr Ibn
Gharbi as Nawab Siddiq Husayn Khan Bhopali writes in his book Hujajil
Karamah and the words are as follow: “There is no doubt that from the
aspect of demand of religion of Ahlul Sunnat, the belief of Abu Bakr Ibn
Gharibi is not inappropriate. It is a necessary thing that from the
aspect of roots of belief, only this should be the belief of Ahlul
Sunnat, but those Sunnat who have a contrary belief, are indeed
unprincipled.”

In short, to read the Marsiya of Shia, it is necessary for the reader to
be aware of Shia beliefs. Otherwise, he would not be able to fully
understand the principles of Shia faith and nor would he be able to
derive any pleasure from them. It should be clear that Ahlul Sunnat of
Bihar who follow the Hanafite religion and who are safe from the
influence of Wahhabis, look at the tragedy of Karbala’ as viewed by
Shia. They consider Imam Husayn (a.s.) as the oppressed one and believe
that his killing was martyrdom. Though they may be opposed to the
rituals of mourning as practiced by Shias, they have no difference of
opinion regarding the tragedy of Karbala’ itself.

According to the belief of Shias, Imam Husayn (a.s.) was infallible like
his grandfather, the Holy Prophet (S) and his father, mother and brother
were, like the Holy Prophet (S) also infallible. And his successors from
Imam Zainul Aabideen (a.s.) to Imam Sahibul Asr (a.s.) are considered
infallible. The Imamiyah consider these fourteen infallibles to be pure
from small and great sins and to be immaculate in all aspects.

This however is not the belief of Ahlul Sunnat. But since Shia Marsiya
writing is based on Shia beliefs, Imam Husayn (a.s.) is mentioned as an
infallible in Shia Marsiya and his Imamate is considered a divinely
ordained affair. On the basis of his infallibility and divine
appointment, Shias ascribe to the belief in his oppressed position and
his death is considered a martyrdom.

Thus, if the matter of infallibility and divine office is taken away,
the structure of Marsiya writing crashes to the ground. Sometime ago, a
book was published by Maulavi Nazir Ahmad Dehlavi, which shows that the
writer had no connection with the belief of infallibility. That is, he
did not even ascribe to the belief in the infallibility of the Holy
Prophet (S).

[^1]: A very famous Urdu poet of India.


