‘Devotion’ Of Maulavi Nazir Ahmad to the Holy Prophet and His Family
====================================================================

From the topic of his writing, it seems to be devotion, but he says: “We
consider the Holy Prophet (S) to be having all the human weaknesses and
regard him as human.”[^1] If this statement is correct, the Prophet
cannot be in any way considered superior to Isa (a.s.) and from this
statement, the infallibility of the Holy Prophet (S) is nullified.
Indeed, being a prophet, Isa (a.s.) was infallible just as his followers
agree to his infallibility and on the basis of his infallibility, he was
away from all human weaknesses. In this way, the non-infallible cannot
be superior to an infallible.

Now the Christians would know that a well-known Ahlul Sunnat scholar has
made a statement, which testifies to the claim of the Christians and
falsifies the claim of the followers of Muhammad. It is correct that:
The people are on the religion of their rulers. Thus, the writer has
only supported the religion of his masters, the British, who were ruling
the country during this time, so it was not unexpected from him. The
writer has, by his writing, repaid the favors of his British masters,
especially, Sir William Mayer, who was the Lieutenant Governor and a
well-known anti-Muslim personality. The Maulavi has written similar
things about the Chief of the Lady of Paradise, Lady Fatima Zahra
(s.a.), which shows that he had no regard for the infallibility of the
great lady.

On page 99 of his book, he writes: “In spite of the fact that Fatima was
not denied her rightful share of Fadak, she, on the basis of her enmity
with Abu Bakr took a negative stance. She stopped speaking to Abu Bakr
and made a request that she must be buried at night and these people
should not be allowed to participate in her funeral. What a severe anger
she had!”

We seek Allah’s refuge! O Maulavi fear Allah! You have written such a
statement about the Chief of the Lady of Paradise! And accused her of
anger? Can such words be justified for a daughter of the Holy Prophet
(S) like Fatima (s.a.)? Except for an everlasting unfortunate person,
such a misdemeanor cannot be performed by anyone. Whether Fatima (s.a.)
rightfully expressed her dislike for Abu Bakr and Umar or not is beyond
the scope of this discussion. Here, we just point out the disrespectful
attitude of the Maulavi. Indeed, such a statement about the chief of the
Lady of Paradise can only be issued by one who is an opponent of the
family of the Holy Prophet (S). It seems that the writer had no manners
at all, though he considered his style to be liberal.

There is no strength and power except by Allah.

Another example of the same type of misdemeanor is presented below. The
Maulana says: “It was all the better for Islam that the male issues of
the Holy Prophet (S) did not survive. Only a daughter survived him and
due to her progeny, the Muslims were divided into Sunnis and Shias, who
are forever fighting each other. If a male child had survived, he would
have proved to be like the son of Nuh (a.s.).”

O Muslims! Is such writing according to Islamic etiquette that he is
expressing satisfaction that the Holy Prophet (S) did not leave a male
issue? First he said that his son would have proved to be like the son
of Nuh (a.s.), then he expressed regret that his surviving daughter had
issues and progeny. He wished that she were issueless. How can a Muslim
pen such words? Or can be pleased with such writings? If such writings
are not considered vile, what is?

Apparently, it seems that just as the Maulana is pleased at the absence
of male issues of the Prophet, he was also unhappy that Lady Fatima had
issues. If the Maulana had been present during the time of the Prophet,
he would have congratulated the Prophet for his not having any son and
he would have also expressed condolence on the birth of his grandsons.
The statement of Maulana clearly shows that he is indeed hateful to the
Sadaat, and he wished that all Sadaat became extinct. But when cruel
people like Muawiyah and Yazeed could not destroy the Sadaat how can
this Maulana succeed in his aim?

When the wretched infidels began to address the Prophet as childless,
the divine command affected the spread of the Prophet’s progeny to such
an extent that Muawiyah, Yazeed and all the Caliphs of Bani Umayyah and
Bani Abbas got tired of killing the Sadaat, but they did not succeed in
their mission. How can the Maulana be considered in any way effective in
this matter?

The Maulana writes that if a son of the Prophet had survived, he would
have been like the son of Nuh (a.s.). This is indeed a strange
statement. It is not necessary that the son of every Prophet should be
like Nuh’s son. However, one thing is certain that if the Prophet had
left a son, he would also have been treated like the other members of
the Prophet’s family at the hands of people like the Maulana.

The next example of this disrespect is on the page 99 of his book where
he writes: “On one side was Fatima (s.a.) that she died but did not
reconcile and on the other was ‘A’ysha, much more than this. In our
country there is a belief that women are extremely stubborn and the same
qualities were found in these two.”

Whatever the Maulana has written about Fatima (s.a.) will be recompensed
by the Prophet but whatever he has written disrespectfully about ‘A’ysha
caused consternation among Sunnis and after this he was greatly
criticized by Ahlul Sunnat intellectuals. Apparently, Shias do not say
anything because this sect was used to such disrespectful acts.

Now in the end, I am giving another statement of the Maulana by which we
realize the devotion of the Maulana to the family of the Messenger (S),
especially with regard to Imam Husayn (a.s.) and the tragedy of
Karbala’. In the same book, on page 94, he writes: The Prophet willingly
spent his life in poverty and hunger and he preferred it. He always
prayed for such a life for himself: “O Allah! Make me live among the
poor and count me among the group of the destitute.” And for his progeny
he used to pray: “O Allah! Appoint the bare minimum sustenance for the
progeny of Muhammad.”

The Progeny members could not remain content on their sustenance and
they began to dream of kingdom and even lost their demeanor. How many
conquests did His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) obtain when he was on the seat of
Caliphate. Poor man! He could remain a Caliph only for four years and
nine months. And in the beginning itself an internal war erupted. When
he was free from it, Muawiyah usurped the Caliphate and he was just a
Caliph for namesake.

After his death, his son, Hasan, tried his best to obtain Caliphate but
within a period of six months, he had to forgo Caliphate and the power
of governance completely came into the hands of Muawiyah and after his
death this continued in his progeny. At that time, the Prophet’s progeny
should have remained patient and content like their respected
grandfather. But Husayn, the second son of Ali, did not accept the
Caliphate of Yazeed, the son of Muawiyah. And reaching Kufa, he took
allegiance of the people for his own Caliphate. Everyone knows the
consequence of this. The future progeny of Fatima (s.a.) should have
derived a lesson from this incident. But the greed of kingdom never
allowed them to sit in peace.

In the view of this Maulana, Muhammad’s Progeny had no contentment and
they were greedy for rulership. If Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.) did not accept
the Caliphate of Yazeed, it was a very unsuitable act. And when he did
not do so, he had to suffer the consequence of his deed. This shows that
the Maulana does not consider Muhammad’s Progeny worth honoring.
Apparently, in his view, Muhammad’s Progeny was selfish and greedy. If
the Maulana had only half the love for Muhammad’s Progeny that he has
for their enemies, he would not have written such a book.

Patience, contentment and thankfulness were imbibed in the very souls of
Muhammad’s Progeny and they had no desire for rulership. Imam Husayn
(a.s.) had opposed Yazeed for religious factors. He considered it
illegal to give allegiance to Yazeed and he also believed that the
allegiance of Muslims for Yazeed was incorrect. Imam Husayn (a.s.) knew
that he was the rightful Imam and the Caliph appointed by Allah. That is
why he gave his life on the path of truth with absolute patience and
satisfaction. The view of Maulana that Imam Husayn (a.s.) lost his life
for greed of material world, could only be the belief of the followers
of Yazeed and it cannot be a belief of any Muslim. The views of a person
are in consonance with his character.

Here, I am reminded of an incident, which is very suitable at this
juncture. A person who had become rich by chance, told a friend of mine
that Husayn (a.s.) gave his life in pursuit of material wealth. If he
had no greed of wealth and kingdom, he would not have rebelled against
Yazeed. My friend replied: “Because you are prepared to lay your life
for worldly wealth, always busy in selfish pursuit of wealth and spend a
life of selfishness, you consider Imam Husayn (a.s.) like yourself.
Indeed, one considers others like oneself.

I know what type of a person you are. Providence has not given you the
ability to discern the merits of Imam Husayn (a.s.). Your internal make
up is like Bani Umayyah and you are created only for the worldly life.
How can you understand the benevolence, courage, magnanimity and other
praised qualities of Imam Husayn (a.s.)?” One who considers Caliphate
and Imamate as divinely ordained affairs could not have a view like that
of the Maulana. It is a pity that on the basis of false beliefs, Muslims
used to consider Muhammad’s Progeny as ordinary people. They should look
at them with an impartial view. How can the Maulana call himself a
Muslim and refer to Imam Husayn (a.s.) in such words?

While a German scholar has contrary views. He writes: “Imam Husayn
(a.s.) certainly did not undergo the hardships of Karbala’ for greed of
wealth. It was for the defense of his grandfather’s religion that he
suffered such tribulations.” The same scholar has penned a seven-volume
book on Islamic Politics. The followers of truth must appreciate his
impartiality and truthful view and gain divine rewards for this. He
writes: “On one hand, Imam Husayn (a.s.) saw that Yazeed has become the
heir apparent and Bani Umayyah has got the rulership of Muslim lands.
They were slowly gaining influence over the religious affairs of the
Muslims. It was certain that in the due course, they would destroy the
faith of Muslims and deviate them from the religion of his grandfather.

On the other hand, Imam Husayn (a.s.) was certain that due to ancestral
enmity, Yazeed will destroy Bani Hashim whether he was given allegiance
or not. This was the reason why he decided to start a revolution against
Bani Umayyah. From the time Yazeed became the successor of Muawiyah,
Imam Husayn (a.s.) considered it obligatory for himself to deny his
obedience. He did not even conceal his opposition from anyone. And on
the same basis, Yazeed was in pursuit to extract allegiance from him and
to make him subservient. Imam Husayn (a.s.) moved towards martyrdom and
established a superb example of revolution.”

Anyone who is aware of the historical realities of that time and the
kind of carnage unleashed by Bani Umayyah and the way they had started
distorting the religion of Muhammad (S) would indeed confess that if
Imam Husayn (a.s.) had not laid down his life at Karbala’, the Muslim
Ummah would have had quite a different Islam than what they are having
now. It was the initial period of Islam and hence it was possible that
its rituals and rules would have been destroyed completely. Imam Husayn
(a.s.) had seen the character of Bani Umayyah during the Caliphate of
his father, Ali (a.s.) and his brother Imam Hasan (a.s.), that is why
immediately after Yazeed came to the throne, Imam Husayn (a.s.) traveled
from Medina so that he may propagate true Islam in major Muslim areas.
Wherever he went, people developed hatred towards Bani Umayyah.

Yazeed was also not unaware of these subtle factors. He knew that even
if Imam Husayn (a.s.) got the support of people at any minor town and
raised the standard or revolt due to the hatred of people towards Bani
Umayyah and their love for Imam Husayn (a.s.), he would gain influence
over all the kingdom of Islam and Bani Umayyah will be annihilated; that
is why immediately after assuming the throne, Yazeed made a firm
intention to kill Imam Husayn (a.s.). This was the only cause due to
which Bani Umayyah contributed to their own eradication from the face of
the earth.

The greatest proof that Imam Husayn (a.s.) willingly moved to martyrdom
is that he was well aware of the military prowess of Bani Umayyah since
the time of his father and brother. He was certain that he would be
martyred and this was often stated after the martyrdom of his father.
This proves that he had no ambition for rulership. He had time and again
reiterated since he left Medina that he would certainly be killed. If it
had not been a willing step, he would not have rushed to it, knowing
fully well the military prowess of Bani Umayyah.

He also stated this to the people who had accompanied him, so that if
any among them were after material benefits, they may leave his side. If
Husayn (a.s.) had desired to save his life, he would have tried his best
to collect an army. But instead of mobilizing forces, he was constantly
beseeching his companions to leave him if they wanted to live. Knowing
that it was the first step towards a revolution, Imam Husayn (a.s.) let
himself be martyred in the most pitiful manner, so that people may be
more affected by his sorrowful plight.

Obviously, if Imam Husayn (a.s.) had exploited the devotion that the
people had towards him, he would have succeeded in raising a huge army.
But if he were killed in those circumstances, it would have been said
that he died for greed of wealth and rulership and the oppressed
position that heralded the magnificent revolution would not have been
achieved. Thus, except for whom it was impossible to leave; that is the
sons, brothers, and nephews; he told them to leave him, but they did not
agree. They were also such people whose piety and honor was much valued
by the Muslims. Their martyrdom with Imam Husayn (a.s.) lent more
effectiveness to the tragedy.

On the basis of his knowledge and diplomacy, and on the basis of the
animosity of Bani Umayyah towards Bani Hashim, be left no stone unturned
to highlight all this. Imam (a.s.) knew that after his martyrdom, the
women and children of Bani Hashim, who were Muhammad’s Progeny would be
made prisoners and would be taken from one place to another. This
incident would spread in the Arab world and have such an effect as
cannot be imagined. Thus, the way the prisoners were taken around, was
in no way less cruel than being killed. Similarly, it created the same
effect on Muslims as the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) had.

In these incidents, the enmity of Bani Umayyah to the Prophet’s family
and their beliefs regarding Islam and their treatment of Muslims has
been clearly brought out. This was the reason that Imam Husayn (a.s.)
used to clearly tell those of his friends who restrained him from this
journey that he was going for being killed. It was because their
thoughts were limited and they had no idea of Imam Husayn’s aim, which
is why they used to restrain him. The last reply of which was that he
was going because it was the Will of Allah and his grandfather had
ordered him to take the step. The people used to say that since he was
going to be killed, he should not take women and children with him. On
this Husayn (a.s.) used to reply that it was the Will of Allah that his
family should be made prisoners.

The words of Imam Husayn (a.s.) were unique from the aspect of
spirituality and apparently he did not take these steps to obtain
rulership or power. And he also did not step into this great danger
without being aware of consequences. The proof is that a year before
this tragedy, he used to tell his close confidants who had an
enlightened heart and perfect reason to comfort them that after his
martyrdom, the Almighty Allah would prepare a group who would separate
truth from falsehood. And who would visit their graves and weep on their
tribulations and destroy the enemies of Muhammad’s Progeny. These people
would follow the religion of his grandfather. He and his father would
love them and on Judgment Day, they shall be raised with Muhammad’s
Progeny.

O readers! What should be done! It is surprising that a scholar of
non-Muslims is relating the incident of Karbala’ in such a way that
informs of the great status of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) while
a Maulana of Delhi in spite of his claim for being a Muslim, lays false
allegations on Imam Husayn (a.s.) that are not possible in any
respectable people. No one can say that the Maulana was insane, but it
is certain that his blind greed for worldly status had deprived him from
the wealth of the love for Muhammad’s Progeny.

[^1]: Ummahatul Aimma, Pg. 33, line 7.


