Writer’s Belief
===============

It is the writer’s belief that the Holy Prophet (S) was infallible and
all the prophets that have passed, were also infallible. Their
successors and their legatees were also infallible like them. Reason
dictates that the legatee of an infallible cannot be fallible.

From this point of view, it is necessary that the successor of the Holy
Prophet (S) must also be infallible. According to our belief, His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was infallible and inerrant in every way. He never
worshipped idols, never indulged in polytheism or drinking wine and
never disobeyed the divine commands. He was always steadfast in the
battles in company of the Holy Prophet (S). He never fled from the
battlefield.

He never left the Holy Prophet (S) in danger to save his own skin. He
helped Islam with his sword in such a way that in its absence, Islam
would not have gained stability in Medina. He is included in the verse
of Purification (Quran 33:33) and the verse of Malediction (Quran 3:16)
and there are many verses that are with regard to his merits. He had
clear Quranic nomination to the post of Caliphate before the Caliphate
of the three Caliphs and even today, he holds the same position near
Allah.

The Holy Prophet (S) has mentioned his creation along with the creation
of Ali (a.s.) to be from a single radiance (Noor). Even from the aspect
of tradition of Two Heavy Things (Thaqalayn), since he is from the Ahlul
Bayt of the Prophet, he is deserving of attachment. And from the point
of view of the same tradition if Ali (a.s.) is not superior to Quran, at
least he is equal to it. The Holy Prophet (S) had stated that Ali (a.s.)
was his soul, flesh and blood.

What more can be said to prove his infallibility? If the Holy Prophet
(S) was infallible, his successors must also be infallible. Anything
else is bigotry and an unfortunate thing. The Holy Prophet (S) has
stated that Ali (a.s.) is the gate of knowledge. In the same way, he
said:

“Ali is with Quran and the Quran is with Ali.”

In brief, it is beyond reason and understanding to consider him
non-infallible. Anyone who is unbiased and his heart is pure of his
enmity, will indeed consider him infallible. In brief, the writer, from
the aspect of his belief, considers Ali (a.s.) and the rest of the
eleven Imams as infallible, like the Holy Prophet (S). The consequence
of this belief in their infallibility implies that the Caliphate of
these infallibles was a divinely constituted affair. It cannot be a
matter decided by the people.

Thus, from Ali (a.s.) to the Master of the Age (a.j.), all these Holy
Imams (a.s.) were successors of the Prophet who were appointed Caliphs
and Imams by Allah. This belief is in all respects, his spiritual style.
From the aspect of this belief, Ali (a.s.) has the right to be
considered the successor of the Holy Prophet (S). Even if we forgo this
aspect and view it from a political lens, we again have to agree that
only Ali (a.s.) should be the successor of the Prophet. The political
expediency dictated that Muslims would have selected only Ali (a.s.) as
the successor of the Prophet. The below discussion deserves our
attention.

Generally, Sunni belief is not that Abu Bakr became the Caliph of the
Prophet through Quranic injunction or prophetic tradition. According to
the religion of Ahlul Sunnat, Abu Bakr became the Caliph on the basis of
consensus. This is the fact, and majority of Sunnis confess to it.
However, some people also present Quranic proofs in support of the
rightly guided Caliphate. If Allah wills, we shall investigate this
point of view in the future.

But just for the time being, it can be said that this consensus, which
had many defects, cannot be construed to be an election. Because an
important tribe of Muslims to which the Prophet himself belonged, was
not represented in this consensus and neither was it able to exercise
its opinion. Rather, this matter of Saqifah was conducted in such a
hurried manner that Bani Hashim had no news of it.

Apparently, it seems that even if Bani Hashim had received information,
they still would not have been able to attend the gathering, because
they were busy in the last rites of the Holy Prophet (S). It was not
possible for them to leave the Prophet and attend the election of
Saqifah. But if the Bani Hashim had been able to attend the election,
Abu Bakr would not have become the Caliph so easily.

At that time, Umar, who had great political cunning, hurriedly decided
the matter of Caliphate. This election, which did not follow any
principle of election, informs us of a certain defective course of
action. At the time of the passing away of the Prophet, Medina alone did
not constitute Islamic territory. The religion of Muhammad had spread to
the whole of Hijaz. For a perfect election, it was necessary that all
the chiefs of all the areas must be gathered.

But this did not happen. In this haste, leave alone the people of Hijaz,
even all the respectable personalities of Medina could not be summoned.
The people of decision will themselves decide to what extent is correct
the claim of Ahlul Sunnat that Abu Bakr became the Caliph by consensus.

Indeed, this weak claim of the supporters of consensus is defective was
well known to even those people. But for the need of religion they
consider it rightful. The believers of consensus have also believed that
consensus is correct even if two people other than Bani Hashim take part
in it.

On the other hand, if thousands of Bani Hashim effect a consensus, it
shall not be accepted as valid. Obviously, these types of bigotries
create many disconcerting views in the minds of unbiased and just
people. There is no need to mention them. Those who claim it was an
election, must see it with absolute sincerity was it really a fair
election that was effected in a hurried manner at Saqifah Bani Saada?

Though we confess to the cunning of Umar, who easily wrested Caliphate
from Bani Hashim so easily that they could not do anything. Though Bani
Hashim were once considered indispensable for Caliphate. If he had
desired, Umar could have passed on the benefit of this consensus to Ali
(a.s.) but he did not like Ali (a.s.) due to a number of factors. That
is why in the absence of Ali (a.s.), he made Abu Bakr the Caliph.

Although Umar and Ali (a.s.) had such opposite traits that friendship
between them is unimaginable, but apparently it seems that Umar had
extreme hatred towards Fatima (s.a.). Thus, he could not bear any good
for Ali (a.s.). The cause of this enmity seems that Umar had once
desired to marry the Lady of Paradise, but the Holy Prophet (S) on the
basis of his hidden wisdom, married her to Ali (a.s.).

Umar very well knew that Abu Bakr had no merit in comparison to Ali
(a.s.), but he pledged allegiance to him and other people at Saqifah
were also compelled to do the same. The other people did not hesitate in
giving allegiance to Abu Bakr. They did not even ask why any member of
Bani Hashim was not present. Without considering if Abu Bakr had any
superiority to Ali (a.s.), they followed Umar in giving allegiance. This
definitely did not prove beneficial to Islam.

As shall be clear from my further analysis, the preference of Umar
towards his personal affairs instead of the general good of the people
was most unbecoming for Umar. It was also not that Umar was ignorant of
the merits of Ali (a.s.). In spite of having no knowledge of Quran, he
still knew that Ali (a.s.) was included in the verse of Purification and
the verse of Malediction. The verses of Surah Insan[^1] were also
applicable to Ali (a.s.).

In addition to this, there are many other verses that are revealed to
highlight the merits of Ali and Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Apart from this, at
the time of the passing away of the Prophet, the position of Ali (a.s.)
as the successor of the Holy Prophet (S) was well established. The name
of Ali (a.s.) was indeed included in the Holy Quran at many places and
the word of Aale Muhammad (Muhammad’s Progeny) was also present therein,
as we have shown above. Umar knew that the Prophet had said about Ali:

“Quran is with Ali and Ali is with Quran and I am the city of knowledge
and Ali is its gate and your self is my self and your soul is my soul
and your blood is my blood and your flesh is my flesh and I and Ali are
from one single radiance (Noor), and you are to me like Haroon was to
Moosa.”

And many other similar traditions are there that describe the merits of
Ali (a.s.). Umar knew full well that Islam owed a lot to the sword of
Ali (a.s.). If Ali (a.s.) had not been there, the Islamic Medina would
have been annihilated by the attacks of Meccan infidels. And without the
sword of Ali (a.s.) the establishment of Islam would not have been
possible during the time of the Prophet. Umar knew that Ali (a.s.) was
firm-footed in the battles of Badr, Uhud, Khandaq, Hunayn and Khaybar.

Rather, the success in all these battles was due to the unique valor of
Ali (a.s.). Umar knew how much the Holy Prophet (S) loved Ali (a.s.) as
proved by the tradition of the Roasted Fowl (Hadith Tayr). Umar knew
that in addition to excellent knowledge, the Almighty had also bestowed
Ali (a.s.) with great piety. Umar knew that after the Holy Prophet (S)
it was Ali (a.s.) indeed, who was the chief of Bani Hashim tribe and the
Bani Hashim was the most superior tribe of Arabs from many aspects.

First of all, from the ancient age, this tribe was the leader of Arabs.
Secondly, the Holy Prophet (S) was a chief of that very tribe. Umar knew
that Abu Bakr belonged to a nameless tribe. Bani Teem could not be in
any way compared to Bani Hashim. Umar knew that Ali (a.s.) was the
husband of the Lady of Paradise. Apart from this, he was a close cousin
of the Holy Prophet (S). The Holy Prophet (S) had no son and Ali (a.s.)
had the status of the son of the Prophet. Umar knew that although Abu
Bakr migrated to Medina with the Holy Prophet (S) his predicament could
not be more meritorious than the risk that Ali (a.s.) faced after the
Prophet’s departure. It was a time that the infidels of Mecca could have
martyred Ali (a.s.) mistaking him to be the Holy Prophet (S).

But Ali (a.s.) did not care for his life and continued to lie on the
Prophet’s bed all night. Umar knew that Ali (a.s.) was the first to
agree to the help and obedience of the Holy Prophet (S). He was the
first to believe in the Holy Prophet (S), he never worshipped idols; he
was always aloof from polytheism. Umar knew that after the Holy Prophet
(S), Ali (a.s.) was the chief of the tribe in which Prophethood has been
sent. Umar knew that the Holy Prophet (S) made elaborate arrangements at
Ghadeer Khumm and declared Ali (a.s.) as the master of all believers.

Umar himself at that time had congratulated Ali (a.s.) saying, ‘Bakhin
Bakhin’ (congratulations) and confessed that Ali (a.s.) was indeed his
master and the master of all believers. It is surprising that in spite
of knowing all this, how Umar gave preference to Abu Bakr? And after
appointing Abu Bakr as the Caliph, he made such haste in allegiance. If
Umar had even the slightest attachment to Ali (a.s.), he would not have
turned his face away from him and paid allegiance to Abu Bakr.

If it is said that Ali (a.s.) was not capable of Caliphate, as some
ignorant people say, and thus Umar made Abu Bakr the Caliph. This
statement is absolutely incorrect. Ali (a.s.) was more capable of being
a Caliph than Abu Bakr. The defect of old age was not less in Abu Bakr.
The reality is that if Umar had not remained at the side of Abu Bakr, he
would not have been able to perform any caliphal function.

Though apparently Abu Bakr had become the Caliph, it was actually the
Caliphate of Umar. This seems to be the greatest cause why Umar did not
make Ali (a.s.) the Caliph. Umar knew that Ali (a.s.) was an independent
person having his own opinions. He would never allow any interference of
Umar in the matters of Caliphate. So he kept Ali (a.s.) away from
Caliphate and behind the veil of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate, himself became
the Caliph. The interference of Umar was to such a great extent that Abu
Bakr was compelled to say: “O Umar! Then what was the need to make me
the Caliph?” If Ali (a.s.) had become the Caliph, Umar would not have
got any chance of interfering like this and would have been forced away
from Caliphate.

In the view of the writer, in addition to his personal difference, this
was the reason why Umar could not stand Ali (a.s.) becoming the Caliph.
In brief, it was the first political blunder of Islam that Ali (a.s.)
was kept away from Caliphate. This error gave rise to all sorts of
conflicts in Islamic lands, whose consequences are still being borne by
Muslims. If Umar had accepted Ali (a.s.) as the Caliph instead of Abu
Bakr, Ali (a.s.) apparently would have remained the Caliph for a long
time and performed all the duties of Caliphate because he was healthy
and young.

It is likely that if Umar had accepted Ali (a.s.) as the Caliph, there
would have been only one religion among the Muslims, because Ali (a.s.)
was absolutely cultured, educated and an accomplished personality, so
there would have been no kind of turmoil in the affairs of Islam. The
opposition of Umar not only proved harmful to Ali (a.s.), it caused
widespread destruction in Islam also. Umar also beautifully arranged the
Caliphate of Uthman.

The third time also, though Ali (a.s.) was superior, he was again
deprived of Caliphate, which was nothing but harmful to Islam. We shall
discuss the turmoil of the period of Uthman’s Caliphate. At last Ali
(a.s.) did become the Caliph, but the Caliphate had deteriorated to such
an extent that it was one and the same whether he was a Caliph or not.
What is the use of discussing the Caliphate during which conflicts like
the battles of Jamal and Siffeen occurred. The one single mistake of not
accepting Ali (a.s.) as the first Caliph caused numerous turmoils, and
still proves to be a bane for the Muslim world.

Umar was a very clever man and he could have teamed up with Ali (a.s.)
and served Islam to a great extent. If he had been a supporter of Ali
(a.s.), Ali (a.s.) would have continued at the helm of Caliphate for a
long time, which would have bestowed all sorts of benefits on Islam. The
statement of the opponents of Ali (a.s.) that he had no capability of
Caliphate is a lie. Ali (a.s.) had the same capability to conquer Shaam
and Fars just as Umar had. There was no special capability required for
such conquests. Shaam was a part of the Eastern Roman Empire. The
Eastern Roman had become useless like their Western counterparts. As
with all the nations, there is decadence after exaltation. The same
happened to Fars. They had become accustomed to vices and pleasures.

On the other hand, the Arabs on the basis of a new faith, had fresh
impetus and zeal. In such a situation, it was not a matter of surprise
that Muslims conquered these territories in a short time. These
conquests were not a result of any special capabilities of the Caliph.
The conquests were effected when the hungry Arabs rushed to Shaam and
Rome in greed of war booty. Just as Goth and Vandel conquered Rome, the
Arabs conquered Shaam etc. Such conquests would have been possible even
in the time of Ali (a.s.) but he didn’t get any chance. First of all,
during his Caliphate, Ali (a.s.) did not get respite from mischief
mongers.

Secondly, at that time, the Arabs had already accomplished all the
conquests possible. In those circumstances, no scope remained for
territorial expansion. If Ali (a.s.) had become the Caliph immediately
after the Holy Prophet (S) all the conquests made during the Caliphate
of the second Caliph would have been made during the Caliphate of Ali
(a.s.). Umar, instead of being the Caliph, would have become the deputy
Caliph and served Islam in a beautiful way. But such a golden age for
Islam was not destined and the events turned in the way they did.

It should be clear that the aloofness of the people from Bani Hashim in
the matter of Caliphate proved very harmful from the political point of
view. It is well known that Bani Hashim and Bani Umayyah were the two
most powerful tribes of Arabs. They were at loggerheads from ages. Even
before the arrival of Islam, sometimes Bani Hashim and sometimes Bani
Umayyah gained the upper hand. That is why these two tribes were
considered equal.

But when the Holy Prophet (S) migrated and settled down in Medina and
Bani Umayyah become weak due to repeated defeats, at that time, Bani
Hashim were becoming powerful in Medina, and the people of Medina used
to regard them with great respect. But immediately after the demise of
the Holy Prophet (S) they were unexpectedly distanced from rulership and
power.

And the cause of the distancing was the ‘election’ of Saqifah. It was
the great political blunder of Saqifah when they did not select Ali
(a.s.) as the Caliph. Ali (a.s.) at that time, was the chief of Bani
Hashim. If he were made the Caliph, the future political terror of Bani
Umayyah and Bani Abbas would not have come into being. The result of the
error of Saqifah was such that Bani Hashim had to fight for their rights
with Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas and they continued to be weakened, till
finally at the hands of Tartars, Muslim hegemony was completely wiped
out.

This ‘election’ of Saqifah not only resulted in the massacre of Bani
Hashim, but non-Bani Hashim were also mercilessly massacred. Bani Hashim
continued to confront the enemies and sacrifice their lives, because in
every age they considered themselves rightful claimants for Caliphate,
and many Arabs also confessed that they were on the right. Apparently,
the history of Islam is filled with series of uprisings by Bani Hashim
and it was because they had lost the Caliphate at Saqifah at the hands
of Umar.

It should be remembered that Bani Hashim was a tribe that could not be
easily wiped out. This was the lifeblood of Arab nation. It had great
importance like Bani Umayyah. It was in this tribe that prophethood had
descended. Thus, it was not an easy job to exterminate this tribe. The
honor that it had got during the time of the Holy Prophet (S) made it
eligible that it must not be deprived of Caliphate.

If Umar or the people of Saqifah had the good of the Muslims in mind,
instead of choosing Abu Bakr, they would have chosen Ali (a.s.). Abu
Bakr was from an insignificant tribe and neither he trusted his
tribesmen nor did they trust him. To bring such a person at the helm of
affairs of Caliphate was a dreadful political mistake. The distancing of
Bani Hashim from rulership could not have been beneficial to the
country. Thus, it resulted in untold turmoil for the community.

If Ali (a.s.) had been selected as the Caliph, there would have been no
division of sects. There would have been no Sunni or Shia.

In the event of Ali becoming the Caliph, Bani Hashim would have forever
been released from participating in the uprisings. Due to his
successorship, neither Umar nor Uthman had been killed, nor Muhammad bin
Abu Bakr slain. Ali (a.s.) himself would have been safe from the battles
of Jamal and Siffeen etc. Neither ‘A’ysha would have joined the Battle
of Jamal nor Talha and Zubair had died.

Neither ‘A’ysha would have been killed by being thrown into the well nor
Bani Umayyah had become such blatant oppressors. Neither Ali (a.s.) had
been killed nor Imam Hasan (a.s.) poisoned. Neither Imam Husayn (a.s.)
had to face the tragedy of Karbala’ nor would there have been the
killings of Imams in the future. Neither horses had been tied in the
Holy Kaaba not there would have been bloodshed at the hands of Bani
Umayyah.

Neither Bani Umayyah had to face downfall nor Bani Abbas would have
become powerful, nor they would have soiled their hands with the blood
of people. And neither the Arab nation had been conquered by foreigners.
The ‘election’ of Saqifah was responsible for all the ills that have
plagued the Muslim nations till now and which still continue to do so.

In brief, the first mistake was to distance Ali (a.s.) from Caliphate
but on top of that such developments were effected that Bani Umayyah
were enabled to rise to the heights of affluence. Bani Umayyah had no
right to become rulers of Muslim dominions. This tribe had been the
deadliest enemy of Islam, since times immemorial. What right this tribe
had to gain power through means created by the religion of Islam?

Yes, if Bani Hashim had become Caliph or had been made Caliph, it would
not have been against wisdom, because the Prophet belonged to this tribe
and in his time, he was the ruler of the Arab world. It would not have
been surprising if his progeny were made Caliph or ruler. Indeed, to
keep Bani Hashim away from power and to give the same power to Bani
Umayyah was the worst mistake of Saqifah.

Of course, Abu Bakr and Umar gave in to the wishes of Abu Sufyan because
they were helpless. It is also true that if they had not furnished the
means of pleasing Abu Sufyan, all that was achieved in Saqifah would
have been destroyed. But if Ali (a.s.) had been in the place of Abu
Bakr, he would not have supported Abu Sufyan for many reasons. To keep
Bani Umayyah weak would have been in the best interest of Islam.

No doubt, Bani Umayyah had vied for equality with Bani Hashim but the
Holy Prophet (S) had weakened them. Now to make them strong again was
very harmful for the mission of the Prophet. If all the factors had been
sidelined, and Ali (a.s.) had been made the Caliph, it would have been
absolutely appropriate according to reason.

Ali (a.s.) was not an uneducated, incapable person and he never went
around sowing seeds of discord. He was a brave and guided one and had
his own opinion. He very well understood the affairs of the world and
was expert in understanding people. He never had anything to do with
diplomacy and deceit. But he well understood the deceit of other people.
He was incomparable in forbearance and maturity. He was exceedingly
courageous and compassionate. He was enriched with the wealth of
contentment, had incomparable divine good sense for worship; he was
truthful, stable minded and gentle in words. Though his praised
qualities were same as those of the Great (Ulul Azm) prophets he has
also been praised by Allah and the Messenger of Allah (S). Who can dare
to excel him in those qualities? According to the statement of the Holy
Prophet (S), the remembrance of Ali (a.s.) is worship.[^2] The Holy
Prophet (S) also said: “Decorate your gathering by the discussion of
Ali.”[^3]

Though this is an emphatic saying of the Holy Prophet (S), here the
condition of the people is such that when they hear the praise of Ali
(a.s.), their faces redden in fury. In many gatherings, it is even
against wisdom to utter the name of Ali (a.s.). Anyway, if with the
above merits, Ali (a.s.) had been accepted as Caliph, Caliphate would
not have suffered from any lacunae or defect.

Apparently, if any mischief was to be expected, it was from Bani Umayyah
and the Holy Prophet (S) had already subdued Bani Umayyah and after
becoming the Caliph, Ali (a.s.) would not have allowed this tribe to
gain fresh strength and in the whole of Islamic lands, there would have
been nothing but unity among Muslims.

Not only Islam would have remained strong, its strength would have
increased day by day. The rise of Bani Umayyah was effected due to
internal strife, which led to the weakening of Arabs and at last, they
had to face humiliation and at last Bani Umayyah were obliterated from
the face of the earth.

The Caliphate of Ali (a.s.) would have bestowed unity to the Islamic
nation. The progress of the nation would have remained in order. And the
time and wealth that was spent in internal wars would have been put to
some useful purpose. It is very regrettable that due to the deprivation
of Ali (a.s.) from Caliphate, whatever worst that could have been
expected, came to pass on the Arab kingdom.

The truth is that all the calamities that befell Muslims and Islam were
rooted in the misdoings of Umar and Abu Bakr. Rather, it was especially
due to Umar. Although Ali (a.s.), by his own efforts, restrained Bani
Hashim from confronting the people of Saqifah, but the conflicts of the
future could not be controlled. The condition was that the ‘Rightful
Caliph’ sided with Bani Umayyah either due to fear or due to their
attachment with them. Getting this opportunity, Bani Umayyah began to
revitalize themselves.

Till the period of the first two Caliphs, this tribe had regained so
much strength that no excuse remained for them to be suppressed by Bani
Hashim. Though apparently they did not create any mischief against Bani
Hashim during this period, when the period of Uthman arrived, this tribe
made further progress. The third Caliph himself belonged to this tribe.

In his period, Bani Umayyah became so strong that if after this there
was to be a Caliph from Bani Hashim in the future, Bani Umayyah would
not be compelled to obey him. This is what happened when Ali (a.s.) was
appointed as the Caliph and Muawiyah began to confront him.

The Battle of Jamal was through the instigation of Muawiyah alone. After
that, Muawiyah came out openly in opposition to Ali (a.s.) and continued
to be independent of Ali’s Caliphate. Then finally, Bani Hashim had to
suffer the carnage of Karbala’. Thus, Bani Hashim and Bani Umayyah were
always at war. This uprising and war of Muhammad’s Progeny continued
till the time of Bani Abbas.

In view of the writer, the destruction of Muhammad’s Progeny was not an
insignificant matter. Though their opponents may be pleased at it, it is
very painful spiritually for the followers of Muhammad’s Progeny. Here a
question could be raised that when in the tenure of the Caliphate there
were two powerful tribes of Bani Umayyah and Bani Hashim, and due to
their mutual enmity, there was great danger of civil war, was it not a
political necessity to subdue one of them? Thus, the Caliphate sided
with Bani Umayyah and strove to destroy Bani Hashim.

Therefore, from the political point of view, the Caliphate could not be
blamed for supporting Bani Umayyah. The reply to this objection is that
though it was necessary to subdue one of these tribes, the suppression
of Bani Hashim by the Caliphate was not correct due to some reasons.
First of all, Bani Hashim was the tribe in which Ali (a.s.) was born and
also because prophethood was in this tribe. They should have accorded
more honor to this tribe instead of degrading it. Justice, religion and
ethics demand only this.

Secondly, the Holy Prophet (S) was extremely hateful to Bani Umayyah. He
was so infuriated with it that he used to curse this tribe.

Thirdly, after the efforts of ten years, the Holy Prophet (S) had
weakened Bani Umayyah. The Caliphate should not have acted against the
policy of the Prophet.

Fourthly, Bani Umayyah did not deserve any respect and honor from the
Islamic government. They were the same who had exceedingly troubled the
Holy Prophet (S) and were such deadly enemies of Islam, that not only
did they hinder the progress of Islam in Mecca, they continued to make
efforts to destroy Islam till Medina. The battles of Badr, Uhud, Khandaq
and Hunayn were such that now Bani Umayyah had completely lost hope of
wealth and power.

Fifthly, Bani Umayyah were absolutely wanton people. In the days of
ignorance, as well as after accepting Islam, they had the same enmity
towards Islam and Ali (a.s.). A simple example of this is that when the
Holy Prophet (S) had before him the Battle of Hunayn, Abu Sufyan who had
apparently become a Muslim and was also with the Holy Prophet (S) in the
battlefield but since in reality this battle was also between the Holy
Prophet (S) and Bani Umayyah, Abu Sufyan and his supporters just stood
by and watched the fighting.

When the Muslim fighters were beheaded by the swords of Bani Umayyah,
Abu Sufyan and his supporters used to laugh in joy. If Ali (a.s.) had
not participated in this battle, the Holy Prophet (S) would surely have
suffered defeat. This incident clearly shows what type of people Bani
Umayyah were.

It is very astonishing how Caliphate presented Abu Sufyan, the
governorship of Shaam. It is well known what type of a person Muawiyah,
the son of Abu Sufyan was. Deceit, falsehood, intrigue and bloodshed was
his practice. Yazeed, the illustrious son of Muawiyah, was beyond
praise!

In addition to the greatness of his grandfather and father, Yazeed had
horses tied in the Holy Kaaba.[^4] Yazeed allowed homosexuality and
incest etc. Marwan was also an excellent example of Bani Umayyah. In the
same way, there are many personalities of this tribe whose detailed
description is not possible here. In brief, all the misdeeds of Bani
Umayyah are clear and obvious in the historical records of their age. It
is not surprising that bigots consider Bani Umayyah to be praiseworthy.
There is an Arabic saying: “If the eyes are pleased with someone all
their defects are negligible.”

Sixthly, as Bani Umayyah were extremely bad character, in the same way,
Bani Hashim were good natured and kind. Now the job was to suppress Bani
Umayyah and promote Bani Hashim. But regretfully, Umar and the Rightful
Caliphate acted against Bani Hashim, but they were not so weak that Bani
Umayyah’s empowerment would have immediately wiped them out. The
weakening of Bani Hashim was possible. Just as was clear from the
actions of Righteous Caliphate, but it was not possible to wipe them
out.

This is what actually happened. For a long period, Bani Hashim and Bani
Umayyah continued to fight each other, but when Bani Hashim could not be
wiped out easily, the causes of internal strife remained intact, through
which the nation had to suffer many losses, economical as well as in
terms of human lives. There seem to be two causes of the help and
assistance to Bani Umayyah from the side of Umar and the Righteous
Caliphate.

Firstly, the Righteous Caliphate saw it as necessary that Bani Umayyah
should be kept happy. There is a Persian saying that ‘feed the dog to
keep it happy’. On this principle, they were given the rule of Shaam.
The fact is that Bani Umayyah was a tribe, which had exceeding greed for
wealth and power. They had no aim except to gain worldly benefits. They
had nothing to do with religion. They had absolutely no regard or
respect for Islam. The chief of this tribe, Abu Sufyan, had apparently
become a Muslim due to compulsion. When he saw that there was no gain in
remaining an infidel, he accepted Islam.

When the Holy Prophet (S) passed away, Abu Sufyan decided to cash upon
the passing away of the Holy Prophet (S). He saw nothing gainful in the
happening of Saqifah. So he could not do anything but come to Ali (a.s.)
and said that “the matter of Caliphate has been decided and you have
been deprived of your right. If you say, I will fill the land of Medina
with riders of Mecca and destroy this Caliphate of ‘election’.” His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.), on the basis of the factors already mentioned
before, became infuriated at Abu Sufyan and said: “O Abu Sufyan! You
created mischief when you were infidel and now that you have accepted
Islam, your mischief mongering is still there.”

After getting this reply, Abu Sufyan came to Abu Bakr and Umar and said,
“You people have got hold of Caliphate and we have not got any benefit
from it. If you don’t provide us with something, we will destroy the
Caliphate.” Umar and Abu Bakr realized that though Bani Umayyah had
weakened by the action taken against it by the Holy Prophet (S) now if
they are not heeded, they will start their harmful activities against
Caliphate and it would not survive. After pondering on this matter, Umar
and Abu Bakr asked Abu Sufyan that if he is given a share in Caliphate,
would he still oppose it?

Abu Sufyan had nothing to do with Ali (a.s.) or Umar and Abu Bakr. He
had only his benefit in mind. The governorship of Shaam was given to him
in a platter and now it made no difference whether the decision of
Saqifah was good or bad. It is clear that this gift of governorship from
Caliphate was due to compulsion. Umar and Abu Bakr had to somehow dispel
the danger and they finally achieved this. The fact is that Umar and Abu
Bakr were helpless in comparison to Abu Sufyan.

What else could they have done? Abu Sufyan was the chief of a great
clan. It would not have been much difficult for Abu Sufyan to shake the
Caliphate of ‘election’ (Ijma). Abu Bakr was not from a tribe of any
distinction. He did not have any trust on his clan. Umar also did not
rely on his tribesmen. The Bani Hashim were already in consternation at
the happenings of Saqifah. In such conditions, how else could Umar and
Abu Bakr save the Caliphate?

Secondly, Umar and Abu Bakr were not feeling safe from Bani Hashim. Both
of them knew that Ali (a.s.) will not take any strict measures against
Caliphate. But it was clear that Ali (a.s.) was not satisfied by the
decision of Saqifah. And along with this, was the certainty that Bani
Hashim were nursing a grudge. If Ali (a.s.) had not restrained them,
every member of Bani Hashim tribe would have taken up arms. In such
circumstances, what else could Umar and Abu Bakr have done? Whether it
was due to political exigency or due to the love of Caliphate seat.

In brief, due to these two compulsions, Umar and Abu Bakr accorded
respect and acquiesced Bani Umayyah. And the truth is that one mistake
begets thousands. How sad that one mistake of Saqifah had wreaked havoc
in the world of Islam and till now, Muslims are suffering its
consequences. If they don’t reform their conditions, they would continue
to suffer till Judgment Day. Now the equitable people are free to take
whatever decision they like on the tragedy of Karbala’ while keeping in
mind the above discussion.

Apparently, in the history of Arabs, there is no event of such
significance and the causes of this event were such that any historian
having an unbiased mind, can derive many useful conclusions from it. In
the view of the intelligent people, the seed of this tragedy was the
saying of Umar: “The Book of Allah is with us.”

The immediate result of this was the ‘election’ of Saqifah and the tree
of Caliphate took root. And among the various fruits of this tree was
the tragedy of Karbala’. It is not stated from the religious point of
view. Rather, the fact is that those who view the history of nations
with an unbiased eye, have no recourse except to conclude that this
tragedy was nothing but the political consequence of the upheavals that
started immediately after the passing away of the Holy Prophet (S).

[^1]: Quran 76:1 and 76:6

[^2]: Sawaiqul Mohreqa

[^3]: Refer to the Biography of Ali (a.s.) by Maulana Amritsari.

[^4]: Ref. Tarikhul Khulafa of Suyuti.


