A Glance At The Prevalent Sufism
================================

As I have mentioned above, the best mysticism is the mysticism of Quran
and traditions. But, as regards the prevalent Sufism, the fact is that
knowledge and science of religion remained all right upto the time of
the companions, but thereafter, many innovations (Bidat) entered, one of
which is the mysticism adopted by Ahlul Sunnat. Ever since it entered
Ahlul Sunnat circles, it created a very serious change in them.[^1]

They deviated to such an extent that they reached almost upto the belief
of Christians in the matter of metempsychosis and ‘union’ as is seen
among some Sunni Sufis.[^2]

It seems, they adopted the beliefs of Greek philosopher, Farforius.[^3]
Now it has deviated so much in India that matters which are totally
against the teachings of the Shariat of Muhammad have become prevalent
among these Sufis. Today there are many Sufi teachers who have nothing
to do with mendicancy and whose business runs on the falsities spread by
the agents of selfish Sufis who have turned mysticism into a
money-making trade thus changing monkery into self interest. None
remains poor so long as fools live.

Hence cheating, deception, lying etc. have entered the deviated form of
mysticism. Now they need not refrain from things prohibited by Shariat,
so drugs like marijuana and ganja have become inseparable necessities
for such Sufi masters. Beauty worship has become the heart of mysticism.
Musical instruments like two-sided drums, sitar (Indian guitar) and
singing of mystic poems are a must for being lost in a statement of
mysticism. Their programs present a scene of Hindu singing parties. Even
prostitutes, and singing and dancing girls participate in their programs
for improving their ‘hereafter’? Hoards of dancing prostitutes are seen
before living and dead mystic saints! O Allah! What kind of Islam is
this, which is glaringly opposed to the Islam brought by Muhammad (S)?
Hindu temples used to have (and some still have thousands of
prostitutes). Now they are entering Khanqahs (Sufi dens) also.

In short, all the things, which were prohibited by the Holy Prophet (S)
are made necessary for this new mysticism so willingly! Some Sufis have
freed themselves from fasting and prayer too! Likewise, many necessities
of this Sufism are totally against original Islam! Allah forbid! Briefly
speaking, so many things are there, which have nothing to do with the
ways of Allah, Prophet (S), Imams (a.s.) and Ahlul Bayt.

Research shows that such mysticism began during the time of Bani Umayyah
and Bani Abbas. The aim was to divert the attention of people from the
teachings of the Holy Family, so that they might remain attached to
unlawful rulers. The biggest machination for this evil purpose is
Mukashifa (spiritual contemplation). There is nothing in it. Mulla Ali
Qari says that it can be obtained by both Muslims and infidels.[^4]

In short, the best mysticism, in the opinion of the writer, is to follow
the teachings of Allah, His Prophet and the Holy Imams (a.s.). “The path
of purity can be trod only by following the Holy Prophet (S).”[^5]

Note that the Imamites also have Persian mysticism, but theirs is not
deviated from the Persian mysticism of the Shariat of Muhammad (S) even
by an inch. The Imamites also believe in Awliya (friends of Allah) but
not so madly as seen among Sunni Sufis.

A number of Sufis were there among Shias also, like Sadruddin Shirazi,
Abdur Razzaq Laahiji, Mulla Hasan Kaashi, Hajib Rajab Barsi and others.
Quite a long list of Shia Sufis can be seen in Majalisul Mo-mineen by
Qadi Nurullah Shushtari. Prominent among the listed are Shaykh
Shahabuddin Suhurwardi, Najmuddin Kubra, Bayzid Bustami, Jalaluddin
Rumi, Shaykh Muslehuddin Saadi Shirazi, Khwaja Hafiz Shirazi, Fariduddin
Attar, Sayyid Ashrafuddin Jehangir Kachhoch, Sayyid Muinuddin Chisti
Ajmeri. Many of them had to adopt dissimulation due to circumstances.

That is why Ahlul Sunnat have mistaken them to be Sunnis. There are
Sufis in Shias today also. Here it seems proper to mention about
Ghazzali that in the beginning he was not following any particular creed
of Islam. Thereafter, he became a Hanafite and then changed to Shafei.
Thereafter, he turned Sufi and at last adopted the path of Shiaism of
Ahlul Bayt.

That is why his works (books) show different colors of different periods
of his life. This is what usually happens to researchers as their
thoughts change in the matter of religion. At last, when his research
ends, he is seen in the color of the creed adopted by him after all the
findings. Research shows that Ghazzali’s path before his death was that
of Ahlul Bayt, that is, creed of the Imamites.

***“And whom Allah guides, there is none that can lead him
astray.”***[^6]

All praise to Allah. The last belief of the writer of this book has also
been the Imamiyah and if Allah wills, he too will die a Shia.[^7]

Here we end the discussion of Sufism, because this book has no more room
for more discussion on this matter.

[^1]: Ref. Chalapi, Vol. 1, Pg. 422

[^2]: Ref. Sharh Muwaqif, Pg. 475

[^3]: Ref. notes of Siva al Huda on the comments of Ghulam Yahya Bihari,
Pg. 182.

[^4]: Ref. Sharhe Fiqhe Akbar, Pg. 97.

[^5]: Persian saying

[^6]: Surah Zumar 39:37

[^7]: This happened when he breathed his last in 1354 H.E. and attained
nearness to the Holy Family.


