The Verse Of Surah Noor Discussed
=================================

***“Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange: they shall
serve Me, not associating ought with Me; and whoever is ungrateful after
this, these it is who are the transgressors.”***[^1]

The Ahlul Sunnat say that the above verse proves the validity of the
Righteous Caliphs or the Caliphate of the three Caliphs. However, no
word of this verse indicates that it is in any way restricted to the
Caliphs. Here, Allah has clearly promised the believers and good doers,
Caliphate. That Allah will make some of them rulers in the land just as
He had made rulers before them. This address of Allah is for all the
believers, as clear from Tafseer Zahidi:

“And it is not restricted to the three Caliphs. Neither is it restricted
to any particular time period. It is a promise that applies to all the
believers from the time of the Holy Prophet (S) till the present time.”

It is a verse that followers of the three Caliphs can apply to their
Caliphs, the Bani Umayyah can apply to their rulers, the Bani Abbas can
pull it towards their Caliphate, the Bani Hashim can say it is a promise
of their Caliphate. In these circumstances, it is obstinacy to restrict
it to the Caliphate of the three Caliphs. If this verse proves the
validity of the Caliphate of the three Caliphs, Abu Bakr and Umar would
have used it to prove their stand in Saqifah. But they did not do so.

This shows that this verse was not considered a proof during the
Caliphate of Umar and Abu Bakr. Leave alone that period, this verse has
never been presented as proof in the subsequent period. Such illogical
interpretations were invented much later to prove the validity of
Caliphate.

It is a verse that followers of the three Caliphs can apply to their
Caliphs, the Bani Umayyah can apply to their rulers, the Bani Abbas can
pull it towards their Caliphate, the Bani Hashim can say it is a promise
of their Caliphate. In these circumstances, it is obstinacy to restrict
it to the Caliphate of the three Caliphs.

If this verse proves the validity of the Caliphate of the three Caliphs,
Abu Bakr and Umar would have used it to prove their stand in Saqifah.
But they did not do so.

This shows that this verse was not considered a proof during the
Caliphate of Umar and Abu Bakr. Leave alone that period, this verse has
never been presented as proof in the subsequent period. Such illogical
interpretations were invented much later to prove the validity of
Caliphate.

Though the above verse does not prove the Caliphate of three Caliphs, a
tradition of the Prophet (S) indicates that this verse is applicable to
the family of the Prophet (S).

Muhaddith Mir Jamaluddin Husaini quotes this tradition in *Rauzatul
Ahbab*. Jabir Ibne Abdullah Ansari (r.a.) relates that when the verse:
***“O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you…”…***was revealed, I asked the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.): I have recognized Allah and the Apostle, but who are
*‘those in authority’* whose obedience has been made compulsory by
Allah?

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: ‘They are my Caliphs after me, the
first of whom is Ali Ibne Abi Talib, then Hasan, then Husain, then Ali
the son of Husain, then Muhammad the son of Ali, known in the Taurat as
al-Baqir, and you will soon reach him, when you meet him, convey my
salutations to him. Then Sadiq, Ja’far, the son of Muhammad, then Moosa,
the son of Ja’far, then Ali, the son of Moosa, then Muhammad, the son of
Ali, then Ali, the son of Muhammad, then Hasan, the son of Ali, then the
proof of Allah on His earth.’”

This book, *Rauzatul Ahbab* is such that Shah Waliullah Dehlavi has
praised it in his journal, ‘Usoole Hadith’. We should know that the
twelve Imams are such that they are clearly mentioned in Taurat. The
Almighty Allah says in the Book of Genesis:

“As for Ishmael, I have heard you; behold, I will bless him and make him
fruitful and multiply him exceedingly; he shall be the father of twelve
princes, and I will make him a great nation.”[^2]

Apart from this, the above tradition also shows that Imam Muhammad Ibn
Ali is mentioned as ‘Baqir’ in the Taurat. It is not surprising that the
verse “Allah promises those…” mentions Caliphate in relation to the
twelve Imams, who the Prophet has said were his Caliphs in his saying to
Jabir. In fact, who can be more deserving of the Caliphate of the
Prophet?

Even though they could not achieve worldly kingdom, due to the lack of
support from Muslims, but their religious authority had always been
there and it will be till there is Islam. Obviously, what is the value
of a worldly kingdom? Even Nimrod, Shaddad, Firon, Muawiyah and Yazeed
had it, and of what use was it? Can the verse apply to such people?
Certainly not! Indeed, what is worthy, is religious Caliphate and as per
the saying of the Holy Prophet (S), it is the right of the twelve Imams
(a.s.).

May Allah bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad.

[^1]: Surah Noor 24:55

[^2]: Genesis 17:20


