Existence Of Mahdi, Master Of The Age
=====================================

It should be clear that Jews once had a belief and they still have, that
one day the Messiah, the Promised one will appear in the world. When
Jesus came, the Jews did not accept him as the Promised Messiah and they
were inimical towards him to such an extent that they did not leave any
stone unturned to kill him. The Jews are still awaiting the Promised
Messiah.

The Christians are also awaiting the return of Jesus. Muslims also share
this belief. The difference is that Muslims are waiting for the return
of Jesus after reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.j.). It is proved from the
books of both the sects that the Twelfth Imam (a.s.) has already taken
birth. He is the last of the twelve Imams and is from the progeny of the
Lady of Paradise [Fatima Zahra (s.a.)]. His respected father is Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s.), son of Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.), son of Imam Muhammad
Taqi, son of Imam Ali Reza, son of Imam Moosa Kazim, son of Imam Ja’far
Sadiq, son of Imam Muhammad Baqir, son of Imam Zainul Aabideen Ali Ibnul
Husayn, son of Ali al-Murtadha’ [Peace be on them all].[^1]

The name of his honorable mother is Narjis Khatoon. However, Mulla Abdul
Rahman Jarri’s book Shawahidun Nubuwwah[^2] indicates that the name of
that lady was Saiqal, and some have also mentioned it as Susan. His name
is the same as the Holy Prophet (S).

Tarikh of Ibn Khallikan mentions[^3] that he was born on Friday, in the
middle of the month of Shaban. And when his father, Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s.) passed away, he was only five years old. Ibn Arzak says that he
was born on the 9th of Rabiul Awwal, 258 A.H. and it is also said that
his date of birth was 8th Shaban and the year of the birth was 256 A.H.
(Some over intelligent people had derived from numerology that the
equivalent of the Arabic letter ‘noon’ (N) is 256.

In the view of this writer, the conclusion of Ibn Khallikan seems to be
correct and most historians of that time have agreed that the date of
his birth was 15th Shaban. In the same way, when he disappeared after
entering the cellar, he was five years old, while some have said that he
was four years.

It is also mentioned that his disappearance into the cellar was in 275
A.H. At that time his age was 17 years (The fact is that the Minor
Occultation occurred at the age of five years.). Abdul Wahhab Sherani
says that Imam Mahdi (a.j.) is the son of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.). He
was born in the middle of Shaban. He is alive and present in the world.
His birth is also mentioned in Sunan Abi Dawood and Sawaiqul Mohreqa.

Shaykh Muhiyuddin says in Al-Futoohat that the reappearance of Imam
Mahdi (a.j.) is certain, but not until the world is filled with
injustice and oppression.

And when that Imam appears, he will fill the earth with justice and
equity just as it would have been full of injustice and oppression. He
is the descendant of the Holy Prophet (S) and from the progeny of Fatima
Zahra (s.a.). Shaykh Imam Bakhsh Nasikh Lakhnavi says in a poem
(Ghazal):

“Show us, O Lord! About whose advent there is clamor in the world My
Lord! I am very desirous to view Muhammad. Show us now the spring of the
Religion of Muhammad (S). The bubble of the heart is in anticipation of
the spring of the flower.”

[^1]: Ref. Isafur Raghebeen, Pg. 140

[^2]: Pg. 247

[^3]: Pg. 24 of Vol. 2


