Lineage Of Imam Mahdi
=====================

Only one Muslim sect believes that he is not yet born and that he would
be born in the future. It is clear from the books of both the sects that
he has already taken birth and after sometime he went into occultation.
He would reappear in the last age and lead Prophet Isa (a.s.) in
prayers. There is no difference between the sects so far, but from here
begins a falsification process by the Hanafite scholars. It is written
in Durre Mukhtar that on his return, Isa (a.s.) will emulate (do Taqlid)
of Abu Hanifah. It is a strange belief.

Anyway, Maulana Abdul Hai Lakhnavi presents its refutation in the
preface of that book itself: “It is a matter unsupported by arguments.”
In the same way, Suyuti has said that the prophecy that Isa (a.s.) will
follow the four schools of thoughts is baseless. And how can it be
possible that a prophet should follow a jurisprudent (Mujtahid)? Rather,
he will act on the religion of Muhammad in conformity with the Shariah
and Quran.

Mulla Ali Qari has also said that one of the stupid innovation of
Hanafite scholars is that Khizr studied under Abu Hanifah for thirty
years, first when he was alive and at his grave after he died. Mulla Ali
Qari says that Khizr is the person regarding whom the Almighty has said
in Surah Kahf that he had Divinely bestowed Knowledge (Ilme Ladunni). He
had been a teacher of Moosa (a.s.). How can such a personality be a
disciple of Abu Hanifah? And it is also false that Isa (a.s.) will
descend and follow Abu Hanifah in religious law. Mulla Ali Qari says
that Imam Mahdi (a.j.) is himself a jurisprudent, it is not permitted
for him to emulate anyone.

Muhiyuddin Ibn Arabi has said that analogy is prohibited for the Imam of
the Age (a.j.). Whatever he would command, would be on the basis of
whatever the divinely appointed angels guide him to. In no case can it
be allowed for him to emulate Abu Hanifah. Now there remains no need for
me to refute such baseless claims of Hanafite scholars. I have been
saved the trouble by the writings of Abdul Hai. But the people of
justice may note how bigoted the Hanafite scholars are! They say
whatever they like in praise of Abu Hanifah. How beautifully they raise
the status of their ‘Imam’. O Hanafite brothers! Remember that following
the truth is a great thing indeed. No one can remain a Muslim, if he
does not follow the path of truth. I request my Hanafite brothers not to
become blind to truth in their love for their ‘Imam’.

The following are the beliefs of Ahlul Sunnat with regard to the
reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.j.), and along with them are presented the
objections of Shias against the concocted beliefs:

1. Ahlul Sunnat believe that Imam Mahdi (a.j.) is the divine Caliph
appointed by the Almighty.[^1] The text is as follows: “The Almighty
appointed the Qaim, a rightful Caliph.” This tradition is related by Abi
Dawood. Then is the report of Ahmad in the same book. He will be the
Caliph in the last age. Then Ali (a.s.) is reported to have said as
mentioned on page 233 of Sunan Abi Dawood:

The Prophet’s saying is that: “Allah will send a man from my Ahlul Bayt
who would fill the earth with justice, just as it is filled with
inequity.”

The objection applicable to this belief is that according to Ahlul
Sunnat, Caliphate depends on consensus and allegiance but there is no
consensus of scholars and leaders for Imam Mahdi (a.j.). Thus, how can
his Caliphate be correct from the principles of Ahlul Sunnat? The second
objection is that according to Ahlul Sunnat, appointing of the Caliph
and the Imam is obligatory on people and not on Allah. But the text of
Sunan Abi Dawood says:

“Allah appointed Qaim as the rightful Caliph…”

This shows that Allah has considered the appointment of Caliph and Imam
obligatory on Himself and not on the people. Thus, we realize that the
appointment of Imam Mahdi (a.j.) was by the will of Allah and not by the
selection of people. In such circumstances, the application of consensus
and allegiance, for Caliphate is invalid.

2. If, according to Ahlul Sunnat, Caliphate and Imamate of Imam Mahdi
(a.j.) is from Allah, why the Imamate of other Imams could not be from
Allah? How can the Imamate of the 12th Imam be considered divinely
appointed and the Imamate of the other eleven Imams from Ali
al-Murtadha’ (a.s.) to Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) be considered the
opposite? It is no secret that Shias follow only one principle. That is
just as they consider the appointment of eleven Imams to be from Allah,
the Imamate of Imam Mahdi (a.j.) is also considered to be from Allah.

Now we realize why Ahlul Sunnat believe in the opposite. It is so
because by believing in the divine appointment of the eleven Imams
(a.s.), the Caliphate of the three Caliphs would be rendered invalid.

3. According to most Sunni scholars, Imam Mahdi (a.j.) is the twelfth
Imam. But the list of the Twelve Imams of Ahlul Sunnat includes the
Caliphs of Bani Abbas and Bani Umayyah. Thus, there is no option but to
make Imam Mahdi (a.j.) as the thirteenth Imam! Then how can Ahlul Sunnat
say that Imam Mahdi (a.j.) is the twelfth Imam?

4. Some Ahlul Sunnat traditionists have believed Mahdi the Abbasid to be
the promised Mahdi. But when did Isa (a.s.) pray behind Mahdi, the
Abbasid, or followed him in any way?

5. The following tradition of Umar is mentioned in Sahih Bukhari and
Sahih Muslim: “The Messenger of Allah (S) did not have a Caliph.” But
regarding Imam Mahdi (a.j.), often we see the word of Caliph. How can we
relate this to the tradition of Umar?

6. According to Ahlul Sunnat, prophets are superior to the Holy Imams;
then the prayer of Isa (a.s.) behind Imam Mahdi (a.j.) would be invalid.

7. If Isa (a.s.) prays behind Imam Mahdi (a.j.), it would imply that
Imam Mahdi (a.j.) is superior to Isa (a.s.). But Ahlul Sunnat believe
that the three Caliphs are not superior to Isa (a.s.). Then it is
necessary that Imam Mahdi (a.j.) is superior or more than superior to
the three Caliphs. But Ali al-Murtadha’ (a.s.) is superior to Imam Mahdi
(a.j.). Then, it is obvious that Ali (a.s.) should be much more superior
to the three Caliphs. But according to the belief of Ahlul Sunnat, Ali
(a.s.) is considered inferior to the three Caliphs. What enigma is this?
Ahlul Sunnat may themselves sort it out!

The fact is that many things of Ahlul Sunnat defy logic. And the
specialty of their belief is that they include the progeny of Abbas in
Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet. But from the aspect of the tradition of Two
Heavy Things (Thaqalayn), it is necessary to remain attached to the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Therefore, all Abbasids have to be obeyed
obligatorily in affairs of religion.

In such circumstances, why do Ahlul Sunnat follow the four Imams: Abu
Hanifah, Malik, Shafei and Hanbal? They should follow the religion of
Motasim, Mutawakkil, Haroon and Mamoon, most whom where Motazalite. Why
do Ahlul Sunnat not follow the Motazalite school of thought? It is
indeed true that once you follow a false principle, you will have to
face thousands of invalid and concocted principles.

The writer actually wanted to end the discussion with the controversial
points between the two sects, but here it seems necessary to discuss the
following additional controversial matters between the two sects. The
humble writer pleads the people of justice to read them with utmost
attention.

[^1]: Ref. Sawaiqul Mohreqa, Pg. 114.


