Martyrdom Of Imam Husain And Yazeed’s Desire
============================================

Some followers of Yazeed try to prove that Yazeed told Imam Zainul
Aabideen (a.s.): “By Allah, I never intended to kill your father.[^1]
Curse on the son of Marjana (Ibn Ziyad). I did not command him to kill
Husayn.”

All this is okay, but the Tarikh of Abul Hasan Madayani, Seerat Hisham
Kalbi, and Ibn Athir, writer of Tarikh Kamil and Abu Ja’far Tabari and
Abi Makhnaf, Abu Ishaq Isfayarani show that Yazeed had openly sent the
following message to Walid, the governor of Medina: “If Husayn refuses
to give allegiance, kill him and send me his severed head.” It is not
hidden that the denial of Yazeed was to save himself from the criticism
of Syrians and that there might not be civil disturbance in the country,
resulting in his dethroning. Otherwise, his correspondence with Walid is
still present in history books.

The report of Abi Makhnaf shows that when Yazeed feared the censure and
criticism of the people of Syria, he began to ask each of his commanders
whether he had killed Husayn. All the accursed ones denied. Even Shimr
and Khuli denied having killed Husayn.

At last, Qays said to Yazeed: “You have killed Husayn.” This made Yazeed
ashamed and from that moment, Yazeed used to slap his own face. Then he
also apologized to the prisoners of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). The friends of
Yazeed can say that this regret of Yazeed had got his sins forgiven. But
such people should know that when he was drowning, Firon had also said:
“I believe in the Lord of Moosa and Haroon.” Can this statement be a
proof of Firon’s faith? A shaky action cannot be considered firm and
cannot be accepted.

I ask the friends of Yazeed why they are so much aggrieved on the
martyrdom of Husayn? Why do they not say in support of Yazeed that
Husayn was a traitor to the Caliph? If he was killed, the Caliph cannot
be blamed. The friends of Yazeed have the right to claim thus, because
according to the principles of their faith, Yazeed was a rightful Caliph
and Husayn was a traitor. Though there are not many Muslims having such
a belief, yet they are not against the principles of their religion.

What is the need to say that Yazeed did not desire the killing of Husayn
(a.s.), etc.? What is the need to present this excuse? If the principles
of Caliphate had been against Yazeed, it would have been another matter.
Not only one principle, many rules were in favor of Yazeed. The fact is
that following one falsehood, compels us to thousands of deviations. One
affair of Saqifah has misguided people in a thousand ways.

[^1]: Ref. Tarikh Tabari, Pg. 176


