Lady Khadija And ‘A’ysha
========================

Lady Khadija and ‘A’ysha; both are mothers of believers (Ummul
Mo-mineen). From this aspect, both these ladies are deserving of respect
by the Muslims. But the difference of both these mothers of believers
will be apparent from their personal circumstances. The following
discussion is worthy of attention:

Lady Khadija was related to the Holy Prophet (S). The respected lady was
wealthy and the Prophet used to manage her business. During that time,
the Prophet used to carry Meccan goods for trading in Syria. Upon his
return, he used to give the accounts to the owners. He used to perform
these duties with such honesty and integrity that the people of Mecca
called him by the title of Ameen (trustworthy).

Along with other goods, he used to carry the goods of Khadija also for
trading. The gentle and honest nature of the Prophet affected Khadija
and she desired to marry him. Nothing could prevent this marriage,
because Lady Khadija was a noble lady of Mecca and the Prophet was equal
in class. Thus, his uncle and benefactor, Abu Talib also liked the
proposal and Lady Khadija was married to the Messenger of Allah (S). At
the time of this marriage, the age of the

Prophet was twenty-five years and Lady Khadija was forty years old.
Though there was a vast difference between their ages, their marriage
proved to be a very happy union. May Allah make the marriages of all the
people so happy and blessed.

Though Lady Khadija was fifteen years senior to the Holy Prophet (S), he
was very much attached to her. The proof of his affections for her is
clear from the fact that during the lifetime of Lady Khadija, the
Prophet did not take another wife. If he had done so, it would not have
been against religion and tradition. The reason for not doing so was
that the Prophet had a spiritual relationship with Lady Khadija. He had
not married her only for physical relationship. The Prophet used to
respect Lady Khadija a great deal, and he loved her all his life. Even
after her death, he never forgot her and he remembered her with the same
love and affection.

The greatest reason for this love was that Khadija (s.a.) had great
respect for the Messenger of Allah (S). She did nothing that would even
slightly displease the Prophet. She at once understood that the
Messenger of Allah (S) was a true Prophet. Indeed, she was the first
lady to bring faith on the Messenger of Allah (S). Lady Khadija was an
accomplished and cultured lady. She possessed all the superior qualities
of womanhood. Though it is an honor for a woman to be called a perfect
woman, Lady Khadija also qualified to be the most superior woman by her
spirituality. Her spirituality was obvious from the fact that ‘the Lady
of Judgment Day’ and rather, ‘the Chief of the Ladies of the world’ was
to be born from her womb. And she was the lady who became the wife of
Ali (a.s.) and from whose womb were born Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn
(a.s.) and then from the progeny of Imam Husayn (a.s.) were born nine
purified Imams, one after the other.

On the basis of those excellences, the Messenger of Allah (S) loved Lady
Khadija (s.a.) so much. Indeed, without spiritual superiority, the
husband can never love his wife so much. Lady Khadija passed away at
Mecca itself before the Hijrat (migration) of the Messenger of Allah
(S). The Prophet was so aggrieved due to her demise that he could not
forget his dear wife for the rest of his life. After emigrating from
Mecca to Medina, the Holy Prophet (S) married ‘A’ysha. And after that he
married a number of ladies. But whatever Khadija had, was taken with her
to the grave. It is worthy to note that at the age of 25, he married
Khadija and spent his youth and a part of his middle age with her. The
love of the Holy Prophet (S) to Khadija increased day by day and never
decreased. The cause of such a love has spiritual aspects and is
restricted to the selected ones of Allah.

Now, the writer shall mention some facts about ‘A’ysha. ‘A’ysha was the
daughter of Abu Bakr. She married the Prophet at a very young age. Her
young age is proved from the fact that at the time of the passing away
of the Messenger of Allah (S) she was only 18 years old. She married in
Medina and she was widowed only after a few years.

After his marriage to ‘A’ysha, the Prophet married a few times more.
‘A’ysha was beautiful and the Prophet appreciated this quality of hers.
In spite of her beauty and attraction, ‘A’ysha could not create such a
respect in the heart of the Prophet as Khadija was having, because
‘A’ysha was not bestowed with those spiritual qualities. And how could
it be? Because Providence did not intend that a daughter like Fatima
should be born from her and should marry a person like Ali (a.s.), and
that such sons should be born from her, who are mentioned in Taurat and
those who would all be the true Caliphs of the Messenger of Allah (S).

We never compare Lady Khadija to ‘A’ysha because both are mothers of
believers for us. But Ahlul Sunnat do a lot of injustice in this regard
since the beginning. What type of justice is that ‘A’ysha should be
called the most superior of the women, instead of Lady Khadija? But
since their religion is based on opposition to Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) what
else could they have done? The main cause is that ‘A’ysha was the
daughter of Abu Bakr. If it had not been so, Ahlul Sunnat would not have
acted like that. Indeed, if Pir Dastagir had referred to Khadija as the
favorite wife of the Prophet, it would have been all right, but indeed
it’s a pity that he calls ‘A’ysha the favorite wife of the Prophet. In
the view of the writer, ‘A’ysha had nothing extraordinary except that
she was a wife of the Prophet. That alone could not lend her spiritual
superiority. It is not difficult to learn about her manners and
spiritual position.

On page 284 of Sahih Muslim, we read about the inner feelings of
‘A’ysha. One day Hawla Binte Khuwailid, the sister of Khadija, came to
visit the Messenger of Allah (S). The Prophet met her with exceeding
good behavior. This made ‘A’ysha jealous. She said: “You continue to
remember that old woman whose teeth had fallen off, the redness of whose
hair faded and whose thighs had become dry? Allah has now given you a
better woman.”

Now we ask the readers: “Does this conversation imply any spirituality?
Can any respectable lady talk in this way?” ‘A’ysha is the wife of the
Prophet. We cannot express our views about her openly, but suffice it to
say what type of manners are these. That one should speak in this way in
front of the sister of a late co-wife? Indeed, it was beyond the
understanding of ‘A’ysha that how discerning the Prophet was regarding
merit and that why he remembered Khadija even after her death in the way
he did. It was not without any reason that the Messenger of Allah (S)
has made Lady Khadija equal to Lady Maryam and Lady Aasiya.[^1]

Both these ladies also were having a pure soul like Khadijatul Kubra.

In that same tradition, the Prophet has compared ‘A’ysha to a brittle
piece of bread whose taste is only material and has no connection with
spirituality. ‘A’ysha was having a great friendship with Hafasa due to
their similar natures. Hafasa was the daughter of Umar and she had such
a nasty temperament that no one was prepared to marry her. When Umar saw
that there was no possibility of her marriage, he became very angry and
we do not know what would have been the consequences of this, but the
Holy Prophet (S), in order to dispel turmoil, married Hafasa. Among men,
‘A’ysha had great hatred towards Ali (a.s.) and the Battle of Jamal was
the result of this animosity.

Regarding the death of ‘A’ysha, it is said that Muawiyah had her drowned
in a well. Such a thing is not unexpected from Muawiyah. It is very much
possible.

We have already mentioned that there was great friendship between
‘A’ysha and Hafasa due the similarity of their natures. Thus, the two of
them had confidential conversations and sought advice of each other and
also made many policies.

The following incident is an example of this:

The Holy Prophet (S) used to compulsorily visit the houses of all the
wives. Sometimes he ate something at one place and sometimes he just
drank something. Often he had honey drink at a wife and then came to
‘A’ysha or Hafasa. These two planned to do something, so that the
Prophet will not go to the other wives. They decided to tell the Prophet
that he was having a foul breath due to something he had drunk at the
houses of his other wives. May Allah the Great, give us refuge! The
Quran says that ‘A’ysha and Hafasa exposed some secret of the Holy
Prophet (S) regarding which, the Almighty Allah informed the Prophet.
The verse of Surah Tahrim says:

***“But when she informed (others) of it, and Allah made him to know
it,***[^2]***”***[^3]

The Almighty Allah chided ‘A’ysha and Hafasa in the following words, in
the same Surah Tahrim:

***“If you both turn to Allah, then indeed your hearts are already
inclined (to this); and if you back up each other against him, then
surely Allah it is Who is his Guardian…”***[^4]

In spite of such severe words of the Almighty, Pir Dastagir in his book
*Ghaniyatu Talibeen,* makes ‘A’ysha the most superior of the women.
Indeed, it is an enigma of Sunni faith. On one side is the stricture of
Allah and on the other side, they consider her most superior of
womenfolk. It seems the foundation of Sunni religion is acting against
the truth and enmity to Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Indeed, the edifice of a religion based on such a defective foundation
will be weak. Now the equitable people should decide, who has the right
to be called the superior most, Lady Khadija or ‘A’ysha? In addition to
the above verses, there is a verse in Surah Ahzab:

***“O Prophet! Say to your wives: If you desire this world’s life and
its adornment, then come, I will give you a provision and allow you to
depart a goodly departing… And stay in your houses and do not display
your finery like the displaying of the ignorance of yore…”***[^5]

The wives meant herein are ‘A’ysha and Hafasa. So much hurt has been
caused by these two that the Holy Prophet (S) had spoken of divorcing
‘A’ysha and had already given revocable divorce to Hafasa.[^6]

All this shows that the Messenger of Allah (S) was not pleased with
‘A’ysha and Hafasa. Obviously, ‘A’ysha cannot claim equality with Lady
Khadija, how can she be considered superior to her? O servants of Allah!
Your creator has not created you without intellect. At least use your
brains. If you don’t beseech Allah to make you the followers of truth, I
pray on behalf of you.

It well known that Lady Khadija was bestowed with al the good qualities.
She never troubled the Messenger of Allah (S) for any worldly thing. She
put all her wealth at his disposal and herself lived like a poor woman.

Lady Khadija already possessed the praiseworthy qualities herself and
the company of the Holy Prophet (S) further enhanced her good qualities.
On the other hand, it is seen that the company of the Holy Prophet (S)
had no effect on ‘A’ysha. She had no wealth that could have given her
contentment.

Thus, whenever war booty arrived, ‘A’ysha used to rush towards it to get
her share. In brief, after studying this in an impartial way, we find
that Lady Khadija was an incomparable lady, whereas ‘A’ysha was not
worth anything in comparison to her. Pir Dastagir said that ‘A’ysha was
the most superior of the womenfolk was only on the basis of his love for
Abu Bakr. There is intoxication in love and man becomes completely blind
in love.

In the end, the writer presents an incident, which is related to the
above discussion. This writer had attended a function to commemorate the
Prophet’s birthday at a friend’s place. Two reciters of poems after
giving their recitations, began to give a speech. In their speech, first
they praised the Messenger of Allah (S), then started extolling ‘A’ysha
and they did not leave any stone unturned to praise her. The poor
audience, most of whom were illiterate and only a few educated, listened
with rapt attention.

The writer underwent great torture during the speech, till the speaker
alluded to the incident that most Ahlul Sunnat quote to prove the merit
of ‘A’ysha. And that is the report that the Holy Prophet (S) took
‘A’ysha upon his shoulder so that she can watch some entertainment
program. Now what is so great in that? How does this prove the merit of
‘A’ysha? This does not in any way prove any spiritual connection between
‘A’ysha and the Holy Prophet (S). It is just blindness in the love of
Abu Bakr.

Even if we suppose it to be true, though it seems unlikely, it has
nothing to prove any good quality of ‘A’ysha, except that being of very
young age, she wanted to watch the performance and the Holy Prophet (S)
made her perch on his shoulders. This shows that the Holy Prophet (S)
was very kind to ‘A’ysha and he would have been kinder if she had not
hurt him. The sorrow that she caused him was so intense that he even
thought of divorcing her. The function continued for a long time and at
last the sane people got release from it.

It is really astonishing that the two poets praised ‘A’ysha no end but
none of them even mentioned the name of Khadija. This shows how much
Ahlul Sunnat are attached to truth. O Sunni brothers! You must
understand that leaving the path of truth is not allowed in any
religion. You consider yourself as the sect, which will alone achieve
salvation, then why this concealment of facts? Your books are present,
wherein you can read about Lady Khadija and also ‘A’ysha.

[^1]: Ref. Nawawi

[^2]: Surah Tahrim 66:3

[^3]: Refer Tafseer Baidhawi, Vol. II, Pg. 373; Tafseer Maalimut
Tanzeel, Pg. 919; Tafseer Nishapuri, Vol. III, Pg. 435; Tafseer Kabir,
Vol. 4, Pg. 233.

[^4]: Surah Tahrim 66:4

[^5]: Surah Ahzab 33:28-33

[^6]: Ref: Tafseer Nishapuri Vol. II, Pg. 207; Tafseer Maalimut Tanzeel,
Pg. 715; Tafseer Baidhawi, Vol. II, Pg. 79.


