Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya And Imam Zainul Aabideen
==============================================

Ahlul Sunnat say that Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya was the son of Ali (a.s.)
and he denied the Imamate of Imam Zainul Aabideen (a.s.) and himself
claimed to be an Imam. In spite of that Shias praise him. Then why do
they not praise the three Caliphs too? The only reason for this is
because Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya was from Alawite Sadaat.

The reply of Shias is that when Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya said to Imam
Zainul Aabideen (a.s.): “My father’s bequest was for Hasan and Husayn
(a.s.) and your father died without making a bequest. I am more senior
to you. So you must not oppose my Imamate.” Imam Zainul Aabideen (a.s.)
said: “O my Uncle! My father had made bequest regarding my Imamate. To
prove this, I have the weapons of the Holy Prophet (S). It would be
better if you do not oppose me in the matter of Imamate. Lack of age and
wealth have no effect on this matter. You must know that Almighty Allah
bestowed Imamate in the loins of Husayn (a.s.).”

This reply was sufficient for an intelligent person like Muhammad Ibn
Hanafiya. After this he always considered Imam Zainul Aabideen (a.s.)
his Imam and his master. If only the three Caliphs had also agreed to
the claim of Ali (a.s.), Shias would surely have praised them. The truth
is that Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya committed one ‘mistake’ and then corrected
himself in time. The three Caliphs were firm on their numerous mistakes
till the end of their lives. In such a case, how can Shias accord
respect to them?[^1]

The detailed incident is that Imam Zainul Aabideen (a.s.) proposed to
Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya that they refer this matter to the Black Stone at
Kaaba (Hajar al-Aswad). Muhammad accepted this and both came to Hajar
al- Aswad. The Black Stone spoke up by the will of Allah that the
bequest of Imam Husayn (a.s.) for Imam Zainul Aabideen (a.s.) was proved
true. On hearing the decision, Ibn Hanafiya gave up his claim and for
the rest of his life, considered Imam Zainul Aabideen (a.s.) as his
Imam. In view of the writer, the claim of Imam Zainul Aabideen (a.s.)
was so strong that there was no need for him to refer the matter to
Hajar al-Aswad.

[^1]: The report is from Ihtejaaj of Shaykh Tabarsi; Pg. 177.


