Was Abu Talib a Disbeliever?
============================

Ahlul Sunnat say that Abu Talib was a disbeliever! The writer wishes to
state that Abdullah had two brothers, one of them was Zubair and other,
Abu Talib. Regarding Zubair, it is said that he brought up the Prophet
in his childhood, but in Tarikh Khamis[^1] it is seen that Abu Talib and
Zubair had cast lots for this purpose and the lot fell in favor of Abu
Talib and the Holy Prophet (S) had himself preferred Abu Talib, because
he was more attached to him.

The fact was that Abu Talib loved the Prophet even more than his own
children. He always slept besides him. Wherever the Prophet went, he
went with him to protect him. When the Holy Prophet (S) reached
maturity, Abu Talib told him: “I have many children and I am poor and
Lady Khadija is going to appoint someone for Syria. If you approach her,
she will definitely select you.”

When Khadija learnt of this, she sent her own messenger to the Holy
Prophet (S) and requested that he accept her offer to trade her goods in
Syria and that she was prepared to pay him twice the normal
remuneration. The Prophet served her with great honesty and integrity
and she realized that he was an extraordinary person and decided to
marry him. Abu Talib also approved the proposal and the marriage was
performed. Tarikh Khamis, Seeratul Muhammadiya and Seeratul Halabiyah
show that the sermon of this marriage was recited by Abu Talib himself.
He said in that sermon:

“Praise of the Lord who made us inheritors of the progeny of Ibrahim
(a.s.) and entrusted us with the caretaking of Kaaba and pilgrims. And
we became the ones to establish Divine laws and the Sanctuary of the
Kaaba became our home and we became rulers of men. And though my cousin
is without parents, in his lineage and family, in intellect and
knowledge, he is the most superior. And wealth and position is
temporary, while the wealth of the faith is forever. And soon that
wealth will be become apparent.”

The last sentence is worth attention. This clearly shows that Abu Talib
had recognized the spiritual qualities of the Prophet and had faith that
he had the appointment of Allah. The sentences before this show that Abu
Talib had not considered the material progress of the Holy Prophet (S).
If it had been so, he would not have said:

“Wealth and position are temporary, but the wealth of the faith is
forever.”

Glory be to Allah! What pure thoughts Abu Talib had. What else is
religiosity? O opponents of Abu Talib, would you still consider this
uncle of the Prophet an infidel? It was impossible that the successor of
the Prophet and his rightful Caliph should be the son of some infidel.
Anyway! The incident connected with the marriage of the Prophet is as
follows: When as per the desire of Lady Khadija, the Holy Prophet (S)
came to her, she held his hand, and said:

“My parents be sacrificed for you. Accept my spousehood, I hope that you
would be a Prophet, you must acknowledge my favor.”

The Prophet said that if he is ever given prophethood, he would do as
she says. Thus, the marriage of the Prophet was performed after the trip
to Syria. After his marriage, the infidels of Quraish decided to kill
him. Abu Talib collected all the Bani Hashim whether infidel or Muslim
and said:

“Go to my house and stop the infidels of Quraish from this action. Then
all the Bani Hashim did as they were advised.”

Those who call Abu Talib infidel, please tell us whether this action of
his was of a Muslim or an infidel? The person who saved his life is
called an infidel and those who left him surrounded with infidels and
escaped to save their own skins (like the three Caliphs ran from Uhud
and Hunayn), or sometimes excused themselves saying the infidels were
their relatives; like Umar said Abu Jahl was his maternal uncle, so he
could not kill him in Badr, and sometimes they refused to take up the
challenge of the opponents due to their power; like Umar said regarding
Amr Ibn Abde Wudd in the Battle of Khandaq; such people are considered
perfect Muslims. They are Caliphs of the Prophet and Imams of the Muslim
world! If this is the way Muslims judge truth and falsehood, then their
religion is the strangest of things.

After this, if we see Sirul Muhammadiya[^2] we see that when the Quraish
saw that Abu Talib refused to expose and destroy the Prophet, they
brought Ammara the Quraishite to Abu Talib and said: “This lad is
handsome and rich. You take him; and in return give us Muhammad (S).”
Then they said: “What type of a person you are that you support one who
has opposed your religion and insulted your people and the elders of the
community?”

Abu Talib replied: “Your evil view has been very much painful to me. How
good an advice you give me! That I rear your son and give my son to you
so that you can kill him? By Allah, this is not possible.” After this,
the Quraish began to trouble the Messenger of Allah (S). The Holy
Prophet (S) told Abu Talib: “O Uncle! Find out a way to dispel the
mischief of Quraish.”

Upon this, Abu Talib collected the whole Bani Hashim clan and said to
them: “You all protect Muhammad and save him from the mischief of the
enemies.” Except for Abu Lahab, all Bani Hashim accepted this request of
Abu Talib.

Now, those who call Abu Talib a disbeliever, was it any kind of wrong
behavior that Abu Talib indulged in against the founder of Islam? Fear
Allah, my friends! A person who is so much supportive and helpful to the
founder of Islam; should he be considered a disbeliever according to
Muslim belief?

If this is Muslim behavior, then a million salutes to such an attitude!
What a way to thank for the favors of Abu Talib! In Tarikh Abul Fida[^3]
we see that the Holy Prophet (S) told Abu Talib: “O my uncle! The
Almighty has sent prophethood in the world through the Quran and there
is name of Allah in the Quran and it refrains from evil acts.”

Abu Talib went to the Quraish and related the matter to them and said:
“Do not break off relations. If Muhammad proves to be false in his
claim, I will hand him over to you myself; but if he is true, you all
must come to the path of truth.” The Quraish agreed. This shows that Abu
Talib always acted in the interest of Islam and the founder of Islam.
Yet the opponents of Abu Talib do not feel ashamed of calling him a
disbeliever. The fact is that if Abu Talib had not been so protective
and defending for the Prophet, he would not have survived the
machinations of Quraish.

Please note how beautifully Abu Talib has conveyed the message of Islam
to Quraish and at the same time prevented them from violence. O people
who love justice! Please compare this statement of Abu Talib with that
of Abu Bakr when he said: “Indeed! Muhammad is killed. You all turn back
to your religion of ignorance!” Or Umar’s words: “I had never doubted
prophethood so much before, as I doubted it today.” Then we shall
realize which of the statement conveys acceptance of Islam and which one
conveys denial.

Even Muslim and Bukhari have related that Abu Talib died a disbeliever
and is being punished in Hell. Indeed, this report is concocted by Bani
Umayyah and that is why it is against logic and rules of traditional
science.

Thus, Ibn Abil Hadid writes in Sharhe Nahjul Balagha: “If Abu Talib had
been a disbeliever, the Messenger of Allah (S) would not have loved a
disbeliever, because the Almighty Allah has prohibited loving the
infidels.”

Please note that one of the captioned forged traditions are related by
Mughaira, whose friendship of Bani Umayyah and enmity to Ali (a.s.) is
proved beyond any doubt. In addition to this, Mughaira was a terrible
transgressor. The narrator of the second concocted report is Shaibah
regarding whom Darqutni has argued and said: “This person is like a
wheat seller. Apparently, he is trustworthy but inside he is a terrible
Satan. He was also a terrible transgressor.”

It is a pity that opponents have taken such fabricated traditions as the
basis and labeled Abu Talib as a disbeliever. And all this was carried
out so that Ali (a.s.) is not proved superior to Abu Bakr and Umar!
Apparently, the fathers of Abu Bakr and Umar had never accepted Islam.
Thus, if Abu Talib is considered a Muslim, he would be considered
superior by way of paternity. Thus, the best thing was to consider all
their fathers disbelievers. To save the honor of the three, the religion
may be put to humiliation!

There is another hidden cause in this. It is that from the aspect of
Imamiyah religion, the father of Prophet and Imam must be steadfast on
the religion of Allah. Thus, if the father of Ali (a.s.) is accepted as
a Muslim, Ali (a.s.) would have to be considered at the position of an
Imam to whom people refer in all their problems.

Thus, there was no other way except to fabricate traditions alleging Abu
Talib to be a disbeliever. The fabrication of traditional reports was
common during the time of Muawiyah. As mentioned above, 24000 traditions
were fabricated in praise of Abu Bakr and against that numerous
traditions were concocted to degrade Ali (a.s.) that make people shun
and curse him. The curse of Allah be on the unjust people!

Seeratul Halabiyah[^4] says that the people of Quraish complained to Abu
Talib regarding the Holy Prophet (S), Abu Talib said to the Holy Prophet
(S): “My nephew! As far as I know, no action of yours is despicable.”
The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O uncle! Recite the confession formula
(Kalima) so that my intercession will be in your favor on Judgment Day,
even though you might have committed any sort of sin.”

Abu Talib said: “Son! If I had not been worried of the increase of the
atrocities of Quraish, increase in their animosity and weakness of
Muslims, I would have obliged you. But I will die only on the religion
of my forefathers.” At the time of his death, Abu Talib made bequest to
all Bani Hashim that they should obey Muhammad (S) and testify to his
prophethood “so that you may be guided to truth.” At that time, the Holy
Prophet (S) told him: “O uncle! You preach to others, what you yourself
do not practice?” In reply to this Abu Talib said: “I know that you are
true in your claim, but I am ashamed of the fact that Quraish will say I
confessed to your prophethood due to the fear of death.”

The above tradition shows that Abu Talib sincerely supported Islam and
secretly tried to make it popular. This is sufficient to qualify him to
be called a Muslim. His refusal for public acceptance of Islam was not
against reason. If he had openly announced his Islam before Quraish and
Bani Hashim, his influence on them would have become nil.

Having confessed to Islam, he could not have saved the Messenger of
Allah (S) from the enemies of Islam. If he had publicly become a Muslim,
the Quraish and the infidels of his clan would not have paid any heed to
his words.

In order to maintain proper influence, he remained as he was apparently.
The ending of this influence would have been poison to the Holy Prophet
(S). The Quraish would have killed him and due to this, Islam would have
been finished before it could begin. Abu Talib was a very astute person
and well understood the prevailing circumstances. He knew that by
accepting Islam openly, he would not be able to serve Islam and the
founder of Islam more. That is why apparently he remained on his
previous condition. Although actually he had complete submission to
Islam and well understood the merits of that faith. May Allah bestow him
with the best of recompense.

[^1]: Vol. 1, Pg. 253.

[^2]: Pg. 88

[^3]: Vol. I, Pg. 121.

[^4]: Vol. 1, Pg. 366.


