Allegation That Abdullah Ibn Umar Paid Allegiance To Yazeed
===========================================================

Ahlul Sunnat say that the allegation of Shias that he had given
allegiance to Yazeed does not in any way indict Abdullah, because the
son of the Imam of Shias, Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya the son of Ali (a.s.)
had also pledged allegiance at the hands of Yazeed.

The reply to this is that when Yazeed wrote a lengthy letter to Muhammad
Ibn Hanafiya to pledge allegiance to him, Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya replied,
“Yes, I have given allegiance to you.” He did not travel from Medina to
Damascus to give the allegiance. Sitting in Medina, he sent such a reply
to Yazeed’s letter so that he remains safe from Yazeed’s mischief. He
was seeing how Yazeed had acted with Imam Husayn (a.s.) regarding the
allegiance.

Now neither Imam Hasan (a.s.) was alive nor Imam Husayn (a.s.) and the
Bani Hashim had been weakened a great deal. Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya
himself was so handicapped due to the severing of the nerves of his arms
in the Battle of Siffeen that he could not confront anyone. In such a
helpless condition, what else could he have done? We should know that
this tradition is of Baihaqi, who was a Sunni. There is no such report
in Shias.[^1] This allegation of Ahlul Sunnat is based on their own
tradition. There is no Shia tradition that can prove the allegiance of
Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya at the hands of Yazeed.

In the view of the writer, the allegation of Shias on Abdullah Ibn Umar
is useless. If any Ahlul Sunnat has given allegiance to Muawiyah or
Yazeed what has he done against the demands of his religion? Just as
Muawiyah was a valid Caliph, Yazeed also has the right to be called a
proper Caliph. How can you blame an Ahlul Sunnat for pledging allegiance
to a legitimate Caliph? That Yazeed was a legitimate Caliph for Ahlul
Sunnat is proved by the statement of Ghazzali, which says that it was
obligatory for Imam Husayn (a.s.) to obey Yazeed, because Muawiyah had
made Yazeed the Caliph by bequest.

The fact is that Muawiyah had acted upon the practice of Abu Bakr. Thus,
Abdullah Ibn Umar did not do anything wrong by the criteria of Sunni
faith, though it may seem unacceptable according to Shia belief. In
addition to nomination, the conditions of consensus, consultation and
armed power were in favor of Yazeed. From the aspect of the followers of
Caliphate, Yazeed was a legitimate Caliph and the allegiance of Abdullah
Ibn Umar to him was an action to save himself from the death of
ignorance, because according to the tradition of the Messenger of Allah
(S):

“One who dies without recognizing the Imam of his time, dies the death
of ignorance.”

[^1]: Ref. Biharul Anwar, Vol. 10, Pg. 299.


