Muawiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan
=======================

I have stated above that the Holy Prophet (S) absolutely despised the
Bani Umayyah. So much so that he had even cursed this clan. The accursed
tree in the Holy Quran denotes Bani Umayyah according to the unanimous
view of the interpreters of Quran. The Holy Prophet (S) says: “I dreamt
that Bani Umayyah were jumping on my pulpit like monkeys.”[^1]

I have also described how Bani Umayyah became the rulers of Shaam
(Syria) and how the Arab Kingdom passed into their hands. The Holy
Prophet (S), after ten years of efforts, had left Bani Umayyah so weak
that now there remained no capacity for them to create mischief. But in
order to save their Caliphate, Abu Bakr and Umar made the Chief of this
tribe, Abu Sufyan, the ruler of Shaam. Since Abu Sufyan could not move
to Shaam himself, his elder son, Yazeed Ibn Abu Sufyan was appointed the
governor of Shaam. He died within a period of four years and Muawiyah
took his position.

With this, began the worldly ascendancy of Bani Umayyah and its main
promoters were Abu Bakr and Umar. Similarly, the two were also
responsible for all the calamities that visited the family of the
Messenger (S). Muawiyah is the fifth Caliph of Ahlul Sunnat. He became a
Caliph by use of force, but the condition of consensus was also present
in him. Below we describe the traits of Muawiyah:

On page 194 of Tarikhul Khulafa and in Izalatul Khifa, it is written
that Muawiyah said: “Since the Prophet told me that when you become a
king be kind to the subjects, I always vied for rulership.”

Indeed, whatever kindness he might have done to common people, he was
indeed very kind to the family of the Prophet after he became the ruler!
The reward of this kindness will definitely, be given to him on the Day
of Recompense by Ali (a.s.), Hasan (a.s.) and their numerous companions.
The Prophet must have learnt through divine intuition, what Muawiyah was
about to do, that is why he told him to be kind to the creatures of
Allah.

Jabir bin Saad is reported to have said in Sahih Muslim[^2] that
Muawiyah asked Saad bin Abi Waqqas why he did not curse Ali (a.s.)? It
is also written in Asaatul Labeeb that Muawiyah forcibly told people not
to relate any tradition in favor of Ali (a.s.) and no one should narrate
any tradition from that person. Tarikh Abul Fida[^3] says:

In the initial period of the Caliphate of Imam Hasan (a.s.), in 41 A.H.
upto 99 A.H., the Bani Umayyah Caliphs recited curses on Ali (a.s.) from
pulpits till Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz discontinued the practice.[^4]

It is also written in Tarikh Abul Fida[^5] that the agents of Muawiyah
used to recite curse on Ali (a.s.) in the sermon of Friday prayers. In
the same way, in Izalatul Khifa[^6] it is seen that Muawiyah told his
officials: “You all force to curse Ali, anyone who praises him.” Thus,
the preachers began to recite curse on Ali (a.s.) from the pulpits
throughout the kingdom of Shaam. At that time, Shias of Kufa were under
very perilous circumstances. No well-known Shia personality survived.

Muawiyah had written to his officers that if any Shia of Ali was in any
government post, he should be expelled and he should not be paid any
compensation. Anyone found having regard for Ali should be put to the
sword and his house should be demolished. In those days, if a Shia
visited another Shia, it was in an extremely secret manner. They would
only open themselves up when they are absolutely certain they would not
be exposed.

Masters were in fear of their slaves and maids and used to take oaths
from them that they would not betray their Shia faith or they shall be
destroyed. The time of the passing away of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was the
most difficult period. They spent their life in dissimulation
(Taqayyah). After the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.), Abdul Malik bin
Marwan became the Caliph. The period was no better for Shias. The order
of the Caliph was that people should practice hatred of Ali – as it was
actual piety.

In Tarikhul Khulafa[^7] it is seen that the people of Shaam raised the
pages of Quran as per the advice of Muawiyah. What an intelligent way to
use the Quran! Muawiyah was indeed incomparable in deceitful ways. It is
written on page 76 of Dar Asaatul Labeeb that Muawiyah started many
innovations. The chief of them being kissing the Rukne Yamani[^8] in
Kaaba and omitting Bismillaah (In the name of Allah…) etc.

The same book says, that when Imam Hasan (a.s.) passed away, Muawiyah
said: “It was a spark that has now become silent.” Followers of Muawiyah
must also consider Imam Hasan (a.s.) as a spark, and like their leader,
should also celebrate the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.). If you really
follow Muawiyah, you must act as he did. The Holy Prophet (S) would
indeed intercede for such Muslims of Muawiyah on Judgment Day and their
intercession is guaranteed. They must continue to follow Muawiyah.

In Sharhe Fiqhe Akbar[^9], it is mentioned that Muawiyah said: “The
responsibility of the killings of Muslims is on Ali, because if he had
not fought, there would have been no bloodshed.” Ali (a.s.) replied: “It
means that the killing of Hamza lies on the Prophet!” On page 83 of the
same book, we see that the first king of Islam was Muawiyah and he is
the greatest of the Bani Umayyah kings and he is also the rightful Imam.

O Muslims! Congratulations for getting such an Imam! The known fact is
that Muawiyah uprooted the pulpit of Medina. The day he did this, the
sun became dark and stars were seen. The writer of Tarikh Khamis
writes[^10] that when Imam Hasan (a.s.) was sick, Marwan sent the
information to Muawiyah. Muawiyah replied that when Imam Hasan (a.s.)
dies, Marwan should immediately inform Muawiyah.

When Muawiyah got the news of Imam Hasan’s death, he recited “God is the
Greatest” (Allaahu Akbar) aloud and the people of Shaam followed suit.
Upon this, his wife said: “You are happy on the death of Fatima’s son?”
Muawiyah said: “Not only am I happy; my heart has become restful.” O
followers of Muawiyah! Do you also feel restful or not? If not, then
what type of followers are you? The passing away of Imam Hasan (a.s.)
should cause restfulness! What a strange thing indeed! Curse of Allah be
on the unjust people.

It is written on page 199 of Tarikhul Khulafa that the first to recite
the sermon in the sitting position, was Muawiyah. This was so, because
he was very obese and had a huge belly. In the same way, he made
innovations before Eid prayer; he removed one Takbeer (Allaahu Akbar)
from the funeral prayer; he castrated males and kept them as slaves and
he also uncovered the Holy Kaaba, though before this, there used to be
layers on the Kaaba.

It seems that Muawiyah was only worried about this world. The thought of
the Hereafter never troubled him. How evil is a man who castrates
another man to enslave him? Such a practice is not sanctioned in any
religion or community. Which is that evil deed Muawiyah was not capable
of doing? Poison, deceit and intrigue was his staple diet. He was an
exemplar of his tribe, Bani Umayyah. Bani Umayyah was cursed by the Holy
Prophet (S).

On page 234 of Sharh Ibn Abil Hadid, we see the statement of Tabari that
the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Muawiyah will not die on the Shariah
of Muhammad.”

Also that Muawiyah will scream from the casket of fire that he was
burning and the angel’s will reply: “You were from the transgressors and
you deserved it.” The statement of Nasai is similar to this: The Prophet
said: “It would be too much if Muawiyah could escape Hell fire, how can
there be any good in him?[^11]

This Nasai is the same person who used to relate the merits of Ali
(a.s.). One day the people of Shaam asked him to mention some merits of
Muawiyah. He said what merit Muawiyah had that could deserve mention?
Yes, there is only one merit of Muawiyah that the Prophet said: “May
Allah never fill your stomach.”

Upon this, the people of Shaam beat up Nasai, crushing his testicles,
resulting in his death. The above prophecy was from the Prophet. It was
proved true and Muawiyah was greedy all his life and was never satisfied
till death. In view of the writer, the Prophet, due to his divinely
bestowed knowledge, had known that Muawiyah will enter Hell and he would
be burning. Actually the proof of existence of Hell is the existence of
Muawiyah. There would be no lack of space in the domain of Muawiyah in
the abode of fire. All his supporters, friends and followers will be
accommodated with him. One gets a place in the neighborhood of one that
loves.

Of the merits of Muawiyah is that he brought together the companions and
the Tabein (companions of companions) on a single purpose to invent
traditions criticizing Ali (a.s.). Of them were Amr Ibn Aas, Mughaira,
Urwah and Zuhri and also Abu Huraira who is the favorite companion of
the Sunnis. Urwah has fabricated a tradition on the authority of ‘A’ysha
that His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) and Abbas will die on disbelief and the
two of them will go to Hell. Refer Sharh Ibn Abil Hadid, page 194.

Apparently, it is a concocted tradition of Muawiyah, which is fabricated
to counter the tradition of the Messenger of Allah (S) that prophesied
that Muawiyah will go to Hell. That Muawiyah was finally relegated to
Haawiya[^12] in Hell, those who cursed Ali (a.s.) were also due to
Muawiyah, involved in new kinds of maladies in this world and at last
after death, they were taken to the place where Muawiyah was dispatched.

The supporters of Muawiyah quote the following tradition of Tirmidhi to
prove the superiority of Muawiyah: “O Allah! Make him a guide and the
guided one.” And the tradition of Ahmad Hanbal: “O Allah! Teach the book
to Muawiyah and save him from punishment.” But Muhaddith Dehlavi writes
in Madarijun Nubuwwah that traditionists are unanimous that no tradition
is proved authentic in praise of Muawiyah. Both these tradition are
concocted.

Whatever the devotees of Muawiyah might say, the Prophet despised
Muawiyah greatly. Thus, in Tarikh Abul Fida[^13] it is written that
Muawiyah and his father accepted Islam at the time of the conquest of
Mecca, but the Holy Prophet (S) continued to hate them. How can he be
virtuous, one who is said to be an inmate of Hell by the Prophet? Only
that person can believe in the merits of Muawiyah that is an opponent of
the Messenger of Allah (S) and who harbors enmity to Ali (a.s.).

Now I will show what position Muawiyah has in Islam. The Imamite sect
considers him a traitor, an enemy of Ali (a.s.) and the Prophet’s family
(a.s.). He is absolutely irreligious and an inmate of hell on the basis
of the sayings of the Holy Prophet (S). The Sufi sect is also against
considering Muawiyah to be good. But Ahlul Sunnat consider him a
rightful Caliph and Imam due to the demands of their faith they call his
mistakes, mistakes of jurisprudence. They consider him fifth of their
twelve Caliphs. Below we shall discuss his religious leadership.

Abu Shakoor Salmi’s Sharh Aqaide Nasafi[^14] indicates that after Ali
(a.s.), the majority of companions and Muslims followed Muawiyah, son of
Yazeed. They say it was valid, because Muawiyah had made a bequest for
him and the companions and the Muslims obeyed Yazeed.

According to analogy, the obedience of Yazeed was obligatory on Imam
Husayn (a.s.). Thus, I (Abu Shakoor) say: “Muawiyah was a scholar who
had committed no transgression and he was also a trustworthy man. If he
had no trustworthiness, Imam Hasan (a.s.) would not have signed a peace
treaty with him. After Ali (a.s.), Muawiyah was a just Imam, a righteous
and pious person in the religion of Allah.”

The above statement of Abu Shakoor Salmi informs us of a few things:

**First of all,** Muawiyah was made a Caliph in the same way as Abu Bakr
was appointed Caliph by consensus.

**Secondly,** the son of Muawiyah was made Caliph and Imam by will, just
as Umar was appointed a Caliph.

**Thirdly,** since the companions and Muslims had approved the
appointment of Yazeed, it was necessary for Imam Husayn (a.s.) to
consider the obedience of Yazeed to be compulsory.

**Fourthly,** Muawiyah was a non-transgressing scholar and was
trustworthy.

**Fifthly,** if there had been no trustworthiness in Muawiyah, Imam
Hasan (a.s.) would not have signed a peace treaty with him.

**Sixthly,** Muawiyah was a just Imam, righteous and pious in the
religion of Allah. Now what remains to be said for Muawiyah and Yazeed?
The father is like Abu Bakr and son is like Umar in the affair of
Caliphate and Imamate. Muawiyah himself was on the practice of Abu Bakr
and Umar, so why his son should not have acted according to their
practice?

However, Imam Husayn (a.s.) could not have obeyed Yazeed, because on the
basis of his religious beliefs, leave alone Yazeed, he did not even
consider, Muawiyah and his peers (like Umar and Abu Bakr) worthy of
obedience, because the four of them were not the Caliphs of the Prophet;
they were made Caliphs by the people. On the other hand, Imam Husayn
(a.s.) considered himself to be the Caliph of the Prophet, and he was
correct in this way. Then how could Imam Husayn (a.s.) obey Yazeed?

The fact is that neither Imam Husayn (a.s.) considered Yazeed to be a
rightful Caliph and Imam on the basis of appointment by will nor he
considered Umar to be so. Imam Husayn (a.s.) and other Imams of the
family of the Prophet considered Caliphate and Imamate to be divinely
ordained and not something decided by the people. Such a person cannot
be expected to obey Yazeed.

Indeed, in the view of Ahlul Sunnat, Yazeed seems to be one whose
obedience is compulsory. If it had not been so, such a large number of
Muslims, the people of Shaam and other unscrupulous religion-sellers
would not have taken precedence in giving allegiance to Yazeed. But when
Imam Husayn (a.s.) had remained aloof from all the preceding so-called
Caliphs, what was so special in Yazeed that he should have given
allegiance to him? Imam Husayn (a.s.) was an Imam like his father and a
member of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

If he had been a Sunni, he could have paid allegiance to Yazeed,
Muawiyah, Umar, Abu Bakr and all the Caliphs and Imams of Ahlul Sunnat.
As for as the matter of trustworthiness and non-transgression of
Muawiyah, except for Abu Shakoor Salmi, no sane person could agree to
it. If Muawiyah had been so, why was the Prophet displeased with him?
Why should he (S) prophesize that Muawiyah will go to hell? If he had
any type of merit, why did the writer of Madarijun Nubuwwah write that
no merit of Muawiyah is confirmed?

And why would Nasai had said that on the basis of the saying of the
Prophet, if Muawiyah escapes the fire of Hell, it is sufficient? What
merit can there be in him? Abu Shakoor Salmi can write whether he likes
about Muawiyah but according to Ali (a.s.) the abode of Muawiyah is
Haawiya (in Hell). This statement of Ali (a.s.) is based on the saying
of the Messenger of Allah (S). Thus, according to both their sayings,
Muawiyah belongs to Hell.

The argument of Abu Shakoor that if there had been no trustworthiness in
Muawiyah, Imam Hasan (a.s.) would not have signed a peace treaty with
him, is also mentioned in the book Ashatul Lumaat[^15] to prove the
correctness of the Imamate of Muawiyah. It is like saying: “That the
signing of the Treaty of Hudaibiya proves the validity of the religion
of Meccan infidels.”

The reason for signing the treaty was that the faithless Muslims of that
time, especially the people of Shaam, had become opposed to Imam Hasan
(a.s.). With what strength could he have fought the father of Yazeed?
Muawiyah had been made so powerful by Umar and Uthman that this traitor
had no problem in confronting His Eminence, Ali (a.s.). What did Imam
Hasan (a.s.) had that he could have fought an enemy of the family of the
Prophet?

What recourse did Imam Hasan (a.s.) have, except to sign the treaty?
Signing the treaty does not prove any superiority of Muawiyah? If
Caliphate obtained through force is considered valid by Ahlul Sunnat,
let it be so. Apparently, the signing of the treaty by Imam Hasan (a.s.)
was very much appropriate. The army and wealth of Muawiyah was much more
than the military and wealth of Imam Hasan (a.s.). The result of such a
fighting would have been nothing, except defeat. The followers of Imam
Hasan (a.s.) would have been killed in vain. Keeping these consequences
in mind, Imam Hasan (a.s.) made peace with the enemies. But how could
this treaty make his enemy a rightful Imam and a Caliph? Yes, if Imam
Hasan (a.s.) had signed the treaty saying:

“O Muawiyah! You and your tribe had been a helper and supporter of Islam
since the time of the Prophet and the Holy Prophet (S) has not said that
you and your tribe will go to Hell and you are deserving of Imamate and
Caliphate by the divine command,” it would have proved the correctness
of the Caliphate of Muawiyah. Just suppose, instead of Muawiyah some
transgressing king had attacked Imam Hasan (a.s.) and he had made peace
with him due to his inability to confront him, according to the logic of
Abu Shakoor Salmi that king would not have been considered a
transgressor, because Imam Hasan (a.s.) could not have made peace with a
transgressor. Obviously, in such situations a person only sees the best
option rather than insist on the trustworthiness and religiosity of the
foe.

The Holy Prophet (S) had also this in view and he had not considered
whether his opponents were disbelievers or not, but by the logic of Abu
Shakoor Salmi, they could not be considered disbelievers, because the
Prophet could not make peace with infidels. Indeed, the religion of
Ahlul Sunnat is a very astounding faith. Though there are many strange
things in the world, this religion is the strangest of all.

Because Ahlul Sunnat religion is based on opposition to Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.), that is why this rule is framed that if the companions commit
any mistake or become eligible for curse and criticism even then with
the help of interpretation they can be saved from blame, even if that
interpretation is against Quran and tradition. There is no need to
comment on this rule.

According to the principle of Ahlul Sunnat, an Imam cannot become
disqualified on the basis of transgression and injustice. Because most
Sunni Imams, after the Righteous Caliphs had committed sins and
transgression and the scholars of the time were under the control of the
unjust Imam. Obviously, if infallibility is not accepted as a necessary
condition of Imamate, it is one and the same thing, whether the Imam is
good or bad. Ahlul Sunnat want an Imam. It is not important what type of
an Imam he is. That is why on this principle, Yazeed is as qualified for
Imamate as Abu Bakr was. Thus, Yazeed is one of the twelve Caliphs of
Sunnis. What a strange rule, under which every transgressor and sinner
can become an Imam of Ahlul Sunnat just as often was seen and the
Caliphs of Bani Umayyah are included in the twelve Caliphs of Ahlul
Sunnat.[^16]

In this book[^17] it is written that all battles fought against Ali
(a.s.) were not because of the Caliphate. They occurred due to the
mistake of jurisprudence. For example, the Battle of Jamal and Siffeen.
But on page 395 of Seeratul Muhammadiya, it says that the confrontation
between Ali (a.s.) and Muawiyah was the confrontation of Caliphate. Then
the statement of Nasafi regarding the mistake of jurisprudence will be
proved invalid. Now we don’t know what is the correct position.

It is proved in history that Muawiyah totally denied the Caliphate of
Ali (a.s.). Thus, Muawiyah practically opposed Amirul Mo-mineen in the
treaty, as clearly mentioned in Shawaahidun Nubuwwah.[^18] The fact is
that the religion of Ahlul Sunnat is a concocted one. If one thinks
deeply in this matter, it is proved that there is a great shield in
Ahlul Sunnat called the mistake of jurisprudence. It was created to
protect the opponents of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) from criticism.

Apparently, it is seen that Ahlul Sunnat tried their best so that no
blame should come on the opponents of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Even though in
this venture, the interpretation of Quran and tradition may be distorted
beyond recognition.

[^1]: Tafseer Nishapuri, Tafseer Baidhawi and Tafseer Kabir of Razi

[^2]: Vol. 2, Pg. 278.

[^3]: Vol. 1, Pg. 212.

[^4]: Ref. Tarikh Khamis, Vol. 2, Pg. 317.

[^5]: Vol. 1, Pg. 196

[^6]: Vol. 2, Pg. 96

[^7]: Pg. 72

[^8]: A sacred place in Holy Kaaba.

[^9]: Pg. 79

[^10]: Vol. 2, Pg. 294.

[^11]: Ref. Tarikh Ibn Khallikan

[^12]: A particular section of Hell.

[^13]: Pg. 198

[^14]: Pg. 102

[^15]: Vol. 47, Pg. 678.

[^16]: Ref. Sharh Aqaide Nasafi

[^17]: Ibid.

[^18]: Pg. 87


