Yazeed Bin Muawiyah Bin Abu Sufyan
==================================

Allamah Suyuti writes that Muawiyah wrote to Marwan, the Governor of
Medina, to take allegiance for Yazeed. Marwan told the people of Medina
that Muawiyah has ordered them to give allegiance to Yazeed, as it is
the practice of Abu Bakr and Umar.[^1] On page 197 of the same book, it
is written that when Muawiyah made Yazeed the heir apparent and began to
take allegiance, the people of Shaam paid the allegiance.

Marwan bin al-Hakam tried to take allegiance from the people of Medina,
but Husain, Abdullah Ibn Zubair and Abdul Rahman bin Abu Bakr prevented
it and due to that, the men of Medina refused to pledged allegiance.
Then Muawiyah came to Medina with 1000 riders and explained the matter
to ‘A’iysha. It was then that the people of Hijaz gave allegiance for
Yazeed.

In brief, Muawiyah made Yazeed, the Caliph by inheritance and left this
world. The day Muawiyah died, people gave allegiance of Caliphate to
Yazeed and a royal edict was issued for people to give allegiance.
Everyone acted on this, except Husain and Abdullah Ibn Zubair, who went
into hiding from Walid, the governor of Medina.[^2] Abdullah Ibn Umar
wrote a very sincere letter to Yazeed after the death of Muawiyah.

But the people of Medina broke the allegiance of Yazeed. The reason was
that Yazeed had appointed Ammar bin Muhammad bin Abu Sufyan, his cousin,
as the governor of Medina. Some people complained about him to Yazeed,
exposed his transgression and alcoholism and at last externed him from
the city.

When Abdullah Ibn Umar learnt of this, he collected a vast body of men
and said: “I have heard from the Holy Prophet (S) that on Judgment Day
every traitor will be given a painful chastisement and it is for this
very reason I have given allegiance to Yazeed. And this allegiance has
the approval of Allah and the Prophet and in my view nothing is greater
than the fact that one should pledge allegiance on the command of Allah
and the Prophet and then go back on his word. And I do not find any
justification for refusing to give allegiance.

Obedience of that Imam is obligatory on whom consensus has taken place.
And refusal to give allegiance on the basis of transgression is not
allowed.”[^3]

All this shows that Abdullah Ibn Umar had special attachment to the
allegiance of Yazeed. He had not done the allegiance of Yazeed under any
compulsion. People of justice may compare this allegiance with the
allegiance of Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya. The fact is that Muhammad Ibn
Hanafiya just said: “I am prepared to give allegiance or I give your
allegiance,” and in this way he passed over the demand of Yazeed. Anyone
having some faith cannot blame Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya for allegiance. But
Ahlul Sunnat blame Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya in order to justify the actions
of Abdullah Ibn Umar regarding the allegiance of Yazeed.

Most Ahlul Sunnat scholars are seen in support of Yazeed. Ibn Hajar
Makki writes in *Sawaiqul Mohreqa* that it is not allowed to curse
Yazeed or call him a disbeliever, because he was from the believers and
his affair is in Allah’s hand.

In *Sharhe Fiqhe Akbar*[^4] Mulla Ali Qari and Ghazzali have stated that
the killing of Imam Husain (a.s.) is not proved on Yazeed, so it does
not make Yazeed a disbeliever.

It is not allowed to blame a Muslim for having committed a Greater sin
without any proper investigation. Abu Shakoor Salmi writes in the
marginal notes of *Sharh Aqaide Nasafi*[^5] that the allegiance and
obedience of Yazeed was obligatory on Imam Husain (a.s.), because his
Caliphate was legitimate. It is written in *Hayatul Haiwan*[^6] that
Ghazzali says: “If at all, the blame of Husain’s killing is proved on
Yazeed, it would only be that he has killed a Muslim. He might have
repented for it. Thus, Yazeed who was a Muslim must not be cursed.”

It is written in *Tarikh Ibn Khallikan* that according to Ghazzali,
Yazeed is deserving of mercy and it is recommended to invoke blessings
on him. *Tafseer* *Baidhawi*[^7] says that divine help was given to
Yazeed in view of the prophecy of the verses of Holy Quran. The greatest
support is seen in the fact that Yazeed is one of the twelve Caliphs of
Ahlul Sunnat.

It is mentioned is *Sharh Fiqhe Akbar* that the Holy Prophet (S) said
that there will be twelve Caliphs after him. The four of them are the
righteous Caliphs (*Khulafa Rashideen*), i.e. Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and
Ali (a.s.) and the rest are Muawiyah and his son, Yazeed, Abdul Malik
bin Marwan and his four sons. Yazeed bin Abdul Malik, Sulaiman, Hisham
and Walid and of them is Umar bin Abdul Aziz. This shows that the
Caliphate of Yazeed came into being in accordance with the saying of the
Messenger of Allah (S). Now what can be said of Yazeed? Father and son,
both became the successors of the Prophet.

In Shahristani’s *Al-Milal Wan-Nihal*[^8] it is said that Ahlul Sunnat
believe in the Caliphate of Muawiyah, Yazeed and Bani Marwan. All this
shows that the foundation of the religion of Ahlul Sunnat is based on
enmity to Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet. The fact is that from the time of
Abu Bakr, till today, it has continuous opposition to the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) and it will continue till Judgment Day.

Now let us find out whether Yazeed was pleased with the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) or not? Why should he not be happy? When he had,
before this, written to Walid that if Husayn does not give allegiance,
he should be beheaded and his head should be sent to Medina? If Walid
could not carry out these instructions and Ibn Saad did it instead, it
was same for Yazeed. He became happy by this according to the dictates
of reason.[^9]

It is written therein: When Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his companions were
martyred and their blessed severed heads were brought to Yazeed, he
became extremely happy; but when Muslims criticized him, he became
ashamed. In the same way, it is written on page 102 of Sharh Aqaide
Nasafi that Yazeed indeed approved the killing of Husayn and was pleased
when it was carried out. He used to be happy at the martyrdom and the
insult to the family of the Prophet.

This report is narrated by a large number of historians and
traditionists. After this, the commentator writes: “I do not approve the
cursing of Yazeed, his friends and supporters.” Curse of Allah be upon
him. One would pose a question whether Muawiyah could be considered
among the supporters of Yazeed or not? If not, why not? In Tarikh
Balazari[^10] it is written that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred,
Abdullah Ibn Umar wrote to Yazeed: “A great calamity occurred in Islam
and a tragedy has occurred. That is, Husayn is martyred!” Yazeed
replied: “O foolish man! I am sitting in my house on a restful couch. If
our opponents were on the right, your elders were the first to initiate
this trend.”

On this basis, people say that Husayn was killed on the day of Saqifah.

This reply of Yazeed is very much appropriate. Saqifah was the first of
the chain of events that finally culminated in the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (a.s.). The fact is that as there arose controversies in Islam,
which brought new kinds of calamities on the Prophet’s family, there was
bloodshed of Muslims and due to disunity among Muslims they are weak and
downtrodden in every part of the world.

The root cause of all this lacunae is Umar, the father of Abdullah.
Yazeed was aware of all this, that is why he could give such a fitting
reply to Abdullah Ibn Umar. The fact is that if Umar had not been there
and if he had not been such a severe opponent of the Prophet’s family,
the history of Islam would have been quite different. The writer has
written a great deal in this regard and it is not worth repeating here.

[^1]: Tarikhul Khulafa, Pg. 195

[^2]: Hayatul Haiwan, Vol. 1

[^3]: Qastalani, Vol. 10, Pg. 162.

[^4]: Pg. 87

[^5]: Pg. 102

[^6]: Hayatul Haiwan

[^7]: Pg. 33

[^8]: Pg. 8

[^9]: Ref. Tarikhul Khulafa, Pg. 308.

[^10]: Pg. 462


