A Thirty-Year Caliphate
=======================

A tradition of Safina is seen in Tirmidhi[^1] that according to the Holy
Prophet (S), Caliphate is only for thirty years, and after that, there
is kingship. A tradition like this is also seen in Sunan Abi Dawood.[^2]
It is reported from Saeed bin Jumhan. Sharhe Fiqhe Akbar also indicates
that the period of Caliphate is thirty years.

Author of Sharhe Maqasid, Allamah Taftazani says: “Caliphate is as
follows: Abu Bakr for two years, Umar for ten years, Uthman 12 years and
Ali (a.s.) for six years. From this aspect the figure of 30 is reached
easily.” But books of history and biography throw up many difficulties
and the calculation of Taftazani is proved incorrect. Now the readers
may see that Taftazani says the Caliphate of Abu Bakr was only two
years. But in Hayatul Haiwan[^3] the period of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate is
given as two years, three months and eight days. Similarly, in Tarikh
Abul Fida[^4] it is given as two years, three months and ten days. Then
in Seeratul Muhammadiya[^5] it is given as two years, three months and 4
or 5 nights. In brief, these different accounts show that the period of
Abu Bakr’s Caliphate was two years, three months and some days.

According to Taftazani, the Caliphate of Umar was 10 years. While in
Seeratul Muhammadiya it was 10 years, 7 months and 5 nights, in Abul
Fida[^6] and Hayatul Haiwan this period is 10 years, 6 months and 8 days
or 5 nights. Some have written, 13 nights instead of 5 nights. All this
shows that the period of Umar’s Caliphate is more than 10 years, whether
it is seven months or less. There are not many differences of opinion
regarding the period of Uthman’s Caliphate.

Abul Fida also says it is 12 years and Damiri’s research also says the
same. But some have written 11 years, 11 months and 14 days. But there
is a great divergence from the view of Taftazani regarding the period of
Caliphate of Ali (a.s.). Taftazani says it was 6 years but on page 574
of Seeratul Muhammadiya, it is 4 years, 4 months and in Hayatul Haiwan
it is 4 years and 9 months. None of the books mention it to be 6 years.

The conclusion of all this calculation is the Caliphate of all these
four Caliphs together does not add up to 30 years. Then in order to
complete the figure, scholars include the short Caliphate of Imam Hasan
(a.s.) in this thirty years Caliphate. In spite of this, the figure of
30 years is not reached.

Also the view of Taftazani, that the Caliphate of Ali (a.s.) was six
years, necessitates that we include the period when there was no
Caliphate, since the condition of Caliphate is control over Islamic
territory. This control had passed into the hands of Muawiyah. Thus, the
view of Taftazani is incorrect.

Some have calculated the period of Caliphate of Imam Ali (a.s.) till his
martyrdom. But this also seems incorrect, because his control on Islamic
lands had ceased to exist. Thus, the period of 30 years can never be
made to fit Caliphate. According to the writer, this tradition itself
seems baseless. If it had really been authentic, the period would have
definitely reached 30 years. On the basis of the unseen knowledge of the
Holy Prophet (S) he knew all that was to occur till Judgment Day. So how
could he not know the duration of Caliphate? Thus, this tradition is a
fabricated one. The one who has fabricated it, did not do his
calculations properly. It seems it was concocted to prove the legitimacy
of the first three Caliphs.

[^1]: Vol. 2, Pg. 50.

[^2]: Vol. 2, Pg. 282.

[^3]: Vol. 1, Pg. 60.

[^4]: Vol. 1, Pg. 167.

[^5]: Pg. 566

[^6]: Vol. 1, Pg. 173.


