Jurisprudence Based On Personal Opinion and Analogy
===================================================

Of the four Sunni Imams, Abu Hanifah seems to be particularly fond of
personal judgment (Rayy) and analogy (Qiyas). Personal opinion and
analogy that is not based on Quran and tradition is generally
unacceptable. Conformity with Quran and tradition is necessary for
jurisprudence.

A jurisprudent should not become aloof from Quran and tradition and
depend on his personal opinion and analogy. This aloofness results in
innovation and innovation destroys religion.

On page 19 of Mishkat, there is a tradition from Muslim narrated by
Jabir on this topic: “The Holy Prophet (S) has said that the best of the
tradition is Quran and the best biography is the biography of Muhammad.”
That is, we must remain attached to Quran and act upon it and the best
of the guidances are the guidances of Muhammad. And innovation is the
worst of the evil deeds. All innovations are deviations. Another
prophetic tradition is related from Ayesha in Mishkat: “One who
concludes something new from my sayings, is accursed.”

Muawiyah had 14000 traditions fabricated in praise of Abu Bakr and also
got thousands of traditions fabricated in criticism of Ali (a.s.). What
type of a person was Muawiyah in light of Ayesha’s tradition? Similar
traditions are recorded in Mishkat from Ibne Abbas, Afif bin Harith and
Ibne Maisera etc.

These sayings emphasize on remaining attached to Quran and traditions.
There is one more tradition in *Mishkat,* which is very much concerned
with our discussion below. On page 27 of that same book, we have from
Abi Dawood a tradition:

“One who gives a verdict without having knowledge of Quran and
tradition, has committed misappropriation (done *Khayanat*) with
Shariah.”

On page 432 of *Asaatul Bayat,* it is written that the purified Imams,
after Ali (a.s.) were giving verdicts against the scholars of that time,
though the latter were having knowledge. These Imams considered personal
opinion and analogy unlawful in religious jurisprudence (Fiqh). One day,
Abu Hanifah came to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and the Imam (a.s.) said:
“You use analogy in jurisprudence, while it must not be, because the
first one to resort to analogy was Iblees.”

Imam (a.s.) says: “The worst mischiefs in Muhammad’s Ummah are personal
opinion and analogy, which have changed unlawful into lawful and lawful
into unlawful.”

It is also related from Thalabi that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “Very
soon a nation will appear, which will use analogy and personal opinion
in jurisprudence, by which Islam will be destroyed.”

Doubtlessly, Abu Hanifah was very fond of analogy and personal opinion,
as seen from his jurisprudence. The apparent reason for this is that in
his time, he had no access to authentic traditions.[^1] This is
supported by the statement of Mulla Ali Qari, who quotes from Sakhawi in
an authentic report that due to his young age, the great Imam (Abu
Hanifah) did not get any chance of meeting any companion.[^2] There is
no doubt that Abu Hanifah had great trust in his opinion and analogy.

Thus, it is apparent from Pg. 82 of *Al-Milal wan-Nihal* that Abu
Hanifah preferred analogy to a solitary report. Thus, to prefer ones
personal opinion over tradition is like abrogating the traditions. On
the same basis, the later scholars have criticized Abu Hanifah for his
verdict regard divorce.[^3] In the same way, Khatib Baghdadi, Ahmad
Hanbal, Ibne Jauzi have all ridiculed Abu Hanifah.[^4] On page 4 of the
same preface, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said: “My nation
will be divided into more than seventy sects but the worst sect is the
one which uses analogy and one who does so, has legalized illegal things
and made the legal ones illegal.”

Another tradition of the Prophet (S) says: “No one has snatched away the
knowledge of religion, except the incapable scholars.”

When there remained no scholars of religion, people began to follow
ignorant rich men, and they began to issue verdicts based on personal
views without the help of Quran and tradition. They became misguided and
also misguided others.

In Vol. 1 of Qastalani there is a tradition from Abu Saeed Khudri that
the Prophet (S) said:

“One who performs jurisprudence without tradition, only on the basis of
analogy, is accursed, and one who acts upon it, is also accursed.”

The gist of the above is that in presence of Quran and tradition,
jurisprudence based on personal opinion and analogy, is severely
prohibited. It is also prohibited to emulate (do Taqlid) of a
jurisprudent (Mujtahid) who relies on analogy and personal opinion. This
view of the writer is certified by the statement of Hujjatul
Baligha.[^5]

The writer says: “Allah has not permitted the emulation of anyone except
that of Quran and tradition. It is unlawful to act on any other thing.
There is consensus of opinion among the companions, Tabein (companions
of companions) and Tabe Tabein (companions of companions of companions)
continuously, against the emulation one person. Thus, one who has
emulated Abu Hanifah or Shafei will not trust the statement of anyone
else. Such a follower will no more regard Quran and tradition to be of
any importance.”

The book of Allah, that is Quran; and traditions, that is the sayings of
Prophet (S), have criticized personal opinion and analogy. Now we shall
quote such a tradition that really upsets the mind: The Holy Prophet (S)
said:

“Adam (a.s.) became proud on our existence and I am proud of the
existence of Abu Hanifah that he is the lamp of the community.” Then he
said:

“All the prophets are proud of my existence and I am proud of the
existence of Abu Hanifah. One who befriends him, has befriended me and
one who has harbored enmity to him, has harbored enmity to me.”

There has to be a method to concoct lies! It should at least have some
semblance to truth! What type of a lie would be that “in China, there is
an ant as huge as a mountain?” Anyway, there is no need for me to prove
the falsity of this concocted tradition. The scholars of Ahlul Sunnat
have themselves considered it baseless. Thus, Ibn Jauzi, Zahabi, Suyuti
and Ibn Hajar and even Shaykh Qasim Hanafi have said that these
traditions are fabricated.[^6] Some more discussion about Abu Hanifah is
to come in the following pages, if Allah the High wills.

[^1]: Ref. Darasatul Labeeb, Pg. 65.

[^2]: Ref. Muqaddima Hidaya of Maulavi Abdul Hai of Lucknow, Pg. 8.

[^3]: Darasatul Labeeb, Pg. 65.

[^4]: Muqaddima Hidaya, Maulavi Abdul Hai Lucknowi

[^5]: Pg. 59

[^6]: Muqaddimah Hidaya, Maulavi Abdul Hai Lakhnavi, Pg. 9.


