Seeing Allah
============

We should know that there is difference of opinion regarding the seeing
of the Almighty. Ahlul Sunnat say that Allah can show Himself to His
creatures in a way the moon is visible on a moonlit night. That is the
people will be able to see Allah with the eyes just as they can see the
moon at night.[^1] The same is the belief of the commentator, Qaushiji,
Haji Izuddin, Sayyid Sharif, Amadi and Shafei.

People of the Nusairi sect were also following this belief. The Motazela
and the Imamite sects do not believe in seeing Allah with the physical
eyes, whether in this world or in the Hereafter. The eyes are given to
human beings and the animals to see material objects. It has no effect
in the sphere of spirituality. Thus, how can he see a God, Who is,
according to the Sharh Aqaide Nasafi[^2] neither has body, elements,
shape or form? He can neither be measured nor divided into parts. He is
neither restricted to space nor is a compound. He is neither limited nor
has material qualities. He has neither change in condition, nor is
restricted in time. He is neither a partner nor anyone or anything is
His partner.

The above qualities are material things, which are within the sphere of
visibility. Thus, when Allah is beyond material existence, He is also
beyond the sphere of visibility. The eye can neither see such a thing in
the world nor in the Hereafter.

When Bani Israel said to Moosa (a.s.): We would definitely not believe
till we do not see Allah with our own eyes. Moosa (a.s.) conveyed the
request of his people to Allah. Allah ordered them to come to Mt. Toor.
Moosa (a.s.) selected seventy persons from Bani Israel and went to Mt.
Toor. At the foot of the mountain, they said to Moosa (a.s.): “You
question Allah so that we can hear His voice.” On the request of Moosa
(a.s.), a cloud came and shaded the questioners. At that time Moosa
(a.s.) ordered them to fall down in prostration. When Moosa (a.s.) used
to converse, the divine light was visible on his holy face. On that
point, Allah told Bani Israel that He has liberated them from Firon and
settled them in Egypt. “You must worship Me and except for Me you must
not be worship anyone else.”

But Bani Israel were not satisfied with this divine voice. They demanded
Moosa (a.s.) to see Allah with their own eyes. The result of this demand
was that suddenly lightning struck Mt. Toor and all those who were
present there died. Moosa (a.s.) himself fell down in a swoon and
regained consciousness only after a long time. Later, Moosa (a.s.) began
to weep and said how he could go back to Bani Israel? “They would blame
me for the death of their elders. If You had killed them before this
incident, I would have been free from this blame. Now the Bani Israel
will try to kill me. I committed this foolish act of asking to see You
with the eyes. O my God, please raise them alive again, so that they can
testify the seeing.”[^3]

The writer says that the incident of Moosa (a.s.) shows that neither
Moosa (a.s.) saw Allah nor the people did. They all saw only the
lightning, which is a sign of Allah’s power. Staff, Shining arm, the
flood etc. and all the miracles are visible, but Allah can never be
seen, because he is beyond vision.

Some Ahlul Sunnat scholars say that though Allah cannot be seen in the
world, people would be able to see Him in the Hereafter, and Muhiyuddin
Arabi also has the same view.[^4] Obviously, just as Allah cannot be
seen in the world, the same condition will apply for the Hereafter.
Though Moosa (a.s.) did not see Allah with physical eyes, he saw the
lightning, which is the sign of Allah and he swooned due to it. Now the
question is, whether the Holy Prophet (S) saw Allah on the night of
Ascension or not? In view of the writer, the Prophet did not see Allah
with this organ of sight, which is the eye. No one can say what he saw
and with which eye.

Anyway, in Sahih Muslim[^5] there are traditions from Shaibani and
Abdullah that the Holy Prophet (S) saw only Jibraeel (a.s.) with these
eyes, he did not see Allah. Ibn Abbas says that the Holy Prophet (S) saw
Allah, but with the eye of his heart.

The writer says that this tradition of Ibn Abbas is in accordance with
reason. According to the tradition of Shobi, ‘A’ysha says: “The
Messenger of Allah (S) saw Jibraeel, he did not see Allah.” The same
tradition is present in the 10th volume of Sahih Bukhari.[^6] And on
page no. 98, according to a report of Masruq, ‘A’ysha said: “The Holy
Prophet (S) did not see Allah. When I hear this, my hair stand on their
ends.”

In the same way, on Page 99 of Sahih Bukhari, we see the following
tradition of Abu Dharr that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “On the night of
Ascension, I saw only a radiance.” But he didn’t say that, that radiance
was Allah Himself. From the aspect of commentaries also, the seeing of
Allah by the Prophet on the night of Ascension is not proved.

In the Tafseer of Surah Najm, on page 33, Baidhawi says that the Holy
Prophet (S) saw Allah with the eye of his heart and not with these
ordinary eyes. Seeing Allah on the night of Ascension, denotes the
various powers of Allah and the world of angels etc. Muhiyuddin Arabi
says on page 271 of the second volume of his Tafseer that the Holy
Prophet (S) saw Jibraeel in his true form.

Then on the same page, he says, eyes cannot see Allah. This is also the
belief of the Imamiyah and Motazela and there is no doubt that it is
logical and therefore acceptable. The writer says that when man cannot
see the air with the physical eyes, how can he see Allah? Air is a
material thing but it is beyond the scope of vision. But Allah is even
beyond physical perception, so He cannot be seen through physical eyes.

[^1]: Ref. Sharhe Mawaqif, Pg. 503.

[^2]: Pg. 27

[^3]: Ref. Tafseer Maalimut Tanzeel, Baghawi, Pg. 38.

[^4]: Tafseer Surah Anam, Pg. 317.

[^5]: Vol. 1, Pg. 97.

[^6]: Pg. 296


