The Fourth Imam: ‘Ali ibn Husayn
================================

Birth and Martyrdom
-------------------

According to some traditions, Imam Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) was born on the
fifteenth of Jamadul ‘ula’ in the year thirty one or thirty six A.H. in
Medina.[^1] His father was Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.) and his mother, based
on some narrations, was Shahrbanu, daughter of Yazdgird (Iranian
King).[^2] His nicknames were Abul Hasan, Abul Qasim, Abu Muhammad, Abu
Bakr, and his most famous titles were Ziynul ‘abidin, Ziynus Salihin,
and Sajjad.[^3]

According to some traditions, he was martyred on twelfth of Muharram in
the year ninety four A.H. in Medina and his holy body was buried in
Baqi’ cemetery.

Imam Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) lived fifty seven years in this world. When
he was two years old, his grandfather Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) was
martyred. He then experienced the Imamate of his uncle, Imam Hasan
(a.s.) for ten years. On ‘ashura of the year sixty one A.H., when his
father was martyred, Imam Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) was twenty two. He lived
thirty five years –his Imamate age– after his father.[^4]

Texts Proving His Imamate
-------------------------

In addition to general reasons for Imamate of the twelve infallible
Imams (a.s.), certain specific reasons are pointed out for proving the
Imamate of Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), some of which are quoted here from his
father, Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Abu Bakr Hazrami has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.), “When Husayn Ibn
Ali (a.s.) was going to travel to Iraq, he gave a book and a will to Umm
Salamah. When Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) returned from Karbala to Medina, Umm
Salamah gave the trusts to him.”[^5]

Fuzayl Ibn Yasar has narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), “When
Imam Husayn (a.s.) was going to Iraq, he gave a book, his will, and some
other things to Umm Salamah, Prophet Muhammad (S)’s wife, and said,
‘When my eldest son comes to you, give these to him.’ After Imam
Husayn’s (a.s.) martyrdom, his son Ali went to Umm Salamah and took the
trusts.” [^6]

Abul Jarud has quoted from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), “Imam Husayn
(a.s.) called his daughter, Fatimah, before his martyrdom and gave her a
wrapped book and an open will. At that time, Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) was
very sick. Later, Fatimah gave him the book. By Allah that the book is
now with us.” Abul Jarud asked, “What is in this book?” Imam Baqir
(a.s.) answered, “Whatever the people need exists in the book. By Allah
that all Islamic commandments and limits (the Hudud) are in it, even the
compensation fee for a scrape on the skin.”[^7]

Abdullah Ibn ‘Atabah says, “I was with Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.) when Ali
Ibn Husayn (a.s.) came in. I asked Imam Husayn (a.s.), ‘If you pass away
one day, who should we refer to?’ Imam (a.s.) answered, ‘Refer to this
son of me. He will be the Imam and the father of Imams.’”[^8]

Mas’udi has written in his book ‘Ithbatul Wasilah, “In Karbala, Husayn
(a.s.) called Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), who was sick, presented Allah’s
Great Name and the legacy of the prophets (S) to him, and informed him
that the Prophet’s books, sciences, and weapon are trusted to Umm
Salamah and she will give all of them to him.”[^9]

Sayyid Murtaza has written in ‘Uyunul Murtaza, “The narrators have
narrated that Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.) willed that Allah’s Great Name and
the Prophet (S)’s legacy be given to his son Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.). Then
Imam Husayn (a.s.) stated, ‘He will be the Imam after me.’”[^10]

Muhammad Ibn Muslim says, “I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘Where is the ring
of Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.)? I have heard that it was removed from his
finger in Karbala.’ Imam (a.s.) replied, ‘That is not true. Husayn
(a.s.) willed to his son, Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), gave Ali his ring, and
left the Imamate to Ali, just as the Messenger of Allah (S) did in case
of Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.), Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) did in case of his son
Hasan, and Hasan did in case of his brother Husayn. After Ali Ibn Husayn
(a.s.), Imam Husayn’s (a.s.) ring was given to my father and then to me.
I wear it every Friday and perform prayers with it.’

I went to Imam Sadiq (a.s.) on Friday and found him performing prayers.
When his prayer finished, he stretched his hand toward me. I saw a ring
in his holy finger with the sign: ‘There is no deity but Allah;
preparation for meeting Allah.’ Then Imam (a.s.) said, ‘This is the ring
of my grandfather, Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.).’”[^11]

The author of Kashful Ghummah has argued for the Imamate of Ali Ibn
Husayn (a.s.) using some other reasons:

First, Imam Sajjad (a.s.) was the most virtuous most knowledgeable of
the people in his own age after his father. Logically, when such a
person exists, no other one can be the Imam.

Second, it is proved using logical reasons and the traditions that the
existence of Imam is necessary in all ages; the earth will never be void
of Allah’s successor. The people who claimed to be the Imam in the age
of Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) had no true reason for their Imamate and their
claims were invalid. Therefore, the Imamate of Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) is
proved, as there should be an Imam on the earth.

Third, there are some traditions from the Messenger of Allah (S) about
the Imamate of Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), such as the tradition Jabir has
narrated from Prophet Muhammad (S), Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) narrated
from his father, from his grandfather, and from Fatimah (s.a.), daughter
of the Messenger of Allah (S). The names of the twelve Imams, including
Imam Sajjad (a.s.), are recorded in this tradition.

As mentioned in the traditions, Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) had declared the
Imamate of Ali, son of Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.), when Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.)
was alive.

Moreover, Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.) referred to the Imamate of his son, Ali,
in his will before being martyred and gave the will to Umm Salaamh to be
given to his son, Ali, after himself. Imam Husayn (a.s.) has considered
asking for the will from Umm Salamah as a sign of the real Imam.[^12]

Jabir Ibn Abdullah ‘Ansari told the Prophet (S), “O Messenger of Allah!
Who will be the Imams from the progeny of Ali Ibn Abi Talib?” Prophet
Muhammad (S) stated, “Hasan and Husayn, masters of youth of the
Paradise. Then master of the worshippers, Ali Ibn Husayn and then Baqir;
Muhammad Ibn Ali. O Jabir! You will be alive and see him, so say my
hello to him! After him, Sadiq, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, then Al-Kadhim,
Musa Ibn Ja’far, then Ridha’, Ali Ibn Musa. After him, Taqi, Muhammad
Ibn Ali, and then Naqi, Ali Ibn Muhammad. After him, Zaki, Hasan Ibn
Ali, and then his son, Qa’im, Mahdi. He will fill the world with justice
after being filled with injustice and oppression.

O Jabir! They will be my successors, progeny, and caliphs. Everyone who
obeys them has obeyed me. And everyone who disobeys them has disobeyed
me. Everyone who denies one or all of them has denied me. Allah keeps
the earth from swallowing its residents because of the bliss of their
existence.”[^13]

Virtues of Imam Sajjad
----------------------

Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) was the best most virtuous of the people of his
own age, so he was called the adornment of the worshippers.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, “In the Hereafter, a caller will cry out,
‘Where is Ziynul ‘Abidin (the adornment of worshippers)?’ It is as if I
see Ali Ibn Husayn, who has stood up and is walking among people’s lines
in the Hereafter.”[^14]

When Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) was leaving the circle of ‘Umar Ibn Abdul
‘Aziz, ‘Umar asked the audience, “Who is the noblest of the people?” The
people said, “You.” ‘Umar said, “No, it is not me. It is the one who
just left us.”[^15]

Husham Ibn Abdul Malik went to *Hajj* pilgrimage before his caliphate.
He was going to touch and kiss the Hajarul ‘Aswad, but he could not
because of the crowd. At that time, Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) arrived there.
The *Hajj*is opened a way for him to Hajarul ‘Aswad. The companions of
Husham asked, “Who is this man?” “I do not know him,” answered Husham.
Farazdaq, the poet, heard Husham’s speech and told him, “I know him
well; he is Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), Ziynul ‘Abidin.” Then he composed a
pretty poem for introducing Imam Sajjad (a.s.).[^16]

Abu Hazim, Sufyan Ibn ‘Ayinah and Zahri have narrated, “We did not see
anyone better and more knowledgeable than Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) among
Hashemite.”[^17]

### Worship and Vigil

After Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) was the most
devout person in his age, thus he was called Ziynul Abidin.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said about Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), “When the prayer
time came, his body trembled, his face paled, and shivered like a palm
tree.”[^18]

Imam Baqir (a.s.) stated, “When my father began praying he was quite
still as the stem of a tree.”[^19]

Abu Hamzah Thumali says, “I saw Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) whose cloak fell
off his shoulder in prayer, but he did not move to put it in place until
his prayer completed. I asked him the reason. Imam (a.s.) said, ‘Do you
know who I was standing before? Surely one’s prayer is accepted as much
as his heart attends to Allah.’”[^20]

When Imam Sajjad (a.s.) rose for performing prayer his face paled, his
body trembled, and his state changed. When he was asked for the reason,
he said, “I am going to rise before a Great King.”

When he began praying, he ignored everything and it was as if he heard
no voice.[^21]

Abdullah, the son of Imam Sajjad (a.s.) says, “My father prayed at
nights until he got tired and crawled to his bed like children.”[^22]

If Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) could not perform nawafil (recommended prayers)
of the day, he performed them at night. He told his children, “Though
the nawafil are not obligatory, I like you to continue every good thing
you get used to.” Imam Sajjad’s (a.s.) son continues, “My father did not
leave the Night Prayer at home or in travel.”[^23]

The father of Abu Hamzah Thumali says, “I saw Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), who
was performing prayer beside Ka’bah. He lasted his standing so much
until he got tired and lent over his feet alternatively. I heard him
saying, ‘O my Master! Do you punish me while my heart is full of your
love? By Your honor do not gather me together with the people who have
long been Your enemy.’”

Zahri has quoted from Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), “If all the people die in
East and West of the world but the Quran accompany me, I will not be
fearful at all.” Zahri continues, “And when he reached the Quranic verse
‘Master of the Day of Judgment’, he repeated it to the extent that he
was going to die.”[^24]

Imam Baqir (a.s.) stated, “Fatimah, the daughter of Ali Ibn Abi Talib,
saw Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), who was exhausted from worship. So she went
to Jabir Ibn Abdullah ‘Ansari and said, ‘O companion of Messenger of
Allah! We deserve being advised by you in case one of us exhausts
himself out of intensive worship and harms his health. Now Ali Ibn
Husayn, who is the memory of his father, has callus on his forehead,
knees, and hands. Come and talk to him so that he puts himself less in
trouble for worship.’”

Jabir went to Imam Sajjad (a.s.) and saw him in worship. Ali Ibn Husayn
(a.s.) rose for Jabir, greeted him, and seated him beside himself.”

Jabir said, ‘O son of Messenger of Allah! Do you know that the Exalted
Allah has created the Paradise for you and your lovers and the Hell for
your enemies? Why do you take yourself into trouble in worship?’”

Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) said in reply, ‘O companion of Messenger of Alalh!
Don’t you know that my grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (S) had no
sin, but did not leave intensive worship until his holy feet inflated?
And he said in answer to the advisors, ‘Shouldn’t I be a grateful
servant?’”

When Jabir heard Imam Sajjad’s (a.s.) speech, he said, ‘O son of
Messenger of Allah! Watch for your health, since you are from a family
(the Ahlul Bayt) for whose sake the earth is away from calamities and
the rain is descending.’”

Imam Sajjad (a.s.) stated, ‘O Jabir! I do not leave the tradition of my
father and grandfathers until I meet them.’”[^25]

Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) went to *Hajj* on foot and traversed the distance
between Medina and Mecca in twenty days.[^26]

### Almsgiving

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said, “My father divided all his property
into two parts, giving half of it to the poor, twice in his
lifetime.”[^27]

Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) filled his sack with bread and other foods,
divided it among the poor, and said, “Almsgiving extinguishes the fire
of Allah’s wrath.”[^28]

‘Umar Ibn Dinar says, “Ziyad Ibn Usamah cried before his death. Ali Ibn
Husayn (a.s.) who was present asked the reason for his weeping. ‘Umar
answered, ‘I have fifteen thousand dinars debt and cannot afford to pay
it. I am fearful of dying and being still a debtor.’ Imam Sajjad (a.s.)
stated, ‘Do not be upset. I will pay your debt.’”[^29]

Abdullah was at the point of death. His creditors had surrounded him and
asked their money. He told them, “I have no money to pay you, but I will
to one of my two cousins, Ali Ibn Husayn or Abdullah Ibn Ja’far to pay
your loan. You can choose anyone you like.” The creditors said,
“Abdullah Ibn Ja’far is wealthy. Ali Ibn Husayn is not wealthy but he is
truthful; we choose him.”

Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) was informed of the issue. He said, “I will pay
your loan after cropping the crop.” The creditors were satisfied, though
Imam Sajjad (a.s.) had no crop. However, at harvest time, the Almighty
Allah granted him some property to pay the loan he had accepted.[^30]

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said, “My father held a sack of dinar and
food at dark nights. He knocked on the poor houses and divided the money
and food among them, while he had hid his face. After his demise, the
poor found out that the unidentified man has been Ali Ibn Husayn
(a.s.).”[^31]

Zahri has said, “On a cold rainy night, I saw Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), who
was going with some wheat on his shoulder. I told him, ‘O son of
Messenger of Allah! What are you carrying?’ Imam Sajjad (a.s.) replied,
‘I am going to travel, so I am transferring my sustenance to a safe
place.’ I said, ‘Let my servant help you!’ But Imam (a.s.) did not
accept. I said, ‘Let me help you!’ Imam Sajjad (a.s.) answered, ‘I
should carry it myself and take it to the destination. Go away and leave
me alone!’ After some days, I saw Imam (a.s.), who had not gone to
travel yet. I told him, ‘O son of Messenger of Allah! Have you not gone
on travel yet?’ Imam Sajjad (a.s.) told me, ‘O Zahri! That travel was
not like what you thought. I meant the travel to the Hereafter for which
I should prepare myself. Preparedness for death is in two ways; avoiding
the unlawful deeds and spending property in charity.’”[^32]

When Medina was attacked by the army of Yazid, Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.)
accepted the guardianship of four hundred families until the army of
Muslim Ibn ‘Aqabah left Medina.[^33]

### Modesty

Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) was ridding his horse when he passed a group of
lepers who were eating food. They invited Imam Sajjad (a.s.) to eat with
them. Imam (a.s.) said, “I am fasting, otherwise I accepted your
invitation.” When Imam (a.s.) reached home, he ordered to prepare a good
food for the lepers. Then he invited them to his home and they ate
together.[^34]

### Remission

One of the companions of Imam Sajjad (a.s.) has narrated that a relative
of Imam (a.s.) insulted and misnamed him in presence of some of the
companions. Imam sajjad (a.s.), however, did not answer him. After a
while, Imam (a.s.) told his companions, “You heard the insult of this
man. Now I want to go and answer him. Come with me if you want.” The
companions accompanied Imam Sajjad (a.s.) to the insulter man’s house
and heard Imam (a.s.) reciting this Quranic verse,

***“Those who restrain anger, and pardon (all) men; for God loves those
who do good.***[^35]***”***

When they arrived at the house of that man, he came out angrily and
offensively, since he thought Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) had come to treat
him as he had done. Then Imam Sajjad (a.s.) told him, “O brother! You
said some words about me. If what you said is true, I repent, but if it
is false, May Allah forgive your sins.” The man regretted his speech,
kissed the forehead of Imam (a.s.), and said, “I said things which are
not true about you and deserve myself.”[^36]

The female slave of Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) poured water for him to
perform ablution. Suddenly the pitcher fell down from her hand, hit
Imam’s (a.s.) head, and injured his face. Imam Sajjad (a.s.) raised his
head and looked at the slave. She said, “The Almighty Allah states in
Holy Quran, ‘Those who restrain anger.’” Imam Sajjad (a.s.) said, “I
restrained my anger.” The female slave said again, ‘and those who pardon
(all) men.’ Imam (a.s.) said, “May Allah forgive your sins.” She said,
‘for God loves those who do good.’ Imam Sajjad (a.s.) told her, “I make
you free; go wherever you want.”[^37]

Imam Sajjad (a.s.) had some guests and his servant brought kebab for the
guests.

Suddenly the iron kebab skewer fell on a child’s head. The servant was
embarrassed when Imam Sajjad (a.s.) told him, “You did not do it
intentionally and I make you free.”[^38]

A man insulted Imam Sajjad (a.s.), using abusive language. The
companions of Imam (a.s.) wanted to attack the insulter, but Imam Sajjad
(a.s.) prohibited them. Then he told the rude man, “What you do not know
about me is more than what you said. Do you have a request so that I may
help you?” Then Imam (a.s.) granted him a garment and a thousand dinars.
That man got ashamed of his conduct after Imam’s (a.s.) benevolent
conduct and regretted. From then on, whenever that man saw Imam Sajjad
(a.s.), he said, “I testify that you are a progeny of the Prophet
(S).”[^39]

Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) went to his cousin’s house at nights and helped
him in disguise. Imam’s cousin said, “May Allah bless you that you help
me. Ali Ibn Husayn does not help me; may Allah give him no Mercy!” Imam
Sajjad (a.s.) heard his speech, bore it, and did not introduce himself.
After Imam’s (a.s.) demise, the helps stopped, so his cousin realized
that the helper has been Imam (a.s.). Then he visited Imam Sajjad’s
(a.s.) grave and cried there.[^40]

Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) saw a group of people who were back biting him. He
stopped and said, “If you tell the truth, may Allah forgive me. And if
you lie, may He forgive you.”[^41]

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 14.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 13.

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 4.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, pp. 8 & 154.

[^5]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 212.

[^6]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 212.

[^7]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 213. There may appear a doubt here that
needs to be clarified. This tradition cites that Imam Husayn (a.s.) gave
his book and will to his daughter, Fatimah, while according to two
previous traditions Imam Husayn (a.s.) had given the book and the will
to Umm Salamah. It can be explained that perhaps the books and wills
have been numerous; therefore, Imam Husayn (a.s.) had given some of them
to Umm Salamah and some of them to his daughter, Fatimah.

[^8]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 215.

[^9]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, p. 216.

[^10]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, p. 216.

[^11]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 17.

[^12]: Kashful Ghummah, Vol 2, p. 265.

[^13]: Kamalid Din wa Tamamun Ni’mah, Vol 1, p. 372.

[^14]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 3.

[^15]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 3.

[^16]: Kashful Ghummah, Vol 2, p. 291.

[^17]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 97.

[^18]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 55.

[^19]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 64.

[^20]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 66.

[^21]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 80.

[^22]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 99.

[^23]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 98.

[^24]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 107.

[^25]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 60.

[^26]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 76.

[^27]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 90.

[^28]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 100.

[^29]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 56.

[^30]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 94.

[^31]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 62.

[^32]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 65.

[^33]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 101.

[^34]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 94.

[^35]: Surah ‘Ali Imran 3: 134.

[^36]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 54.

[^37]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 68.

[^38]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 99.

[^39]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 99.

[^40]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 100.

[^41]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 46, p. 96.


