The Seventh Imam: Musa Al-Kadhim
================================

Birth and Martyrdom
-------------------

Imam Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) was born on the seventh of Safar in the year
128 A.H. in a village called Abwa’ between Mecca and Medina. His father
was Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and his mother was Hamidah. His nicknames
were Abul Hasan, Abu ‘Ibrahim, Abu Ali, and Abu ‘Isma’i and his titles
were ‘Abd Salih, Nafs Zakiyyah, Ziynul Mujahidin, Sabir, Amin, Zahid,
and Salih. His most famous title is Al-Kadhim.

Imam Musa Al-Kadhim (a.s.) was martyred in the prison of Sandi Ibn
Shahak in Baghdad on twenty fifth of Rajab in the year 183 A.H. He was
buried in Quraysh tomb (Al-Kadhimiyn city). He was fifty five then. Imam
Al-Kadhim (a.s.) lived twenty years with his father and his Imamate
lasted thirty five years.[^1]

Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.) did not make much trouble for the incumbent
caliphs, due to unprepared conditions. He spent his time in worshipping,
working for making a living, publishing religious sciences and
teachings, guiding the people, and training students and hadith
narrators. He was, in fact, considered a famous scholar and
jurisprudent. Nevertheless, the caliphs in office feared his scientific
stance and social popularity.

They always watched Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.), his companions, and his
students, hindering their activities in various ways. Imam Al-Kadhim
(a.s.) was called from Medina to Baghdad several times and was inquired.
Once they were going to kill Imam (a.s.), but they were dissuaded
because of some considerations and Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.) returned to
medina.

Finally, because of enmity of some of his relatives, Harunur Rashid, the
Abbaside caliph, called Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.) from Medina to Baghdad.
Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.) was in prisons of Basrah and Baghdad for long. His
last prison was Sandi Shahak prison –a very hideous prison– in Baghdad.

At last, Sandi Ibn Shahak poisoned Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.) by the order of
Harunur Rashid. Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.) was martyred some days later and
his holy body was buried in Quraysh tomb, near Baghdad.[^2]

Texts Proving His Imamate
-------------------------

As mentioned before, the reasons for Imamate are of two kinds; the
general reasons used for proving the Imamate of any of twelve infallible
Imams, and the specific reasons or explicit traditions from each of the
Imams about the next Imam. The first type of reasons has been discussed
in detail before. Here only the traditions from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) about
Imamate of his son, Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.), are cited.

Shiykh Mufid has written, “Mufazzal Ibn ‘Umar Ju’fi, Ma’adh Ibn Kathir,
Abdur Rahman Ibn Hajjaj, Fiyz Ibn Mukhtar, Ya’qub Siraj, Suliyman Ibn
Khalid, Safwan Ibn Jamal, and many more are close trustworthy companions
of Imam Sadiq (a.s.) who have narrated traditions about Imamate of Abul
Hasan Musa (a.s.).”

‘Is’haq and Ali, Imam Sadiq’s (a.s.) pious scholar sons, are among
narrators of traditions about Imamate of their brother, Musa Ibn Ja’far
(a.s.).

Mufazzal Ibn ‘Umar has said, “I was with Imam Sadiq (a.s.) when Abu
‘Ibrahim Musa (a.s.), who was a child, came in. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) told
me, ‘I recommend you about my son’s Imamate. Recommend his Imamate to
any of reliable companions.’”[^3]

Ma’adh Ibn Kathir has said, “I told Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘I ask the
Almighty Allah to grant you an honorable child to remain after your
death, just as He granted you, with this high stance, to your father.’
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, ‘The Exalted Allah has granted me such a
child.’ I asked, ‘Who is he?’ Imam (a.s.) pointed to ‘Abd Salih, who was
sleeping, and said, ‘The one who is asleep.’”[^4]

Abdur Rahman Ibn Hajjaj has said, “I entered a house in which Ja’far Ibn
Muhammad (a.s.) was praying and Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) was sitting on
his right, saying Amen. I asked, ‘You know that I am a sincere lover of
you. Tell me who will be the Imam after you?’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
answered, ‘O Abdur Rahman! My son, Musa, wore the armor of Messenger of
Allah (S) and it fitted him.’ So I said, ‘I found out the truth now and
need no other reason.’”[^5]

Fiyz Ibn Mukhtar has said, “I told Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘Take my hand and
save me from the Hell! Who will be my master after you?’ At that time,
Abu ‘Ibrahim, who was a child, came in. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) replied, ‘He
will be your master; follow him!’”[^6]

Mansur Ibn Hazim has said, “I told Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘May my parents be
sacrificed for you! The death is a truth and everyone will die. If it
happens to you, who will be the Imam after you?’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.) put
his hand on Abul Hasan’s shoulder and said, ‘He will be your master.’
Then Abul Hasan was only five and Abdullah Ibn Ja’far was also
there.”[^7]

‘Isa Ibn Abdullah has said, “I told Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘If, Allah
forbids, something bad happens to you, who should we follow?’ Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) pointed to his son, Musa, and said, ‘Follow him!’ I asked again,
‘If something bad happens to Musa, who should we follow?’ Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) replied, ‘Follow his son!’ I asked, ‘If something happens to him,
while he has an elder brother and a little child, who should we follow?’
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) answered, ‘Follow his son, and this will continue
forever.’”[^8]

Tahir Ibn Muhammad has said, “I saw Imam Sadiq (a.s.), who was preaching
his son, Abdullah, saying, ‘Why are you not like your brother? By Allah
that I see a light in his face.’ Abdullah told his father, ‘Don’t we
have the same father?’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, ‘He is from my essence
and you are my son.’”[^9]

Ya’qub Sarraj has said, “I went to see Imam Sadiq (a.s.), who was
standing beside the cradle of Abul Hasan, talking to him quietly for a
long time. I waited until his talking finished. Then I approached Imam
(a.s.). He told me, ‘Go to your master and greet him.’ I approached the
child and said hello. He said hello eloquently and said, ‘Change your
newborn daughter’s name; Allah dislikes such a name.’ My daughter was
born some time ago and I had named her Humiyra’. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) told
me, ‘Obey my son’s order!’ So I changed my daughter’s name.”[^10]

Safwan Jammal has said, “I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘Who is the Muslim’s
guardian?’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.) answered, ‘He is someone who avoids useless
works.’ Then Abul Hasan came in with a little lamb in his arms, saying
to it, ‘Perform sajdah for Allah!’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.) hugged him and
said, ‘May my parents be sacrificed for you that do not do useless
works.’”[^11]

‘Is’haq Ibn Ja’far has said, “One day, I was with my father (Imam Sadiq
(a.s.)). Ali Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Ali told him, ‘Who will the people and I
restore to after you?’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘The one wearing two
pieces of yellow cloth and has two crimps of hair that is coming now.’
Soon the door opened and Abu Ibrahim Musa entered, who was a child then
wearing two pieces of yellow cloth.”[^12]

Muhammad Ibn Walid has said, “I heard from Ali Ibn Ja’far Ibn Muhammad
Sadiq (a.s.), ‘I heard from my father, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad (a.s.),
addressing some of his close companions, ‘I recommend you follow my son,
Musa, because he is my best son. He will be the caliph and guardian of
the people after me.’ ‘”[^13]

In conclusion, Shiykh Mufid has written, “Ali Ibn Ja’far loved his
brother, Musa, very much, followed him, and learned religious
commandments from him. Ali asked Musa many questions and narrated his
answers to others.”[^14]

Nasr Ibn Qabus has said, “I went to see Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and asked him,
‘Who will be the Imam after you?’ Imam (a.s.) answered, ‘My son, Abul
Hasan Musa Ibn Ja’far will be the Imam after me.’”[^15]

Suliyman Ibn Khalid said, “One day, we were with Imam Sadiq (a.s.). He
called his son, Abul Hasan, and told us, ‘Refer to him after me! By
Allah that he will be your guardian.’”[^16]

Dawud Ibn Kathir has said, “I told Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘May I sacrifice
for you! If something happens to you, who should I refer to?’ Imam
(a.s.) answered, ‘refer to my son, Musa.’ After Imam Sadiq’s (a.s.)
demise, I never doubted about the Imamate of Musa.”[^17]

Muhammad Ibn Sanan and Abu Ali Zarrad have narrated from ‘Ibrahim
Karkhi, “I was with Imam Sadiq (a.s.) when Abul Hasan, Musa Ibn Ja’far,
who was a child, came in. I stood up, kissed his face, and then sat
down. Then Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘He will be your guardian after
me.’”[^18]

The above-mentioned were few examples of many traditions about Imamate
of Imam Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.). Moreover, many miracles have been cited
from him, which cannot be pointed out in this brief work.

Virtues
-------

Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.), like his fathers, was a perfect human in terms of
all good characteristics and the best person of his own age. Many of the
scholars have admired his great character.

Ibn Sabbagh Maliki has written, “Musa Al-Kadhim was a great honorable
Imam. He was a unique scholar. He spent his nights in prayers and
worship and his days in fasting. He forgave the sinners a lot, thus he
was called Al-Kadhim. The people of Iraq know him as Babul Hawa’ij (the
answer to all requests).”[^19]

‘Ahmad Ibn Hajar Hiythami has written, “Musa Al-Kadhim was the holder of
his father’s legacy in regard to knowledge, understanding, and virtues.
He was so tolerant that he was called Al-Kadhim. He is entitled Babul
Hawa’ij by Iraqi people. He was the most pious, the most generous person
of his own age.”[^20]

Ibn Sabbagh Maliki has written, “Musa Al-Kadhim was the most pious, most
knowledgeable, most generous, and most forgiver person of his own age.
He identified the poor of Medina and regularly sent money for them,
while they did not know the sender. After his demise, the poor
understood that the help has been from him.”[^21]

Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalani has written about Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.), “His
virtues are numerous.”[^22]

Khatib Baghdadi has narrated from Abdur Rahman Ibn Salih ‘Azadi, “When
Harunur Rashid had gone to *Hajj*, he went to the shrine of Messenger of
Allah (S), along with a group of nobles from Quraysh and other Arab
tribes. Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) accompanied them too. When Harun reached
the holy shrine, he said, ‘Greetings to you, o Messenger of Allah! O my
cousin!’ He wanted to boast about his relationship with the Prophet (S).
Then Musa Ibn Ja’far approached the grave and said, ‘Greetings to you, o
my father!’ Hearing this, Harun’s face changed color and said, ‘O Abul
Hasan! The real honor is about what you said.’”[^23]

Ibn Shahr ashub has written, “Musa Ibn Ja’far was superior to the people
of his own age in terms of jurisprudence and memorization of Quran. He
recited the Holy Quran with a good voice. He wept while reciting it and
the listeners wept too. His stance was above other people. His
generosity was more than others. His speech was more eloquent than that
of others. His heart was braver than others’ hearts. He was honored by
having the guardianship of the people. He received the legacy of prophet
hood. He was appointed to caliphate position.”[^24]

Shiykh Mufid has written, “Imam Abul Hasan Musa (a.s.) was the most
pious, the best jurisprudent, the most generous, and the most forgiver
of the people in his own age.”[^25]

Ali Ibn Abil Fat’h ‘Arbali has narrated from Kamalid Din, “Musa Ibn
Ja’far (a.s.) was a great honorable Imam. He attempted in worshipping
Allah much. His virtues were obvious and his worship was famous. He was
careful in performing the obligatory deeds. He spent his nights in
sajdah and qiyam. He was fasting and giving charity on days. He was so
tolerant that he was entitled Al-Kadhim. He did good to the people who
did bad to him. He was entitled Abd Salih because of his much worship.
He is called Babul Hawa’ij in Iraq. His miracles are numerous, which
show his stance before the Almighty Allah.”[^26]

Ma’mun has said, “I told my father Rashid, ‘O Amiral Mu’minin! Who was
the man you honored so much, stood up when he came in, sat him in your
own place, and ordered us to hold his horse stirrup when leaving?’ My
father answered, ‘He was people’s Imam, Allah’s *Hujjat* for his
servants, and Allah’s caliph.’ I asked, ‘O Amiral Muminin! Don’t you
have these qualities?’ He answered, ‘I am the superficial caliph, who
has taken the place by force. But he is the real Imam. By Allah that he
is more deserved than anyone elses in occupying the Prophet (S)’s
position. By Allah that if you quarrel with me about caliphate, I will
behead you too. Surely sovereignty is helpless.’”[^27]

Knowledge
---------

It was proved in previous sections that a thorough knowledge of all
religious issues is a necessary condition for Imamate. All the
infallible Imams (a.s.) possessed this quality. So was Imam Al-Kadhim
(a.s.). His knowledge and jurisprudence was famous in his own age.
Everyone recognized his scientific position as the jurisprudent of the
people.

Ibn Sabbagh Maliki has written, “Musa Al-Kadhim was the most pious, most
knowledgeable, most generous, and most forgiving person of his own
age.”[^28]

Ma’mun has said, “I asked my father, Rashid, ‘Who was the man you
honored so much?’ He answered, ‘He was Musa Ibn Ja’far; the heir of
sciences of the prophets (S). If you seek true knowledge, it is with
him.’”[^29]

For more information on scientific stance of Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.), you
can refer to traditions narrated from him in tradition books, as well as
his debates with incumbent caliphs, the Sunni scholars, and others.

A researcher called Mr. Atarudi has collected Imam Al-Kadhim’s (a.s.)
traditions about belief, teachings, kalam, jurisprudence, exegesis,
ethics, supplications, history, debates, and even hygiene, benefits of
fruits and vegetables in a book and published it. The narrators of Imam
Al-Kadhim’s (a.s.) traditions, which exceed six hundred and thirty eight
persons, are reviewed in this book.[^30]

Worship
-------

Like his father and grandfathers, Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.), was the most
pious person of his own age. He frequently remembered and worshipped
Allah, prayed, recited Quran and was humble before the Lord of the
worlds. Because of his deep understanding of monotheism and Allah’s
Power and Greatness, he did everything even making a living for Allah’s
sake. Some instances of his worship are cited here, as narrated in
history and tradition books.

Hasan Ibn Muhammad Ibn Yahya ‘Alawi has narrated from his grandfather,
“Musa Ibn Ja’far attempted so much in worship that he was entitled Abd
Salih (the righteous servant).”

Some of Imam Al-Kadhim’s (a.s.) companions have narrated that one night
Imam (a.s.) entered the mosque of Messenger of Allah (S). He had a long
sajdah early at night, saying, “Great sins are with me, good forgiving
is with You! O Lord of pardon and Piety!” And Imam (a.s.) repeated the
same supplication in his sajdah until the dawn.[^31]

Yahya Ibn Hasan has said, “Musa Ibn Ja’far was called Abd Salih because
of his resolution in worship.”[^32]

Ibn Sabbagh has written, “Musa Ibn Ja’far was the most pious, the most
learned, the most generous, and the most tolerant person of his own
age.”[^33]

Ibn Hajar has written, “Musa Al-Kadhim was the most pious, the most
learned, and the most generous person of his age.”[^34]

Ibn Juwzi Hanafi has written, “Musa Al-Kadhim was called Abd Salih
because of determination in worship and the Night Prayer.”[^35]

Shiykh Mufid has written, “Abul Hasan Musa (a.s.) was the most learned
jurisprudent, the most pious, the most generous, and the most tolerant
one in his own age. It is narrated that he linked the Night Prayer to
the Morning Prayer, and then he performed supplications until the
sunrise. He then performed sajdah and recited zikr until noon. He
repeated this prayer a lot, ‘O Allah! I ask You comfort at the time of
death and forgiveness at the time of Reckoning.’ Another prayer of Imam
Musa Al-Kadhim (a.s.) is, ‘My sins are great, so how good is Your
forgiveness!’ He wept so much from Allah’s fear that his holy beard got
wet.”[^36]

The sister of Sandi Ibn Shahak who was a guard in Imam Al-Kadhim’s
(a.s.) prison, says about him, “In prison, Musa Ibn Ja’far had this
daily routine; he began praying and supplication after performing the
Evening Prayer until the midnight, when he performed the night prayer
and lasted it until the morning adhan. Afterwards, he performed the
Morning Prayer and was engaged in prayer and supplication until the
sunrise. Then he rested until the sun rose in the sky.

Afterwards, he brushed his teeth, ate a meal, and slept a little until
before the noon. At noon, he got up, performed wudu, and performed the
Noon Prayer. Then he performed nafilah prayer until the time for
Afternoon Prayer. After performing the Afternoon Prayer, he sat in the
direction of qiblah and remembered Allah until the sunset. After the
Evening Prayer, he performed nafilah prayers until the Night Prayer. He
did the same every day.” Seeing Imam Musa Al-Kadhim (a.s.) in this
state, she said, “The people who misbehave such a pious servant of Allah
will be losers.”[^37]

Ahmad Ibn Abdullah has narrated from his father, “One day, I went to see
Fazl Ibn Rabi’ who was on the roof of his house. He told me, ‘Look at
that house through that window! What do you see?’ I said, ‘I see a
garment on the ground.’ He said, ‘Look more carefully!’ I said again,
‘It is as if a man is performing sajdah.’ He asked me, ‘Do you know him?
He is Musa Ibn Ja’far. I watch him day and night and find him only in
this state. After performing the Morning Prayer, he recites
supplications until the sunrise. Then he performs sajdah until before
the noon. He has hired someone to inform him of prayer times. When he is
informed of the prayer time, he finishes the sajdah and begins praying
without performing ablution again. After performing the Night Prayer, he
breaks his fast, performs ablution, and performs a sajdah again. He
performs prayers from the midnight until the dawn. ‘” Some observers
have heard him say in his supplications, ‘O Allah! I ask You to give me
spare time for Your worship, and if You do it, I will praise you.’[^38]

Ibrahim Ibn Abil Bilad said, “Imam Abul Hasan said, ‘I say
astaghfirullah (I seek Allah’s forgiveness) five thousand times a
day.’”[^39]

Almsgiving
----------

Shiykh Mufid has written, “Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) observed the ties of
kinship. He watched the poor in Medina, sending money, wheat, and dates
for them, while they did not know the sender.”[^40]

Muhammad Ibn Abdullah Bikri has said, “I went to Medina to borrow money,
but I found no one who could lend me. I thought to myself that I’d
better go to Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.). I went to see him in his farm
outside Medina. He sat beside me, along with his servant, who had a
colorful bowl of cooked meat. Imam (a.s.) and I ate the meat. Then he
asked about my request. When I talked about my need, he went and brought
a bag. First, he told his servant to leave and then gave me the bag of
three hundred dinars. Then he left me, too. I got the money, rode my
horse, and returned home.”[^41]

‘Isa Ibn Muhammad, a ninety-year-old man said, “I had built a farm
beside Umm ‘Izam shaft and grew watermelon, cucumbers, and gourd. When
the harvest was near, suddenly grasshoppers attacked the farm and
destroyed it. I had spent a hundred and twenty dinars plus the work of
two camels for my farm. I had sat down, thinking of the loss when Musa
Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) came to me and greeted me. I told him the story. He
said, ‘How much have you spent?’ I said, ‘A hundred and twenty dinars,
plus the work of two camels.’ Imam (a.s.) told his agent, ‘Give a
hundred and fifty dinars to Abil Ghiyth!’ Then he added, ‘Thirty dinars
is your profit.’ I told Imam (a.s.), ‘O son of Messenger of Allah! Pray
for me so that Allah will increase my profit.’ So Imam (a.s.) prayed for
me.”[^42]

Some of the scholars have said, “The grant of Musa Ibn Ja’far was always
two hundred to three hundred dinars, in a way that his gift bags of
money were famous.”[^43]

Mansur asked Imam Musa Al-Kadhim (a.s.) to stay at home so that Mansur
could visit him on Nuruz. Imam (a.s.) answered, “I searched in documents
of my grandfather, the messenger of Allah (S), but found nothing about
Nuruz. It is a Persian tradition, ignored in Islam. I do not want to
revitalize it.” Mansur told Imam (a.s.), “Holding Nuruz ceremony is good
as a policy of the army. I ask you by Allah to accept it.” Imam (a.s.)
accepted and stayed at home. The army commanders and leaders visited
Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.), congratulated him, and presented gifts. Mansur’s
servant supervised the gifts.

After the session, an old man came to Imam (a.s.) and said, “O son of
Fatimah, daughter of Messenger of Allah (S)! I am a poor man. I had
nothing to bring as gift for you. But my grandfather composed three
lines of poem in calamity of your grandfather, Imam Husayn (a.s.). I
present it to you.” Then the old man recited the poem. Imam Musa Ib
Ja’far (a.s.) told him, “I accept your gift.” Then Imam (a.s.) told
Mansur’s servant, “Go to your master, report the list of gifts to him,
and ask what we should do with them.” The servant went to Mansur, then
returned and told Imam (a.s.), “My master said that he grants all the
gifts to you and you can spend them as you wish.” Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.)
told that old man, “I grant all this property to you.”[^44]

It is narrated that one of progeny of ‘Umar Ibn Khattab lived in Medina.
He always teased Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.) and cursed Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.). Some of Imam’s (a.s.) companions told him, “Let us kill this
man!” Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.) severely prohibited them. One day, Imam
(a.s.) asked about that man and he was told, “He is working in his
farm.”

Imam Musa Al-Kadhim (a.s.) rode his donkey and went toward the man’s
farm. The man wondered of Imam’s (a.s.) coming. Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.)
sat, smiled, and asked, “How much have you spent for your farm?”

- One hundred dinars.

- How much profit do you expect?

- I cannot foretell.

- How much you hope to benefit?

- I hope to have two hundred dinars.

Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.) granted him three hundred dinars and said, “The
farm is for you too.” The man raised and kissed the forehead of Imam
Al-Kadhim (a.s.).

Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) returned to Medina. Another day, Imam (a.s.) went
to the mosque and saw that man there. He told Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.),
***“God knoweth best where (and how) to carry out His mission.”***[^45]
The man’s friends opposed his new behavior toward Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.).
He argued with them and lauded Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.). From then on, he
always praised Imam Al-Kadhim (a.s.).

Imam Musa Al-Kadhim (a.s.) told his companions who had proposed to kill
that man, “Was your suggestion better or my conduct for reforming this
man?”[^46]

Mu’tab has said, “When the fruits became ripe, Imam Musa Ibn Ja’far
(a.s.) told us, ‘Sell the fruits in the bazaar and buy our needs every
day, just like other Muslims.’”[^47]

[^1]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 215; Biharul Anwar, Vol 48, pp. 1, 6 & 7;
Matalibul Mas’ul, Vol 2, p. 120; Al-Fusulul Muhimmah, p. 214; Manaqib
‘Ali Abi Talib, Vol 4, p. 348; Kashful Ghummah, Vol 3, pp 1-9.

[^2]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, pp. 237-243.

[^3]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 216; Kashful Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 9.

[^4]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 217; Kashful Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 9.

[^5]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 217; Al-Fusulul Muhimmah, p. 213; Kashful
Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 10.

[^6]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 217; Al-Fusulul Muhimmah, p. 213; Kashful
Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 10.

[^7]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 218; Al-Fusulul Muhimmah, p. 214; Kashful
Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 10.

[^8]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 218; Al-Fusulul Muhimmah, p. 214; Kashful
Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 10.

[^9]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 218; Kashful Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 10.

[^10]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 219; ‘Ithbatul Wasiyyah, p. 162; Kashful
Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 11.

[^11]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 219.

[^12]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 219.

[^13]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 220.

[^14]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 220.

[^15]: ‘Ithbatul Wasiyyah, p. 162.

[^16]: Kashful Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 11.

[^17]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 48, p. 14.

[^18]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 48, p. 15.

[^19]: Al-Fusulul Muhimmah, p. 213.

[^20]: Al-Sawa’iqul Muharriqah, p. 203.

[^21]: Al-Fusulul Muhimmah, p. 219.

[^22]: Tahdhibut Tahdhib, Vol 10, p. 340.

[^23]: Tarikh Baghdad, Vol 13, p. 31.

[^24]: Manaqib ‘Ali Abi Talib, Vol 4, p. 348.

[^25]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 231.

[^26]: Kashful Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 1.

[^27]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 48, p. 131.

[^28]: Al-Fusulul Muhimmah, p. 219.

[^29]: Manaqib ‘Ali Abi Talib, Vol 4, p. 335.

[^30]: Musnad Al-Imam Al-Kazim (a.s.) in three volumes.

[^31]: Tarikh Baghdad, Vol 13, p. 27.

[^32]: Tahdhibut Tahdhib, Vol 10, p. 340.

[^33]: Al-Fusulul Muhimmah, p. 219.

[^34]: Al-Sawa’iqul Muharriqah, p. 203.

[^35]: Tadhkiratul Khawas, p. 348.

[^36]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 231.

[^37]: Tarikh Baghdad, Vol 13, p. 31.

[^38]: Manaqib ‘Ali Abi Talib,Vol 4, p. 343.

[^39]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 48, p. 119.

[^40]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 231; Al-Fusulul Muhimmah, p. 219.

[^41]: Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 232; Tarikh Baghdad, Vol 13, p. 28.

[^42]: Tarikh Baghdad, Vol 13, p. 29; Kashful Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 7.

[^43]: Kashful Ghummah, Vol 3, p. 19.

[^44]: Manaqib ‘Ali Abi Talib, Vol 4, p. 344.

[^45]: Surah Al-‘An’am 6: 124.

[^46]: Tarikh Baghdad, Vol 13, p. 28; Al-‘Irshad, Vol 2, p. 233.

[^47]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 48, p. 117.


