Chapter 1: Characteristics of the Imam
======================================

Lexical Definition of Imamate
-----------------------------

Imamate means leadership and Imam is attributed to someone –either
righteous or vicious– whose conduct and ideas are followed by the
people. The leader of the pious and the leader of the evildoer are both
called Imam. Both meanings are mentioned in the Holy Quran too.

The Holy Quran states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنا مِنْهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنا لَمّا صَبَرُوا
وَكانُوا بِآياتِنا يُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We appointed, from among them, leaders, giving guidance under
Our command, so long as they persevered with patience and continued to
have faith in Our Signs.”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْناهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَدْعُونَ إِلَى‏‌ النّارِ وَيَوْمَ القِيامِةِ
لا يُنْصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And we made them (but) leaders inviting to the Fire; and on the Day
of Judgment no help shall they find.”***[^2]

Definition and Position of Imamate
----------------------------------

Imamate has been a fundamental Islamic belief since Early Islamic Era.
It has divided the Islamic Ummah (nation) into two group; the Sunni and
the Shiah, each of which having different definitions of Imamate. Abdur
Rahman Lahiji, a Sunni scholar, defines Imamate as:

Imamate is not an Islamic fundamental for us; rather it is one of
obligatory commandments, unlike the Shiah that consider it as an Islamic
principle. Some have defined Imamate as the leadership of the public in
worldly and religious issues. However, a better definition of it is the
caliphate of Prophet Muhammad (S) in establishing the religion and
maintaining the Muslims’ unity. Obeying such a caliph is then obligatory
for all the Muslims.[^3]

As is clear, the Sunni Muslims consider Imamate a worldly position, and
an Islamic fundamental. They regard the necessity of appointing Imam a
jurisprudential issue and appointment of him the duty of Islamic Ummah,
unlike the Shiah, who know Imamate as an Islamic fundamental, after
Prophethood. The Shiah define Imamate as succession and caliphate of the
Messenger of Allah (S) in all prophetic duties and ranks, except
relation with the invisible world and receiving revelation, which are
only for the prophets (a.s.).

The Prophet’s Positions
-----------------------

It is proved in *Kalam*[^4] books that Prophet of Islam (S) had several
positions during his lifetime:

1. Having relation with the invisible world and getting revelation from
the Almighty Allah,

2. Maintaining religious knowledge, teachings, commandments, and laws
descended as revelation,

3. Propagating this heavenly collection among the people, answering
their questions, and fighting superstition,

4. Enforcing political, social, judiciary, economic, legal, and punitive
Islamic commandments, defending Islam and the Muslims, and establishing
Islamic government.

Prophet Muhammad (S) was always away from mistakes and forgetfulness in
fulfilling these duties. He was also infallible and away from committing
sins and crimes. If a prophet is not infallible, religious commandments
and rules are not guaranteed and Divine Mercy is not accomplished.

This is, in fact, the Shiah viewpoint, who believe that just as human
being needs Divine knowledge, teachings, and rules revealed to prophets
(a.s.) for reaching material and spiritual perfection, he needs to have
an infallible leader who undertakes the Prophet(S)’s responsibilities
and follow his goals in the absence of the Prophet (S) throughout
history. Otherwise, the prophets’ (a.s.) mission in guiding human beings
will remain incomplete.

Human need for religious sciences and teachings is not limited to the
Prophet (S)’s age; humans need this Divine Source of knowledge in all
ages. The short time of Prophet Muhammad (S)’s prophetic mission did not
secure this continual need; especially because of termination of
prophetic missions ever.

The Shiah Muslims know the Imam as a brilliant complete human, who
succeeds the Prophet of Islam (S) and undertakes all his duties, except
receiving revelation.

The Duties of the Imam
----------------------

The characteristics and duties of the Imam are as follows.

1. He knows all sciences, teachings, commandment, and rules of the
religion, not from revelation, but through the Prophet (S)’s training
and other sources that will be mentioned later.

2. He tries to propagate Islamic teachings and commandments and fight
religious deviations.

3. He enforces political, social, judiciary, legal, punitive, and
economic rules of Islam; that is he continues the Prophet (S)’s Islamic
government based on Islamic criteria.

4. The Imam, like the Prophet (S), is completely away from mistakes,
forgetfulness, and intentional wrongdoing. He is, in fact, infallible;
otherwise, Allah’s purpose of guiding humans and introducing the true
path toward perfection would remain incomplete and His Mercy would not
be accomplished.

The Shiah argue for human need to the Imam, his knowledge and
infallibility, and the necessity of his appointment by the Almighty
Allah based on the famous Mercy (lutf) principle, considering the
existence and appointment of the Imam as a sign of Allah’s Mercy.

The late Allamah Hilli writes, “The existence of Imam is because of
Allah’s Mercy and appointing the Imam is obligatory upon the Exalted
Allah, so that His purpose is accomplished!”[^5]

The Imamiyyah (Shiah) Muslims know the Imam a noble person, who is the
best one in his age in regard to belief, commitment to ethical virtues,
true knowledge of Islamic commandments and rules, and devoutness, after
the Messenger of Allah (S). He is infallible and away from mistakes,
forgetfulness, wrongdoing, and sins. Only such a person can be the
Prophet (S)’s successor and the people’s leader.

The Sunni Muslims, however, do not necessitate these conditions for the
successor of Prophet Muhammad (S). They even do not nullify the
probability of mistakes or wrongdoing for him. They think that
qualification for ruling and managing worldly issues suffices for the
Imam. The Sunni Muslims consider obeying the Imam obligatory for the
people and opposing him forbidden.

The Imam as Mentioned in Traditions
-----------------------------------

There are many traditions, which define the Imam and Imamate, one of
which we mention here. The eighth infallible Imam of the Shiah, Imam
Ridha’ (a.s.) stated,

Imamate is the position of the prophets (S) and the heritage of their
successors. Imamate is caliphate of Allah and His Messenger and the
position of Amiral Mu’minin, Imam Ali (a.s.), Imam Hasan (a.s.), and
Imam Husayn (a.s.). Imamate is governing Muslims’ religion and system,
worldly prosperity and honor.

Imamate is the basis of blossoming tree of Islam and its young branches.
The Imam manages well the issues related to *Salat* (regular prayers),
*Sawm* (fasting), *Zakat* (statutory Islamic levy), *Hajj* (pilgrimage
of the ka’bah), *Jihad*, developing government properties, *Sadaqat*
(alms), execution of commandments and *Hudud* (Islamic punishment
defined for specific sins), and guarding the boundaries.

The Imam is Allah’s trusted servant among the people, His *Hujjat*
(sign) for the servants, His caliph in lands, inviter to Allah’s
religion, and protector of Allah’s sanctuary. The Imam is infallible and
away from sins and vices. He is abound with knowledge and patience, the
pillar of religion, honor of Muslims, and the cause of anger and perish
of the infidel and the heterodox. The Imam is a unique personality in
his own age; no one can replace him and no scholar reaches his
scientific stance. The Imam’s virtues and goodness are not obtainable;
rather he has reached such a position by Allah’s Mercy.[^6]

Characteristics of the Imam
---------------------------

According to the tradition of Imam Ridha’ (a.s.), the Imam is a noble
personality with the following characteristics:

1. He is completely away from committing sins; he is infallible.

2. He has unobtainable sciences, which are granted to him by the Exalted
Allah.

3. He is patient in dealing with the people and fulfilling his duties.

4. His position is the position of the prophets (a.s.).

5. He is Allah’s caliph and the successor of the Messenger of Allah.

6. His government organizes Muslims’ affairs and gives them honor and
prosperity.

7. Islamic rules and commandments are enforced in his government;
*Salat*, *Sawm*, *Zakat*, *Hajj*, and *Jihad*. Religious *Hudud* are
executed and Islamic country’s boundaries are protected.

8. The Imamate is steady tree of Islam, whose branches are always
spreading in the world.

9. The Imam is Allah’s trustee and His *Hujjat* for the servants. He
invites the people toward Allah and defends Allah’s commandments.

10. The Imam is a unique person in his own age; no one is like him, nor
can anyone reach his position.

11. The Imam honors Muslims, but angers and perishes the infidel and the
heterodox.

The Necessity of Obeying the Imam
---------------------------------

The Holy Quran has placed obeying the Imam in the same rank as obeying
the Almighty Allah and His Messenger (S);

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أَيُّها الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطيعُوا الرَّسُولَ
وَأُولِى‏‌ الأمْرِ مِنْكُمْ فَإِنْ تَنازَعْتُمْ فِى‏‌ شَى‏‌ءٍ
فَرُدُّوهُ إِلَى‏‌ اللَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ
بِاللَّهِ وَاليَوْمِ الآخِرِ ذ لِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O ye who believe! Obey God, and obey the Messenger, and those
charged with authority among you. If ye differ in anything among
yourselves, refer it to God and His Messenger, if ye do believe in God
and the Last Day: That is best, and most suitable for final
determination.”***[^7]

In this verse, obeying three ones is considered obligatory for the
believers:

1. The Almighty Allah has created humans and all the blessings for them,
so appreciating the Creator is a logical issue.

One of the Divine blessings is sending the prophets (a.s.) along with
Divine guidelines. Allah’s Mercy necessitates that He regulate
guidelines and plans for humans’ worldly and spiritual perfection and
send them by His messengers, so that the people are guided to the true
path and warned against evilness and wrongdoing. In other words,
following the Divine commandments and obeying the prophets (S) are to
the benefit of the servants, hence logically obligatory.

2. The Prophet of Islam (S) is the second one whose obeying is
considered obligatory in the mentioned Quranic verse. Prophet Muhammad
(S) received messages from Allah through revelation and declared them to
the people. Moreover, the Almighty Allah had allowed him to issue
commandments in two cases. First he was allowed to issue commandments in
various jurisprudential fields based on heavenly revelations and propose
them to the believers. Second, since he was the Muslims’ leader and
managed their social and political issues, he was permitted to make
rules based on the expediency of the Islamic Ummah and in framework of
general Islamic commandments and execute them. These rules are literally
called ‘governmental commandments’.

Based on the mentioned Quranic verse, obeying the Prophet (S) is
obligatory in this case too. This verse is also a proof for Prophet
Muhammad (S)’s infallibility, or else obeying him absolutely was
unjustified.

3. The Ulul Amr (those charged with authority). Although ulul amr
apparently includes all the leaders and rulers, it should only mean the
infallible rulers, because obeying them is considered absolutely
obligatory. As mentioned before, obeying the fallible is religiously and
logically baseless. As a result, ulul amr –as mentioned in the Quranic
verse under discussion- means the Prophet (S)’s successors or the
infallible Imams (a.s.), who are responsible for ruling the Islamic
ummah after the Messenger of Allah (S) and manage the Islamic country.
Some traditions interpret ulul amr as the infallible from the Prophet
(S)’s Household.

Husayn Ibn Abil ‘Ala’ says, “I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘Is obeying the
successors of Messenger of Allah (S) obligatory?’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
answered, ‘Yes. They are the people about whom the Exalted Allah said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِى‏‌ الأمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘Obey Allah and obey the Apostle’***

And He stated,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّما وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكاةَ وَهُمْ راكِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘(Your (real) friends are (no less than) God, His Apostle, and the
(fellowship of) believers,- those who establish regular prayers and
regular charity, and they bow down humbly (in
worship).***[^8]***)”***[^9]

Therefore, the infallible Imams (a.s.) were the possessors of the
Prophet (S)’s sciences and attempted in circulating them. Moreover,
Prophet Muhammad (S) had allowed them to make necessary laws in case
there was no explicit text in Holy Quran, based on Muslims’ expediency
and time and place requirements and execute these so called
‘governmental laws’.

The Imam’s Knowledge from a Logical Point of View
-------------------------------------------------

The main goal of Prophet Muhammad (S)’s mission was training and
refining humans. In addition to reciting and teaching the Holy Quran,
the Messenger of Allah (S) interpreted Quranic verses and explained
vague points when necessary. He mentioned transformer and obsolete,
general and specific, absolute and conditional verses. He presented
religious commandments and rules that he obtained from revelation to the
people. He spread true beliefs and fought superstition and wrong ideas.
He invited the people to moral virtues and prohibited from vices. He had
necessary knowledge about all these teachings and sciences from
revelation or logic; hence he could accomplish these duties well,
directing his followers to the right path.

The Imam, who is the successor to the Prophet (S) and continues his
path, should possess all these sciences to be able to fulfill his
responsibilities; otherwise there will be no valid guarantee for
continuation of religion. In other words, the Imam should have all the
sciences of the Prophet (S), except that the Prophet gets them directly
via the Divine revelation but the Imam gets them from the Prophet (S).

The Imam’s Knowledge in Traditions
----------------------------------

In various traditions, knowing religious sciences, teachings, and
commandments is considered a necessary condition of the Imam. Imam
Ridha’ (a.s.) has stated, “In fact, the Almighty Allah grants success to
the prophets and Imams and benefits them from His treasure of sciences
and maxims like no one else. Therefore, their knowledge is superior to
that of the people in their own age. The Holy Quran states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ يَهْدِى‏‌ إِلَى‏‌ الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَنْ يَتَّبَعَ أَمَّنْ لا
يَهِدِّى‏‌ إِلّا أَنْ يُهْدى‏‌ فَما لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is then He Who gives guidance to truth more worthy to be followed,
or he who finds not guidance (himself) unless he is guided? What then is
the matter with you? How judge ye?”***[^10]

And also,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُؤْتَ الحِكْمَةَ فَقَدْ أُوتِىَ خَيْراً كَثِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He to whom wisdom is granted receiveth indeed a benefit overflowing;
but none will grasp the Message but men of understanding.***[^11]

When the Almighty Allah selects one of His servants for managing other
servants, He grants him patience, fills his heart with knowledge, and
continuously reveals His sciences to him. Therefore he is not disabled
from answering questions and does not become bewildered in finding the
truth.” [^12]

Imam Ali (a.s.) stated, “O people! The most deserving person for Imamate
is the most powerful one among you in managing the issues and the most
learned one in Divine commandments. If someone was going to plot
sedition after taking oath of allegiance, he is asked to leave it and if
he did not accept, he is fought with.”[^13]

Amiral Mu’minin, Imam Ali (a.s.), also stated, “The Imam is aware of the
lawful and the unlawful, the obligatory and recommended deeds and
Allah’s commandments. He is needless to the people and everyone needs
him.” [^14]

He has also stated, “Learn the true path to salvation from those who
know this path (the Ahlul Bayt). They are revivers of knowledge and
removers of ignorance. Their commandments reveal their knowledge to you.
Their silence shows their speech style. Their appearance is the sign of
their inside. They never oppose the religion and have no controversy
over it.”[^15]

The first infallible Imam of the Shi’ah also described the Prophet (S)’s
Ahlul Bayt this way, “They pondered in the religion as they should,
learned it, and used it, not merely hear it and transfer to others. The
narrators of knowledge are numerous, but safe guarders of it are
little.”[^16]

Conclusion of Prophethod and Accomplishment of Religion
-------------------------------------------------------

As the Holy Quran explicitly states, the Prophet of Islam is the last
prophet and there will be no prophets after him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما كانَ مُحَمَّدٌ أَبا أَحَدٍ مِنْ رِجالِكُمْ وَلكِنْ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ
وَخاتَمَ النَّبِيِّينَ وَكانَ اللَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَى‏‌ءٍ عَلِيما
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but (he is) the
Apostle of God, and the Seal of the Prophets: and God has full knowledge
of all things.***[^17]

The end of prophet hood is a fundamental idea in Islam and the Islamic
Ummah has consensus over it. Therefore, Islam is a religion forever and
suffices human need for a religion in all times and all places.
Moreover, since Prophet Muhammad (S) is the last prophet, revelation has
ended after him. This is explicitly stated in Nahjul Balaghah of Imam
Ali (a.s.) and some traditions.

Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) stated, “The Exalted Allah sent Prophet Muhammad
(S) at a time when there were no prophets and the people were in
controversy. Therefore, He sent the Prophet (S) after other prophets and
the revelation ended after him.” [^18]

As a result, at the time of Prophet Muhammad (S)’s demise all religious
commandments and rules should have been presented to the people and the
religion been completed, as is explicitly stated in the Holy Quran.

The Holy Quran says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ يَئِسَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ دِينِكُمْ فَلا تَخْشَوْهُمْ
وَاخْشَوْنِ اليَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ وَأَتْمَمْتُ
عَلَيْكُمْ نِعْمَتِى‏‌ وَرَضِيتُ لَكُمُ الإِسْلامَ دِيناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***This day have I perfected your religion for you, completed My favor
upon you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion.***[^19]

There is controversy among Quran interpreters about the important day
mentioned in this verse, in which Islam is completed and stabilized and
the infidels got disappointed of nullifying it. After precise detailed
discussions and reviewing some traditions, the late Allamiyi Tabataba’i
concludes that the important day mentioned in the Quranic verse is
eighteenth of Zil Hajjah (the last lunar month) and during Prophet
Muhammad’s Hajjatul Wida’ (the last *Hajj* pilgrimage)[^20].

As mentioned in traditions and history books, the Messenger of Allah
(S), who was returning from his last *Hajj* pilgrimage, gathered the
pilgrims in Ghadir land on this day. After performing a sermon, he
formally appointed Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) to the Imamate position and
during a long tradition he said, “Anyone whose Imam is I, so now Ali
(a.s.) is his Imam. O Lord! Love those who love him and dislike those
who dislike him!”

The Messenger of Allah (S) did two things in that historical day. First,
he introduced the Holy Quran and his Household (the Ahlul Bayt) as two
valid scientific sources, saying, “Anyone who follows these two sources
will not go astray.” Second, he introduced Imam Ali (a.s.) as his first
successor and Imam from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Since the Prophet of Islam (S) had chosen Ali (a.s.) as the guardian of
prophet hood sciences during his prophecy and attempted well in training
him, Islam was completed by appointing him as the Imam of the ummah; a
trustworthy guardian and executer of religious sciences. In such
conditions, the mentioned verse was revealed to the Messenger of Allah
(S).

How the ‘completion of religion’ by the Almighty Allah is justified,
except that the Prophet (S) taught all religious commandments and rules
part by part or wholly to Imam Ali (a.s.) during his lifetime and to
other Imams (a.s.) via Imam Ali (a.s.).

It should also be remembered that the rules and commandments mentioned
in the Holy Quran or left from Prophet Muhammad (S) do not satisfy the
needs of people in that age and later eras. That is why the Sunni
jurisprudents were forced to use qiyas (analogy), istihsan (using Imams’
speech), or other principles for deducting religious commandments.

The Range of Imam’s Knowledge
-----------------------------

The range of Imam’s knowledge is similar to that of prophet hood
knowledge for fulfilling the prophet hood mission and conveying Allah’
guidance to human beings. It is understood from the Mercy Theorem that
since human is not able to provide his own physical and spiritual
salvation he needs divine guidance sent by the prophets (S).

Therefore, the prophet receives from Allah everything humans need for
seeking the path toward Allah and presents them to humans. The Imam, as
the Prophet (S)’s successor, continues the Prophet (S)’s mission, hence
he should know the prophet’s sciences. The necessary prophet hood and
Imamate sciences can be divided to six parts, as follows:

First, worshipping issues have the greatest role in guaranteeing
heavenly salvation. These are, in fact, religious obligatory and
recommended deeds, such as prayer, fasting, *Hajj*, supplication,
alms-giving, *Jihad*, etc. The Prophet (S) and the Imams (a.s.) are
completely aware of the quality, prelude, conditions, and other related
issues of performing these worshipping duties and they guide the people
in this regard.

Second, unlawful worshipping deeds are considered obstacles to seeking
the path to salvation. Examples of such deeds are usury, bribery,
drinking wine, oppression, usurp, dishonesty in transactions, adultery,
etc. The Prophet (S) and Imams (a.s.) are quite aware of these vices and
forbid people from committing them.

Third, belief principles –that are theology and Resurrection– are the
basis of the Prophet (S)’s and Imams’ (a.s.) mission. Although attention
to Allah and Resurrection is set in human temperament and can be
discovered by thinking, they are often neglected and need to be
revitalized and completed in human nature by the Prophet (S) and the
Imams (a.s.).

This way Allah’s hujjah (reasoning) is completed for the servants. To
this end, the first human on the earth was a prophet. Therefore, the
prophet and the Imam should have a firm belief in belief principles and
know the related issues to be able to guide the people to it too.

Fourth, attending to ethics as well as avoiding the vices have a major
role in human worldly and heavenly salvation. Though, understanding
goodness of morality and obscenity of evilness is set in human
temperament, he needs a guide in recognizing good and evil and having a
desirable behavior, because of his powerful carnal instincts. That is
why refinement of the soul has been considered a major purpose of the
prophets. The prophet and the Imam should be familiar with virtues and
vices. They should be adorned with virtues and away from vices to lead
the people in this way by their knowledge and behavior.

Fifth, political and social issues or government-related rules and
commandments, such as judgment, retaliation (*Qisas*), *Hudud*, *Diyah*
(blood money), *Ta’zirat* (Islamic punishment limits), *Jihad*, defense,
*Khums* (Islamic one-fifth tax), *Zakat* (Islamic statutory levy), war
booties, state property, etc. One of the jobs of Prophet Muhammad (S)
was governing the Islamic society.

This needed certain rules, some of which were descended by revelation
and he was allowed by the Exalted Allah to deduct some others and then
execute them based on expediency of Islamic system. This type of rules
called governmental rules was obligatory for Muslims. After the Prophet
(S)’s demise, this duty was put to his successor, who was permitted to
deduct and execute necessary rules according to the interests of Islamic
ummah. Therefore, the Imam should know all the social and political
rules.

Sixth, customary issues that are related to different transactions,
heritage, will, matrimony, divorce, etc. Although such issues are
customary and have existed in all ages including the Prophet (S)’s era,
they are considered Islamic commandments because they have been
rejected, validated, modified, or completed by the Messenger of Allah
(S). As a result, the Imam should know the related issues. Certainly the
Imam can modify such issues too, considering the interests of Islamic
ummah and time and place necessities.

The Prophet (S)’s Traditions as Source of Imams’ Knowledge
----------------------------------------------------------

The main source of infallible Imams’ sciences is the traditions
presented by Messenger of Allah (S) to Imam Ali (a.s.) and Imam Ali
(a.s.) recorded. He then presented these to his successor, Imam Hasan
(a.s.), and later to other infallible Imams (a.s.) in the same way.

Here is how this tradition collection was compiled: Islamic rules and
commandments were revealed to Prophet Muhammad (S) during his 23-year
mission in two ways; first, in the form of the Holy Quran, whose
illuminating verses were descended to Prophet (S)’s heart and second, as
traditions, whose phrases were revealed to his heart in various
instances.

The Messenger of Allah (S) recited the very Quranic verses to the
Muslims and especially to Imam Ali (a.s.). He recommended Imam Ali
(a.s.) –who was able to read and write– record and maintain Quranic
verses for future Muslims. There were, of course, other people, who
wrote all Quranic verses or memorized them. Still there were some others
who wrote or memorized only some of the verses.

The traditions were, however, dealt with differently. Though Prophet
Muhammad (S) conveyed the rules and commandments he received through
revelation for his companions, they were not committed to write or
memorize the exact words of the Prophet (S) and transmit them to others.
They either quoted from the Prophet (S)’s traditions approximately or
ignored them and forgot them later. Of course there were people among
the companions who were committed to writing or memorizing the
traditions of the Prophet (S), but unfortunately they were scarce.

Islamic general issues and jurisprudential minor points were very
enormous. They should have been kept for Muslims outside Medina –Prophet
Muhammad’ city– and later generations. Moreover, many jurisprudential
issues were not related to simple life of the people in that age to be
asked from Prophet Muhammad (S) and answered by him. That is while Islam
is the everlasting religion and should respond to human needs in all
ages and places.

The Messenger of Allah (S) who was aware of present and future
conditions of Islamic ummah should have found a solution for this
scientific problem; maintaining all religious rules, commandments,
teachings, and sciences in a safe position, which was immune from
mistakes and forgetfulness. This position was not but the luminous heart
of Imam Ali (a.s.). Prophet Muhammad (S) attended to this important duty
–by Allah’s revelation and support– from the outset of his mission to
his demise. He transmitted whatever he received from revelation to Imam
Ali (a.s.). Imam Ali (a.s.) in turn attempted at exact recording and
maintaining the information and was supported by the Almighty Allah in
this major duty.

Imam Ali (a.s.) stated, “Once, the Messenger of Allah (S) embraced me
and said, ‘The Exalted Allah has ordered not to distance you from myself
so that you hear my words and remember them.’ Then this Quranic verse
was revealed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَعِيَها أُذُنٌ واعِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and that ears (that should hear the tale and) retain its memory
should bear its (lessons) in remembrance.***[^21]***”*** [^22]

Ibn Abbas has quoted from the Prophet (S), “When the holy verse
وَتَعِيَها أُذُنٌ واعِيَةٌ was revealed, I asked my Lord to set that
retaining ear Ali’s ear.” Ibn Abbas then says, “Therefore, Ali (a.s.)
recorded and kept what he had heard from Allah’s Messenger and never
forgot it.”[^23]

Imam Ali (a.s.) says, “I visited Messenger of Allah (S) every day. We
were alone for an hour or so. I followed him everywhere he went. The
Prophet (S)’s companions know that he did not behave so with others.
Sometimes he came to my house and sometimes I went to him. We then went
to a solitude place. Prophet Muhammad (S) even sent his wives out. When
he came to my house, however, Hadrat Fatimah (s.a.) and my children were
present. I asked him questions and he answered. When my questions
finished, he began speaking. He recited all newly-revealed Quranic
verses for me and I wrote them down. He explained exegesis, transformer,
outdated, strong, similar, specific, and general of the verses.

He had asked Allah to grant me ability to understand and memorize them;
therefore, I did not forget any Quranic verse or scientific information
I had written down. Prophet Muhammad (S) taught me the whole knowledge
Allah had taught him, including *halal* and *haram*, recommended and
prohibited, past and future information, all the heavenly Books of past
prophets (a.s.), and any worship and wrongdoing. I memorized them all
and forgot not even a letter of them. The Messenger of Allah (S) put his
hand on my chest and prayed that the Almighty Allah replete my heart
with knowledge, understanding, wisdom, and light. Then I told him, ‘O
Messenger of Allah! I did not forget anything from the time you prayed
for me. Do you fear that I forget something?’ He said, ‘’No, I do not
fear that you may be forgetful or ignorant.”[^24]

Imam Ali (a.s.) was asked, “Why is it that you have quoted more
traditions from the Messenger of Allah (S) than other companions?” He
answered, “Because when I asked him questions he answered and when I
became silent he began speaking.”[^25]

Imam Ali (a.s.) also said, “By Allah that no verse is revealed except
that I know where and about which subject or person it is revealed. My
Lord has granted me conscious mind and fluent speech.”[^26]

The Prophet Confirms Ali’s Scientific Mastery
---------------------------------------------

Imam Ali (a.s.) could acquire all Islamic sciences, teachings, rules,
and commandments in Prophet Muhammad (S)’s 23-year mission due to his
extraordinary talent, Allah’s support, and the Prophet’s especial
attention to him. This way he became the treasurer of prophet hood
sciences, as confirmed by the Prophet (S) in various occasions too. The
Prophet (S) stated, “O Abal Hasan[^27]! You have drunk out of science
beverage and you have drunk it much.”[^28]

The Messenger of Allah (S) also stated, “I am the house of wisdom and
Ali is its door.”[^29]

Anas Ibn Malik has quoted from the Prophet, who told Imam Ali (a.s.),
“You will state the truth whenever the ummah has controversy over
something after me.”[^30]

Salman Farsi has quoted from Prophet Muhammad (S), “Ali Ibn Abi Talib is
the most learned one in my ummah.”[^31]

Inscription Order
-----------------

Although Imam Ali (a.s.) was away from mistakes and forgetfulness in
keeping traditions, Prophet of Islam (S) ordered him to write down the
sciences the Prophet (S) taught him in a book to be left for next Imams
(a.s.).

Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) has quoted, “The Prophet (S) told me, ‘Write down
what I tell you.’ I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Do you fear that I may
forget?’ He said, ‘I am not afraid of your forgetfulness, because I have
asked the Almighty Allah to set you as guardian of sciences. But write
them down for the Imams from your progeny.’”[^32]

Transmission of Science Books to Other Imams
--------------------------------------------

By Imam Ali’s (a.s.) constant attempt and Prophet Muhammad (S)’s
supervision, prophet hood sciences and religious rules and commandments
were recorded in some books, inherited to each of the infallible Imams
(a.s.) and used by them. The infallible Imams (a.s.) sometimes made
reference to these books in their speeches, calling the books ‘Ali’s
book’, ‘sahifah’, or ‘jami’ah’.

Various traditions include this fact, some of which are pointed out
here:

Abu Maryam has quoted from Imam Baqir (a.s.), “The jami’ah book is with
us (the Prophet’s Ahlul Bayt). It is a script as long as seventy
dhara’[^33]; everything is recorded in it even the diyah (compensation)
of a scrape on the skin. This book is dictated by Messenger of Allah (S)
and hand written by Imam Ali (a.s.). Another book is owned by us called
jafr that is written on a piece of tanned skin. Past, present, and
future sciences until the Hereafter are recorded in it.”[^34]

Abdullah Ibn Sanan has narrated that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said, “There is a
piece of skin of seventy dhira’ with us, dictated by Prophet Muhammad
(S) and in Imam Ali’s (a.s.) handwriting. Whatever the people need
exists in it, even the compensation for a scrape on someone’s
skin.”[^35]

Mu’alli Ibn Khanis has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) who stated, “The
books were with Imam Ali (a.s.). When he traveled to Iraq, he entrusted
them to Umm Salamah. After his demise, they were given to Imam Hasan
(a.s.). After Imam Hasan (a.s.), they were given to Imam Husayn (a.s.)
and after his martyrdom to Ali Ibn Al-Husayn (a.s.), the fourth
infallible Imam. After his demise, they were with my father.”[^36]

Jabir Ibn Hayyan says that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) told him, “O
Jabir! By Allah that if we narrated traditions with our own opinion, we
were certainly perished. Rather, we state traditions from what we have
inherited from Messenger of Allah (S). Just as the people save gold and
silver, our fathers have saved traditions to leave them for us.”[^37]

Ibn Hayyan considers Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, Imam Sadiq (a.s.), as a
trustworthy narrator, saying, “He is among the nobles of Ahlul Bayt
regarding jurisprudence, knowledge, and virtues; his traditions are
reliable. I examined the traditions I narrated from him and found all of
them true. I found nothing opposing the reliable traditions in
them.”[^38]

Conclusion
----------

Some points can be understood from mentioned traditions and many other
similar ones:

1. Islam was completed during Prophet Muhammad(S)’s lifetime and all
required sciences, teachings, and rules were received through
revelation.

2. The Messenger of Allah (S) attempted in publicizing and imparting the
commandments in two ways; first, imparting them to the people and
recommending they maintain and follow the commandments and second,
saving all of the commandments in a secure place completely immune to
forgetfulness and mistakes, that is Imam Ali’s (a.s.) luminous heart.

3. Prophet Muhammad (S) recommended Imam Ali (a.s.) to record and write
the traditions and leave them for the following Imams (a.s.).

4. Therefore, some books were compiled by Imam Ali (a.s.), who used them
after Prophet Muhammad (S)’s demise. After Imam Ali’s martyrdom the
books were given to Imam Hasan (a.s.) and to other infallible Imams
(a.s.) successively.

Reference to the Books
----------------------

The mentioned books were with the infallible Imams (a.s.) and they
attributed their knowledge to them. Each of the Imams (a.s.) transmitted
religious sciences and commandments to his successor in two ways; verbal
training and granting of books and permission to narrate from them. Each
of the Imams attributed his traditions to the Prophet (S) through his
fathers, as is seen in traditions.

Husham Ibn Salim, Hamad Ibn Uthman, and other people have narrated from
Imam Sadiq (a.s.), “My tradition is the tradition of my father and his
tradition is the tradition of my grandfather. The tradition of my
grandfather is the tradition of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his tradition is
the tradition of Imam Hasan (a.s.), whose tradition is the tradition of
Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.). The tradition of Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) is the
tradition of Messenger of Allah (S) and his tradition is the speech of
the Exalted Allah.” [^39]

Jabir says, “I told Imam Baqir (a.s.), ‘When you recite a tradition for
me, please mention its document.’ Imam Baqir (a.s.) said, ‘My father has
narrated traditions from my grandfather and he from Gabriel and he from
the Almighty Allah. Every tradition I recite for you has the same
document. O Jabir! If you acquire a tradition from a truthful narrator,
it will be better than the whole world for you.’” [^40]

Hafs says, “I told Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘I have heard a tradition, which I
am not sure is from you or your father.’ He stated, ‘What you hear from
me you can narrate from my father and the Messenger of Allah (S).’”[^41]

With regard to above-mentioned discussion it can be said that a major
source of knowledge of infallible Imams (a.s.) is the traditions
compiled from Prophet Muhammad’s speech by Imam Ali (a.s.), which is
transmitted to infallible Imams (a.s.). As a result, although the Imams
(a.s.) were deprived of direct revelation, they benefited from
revelation sciences indirectly. Each of the Imams (a.s.) narrated
traditions with the most reliable documents –all whose narrators were
infallible– from direct revelation. What an honor!

The Contents of the Books
-------------------------

Unfortunately, the content of the books is not completely known to us.
We do not know if they only included jurisprudential issues and
commandments or other religion-related issues such as ethics and mental
teachings, or they contained all sciences. We do not know if all
jurisprudential trivial points were recorded in detail in those books or
they only contained principles of jurisprudence, from which the
infallible Imams (a.s.) deducted the minor points. Some traditions imply
that all required issues of the Muslims existed in the books.

Muhammad Ibn Muslim says, “I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘Does your
scientific heritage of the Prophet (S) include main principles or the
exegesis of all the topics people need, such as divorce and legacy as
well?’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.) replied, ‘Imam Ali (a.s.) has written all
scientific issues, even divorce and legacy in that book. If our Imamate
be accepted, we have a tradition in every field, which will be
executed.’”[^42]

Traditions similar to above-mentioned ones reveal that everything, even
the compensation (‘arsh) for a scrape on body skin is recorded in those
books.

Nevertheless, it is improbable that the mentioned books also include all
minor issues in all jurisprudential topics. Everyone familiar with
extensive Islamic jurisprudence confirms that including all related
issues in a single book –even if it is seventy dhara’– is impossible,
especially if it contains other religion-related sciences too. In sum,
the exact content of the books is not known.

The Holy Quran
--------------

The second source of infallible Imams’ sciences is the Holy Quran. This
heavenly book is the main most valid source of Islamic sciences,
teachings, commandments, and rules. The reliability of Holy Quran is
certain, because successive narrations and Muslims’ consensus throughout
history prove that the present text of Quran has revealed from Almighty
Allah to Prophet Muhammad (S)’s luminous heart. He has recited it –with
its rich content– and Imam Ali (a.s.) and other revelation writers have
recorded it and transmitted to Muslims in that era and finally to us.

The Holy Quran has a very rich content to the extent that whatever human
being needs for his salvation in this world and the Hereafter –and has
necessitated sending of the prophets (S) for the Generous Al-wise–
exists in it. The sciences and teachings mentioning which have been
necessary because of Allah’s Mercy as pointed out in Holy Quran are:
major principles about the world Creator, theology and the Almighty
Allah’s Attributes, some of His blessings, the after-death life,
Resurrection, reckoning human deeds in the Hereafter, the Paradise and
rewards of good deeds, the Hell and punishment of evil deeds, Prophet
Muhammad (S) and other prophets (S) and their role in guiding mankind
throughout history, good conduct and its result in human salvation, bad
behavior and its harm, duties of the servants before the Creator, and
the methods of worshipping and thanking Him.

Human should know these issues, ignoring which brings about irreparable
harms. Therefore, common sense necessitates that the All-Merciful never
leaves human without guiding him; rather He sends prophets (S) equipped
with sciences to guide people to the true way.

The Prophet of Islam (S) was appointed to prophet hood for the same
reason and his mission plan is mentioned in the Holy Quran. Prophet
Muhammad (S) is the last messenger and there will be no prophet with a
heavenly book after him. Since human mind is always progressing,
reaching new findings every day and evolving his life, sciences and
teachings of the Holy Quran should be so comprehensive that they fulfill
religious requirements of all times, places, and conditions. The Holy
Quran introduces itself this way,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَزَّلْنا عَلَيْكَ الكِتابَ تِبْياناً لِكُلِّ شَى‏‌ءٍ وَهُدىً
وَرَحْمَةً وَبُشْرى‏‌ لِلْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We have sent down to thee the Book explaining all things, a
Guide, a Mercy, and Glad Tidings to Muslims.***[^43]

In other words, all sciences and teachings that are related to religion
and human beings need are present in the Quran.

It should be borne in mind, however, that though the Holy Quran is an
explanatory guiding book from which every human can benefit as much as
his understanding, it has a very deep inside, which is not captured by
everyone. Different people have different understandings from the Quran
internal meanings, which have led to appearance of Quranic exegesis
(tafsir).

The Quranic verses are not alike; there are indisputable and analogous
verses, cancelling and cancelled verses, general and specific verses,
and absolute and conditional verses. The exegetists of Holy Quran can
compare the verses, ponder, use related sciences, and refer
understanding of analogous verses to the indisputable ones, thus finding
the truth of verses.

An expert exegetist is someone who is completely familiar with Arabic
language, literature, and minute linguistic points, speculative theology
(*ilmul kalam*), philosophy, and other related sciences, as well as all
Quranic verses and traditions of Prophet Muhammad (S). However, not all
exegetists have equal knowledge in these fields. Everyone can benefit
from deep meanings of this heavenly book to the extent of his innate
genius and curiosity.

The honorable Prophet of Islam (S) was a brilliant Quran exegetist. He
was quite aware of indisputable vs. analogous, cancelling vs. cancelled,
general vs. specific verses, and absolute vs. conditional verses,
revelation reason of verses, and minute literary points of Quranic
verses. Moreover, he was familiar with interpretation of verses and was
considered a pioneer in Quranic sciences. His understanding of Quranic
themes was chiefly different from other exegetists; ordinary exegetists
get Quranic teachings by their apparent or inner senses and are not
aware of objective realities, while Prophet Muhammad (S) –the first
addressee of Holy Quran– observed Quranic realities through his inner
sense in their own places, which helped have mental understanding of
them too.

This unseen means of understanding was always a powerful aid for him.
The secret of his infallibility is also rooted in this important
privilege.

As a result, Prophet Muhammad (S)’s understanding of theology, theism,
or Allah’s attributes is different from and much deeper than our
understanding of these themes, because his knowledge is intuitive while
ours is acquirable. When the honorable Messenger of Allah (S) gave news
of the after-death life, Resurrection, the Paradise, and the Hell, he
had already witnessed their true setting; his mental understanding
resulted from objective realities.

The Prophet (S)’s understanding of enjoining and forbidding, obligations
and prohibitions, religious rules and commandments was different from
our understanding. During revelation, Prophet Muhammad (S) saw true
expediency or imperfection of religious rules and their sources and
roots –which show the true path to humanity and guarantee salvation in
this world and the Hereafter– through his insight. Moreover, he
witnessed the goodness of good deeds and evilness of wrongdoing
directly.

Considering this background about Prophet Muhammad (S)’s sciences, we
can conclude that some commandments –which are not mentioned as
revelation– have been general revelation. Or they have been issued by
the Prophet (S); he was religiously allowed to issue verdicts because of
his known purified conduct.

Transmission of Quranic Sciences to the Infallible Imams
--------------------------------------------------------

The honorable Messenger of Islam (S) attempted to teach Quranic sciences
and teachings as well as exegesis of the verses to Imam Ali (a.s.) to be
left for later Muslims. Imam Ali (a.s.) recorded this information
exactly and transmitted to other Imams (a.s.). Therefore, all infallible
Imams (a.s.) can be considered knower of Quranic exegesis and truth and
pioneers in Quranic sciences, as was Prophet Muhammad (S). The
difference, however, was that the Prophet (S) received the revelation
–and Quranic sciences– directly, while the Imams (a.s.) acquired the
sciences through Prophet Muhammad (S)’s guidance and Allah’s especial
attention –which is a key necessity for being an Imam.

In sum, the Holy Quran is a major source of infallible Imams’ sciences
and the Imams (a.s.) are knower of Quranic sciences and exegesis, as is
mentioned in many traditions.

Abus Sabah says, “By Allah that Imam Baqir (a.s.) stated, ‘The Almighty
Allah taught Quranic sciences and exegesis to His Prophet (S). The
Prophet (S) taught them to Ali (a.s.). By Allah that Ali (a.s.) taught
them to us.’”[^44]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said, “I know Allah’s Book by heart completely. The
news of heaven and the earth from the past to the future are in it. The
Almighty Allah stated, ‘Everything is mentioned in the Quran.’”[^45]

Barid Ibn Mu’awiyyah has narrated Imam Sadiq (a.s.) or Imam Baqir (a.s.)
who said about the Quranic verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَما يَعْلَمُ تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلّا اللَّهُ وَالرّاسِخُونَ فِى‏‌ العِلْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(no one knows its hidden meanings except God and those who are firmly
grounded in knowledge***[^46]***),*** “The Messenger of Allah (S) was
the best pioneer in science. The Almighty Allah taught him whatever He
had revealed to other prophets (S) in addition to their exegesis, not
leaving anything untold. The Prophet (S)’s successors know all these
too.

Those who are now aware of Quranic exegesis say that they believe in
what Allah has revealed when they hear it from a scholar (Prophet’s
successor). The Holy Quran has absolute and conditional, cancelling and
cancelled, and specific and general verses. Pioneers in science know
them all.”[^47]

Abdur Rahman Ibn Kathir has quoted from Imam Sadiq (a.s.), “The pioneers
in science are Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) and the Imams (a.s.) after
him.”[^48]

The mentioned traditions and many other similar ones indicate that the
infallible Imams (a.s.) knew Quranic exegesis, the scientific sources,
the real advantages and reasons for issuing religious commandments and
rules, just like Prophet Muhammad (S). The difference, of course, was
that the Prophet (S) received the revelation directly, while infallible
Imams (a.s.) were deprived of it.

Therefore, what was mentioned about the commandments issued by the
Prophet (S) is true about the commandments issued by the Imams (a.s.),
which are not seen in Holy Quran and Prophet (S)’s tradition. In other
words, they are issued by the Imams; they were allowed to issue verdicts
because of their known purified conduct. And Allah knows best.

The Infallible Imams and Mental Sciences
----------------------------------------

Human being is wise. He uses his wisdom and logical measurement to
discover some unknown things from his definite general data. Human, for
instance, understands the cause-effect relationship and that everything
requires a cause. Therefore, when he sees something, he is certain that
it has a cause and seeks that cause. This is a privilege for human
being, which is idiomatically called theoretical mentality.

Such mental reasoning is used in proving belief principles, such as
theology, Resurrection, or prophet hood. All humans have the Divine
blessing of mentality, but their intellectual levels are very different.
The prophets (S) and the infallible Imams (a.s.) have been the wisest of
the people in their own age.

The Messenger of Islam (S) states, “The Almighty Allah did not send a
prophet or messenger except when his wisdom was perfect and superior to
that of his people.”[^49]

The honorable Messenger of Allah (S) used his perfect wisdom in
understanding belief principles, such as theology, Resurrection, and
human need to prophets’ guidance sent by the Almighty. In fact, he
believed in these facts through his mentality. Therefore, he had
certainly believed in Allah even before his appointment and hated
disbelief and polytheism. It should be pointed out that mental belief
–the belief that is acquired by pondering– is not beyond conception and
acquirable knowledge, even if it reaches certainty.

After being appointed to prophet hood, direct relationship with the
unseen world, and receiving revelation, however, Prophet Muhammad (S)’s
mental belief got beyond meaning and reached the level of intuition. In
this level, he observed the facts that cannot be understood with
conceptual knowledge. Intuitive knowledge and heavenly observations of
Prophet Muhammad (S) can be considered as a support for his mental
sciences.

The belief and heavenly sciences have special effects that do not exist
in case of mental sciences. The infallible Imams (a.s.) –as testified in
the history and their traditions– have been the wisest of the people in
their own age. Therefore, they perceived sciences related to Creation
and the Resurrection by their perfect mentality. They were away from
disbelief and infidelity even before being appointed for Imamate.

These chosen people did not receive the revelation directly, but they
benefited from the Prophet (S)’s heavenly sciences indirectly due to
Allah’s especial blessings and Prophet Muhammad (S)’s guidance. As a
result, their knowledge about the Creation and the Resurrection was
above conceptual science and had reached the level of intuition and
certainty. They sometimes talked about Creation- or Resurrection-related
facts in a way as if they directly observed them. Some examples of this
manner can be studied in tradition, biography, or history books.

Amiral Mu’minin, Imam Ali (a.s.) stated about knowledge of the
infallible Imams (a.s.), “Knowledge has been perceived by their insight
and they have touched certainty. They have easily accepted what is
considered difficult by the mollycoddle and are accustomed to what the
unwise fear. They relate with the bodies whose souls have ascended to
the Heavens. They are Allah’s caliphs on the earth and inviters to His
religion. How much I desire meeting them!”[^50]

Imam Ali (a.s.) also stated about the sciences of infallible Imams
(a.s.), “They revitalize knowledge and perish ignorance. Their patience
reveals their knowledge and their appearance shows their inside. Their
silence is a sign of their strong logic. They do not oppose the truth
and have no difference about it. They are pillars of the religion and
refuge of the people. They replace the falsehood with the truth, drive
falsehood away and abandon it forever. They ponder on and use the
religion as it deserves, not merely hearing it and narrating for others.
In fact, narrators of science are many, but its guardians are few.”[^51]

The infallible Imams (a.s.), just as prophet Muhammad (S), used mental
and logical methods in inviting people to the belief principles, as is
seen in their traditions and discussions. They talked to everyone as
much as his recognition and understanding. Some of their words are so
deep and complicated that are only understandable for the scholars.
However, they sometimes speak so simply for the ordinary people. These
different speech styles can be found in Imam Ali’s (a.s.) Maxims in
Nahjul Balaghah as well as various traditions of infallible Imams
(a.s.).

As a result, the wisdom of the infallible can be considered a science
source of the Prophet (S) and Imams (a.s.). Mental and logical reasoning
is their propaganda method too. Of course, they were way from fallacy
and wrong doing in deploying these tools.

The Role of Mind in Recognizing Ethics
--------------------------------------

Human being has an innate power that –if used properly– can recognize
moral codes and follow them in the interest of the society and
perfection of his soul. It knows wrongness too and considers it to the
detriment of his life in this world and the Hereafter as well as the
society. This precious innate power is called practical wisdom or the
conscience. The Holy Quran considers this recognition as an innate
sense.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَفْسٍ وَما سَوّاها\* فَأَلْهَمَها فُجُورَها وَتَقْواها\* قَدْ
أَفْلَحَ مَنْ زَكّاها\* وَقَدْ خابَ مَنْ دَسّاها
  </p>
</blockquote>

***By the Soul, and the proportion and order given to it; And its
enlightenment as to its wrong and its right; Truly he succeeds that
purifies it, And he fails that corrupts it!***[^52]

This invaluable force exists more or less in all humans and can be used
in ordinary conditions, provided inhumane forces have not overcome human
wisdom. Unfortunately, some people are so much surrendered to carnal
instincts, such as selfishness, lust of position and property,
greediness, wrath, hatred, and revenge that they forget their human
spirit.

Therefore, the light of their pure instinct is darkened and they cannot
recognize virtues and vices; they even sometimes consider vices as
virtues. That is why human being always needs the guidance of selected
infallible individuals to brighten his nature and help him know virtues
and vices.

These selected people are the prophets (S) and infallible Imams (a.s.).
Since the infallible Imams (a.s.) have perfect mentality and are away
from faults and wrongdoing, they completely recognized ethical values
and their outcomes in this world and the Hereafter. They followed these
values and invited others to them too. They also knew ethical vices and
their undesirable consequences in this world and the Hereafter.

They avoided the vices and forbade others from them too. Therefore,
practical wisdom and ethical conscience –in addition to the Holy Quran
and Prophet (S)’s traditions– can be considered a source of infallible
Imams’ (a.s.) ethical knowledge. The thousands of traditions about
ethics, which are recorded in tradition books, are rooted in this rich
infallible source.

The Prophet (S) and Guardianship Commandments
---------------------------------------------

The commandments issued by Prophet Muhammad (S) were of two types;
religious and guardianship. The religious commandments are the ones
directly issued from the Exalted Allah and revealed to the Prophet (S).
The Prophet (S) was ordered to convey them to the people. These
commandments form the religion of Islam and no one except Allah has the
right to issue them. Such commandments are either mentioned in Holy
Quran or revealed to the Messenger of Allah (S) in different occasions
and presented to the people.

The guardianship commandments, however, are the commandments that are
not directly issued by the Almighty Allah. Rather Prophet Muhammad (S)
–who was the guardian and ruler of Islamic government– was allowed to
issue and execute the commandments necessary for managing social affairs
of the society, such as defining tax for the expenses of Islamic
government, issuing the order of *Jihad* (the holy war) or peace,
relations with other Islamic or non-Islamic governments, judicial
commandments, the limits of personal or governmental ownership,
expropriating or limiting personal ownership in certain cases, and
ordaining necessary commandments for various fields of Islamic
government. In fact, since the ruling was given to the Prophet (S), wide
authority was given to him too.

The Holy Quran states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّبِىُّ أَوْلى‏‌ بِالمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Prophet is closer to the Believers than their own
selves.”***[^53]

What was mentioned above was about government-related commandments.

According to some traditions, Prophet Muhammad (S) was permitted to
ordain commandments in minor religious issues too and even in case of
worships and present them to the people.

Abu Basir says, “I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.) about the Quranic verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِى‏‌ الأمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘Obey God, and obey the Messenger, and those charged with authority
among you.’***

The Imam (a.s.) said, ‘This verse is revealed about Ali Ibn Abi Talib,
Imam Hasan (a.s.), and Imam Husayn (a.s.).’ I said, ‘People wonder why
the names of Imam Ali (a.s.) and the Ahlul Bayt are not mentioned in the
Holy Quran.’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.) replied, ‘Tell people that *Salat* (the
prayer) is mentioned in the Quran, but not the number of rak’ahs
(unites); the Messenger of Allah defined it.

*Zakat* (statutory Islamic levy) is mentioned in the Holy Quran, but its
amount –which is one dirham in every forty dirhams– was defined by
Prophet Muhammad (S). The *Hajj* issue is mentioned in Quran, but the
obligation of seven rounds of *Tawaf* (circumambulation around the
ka’bah) was only mentioned by the Prophet (S). The mentioned verse was
revealed about Imam Ali (a.s.), Imam Hasan (a.s.), and Imam Husayn
(a.s.) and then Prophet Muhammad (S) said about Imam Ali (a.s.) in
*Hajjatul wida’* (the last *Hajj*), ‘Everyone whose leader is I, now Ali
is his leader.’”[^54]

Based on such traditions, it can be said that the guardianship
commandments go beyond governmental commandments and include issuing
obligatory commandments too. All the commandments issued by Prophet
Muhammad (S) are so, unless they are mentioned in Holy Quran or the
Prophet (S) had announced them as revelation. Anyway, if such
commandments are narrated with true document, they are religiously valid
and should be followed by the Muslims. According to the text of Holy
Quran, obeying Prophet’s order and avoidance is obligatory for the
believers.

We read in the Holy Quran,

***“Obey God, and obey the Messenger, and those charged with authority
among you.”***[^55]

It should be said that guardianship commandments of Messenger of Allah
(S) were never issued out of carnal desires and without criterion. Being
aware of real interest of the Muslims –through revelation– and away from
fault or wrongdoing, he issued necessary commandments to maintain these
interests. The Holy Quran states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما ضَلَّ صاحِبُكُمْ وَما غَوى‏‌\* وَما يَنْطِقُ عَنِ الهَوى‏‌\* إِنْ
هُوَ إِلّا وَحْىٌ يُوحى‏‌\* عَلَّمَهُ شَدِيدُ القُوى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your Companion is neither astray nor being misled. Nor does he say
(aught) of (his own) Desire. It is no less than inspiration sent down to
him: He was taught by one Mighty in Power.”***[^56]

Therefore, intuitive awareness of real interests and detriments can be
considered a source of the Prophet’s sciences.

Fuzayl Ibn Yasar said, “I heard from Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘The Almighty
Allah trained His Prophet with the best method. When his learning
completed, Allah told him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّکَ لَعَلى خُلُقٍ عَظِیمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘And thou (standest) on an exalted standard of character.’***[^57]

Then He presented the command of religion and the Ummah (Islamic nation)
to the Prophet (S) to guide the people. Allah then told the people,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا آتَاکُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاکُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘So take what the Apostle assigns to you, and deny yourselves that
which he withholds from you.’***[^58]

The Messenger of Allah (S) was supported by *Ruhul Qudus* (Gabriel). He
was away from fault in managing people’s issues and observed Allah’s
rules. Next Allah religiously set the prayers two units by two units
until they were ten units a day. The Messenger of Allah (S) added
another two units to all the two-unit prayers and one unit to the
Evening Prayer (*Salat*ul Maghrib).

What was added by Prophet Muhammad (S) was included in wajib
(obligatory) prayers, whose leaving is not permitted unless in travel.
The one unit added to Evening Prayer should not be left even in travel.
The Exalted Allah confirmed these alterations, therefore, the wajib
prayers became seventeen units (rak’ahs).

Afterward, the Messenger of Allah (S) set the *nawafil* (recommended
prayers) 34 units –twice the unit of obligatory prayers– which was
confirmed by Allah too. This way the obligatory and recommended prayers
became 51 units; *nafilah* of Night Prayer (*Salatul ‘Isha’*) is two
units that is performed while sitting and is considered one unit. The
Almighty Allah obliged the *Sawm* (fasting) of Ramadan and His Messenger
(S) recommended the fasting of Sha’ban month and three days in every
month, which were confirmed by the Almighty.

The Almighty Allah prohibited drinking wine, but the Prophet (S)
prohibited every intoxicating drink and was supported by Allah’s
confirmation. Prophet Muhammad (S) prohibited the Muslims from doing
some deeds in the form of undesirability not complete forbiddance,
giving option to the people. Therefore, the servants should use the
options, but avoid the prohibited deeds altogether.

The Messenger of Allah (S) did not permit avoiding the obligations and
doing the prohibitions. One such prohibited deed is drinking any
intoxicating drink, which is forbidden for everyone. The Prophet (S) did
not allow the people to abandon the two units he added to all the
obligatory prayers, except while in travel, so they should be stuck to.
As a result, Prophet Muhammad (S)’s enjoining and forbidding is
obligatory to be obeyed by the servants just as Allah’s enjoining and
forbidding.’”[^59]

Moreover, Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has stated, “The Exalted Allah trained His
Prophet (S) until he reached perfection. Then Allah told him, ***‘And
thou (standest) on an exalted standard of character.’***, presented the
religion to him, and said, ‘So take what the Apostle assigns to you, and
deny yourselves that which he withholds from you.’ Allah defined the
heritage shares of family members, but set nothing for the forefather.
The Prophet (S) defined one-sixth of the dead property for the
forefather and Allah verified it. That is why Allah said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذَا عَطَاؤُنَا فَامْنُنْ أَوْ أَمْسِکْ بِغَیْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘Such are Our Bounties: whether thou bestow them (on others) or
withhold them, no account will be asked.’***[^60]”[^61]

Imam Baqir (a.s.) stated, “The Messenger of Allah (S) defined the
compensation for eye loss and murder and prohibited wine and any
intoxicating substance.” The narrator asked Imam (a.s.), “Did the
Prophet (S) issue any commandments without being first revealed by
Allah?” Imam Baqir (a.s.) said, “Yes. It was for recognizing those who
obeyed and those who disobeyed the Prophet (S).”[^62]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, “By Allah that the Exalted Allah relegated the
religious issues to no one but His Messenger (S) and the Imams (a.s.).
Allah stated,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنّا أَنْزَلْنا إِلَيْكَ الكِتابَ‏بِالحَقِّ لِتَحْكُمَ بَيْنَ‏النّاسِ
بِما أَراكَ اللَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘We have sent down to thee the Book in truth, that thou mightest
judge between men, as guided by God: so be not (used) as an advocate by
those who betray their trust.’***[^63]

The same is true about the Prophet (S)’s successors.”[^64]

The Imams and Guardianship Commandments
---------------------------------------

The Imams (a.s.) are successors to Prophet Muhammad (S). They have all
the Prophet (S)’s duties and the necessary authority. The Prophet (S)
ruled the people and was permitted to issue commandments in the same
filed. An Imam, too, has the government position and can issue and
execute the necessary commandments related to ruling. Although, none of
the infallible Imams (a.s.) –except Imam Ali (a.s.)– were formally in
office, they were religiously the rulers of Islamic country and had
guardianship.

They were also permitted to issue commandments in the field of their
guardianship. The traditions about minor issues of judgment, testimony,
*Hudud*, *Diyah*, *Qisas*, *Ta’zirat*, duties, authority, and
qualifications of rulers and judges, *Jihad*, defense, *Khums*, and
*Zakat*, which are narrated from infallible Imams (a.s.) and have no
similar theme in Quran or traditions of Prophet Muhammad (S), are
considered guardianship commandments of infallible Imams (a.s.). Rulers
and officials of government should follow these guidelines. The Muslims
should ask the rulers to execute these useful principles. This is the
least of what infallible Imams (a.s.) could do in the hard conditions of
oppressed governments in their ages to show the true image of Islamic
government.

Some jurisprudential commandments transferred to us from infallible
Imams (a.s.), which are not mentioned in Holy Quran or Prophet Muhammad
(S)’s traditions. They may be guardianship commandments too. One may
say, “Just as the Prophet (S) was permitted to issue these commandments
from Allah, the infallible Imams (a.s.) are allowed to do so from
Prophet Muhammad (S). Such commandments are rooted in their
guardianship, which is mentioned in Holy Quran and approved by the
Prophet (S). If these kinds of commandments are narrated to us with
valid religious documents, they are religiously reliable and should be
obeyed.”

It should be said that guardianship commandments of infallible Imams
(a.s.) were not issued without regulation and out of carnal desires;
rather they were based on real personal and social interests of Muslims
in this world and the Hereafter. The Imams (a.s.) had received general
regulations for issuing commandments from Prophet Muhammad (S) and
issued necessary commandments based on time and place requirements and
presented them to the people. They benefitted from Divine support and
their infallibility –as a strong aid– and were away from faults and
wrongdoing.

The Infallibility of Imams and its Limits
-----------------------------------------

One of the brilliant characteristics of the Imams (a.s.) is
infallibility. Infallibility means being safe. An infallible person is
someone who is completely safe from committing faults, forgetfulness,
and wrongdoing. Just as the Prophet (S) should be infallible, the Imam
should be infallible, since he is the Prophet (S)’s successor.

If the Prophet (S)’s successor is not infallible, there will be no
guarantee for execution of religious commandments revealed for people’
guidance and Allah’s blessings will not be completed. Various qualities
of an infallible person are:

1. He has no superstitious or wrong opinion.

2. He commits no fault in understanding religious facts and issues.

3. He is away from fault and forgetfulness in recording and maintaining
religious commandments, sciences, and teachings.

4. He commits no fault in presenting religious commandments, sciences,
and teachings to the people.

5. He commits no unlawful or irreligious deed.

The Secret of Infallibility
---------------------------

The infallibility of the Prophet (S) and the Imams (a.s.) does not mean
that they do not have the factors for or ability to commit sins. It does
not mean that if they intended to commit sins, the Almighty Allah
directly or through His angels avoided them. Rather, the infallible
Imams (a.s.) –like other people– had lust and anger and could do wrong,
but they avoided it.

The secret of their infallibility is twofold; first, their strong belief
in Allah, the Hereafter, the Hell and the Paradise, the Reckoning, and
punishments and rewards, and second, inner intuition of outcomes of
wrongdoing, which is granted to them by the Almighty Allah.

The secret of infallibility of the Imams from faults and forgetfulness
is their knowledge type. The Imams’ (a.s.) knowledge of religious facts
is intuitive, which originates from their insight. They intuitively know
the true path to humanity and the sources of religious commandments and
rules without any forgetfulness.

Moreover, their physical structure is created by the Exalted Allah in a
way that they can state their intuitive knowledge in words for the
people. This in another Devine blessing and support from the Almighty
Allah.

Infallibility in Traditions
---------------------------

The main reason for the infallibility of the Imams (a.s.) is the very
mental reason, which was mentioned before. Furthermore, infallible Imams
(a.s.) have considered infallibility as a brilliant characteristic of an
Imam in their traditions. As an example, Imam Ridha’ (a.s.) stated, “The
Imam is away from faults and wrongdoing. He possesses especial knowledge
and patience. He causes the organization of religion, the honor of
Muslims, anger of the heterodox, and perishing of the infidel.”[^65]

Imam Ridha’ (a.s.) also stated in the same tradition, “When the Exalted
Allah selects a servant to manage others, He grants the selected servant
an open chest for this duty, illuminates his heart with wisdom, and
inspires the necessary sciences to him, so that he will be able to
answer any question and tell the truth. This selected person will thus
be away from sins or faults and supported by the Almighty. Allah has
given him these qualifications to be as a reason for other servants.
This is Allah’s blessing that grants everyone He wishes. And Allah
possesses great blessings.”[^66]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) described the Imam this way, “The Imam is a selected
person from the Household of Prophet Muhammad (S), who is always
observed and supported by Him. Allah guards him, saves him from Satan’s
deceits, bad reputations, and calamities. He is away from all faults and
wrongdoing.”[^67]

Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) stated, “The greatest level of *wilayat*
(guardianship) of the Imam –whose obedience is obligatory– is
considering him as infallible from faults, slip, and intentional
offense. He does not commit major (*kabirah*) or minor (*saghirah*)
sins, nor does he commit irreligious deeds or debauchery.”[^68]

[^1]: Surah Al-Sajdah, 320: 24.

[^2]: Surah Al- Qasas 28: 41.

[^3]: Sharhul Mawaqif, Vol 8, p. 344.

[^4]: Speculative theology.

[^5]: Sharhi Tajrid, p. 284.

[^6]: Usul Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 200.

[^7]: Surah Al-Nisa’ 4: 59.

[^8]: Surah Al-Ma’idah 5: 55.

[^9]: Usul Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 189.

[^10]: Surah Al-Yunus 10: 35.

[^11]: Surah Al-Baqarah 2: 269.

[^12]: Usul Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 202.

[^13]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 173.

[^14]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 68, p. 389.

[^15]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 147.

[^16]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 239.

[^17]: Surah Al-Ahzab 33: 40.

[^18]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 133.

[^19]: Surah Al-Ma’idah 5: 3.

[^20]: Al-Mizan Exegesis, Vol 5, pp. 214-277.

[^21]: Surah Al-Haqqah 69: 12.

[^22]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 35, p. 327; Hilyatul Awliya’, Vol 1, p. 108;
Manaqib Kharazmi, p. 199.

[^23]: Manaqib Kharazmi, p. 99.

[^24]: Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 64.

[^25]: At Tabaqatul Kubra, Vol 3, p. 338.

[^26]: At Tabaqatul Kubra, Vol 3, p. 33.

[^27]: Imam Ali’s (a.s.) nickname.

[^28]: Dhakha’irul ‘Uqba, p. 78.

[^29]: Yanabi’ul Mawaddah, p. 82.

[^30]: Mustadrak Hakim Niyshaburi, Vol 3, p. 122.

[^31]: Mustadrak Hakim Niyshaburi, Vol 3, p. 80.

[^32]: Mustadrak Hakim Niyshaburi, Vol 3, p.22.

[^33]: Plural of dhar’, a measure of length equal to 104 centimeters.

[^34]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 1, p. 185.

[^35]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 1, p. 186.

[^36]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 1, p. 195.

[^37]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 1, p. 195.

[^38]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 2, p. 104.

[^39]: Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 53.

[^40]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 1, p. 181.

[^41]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 1, p. 181.

[^42]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 1, P. 192.

[^43]: Surah Al-Nahl 16: 89.

[^44]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 1, p. 184.

[^45]: Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 229.

[^46]: Surah ‘Ali ‘Imran 3:7.

[^47]: Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 113.

[^48]: Usul Al-Kafi, Vol1, p. 213.

[^49]: Mizanul Hikmah, Vol 3, p. 2034.

[^50]: Nahjul Balaghah, Maxim 147.

[^51]: Nahjul Balaghah, Maxim 239.

[^52]: Surah Al-Shams 91: 7-10.

[^53]: Surah Al-Ahzab 33: 6.

[^54]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 1, p. 247.

[^55]: Surah Al-Nisa’ 5: 59.

[^56]: Surah Al-Najm 53: 2-5.

[^57]: Surah Al-Qalam 68:4.

[^58]: Surah Al-Hashr 59: 7.

[^59]: Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 266.

[^60]: Surah Al-Sad 38: 39.

[^61]: Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 267.

[^62]: Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 267.

[^63]: Surah Al- Nisa’ 4: 105.

[^64]: Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 268.

[^65]: Usul Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 200.

[^66]: Usul Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 202.

[^67]: Usul Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 204.

[^68]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 68, p. 389.


