Chapter 2: The Ahlul Bayt in the Quran and the Traditions
=========================================================

The Infallibility of Ahlul Bayt in the Holy Quran
-------------------------------------------------

For proving the infallibility of the Imams (a.s.), the famous *Tat’hir*
verse from the Holy Quran is mentioned here:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّما يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ البَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And God only wishes to remove all abomination from you, ye members of
the Family, and to make you pure and spotless.***[^1]

Some points are mentioned here regarding the exegesis of this verse and
explaining this reason.

Revelation Reason of Tat’hir Verse
----------------------------------

Undoubtedly, the mentioned verse has been revealed about Messenger of
Allah (S), Imam Ali (a.s.), Hadrat Fatimah (s.a.), Imam Hasan (a.s.),
and Imam Husayn (a.s.). There are numerous facts in this regard in the
Shi’ah and Sunni books. For instance, Ayishah says, “One morning the
Messenger of Allah (S) came out wearing a black wool cloth. Then Hasan
(a.s.), Husayn (a.s.), Fatimah (s.a.), and Ali (a.s.) came. Then Prophet
Muhammad (S) placed them beneath his cloak and said, “And God only
wishes to remove all abomination from you, ye members of the Family, and
to make you pure and spotless.”[^2]

Umm Salamah says, “The verse, And God only wishes to remove all
abomination from you, ye members of the Family, and to make you pure and
spotless was revealed to the Prophet (S) in my house. Then Hadrat
Fatimah (s.a.) brought a container of food for him. Messenger of Allah
(S) told her, ‘Invite your husband Ali (a.s.) and your sons Hasan (a.s.)
and Husayn (a.s.) to have food with me.’ When all of them came and were
eating, the verse was revealed. So Prophet Muhammad (S) placed all of
them beneath his cloak and said three times, ‘O Lord! These are my
household; take away pollution and sins from them and make them
pure.’”[^3]

Umar Ibn Abi Salamah says, “The verse And God only wishes to remove all
abomination from you, ye members of the Family, and to make you pure and
spotless was revealed in the house of Umm Salamah. Then Messenger of
Allah (S) called Fatimah (s.a.), Hasan (a.s.), and Husayn (a.s.), spread
his cloth on them, and said, ‘O Lord! They are my household. Take away
pollution from them and purify them.’ Umm Salamah stated, ‘O Messenger
of Allah! Am I included with them?’ He replied, ‘You have your own
place. You are good too.’”[^4]

Zaynab says, “When the Messenger of Allah (S) saw that blessings are
descending from the heaven he stated, ‘Who will invite Ali (a.s.),
Fatimah (s.a.), Hasan (a.s.), and Husayn (a.s.)?’ I said, ‘I do.’ When
they gathered, the Messenger of Allah (S) spread his cloak on them and
joined them beneath it. Then Gabriel was descended with this verse.”[^5]

Abu Sa’id Khidri says, “This verse (*Tat’hir*) was revealed about five
people; the Prophet (S), Ali (a.s.), Fatimah (s.a.), Hasan (a.s.), and
Husayn (a.s.).”[^6]

Imam Hasan (a.s.) stated in his sermon, “We –the Prophet (S)’s
Household– are the people about whom the verse: And God only wishes to
remove all abomination from you, ye members of the Family, and to make
you pure and spotless was revealed.”[^7]

The gathering of *as’habi kisa’* (people of the cloak) and revelation of
*Tat’hir* verse is one of the main events of Prophet Muhammad (S)’s
mission.

As’habi kisa’ were five; the honorable Prophet (S), Imam Ali (a.s.),
Fatimatal Zahra’ (s.a.), Imam Hasan (a.s.), and Imam Husayn (a.s.).

As is revealed from the traditions, when *Tat’hir* verse was revealed to
the Prophet (S), he sent someone to Imam Ali (a.s.), Hadrat Fatimah
(s.a.), Imam Hasan (a.s.), and Imam Husayn (a.s.) and invited them to
his house. Then he placed all of them on a carpet and sat beside them.

Afterward, the Prophet (S) spread his cloak or a cloth on them and
joined them himself. Then he recited the *Tat’hir* verse and said, “O
Allah! They are my Household. Take away pollution and sins from them.”
Apparently, this event has happened in the house of Umm Salamah, the
Prophet (S)’s wife.

The same five people have narrated the happening for others. Moreover,
‘Ayishah and Umm Salamah, the Prophet (S)’s wives, ‘Umar, the son of Abi
Salamah –who was trained in Prophet Muhammad (S)’s house– Zaynab –who
was raised in Prophet (S)’s house– as well as Thawban, the freed slave
of the Prophet (S) and Wasilatibni Asqa’, the Prophet (S)’s maid have
narrated this for other people. All these individuals were among close
companions of Messenger of Allah (S). They can be considered eye
witnesses of the event.

Some other companions of the Prophet (S), such as Anas Ibn Malik, Abul
Hamra’, Abu Sa’id Khidri, and Ibn Abbas have also narrated this event,
though they have not witnessed it directly.

For six or seventeen months, the Messenger of Allah (S) recited the
*Tat’hir* verse loud in front of Hadrat Zahra’s (S) house, every morning
he was going to the mosque for Morning Prayer and said, “O Ahlul Bayt!
Prepare for establishing the prayer!”[^8] He wanted to inform the
companions of it and confirm the event.

Instances of the Ahlul Bayt
---------------------------

The Ahlul Bayt means the members of the promised house. According to the
traditions, the promised house is the house of Umm Salamah –Prophet
Muhammad (S)’s wife. The *Tat’hir* verse was revealed in this house, in
which the Prophet (S) invited Imam Ali (a.s.), Hadrat Fatimah (s.a.),
Imam Hasan (a.s.), and Imam Husayn (a.s.), throw a cloak on them and
himself, and recited the *Tat’hir* verse.

He placed only these four people beneath the cloak with himself, not
letting Umm Salamah to accompany them, to exclude any other one from the
Ahlul Bayt, who were five. Prophet Muhammad (S) did so for fear that
someone in the future claims to be included among the Ahlul Bayt. He
always stipulated that the *Tat’hir* verse was only revealed about Ali,
Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn (a.s.).[^9]

Imam Ali (a.s.), Imam Hasan (a.s.), and Imam Husayn (a.s.) always
referred to the *Tat’hir* verse for proving their virtues and were never
denied in this case.

Exegesis of the Tat’hir Verse
-----------------------------

Two points need mentioning for clarification of the verse:

1. Rijs (abomination) lexically means filth and is used in two meanings
in Holy Quran. The first meaning is apparent religious impurity. The
Holy Quran states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لا أَجِدُ فِيما أُوحِىَ إِلَىَّ مُحَرَّماً عَلى‏‌ طاعِمٍ
يَطْعَمُهُ إِلّا أَنْ يَكُونَ مَيْتَةً أَوْ دَماً مَسْفُوحاً أَوْ
لَحْمَ خِنْزِيرٍ فَإِنَّهُ رِجْسٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: "I find not in the Message received by me by inspiration any
(meat) forbidden to be eaten by one who wishes to eat it, unless it be
dead meat, or blood poured forth, or the flesh of swine,- for it is an
abomination "”***[^10]

The second meaning is internal carnal impurity that is disbelief,
transgression, and sin. The Holy Quran states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمّا الَّذِينَ فِى‏‌ قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ فَزادَتْهُمْ رِجْساً إِلى‏‌
رِجْسِهِمْ وَماتُوا وَهُمْ كافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But those in whose hearts is a disease,- it will add doubt to their
doubt, and they will die in a state of Unbelief.”***[^11]

2. Obviously, the disbelievers do not suffer from apparent filth and the
Almighty Allah has not asked them to avoid outward impurity. Rather,
carnal impurities, such as disbelief, dissension, and malice are
considered disobeying Allah.

The question now is that if the rijs mentioned in the *Tat’hir* verse is
used in the first meaning or the second one. The advantage pointed out
for the Ahlul Bayt is used with the word innama (surely), which shows
specialty in Arabic. If this characteristic of the Ahlul Bayt was only
purity of superficial filth, it could be for all the Muslims, and not an
advantage for the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) to be praised by the Exalted Allah
and honored in many instances.

Will in the Holy Quran
----------------------

Human will is an inner state and a prerequisite of optional acts. Human
will sometimes bring about accomplishment of wishes and sometimes not.
Not everything human wishes is objectively realized. Allah’ deeds are
out of knowledge, will, and option. Allah’ will, however, differs from
human will and always accomplishes ambitions. The Holy Quran points out
two kinds of will for the Almighty Allah; Will of the genesis and Will
of the religion. Allah’s Will of the genesis means realization ambitions
by knowledge and option with no exception.

The Holy Quran states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّما أَمْرُهُ إِذا أَرادَ شَيْئاً أَنْ يَقُولَ لَهُ كُنْ فَيَكُونُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily, when He intends a thing, His Command is, "be", and it
is!”***[^12]

Allah’s religious Will does not command realization of things; rather He
regulates certain rules and verdicts and wants the servants to follow
them, so that His command will be externally realized.

The Holy Quran states about Ramadan fasting,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ شَهِدَ مِنْكُمُ الشَّهْرَ فَلْيَصُمْهُ وَمَنْ كانَ مَرِيضاً
أَوْ عَلى‏‌ سَفَرٍ فَعِدَّةٌ مِنْ أَيّامٍ أُخَرَ يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ
بِكُمُ اليُسْرَ وَلا يُرِيدُ بِكُمُ العُسْرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So every one of you who is present (at his home) during that month
should spend it in fasting, but if anyone is ill, or on a journey, the
prescribed period (should be made up) by days later. God intends every
facility for you; He does not want to put to difficulties.”***[^13]

Allah’s Will in this case is Will of religion. In other words, since the
Almighty Allah has willed not to take the servants into trouble for
*Sawm* (the Ramadan fasting), He has permitted the patients and
travelers not to fast in Ramadan and perform it in other months.

The question now is that if Allah’s Will mentioned in the *Tat’hir*
verse is of genesis or of religion. If this Will is of religion, the
verse would mean that Allah has wished to purify the Prophet’s Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) from carnal impurities, hence regulating necessary verdicts
and presenting them to the Ahlul Bayt. This assumption is not logically
acceptable, since such verdicts are not only dedicated to the Ahlul
Bayt, but to all the Muslims.

Moreover, this assumption is not compatible with the word *innam*
(verily), which has a limiting meaning. If the mentioned assumption was
true, Prophet Muhammad (S) could allow Umm Salamah to come beneath the
cloak too to be included in the *Tat’hir* verse.

She was at least among the believers. As a result, Allah’s Will in this
verse is Will of the genesis. In other words, the Almighty Allah has
originally wished to purify the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) from carnal
impurities, such as disbelief, polytheism, and sins, creating them this
way. They are, in fact, completely away from carnal impurities and are
infallible.

Based on the same exegesis of this verse, being among the Ahlul Bayt is
considered a virtue and honor by the infallible Imams (a.s.) and they
were never denied.

Therefore, numerous traditions have mentioned the *Tat’hir* verse for
proving the Imams’ (a.s.) infallibility, such as the ones below:

Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) stated, “Allah says in Holy Quran, ‘And God
only wishes to remove all abomination from you, ye members of the
Family, and to make you pure and spotless.’ Therefore, He purified us
from inner and outer vices and led us in the path of truth.”[^14]

The Messenger of Allah (S) after reciting the *Tat’hir* verse said, “My
Ahlul Bayt (Household) and I are purified from sins.”[^15]

Imam Hasan (a.s.) stated, “We are the Prophet (S)’s Ahlul Bayt. Allah
honored us by Islam, selected us, and cleaned us from filth and sin.
Rijs means doubt. So we have no doubt in Allah and His religion. He
purified us from any impurity and deviation.”[^16]

The Itrat (Household); Most Valid Religious Source
--------------------------------------------------

The honorable Messenger of Islam (S) was commissioned by the Almighty to
introduce his Household (*Itrat*), as a source of Islamic sciences, to
the Muslims. The Messenger of Allah (S) did so when returning from his
last Hajj pilgrimage (*Hajjatul wida’*) at Ghadir Khum (Ghadir pool).
When he reached Ghadir on his way back to Medina, Gabriel descended with
this verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أَيُّها الرَّسُولُ بَلِّغْ ما أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ وَ
إِنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلْ فَما بَلَّغْتَ رِسالَتَهُ وَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ
النّاسِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لا يَهْدِى‏‌ القَوْمَ الكافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Apostle! proclaim the (message) which hath been sent to thee from
thy Lord. If thou didst not, thou wouldst not have fulfilled and
proclaimed His mission. And God will defend thee from men (who mean
mischief). For God guideth not those who reject Faith.”***[^17]

Although it was very hot, Prophet Muhammad (S) stopped in that desert
for performing Allah’s order. He sent for the *Hajj*is, who had
proceeded, to come back and called on those, who were behind, to travel
faster. When all the *Hajj*is gathered in one place, the Prophet (S)
ascended a pulpit –made from camels’ saddles– and performed a long
sermon, called the Ghadir sermon. This event is narrated in various
traditions, one of which is cited here:

Ziyad Ibn ‘Arqam says, “When Messenger of Allah (S) was returning from
*Hajjatul Wida’*, he stopped in Ghadir Khum. First he ordered to remove
brush hood from beneath the trees. Then he performed a sermon and said,
‘It is as if I am invited by the Exalted Allah and I have accepted it. I
trust two precious things among you, one of which is better than the
other; Allah’s Book and my *Itrat* (Household).

Beware of maintaining these two trusts. They will not separate until the
Resurrection.’ Then he continued, ‘The Exalted Allah is my Lord and I am
the master of all the believers.’ He then held Ali’s (a.s.) hand and
said, ‘Anyone whose guardian is I, Ali (a.s.) is his guardian. O Lord!
Befriend those who accept Ali’s guardianship and dislike his
enemies.’”[^18]

Bara’ Ibn ‘Azib has narrated the same tradition, adding this sentence,
“Prophet Muhammad (S) began his speech this way, ‘Am I not more deserved
to interfere in the believers’ issues than themselves?’ The congregation
said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! In fact you are so.’ So the Prophet (S)
stated, ‘He (Ali) is the guardian of anyone whose guardian is I.’”[^19]

Bara’ has added after this tradition, “Then Umar Ibnil Khattab met Ali
(a.s.) and told him, ‘O Ali! May this position be pleasant for you! Now
you are the guardian of every man and woman.’”[^20]

The Ghadir tradition has been recorded in valid Shi’ah and Sunni books
with different statements and texts and has always been referred to by
Imam Ali (a.s.) and other infallible Imams (a.s.). This tradition is
*mutawatir* (narrated successively) and with an authentic document. Many
great companions of Messenger of Allah (S) have related this tradition,
such as:

Abu Harirah, Abul Ali Ansari, Abul Hiytham Ibnil Tihan, Abu Bakr Ibn Abi
Qahafah, Umar Ibn Khattab, Uthman Ibn Affan, Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Hasan
Ibn Ali, Husayn Ibn Ali, Fatimatal Zahra’, Usamatibni Ziyad, Umm
Salamah, Prophet Muhammad (S)’s wife, Anas Ibn Malik, Bara’ Ibn azib,
Jabir Ibn Samarah, Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari, Hazifatibni Asid, Hisan
Ibn Thabit, Khazimatibni Thabit Ansari, Zubiyr Ibn Awam, Ziyad Ibn
Arqam, Ziyad Ibn Thabit, Abu Sa’id Khidri, Salman Farsi, Miqdad Ibn Amri
Kandi, Abbas Ibn Abdul Mutallib, Abdullah Ibn Ja’far Ibn Abi Talib,
Abdullah Ibn Abbas, Abdullah Ibn Umar Ibn Khattab, and Ammar Ibn
Yasir[^21], may Allah be content with them all!

The Content of the Ghadir Tradition
-----------------------------------

Some facts are understood from the Ghadir tradition:

1. The Messenger of Allah (S) introduced the Holy Quran and the *Itrat*
(his Household) as two precious entities in presence of a great number
of Muslims, saying, “I trust these two things among you to see what you
will do with them.” And according to some narrations he said, “If you
seek help from them, you will never go astray.”

2. Prophet Muhammad (S) also said, “The Holy Quran and the *Itrat* will
be together until the Day of Judgment.” No one can say that there is no
need to the *Itrat* when the Quran exists or vice versa.

3. As the Holy Quran is the greatest and richest source of religious
sciences, teachings, verdicts, and rules, the Muslims are obliged to
benefit from it for solving their religious issues. The Prophet (S)’s
*Itrat* is also a source of religious sciences and teachings and the
Muslim should use it for acquiring religious knowledge, following the
infallible Imams’ (a.s.) behavior and speech.

Resorting to the Holy Quran and Prophet Muhammad (S)’s *Itrat*, which is
stressed in Ghadir (or thaqalayn) tradition and other traditions, is
realized this way, not by superficial respect or rituals.

The Itrat and its Instances
---------------------------

Itrat lexically means the progeny and includes Prophet Muhammad (S)’s
Household or the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), about whom the *Tat’hir* verse is
revealed, as some texts of thaqalayn tradition has quoted the phrase,
“my *Itrat*, my Ahlul Bayt”. It is narrated from Imam Husayn (a.s.),
“Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) was asked, ‘What is the meaning of *Itrat* in
the words of Messenger of Allah (S)?’ Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, ‘The
*Itrat* are I, Hasan, Husayn, and nine Imams from Husayn’s progeny, the
ninth of which is Mahdi, Qa’im of the Ahlul Bayt. They will not separate
from Allah’s Book and the Book will not separate from them until they
are presented to Messenger of Allah (S) in the hawz (Kawthar, fountain
in the Paradise) on the Last Day.’”[^22]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has quoted from his father and grandfathers (a.s.)
from Prophet Muhammad (S), “I leave two precious trusts among you;
Allah’s Book and the *Itrat*, my Ahlul Bayt. They will not separate from
each other until they will be presented to me in the Kawthar fountain.”
Then he stuck his two thumbs together and said, “This way.” Then Jabir
Ibn Abdullah Ansari stood up from the crowd and asked, “O Messenger of
Allah! Who are your *Itrat*?” Prophet Muhammad (S) answered, “Ali,
Hasan, Husayn, and the Imams from the progeny of Husayn until the
Resurrection.”[^23]

Appointment of Imam Ali
-----------------------

The most important part of Ghadir sermon is appointment of Imam Ali
(a.s.) to guardianship and caliphate. Ziyad Ibn Arqam, after the
mentioned tradition, has quoted from the Prophet (S), “The Exalted Allah
is my Lord and Guardian and I am the master and guardian of all the
believers.” Then he caught Ali’s hand and stated, “Anyone whose master
and guardian is I, now Ali is his master and guardian.”

Obviously, the Messenger of Allah (S) has introduced Imam Ali (a.s.) as
the guardian or ruler of the Muslims in this tradition. Both the words
*wali* and *mawla* (mentioned in various forms of this tradition) mean
the same; that is someone who deserves to interfere in others’ affairs.

Ziyad Ibn ‘Arqam says, “The honorable Prophet (S), after performing the
sermon, asked the people to take oath of allegiance with Ali (a.s.). The
people said, ‘We heard and obey the command of Allah and His Messenger
(S).’ The first people to take oath of allegiance with Prophet Muhammad
(S) and Ali (a.s.) were Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Uthman as well as Talhah
and Zubayr.”[^24] It was then that ‘Umar shook hands with Imam Ali
(a.s.) and said, “May this be pleasant for you! From now on you are the
guardian of every believing man and woman.”[^25]

Prophet Muhammad’s Recommendations about Imam Ali
-------------------------------------------------

The honorable Messenger of Allah (S) had pointed out inner virtues and
scientific stance of Imam Ali (a.s.) for the Muslims many times during
his prophetic mission, stating the obligation of following and obeying
him. This way he prepared people’s minds for acceptance of Imam Ali’s
(a.s.) guardianship and Imamate. There are thousands of traditions
recorded in the Shi’ah and Sunni books in this regard, some of which are
mentioned here:

Ibn Abbas says, “The Messenger of Allah (S) said, ‘If you like to live
and die like me and live in the Paradise my Lord has prepared, you
should accept Ali’s (a.s.) guardianship after me, befriend his friends,
and follow the Imams after me. They are my *Itrat*, are created from the
same essence as I was, and possess my understanding and knowledge. Woe
to those who deny the Imams and ignore my kinship right; my intercession
will not include them.’”[^26]

Hadhifat Ibni Yaman said, “Some of the companions told the Prophet (S),
‘O Messenger of Allah! Don’t you appoint Ali (a.s.) as caliph?’ The
Prophet (S) stated, ‘If you accept his guardianship, he will guide you
to the right path.’”[^27]

Abu Sa’id Khidri has narrated that Messenger of Allah (S) stroke Ali’s
shoulder and said, “O Ali! You have seven characteristics, about which
no one can argue in the Last Day; you are the first believer in Allah,
you are the most loyal to Allah’s promises, you are the most firm of all
in performing Allah’s orders, you are the kindest to the people, the
most just in dividing properties, the most learned in judging, and the
best in the Resurrection.”[^28]

Umm Salamah said, “I heard from Messenger of Allah (S) who said, ‘Ali is
with the Quran and the Quran is with Ali and they will not separate
until the Day of Judgment.’”[^29]

The Messenger of Allah (S) stated, “I am the city of knowledge and Ali
is its gate. If someone seeks knowledge, he should enter the gate.”
[^30]

‘Ayishah said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) saying, ‘Ali
accompanies the truth and the truth accompanies Ali; they will not
separate until the Resurrection.’”[^31]

The Messenger of Allah (S) stated, “Everyone who likes to resort to my
religion and be on board of the salvation ship should follow Ali Ibn Abi
Talib, befriend his friends, and dislike his enemies. He will be my
successor and caliph after my demise. Ali is the Imam of Muslims and
hope of the believers. His speech, orders, prohibition, follower, and
companion are just like those of mine. Not helping him is not helping
me.” [^32]

These and tens of other traditions, which can be considered successive
in meaning, reveal that the honorable Prophet (S) has had a mission from
the Almighty Allah to introduce Imam Ali (a.s.) as the Imam and
successor after himself to the Muslims and prepare the conditions for
formal appointment of Imam Ali (a.s.), which was finally realized in
Ghadir Khum.

Recommendation about the Ahlul Bayt
-----------------------------------

The honorable Prophet of Islam (S) always attempted to attract Muslims’
attention to his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) by using the terms ‘kindness’,
‘love’, ‘friendship’, etc. during his mission. An instance of such
speech is:

Ibn Abbas said, “When the verse, Say: "No reward do I ask of you for
this except the love of those near of kin."[^33] was revealed, some of
the Prophet (S)’s companions asked him, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Who are
the people that the Almighty Allah has ordered loving them?’ Prophet
Muhammad (S) replied, ‘Ali and Fatimah and their progeny.’”[^34]

Ibn Abbas has also narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S), “Allah’s
servant does not move in the Hereafter except that he is asked of four
things; how he has spent his lifetime, how he has used his body, how he
has gained and spent his property, and of the affection of the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.).”[^35]

Ibn Abbas has narrated from Prophet Muhammad (S) who said, “The example
of my Ahlul Bayt is like Noah’s ship; the one who boards it will be
saved and the one who resorts to it will get salvation and the one who
denies it will be drowned.”[^36]

Prophet Muhammad (S) had not merely meant expressing superficial verbal
–or even hearty– affection. This is not the remuneration of his
hardships in prophetic mission; rather, he had meant encouraging the
Muslims to follow the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and learn religiousness from
them, as is explicitly stated in *Safinah* (the No’ah ship) tradition.

Affection for the Ahlul Bayt
----------------------------

Affection means loving. It is used in the same meaning in the traditions
too. Affection for the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is so important in Islam that
the Holy Quran introduces it as the remuneration of Prophet Muhammad
(S)’s mission.

The Messenger of Allah (S) is addressed in the Holy Quran and asked to
tell the believers, Say: "No reward do I ask of you for this except the
love of those near of kin."

Prophet Muhammad (S) has enjoined the Muslims to loving his Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) –including Ali (a.s.)– in many traditions, considering it the
best means of salvation.

The Messenger of Allah (S) stated, “Anyone who wants to resort to
Allah’s firm knob should have affection for Ali and my Ahlul Bayt.”
[^37]

The Prophet of Islam (S) stated, “The first thing which is asked about
in the Hereafter is affection for the Ahlul Bayt.”[^38]

The Messenger of Allah (S) stated, “Anyone who loves my Ahlul Bayt will
be resurrected with me in the Hereafter.”[^39]

Prophet Muhammad (S), holding Ali’s hand, said, “Someone who thinks he
loves me, but he does not love Ali, is a liar.”[^40]

Amiral Mu’minin, Imam Ali (a.s.), has quoted from the Prophet (S), “I
will mediate for four groups in the Resurrection; the lovers of my Ahlul
Bayt, those who have accepted guardianship of my Ahlul Bayt and hated
their enemies, those who fulfill requests of my Ahlul Bayt, and those
who help my Ahlul Bayt in their affairs.”[^41]

As is observed, the Holy Quran and Prophet (S)’s traditions have
strongly emphasized the affection for Prophet Muhammad (S) Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.), considering it as a way to reach salvation. Now we should see
who the Prophet (S)’s Ahlul Bayt are. Are they all his close relatives
or certain people among them? Some traditions can help clarify the
issue.

‘Isma’il Ibn Abdul Khallaq says, “Imam Sadiq (a.s.) asked me, ‘What do
the people say about the Quranic verse, Say: "No reward do I ask of you
for this except the love of those near of kin."’ I answered, ‘May I
sacrifice for you! They say the verse is about the Prophet (S)’s close
relatives (*zil qurba*).’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, ‘They lie. The verse
is revealed about us, the Ahlul Bayt; Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn;
people of the cloak.’”[^42]

Abdullah Ibn ‘Ajlan has narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.), who said about
the exegesis of mentioned verse, “The close relatives (*zil qurba*) are
the Imams (a.s.).”[^43]

These and many other traditions –about the *Tat’hir* verse– imply that
Prophet Muhammad (S)’s close relatives (*zil qurba*), mentioned in this
verse are Imam Ali (a.s.), Fatimatal Zahra’ (S), Imam Hasan, Imam
Husayn, and other infallible Imams (a.s.) from Imam Husayn’s progeny.

These noble Imams (a.s.) always introduced themselves as *zil qurba*,
Ahlul Bayt, and source of Prophetic sciences and were never denied by
anyone. Therefore, according to the verse under discussion, all the
Muslims oblige themselves to love the Prophet (S)’s Ahlul Bayt, showing
this affection by composing poems, eulogizing, and visiting their
shrines and tombs.

Now we should see what real affection is, how it is realized, and what
consequences it has?

Affection means loving someone. It is an inner sense in which the lover
is attracted to the beloved; a sense that is perceivable but not
describable. Affection has different levels, the highest level of which
is called love. Affection can be for the people or the objects, but it
certainly has a criterion. This criterion may be the beloved one’s
beauty, handsomeness, good ethics or behavior, or his usefulness.

One of the results of affection is that a lover always tries to honor
and satisfy the beloved and even sacrifices himself for his beloved,
which is a sign of real affection. Expression of affection may be unreal
without a practical sign.

The Holy Quran and the traditions mention Allah’s affection for the
servants, who have at least one virtue, such as, “Surely Allah loves the
pious”, “Surely Allah loves the purified”, “Surely Allah loves the
good-doers”, “Surely Allah loves the repentant”, “Surely Allah loves the
reliers on Allah”, “Surely Allah loves the patient”, “Surely Allah loves
the just.” The Exalted Allah, who has created the servants and granted
them all the blessings, wants the servants to obey His orders and
forbiddances, so that their salvation in this world and the Hereafter is
guaranteed.

Allah’ affection for His servants, however, is not a carnal sense, since
He is away from occurrence of phenomenon. Allah’s affection means His
granting Mercy to the servants for reaching perfection.

The Holy Quran also mentions the servants’ affection for the Almighty
Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أَيُّها الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَنْ يَرْتَدَّ مِنْكُمْ عَنْ دِينِهِ
فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِى‌ اللَّهُ بِقَوْمٍ يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ
أَذِلَّةٍ عَلَى‌ المُؤْمِنِينَ أَعِزَّةٍ عَلَى‌ الكافِرِينَ
يُجاهِدُونَ فِى‌ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلا يَخافُونَ لَوْمَةَ لائِمٍ ذ لِكَ
فَضْلُ اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَنْ يَشاءُ وَاللَّهُ واسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O ye who believe! If any from among you turn back from his Faith,
soon will God produce a people whom He will love as they will love Him,-
lowly with the believers, mighty against the rejecters, fighting in the
way of God, and never afraid of the reproaches of such as find fault.
That is the grace of God, which He will bestow on whom He pleaseth. And
God encompasseth all, and He knoweth all things.”***[^44]

The Almighty Allah suggests mutual affection to the believers in this
verse and introduces *Jihad* in Allah’s path as a sign of believers’
real affection for Allah.

In another verse, obeying the Prophet (S)’s orders is considered a sign
of true fondness. The Holy Quran states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِى‌ يُحْبِبْكُمُ
اللَّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: "If ye do love God, Follow me: God will love you and forgive you
your sins: For God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."***[^45]

As a result, the believers who claim to love Allah, but do not emphasize
it by practicing religious duties and the Prophet’s commands, do not
have a real affection and their affection for the Almighty is not useful
for them.

Affection for *zil qurba* (the Prophet’s close relatives) and his Ahlul
Bayt is the same. Since the Prophet’ (S) Ahlul Bayt –the infallible
Imams (a.s.)– were guardians of the religion and promoters of Prophet
Muhammad (S)’s mission, the Muslims are asked to accept their
guardianship and follow them. Our affection for the infallible Imams
(a.s.) is real in case we set them our leaders and follow their speech,
behavior, and ethics. The people who claim to be the Imams’ (a.s.)
lovers, but do not perform their commands, deceive themselves and such
superficial affection will not save them. The infallible Imams (a.s.)
have always emphasized this point, as will be mentioned in the future.

The Imamate Position
--------------------

True recognition of Imamate position and defining the people who filled
this position is an important issue for the Muslims, as mentioned in
many traditions. The science of kalam[^46] discusses if certain
characteristics are necessary for Imamate position, or if everyone can
get it. If the former is true, what are these qualities? In other words,
is Imamate an innate position or a conventional one –obtained by being
appointed? Can it decay?

The same discussions exist in case of prophet hood, but it is proved
that prophet hood is a real innate position for attaining which inborn
qualifications are necessary. If Prophet Muhammad (S), for instance, was
appointed as prophet, it was because of his own virtues. No other person
could be appointed to that position by the Exalted Allah. Prophet hood
means direct relation of a selected person with the unseen world and
obtaining Divine sciences and teachings from the Almighty Allah. Not
everyone deserves such an important duty.

Some issues are proved about prophet hood that are briefly mentioned
here:

1. Human life is not limited to this world; there will be another life
after death with bliss or misery.

2. Human salvation or misfortune in the Hereafter is the result of his
deeds and ethics in this world.

3. Human being is unable to recognize the best plan for his life and
needs Allah’s guidance.

4. The All-Knowing All-Wise Allah, who has created human beautiful and
delicate, has had a purpose. Allah knows well human material and
spiritual needs and the secret of his salvation or unluckiness. The
Exalted Allah never leaves His servants in deviation, rather He has sent
prophets (S) for guiding humans with the necessary sciences, teachings,
plans, and duties, so that the signs are completed for the servants.
This way, the necessity of sending the prophets (S) is confirmed.

The same theorem affirms the prophets’ (S) science and infallibility. In
other words, Allah’s purpose of sending the prophets (S) is fulfilled
only if all the necessary sciences are presented to them and the
prophets (S) are completely away from mistakes and wrongdoing in
acquiring, maintaining, and declaring the revelation sciences to the
people. It is also proved in philosophy and kalam that revelation
sciences are not like acquirable and conceptual sciences, which are
acquired by our senses from the outside world.

Revelation sciences are illuminating facts revealed to the Prophet (S)’s
soul and he observes them with his inner sight and hears with his inner
hearing. That is why the Prophet (S) does not commit mistakes and sins
and is infallible. Such a person should be followed and can be ‘the best
pattern’ (Uswatul hasanah) for the people. Denying or doubtfulness about
the necessity of the prophet’s sciences and infallibility is like
denying the necessity of existence of the prophet.

In sum, the prophet is a complete, noble, and selected human in terms of
spiritual aspects. He can make relations with the unseen world, acquire
religious sciences, teachings, and commandments, and convey them to the
people exactly. This is the lofty position of prophet hood, which
ordinary people cannot attain. However, the prophet is like other people
in terms of material aspects. He needs Allah in his essence and all his
behaviors and deeds. His sustenance is provided by the Almighty Allah.
He may get tired and ill and he needs medicine for getting well. He
gradually ages and cannot help his appointed death.

The real position and advantages of the prophets become clear from above
discussion.[^47]

The lofty position of the Imams can be understood from what was
mentioned about the prophet’s position, since Imamate is continuation of
prophet hood. Some points should be born in mind in this regard, which
have been proved elsewhere:

1. Prophet Muhammad (S) was the last prophet and Islam is the
ever-lasting religion until the Resurrection.

2. The Prophet (S)’s mission was only 23 years. He had to solve the
problems of new Muslims and could not teach all Islamic sciences,
teachings, and commandments to all the Muslims to be maintained for the
future Muslims.

3. A great amount of Islamic commandments are political, social,
judiciary, economical, etc. which were executed by the Messenger of
Allah (S) among the ummah. He had the guardianship of ummah and defended
Islam.

As a result, a person or some persons should accept all the Prophet
(S)’s duties and attempt in realizing his purposes. Such people are
called the Prophet’s caliphs or Imams and have guardianship on the
people and continue the Prophet (S)’s path. The Imamate is completion of
the religion and an organization for the Muslims. As human being needs a
prophet, he needs an Imam. Allah’s purpose of sending the prophets (S)
for guiding the people is fulfilled well only in case the prophet is
followed by the Imams to pursuit his goals; otherwise the Prophet (S)’s
mission will not be accomplished.

It is concluded that the Imam should be fully aware of religious
teachings, sciences, and commandments just like the prophet, so that the
people access true commandments of Islam in Prophet (S)’s absence
throughout the ages.

The Imam should also be away from mistakes, forgetfulness, and
wrongdoing in maintaining religious commandments and declaring them to
the people, just as the prophet is; otherwise Allah’s blessings for the
servants will not be completed. Such an infallible learned person should
be obeyed and is people’ leader and Imam from Allah.[^48]

The major difference between the Prophet (S) and the Imams is that the
Prophet (S) met the revelation angel and received religious commandments
and rules from Allah, but the Imams do not benefit from revelation and
direct relation with the Exalted Allah; they receive religious sciences,
teachings, rules, and commandments from the Prophet (S).

In sum, the Imam is a perfect selected person, aware of religious
sciences, teachings, and commandments, and away from fault, sin, and
forgetfulness. His knowledge and deeds are so perfect that all human
virtues are materialized in his personality and he can be the people’s
Imam and leader. Denying or doubting about any of these innate
advantages equals denying the necessity of existence of Imam and hence
denying the necessity of existence of the Prophet (S).[^49]

Material Aspects
----------------

It should be emphasized again that the Imam –just like the Prophet (S) –
is materially an ordinary person, created by Allah. He needs the
Almighty in his essence, deeds, sustenance, and other wishes. If he gets
sick, he goes to the doctor to be cured. He ages by the passage of time
and surrenders to the death when its appointed time comes.

As Allah states in the Holy Quran,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لا أَمْلِك لِنَفْسِى‌ نَفْعاً وَلا ضَرّاً إِلّا ما شاءَ اللَّهُ
وَلَوْ كُنْتُ أَعْلَمُ الغَيْبَ لَاسْتَكْثَرْتُ مِنَ الخَيْرِ وَما
مَسَّنِىَ‏السُّوءُ إِنْ أَنَا إِلّا نَذِيرٌ وَبَشِيرٌ لِقَوْمٍ
يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: "I have no power over any good or harm to myself except as God
willeth. If I had knowledge of the unseen, I should have multiplied all
good, and no evil should have touched me: I am but a warner, and a
bringer of glad tidings to those who have faith."***[^50]

The conduct of the Prophet (S) and infallible Imams (a.s.) was this way;
they asked their requests from Allah, not others. They thought resorting
to others prevents granting of the prayers. They never told the people,
“Resort to us for answering your requests!” Rather, they recommended the
people to be hopeful only of Allah and ask their requests from Him,
because everything is in Allah’s hands. No one is able to fulfill the
requests except the Almighty. The conduct of the Prophet (S) and
infallible Imams (a.s.) was so when praying. Some instances of this
manner are cited here:

Amiral Mu’minin, Imam Ali (a.s.), told his son, Imam Hasan (a.s.), “Only
ask your Lord, since granting and depriving is only in His power.” [^51]

He also stated, “You ask something from His treasures of Mercy no one
else can grant you. You ask him long life, health, and abundance of
sustenance and no one but He can grant them.” [^52]

Moreover, Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “Only resort to the One who has created
you, gives you provisions, and has created you beautiful.”[^53]

The fourth infallible Imam, Imam Sajjad (a.s.), states in his prayer,
“Praise be to Allah, Who I ask, whenever I want, for granting my request
and to Who I talk privately for saying my request whenever I wish,
without any mediator. So He grants me my request. Praise be to Allah,
Who I only pray to, and if I prayed to others, my prayer would not be
granted. Praise be to Allah, Who I am hopeful of, and if I were hopeful
of others, I would become disappointed.”[^54]

Imam Sajjad (a.s.) stated in another prayer, “Anyone who attends to Your
servants for his request or consider one of them the means to success
has deprived himself from goodness… And You have stated, ‘How is a needy
asks from another needy and a poor attends to another poor?’[^55]

According to mentioned traditions and prayers as well as hundreds of
other prayers in du’a collections, such as Sahifah Nabawiyyah, Sahifah
Alawiyyah, Sahifah Sajjadiyyah, and Sahifah Al-Kadhimiyyah, the
lifestyle of Prophet Muhammad (S) and infallible Imams (a.s.) has been
direct requesting from the Exalted Allah when having a request, with no
mediator. This conduct was the result of their powerful belief and pure
monotheism; they clearly knew that no one can do anything for them, but
Allah.

We, the Shi’ah, follow the Messenger of Allah (S) and infallible Imams
(a.s.), when praying. We know Allah the All-mighty in the world and ask
Him when in need. If we pray and weep in the Imams’ (a.s.) shrines,
vowing to Allah by them, we do not mean that they have an independent
effect. It is because we have a better spiritual mood to pray to Allah
in shrines and mosques. Our avow, cries, resorts, and mourning are for
the same reason too.

The Real Position of the Imam with three Advantages
---------------------------------------------------

As mentioned before, prophet hood and Imamate are two real positions
with three characteristics:

1. Awareness the religiousness sciences, teachings, commandments, and
rules, ethics, worshipping and non-worshipping duties, and in sum
awareness of all that is revealed to Prophet Muhammad (S) and effects
human salvation in this world and the Hereafter.

2. Infallibility of mistakes, forgetfulness, and sins in maintaining
religious commandments and conveying them to the people.

3. Infallibility of wrongdoing or ignoring religious rules.

The mentioned characteristics are truly the prerequisites of prophet
hood and Imamate positions, by which the Muslims can recognize their
Prophet and Imams and believe in them.

Two Devious Beliefs
-------------------

### Taqsir

If someone is doubtful about some or all of the characteristics of the
Prophet or the Imams, he has not known them well and has committed
taqsir (delinquency) and is called muqassir. A muqassir person is the
one who denies the Prophet (S)’s or the Imams’ (a.s.) comprehensive
knowledge, is doubtful about their infallibility of mistakes, sins, or
forgetfulness, knows them fallible like other humans, or attributes a
wrongdoing to them.

Such devious beliefs are wrong, with whatever reason. The argument
against this wrong belief, as pointed out before, is that any of such
beliefs means denying necessity of sending prophets (S) or necessity of
appointment of Imams (a.s.).

### Ghuluw

Ghuluw (hyperbole) means extravagance in a belief. The late Allamah
Majlisi defines ghuluw this way, “Ghuluw about the prophet or the Imam
is belief in their Divinity, their being Allah’s partner in worshipping,
creation, or granting sustenance to the servants, or manifestation of
the soul of one of them in another person’s body and uniqueness of these
two.

It may also be the belief that the Prophet and Imams are aware of the
unseen without Allah’s help, that Imams are Messengers, or that
recognizing the Imams is enough and the servants do not need obey Allah
or avoid sins.” Then he continues, “All these beliefs are infidelity and
going out of the religion, as emphasized by logical reasons, Quranic
verses, and many traditions. The infallible Imams (a.s.) have rejected
the people with such beliefs and announced their infidelity.”[^56]

Qulat (those who believe in quluw) go to extremes in believing in
Imamate, consider the Imams, Allah’s selected servants, beyond humans,
and sometimes assign Allah’s specific attributes to them.

The qulat consider the Imams (a.s.) Allah’s partners in managing world
issues, such as granting sustenance to the servants, granting people’s
wishes, descending the rain, healing the patients, removing calamities,
or forgiveness of the sins, slaughtering livestock in their path. Some
of claimers of shi’ism replace performing religious deeds, doing the
obligatory deeds and avoiding the unlawful deeds with superficial
expression of affection to the Prophet (S)’s Ahlul Bayt.

Such devious beliefs are not only in contrast with logical reasons,
Quran’s text, and infallible Imams’ (a.s.) conduct, but also considered
infidelity. Sometimes the holders of such beliefs are religiously doomed
to murder.

Abu Hashim says, “I asked Imam Ridha’ (a.s.) about the qulat and
mufawizzah. Imam (a.s.) stated, ‘The qulat are infidels and the
mufawwizah are polytheists. Anyone who interacts with and accompanies
them, has food or drink with them, marries them, trusts them, confirms
their speech, or helps them even by saying a single word, will go out of
guardianship of Allah, His Messenger (S) and the Ahlul Bayt.’”[^57]

Mufazzal Ibn Yazid says, “Imam Sadiq (a.s.) mentioned the companions of
Abul Khattab[^58] and the qulat and said, ‘O Mufazzal! Do not accompany
them, nor eat or drink water with them, nor shake hands with them, nor
receive their heritage.’”[^59]

Two companions of Imam Sadiq (a.s.) came to him and said, “Mufazzal Ibn
‘Umar says that you –the Ahlul Bayt– define the servants’ sustenance.”
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, “By Allah that no one defines the servants’
sustenance except Allah. I once could not provide my family’s provisions
and got upset. I thought about it until I could provide food for my
family, then I became relaxed. May Allah curse Abul Khattab who
attributes lies to us.” The two companions said, “Should we curse Abul
Khattab and avoid him?” Imam (a.s.) replied, “Yes.” So his companions
did so and said, “Allah and His Messenger (S) hate Abul Khattab
too.”[^60]

Zararah says, “I told Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘One of the children of
Abdullah Ibn Sanan believes in tafwiz (devolving).’ Imam (a.s.) asked,
‘What is tafwiz?’ I said, ‘They believe that the Exalted Allah created
Muhammad (S) and Ali (a.s.), then devolved the world issues to them. Now
they create, give sustenance, and give death and life.’ Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) stated, ‘He is Allah’s enemy and lies. If you saw him, recite
this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ جَعَلُوا لِلَّهِ شُرَکاءَ خَلَقُوا کَخَلْقِهِ فَتَشابَهَ
الْخَلْقُ عَلَيْهِمْ قُلِ اللَّهُ خالِقُ کُلِّ شَيْ‏ءٍ وَ هُوَ
الْواحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘Or do they assign to Allah partners who have created (anything) as
He has created, so that the creation seemed to them similar? Say: "Allah
is the Creator of all things: He is the One, the Supreme and
Irresistible."’***[^61]

Zararah says, ‘When I recited the verse for that person it was as if
there was stone in his mouth (He could not defend his belief
anymore).’”[^62]

Abdur Rahman Ibn Kathir says, “Imam Sadiq (a.s.) told his companions,
‘May Allah curse Mughayrat Ibn Sa’id and the Jew woman, who visited him
and learned magic and odd things from him. Mugayrah attributed lies to
my father, so the Almighty Allah took his belief from hims. Some other
people attributed lies to me. Allah will make them taste the heat of
iron.’

By Allah, we are only His servants; He created and selected us. We have
no power to bring advantage or disadvantage for ourselves. If the
Almighty has Mercy on us, it is from He and if He punishes us, it is
because of our own deeds.’

By Allah that we have no argument against Allah! We cannot free
ourselves from the Fire. We die like other people and will be placed
inside a grave. Then we will be resurrected and reckoned about our deeds
in the Hereafter. Woe be to them! May Allah curse them! They upset Him.
They upset Messenger of Allah (S), Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.), Fatimah
(s.a.), Hasan (a.s.), Husayn (a.s.), Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), and Muhammad
Ibn Ali (a.s.) in their graves. I am the son of Prophet Muhammad (S).
You see that I am fearful of Allah’s wrath in my bed, while they sleep
comfortably in their beds. I beg Allah and weep from His fear, but they
are asleep. I am frightened of Allah’s punishment in mountains and
deserts. I take refuge to Allah from this stupid man (Abul Khattab). May
Allah curse him!’”[^63]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, “Be careful that the qulat do not lead your
youth astray! The qulat are the worst creatures of Allah, because they
belittle Allah’s greatness and consider divinity for His servants.”

By Allah that qulat are worse than the Jews, the Christians, and the
infidels. If they come to us, we do not accept to see them, but we will
accept a muqassir.” The Imam (a.s.) was then asked, “O son of Messenger
of Allah! What is the reason?” Imam Sadiq (a.s.) replied, “Because a
ghali is used to abandoning prayer, fasting, *Zakat*, and Hajj and
cannot leave his habit. A muqassir, however, will practice his
obligatory deeds when he finds out his fault.”[^64]

Imam Ridha’ (a.s.) said in his prayers, “O Lord! I take refuge in You
for changing the states and abilities. Wa la hawla wa la quwwata illa
bik (And there is no power except from You) O Lord! I take refuge in You
and hate the people who lie about us. O Lord! I take refuge in You from
the people who say things about us that we do not say.”

O Allah! Creation is done by You and You grant sustenance. I worship You
and ask help from You. You are the Creator of us and our fathers; from
the first one to the last one. O Allah! Divinity is for You and does not
deserve anyone else. I curse the Christians who belittle Your magnitude
and the people who attribute greatness to Your other servants. O Lord!
We are your creatures and servants, not owners of our advantage and
disadvantage, nor our life and death. We avoid anyone who thinks we are
his Lord or supposes that the servants’ creation or sustenance is in our
hands, just like the avoidance of Jesus from the Christians.”

O Lord! We have not invited them to this belief, so do not scold us for
what they say and save us from such invalid qualities. Perish them from
the earth; if they remain on the earth they will lead Your servants
astray and make them infidels.”[^65]

Abu Basir Says, “I told Imam Sadiq (a.s.), ‘People say some things about
you.’ Imam (a.s.) asked, ‘What do they say?’ I said, ‘They say that you
know the number of rain drops, stars, trees’ leaves, sands, and the
weight of seas’ water and deserts’ soil.’ Imam Sadiq (a.s.) raised his
head to the sky and stated, ‘Subhana Allah! Subhana Allah! (Glory be to
Allah!) By Allah not! Only Allah knows these things.’”[^66]

Ibn Mughayrah says, “Yahya Ibn Abdullah and I visited Imam Abul Hasan
(a.s.). Yahya told Imam (a.s.), ‘May I be sacrificed for you! People
think that you know the unseen.’ Imam (a.s.) replied, ‘Glory be to
Allah! Put your hand on my head; by Allah that my hair bristled from
hearing this. By Allah that everything I say I narrate from the
Messenger of Allah (S).’”[^67]

### The Motives of Ghuluw (Hyperbole)

The qulat and their supporters have had different motives, some of which
are mentioned in the traditions as follows:

1. Ignorance. We read in a letter from Hadrat Sahibul ‘Amr, Imam Mahdi
(a.j.), ‘O Muhammad Ibn Ali! The ignorant from the Shi’ah and the people
who do not value their religion as much as a fly wing tease us. I take
Allah, the Prophet (S), the angels, and Allah’s prophets and Imams as
well as anyone who hears this witness that I take refuge in Allah and
His Messenger (S) from the people who say that we know the unseen
sciences or are Allah’s partner in His sovereignty, or attribute
positions to us other than what Allah has defined for us. Surely, Allah,
the angels, the prophets (S), and the Imams (a.s.) avoid such
people.’[^68]

2. Material misuses. Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) stated about three of
the qulat, namely Abul Ghamar, Ja’far Ibn Waqid, and Hashim Ibn Abi
Husham, “They misuse people’s property by our names and invite people to
what Abul Khattab invites. May Allah curse Abul Khattab and the people
who invite others to Abul Khattab and anyone who invited people to him
before.”[^69]

3. Extravagance in affection. Imam Ali Ibn Al-Husayn (a.s.) stated, “The
Jews attributed what they believed in to ‘Uzayr, out of extreme
affection. Therefore, ‘Uzayr is not one of them and they are not like
him. The Christians, too, attributed what they believed in to Christ, so
Christ is not one of them, nor are they his followers. The same is true
about us (the Ahlul Bayt). A group of the Shi’ah loves us so much that
they attribute what the Jews said about ‘Uzayr and what the Christians
said about Jesus to us; therefore, they are not our followers, nor are
we from them.”[^70]

Summary and a Warning
---------------------

As was mentioned, one of the major problems of infallible Imams (a.s.)
and Shi’ism has been the creation of two devious trends of ghuluw and
tafwiz. These invalid beliefs harmed the Imams’ (a.s.) honor and Shi’ism
sect, making the people pessimistic about them. Unfortunately, this
danger was plotted by pretenders of Imams’ (a.s.) affection, who
belittled the Exalted Allah’s greatness because of ignorance, untrue
expression of affection, or due to financial misuses, considering the
Imams’ (a.s.) Allah’s partners in some of His attributes. They deceived
some gullible people by publicizing these ideas, thus threatening the
Shi’ism sect.

In such conditions, the infallible Imams (a.s.) did not remain silent
before these invalid eulogies and struggled with superstitious opinions
behind them. They introduced the heads of these fabricated beliefs as
infidels, cursing, abandoning, and even allowing their murder, in order
to inform their simple-minded followers. Thanks to this conscious step
by the infallible Imams (a.s.), this major plot was removed in a way
that there is no remnant of the ghulat and mufawwizah today. Of course,
the Shi’ah scholars have always attempted to guard true Islamic beliefs
and campaign devious opinions.

It is worth mentioning that religious scholars and dignitaries should be
aware of misusers, now and in future, who plot to deceive the masses
especially at the time of social crises. They do so by telling hopeful
stories, groundless dreams, unreliable quotations, and doing some untrue
deeds and eulogies.

It may also be possible that the mentioned people propagate ghuluw or
tafwiz beliefs consciously or unconsciously. Therefore, religious
authorities should always be conscious of and campaign against invalid
opinions, just as their predecessors.

[^1]: Surah Al-Ahzab 33: 33.

[^2]: Sahih Muslim, Vol 4, p. 1883.

[^3]: Yanabi’ul Mawaddah, p. 125.

[^4]: Yanabi’ul Mawaddah, p. 125.

[^5]: Yanabi’ul Mawaddah, p. 126.

[^6]: Yanabi’ul Mawaddah, p. 126.

[^7]: Yanabi’ul Mawaddah, p. 126.

[^8]: Majma’ul Zawa’id, Vol 9, pp. 168 & 169.

[^9]: Majma’ul Zawa’id, Vol 9, p. 167.

[^10]: Surah Al-‘An’am 6: 145.

[^11]: Surah Al-Tawbah 9: 125.

[^12]: Surah Yasin 36: 82.

[^13]: Surah Al-Baqarah 2: 185.

[^14]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 3, p. 199.

[^15]: Al-Badayah wan Nahayah, Vol 2, p. 136; Biharul Anwar, Vol 35, p.
213, Bab 5.

[^16]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 10, Bab 9, p. 138.

[^17]: Surah Al-Ma’idah 5: 67.

[^18]: Mustadrak Hakim Niyshaburi, Vol 3, p. 109.

[^19]: Al-Bidayah wan Nahayah, Vol 5, p. 229.

[^20]: Al-Bidayah wan Nahayah, Vol 5, p. 229.

[^21]: Al-Ghadir, Vol 1.

[^22]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 23, p. 147.

[^23]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 23, p. 147.

[^24]: Al-Ghadir, Vol 1, p. 508.

[^25]: Al-Bidayah wan Nahayah, Vol 5, p. 229.

[^26]: Hilyatul Awliya’, Vol 1, p. 128.

[^27]: Hilyatul Awliya’, Vol 1, p. 104.

[^28]: Hilyatul Awliya’, Vol 1, p. 106.

[^29]: Nurul Absar, p. 80.

[^30]: Yanabi’ul Mawaddah, Vol 1, p. 75.

[^31]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 5, p. 283.

[^32]: Ikmalud Din, Vol 2, p. 376.

[^33]: Surah Al-Shura 42: 23.

[^34]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 3, p. 233.

[^35]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 3, p. 92.

[^36]: Dhakha’irul Uqba, p. 20.

[^37]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 27, p. 79.

[^38]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 27, p. 79.

[^39]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 27, p. 79.

[^40]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 27, p. 79.

[^41]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 27, p. 79.

[^42]: Rawzatul Kafi, p. 80.

[^43]: Al-Kafi, Vol 1, p. 413.

[^44]: Surah Al-Ma’idah 5: 54.

[^45]: Surah ‘Ali ‘Imran 3: 31.

[^46]: Speculative Theology.

[^47]: For more information, you can refer to kalam and philosophy
books.

[^48]: The same issue is understood from many Quranic verses and
traditions. For more information on this, you can refer to kalam books
about “Imamate”.

[^49]: All the issues related to “Imamate” are authored in detail in the
book General Issues of Imamate and the book Patterns of Excellence, as
well as former sections of the present book.

[^50]: Surah Al-‘A’raf 7: 188.

[^51]: Nahjul Balaghah, Book 31.

[^52]: Nahjul Balaghah, Book 31.

[^53]: Nahjul Balaghah, Book 31.

[^54]: Mafatihul Jinan, Du’a Abu Hamzah Thumali.

[^55]: Sahifah Al-Sajjadiyah, Du’a 13.

[^56]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 346.

[^57]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 273.

[^58]: Abul Khattab , a head of the qulat, lived in Imam Sadiq’s (a.s.)
age. He deceived a group of the masses and founded an invalid religion.
His full name was Muhammad Ibn Ta’las and his nickname Abul Khattab and
Abu Ziynab. He was originally from Kufah, but lived in Medina for
acquiring knowledge and the traditions of Imam Sadiq (a.s.), as his
companion. At first he had no deviation; therefore some traditions are
narrated by him. However, he was a fool person. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has
stated about him, “Abul Khattab was a fool, …” Then he left Medina, went
to other cities, and gathered some stupid people around himself by
deceiving them, fabricating incorrect traditions, and attributing them
to Imam (a.s.). Then he founded an invalid religion with superstitious
infidel beliefs. First he claimed that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has taught him
Allah’s Grand A’zam Name and has set him his successor. Then he went
even further and claimed prophet hood and then prophetic mission. He
said, “Ja’far Ibn Muhammad Imam Sadiq is Allah and I am the Messenger of
Allah, so obey me!” He and his father recommended some unlawful deeds,
such as adultery, theft, and wine-drinking. They did not oblige prayer,
fasting, and zakat. At the beginning, they gave Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and
other infallible Imams positions beyond their real positions,
introducing them as prophets and messengers. Then they even claimed the
Imams are Allah. They said, “The Imam is not merely the person you can
observe; rather he has been a superior light, which has come to this
world after passing some levels, and materialized in the form of a
human.” When his void beliefs and deeds were reported to Imam Sadiq
(a.s.), the Imam (a.s.) raised his hands toward the heaven and said,
“May Allah, His angels, and all the people curse Abul Khattab. By Allah
that he is infidel and polytheist. He will accompany the pharaoh in the
Hell.” Later, Abul Khattab and some of his followers were killed and the
remnant was divided into several groups, continuing their deviant
practice for years. For more information, you can refer to the book
Al-Milal wan Nihal by Shahristani and firaqush Shi’ah by Nubakhti and
rijal books. The authors of rijal books have controversy over Mufazzal
Ibn ‘Umar Kufi mentioned in the same tradition. Some consider him one of
the qulat and follower of Abul Khattab, rejecting the traditions he has
quoted. Some others regard him a real Muslim and a companion of Imam
Sadiq (a.s.), considering his ghuluw belief a scandal. The reason for
this controversy is various traditions attributed to infallible Imams
(a.s.) and recorded in tradition books, either rejecting or approving
him. A group of rijal scientists have found a solution; he has been one
of qulat and follower of Abul Khattab at first, but accepted the truth,
abandoned Abul Khattab, and joined Imam Sadiq (a.s.) later. Therefore,
the traditions Mufazzal has narrated when being a ghali are denied and
the ones narrated after his repenting are valid. Assessment of this
issue needs a long discussion in rijal science, which is not possible in
the present book. For more information, you can refer to Mu’jam Rijal
Al-Hadith by the late Ayatollah Sayyid Abul Qasim Khu’i, Majma’ur Rijal
by ‘Inaytullah Ali Qahbali, Qamusur Rijal by Muhammad Taqi Tastiri,
Bahjatul Maqal by Mulla Ali Alyari, and other rijal sources.

[^59]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 296.

[^60]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p.301.

[^61]: Surah Al-Ra’d 13: 16.

[^62]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 343.

[^63]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 289.

[^64]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 265.

[^65]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 343.

[^66]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 394.

[^67]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 293.

[^68]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 267.

[^69]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 319.

[^70]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 25, p. 288.


