Chapter 3: The Arguments for Imamate
====================================

The Methods of Selecting the Prophet (S)’s Caliph or the Imam
-------------------------------------------------------------

One of the major controversial issues among the Muslims from Early
Islamic Era has been the true and legitimate method of selecting the
Prophet (S)’s caliph or the Imam of the Muslims. The question is that
who is allowed to define the Prophet (S)’s caliph and introduce him to
the people. Is the Divine guidance needed in recognition and appointment
of the Imam or is this task devolved to the Islamic ummah?

This controversy has divided the Muslims into two sects of Sunnism and
Imamiyyah (Shi’ism). The Shi’ah Muslims believe that no one can
recognize and introduce the Imam, except the Almighty Allah and Prophet
Muhammad (S); therefore, the Imam is appointed by Allah and His
Messenger (S).

The Sunni Muslims, however, claim that there is no need to introduction
and appointment of the caliph by the Prophet (S); rather, recognition
and selection of the Imam is put to the Muslims and they are qualified
to do so.

The root of this difference among the two major Islamic sects is another
difference about conditions and characteristics of the caliph and the
Imam. The Shi’ah Muslims consider two qualities necessary for the caliph
of Messenger of Allah (S); first, complete knowledge of Islamic sciences
and teachings, values and disvalues, virtues and all Islamic rules and
commandments revealed to Prophet Muhammad (S), and second infallibility
of faults, forgetfulness, wrongdoing, sins, and transgression of Divine
regulations. The Imamiyyah or Shi’ah have proved these two necessary
qualities of the Prophet (S)’s caliph in kalam books, using logical
arguments and the traditions.[^1]

Regarding the necessity of these two characteristics, it is said that
the introducer of Prophet (S)’s caliph should be able to recognize the
infallible individuals and the Divine scholars among other people. Only
Allah and His Prophet (S) can do so, because it is He Who has created
humans and knows well their innate essence.

The Almighty has created the Prophet (S) and the Imams (a.s.) and is
aware of their infallibility. Therefore, only the Imam who is selected
by Prophet Muhammad (S) possesses the Divine sciences and guidance. This
way, an infallible Imam can be known in one of these three ways; first,
introduction and appointment by the Prophet (S), second, introduction by
the previous infallible Imam, who holds Prophet Muhammad (S)’s sciences
and knowledge, and third, showing a miracle that is the sign of Allah’s
support.

The Sunni Muslims, however, do not consider knowledge of Islamic
sciences and infallibility as necessary conditions of the Prophet (S)’s
caliph. They believe that selecting the caliph is devolved to the
people; anyone, who is selected by the people and the people take the
oath of allegiance with him, is the Prophet (S)’s caliph and should be
obeyed.

They define three methods in this regard. One is people’s consensus, as
happened in case of Abu Bakr’s caliphate. The other method is
introduction of previous fallible caliph, just as Abu Bakr introduced
‘Umar, as the next caliph, before his demise. One other method is
selection by the nobles’ council, like what happened in selecting
Uthman, the third Sunni caliph after Prophet Muhammad (S).

The Imamiyyah Shi’ahs
---------------------

The Imamiyyah Shi’ahs are the people who believe in the successive
caliphate and Imamate of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and eleven of his
progeny after Prophet Muhammad (S). They are also called Ithna ‘Ashari
(Twelver). The Shi’ah believe that these Imams are inheritors of the
Prophet (S)’s sciences and infallible of mistakes and sins and should
all be obeyed.

The Names of Twelve Imams
-------------------------

1. Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)

2. Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.)

3. Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.)

4. Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.)

5. Muhammad Ibn Ali (a.s.)

6. Ja’far Ibn Muhammad (a.s.)

7. Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.)

8. Ali Ibn Musa (a.s.)

9. Muhammad Ibn Ali (a.s.)

10. Ali Ibn Muhammad (a.s.)

11. Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.)

12. Hujjat Ibn Al-Hasan (a.j., May Allah hasten his reappearance)

Each of these Imams reached the imamate position and were martyred or
passed away after a while, except the twelfth Imam, who is alive but
hidden from sight. He will remain absent until the world is ready for
accepting his worldwide government and Allah orders his reappearance.
This important issue will be explained in detail later in the present
book.

The Reasons for Imamate of the Imams
------------------------------------

It was proved in previous sections that recognition and appointment of
the Imam is impossible without Divine guidance. Since the Imam should be
away from mistakes, forgetfulness, and sins, only Allah and His
Messenger (S) who can recognize the infallibles from among the servants
can introduce Prophet (S)’s successor. As a result, the infallible Imam
can be recognized in either of three ways:

1. Identifying and appointing by the Prophet (S) who is aware of
revelation sciences,

2. Identifying and appointment by the previous Imam, whose Imamate is
proved before, and has been aware of the Prophet (S)’s sciences,

3. Bringing a miracle, that is a sign of Divine support.

The First Reason; Prophet Muhammad’s Traditions
-----------------------------------------------

The honorable Messenger of Allah (S) has mentioned the number of twelve
Imams and their names in the traditions recorded in books of the Sunni
and Shi’ah narrators. These traditions are of several types:

### The First Type; Twelve People and All from Quraysh

There are some traditions of this type, some of which are cited here.
Jabir Ibn Samarah said, “I heard from Messenger of Allah (S), ‘People’s
affairs are managed well so long as twelve people rule them.’ Then the
Prophet (S) said something that I could not hear. I asked my father what
the Prophet said. He told me that Prophet Muhammad (S) said, ‘All of
them are from Quraysh.’[^2]”[^3]

Sammak Ibn Harb has quoted Jabir Ibn Samarah who said, “I heard from
Prophet Muhammad (S), ‘Islam will be honored as long as twelve caliphs
will rule the Muslims.’ The Messenger of Allah (S) then said something
that I did not hear. I asked my father about it and he said, ‘The
Prophet (S) stated, ‘All of them will be from Quraysh.’”[^4]

‘amir Ibn Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas said, “I wrote a letter and sent it to
Jabir Ibn Samarah by my slave Nafi’. I asked him to inform me of what he
had heard from messenger of Allah (S). He wrote in reply, ‘On a Friday,
the Prophet (S) stated, ‘This religion will last until the Resurrection
or until twelve caliphs, who are all from Quraysh, rule you.’”[^5]

Prophet Muhammad (S) has declared the existence of twelve righteous
caliphs from Quraysh after himself. They will honor Islam and the
Muslims as rulers. The researchers know well that this number of caliphs
is not compatible with caliphs of Rashidin, the Umayyid, Bani Marwan,
the Abbasid, or combining some of them with some others. The only
twelve-caliphs that remain are the Imamiyyah infallible Imams (a.s.),
who are all from Quraysh.

### The Second Type; Twelve People and All Infallible

Abdullah Ibn Abbas said, “I heard from Messenger of Allah (S), ‘In
addition to me, Ali, Hasan, Husayn, and nine people from Husayn’s
progeny are purified and infallible.’”[^6]

The Messenger of Allah (S) told Hadrat Fatimah (s.a.), “Do not cry or be
upset! You are the Mistress of the ladies in Paradise, your father is
the master of prophets, your cousin (Ali) is the master of caliphs, and
your two sons (Hasan and Husayn) are masters of the youth in Paradise.
Nine Imams from Husayn’s progeny will be appointed, all of which are
infallible. Mahdi (a.j.) of this nation will be from us too.”[^7]

Abu Tufayl has narrated from Imam Ali (a.s.), “The Messenger of Allah
(S) told me, ‘You are my successor and guardian to anyone who dies from
the Ahlul Bayt and my caliph among my ummah. War with you is war with me
and peace with you is peace with me. You are the father of Imams; eleven
Imams from your progeny are infallible and purified. Mahdi of my ummah,
who fills the world with justice, is one of them. Woe be to their
enemies!’”[^8]

Based on what was stated before in proving the necessity of
infallibility for the Imams, the above-mentioned traditions and many
other similar ones confirm the Imamate of twelve Imams (a.s.). Except
for these twelve people from the Prophet (S)’s Ahlul Bayt, about who
*Tat’hir* verse is revealed, no one has claimed infallibility nor has
anyone’s infallibility ever been proved.

### The Third Type; Twelve People and the Names of the First and Last Ones

In many traditions, the number twelve for the Imams and the names of
their first and last ones are mentioned. As an instance, Salman
Muhammadi said, “I went to Prophet Muhammad (S), who had placed Husayn
(a.s.) on his lap, kissing his eyes and mouth. The Prophet (S) then told
him, ‘You are sayyid, son of sayyid, and father of sayyids. You are the
Imam, son of the Imam, and father of the Imams. You are the *Hujjat*,
son of the *Hujjat*, and father of nine Imams, the ninth of which will
be Qa’im.’”[^9]

Abdullah Ibn Abbas has quoted from the Messenger of Allah (S), “The
caliphs, successors, and Allah’s *Hujjat*s after me are twelve; the
first one is my brother, Ali, and the last one will be one of my progeny
too.” The Prophet (S) was then asked, “O Messenger of Allah! Who is your
brother?” He replied, “Ali Ibn Abi Talib.” The Prophet (S) was asked,
“Who is your last progeny?” Prophet Muhammad (S) answered, “Mahdi, who
will fill the earth with justice after being filled with injustice and
oppression.”[^10]

Imam Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) has quoted from the Messenger of Allah (S),
“The number of Imams after me will be as the number of the Israelite
leaders and apostles of Jesus (twelve). Anyone who likes them is
believer and anyone who dislikes them is hypocrite. They are Allah’s
*Hujjat*s for the people and like flags of guidance.”[^11]

### The Fourth Type; Twelve People in Order of Imamate

Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari told the Messenger of Allah (S), “O Messenger
of Allah! Who are the Imams from the progeny of Ali Ibn Abi Talib?”
Prophet Muhammad (S) stated, “Hasan and Husayn; the masters of youth of
Paradise, then Ali Ibn Husayn; Sayyidul ‘abidin (master of the
worshippers) in his own age, then Baqir Ibn Ali, who you will see. Say
my greetings to him. Then Sadiq; Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, then Al-Kadhim;
Musa Ibn Ja’far, then Ridha’; Ali Ibn Musa, then Taqi; Muhammad Ibn Ali,
then Naqi; Ali Ibn Muhammad, then Zakiyy; Hasan Ibn Ali, and then his
son Qa’im; Mahdi, who will fill the earth with justice as it would
filled with injustice. O Jabir! These are my successors, caliphs, sons,
and the ‘*Itrat*. Everyone who obeys them has obeyed me and everyone who
denies one or all of them has denied me. The heaven does not collapse on
the earth nor does the earth swallow its occupants for their sake.”[^12]

Sahl Ibn Sa’d Ansari said, “I asked Hadrat Fatimah (s.a.), the daughter
of Messenger of Allah (S) from the Imams. She said that the messenger of
Allah (S) told Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘O Ali! You are the Imam and caliph
after me; you are more deserved to interfere in believers’ affairs than
themselves. When you pass away, your son Hasan will be more deserved and
after him Husayn will be more deserved. After Husayn’s demise, his son
Ali Ibn Husayn will be more deserved. When Ali Ibn Husayn passes away,
his son Muhammad will be more deserved. When Muhammad passes away, his
son Ja’far will be more deserved. After Ja’far’s demise, his son Musa
will be more deserved. When Musa passes away, his son Ali will be more
deserved. After Ali’s demise, his son Muhammad will be more deserved.
When Muhammad passes away, his son Ali will be more deserved. After
Ali’s demise, his son Hasan will be more deserved. When Hasan passes
away, his son Qa’im and Mahdi will be more deserved; he will conquer the
East and the West.’”[^13]

Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) has quoted from Messenger of Allah (S),
“Everyone who likes to meet Allah and be attended by Him should resort
to your guardianship (wilayat). Everyone who likes to meet the Almighty
Allah without fearing Him should accept the guardianship of your son
Husayn. If anyone likes to meet Allah while his sins are forgiven, he
should accept the guardianship of Ali Ibn Husayn, since the Almighty
said about him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سيماهُمْ في‏ وُجُوهِهِمْ مِنْ أَثَرِ السُّجُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘On their faces are their marks, (being) the traces of their
prostration.’***[^14]

Everyone who wants to meet the Exalted Allah while his eyes are
illuminated should accept the guardianship of Muhammad Ibn Ali. Anyone
who likes to meet his Lord with his Letter of Deeds in his right hand
should know Ja’far Ibn Muhammad Sadiq as his guardian. Everyone who
wants to meet Allah while he is purified should take Musa Ibn Ja’far
Al-Kadhim guardian. Everyone who likes to meet Allah delighted should
accept the guardianship of Ali Ibn Musa Ridha’. Everyone who likes to
meet Allah with high spiritual degrees and removed sins should accept
the guardianship of Muhammad Ibn Ali.

If someone likes to meet the Almighty while his reckoning is easy and go
to the paradise, that is wider than the heavens and the earth, along
with the pious servants, he should accept the guardianship of Ali Ibn
Muhammad. Everyone who wants to meet Allah with salvation should accept
the guardianship of Hasan Ibn Ali.

Everyone who likes to meet the Almighty with perfect belief in Islam
should accept the guardianship of the waited Imam Mahdi; Sahib Al-Zaman.
These are guidance lights in darkness, Imams of guidance, and flags of
piety. I guarantee going to the Paradise for everyone who likes them and
accepts their guardianship.”[^15]

Imam Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) stated, “I heard from the Messenger of Allah
(S) who told Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), ‘You are the inheritor of my
knowledge and wisdom and the Imam after me. When you get martyred, your
son Hasan will be the Imam. When Hasan will be martyred, your other son
Husayn will be the Imam. After Husayn’s martyrdom, his son Ali will be
the Imam. After him nine people from Husayn’s progeny will become the
Imams.’ Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) then said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! What are
the names of these nine Imams?’ Prophet Muhammad (S) answered, ‘Ali,
Muhammad, Ja’far, Musa, Ali, Muhammad, Ali, Hasan, and Mahdi, from
Husayn’s progeny. Mahdi will fill the earth with justice after being
filled with oppression and injustice.’”[^16]

The Second Reason; Appointment by the Previous Imam
---------------------------------------------------

The main reason for the Imamate of twelve Imams (a.s.) is being
appointed by their previous Imam. The Imam, who is appointed by the
Prophet (S), can recognize the Imam after himself and introduce him to
the people, just like the Prophet (S). Since the Imams (a.s.) possess
Prophet Muhammad (S)’s sciences, information, and necessary
recommendation directly from him or from their earlier Imam (a.s.), they
can identify the infallible among the people. The Imamate of Twelve
Imams (a.s.) is done in the same way, as recorded in hadith and kalam
books. The same method is used in the present book.

As pointed out before, the honorable Messenger of Allah (S) was
infallible himself, supported by the Almighty Allah, and recognizer of
the infallible. He had prepared the conditions and people’s minds for
Imamate of Imam Ali (a.s.) by emphasizing his virtues, innate qualities,
scientific stance, and infallibility. Finally, Prophet Muhammad (S)
selected and appointed Imam Ali (a.s.) to Imamate in Ghadir Khum in
presence of tens of thousands of *Hajj* pilgrims.

This way his Imamate was confirmed for the audience. Prophet Muhammad
(S) gave necessary recommendations to Ali (a.s.) for continuation of his
Imamate. Imam Ali (a.s.), too, selected and appointed his son, Hasan,
for the Imamate position in his lifetime. Imam Hasan (a.s.) selected and
appointed Imam Husayn (a.s.) as Imam, before his death. Imam Husayn
(a.s.) selected and appointed his son, Ali Ibn Husayn, for Imamate. The
same method was continued until the appointment of the twelfth Imam
(a.s.).

The Third Reason; Miracles
--------------------------

The infallible Imams (a.s.) have had some miracles in their lifetimes
for proving their Imamate, which are cited in hadith, history, and kalam
books. We do not cite them here not to prolong the discussion.

[^1]: The issues of Imam’s knowledge and infallibility are discussed in
detail early in this book and also in the book Review of General issue
of Imamate.

[^2]: Prophet Muhammad (S)’s tribe.

[^3]: Sahih Muslim, Vol 3, p. 1452.

[^4]: Sahih Muslim, Vol 3, p. 1453.

[^5]: Sahih Muslim, Vol 3, p. 1453.

[^6]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 2, p. 162.

[^7]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 2, p. 239.

[^8]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 1, p. 193.

[^9]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 2, p. 103.

[^10]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 1, p. 106.

[^11]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 1, p. 113.

[^12]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 1, p. 163.

[^13]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 1, p. 216.

[^14]: Surah Al-Fat’h 48: 29.

[^15]: Jami’ Ahadith Al-Shi’ah, Vol 17, p. 103.

[^16]: Ghayatul Maram, Vol 1, p. 193.


