Chapter 4: Brief Biographies of the Infallible Imams
====================================================

The Shi’ah Opinion about the Infallible Imams
---------------------------------------------

Based on mental reason for necessity of existence of the Imam, mentioned
before, and some Quranic verses about the Imamate as well as many
traditions from Prophet Muhammad (S) and infallible Imams (a.s.)
regarding the issue of Imamate, our belief about the twelve Imams (a.s.)
is that:

1. They are completely away from any sins, faults, and wrongdoing and
are infallible.

2. They are the most perfect humans in knowing the Almighty Allah and
His Attributes. They deeply believe in Allah’s uniqueness, the
Resurrection, and prophet hood. They see the unseen world intuitively.

3. They are adorned with all ethical virtues and away from all vices.

4. They are completely aware of religious rules, commandments,
fundamental and minor issues, obligatory, undesirable, recommended, and
prohibited deeds. They did not receive the revelation or make religious
rules; rather they deducted their knowledge directly from the Holy Quran
or indirectly from the Prophet (S) or the books inherited from Messenger
of Allah (S).

5. They knew well all governmental rules and regulations. They benefited
from especial authority too.

The infallible Imams (a.s.) had two major duties as well:

Guarding the Divine Commandments
--------------------------------

The honorable Imams (a.s.) of the Shi’ah possessed the necessary
sciences and were prepared for safeguarding religious rules and
commandments, circulating Islamic teachings and sciences, and pursuing
Prophet Muhammad (S)’s purposes. As mentioned before, the Messenger of
Allah (S) had trained them for this important duty. He introduced his
‘*Itrat* or Ahlul Bayt as the most valid scientific source to the
Muslims and recommended benefitting from their knowledge.

But unfortunately Prophet Muhammad (S)’s purpose was not fully realized;
the seekers of property and worldly positions not only removed the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.)from caliphate of the Prophet (S), but also hindered their
scientific authority, depriving the Islamic ummah from authentic prophet
hood sciences. Each of the Imams (a.s.) attempted in publicizing Islamic
sciences, teachings, and commandments and training scholars as much as
possible in those limited conditions.

As a result of such constant attempts throughout the ages, hundreds of
thousands of traditions in various scientific trends were published,
most of which are recorded in tradition books. If the infallible Imams
(a.s.) had more opportunity, the Islamic ummah benefitted from more
Islamic sciences and teachings.

Holding the Caliphate Position
------------------------------

The second major duty of the Imams (a.s.) was incumbency of caliphate
and managing the Islamic country’s socio-political affairs, which was a
duty of Prophet Muhammad (S)’s too. The Messenger of Allah (S) had given
necessary recommendations before and appointed Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)
as his successor in Ghadir Khum. Imam Ali (a.s.) was ready for accepting
the caliphate position, but people’s acceptance and desirable conditions
were necessary for realization of it too.

Unfortunately, a group of ambitious people ignored Prophet Muhammad
(S)’s recommendation regarding Muslims’ caliphate, misused ignorance of
the masses, and created a deviation in the course of caliphate, opposing
the Prophet (S)’s want. In such conditions, Imam Ali (a.s.) could do
nothing but patience. Twenty five years passed until the people awakened
and took the oath of allegiance with Imam Ali (a.s.) as Muslims’ caliph.

Later, however, some people, who had accustomed to and benefitted from
prejudice and injustice in previous governments, could not accept Imam
Ali’s (a.s.) just ruling. They opposed his government by setting up wars
and adversities. After about five years, Imam Ali (a.s.) was martyred in
worshipping mihrab.

The caliphate then returned to a devious course under the Ummayid and
the Abbasids dynasties for many years, with no grounds for caliphate of
the other infallible Imams (a.s.). Each of the Imams (a.s.) considered
the caliphate after Messenger of Allah (S) his lawful right and was
prepared for taking the position. None of them, nevertheless, could
reach caliphate because of Muslims’ delinquency.

The Signs of Genuine Shi’ah
---------------------------

The term Shi’ah is attributed to someone who believes in successive
Imamate and caliphate of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and eleven of his
progeny after Prophet Muhammad (S) and loves them. Such a person is a
Twelver Shi’ah. Of course, mere verbal affection does not suffice for
being a real Shi’ah nor does it guarantee salvation in this world and
the Hereafter. Basically, the belief without practice is merely a mental
concept.

The lexical meaning of ‘Shi’ah’ is ‘follower’. There is a kind of
practical adherence embedded in its meaning too. The Shi’ah were called
so because they followed the Messenger of Allah (S), Imam Ali (a.s.),
and infallible Imams (a.s.) in speech, behavior, and ethics. Practice is
a necessity for real belief. If there is no practice, one’s belief is
probably superficial. Real affection brings about attention and
satisfaction of the beloved. Can someone be a real lover of infallible
Imams (a.s.) but behave against their recommendations?

For a better recognition of real Shi’ahs one should refer to the
statements of infallible Imams (a.s.). Some of the traditions in this
regard are pointed out here:

Jabir has quoted from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), “O Jabir! Is it enough
for a Shi’ah to say ‘I love the Ahlul Bayt’? By Allah, a Shi’ah should
be pious and obedient to the Almighty. O Jabir! Our followers (Shi’ahs)
are known with these characteristics; humility, obeisance in
worshipping, trusteeship, frequency of zikr (Allah’s remembrance),
*Sawm* (fasting), *Salat* (prayer), goodness to one’s parents,
consideration of poor neighbors, debtors, and orphans, except that
leaving such deeds is better. Our Shi’ahs were trustees among the
people.”

Jabir then asked, “O son of Messenger of Allah! We do not see such
people in this time.” Imam Baqir (a.s.) stated, “O Jabir! Do not go
astray! Does it suffice to say ‘I love Ali (a.s.) and accept his
guardianship’ but not to follow Ali (a.s.) in practice? If someone says,
‘I love Messenger of Allah (S)’, but he does not follow the Prophet
(S)’s conduct, this affection will be of no use to him, though the
Messenger of Allah (S) is better than Ali (a.s.). Fear Allah and do good
deeds! The Almighty is no one’s relative. The most beloved and honorable
of the servants are the most righteous and pious ones. O Jabir! By Allah
that only piety approaches the servants to Allah. Distance from the Hell
is not in our hands. No one has a *Hujjat* (argument) against Allah.
Anyone who obeys Allah is our friend. Anyone who disobeys Allah is our
enemy. No one can get to our guardianship except with righteous deed and
avoiding the sins.”[^1]

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) told Fuzayl, “Say our greetings to our Shi’ahs
and tell them, ‘We can do nothing for you against Allah’s will, except
when you avoid sins.’ So keep your tongues and hands from wrongdoing.
Establish prayers and be patient. Surely Allah is with the patient.”[^2]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) told Ibn Jundab, “Tell our Shi’ahs, ‘Do not go astray!
By Allah that you will not get to our guardianship except by avoiding
the sins, attempting in worshipping, and helping your religious
brothers. Anyone who oppresses the people is not our Shi’ah.’”[^3]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, “O Shi’ah! Keep our face! Do not lose our
face! Be kind to people, keep your tongues from sins, do not say useless
or obscene words!”[^4]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) told Abu Usamah, “Attempt in piety, avoiding sins,
patience in worshipping, truthful speech, returning the trusts, kind
manner, and goodness to neighbors. Attract people to yourselves with
your deeds not verbally! Gain our face! Perform long ruku’ and sujud,
because while you perform them Satan cries out, ‘Woe be on me! This
servant of Allah obeyed Him and performed sujud, but I but I did not and
disobeyed Him.’”[^5]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, “Watch out not to do something by which we
(the Ahlul Bayt) are reproached, because a bad child loses his father’s
face by wrongdoing. Be an honor for someone to who you are
attached!”[^6]

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) told the Shi’ahs, “I recommend you to observe
piety in religion, endeavor for the Almighty Allah, be truthfulness,
return the trusts to everyone –good or bad, perform long sujud, and do
good to the neighbors.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) was appointed to prophet hood for the same
things. Pray in Muslims’ mosques, escort their dead bodies, visit their
patients, and fully pay their rights, because when one of you is pious,
truthful, payer of trusts, and good-mannered, it is said about him, ‘He
is a Shi’ah.’ Then we will be pleased.”

Be pious and gain our face. This way you will bring affection for us and
remove bad reputation from us. Surely, whatever goodness is said about
us we deserve it and we are away from whatever badness that is said
about us. We have rights in Allah’s Book, in relation with Messenger of
Allah (S), and due to purification by the Exalted Allah. No one can
claim these positions, but a liar.”

Remember Allah much! Do not forget death! Recite Quran much! Say
benediction (salawat) to Prophet Muhammad (S)! Salawat on Messenger of
Allah (S) has a tenfold reward. Follow these recommendations! I say
farewell to you. Allah’s blessings be on you!”[^7]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) wrote in his letter to the Shi’ahs, “Observe the
*Salat* times, especially *Salat*ul wusta (The Noon Prayer). Pray for
Allah’s sake, as the Almighty has ordered the believers in His Book.
Befriend poor Muslims, because anyone who belittles them has gone astray
and irritated Allah. My grandfather, Muhammad (S) stated, ‘The Exalted
Allah has ordered me to like poor Muslims.’ Beware that anyone who
humiliates Muslims will be belittled by Allah so that the people will
hate him.”[^8]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, “O the Shi’ah of Muhammad’s Ahlul Bayt! Anyone
who does not control his anger, behaves unkindly with his friends and
companions, does not reconcile with friends, and does not disagree with
enemies is not our Shi’ah. O the Shi’ah of Muhammad (S)’s Household!
Observe piety as much as you can. Wa la hawla wa la quwwata illa bi
Allah (There is no power except from Allah).”[^9]

The mentioned traditions and many other similar ones reveal some points:

1. The mere expression of Shi’ism and affection for the Prophet (S)’s
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) does not suffice for proving Shi’ism; rather
performing religious duties and avoiding sins are the major indicators
of Shi’ism.

2. Expression of affection for the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) does not bring
about salvation from calamities in the Hereafter if it does not
accompany performing obligatory deeds and avoiding unlawful ones.

3. The wilayat (guardianship) of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is not guaranteed
but by observing religious duties and avoiding the sins.

4. Everyone who obeys Allah’s orders is the friend of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) and anyone who transgresses the Divine regulations is an enemy of
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), even if he expresses affection for them verbally.

5. Salvation, distance from the Hell, and gaining the Paradise in not in
the hands of infallible Imams (a.s.); rather, humans go to the Hell or
the Paradise based on their own deeds.

6. The infallible Imams (a.s.) have asked their followers to make people
optimistic about the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) by their good manner and speech
and do not lose their face by wrongdoing.

7. The honorable Messenger of Allah (S) and infallible Imams (a.s.) were
men of practice themselves. They were committed to not only doing the
obligatory deeds and avoiding the unlawful ones, but also to doing the
desirable and avoiding the undesirable deeds. They were prominent in
observing good manner and conduct among the people of their ages and
were away from vices.

The Muslims and the Shi’ah are obliged to follow these noble characters
as their pattern. The salvation in this world and the Hereafter is only
provided in this way. Next, the twelve Imams of the Shi’ah are
introduced in brief.

[^1]: Al-Kafi, Vol 2, p. 74.

[^2]: Mishkatul Anwar, p. 44.

[^3]: Tuhaful Uqul, p. 314.

[^4]: Mishkatul Anwar, p. 67.

[^5]: Al-Kafi, Vol 2, p. 77.

[^6]: Al-Kafi, Vol 2, p. 219.

[^7]: Tuhaful Uqul, p. 518.

[^8]: Tuhaful Uqul, p. 327.

[^9]: Tuhaful Uqul, p. 401.


