The Second Imam: Hasan ibn ‘Ali
===============================

Birth and Martyrdom
-------------------

Imam Hasan (a.s.) was born on fifteenth of Ramadan in the third year
after Hijrah in Medina. His father was Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and his
mother was Fatimah (s.a.), Prophet Muhammad (S)’s daughter. His nickname
was Abu Muhammad and his most famous titles were Taqi, Tayyib, Zaki,
Sayyid, Sibt, and Wali.

At the time of Imam Hasan’s (a.s.) birth, the Messenger of Allah (S)
told ‘Asma’ Binti Umays and Umm Salamah, “When the child of Fatimah
(s.a.) was born, recite ‘adhan in his right ear and ‘iqamah in his left
ear and stay there until I come.”

When Prophet Muhammad (S) went to Fatimah’s (s.a.) house, he cut the
infant’s navel cord and poured his saliva into the infant’s mouth. Then
he said, ‘Allahumma ‘inni ‘a’udhu bika minash Shaytanir rajim, “O Lord!
I take refuge in You from the ousted Satan.” Then Prophet Muhammad (S)
stated, “Name him Hasan!” He then ordered to sacrifice a sheep for him
as ‘aqiqah and divide the meat among the poor.

This auspicious birth gladdened not only Prophet Muhammad (S), Imam Ali
(a.s.), and Hadrat Fatimah (s.a.), but also the prophet’s household.
Imam Hasan (a.s.) lived for seven years with his grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah (S). He was appointed to Imamate after his father,
Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), at the age thirty seven. His caliphate –after
Imam Ali’s (a.s.) martyrdom until his peace with Mu’awiyah– lasted six
months and three days.

In the year forty one after Hijrah, Imam Hasan (a.s.) inevitably signed
a peace contract with Mu’awiyah. Then he returned from Kufah to Medina.
On twenty eighth of Safar in the year fifty A.H., he was martyred and
his gravesite is in Baqi’ cemetery in Medina.

It is recorded that Mu’awiyah sent one hundred thousand dirhams for
Ju’dah, Imam Hasan’s (a.s.) wife, to poison Imam (a.s.). Mu’awiyah had
promised Ju’dah to marry her with his son, Yazid, and she poisoned Imam
Hasan (a.s.).[^1]

Texts Proving His Imamate
-------------------------

In many traditions, the honorable Messenger of Allah (S) has stipulated
the Imamate of Hasan (a.s.) and Husayn (a.s.). Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.),
too, chose his son, Hasan (a.s.) as the Imam and successor after
himself, before his martyrdom.

The Messenger of Allah (S) stated about Hasan (a.s.) and Husayn (a.s.),
“My two sons will be Imams, whether they rise for occupying Imamate
position or not.”[^2]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, “Prophet Muhammad (S) willed to Imam Ali
(a.s.), and Imam Ali (a.s.) willed to Hasan (a.s.) and Husayn (a.s.).
Therefore, Imam Hasan (a.s.) had guardianship over Imam Husayn (a.s.),
too.”[^3]

Salim Ibn Qiys says, “I witnessed the will of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)
about succession of Imam Hasan (a.s.). Imam Ali (a.s.) took as witness
Husayn (a.s.), Prophet Muhammad (S), his entire Household, and the
Shi’ah chiefs. Then he gave Imam Hasan (a.s.) his books and weapon and
said, ‘O my son! The Messenger of Allah (S) ordered me to appoint you as
my successor and give you the books and weapon, just as he appointed me
as his successor and gave me his books and weapon.’”[^4]

Shahr Ibn Huwshab says, “When Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) wanted to go
toward Kufah, he gave his books and weapon to Umm Salamah. When Imam
Hasan (a.s.) returned from Kufah to Medina, Umm Salamah gave them to
him.”[^5]

Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyah told Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.), “I know that Prophet
Muhammad (S) appointed Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) as his successor and
caliph and then Imam Hasan (a.s.) and then Imam Husayn (a.s.).”[^6]

Tariq Ibn Shahab says, “Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) told Hasan (a.s.) and
Husayn (a.s.), ‘You will be the Imams after me and the masters of youth
of Paradise. You are infallible. May Allah guard you! May Allah curse
your enemies!’”[^7]

Fazl Ibn Hasan Tabarsi has written in his book ‘A’lamul Wura, “The
Shi’ah have frequently narrated that Imam Ali (a.s.) had emphasized the
Imamate of his son, Hasan (a.s.), among the Shi’ah, introducing him as
the successor to himself.”[^8]

In the morning of his martyrdom day, Imam Hasan (a.s.) performed a
sermon. Then Abdullah Ibn Abbas stood up and said, “O people! This is
the son of your prophet (S) and will be your successor and Imam. Take
oath of allegiance with him.” The people hurried to take allegiance with
him.[^9]

Abu ‘Abdullah Jadali said, “I was present when Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.)
willed to his son Hasan (a.s.).” Then he quoted Imam Ali’s (a.s.)
will.[^10]

When Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) was hit by the sword of Ibn Muljam and the
people had gathered around his bed, he told them, “Go out, because I
want to will.” So everyone went out except some of the close Shi’ahs.
Then Imam Ali (a.s.) praised the Exalted Allah and said, “I set Hasan
and Husayn (a.s.) as my successors. Obey them, because Prophet Muhammad
(S) has stressed their Imamate.”[^11]

‘Asbagh Ibn Nabatah says, “When Amiral Mu’minin (a.s.) was hit by Ibn
Muljam, he called Hasan and Husayn (a.s.) and said, ‘I pass away
tonight. Listen to me! O Hasan! You are my successor and the Imam after
me. O Husayn! You will be my successor too. Obey Hasan until he is
alive. You will be the teller of truth and establisher of government
after your brother.’”[^12]

Worshipping
-----------

It is narrated from Kamalid Din Talhah, “Worshipping is of three kinds;
physical, financial, and a combination of the two. Physical worship
includes prayer, fasting, reciting the Quran, and various zikrs.
Financial worship includes alms-giving, charity giving, and other forms
of granting. Physical-financial worship includes *Hajj*, *Jihad*, and
*‘umurah*.”

Imam Hasan’s worship was perfect in all the three forms. His endeavor in
prayer, fasting, and the like is famous.

Regarding his alms-giving, it is narrated in *Hilyatul ‘Awliya’* that
Imam Hasan (a.s.) granted his whole wealth twice in his lifetime in
Allah’s path. He also divided his property with the poor three times,
granting half his wealth to the poor altogether, including his own
shoes.

Regarding the physical-financial worship, the author of Hilyatul
‘Awliya’ has narrated from Imam Hasan (a.s.), “I am ashamed of the
Almighty Allah that I ride a horse in *Hajj* pilgrimage, rather than
walking toward Mecca.” Therefore, he traveled from Medina to Mecca for
*Hajj* on foot twenty times, while he had quadruped.[^13]

It is written, “Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) was the most similar one to the
Messenger of Allah (S) regarding ethics, conduct, and nobility.”[^14]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has quoted from his father from Imam Sajjad (a.s.),
“Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) was the best most pious of the people in his own
age. In *Hajj* pilgrimage, he traveled on foot and sometimes barefooted.
He cried when he remembered death. When he remembered the grave, the
Resurrection, the Hereafter, or passing sirat (the path to Paradise), he
wept.

When he remembered statement of human deeds before the Almighty Allah,
he cried and fainted. When he stood for prayer, his body shook from
Allah’s fear. When he remembered the Hell and the Paradise he agonized
like a snake-bitten. He requested the Paradise from the Exalted Allah
and took refuge in Him from the Hell.”[^15]

When he reached the verse ‘O You who believe!’, he said, “Here I am! O
Allah! Here I am!” He always remembered Allah. He was the most righteous
and the most eloquent of the people.[^16]

Imam Ridha’ (a.s.) has narrated from his father and grandfathers (a.s.)
that Imam Hasan (a.s.) cried before his demise. He was asked, “O son of
Messenger of Allah! Do you cry out of Allah’s fear while you had a lofty
position before the Messenger of Allah (S), went to *Hajj* barefooted
twenty times, and divided your wealth with the poor three times?!” Imam
Hasan (a.s.) stated, “My crying is for two things; for fear of the
Resurrection and for distance of the friends.”[^17]

When Imam Hasan (a.s.) reached the mosque door, he raised his head and
stated, “’Ilahi! Zayfuka bi babik! Ya Muhsin! Qad ‘atakal musi’,
fatajawaz ‘an qabihi ma ’indi bi jamili ma ‘indaka, ya Karim!” (O Allah!
Your guest has come to Your door! O Beneficent! Surely Your sinner
servant has come to You, so forgive me my wrongdoing because of Your
Righteousness, O generous!)[^18]

When Imam Hasan (a.s.) ended his Morning Prayer, he did not talk to
anyone until dawn.[^19]

Generosity
----------

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) stated, “A man came to ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan in the
mosque and had a request. ‘Uthman gave him five dirhams. That man said,
‘Introduce me to the people who can help me more.’ ‘Uthman showed him a
corner of the mosque in which Hasan (a.s.), Husayn (a.s.), and Abdullah
Ibn Ja’far had sat. The man went there, said hello, and asked for help.”

Imam Hasan (a.s.) stated, ‘Asking request from the people is unlawful,
except in case of blood money of a murdered person, a debt that is due
to be paid, and extreme poorness. What is your request?’ That man
answered, ‘It is one of these three cases.’ Imam Hasan (a.s.) gave him
fifty dirhams, Imam Husayn (a.s.) gave him forty nine dirhams, and
Abdulla"h Ibn Ja’far gave him forty eight dirhams."

‘Uthman said, ‘Who can be as generous as these youth? They have learned
knowledge from their father and received wisdom and generosity.’”[^20]

Sa’id Ibn Abdul ‘Aziz says, “Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) saw a man who prayed
and asked ten thousand dirhams from the Almighty Allah. So he went home
and sent the praying man ten thousand dirhams.”[^21]

A man came to Imam Hasan (a.s.) and said, “By Allah, Who has granted you
so many blessings without a mediator, save me from this oppressor enemy
who does not respect the elderly nor does he have mercy on the
children!” Imam Hasan (a.s.), who had leaned, sat up and asked, “Who is
your enemy?” That man answered, “Poorness!”

Imam Hasan (a.s.) told his servant, “Bring me whatever money we have at
home!” The servant brought five thousand dirhams. Imam Hasan (a.s.)
said, “Give all the money to this man!” Then he added, “By Allah that
whenever this enemy forced you, come to me for help!”

Ibn ‘Ayishah has narrated that a Shami[^22] man saw Imam Hasan (a.s.)
riding a horse. He began insulting, but Imam Hasan (a.s.) did not talk
until the man stopped swearing. Imam Hasan (a.s.) said hello to him and
said, “O old gentleman! I think you are a stranger and have made a
mistake about me. If you seek my forgiveness, I forgive you. If you ask
something, I will give it to you. If you want to be guided, I will guide
you. If you do not have an animal to ride, I will give you one. If you
are hungry, I will give you food. If you do not have clothes, I will
give you. If you are poor I will make you needless. If you are ousted, I
will shelter you. If you bring your luggage to my house, I will be very
glad to host you; my house is large and equipped.”

The Shami man heard Imam’s (a.s.) speech, and then he cried and said, “I
testify that you are Allah’s caliph on the earth. ***‘God knoweth best
where (and how) to carry out His mission.’***[^23] You and your father
were the most hated people for me before. But now you are my most
beloved ones.”

Then that man took his luggage to Imam Hasan’s (a.s.) house, stayed
there, and became one of Imam’s (a.s.) fans and companions.[^24]

[^1]: ‘A’lamul Wura, Vol 1, p. 402-403; Manaqib ‘ªli Abi Talib, Vol 4,
p. 33; Kashful Ghumma, Vol 2, pp. 140-144.

[^2]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 134.

[^3]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 126.

[^4]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 126.

[^5]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 122.

[^6]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 123.

[^7]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 133.

[^8]: Tadhkiratul Khawas, Vol 5, p. 133.

[^9]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 134.

[^10]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 137.

[^11]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 138.

[^12]: ‘Ithbatul Hudat, Vol 5, p. 140.

[^13]: Kashful Ghummah, Vol 2, p. 181.

[^14]: Kashful Ghummah, Vol 2, p. 142.

[^15]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 43, p. 331.

[^16]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 43, p. 331.

[^17]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 43, p. 332.

[^18]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 43, p. 339.

[^19]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 43, p. 339.

[^20]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 43, p. 332.

[^21]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 43, p. 341.

[^22]: From Sham, now Syria.

[^23]: Surah Al-‘An’am 61:24.

[^24]: Biharul Anwar, Vol 43, p. 344.


