Biography of Ayatullah Ja`far Subhani
=====================================

The golden pages of history are replete with individuals who have
sacrificed their lives for the guidance and leadership of humanity and
throughout the ages, we see many scholars who have dedicated their lives
to the path of progress and spiritual upliftment of mankind. One such
scholar who is also one of the greatest thinkers of the Islamic world is
Ayatullah Hajj Shaykh Ja\`far Subhani who has spent his entire life in
research, writing and teaching and has struggled through these means to
lift the culture and level of humanity.

Ayatullah Subhani was born on the 28th of Shawwal in the year 1347 AH
(1926 CE) in the city of Tabriz (in Iran) into a scholarly and
well-respected family. His father was the late Ayatullah Shaykh Muhammad
Husain Subhani Khayabani who spent more than fifty years teaching,
writing and guiding the people and was also responsible for the training
and educating of the future teachers and leaders of the society.

After completing his primary school and the introductory studies,
Ayatullah Subhani then went on to study the books of Farsi literature
and grammar. Following this, at the age of 14 (1361 AH/1940 CE) he
proceeded to enter into the Theological Seminary of Tabriz named
Talibiyah and was busy in the preliminary and second level of studies in
the Theological Seminary.

He studied the \`Arabic language under the guidance of the following
deceased scholars: Hajj Shaykh Hasan Nahwi and Shaykh \`Ali Akbar
Mudarris Khayabani (author of the book Rayhanatul Adab). These studies
took him five years – until the year 1365 AH (1944 CE) after with
Ayatullah Subhani was able to complete the second level of theological
studies and began the highest level of Islamic studies (Kharij) in Fiqh,
Usulul Fiqh and Philosophy. During this period of his studies, he
benefited from the knowledge of teachers such as:

1. The Late Ayatullah al-\`Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Husain
Burujerdi (d. 1380 AH/1959 CE)

2. The Late Ayatullah al-\`Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Hujjat
Kuhkamari (d. 1372 AH/1951 CE)

3. The Late Ayatullah al-\`Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ruhullah al-Musawi
Khumayni (d. 1409 AH/1988 CE)

In the field of Philosophy, he studied the commentary of the book
*Manzumah* and *al-Asfar* of Mullah Sadra (may Allah be pleased with
him) and also benefited from private lessons in the subject of *realism*
under the tutelage of the late \`Allamah as-Sayyid Muhammad Husain
Taba’taba’i (may Allah be pleased with him).

In addition, he studied \`Ilmul Kalam under the late Sayyid Muhammad
Badkubae (d. 1390 AH/1969 CE).

Ayatullah Subhani is one of those scholars who took up the pen and
writing from a very young age and since then, his entire life has been
spent in the fields of teaching and writing. Because of this, we see
that the first book he ever wrote which was named *The Criterion of
Thinking* (in the field of Logic) was written when he was a mere 17
years old!

At the age of 18, he began teaching the secondary level of Islamic
studies (Sutuh) and was imparting knowledge in the fields of Fiqh, Usul,
Philosophy, Hadith and other subjects.

In addition, he has written notes on the lectures of Usulul Fiqh of the
late Ayatullah Khumayni which have been recently printed.

Through all of this work, he has transformed himself into a teacher who
goes deep into a subject and an effective thinker such that many
important tasks have been imparted onto him, such as:

1) Establishing a centre for the teaching of \`Ilmul Kalam and a
research library and facility for those who are conducting research in
the Islamic sciences.

2) Written one complete topic-wise commentary of the Qur’an in ten
volumes.

3) Prepared and taught one complete course – consisting of 16 printed
volumes of books – in the fields of the History of Fiqh and the Fuqaha.

4) Prepared and wrote manuals for the teaching of Usulul Fiqh, \`Ilmul
Kalam, Hadith, \`Ilmul Rijal and the history and information on the
various religions of the world and their sects and divisions.

We pray to Allah (Glory and Greatness be to Him) to grant the author of
this work the blessings to be able to continue on this path.

**Introduction**

Introduction to the Fourth Printing in Farsi
--------------------------------------------

### Stability of Nations and the Importance of Etiquette

This book, *The Islamic Moral System* which was written close to thirty
years ago, contains a discussion on the Islamic principles and values as
mentioned in the blessed Surah of the Qur’an, al-Hujurat. These topics
were explained in a way that could be easily understood by all readers
and it was our intention and prayer to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He) that the youth would take notice of this book, and through the
manifestation of the Islamic etiquette (mentioned in this book), they
would be able to reach to great (spiritual) levels during the course of
their lives.

Since we desired that this close relationship with the dear readers of
this book (especially the youth) should be re-established (through this
work), we have edited and re-published this work once again.

We remind the readers of one point in relation to the importance of
developing the noble ethical traits, just as an \`Arab poet has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّمٌا الأُمَمُ، الأَخْلاٌقُ مٌا بَقِيَتْ فَإِنْ هُمْ ذَهَبَتْ
أَخْلاٌقُهُمْ ذَهَبُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*So then surely they are (the true) nations,*  
*Whose etiquette has remained behind (for us);*  
*Then if they lost their etiquette (when they existed),*  
*Then they too have ceased to exist (now).*

Who are those nations that had made a pledge to uphold these valuable
ethical traits such that these priceless qualities would rule supreme
over them and through this, have remained in existence? If one day we
see that a nation is destroyed and becomes extinct, then the only reason
for this can be that they did not pay attention to the noble ethical
traits, and thus they were pulled into confusion and destruction.

During the \`Abbasid Empire, all of the branches of knowledge (with the
exception of Akhlaq – Morals and Ethics) of the Greeks were translated
into the \`Arabic language and were widely and openly accepted (by
others) and even the Muslims struggled (to understand these texts).

However in the opinion of the Muslim thinkers, the ethical and moral
teachings of the Greeks did not even carry the slightest importance
since the moral commandments that Islam possessed were much more superb,
such that no other ethical teachings could compare to them. Therefore
after the book Taharatul A\`raq of Ibn Maskuyah, most of the books of
Akhlaq written were concerning the Islamic etiquette.

It is our hope that this book will be the guiding light to the
(straight) path for the Muslim youth.

Qum, Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) Institute  
 6/11/1376  
 27th of the Blessed Month of Ramadhan, 1418 AH  
 Ja\`far Subhani

Introduction to the English Translation
---------------------------------------

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

Allahumma salli ‘ala Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammad

Surah al-Hujurat, the forty-ninth chapter of the Qur’an, lays out many
of the social-ethical concepts in Islam. It covers various themes from
submission and obedience to Almighty Allah and His Messenger, Prophet
Muhammad (peace be upon him), to the status and honour of the Prophet in
eyes of Allah; its talks about the brotherhood of the Muslims and the
ethical duties that they have towards one another; it emphasizes on the
concern that Muslims should have for solving internal disputes, and for
supporting justice against injustice; it presents the equality among the
believers irrespective of their ethnic and racial differences; it
highlights the importance of spiritual conviction (Iman) over the
physical submission (Islam).

Al-Hujurat was my favourite Surah since my student days in Qum in the
seventies. When I was invited by the Imamia Students Organisation (of
Pakistan) in Ramadhan of 1979, I started a tafsir program in their four
local chapters in Karachi and used Surah al-Hujurat as the theme. All
praise is due to Allah that the program became a success even, and that
tradition of tafsir in Ramadhan nights has continued ever since in
Karachi.

When I came to Vancouver (Canada) in summer of 1983, I initiated the
tafsir program in Ramadhan where I again started with Surah al-Hujurat.
That Surah was also used by me as the pilot project for the plan of *An
Explanatory Translation of the Qur’an* which has been published in three
volumes covering half of the holy Qur’an (and the remaining three
volumes will be published soon, Insha-Allah).

The Persian commentary of Surah al-Hujurat by Ayatullah Shaykh Ja\`far
Subhani was one of the sources that I referred to when doing the tafsir
of that Surah. Ayatullah Subhani is one of the leading scholars of Qum,
and his multi-volume commentary of the Qur’an (under the title of
*“Mafahimu ’l-Qur’an”*) may be considered as a pioneering attempt in the
thematic approach of Qur’anic commentary.

And so it was indeed a delight to know that Shaykh Saleem Bhimji has
translated the commentary of Surah al-Hujurat of Ayatullah Subhani and
has thus helped the English speaking students of the Qur’an to study the
moral/ethical concepts of Islam from its original source.

May Almighty Allah bless Shaykh Saleem Bhimji for his endeavours in
translating this book and increase his *tawfiqat*.  
 Amen

18 August 2003 / 20 Jumadi ath-Thani 1424  
 Toronto  
 Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi

**Foreword**

In introducing man as a creature with the ability of thought and
contemplation, the Philosophers and great thinkers of the world have
relied upon the phrase that man is a *rational animal* (الحيوان
الناطق) - one that possesses intelligence and the ability to perceive
things.

Such a definition is precisely correct and undeniable from the point of
view of a Philosopher since his occupation is related to the thoughts
and intelligence of people.

Thus, he wishes to enlighten people by inviting them to the laws and
secrets behind creation and the mysteries of the universe of creation
through the faculty of thought and reasoning. Consequently according to
the Philosopher, a person will never reach to his true objective (in
life) except through strengthening his ability to think and reason.

However, from the point of view of the Scholars of Akhlaq (Islamic
Etiquette and Morals) and others who are active in the field of training
and education and those responsible for the nurturing and development of
man, this definition is completely incorrect and is not a complete nor
expressive definition of man.

They state this since even though half of a person’s character is made
up of his thought and intelligence, however the other half is derived
from instinct, human nature and the (innate) inclinations whose
boundaries and limits are unknown. For those who are engaged in the
field of nurturing and training others, the issues of instinct and human
nature of the person is much more important than his intellect and
intelligence since these are the things that lead and govern a person’s
human nature and his desires.

There is no doubt that every individual has certain innate
characteristics that he has been created with such as: love of self;
desire to reach perfection; help and service to others; love for wealth,
status and beauty; the feeling of fear and revenge; and other things.

These innate characteristics which guarantee the preservation of mankind
and which are the source of every type of movement and development in
life are so deeply rooted in a person that sometimes they take control
of his destiny and make him traverse a particular path in his life.

Through the control that they possess, they penetrate deep into him and
limit his power of thought and reason. It is at this point that the role
of ethical teachings in the life of a person and the necessity of having
a correct guide for one’s instincts is made clear. Thus, this makes the
weighty responsibility that lies on the shoulders of the teachers of
Akhlaq even more apparent.

The Most Important Issue in the Lives of the Youth
--------------------------------------------------

The principle issue in the lives of the youth is that of the control of
their sentiments and feelings. The control of ones’ natural instincts
and keeping ones’ sentiments from going to the two extremes of
extravagance and miserliness is one of the greatest difficulties in the
life of a person, especially during the period of ones’ adolescence.
This is the stage of life in which the young man or woman sees a crisis
in relation to his or her feelings and where the power of the youths’
internal wishes and desires take over.

For example, anger is one of the natural instincts of a person which
plays an active and functional role in the life of a person and which
can - in certain instances - protect the life and guarantee his
existence. When a person’s life is thrown into danger, this natural
instinct takes control and by alerting all of the energy that the person
has, it strives to protect the person whose life has been thrown into
danger by the enemy.

If this natural instinct is not channelled in the proper manner, then
the one who possesses this trait will be just as that person who he is
being threatened by and thus, he too would be labelled as one who has
anger and rage. In addition, he would never be able to be a person of
proper composure and would be such a source of anger that he would have
deviated from the peaks of humanity. Since he was not able to channel
his anger in the proper way, we would be ruined such that there would be
no way for him to make amends for his actions.

We are able to come to this conclusion concerning each of the natural
instincts that we have been given such as: sexual inclinations,
inclinations towards beauty, inclinations towards wealth and status -
which just like the inclination towards anger and wrath have all been
tested and examined. Accordingly we reach to the conclusion that the way
to happiness is to control these emotions and natural instincts and make
sure that they are correctly governed. The people who are responsible
for this important task are none other than the teachers and instructors
of Akhlaq.

The Factors that Can Control One’s Instincts
--------------------------------------------

### 1. Knowledge and Wisdom

Socrates and Aristotle are two of the most well-known scholars of the
ancient Greeks. They truly believed that the proper guide for one’s
natural instincts which could lead to a fruitful life of excellence and
moral ethics in the heart of a human being was possible only under the
shadow of knowledge and wisdom.

Under the shade of knowledge of what is good and bad, mankind would
naturally gravitate towards the noble ethical traits and would seek to
distance themselves from the negative ethical traits. Thus, the
conclusion of this school of thought is that the only thing that forms
the foundations of ethics and etiquette is knowledge and wisdom and
thus, their slogan was, *‘Ethics under the shadow of knowledge.’*

It is not a place of argument that knowledge and wisdom leave a
beneficial mark on the well-being of the moral traits and can also
prevent some crimes from occurring (within a society). However, we can
never accept that for all times and for all people, knowledge and wisdom
can completely and without any doubt be the final solution in
controlling the natural instincts of the people.

Thus, some feel that the bad people within a society are the same people
who did not take advantage of the knowledge available to them; and in
contrast to this, (they say that) the outstanding people of the society
are those that have been disciplined in the middle schools and
universities.

This point is not accurate and if anyone who has knowledge of the world
societies in general were to conduct a study on this issue, one would
see that this statement is a lie since the increase and spread of
corruption in its various forms and shapes amongst those people who have
an education is not something that anyone can deny. Rather, the
statistics that are published in the newspapers of the world bear
witness and make our claims solid and trustworthy.

Certainly, we are not saying that a well-read engineer or a
well-educated doctor can be equivalent to a person who dwells in the
desert and has corrupted himself with sins. Rather, if through this
person (the one with education) demonstrating a special vigilance which
is a direct product of his knowledge and intelligence, his good actions
were to be changed to bad ones and he was to commit a heinous crime due
to various reasons, then it can be said that his actions have stemmed
from his weak religious convictions.

We personally know people who are able to write voluminous books about
the dangers that can be caused by drinking alcohol, however these same
people sometimes get so drunk that they cannot even tie their own
shoelaces!

There are people who can write articles on the individual and societal
damage that is caused by gambling and bribery and illicit relations and
can organize and hold seminars in these regards, however, if you look
carefully at their lives, you will definitely see that from the top of
their head to the tips of their toes, they are submerged in sins and
wickedness. Thus, simply having the knowledge which is a resultant of
studying and attending classes has not saved them from these desires and
inclinations.

There is not a single person who can claim that on its own, knowledge
can prevent greed and gluttony, or that it can stop one who is in the
quest of attaining a higher position. Today, we see that the world has
been pulled towards wars and fighting by those people who seek a higher
position and status and who are educated people and this has occurred
twice already - during World War I and World War II - in which more than
one hundred million people were killed and eradicated.

There are some people who changed the name of the mentioned teachings
which have been inherited from Socrates and Aristotle and in place of
the word ‘knowledge’ substituted the word ‘intellect’. By doing this,
they wished to claim that through the greatness and training of the
intellect and mind of a human being, one is able to strip ones’ self of
all sins and wrongdoings, and in their place, cultivate the noble traits
of humanity.

However this agent (that of the intellect) also does not possess the
ability to do this and is not much different than the first agent
mentioned (knowledge). This is so because the intellect is able to
control and restrain the force and power of the passions (of a person),
but in the face of the demonic lusts and passions, it can be compared to
a straw house being destroyed by a violent river. It can also be
compared to a small lamp which offers very little light to a person
while he is wandering through a dark, gloomy valley.

The natural human instincts can sometimes be compared to a flowing
river. When the flow of water on the river is normal, many truckloads of
gravel can stop the river from overflowing. However once the river has
started to overflow and heavy rains fall upon it and the torrential
currents surge forth, then this water would take with it hundreds of
tons of gravel and sand.

In normal circumstances, in the greatness of the light of his natural
instincts, the intelligence of a person illuminates the path of his life
and prevents him from falling into the valley of extinction, however
when his natural instincts explode, then the intelligence becomes so
weak and muted that even the strongest of people become lost and thus in
the end, they end up falling deep into the dreadful valley of their
(low) human instincts.

### 2. Training and Upbringing without Religion

This is the same design and plan that Freud and those who followed him
had brought forth into the sphere of operation. They stated that the
issues related to moral ethics and the principles of humanity must be
taught to the child while he is in the bosom of his father and mother
and while in the environment of the kindergarten and primary school -
and this is an obligatory requirement. Not only must they be taught
these things, rather, the people (around them) must strive and struggle
such that these things become a regular part of the child’s soul and
spirit.

For example, one of the societal crimes is the breaking of laws that
takes place amongst the older people of the society. In order to prevent
this moral disease from coming about, the young children must be taught
and trained in the centres of learning in such a way that they do not
act in any other method, except that they respect the laws and
regulations of the society. Thus, such thinkers see no other way than
this to move forward upon.

In order to make this moral belief firm rooted and penetrate deep into
the spirit during the period of ones’ youth - right from the beginning
of one’s education - the laws and regulations that the kindergarten and
primary school have in place must be obeyed.

The children must be made to follow these rules and the threat and
punishment of going against these rules must also be practically shown
to them. If the leaders (of the society) and the teachers of the
children would be careful in following up their teaching with injecting
the noble moral, ethical traits to the children and were to make the
principles of upbringing and nurturing of the children under the shadow
of continuous drills and by paying attention to them as common practice,
then this would have a very good effect on the children.

The people who brought forth the idea mentioned above were negligent of
one point which is: whereas it is true that nurturing and upbringing has
a positive effect on the eventual success (of the child) and in the
growth and development of the principles of ethics in the mind of the
young children, however opposition and resistance to this in the face of
the obstinate natural instincts of a person is very rarely seen.

In most times, this opposition is met with defeat and in most instances
in the face of natural desires and instincts such as: self-pride, quest
for status, sexual desires and worship of the beauty (of self) - the
ethics (which have been taught or imposed upon the children) are
overcome and defeated. Thus, we see that the power and strength of these
natural instincts is so great and the force of their blow is so
powerful, that any form of upbringing which is devoid of the divine
religious teachings is completely powerless and will eventually
accomplish nothing.

Most often, there is a discrepancy and difference between a person’s
internal desires, his natural instincts and the ethical principles and
the only way to satisfy one’s internal desires is by throwing the
ethical principles under one’s feet and to not obey them. This is the
case since: doing the right thing, speaking the truth, self-sacrifice,
maintaining the trust that others have given, chastity and forgiveness
of others – which are all clear examples of the principles of ethics and
morality – necessitate that one must be deprived and give up certain
things (of the material life). The woman who wishes to protect her
chastity and modesty must obviously keep away from a series of things
which may bring her pleasure.

Doing the right thing and speaking the truth – even if later on, would
cause troubles, acting with justice and dealing with others with
equality may lead to others falling into difficulties and may also lead
to the loss in the material sphere for others; and in this event, which
person would actually keep away from those things which cause one loss?
In addition, the power of upbringing is not that powerful and firmly
rooted that a person would be able to be transformed into a machine-like
being that all sense of perception and negative emotions would be
completely removed from him.

However, we cannot deny the fact that in this battle field, sometimes
the victory is achieved through nurturing and upbringing. However at the
same time, we cannot deny the fact that when one’s sexual desires are
overflowing, and when the desire to have great amounts of wealth and to
attain a status (within the society) are there, the principles of
upbringing that one has learnt are all thrown under one’s feet and those
things that one is not permitted to perform are now made acceptable.

The people who brought about this view defended their incorrect theory
for some time and claimed that ethics and morality could take the place
of religion and the actions of the well-mannered nations of the West was
made as their document (of ethics). These people were adamant that now
that the Western World had found these humanistic teachings of
upbringing that there was no need for the Divine and Heavenly teachings.

However, not much time passed when they realized their mistake and the
savage World War I broke out, which resulted in the killing of tens of
millions of people. In addition, the entire European continent was
turned upside down by these same Western people who claimed to have
ethics and morality – and this war definitely woke them up from their
deep sleep and made them declare that, *“The perception and intelligence
of humanity has still not yet reached to the level that morals and
ethics can take the place of divine religion nor where proper upbringing
can take the place of religion (a complete code of life).”*

The further ahead we advance in the history of the world, the more it is
made clear that the desire to place morals and etiquette in the place of
religion will not lead to any positive results.

### Beneficial Ethical Traits

The moral traits that are in vogue in the West are those which provide
material benefit which have been founded from the writings of Dale
Carnegie. The roots of these teachings are the same moral teachings of
the Ancient Greek whose distinctions and particulars we will explain
later on. The principle and essence of the teachings of such a school of
ethics and morality are a disguised form of well-mannered exploitation
that believe: *What can we do to increase our wealth and to make our
position and status in the minds of the people firm?*

After a person has finished studying these books, he would have
certainty that if Western Nations have implemented many of these ethical
principles in their lives, for example keeping away from lying and not
deceiving and tricking people, then it is because of the fact that these
traits are ways that they are able to gain (material) benefit and which
lead to increases in the business market and to a change in the economic
wheels (of the country).

If one day the people see that their (material) benefit is in something
opposite to this, then immediately they will change face - and this will
show their true side and character. This in itself is a form of
deviation from the perfect state of a human being since such people
desire ethical traits only to serve their materialistic goals and
pleasures, which would add greatness to their lives and economic status,
not because these traits are worthy in and of themselves and are natural
and instinctive traits.

### 3. Ethical Traits that Rely upon Religious Teachings

The ethical teachings that are based upon religion, such that the
theological beliefs of the faith and the belief that (all people) are
granted rewards and punishments based on their daily actions, are what
support and sustain the principle of ethics. It is through this channel
that the Divine and Heavenly teachings, especially the sacred teachings
of Islam have chosen (to propagate the ethical teachings) and during the
course of 14 centuries, we see a brilliant outcome from traversing this
path.

The belief in a God who is completely aware of the inner thoughts and
apparent actions of humanity; the belief in a God who is not kept
unaware of anything that is upon the Earth or in the Heavens; the belief
in a God who is completely aware of the number of unimaginable atoms in
the universe and the number of molecules in a particular body; the
belief in a God who is the final Judge and on that Day that He judges
everyone, the book of deeds of each human being which has been protected
by the Angels from all sorts of errors and mistakes and is free from all
sorts of materialistic aims and goals, will be brought forth and spread
open for all to see - and He will not even stop at this.

Rather, the actual image of the actions that we had performed will also
be brought forth through His never-ending power and all the parts of our
bodies, through the unbreakable intention, will speak and bear witness
to the acts that he had performed. Then, each and every person will be
given the reward and punishment that they deserve, and…[^1]

The firm and immutable belief in such a day is the greatest support for
the noble ethical traits and is the most natural guarantee for people to
act according to the principles of humanity and in reality, is the most
valuable asset and most priceless treasure that the great divinely
appointed Heavenly leaders have left behind for us and we must support
and keep this priceless legacy alive.

The power of true belief in Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and the
belief in the punishment on the Day of Judgement can sometimes reach to
such a level within a person that these things actually act as a
deterrent to the person who wants to commit a sin and would thus bring a
person who wishes to commit an evil deed to the level of a heavenly
creature and infallible person.

The strength of true faith in controlling a person is such that if one
day, a believer was to act against what true faith entails him to act
upon and went against the teachings of his natural instincts, then he
would immediately think about how to repair the damage he has caused and
would fall into grief and misery through this act of polluting one’s own
self. In order to remove the effects of the sin he had committed,
without those who are responsible for judging and sentencing a person
who had committed such acts, he would seriously request them to punish
him or would request the punishment that Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He) has ordained be meted out on him. In the end, he would come out of
this event as a spiritually cleansed person with no burden (of sin) on
his shoulders and would thus enter on the Resurrection Day as such.[^2]

### The Mission of Ethical Guidance of Islam

Through various types of societal, economic and ethical programs and
guidelines, the religion of Islam stepped into the social arena of life
and through laying this groundwork in all areas (of life), was able to
bring about a valuable and original set of teachings – a set of
teachings that are completely new-found, with positive qualities which
are able to (spiritually) build a society.

The religion of Islam looked favourably at ethical principles and the
role of upbringing and nurturing others and has classified these as
being the most important responsibilities of the Prophet of Islam
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny).

As for the importance of this role, it is worthy to mention that the
topic of training and nurturing others has been placed ahead of teaching
others in the Noble Qur’an[^3]. This has been done since the religion of
Islam wishes to announce to the leaders of society that the issue of
upbringing and nurturing others is more important than teaching and
educating them and thus, the slogan of the leaders of a society, in
relation to the leadership and building the happiness of the entire
society must be first through nurturing and then teaching. This is said
because until that time that a community does not have the proper
nurturing and development, teaching and educating them will never reach
to a level of ever being noticed.

### The Distinctions of the Islamic Ethical Teachings

Before the official appointment of the Prophet of Islam (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his progeny), the Ethics of the Greeks ruled over
the advanced civilizations of the world for a period of time.

After relating and translating the scientific and ethical works of the
Greeks, the principles of their ethical teachings were introduced into
the scholarly gatherings of the Muslims without any thought and a group
of Muslim scholars proceeded to expand upon and perfect these teachings
and thus, wrote treatises and books in relation to these works.

One of the best books that shows the true value of the ethical teachings
of the Greeks is the book, “Tahdhibul Akhlaq Wa Tathirul A\`raq”
**(تهذيب الأخلاق و تطهير الأعراق)** written by Abu \`Ali Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Maskuyah (d. 431 AH). As for the importance and worth of
this book, it is sufficient to state that the late Muhaqqiq at-Tusi has
written a poem in relation to this book, of which the first line states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِنَفْسِي کِتٌاباً حٌازَ كُلِّ فَضِيلَةٍ وَ صٌارَ لِتَكْمِيلِ
لْبَرِيَّةِ ضٌامِناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I sacrifice my soul for a Book*  
*That contains all virtuous traits,*  
*And guarantees to paint the portrait*  
*Of the perfection of creation.”*[^4]

After this book of morals which elucidates upon the principles of the
ethical teachings of the Greeks, the next book which is also very
valuable is Akhlaq-e-Nasiri **[أخلاق ناصري]** written by the late Khajah
Nasir ad-Din at-Tusi which had been penned according to the methodology
of the Greek books of ethics.

The clear deficiency of the ethical teachings of the Greeks is that
their ethical principles have been based upon the foundations of the
quickly diminishing materialistic gains and have been explained and
elucidated as such. For example it has been said in these books that,
“If you put these ethical teachings into practice, then you will
definitely find that you will be remembered in a good way and people
would speak good things about you in the society.”

However these people only looked at things from a materialistic point of
view and were completely uninformed of the next life and its affairs and
thus, they tried to imitate the ethical teachings of the materialists –
whose goal and aim was not geared towards purification of the soul and
the mind. Rather, their aim and purpose was only to ensure the (ease in
the) life of this world and how they could wield influence within a
society.

The spiritual-ethical teachings (Akhlaq-e-Irfani) are directly opposed
to the Greek ethical teachings (Akhlaq-e-Yunani), however both seek to
give the same benefit, but they would never have the ability to build a
persons’ self or instill a moving nature within him. In addition, some
of the teachings (the ethical teachings of the Greeks) cannot even be
taught or presented to the common people and for the youth who are
thirsty over a set of teachings that would not only beautify their
spiritual presence with greatness and nobility, but that would also
teach them a path and customs to follow in their lives, these teachings
of the Greeks would have absolutely no appeal or attraction.

The original and firm set of teachings, which at the same time are also
the most comprehensive and which contain all of the positive qualities
of the religion, are the ethical teachings and guidelines found in the
Noble Qur’an and the faith of Islam. All of the advantages of the
material and spiritual world are completely taken into account – with
the condition that it is put into practice and presented in its purity -
distanced from any sort of artificial decorations.

In some of the books which have been written under the topic of Islamic
Ethics, we see a series of commandments presented which are in no way in
line with the principles of the teachings of Islam. Thus, after careful
research and review, it is made clear that all of the conclusions that
are presented are the specific opinions of the writer of the work and
they have absolutely no connection to the principle ethical teachings of
Islam.

One example which we can present to highlight this point is the book
entitled, *“Ihya’ al-\`Ulum”* (al-Ghazali, d. 505 AH) which is one of
the most comprehensive books of ethics, and possibly in the entire
history of Islam, there has never been a more all-inclusive book written
than this one. Unfortunately however, in expounding on some of the
ethical issues, we see that often times there are things that in no way
can be considered as being harmonious with the teachings of Islam.

The Late Muhammad Muhsin Faidh (Al-Kashani) (d. 1091 AH) has embellished
his monumental work with countless ahadith from the leaders of Islam
(the Prophet and A’immah, prayers be upon all of them) which he named,
*“Al-Mahajjatul Baydha Fi Tahdhibul Ahya”*. this book, which has been
published in eight volumes has been printed countless times to date!

### Necessity of Having a Movement that Encourages Ethics

There is not a single intelligent person – religious or non-religious –
who, in the face of growing corruption amongst the future builders of a
society (the younger generation) who would be indifferent (to what is
happening) and not feel some personal responsibility since this matter
is a warning to the leaders and those who are responsible for upbringing
others, that they must act as fast as possible to make decisions and
rescue this generation from falling into the valley of destruction.

Due to this, there is no other option available to us except that we
must strengthen our source of faith and make the principle theological
beliefs stronger (in our heart) which will be a prelude to laying the
groundwork for the advancement of ethical traits.

Through a correct leadership and by utilizing all the means at our
disposal, we will be able to struggle and refine the ethics of the
society and alongside this, through organizing religious functions and
establishing seminars and in addition, the study of the reasons for the
spread of corruption, we will be able to get together to publish a
series of books on Islamic Ethics which are in line with the spirit,
time and thoughts of the youth of today.

We say this since a majority of the books of ethics have been written in
such a way that they do not confirm to the soul and level of
understanding of our youth. How many times have we seen that after
reading a few pages of these sorts of books, the person becomes tired or
loses his interest to continue the book and puts it aside?

In order to assist in this lofty, humanistic goal, this humble writer
has proceeded to study Surah al-Hujurat which contains a great number of
principle ethical and societal teachings of the faith of Islam. The
principles that have been mentioned in this Surah have been examined and
analysed in such a way that people of all levels of a society would be
able to make use of them. It is our hope that this insignificant book
would serve in this purpose.

We pray for that day when the great scholars of Islam are able to
extract all of the verses of the Qur’an that deal with ethics and
through organizing and putting them in order, are able to comment and
elucidate upon them.[^5] This point too should also not go without
saying that some parts of this book were previously printed in the
scientific-religious magazine, *Maktab-e-Islam*, in the section on
Tafsir of the Qur’an and now, we present it in its complete form to the
dear readers.

Qum, Hawzah \`Ilmiyyah  
 10th Dhul Qa\`dah al-Haram, 1390 AH  
 Ja\`far Subhani

[^1]: This sentence is the meaning of the verses of the Qur’an contained
in various chapters of the Noble Qur’an such as: Surah Luqman (31),
Verse 16; Surah al-Saba’ (34), Verse 4; and Surah al-Zilzal, (99),
Verses 7 and 8.

[^2]: In the book, The History of Punishment in Islam, we see many
examples on this issue which, to keep this discussion brief, we do not
mention in detail here.

[^3]: In the Qur’an, we read the phrase: وَ يُزَكِّيهِمْ وَ
يُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتٌابَ وَ الْحِكْمَةَ... “And he (the Prophet
Muhammad) purifies them (nurturing and upbringing) and teaches them the
Book and the Wisdom…” Surah al-Jumu\`ah (62), Verse 2.

[^4]: Ta’sis al-Shi\`atul Kiram lil-\`Ulumil Islam, Page 411.

[^5]: It should be noted that as far as we are aware, this task has been
completed to a certain level by two noble writers. This book has been
printed under the name of: “Ethics from the point of view of the Qur’an”
and “The Ethics of the Qur’an”.


