Picking Faults is Prohibited
============================

( Verse 11 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَلاٌ تَلْمِزُوا أَنفُسَكُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****Do not find faults in yourselves…”***

One of the pillars of perfection of a person’s soul and spirit is that
he has the ability to examine his own spiritual state, through looking
at his own defects and ethical weaknesses. He looks at his own inner
self through self-recognition so that he is able to cut all of the roots
of the destructive traits that are within his soul and spirit that have
taken shape and materialized over time.

From the point of view of the scholars, the discussion of
self-recognition is so important that they say, *“The person who wishes
to remove the chains of impurity from himself and wishes to save himself
from the negative effects that the spiritual defects cause, must not
only think of these issues during certain times in his life, rather, he
must ponder over these every day during his hectic schedule.*

*Thus when he finds some quiet and peaceful time, he must sit down, take
out a piece of paper and write down all of the actions that he has
performed that day and without being biased, must review* *all of his
deeds. If he finds something that was done which is not commendable,
then he must resolve not to repeat that act.”*

Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلى الْعٌاقِلِ أَنْ يُحْصى مِنْ نَفْسِهِ مُسٌاوِيهٌا فِي الدِّيْنِ وَ
الرَأْى وَ الأَخْلاٌقَ وَ الآدٌابَ فَيَجْمَعْ ذٌلِكَ فِي صَدْرِهِ أَوْ
ِفي كِتٌابٍ وَ يَعْمَلُ فِي إِزٌالَتِهٌا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is incumbent upon every person of intelligence that he carefully
look over his weaknesses in regards to (following his) religion, his
thoughts, etiquette and that of his interaction with other people and he
should either record these in his heart or write them down and then he
should strive to remove all of these (bad traits) from himself.”*[^1]

However, there are a group of people who *incessantly try to pick faults
in people* and due to the lack of insight of the (negative) traits
within their own selves and being unaware of the (spiritual) status of
others, are constantly looking to find faults in people and constantly
strive to lift the curtains that cover the defects and shortcomings of
others.

These are individuals who derive pleasure and enjoyment from finding and
picking faults of others, since they feel some sort of inferiority and
inadequacy within themselves. Thus, through picking the weak points of
others and making these known to people and trying to take away their
worth and status within the society, they feel that they can put their
own inferiority at ease.

At this point in time, it is not our goal to discuss the reasons why
people start picking faults in others – rather, that which is important
for us to realize is that we must stop and think a little bit about the
wickedness and immorality of such an act.

The effects of speaking bad and criticizing the actions of other people
plays a role in the friendship and affinity between two people, such
that this closeness is removed (from them). The friendship and trust is
converted into animosity and sometimes hatred - whereas praising a
person for his good deeds and flattering him for his righteous acts
results in the roots of friendship being made even stronger.

In relation to people who always look at the weaknesses and faults of
other people, Imam Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Baqir (peace be upon him) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَفى بِالْمَرْءِ عَيْـباً أَنْ يُبْصِرَ مِنَ النٌّاسِ مٌا يَعْمى
عَنْهُ مِنْ نَفْسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Sufficient is a person’s own defect (in himself) that he tries to pick
and look for faults in other people when he himself has those same
faults in himself (and does not recognize them)!”*[^2]

If those who pick faults of others would spend the same energy that they
use in looking at the bad in others and through which they reproach
other people, on correcting themselves and looking at their own defects
and trying to recognize their own souls, imagine what level of happiness
they would be able to reach to! It is here that the value and worth of
the hadith which has come to us from one of the leaders of our faith is
made clear when it has been said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ بَحَثَ عَنْ عُيُوبِ النٌّاسِ فَلْيَبْدَأْ بِنَفْسِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The person who busies himself looking into the faults of others should
start by looking into the faults of his own self (first).”*[^3]

The greatest defect of such people is that they can never live around
people in a community since they will make known the inner secrets (of
others) and thus, nobody would be safe from being in their company.

It is because of this reason that Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib
(peace be upon him) has forbidden us from associating ourselves with
such people and has said that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيٌّاكَ وَ مَعٌاشِرَةَ مُتَتَبِّعِي عُيُوبِ النٌّاسِ! فَإِنَّهُ لَمْ
يَسْلَمْ مُصٌاحِبُهُمْ مِنْهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I warn you about keeping relations with people who look for faults in
others, since surely there is not a single person who will be safe from
such people.”*[^4]

Pointing Out One’s Defects with Sincerity is Not the Same as Fault Finding
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

A point of interest which a great majority of people are uninformed
about is that picking faults of others and insulting them in the
presence of other people is one thing, whereas guiding them and pointing
out the proper way to do things and showing them their errors is another
thing.

Picking the faults of others is one of the negative ethical traits,
whereas guiding people and informing them of their own shortcomings by
advising and giving them good council is one of the religious and
humanistic responsibilities.

Therefore, it is incumbent upon every spiritually conscious person to
save his fellow human beings from a terrible end and that dark day (when
everyone will have to answer for their actions).

Informing people of the shortcomings in their own lives is so important
and valuable that Imam Ja\`far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (peace be upon him)
classified this as the greatest gift that a person can give to another
and has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحِمَ اللٌّهُ امْرَأً أَهْدى إِلَيَّ عُيُوبِـي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“May Allah’s mercy be upon that person who offers a gift to me by
pointing out my own mistakes and shortcomings.”*[^5]

In addition, Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him)
has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَكُنْ آثَرُ النٌّاسِ عِنْدَكَ مَنْ أَهْدى إِلَيْكَ عَيْـبَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Let the best person in your estimation be that person who points out
to you your faults and shortcomings and presents them to you as a
gift.”*[^6]

Principally, the first step that a person can take to cure his physical
and spiritual sicknesses and to remove the societal evils is that one
becomes precisely aware of the sources of these diseases and their
various types. As long as this is not carried out, then whatever sort of
cure or remedy that is applied will be of no benefit or use.

The person who is scared of straight talk finds the truth being brought
out into the open as being something bitter to accept. He finds it hard
to acknowledge and accept any sort of open dialogue about the problems
in the society. Such a person wants the spiritual and societal
shortcomings of a community to be swept under the rug and kept quiet and
desires that people should not speak about such things.

These people are never content that the writers and speakers of the
community bring up the problems of the people and anytime these things
are brought up, then those who do not like this done try to destroy and
refute what has been written or said. Therefore, we must say to such a
person: “May you be destroyed! Not bringing up these issues (the
problems of a community) is an error in itself!”

It is not only in the instance of this negative ethical trait (speaking
bad and picking the faults of others) and the natural human disposition
(of guiding people and showing them their short comings and faults) that
are confused with one another.

Rather, it is possible that in many of the other natural human
dispositions and ethical principles, a series of other detested
spiritual and ethical traits can also be confused with one another.
However with careful research, we are able to discern the limits of each
of these from one another and keep them separated.

Stirring Up a Person’s Emotions
-------------------------------

In bringing up this ethical principle, the Qur’an has appealed to the
emotions of humanity and thus when it wants to instruct its’ adherents
that they should not pick the faults of others it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَلاٌ تَلْمِزُوا أَنفُسَكُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not find faults in*** ***yourselves.”***

The aim of expressing it in this form (that we must not find faults in
ourselves) is to stir up the sentiment of the person - since spiritual
fraternity and religious brotherhood bring about such a bond of
friendship and love amongst the believers that they are like one organ
and one collective body. Thus, if a person picks faults with one Muslim,
it is equivalent to picking faults with the entire Muslim body.

[^1]: Ghurur al-Hikm, Page 559.

[^2]: al-Kafi, Volume 2, Page 459.

[^3]: Ghurur al-Hikm, Page 659.

[^4]: Ghurur al-Hikm, Page 148.

[^5]: Tuhaf al-\`Uqul, Page 366.

[^6]: Ghurur al-Hikm, Page 558.


