A Bad Name and Family
=====================

( Verse 11 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَلاٌ تَنٌابَزُوا بِالأَلْقٌابِ بِئْسَ الإِسْمُ الْفُسُوقُ بَعْدَ
الإِيـمٌانِ وَمَنْ لَّمْ يَتُبْ فَأُوْلٌئِكَ هُمُ الظٌّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“** …***and do not defame one another by using bad names. How bad it
is after having true faith that a person (does these acts) but does not
turn in repentance (to Allah) so then surely it is these people who are
the oppressors***.**”**

Bad Names and Titles
--------------------

The name and title of a person are the manifestation of the character of
that individual. It is because of this fact that a good name and title
are classified as being the value and goodness of a person, just like a
bad name and title that a person possess are unpleasant things. Not only
is this something that leads to one being made fun of, but it also takes
away one’s status and character and leads one to being self-conscious
while amongst friends and within the society in general.

When the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) was
officially appointed as a Messenger, a large number of cities and
villages had very bad names. A lot of the tribes (of \`Arabia) were also
renowned for their obscene and repulsive titles and epitaphs. The
\`Arabs would choose names and titles for their children that were rude,
repulsive and symbolized fierceness, plunder and pillaging!

One of the positive steps that the Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) adopted on this path was to command his
followers to change the names of many of the cities, villages and other
parts of the town (that had bad names). He also ordered the tribes or
people that had obscene or repulsive names to replace them (with
something better).[^1]

This noble personality went to such an extreme that he even commanded
parents to choose beautiful names for their children and considered this
as one of the rights and obligations that a father must fulfil in
respect to his children.

The Qur’an al-Majid considers calling one another by rude or obscene
names or titles as a form of violation of the rights of another human
being and has referred to a person who performs this act as being an
oppressor and tyrant and by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَمَنْ لَّمْ يَتُبْ فَأُوْلٌئِكَ هُمُ الظٌّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and whoever does not turn in repentance (back to Allah) is surely
of those who are the oppressors.”***

The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) was pleased
and overjoyed whenever he heard a good name and would say, “Whenever you
want to send a person to me, send one who has a good name.”

1) One day, one of the workers in a temple of idol worshippers (in
\`Arabia) saw a fox urinating on top of one of the idols. This person
thought to himself: “What sort of a thing do we worship that cannot even
defend himself such that he does not even have the ability to get a fox
to move away from itself?” This thought of his affected his soul to such
an extent, that he composed this line of poetry in relation to what he
saw:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرَبٌّ يَـبُولُ الثَّعْلَبَانُ بِرَأْسِهِ لَقَدْ ذَلَّ مَنْ بَالَتْ
عَلَيهِ الثَّعَالِبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Is a stone idol who is being urinated upon by a fox one to be
worshipped?*  
 *Anything that a fox is able to urinate upon is surely despised and
infirm.”*

After witnessing this scene, he arrived in the company of the Prophet of
Allah (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) and described
what he had seen. The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) asked this man what his name was and the man replied, “My name
is Ghawi ibn Dhalim”[^2] The Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny) immediately changed his name and said, “Rather
(from today) your name will be Rashid ibn \`Abdullah.”

2) During the battle of Dhi Qard, the Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) asked what the name of a particular body of
water was - which was extremely sour – and the people replied that it
was called Bisan. The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) immediately replied that it is now changed to Nu\`man.[^3]

3) A man once came to the Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) and when the Prophet met him, he asked him his name.
The man replied, “My name is Baghidh (the hated or despised).” The
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) replied, “Your
name is now Habib (the beloved)” which was the exact opposite of
Baghidh.[^4]

4) The same thing can be seen in relation to another person that had met
the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny). When asked
his name, the man replied, “My name is \`Abdus Sharr’ (the Servant of
Evil).” The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)
replied to him, “Rather, your name (now) is \`Abdul Khair’ (the Servant
of Good).”[^5]

5) In the same way, once a woman came to the Messenger of Allah
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) and when she was asked
what her name was, she replied, “\`Asiyah” (one who commits sins). The
Prophet changed her name and said, “From today onwards, you will be
known as ‘Jamilah’ (beautiful).”[^6]

6) A man whose name was \`Abdul Jan (Servant of the Jinn) came to the
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) and by the
command of the Messenger of Allah (blessings of Allah be upon him and
his progeny) his name was changed to \`Abdullah (Servant of Allah).[^7]

7) Some people who had names such as Jabbar or Qayyum which are names
reserved for Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) were commanded by the
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) to add \`Abd to
the beginning of them. Therefore, their names were changed to \`Abdul
Jabbar and \`Abdul Qayyum.[^8]

8) Those people who had names such as \`Abdul \`Izzah (Servant of
Respect), \`Abdul Shams (Servant of the Sun), \`Abdul Lat (Servant of
the Stone Idol named Lat) or even Shaitan (Satan) where all told to
change their names and the new name of \`Abdullah (Servant of Allah) was
given to all of them.[^9]

There are also other examples in these same instances which in order to
keep our discussion short, we will not narrate here. The historian, Ibn
Athir is his work, *Asadul Ghabah*, which is a commentary on the lives
of the people around the Prophet of Allah (blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny) during the days of Ignorance (pre-Islam), has
narrated many more examples of people who had repulsive names and by the
commandment of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny), their names were changed.

The manifesto of human rights has mentioned that a child’s right to have
a name is the same as his right to possess a nationality - however it
has never been mentioned that the child must possess a decent, righteous
name. Islam has a very precise attitude and view point in relation to
the life of a child – whether it is before his birth or even after
birth - such that even while the child is in the womb of his mother, he
is given the right to have his own character. In addition, the
individual and societal rights have also been designated for him.

The strict attention that the teachings (of Islam) lay down in relation
to the child are to such an extreme that the father and mother have been
commanded to name their child even before it is born and if they do not
know if the child is a boy or a girl, then they are advised to choose a
name that is acceptable to either sex.[^10]

What is important is the name that is chosen for a child. Keeping in
mind the love that the father and mother feel for their child, they will
strive to choose a good name for him/her. However, how unfortunate it is
that sometimes they make a mistake in choosing a name for their children
and give them a name that in the opinion of others is not a praiseworthy
name, even though from the view point of the father and mother, they
feel that they have given their child a good name.

From the point of view of Islam, when choosing a name for one’s child,
the parents must keep in mind the various points of upbringing and
nurturing and must not opt for a bad name that will resemble the child
or will always stay with him. A bad name will act as an impediment (for
the person) and every time the person who has been given a repulsive
name hears his name called out, he will be put through pain and
suffering.

Due to this, in the history of the Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) we read that whenever he came across an area
or a person who had a repulsive or bad name, he changed it.

A man once asked the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny), “What is the child’s right upon me?” The Prophet (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his progeny) replied, “You must give him a good
name and bring him up in a good way. His right on you is also that you
keep a good job or profession in mind for him.”[^11]

How good it truly is that a name is chosen for the child which indicates
the servitude of Allah![^12]

[^1]: Qurb al-Isnad, Page 45.

[^2]: Ghawi is in the meaning of one who has been deluded or lead
astray, while Dhalim means an oppressor or tyrant. (Asadul Ghabah,
Volume 2, Page 149).

[^3]: Sirah Halabi, Volume 3, Page 377.

[^4]: Asad al-Ghabah, volume 1, Page 202.

[^5]: Ibid., Volume 2, Page 63.

[^6]: Ibid., Volume 2, Page 76.

[^7]: Ibid., Volume 3, Page 174.

[^8]: Ibid., Volume 4, Page 362 and Volume 5, Page 250.

[^9]: Ibid., Volume 3, Page 232, 240, 271 and Volume 4, Page 362.

[^10]: In a tradition from the Prophet, it is mentioned that he has
said: سَمُّوا أَوْلاٌدَكُمْ قَبْلَ أَنْ يُوْلَدُوا! فَإِنْ لَمْ تَدْرُوا
أَذَكَرٌ أَمْ أُنْـثـى فَسَمُّوهُمْ بِالأَسْمٌاءِ الَّتِي تَكُونُ
لِلْذَّكَرِ وَ الأُنْـثَـى “Name your children before they are even
born! So then if you do not know if you will have a boy or a girl, then
name them with a name that is appropriate for both a boy and girl.”
(Al-Kafi, Volume 6, Page 18).

[^11]: The hadith states: قٌالَ رَجُلٌ: يٌا رَسُولَ 9للٌّهِ! مٌا حَقٌّ
ابْنِي هٌذَا؟ قٌالَ: تُحَسِّنُ اسْمَهُ وَ أَدَبَهُ و تَضَعُهُ مَوْضِعاً
حَسَناً. “A man said, ‘O’ Messenger of Allah! What is the right of my
son?’ The Prophet replied, ‘Give him a good name and train him well and
choose a good job or profession for him.”

[^12]: The hadith states: سَمِّهْ بِأَسْمٌاءِ مِنَ الْعُبُودِيَّةِ!
فَقٌالَ: أَيِّ الأَسْمٌاءِ هُوَ؟ قٌالَ عَبْدُ الرَّحْمٌنِ “Name (your
children) with the name of servitude and worship (to Allah). They said,
“And what name is this?” He said, “\`Abdul Rahman.”


