Being Pessimistic About Others
==============================

( Verse 12 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يٌا أَيُّهٌا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اجْتَنِبُوا كَثِيـراً مِّنَ الظَّنِّ
إِنَّ بَعْضَ الظَّنِّ إِثْمٌ وَلاٌ تَجَسَّسُوا وَلاٌ يَغْتَبْ
بَّعْضُكُم بَعْضاً أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ
مَيْتاً فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ وَاتَّقُوا اللٌّهَ إِنَّ اللٌّهَ تَوٌّابٌ
رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O’ you who have true faith! Keep away from all sorts of conjecture
since surely some types of conjecture may lead to sin. In addition, do
not spy on and do not back-bite one another. Do any of you (who
back-bite) love to eat the flesh of your dead brother? Rather, you
detest this act, therefore have consciousness of Allah. Certainly Allah
is the One who is Oft-Turning to you in Repentance, Merciful***.**”**

In this verse, Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) has made it incumbent
upon the Muslim community to observe three ethical principles which are
classified as the necessary rights (of Islam) and are the essentials of
Islamic brotherhood and religious fellowship.

These three principles in summary are:

1. It is prohibited to have bad thoughts or be cynical of another
Muslim.

2. A Muslim is not permitted to spy into the life of another Muslim.

3. It is forbidden to back-bite and talk bad about other Muslims behind
their back.

Seeing as to how the principles that have been mentioned, form the
primary ethical traits of Islam and play an important role in the
improvement of society, and since we have beautiful and interesting
explanations from the leaders of our religion in relation to these
traits, it would be fitting to discuss each of these separately on their
own with their independent analysis. At this point, we begin by
discussing the first principle - spying on others.

Spying on others is a negative, psychological trait which can cause
damage and injury to the character, respect, piety and spiritual purity
of a person whom one is busy in thought about. A person who is
pessimistic about others will forget about the thousands of good deeds
and righteous actions that the person performs in his life and will only
pay attention to those few vague, dark and murky actions of the person.

We all know that the life, wealth and honour of a Muslim is sacred and
any sort of encroachment to these are prohibited in Islam. However in
this verse, another form of injustice upon the rights of a Muslim has
been alluded to and it is says that: “The respect, honour and character
of every Muslim – even in our thoughts and imagination and in making
judgements in our mind (about that Muslim) must also be respected and
revered.” A Muslim is not permitted to cross the boundaries even in his
mind in relation to the purity of another Muslim by harbouring bad
thoughts or beliefs about him or her.

In the words of one of our present day Scholars, “The limits of security
that Islam has brought forth for the Muslim society is not limited to
just the life, wealth and character of another person. Rather, in
addition to these three securities, there is also a fourth security
which is required and that is the safety of being judged by others. By
this, we mean that within one’s thoughts, one must not launch attacks or
think bad and unpleasant thoughts about other people.

The respect and character of a Muslim, in addition to being practically
adopted, is one that must also be protected in ones’ mind and thoughts.”

From the point of view of Islam, any sort of bad thoughts or misgiving
in ones’ mind which would lead to tainting the character of another
person is prohibited. Thus, we have been commanded that a society of
people who have true faith will keep away from any sort of bad thoughts
in relation to others.

In one of his most eloquent sayings in relation to the safety and
security of a Muslim in relation to the four traits mentioned above, the
Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) has
stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللٌّهَ حَرَّمَ عَلى الْمُسْلِمِ دَمَهُ وَ مٌالَهُ وَ عِرْضَهُ
وَ أَنْ يَظُنَّ بِهِ سُوءَ الظَّنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Certainly Allah has made sacred the blood, property and respect of a
Muslim (from another Muslim) and he must not even entertain bad thoughts
(about the other* *Muslim).”*[^1]

If we see that the first three types of safety and sanctity that have
been mentioned in the ahadith are enacted in the physical world and in
the various global organizations, but the fourth – namely the safety of
a person in relation to the thoughts that others entertain about him -
is not acted upon except under the shadow of true faith in Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He), then it is because the limits of
governance of the material (non-religious) world are limited to the
apparent aspects of life only and preventing any sort of trespassing of
the inner thoughts are out of the limits and boundaries of the powers
mentioned.

Thus, it is only true faith in Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) which
can prevent a person from this sort of trespassing (through his
thoughts), since a Muslim has firm conviction that Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) sees all of the actions that he performs and is even
aware of his inner thoughts.

The Dangers of Being Pessimistic About Others
---------------------------------------------

1. The first result of distrusting others will return back to the person
who himself possess this trait, since a person who does not trust others
will never be able to imagine that others can do things without any
(hidden) motive. Therefore, in addition to causing himself spiritual
difficulties and putting his soul through troubles, one will lead a
difficult life. Also, the burning and passion that are brought about
through one’s imagination and thoughts will only increase the (mental)
torture of a person.

2. Being pessimistic and not trusting other people also destroys the
roots of friendship and harmony amongst people. The person who thinks
bad about others will always imagine such people as being treacherous
and will feel that their friendship is something that is not stable or
is not built upon faithfulness (to one another). Thus, such people will
be compelled to cut off relations with those around them and it is for
this reason that the A’immah (peace be upon them all) have told us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ غَلَبَ عَلَيْهِ سُوءُ الظَّنِّ لَمْ يَتْرُكْ بَيْنَهُ وَ بَيْنَ
خَلِيلٍ صُلْحاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The person whose pessimism about others takes control over him will
destroy any sort of peace or harmony that exists between himself and his
friend.”*[^2]

3. The person who is pessimistic and distrusts others will always be
reclusive and will withdraw himself from others. Due to the fear and
apprehension that he has for other people, he will never be able to be
sociable with others and it is for this reason that we have been told in
the ahadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لَمْ يَحْسُنْ ظَنُّهُ إِسْتَوْحَشَ مِنْ كُلِّ أَحَدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A person who does not correct his thoughts about other people, will
always be frightened of every single person.”*[^3]

4. Being pessimistic and distrustful of others is a major calamity and
will affect a person’s reason and ability to judge others, since this
sickness is a type of disorder that affects the thought pattern and
discernment of a person. Thus, he would never be able to judge a
situation based upon his logical reasoning or by what reality is.

5. Pessimism is a sickness that is also contagious such that even those
people that a pessimist sits and associates with, will fall into the
filth of this negative trait.

6. Not only does pessimism and distrust affect the soul of a person,
rather since there is a direct correlation between the body and the
soul, the body too will remain un-healthy. In the words of the famous
thinker of our time, Dr. Alexis Carol says, “Being pessimistic and
always finding faults in things also takes away from the life span of a
person since this harmful habit affects the nerves of the body known as
the sympatic nerves and the internal glands as well. This can be the
commencement of other physical disorders including affecting the limbs
and organs of the body.”

7. Having bad thoughts about people without any reason will also drag
ones’ spouse, employees, workers and helpers around the house into
committing treachery and crimes. This is true since when the leader of
the house or the husband continuously pries into the lives of others,
then due to his associating thoughts to other people, an untrue picture
or representation and despicable act will be made manifest to those
around him and these untrue thoughts and feelings will get placed in the
hearts of his close ones. In the words of some of the scholars, ‘The
worker who is at the whims of the bad thoughts of his boss who is
constantly thinking that his worker is stealing things from his house
will slowly push his servant into actually stealing his property.’

Due to this, in the sacred teachings of Islam, pretending to be very
zealous or passionate when the situation does not call for it, or to be
extravagant in relation to one’s spouse has been highly discouraged. How
many times has it occurred that an innocent, chaste person is pulled
towards impurity and people who usually perform good deeds are tempted
and encouraged to do bad deeds, just as Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi
Talib (peace be upon him) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيٌّاكَ وَالتَّغٌايُرَ فِي غَيْرِ مَوْضِعِهِ فَإِنَّ ذٌلِكَ يَدْعُوا
الصَّحِيحَةِ إِلـى السُّقْمِ وَ الْبَرِيئَةِ إِلـى الْرَيْبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I warn you about being overzealous and obsessive in improper occasions
since unquestionably this act will tempt and encourage chaste women to
go towards (spiritually) dirtied and fouled traits and would drag women
who do not commit sin towards committing wicked deeds.”*[^4]

[^1]: Al-Mahajjat al-Baydha, Volume 5, Page 268.

[^2]: Ghurur al-Hikm, Page 697.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Ibid., Page 152.


