Speaking Bad Behind Someone’s Back
==================================

( Verse 12 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَلاٌ يَغْتَبْ بَّعْضُكُم بَعْضاً أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ
يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ مَيْتاً فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ وَاتَّقُوا اللٌّهَ
إِنَّ اللٌّهَ تَوٌّابٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****…and do not back-bite one another. Do any of you (who back-bite)
love to eat the flesh of your dead brother? Rather, you detest this act,
therefore have consciousness of Allah. Certainly Allah is the One who is
Oft-Turning to you in repentance, the Merciful***.**”**

In this part of the verse, one of the worst ethical traits has been
mentioned. This destructive trait is regarded as being so despicable and
appalling that the Qur’an offers a comparison as it has never done
before by stating that speaking bad about someone behind his back is
just like eating the flesh of one’s dead brother!

The most disgraceful act that can be done is that a person attacks the
body of a dead person, and it is especially bad if the deceased happens
to be his own brother, and even more so if his method of attack is that
he begins to eat from his flesh! This action is so despised and wicked
that very few people would ever do such a thing.

Why has backbiting and talking bad about others behind their back been
compared to eating the flesh of one’s deceased brother? It is possible
that it is for this reason that such a person who eats the flesh of his
own brother and the one who back-bites other people destroy the respect
and honour of that person.

The indecency of this act is divided such that both people – the one who
is speaking the bad words and the one who is listening to them - are
both classified as launching an attack against a person who is not able
to defend himself.

The one person is eating the flesh of a dead person who is unable to
defend himself, while the other person (who is listening to such talk)
is aiding in the attack on someone who is not present in the gathering
so as to be able to defend himself. Thus, to attack a person who does
not have the ability to defend himself is something that is considered
as a shameful act.

In other words, the Qur’an draws this similitude and parable that the
one who talks bad about a person behind his back is equivalent to the
one who eats the flesh of his own deceased brother. Thus, the following
four points have been taken into consideration:

1. One’s religious brother is the same as one’s biological brother.

2. A person’s dignity and respect are the same as his physical flesh.

3. Speaking bad words about a person behind his back and causing harm to
his character or disrespecting him is equivalent to eating his flesh.

4. Since this person is not present in the gathering and is unable to
defend himself against these cowardly attacks, it is said that he is
dead and has been attacked upon in such a state.

It is possible that in order to explain the fourth point, Amir
al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) referred to the
person who back-bites and speaks ill of others behind their back as
being lowly and weak (since they are attacking a person who does not
have the ability to defend himself) when he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْغِيْبَةُ جَهْدُ الْعٌاجِزِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Backbiting another person is (equivalent) to fighting a person who
cannot defend himself.”*[^1]

The Motives that Lead to Backbiting
-----------------------------------

One of the reasons and motives of a person backbiting is jealousy and
envy that one has which makes him speak ill of another person. It is the
person’s position and status that are upsetting him and through this act
(of speaking ill of him) he wishes to lower the status and worth of him
or her.

In his speech to Mufaddhal ibn \`Umar, Imam Ja\`far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) has referred to this motive as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ رَوَى عَلى مُؤْمِنٍ رِوٌايَةً يُرِيدُ بِهٌا شَيْنَهُ وَ هَدْمَ
مُرُوؤَتَهُ لِيُسْقِطَهُ مِنْ أَعْيُنِ النٌّاسِ أَخْرَجَهُ اللٌّهُ
مِنْ وِلاٌيَتِهِ إِلـى وِلاٌيِةِ الشَّيْطٌانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A person who talks about a believer’s conduct hoping that through this
act, he is able to lower the other person’s value and worth in the eyes
of others will be taken out of the guardianship of Allah and will be
placed in the guardianship of the Shaitan.”*[^2]

In this hadith, Imam Ja\`far as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) has mentioned
one of the motives behind backbiting which is the jealousy, envy and the
status that a person may feel for another person within the society.
Sometimes however, feelings such as anger, rage, pride and conceit also
compel a person towards this negative, ethical trait.

In another hadith, it has first been mentioned that envy and then anger
lead a person towards backbiting. It is possible that these attributes
have been mentioned in this particular order since envy and anger are
two reasons and motives that lead a person to speak bad about others
behind their back, just as it has been stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ تُحٌاسِدُوا وَ لاٌ تُبٌاغِضُوا وَ لاٌ يَغْتَبْ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضاً
وَ كُونُوا عِبٌادَ اللٌّهِ إِخْوٌاناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not have jealousy for one another and do not have hatred for
another and do not back-bite others and be servants of Allah, brothers
to one another.”*[^3]

Dangers of Backbiting
---------------------

Speaking ill behind a person’s back has many negative consequences
related to both the individual and the society. In relation to the
individual, backbiting has been referred to as oppression against one’s
believing Muslim brother - and what kind of oppression can be worse than
when a person tramples upon the respect and character of another
believer, such that there is nothing that can make up for this act?

Some of the consequences that affect an entire society come about from
backbiting, and the dangers that come about from these two negative
traits of having pessimism and speaking bad behind another person’s back
have been mentioned in brief in the previous discussion and which are
common between the two, include:

1. A society that becomes contaminated with backbiting will never see
agreement and unity and there will never be closeness and love amongst
the people. They will never become a society that has matured in
humanity, such that love and affection will rule over everyone.

2. Cooperation and teamwork, with the aim of reaching the sacred goals
of the society, can only be realized through confidence and trust of one
another will never be achieved. The society in which the defects of the
people are openly talked about and one in which the curtains that
conceal private acts and deeds are lifted and one in which the feeling
of confidence gives birth and produces the good opinion that people have
of one another, will be destroyed.

3. Speaking bad behind a person’s back is something that ignites the
fire of hatred and enmity. The person who has been spoken bad about and
has had his secrets spread out for everyone to know and has had his
respect and dignity taken away will be extremely upset and will
obviously resort to taking revenge.

4. Lifting the curtains that cover the sins and transgressions of the
people would result in them performing these disgraceful actions in the
future openly since other’s respect and dignity normally prevent one
from committing sins.

If a person commits sins, one would do so in private where no one can
see him with complete fear (of others). Therefore, if due to speaking
bad about others behind their back, we remove the curtains that cover
their secrets, and by doing so we destroy their character and dignity,
then who is to say that they would not commit these sorts of sins openly
in the presence of others (due to our actions)?

Due to the fear of losing respect and honour, a great number of people
stop themselves from committing sins and evil deeds and if this
obstacle - which in reality is the spiritual worth of a person - was to
be taken away, then there would remain no barrier for one to refrain
from sinning.

In addition to this, not only does spreading the secrets of the people
lead to added courage of the person doing this act, but also those who
are listening to such things and who may be weak of faith may also
develop the courage to commit this (and other) sins as well. Thus, this
act of backbiting other people will actually be a source for the spread
of corruption and wickedness.

Imam Ja\`far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ قٌالَ فِي مُؤْمِنٍ مٌا رَأَتْهُ عَيْنٌاهُ أَوْ سَمِعَتْهُ
أُذُنٌاهُ فَهُوَ مِنَ الَّذِينَ قٌالَ اللٌّهُ عَزَّوَجَلَّ: إِنَّ
الَّذِينَ يُحِـبُّونَ أَنْ تَشِيعَ الْفٌاحِشَةَ فِي الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
لَهُمْ عَذٌابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A person who tells others the actions of another believer that he has
seen or heard with his ears is of those people about whom Allah (the
Glorious and Noble) has said:* ***Unquestionably those people who love
to spread evil words around, regarding those who have faith have a
perpetual punishment awaiting them.”***[^4]

[^1]: Ghurur al-Hikm, Page 36.

[^2]: Al-Mahajjat al-Baydha, Volume 5, Page 155.

[^3]: Ibid., Page 251.

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi, Volume 2, Page 357.


