‘Islam’ and ‘Iman’ from the Point of View of the Qur’an
=======================================================

( Verse 14 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قٌالَتِ الأَعْرٌابُ آمَنٌّا قُلْ لَّمْ تُؤْمِنُوا وَلٌكِنْ قُولُوا
أَسْلَمْنٌا وَلَمٌّا يَدْخُلِ الإِيـمٌانُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ وَإِنْ
تُطِيعُوا اللٌّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ لاٌ يَلِتْكُم مِّنْ أَعْمٌالِكُمْ
شَيْئاً إِنَّ اللٌّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****The Desert \`Arabs (come to you O’ Muhammad) and say ‘We have
true belief!’ Say to them*** *(O’ Muhammad, blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny)* ***that, ’You are not true believers, rather you
have only submitted (to Allah), since true faith has not yet entered
into your hearts. However if you were to obey Allah and His***
*Messenger (Muhammad, blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)*
***then nothing would be reduced from your good deeds. Surely Allah is
All-Forgiving, All-Merciful.’*** **”**

The axis of discussion of this verse revolves around a group of people
who were “apparently” Muslims that were pretending to be of those who
submitted and had true faith - however not even the smallest amount of
faith existed in their hearts!

This group is known as the hypocrites whose danger is much more serious
than that of others, since the Jews and Christians are the known and
apparent enemies of Islam; however the hypocrites are the
undistinguishable enemies. Thus, the damage and injury that people at
this level can inflict is much greater than the other group (Jews and
Christians)[^1]

By studying the verses of the Qur’an in which the words ‘Islam’ and
‘«man’ are mentioned in their various forms, one can reach to the
conclusion that in most cases, the word ‘Islam’ (submission) is used as
an opposite to ‘Shirk’ (polytheism) and ‘Iman’ (true faith) is used as
an opposite to ‘Kufr’ (disbelief) and ‘Fisq’ (wickedness).

The lexical meaning of the word Islam is ‘submission and humility’;
while the lexical meaning of the word Iman is ‘assurance and
confidence’. Therefore, the meaning of Islam in the language of the
Divine teachings is the state of humility and submission to the Creator
of the Universe and that which is opposite to this is Shirk (polytheism)
and Ilhad (atheism). It should also be mentioned that an atheist is not
humble or submissive to anything, whereas a Mushrik (polytheist) submits
to idols, bodies or things that have been fashioned by one’s own hands.

Seeing as to how during the time when the Qur’an was being revealed, the
meaning of a Mulhid (atheist) was a person who did not believe in a
Creator, in most cases, the word Islam was used as an opposite to Shirk
and a Muslim was used as an opposite to a Mushrik. Pay attention to the
following verses of the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ أَوَّلَ مَنْ أَسْلَمَ وَلاٌ
تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِيـنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say (O’ Muhammad): "Certainly I have been commanded to be the first
of those who submit (to Allah (in Islam)) and unquestionably not to be
of those who join (gods) with Allah.”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِلٌهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وٌاحِدٌ فَلَهُ أَسْلِمُوا وَبَشِّرِ
الْمُخْبِـتِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So then your god is One God: submit then your will (entire presence)
to Him (in Islam): and give the good news (O’ Muhammad) to those who
humble themselves.”***[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مٌا كٌانَ إِبْرٌاهِيمُ يَهُودِيًّا وَلاٌ نَصْرٌانِيًّا وَلٌكِنْ كٌانَ
حَنِيفًا مُّسْلِمًا وَمٌا كٌانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِيـنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(Prophet) Ibrahim*** ***was not a Jew, nor was he a Christian; but
he was true in faith (Hanif) and he bowed his will (entire presence) to
Allah (in Islam), and he was not of those who joined gods (with
Allah).”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَعْبُدُ إِلٌـهَكَ وَإِلٌـهَ آبٌائِكَ إِبْرٌاهِيمَ وَإِسْمٌاعِيلَ
وَإِسْحَقَ إِلٌـهاً وٌاحِداً وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We shall worship your God and the God of your fathers, of Ibrahim***
***and Isma\`il*** ***and Ishaq*** ***- the one (True) God (Allah) and
to Him do we all submit (in Islam).”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمٌا يُوحَى إِلَيَّ أَنَّمٌا إِلٌهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وٌاحِدٌ فَهَلْ
أَنتُم مُّسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say (O’ Muhammad): ‘That which has been revealed to me (from Allah)
is that your God is the One God (Allah): will you then be of those who
submit to him as Muslims (in Islam)?”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ شَرِيكَ لَهُ وَ بِذٌالِكَ أُمِرْتُ وَ أَنٌا أَوَّلُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He has no partners and to this I have been commanded and I am***
***the first*** ***of those who submit (one of the Muslims).”***[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ إِلٌـهَ إِلاٌّ الَّذِي آمَنَتْ بِهِ بَنُو إِسْرٌائِيلَ وَأَنٌا
مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is no god except Him Whom the Children of Isra’il believe in
and I am one of those who submit (to Allah in Islam).”***[^8]

By paying close attention to these verses that present the meaning of
Islam and all the derivatives that come from this word, we see that
truly this word means humility to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)
and turning away from all forms of polytheism and diverging thoughts.

Seeing as to how the worship of the One Creator and abandoning any sort
of polytheism and not paying heed to any created object, is the
fundamental belief of all of the Heavenly Teachings, it is because of
this fact that from the very first day that mankind was created, there
has never been more than one true religion and that is al-Islam, just as
it is mentioned in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِنْدَ اللٌّهِ الإِسْلاٌمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Unquestionably the only Din (complete code and way of life)
acceptable to Allah is al-Islam.”***[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الإِسْلاٌمِ دِيناً فَلَنْ يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever chooses other than al-Islam as his Din - then it will
never be accepted from him.”***[^10]

Given that the Qur’an wishes to invite the followers of the Injil and
the Tawrat to one common goal and aim, all of humanity have been invited
towards al-Islam. In addition, the reality of Islam is that the
followers do not turn to polytheism and the worship of idols, as it has
been mentioned in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...أَلاٌّ نَعْبُدَ إِلاٌّ اللٌّهَ وَلاٌ نُشْرِكَ بِهِ شَيْئًا وَلاٌ
يَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُنٌا بَعْضاً أَرْبٌاباً مِّنْ دُونِ اللٌّهِ فَإِنْ
تَوَلَّوا فَقُولُوا اشْهَدُوا بِأَنٌّا مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***  
***

“’

***  
***
…that we shall not worship any other creature or entity other than Allah
and we shall not setup with Him partners and we will not take some
people over us as lords other than Allah.’ So

***  
***

***  
***
then if they turn away (and do not accept these things) then say to them
(O’ Muhammad

***  
***

***  
***

***  
***
) that ‘Bear witness surely we are of those who submit (as Muslims).’”

[^11]
Again, since the reality of Islam is to worship Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) and to turn away from everything other than Him, and
during all times and ages this is what mankind has been commanded to
follow, we see that even after building the Ka\`bah, Prophet Ibrahim
al-Khalil al-Rahman (peace be upon him) prayed to Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) to make him and his children Muslims, when he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنٌا وَاجْعَلْنٌا مُسْلِمَينِ لَكَ وَ مِنْ ذُرِّيَّـتِـنٌا أُمَّةً
مُسْلِمَةً لَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O’ our Lord! Make us from those who submit to You (as Muslims) and
also (make) our children to be from the nation of submitters (Muslims)
to You.”***[^12]

The Qur’an also holds firm to the belief that Prophet Ibrahim (peace be
upon him) had named those people who worshipped Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) from a previous time as being Muslims:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ سَمٌّاكُمُ الْمُسْلِمَينِ مِنْ قَبْلُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is he (Ibrahim) who called you Muslims from before.”***[^13]

From these verses of the Qur’an, we can deduce that the truth of Islam
and the principle goal of this religion (in the instances that have been
elucidated to in these verses) is submission and obedience in the
presence of the Truth which takes form in the worship of One God (Allah,
Glorified and Exalted is He).

It goes without saying that the centre for this form of true submission
which is also the basis through which one is saved from the fire of hell
and is graced with the bounties of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)
is the heart and the soul of the person. Therefore, a Muslim is one who
is humble and submissive from the bottom of his heart towards Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) and does not accept anyone or anything
other than Him at the level of Lordship.

The first part of the body that this manifests itself on to is the
tongue of the person (through the verbal declaration), followed by the
other parts of the body. Therefore the true meeting point of submission
and obedience is the heart and soul of a person and the tongue is simply
the faculty through which it is made known.

Analysis of the Word ‘Iman’
---------------------------

In the Qur’an, the word Iman (true faith) is used as an opposite to the
word Kufr (disbelief). A point that must be mentioned in relation to
this is that Iman is a mental state of believing and accepting
something. With this said, we see that Kufr is in the meaning of
covering up something and thus is the opposite of Iman. It is said that
through his own disregard and denial (of the Truth), a disbeliever
covers up the true visage of the Truth and in this relation, the Qur’an
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يَتَبَدَّلِ الْكُفْرَ بِالإِيـمٌانِ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوٌاءَ
السَّبِيـلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***  
***

“But whoever changes from true faith (Iman) to disbelief (Kufr) has
definitely strayed from the correct way.”

[^14]
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمْ لِلْكُفْرِ يَوْمَئِذٍ أَقْرَبُ مِنْهُمْ لِلإِيْمٌانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On that day, they were nearer to disbelief (Kufr)than they were to
true faith (Iman).”***[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِ اسْتَحَبُّوا الْكُفْرَ عَلى الإِيْمٌانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If they love disbelief (Kufr) over true faith (Iman).”***[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُؤْمِنُونُ بِاللٌّهِ وَ الْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They have true faith (Iman) in Allah and the Last Day.”***[^17]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ وَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاٌةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those people who have true faith (Iman) in the unseen and uphold the
Salat.”***[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذٌالِكَ أَنْزَلْـنٌا إِلَـيْكَ الْكِتٌابَ فَـالَّذِينَ
آتَيْـنٌاهُمُ الْكِتٌابَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And thus (it is) We that have sent down the Book (al-Qur’an) to you
(O’ Muhammad). So, the people who have been given the book have true
faith therein.”***[^19]

The conclusion that we arrive at by studying these verses is that the
intended meaning of Islam in the language of the Qur’an is submission
and humility in the presence of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He);
while Shirk is classified as humility in the presence of idols – which
are made from the things that Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)
Himself has created.

The meaning of Iman in the Qur’an is voluntary submission and obedience
to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and those things which are
connected to Him such as the Prophetic Mission of the Prophets, the Day
of Judgement, the Heavenly books and other (such) things and this is the
opposite to Kufr in which all of these things or even some of them are
denied and not accepted.

If the true visage of Islam is submission and attestation, then without
doubt the true focal point of these two states is the ruh (spirit) and
the soul of a person, and the tongue and other parts of one’s body are
the places where the physical manifestations of these two states are
made.

However, if the meaning of these two words is simply to show or
demonstrate one’s submission and obedience even though in the heart and
deep down in the soul of the person, there are no effects present - just
as we find people in whose hearts there is no effect of submission or
obedience, however by their words they act as if they are submitting and
obedient to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) - then in this event the
manifestation of submission and obedience will simply remain on their
tongues. In some of the verses of the Qur’an, this sort of external or
apparent form of Islam and dishonest Iman has been mentioned.

In relation to the cause of revelation of the verse under discussion,
the Commentators of the Qur’an have narrated that a group of people from
the tribe of Bani Asad came to the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny) to ask permission to use the Zakat and they made
known to the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)
that they had true faith in him (they had Iman). Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) commanded the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and
his progeny) to say to them that, “You have accepted Islam (not Iman),
since true faith has not yet entered into your hearts.”

It goes without saying that just as Iman had not entered into their
hearts, so too Islam (submission) had also not entered into their hearts
and their submission or acceptance of Islam was nothing more than a
verbal attestation. However, why is it that the Prophet told them: “Do
not say that you have true faith (Iman), rather say that you have
submitted (accepted Islam)” since from the apparent point of view they
had accepted Islam and Iman, however deep down inside themselves, they
had neither Iman nor Islam? We will elaborate upon these points later
on.

In the Qur’an, there are some verses which speak about verbal faith such
as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ يَحْزُنْكَ الَّذِينَ يُسٌارِعُونَ فِي الْكُفْرِ مِنَ الَّذِينَ
قٌالُوا آمَنٌّا بِأَفْوٌاهِهِمْ وَ لَمْ يُؤْمِنْ قُلُوبُهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***  
***

“(O’ Muhammad!) Do not let those people grieve you who race each other
into disbelief (Kufr) (if it be) among those who say “We believe” with
their mouths but whose hearts have no true faith (Iman).”

[^20]
From this discussion, it is clear that the true focal point of Islam and
Iman is the heart and soul of a person and the tongue is the place where
the physical manifestation of these two traits takes place. Sometimes
however, it is possible that the true physical manifestation of Islam
and Iman do not occur and the presence of Islam and Iman is not made
known within the depths of a person.

Therefore, opposed to what some people may imagine, Iman is not
particularly related to the heart and Islam is not particularly related
to the tongue (verbal confirmation) - rather both of these, both from
the inner and the outer aspects - are of various degrees and levels.

Another Meaning of ‘Islam’ and ‘Iman’
-------------------------------------

The popular and prevalent meaning of these two terms are just as have
been mentioned, however there are some other verses of the Qur’an and
ahadith that offer another interpretation of them, of which we mention
some of them here.

1. Sometimes Islam is defined as the physical submission, whereas Iman
is limited specifically to the ethereal beliefs and these are the
meanings of these two words when they are used together as opposites to
one another. The person who is hearing these words is in a position
where he must separate (two things from themselves), as can be seen in
the verse under discussion.

In this verse, we see that the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) had been commanded by Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He) to tell the people from the tribe of Bani Asad who had come to him
to ask permission to use the Zakat and outwardly showed that they had
accepted the faith. It was here that the Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) was commanded to tell them that they had
accepted Islam (submission), but not Iman (true faith).

This sentence clearly shows that by attributing Islam to these people,
they had traversed one of the stages and levels of Islam which was the
verbal submission but not all of the levels that Islam entails. Also by
negating any sort of Iman that they possessed, this negation was only in
relation to some of the stages and levels of Iman of which the hidden or
true faith of the heart is that which was negated from these people and
not all the levels of Iman. This is the case since we see that from the
apparent aspect they had accepted Islam and they also had Iman, however
if we looked at what was deep in their hearts, they neither had Islam
nor Iman.

It is possible that the reason why these two words are used in this
fashion is that the most clear area of manifestation of submission (to
Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He) is the tongue and the most natural
part of the body in which Iman would be made manifest is the soul and
spirit of a person. Due to this, in the verse under discussion we see
that the word Islam is simply the Islam of the tongue and Iman is the
Iman of the spirit; and because of this, it is correct to state that one
of these confirms the other one, while the other one negates the first
one.

2. Islam is a phrase that is confessed by the tongue and is linked to
the beliefs that one has in his heart. However in regards to Iman, in
addition to this (definition), it also entails acting according to one’s
responsibilities (of the religion) and this is the meaning that has been
specified in the ahadith.

Muhammad ibn Muslim has narrated from either Imam Muhammad ibn \`Ali
al-Baqir or Imam Ja\`far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (peace be upon them both)
that it was said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلإِيـمٌانُ إِقْرٌارٌ وَ عَمَلٌ وَ الإِسْلاٌمُ إِقْرٌارٌ بِلاٌعَمَلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Iman is the confession (by the tongue) and acting (according to one’s
responsibility) and Islam is confession (by the tongue) without
acting.”*[^21]

In a letter which Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (peace be upon him) wrote
to Ma’mun, he summarized Islam by stating the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَصْحٌابُ الْحُدُودِ مُسْلِمُونَ لاٌ مُؤْمِنُونَ وَ لاٌ كٌافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The people upon whom the punishment of Allah must be meted out are the
Muslims, not those who have true faith (Mu’minun), nor the disbelievers
(Kafirun).”*[^22]

However, these people (of the tribe of Bani Asad) are Muslims, since
both in their heart and through their tongue they had testified to the
truthfulness of the religion of Islam, however they were not true
believers (Mu’minun).

This is said because the foundation of Islam is based on acting
according to the injunctions of the religion whereas a person who
commits a sin that necessitates the punishment that Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) has prescribed has naturally trampled upon a series of
responsibilities that Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) has placed for
him.

Building up on this interpretation, there is a well-known hadith which
has been narrated in the books of the Ahl al-Sunnah and the Shi\`a that
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ يَسْرِقُ السٌّارِقُ حِيْنَ يَسْرِقُ وَ هُوَ مُؤْمِنُ وَ لاٌ
يَزْنـى الزٌّانِي حِيْنَ يَزْنـى وَ هُوَ مُؤْمِنُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“At the time that a thief is stealing and (at the time that) an
adulterer is committing adultery, he is not a Believer.”*[^23]

In this interpretation, Iman has been sited as an opposite to sin and
rebellion (against the laws of Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He) and
Islam has been used as an opposite to Kufr or disbelief.

3. Within the definition of Iman, in addition to Islam being one of the
conditions, Wilayah (recognizing the true successors of the Messenger of
Allah, blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) is also a
prerequisite. After mentioning the definition of Islam as being the
confession to Tawhid (Oneness of Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He) and
the Prophetic Mission of the Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) and fulfilling one’s religious obligations,
Imam Ja\`far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) went on to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلإِيـمٌانُ مَعْرِفَةُ هٌذٌا الأَمْرِ مَعَ هٌذٌا فَإِنْ أَقَرَّ بِهٌا
وَ لَمْ يَعْرِفْ هٌـذٌا الأَمْرِ كٌانَ مُسْلِماً وَ كٌانَ ضٌالاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Iman (means) to recognize and believe in this issue (Wilayah of us,
the Ahlul Bait) and if one testifies to this but does not recognize this
issue (the Wilayah of the Ahlul Bait), then he is a Muslim and he is
misguided.”*[^24]

Investigating a Long Running Dispute
------------------------------------

The dispute as to the reality of what Islam and Iman are is a dispute
that is long running. The great teacher of the Shi\`a, late Shaikh Mufid
(may Allah be pleased with him) in his precious work Awail
al-Muqalat[^25] has clearly explained the opinion of the Shi\`a. Also,
the late scholar \`Allamah Majlisi (may Allah be pleased with him), in
his discussion on Kufr and Iman[^26], has brought forth both verses of
the Qur’an and ahadith in relation to this dispute. However we bring
this discussion to a close by quoting the words of Shahid ath-Thani (may
Allah be pleased with him):

The difference of opinion amongst the Scholars in relation to the
meaning of these two words can be divided into three categories:

**Issue 1:** *Do the words Islam and Iman, from the point of view of
their purport and subject have a different (lexical) meaning or is their
substance one and the same?*

The answer to this question was made clear in the beginning of this
discussion since these two words, from the point of view of their
lexical meaning have two distinct and different meanings. The reality of
Islam is humility, while the definition of Iman is submission,
confirmation and voluntary obedience to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He). With this said, how is it possible to say that the original meaning
of these two words – whether from the point of view of their lexical
meaning or how they are used in the religion – are one and the same?

**Issue 2:** *In the meanings of these two words, is there a sense of
sharing of a common ground or not? By this we mean that is every true
Muslim also a true Mu’min and vice-versa or not?*

Answer: If this question is related to the common and prevalent meaning
of these two words, then without doubt the meanings of them would lead
us to accept that there is a relationship and both mean the same thing,
since if someone is humble and submits himself to Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He), then certainly between himself and that which is related
to him (his body parts), there will also be submission. There are some
verses of the Qur’an which show that both of these words are equal in
meaning:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَخْرَجْنٌا مَنْ كٌانَ فِيهٌا مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ فَمٌا وَجَدْنٌا
فِيهٌا غَيْرَ بَيْتٍ مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then We brought forth such as were therein of the believers. But We
did not find therein save a (single) house of those who submitted (the
Muslims).”***[^27]

However, if this question is related to the final three meanings that
were mentioned, then without doubt the relationship between these two
words is that they share some commonality but also have their own
independent meanings. By this we mean that everyone who has true faith
(Iman) is a Muslim, however not all Muslims have true faith (Iman).

In the first definition that was given for Iman, it was mentioned that
Iman is a firm belief which is rooted in the heart, whereas in the
second definition, it was mentioned that Iman is to fulfil one’s
responsibilities. The third interpretation was that Iman means to
recognize and accept the rightful successors of the Prophet; whereas for
one to be considered a Muslim, none of these three things are necessary.

**Issue 3.** *Are the issues that are related to the practical laws of
Islam such as purity (taharah), one’s life and wealth being sacrosanct
(from other Muslims) and the permissibility to eat meat that has been
slaughtered by such a person and the other rulings in Islam specific to
the one who has Iman or even to the one who professes Islam?*

Answer: If this question is related to the common and prevalent meaning
of these two words, then we must state that the issue of the practical
laws of Islam are simply related to submission and the apparent
obedience to Islam. Thus, it is not necessary to delve deep into the
inner submission of the heart and true acceptance of the teachings.

However if this question is in relation to the other three meanings of
these two words, especially the first meaning that Islam is related to
the apparent testimony and that faith is an internal issue rooted in the
heart, then it must be stated that the practical laws of Islam are
limited to only that – Islam – not Iman. This reality can easily be seen
by looking through the history of the life of the Prophet (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his progeny) and the ahadith of his successors.

In the beginning days of Islam, anyone was able to openly testify to
their acceptance of Islam even if they did not have such a belief in
their hearts and their submission was accepted and the laws of Islam
were applicable to them. Imam Ja\`far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (peace be
upon him) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلإِسْلاٌمُ يُحْقَنُ بِهِ الدَّمُ وَ تُؤَدَّى بِهِ الأَمٌانَةُ وَ
يُسْتَحَلُّ بِهِ الْفَرْجُ وَ الثَّوٌابُ عَلى الإِيـمٌانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One who accepts Islam, his blood will be sanctified (he cannot be
killed); anytime he gives you a trust, it must be returned; and (sexual)
relations are made permissible (after marriage), however the reward
(from Allah) is limited to Iman (true faith).”*[^28]

In another tradition, Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be
upon him) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أُقٌاتِلَ النٌّاسَ حَتَّـى يَقُولُوا لاٌ إِلٌهَ إِلاٌّ
اللٌّهَ فَإِذٌا قٌالُوهٌا فَقَدْ حَرُمَ عَلَيَّ دِمٌاؤُهُمْ وَ
أَمْوٌالُهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I have been commanded to fight the people until they testify that
there is no creature or entity worthy of worship except for Allah, and
when they say this then at that time, their blood and property are
sacrosanct.”*[^29]

[^1]: This topic has been thoroughly explained by this author in his
commentary of Surah al-Munafiqun under verse number 4 that reads: هُمُ
الْعَدُوُّ فَاحْذَرْهُمْ… “They are your enemies so then beware of
them…”

[^2]: Surah al-An\`am (6), Verse 14.

[^3]: Surah al-Hajj (22), Verse 34.

[^4]: Surah Aali Imran (3), Verse 67.

[^5]: Surah al-Baqarah (2), Verse 133.

[^6]: Surah al-Anbiya’ (21), Verse 108.

[^7]: Surah al-An\`am (6), Verse 163.

[^8]: Surah Yunus (10), Verse 90.

[^9]: Surah Aali Imran (3), Verse 19.

[^10]: Ibid., Verse 85.

[^11]: Ibid., Verse 64.

[^12]: Surah al-Baqarah (2), Verse 128.

[^13]: Surah al-Hajj (22), Verse 78.

[^14]: Surah al-Baqarah (2), Verse 108.

[^15]: Surah Aali Imran (3), Verse 167.

[^16]: Surah at-Tawbah (9), Verse 23.

[^17]: Surah Aali Imran (3), Verse 114.

[^18]: Surah al-Baqarah (2), Verse 2.

[^19]: Surah al-\`Ankabut (29), Verse 47.

[^20]: Surah al-Maidah (5), Verse 41.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 68, Page 246.

[^22]: Ibid., Page 262.

[^23]: Ibid., Page 270.

[^24]: Usul al-Kafi, Volume 2, Page 24.

[^25]: Page 15.

[^26]: Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 68, Page 225-301.

[^27]: Surah al-Dhariyat (51), Verse 35 & 36.

[^28]: Al-Mahasin, Page 285.

[^29]: Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 68, Page 262.


