Self-Sacrifice in Order to Reach One’s Objectives
=================================================

( Verse 15 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمٌا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللٌّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ ثُمَّ
لَمْ يَرْتٌابُوا وَجٌاهَدُوا بِأَمْوٌالِهِمْ وَأَنفُسِهِمْ فِي سَبِيلِ
اللٌّهِ أُوْلٌئِكَ هُمُ الصٌّادِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****Without doubt the true believers are only those who have faith
in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad) and then do not change their
belief into doubt, and (the believers are those) who struggle with their
wealth and their lives in the way of Allah. Surely it is these people
alone who are the truthful ones.”***

The style of the Qur’an is such that when discussing an issue, it puts
forth the clearest proofs and it follows this method when it elucidates
on the practical laws and issues related to society. Within its
communications, the Qur’an also introduces both logical proofs and the
traits which are within our innate disposition and in a majority of
instances, its directives are not propounded as simply matters of
submission.[^1]

Many times during the course of a person’s research, a scholar will view
a verse of the Qur’an as an isolated, independent issue, separate from
that which came before it. However after careful study, he will realize
that the issue which he is studying is not independent; rather the aim
and intention of the contents of the verse he was studying was to
elucidate and draw his attention to a previously mentioned fact, and
this point is absolutely clear for the person who has a deep love for
the Qur’an.

The verse under discussion is of this type and although the plan and
design of this verse is to explain some of the signs of a person of true
faith, however in reality it explains the causes why the tribe of Bani
Asad must say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْلَمْنٌا وَ لَمٌّا يَدْخُلِ الإِيْمٌانُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(Rather say) that we submit (as Muslims) since true faith has not
yet entered into your hearts.”***

Why does the Qur’an say this? It is because people who possess true
faith can be distinguished through the following characteristics:

1. They have firm faith in Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and His
Messenger (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) and this is
deeply rooted in the bottom of their hearts.

2. They do not allow doubt or scepticism to enter into their hearts.

3. They offer sacrifices in the way of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He).

Were these characteristics within them (the tribe of Bani Asad)? Without
doubt, they were not. This was said because the outward show of their
actions illustrated that they had not yet developed true faith in the
bottom of their hearts and there was still doubt and scepticism in them
and thus, they were not willing to give up their life and wealth in the
way of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).

Now, we offer an explanation of the third characteristic:

One of the signs of a person who possesses true faith is that he is
unselfish and self-sacrificing. Such a person is constantly struggling
with his life and property toward his goals and the action and behaviour
of one are brought forth through his manner of thinking and his beliefs.

If the beliefs of a person in relation to something reach to such a
level that they overtake the importance of his own life, property and
his entire existence, then without doubt he will exert as much energy
that is needed to reach and protect his goals and will be ready to give
up everything (to reach to such an aim).

Principally, true faith and belief in something would produce such a
strong love and affection in a person that sometimes without his own
volition he would express his love for that thing. It goes without
saying that love is an internal, conscious feeling that makes a person
act in a particular way out of its own desire.

The power and force that this emotion has on the internal conscious of a
human being and the wave of excitement that love and affection bring
about in a persons’ life can never be explained or brought about with
proof or logic.

Sometimes, it could be that countless points of logic and other sorts of
proof could be brought forward to crush the internal feelings and
emotions of a person, however when those same feelings become stronger
and more powerful in the (spiritual) heart, then they uncontrollably
take over a person and thus the person is left to submit to his powerful
inner emotions.

For example, sometimes it may be impossible to get even one dollar from
a person who has a strong love and affinity to money and wealth however
when his child falls victim to an illness, then the natural instinct
within himself that forces him to love his child takes precedence over
his love for wealth. In such an instance, it is possible that he would
even give away half of his wealth just to have his child cured from a
sickness!

The feelings and inner desires, rather all of the innate characteristics
of a human being bring about an intense form of (spiritual) movement and
motion in a person, and if these emotions and feelings are not
controlled and channelled in a proper manner, then truly the person
would transgress many boundaries and limits.

When we look at the self-sacrifice of people during the passing of time,
we see individuals who in an urge to push their own goals and aims
forward, became so uncontrollable and illogical that they ended up
losing their own respect and dignity just to make sure that their goals
were achieved.

It is because of this fact that it is said they have true faith in the
bottom of their hearts for the goals that they were trying to reach
towards and their faith created such a strong sense of love within
themselves that without even calculating the outcome of their acts, they
ended up sacrificing everything to reach to their goals and without any
control, were pulled towards reaching it. If we see that at the final
stages of their lives they even ended up forgetting their spouses and
children and were still trying to pursue their goals, then it is because
of this reason.

Sa\`d Rabi\` was one of the self-sacrificing companions of the Prophet
of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) who possessed
a heart that was overflowing with faith and sincerity. During the battle
of Uhud, he fell to the ground with a staggering twelve injuries to his
body and was in a state of giving up his life when the Prophet
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) commanded another
believer to go and investigate the state of Sa\`d Rabi\` and to bring
him back the real news of how he was.

Zaid ibn Thabit found this companion of the Prophet (blessings of Allah
be upon him and his progeny) amongst the others who had been killed on
the battle field and (just before he died), he proceeded to ask how he
was doing, to which Sa\`d replied in the following manner:

“Tell the Prophet that there are only a few moments left in the life of
Sa\`d and may Allah give you, O’ Messenger of Allah, the best reward
that one who is a Prophet is entitled to receive.” He then went on to
say, “Convey my greetings to the companions of the Prophet and tell them
that anytime any sort of injury or harm is inflicted on the Prophet and
they are living then they must ask forgiveness from Allah for this.”[^2]

There is no love or affection greater than the love that true faith
brings about in a person, since the person who has such a faith will be
so drowned in the glory and beauty of the one that he loves and will
strive to reach his goal, that he would be willing to give up his entire
life to attain that which he loves, and will forget everything else
around him.

The Areas Where Love is of No Use
---------------------------------

Each and every person has been created with a specific inclination or
set of emotions within him. This spiritual blessing exists in all people
however with a variance in its levels amongst people. Amongst all of the
various levels that exist, women are the focal point of this inclination
and it is their hearts which are full of love and affection.

One time, a Muslim woman of Madinah was told that three of her loved
ones were killed in the battle of Uhud. This woman mounted a camel and
proceeded towards the area where the battle of Uhud had taken place so
that she could go and bring the bodies of her deceased ones back home
for burial. On the return back to Madinah, she was carrying the three
bodies with her on the camel and was getting ready to enter into the
city.

Half way to the city, she met up with one of the wives of the Messenger
of Allah (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny). This wife of
the Prophet asked the lady how the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny) was doing.

This selfless woman - with a clear face resembling one who had not even
seen the smallest difficulty – who was holding the ropes of the camel in
one hand and was covered in the blood of the martyrs that were on the
camel being transported back, said to the wife of the Prophet (blessings
of Allah be upon him and his progeny), “I have good news for you and
that is that the Prophet is alive and safe and because of this great
blessing, all other trials and tribulations seem to be insignificant,
trivial things!”

The wife of the Prophet asked this lady, “Whose bodies are those?” The
lady replied, “The one body is that of my husband, the second is that of
my son and the third is my brother’s. I am taking them all back to
Madinah to have them buried there.”[^3]

What factors were responsible for this display of self-sacrifice and
unselfishness in one’s aim and purpose that flowed through this woman?
How is it possible that such a true faith and strong affection to the
true visage of Tawhid could be present in the heart of a person such
that her innate inclinations of motherhood could be kept under such
control?!

True Faith Takes the Place of the Forces of Equality
----------------------------------------------------

One of main reasons for the victories during the previous wars is the
superiority of the military forces or at least being at par or balance
with the opposing side. By this we mean that each side of the conflict
would try their best to make sure that the number of soldiers and
quantity of weapons would be equal with the opposing side so that there
would be some equality between the two armies.

However in relation to the wars that are fought to defend the sanctity
of an ideology and teachings in which the soldiers are equipped with
true faith, inner desires, wishes and through their spiritual stimulants
which make them go towards the enemies, at no time can equality (of
military strength) be the classification for victory.

Rather, there have been people who were small in number and
insignificant (from the point of view of strength) that were victorious
over a large group of people and it was the power of their soul and
spirit that made them victorious over their well-equipped enemy.

For example, in the Battle of Badr, the forces of the idol worshippers
were three times that of the Muslim forces. In addition, the entire
force of the enemy was armed to the teeth with weapons and had enough
troops mobilized (to win the battle). Before the flames of war erupted
between these two groups, the elders of the Quraish requested one of the
bravest men to go and count the number of companions of Muhammad
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny).

With his swift horse, he circled the camp of the Muslim army and
returned with the following report: “The number of fighters with
Muhammad does not exceed more than 300 people and there are no other
people behind them that could be used to ambush us. However, I also
tried to study their mental and spiritual state and found that they have
brought death and destruction from Madinah as a gift for you all!”

The man continued: “I saw a group of people who have nothing except for
a sword to use for protection such that until they do not kill one of
you, they will not be able to be killed. When this number of people have
killed an equivalent number of you, then their lives will have no more
worth.”[^4]

This man found all of the polytheists of the Quraish quiet, however the
firm resolve could be seen on their faces and their snake-like venomous
tongue was still in their mouths.

It is because of this that the Qur’an considers the greatest sign of
true faith to be self-sacrifice when it mentions that those people who
have true faith are those who as the Qur’an puts it: “Those who have
true faith are those people who have a firm belief in Allah and His
Messenger which is rooted in the bottom of their hearts and are willing
to give up their lives and wealth to reach to their goals, surely it is
these people who are the truthful ones.”[^5]

The Generation of Freedom
-------------------------

The second half of the twentieth century has been introduced as the
generation of freedom for the exploited nations of the world. Those
nations who for countless years were locked under the chains of
colonization finally awoke and through their intelligence and vigilance,
broke off the chains (of oppression) that were upon them and have
proclaimed their freedom to the entire world.

However the only nations that proved to be successful were those who
traversed this path (of freedom) with true faith and self-sacrifice in
all areas of their lives and completely turned their backs to the
colonizing empires of the world. The self-sacrifices of the freed nation
of Algeria and the other countries of Africa are clear examples of this
issue.

Today, for the countries who are busy exploiting and colonizing others,
there is no fear if a group of wicked, rebellious people that do not
possess any spiritual goal and motives based on true faith rise up in
aggression.

The greatest danger and threat for Imperialism on a national level are
the developed nations which have true faith such that by relying on
their faith and spiritual goals that they have set for themselves, have
risen up and even with arrows and rocks, have been able to remove the
colonial forces from their lands. As long as life is flowing through
them, they will never rest for even one moment, and thus their eventual
end will be that of victory.

[^1]: By this, it is meant that when the Qur’an speaks on various
issues, it does not make the issue as one that we must accept without
proof or logical arguments and as simply being commandments that we must
follow as Muslims – or those who submit to the word of Allah - rather,
the Qur’an tries to explain issues to us through proofs and reasoning
that our minds would understand and accept. (Tr.).

[^2]: Sirah Ibn Hisham, Volume 2, Page 497; Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 20,
Page 121.

[^3]: Maghazi, Volume 1, Page 265.

[^4]: Sirah Ibn Hisham, Volume 1, Page 622; Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 19,
Page 251.

[^5]: Surah al-Hujurat (49), Verse 15 [Verse Under Discussion].


