The Infinite Knowledge of Allah
===============================

( Verse 16 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَتُعَلِّمُونَ اللٌّهَ بِدِينِكُمْ وَاللٌّهُ يَعْلَمُ مٌا فِي
السَّمٌوٌاتِ وَمٌا فِي الأَرْضِ وَاللٌّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say (to the people O’ Muhammad): ‘Do you wish to teach Allah about
your Din (complete way of life) whereas Allah knows all that is
contained in the Heavens and all that is upon the Earth; and surely
Allah has complete knowledge of everything.*****”**

The all-encompassing knowledge of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)
over all of the creations of the world is referred to by various words
and phrases in many places in the Qur’an. One such phrase which is
employed is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…complete knowledge of everything.”***

This phrase has been mentioned in the above verse under discussion and
has also been repeated in over twenty other instances in the Qur’an.
This sentence and other such examples negate any sort of ignorance on
the part of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) in relation to any
affair of even the smallest size. The Qur’an has not stopped at this
sentence and in other verses as well, the encompassing knowledge of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) has also been explained:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ يَعْزُبُ عَنْهُ مِثْقٌالُ ذَرَّةٍ فِي السَّمٌوٌاتِ وَ لاٌ فِي
الأَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Not even the weight of an atom that is within the Heavens nor in the
Earth is hidden from Him.”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللٌّهَ لاٌ يَخْفـى عَلَيْهِ شَيْءٌ فِي الأَرْضِ وَ لاٌ فِي
السَّمٌاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely there is nothing that is hidden from Allah whether it be in
the Earth or in the Heaven.”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عِنْدَهُ مَفٌاتِحُ الْغَيْبِ لاٌ يَعْلَمُهٌا إِلاٌّ هُوَ وَ
يَعْلَمُ مٌا فِي الْبَرِّ وَ الْبَحْرِ وَ مٌا تَسْقُطُ مِنْ وَرَقَةٍ
إِلاٌّ يَعْلَمُهٌا وَ لاٌ حَبَّةٍ فِي ظُلُمٌاتِ الأَرْضِ وَ لاٌ رَطْبٍ
وَ لاٌ يٌابِسٍ إِلاٌّ فِي كِتٌابٍ مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And with Him (Allah) are the Keys of the Unseen. No one knows them
(the Secrets of the Unseen) except for Him (Allah). And He (Allah) knows
all that is on the land and all that is in the seas and there is not
even a single leaf that falls except that He has full knowledge of it
and there is also not a single dry thing that is hidden in the darkness
of the Earth, nor anything that is wet or dry, except that (all of
these) are preserved in a Clear Book.”***[^3]

Is there a more expressive way that these (verses of the Qur’an) can
explain the comprehensive knowledge of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He) over all of the creations?

In one of his lectures, Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be
upon him) has elucidated on the comprehensive knowledge of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) over all of His creations of the world in
the following manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْلَمُ عَجِيجَ الْوُحُوشِ فِي الْفَلَوٌاتِ وَ مَعٌاصِيَّ الْعِبٌادِ
فِي الْخَلَوٌاتِ وَاخْتِلاٌفَ الْحِيتٌانِ فِي الْبِحٌارِ الْغٌامِرٌاتِ
وَتَلاٌطُمَ الْمٌاءِ بِالرِّيٌاحِ الْعٌاصِفٌاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“He (Allah) knows of the cries of the beasts in the forest; the sins of
the servants while they are in seclusion and the movements of the fish
in the deep seas and the rising of the water by the tempestuous
winds.”*[^4]

Proofs of Allah’s Never-Ending Knowledge
----------------------------------------

Through various ways and methods available to them, the scholars and
experts of Islamic Theology have proven the knowledge and wisdom of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) ranging from the smallest of
creations to the phenomenon of the world, as well as the secrets of the
creation, and of these, we mention two.

### First Proof for the Comprehensive Knowledge of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He):

1. Without doubt, the designer of a machine has knowledge of even the
most intricate workings of what he has manufactured. Is it possible to
say that, “The manufacturer of a plane is unaware of a scientific or
technical aspect of his design”?! Or, is it possible that the author of
an encyclopaedia would not know what the contents of his own work are?!

In our previous discussion, we elucidated on the fact that if the
presence of a creation proves that there was a creator to bring that
thing about; and similarly the characteristics of the thing created give
witness to the specific characteristics of the creator who has brought
the thing into being, then any time the created thing is studied in
detail in relation to its blue-print of creation, size, organization and
arrangement of creation, then without doubt it would have to be said
that the creator of that thing must be one who possesses knowledge -
such that through his extensive knowledge, we was able to bring about
such a thing.

Therefore, seeing as to how all of the creations of the world – from the
atoms to the stars in the sky – have all been created according to a set
plan and certain organized conventional rules, and day by day mankind is
discovering the unity and harmony of the Universe and is becoming more
and more aware (of its surroundings), therefore we must say that the
world of creation has taken its beginnings from a very Learned and
All-Knowing source that has complete knowledge of all the
particularities. Thus, He has created all of them in accordance with His
pre-prepared plan.

The existing order of every leaf from all of the leaves in creation; of
every atom from all of the innumerable atoms; every particle from the
particles that make up the human being; every cell from amongst all of
the cells of living creatures; every star from amongst the stars in the
heavens - all point to the organization and order that exists and bears
witness to the fact that the Creator of all of these things and all of
their specifics that they possess, can only be the one All-Knowing
(Allah). Therefore, it is impossible to think that the world of creation
would come about without an All-Knowing Creator.

### Guidance from the Qur’an on the First Proof

The Noble Qur’an has explained this proof in a very subtle manner and
the creation of mankind has been used as the evidence of the knowledge
of the Creator where it has been said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاٌ يَعْلَمُ مَنْ خَلَقَ وَ هُوَ اللَّطِيفُ الْخَبِـيــرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What then does He who created (all), and He who is the knower of the
subtleties - the Aware - not know (about His creations?)”***[^5]

In another verse of the Qur’an, it has been mentioned that Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) is closer to the human being than his own
jugular vein:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنٌا الإِنْسٌانَ وَ نَعْلَمُ مٌا تُوَسْوِسُ بِهِ
نَفْسَهُ وَ نَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Unquestionably We have created mankind and We know what his soul
whispers to him (the evil whisperings) and We are closer to him than his
jugular vein.”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دل من تا ز دوست سرشار است دائم ازغير دوست بيزار است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غايب از ديده و به در حاضر با چنين دلبري مرا كار است
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As long as my heart is filled with the love of my friend (Allah),*  
 *It will always be averse from those who are not my friends.*  
*Absent from the sight (is Allah), however attentive in the heart,*  
 *I associate with none but such lovers (of Him).*

The eighth Imam, \`Ali ibn Musa ar-Ridha (peace be upon him) has taken
the unity of creation and organization of the universe, as the proof of
the knowledge of a Creator and has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتْقَنَ مٌا خَلَقَ بِحِكْمَتِهِ وَ وَضَعَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ مِنْهُ
مَوْضِعَهُ بِعِلْمِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The world of creation has been made firm and solid through His plan
based on wisdom and everything has been placed in its rightful place
through His knowledge.”*[^7]

### Second Proof for the Comprehensive Knowledge of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He):

2. Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) is the One who is everywhere (at
all times) and has complete knowledge of all periods and all things.

The second proof for the vast knowledge of Allah (Glorified and Exalted
is He) and His complete perception of all of the creations and events
that are occurring in the universe - is the comprehensive knowledge of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) in relation to the origins and
beginnings of the universe of creation and Him being unlimited and
unrestricted.

The being which is unlimited and which is in all places at all times and
sees all of the creations, is naturally more knowledgeable than anything
else in existence. However, if such an entity was limited to the
physical world and was imprisoned only to the limits of space, then it
would not be possible for that being to have (complete) knowledge and be
fully aware of all things.[^8]

In summary: There is not a single material creation that is independent
of the sphere of time and the radius of existence and every single
creation that is under the cover and control of time is limited to that
restricted sphere of time which it is contained in.

Thus, it is not possible that any creation can occupy a previous or
future period of time, other than its own and without doubt a creation
has no way of being acquainted with events that have occurred in the
past or in the future (through their own free will). However, if we were
able to smash through the prisons of time and space and go into the
sphere which is beyond time, then yesterday and today would have
absolutely no meaning. Thus, time as we know it and the events that take
place within it (both in the past and future) would be accessible to the
person just as if the event was happening in his own present time.

Every single material creation maintains its existence in its specific
place and fills a specific location and with this said, if something
exists between him and something near to him, then this thing would be
said as being close (to him); and if there was something that was a
great distance from him, then it would be said that the thing is far
(from him). However if a being was able to break through the prisons of
time and was able to make himself needless of residing in a specific
place and could place himself with a world higher than that of space,
then for him there would be no meaning of something being close or far.

In order to make this point more clear, we relate the following
examples:

**Example 1:** Imagine a microscopic insect that possess a limited field
of vision walking upon a colourful rug. At any point in time, this
insect can only see one pattern and one specific colour (that is in
front of him) and has knowledge of only that one particular spot on the
rug.

Thus, it has no knowledge of another spot which is out of the ability of
his sight and therefore he is completely unaware of it. However a human
being that is standing beside the rug and can see the complete rug with
all of its colours and patterns – which is completely opposite to how
the insect can see it - has knowledge of the complete rug.

**Example 2:** Imagine that we are sitting on the bank of a large river,
along with a group of friends, watching the waves come in and are
observing the movement of the water. At any single moment, we are
witnessing a new wave and movement of water, however we do not have
complete knowledge of all of the waves and all the water from where this
river begins up to the sea where the river drains into.

The reason for this limited knowledge is because of the limited area
that we are in which makes up the space which we occupy. If we were to
go on a plane and fly over the river, then at that time we would be able
to see many different sections of the river and we would also be able to
see all of the waves and the flowing water that is in this river.

**Example 3:** Imagine once again that we are sitting in a small room
which has only one small window through which we can see the outside
world. All of a sudden, a caravan of camels carrying large loads passes
by our room. From this small window, at any particular instance in time,
we cannot see more than one camel. However a person who is on the roof
of the house would be able to see the entire caravan at one time.

The condition of mankind in relation to the past and the future is the
same as the person who is watching the caravan of camels through a small
window. However the situation of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) who
is free from material essence and thus is not limited to place, and in
addition does not have any sort of limit in relation to time and space
is present everywhere and sees everything in creation, which can be
compared to a person who is sitting on the roof of his house and thus,
can see everything that is around him (though this even is limited for a
human being).

Therefore, we must state that His essence is not limited, and His being
is present in all places at all times, and He is not limited to time or
place. Thus, there is not a single time or place which is free from Him.
He himself bears witness that His comprehensive knowledge encompasses
all creations, and all events that have happened in the past, and those
that will come in the future, are known to Him.

### The Knowledge of God in the Tawrat

The Qur’an elucidates on the complete, All-Encompassing Knowledge of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) as has been mentioned. In comparison
however, it is worthwhile to take a look at the Tawrat and see how this
book introduces God. In the Tawrat, we read the following:

1”Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the
**Lord** God had made. He said to the woman, “Did God really say, ‘You
must not eat from any tree in the garden?’”

2 The woman said to the serpent, “We may eat fruit from the trees in the
garden, 3 but God did say, ‘You must not eat fruit from the tree that is
in the middle of the garden, and you must not touch it, or you will
die.’”

4 “You will not surely die,” the serpent said to the woman.

5 “For God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and
you will be like God, knowing good and evil.”

6 When the woman saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food and
pleasing to the eye, and also desirable for gaining wisdom, she took
some and ate it. She also gave some to her husband, who was with her,
and he ate it.

7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized they were
naked; so they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for
themselves. 8 Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the **Lord**
God as he was walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and they hid
from the **Lord** God among the trees of the garden. 9 But the **Lord**
God called to the man, “Where are you?”

10 He answered, “I heard you in the garden, and I was afraid because I
was naked; so I hid.”

11 And he said, “Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from
the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?”

12 The man said, “The woman you put here with me - she gave me some
fruit from the tree, and I ate it.”

13 Then the **Lord** God said to the woman, “What is this you have
done?” The woman said, “The serpent deceived me, and I ate.”

14 So the **Lord** God said to the serpent, “Because you have done this,
“Cursed are you above all the livestock and all the wild animals! You
will crawl on your belly and you will eat dust all the days of your
life.

15 And I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your
offspring and hers; he will crush your head, and you will strike his
heel.”

16 To the woman he said, “I will greatly increase your pains in
childbearing; with pain you will give birth to children. Your desire
will be for your husband, and he will rule over you.”

17 To Adam he said, “Because you listened to your wife and ate from the
tree about which I commanded you, ‘You must not eat of it,’ “Cursed is
the ground because of you; through painful toil you will eat of it all
the days of your life. 18 It will produce thorns and thistles for you,
and you will eat the plants of the field. 19 By the sweat of your brow
you will eat your food until you return to the ground, since from it you
were taken; for dust you are and to dust you will return.”

20 Adam named his wife Eve, because she would become the mother of all
the living. 21 The **Lord** God made garments of skin for Adam and his
wife and clothed them. 22 And the **Lord** God said, “The man has now
become like one of us, knowing good and evil. He must not be allowed to
reach out his hand and take also from the tree of life and eat, and live
forever.”

23 So the **Lord** God banished him from the Garden of Eden to work the
ground from which he had been taken. 24 After he drove the man out, he
placed on the east side of the Garden of Eden cherubim and a flaming
sword flashing back and forth to guard the way to the tree of life.”[^9]

This is the God which the Tawrat introduces that when Adam hid in the
garden, God had no knowledge where he was and thus, He was forced to
call out to him that, *“Adam, where are you?”* This is the sort of God
who does not know if Adam had eaten from the tree of wisdom; a God that
forbids His servants from eating from the tree of knowledge and
understanding; a God that fears that Adam will - without His knowledge -
eat from the tree of perpetual life; a God that in order to stop Adam
and his wife from reaching to the tree of everlasting life, hires Angels
to be as police to guard the tree!

However, the God that is described in the Qur’an is One that has
complete knowledge of that which is in the Heavens and the Earth; He
also knows what is in the hearts of His creations and those of the
desert \`Arabs who claimed to have true faith in their hearts were told
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتُعَلِّمُونَ اللٌّهَ بِدِينِكُمْ وَاللٌّهُ يَعْلَمُ مٌا فِي
السَّمٌوٌاتِ وَمٌا فِي الأَرْضِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do you wish to teach Allah about your Din (complete way of life)
whereas Allah knows all that is contained in the Heavens and all that is
upon the Earth…”***

The God that the Qur’an introduces is completely opposite of the God
that the Tawrat mentions and with complete clarity, the Qur’an states
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَلَّمَ آدَمَ الأَسْمٌآءَ كُلَّهٌا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He (Allah) taught Adam all of the names…”***

Thus, the verses of the Qur’an have introduced Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) as One who is completely free from all sorts of
stinginess and miserliness in relation to teaching and educating His
servants of the truths of the universe.

With this summary, the relation between the previous verse and the verse
under discussion is clear and it is unambiguous that this verse explains
the comprehensive knowledge of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) over
everything that is hidden and the apparent phenomenon in creation and
thus, nullifies the claims and assertions of the desert \`Arabs.

[^1]: Surah al-Saba (34), Verse 3.

[^2]: Surah Aali Imran (3), Verse 5.

[^3]: Surah al-An\`am (6), Verse 59.

[^4]: Nahjul Balagha, Khutbah 193.

[^5]: Surah al-Mulk (67), Verse 14.

[^6]: Surah Qaf (50), Verse 16.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 4, Page 58.

[^8]: In the upcoming sections, we will discuss further the issue of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) being free from the physical world
and His being free from time and space.

[^9]: Genesis, Chapter 3 [The Fall of Man], extracted verbatim from the
New International Version (NIV) of the Old Testament found on
www.biblegateway.com.


