The Specifics of Surah al-Hujurat
=================================

### What Objectives does this Surah Pursue?

The goal of this Surah is to elucidate upon a series of life-giving
commandments of Akhlaq (Ethics and Morality) and social interaction
which (if put into practice), would lead an ideal civilization. These in
turn could create and cultivate a pure society that is far removed from
all sorts of blameworthy moral traits.

According to the unanimous verdict of all the commentators of the
Qur’an, the number of verses of this Surah are eighteen. Through its own
particular way of explaining things, this Surah incorporates a series of
comprehensive and beneficial commandments for the purification of the
soul and spirit for all of humanity. If the conditions and ethical
injunctions mentioned in this Surah were acted upon within all
societies, then we would definitely be able to bring about a calm and
peaceful environment full of consideration (for others) and contentment
for all – far removed from all sorts of wicked and evil ethical traits.

This Surah gives us an overall view of a pure and uncontaminated society
in which not only the tongue and ears of the individuals, rather even
their thoughts and reflections are not given complete free reign, such
that are free to say whatever they want to say, hear whatever they want
to hear, or do whatever they wish to do in relation to other people.

The following is a list summarizing the commandments that are mentioned
in this Surah:

1. This Surah begins its first commandment by bringing up a point in
regards to having discipline and order, while in the presence of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) and the Messenger (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny). The meaning of this discipline and order is
that the Muslims must learn the commandments and legislations (of the
religion) from Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and must not let
their own inner desires and whims lead them to formulating laws and
regulations.

2. The people who have true faith are instructed and commanded how they
should speak to their leaders.

3. The people who have true faith are also commanded that when they are
given news or testimony about another person from one who commits sins
in the open, is known for his wicked ways or is not scared of his
transgressions (against the laws of Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He),
that they must not accept such a testimony from him and must stay away
from all forms of rumours and gossip.

4. The general thoughts and opinions of the people have absolutely no
value when compared to the orders and directives of the infallible
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny).

5. Each and every person possesses an ethical conscience.

6. It is incumbent upon every Muslim that he strives for peace, and to
attain this goal he must stand up against the oppressors so that he
would be able to uphold the truth and maintain the rights of the
oppressed.

7. All Muslims are brothers (and sisters) of and equal to one another
and it is incumbent that they all endeavour to ensure that peace and
happiness are established amongst themselves.

8. A Muslim does not have the right to make fun of another Muslim.

9. It is forbidden to find or pick faults in other people according to
the teachings of Islam.

10. A true believer does not have the right to call his brother in faith
by a nickname or bad name.

11. It is forbidden *(haram)* to think bad thoughts about a believing
brother (or sister).

12. It is expressly forbidden to spy on or pry into the secrets and
private life and affairs of other people.

13. It is a major sin to speak bad things behind the back of another
Muslim.

14. In this Surah, the issue of racial superiority has also been brought
to an end and the only criteria for judging who is better (than another
person) is one’s merit, piety and abstinence from those things which
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) has forbidden and by keeping away
from all sins.

After these fourteen commandments have been explained, there is another
series of issues that are discussed which will be explained in their own
section. When glancing over these commandments, is the superiority and
dominance of the ethical Qur’anic teachings over all other ethical
teachings of the world not clear and obvious for all to see?

This Surah was Revealed in Madinah, Not Makkah
----------------------------------------------

We are able to discern which Surahs were revealed in Makkah and which
were revealed in Madinah by keeping the following two points in mind:

1. The narrations and traditions which mention to us the place of
revelation of a specific Surah.

2. Pondering and thinking over the contents of the verses of the Surah
which usually act as a verbal chain of events that tell us if the Surah
was revealed in Makkah or Madinah.

Seeing as how the cities of Makkah and Madinah were two completely
different environments, we understand that each was governed by its own
ways of thought, and thus the religion of Islam was put face to face
with issues and difficulties which were specific to that particular
area.

Thus, after we are acquainted with the way of thinking and the
particular issues of an area (Makkah or Madinah), and we have studied
the contents and verses of a Surah, then we are then able to discern
where the Surah or the verses of the Surah were revealed.

For instance, the environment of Makkah was one polluted with polytheism
and idol worship. The Jews and Christians had not permeated into this
city and thus, those who had true faith (Iman) were very small in
number. The issue of Jihad and fighting were not brought up in this
environment and the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) had frequent dealings and relations with the idol worshippers.

Therefore, the point of difference of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) with the polytheists (of Makkah) was
concerning Tawhid (the Oneness of Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He)
and the concept of being brought back to life on the Day of Judgement
after one was physically dead.

Thus, the verses whose axis rotates around the discussion of issues such
as the origin (of life), Resurrection Day and the verses which reproach
Polytheism and speak about the outcome of the previous generations that
were inflicted with the anger and punishment of Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) due to not following His commandments and their appointed
Messengers, were most often revealed in Makkah.

However the environment in Madinah was an atmosphere of faith, virtue
and piety. It was a centred where the *Ahl al-Kitab* - especially the
Jews – had influenced and permeated into. It was an atmosphere of young
men, heroes, champions and brave people who readily accepted the
teachings of Islam.

In addition, it was also an environment where the Muslims had little
need to discuss the foundational beliefs *(Usul ad-Din)* of the religion
and thus it was time for them to become acquainted with a series of
other issues including their practical responsibilities, the ethical and
societal guidelines and the performance of devotional acts such as
Salat, Sawm (fasting), Zakat and other issues.

It is because of this fact that the verses in relation to the Tawrat and
Injil and the beliefs of the Ahl al-Kitab (Jews and Christians) and the
explanation of the altercations, battles and wars of the Muslims with
the Ahl al-Kitab and the Polytheists were revealed in Madinah.

Also, the verses that speak of the principles of etiquette and the
commandments of the religion including the obligatory *(wajib)* and
recommended *(mustahab)* acts were all revealed in Madinah – meaning
after the migration *(hijrah)* of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) from Makkah to Madinah.[^1]

Given that the mood in Madinah was one of interaction between the
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) and the Ansar
(the local people of Madinah who welcomed the Prophet and his followers
to their city) and other groups that slowly accepted the teachings of
Islam, this limited time frame did not permit the Prophet (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his progeny) to discuss issues such as condemning
idols and idol worshippers (while in Madinah). Therefore we must
acknowledge that all the verses of this Surah were revealed in Madinah.

In addition to all of the commentators of the Qur’an being unanimous on
this issue (that all of the verses of this Surah were revealed in
Madinah) – and it has only been related from Ibn \`Abbas that in his
opinion, the thirteenth verse of this Surah was revealed in Makkah – the
contents of these verses are a living, practical example that they were
all revealed in Madinah.

The atmosphere in Makkah was not conducive to discussing these sorts of
ethical issues, since the people of Makkah still held doubts concerning
the principles of Islam (origin of life and Day of Resurrection), and
did not attest to the prophetic mission of the Prophet of Islam
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) and had not yet
developed faith in his universal message.

In such an environment, the opportunity never arose that would allow the
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) to bring up
issues of morality such as having bad thoughts about others or
backbiting other people.

Above all of this, those who are being spoken to in this Surah are those
that possess true faith (Mu’minun), just as we see that Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He) has started out this Surah with the phrase:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يٌا أَيُّهٌا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O’ you who have true faith!”***

Thus, from this beginning of this Surah until we reach the end, we see
that with the exception of one instance, all of the contents of this
chapter are addressed to the believers or those who have true faith and
this is one indisputable indication that this Surah was revealed in
Madinah.

[^1]: Those verses which were revealed to the Prophet (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his progeny) during his Hajjatul Wida\` or
Farewell Hajj (before he passed away) while in Makkah are technically
referred to as Madani verses (verses revealed in Madinah) of the Qur’an
even though they were not actually sent to him in the city of Madinah.
This is so because the condition that is used to judge whether a verse
is Madani is if it was revealed after the migration to Madinah. It is by
observing this definition that we have given the above classification
(in relation to the place of revelation).


