The Greatest Blessing
=====================

( Verse 17 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَمُنُّونَ عَلَيْكَ أَنْ أَسْلَمُوا قُلْ لاٌّ تَمُنُّوا عَلَيَّ
إِسْلاٌمَكُم بَلِ اللٌّهُ يَمُنُّ عَلَيْكُمْ أَنْ هَدٌاكُمْ
لِلْإِيـمٌانِ إِنْ كُنْـتُمْ صٌادِقِـينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(***The Bedouins tell you O’ Muhammad*** ***that) you owe them (a great
deal) for their embracing (the religion of Islam). Say to them (O’
Muhammad, blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) that, ‘You are
not doing me any favour by embracing Islam. In fact, it is Allah who has
done a great favour to you by guiding you to the true faith. (Think
about this) if you are people of truth.’***

The services of the Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and
his progeny) and the Noble Qur’an that he brought to the world of
humanity can never be forgotten. The value of this service can only be
made clear when we study the thoughts, beliefs, customs and traditions
of the nations at that time in history (leaving aside those animalistic
nations and civilizations who possessed no culture) and compare these to
the lofty goals and teachings of Islam and the blessings that the
nations of the world were given due to the influence of the Islamic
teachings. At this time would the value of the services that the
teachings of Islam conferred upon the human society be made evident for
all to see.

Eventually from the depths of their hearts, mankind will have to
acknowledge that the superior teachings of the Qur’an and the Prophet
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) are the greatest
blessings of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).

Eventually, people will have to confirm that it is these teachings which
is protecting the future generations, the culture of humanity and is the
connection that lies between the old and new civilizations. It is this
truth that has been mentioned in the Qur’an by Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) when He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ مَنَّ اللٌّهُ عَلَى الْمُؤمِنِينَ إِذْ بَعَثَ فِيهِمْ رَسُولاً
مِّنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ يَتْلُوا عَلَيْهِمْ آيٌاتِهِ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ
وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتٌابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَإِنْ كٌانُوا مِنْ قَبْلُ
لَفِي ضَلاٌلٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly Allah granted a great favour to the believers when He
raised up from amongst their own people a Messenger (Muhammad, blessings
of Allah be upon him and his progeny) to recite to them His (Allah’s)
signs, to purify them (of moral defects), to teach them the Book and the
Wisdom, and before this they had surely lived in manifest error.”***[^1]

We simply need to take a cursory glance at the past history of mankind,
especially in those parts of the world in which the life-giving call of
Tawhid and the prophetic missions of the appointed leaders of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) had not reached and then judge for
ourselves to what extent Islam has helped and assisted the world of
humanity.

The country of India - which is a vast region and from the point of view
of being a machine-driven society - is one of the most advanced
countries in the East, however their government and nation still are
held captive to the authority of the sacred cow.

Some time back, in order to prevent a massive famine and starvation
which was placing the lives of its’ people in danger, the government
gave the permission to kill cows (for food), however mass confusion
engulfed the entire country which was followed up with fierce fighting
and riots! Due to this, one of the ministers of the Government was fired
from his job and thus the state of the country and the government in
power was made unstable![^2]

There is not a single person in all of India who enjoys the same level
of freedom, respect and character as the sacred cow does and it suffices
us to mention this final point that many times, it has been seen that
from out of nowhere, a cow will come and sit in the middle of the street
and behind him, a large line-up of cars will be waiting (for the cow to
move).

The police will not interfere in this issue nor would anyone else have
the courage to touch the cow or cause him any sort of discomfort. Thus
in the end, it is up to the cow and his own intentions to decide when he
will get up and move out of the way, ending this inconvenience to the
people.

If the cow was to sit down on the railway tracks, the train operator
would be obliged to apply the breaks and stop there in waiting until the
cow gets up and moves away on his own free will, thus removing this
inconvenience from the passengers in the train!

The number of sacred cows in this country is well over 150,000,000. Just
picture for one minute if all of these cows were completely free (to do
as they want) and were at peace (with whatever they were doing) - what
would be the outcome?

Without doubt they would destroy all the farms. They would manage to eat
up the food that is earmarked for hundreds of millions of people for the
upcoming years and in the end who knows what the outcome would be?
Nothing. In addition, when these cows die, their corpses must be
disposed of in such a way (that does not show any disrespect for them)
and this too creates great headaches for the people.

Another point of amazement to us is that how is it possible for
humanity - who have ascended into the heavens on the wings of knowledge
and intelligence – to be so separated from the teachings of the Heavenly
Prophets and show such humility and humbleness to a cow!

How do we know that if the call of the life-saving teachings of Tawhid
had not reached our country we too may have fallen into this same state
or even worse? How do we know that if the Noble Qur’an and the Prophet
of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) - with the
logic that (they brought) that knocked sense into us and that unseen
self-sacrifice - had not stood up against the idols and the various
types of idol worshipping, that today, just like a large number of
people of the world and those countries that are around us who have
beliefs such as the cow-worshippers of India, fire-worshippers, sun
worshippers, those who worship rocks and pieces of wood – that we too
would have not have been as they are?

The country of Japan is one of the most advanced countries in the world
today. The products of this country are in competition in the free
market with the goods made in America and the European countries;
however this nation, which has reached to and conquered the machine age
are so engulfed in shameful thoughts and imaginations such that the pen
is even ashamed to write such things.

One of the businessmen of our country (Iran) who has been quite active
in trade and commerce in Japan for some time now once said,
“Unfortunately, the majority of the people of the nation of Japan are
idol worshippers and for every event that comes up in their lives, they
believe that a separate god and creator is responsible for that event
and they attribute it to him.

For example, they have fashioned a god of rain, a god of war and a god
of peace, etc… One of their gods is the god that brings a man to a woman
who is looking to get married. In the idol-worshipping centres of this
country, these idols are made to resemble shocking and repulsive shapes;
for example (the god that they believe helps a woman find her mate)
actually resembles what they think such a god would look like. Women who
are single actually pay visitation to this place at specific times and
ask their requests from such things!”

This act shows the level and degree of intelligence of a nation who has
penetrated through the realms of the heavens and has explored deep into
the oceans and whose entire life and existence has been changed through
technology and expertise.

Through a cursory glance at this scene and by studying this part of the
world which has been deprived of the spiritual bounties of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He), do we still fail to recognize the service
and benefits that Islam has brought to civilization?

Seeing as how Ja\`far ibn Abi Talib had observed - from close up - the
corruption that idol worshipping had brought and the dangers that were
brought about by being distanced from the teachings of Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He), when the ruler of Habasha (present day Ethiopia)
asked him about the true visage of Islam, he replied in the following
manner:

“O King, we were an unenlightened people plunged in ignorance. We
worshipped idols, we ate animals that died on their own, and we
committed many other abominations. We broke the natural ties (of family)
and mistreated our neighbours and the strong amongst us exploited the
weaker ones.

We lived in this manner until Allah raised among us a Prophet of noble
birth and lineage, truthfulness, honesty and purity that we were all
aware of. He invited us to acknowledge the Unity of Allah and to worship
Him and to renounce the stones and idols that our forefathers and we
ourselves used to venerate.

He enjoined us to speak the truth, to redeem our pledges, to be kind and
considerate to our kin and neighbours; he forbade and told us to refrain
from every vice including bloodshed, shamelessness, lies, deceit and
told us not to encroach upon the rights of the orphans nor to vilify
chaste women.

He commanded us to pay divine homage to Allah alone and never associate
others with Him; he ordered us to offer prayers, to pay the Zakat, to
observe the fast (thus enumerating other injunctions of Islam).

We acknowledged his truthfulness and believed in him; we followed him in
whatever he brought from Allah and we worshipped only One God without
associating anything or anyone else with Him; we treated as unlawful
what he prohibited and accepted what he made lawful for us.

From then on, we were estranged from our own people such that they
persecuted us, tried to seduce us from our faith and forced us to take
back the idols as our gods and they even compelled us to return to the
abominations we had committed earlier. So when they tortured us and held
us under their tyranny and stood between us and our religion, we fled to
your country having chosen you above all others for refuge. We have come
here, O’ King, to your land seeking your protection and we hope that we
shall not be dealt with unjustly.”[^3]

Since Ja\`far ibn Abi Talib and those who were with him had seen the
manifestation and outcome of not subscribing to a religion and the state
of those who were free in their (religious) practices, they realized the
true importance of the teachings of Islam and thus considered it even
more worthy than their own lives.

However, those people who have been born into a religious and spiritual
family and have not had to travel the difficult path to find religion,
nor have they been abused and had wounds inflicted upon them in this
path to the point where their blood has been shed, would never
understand the true importance that religion has and the important role
that it plays in the improvement and well-being of a society.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شب باران و بيم موج و گردابی چنين هايل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كجا دانند حال ما سبكباران ساحلها!؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A rainy night and the scary ocean swells with uneasy storms,*  
 *The light rain on the coasts can never know this (turbulent) state.*

The Qur’an considers religion as being the greatest spiritual blessing
that has been given to mankind:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرُوا نِعْـمَةَ اللٌّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ كُنْـتُمْ أَعْدٌاءً
فَـأَلَّفَ بَيْنَ قُلُـوبِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And recall (O’ Muslims) the blessings of Allah that were showered
upon you during the time when you were enemies of one another and
(through the blessings of Allah) He united your hearts.”***[^4]

On the day that the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) made known his Wasi (successor), the revelation of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) came down to him and referred to this
event (18th of Dhul Hijjah) as the greatest blessing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ وَ أَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ
نِعْمَتِي...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This day (18th of Dhul Hijjah) have I (Allah) completed your
religion for you and have I perfected upon you My bounties.”***[^5]

The \`Arabs that lived in the desert imagined that by simply accepting
Islam, they had done a service to the Prophet of Islam (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his progeny) and through this act of theirs, they
felt as if they had put an obligation upon the Prophet (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his progeny).

However, if they had truly and sincerely accepted Islam, then at the
first level (of their submission) they would have derived much benefit,
since the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) would
have been obligated to grace and bless them since they had chosen the
path of happiness and the road to complete perfection just as it has
been mentioned in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلِ اللٌّهُ يَمُنُّ عَلَيْكُمْ أَنْ هَدٌاكُمْ لِلإِيـمٌانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Rather, it is Allah who has laid upon you an obligation by guiding
you to the faith.”***[^6]

One of the distinctions of the Qur’an is that there is not a single
instance in which it neglects to mention any detail or aspect and it
tackles every issue that it speaks about from various different aspects.
For example, in the verse under discussion, when it is mentioned in
regards to the desert \`Arabs and their apparent acceptance of the
religion of Islam and attributing this as being Iman or true faith, the
Qur’an then says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْ هَدٌاكُمْ لِلإِيـمٌانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…by guiding you to the faith.”***

And immediately it ends with the following sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...إِنْ كُنتُمْ صٌادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…if you are truthful.”***

By this it is meant that attributing true faith (Iman) to these people
is something that they themselves had said in regards to their own
souls, but in the opinion of the Qur’an, true faith (Iman) had not yet
entered into their hearts.

By the Qur’an mentioning this condition, it removes any kind of
contradiction that might be imagined in relation to this verse and the
previous verse (verse number 14) since in the 14th verse of this Surah,
it is clearly mentioned that these people had accepted Islam however
they were devoid of true faith (Iman).

Thus, if in this verse they were to be counted amongst the ranks of the
Believers (Mu’minin) which is the greatest blessing of Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He), then it is only due to the fact that this is what
they themselves claimed about their own souls and it is for this reason
that immediately, the Qur’an replies to them that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...إِنْ كُنتُمْ صٌادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…if you are truthful.”***

[^1]: Surah Aali Imran (3), Verse 164.

[^2]: Various Newspaper articles.

[^3]: Sirah of Ibn Hisham, Volume 1, page 336 (adapted from the
translation found on www.islamvision.org).

[^4]: Surah Aali Imran (3), Verse 103.

[^5]: Surah al-Maidah (5), Verse 5.

[^6]: Surah al-Hujurat (49), Verse 17.


