The Sin of Making up Rumours
============================

( Verse 6 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يٌا أَيُّهٌا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنْ جٌاءَكُمْ فٌاسِقٌ بِنَبَأٍ
فَتَبَيَّنُوا أَنْ تُصِيبُوا قَوْماً بِجَهٌالَةٍ فَتُصْبِحُوا عَلَى
مٌا فَعَلْـتُمْ نٌادِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O’ you who have true faith! If one who publicly and openly commits
sins brings you any news (concerning another person) then ascertain its
truthfulness carefully (before you spread it) lest you harm people
through (your own) ignorance*** ***(through accepting and following
false reports) and then regret what you have done.***

Making up rumours and lying about others is one of the greatest sins
that can occur within a society and sometimes can even place the lives
of others in danger. This act can also result in one’s honour and
dignity being stripped from one - thus paralyzing one’s life within a
society. How many times has information that has absolutely no
foundation, ignited the flames of war between two people resulting in a
great loss and injury to both sides?

In order to prevent such a great injustice from occurring, Islam has
commanded the Muslims not to pay attention to just any piece of news or
information that comes to them and not to accept just anything that
anyone says to them.

Rather, Muslims are only supposed to accept the reports from those
people who possess some inner feelings and the fear of Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He). It is the reports from those people who possess the
ethical traits of justice, confidence (of their speech) and reliance (in
what the person says) which would prevent a person from making up false
reports and lying and relating bits of news and information that are
unfounded and fabricated.

In some important issues in relation to religion and the society in
which the honour and respect of a person or a group of people is at
stake, we have been commanded not to take the word of only one ‘just’
and truthful person, rather until three other people who are ‘just’ and
have the fear of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) in them support the
statement of the first person, then only are we permitted to accept the
statement made by them.

Thus, we must make sure that their statements match exactly with one
another in all ways. In other issues that may not be as important as
those mentioned above, we have been commanded to make sure that those
who are providing the information to us are a minimum of two \`Adil
(just – from the point of view of the Islamic definition) people.

In order to prove that the words of a person are true in a particular
issue (to protect and safeguard the honour of a person or a group of
individuals and to prevent any sort of negative outcome from taking
place), in addition to the two conditions that were mentioned (the
righteousness of the person giving testimony and the number of witnesses
that must be present when giving witness to a sensitive societal issue
such as adultery or theft) the religion of Islam also lays down
conditions for the person who is acting as a witness. If these
conditions are not fulfilled, then the person’s testimony will not have
even the slightest worth or value. Some of these additional conditions
include:

1. The witness must have good eyesight and must have vigilance such that
with good vision and a powerful memory, he would not add or forget
anything about that which he is testifying in regards to.

2. Those things which one can differentiate by the senses must be borne
witness to through one of the (five) natural senses. Thus, it is not
permitted to base one’s testimony on an estimate, guess or assumption
and according to the words of the Imam (peace be upon him):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِمِثْلِ هٌـذَا فَاشْهَدْ أَوْ دَعْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Those things which you are required to testify concerning must be –
just like the sun – plain and clear and in other than this event, you do
not have the right to spread any reports.”*

3. A person - who without any basis or foundation - gives testimony to
an issue without delay or hesitation (without first confirming the
reports) must be whipped and he must also be presented to the people as
being one who has given false testimony so that next time people will
not accept what he says.[^1]

These conditions are proof that the religion of Islam - by specifying
the prerequisites for the acceptance of any sort of information – is
striving to protect the Islamic society from falling into dangers that
stem from making up rumours and from evil forces that formulate lies.

Thus, the religion has emphatically commanded its’ followers who have
true faith that they must carefully review and study any news that comes
to them from people who are open sinners or in whom there is a
possibility that they have made up reports or lied about an issue. This
is done so that the believers do not unknowingly follow a false report
and end up causing harm or damage to another person.

Liars During the Period of Prophet Muhammad
-------------------------------------------

During the time of the Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny), Walid ibn \`Aqbah ibn Abi Mu\`it - who belonged to one
of the branches of the polluted tree of the Bani Umayyah - was given the
authority to go to the tribe of Bani al-Mustaliq and collect the Islamic
tax (Zakat) from them and bring it back to Madinah.

When the people of the tribe heard that the representative of the
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) was coming to
their village, all of the people rushed out to meet and welcome him into
their village. However, since there was some previous enmity that Walid
had with this tribe (before the coming of Islam) or because of the
incorrect thoughts he had that the tribe was coming to kill him, without
going to meet those who were in charge of welcoming him into the city,
Walid turned back from where he had reached and went back to the city of
Madinah.

He proceeded to report to the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) that the tribe of Bani al-Mustaliq had rejected the
teachings of Islam and were not prepared to pay the Islamic tax and even
had the intention of killing him! It goes without saying how dangerous
such an incorrect report is and to what extent such information is able
to cause damage and injury to innocent people.

The Muslims of Madinah reached a stage where they were trying to decide
what should be done with this tribe (Bani al-Mustaliq). In the meantime,
the chiefs of this tribe were informed as to what had transpired and
rushed to the presence of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) and told him, ‘We seek refuge in you from the anger of
Allah and His Prophet.’

The Messenger of Allah (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)
who was extremely upset said to them, “Turn back from what you have done
and return to the teachings of Islam. If you do not, then we will send
someone to put you back in line – that person who is my life and soul”
and at this time, the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) placed his hand on the shoulder of \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace
be upon him).

The Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) did
not stop at that - rather, he secretly dispatched a person to the tribe
of Bani al-Mustaliq to watch over how they conduct the affairs of their
religion. It was through this person that the Prophet (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his progeny) realized that the report that Walid
had brought back was a lie since during the time of Salat, they were
busy in their \`Ibadat and were ready and willing to pay their Islamic
taxes.[^2]

Who was Walid?
--------------

Walid was the son of \`Aqabah ibn Abi Mu\`it and just as it is known,
\`Aqabah was one of the staunch enemies of the Prophet (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his progeny). He was also one of the four people
who always used to irritate and annoy the Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny)[^3]

\`Aqabah was also the person who showed no shame in throwing garbage at
the door of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)
and anytime he came face to face with the Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny), he would use the most indecent curse words in
front of him.

In addition, anytime he saw the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) in Sajdah, he would try to harm him violently. His
enmity to the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)
reached to such a level that the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) once said: “If I ever see you outside of the precincts
of the Haram, I will definitely punish you for all the actions you have
done to me.”

Incidentally during the Battle of Badr which happened to be the first
war between the Muslims and the Polytheists, \`Aqabah was killed after
being captured in the war.

Walid was one of the branches of this evil tree (of the Bani Umayyah)
and was not too far away from the wickedness of his own root (his
father). According to the rulings of the verses of the Qur’an, he was a
sinful and unclean person who due to the grudges and past hatred that he
had for the tribe of Bani al-Mustaliq, or due to his own carelessness -
wanted the blood of the Muslims to be shed. Not only has the Qur’an
referred to him as an open sinner in this verse, rather in other verses
too he has been referred to with this same attribute, as it has been
mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ كٌانَ مُؤْمِناً كَمَنْ كٌانَ فٌاسِقاً لاٌ يَسْتَوُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So then is he who is a true believer similar to the person who is an
open sinner – never can these two be considered as equal.”***[^4]

A majority of the commentators of the Qur’an if not all of them have
said that, “The meaning of a true believer in this verse is Amir
al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) and the meaning of
an open sinner is Walid.”[^5]

This verse was revealed at a time when the manifestation of true faith
and the manifestation of pure debauchery – meaning Amir al-Mu’minin
\`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) and Walid (respectively) were
boasting about their own selves. Walid spoke proudly (of his family) and
was boasting to \`Ali (peace be upon him), however \`Ali ibn Abi Talib
(peace be upon him) considered his true faith and belief in Islam as
being his pride and honour and thus said to Walid, “Be quiet! You are a
man whose heart has not yet had true faith enter into it…” It was at
this time that the above verse of the Qur’an was revealed about these
two personalities.[^6]

The inner wickedness and enmity that Walid had did not stop here. It was
during the succession of \`Uthman ibn al-Affan that the Islamic
leadership fell prey to even more divisions and wars and since he
(Walid) was the foster brother of the Khalifah of that time, he was
appointed as the governor of Kufah. During those days, only those people
who were amongst the family of the Khalifah would be appointed to major
positions within the government.

The day that Walid entered into the city of Kufah, \`Abdullah ibn
Mas\`ud was the head of the public treasury. Walid proceeded to take an
exorbitant loan from Ibn Mas\`ud in the amount of approximately 300,000
dinar since even before him, the previous governors of Kufah used to
take loans from the public treasury and then later on, pay them back.

Even though the treasurer impressed on him the importance of paying this
money back to the public treasury which was repeatedly mentioned, Walid
wrote a letter to the Khalifah of the time - who was his foster
brother - and asked him to let the person in charge of the public
treasury know that he should overlook the money that had been taken. The
Khalifah, who was under the influence of the love of his brother wrote a
letter to \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud and said, “You are **my** treasurer! Do
not interfere with Walid!”

The treasurer happened to be a true follower of the Messenger of Allah
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) and a righteous person
and became extremely upset with the actions of the Khalifah and wrote
him a reply stating: “I had always assumed that I was the treasurer of
the public treasury of the Muslims! Now it is clear to me that I am the
treasurer of the Khalifah. I have no need for such a position and from
today, I officially tender my resignation.”

Thereafter in a heated speech that he proceeded to give, Ibn Mas\`ud
informed all of the people of Kufah about what had transpired (between
him and the Khalifah).[^7]

Walid Performs Four Rak\`at of Salat al-Fajr
--------------------------------------------

In addition to being the leader of the region, the Governor was also
given the responsibility of being the Imam of the Salat al-Jama\`at in
the central Masjid. One evening, Walid drank an excessive amount of
alcohol and in the state of being intoxicated, went into the Masjid and
performed four Rak\`at of Salat al-Fajr and in place of the dhikr of the
Ruku\` and Sujud, he said the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَشْرَبِي وَ أَسْقِـيـنِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“(O’ the one who loves me) Drink me (the alcohol) and satiate yourself
with me!”*

In addition, he recited the following poem in a loud voice which showed
the burning passion and lust he felt for a woman named Rubab:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلِقَ الْقَلْبُ الرُّبٌاباً بَعْدَ مٌا شٌابَتْ وَ شٌابـــاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The heart is attracted to Rubab,* *after it drinks (alcohol) and is
drunk.”*

After he finished his Salat, he turned towards the people and said, “If
you desire, we can add a few more Rak\`at to the previous ones that we
just performed!”

The state that he was in and because of the excess amount of alcohol
that he had drunk, he lost control of his bodily functions and soiled
the Masjid, Mihrab[^8] and Mimbar[^9] by vomiting everywhere.

When this occurred, Abu Zainab and Jundub ibn Zahir Azdi who were both
present in the Salat, took the ring off of the finger of Walid, which he
did not notice (since he was drunk) that was used to sign and stamp all
of the official letters and books in relation to the government. Along
with four noble and respected people from Kufah, \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud
went to Madinah to meet the leader and Khalifah of the time with the
ring of Governor (Walid) and complained to him (about the actions of
Walid).

They informed the Khalifah of what had transpired however \`Uthman did
not accept their words and rejected the testimony of these people and in
addition, warned them (of their actions).

These people then went to see \`Ayesha bint Abu Bakr who was also
involved in the political affairs of Madinah and informed her of the
actions of the Governor of Kufah and of the warning that the Khalifah
(\`Uthman) had given them. She went out amongst the people and
proclaimed that: “\`Uthman has stopped meting out the punishments
ordained by Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and has also warned
these people who have come to him bearing witness (of crimes being
committed by his Governor)” however this act as well did not solve the
problem.

This group of Muslims then went to Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib
(peace be upon him) and complained to him about what had transpired.
\`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) met with \`Uthman and said to
him, “Why have you stopped meting out the punishments ordained by Allah
and have instead warned these people who have witnessed (a crime)?

Have you forgotten the admonition that \`Umar gave to you when he said,
‘Do not make the Bani Umayyah and the children of Abi Mu\`it preside
over the people! O’ \`Uthman! It is incumbent upon you to remove this
person from the governorship of Kufah and you must not appoint him to
any other religious position. You need to investigate into the testimony
of these witnesses. If they are people of faith, then summon Walid from
Kufah and apply the punishment that Allah has designated for those who
drink wine.”

The pressures of the common people reached to such a level that \`Uthman
was forced to summon his governor from Kufah and (after investigating)
was finally ready to impose the Islamic penalty upon him – meaning that
he was ready to lash him 80 times. However, not a single person had the
courage to whip the brother of the Khalifah. Whoever went close to Walid
(to try to hit him) would be warned by Walid of his close family ties to
the \`Uthman.

It was at this time that Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be
upon him) himself took the whip and with the full power and strength
that he had, whipped Walid 80 times on his body; and according to some
of the ahadith, \`Abdullah bin Ja\`far was the one who whipped Walid by
the command of \`Ali (peace be upon him).[^10]

Rumour Mongering in Our Time
----------------------------

The printing and publishing industry is one of the most valuable gifts
of the industrial era. In addition to alleviating the high cost of
printing, it is through the blessing of this industry that mankind has
been able to print and spread the sciences and various branches of
knowledge throughout the world in a very short time span. Unfortunately
however, this industry has also struck a blow to humanity through the
spreading of lies and rumours which has enabled it to make a profit
through untruths and dishonesty via the printing of deception.

Today, the spreading of rumours, fabrication of lies, levelling
accusations and other inappropriate things upon others, is one of the
most active missions of the Western press. However we cannot say that
all of the publications that come from the West are inflicted with this
societal disease, because not being careful and observing precaution and
negligently narrating reports to some newspapers and magazines has also
been unintentionally done by us (the Muslims) as well.

How many people have lost their honour and respect through the negligent
reporting and printing of wrong reports? Even after apologizing and
making amends later on, this wrong can never be made right. How many
times have we seen the esteem and honour of a group of people fall
victim due to the lack of communication between the various news
reporters?

Today is the day that we must say: “The print media must take the pen
away from those people who feel that they are free to write whatever
they wish to write and feel that they can attribute whatever they wish
to attribute to whoever they wish.”

Thus, the fourth article in the Constitution (of Iran) which can lead to
the (spiritual) illumination of the minds and thoughts of a nation must
be saved and liberated from those authors who either write for no
purpose, for a hidden benefit or for some personal gain.

[^1]: al-Khilaf (Section of giving Witness), Page 235.

[^2]: al-Kashhaf, Volume 3, Page 149.

[^3]: The other three people include: Abu Jahl, Abu Lahab and Hakam ibn
al-\`As ibn Umayyah.

[^4]: Surah al-Sajdah (32), Verse 81.

[^5]: Hisan ibn Thabit, the poet of the Messenger of Allah (S), wrote
the following lines of poetry in reference to this person: أَنْزَلَ
اللٌّهُ وَ الْكِتٌابُ عَزِيزٌ فِي عَلِيٍّ وَ فِي الْوَلِيدٍ قُرٌآناً
فَتَبَوَّاً الْوَلِيدُ إِذْ ذٌاكَ فٌاسِقاً وَ عَلِــيٌّ مَبُوءٌ
إِيْـمٌاناً

[^6]: “Allah has revealed – in the indisputable Book - About \`Ali and
al-Walid a verse, Through which wickedness has been attributed to
al-Walid While faithfulness has been attributed to \`Ali.” Commentary of
Nahjul Balagha, Volume 2, Page 103.

[^7]: \`Aqd al-Farid, Volume 2, Page 172.

[^8]: The place where the Imam of the Salat al-Jama\`ah stands to lead
the congregation – usually semi-circle in shape.

[^9]: The pulpit upon which the orator would stand or sit upon to
deliver a lecture.

[^10]: Ansab al-Ashraf, Volume 4, Page 23; Sahih al-Muslim, Volume 2,
Page 52.


