Immunity from Sin and Error
===========================

( Verses 7 – 8 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ فِيكُمْ رَسُولَ اللٌّهِ لَوْ يُطِيعُكُمْ فِي
كَثِـيرٍ مِّنَ الأَمْرِ لَعَنِتُّمْ وَلٌكِنَّ اللٌّهَ حَبَّبَ
إِلَيْكُمُ الإِيـمٌانَ وَزَيَّنَهُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ وَكَرَّهَ
إِلَيْكُمُ الْكُفْرَ وَالْفُسُوقَ وَالْعِصْيٌانَ أُوْلٌئِكَ هُمُ
الرٌّاشِدُونَ. فَضْلاً مِّنَ اللٌّهِ وَنِعْمَةً وَاللٌّهُ عَلِيمٌ
حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“ ***(O’ Believers!) Know that surely the Messenger of Allah***
*(Muhammad, blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny**) is among
you. Had he (**Muhammad, blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny)* ***obeyed you (took your advice and acted upon it) on many
occasions, then you would have been in great trouble now. However, Allah
has endeared the faith to you and He has made it attractive to your
hearts and He has made disbelief, evil deeds and disobedience hateful to
you. Such people (those who have faith and keep away from evil traits)
are those who are rightly guided. This blessing (of faith) is a favour
and blessing from Allah and Allah is the All-Knowing, All-Wise.***”

The goal of these two verses of the Qur’an is to inform those who have
true faith of two major ethical points. The first point is that that the
Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) is free
from committing sins or errors and thus all of his orders and commands
must be carried out completely. We are commanded to follow him and he is
not required to follow us. The second point is that each and every
person has innate ethical traits and qualities instilled within him.

Seeing as to how both of these issues carry their own significance and
importance, we will discuss each of them individually.

Is there any level or status (that one can have in a society) that is
greater and which holds more of a responsibility than leadership (of
that community)? Is it possible for a person who lacks both the
spiritual and physical qualifications to fulfil the task and
responsibilities of a leader? What about the person who cannot even
fulfil the role of a leader in matters related to one’s own life - how
can he be a leader of the people?

Is it possible for a political leader who only leads the people in
matters of politics; or those who are experts in the matters of
economics and who are in charge of the economic and business affairs of
the entire country be placed in these positions if they do not possess a
series of moral and ethical values that would permit them to occupy such
important positions? Can such people be placed within the framework of
the political and economic affairs of a community?

The divinely appointed Messengers are true leaders of the people in all
matters of their lives and thus they must possess the noble and grand
qualities which would reflect their competence in the mission of leading
the people and which would give the people a reason to follow them.
Thus, we can summarize the traits and qualities that the Messengers of
Allah must possess as follows:

1. Comprehensive knowledge and understanding. By this we mean that the
Prophets of Allah must have complete and precise knowledge in relation
to all matters that they have been commanded to convey to the people,
such that not a single ruling from amongst the rulings of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) should be hidden or concealed from them.
In addition, there should also be no question asked to them in relation
to the religion that they would not be able to answer.

2. They must be protected from committing sins and going against the
commandments of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) at all times in
their lives – whether this be before their official appointment or after
their official appointment (to the station of Prophethood).

3. They must be protected from committing any sort of mistake or error
in relation to the propagation of the religion and the application of
its’ practical rulings.

4. They must be purified from all sorts of negative spiritual traits and
physical defects which (if they possessed) may lead the people to
develop an aversion and dislike for them. This would make the people
keep their distance from them which would in turn lead to the Prophets
and Messengers not being successful in their mission of conveying the
message (of Allah) to the people.

In order to stress the importance of each of these points, the scholars
of Islam and the specialists in Theology have gathered clear proofs and
evidence[^1] of which, to keep this discussion concise, we do not
mention here.

Do not such distinctions (of these personalities) necessitate that in
relation to matters of the religion, we must follow them and that we
should never anticipate or expect that these Divinely sent teachers -
since they have been granted \`Ismat (protection from committing errors
or sins) and are free from all errors and slips in relation to the
Divine Commandments and leadership - would ever follow any incomplete
and imperfect ideas and opinions?

A person who desires that the Heavenly teachings and Divinely appointed
leaders should follow their own personal thoughts and desires and who
feels that the wheel of the religious teachings should revolve around
their own opinions, is lacking a correct understanding of the Prophets
and the status and rank of the Messengers, and has definitely not kept
in mind the infallibility of these personalities.

In the verse of the Qur’an under discussion, Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ فِيكُمْ رَسُولَ اللٌّهِ لَوْ يُطِيعُكُمْ فِي كَثِيرٍ
مِّنَ الأَمْرِ لَعَنِتُّمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(O’ Believers!) You should know that surely the Messenger of
Allah*** *(Muhammad, blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)*
***is amongst you. Had he*** *(Muhammad, blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny)* ***obeyed you (took your advice and acted upon it) on
many occasions, then you would have been in great trouble now.”***

The person who wishes to take precedence over Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) and His Messenger (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) and wants to place his own thoughts and ideas ahead of those of
the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) has been
reminded that since he has been given a Prophet that is free from sins
and committing any sort of error, one must not place his own desires and
ideas ahead of the revelation of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).

In summary (you will recall that), in the beginning of this Surah, Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) addressed the believers by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللٌّهِ وَ رَسُولِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…do not give preference (to your own words and deeds) above those of
Allah and His Messenger*** *(the Prophet Muhammad, blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny).**”***

Continuing on in the verse under discussion, we have been commanded not
to give preference to our own ideas in relation to the Prophet
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) since he is a man who
has been protected from all types of errors and sins and because of
this, we must follow him.

In addition, it must be mentioned that this part of the verse relates to
issues of the Islamic legislation and thus the thoughts of the common
people cannot be accepted and followed (over the rulings of Allah,
Glorified and Exalted is He). Therefore, we must take inspiration from
the revelation of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and just because
the people may feel offended or insulted is no reason that the commands
of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) should be changed.

An Infallible Prophet and the Subject of Asking Advice
------------------------------------------------------

Yes, in those issues related to the society and community which were not
(directly) associated to the religion or Divine revelation that even the
common people were able to differentiate between the truth and falsehood
(in them), the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)
was commanded to ask advice from those around him. Thus, through asking
advice from the common people, problems and difficulties can be solved.

It has been mentioned in the Qur’an that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْفُ عَنْهُمْ وَاسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ وَ شٌاوِرْهُمْ فِي الأَمْرِ
فَإِذٌا عَزَمْتَ فَتَوَكَّلْ عَلى اللٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> “So then (Muhammad, blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)
> forgive the people their slips and errors and seek forgiveness from
> Allah for them all and consult and seek council from them in matters
> (not relating to the religion or the teachings of Allah). So then when
> you are ready to make a decision (based on the advice of the others),
> then have trust in Allah (put a collective decision into practice).”34

In addition, Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) testifies that one of
the signs of a person with true faith is that he asks for advice from
others in relation to performing a certain task:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اسْتَجٌابُوا لِرَبِّهِمْ وَ أَقٌامُوا الصَّلاٌةَ وَ
أَمْرُهُمْ شُورى بَيْنَهُمْ وَ مِـمٌّا رَزَقْنٌاهُمْ يُنْـفِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And as for those people (who are believers) and who answer the call
of their Lord (Allah) and uphold the Salat and conduct their affairs
through consultation with one another and (these are the people) who
give out of their wealth (to the needy).”***[^2]

By the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) asking
for advice as the very first step (in carrying out any task), this truly
sets an example for others, that in matters relating to the society and
community, we should not appear as despotic or authoritarian - rather we
must give respect to the opinions of other people and ask for help and
assistance through soliciting their opinions. Yes, the part of the verse
that says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذٌا عَزَمْتَ فَتَوَكَّلْ عَلى اللٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So then when you are ready to make a decision (based on the advice
of the others), then have trust in Allah (put a collective decision into
practice).”***

shows us that the first stage that the Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) would traverse was that of seeking advise, and
then at the conclusion, the final decision would be left to him alone.

All of the democratic societies and free governments of the world resort
to asking others in the society for advice in deciding how to solve
their problems, however at the same time they still have one leader who,
after taking advice from others, makes his final decision. To an extent,
asking advice from others helps remove the curtains and veils (that a
person may have) and gives the person a proper outlook of events.
However in the end, it is necessary for the person who will make the
final decision to weigh the various opinions and then make one ultimate
resolution.

Some people think that: “The only outcome that can come from asking
others for advice is that difficulties will be prolonged and a group of
people who do not possess one definitive leader and who instead resort
to consultation and asking the general population for advice, cannot
bring an issue or affair to closure once it has been started without a
stoppage of work.”

However, the above quoted verse of the Qur’an goes against this opinion
and conveys the fact and bears witness that a difference of opinion and
diversity of beliefs actually leads to a standstill and stoppage of
work. Thus in the end, it is incumbent that after the leader or person
in charge has asked others for advice, he gives his own decisive
judgment.

Due to this fact, after Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) commands the
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) to seek council
from other people, He (Glorified and Exalted is He) then states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذٌا عَزَمْتَ فَتَوَكَّلْ عَلى اللٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So then when you are ready to make a decision (based on the advice
of the others), then have trust in Allah (put a collective decision into
practice).”***

The life of the Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) clearly shows us to what level he respected the opinions of his
companions. Even though the true face and reality of the actions was
made known to the mirror of his heart (through Divine Inspiration) and
he was completely aware of both the good and bad that would come out of
every act, more so than others knew, still in many complex issues he
would form a committee and ask his companions for their opinions and
judgements. Take for example the following cases:

1. Before the Prophet went face to face on the battlefield of Badr with
the armies of the Quraish, he formed a committee comprised of the
Muhajirin and the Ansar and asked them for their advice in relation to
the battle against the polytheists, which the companions saw as an
uninhibited opportunity for them to expound their various beliefs. The
Messenger of Allah (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)
accepted and followed the opinions of the people and marched with his
soldiers towards Badr.[^3]

2. When the news reached the Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) while in Madinah that the forces of the
Quraish - who had lost many people during the battle of Badr - were
coming to exact revenge on those that were killed (thus, starting the
war of Uhud), he examined the situation by asking what the method of
defence of the Muslims should be and if they should stay in the city or
if they should all leave and fight the war outside (of the city). When
the youth from amongst the Ansar suggested that they go out of the city
of Madinah to fight the battle, he acted upon their suggestion.[^4]

3. During the battle of Ahzab in which the forces of idolatry
congregated like locusts from all parts of \`Arabia and were making
their way to Madinah to destroy the young religion of Islam, in his own
particular way of fighting against this onslaught, the Prophet
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) took the opinion of a
great Iranian personality and put his ideas into practice.

It was Salman al-Farsi (may Allah be pleased with him) who suggested
that those areas of Madinah which could be easily infiltrated should be
fortified with a three metre deep trench and throughout the whole length
of this ditch, rifle-pits should be placed separated by a small
distance. This was suggested so that any time the valiant fighters from
amongst the polytheists desired to fill the trench (to make their way
across) or attempt to cross over the trench (on their horses), the
soldiers of Islam would be able to catapult rocks and stones to push
back the approaching soldiers.[^5]

4. When trying to take over the fortified stronghold of the Jews in
Khaibar, we see that the area where the soldiers of Islam invaded from,
by following the orders of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) was completely unthought-of of by the enemies (and
thus, it caught them off guard).

One of the experienced warriors of Islam by the name of Habib ibn
Mandhar who had in-depth knowledge of the area of Khaibar went to the
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) and said to
him, “Anytime the command comes from Allah to attack this area, I will
not have even the smallest thing to say about it. However if this is an
issue in which I am permitted to offer my advice, then I would say that
I do not think this is a good place to choose as the base to keep the
soldiers in, because this area is accessible to the enemies and is very
close to the Fortress of Nistat. The archers from that Fortress will be
able to hit our troops easily since there are no date trees or houses
that would block their view.”

The Qur’anic principle that states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ شٌاوِرْهُمْ فِي الأَمْرِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So then consult with them (O’ Prophet) in your affairs.”***

The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) said that,
“If in a particular issue, you are able to bring forth a better point,
then we will choose that place as the area to travel towards.”

It is because of this discussion that took place and after studying the
fortress of Khaibar, that the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) chose an area for his base that was behind the date
trees.[^6]

[^1]: In discussing the importance of each of these traits, we have
written a book entitled, “Universal Message of the Prophets” in which we
have discussed these points in detail. Please refer to this book for
more information.

[^2]: Surah al-Shuara’ (42), Verse 38.

[^3]: Sirah Ibn Hisham, Volume 1, Page 614.

[^4]: Ibid., Volume 2, Page 63.

[^5]: Sirah al-Halabi, Volume 2, Page 331.

[^6]: Ibid., Volume 3, Page 39.


