An Everlasting Peace Treaty
===========================

( Verse 9 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ طٌائِفَتٌانِ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ اقْتَتَلُوا فَأَصْلِحُوا
بَيْنَهُمٌا فَإِنْ بَغَتْ إِحْدٌهُمٌا عَلى الأُخْرَى فَقٌاتِلُوا
الَّتِي تَبْغِي حَتَّى تَفِيءَ إِلَى أَمْرِ اللٌّهِ فَإِنْ فٌائَتْ
فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمٌا بِالْعَدْلِ وَأَقْسِطُوا إِنَّ اللٌّهَ
يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****And if two factions from amongst the believers begin fighting
against one another, then restore peace between them both. However, if
one party revolts against the other party, then fight the revolting
party until they submit to the command of Allah. When they do so, then
restore the peace that was between them with justice and act with
equality (between the parties involved). Surely Allah loves those people
who act with equality.”***

Peace and harmony, whose basis is founded upon justice and fairness is
one of the benefits of the teachings of the moral ethics and is also one
of the rulings (that must be enacted) in an Islamic society. However
true peace is one in which the interests of the opposing parties who are
belligerent towards one another is brought forth in the correct manner.

It is peace and harmony which is upheld by people of true faith and who
possess cognizance of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and if one of
the two sides who are within the sphere of justice and fairness were to
step out and go beyond the boundaries, then with whatever force and
power is available, they would be stopped. The forces would be mustered
up to fight against the aggressive party so that they return back to the
path of truth.

In order to make such a peace agreement permanent and stable, Islam has
laid down certain conditions:

1. Any sort of peace treaty or agreement to refrain from aggression and
hostility must be based upon justice and fair dealings and if one party
is more powerful than the other side, then they must not use their power
to impose their wishes and desires on the party who is weaker.

It has been said in the past that, “True peace between a powerful
(nation) and a weaker one can never be conceivable” and this is
definitely the truth and thus, the Qur’an has told us that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَمُهٌا بِالْعَدْلِ وَ أَقْسِطُوا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…then restore the peace that was between them with justice and act
with equality (between the parties involved).”***

2. Those who possess true faith and genuinely recognize Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He) and who do not stand to profit from the disagreement
must be the ones who oversee the peace treaty.

3. Anytime one of the two parties thinks about expansion (of their area
or land) and try to take steps that go against the peace treaty, then
those who are the arbitrators and the neutral party involved must inform
the aggressive party about the outcomes or effects of them starting a
war. This must be done so that the person who wishes to oppress others
and go against the laws of Islam would know that there is no room in an
Islamic society for such people and these two fundamental conditions are
found in the Qur’an in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ بَغَتْ إِحْدٌهُمٌا عَلى الأُخْرى فَقٌاتِلُوا الَّتِي تَبْغِي...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***  
***

“However, if one party revolts against the other party, then fight the
revolting party until they submit…”

4. Fighting against the oppressing party must not take on the form of
revenge or retribution. Rather, any form of opposition to the oppressor
must be due to the fact that he has gone against the laws of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He), and one must try to remove the thoughts
from his head in which he feels that he is able to violate and encroach
upon the rights of the believers, and this can be deduced from the
section of this verse that states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...حَتٌّى تَفِيءَ إِلـى أَمْرِ اللٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…until they submit to the command of Allah.”***

Thus, opposition to oppression must continue until the oppressor returns
back to the path of justice and fairness – which in essence are the
commandments of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) – as have been
mentioned in this verse.

5. At the end of this verse, we have been reminded of an important point
which is that those people who have true faith must constantly strive to
make sure peace is attained and any wars that take place must not make
them hopeless or discouraged of trying to attain peace. This must be
realized and carried out even to the point that after the oppressors
have subjugated a group of people, we must still keep our spirits high
and try to formalize a new peace treaty that is based upon justice, just
as it has been mentioned in the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ فٌائَتْ فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمٌا بِالْعَدْلِ وَ أَقْسِطُوا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When they do so, then restore the peace that was between them (the
parties involved) with justice and equality)...”***

Such a peace treaty and agreement that is founded on the above mentioned
conditions is a true peace agreement that Islam has laid down and
enjoined upon the belligerent parties at war.

If the above mentioned conditions were to be carried out, then in
addition to being able to safeguard the interests of both parties, we
would also be able to cover the entire world with the clothing of a
peaceful life – which is the greatest wish and longing for the people of
the entire world. This is the peace that Islam has proposed and the
conditions that it has given to attain and maintain such a state.

Let us take a look at the peace treaties that both the major and minor
nations of the world have signed and ratified in the past - which of
these agreements are truly just? Is a peace treaty that is drawn up
between two aggressive parties ever equitable, or is it ever imaginable
that peace between a powerful and a weak nation is attainable?

Are the councils that oversee the peace treaties impartial or are they
completely free of any benefit or profit in their arbitration, problem
solving and settling of a dispute and enmity? Are the aggressive parties
made known of the peace treaties, agreements and settlements (that are
imposed upon them) by the major powers of the world before they sign and
enact them?

The political commentators of the world are all in agreement and have
stated that, “Establishing peace in any part of the world will never be
accepted except with complete agreement of the world powers and the
dominating super powers of the world. Even the establishment of peace in
the Middle East will only become possible when two camps – from both the
East and the West – are in agreement of such a peace.”

Therefore, such an imposed peace which is far from being achieved will
never yield positive results and an everlasting and perpetual peace will
in no way be realized or established.

Struggling for Peace
--------------------

Peace is one of the goals and ethical values of the religion of Islam
and is one of the most important obligatory acts of the religion (for
the believers) which must be enacted with the conditions mentioned
above. It does not make any difference if the peace agreement which is
trying to be reached is between two Muslims, two groups of people or two
major nations. In any event, it is incumbent on every Muslim that in the
minimum, he must strive and struggle to make sure peace is established.

In the war of Hudaybiah, the Messenger of Islam (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) displayed an amazing self-sacrifice in
establishing peace between the Muslims and the Polytheists. He was
willing to order some of his companions to return back to Makkah [to
live amongst the Polytheists just as they (the people of Makkah) had
wished] just to make sure the peace treaty could be ratified. (We have
gone into detail on this issue in our book, Furugh Abadiyyat).[^1]

Elaborating on the importance of peace and friendship between two
opposing parties, Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon
him), has said the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ صَلاٌحُ ذٌاتَ بَيْنَكُمْ فَإِنِّي سَمِعْتُ جَدَّكُمٌا يَقُولُ:
صَلاٌحُ ذٌاتَ الْبَيْنِ أَفْضَلُ مِنْ عٌامَّةٍ الصَّلاٌةِ وَ
الصِّيٌامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I advise you (my two sons – al-Hasan and al-Husain) to establish and
foster peace amongst two opposing parties, since surely I have heard
your grandfather (the Messenger of Allah, blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) say, ‘Establishing peace between two opposing parties
is better than praying and fasting for the entire year.”*[^2]

The commandment of establishing peace is so important in the view of
Islam that the person who is trying to make peace (between two parties)
is permitted to use any logical means at his disposal and he is even
permitted to lie to the opposing parties to bring about this peace![^3]

Standing up to an Oppressor
---------------------------

Without doubt, standing up to an oppressor is one of the sacred primary
teachings of Islam. Principally, a majority of the Heavenly Prophets
came from families who lived under the oppression and domination of
tyrants.

In addition, there are very few Surah’s of the Qur’an in which the names
and punishments of the tyrants is not mentioned (either directly or
indirectly) and even in the verse under discussion, the Islamic society
has been commanded to fight against tyrants and oppressors until they
return back to the straight path and open the doors to the commandments
of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He). It is said in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...فَقٌاتِلُوا الَّتِي تَبْغِي حَتَّـى تَفِيءَ إِلـى أَمْرِ اللٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> “…then fight the revolting party until they submit to the command of
> Allah.”

In another place in the Qur’an, we are cautioned that no Muslim is
permitted to take an oppressor as a protector; it has been mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لاٌ تَرْكَنُوا إِلـى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا فَتَمَسَّكُمُ النٌّارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> “And do not incline towards those people who are oppressive and do
> wrong or the fire will seize you.”51

The noble leader of the Shi\`a world, Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi
Talib (peace be upon him) has said, “Many times the Prophet of Islam
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَنْ تُقَدَّسَ أُمَّةٌ لاٌ يُؤْخَذُ لِلضَّعِيفِ فِيهٌا حَقُّهُ مِنَ
الْقَوِيِّ غَيْرَ مُتَتَعْـتِعٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“That nation or government in which the rights of the oppressed and
destitute people are not guarded and where the mighty and powerful
people are not forced to accede to these rights will never see happiness
and salvation.”*[^4]

After being deprived of the right to lead the community for twenty-five
years, Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him)
explained the reason why he accepted the leadership (Khilafah), at that
time:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمٌّا وَالَّذِي فَلَقَ الْحَبَّةَ وَبَرَأَ النَّسَمَةَ لَوْ لاٌ
حُضُورُ الْحٌاضِرِ وَقِيٌامُ الْحُجَّةِ بِوُجُودِ النٌّاصِرِ وَ مٌا
أَخَذَ اللٌّهُ عَلى الْعُلَمٌاءِ أَنْ لاٌّ يُقٌارُّوا عَلى كِظَّةِ
ظٌالِمٍ وَ لاٌ سَغَبِ مَظْلُومٍ لَأََلَـقَيْتُ حَبْلَهٌا عَلى
غٌارِبِهٌا وَ لَسَقَيْتُ آخِرَهٌا بِكَأْسِ أَوَّلِهٌا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Behold, I swear by Him who split the grain (to grow) and created
living beings that had it not been for the people coming to me and had
the supporters not exhausted the argument and if there had not been the
pledge of Allah with the scholars that they should not acquiesce in the
gluttony of the oppressor and the hunger of the oppressed, I would have
cast the rope (of Khilafah) on its own shoulders and would have given
the last one the same treatment as to the first one.”*[^5]

Through his clear speech and the unmistakable events of Islamic history
and keeping in mind that those who held the flag of the religion in
every time were always the oppressed individuals of society and the
powers who worked against the Prophets were the ones who made up the
exploitation powers (of their time), is it correct what the materialists
claim the following about religion that: “Religion instructs its
followers to observe patience and tolerance in the face of oppression
from the exploiters and that one should consider their oppression as
being a part of undisputable fate and destiny that has protected the
interests of the exploiters.”

“The pressures and forces exacted by the leaders in relation to their
subjects and the extortion and encroachment on the rights of the
Feudalists and the Aristocrats in relation to the oppressed and
downtrodden people - even though it lead to violent uprisings – however,
by drawing upon the parallels that these uprisings and ineffectiveness
had, lead to consolation in the minds of those who were deprived amongst
the society and thus it was slowly thought that religion had a
stupefying effect on the soul of a person.”

The person who has even the least amount of knowledge in relation to the
plan that religion has brought forth, would know that all of the
incorrect observations (mentioned in the above mentioned quotes) were
designed to confuse the people who do not know the truth and realities
about religion.

The issue of observing patience is a belief that even the materialists
of our time possess. It is indeed one of the upright principles of the
ethical teachings which all nations and all people - including the
materialists - have true faith in. Without this main ethical trait,
there is not a single person who possesses aims and goals (for himself)
that would ever be able to reach his objectives (without this trait).

This is so because the meaning of patience *(sabr)* is not that one
gives in to the oppression of a tyrant. In no culture or in any of the
books of ethical traits has patience been explained in this way. Rather,
the meaning of patience *(sabr)* means to be firm on the path to reach
one’s goals and to have endurance in the face of tribulations. Thus,
there is not a single nation that has reached to any point without
showing endurance and firmness (on the path towards their goal).[^6]

Therefore, the true meaning of patience is opposite to that which the
materialists imagine it to be as it truly means to be firm and resolved
against the opposing enemies and opposition to the incorrect wishes and
desires of the soul or the unpleasant events that happen in one’s life.
Such an ethical principle is one which will destroy subjugation,
demolish the empires of the oppressors and one which will bring about
success and victory in the various stages of one’s personal life.

The aversion that Islam shows to oppression and tyranny is to such an
extreme, that even the person who is pleased with an oppressor living is
counted as being amongst those who commit oppression:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قٌالَ الإِمٌامُ جَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ الصٌّادِقُ (عَلَيْهِ
السَّلاٌمُ): أَلْعٌامِلُ بِالظُّلْمِ وَ الْمُعِينُ لَهُ وَ الرٌّاضِي
بِهِ شُرَكٌاءٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Ja\`far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: *“The
person who oppresses (another person) and the one who helps him and the
one who is pleased with him (oppressing someone else) are all equal to
one another.”*[^7]

Safwan ibn Mahran, was one of the close friends and companions of Imam
Musa ibn Ja\`far al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) who owned many camels.
One day the Imam (peace be upon him) reproached him by saying that, “All
of your deeds are good except one of them and that is that you rent out
your camels to Harun al-Rashid, the Oppressor.”

The companion said to the Imam, “I swear by Allah! I never rent him my
camels for vain or prohibited acts. Rather, at the time of the Hajj, I
give him my camels so that he is able to visit the House of Allah. I do
not even go with him on this journey; rather, I send those who work with
me to accompany him.”

The Imam replied, “When you give Harun the camels, do you request him to
pay you in full before he takes them or does he give you an amount and
then the rest is paid to you (when he returns)?”

Safwan replied, “He pays me an amount before he goes and then the rest
when he returns from his trip.”

The Imam then asked Safwan, “Do you wish that Harun returns back from
his trip alive so that he can pay you back the rest of the money that he
owes you?”

The companion replied, “Yes.”

The Imam (peace be upon him) then said, “Whoever is happy or wishes that
an oppressor is given a long life is considered as an oppressor himself
and his eventual outcome will be the hell-fire.”[^8]

Yes! That what the materialists say about religion has been extracted
from Christianity and is close to the teachings of the Christian Church
since in their opinion, one of the teachings of the Messiah (\`Isa ibn
Mariam, peace be upon them both) is that if a person hits you on one
side of your face, then give him the other side too, as it is stated:
“But I tell you, Do not resist an evil person. If someone strikes you on
the right cheek, turn to him also the other.”[^9]

[^1]: Volume 2, Page 580-603 (Third Printing); this can also be read in
the English translation of the mentioned book entitled, The Message,
published by Islamic Seminary Publications of Karachi, Pakistan,
reprinted by Ansariyan Publications (Refer to Page 518 – 539).

[^2]: Nahjul Balagha, Volume 3, Page 85 (Advice from Amir al-Mu’minin
\`Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, to his children.)

[^3]: al-Makasib al-Muharramah, Discussion on the Prohibition of Lying.

[^4]: Nahjul Balagha, Volume 3, Page 113 (Letter that was written to
Malik al-Ashtar).

[^5]: Ibid., Volume 1, Speech 3.

[^6]: We have explained the true meaning of sabr or patience as
explained in the Qur’an under the commentary of verse 11 of Surah Luqman
(31) where it is stated: وَاصْبِرْ عَلـى مٌا أَصٌابَکَ “So then bear
with patience that which we have tested you with.”

[^7]: Wasail al-Shi\`a, Volume 12, Page 128.

[^8]: Ibid., Volume 12, Page 132.

[^9]: New Testament, St. Matthew, Chapter Five, Verse 39 (as found on
bible.gospelcom.net).


