Brotherhood in Islam
====================

( Verse 10 )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمٌا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ إِخْوَةٌ فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَ أَخَوَيْكُمْ
وَاتَّقُوا اللٌّهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Without doubt the believers are brothers of one another so then make
peace and harmony between your brothers and have consciousness of Allah
so that maybe He will show you mercy.***

The closest relationship and bond that can take place between two people
during the course of their lifetime is that of brotherhood. Although the
relationship between a father and his children is much stronger and
powerful than the ties of brotherhood, however this relationship
(between a father and his child) is one in which the two people are not
on an equal level – from the point of view of time, situation, character
and the level of respect (that they must show one another), they are
different.

The only relationship that is a complete manifestation of strong unity,
love and affection is the one that exists between two people who are
living on an equal plane in life and this is the relationship of
brotherhood and sisterhood.

This unbreakable relationship that has been brought about by creation is
constantly found in all environments and societies and is the secret
behind love, affection and closeness that exists between individuals. It
is because of this fact that the Qur’an invites humanity to unite and
come together under the principles of love and affection and thus, has
referred to the faithful believers of a society as being brothers (and
sisters) of one another.

For the first time in history, a community of people that numbered
hundreds of millions was brought together as brothers of one another and
the following sentence was made their slogan and motto:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمٌا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ إِخْوَةٌ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Without doubt the believers are brothers of one another…”***

You may ask yourself this question that why has this circle of
relationship not been made wider and taken all of humanity into it as
brothers of one another, whereas (in this verse) the sphere of
brotherhood is limited to only those who have true faith? The answer to
this question is obvious and a cursory glance is sufficient for us to
understand the reason why this was not done.

This religious brotherhood is not a simple formality and that too of a
political nature such that all of humanity – whether or not they have
the qualities of brotherhood – should be classified and grouped together
as brothers of one another. Rather, the purpose of making the believers
brothers of one another points to a series of noble societal and ethical
goals and responsibilities that take shape within the greatness of the
Islamic brotherhood that the believers must manifest to one another.

All of these responsibilities and goals have been mentioned in the books
of Ahadith and Jurisprudence in detail. Therefore, until unity of
thought and spirit towards one goal and belief is not established, there
can never be firm unity and association of individuals.

If one day, a group of people who are wavering (in belief) in their
hearts are seen uniting together under a series of political issues and
trying to unite as brothers for a specific cause (other than that of
religion), then even the smallest thing would be able to break the unity
that was brought about through the mere agreement of thoughts, spirits,
difference of (personal benefits) and difference of foundations, and
would thus cause them to separate from one another.

A society whose axis or pivot is not based on (unity of) ideas and
beliefs and in which everyone acts as individuals will always rotate
upon various thoughts and ideologies opposed to one another and no sort
of unity or harmony will ever exist amongst those people. Only to that
level that unity and harmony protects their material interests will they
be able to lead a peaceful life. If one day a person who is united with
others sees that he is not in need of this form of unity and feels that
he has become successful in the arena of his own life and has reached
his goals, then all of the relations that united him with others – which
were all based on political motives – will be turned into differences
and disputes.

Never would a Muslim – one who has true faith in One Allah and the Day
of Judgement and who believes in the governance of justice and equality
and who deems it necessary to follow the noble moral traits and the
humanistic virtues - be able to become the brother of an atheist who
does not believe in Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) or the Last Day
and who feels that ethical teachings and traits are just play-things and
considers such teachings as fables.

Unity under the Luminance of True Belief
----------------------------------------

If we have doubts and misgivings about every issue among the issues
within a society, or require that in order to acknowledge a specific
issue that we must carry out analysis and research and claim the need to
have proof (for these various issues), then we must not let these
(doubts and misgivings) creep into the discussion of unity and harmony
in the society. Thus, we can never find even a single person in this
world who would say that dispersion and disarray (of the society) are
beneficial and that unity and agreement are harmful and detrimental,
since even the smallest benefit that can come about through unity and
agreement returns back to the society.

It is through uniting small independent forces with one another that
under the shadow of such unity can great power and strength come about
which would be able to bring about numerous changes in the lives of
people.

The huge dams of the world that manifest themselves as blocking large
bodies of water are actually joining smaller bodies (of water) together
since these small individual rivers do not have the ability to produce
electricity, nor can they be beneficial for the irrigation of crops.

However, when all of these small rivers join to make one major body of
water, then at this time they are able to produce thousands of kilowatts
of electricity and it is through this one large river that thousands of
hectares of land can be irrigated. Where do all of these great bounties
come from? They come about through the unity of small drops of water
that were once weak and did not possess the ability to do anything on
their own.

The power of the atom is clear to everyone. A single atom does not have
the power or ability to do anything and is so small and insignificant
that even the most powerful microscopes cannot see what it looks like.

However when innumerable atoms join together, they produce such power
and energy that if just a few atomic bombs were to be detonated, the
civilization and life of mankind on this Earth, as we know it, would be
brought to an end. In the span of a few minutes, the entire surface of
the Earth would be a mass of fire with piles of ashes lingering
everywhere.

In the words of a poet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غرض ز انـجمن و اجـتماع جمع قواست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چرا كه قطره چـو شد مـتصل به هم درياست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The goal of union and coalition,*  
*Is to gather the powers.*  
*Since when drops of water gather,*  
*Then they form a (powerful) river.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ز قطـره هيچ نيـايد ولى چو دريا گشت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر آنـچه نفـع تصور کنی در او آن جـاست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Nothing comes about from a drop (individual),*  
*However the river (unity) runs strong.*  
*Any benefit that can be imagined,*  
*Comes about from that river (of unity).*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ز قطره ماهی پيدا نـمى شود هر گز
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مـحيط باشد كزوى نـهنگ خواهد ساخـت
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A fish can never be seen,*  
*In one single drop of water.*  
*How is it then from the river,*  
*Whales can come about.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زگندمی نتوان پخت نان و قوت نـمود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چو گشت خرمن و خروار وقت برگ و نواست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A loaf of bread can never be made ,*  
*From a single head of wheat,*  
*But when gathered together and thrashed,*  
 *It brings out all of its prosperity.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ز فرد فرد مـحالست کارهای بزرگ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولی ز جمع توان خواست هر چه خواهی خواست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is impossible for individuals - one by one,*  
*To take on a great task.*  
 *However, from uniting together,*  
*Anything that is desired can be accomplished.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بلی چو مورچگان را وفاق دست دهد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بـه قـول شيخ هـژبر ژيان اسـير و فنـاست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Unity and conciliation can be seen,*  
*In the way that the ants gather together.*  
*In the words of the Shaikh,*  
*Glory is strong, captive and temporary.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولى چو نفرقه اندر ميان جمع افتد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هـمان حکـايت صـوفى و سيـد و مـلاست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*However when separation occurs,*  
*To a community that is together.*  
*They become just like the stories,*  
 *Of the Sufis, the Sayyid and the Mullah.*

Not only must the physical strength of the people be made use of with
everyone working towards one common goal, rather we must also seek
assistance through the intelligence and aptitude of the members of
society. Through taking advice, working together and accepting the
opinions of others, we must remove the monstrous difficulties that are
facing us.

The Noble Qur’an considers asking advice and (through this), changing
one’s opinion as one of the characteristics of a person with true faith
and has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اسْتَجٌابُوا لِرِبِّهِمْ وَ أَقٌامُوا الصَّلٌوةَ وَ
أَمْرُهُمْ شُورَى بَيْنَهُمْ وَ مِمٌّا رَزَقْنٌاهُمْ يُنْفِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those people who respond to the call of their Lord and who
(also) uphold the Salat and proceed in their activities through
consultation with one another and give out in charity of that which We
have granted to them.”***[^1]

The same point mentioned in the above verse of the Qur’an can also be
seen in the poem previously quoted and also in the following two lines
of poetry:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اگر مرا و تو عقل خويش كافى بود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چرا به امر خداوند، امر بر شورى است
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If mine and your intelligence were enough,*  
 *Then why has Allah commanded us to consult (one another)?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بدين دليل ((يد اللٌّه مع الجماعة)) سرود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كه با جماعت، دستى قوی يدى طولـى است
  </p>
</blockquote>

*We must resonate with the proof that:*  
*‘The Hand of Allah is with the Congregation’.*  
*Since by being with the community,*  
 *The strong hand has a longer reach.*

What is the Basis and Source of Unity?
--------------------------------------

A majority of Sociologists state that: *“The human being is a societal
animal and within his creation, he has been given a strong attraction to
living within a community.”* At this point, we must see that under what
factors and conditions does our societal life take form?

Some of today’s Sociologists are of the firm belief that factors such
as: race, language, sharing a common history and country, blood-ties and
other elements make up the unity of nations. The society which is
brought about through these elements just mentioned is the same one that
the Legal Experts refer to as a **Nation**.

It is under the shadow of these factors that one is able to bring about
a nation which is united in which the various organs and members, who
are living in the midst of one another, can have a loving and close life
together.

However these people (who have such a belief) have forgotten an
important point: how is it possible for a society which is made up of
people of various ideologies, who have different wishes and desires (for
their own life) and who have their own opinions and thoughts in relation
to every aspect, to come together as one united nation with complete
harmony and live among one another in this form?

It is true that those factors which were mentioned do help and play a
role in the unity and harmony of a society, however as long as there is
no unity in thought and idea and each person has his own goals and
ideologies, the unity and harmony of the individuals under these factors
and principles will be involuntarily brought about and thus will not be
permanent and stable.

If one day, the people were to unite under one common goal and stretch
forth their hands towards one another in unity and express their
brotherhood towards one another, then they would definitely be able to
reach their goal. In this event, not a single event could occur that
would cause them to fall into intellectual difference and discrepancy in
relation to their wishes and goals - nor would they fall prey to
conflicts and divergences that would lead them to be divided with one
another.

A society whose axis does not rotate around one thought and ideology in
which the people revolve around various factors that have been imposed
upon them will never have a guaranteed unity (of the society) since the
path of life of each person is determined through (one’s own) thoughts
and ideological beliefs, and not factors that have been imposed upon
one. If a day comes that amongst the people of a nation who share the
same nationality, blood-ties and language - a spiritual bond and
cultural affinity were to come about, then there could never be any sort
of blow brought to the unity of that nation.

It is here that the great leaders of humanity – who take their
inspiration from the Divine Revelation – have said that the foremost
pillar of nationality must be based on unity of thought and ideology.
The people of that society - who from the point of view of their
ideological beliefs and method of thought share a common opinion – have
been referred to as brothers of one another, and thus, their motto would
be:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمٌا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ إِخْوَةٌ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Without doubt the believers are brothers of one another…”***

In his historical speech, the greatest leader of humanity, Prophet
Muhammad (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) categorized
the people within a society who have true belief as being equivalent to
the limbs of one body, such that they all share one common thought and
ideology, one soul that commands and governs over them and whose hearts
are united.[^2]

In summary, the material factors which contain absolutely no soul or
essence such as: nationality, language, blood (relation) and others
which cannot build unity of thought and which are not from those things
which the human soul has been inspired with, cannot bring about the
basis by which nationality and the principles of a common life are based
upon and which can lead to one united nation of people – which have
complete love and close friendship and unity amongst the individuals.
Rather, individuals that are brought together under the banner of these
factors - due to the difference of thoughts and their divergence in
distinguishing their goals - will give up any sort of unity and alliance
that they have amongst one another.

In addition to this, the person who wishes to build a nation under the
flag of these sorts of material factors can never claim that with these
factors in place, they have been able to bring all of humanity as
brothers of one another, nor will they be able to claim that the entire
society has become spiritually close.

Rather, the only claim they would be able to bring is that they have
been able to unite a large number of people (not all) together under
certain incidental phenomena (those factors which were previously
mentioned).

If the sublime Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) was able to bring the hearts of various groups of people
together and bring people of various nations - each of which had their
own nationality and language - together as one nation and make them
brothers of one another, then he was able to do so because he was able
to bring about one common united thought and ideology amongst them all.
In addition, the direction of all of their lives was geared towards one
goal and all of their ideas and thoughts were channelled into one main
thought.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آفرين بر همت آن اوستاد صد هزاران ذره را داد اتـحاد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Congratulations to the efforts of that one leader,*  
*Who brought unity to hundreds of thousands of individual minds.*

An Effective Medication
-----------------------

On the day that the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) was commanded to convey the Heavenly messages of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He), we see that the environment of the
Muslims in Madinah was plagued with differences. It was not possible to
restore back to health the sickness of division that had plagued the
community, except by going under the banner of unanimity, accord and
unity of thought.

The Muhajirin and the Ansar had been brought up in two completely
different environments and each of them felt some sort of supremacy over
the other group, while the Ansar themselves were divided into two
factions which had the fires of war raging between them for years. The
Muslims who had come from places far and wide such as Habasha (Ethiopa)
and other parts of the world suddenly converged on the land of Madinah.

From the point of view of their nationality and language, a majority of
them differed from one another. The most powerful of relations that
existed amongst all these people - keeping in mind the differences that
were also there - was the relationship of true faith and religious
brotherhood through which the enmity, hatred and other negative effects
that their differences created amongst themselves, was removed from
their hearts.

One day, the Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) stood up in the Masjid, turned towards the Muslims and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَآخَوْا فِي اللٌّهِ أَخَوَينِ أَخَوَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“(O’ people!)* *Stand up so that I can make you brothers of one another
(in the name of Allah).”*

Upon hearing this, the Muslims stood up and each one was made a brother
of another one whom they had a great deal of love and affection for and
it was here that the Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) chose Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be
upon him) as his own brother.[^3]

This sort of brotherhood which took place amongst a very small circle of
people is a minor example of the unity that ruled over the Islamic
society which encompassed all Muslims and made them brothers of one
another. Under the greatness of this Islamic brotherhood, the Muslims
were victorious over all of their difficulties and as long as this
religious bond of love and affinity was amongst them, they had supremacy
over the entire world.

An Alert Enemy
--------------

The enemies, who at that time were desperately seeking the down-fall of
the Muslims, struggled and are continuing to struggle (even today) to
cut the firm roots of unity from amongst the Muslims and to remove this
affinity from the Muslim nation. By bringing up a series of issues which
are not related to the fundamental principles (of the religion), they
have been able to light the fire of difference amongst the Muslims. This
is not only the goal of the enemies of our present time - rather, from
that first day that this Islamic commandment was given, those who wanted
bad things to come to the Muslims struggled to break the unity and
accord.

One day, a group of young men from the tribes of Aws and Khazraj (two
tribes from \`Arabia that had been at war for countless years, however
under the shadow of Islam and true faith, were able to come together as
brothers of one another and have love rule between them both) were
sitting together.

A Jew from Madinah named Shas ibn Qais who was very jealous of the unity
that had been brought about between these two tribes, entered into their
gathering and through the shrewdness that he possessed, started to speak
about and remind them about the bitter moments that had transpired
between these two tribes during the battle of Ba\`ath before the coming
of Islam. He spoke in such a manner that he was able to instigate the
youth of both tribes to reach for their swords causing them to re-ignite
the war of Ba\`ath.

The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) was
informed of what was transpiring and he himself went to this gathering
and gave a speech in which he mentioned, “Islam made you brothers of one
another and commanded you to remove any form of hatred or grudges that
remain in your heart.”

When the speech of the Prophet reached to this phase, the deafening
sound of crying and weeping could be heard and in order to attest to the
religious brotherhood that existed amongst themselves, they began to hug
each other and asked Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) for
forgiveness.[^4]

If on that day a man named Shas existed (that caused such turmoil), then
today too there are those who under different names, different
physiognomies and different shapes are trying to stir up corruption
within the Muslim society. It is these people who are trying to strike
devastating blows to the unity and harmony of the Muslims.

Examples of Self-Sacrifice through Islamic Brotherhood
------------------------------------------------------

One of the greatest manifestations and materializations of brotherhood
is that a Muslim does not encroach upon the life, reputation and wealth
of his brother.  
 This point has been mentioned in one of the valuable pieces of advice
from the Messenger of Allah (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) which he delivered to a large gathering of people in Mina. In
this assembly, he turned towards his companions and addressed them as
such: “(O’ People!) Today is a day which is very sacred in the sight of
your Lord and this land of Mina too is one of sanctity and this month
(Dhul Hijjah) which we are presently in, is a noble month in the sight
of Allah!”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ دِمٌائَكُمْ وَ أَمْوٌالَكُمْ وَ أَعْرٌاضَكُمْ عَلَيْكُمْ حَرٌامٌ
كَحُرْمَةِ يَوْمِكُمْ هٌـذَا وَ بَلَدِكُمْ هٌـذَا وَ شَهْرِكُمْ هٌـذَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Unquestionably your lives and your properties and your reputations are
all sacred and sacrosanct just as this day of yours, this land of yours
and this month of yours (are sacred).”*[^5]

The Prophet repeated this sentence three times and then looked towards
the sky and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ بَلَّغْتُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O’ Allah (You bear witness that) I have (fulfilled my responsibility
and) conveyed the message.”*

In order to nurture and cultivate this spiritual relationship, Islam has
laid down commandments through which the Muslims are able to make their
brotherhood and love for one another known (to one another) in a
practical manner.

There was once a man in the Masjid of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) who asked Imam Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Baqir
(peace be upon him), “I am this man’s friend (pointing to the person
beside him).” The Imam replied, “Show the level of your friendship to
him, because by expressing your love and friendship for a person, you
will make the relationship last (longer).”[^6]

The words of the leaders of Islam (the Prophet and A’immah) in making
this religious affinity strong are so many in number than we would not
even be able to bring forth one-tenth of them (in this book), however
from amongst all of these narrations and commandments, we present two
traditions. The Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمٌا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ فِي تَرٌاحُمِهِمْ وَ تَعٌاطُفِهِمْ
بِمَنْـزِلَةِ الْجَسَدِ الْوٌاحِدِ إِذٌا اشْتَكى مِنْهُ عُضْوٌ وٌاحِدٌ
تَدٌاعى لَهُ سٌائِرُ الْجَسَدِ بِالْحِمى وَالسَّهَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Surely the believers – in relation to the mercy and compassion and
affection (that they show for one another) - are the same as one body.
Therefore, if one part of the body is feeling pain, then it complains
about this pain to the other parts of the body through a fear and hurt
(so that the body can help the hurt or injured part).”*[^7]

Therefore, any time a Muslim is facing troubles or difficulties, it is
incumbent upon all the individuals of the society to rush to his aid and
to also share in his grief.

Sa\`di, the gifted poet and brilliant orator from Shiraz has taken
inspiration from this hadith and expressed it in the following poem:

*The Children of Adam are related to one another,*  
 *And in their creation, they are all from one essence.*  
*If one part of the body falls into pain and suffering,*  
 *Then all other parts of the body are also affected.*

In the second hadith, the Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْمُسْلِمُونَ تَتَكٌافِـيءُ دِمٌــاؤُهُمْ وَ تَسْعـى بِذِمَّتِهِمْ
أَدْنٌاهُمْ وَ هُمْ يَدٌ عَلى مَنْ سِوٌاهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The worth of the blood (the lives) of the Muslims is equal to another
Muslim and even the smallest trust that is given from one of them to
another must be honoured, and in the face of foreigners (enemies) they
are all united together and are one force (against the opponents).”*[^8]

We suffice with these two hadith in relation to Islamic brotherhood,
which is one of the most essential principles of Islam for the Muslims.
Later on, the rights of a believer over his brother will be
mentioned.[^9]

In truth, we are able to say that the closest relationship and firmest
link which can exist within a society and which will never be broken -
is the religious affinity which covers all boundaries of status, racial
diversity and spiritual levels and we must struggle to maintain this
benefit that the religion has given us.

Yes! In the words of the Qur’an, that which has brought about this
religious affinity is the Islamic brotherhood. An everlasting peace and
harmony can never be brought forth except through this commandment.

One of the necessary criteria for religious brotherhood is that whenever
two groups of Muslims fall into disagreement with one another, it is
necessary for all of the believers to struggle and try to put out the
flames of war between them and to raise the flag of peace and agreement
over them. However, Islam is not hell-bent on achieving peace at any
cost. Rather, Islam wants peace on the basis of justice and equality and
one in which the rights of both sides are protected and thus, the
following verse of the Qur’an mentions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمٌا بِالْعَدْلِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So then make peace between the two parties with justice…”***

If this is not done, then a peace treaty or any other sort of agreement
which tramples upon the rights of one of the two parties would not be a
long lasting one. Rather, it would lay the groundwork for enmity and
hostility which is not looked upon favourably by the teachings of Islam.

[^1]: Surah al-Shuara’ (42), Verse 38.

[^2]: Safinat al-Bihar, Volume 1, Page 13.

[^3]: Sirah ibn Hisham, Volume 1, Page 123-124.

[^4]: Ibid., Page 555.

[^5]: Sirah Ibn Hisham, Volume 2, Page 605.

[^6]: Safinat al-Bihar, Volume 1, Page 12.

[^7]: Al-Taj, Volume 2, Page 136.

[^8]: Wasail al-Shi\`a, Section 31 (Section on the Penalty for Killing
Another Person); Maghazi, Volume 2, Page 836.

[^9]: Many of these rights have been mentioned in the book, Wasail
al-Shi\`a in the section of “Ahkam al-\`Ushrah”, Volume 8, Page 166 and
on.


