Preface by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) World Assembly
==============================================

The Holy Messenger of Allah (S)[^1] is reported to have said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَقْرَبُ النَّاسِ مِنْ دَرَجَةِ النُّبُوَّةِ أَهْلُ الْعِلْمِ
وَالْجِهَادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The people closest to the rank of Prophets are the people of knowledge
and jihad (utmost endeavor).*[^2]

Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (the Commander of the Faithful) (‘a) is also
reported as saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْعُلَمَاءُ بَاقُونَ مَا بَقِيَ الدَّهْرُ… أُولَئِكَ خُلَفَاءُ اللهِ
فِي أَرْضِهِ وَالدُّعَاةُ إلَى دِينِهِ، آهٍ آهٍ شَوْقاً إلَى
رُؤْيَتِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The knowledgeable people are as endless as time. They are the
representatives of Allah on the earth, and inviters to His religion. Oh!
How eager am I to see them!*[^3]

Peace and blessings of Allah and of His Apostle be upon the pure souls
of the martyrs, especially the students of the Seminary (Hawzah). Peace
be upon the immortal men of religion who aroused enthusiasm in others,
wrote down their academic and practical theses with their martyrdoms and
the ink of their blood and transformed their lives into brilliant gems
on the pulpits in order to guide others.

Peace and immortality be upon the martyrs and the spiritualists among
the students of the Hawzah who left their schools in order to join the
fields of jihad, shed off any thing that connected them to worldly
ambitions and set forth to join the immortal group of divine people.

Peace be upon those who unveiled true religious knowledge and became
honest warners for their people, whose every act and intention testified
practically to all parts of their discourses. In all honesty, the true
men of the religion of Islam, and Shi’ism in particular, who guide
others to the straight path and encourage them to tread the difficult
path of truth ultimately become the foremost victims and seal their
books of deeds with their blood.

Indeed, those who attended the classes of the spiritual masters of the
Hawzah have not been heard hoping for anything other than martyrdom,
since they, having enjoyed the highest ranks of sincere connection with
their Lord, always pray to Almighty Allah to confer martyrdom.[^4]

It is now fourteen years since the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) World Assembly was
founded. Throughout this period, its one and only endeavor has been to
spare no efforts in the propagation of Islamic culture and knowledge,
defending the sanctity of the Holy Qur’an and the Holy Sunnah[^5], as
well as the entity and the rights of the Ahl al-Bayt’s[^6] followers. By
pursuing this goal, we hope to attain the rank aspired by the leader,
the Grand Ayatullah Sayyid al-Khamene'i—may Allah perpetuate his
blessings on us.

In view of the above, the Assembly has shown remarkable activity in the
fields of Islamic research, inquiry, teaching, and propagation as well
as many other related fields.

Taking upon itself the mission of honoring the scholars and those who
devoted themselves to defending the genuine principles of Islam, the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) World Assembly is proud to hold a conference to honor
martyr Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Hakim, the vice-chairman of
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) World Assembly.

It goes without saying that martyr Ayatullah al-Hakim was outstandingly
well versed in both Islamic knowledge and policy not only in Iran and
the Shi’ite world but also in the entire Islamic world. Unquestionably,
his endeavors were the main impetus for the pressures that removed the
Baathist regime that ruled Iraq so mercilessly.

This divine leader undertook the mission of spreading the Ahl al-Bayt’s
culture through his wide-ranging activities that included teaching,
writing and delivering lectures on various occasions. His writings, some
of which have been published and others that are to be published in the
future, stand as witnesses to testify to his efforts in these fields.

According to the saying that “the affairs of both religion and the world
stand on two things—a pen and a sword behind the pen,” martyr Ayatullah
Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Hakim was armed with both pen and sword. His
pen is still overflowing with wisdom and knowledge that are like
unsheathed swords waiting for a signal from him to fight again as they
had previously fought against infidelity and challenged persecution and
oppression.

A Hadith holds that the Holy Prophet (S) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَلاَثٌ تَخْرِقُ الْحُجُبَ وَتَنْتَهِي إلَى مَا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللهِ:
صَرِيرُ أَقْلاَمِ الْعُلَمَاءِ، وَوَطْءُ أَقْدَامِ الْمُجَاهِدِينَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Three things penetrate the Veils (of Divinity) and stand directly
before Almighty Allah. These are the susurrations of the scholars’ pens,
the steps of the warriors (for the sake of Almighty Allah)… etc.*

Correspondingly, the susurrations of martyr Ayatullah al-Hakim’s pen and
his steps on the path of jihad were so well known in the east and the
west of the globe that the gates of martyrdom were wide open before him.
After twenty-five years of exile and alienation from his homeland,
martyr Sayyid al-Hakim returned immediately after the collapse of the
Baathist regime in Iraq. He aimed at residing in the vicinity of the
holy shrines of his immaculate forefathers, living amongst the Iraqi
people who were severely tormented and persecuted, reconstructing all
that was demolished by the infidels and transgressors.

From the sacred minbar (i.e. pulpit) of the Congregational Friday
Prayer, he delivered sermons full of admonition and guidance to spread
awareness among the faithful. Thus, the people’s love for him augmented
day by day. Unfortunately, this brilliant lantern was extinguished by
the harbingers of gloom who could not tolerate such luminosity. They
stretched forth their treacherous hands to end his life immediately
after he had finished his prayer on Friday beside the holy mausoleum of
his forefather, Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a). Sayyid al-Hakim
embraced the great victory of martyrdom after an extraordinary journey,
full of strife. In truth, Sayyid al-Hakim did not die, because martyrs
are forever alive and provided sustenance from their Lord. Although we
can no longer see the person of Sayyid al-Hakim, he is present with us
constantly illuminating our lives.

The Grand Ayatullah Sayyid al-Khamene'i said about Sayyid al-Hakim,

*“This dear martyr was both a scholar and a warrior (for Islam). He
challenged the oppressive regime of Saddam for many long years. When
this sign of evil and transgression collapsed, Sayyid al-Hakim acted as
an invincible wall in the face of the occupiers—the Americans and the
English. He resisted ill-omened plans and prepared for martyrdom in the
long path of jihad to join the caravan of martyrs from the family of
al-Hakim along with other martyrs of knowledge and virtue in Iraq.”*

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) World Assembly, in co-operation with other
foundations, held a conference on the anniversary of the passing of this
‘martyr of the prayer-niche’ (*shahid al-mihrab*), Ayatullah Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir al-Hakim, on the eighteenth of Rajab, 1425 AH, in Tehran,
the capital of the Islamic Republic of Iran. This conference was
attended by a group of eminent Muslim scholars who delivered speeches
for the occasion.

The consequent activities of the Cultural Committee of this conference
can be classified in two sections:

**The first section**: Reprinting a group of the writings of Sayyid
al-Hakim, as follows:

(1) The two-volume book entitled, ‘*dawr ahl al-bayt fi bina' al-jama’ah
al-salihah’ (The Role of the Ahl al-Bayt in Building the Virtuous
Community)*.

(2) The book entitled, ‘*al-wihdah al-islamiyyah min manzur
al-thaqalayn’* *(Islamic Unity from the Perspective of the Two Weighty
Things—i.e. the Holy Qur’an and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a))*.

(3) The book, ‘*‘Ulum al-Qur’an’* *(Sciences of the Qur’an)* in
cooperation with the Assembly of Islamic Thought (*Majma’ al-Fikr
al-Islami*).

(4) The book entitled, ‘*Tafsir Surat al-Hamd’* *(Exegesis of the
Opening Chapter)* in cooperation with the Assembly of Islamic Thought.

(5) The book, ‘*al-Qasas al-Qur’ani*’ (*Narratives of the Qur’an*) in
cooperation with the International Center for Islamic Studies
(*al-Markaz al-’Alami li’l-Dirasat al-Islamiyyah*).

(6) The book entitled, ‘*al-Ukhuwwah al-«maniyyah*’
*(Brotherhood-in-faith)* in cooperation with Dar al-Ghadir Foundation.

(7) The book, ‘*Thawrat al-Husayn*’ *(The Revolution of Imam al-Husayn
(‘a))* in cooperation with Imam al-Husayn (‘a) Foundation.

**Second Section**: Preparation and distribution of compact disks (CD’s)
comprising Sayyid al-Hakim’s books, which will be offered at the
conference. The CD will include:

(1) The life account of martyr Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Hakim
by the Approximation of the Islamic Sects Assembly (*majma’ al-taqrib
bayna al-madhahib al-islamiyyah*)

(2) The book entitled, ‘*al-Arba’ata ‘Ashara Manahija wa Ru’a*’
*(Fourteen Methods and Standpoints)* by the Foundation for Printing the
Writings and Works of Martyr Ayatullah al-Hakim, in cooperation with the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) World Assembly.

(3) The book entitled, ‘*Shuhada' al-’Ilm wa’l-Fadhilah fi’l-’Iraq*’
*(Martyrs of Knowledge and Virtue in Iraq)* by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
World Assembly. This book comprises the life accounts of 120 Iraqi
scholars who were martyred. It is presented in two languages—Arabic and
Persian.

(4) A complete collection of Sayyid al-Hakim’s writings and works

Finally, I express my deepest gratitude and appreciation to all the
cultural and executive offices that have extended aid in holding this
conference and all their esteemed representatives who have participated
in the preparatory sessions and meetings for the conference.

I pray that Almighty Allah lead all the adherents of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) to greater success and include them all among the helpers of His
Representative, the Patron of the Age, Imam al-Mahdi—may Allah hasten
his relief.

**Muhammad Hasan Tashayyu’**
**Cultural Assistant of the**
**Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) World Assembly**

[^1]: - For maintaining readability, (S) which is an acronym for “salla
allahu ‘alayhi wa alihi” is used throughout the book to denote "May
Allah bless him and his Household.”

[^2]: - Muhammad al-Rayshahri 3:2067.

[^3]: - Nahj al-Balaghah, Saying No. 147,
http://www.al-islam.org/nahjul-balagha-part-2-letters-and-sayings/select...

[^4]: - Imam al-Khumayni’s Epistle to the Faculties of the Religious
Studies; Isphand, AH 1367 (February/March 1989 CE).

[^5]: - The Holy Sunnah, being the second major reference of Islamic
legislation, stands for the Prophet Muhammad’s words, acts, and
confirmations.

[^6]: - The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) (People of the House) is a term dedicated
to the family of the Holy Prophet (S). More precisely, it is dedicated
to definite individuals; namely, Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib, Fatimah
al-Zahra’ (the Holy Prophet’s daughter and Imam ‘Ali’s wife), al-Hasan
ibn ‘Ali, and al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali. The nine Immaculate Imams (namely,
‘Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sajjad, Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir, Ja’far ibn
Muhammad al-Sadiq, Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim, ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha,
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Jawad, ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Hadi, al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali
al-’Askari, and al-Mahdi the Awaited) are also among the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a).


