Preamble
========

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) worked in the Muslim community within two major
frameworks and in two interlaced spheres:

**First**: They worked amidst the wide-ranging domain of Muslims and
interacted with the community in general and in its broad extremities.
Within this scope, the adherents and believers in the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
were not distinguishable from the other individuals of the Muslim
community except by the amount of their doctrinal, spiritual, and
emotional attachment to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). This was demonstrated by
their doctrinal and political loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) as well as
moral commitment and obedience to their commands and instructions.

**Second**: They worked privately with special Muslim individuals who
interacted with the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) at a higher level and believed in
the Ahl al-Bayt’s special role in Islamic ideology based on the
principle of Imamate (i.e. leadership of the Muslim community) and the
divinely commissioned successorship of the Holy Prophet (S).

It is important to note that those involved in the second circle became
a virtuous community of special identity and a righteous entity enjoying
its own features and known in the Muslim milieus as ‘*the Shi’ah*
(adherents) *of the Ahl al-Bayt* (‘a)’. They were not differentiated
from the Muslims of the first wider circle solely due to their
inclination towards the movement of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). Rather, the
individuals of this special circle were promoted on account of the
responsibilities and instructions directly placed upon them by the Holy
Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), whose purpose beyond such promotion was
to engender this community and entity.

To sum up, this entity, the Shi’ah of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), did not
exist arbitrarily. Such faithful individuals were the outcome of a
purposeful and focused plan designed by the Holy Imams (‘a) to build
this virtuous community.

The Holy Imams (‘a) had realized that their general goals, one of which
was to defend the entity of Islam and to safeguard the existence of the
Muslim nation, would not be achieved if they directed their efforts to
the totality of Muslims represented by the first circle. The achievement
of this goal, along with its various aspects, depended upon the features
of perpetual cognizance, continuous emotional momentum, and presence of
a leader who could undertake the mission of enlightenment.

We thus observe that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), from the beginning, in
addition to undertaking their general responsibilities entrusted to them
by Almighty Allah, used to pay special attention to activity within the
private circle. For instance, the Holy Prophet (S) took an extraordinary
interest in this aspect; he, therefore, founded the practice of
following Imam ‘Ali (namely, *tashayyu’*) and promoted it as an
ideological and political line that came into existence during his
lifetime and under his supervision. Not stopping here, the Holy Prophet
(S) directed an elite group of his companions towards this line, causing
them to be the virtuous seed of Shi’ism.[^1]

In addition, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) himself undertook this mission when he built
a virtuous community in the holy city of al-Madinah. Thereafter, he
expanded this group in al-Kufah through the agency of Hudhayfah ibn
al-Yaman, Salman al-Farisi (the Persian), and ‘Ammar ibn Yasir, and in
Lebanon through the agency of Abu-Dharr al-Ghifari, and in the Yemen
during the period that he spent there as governor. The same thing can be
said about other cities, such as Egypt and al-Basrah.

More light will be shed on this topic later in this book when we present
the features of the process of building a virtuous community as led by
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

[^1]: - The reader is advised to refer to my book entitled ‘al-Shi’ah
wa’l-Tashayyu’’ for evidence on this claim and more details about this
topic.


