Chapter 2: Characteristics Of The Virtuous Community
====================================================

Undoubtedly, the general objectives of building a virtuous community
contribute to the characteristics and features that are required in such
a community. Likewise, these characteristics redound on the details of
the necessity of building it. This fact may give reasons for the
similarity in some points of these three aspects (i.e. objectives,
characteristics, and features), yet there are differences with regard to
different perspectives of any propounded point.

It is necessary to introduce the basic characteristics and features that
must distinguish this virtuous community so that its individuals can
play their essential roles in the history of Islam and perpetuate the
roles of the Holy Imams (‘a) by defending Islam and safeguarding Muslim
society.

In this discussion, we will summarize and catalogue these
characteristics, including those previously mentioned.

Sound Belief
------------

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) constructed the virtuous
community to ensure the maintenance of the genuine doctrines of Islam
and insulate it from the influence of the intellectual and cultural
components of the Roman, Persian, and Greek civilizations that led some
groups of Muslims to atheism, apostasy, and intellectual corruption in
the early centuries of Islam.

The Holy Imams (‘a) also aimed at keeping the virtuous community sound
from cultural lethargy that inflicted the Muslim nation after being
exposed to cultures of new nations that joined the Muslim world bringing
with them huge fortunes, luxurious lifestyles and new methods of lustful
entertainment.

Furthermore, the Holy Imams (‘a) warned the virtuous community about
being manipulated by the psychological and spiritual reactions that led
some groups of Muslims to pursue seclusion and self-isolation, as can be
seen in Sufism and esotericism. These movements led other groups, such
as the Khawarij and the Qaramitah movements, to fall into the abyss of
anarchism and openly rebel against Muslim society and its system of
rule, canceling all duties and condemning all the common manners and
habits of Muslim society as futile.

This further led a third category to unfounded fanaticism and
immoderation in emotions that changed into various sects and beliefs,
including the Ghulat (extremists), the Nawasib (antagonists of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers), the Qadariyyah (fatalists), and the
Mufawwidhah (indeterminists).

The Holy Imams (‘a) maintained a balanced lifestyle and instilled a
sound belief in their followers so that they could preserve the genuine
doctrines of Islam and possess the ability to survive, co-exist, and act
dynamically by activating, impressing and inspiring others with their
firm faith.

Because of this fact, if we observe the movement of this virtuous
community and its progress throughout the history of Islam, we will
notice genuineness and deep-rootedness on the one hand and expansion,
steadfastness and firmness on the other in spite of the persecution and
attempts at eradication that this virtuous community had to encounter.
Nevertheless, the individuals of this community did not flee from social
realities or cloister themselves in distant areas of Muslim lands.

On the contrary, they coexisted with their brethren in Muslim cities and
in the centers of scientific, cultural, and religious knowledge, such as
Iraq, Iran, Turkey, Lebanon, Syria, Middle Asia, Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan, some important districts of Africa, countries of the Persian
Gulf, and the Indian subcontinent (India and Pakistan). The virtuous
community has thus included individuals from all nationalities, like the
Arabs, Persians, Turks, Kurds, Indians, Berbers, Africans, and many
more.

Thus, it is probable that the Holy Imams (‘a), having understood this
fact, did not deem it necessary to exhort their followers to exert
excessive effort in the domain of propagation, because true belief can
perform this mission automatically when it is proposed and offered
before a nation. In this respect, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported Thabit
ibn Sa’id as saying that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) once told him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا ثَابِتُ، مَا لَكُمْ وَلِلنَّاسِ؟ كُفُّوا عَنِ النَّاسِ! وَلاَ
تَدْعُوا أَحَداً إلَى أَمْرِكُمْ. فَوَاللهِ لَوْ أَنَّ أَهْلَ
السَّمَاءِ وَأَهْلَ الأَرْضِ اجْتَمَعُوا عَلَى أَنْ يُضِلُّوا عَبْداً
يُرِيدُ اللهُ هُدَاهُ مَا اسْتَطَاعُوا. كُفُّوا عَنِ النَّاسِ وَلاَ
يَقُلْ أَحَدُكُمْ أَخِي وَابْنُ عَمِّي وَجَارِي! فَإنَّ اللهَ إذَا
أَرَادَ بِعَبْدٍ خَيْراً طَيَّبَ رُوحَهُ، فَلاَ يَسْمَعُ بِمَعْرُوفٍ
إلاَّ عَرَفَهُ، وَلاَ بِمُنْكَرٍ إلاَّ أَنْكَرَهُ، ثُمَّ يَقْذِفُ
اللهُ فِي قَلْبِهِ كَلِمَةً يَجْمَعُ بِهَا أَمْرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Thabit, why are you arguing with the people? Stop debating with them
(attempting to convince them to join your creed) and do not summon them
to your belief. I swear by Allah that if all the inhabitants of the
skies and all the inhabitants of the earth help each other to mislead a
servant (of Allah) whom Almighty Allah wants to guide, they shall never
be able to do so. Stop arguing with the people and do not impose your
belief on anyone even if you believe one will respond because he is your
brother, cousin, or neighbor. Verily, if Almighty Allah wants somebody
to join the truth, He will make his soul responsive. As a result, he
will follow that which is decent and reject that which is vile. Then,
Almighty Allah will cast in his heart a word that will inspire the
correct attitude.*[^1]

To make this clear, such commands to refrain from arguing with people
about doctrine and such warnings against inviting them to accept beliefs
are meant for no reason other than to avoid divisive disputes and
unwanted discrepancies. This fact is confirmed by another tradition also
reported by Shaykh al-Kulayni from one of the Holy Imams (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تُخَاصِمُوا بِدِينِكُمُ النَّاسَ، فَإنَّ الْمُخَاصَمَةَ
مُمْرِضَةٌ لِلْقَلْبِ. فَإنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ قَالَ لِنَبِيِّهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: ﴿إِنَّكَ لا تَهْدِي مَنْ أَحْبَبْتَ
وَلَكِنَّ اللَّهَ يَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ﴾ وَقَالَ: ﴿ أَفَأَنْتَ تُكْرِهُ
النَّاسَ حَتَّى يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not dispute with people about your religion, for dispute gives rise
to rumors. Almighty Allah has said to His Prophet (S),* ***‘Surely, you
cannot guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He pleases.
(28:56)’*** *He has also said,* ***‘Will you then force mankind to
become believers? (10/99)**’*[^2]

At the same time, some other traditions encourage inviting others to the
true faith when there is a suitable chance or when this would not lead
to dispute, because inviting to the true faith is a religious duty.[^3]

In this way, we can understand why the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) have always laid stress on demonstration of the pillars of religion
in general and loyalty to the divinely commissioned leadership of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) (i.e. *wilayah*) in particular. They have also
discriminated between Islam and atheism (*kufr*), and Islam and faith
(*iman*). Of course, all such demonstrations mean to highlight the
features of the true faith.

The distinctive feature of the faith of this virtuous community is love
for Imam ‘Ali and the other eleven Imams (‘a) with the belief that they
are the divinely designated leaders of Muslims. According to some
traditions, true faith is linked to *wilayah* (divinely commissioned
leadership of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)). Through an authentic chain of
authority, Zurarah has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بُنِيَ الإسْلاَمُ عَلَى خَمْسَةِ أَشْيَاءَ: عَلَى الصَّلاَةِ،
وَالزَّكَاةِ، وَالْحَجِّ، وَالصَّوْمِ، وَالْوِلاَيَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Islam is based on five things: salat (prayer), zakat (poor-rate), hajj
(pilgrimage), sawm (fasting), and wilayah.*

*Zurarah asked, “What is the best among these things?”*

*The Imam (‘a) answered:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلوِلاَيَةُ أَفْضَلُ لأَنَّهَا مِفْتَاحُهُنَّ، وَالوَلِيُّ هُوَ
الدَّلِيلُ عَلَيْهِنَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The best of them is wilayah, because it is the key to the others and
the wali is the guide to them.*

*Zurarah asked, “What is next in being the best?”*

*The Imam (‘a) answered, “Then comes prayer.”*

*Zurarah asked, “What is next?”*

*The Imam (‘a) answered, “Then comes zakat, because Almighty Allah has
paired it with prayer and mentioned prayer first.”*

*Zurarah asked, “What is next?”*

*The Imam (‘a) answered, “Then comes hajj.”*

*Zurarah asked, “What is next?”*

*The Imam (‘a) answered, “Then comes fasting.”*[^4]

According to another tradition reported by Shaykh al-Saduq in his book
of *al-Amali*, Abu-Hamzah al-Thumali reported Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn
(Zayn al-Abidin) (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ سَلْمَانُ الْفَارِسِيُّ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ: كُنْتُ جَالِساً
عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ إذْ أَقْبَلَ
عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ، فَقَالَ لَهُ: يَا
عَلِيُّ، أَلاَ أُبَشِّرُكَ؟ قَالَ: بَلَى، يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ. قَالَ:
هَذَا حَبِيبِي جِبْرَئِيلُ يُخْبِرُنِي عَنِ اللهِ جَلَّ جَلاَلُهُ
أَنَّهُ قَدْ أَعْطَى مُحِبِّيكَ وَشِيعَتَكَ سَبْعَ خِصَالٍ: الرِّفْقَ
عِنْدَ الْمَوْتِ، وَالأُنْسَ عِنْدَ الْوَحْشَةِ، وَالنُّورَ عِنْدَ
الظُّلْمَةِ، وَالأَمْنَ عِنْدَ الْفَزَعِ، وَالْقِسْطَ عِنْدَ
الْمِيزَانِ، وَالْجَوَازَ عَلَى الصِّرَاطِ، وَدُخُولَ الْجَنَّةِ
قَبْلَ سَائِرِ النَّاسِ مِنَ الأُمَمِ بِثَمَانِينَ عَاماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Salman al-Farisi—may Allah have mercy upon him—narrated that he was
with the Holy Prophet (S) when ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib (‘a) joined them. The
Holy Prophet (S) said to him,* *‘O ‘Ali, May I convey some good news to
you?’ ‘Yes, Allah’s Messenger! You may,’ answered ‘Ali (‘a). The Holy
Prophet (S) said, ‘Dear Archangel Gabriel has just informed me that
Almighty Allah has bestowed 7 blessings on those who love you and are
your followers. These are (1) lenience at the hour of death, (2) company
during loneli-ness of the grave, (3) light in the darkness of the grave,
(4) security against the horror of the Day of Resurrection, (5) justice
at The Balance, (6) permission to cross the Discriminating Bridge, and
(7) entry to Paradise eighty years before other nations.’*[^5]

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have specified a number of
features and indications that confirm this love and loyalty to the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) in a person. The most eminent of these indications are
piety, hard work, steadfastness against hardships, and self-sacrifice,
epitomized by the practice of visiting the holy tomb of Imam al-Husayn
(‘a) at Karbala', as is maintained by a number of traditions.

Turning to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) to Obtain Religious Knowledge
-------------------------------------------------------------

Another essential feature that characterizes the individuals of the
virtuous community from others is the issue of obtaining religious law
from its genuine and authentic sources. They are also distinguished for
deriving religious decisions about the settlement of disputes and
regarding emerging issues from an ‘Infallible Imam’ (‘a), ‘virtuous man’
or ‘decent jurisprudent’.

Although all Muslims unanimously agree that the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah
are the two basic sources of Islamic laws, the followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) are distinguished from the other Muslims by a number of
important points in this respect. These points are as follows:

Understanding the Holy Qur’an
-----------------------------

The followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are characterized by turning to
the Holy Imams (‘a) in the understanding of the Holy Qur’an and
religious issues that depend upon the Holy Qur’an. They have learnt to
distinguish between the abrogating and the abrogated texts of the Holy
Qur’an, the decisive and the allegorical, the specific and the general
and the summarized and the detailed. Likewise, they have learned the
motives of the revelation of each verse as well as other points
appertaining to the exegesis and interpretation of the Holy Qur’an.

All Muslims unanimously agree that ‘Ali and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) were
the most learned in the sciences of the Holy Qur’an. Authentic
traditions reported by both Sunnis and Shiites demonstrate this fact.

In this regard, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”كَيْفَ تُخَلِّفُونَنِي فِي الثَّقَلَيْنِ؟“ قِيلَ: ”وَمَا الثَّقَلاَنِ
يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ؟“ قَالَ: ”الأَكْبَرُ كِتَابُ اللهِ؛ سَبَبٌ طَرَفُهُ
بِيَدِ اللهِ وَطَرَفُهُ بِأَيْدِيكُمْ. فَتَمَسَّكُوا بِهِ لَنْ
تَزِلُّوا وَلَنْ تَضِلُّوا. وَالأَصْغَرُ عِتْرَتِي؛ فَإنَّهُمَا لَنْ
يَفْتَرِقَا حَتَّى يَرِدَا عَلَيَّ الْحَوْضَ. وَسَأَلْتُ لَهُمَا
ذَلِكَ رَبِّي. وَلاَ تَقَدَّمُوهُمَا فَتَهْلَكُوا، وَلاَ
تُعَلِّمُوهُمَا فَإنَّهُمَا أَعْلَمُ مِنْكُمْ.“
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“How will you behave after me regarding the two Weighty Things?” He was
asked, “Allah’s Messenger, what are the two Weighty Things?” He (S)
explained, “The major Weighty Thing is Allah’s Book. One of its edges is
in Allah’s Hand while the other is in yours; so, adhere to it
persistently so that you shall never slip or stray. The minor Weighty
Thing is my Progeny. Verily, these two things shall never separate from
each other until they both join me at the Divine Pond. I have prayed to
my Lord to guarantee this for me. So, do not precede them lest you shall
perish and do not impose your knowledge on them, for they are verily
more knowledgeable than you.”*[^6]

Acquaintance with the Holy Sunnah
---------------------------------

The followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) always turn to the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) to acquaint themselves with the Holy Sunnah, which has been exposed
to problems of forgery and obscurity. The reason for such problems can
be summed up in the following points:

(1) Some Prophetic traditions have been unfaithfully transmitted and
intentionally distorted.

(2) The texts of other traditions have been separated from the
circumstances under which they were uttered.

(3) Many traditions about the Holy Prophet (S) have been invented,
forged, and fabricated.

(4) Some genuine Prophetic traditions were suspended due to certain
personal views.

(5) Some people intentionally disregarded some genuine traditions
claiming that they served no interest for Islam. As a result, confusion
and immense commotion overshadowed some Islamic laws.

One of the distinctive features of the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
was that they turned to the Holy Imams (‘a) alone[^7] to receive,
understand, and learn the Holy Sunnah. They believed that the Imams (‘a)
held the Holy Sunnah in its entirety without need to turn to any other
conjectural points of evidence to reach the true religious law.

Acting upon the Verdicts of an Upright, Living, Well-Versed Jurisprudent
------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the process of receiving religious law, the followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) are restricted to taking such laws from a just and
responsible (*‘adil*)[^8] *mujtahid* (well-versed jurisprudent) who is
known to be experienced in Muslim jurisprudence. He must be extremely
pious and God-fearing. The truth about his character must be acquired
through personal investigation and a sense of responsibility, free from
the intimidation of rulers.

Acting according to a *mujtahid’s* verdicts and judgments and becoming
acquainted with religious conditions about a certain issue or dispute,
as well as compliance with the verdicts of a living[^9] *mujtahid*, must
be restricted to a person who has lived the event and whose
characteristics and qualities can be easily observed by people.

This point has given the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) a good
opportunity to move within the true framework of Muslim legislation.
They have, therefore, kept themselves away from dilemmas that are faced
by the followers of other Muslim sects regarding verdicts, leading them
to massive contradiction, discrepancy, and disputes about verdicts,
judgments, and conditions. This may be the logic behind the Holy Prophet
(S) highlighting the significance of referring to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
with regard to the laws of Islam in addition to the significance of
loyalty to their divinely commissioned leadership. Through many
authentic and uninterruptedly reported traditions, the Holy Prophet (S)
emphasized this on many occasions. One form of such emphasis is the
famous tradition known as *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* (the Two Weighty Things)
in which the Holy Prophet (S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَيْنِ؛ كِتَابَ اللهِ وَعِتْرَتِي أَهْلَ
بَيْتِي، مَا إنْ تَمَسَّكْتُمْ بِهِمَا لَنْ تَضِلُّوا بَعْدِي أَبَداً،
وَلَنْ يَفْتَرِقَا حَتَّى يَرِدَا عَلَيَّ الْحَوْضَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Indeed, I leave among you the two weighty things: the Book of Allah and
my Household—the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). If you adhere to them, you shall
never stray after me. They shall never leave one another until they both
join me at the Divine Pond.*[^10]

In the same way, the Holy Imams (‘a) have laid great emphasis on
referring to them (*marji’iyyah*) regarding the religious laws through
numerous clear-cut traditions. They have thus educated their followers
to carry out this duty and warned them against falling into deviations
by depending upon conjecture or equitable preferences (*istihsan*) in
the process of attaining religious law.

Commitment to the Highest Rank of Human Perfection
--------------------------------------------------

In the view of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), achieving the highest ranks of
human perfection is one of the objectives of Islam and signifies the
essential quality that the individuals of the virtuous community must
possess so that they can play their roles in human history adequately.
Only by doing so can these individuals influence the progress of human
history and bring victory, wealth, and divine fortune to a society.
Declaring this fact, the Holy Qur’an states:

**
**

وَلَوْ أَنَّ أَهْلَ الْقُرَىٰ آمَنُوا وَاتَّقَوْا لَفَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ
بَرَكَاتٍ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَلَٰكِنْ كَذَّبُوا
فَأَخَذْنَاهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ (7/96)

***And if the people of the towns had believed and shown piety, We would
certainly have opened up for them blessings from the heaven and the
earth, but they rejected, so We overtook them for what they had earned.
(7/96)***

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) emphasized this not only in the course of educating
their followers (Shi’ah), but also while demonstrating their identity
and personality. In this respect, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) is reported to have
quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying to Imam ‘Ali (‘a),

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَلِيُّ؛ طُوبَى‏ لِمَنْ أَحَبَّكَ وَ‏صَدَّقَ بِكَ، وَوَيْلٌ لِمَنْ
أَبْغَضَكَ وَكَذَّبَ بِكَ. مُحِبُّوكَ مَعْرُوفُونَ فِي السَّماءِ
السَّابِعَة وَالأَرْضِ السَّابِعَة السُّفْلَى وَمَا بَيْنِ ذلِكَ. هُمْ
أَهْلُ الدِّينِ وَالوَرْعِ وَالسَّمْتِ الْحَسَنِ وَالتَّوَاضُعِ للهِ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ؛ خَاشِعَةً أَبْصَارُهُمْ، وَجِلَةً قُلُوبُهُمْ لِذِكْرِ
اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، وَقَدْ عَرَفُوا حَقَّ وِلاَيَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O ‘Ali, blessed be those who love you and believe in you. Woe be to
those who bear malice against you and belie you. Your devotees are known
by the inhabitants of the* *Seventh Sky, the seventh layer of the earth,
and whatever exists between these two. They are the people of
religiousness, piety, noble manners, and submission to Almighty Allah.
Their eyes and their hearts are always full of fear whenever Allah, the
Almighty and Majestic, is mentioned. They have recognized their duties
towards your (divinely commissioned) leadership.*[^11]

In this regard, traditions have described a number of attributes and
basic features that the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) must enjoy.
These features are as follows:

Worship and Asceticism
----------------------

Traditions have laid emphasis on all aspects of asceticism and
perseverance in worship. Many traditions carry an excellent depiction of
the exemplary worship of the Ahl al-Bayt’s followers. In this regard,
Abul-Miqdad has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا الْمِقْدَادِ؛ إنَّمَا شِيعَةُ عَلِيٍّ الشَّاحِبُونَ
النَّاحِلُونَ الذَّابِلُونَ: ذَابِلَةٌ شِفَاهُهُمْ، خَمِيصَةٌ
بُطُونُهُمْ، مُتَغَيِّرَةٌ أَلْوَانُهُمْ، مُصْفَرَّةٌ وُجُوهُهُمْ.
إذَا جَنَّهُمُ اللَّيْلُ اتَّخَذُوا الأَرْضَ فِرَاشاً وَاسْتَقْبَلُوا
الأَرْضَ بِجِبَاهِهِمْ. كَثِيرٌ سُجُودُهُمْ، كَثِيرَةٌ دُمُوعُهُمْ،
كَثِيرٌ دُعَاؤُهُمْ، كَثِيرٌ بُكَاؤُهُمْ. يَفْرَحُ النَّاسُ وَهُمْ
مَحْزُونُونَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Abul-Miqdad, the Shi’ah of ‘Ali are only those who are pale, thin,
and feeble. Their lips are faded because of worship and their stomachs
are emaciated. Their faces are pale and yellowish. When night comes upon
them, they take the ground as their beds and welcome the ground with
their foreheads. Their prostrations are long, their teardrops heavy, and
their prayers innumerable. While people rejoice, they remain in
grief.*[^12]

Shaykh al-Mufid, in his book of *al-Irshad* and Shaykh al-Tusi, in his
book of *al-Amali*, have reported the following:

*One luminous night the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali, (‘a) went
out of his house towards the graveyard. A group of people followed him.
He turned towards them and asked who they were.*

*“We are your followers (Shi’ah), Amir al-Mu'minin,” they answered.*

*He said, “But I cannot see the marks of a true Shi’ah on your faces.”*

*“What are the marks of a true Shi’ah?” asked they.*

*He (‘a) said:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صُفْرُ الوُجُوهِ مِنَ السَّهَرِ، عُمْشُ العُيُونِ مِنَ البُكَاءِ،
حُدْبُ الظُّهُورِ مِنَ القِيَامِ، خُمْصُ البُطُونِ مِنَ الصِّيَامِ،
ذُبْلُ الشِّفَاهِ مِنَ الدُّعَاءِ، عَلَيْهِمْ غَبَرَةُ الْخَاشِعِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The true Shi’ah are pale-faced because of staying up at night,
thin-stomached because of fasting, and dry-lipped because of endless
praying to Almighty Allah. The dust of* *humility covers them.”*[^13]

Further details of these features described by Imam ‘Ali (‘a) for the
true Shi’ah can be envisaged from his discourse with al-Ahnaf ibn Qays
as reported by Shaykh al-Saduq in his book of *Sifat al-Shi’ah*
(Qualities of the Shi’ah):

Al-Ahnaf ibn Qays once invited Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) to al-Basrah after
the Battle of the Camel. When Amir al-Mu’minin responded to the
invitation, he asked al-Ahnaf to also include his companions in the
invitation. Some very reverent people with withered skin came in.

“O Amir al-Mu’minin,” asked al-Ahnaf, “What has befallen these people?
Was it scarcity of food or the terror of war?”

*Answering him, Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) said:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَا أَحْنَفُ! إنَّ اللهَ سُبْحَانَهُ أَحَبَّ أَقْوَاماً
تَنَسَّكُوا لَهُ فِي دَارِ الدُّنْيَا تَنَسُّكَ مَنْ هَجَمَ عَلَى مَا
عَلِمَ مِنْ قُرْبِهِمْ مِنْ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ
يُشَاهِدُوهَا فَحَمَلُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ عَلَى مَجْهُودِهَا وَكَانُوا
إذَا ذَكَرُوا صَبَاحَ يَوْمِ الْعَرْضِ عَلَى اللهِ سُبْحَانَهُ
تَوَهَّمُوا خُرُوجَ عُنُقٍ يَخْرُجُ مِنَ النَّارِ يَحْشُرُ
الْخَلاَئِقَ إلَى رَبِّهِمْ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى وَكِتَابٍ يَبْدُو
فِيهِ عَلَى رُؤُوسِ الأَشْهَادِ فَضَائِحُ ذُنُوبِهِمْ، فَكَادَتْ
أَنْفُسُهُمْ تَسِيلُ سَيَلاَناً أَوْ تَطِيرُ قُلُوبُهُمْ بِأَجْنِحَةِ
الْخَوْفِ طَيَرَاناً، وَتُفَارِقُهُمْ عُقُولُهُمْ إذَا غَلَتْ بِهِمْ
مِنْ أَجْلِ التَّجَرُّدِ إلَى اللهِ سُبْحَانَهُ غَلَيَاناً. فَكَانُوا
يِحِنُّونَ حَنِينَ الوَالِهِ فِي دُجَى الظُّلَمِ، وَكَانُوا
يُفْجَعُونَ مِنْ خَوْفِ مَا أَوْقَفُوا عَلَيْهِ أَنْفُسَهُمْ،
فَمَضَوْا ذُبْلَ الْجِسَامِ، حَزِينَةً قُلُوبُهُمْ، كَالِحَةً
وُجُوهُهُمْ، ذَابِلَةً شِفَاهُهُمْ، خَامِصَةً بُطُونُهُمْ، تَرَاهُمْ
سُكَارَى. سُمَّارُ وَحْشَةٍ بِاللَّيْلِ، مُتَخَشِّعُونَ كَأَنَّهُمْ
شِنَانٌ بَوَالٍ، قَدْ أَخْلَصُوا للهِ أَعْمَالَهُمْ سِرّاً
وَعَلاَنِيَةً، فَلَمْ تَأْمَنْ مِنْ فَزَعِهِ قُلُوبُهُمْ، بَلْ كَانُوا
كَمَنْ حَرَسُوا قِبَابَ خَرَاجِهِمْ. فَلَوْ رَأَيْتَهُمْ فِي
لَيْلَتِهِمْ، وَقَدْ نَامَتِ الْعُيُونُ، وَهَدَأَتِ الأَصْوَاتُ،
وَسَكَنَتِ الْحَرَكَاتُ مِنَ الطَّيْرِ فِي الوُكُورِ وَقَدْ
نَهْنَهَهُمْ هَوْلُ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ بِالْوَعِيدِ عَنِ الرُّقَادِ
كَمَا قَالَ سُبْحَانَهُ: ”أَفَأَمِنَ أَهْلُ الْقُرَى أَنْ يَأتِيَهُمْ
بَأسُنَا بَيَاتاً وَهُمْ نَائِمُونَ؟“ فَاسْتَيْقَظُوا إلَيْهَا
فِزِعِينَ، وَقَامُوا إلَى صَلاَتِهِمْ مُعَوِّلِينَ، بَاكِينَ تَارَةً
وَأُخْرَى مُسَبِّحِينَ، يَبْكُونَ فِي مَحَارِيبِهِمْ وَيَرُنُّونَ،
يَصْطَفُّونَ لَيْلَةً مُظْلِمَةً بَهْمَاءَ يَبْكُونَ. فَلَوْ
رَأَيْتَهُمْ يَا أَحْنَفُ فِي لَيْلَتِهِمْ قِيَاماً عَلَى
أَطْرَافِهِمْ، مُنْحَنِيَةً ظُهُورُهُمْ يَتْلُونَ أَجْزَاءَ الْقُرْآنِ
لِصَلاَتِهِمْ، قَدِ اشْتَدَّتْ إعْوَالُهُمْ وَنَحِيبُهُمْ
وَزَفِيرُهُمْ، إذَا زَفَرُوا خِلْتَ النَّارُ قَدْ أَخَذَتْ مِنْهُمْ
إلَى حَلاَقِيمِهِمْ، وَإذَا أَعْوَلُوا حَسِبْتَ السَّلاَسِلُ قَدْ
صُفِّدَتْ فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ، فَلَوْ رَأَيْتَهُمْ فِي نَهَارِهِمْ إذاً
لَرَأَيْتَ قَوماً ”يَمْشُونَ عَلَى الأَرْضِ هَوْناً“ وَيَقُولُونَ
”لِلنَّاسِ حُسْناً فَإذَا ”خَاطَبَهُمُ الْجَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا سَلاَماً“
”وَإِذَا مَرُّوا بِاللَّغْوِ مَرُّوا كِرَاماً“. قَد قَيَّدُوا
أَقْدَامَهُمْ مِنَ التَّهَمَاتِ، وَأَبْكَمُوا أَلْسِنَتَهُمْ أَنْ
يَتَكَلَّمُوا فِي أَعْرَاضِ النَّاسِ، وَسَجَّمُوا أَسْمَاعَهُمْ أَنْ
يَلِجَهَا خَوْضُ خَائِضٍ، وَكَحَّلُوا أَبْصَارَهُمْ بِغَضِّ الْبَصَرِ
عَنِ الْمَعَاصِي، وَانْتَحَوْا دَارَ السَّلاَمِ الَّتِي مَنْ دَخَلَهَا
كَانَ آمِناً مِنَ الرَّيْبِ وَالأَحْزَانِ. فَلَعَلَّكَ يَا أَحْنَفُ
شَغَلَكَ نَظَرُكَ فِي وَجْهِ وَاحِدَةٍ تُبْدِي الأَسْقَامَ بِغَضَارَةِ
وَجْهِهَا، وَدَارٍ قَدْ أُشْغِلْتَ بِنَقْشِ رَوَاقِهَا وَسُتُورٍ قَدْ
عَلَّقْتَهَا، وَالرِّيحُ وَالآجَامُ مُوَكَّلَةٌ بِثَمَرِهَا.
وَلَيْسَتْ دَارُكَ هَذِهِ دَارَ الْبَقَاءِ فَأَحْمَتْكَ الدَّارُ
الَّتِي خَلَقَهَا اللهُ سُبْحَانَهُ مِنْ لُؤْلُؤَةٍ بَيْضَاءَ،
فَشَقَّقَ فِيهَا أَنْهَارَهَا، وَغَرَسَ فِيهَا أَشْجَارَهَا،
وَأَظْلَلَ عَلَيْهَا بِالنُّضَّجِ مِنْ أَثْمَارِهَا وَكَبَسَهَا
بِالْعَوَاتِقِ مِنْ حُورِهَا. ثُمَّ أَسْكَنَهَا أَوْلِيَاءَهُ وَأَهْلَ
طَاعَتِهِ. فَلَوْ رَأَيْتَهُمْ يَا أَحْنَفُ وَقَدْ قَدِمُوا عَلَى
زِيَادَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ سُبْحَانَهُ فَإذَا ضُرِبَتْ جَنَائِبُهُمْ
صَوَّتَتْ رَوَاحِلُهُمْ بِأَصْوَاتٍ لَمْ يَسْمَعِ السَّامِعُونَ
بِأَحْسَنَ مِنْهَا، وَأَظَلَّتْهُمْ غَمَامَةٌ فَأَمْطَرَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ
الْمِسْكَ وَالرَّادَنَ، وَصَهِلَتْ خُيُولُهَا بَيْنَ أَغْرَاسِ تِلْكَ
الْجِنَانِ، وَتَخلَّلَتْ بِهِمْ نُوقُهُمْ بَيْنَ كُثُبِ الزَّعْفَرَانِ
وَيَتَّطِئُ مِنْ تَحْتِ أَقْدَامِهِمُ اللُّؤْلُؤُ وَالْمَرْجَانُ
وَاسْتَقْبَلَتْهُمْ قَهَارِمَتُهَا بِمَنَابِرِ الرَّيْحَانِ. وَهَاجَتِ
لَهُمْ رِيحٌ مِنْ قِبَلِ الْعَرْشِ فَنَثَرَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الْيَاسَمِينَ
وَالأُقْحُوَانَ، وَذَهَبُوا إلَى بَابِهَا فَيَفْتَحُ لَهُمُ الْبَابَ
رِضْوَانُ ثُمَّ يَسْجُدُونَ للهِ فِي فَنَاءِ الْجِنَانِ. فَقَالَ
لَهُمُ الْجَبَّارُ: إرْفَعُوا رُؤوسَكُمْ، فَإنِّي قَدْ رَفَعْتُ
عَنْكُمْ مَؤونَةَ الْعِبَادَةِ، وَأَسْكَنْتُكُمْ جَنَّةَ الرِّضْوَانِ.
فَإنْ فَاتَكَ يَا أَحْنَفُ مَا ذَكَرْتُ لَكَ فِي صَدْرِ كَلاَمِي،
لَتُتْرَكُنَّ فِي سَرَابِيلِ الْقَطِرَانِ وَلَتُطَوَّفَنَّ بَيْنَهَا
وَبَيْنَ حَمِيمٍ آنٍ، وَلَتُسْقَيَنَّ شَرَاباً حَارَّ الْغَلَيَانِ فِي
أَنْضَاجِهِ، فَكَمْ يَؤْمَئِذٍ فِي النَّارِ مِنْ صُلْبٍ مَحْطُومٍ
وَوَجْهٍ مَهْشُومٍ وَمُشَوَّهٍ مَضْرُوبٍ عَلَى الْخُرْطُومِ، قَدْ
أَكَلَتِ الْجَامِعَةُ كَفَّهُ، وَالْتَحَمَ الطَّوْقُ بِعُنُقِهِ.
فَلَوْ رَأَيْتَهُمْ يَا أَحْنَفُ يَنْحَدِرُونَ فِي أَوْدِيَتِهَا،
وَيَصْعَدُونَ جِبَالَهَا، وَقَدْ أُلْبِسُوا الْمُقَطَّعَاتِ مِنَ
القَطِرَانِ، وَأُقْرِنُوا مَعَ فُجَّارِهَا وَشَيَاطِينِهَا، فَإذَا
اسْتَغَاثُوا بِأَسْوَأَ أَخْذٍ مِنْ حَرِيقٍ شَدَّتْ عَلَيْهِمْ
عَقَارِبُهَا وَحَيَّاتُهَا، وَلَوْ رَأَيْتَ مُنَادِياً يُنَادِي وَهُوَ
يَقُولُ: يَا أَهْلَ الْجَنَّةِ وَنَعِيمِهَا، وَيَا أَهْلَ حُلِيِّهَا
وَحُلَلِهَا، خُلُودٌ فَلاَ مَوْتَ، فَعِنْدَهَا يَنْقَطِعُ رَجَاؤُهُمْ،
وَتَنْغَلِقُ الأَبْوَابُ، وَتَنْقَطِعُ بِهِمُ الأَسْبَابُ. فَكَمْ
يَوْمَئِذٍ مِنْ شَيْخٍ يُنَادِي وَاشَيْبَتَاهُ! وَكَمْ مِنْ شَابٍّ
يُنَادِي وَاشَبَابَاهُ! وَكَمْ مِنِ امْرَأَةٍ تُنَادِي
وَافَضِيحَتَاهُ! هُتِكَتْ عَنْهُمُ السُّتُورُ، فَكَمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ مِنْ
مَغْمُوسٍ بَيْنَ أَطْبَاقِهَا مَحْبُوسٌ. يَا لَكَ غَمْسَةٌ
أَلْبَسَتْكَ بَعَدْ لِبَاسِ الكُتَّانِ وَالْمَاءِ الْمُبَرَّدِ عَلَى
الْجُدْرَانِ وَأَكْلِ الطَّعَامِ أَلْوَاناً بَعْدَ أَلْوَانٍ لِبَاساً
لَمْ يَدَعْ لَكَ شَعْراً نَاعِماً كُنْتَ مُطْعِمَهُ إلاَّ بَيَّضَهُ
وَلاَ عَيْناً كُنْتَ تُبْصِرُ بِهَا إلَى حَبِيبٍ إلاَّ فَقَأَهَا،
هَذَا مَا أَعَدَّ اللهُ لِلْمُجْرِمِينَ، وَذَلِكَ مَا أَعَدَّ اللهُ
لِلْمُتَّقِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No, Ahnaf. Their state is not due to either. Allah, the Glorified,
loved some people, those who served Him with devotion in this world as
if they were heavily burdened, because He knew their dread of the Day of
Resurrection before they had witnessed it. My companions have therefore
exerted all their possible efforts in this regard. When they imagine the
morning when all creatures will appear in the presence of their Lord,
they imagine a rope coming out of Hell to gather all the creatures
before their Lord and visualize the record that will open before the
Witnesses and uncover all their sins. Thus, their souls turn to flee,
their hearts seek escape with wings of fear, and their minds toss hither
and thither as if boiling in a cauldron. Though they long (to meet
Allah) with the longing of one lost in the darkness, they are distressed
and afraid because of that to which they have dedicated themselves.
Thus, they have become weak-bodied, broken-hearted, gloomy-faced,
dry-lipped, and thin-stomached. You see them as if they are drunk; they
talk in the loneliness of nights and are as worn out as their shriveled
skins. They have sincerely offered their acts to Allah, overtly and in
private. Their hearts have never felt secure because of their fear of
Allah. They have guarded their actions knowing they were the domes of
their tribute. Were you to see them at night—when eyes sleep, silence
prevails, and birds remain calm and motionless in their nests—the
threatening horror of the Day of Resurrection deters them from sleeping,
being reminded of Allah saying, “Did the people of the towns think
themselves secure from Our wrath that could strike them at night during
their sleep? (7:97)” So, they wake up panic-stricken, and hurry to their
prayers, crying. Sometimes they weep and at other times praise Allah. In
their places of worship, their wailing resounds. On gloomy* *nights,
they weep. Were you, O Ahnaf, to see them at night either standing or
with backs bent! They recite parts of the Qur’an in their prayers. Their
wailings, lamentations, and sighs are heart-rending. If they sigh, you
think the fire (of Hell) has taken them by the throat. If they wail, you
think their necks are in the noose. If you look at them during the day,
you see them as people who “walk gently on the earth,” speak “politely
to people,” and “when addressed by the ignorant ones, their only
response is, ‘Peace be with you.’” And “when they come across something
impious, they pass by, ignoring it.” They prevent their feet from
following and investigating people’s defects, stop their tongues from
speaking ill of people’s reputations, check their ears from hearing evil
about others, turn their eyes away from (looking at) the acts of
disobedience to Allah, and direct them towards the Abode of
Peace—whoever enters it will be saved from doubt and grief. It seems, O
Ahnaf, that you have been engaged in looking at a face that afflicts you
with various sorts of misfortunes the very moment that you enjoy looking
at its prosperous appearance; and you have been engaged in looking at
the drawings of the exterior of that lodging, as well as its hanging
curtains, while wind and hot weather are destroying its fruits within.
Nevertheless, that lodging, which is definitely not your permanent
abode, has distracted you from (working for) the Final Abode that Allah
created from a white pearl, deep rivers, and planted trees, and cast
shadows of ripe fruit over it, and filled it with young Paradisiacal
women (houris). There He will lodge (permanently) His disciples and the
obedient people.* *Were you, O Ahnaf, to see them when they will come to
their Lord, the Glorified! When their mares are stricken, their riding
camels will produce a sound that no one has ever heard. A cloud that
rains musk and saffron will overshadow them. Their mares will neigh
among the plants of the gardens (of Paradise), and their camels will
take them over the rising slopes of saffron. They will walk solemnly on
pearls and corals. The curators of Paradise will receive them* *with
pulpits of basil. A wind from the direction of the Divine Throne will
then disperse over them jasmine and daisies. When they approach the
portals (of Paradise), Ridhwan (the Paradise doorkeeper) will open these
portals before them and they will prostrate themselves before Allah in
the courtyard of Paradise. Allah, the Omnipotent, will say to them,
“Raise your heads. I have freed you from the burden of worship and
housed you in the bliss of contentment.” If you, O Ahnaf, disregard that
which I have related, you will be left in shirts of tar, run between
blazing fire and boiling water, and be served with boiling water. On
that day, many spines will be broken, many faces distorted, and many
deformed and beaten on the nose. Likewise, chains will gouge the palms
of many and bands will choke the necks. Were you, O Ahnaf, to see them
slipping into the valleys of Hell and climbing the mountains there while
dressed in tar and grouped with the sinful and the devils! If they call
for help against the fire, scorpions and snakes will attack them. Were
you also to see the caller who will say, “O people of Paradise and its
bliss, jewels, and garments, you will live forever and you will never
die.” Only then will they lose hope completely. The doors will close and
relationships will be cut off. On that day, many old men will mourn
their old age, many youths will mourn their youth, and many women will
bewail their scandals. The screens (separating them from Hell) will be
removed. On that day, many will be dipped into and detained between the
layers of Hell. It is a dip that will cause you to wear a garment–after
having worn linen clothes, drunk water that was cooled, and eaten
various meals—which will turn every single smooth hair grey and gouge
out the eye with which you saw your dear ones. This is what Allah has
prepared for the* *offenders* *and that was what Allah has prepared for
the God-fearing.*[^14]

Another depiction has been reported by al-Karachaki in his book of *Kanz
al-Fawa'id*[^15] as reported by Nawf al-Bakkali[^16] from Imam ‘Ali (‘a)
in an address to a group of his companions among whom was Hammam ibn
‘Abadah ibn Khaytham. A part of this discourse has been recorded by
al-Sharif al-Radhi in *Nahj al-Balaghah*.[^17]

Practical Belief in Wilayah
---------------------------

One of the characteristics of the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) is
conformity between their claim of Shi’ism and loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) on the one hand, and practical patterning after them on the other.
Islam has highlighted this as one of its most significant principles.
The Holy Qur’an says:

> يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لِمَ تَقُولُونَ مَا لَا تَفْعَلُونَ {2}
> كَبُرَ مَقْتًا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَنْ تَقُولُوا مَا لَا تَفْعَلُونَ {3}
> (61)

***O you who believe: Why do you say that which you do not do? It is
most hateful to Allah that you should say that which you do not do.
(61/2-3)***

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have also called attention to this principle as
they established connections between faith and practice and clearly
stated that perfection of faith cannot be achieved without putting faith
into practice. In the coming discussions, more light will be shed on
this topic. Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْبَغِي لِمَنِ إدَّعَى هَذَا الأَمْرَ فِي السِّرِّ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ
عَلَيْهِ بِبُرْهَانٍ فِي الْعَلاَنِيَةِ… يُحِلُّ حَلاَلَ اللهِ،
وَيُحَرِّمُ حَرَامَ اللهِ، وَيَكُونُ لَهُ ظَاهِرٌ يُصَدِّقُ بَاطِنَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who claims embracing this faith (i.e. loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a))* *within one’s heart must provide overt proof.…He must commit to
all that which Almighty Allah has deemed lawful, refrain from whatever
He has deemed unlawful, and show an outward appearance that proves his
inner belief.*[^18]

He (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ مِنْ شِيعَتِنَا مَنْ قَالَ بِلِسَانِهِ وَخَالَفَنَا فِي
أَعْمَالِنَا وَآثَارِنَا؛ وَلَكِنْ مِنْ شِيعَتِنَا مَنْ وَافَقَنَا
بِلِسَانِهِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَاتَّبَعَ آثَارَنَا وَعَمِلَ عَمَلَنَا.
أُولَئِكَ شِيعَتُنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, he who claims being one of our followers in words but violates
our deeds and traditions is not one of our Shi’ah. Our Shi’ah are only
those who concur with us in words and intentions, imitate our
traditions, and emulate our deeds. These, indeed, are our Shi’ah.*[^19]

Through an authentic chain of authority, al-Kashshi reported Dawud ibn
Farqad to have said that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ أَصْحَابِي أُولُوا النُّهَى وَالتُّقَى؛ فَمَنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ مِنْ
أَهْلِ النُّهَى وَالتُّقَى فَلَيْسَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My companions are verily the people of understanding and piety. Hence,
he who does not enjoy understanding and piety is not my companion.*[^20]

Cordial and Practical Devotion to Almighty Allah
------------------------------------------------

Another feature that distinguishes the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
is devotion to Almighty Allah in practice and behavior as well as in
emotions and feelings—at both individual and collective levels—which
includes commitment to building good relationships with others in order
to connect with Almighty Allah. In other words, followers of Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) befriend people for Almighty Allah’s sake, shun others for the same
sake, and keep themselves away from worldly attractions and carnal
tendencies.

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have focused on this aspect, which expresses real
religiousness and faith in the doctrinal commitments of a Muslim. They
have laid down this aspect as a goal and objective for their followers.
This has come in the form of traditions and discourses declaring this
objective openly or expressing it as one of the practical commitments.

In his book of *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through an
authentic chain of authority that Abu-’Ubaydah al-Hadhdha' reported Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحَبَّ للهِ وَأَبْغَضَ للهِ وَأَعْطَى للهِ فَهُوَ مِمَّنْ كَمُلَ
إِيـمَانُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who loves, hates, and gives for the sake of Allah actually enjoys
perfect faith.*[^21]

According to another tradition, Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وِدُّ الْمُؤْمِنِ فِي اللهِ مِنْ أَعْظَمِ شُعَبِ الإيمَانِ. أَلاَ
وَمَنْ أَحَبَّ فِي اللهِ وَأَبْغَضَ فِي اللهِ وَأَعْطَى فِي اللهِ
وَمَنَعَ فِي اللهِ فَهُوَ مِنْ أَصْفِيَاءِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When a believer loves (others) for the sake of Almighty Allah, this
will be one of the greatest parts of faith. Verily, he who loves, hates,
gives, and withholds for the sake of Almighty Allah is one of His elite
servants.*[^22]

Other traditions also express true faith and piety through love that is
intended purely for Allah’s sake. Fudhayl ibn Yasar reported that he
asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) whether loving and hating for Allah’s sake is
part of faith. The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَلِ الإيمَانُ إلاَّ الْحُبُّ وَالبُغْضُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Is true faith anything other than love and hate?*

Then, the Imam (‘a) quoted the following Qur’anic verse to confirm his
words:

>  اللَّهَ حَبَّبَ إِلَيْكُمُ الْإِيمَانَ وَزَيَّنَهُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ
> وَكَرَّهَ إِلَيْكُمُ الْكُفْرَ وَالْفُسُوقَ وَالْعِصْيَانَ ۚ
> أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الرَّاشِدُونَ (49/7)

***…Allah has endeared faith to you and has made it seemly in your
hearts, and He has made hateful to you unbelief, transgression and
disobedience; these are the followers of a right way. (49/7)***[^23]

Abu-Ubaydah al-Hadhdha' also reported that Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said to
him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا زِيَادُ، وَيْحَكَ! وَهَلِ الدِّينُ إلاَّ الْحُبُّ؟ أَلاَ تَرَى
قَوْلَ اللهِ تَعَالَى: ﴿قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ
فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ اللَّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ
وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Ziyad, woe unto you! Is faith anything other than love? You should
have considered Almighty Allah’s saying (in the Holy Qur’an),* ***“Say:
If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you and forgive you
your faults, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. (3/31)”***[^24]

Acting as Excellent Exemplars
-----------------------------

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have listed a number of features, the most
important of which is to become excellent exemplars among people in both
individual and social behavior. Because of the necessity of this
feature, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have instructed their followers to be
characterized by it; making it one of the goals of building a virtuous
community.

This emphasis of the Holy Imams (‘a) that their followers be
characterized by piety, godliness, sincerity, and constancy in worship
can represent only one aspect of the many aspects of acting as excellent
exemplars.

In view of this, the practical demonstration as excellent exemplars must
be among the features that distinguish the Shi’ah from others. Moreover,
the Holy Imams (‘a), through traditions, have matched this feature to
their own attributes, since the Imams (‘a) have always been excellent
exemplars.

‘Umar ibn Yahya is reported to have heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ أَحَقَّ النَّاسِ بِالْوَرَعِ آلُ مُحَمَّدٍ وَشِيعَتُهُمْ، كَيْمَا
تَقْتَدِيَ الرَّعِيَّةُ بِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, the first to be characterized by devoutness are the Household
of Muhammad (‘a)* *and their followers so that the people will pattern
themselves after them.(*[^25]*)*

As has been previously cited, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّ الرَّجُلَ مِنْكُمْ إذَا وَرِعَ فِي دِينِهِ وَصَدَقَ الْحَدِيثَ
وَأَدَّى الأَمَانَةَ وَحَسَّنَ خُلُقَهُ مَعَ النَّاسِ قِيلَ هَذَا
جَعْفَرِيٌّ، فَيَسُرُّنِي ذَلِكَ وَيَدْخُلُ عَلَيَّ مِنْهُ السُّرُورَ،
وَقِيلَ هَذَا أَدَبُ جَعْفَرٍ. وَاللهِ لَحَدَّثَنِي أَبِي عَلَيْهِ
السَّلاَمُ أَنَّ الرَّجُلَ كَانَ يَكُونُ فِي القَبِيلَةِ مِنْ شِيعَةِ
عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَيَكُونُ زَيْنَهَا، آدَاهُمْ
لِلأَمَانَةِ، وَأَقْضَاهُمْ لِلْحُقُوقِ، وَأَصْدَقَهُمْ لِلْحَدِيثِ،
إلَيْهِ وَصَايَاهُمْ وَوَدَائِعُهُمْ، تُسْأَلُ الْعَشِيرَةُ عَنْهُ
فَتَقُولُ: مَنْ مِثْلُ فُلانٍ؟ إنَّهُ آدَانَا لِلأَمَانَةِ
وَأَصْدَقُنَا لِلْحَدِيثِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, if one of you shows piety in his religious affairs, speaks
nothing but the truth, and behaves politely towards the people, they
will refer to him as belonging to Ja’far and they will say that this is
the way Ja’far educates his followers. This will please me* *and fill me
with delight. If one does the opposite, it is I who will be defamed and
offended, since the people will say that Ja’far has educated his
followers in this manner. I swear by Allah that my father (‘a) told me
that a Shi’ite in a clan would be the best of its individuals, the most
trustworthy, the most observant of their rights, and the most honest.
The other individuals would always keep their wills and trusts with him,
and when asked about him, they would answer that he was unmatched among
them, since he was the most trustworthy and the most honest.*[^26]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ أَصْحَابَ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ كَانُوا الْمَنْظُورَ
إلَيْهِمْ فِي الْقَبَائِلِ، وَكَانُوا أَصْحَابَ الْوَدَائِعِ،
مَرْضِيِّينَ عِنْدَ النَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The companions of ‘Ali (‘a) were the most notable figures in their
clans. They were also the most trustworthy and the most respected in the
eyes of the people.*[^27]

According to another tradition, Sulayman ibn Mahran reported that he
once visited Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) and found a group of Shi’ah listening to
the Imam while he was instructing them by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَعَاشِرَ الشِّيعَةِ! كُونُوا لَنَا زَيْناً، وَلاَ تَكُونُوا عَلَيْنَا
شَيْناً. قُولُوا لِلنَّاسِ حُسْناً، وَاحْفَظُوا أَلْسِنَتَكُمْ،
وَكُفُّوهَا عَنِ الفُضُولِ وَقُبْحِ القَوْلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O groups of Shi’ah, represent us with fairness and do not represent us
unbecomingly. Speak to men good words, withhold your tongues (from
speaking evil), and desist from idle chat and foul language.*[^28]

Steadfastness
-------------

The capability to withstand and undertake the great historical
responsibility of steadfastness in order to achieve the major goals of
Imamate must be found in the personalities of the individuals of the
virtuous community, because without such qualities human perfection
cannot be attained. Steadfastness includes commitment, self-control,
keeping a confidence, patience, trust in Allah and reliance upon Him,
self-sacrifice, courteous association with people, fulfillment of
promises and trusts, practicing the noble manners of Islam, cognizance
and a sound understanding of the historical conditions and events of
Islam.

The virtuous community is in urgent need of these qualities to ensure
endurance in the face of annihilation and spiritual and mental pressure
exercised by the enemies against them; to confront social clashes,
political changes, ethical and social problems; and to guarantee the
continuity of the transmission of the message of Islam to the coming
generations. To facilitate this, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) prepared, for
their followers, multi-dimensional systems, regulations, special
rules—such as *taqiyyah*—and a collective security system.[^29] They
also drafted certain systems of social association which include the
spiritual, ethical, and cultural aspects of life. The Holy Imams (‘a)
have considered compliance with these regulations to be one of the
features that discriminate a Shi’ite individual from others.

Let us now mention some traditions that refer to the quality of
steadfastness:

Ibn Sadaqah has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إمْتَحِنُوا شِيعَتَنَا عِنْدَ مَوَاقِيتِ الصَّلاَةِ كَيْفَ
مُحَافَظَتُهُمْ عَلَيْهَا، وَإلَى أَسْرَارِنَا كَيْفَ حِفْظُهُمْ لَهَا
عِنْدَ عَدُوِّنَا، وَإلَى أَمْوَالِهِمْ كَيْفَ مُوَاسَاتُهُمْ
لإِخْوَانِهِمْ فِيهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You can test our true followers (the Shi’ah) through their performing
the prayers at the best time of prayer, keeping our secrets from our
enemies, and taking their brethren-in-faith as partners in their
wealth.*[^30]

Another tradition holds that Abul-Rabi’ al-Shami reported that he once
visited Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) and found his house full of attendants some
of whom were from Khurasan and others from Syria and other districts. He
could not find a place to sit. Then, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), who was
leaning, sat erect and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا شِيعَةَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ! إعْلَمُوا أَنَّهُ لَيْسَ مِنَّا مَنْ لَمْ
يَمْلِكْ نَفْسَهُ عِنْدَ غَضَبِهِ، وَمَنْ لَمْ يُحْسِنْ صُحْبَةَ مَنْ
صَحِبَهُ، وَمُخَالَفَةَ مَنْ خَالَفَهُ، وَمُرَافَقَةَ مَنْ رَافَقَهُ،
وَمُجَاوَرَةَ مَنْ جَاوَرَهُ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Adherents of Muhammad’s Household, know that they are not ours who do
not control themselves when in rage, do not respect the association with
their companions, associates, and parties, and do not oppose those
opposed to them in a peaceful way.*[^31]

Maysir has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying to him, “O Maysir! May
I introduce to you our true Shi’ah?” Maysir said, “May I be your devoted
servant! Please do.” The Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُمْ حُصُونٌ حَصِينَةٌ، وَصُدُورٌ أَمِينَةٌ، وَأَحْلاَمٌ
رَزِينَةٌ، لَيْسُوا بِالْمَذَايِيعِ الْبُذَّرِ، وَلاَ بِالْجُفَاةِ
الْمُرَائِينَ، رُهْبَانُ اللَّيْلِ، أُسْدُ النَّهَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*They are strong fortresses, faithful hearts and restrained intellects.
They do not hide the truth and are not vain or ostentatious. They are
humble worshippers at night and courageous lions during the day.*[^32]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شِيعَتُنَا الْمُتَبَاذِلُونَ فِي وِلاَيَتِنَا، الْمُتَحَابُّونَ فِي
مَوَدَّتِنَا، الْمُتَزَاوِرُونَ فِي إحْيَاءِ أَمْرِنَا، الَّذِينَ إذَا
غَضِبُوا لَمْ يَظْلِمُوا، وَإنْ رَضُوا لَمْ يُسْرِفُوا، بَرَكَةٌ عَلَى
مَنْ جَاوَرُوا، سِلْمٌ لِمَنْ خَالَطُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Our true Shi’ah are surely those who meet the needs of each other for
the sake of (their loyalty to) our leadership, love each other for the
sake of their love for us, and exchange visits for the sake of
discussing our affairs. They neither wrong others when they are enraged
nor exceed the limits when they are pleased. They are a blessing for
their neighbors and peace for their associates.*[^33]

In previously mentioned traditions, we have come to know about the Holy
Imams (‘a) approach of instructing and disciplining their followers to
comply with high moral standards, emphasizing the quality of restoring
trusts to their owners and fulfilling responsibilities. Such traditions
can also be found in reference books of Hadith, especially chapters on
appropriate relationships with others and enjoining that which is right.
Furthermore, separate books have been written on such topics.[^34]

Keeping the Entity Strongly Perfected
-------------------------------------

Relying upon divine support and upon the subjective capacities of the
virtuous community, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) established a well-built,
strong social entity that would be spiritually and morally capable of
withstanding the impositions of tyrannical rulers on Muslim societies
and the changing social conditions. This feature, which will be
discussed in more detail in the coming books of this series, can be seen
throughout the history of Islam and includes the following aspects:

**First**: The political system represents the system of adinistration,
judicature, and issuance of verdicts. The well-versed jurisprudents
(*mujtahids*) are required to undertake the responsibility of managing
this system on the guidance of the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).
The Holy Imams (‘a) have formed this system so carefully that it
corresponds with the general political system of the nation and, at the
same time, enables the virtuous community to be independent and capable
of undertaking their mission while avoiding falling prey to corrupt
political conditions, such as, turning into tyrannical rulers.[^35]

**Second**: The financial system of the virtuous community secures for
them disbursements for general religious work inside the community. This
system basically depends upon the religious dues headed by the taxes of
*khums* and *zakat*, which play a significant role in the maintenance
and continuity of this community.[^36]

**Third**: The establishment of cultural foundations, such as schools
and seminaries that educate well-versed jurisprudents, propagators, and
scholars specialized in religious sciences. Such schools have been
invulnerable forts that shelter this virtuous community against
collapse. Therefore, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have emphasized the duty of
seeking knowledge and the necessity of dissemination of knowledge by the
scholars. In this respect, Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) is reported
as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ! إعْلَمُوا أَنَّ كَمَالَ الدِّينِ طَلَبُ الْعِلْمِ
وَالْعَمَلُ بِهِ. أَلاَ وَإنَّ طَلَبَ الْعِلْمِ أَوْجَبُ عَلَيْكُمْ
مِنْ طَلَبِ الْمَالِ. إنَّ الْمَالَ مَقْسُومٌ مَضْمُونٌ لَكُمْ، قَدْ
قَسَمَهُ عَادِلٌ بَيْنَكُمْ وَضَمِنَهُ، وَسَيَفِي لَكُمْ. وَالْعِلْمُ
مَخْزُونٌ عِنْدَ أَهْلِهِ، وَقَدْ أُمِرْتُمْ بِطَلَبِهِ مِنْ أَهْلِهِ
فَاطْلُبُوهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O people! Beware that the perfection of religion depends upon acquiring
knowledge and putting it into practice. It is more important for you to
acquire knowledge than to collect wealth. Wealth has been distributed
among you by the Just Lord. He has* *guaranteed it and He will keep His
promise. However, He has stored knowledge in the hearts of some, and has
ordered you to go forth to seek it from them.*[^37]

Many traditions carry this emphasis on seeking knowledge:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طَلَبُ الْعِلْمِ فَرِيضَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Seeking knowledge is a religious duty.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ إنَّ اللهَ يُحِبُّ بُغَاةَ الْعِلْمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, Almighty Allah loves the seekers of knowledge.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الشَّاخِصَ فِي طَلَبِ الْعِلْمِ كَالْمُجَاهِدِ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who exerts serious effort to seek knowledge will have the same
reward as one who strives in the way of Allah.

Furthermore, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَذَاكَرُوا، وَتَلاَقَوْا، وَتَحَدَّثُوا: فَإنَّ الْحَدِيثَ جَلاَءٌ
لِلْقُلُوبِ. إنَّ الْقُلُوبَ لَتَرِينُ كَمَا يَرِينُ السَّيْفُ؛
وَجَلاَؤُهَا الْحَدِيثُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hold talks with each other, meet each other for study, and exchange
discourses, because discourses refine hearts. Like swords, hearts are
exposed to corrosion, and discourse is their refining polish.

Holding sessions and meetings to discuss the cultural and moral heritage
of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), their virtues, everyday matters and imperative
affairs of the virtuous community are also necessary for strengthening
the cultural aspect of this community.[^38]

**Fourth**: Among the distinctive features of the virtuous community
built by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) is to take considerable interest in the
assurance of financial resources for the virtuous community through two
courses of action: trade and agriculture. These two courses procure a
sort of economic protection against the influence of tyrannical rulers,
persecution, pursuit, and sieges against the individuals of the virtuous
community.

Numerous are the traditions that encourage commerce and agriculture.
Some of these declare that nine tenths of sustenance lies in
commerce.[^39]

Standing by the Believers
-------------------------

Another distinctive feature of the virtuous community is the spirit of
justice, mutual support, collaboration, joint liability and helping
brethren-in-faith. This feature represents the covenant of allegiance
among believers on which all relationships among individuals of the
virtuous community depend, and through which their unity and adherence
is achieved and points of weakness and defect dealt with. An individual
might face isolation, siege, or insecurity because of certain social,
economic or political conditions. However, such a spirit of allegiance
will definitely come to his rescue.

Traditions convey the Ahl al-Bayt’s verdict concerning the significance
of this principle as one of the duties towards brothers-in-faith. This
topic will be discussed in the coming book about the economic system and
social relationships within the virtuous community. In this respect,
Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ مِنْ حَقِّ الْمُؤْمِنِ عَلَى أَخِيهِ الْمُؤْمِنِ أَنْ يُشْبِعَ
جَوعَتَهُ، وَيُوَارِيَ عَوْرَتَهُ، وَيُفَرِّجَ عَنْ كُرْبَتِهِ،
وَيَقْضِيَ دَيْنَهُ. فَإذَا مَاتَ خَلَّفَهُ فِي أَهْلِهِ وَوِلْدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The rights of a believer over another believer include: feeding him
when he is hungry, clothing him when he is naked, rescuing him from
trouble, paying off his debts, and taking care of his family after his
death.*[^40]

Undertaking Public Responsibilities
-----------------------------------

The individuals of the virtuous community are characterized by their
affection for all Muslims and assuming responsibility for the entire
Muslim community. This feature has come from the Holy Imams’ (‘a)
emphasis on the following principles:

(1) Enjoining that which is right, forbidding that which is wrong and
striving hard for Allah’s sake. This principle means to resist wrong
acts, oppression, and deviation.

(2) Mutual cooperation

(3) Helping each other

(4) Guiding each other

(5) Protecting the lives, possessions, and honor of the fraternity of
believers

(6) Coexisting with Muslims of all inclinations

In addition, the Holy Imams (‘a) emphasized many other principles that
work together to help form the strong, fundamentally perfect system
which will be discussed in greater detail in the coming books of this
series.

[^1]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:213, H. 2.

[^2]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:213-214.

[^3]: - This topic will be discussed along with its divergent aspects in
the coming book, Security System of the Virtuous Community (security
policies). In my thesis about Imam al-Mahdi (‘a), I have also shed light
on this topic.

[^4]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:18-19; al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il
al-Shi’ah 1:7, H.2.

[^5]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, al-Amali, p. 416, H. 548. Many traditions have
demonstrated the same content of this tradition. For instance, see
‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 78:9, H. 4 as well as other
reference books appertaining to qualities of the Shi’ah.

[^6]: - Al-Tabarani, al-Mu’jam al-Kabir 3:66, H. 2681; Ibn Hajar,
al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, pp. 228-229.

[^7]: - The followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) accept the report of any
trustworthy person who reports from one of the Holy Infallibles (‘a);
they, therefore accept generally the reports of the trustworthy
reporters even if they follow other Muslim sects or jurisprudential
schools other than the Ahl al-Bayt’s (‘a). By doing so, they in reality
accept the sayings and judgments of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) alone, because
a very limited number of traditions that are reported by other than the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) has been proven authentic while all the others have not
been proven so. These very few accepted narrations are called ‘al-nabawi
(the Prophetic traditions)’ and famously known by all Muslims who
transmitted them from one generation to another. However, some scholars
also doubt such narrations because their chains of authority have not
been found adequately authentic.

[^8]: - Although the Arabic word ‘adil literally means impartial, the
characteristic of ‘adalah goes beyond justice to include decency.

[^9]: - Although the stipulation of acting upon the verdicts of an
living mujtahid is not unanimously agreed upon by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
School, the greater majority of scholars, in the recent ages at least,
comply with this term.

[^10]: - Ibn Hajar: al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah p. 341; al-Muttaqi al-Hindi:
Kanz al-’Ummal 1:185-189.

[^11]: - Shaykh al-Saduq: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha, 1:261, H.21.

[^12]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, al-Khisal p. 2, H. 4.

[^13]: - Al-Irshad, p. 114; al-Amali, p. 216, H. 377.

[^14]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, Sifat al-Shi’ah, English version translated by
Badr Shahin, pp. 329-336.

[^15]: - Kanz al-Fawa’id 1:87-88; Bihar al-Anwar 68:191, H. 47.

[^16]: - Kanz al-Fawa’id 1:88-92; Bihar al-Anwar 68:192-196, H. 48.

[^17]: - Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon No. 193. This sermon is as follows: It
is related that a companion of Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) called Hammam, who
was a man devoted to worship, said to him “O Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a),
describe to me the pious men in such a way that I can see them.” Amir
al-Mu’minin (‘a) avoided responding to him and, instead said, O Hammam,
fear Allah and perform good acts because “verily, Allah is with those
who guard themselves against evil and those who do good to others.
(16:128)” Hammam was not satisfied with this reply; he therefore forced
him to speak. Thereupon, Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) praised and extolled
Allah, invoked His blessings upon the Holy Prophet (S), and spoke thus:
Now then, Allah the Glorified, the Sublime, created (the things of)
creation. He created them without having any need for their obedience or
need to be safe from their sins, because the sin of anyone who sins does
not harm Him nor does the obedience of anyone who obeys Him benefit Him.
He has distributed among them their livelihood, and has assigned them
their positions in the world. Thus, among the God-fearing are the people
of distinction. Their speech is to the point, their dress is moderate
and their gait is humble. They keep their eyes closed to what Allah has
made unlawful for them, and they use their ears to gain that knowledge
which is beneficial to them. They remain, in the time of trials, as
though they are in comfort. If there had not been fixed periods (of
life) ordained for each, their spirits would not have remained in their
bodies even for the twinkling of an eye because of (their) eagerness for
the reward and fear of chastisement. The greatness of the Creator
permeates their hearts and, as a result, everything else appears small
in their eyes. Thus to them Paradise is before them as though they see
it and are enjoying its favors. They also feel that Hell is before them
as if they see it and are suffering punishment in it. Their hearts are
grieved, they are protected against evils, their bodies are thin, their
needs are scanty, and their souls are chaste. They endure (hardship) for
a short while, and in consequence they secure comfort forever. It is a
beneficial transaction that Allah made easy for them. The world aimed at
them, but they did not aim at it. It captured them, but they freed
themselves from it by paying the ransom. During night they stand on
their feet reading portions of the Qur'an and reciting it in a
well-measured way, creating through it grief for themselves and seeking
by it the cure for their ailments. If they come across a verse that
brings about eagerness (for Paradise), they pursue it avidly, their
spirits turn towards it eagerly, and they feel as if it is in front of
them. When they come across a verse that concerns fear (of Hell), they
picture it in their minds and feel as though the sound of Hell and its
cries are reaching their ears. They bow and prostrate
themselves–touching their foreheads, palms, knees and toes–and beseech
Allah, the Sublime, for their deliverance. During the day, they are
enduring, learned, virtuous and God-fearing. Fear (of Allah) has made
them thin like arrows. Whoever looks at them believes they are sick,
although they are not, or that they have gone mad. In fact, great
concern (i.e., fear) has made them seem such. They are not satisfied
with their meager good acts, and do not regard their major acts as
great. They always reproach themselves and are afraid of the
unacceptability of their deeds. When any one of them is spoken of
highly, he says: “I know myself better than others, and my Lord knows me
better than I know myself. O Allah, do not deal with me according to
what they say, and make me better than they think of me and forgive me
(those shortcomings) which they do not know. The qualities that you will
see in one of them is that he has strength in religion, determination
along with leniency, faith with conviction, eagerness in (seeking)
knowledge in forbearance, moderation in riches, devotion in worship,
gracefulness in hunger, endurance in hardship, desire for the lawful,
pleasure in guidance and hatred for greed. He performs virtuous deeds
but still feels afraid. In the evening, he is anxious to offer thanks
(to Allah). In the morning, his anxiety is to engage in remembrance of
(Allah). He passes the night in fear and rises in the morning in
joy—fear lest night passes in forgetfulness and joy over the favor and
mercy he has received. If his self refuses to endure a thing it does not
like, he still does not grant its request for what it likes. The
coolness of his eye lies in what is to last forever, while from the
things (of this world) that will not last he keeps aloof. He transfuses
knowledge with forbearance, and speech with action. You will see his
hopes simple, his shortcomings few, his heart fearing, his spirit
contented, his meal small and simple, his religion safe, his desires
dead and his anger suppressed. Good alone is expected from him. Evil
from him is not to be feared. Even if he is found among those who forget
(Allah) he is counted among those who remember (Him), but if he is among
the rememberers he is not counted among the forgetful. He forgives him
who is unjust to him, and he gives to him who deprives him. He behaves
well with him who behaves ill with him. Indecent speech is far from him,
his utterance is lenient, his vices non-existent, his virtues abide,
good precedes him and mischief has turned its face (from him). He is
dignified during calamities, patient in distress, and thankful during
ease. He does not commit excess even towards him whom he hates, and does
not commit sin for the sake of him whom he loves. He admits truth before
evidence is brought against him. He does not misappropriate what is
placed in his trust nor forget what he is required to remember. He does
not utter profanities, cause harm to his neighbors, feel happy at the
misfortunes of others, enter into wrong nor abandon the boundaries of
right. If he is silent, this silence does not grieve him, if he laughs
he does not raise his voice, and if he is wronged he endures until Allah
takes revenge on his behalf. His own self is in distress because of his
actions, while the people are in ease from them. He puts himself in
hardship for the sake of the next life, and makes people feel safe. His
keeping away from others is for the sake of asceticism and purification,
and his nearness to those to whom he is near is by way of leniency and
mercifulness. His keeping away is not due to vanity or feeling of
greatness, nor his nearness due to deceit and cheating. It is related
that, after this speech, Hammam passed into a deep swoon and then
expired. Then Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) said: Verily, by Allah, I feared
this would happen to him. Then he added: Effective advice produces such
effects on receptive minds. Someone said to him: O Amir al-Mu’minin, how
is it you do not receive such an effect? Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) replied:
Woe to you. For death there is a fixed hour that cannot be exceeded, and
a cause which does not change. Be careful, never repeat what Satan just
put on your tongue. (From Syed Ali Reza’s translation of Nahj
al-Balaghah).

[^18]: - Al-Nu’mani, al-Ghaybah, p. 113, H. 7.

[^19]: - Tafsir al-Imam al-’Askari, p. 330.

[^20]: - Al-Kashshi, Ikhtiyar Ma’rifat al-Rijal, p. 525; Allamah
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 68:166, H. 17.

[^21]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, 11:431, H. 1.

[^22]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, 11:431, H. 3.

[^23]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, 11:435, H. 16; Al-Barqi,
al-Mahasin, 1:409, H. 930, published by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) World
Assembly.

[^24]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, 11:435, H. 17; Al-Barqi,
al-Mahasin, 1:409, H. 931, published by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) World
Assembly.

[^25]: - Bisharat al-Mustafa, p. 17.

[^26]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:398 H. 2.

[^27]: - Al-Tabrisi, Mishkat al-Anwar, p. 63.

[^28]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Amali, p. 440, H. 987.

[^29]: - Later on we will discuss these aspects in further detail.

[^30]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, Qurb al-Isnad, p. 78, H. 253; ‘Allamah
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 68:149, H. 1.

[^31]: - Ibn Shu’bah al-Harrani, Tuhaf al-’Uqul, English version
translated by Badr Shahin, p. 289.

[^32]: - Al-Tabrisi, Mishkat al-Anwar, p. 62, H. 298.

[^33]: - Ibn Shu’bah al-Harrani, Tuhaf al-’Uqul, English version
translated by Badr Shahin, p. 199.

[^34]: - More details about this topic will be presented in the coming
chapters about spiritual aspects and the system of social relationships.

[^35]: - In coming books of this series, detailed discussion about this
system of rule will be cited.

[^36]: - In the coming book, under the economic system of the virtuous
community, this topic will be discussed in more detail.

[^37]: - Al-Tabrisi, Mishkat al-Anwar, English version, p. 346, H. 713.

[^38]: - A detailed discussion follows in the book concerning the
cultural aspects of the virtuous community.

[^39]: - A detailed discussion follows in the chapter on the economic
system of the virtuous community.

[^40]: - Mishkat al-Anwar, English version, p. 477, H. 1085.


