‘Fatimiyyah means to oppose the chiefs of oppression…’
======================================================

In one of his writings, Grand Ayatullah Shaykh Lutfullah Safi Gulpaygani
elucidated upon some issues in regards to the personality of Sayyidah
Zahra, peace be upon her. In speaking about commemorating the [days] of
Fatimiyyah[^1], he stated that, “…in every religious event and at every
opportunity [which we are given], we must speak about her standpoints,
life, her traits of asceticism, worship [of God], and her knowledge…”

***In the Name of God, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

What can be said when trying to express the status of the *Ahlul Bayt*,
peace be upon them, specifically the eminence of Sayyidah Fatima Zahra,
peace be upon her, and the blessings which emanate from all of them –
and from where shall we start!?

These people are individuals whom God, the Most High, had created the
entire world of existence for, just as the Messenger of God, peace be
upon him and his family, had stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ لاَ نَحْنُ مَا خَلَقَ اللهُ آدَمَ وَ لاَ حَوَّاءَ وَ لاَ
الْجَنَّةَ وَ لاَ النَّارَ وَ لاَ السَّمَآءَ وَ لاَ الأَرْضَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Had it not been for us (the Prophet and the Ahlul Bayt), God would not
have created Adam nor Eve nor the paradise nor the hell-fire nor the sky
nor the earth.*[^2]

In addition, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon him, had
written the following in his letter to Muʿawiyah in regards to the
status of the *Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّ صَنَائِعُ رَبِّنَا وَ النَّاسُ بَعْدُ صَنَائِعُ لَنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

The wordings of this passage are extremely important.[^3] There are some
people who claim that the meaning of this statement is that *“The people
have been trained or have had their nurturing and upbringing under our
school of teachings (the Ahlul Bayt)”* however there is no problem in
stating that the meaning of this statement is (also that), *“The
ultimate purpose of creation is the manifestation and existence of
Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, peace be upon all of them.”*

There is also a sacred tradition *(hadith al-qudsi)* in which God has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقْتُكَ لِأَجْلِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I created you (Muhammad – and as an extension the Ahlul Bayt) for*
***Me*** *(God).*[^4]

In yet another tradition we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ لاَكَ مَا خَلَقْتُ الأَفْلاَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Had it not been for you (Muhammad) I (God) would not have created the
entire universe.*[^5]

It is impossible for the human mind to fathom what the meaning of the
words of God, the Most High, are when He says, *“I created you
(Muhammad) for* ***Me*** *and I created the entire world of existence
for you.”*

 **What Does This Mean!?**

That which we generally derive from all of these statements is that
their (Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him and his family, and his
*Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon all of them) relationship with God, the Most
High, is something extremely extraordinary just as He Himself is
elevated and superior [than everything else in existence]. Of course the
Noble Prophet, peace be upon him and his family, expresses his own
inability [to reach the level of truly ‘knowing’ God] and openly states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عَرَفْنَاكَ حَقَّ مَعْرِفَتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*We fell short in truly recognizing You as You deserve to be known.*

Therefore first off, we must appreciate the fact that whatever we have
is due to the *Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them. Other than them,
whatever else any other person says [about matters of the faith or
otherwise] - when one takes their words and reviews them, one will see
that their words lack clarity and we cannot rely on their assertions.
Rather, we see that everything is contained with the teachings which
emanate from the *Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them and it is for this
reason that the Prophet has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَينِ كِتَابَ اللهِ وَ عِتْرَتِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I leave behind you two weighty things – the book of God [Qur’an] and my
family [the Ahlul Bayt].*

This statement means: take everything [that you need in your life] from
the *Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them, and reject everything that comes
from other than them.

The Noble Prophet, peace be upon him and his family, has also said: *“Do
not seek to precede them (the Ahlul Bayt) nor fall back from them (the
Ahlul Bayt) as if you seek to precede them, you will go astray, and if
you stay behind, you will be destroyed.”*

He, peace be upon him and his family, also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُعَلِّمُوهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ أَعْلَمُ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not seek to teach them (Ahlul Bayt) as they are more knowledgeable
than all of you.*

Amongst the *Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them, Sayyidah Zahra, peace be
upon her, enjoys a distinct pivotal role and significance. When the
*Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them, are introduced, she is placed in the
midst of them all, as we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمْ فَاطِمَةُ وَ أَبُوهَا وَ بَعْلُهَا وَ بَنُوهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*They [those who are under the cloak during the revelation of 33:33] are
Fatima and* ***her*** *father and* ***her*** *husband and* ***her***
*sons.*[^6]

Indeed, amongst the *Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them, Sayyidah Zahra,
peace be upon her, has a pivotal role, status and greatness for which
all of the Imams, peace be upon them all, take pride in.

In reality, this blessed woman is actually a *hujjah* (proof or
argument) over all of the *Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them – meaning
that in order to prove their own truthfulness and to devoid the usurpers
and oppressors, they have all made use of this magnanimous lady in their
arguments.

Absolutely, all of the members of the *Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them,
are a *hujjah* (proof or argument), however Sayyidah Fatima Zahra’s,
peace be upon her, *hujjah* is, from various aspects, greater than all
of the Imams!

Fatima Zahra, peace be upon her, is the *chief of all of the women of
the entire universe;* she is *a part and parcel of the Messenger;* and
she is the *wife of the [first] Representative of God.* She is such a
[significant] woman that she alone [from amongst the women-folk] was
chosen to take part in the event of *Mubahilah*, based upon the order of
the Noble Qurʾan.

In addition, from the members of the *Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them,
she is the only woman who was granted the status of ʿ*i*ṣ*mah*
[infallibility] and spiritual purity just as her father, husband and her
two sons were graced with. In that gathering [in which her spiritual
purity was confirmed through the revelation of the Qurʾanic verse in
chapter 33, verse 33], the wife of the Prophet, peace be upon him and
his family, Umm Salama, blessings of God be upon her, was not permitted
to partake in the sacred event in instead, the Prophet, peace be upon
him and his family, told her:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكِ عَلىٰ الْخَيْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You (Umm Salama) are on [a path of] goodness.*

And thus, the only woman who was included in the verse of purification
was Fatima Zahra, peace be upon her.

In every aspect – other than in the status of prophethood - she is a
carbon copy of her father: in terms of her mannerisms *(akhlaq),*
knowledge *(ʿilm)* and perfection *(kamalat)* and just as all of the
Imams, peace be upon them, in her life, her actions and her speech, the
way she practiced her religion and followed the religious precepts, she
is a guide towards the religious injunctions of the Divine.

Infact, she possesses [a level of] *imamate* (Divinely-appointed
leadership) in the sense of her knowledge and guidance and her honour,
infallibility, munificence and the way in which she [spiritually]
protected herself and thus, she is known as the ‘first woman of Islam’
and is a role-model for all.

Being active in the outside work force (outside of the house) and
working along-side men (whom a woman is not related to) is beneath the
status of every single woman who enjoys a special status [such as that
of Fatima Zahra, peace be upon her] and as such, today when compelled to
be in such situations, [our women] must ensure to [properly] cover and
safe-guard their modesty – so what can be said about that woman whose
status has been described as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالىٰ يَغْضِبَ لِغَضَبِ فَاطِمَةَ وَ يَرْضىٰ لِرِضَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Indeed God, the Most High, becomes angry with the anger of Fatima and
is pleased at her pleasure.*

Thus, for a woman such as her, to being present in those places [within
the society] which are the exclusive domain of men, is something which
would diminish her from the status of being ‘the greatest’, ‘the most
preventative’ and ‘the most scared’.

*The Sermon of Fadak*[^7]

One of the miracles of Sayyidah Fatima, peace be upon her, is her
spontaneously delivered sermon [the Sermon of Fadak].

This grand woman, during that atmosphere [in Medina] of
spiritual-asphyxiation and [during that period of the] major coup d’état
which had taken place, and [shortly after] the tragic demise of the
Messenger of God, peace be upon him and his family, and all of the other
heartrending events which had transpired, delivered a sermon which is at
the pinnacles of eloquence and oratory prowess.

This sermon is one the likes of which even the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be upon him, even though he is the Leader *(Imam)* of
the Eloquent Ones and the Commander *(Amir)* of those with Oratory
Prowess, never had the opportunity to deliver such a comprehensive,
illustrative, thrashing and ineffaceable sermon keeping in mind that he
[ʿAli b. Abi Talib, peace be upon him] is the same person who has
pronounced:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا لَأُمَرَآءُ الْكَلاَمِ وَ فِينَا تَنَشَّبَتْ عُرُوقُهُ وَ
عَلَيْنَا تَهَدَّلَتْ غُصُونُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Certainly, we are the masters of speaking. Its veins are fixed in us
and its branches are hanging over us...*[^8]

The grandeur of Sayyidah Fatima, the Truthful and Chaste One, peace be
upon her, resulted in the fact that in that major historical gathering
and that large court proceeding [in the *Masjid* of the Prophet in which
she delivered this historic sermon], the masses were not able to prevent
her from delivering her words and [for those in that gathering] it was
as if the Noble Prophet of Islam, peace be upon him and his family,
himself was present and speaking to the masses! In fact, many of the
people present, heard the truths being presented as they were [by her],
and broke down in tears.

In any case, this sermon is comprised of extremely lofty content and is,
as we once again state, one of the miracles of the *Ahlul Bayt* and has
even been narrated in a book compiled in the second century after the
migration *(hijrah)* entitled *‘Balaghat al-Nisa’* of Ibn Tayfūr[^9].

Of course, the greatness of this lady [which has been mentioned in the
Islamic sources] is numerous – just reflect on the famous Prophetic
tradition in which he, peace be upon him and his family, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالىٰ يَغْضِبَ لِغَضَبِ فَاطِمَةَ وَ يَرْضىٰ لِرِضَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Indeed God, the Most High, becomes angry with the anger of Fatima and
is pleased at her pleasure.*[^10]

Even though this tradition is extremely brief, however it is
exceptionally sublime and notable in its import. The actualities and
critical particulars [of this statement] are so impressive that Imam
al-Mahdi, peace be upon him, himself has used this tradition as
substantiation [in his own statements and declarations].

We can also consider the tradition in which the Noble Prophet, peace be
upon him and his family, whenever he wished to console and reassure his
daughter Sayyidah Fatima, peace be upon her, would tell her:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبْشِرِي يَا فَاطِمَةَ إِنَّ الْمَهْدِيَّ مِنْكِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I give you the glad tidings O Fatima! Indeed al-Mahdi is from
you.*[^11]

This statement is extremely important as the Noble Prophet, peace be
upon him and his family, is the first individual in the creation of the
world of possibilities - and to grant comfort to his only beloved
daughter and prepare her to bear the tribulations and everything which
will transpire in the future, he comforts her by telling her that
*“al-Mahdi is from you”* – meaning that everything originates **from**
you (Fatima) and everything exists solely **for** you (Fatima); the
gradual forward march of the entire world is one which is moving
**towards** you (Fatima) and the victory of truth over falsehood and the
eventual victory of the *Divine Light* over the spiritual darknesses are
all **for** you (Fatima).

In any case, as we have said, the words which speak about the greatness
of Fatima Zahra, peace be upon her, are too numerous [to enumerate].

Honouring *Fatimiyyah* and the stances of Fatima, and the life history
of Fatima, and the asceticism of Fatima and the worship of Fatima and
the knowledge and wisdom of Fatima must always be a part of our
religious regiment and in our spiritual discourses, writings and at
every possible juncture and opportune moment we find out selves in, we
must speak about these things.

We must also always speak about the tribulations which befell this woman
which are so openly acknowledged and accepted that they are even
recounted in books such as *Al-Nihayah fi al-gharib al-hadith wa
al-athar* of Ibn Athir – even though he is a Sunni and this book is one
of Arabic lexicon – when he writes about the death of the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his family, he was not able to withhold
himself and thus, he too was forced to allude to these tribulations!

In his work, *Al-Nihayah fi al-gharib al-hadith wa al-athar*, Ibn Athir,
refers to the word “هنبث”, after which he quotes the following two lines
of poetry from Sayyida Zahra, peace be upon her, as proofs of, those
tragedies and the breaking of her sanctity which this illustrious women
of Islam possessed – and if any aware person would read these lines of
poetry, he would understand much [of the history of what transpired].
These words clearly explain the intense level of displeasure of Fatima
Zahra, peace be upon her, and also allude to the pains and sorrow which
she faced and also the protests which she raised in regards to what
befell her. When she spoke and addressed her noble father, she said the
following words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد كان بعدك أنباء و هنبثة لو كنت شاهدها لو يكثر الخطب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنا فقدناك فقد الأرض وأبها فاختل قومك فاشهدهم و لا تغب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Shortly after you such troubles and incidents came up, that if you had
been alive they would not have increased; your death upon us is similar
to the Earth that is devoid of rain - your nation defaulted (from their
promise) after your departure, then you be witness and do not neglect
it.*

He then says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الهنبثة واحدة الهنابت و هي الأمور الشداد المختلفة و أشار إلى عتبها على
أبي بكر: إنها خرجت في لمة من نسائها تتوطأ ذيلها إلى أبي بكر فعاتبته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

\*\*\*

We must work at teaching the Islamic history to the peoples of the
world; we must carry the words of Sayyidah Zahra, peace be upon her,
specifically that grand and expressive sermon which is counted as one of
her miracles, to the people of the entire world.

During these *Fatimiyyah* events, we must glorify, show respect and
veneration to this great celestially-sent being and must instill the
love and affection for this distinct woman of Islam, the daughter of the
Noble Prophet of Mercy – Fatima al-Zahra, peace be upon her, within the
hearts of all people.

Today, we are all in need of taking Sayyidah Zahra, peace be upon her,
as our role model. Our society needs to look towards her and follow her
example in how she lived her married life and also in how she brought up
her children – as indeed she had the best approach and technique in
these regards.

Today, the words of this great woman must become the life-lessons in the
lives of all women – rather, even in the lives of us men! This great
woman conveyed to the world the true status and the true level of
dignity which women possess and has proclaimed: “*The best of women is
that one whom does not see other strange men and whom no strange men see
her.”*

This is what Sayyidah Zahra, peace be upon her, has left within the
hearts of all spiritually awake people and those who actively worship
and serve God and are constantly on the search for truth, till today and
until the end of the world.

*Fatimiyyah* is an era; *Fatimiyyah* means to oppose the leaders of
oppression; *Fatimiyyah* means to wage war in order for truth to be
victorious over falsehood and ultimately, *Fatimiyyah* means the global
and Divinely appointed governance of Imam al-Mahdi, may Allah hasten his
noble advent!

Yes indeed! *Fatimiyyah* is Ashura; *Fatimiyyah* is the night of
*al-Qadr*; *Fatimiyyah* is *Ghadeer*; *Fatimiyyah* is the 15th of
*Shaʿban* and *Fatimiyyah* is, in its true essence, the day of victory
of Light over darkness.

In the radiance of extolling the virtues of this great woman, all of the
aspects of the faith of Islam and the supreme authority and mastership
of the purified leaders of the faith (Imams) and the invitation to
Islam, the Qurʾan and the teachings of the *Ahlul Bayt* – and in summary
– the messengership of the Messenger of God, peace be upon him and his
family, must be conveyed to others.

One thing which we must keep in mind is that we must constantly fight
against: innovations (in the religion); gravitating towards the foreign
elements; instruments of turmoil (within our community); sins; the
prevalence of difficulties and tribulation, immorality, obstinacy and
deviation.

The school of the *Ahlul Bayt*, peace be upon them, is a religious
school built upon knowledge and wisdom; it is a school of learning and
spiritual vigilance; it is a school of immediacy and equality and one of
intellectual progress and one of illuminating reflection and this is yet
another thing which we must all convey to others when we have these
opportunities.

All of us must be appreciative of the institution of the enlightening
*Majalis-e-Fatimi* and take full use of the blessings contained therein.
One of the most important responsibilities which we have in this regards
is to make supplication with complete humility and penitence to God, the
Most High, for the hastening of the advent of the dear child of Fatima,
Imam al-Mahdi, may Allah hasten his noble advent.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أللهم عَجِّلْ فَرَجَهُ الشَّرِيفِ وَ اجْعَلْنَا مِنْ أَعْوَانِهِ وَ
أَنْصَارِهِ وَ الْمُسْتَشْهَدِينَ بَيْنَ يَدَيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O God! Hasten his noble advent and make us amongst his helpers and his
assistants and allow us to sacrifice our lives in his presence!* 

[^1]: Fāṭimiyyah refers to the annual programs which are held throughout
the Muslim world to commemorate the martyrdom of Fāṭima Zahrā, peace be
upon her, the only daughter of Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him and
his family. As there are numerous dates in history on when she left this
world and no one knows for sure on which day she died, the scholars have
deemed that it is best to remember her on the two most well-known dates
– 75 days after the death of the Messenger of God, peace be upon him and
his family, and 95 days after the death of the Messenger of God, peace
be upon him and his family.

[^2]: ʿUyūn al-akhbār al-riḍā, volume 1, section 26, tradition 22

[^3]: Nahj al-balāgha, letter 28

[^4]: Al-Jawāhir al-saniyyah, Shaykh Ḥurr Amulī, pg. 710

[^5]: Biḥār al-anwār, volume 68, section 61, tradition 1

[^6]: Awālim al-ʿulūm, pg. 933

[^7]: We have presented the entire text of this sermon at the end of
this article. (Tr.)

[^8]: Nahj al-balāgha, sermon 233

[^9]: Available on-line in Arabic here.

[^10]: Ṣaḥīfa Imām al-Riḍā, peace be upon him, pg. 45, tradition 22

[^11]: Al-Burhān of Muttaqī al-Hindī, page 94


