The Historic Fadak Sermon of Fatima
===================================

It is quoted in the book al-Ihtijaj of Shaykh al-Tabarsi from ʿAbdullah
b. Hasan who relates from his fore-fathers that when Sayyidah Zahra was
informed that Abū Bakr had confiscated Fadak, she put on her veil and
cloak, and accompanied by some servants and women of the Bani Hashim,
came to the Masjid and facing Abū Bakr and the Muslims who were present,
recited a powerful sermon.

Sayyidah Zahra had worn a long dress (and was thus placing her feet upon
her dress) and her way of walking was similar to that of the Prophet.
When she entered the Masjid, Abū Bakr was seated with a group of the
Muhajirin, Anṣar and others and a curtain was put up for her and she sat
behind it.

Lamentation of those Present
----------------------------

Sayyidah Zahra heaved a sorrowful sigh from her scorched and aggrieved
heart such that all of those present were affected by it and began to
weep. The gathering was converted into a mourning ceremony and everyone
was deeply touched. Sayyidah Zahra then remained silent for a moment
until the weeping of those present calmed down, and then she began her
speech.

Praise and Eulogy for the Lord and Witness of the Unity of Allah and the Prophethood of Muhammad
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

She started her speech[^1] by saying: “Praise be to Allah for His
bounties (upon us) and thanks be to Him for all that He inspired; and
commended is His name for all the bounties He created before our own
creation, for all the common bounties that He bestowed (upon us) from
His Ownself without even (our) asking for it, and abundant and complete
bounties[^2], such plenteous and unlimited bounties whose numbers cannot
be computed,[^3] and thanks cannot be offered for the duration and
commencement (of the bounties), and whose perpetuity is beyond
comprehension.

He invited (His servants) to offer praise, thus resulting in an increase
and perpetuity (in their blessings)[^4], and in lieu of this abundance
(of bounties), Allah desired that His creatures praise Him. Again, He
invited you (to perform good deeds) resulting in bounties of this world
as well as for the hereafter.

I bear witness that there is no other deity (worthy of worship) except
Allah - He is Unique and Unparalleled. Certainly interpretation (and
result) of this witness (of monotheism) is sincerity, and it’s
comprehension has been placed in the hearts, and the mind is illuminated
by its (profound) understanding. He (Allah) cannot be seen with the
eyes, nor can He be described with the tongues, and His state cannot be
perceived.

He is the One Who created all things without any past prototype, and
originated them without having any past image and equals. Rather He
created them with His Might and dispersed them according to His Will, He
did not create them for a need, nor did He shape them for a benefit (for
Himself), but rather (He did all of this) to establish His Wisdom and to
bring their (the creature’s) attention to His obedience, and manifest
His Might and (so that) His creatures may venerate Him, and (He created
to) strengthen His invitation by dispatching His prophets and friends.
Thus He provided recompense for His obedience and granted punishment for
His disobedience, (He informed) His slaves from performing such acts
that invite His wrath, and thus would gather them in His Paradise.

And I bear witness that my father Muhammad, is His slave and His
Messenger, while Allah the Almighty chose him and selected him before
bestowing prophethood upon him, and named him before selecting him, and
chose him before sending him (for the mission of Islam), when the whole
of creation was concealed in the hidden world, and they were in awe, and
were in the extinction of nothingness.

Almighty Allah was certainly aware of the consequences of all the tasks,
and was acquainted with the occurrences of the ages, and conscious of
the position of the destined. Allah sent His Prophet so as to complete
His commands, to execute His rulings, and to deliver His decisive
ordinances. He saw the nation divided into various religions, addicted
to their places of worship, worshipping their idols, denying Allah
despite their knowledge of Him. Then Allah illuminated their darkness
(misguidance) through the medium of my father Muhammad and lifted the
veils of obscurity from their hearts, and removed ignorance from their
eyes. He (the Prophet) stood up among them for their guidance; delivered
them from misguidance, enlightened their eyes from blindness, guided
them towards the ‘Straight Path’ and invited them towards ‘the Right
Path’.

Then, Allah took away his soul with affection and by his choice,
willingness and submission. Thus, Muhammad was relieved of the toils of
this world and entered (the world of) comfort. There, he lives in ease
among the righteous angels, and in the Paradise of the forgiving Lord,
and in the neighborhood of the Mighty King.

May Allah’s mercy be upon my father, His messenger and the trustworthy
one with regards to His revelation, His friend, the best among His
creations, His favorite one; and peace upon him and Allah’s Mercy and
Blessings.

Focus upon Memorizing the Qurʾan, an Exalted Trust of Allah
-----------------------------------------------------------

You are the slaves of Allah and you are the establishers of His commands
and prohibitions. You are the possessors of His religion and His
revelation, the trustworthy ones with regards to yourselves and you
should propagate it (Islam) to other nations, while you deem yourselves
worthy of all this?[^5]

A pledge had been taken from you in advance by Allah and there is among
you His remembrance and that is the book of Allah (Qurʾan), the speaking
one. It is a book of complete truthfulness and a bright light, the
brilliant light. Its imminence is evident, its secrets are revealed, its
apparent aspects are clear, its adherents become reasons for others to
envy, it leads its adherents to the status of paradise (or the pleasure
of Allah), its listeners are guided towards salvation[^6] and through it
are gained the illuminated evidences of Allah. It determines the
ordinances and prohibitions (of Allah), its evidences are illuminated
and its proofs are sufficient, it contains the virtues of the
recommendable acts (*mustahabbat*)[^7], freedom with regards to
performing the lawful things (*mubah*)[^8] and (informs about the)
discouraged (*makrūh*)[^9] acts, and in it are written down other legal
laws (of Islam).

Concentration upon the Philosophy and Aim of Divine Ordinances
--------------------------------------------------------------

Faith has been set so as to cleanse you of polytheism; *ṣalat* (prayers)
are prescribed to keep you away from pride, *zakat* (charity) has been
prescribed to purify ones’ self and results in the increase of
sustenance[^10]; *ṣawm* (fasting) has been prescribed so that
genuineness may be reinforced; *hajj* (pilgrimage to Mecca) has been
prescribed to establish the religion; justice is prescribed to establish
proper harmony in the hearts; the obligation to obey us (the *Ahlul
Bayt*) has been prescribed to set up order in the community, and our
authority (*imamah*) has been prescribed to save the people from
differences.

*Jihad* (struggle) is the honour of Islam and a humiliation for the
people of polytheism and hypocrisy; patience has been made a medium for
recompense to be bestowed[^11]; enjoining good has been prescribed for
the general welfare (of the society); righteousness with one’s parents
is a safeguard against His (Allah’s) wrath; kindness with one’s
relatives is a medium of increasing one’s age and results in an increase
of friends and relations; retribution has been prescribed so that
people’s lives may be safe-guarded[^12]; fulfillment of vows leads to
forgiveness[^13]; consideration of accuracy in measurement in weighing
commodities saves one from loss.

Prohibition of intoxicants has been prescribed so that humanity may
remain away from filth[^14]; the prohibition of defaming (of adultery)
has been prescribed so as to keep oneself away from the curse of
Allah[^15]; robbery has been prohibited so that the hands may be pure;
and polytheism has been prohibited so that sincerity may be established
in Allah’s Divinity.

Thus fear Allah as you should, and (see that) you die not but as
Muslims.[^16] Obey Allah with regards to His orders and prohibitions for
surely only those of His servants are conscious of Allah who are endowed
with knowledge.[^17]

The Decisiveness of the Prophet in Strengthening the Path of Guidance
---------------------------------------------------------------------

O people! Know that I am Fatima and my father was Muhammad. I say and I
will repeat this again and again and I do not utter any falsehood, and
whatever I do shall not be wrong.

Indeed an Apostle from among yourselves has come to you, grievous to him
is your falling into distress, (he is) solicitous regarding your
welfare, towards the faithful (he is) compassionate, (and)
merciful.[^18]

If you look and understand, you will find that this Apostle is my father
and not the father of any one of your women; he is the brother of my
cousin (Imam ʿAli) and not the brother of any one of your men and how
fortunate is the one related to him (the Prophet).

The Prophet proclaimed the message and prevented the people from
ignorance and polytheism and worked at opposing the customs of the
polytheists. He broke their backs while their breath was entrapped in
their chests. He called to the way of his Lord with wisdom and kind
exhortation.[^19] He broke the idols and crushed the heads (of
rebellion) of the polytheists until they were eradicated and took to
flight. Then, the darkness of the night passed and it dawned and the
truth became manifest in its true form.

When the leader of the religion (the Prophet) spoke, foam gushed forth
from the mouths of the polytheists and they became silent; the degraded
group of the hypocrites was annihilated and pledges between disbelief
and animosity broke. You all started uttering words of sincerity
(Monotheism) and you were among a group consisting of illuminated
countenances and fasting ones - those whom Allah intended to keep off
from them uncleanliness and purify them with a thorough
purification.[^20] Indeed, you were on the brink of the pit of the
hell-fire.[^21]

You were a community that was (considered just) - a medium who would
quench the thirst of others and were a tool in the hands of the
avaricious. You were similar to the place were hasty men come to take
the fire (for their own benefit) and were being trampled under the feet
while at that time, your state was such that you would drink water from
the wayside gutter and your food was the unclean hides (of animals) or
leaves. You were the humiliated and degraded ones from among the masses,
fearing that people may carry you away by force![^22]

Thus Allah, the Blessed, the Sublime, delivered you through the medium
of my father Muhammad, while you attained this deliverance after he (the
Prophet) had to face numerous difficulties and fight with the stubborn
polytheists, the beasts among the ʿArabs and after that with the People
of the Book (the Christians and the Jews).

Role of Imam ʿAli in the Defense of Islam
-----------------------------------------

Whenever the polytheists kindled the fire of wars, Allah would put it
out; and when the adherents of Satan would manifest themselves or the
beastly ones among the polytheists opened their mouths of envy, he (the
Prophet) would dispatch his brother (Imam ʿAli) towards them. He (Imam
ʿAli) would crush them and extinguish the blaze of their fire with his
sword and he (Imam ʿAli) bore extreme brutality in the way of Allah and
strove to obey the commands of Allah. He was the nearest to the Prophet
of Allah and the master of the friends of Allah.

He was always ready to serve the creations (of Allah), looking over the
welfare of the people, endeavoring and toiling (in this way) and he was
not affected with the censure of any censurer[^23]; while you were
living a life of pleasure and peace, and were far away from the severity
of battle, (you were in) enjoyment and security. Then you waited that
we, the Ahlul Bayt, may be engulfed in severity of trails and waited to
hear this news and in the heat of the battle, you retreated and fled
from the battlefield!

Criticism Against the Treachery of Men
--------------------------------------

Thus when Allah the Almighty exalted his Prophet from this perishable
world towards the abode of His prophets and His chosen ones, the thorns
of hypocrisy became manifest in you and the mantle of your religion
gave, and the astray ones, who were silent until yesterday, suddenly
started shrieking; the degraded and mean ones came out of their burrows
into the open ground, and the valiant ones of the polytheists of
falsehood started roaring.

Now, these very people have taken the reins of authority into their
hands and Satan has raised his head from the place of his concealment,
inviting you towards evil - thus he found you to be among those
accepting his invitation and you held him (in esteem) with the intention
of securing position or being deceived. Satan invited you to rebel and
found you to be (among the) base and meanest of people and he incited
your rage and thus you became enraged.

Then you started to snatch the rights of others and entered the spring
that did not belong to you and you did all of this when not much time
had passed since the passing of the Prophet and the wound (of his death)
was deep and our hearts had not yet healed, and the corpse of the
Prophet was not even laid to rest in the grave!

You acted very swiftly dreading the outbreak of an agitation - beware
that they themselves have fallen into the pit of agitation. Surely into
trial have they already fallen, and verily hell encompasses the
infidels.[^24]

Far be it away from you! What has happened to you? Where are you
wandering while the book of Allah (The Qurʾan) is amongst you; whose
orders are apparent and judgements are illuminated; its emblems dazzling
and whose enjoinments and prohibitions are straightforward. Did you not
leave it behind your backs and then turned your faces away from it in
disgust and turned to something else for judgement? Evil for the unjust
will be the exchange;[^25] and whoever seeks a religion other than
Islam, it will never be accepted from him, and in the next world he will
be among the losers.[^26]

You did not even wait that the tempest may calm down! Rather, you
hastened to take the reins (of the caliphate) into your hands. After
having acquired it (the caliphate), you started to ignite the fire of
mutiny and you became engrossed in inciting the fire. You responded to
the call of Satan, the seducer, and you intended to put out the light of
the glorious religion.[^27] You started to destroy the practices of the
chosen Prophet, then you delighted in suckling the delicacies of the
caliphate and opposed the Ahlul Bayt in secret and in the open.

We have no choice but to bear the cuts of your daggers and the piercing
of your spears into the body.

Reasoning of Fatima for Fadak
-----------------------------

Now you presume that we do not have any inheritance from the Prophet -
do you follow the customs of the (age of) ignorance? Is it the judgement
of (the days of) ignorance (the Pagan era) that they desire? Who (else)
can be better than Allah to judge for the people of assured faith.[^28]
Indeed, it is as bright as the sun that I am the daughter of the Prophet
of Allah.

O Muslims! Is it befitting that I am deprived of my inheritance? O son
of Abū Quhafah (Abu Bakr)! Is it contained in the Glorious Qurʾan that
one should inherit from their father; while in your opinion, I should
not inherit from my father? Indeed you have come with an unusual
thing[^29] (attributed) upon Allah and His Prophet. Did you then
intentionally forsake the Book of Allah and leave it behind your backs?
Allah says: And Sulayman inherited Dawūd[^30]; in regards to the life
of Zakariyyah, He says: So grant me from Yourself an heir who shall
inherit from me and inherit from the family of Yaʿqūb[^31]; ‘Allah also
says: And the blood relations are nearer to each other in the Book of
Allah[^32]; Allah says: Allah enjoins upon you about your children -
the male shall have the equal of the shares of two females[^33]; and He
also says, If he (the believer) leaves behind any goods that he makes a
bequest for parents and (the nearest) kinsmen in goodness (this is) a
duty upon the pious ones.[^34]

You assume that I do not have a share and allowance (in the inheritance)
and that I should not inherit from my father and that there is no
relation between us? Has Allah in His verses (of the Qurʾan) not taken
into consideration everyone in general and are not all (of the) classes
of men included in these verses? Is my father discharged from the
applicability of this verse or do you say that two people of the same
community do not inherit from one another? Are my father and I not a
part and parcel of one community?

Then, are you more cognizant of understanding the general and particular
verses of the Qurʾan than my father and my cousin (Imam ʿAli)? Then take
it (Fadak) until we meet you on the Day of Judgement - where Allah will
be the Best Judge, and Muhammad will be the claimant on that day, and
our destined time of meeting will be the Resurrection and on that
promised day, the fallacious ones will be engulfed in deep loss and
their regret (on that day) will be of no use to them! For every
prophesy, there is a (prefixed) time[^35] and you will soon realize upon
whom a torment (of tribulations) will descend which will disgrace him,
and on who falls this lasting punishment.”[^36]

Intense Criticism of the Ansar
------------------------------

Then Sayyidah Fatima turned towards the Anṣar and said, “O group of
valorous men! The aides of the nation! The helpers of Islam! What is
this slackness (that you display) in regards to me while you are
witnessing the oppression being meted upon me, but you still lie in a
deep sleep! Did my father not say that the rights of a father for his
children must be considered? How soon have you changed tracks, even
though you possess the strength to stand up for my rights and are
capable of supporting me regarding my claim!

Do you then say that Muhammad has passed away and there remains no
responsibility upon us?

His loss is great and the crack that has appeared (in Islam) is severe
and the division is immense. Unity has been shattered, the Earth is
engulfed in darkness due to his concealment, the sun and the moon are
eclipsed, and the stars have scattered away! Hopes have broken,
mountains have crumbled, the family of the Prophet has been lost and
their sanctity has been dishonored after his death! This is, by Allah, a
great calamity and a grand adversity, while this calamity is
incomparable and there is no other greater calamity than the death of
the Prophet!

This (the death of the Prophet) had already been conveyed to you in the
Book of Allah, may He be glorified.[^37] You were reading the Qurʾan day
and night in a loud voice, lamentingly, in a normal tone and in a
pleasant voice. As for what happened in the past to Allah’s prophets and
apostles - the command is decisive and destiny enjoined:

***And Muhammad is not but an apostle, (other) apostles have already
passed away prior to him, therefore if he dies or is killed, will you
turn upon your heels? And he who turns upon his heels will by no means
do harm to Allah in the least, and soon shall We reward the grateful
ones.***[^38]******

Be aware! I have said what I wanted to say, even though I know that you
will not assist me as this slackness of yours to assist us has become a
part of your heart (your practice). But all of this complaint is the
result of the grief of the heart and the internal rage (that I feel) and
(I know that) it is of no use, but I have said this to manifest my
internal sorrow and to complete my proof upon you.

Thus usurp it (Fadak) and fasten it firmly, for it is weak and feeble,
while its shame and disgrace will always remain over you. The sign of
the rage of the Supreme Allah has been cast upon it, and it will be an
everlasting disgrace upon you and it will lead you to the fire of Allah
which will engulf the heart. Thus Allah sees whatever you do,

***‘And soon shall those who deal unjustly know what an (evil) turning
they will be turned into.’***[^39]

I am the daughter of that Prophet who was sent to warn you against the
severe wrath of Allah,

***Act (you) whatever you can, and verily we (too) act, and wait,
indeed we too are waiting.”***[^40]******

[^1]: This is the renowned sermon of Sayyidah Fāṭimah al-Zahrā. The
words of the Infallibles are far beyond the comprehension of anyone
except their Creator, who created them as the epitome of infallibility
and embodiment of perfection. Their words are replete with lucidity,
insight and perfection, while pearls of wisdom and eloquence flow
through their tongues. It is for this reason that I have mainly relied
upon the book “Khutbae Haḍrat Fāṭimah” of one of the present Marja,
Āyatullāh al-Uẓmā Shaykh Ḥusayn ʿAlī al-Muntazarī, wherein he explains
each of her statements in detail. Instead of translating the literal
meanings, I have sufficed upon quoting their explanation. For further
study, readers are requested to refer to this informative work.

[^2]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse: “This day have I perfected for you,
your religion, and have completed my favour upon you, and chosen for you
Islām (to be) the religion.” Sūratul Māʾidah (5): 3. This verse was
revealed on the day of Ghadīr al-Khum wherein the authority of Imām ʿAlī
was established by the Prophet while returning from the farewell
pilgrimage. Thus the ‘complete bounties’ in this case refers to the
bounty of the wilāyah of Imām ʿAlī by whose means the bounty of guidance
is completed.

[^3]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse: “And if you reckon Allāh’s bounties,
you will not be able to compute them.” Sūrah Ibrāhīm (14): 34.

[^4]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse: “And when your Lord declared: If you
are grateful then I will increase (My favours) upon you, and if you are
ungrateful, then verily My torment is indeed severe.” Sūrah Ibrāhīm
(14): 7.

[^5]: Here Sayyidah Fāṭimah taunts the audience and says that you think
that you are worthy of all of these great entitlements and satisfied
with it, while the reality is that you do not stand up to defend truth
against falsehood. Then what is the use of this status being bestowed
upon you when you do not act and defend the rights of the Ahlul Bayt?

[^6]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse: “And when the Qurʾān is recited, then
listen to it and be attentive that you might be shown mercy.” Sūratul
Aʿraf (7): 204.

[^7]: They are the recommended acts which are rewarded, but if they are
not performed, then no sin is committed. For example, the optional
(nāfilah) prayers that either precede or follow the daily prayers.

[^8]: Permissible acts, performance or non-performance of these acts
does not entail any reward or punishment.

[^9]: There are certain unworthy acts, which a Muslim is advised to
avoid, but no sin is committed if one engages in them, Allāh’s pleasure
is not in them.

[^10]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “Take alms out of their wealth (O
Prophet), you would cleanse them and purify them thereby.” Sūratul
Barā’at (9): 103

[^11]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “Verily, only the patient ones will
be paid their recompense without any account.” Sūratul Zumur (39): 10

[^12]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “And for you there is (security of)
life in retribution, O you people of understanding, so that you may
guard yourself (against evil).” Sūratul Baqarah (2): 179

[^13]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “They who fulfill their vows, and
fear the day the woe of which stretches far and wide” Sūratul Dahr (76):
7

[^14]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “Intoxicants and games of chance,
(dedication of) stones (i.e. idols) and (divination by) arrows, are only
an abomination of Satan’s handiwork.” Sūratul Māʾidah (5): 90

[^15]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “Verily they who accuse protected
believing women, unaware (of the crime), shall be accursed in this world
and in the hereafter.” Sūratul Nūr (24): 23

[^16]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūrah Āle ʿImrān (3): 102

[^17]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Fāṭir (35): 28

[^18]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Tawbah (9): 128

[^19]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “And call you unto the way of your
Lord with wisdom and kindly exhortation and dispute with them in a
manner which is the best.” Sūratul Naḥl (16): 125

[^20]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “Verily Allāh intends but to keep
off from you (every kind of) uncleanliness O people of the House, and
purify you (with) a thorough purification.” Sūratul Aḥzāb (33): 33

[^21]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūrah Āle ʿImrān (3): 103

[^22]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “And remember when you were few and
deemed weak in the Earth, fearing that people may carry you away by
force, but He strengthened you with His aide and provided you with the
good things (of sustenance) that you may give thanks” Sūratul Anfāl (8):
26

[^23]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “Soon will Allāh bring (forward) a
people, them He loves and they love Him, lowly before the believers,
mighty against the infidels, striving hard in Allāh’s way, and they fear
not the censure of any censurer. This is the Grace of Allāh, He gives it
to whomsoever He desires” Sūratul Māʾidah (5): 54

[^24]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Tawbah (9): 49

[^25]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Kahf (18): 50

[^26]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūrat Āle ʿImrān (3): 85

[^27]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verses, “They intend to put out the Light
of Allāh with (the blow of) their mouths, and disdains Allāh save that
He perfects His Light, though the infidels may detest this.” Sūratul
Tawbah (9): 32 and “They intend they to put out the Light of Allāh with
their mouths, but Allāh will perfect His Light, though the disbelievers
may be averse.” (Sūratul Saff (61): 8)

[^28]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Māʾidah (5): 50

[^29]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūrah Maryam (19): 27

[^30]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Naml (27): 16

[^31]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūrah Maryam (19): 5-6

[^32]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Anfāl (8): 75

[^33]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Nisāʾ (4): 11

[^34]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Baqarah (2): 180

[^35]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Anʿām (6): 67

[^36]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūrat Hūd (11): 39

[^37]: Refer to the Qurʾānic verse, “And Muḥammad is not but an Apostle,
(other) Apostles have already passed away prior to him, therefore if he
dies or be slain, will you turn upon your heels?” (Sūrat Āle ʿImrān (3):
144 )

[^38]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūrat Āle ʿImrān (3): 144

[^39]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūratul Shuʿarā (26): 227

[^40]: Noble Qurʾān, Sūrat Hūd (10): 121-122


