Preface
=======

Today is 18 Dhul-hijjah, the day when the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* stayed at Ghadīr Khum after his return from
Hajjat-ul-wadā‘ to Medina. Surrounded by the Companions, he declared
while raising the hand of ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA):

<p dir="rtl">
مَنْ كُنْتُ مَولاهُ فَعَلِيٌّ مَولاهُ.
</p>

*Whoever has me as his master ‘Alī is his master.*

This was the declaration of ‘Alī’s spiritual sovereignty and its
unconditional acceptance is binding on believers till the Day of
Judgement. It clearly proves that anyone who denies ‘Alī’s spiritual
sovereignty in fact denies the Prophet’s spiritual sovereignty. This
most humble follower of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* felt that some people deny this reality partly out of
ignorance and partly out of prejudice, which is spreading unnecessary
tension and disunity in the Muslim community. Under the circumstances I
thought it necessary to write two pamphlets on the issue of sovereignty
and leadership: one titled as The Ghadīr Declaration and the other
titled The Awaited Imām Mahdī (D). The former is designed to clarify the
status of ‘Alī*(Peace Be Upon Him)* as the opener of the spiritual
sovereignty and the latter is designed to describe the status of Imām
Mahdī *(Peace Be Upon Him)* , the seal of spiritual sovereignty. The
main purpose is to remove the doubts that have gathered around the issue
and to make the Muslims aware of the reality. The spiritual sovereignty
of ‘Alī and Mahdī ( عليهما السلام ) are proved by the authentic
hadīth-books of Ahl-us-Sunnah wal-Jamā‘ah, in the form of continuous
traditions, (that is, there is uninterrupted evidence to endorse the
soundness of the traditions). In the first pamphlet I have included 51
traditions which are full authenticated and referenced. The reason for
this number is that this year I have completed 51 years of my life.
Therefore, in order to gain blessings I have humbly used this
relationship as wasīlah (intermediation) in the presence of ‘Alī (RA),
so that this meagre effort is accepted. (Āmīn)

In this preface I want to clarify the three types of legacy
(inheritance) handed down by the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* :

The spiritual inheritance of ‘unapparent succession’ (spiritual
khilāfah).

The political inheritance of ‘external caliphate.’

The general inheritance of ‘religious caliphate.’

The first form of inheritance was given to the members of the Prophet’s
family.

The second form of inheritance was given to the rightly-guided caliphs.

The third form of inheritance was given to other Companions and the
Successors.

The ‘unapparent succession’ is that fountainhead of Prophet Muhammad’s
succession which not only safeguarded spiritual achievements and hidden
blessings of Islam, but also introduced the Ummah to spiritual
sovereignty, saintly rank of qutb and reformation through which the
Ummah benefited spiritually.

The ‘external caliphate’ is that fountainhead of Prophet Muhammad’s
succession which led to the practical dominance of Islam as well as its
establishment as a practical system. This lead to governance and
stability of the Prophet’s dīn. It paved the way for the creation of
different Islamic states and practically introduced the sharī‘ah of
Prophet Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* as a world
system.

The ‘general caliphate’ is the fountainhead of Prophet Muhammad’s
succession which promoted the Islamic teachings and proved the
importance of righteous deeds in the Muslim community. It not only
helped in the preservation of knowledge and piety among the Ummah but
also in the spread and propagation of Islamic morality. The three types
of caliphate may be summed up as:

Succession of spiritual sovereignty.

Caliphate of governance.

Caliphate of guidance.

Shāh Walī Allāh (رحمة الله تعالى عليه), a great scholar of the Indian
Subcontinent, has commented on this division of Prophet’s inheritance in
the following words:

<p dir="rtl">
پس وارث آنحضرت هم بسه قسم منقسم اند، فوراثه الذين أخذوا الحكمة و العصمة
و القطبية الباطنية، هم أهل بيته و خاصته، و وراثه الذين أخذوا الحفظ و
التلقين و القطبية الظاهرة الإرشادية، هم أصحابه الكبار كالخلفاء الأربعة و
سائر العشرة، و وراثه الذين أخذوا العنايات الجزئية و التقوى و العلم، هم
أصحابه الذين لحقوا بإحسان كأنس و أبي هريرة و غيرهم من المتأخرين، فهذه
ثلاثة مراتب متفرعة من كمال خاتم الرسل صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم.
</p>

People who have received the Prophet’s inheritance are of three kinds:
‘The first kind is of those who received wisdom, piety and inner
enlightenment from him. These are the members of his family and other
specific personalities. The second group is of those who received the
inheritance of external enlightenment from him in the form of
virtuousness, and guidance. These are his senior Companions, eg the four
caliphs and the ten Companions who received the great news (of paradise
from the Prophet Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* ). The
third group is of those who received individual blessings from him in
the form of knowledge and piety. These are the people who were steeped
in the virtue of īhsān (selflessness), like Anas and Abū Hurayrah, and
the people who came later.’ The three forms of inheritance owe their
origin to the finality of messengership.

It may be noted that this division is based on convenience and special
status whereas each category of inheritance shares the qualities of
other inheritances of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
. Each category has, in some shape or form, a relationship with the
other.

In governance, Abū Bakr as-Siddīq (RA) was the immediate deputy of the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* .

In spirituality and sainthood ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA) was his directly
appointed deputy.

In guidance all of his Companions and Caliphs were his immediate
deputies.

As a result, after the finality of prophethood, three horizons were set
up in order to facilitate the eternal continuity of the Prophet’s*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* blessing:

The first horizon is for the political inheritance of the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* .

The second horizon is for the spiritual inheritance of the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* .

The third horizon is for the educational and practical inheritance of
the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* .

The political inheritance of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* was known as khilāfah rāshidah (the rightly-guided
caliphate).

The spiritual inheritance of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* was known as wilāyah (spiritual sovereignty) and imāmah
(spiritual leadership).

The educational and practical inheritance of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* came to be known as guidance and honesty.

Therefore, the first recipient of political inheritance was Abū Bakr
as-Siddīq (RA), the first recipient of spiritual inheritance was ‘Alī
al-Murtadā (RA), and the first recipients of educational and practical
inheritance were the Companions. So all of them were immediate caliphs
(heads of their particular categories). There is no form of
contradiction or rivalry between the three.

The second important point to be noted is that the true status of the
three differs with regards to various issues, such as:

External caliphate’ is the political office of Islam.

The ‘unapparent caliphate’ is exclusively a spiritual office.

The ‘external caliphate’ is an elective and consultative process.

The ‘unapparent caliphate’ is an inherent and selective act.

The ‘external’ caliph is elected by the people.

The ‘unapparent’ caliph is selected by God.

The political caliph is elected.The spiritual caliph is selected.

This is the reason that the first caliph Abū Bakr as-Siddīq (RA) was
elected on the basis of ‘Umar Fārūq’s (RA) proposal and the consensus of
the majority of the public. But the election of the first Imām of
spiritual sovereignty*-* ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA)*-* required neither
anybody’s proposal nor a consensus.

Democracy was to be derived from the caliphate, which is why the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* did not announce who will
be the caliph after him. Spiritual leadership was an act of assignment;
therefore, the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* declared
it in the valley of Ghadīr Khum.

The Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* left the election of
the caliph to the will of the people, but the spiritual leader (walī)
was selected by himself by the will of Allāh.

External caliphate is established to perfect the worldly system.

Spiritual leadership is established to beautify it with the heavenly
charm and grace.

Caliphate makes men just.

Spiritual leadership makes them perfect.

Caliphate is confined to the floor (earth).

Spiritual leadership extends to the Throne (of Allāh).

Caliphate is ineffective without officially taking office.

Spiritual leadership is effective even without taking office.

This is probably the reason why caliphate was entrusted to the Ummah,
and

Spiritual leadership was entrusted to the family of the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* .

Therefore, there is no escaping (room for the denial of) political
leadership (khilāfah; caliphate) nor of spiritual sovereignty (wilāyah).
The direct caliphate of Abū Bakr as-Siddīq (RA) was established with the
consensus of the Companions and is categorically proven by history. The
direct spiritual sovereignty of ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA) was announced by
the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* himself and is
categorically proven by mutawātir (unbroken chain of) traditions. The
proof of the caliphate is the consensus of the Companions and the proof
of spiritual sovereignty (wilāyah) is the declaration of the Prophet
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* . One who denies the caliphate
in fact denies history and consensus, and one who denies the spiritual
sovereignty (wilāyah) denies the Prophet’s declaration. Therefore, both
the caliphate and the spiritual leadership are inescapable realities.
What is urgently needed is a clear understanding of the reality of the
two institutions in order to present conformity rather than difference
(clash) between the two.

It should be understood that just as the external caliphate started with
the rightly-guided caliphs and its blessings were passed on to the
righteous and just rulers, similarly the unapparent caliphate (spiritual
sovereignty) started with ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA) and its blessings were
passed on to the members of the Prophet’s family and perfected saints of
the Ummah. By means of the declaration*-* مَنْ كُنْتُ مَولاهُ فَعَلِيٌّ
مَولاهُ (whoever has me as his master ‘Alī is his master)*-* and*-* عليّ
وليكم من بعدي (‘Alī is your spiritual leader after me)*-* the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* publicly declared ‘Alī
(RA) as the opener of spiritual sovereignty.

Shāh Walī Allāh (رحمة الله تعالى عليه) in the chapter of wilāyah says:

1. و فاتحِ اَوّل اَزين اُمت مرحومه حضرت على مرتضى است كرم الله تعالى
وجهه.

In this Ummah the first person to open the door of spiritual sovereignty
(wilāyah) is ‘Alī al-Murtadā (كرم الله تعالى وجهه).

2. و سِر حضرت اَمير كرم الله وجهه در اولاد كرام ايشان رضي الله عنهم
سرايت كرد.

The secret of the spiritual sovereignty (wilāyah) of the Leader (‘Alī
كرم الله تعالى وجهه) was passed down to his children.

3. چنانكه كسى اَز اولياء امت نيست الا بخاندانِ مرتضى رضي الله عنه مرتبط
است بوجهى اَز وجوه.

Therefore, there is not a single saint in the Ummah who is not directly
or indirectly linked to the family of ‘Alī (RA) (to attain spiritual
leadership).

4. و اَز اُمت آنحضرت صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم اَوّل كسيكه فاتح باب جذب
شده است، و دران جا قدم نهاده است حضرت امير المؤمنين على كرم الله وجهه، و
لهذا سلاسل طرق بدان جانب راجع ميشوند.

The first person in the Prophet’s Ummah who opened the gate of
self-denial in (the most superior and powerful category of) spiritual
sovereignty and who took the first step on to this elevated spot is ‘Alī
(كرم الله وجهه). That is why different orders (salāsil) of spirituality
return to him.

5. Shāh Walī Allāh (رحمة الله تعالى عليه) writes:

“Now whosoever receives wilāyah (spiritual sovereignty) from the Holy
Prophet Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , it is either
received through a relationship with ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA) or a
relationship with the Chief Helper (Ghawth-ul-A‘zam) Jīlanī (رحمة الله
تعالى عليه). No one can gain wilāyah (spiritual sovereignty) by
bypassing this process.”

It should be noted that the relationship with the Chief Helper
(Ghawth-ul-A‘zam) is in fact a chapter and a ray of the relationship
with ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA).

Shāh Ismā‘īl Dihlawī has clarified this point:

“‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA) also has superiority in a single dimension over
Abū Bakr as-Siddīq (RA) and ‘Umar Fārūq (RA). This superiority lies,
firstly, in the greater number of his followers. Secondly, all
categories of wilāyah (spiritual sovereignty) from his day till the end
of time are only possible through him. He has a say in the kingdom of
the kings and the leadership of the leaders and this is not hidden from
those who are familiar with the world of angels… Most spiritual chains
are directly derived from ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA). So, on the Day of
Judgement, ‘Alī’s army including followers of high status and great
reputation, will outnumber and outshine others to be a source of wonder
for all the spectators.”

‘Spiritual sovereignty’ (wilāyah), within the Prophet Muhammad’s*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* Ummah, whose fountainhead is ‘Alī
al-Murtadā (RA), is directly shared by Fātimah, Hassan and Hussein
(علیهما السلام) and then through them it was passed down to the twelve
Imāms (spiritual leaders), the last leader being Imām Mahdī*(Peace Be
Upon Him)* . Just as ‘Alī al-Murtadā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* is the opener
of

spiritual sovereignty, Imām Mahdī*(Peace Be Upon Him)* is the seal of
spiritual sovereignty.

The words of Shaykh Mujaddid Alf Thānī Ahmad Sarhandī (رحمة الله تعالى
عليه) appropriately highlight the point:

<p dir="rtl">
وراهى است كه بقرب ولايت تعلق دارد: اقطاب و اوتاد و بدلاء و نجباء و عامه
اولياء الله، به همين راه واصل اند وراه سلوك عبارت ازين راه است بلكه جذبه
متعارفه، نيز داخل همين است و توسط و حيلولت درين راه كائن است و پيشواى و
اصلان اين راه و سرگروه اينها و منبع فيض اين بزرگواران: حضرت على مرتضى
است كرم الله تعالى وجهه الكريم، و اين منصب عظيم الشان بايشان تعلق دارد
درينمقام گوئيا هر دو قدم مبارك آنسرور عليه و على آله الصلوة و السلام بر
فرق مبارك اوست كرم الله تعالى وجهه وحضرت فاطمه و حضرات حسنين رضي الله
تعالى عنهم درينمقام با ايشان شريك اند، اﻧﮔارم كه حضرت امير قبل از نشأ
عنصرى نيز ملاذ وملجاء اين مقام بوده اند، چنانچه بعد از نشأ عنصرى و هر
كرا فيض و هدايت ازين راه ميرسيد بتوسط ايشان ميرسيد چه ايشان نزد نقطه
منتهائى اين راه اند و مركز اين مقام بايشان تعلق دارد، و چون دوره حضرت
امير تمام شد اين منصب عظيم القدر بحضرات حسنين ترتيبا مفوض و مسلم گشت، و
بعد از ايشان همان منصب بهريكى از ائمه اثنا عشر على الترتيب و التفصيل
قرار گفت و در اعصاراين بزرگواران و همچنين بعد از ارتحال ايشان هر كرا فيض
و هدايت ميرسيد بتوسط اين بزرگواران بوده و بخيلولة ايشانان هر چند اقطاب و
نجباى وقت بوده باشند، و ملاذ و ملجاء همه ايشان بوده اند چه اطراف را غير
از لحوق بمركز چاره نيست.
</p>

And there is another way close to spiritual sovereignty and this is the
way of all categories of saints of all levels. The path of mysticism
(tasawwuf) springs from this path and it also involves the status of
self-denial. Intermediation is proven in this process because ‘Alī
al-Murtadā (RA) is the fountainhead of from which the Shaykhs of those
on this path gain all their blessings. And this grand office is reserved
for him. On this path, the feet of the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* are on ‘Alī’s head whereas Fātimah, Hassan and
Hussein (علیهما السلام) share this status with him. I believe that he
enjoyed this position even before his physical birth, as he did after
it. Whosoever has received the divine blessings and guidance on this
path, has received it through him, because he is closest to the last
point on this path and the centre of this spot belongs to him. And when
‘Alī’s period ended, the grand office was passed down to

Hassan and Hussein (Peace Be Upon Them). Then it was passed down to the
twelve Imāms in the correct order one by one, the last of whom will be
Imām Mahdī (D). Whosoever received guidance in their life and after
their death, received it through these saints. These Imāms are the
source of all blessing for even the high ranking saints (such as qutubs
and nujabā’ because they are the centre of all spiritual activity) and
no one can survive without a link with the headquarters.

Shaykh Ahmad Sarhandī (رحمة الله تعالى عليه) believes that Imām
Mahdī*(Peace Be Upon Him)* will share spiritual sovereignty (wilāyah)
with ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA).

The gist of the discussion is that the Prophet’s declaration at Ghadīr
Khum proved forever that ‘Alī’s spiritual sovereignty is in fact the
Prophet Muhammad’s spiritual sovereignty. As the door of prophethood was
closed after the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* ,
Allāh (SWT) has opened new avenues for the continuation of the Prophet’s
blessings till the Day of Judgement. Some were blessed by an external
status whilst others by an internal status. The hidden avenue is known
as spiritual sovereignty and ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA) was its first Imām.
Then this chain of sovereignty was passed down to the Prophet’s family
and finally to the twelve Imāms. Besides the twelve Imāms there are
thousands of other pious individuals who reached the status of
sainthood. They have held high ranks of sainthood (such as ghawth,
qutub) and have enlightened the lives of millions of people through the
internal light of wilāyah, taking them out of ignorance and astray. Yet
all of them gained their spiritual status from the spiritual sovereignty
of ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA), be it directly or indirectly. No one was
self-sufficient and independent from the wilāyah of ‘Alī al-Murtadā (RA)
and this chain will continue up to the Day of Judgement until the
appearance of the last Imām (spiritual leader) and the centre of
spiritual leadership. He will be Imām Muhammad Mahdī*(Peace Be Upon
Him)* , the twelfth Imām and the last caliph. In his person, the
external and the unapparent caliphates which ran parallel to each other
will come together. He will be the spiritual as well as the political
inheritor, and he will be the last person to hold the offices of
khilāfah and wilāyah. Anyone who denies Imām Mahdī *(Peace Be Upon Him)*
will deny both the external and unapparent forms of Islam.

This will be the climax of the exposure and disclosure of the Prophet
Muhammad’s blessing. This is due to the fact that, he will be named
Muhammad and he will also resemble the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* in moral excellence. So the world should know that
this Imām is the recipient of both the external and internal inheritance
of the Prophet’s blessings. That is why the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* said, “Anyone who denies Mahdī will be a
disbeliever.”

At that time, he will be the focus of all saints on earth, and, being
the leader of Prophet Muhammad’s Ummah, prophet ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon
Him)* will offer his prayer behind him and in this way, he will announce
his leadership to the whole world.

So we should realize that ‘Alī al-Murtadā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* and Mahdī
*(Peace Be Upon Him)* of the earth and heavens *-* the father and the
son *-* are both Allāh’s friends and the Prophet’s inheritors. It is
therefore compulsory on every believer to acknowledge their exceptional
status.

May Allāh (SWT) give us the ability to gain blessings from these
fountainheads of wilāyah. (Āmīn! with the intermediation of the Leader
of the Prophets*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* ).

**Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri**

One of the servants of Prophet’s*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
Family


