Section: 1-6
============

Section 1 : Imām Mahdī (Peace Be Upon Him) is the true Imām and is from the family of Fātimah (Allāh Be Pleased With Her)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. عن سعيد بن المسيب يقول: سمعت أم سلمة رضي الله عنها تقول: سمعت النبي
صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يذكر المهدي، فقال: نعم، هو حق وهو من بني فاطمة.

“Sa‘īd ibn Musayyab relates that he heard Umm Salamah*(Allāh Be Pleased
With Her)* say: I heard the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* mention Mahdī. He said: yes, Mahdī is the Truth (that
is, his appearance is true and imminent) and he will be from the family
of Fātimah.”

2. عن أنس بن مالك رضي الله عنه، قال: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم يقول: نحن وَلَد عبد المطلب سادة أهل الجنة: أنا وحمزة وعلي وجعفر
والحسن والحسين والمهدي.

“Anas ibn Mālik (RA) narrates: I heard the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* say: we, the children of ‘Abd-ul-Muttalib,
will be the chiefs of the people of Paradise, that is, myself, Hamzah,
‘Alī, Ja‘far, Hassan, Hussein and Mahdī.”

3. عن أم سلمة رضي الله عنها، قالت: ذكر رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم
المهدي، فقال: هو من ولد فاطمة.

“Umm Salamah*(Allāh Be Pleased With Her)* says that Allāh’s
Messenger*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* mentioned Mahdī (and he
said:) he will be from the children of Fātimah.”

4. عن عائشة رضى الله عنها، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم قال: هو رجل من
عترتي يقاتل على سنتي كما قاتلت أنا على الوحي.

“‘Ā’ishah relates that the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* said: Mahdī will be from my children who will fight (to
establish) my sunnah as I fought according to the divine revelation.”

5. عن سليمان بن حبيب، قال: سمعت أبا أمامة رضي الله عنه، يقول: قال رسول
الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم: سيكون بينكم وبين الروم أربع هدن، تقوم
الرابعة على يد رجل من أهل هرقل، يدوم سبع سنين. فقال له رجل من عبد القيس
يقال له المستورد بن خيلان: يا رسول الله! مَن إمام الناس يومئذ؟ قال: من
وُلد أربعين سنة كأن وجهه كوكب دري في خده الأيمن، خال أسود، عليه عباءتان
قعوايتان كأنه من رجال بني إسرائيل، يملك عشرين سنة، يستخرج الكنوز ويفتح
مدائن الشرك.

“Sulaymān ibn Habīb says that he heard Abū Umāmah (RA) narrate: The
Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: there
will be peace between you and Rome four times and the fourth time the
leader of the Romans will be a person belonging to the children of
Heraclius. This ‘peace’ will last seven continuous years. A man from
‘Abd al-Qays, Mustawrid ibn Khaylān, asked the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* : who will be the Imām of the Muslims at
that time? He*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* replied: that
person will be from (my) children and he will be forty years old. His
face will be bright like a star and there will be a black beauty spot on
his right cheek, and he will be dressed in two cotton gowns and it will
seem as though he is exactly like one of the Children of Israel. He will
rule for ten years, discover treasures from beneath the earth and
conquer the cities ruled by the polytheists.”

6. عن ابن مسعود رضي الله عنه، عن النبي صلي الله عليه وآله وسلم قال: اسم
المهدي محمد.

“‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd (رضي الله عنهما) has related it from the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* : he said: The name of
Mahdī will be Muhammad.”

Section 2 : The Day of Judgment will not arrive before the caliphate of Imām Mahdī (Peace Be Upon Him)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. عن عبد الله رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم:
لا تذهب الدنيا حتى يملك العرب رجل من أهل بيتي، يواطئ اسمه اسمي.

“Related by ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd (رضي الله عنهما) that the Messenger of
Allāh’*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: the world will not
seize to exist until someone from my family becomes the king of Arabia
whose name will be the same as my name (ie Muhammad).”

8. عن عبد الله رضي الله عنه، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، قال: يلي
رجل من أهل بيتي يواطئ اسمه اسمي. قال عاصم: وأخبرنا أبو صالح، عن أبي
هريرة رضي الله عنه، قال: لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم، لطوّل الله ذلك
اليوم حتى يلي.

“‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd (رضي الله عنهما) narrates that the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: one of my children will be the
caliph and his name will be the same as mine.

“‘Āsim said: Abū Sālih related to us: Narrated by Abū Hurayrah (RA):
even if only one day remains before the end of the world, Allāh will
lengthen the day to the extent that that person (ie Mahdī) becomes the
caliph.”

9. عن أم سلمة رضي الله عنها، قالت: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم يقول: المهدي من عترتي من ولد فاطمة.

“Umm Salamah*(Allāh Be Pleased With Her)* says: I heard the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* say: Mahdī will be from my
family and he will be from the children of Fātimāh.”

10. عن أبي نضرة، قال: كنا عند جابر بن عبد الله رضي الله عنهما، فقال:
يوشك أهل الشام أن لا يجبى إليهم دينار ولا مدى. قلنا: من أين ذاك؟ قال: من
قبل الروم. ثم أسكت هنية، ثم قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم:
يكون في آخر أمتي خليفة يحثى المال حثيا لا يعده عددا. قال: قلت لأبي نضرة
وأبي العلاء: أتريان أنه عمر بن عبد العزيز؟ فقالا: لا.

“Abū Nadrah narrates that we were with Jābir ibn ‘Abdullāh (رضي الله
عنهما) when he said: That time is near when neither dinars nor grain
will be brought to the natives of Syria. We asked: who will impose this
restriction? Jābir (RA) said: The Romans. Then he kept quiet for a while
and said: Allāh’s Messenger*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* has
said that a Caliph (ie Mahdī) will appear in the last days of my Ummah
and he will give wealth in vast quantities without keeping a record of
it.

“Jurayrī, the sub-narrator, said: I asked Abū Nadrah and Abū ‘Alā’: in
your opinion is ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd-ul-‘Azīz, the Caliph mentioned in the
hadīth? They replied: No (this Caliph will be someone other than ‘Umar
ibn ‘Abd-ul-‘Azīz).”

11. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وآله وسلم: لا تقوم الساعة حتى تملأ الأرض ظلما وجورا وعدوانا، ثم يخرج من
أهل بيتي من يملأها قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت ظلما وعدوانا.

“Narrated by Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said: The Day of Judgment will not come
until the earth is filled with tyranny, exploitation and rebellion.
Later, a person (Mahdī) will be born from among my children who will
fill the earth with justice and equity. (It means that the Day of
Judgment will not come before the appearance of the Caliph Mahdī) as it
was filled with tyranny and rebellion.”

12. عن أبي سعيد رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم: المهدي منا أهل البيت، أشم الأنف أقنى أجلى، يملأ الأرض قسطا وعدلا
كما ملئت جورا وظلما، يعيش هكذا. وبسط يساره، وإصبعين من يمينه المسبحة
والإبهام وعقد ثلاثة.

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) narrates that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said: Mahdī will be from my family, his
nose will be pointed and high and his forehead will be bright and
shining. He will fill the earth with justice and equity, just as (before
it) it had been filled with tyranny and transgression. The
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said, “he will live for,”
then he stretched out his left (hand), two forefingers and thumb of his
right hand and joined the three (meaning Mahdī will live for eight
years).”

13. عن علي رضي الله عنه، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، قال: لو لم
يبق من الدهر إلا يوم لبعث الله رجلا من أهل بيتي، يملأها عدلا كما ملئت
جورا.

“‘Alī (RA) has related it from the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* : he*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: If only
one day was to remain for this world to stay in tact (Allāh will
lengthen the day and) a person, (called Mahdī) from my family, will be
born who will fill the world with justice and equity just as (before
him) it had been filled with tyranny and oppression.”

Section 3 : Imām Mahdī (Peace Be Upon Him) and Economic Justice
---------------------------------------------------------------

14. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وآله وسلم: المهدي مني، أجلى الجبهة أقنى الأنف: يملأ الأرض قسطا وعدلا كما
ملئت ظلما وجورا، ويملك سبع سنين.

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) narrates that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said: Mahdī will be from me (ie from my
family), his face will be bright and shining and his nose will be
pointed and high. He will fill the earth with justice and fairness just
as before him it was filled with tyranny and oppression. (Meaning that
before the caliphate of Mahdī, tyranny and exploitation shall reign
supreme in the world and there will not be the slightest trace of
justice and equity.)”

15. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وآله وسلم: تملأ الأرض جورا وظلما، فيخرج رجل من عترتي، يملك سبعا أو تسعا،
فيملأ الأرض قسطا وعدلا.

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) narrates that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said: (Near to the end of time) the earth
will be filled with tyranny and oppression and a person will be born
from among my children, and he will rule as Caliph for seven or nine
years. (During his caliphate) he will fill the earth with justice and
fairness just as it was previously filled with tyranny and injustice.”

16. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه، قال: (ذكر رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وآله وسلم بلاء يصيب هذه الأمة، حتى) لا يجد المؤمن ملجأ يلتجئ إليه من
الظلم،

<p dir="rtl">
فيبعث الله عز وجل رجلا من عترتي، فيملأ الأرض قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت ظلما
وجورا، يرضى عنه ساكن السماء وساكن الأرض، لا تدخر الأرض من بذرها شيئا إلا
أخرجته، ولا السماء من قطرها شيئا إلا صبه الله عليهم مدرارا، يعيش فيها
سبع سنين أو ثمان أو تسع، تتمنى الأحياء الأموات مما صنع الله عز وجل بأهل
الأرض من خيره.
</p>

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) says that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* mentioned a great test that will face this
Ummah. A time will come when oppression will be at such a peak that
there will not be any refuge for any Muslim. Then Allāh will raise
someone from amongst my children who will refill the earth with justice
and fairness just as it was filled with tyranny and oppression before
it. All those living in the heavens and earth will be pleased with him.
The earth will produce as much as possible, and Allāh will pour down
torrential rain from the sky. Mahdī will live in this era (of
prosperity, equity and justice) for seven, eight or nine years.
Prosperity will be on such a high that the people at the time will wish
that only if those who had passed before them and experienced misery and
oppression were alive.”

17. عن ابن مسعود رضي الله عنه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم: لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا ليلة لطول الله تلك الليلة حتى يملك رجل من
أهل بيتي، يواطي اسمه اسمي، واسم أبيه اسم أبي، يملأها قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت
ظلما وجورا، و يقسم المال بالسوية، ويجعل الله الغني في قلوب هذه الأمة،
فيمكث سبعا أو تسعا، ثم لا خير في عيش الحياة بعد المهدي.

“Narrated by ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd (رضي الله عنهما) that Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: if there was only one
night left for this world to stay in tact, Allāh will lengthen it until
a member of my family becomes the ruler whose name will be the same as
my name and the name of his father will be the same as the name of my
father. He will fill the world with justice and fairness just as it was
filled with tyranny and exploitation. He will distribute things equally
among the people and Allāh will also fill the hearts of the Ummah with
content. He will rule for seven or nine years. Then after the caliphate
of Mahdī, there will be a total end to goodness (and virtue).”

Section 4 : Imām Mahdī (Peace Be Upon Him) and the Saints
---------------------------------------------------------

18. عن أم سلمة رضي الله عنها، قالت: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم: يبايع لرجل من أمتي بين الركن والمقام كعدة أهل بدر، فيأتيه عصب
العراق وأبدال الشام.

“Umm Salamah*(Allāh Be Pleased With Her)* narrates that Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: People exactly equal
in number to the Companions of Badr (ie 313) will take the oath of

allegiance on the hand of a person from my Ummah (Mahdī) between the
Black Stone and the Station of Ibrāhīm (maqām Ibrāhīm). Later on, the
saints of Iraq and the abdāl (Substitutes) of Syria will also come to
him (to give the oath of allegiance).”

19. عن أم سلمة رضي الله عنها زوج النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، عن النبي
صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، قال: يكون اختلاف عند موت خليفة، فيخرج رجل من
أهل المدينة هاربا إلى مكة، فيأتيه ناس من أهل مكة، فيُخرجونه وهو كاره،
فيبايعونه بين الركن والمقام، ويُبعث إليه بعث من الشام، فيُخسف بهم
بالبيداء بين مكة والمدينة، فإذا رأى الناس ذلك أتاه أبدال الشام وعصائب
أهل العراق، فيبايعونه، ثم ينشأ رجل من قريش أخواله كلب فيبعث إليهم بعثا،
فيظهرون عليهم، وذلك بعث كلب، والخيبة لمن لم يشهد غنيمة كلب، فيقسم المال
ويعمل في الناس بسنة نبيهم صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، ويلقي الإسلام بجرانه
إلى الأرض، فيلبث سبع سنين، ثم يتوفى ويصلي عليه المسلمون. قال أبو داود:
وقال بعضهم عن هشام: تسع سنين. وقال بعضهم: سبع سنين.

“Narrated by Umm Salamah*(Allāh Be Pleased With Her)* , the wife of the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , who says that the
Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: at the
death of a Caliph there will be a difference of opinion (between the
Muslims of Medina over the election of the new Caliph). One person (that
is, Mahdī, realising that the people might elect him as the caliph) will
leave Medina for Makkah. Some of the residents of Makkah (who will
recognize him as Mahdī) will come to him, and bring him out (of his
home) against his will; they will take the oath (of caliphate) on his
hand between the Black Stone and the Station of Ibrāhīm (maqām Ibrāhīm).
(When the news of his caliphate will spread), an army will set out from
Syria to wage war on him (but before reaching him) it will be pushed
down into the (treeless) ground at Baydā’ between Makkah and Medina. The
abdāl (Substitutes) of Syria and the Saints of Iraq will take the oath
of caliphate on his hand. Later, a Qurayshī (that is, Sufyānī) person,
whose maternal relatives will be from the Kalb tribe, will send an armed
force against them. They will prevail over the invading army and this
will be the Battle of Kalb. One who (does not take part in the Battle of
Kalb) has nothing to do with the booty will be in loss. (After this
conquest) the Caliph Māhdī will generously donate wealth among the
people and make them follow the sunnah of their Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* . Islam will be fully established on earth (ie
Islam will be dominant and accepted all over the world). Mahdī will
remain (as Caliph) for seven years, then he will die, and the Muslims
will attend his funeral.

“Abū Dāwūd said: some transmitted from Hishām “nine years” and some
“seven years.”

20. عن أم سلمة رضي الله عنها، قالت: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم يقول: يكون اختلاف عند موت خليفة، فيخرج رجل من بني هاشم، فيأتي مكة
فيستخرجه الناس من بيته وهو كاره، فيبايعونه بين الركن والمقام، فيجهز إليه
جيش من الشام، حتى إذا كانوا بالبيداء خسف بهم، فيأتيه عصائب العراق وأبدال
الشام، وينشأ رجل بالشام، وأخواله كلب فيجهز إليه جيش، فيهزمهم الله، فتكون
الدائرة عليهم، فذلك يوم كلب، الخائب من خاب من غنيمة كلب، فيستفتح الكنوز،
ويقسم الأموال، ويلقي الإسلام بجرانه إلى الأرض، فيعيش بذلك سبع سنين، أو
قال: تسع سنين.

“Umm Salamah*(Allāh Be Pleased With Her)* relates: she heard the
Messenger of Allāh’s*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* say: there
will be difference of opinion over the death of the caliph (ie
difference on who should be appointed as the next Caliph. On seeing
this) a person from the tribe of Hāshim (fearing he may be selected to
take the burden of the Caliphate) will leave for Makkah from Medina.
Some people will come and take him out of his house although he will
resist it. Then they will take the oath (of caliphate) on his hand
between the Black Stone and the Station of Ibrāhīm (maqām Ibrāhīm). (On
hearing the news of their allegiance) an army will set out towards them
from Syria but it will be crushed into the ground as it reaches Baydā’
(a plain between Makkah and Medina). After this, the saints of Iraq and
the abdāl (Substitutes) of Syria will call on him. Then a (Sufyānī)
person will come from Syria, his maternal relatives belonging to the
Kalb tribe, he will despatch his army to wage war on him. Allāh will
defeat them, resulting in them facing a catastrophe. This is the Battle
of Kalb. So anyone who (does not take part in the Battle of Kalb and as
a result) does not share in the booty, will be in loss. Then the caliph
Mahdī will discover treasures and distribute them generously (among the
people). Islam will be fully established on earth. People will live (in
this state of prosperity and comfort) for seven or nine years (that is,
people will live in peace and comfort until the death of Māhdī).”

21. عن علي رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم:
المهدي منا أهل البيت يصلحه الله في ليلة.

“‘Alī (RA) relates that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* said: Mahdī will be from my family. Allāh will turn him
overnight into a righteous person (that is, through His guidance, He
will raise him to the highest levels of sainthood).”

Section 5 : Imām Mahdī (Peace Be Upon Him) as Allāh’s Caliph
------------------------------------------------------------

22. عن ثوبان رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم:
يقتتل عند كنزكم ثلاثة كلهم ابن خليفة، ثم لا يصير إلى واحد منهم، ثم تطلع
الرايات السود من قبل المشرق، فيقتلونكم قتلا لم يقتله قوم

<p dir="rtl">
ثم ذكر شيئا لا أحفظه، فقال: فإذا رأيتموه فبايعوه ولو حبوا على الثلج،
فإنه خليفة الله المهدي.
</p>

“Thawbān (RA) narrates that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* said: Three persons will wage war near your
treasure. All three will be sons of the caliph and yet this treasure
will not be transferred to anyone of them. Then black flags will appear
from the east and they will wage war on you with such intensity that no
nation had waged war with such aggression before.

“(Thawbān (RA) says:) then the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* said something (which I could not remember.) Then the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: when you people see
him, you should take the oath of allegiance on his hand even if you have
to come dragging on snow. Indeed he will be the Caliph of Allāh, Mahdī.”

Necessary Clarification: Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalānī comments in Fath-ul-bārī
(13:78, 79) while quoting this tradition: If the treasure mentioned in
this tradition is the one referred to by Abū Hurayrah (RA) in this
tradition:

<p dir="rtl">
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم: يوشك الفرات أن يحسر عن كنز من
ذهب.
</p>

“The Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: The
time is near when the river Euphrates (having dried up) will reveal a
treasure of gold.”

Then this tradition clearly indicates that these events will occur at
the time of Mahdī’s appearance.

23. عن حذيفة رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلي الله عليه وآله وسلم:
المهدي رجل من ولدي، لونه لون عربي، وجسمه جسم إسرائيلي، على خده الأيمن
خال كأنه كوكب دري، يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت جوراً، يرضى في خلافته أهل
الأرض وأهل السماء والطير في الجو.

“Narrated by Hudhayfah (RA) that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* said: Mahdī will be from my family. His
complexion will be of an Arab and a physical structure of the children
of Israel. There will be a beauty spot on his right cheek. His
appearance will be similar to a luminous star. He will fill the earth
with justice just as it was filled (before him) with injustice. Those in
the earth and the heavens will be pleased with his caliphate. The birds
in the skies will also be pleased.”

24. عن أبي سعيد رضي الله عنه، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم قال: يخرج
في آخر الزمان خليفة، يعطى الحق بغير عدد.

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) relates from the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* that he said: Near to the end of time, a Caliph (Mahdī)
will come who will give their due rights to the people without recording
it (ie without keeping a record of who has received what).”

Section 6 : Imām Mahdī (Peace Be Upon Him) and Islamic Dominance
----------------------------------------------------------------

25. عن أبي الطفيل، عن محمد بن الحنفية، قال: كنا عند علي رضي الله عنه،
فسأله رجل عن المهدي، فقال علي رضي الله عنه: هيهات، ثم عقد بيده سبعا،
فقال: ذاك يخرج في آخر الزمان، إذا قال الرجل: الله! الله! قتل، فيجمع الله
تعالى له قوما قزع كقزع السحاب، يؤلف الله بين قلوبهم، لا يستوحشون إلى أحد
ولا يفرحون بأحد، يدخل فيهم على عدة أصحاب بدر لم يسبقهم الأولون ولا
يدركهم الآخرون، وعلى عدد أصحاب طالوت الذين جاوزوا معه النهر. قال أبو
الطفيل: قال ابن الحنفية: أتريده؟ قلت: نعم. قال: إنه يخرج من بين هذين
الخشبتين. قلت: لا جرم، والله! لا أريهما حتى أموت. فمات بها يعني مكة
حرسها الله تعالى.

“Abū Tufayl relates from Muhammad ibn Hanafiyyah that he said: We were
sitting in the company of ‘Alī (RA) that a person asked him about Mahdī.
‘Alī (RA) (pleasantly) said: go away. Then, counting seven on his hand,
he said: Mahdī will appear in the last days and (the dominance of
non-religious forces will be at such a level that) anyone mentioning the
name of Allāh will be killed. (At the time of Mahdī’s appearance) Allāh
will gather a party around him, just as the separate pieces of cloud are
joined together and Allāh will create love (and unity) among them. They
will neither fear anyone nor will they unnecessarily favour anyone
(meaning that they deal with everybody equally). The people who will
gather round the caliph will number the Companions who had taken part in
the battle of Badr (that is, 313). This party will have a special
superiority which was not possessed by anyone before them nor will
anyone possess it after them. The number of the people in this party
will be the same as the Companions of Tālūt who had crossed the (Jordan)
canal in the company of Tālūt.

“Abū Tufayl says that Muhammad ibn Hanafiyyah asked the audience: Do you
intend to join this party? I said: yes. He said, pointing toward the two
pillars (of Ka‘bah): The appearance of caliph Mahdī will take place
between them. At this, Abū Tufayl said: By God! I shall not leave them
during my whole life. (The narrator says): accordingly, the death of Abū
Tufayl took place in Makkah.”

26. عن علي الهلالي رضي الله عنه، أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم
قال لفاطمة: والذي بعثني بالحق! إن منهما – يعني من الحسن والحسين – مهدي
هذه الأمة، إذا صارت الدنيا هرجا ومرجا وتظاهرت الفتن وتقطعت السبل وأغار
بعضهم

<p dir="rtl">
على بعض، فلا كبير يرحم صغيرا ولا صغير يؤقر كبيرا، بعث الله عز وجل عند
ذلك منهما من يفتح حصون الضلالة وقلوبا غلفا يقوم بالدين في آخر الزمان كما
قمت في أول الزمان، ويملأ الأرض عدلا كما ملئت جورا.
</p>

“‘Alī al-Hilālī (RA) narrates that the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* said to Fātimah*(Allāh Be Pleased With Her)* : I swear
by the One who has sent me with the Truth! Surely, the Mahdī of this
Ummah will be from among (the children of) these two, that is, Hassan
and Hussein. At a time when the world will be subject to chaos and
turmoil, roads will be cut off and people will attack one another, no
elderly will show love to the younger and no youngster will respect the
elderly, then Allāh will send a person from among these two who will
conquer the forts of disbelief and open closed hearts. He will establish
Islam in the last days of the Ummah as I have established it in the
early days (of this Ummah). He will fill the earth with justice just as
it was formerly filled with tyranny and persecution.”

27. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه، سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم يقول: يخرج رجل من أهل بيتي يقول بسنتي، ينزل الله عز وجل له القطر من
السماء، وتخرج له الأرض من بركتها، تملأ الأرض منه قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت
جورا وظلما، يعمل على هذه الأمة سبع سنين، وينزل بيت المقدس.

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) has narrated: I heard the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* say: A person will appear
from my family who will preach my sunnah. Allāh will pour down rain for
him from the skies and the earth will disclose (and throw out) its
treasures for him. The earth will be filled with justice and fairness
because of him just as it was filled before hand with tyranny and
persecution. He will rule this Ummah for seven years and he will descend
at the Holy House (Bayt-ul-Muqaddas).”

28. عن أبي هريرة رضي الله عنه، قال: حدثني خليلي أبو القاسم صلى الله عليه
وآله وسلم قال: لا تقوم الساعة حتى يخرج عليهم رجل من أهل بيتي فيضربهم حتى
يرجعوا إلى الحق. قلت: وكم يملك؟

<p dir="rtl">
قال: خمسا واثنين.
</p>

“Abū Hurayrah (RA) has narrated: My beloved Abū al-Qāsim*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* said to me: The Day of Judgement will not come
until a person appears from my family who will confront the people until
they turn to the truth. I said: How long will he rule for? He said: Five
and two (years).”

29. عن جابر بن عبد الله رضي الله عنهما، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم، قال: يكون في أمتي خليفة يحثي المال حثيا لا يعده عدا. ثم قال: والذي
نفسي بيده! ليعودن.

“Narrated by Jābir ibn ‘Abdullāh (رضي الله عنهما) that Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: There will be a
caliph in my Ummah who will generously distribute wealth without keeping
a record of it. And I swear by the One who controls my life! Certainly
that the dominance (of Islam) will return (that is, Islam will recapture
its lost glory and retrieve its status during his reign).”


