Section: 7-12
=============

Section 7: Economic Prosperity and Fair Distribution of Wealth
--------------------------------------------------------------

30. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه: أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم قال: يخرج في آخر أمتي المهدي يسقيه الله الغيث وتخرج الأرض نباتها
ويعطى المال صحاحا وتكثر الماشية وتعظم الأمة يعيش سبعا أو ثمانيا.

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) has narrated that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: Mahdī will be born during the last
days of my Ummah. Allāh will pour down heavy rain during his caliphate
and the earth will grow its produce in abundance, and he will distribute
things equally among the people. During his reign there will be plenty
of cattle and the Ummah will be held in great esteem. (After becoming
the caliph) he will live for seven or eight years.”

31. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وآله وسلم: أبشركم بالمهدي يبعث في أمتي على اختلاف من الناس وزلازل، فيملأ
الأرض قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت جورا وظلما، يرضى عنه ساكن السماء وساكن الأرض،
يقسم المال صحاحا. فقال له رجل: ما صحاحا؟ قال: بالسوية بين الناس، ويملأ
الله قلوب أمة محمد صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم غنى ويسعهم عدله حتى يأمر
مناديا فينادي، فيقول: من له في مال حاجة؟ فما يقوم من الناس إلا رجل واحد،
فيقول: ائت السدان يعني الخازن. فقل له: إن المهدي يأمرك أن تعطيني مالا،
فيقول له: أحث حتى إذا جعله في حجره وأبرزه ندم. فيقول: كنت أجشع أمة محمد
نفسا أو عجز عني ما وسعهم، قال: فيرده فلا يقبل منه، فيقال له: إنا لا نأخذ
شيا أعطيناه، فيكون كذلك سبع سنين أو ثمان سنين أو تسع سنين، ثم لا خير في
العيش بعده، أو قال: ثم لا خير في الحياة بعده.

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) has narrated that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: I am giving you the good news of
the coming of Mahdī who will be sent down at a time when my Ummah will
fall prey to disputes and chaos. He will fill the earth with justice and
fairness just as it was filled (before him) with oppression and
persecution. Those in the earth and heavens will be pleased with him. He
will distribute things equally among the people (ie he will not
discriminate against anyone). Allāh (during his caliphate) will fill the
hearts of my Ummah with generosity. He will provide justice to all
(without any discrimination or preference). He will ask his announcer to
announce that if anyone required anything (they should come to Mahdī. On
hearing this announcement) no one from among the Muslims except one
person will stand up. Mahdī will ask him to go to

the treasurer and tell him that Mahdī has ordered you to give me some
goods. (The man will go to the treasurer), the treasure will say to him:
take as much as you want. He will take (as much as he wishes) and will
come out of the treasury. He will, at that moment, be ashamed (of his
act) and (will say to himself), am I the greediest person in Muhammad’s
Ummah, or he will say to himself that which is enough for others is not
enough for me. (Feeling guilty of his act) he will want to return the
goods but it will not be taken back. He will be told that, once we have
given something we do not take it back. So Mahdī will live for seven,
eight or nine years with this justice and fairness and distribution of
wealth. Then after his (death) there will be no goodness (comfortable
life) for the living to enjoy.”

32. عن أبي هريرة رضي الله عنه، قال: ذكر رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآاله
وسلم المهدي، فقال: إن قصر فسبع وإلا فثمان وإلا فتسع، وليملأن الأرض قسطا
كما ملئت جورا وظلما.

“Abū Hurayrah (RA) has narrated that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said while mentioning Mahdī: At minimum,
the duration of the caliphate of Mahdī will be seven years. It can also
be eight or nine years. He will fill the earth with justice and fairness
just as it was filled with tyranny and oppression before it.”

33. عن جابر بن عبد الله رضي الله عنهما، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم
قال: يكون في أمتي خليفة يحثي المال حثيا لا يعده عدا. ثم قال: والذي نفسي
بيده! ليعودن.

“Narrated by Jābir ibn ‘Abdullāh (رضي الله عنهما) that the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: There will be a
caliph in my Ummah who will generously distribute wealth without keeping
a record of it. And I swear by the One who controls my life! Certainly,
the dominance (of Islam) will return (that is, Islam will recapture its
lost glory and retrieve its status during his reign).”

34. عن أبي هريرة رضي الله عنه، أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم قال:
يكون في أمتي المهدي، إن قصر فسبع وإلا فثمان وإلا فتسع، ينعم أمتي فيه
نعمة لم ينعموا مثلها، يرسل السماء عليهم مدرارا ولا تدخر الأرض شيئا من
النبات، والمال كدوس، يقوم الرجل، فيقول: يا مهدي! أعطني. فيقول: خذه.

“Abū Hurayrah (RA) has related that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said: there will be Mahdī in my Ummah. If
(the duration of his caliphate is a) short (period) then it will be
seven years, otherwise, it will be eight or nine years. The prosperity
of my Ummah will be at such a high, the likes of which not experienced
by it in the past. Rain will pour down from the sky (as needed), the
earth will grow as much crop as possible and there will be no shortage
of wealth. A person will stand and

say: O Mahdī! Give me something. Mahdī will say him: take it yourself
(from the treasury according to your desires).”

35. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه، أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم
قال: يكون في أمتي المهدي، إن قصر فسبع وإلا فتسع، فتنعم فيه أمتي نعمة لم
ينعموا مثلها قط، تؤتى أكلها ولا تدخر منهم شيئا، والمال يومئذ كدوس، فيقوم
الرجل، فيقول: يا مهدي! أعطني. فيقول: خذ.

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) has related that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said: There will be Mahdī in my Ummah who
will be the caliph for at least seven years, otherwise for nine years.
My Ummah will be so prosperous in his period that it would not have
experienced such prosperity before it. The earth will grow every form of
crop and hold back nothing. During this period goods will be in such a
high quantity as a heap of grain on the threshing floor. Someone will
stand up and say: O Mahdī! Give me something. He will say: Take (as much
you like).”

36. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه، قال: خشينا أن يكون بعد نبينا حدث،
فسألنا نبي الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، فقال: إن في أمتي المهدي يخرج
يعيش خمسا أو سبعا أو تسعا*-* زيد الشاك*-* قال: قلنا: وما ذاك؟ قال: سنين.
قال: فيجيء إليه رجل، فيقول: يا مهدي! أعطني، أعطني. قال: فيحثي له في ثوبه
ما استطاع أن يحمله.

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) narrates: We asked the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* about happenings after him. We asked him: What will
happen after you? He said: There will be Mahdī in my Ummah who will rule
for five, or seven or nine, (the narrator is doubtful about the correct
period). I asked: what is meant by this figure? He said: (this figure
means) years. He said: (his period will be a period of blessing and
prosperity.) A person will come over to him and ask him: O Mahdī! Give
me something, give me something. So Mahdī will give him as many goods as
he will be able to carry.”

Section 8: Imām Mahdī (Peace Be Upon Him) will be welcomed with Open Arms
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

37. عن مجاهد، قال: حدثني فلان رجل من أصحاب النبي صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم: أن المهدي لا يخرج حتى تقتل النفس الزكية، فإذا قتلت النفس الزكية
غضب عليهم من في السماء ومن في الأرض، فأتى الناس المهدي، فزفوه كما تزف
العروس إلى زوجها ليلة عرسها، وهو يملأ الأرض قسطا وعدلا وتخرج الأرض
نباتها وتمطر السماء مطرها، وتنعم أمتي في ولايته نعمة لم تنعمها قط.

“(The famous tabi‘ī (Successor)) Mujāhid has narrated that a Companion
said: (The caliph) Mahdī will appear after the murder of ‘Nafs
Zakiyyah’. When ‘Nafs Zakiyyah’ is murdered, those in the heavens and
the earth will be angry with the murderers. Later, the people will come
to Mahdī and bring him (with great pomp and show) as the bride is
carried to her groom on wedding night. He will fill the earth with
equity and justice. (During his caliphate) the earth will grow its crops
as the skies pour down plenty of rain. During his rule my Ummah will be
blessed with so many favours that it has never been blessed before.”

Necessary Clarification: A man known as Nafs Zakiyyah was Muhammad ibn
‘Abdullāh ibn Hussein ibn ‘Alī ibn Abī Tālib who revolted against
Abbasid caliph Mansūr in 145 AH and was martyred. The tradition does not
refer to him. Here Nafs Zakiyyah stands for some other saint who will
come before Imām Mahdī.

38. عن أبي هريرة رضي الله عنه، أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم قال:
يكون في أمتى المهدي، إن قصر فسبع وإلا فثمان وإلا فتسع، ينعم أمتي فيه
نعمة لم ينعموا مثلها، يرسل السماء عليهم مدرارا ولا تدخر الأرض شيئا من
النبات، والمال كدوس، يقوم الرجل، فيقول: يا مهدي! اعطني. فيقول: خذه.

“Abū Hurayrah (RA) has narrated that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said: there will be Mahdī in my Ummah who
will rule for seven years if the period is short, otherwise for eight or
nine years. During Mahdī’s period, my Ummah will be so prosperous that
it will not have experienced such prosperity before it. The sky will
pour down torrential rain and the earth will yield its entire produce.
Goods will be lying like a heap of grains on the threshing floor. One
man will stand up and say: O Mahdī: give me something. So he will say:
take (as much as you like).”

39. عن علي رضي الله عنه، قال: قلت: يا رسول الله! أمنا آل محمد المهدي أم
من غيرنا؟ فقال: لا، بل منا، يختم الله به الدين كما فتح بنا، وبنا ينقذون
من الفتنة كما أنقذوا من الشرك، وبنا يؤلف الله بين قلوبهم بعد عداوة
الفتنة كما ألف بين قلوبهم بعد عداوة الشرك، وبنا يصبحون بعد عداوة الفتنة
إخوانا كما أصبحوا بعد عداوة الشرك إخوانا في دينهم.

Narrated by ‘Alī (RA), he said: I said (to the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* ): O Messenger of Allāh (صلى الله عليك وسلم)!
Will Mahdī be from us, the family of Muhammad or from others? He said:
no, but he will be from among us, Allāh will re-establish Islam through
him as he did so (in the beginning) through us. These people will be
rescued from mischief through us (Mahdī) as they have been saved from
polytheism. And through our means (Mahdī) Allāh will create love in
their hearts after the hatred of mischief as He created love in their
hearts after the hatred of polytheism. And through our means people will
become brotherly amongst

each other after the rivalry of turmoils as they have done so in Islam
after the rivalry of polytheism."

Section 9: Prophet ‘Īsā (Peace Be Upon Him) and Imām Mahdī (Peace Be Upon Him)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

40. عن أبي هريرة رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم: كيف أنتم إذا نزل ابن مريم فيكم، وإمامكم منكم.

“Abū Hurayrah (RA) has narrated that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said: what will be the state (of your joy)
at the time when ‘Īsā ibn Maryam will descend (from the heavens) and
your Imām will be from among you.”

Explanation: It means that ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* , at the time of
descent, will offer his prayers in congregation but he himself will not
be the Imām but a member of the Ummah, that is, caliph Mahdī.
Accordingly, Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalānī with reference to Abū al-Hassan
Āburrī’s Manāqib ash-Shāfi‘ī writes: there are continuous traditions in
its support and ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* will offer one prayer behind
caliph Mahdī.

41. عن ابن جريج، قال: أخبرني أبو الزبير؛ أنه سمع جابر بن عبد الله رضي
الله عنهما يقول: سمعت النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول: لا تزال طائفة
من أمتي يقاتلون على الحق ظاهرين إلى يوم القيامة، قال: فينزل عيسى بن
مريم، فيقول أميرهم: تعال! صل لنا. فيقول: لا، إن بعضكم على بعض أمراء،
تكرمة الله هذه الأمة.

“Narrated by Ibn Jurayh: Abū Zubayr reported to me: He heard Jābir ibn
‘Abdullāh (رضي الله عنهما) saying: I heard the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* saying: A section of my people will not
cease fighting for the Truth successfully till the Day of Resurrection.
He said: ‘Īsā ibn Maryam would then descend and the leader of the
Muslims will say: come and lead us in prayer, but he will say: “No, some
amongst you are leaders over others. This is the honour from Allāh for
this nation” (ie prophet ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* will decline the
offer of leading the prayer due to the high status given by Allāh to
this Ummah).”

42. عن جابر بن عبد الله رضي الله عنهما، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وآله وسلم: يخرج الدجال في خفقة من الدين*-* وذكر الدجال*-* ثم قال: ثم
ينزل عيسى بن مريم فينادي من السحر، فيقول: يا أيها الناس! ما يمنعكم أن
تخرجوا إلى الكذاب الخبيث؟ فيقولون: هذا رجل جني، فينطلقون، فإذا هم بعيسى
بن مريم، فتقام الصلاة، فيقال له: تقدم، يا روح الله! فيقول: ليتقدم
إمامكم، فليصل بكم، فإذا صلى صلاة الصبح خرجوا إليه، قال: فحين يرى الكذاب
ينماث كما ينماث الملح في الماء.

“Jābir ibn ‘Abdullāh (رضي الله عنهما) narrates that the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: when Islam (ie the
state of

the Ummah) becomes weak, Dajjāl will appear*-* and after giving details
about Dajjāl*-* he said: After some time, ‘Īsā ibn Maryam will descend
(from the heaven) and in the morning (that is, at pre-dawn) he will call
out: O people! What is stopping you from fighting with this evil
pretender (Dajjāl)? People will say: he appears to be a supernatural
creation (jinn), but as they will move forward they will see ‘Īsā*(Peace
Be Upon Him)* . Then it will be time for prayer, so their leader will
say: O Allāh’s Spirit: come forward (and lead the prayer). He will say:
“Your Imām should lead you” (and at that time the Imām will be Mahdī).
When the people will finish their Dawn prayer, they will leave (under
the leadership of ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* ) to fight Dajjāl. When ‘Īsā
will see the Liar (Dajjāl), he (ie Dajjāl, out of fear) will start
melting as salt melts in water.”

43. عن أبي أمامة الباهلي رضي الله عنه، مرفوعا، فقالت أم شريك بنت أبي
العكر رضي الله عنها: يا رسول الله! فأين العرب يومئذ؟ قال: هم يومئذ قليل
وجلهم ببيت المقدس وإمامهم رجل صالح، فبينما إمامهم قد تقدم يصلي بهم الصبح
إذ نزل عليهم عيسى بن مريم الصبح، فرجع ذلك الإمام ينكص يمشي القهقري
ليتقدم عيسى يصلي بالناس، فيضع عيسى يده بين كتفيه، ثم يقول له: تقدم! فصل،
فإنها لك أقيمت، فيصلي بهم إمامهم.

“Abū Umāmah Bāhilī (RA) has related (a long tradition) from the
Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* in which a
female Companion Umm Sharīk bint ‘Abī al-‘Akar*(Allāh Be Pleased With
Her)* said: O Messenger of Allāh (صلى الله عليك وآلك وسلم)! Where will
the Arabs be at that time, (why will the Arabs not come out in support
of the Ummah)? The Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* said: the Arabs will be in small number, and most of these
will be in the Sacred House and their Imām will be a highly pious person
(named Mahdī). When their Imām will come forward for Dawn prayer, at
that time ‘Īsā will descend (from the heaven). The Imām will retreat and
give way to him so that ‘Īsā can lead people in the prayer. ‘Īsā placing
his hand between the Imām’s shoulders will say: step forward and lead
the prayer because the iqāmah was said for you. Then their Imām (Mahdī)
will lead the prayer.”

44. عن عثمان بن أبي العاص رضي الله عنه، مرفوعا: فينزل عيسى بن مريم عند
صلاة الفجر، فيقول له إمام الناس: تقدم، يا روح الله! فصل بنا. فيقول: إنكم
معشر هذه الأمة أمراء بعضكم على بعض، تقدم أنت فصل بنا. فيتقدم فيصلي بهم.

“Uthmān ibn Abī al-‘Ās (RA) directly narrates that the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: prophet ‘Īsā ibn
Maryam will descend (from the heaven) at the time of Dawn prayer (fajr)
and the leader of the people will request him: O Allāh’s Spirit! (Come
forward and) lead us in prayer. ‘Īsā will say: “you are the people of
Muhammad’s Ummah. Some amongst you are leaders over others. So move

forward and lead us in prayer.” The leader of the Muslims will come
forward and lead the prayer.”

45. عن عبد الله بن عمرو رضى الله عنه، قال: المهدي الذي ينزل عليه عيسى
ابن مريم، ويصلي خلفه عيسى.

“‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Amr (RA) says that ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* will
descend after Mahdī and will offer (one) prayer behind him.”

46. عن أبي سعيد رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم: منا الذي يصلي عيسى ابن مريم خلفه.

“Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī (RA) narrates that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said: there will be a person from this
Ummah and ‘Īsā ibn Maryam (عليهما السلام) will pray behind him.”

47. عن حذيفة رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلي الله عليه وآله وسلم:
يلتفت المهدي وقد نزل عيسى ابن مريم كأنما يقطر من شعره الماء، فيقول
المهدي: تقدم! صل بالناس. فيقول عيسى: إنما أقيمت الصلوة لك. فيصلي خلف رجل
من ولدي.

“Hudhayfah (RA) relates that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* said: When Mahdī will appear ‘Īsā ibn Maryam will
descend and it will seem as though water is dropping from his hair. At
that time Mahdī, addressing him, will say: please come forward and lead
the people in prayer. Prophet ‘Īsā will say: the iqāmah was said for
you; therefore, you will lead the prayer. Accordingly, ‘Īsā will offer
this prayer behind a man from my family (Mahdī).”

48. عن ابن سيرين، قال: المهدي من هذه الأمة، وهو الذي يؤم عيسى ابن مريم.

“Ibn Sīrīn relates that (Imām) Mahdī will be from this Ummah and will
lead ‘Īsā ibn Maryam (رضي الله عنهما) in prayer.”

Section 10: Obedience of Imām Mahdī (Peace Be Upon Him) will be Compulsory
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

49. عن شهر بن حوشب، قال: بلغني أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم قال:
في المحرم ينادي منادى من السماء: ألا! إن صفوة الله من خلفه فلان،
فاسمعموا له وأطيعوا، في سنة الصوت والمعمعة.

“Shahr ibn Hawshab (RA) narrates that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said: In (the month of) Muharram, an
announcer will call out from the heaven: beware! Surely, (be informed
that) such a person has been chosen by Allāh, so listen to him and obey
him during the year of uproar and turmoil.”

50. عن جابر بن عبد الله رضي الله عنهما، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وآله وسلم: من كذب بالدجال فقد كفر، ومن كذب بالمهدي فقد كفر.

“Jābir ibn ‘Abdullāh (رضي الله عنهما) narrates that the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: whoever denies (the
coming of) Dajjāl, has surely committed disbelief, and whoever denies
(the coming of) Mahdī has (also) committed disbelief.”

51. عن ابن عمر رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم:
يخرج المهدي وعلى رأسه عمامة، فيها مناد ينادي: هذا المهدي خليفة الله،
فاتبعوه.

“‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Umar (رضي الله عنهما) narrates that the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: Mahdī will come and
there will be a turban on his head. There will be an announcer who will
proclaim: this is Mahdī, Allāh’s caliph, so follow and obey him.”

Section 11: Circumstances Surrounding Imām Mahdī’s Arrival
----------------------------------------------------------

52. عن سليمان بن عيسى قال: بلغني أنه على يدي المهدي يظهر تابوت السكينة
من بحيرة الطبرية حتى يحمل، فيوضع بين يديه بيت المقدس فإذا نظرت إليه
اليهود أسلمت إلا قليلا منهم.

“Related by Sulaymān ibn ‘Īsā (رضي الله عنهما): I was informed that the
Ark of the Covenant will emerge from Tabariyyah Sea through the efforts
of Imām Mahdī. It will be placed before him at the Sacred House. When
the Jews will see this (Ark), all of them except a few will embrace
Islam.”

53. عن كعب، قال: يطلع نجم من المشرق قبل خروج المهدي، له ذنب يضئ.

“Ka‘b (RA) has narrated: A comet with a bright tail will appear from the
east before the appearance of Imām Mahdī.”

54. عن شريك، قال: بلغني أنه قبل خروج المهدي ينكسف القمر في شهر رمضان
مرتين.

“Sharīk (RA) has related: I was informed that before the appearance of
Mahdī there will be lunar eclipse twice in the month of Ramadān.”

55. عن علي رضى الله عنه، قال: إذا نادى مناد من السماء: إن الحق في آل
محمد، فعند ذلك يظهر المهدي على أفواه الناس، ويشربون حبه ولا يكون لهم ذكر
غيره.

“‘Alī (RA) said: when the announcer will announce that the truth is in
the family of Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , at that
time everyone will be talking about Mahdī’s arrival and his love will be
fed into them (in such a manner) that they will talk of nothing else but
him.”

56. عن أبي الجلد، قال: تكون فتنة بعدها فتنة، الأولى في الآخرة كثمرة
السوط يتبعها ذباب السيف، ثم تكون بعد ذلك فتنة تستحل فيها المحارم كلها،
ثم تأتي الخلافة خير أهل الأرض وهو قاعد في بيته هنيا.

“Abū Jalad (RA) narrates: a disruption will arise which will be followed
by another disruption. The first will be related to the second
disruption as the lace is joined to its whip (meaning they will be
closely related, either the second will immediately follow the first or
their content will be similar). Then there will be the (disruption of)
swords. It will be followed by another disruption in which all forbidden
things will be declared permissible. Then the caliphate will come about,
through the best person amongst the people. If will come about whilst he
is sitting at home.”

57. عن عبد الله بن عمرو رضى الله عنهما، قال: يحج الناس معا ويعرفون معا
على غير إمام، فبينماهم نزول بمنى إذ أخذهم كالكلب، فثارت القبائل بعضها
إلى بعض، واقتتلوا حتى تسيل العقبة دما، فيفزعون إلى خيرهم فيأتونه وهو
ملصق وجهه إلى الكعبة، يبكي كأني أنظر إلى دموعه، فيقولون: هلم فلنبايعك،
فيقول: ويحكم كم عهد قد نقضتموه، وكم دم قد سفكتموه! فيبايع كرها، فإذا
أدركتموه فبايعوه، فإنه المهدي فى الأرض والمهدي فى السماء.

“‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Amr (RA) narrates: people will perform the pilgrimage
together and will gather at ‘Arafāt without the Imām. So at Minā during
their descent a revolt will pounce upon them like a dog (due to which)
the tribes will pounce on one another. They will kill one another until
the valley begins to flow within blood. (In this worried state) they
will go to the best person amongst them to seek his refuge while he will
be crying with his face touching the ka‘bah as (the narrator says) I am
looking at his tears. So they will request him: please come! We want to
take an oath of loyalty on your hand. He will say: it is very sad that
you have broken so many promises and have shed so much blood. So,
unwillingly, he will accept their oath. So when you find that person,
you should take the oath on his hand because he will be Mahdī on earth
as well as Mahdī in the heavens.”

Section 12: Imam Mahdī (Peace Be Upon Him) as the Last Caliph
-------------------------------------------------------------

58. عن جابر بن سمرة رضي الله عنه، قال: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم يقول: لا يزال هذا الدين قائما حتى يكون عليكم اثنا عشر خليفة، كلهم
تجتمع عليه الأمة

<p dir="rtl">
فسمعت كلاما من النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم لم أفهمه، فقلت لأبي: ما
يقول؟ قال: كلهم من قريش.
</p>

“It is narrated by Jābir ibn Samurah (RA): I heard the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* say: Islam will remain
established until twelve caliphs have ruled over you. The Ummah will be
united on all of them.

“Then I heard the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* say
(something) which I could not understand. I asked my father: what is he

saying? He told me that he had said: all (the twelve caliphs) will be
from the Quraysh.”

59. عن جابر بن سمرة رضي الله عنه، قال: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم يقول: لا يزال هذا الدين عزيزا إلى اثني عشر خليفة. قال: فكبر الناس
وضجوا، ثم قال كلمة خفية، قلت لأبي: يا أبة! ما قال؟ قال: كلهم من قريش.

“Jābir ibn Samurah (RA) has narrated that he heard the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* say: Islam will remain
dominant until twelve caliphs have passed.” Jābir (RA) said: (at this)
people said (loudly:) “Allāh is the greatest” and it became noisy all
around. Then the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said
something quietly. I asked my father: O father! What did he say? (My
father told me:) he said, “All those (twelve caliphs) will be from the
Quraysh.”

Imam Suyūtī comments on Abū Dāwūd’s narration in al-Hāwī lil-fatāwā
(2:85):

<p dir="rtl">
عقد أبو داؤد في سننه بابا في المهدي، وأورد في صدره حديث جابر بن سمرة رضي
الله عنه، عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم: لا يزال هذا الدين قائما
حتى يكون اثنا عشر خليفة، كلهم تجتمع عليه الأمة. وفي رواية: لا يزال هذا
الدين عزيزا إلى اثني عشر خليفة، كلهم من قريش. فأشار بذلك إلى ما قاله
العلماء: ان المهدي أحد الاثنى عشر.
</p>

“Abū Dāwūd has devoted a chapter to Imām Mahdī in his book as-Sunan
(4:86). In the beginning of the chapter a narration of Jābir ibn Samurah
(RA) is given. The Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* said: “until twelve caliphs have passed, on whom this Ummah
will unite.” According to another tradition, “this dīn will remain
dominant till the twelve caliphs have passed and all of them will be
from the Quraysh.”

“In this chapter Abū Dāwūd has referred to the opinion of scholars who
believe that Imām Mahdī is one of those twelve caliphs.”

The conclusion Suyūtī has drawn from this is that Imām Mahdī will be the
twelfth and last Imām on this earth.

Abū Dāwūd, after introducing the chapter with these two traditions, has
included the following narration:

<p dir="rtl">
عن أم سلمة رضي الله عنها، قالت: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم
يقول: المهدي من عترتي من ولد فاطمة.
</p>

“Narrated by Umm Salamah*(Allāh Be Pleased With Her)* that she heard the
Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* saying: Mahdī
will be from my family and from the children of Fātimah.”

Before it he has described the tradition which says that even if only
one day remains in the arrival of the Day of Judgment, Allāh will send a
person

(named Mahdī) from the Prophet’s family who will fill the earth with
justice and fairness just as it was formerly filled with tyranny and
affection.

60. عن أبي سعيد رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم: يكون عند إنقطاع من الزمان وظهور من الفتن رجل يقال له المهدي، يكون
عطاؤه هنيئا.

“Abū Sa‘īd (RA) has narrated that the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* said: In the last days when so many disruptions will appear,
at that time there will be a person called Mahdī. His contributions will
be (very) pleasant.”

61. عن الزهري، قال: (إذا) التقى السفياني والمهدي للقتال يومئذ يسمع صوت
من السماء: ألا! إن أولياء الله أصحاب فلان، يعني المهدي. وقالت أسماء بنت
عميس: إن أمارة ذلك اليوم أن كفا من السماء مدلاة ينظر إليها الناس.

“Zuhrī has narrated: when Sufyān’s (army) and Mahdī’s army will face
each other for battle, on that day a voice will be heard from the sky:
‘beware! Surely, the friends of (Imām) Mahdī are the friends of Allāh.’

“And Asmā’ bint ‘Umays said: the sign of that day will be that a hand
will be seen hanging from the sky which (all) the people will see.”

62. عن علي رضي الله عنه، قال: قلت: يا رسول الله! أمنا آل محمد المهدي أم
من غيرنا؟ فقال: لا، بل منا، يختم الله به الدين كما فتح بنا، وبنا ينقذون
من الفتنة كما أنقذوا من الشرك، وبنا يؤلف الله بين قلوبهم بعد عداوة
الفتنة كما ألف بين قلوبهم بعد عداوة الشرك، وبنا يصبحون بعد عداوة الفتنة
إخوانا كما أصبحوا بعد عداوة الشرك إخوانا في دينهم.

Narrated by ‘Alī (RA), he said: I said (to the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* ): O Messenger of Allāh (صلى الله عليك وسلم)!
Will Mahdī be from us, the family of Muhammad or from others? He said:
no, but he will be from among us, Allāh will re-establish Islam through
him as he did so (in the beginning) through us, and these people will be
rescued from mischief through us (Mahdī) as they have been saved from
polytheism. And through our means (Mahdī) Allāh will create love in
their hearts after the hatred of mischief as He created love in their
hearts after the hatred of polytheism. And through our means people will
become brotherly amongst each other after the rivalry of turmoils as
they have done so in Islam after the rivalry of polytheism."

63. عن أرطاة، قال: يخرج رجل من أهل بيت النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم
مهدي حسن السيرة، يغزو مدينة قيصر، وهو آخر أمير من أمة محمد صلى الله عليه
وآله وسلم، ثم يخرج في زمانه الدجال وينزل في زمانه عيسى ابن مريم.

“Artāh has narrated that a person (Mahdī) will appear from the Prophet’s
family who will fight in the city of Rome and he will be the last leader
(Imām) of Muhammad’s Ummah. Dajjāl will appear in his time and in his
time also ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* will descend (from the heaven).”

“Imam Suyūtī in al-Hāwī lil-fatāwā (2:80) after listing the signs of the
arrival of Imām Mahdī, comments:

<p dir="rtl">
هذه الآثار كلها لخصتها من "كتاب الفتن" لنعيم بن حماد، وهو أحد الأئمة
الحفاظ، وأحد شيوخ البخاري.
</p>

“All these signs which I have summarised from the book “al-Fitan” by
Nu‘aym ibn Hammād who was a hāfiz (of hadīth) and one of the teachers of
Imām Bukhārī.”

64. عن جابر رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم:
سيكون في أمتي خليفة يحثو المال حيثا، لا يعده عدا.

“Jābir ibn ‘Abdullāh (رضي الله عنهما) narrates that the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: In my Ummah, soon, there will be a
caliph who will distribute goods generously without keeping a record of
who has received what.”

65. عن جابر بن عبد الله رضي الله عنهما، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم، قال: يكون في أمتي خليفة يحثي المال حثيا لا يعده عدا. ثم قال: والذي
نفسي بيده! ليعودن.

“Narrated by Jābir ibn ‘Abdullāh (رضي الله عنهما) that the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: There will be a
caliph in my Ummah who will generously distribute wealth without keeping
a record of it. And I swear by the One who controls my life! Certainly
that the dominance (of Islam) will return (that is, Islam will recapture
its lost glory and retrieve its status during his reign).”

66. عن ابن مسعود رضي الله عنه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم: لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا ليلة لطول الله تلك الليلة حتى يملك رجل من
أهل بيتي، يواطي اسمه اسمي، واسم أبيه اسم أبي، يملأها قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت
ظلما وجورا، و يقسم المال بالسوية، ويجعل الله الغني في قلوب هذه الأمة،
فيمكث سبعا أو تسعا، ثم لا خير في عيش الحياة بعد المهدي.

“Narrated by ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd (رضي الله عنهما) that Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: if there was only one
night left for this world to stay in tact, Allāh will lengthen it until
a member of my family becomes the ruler whose name will be the same as
my name and the name of his father will be the same as the name of my
father. He will fill the world with justice and fairness just as it was
filled with tyranny

and exploitation. He will distribute things equally among the people and
Allāh will also fill their hearts with content. He will rule for seven
or nine years. Then after the caliphate of Mahdī, there will be a total
end to goodness (and virtue).”


