Glossary
========

**رضی الله عنه** **:** radiyallāhu ‘anhu*-* Allāh be pleased with him:
used after the name of Companion of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* .

**رضي الله عنها** **:** radiyallāhu ‘anhā*-* Allāh be pleased with her:
used after the name of a female Companion of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* .

**رضي الله عنهم** **:** radiyallāhu ‘anhum*-* Allāh be pleased with all
of them: used after the names of more than two male Companions of the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* .

**رضي الله عنهما** **:** radiyallāhu ‘anhumā*-* Allāh is pleased with
both of them; used after the names of two Companions of the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , irrespective of their
gender.

**علیه السلام** **:** ‘alayh-is-salām*-* (May Allāh shower His peace on
him): used after the name of Allāh’s messenger, prophet and angel.

**عليهما السلام** **:** ‘alayhim-as-salām*-* (May Allāh shower His peace
on both of them): used after the names of two messengers, prophets and
angels.

**صلی الله علیه وآله وسلم** **:** sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa ālihī wa
sallam*-* Allāh bless and send peace on him and his children: used after
the name of the Last Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* .

**abdāl:** pl. of badal. lit. Substitutes. A person by whom Allāh
continues the world in existence as mentioned in the traditions. Their
number is seventy, of whom forty live in Syria and thirty elsewhere.
When one dies another takes his place, being appointed by Allāh.

**athar:** pl. āthār. lit. relating. Generally used for a narration
related from one of the Companions, rather than from the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* , which is known as hadīth.

**caliphate:** khilāfah. This is the political system of Islam, its head
the caliph/khalīfah is the successor of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* in this regard.

**dīn:** it is an Arabic word used for Islam. It is more specificially
used for the religion and revealed books of the prophets and the
messengers. It is a comprehensive term covering not only religious
practices and rituals but also applies to all aspects of life and
provides guidance for it. While madhab (religion) is restricted to man’s
spiritual life and deals with its relationship with God alone.

**dinar:** an ancient gold coin.

**fajr:** dawn or early morning before sunrise; morning prayer.

**ghawth:** lit. one to whom we can cry for help. A mediator; a title
given to a saint of the highest order.

**hadīth:** pl. ahādīth. lit. tradition. The sayings, practice and
approved traditions of the Prophet Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* .

**hāfiz:** lit. a guardian or protector. (1) one of the names of God,
al-Hāfiz. (2) a governor, guardian of the Makkan temple. (3) one who has
memorized the whole of the Qur’ān. (4) one who has memorized one hundred
thousand traditions.

**hasan:** a hadīth, narrated by a reliable chain of narrators though
not reaching the grade of sahīh (sound) hadīth, but records a complete
chain of narrators up to the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* .

**Imām:** (1) one who leads people in prayers; (2) an eminent Islamic
scholar; (3) spiritual leader of the Muslims. There will be total of
twelve such Imāms, the first being Imām ‘Alī*(Peace Be Upon Him)* and
the last Imām Mahdī*(Peace Be Upon Him)* .

**iqāmah:** a call similar to the adhān (the call to prayer), said
immediately before a congregational prayer.

**‘Īsā** *(Peace Be Upon Him)* **:** name of Allah’s penultimate
messenger, Jesus. He will come down from the heavens during the time of
Imām Mahdī*(Peace Be Upon Him)* .

**ka‘bah:** a cube-shaped building at the centre of al-Masjid-ul-Harām
(the great mosque at Makkah) towards which all Muslims face in prayer.
It is also known as the House of Allah.

**maqām Ibrāhīm:** the stone at Makkah within the boundary of
al-Masjid-ul-Harām, which has the impression of the footprints of the
Prophet Ibrāhīm*(Peace Be Upon Him)* . This is the stone on which
Ibrāhīm*(Peace Be Upon Him)* stood while he and his son, the Prophet
Ismā‘īl*(Peace Be Upon Him)* , were building the ka‘bah.

**Maryam:** the mother of prophet ‘Īsā; Mary.

**sahīh:** sound. A hadīth with an unbroken chain of narrators ranging
from the Prophet Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* and
approaching an era through reliable narrators without being shādh (odd)
or mu‘allal (faulty) in between the two cross relaters.

**sharī‘ah:** lit. road. It is a legal system of a nation based on the
revelation of their prophet/messenger. The last sharī‘ah is that of
Islam that replaces all previous sharī‘ahs.

**spiritual leadership:** imāmah. This status will be held by twelve
Imāms, the first of which was ‘Alī al-Murtadā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* , and
the last Imām Mahdī*(Peace Be Upon Him)* .

**spiritual sovereignty:** wilāyah; sainthood. A special spiritual
status which raises the person above that of normal people. There are
various levels and grades of wilāyah such as ghawth, qutb, etc.

**sunnah:** pl. sunan. lit. the path, way or a form, the customary
practice of a person or a group of people. It has come to refer almost
exclusively to the legal way or ways, orders, statements and acts of
worship, etc., of the Prophet Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* which have become the models to be followed by Muslims.

**tābi‘ī:** someone who has met a Companion of the Holy Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* in the state of īmān (faith) and died as
a believer.


