Introduction
============

***"When the earth is shaken with a mighty shaking, and earth brings
forth her burdens, and man says, 'What ails her?' Upon that day she
shall tell her tidings for that her Lord has inspired her."*** **(99:
1‑5)**

It is 1971, just the beginning of the end of the Pahlavi regime and the
monarchial system in Iran. The words of Ali Shariati, the great teacher,
the man who redefines Islam as it has been and not as it has become,
ring out at the Husayniyyeh Ershad[^1] on the night which marks the
anniversary of the birth of the daughter of the Prophet of Islam ‑
Fatima (*‘a*).[^2]

He cries out the question which is upon all women's lips, "Who am I?"
"Am I a mother?", "A wife?", "A daughter?", "A friend?", "A biologist?",
"A chemist?", "A doctor, nurse, mid‑wife, laborer, writer, human
be­ing...?" "Who am I?"

It is the very first time that an Iranian woman is confronted with this
question. She knows, feels, senses the question with her innermost being
but she has never had it expressed for her before. Once expressed, the
question, of necessity, begs for an answer which is a genuine and
authentic part of that person.

This is the beginning of the Revolution which Iranian women were to
undergo but it will take seven long years before it is expressed in
society namely, in the Islamic Revolution of Iran.

But we have moved too quickly. We are way ahead of ourselves. We have to
return to that night when so many of us were not present, the night when
the question was first expressed.

On that night in 1971, he begins the journey to Fatima with this
question and slowly but surely unfolds an answer. He lays the
groundwork: be authentic, genuine in your search. Search for what?
Search for the Truth. Do not be intimidated by external forms and eye
catching colors. Be yourself, that which you really are and not that
which you have become. Seek out the Truth.

With this as a base, you face the first obstacle. "How can I be
authentic when I still do not know who I am?" He tells us, "You do not
know who you are because you have no traditional models to turn to."
That is, you have no direction, you have no orientation. Why? Because
scholars for the last fourteen centuries have been too busy describing
the details of devotions and by doing so, have inadvertently left the
models aside. They failed to present Islam to the people in the people's
language.

Other than a few responsible and committed scholars, they failed to
bring the essence of Islam to light. That is, Islam stresses inner as
well as outer freedom. When presented in the form that the Prophet
received it, it brings self respect. It opposes tyranny, oppression and
colo­nialism for they foster dependence upon a man made system. These
scholars failed to uncover the forgotten concepts of Islam. They ignored
its revolutionary dimen­sion.

They stepped over the family of Ali (*‘a*), Islam as it was at the time
of the Prophet and what Shi'ism really stands for. The essential
principles, the columns which hold up the personality had been so
intricately carved and decorated that their basic form and function had
been covered over. Pillars such as *azadeh -* freedom from attachments
to this world or inner liberation, being in­wardly free and the seeking
of justice, all lay dormant within their exterior decoration.

What should be done? One should seek out the methodology set down by the
Prophet. Shariati then describes the three methods of the conservative,
the reformist and the revolutionary pointing out the pros and cons of
each approach. Then he turns his analysis to the method which the
Prophet was inspired with. "The Prophet preserves the form," Shariati
tells us, "the container of a custom which has deep roots in society,
one which people have gotten used to from generation to generation, and
one which is practiced in a natural manner, but he changes the
contained, the contents, spirit, direction and practical application of
this custom in a revolutionary, decisive and immediate manner."

Is this not the very method he puts forth for women? If your culture
holds the tradition of a Fatima, seek her out. Retain your outer
feminine form but change the contents, for the infiltration of your
inner essence by imported contents brought by the enemy in the guise of
a friend is far more harmful than the changes one's outer form may take.

The state of one's hemline is a superficial problem resolved one way
this year and another way, next. It produces meaningless consumerism.
However, when the disease reaches the roots, the inner essence of the
form, the form falls away from its society and remains root‑less,
wandering, without meaning. This is what the enemy, the destroyer of the
inner essence of womanhood wants, for root‑less forms follow the course
of events without ever again taking roots, without any concern for their
society, without commitment, alienated and completely capable of being
molded into whatever framework is provided.

This is what the Prophet brought when Islam, 'the real sense of
submission' was revealed to him. Submit to that which gave you roots,
the One God and not the multiple forms which attract one away from one's
roots. Strengthen your roots and your earth so that when there is a
'mighty shaking' as the Qur’an so firmly announces, which at one level
can be interpreted as an 'awakening of consciousness', your roots will
hold, you will prevail, the outer winds, storms, lightening and thunder
can not pull you away.

This takes us to another stage. We have a method but now we need a
direction. Will it be that of a realist or that of an idealist? Shariati
tells us, "Neither. Both."

Islam admits to all realities ‑ hunger, ignorance, drug addiction, the
need for divorce, the weakening of the weak by the strong, oppression
and suppression (realities according to realists, must be translated
into real forms so they have no problem with imagination, ideology and
ideas which they ignore). "But as opposed to realism, Islam does not
accept the status quo but changes the realities." Shariati continues,
"It changes their essence in a revolutionary way. It carries realities
along with its ideals. It uses realities as a means to reach its
idealistic goals, its real desires, which are nonexistent by
them­selves. Unlike realists, Islam does not submit to realities, but
rather, it causes the realities to submit to it. Islam does not turn
away from realities as idealists do. It seeks them out. It tames them.
Through this means, Islam uses that which hinders the idealists as a
composite for its own ideals."

With this approach, an independence of thinking develops which, in order
to succeed as an answer and not to cause deviation, must branch out from
that so­ciety's historical roots. Face up to your realities. Tame them.
Work through them to reach your ideals.

Which mould does the Iranian woman of 1971 fill? Traditional or absurd?
Women of the tradition or women of the new imported mould? The question,
"Who am I?" does not concern them. It is directed towards those who "can
neither automatically accept their hereditary, tradi­tional form nor
surrender to the imposed new forms."

The question is relevant to the woman who wants to decide for herself
and who desires a decision that relates to her own culture; for if she
is authentically and genuinely searching, she cannot neglect her culture
nor can she ignore it. Is she one who serves herself or others? Is she
an individual or a social being? Is she aware of the fact that,
individualism, that is, 'individual independence,' in the present
century, "in one's relationship to one's society (family, tribe or
country) or the serving of oneself, replaces the spirit and unity of
society and the serving of others"?

As Shariati points out, there are many women whom we cannot see ‑ women
who are independent and who rely on their own accomplishments and relate
these to their own cultural background. It is for a woman to awaken so
that she will not live her life unconsciously imitating borrowed forms
and ideas ‑ forms and ideas which neither she nor her ancestors
participated in the creation of, thereby being essentially irrelevant to
her.

It is here that Shariati develops the concept of Islamic social justice.
In Islam it is not sufficient to tell one's self, "Thou shalt not ...
this or that." For there is a commitment by which each individual is
bound by and that is to be an active participant in society opposing
social ills. That is, one should say to one's self, "Thou shalt not be
an oppressor," but one is equally obliged to say to one's self, "Thou
shalt help the oppressed."

Ali Shariati was a firm believer in the traditions of, his culture. He
realized that you cannot inject ideas from other cultures which have no
organic or rational roots. He realized that concepts must be tested
according to the cultural and social criteria of that environment. He
was able to redefine the basis of the beliefs of his people, his society
and his society’s perception of itself. He awoke latent ideas. His goal
was the development of a dynamic social environment which would be
embedded in the historical background and conscience of that society.

To this end, he takes us to the heart of Shi'ism: Fatima, the beloved
daughter of the Prophet of Islam. He describes the woman we could not
see, the one we thought we knew but only after his guidance did we
become aware of the fact that although we related each day directly to
her spirit, she had been lost as a model for our daily lives. That is,
we had an emotional attachment to her inner essence but we had removed
her form.

Shariati takes us to Fatima. He begins with the social customs of the
Arabian Peninsula before her birth where according to custom, female
children were buried alive at birth in order to save the family from the
disgrace of having an unsuitable son-in-law. It was the revolutionary
message of Islam which did away with this custom.

God reveals through the Qur’an that the Prophet Muhammad (*‘s*)[^3] had
been given 'the abundant river of Paradise', *kawthar,* and through that
river, he shall have abundant progeny although according to Arab beliefs
at that time, a man without a son is called 'cut‑off'. How could it be?
The father of a daughter will have abundant progeny? His wife, over 50
years old, gives birth to a fourth daughter, Fatima. God has kept his
promise to the Prophet for through her, the progeny of the Prophet
multiples ‑ through a woman.

Shariati then goes on to further enumerate the honors that Islam has
bestowed upon women. There is only one person buried in the Ka'ba, the
'House of God' and that is a woman, a slave, Hajar, the second wife of
Abraham and mother of Ismail.

The Prophet always treated Fatima with a love and respect which caused
great amazement to the people of the times. Their relationship was such
that Fatima became known as 'the mother of her father' for she
accompanied him everywhere and she was always protecting and, caring for
him.

Although polygamy is allowed in Islam in certain circumstances, the
Prophet, because of his love and respect for Khadijah, the mother of
Fatima, never married another during her lifetime nor did his cousin and
son-in-law, Ali, marry another wife as long as Fatima was alive.

Fatima spent her life in struggle, resisting poverty and difficulties.
Her father was forced to spend three years in a valley with his family
when his tribe imposed economic and social sanctions against his message
of Islam. After the migration to Medina, her new life as a married woman
begins but she continues to face the same hardships and difficulties
that she has encountered since childhood.

She is inspired by the spirit and compassion of her father. She grows up
in his shadow as her husband, Hazrat Ali, had. They came to know the
spirit of struggle and resistance and the turns of fate.

Ali Shariati describes these events and many others based upon Sunni and
Shiite sources of the Traditions. At the beginning, in Part One, he has
told us, "The only thing our beloved people know about Fatima is the
fol­lowing:

'Fatima was the beloved daughter of the Prophet and detested by Aiesha
[the wife of the Prophet after Khadijah's death and the daughter of Abu
Bakr, the first of the Orthodox Caliphs]. After the death of the
Prophet, Abu Bakr took her grazing land in Fadak. Omar attacked her home
with a group of his men. They struck her .in her side and she, six
months pregnant, aborted her son, Mohsin.

From then on, her days passed with the taking of her children's hands
and walking outside of the city to a place called \`House of Sorrows'.
There she would sit and cry. She would speak ill of the usurpers of
Ali's rights. She would cry and lament for hours. She spent her short
life crying and cursing her fate until she died. She requested in her
will that she be buried at night so that those who thought ill of her
would not follow her funeral and they would not know where she was
buried.'

What we learn in Part two is a far cry from what we had known. Is that a
Moslem female child who defends her father against the elders of her
tribe? Is that a Moslem female child who, holding her father's hand,
accompanies him into the bazaar, listens to his debates and walks with
him to her home?

Is that a Moslem woman who stands at the door and defends her husband
and her home when usurpers try to burn it down? Is that a Moslem woman
who tells the newly elected Caliph that he has displeased God and God's
Prophet by not listening to the Prophet's advice and taking only his own
interests to heart? Is that a Moslem woman who when she finds injustice
and oppression speaks out with the totality of her being, not fearing
the outcome of her words for‑she knows she speaks with the tongue of
Truth?

Let us turn to her last sermon and have her own words tell us what she
really believed and practiced. When Fatima was ill with the final
sickness which caused her death, the wives of the Emigrants and
Companions of the Prophet went to visit her to ask how she was feeling.
Abu Bakr had been elected Caliph and Ali was put aside. In reply to
them, after asking for the blessings of God for her father, Muhammad,
she said:

"By God I am alive while I have nothing but con­tempt for this world. I
detest your men. After I tried to show them who their real enemy was and
they did not listen, I put them aside.

"How ugly are the sharp edges of swords when they are broken and then
play with people's efforts and strug­gles which so many have undertaken,
destroying the fortifications, breaking spears, making devious decisions
and standing on the precipice of material and personal self desires.
What a terrible future they are preparing for by causing the wrath of
God and thereby bringing about permanent torment for themselves.

"l tried to awaken them to their acts and show them the burden they had
placed upon their own shoulders. They deserve to be slaughtered, to be
wounded by swords. Those who act oppressively are far from ‑the
blessings and mercy of God. Woe be to those people. They brought down a
leader (Ali) who was at the peak of the mission. Mountains form upon the
unconquerable pillars of pro­phecy, the place of inspiration, the wise
and expert do­minated by both routine and spiritual affairs. Beware!
This is an obvious loss.

"By God, why did they dislike Ali? Were they afraid of the sharpness of
his sword in supporting right and truth, his braveness in fighting and
martyrdom, his killing of oppressors, his effective blows in words and
his anger for the sake of God?

"By God, if they had followed the selection of the Prophet, Hazrat Ali,
he would have guided anyone who had gone astray and if one rejected the
right reasoning Ali would have shown the error in a way that neither
would the rider be hurt nor the horse he is riding upon, wounded.

"If Ali had been leader, he would guide them to a clear, sweet spring of
water. The watering spring would be full, its shores clean and sound and
he would return them safely to the edge after they had drank from the
water.

"He would advise them in things both manifest and hidden without any
benefit to himself from their needs and without taking more than a small
share for himself ‑ just enough so that he would not go thirsty or
hungry. In such a case, worshippers of this world (materialists) would
be distinguished from the ascetics and the right ones from the
antagonists.

"God says, 'if citizens are faithful and avoid wrong deeds, We will give
blessings from heaven and earth to them. But they deny the truths so we
captivated them for their deeds. From those who oppressed, the results
of their actions will be returned to themselves: They cannot change the
traditions of history.'

"Arise! Arise! If you stay a while you will see the wonders of nature,
but more wonderful than these is speech. What is their argument? What
pillars do they support? What rope do they hold onto? What family do
they admire and dominate over?

"What a terrible leader they have elected (Abu Bakr). What a terrible
helper they have appointed (Omar). What a wrong and oppressive exchange
they have made! By God, they gave superiority to those who deferred
their decision to become Moslems rather than to those who were the
pioneers. They elected weak ones instead of strong ones. They destroyed
those who believe they are performing good affairs. They are corrupters
who do not understand.

"Woe be to them! Is it not more worthy to follow the one who guides
rather than the one who cannot find his way if he is not guided? What
has happened to you? What kind of a judgment is this? You have
impregnated the earth with your act. Just wait until the time when it
gives birth. I swear to you, instead of milk, you will have buckets full
of blood and poison will flow from the breasts of the newborn.

"It is then that the destroyers of rights will lose and those who will
come in the future will find and realize the terrible results of what
the ancestors have done. So you should be satisfied with your daily
affairs and live in peace prior to the storm and terrible revolts.

"For then, the sharp swords of the dominations of the oppressors,
anarchy and the rule of tyrants will over­come you. The oppressors will
enslave you. No public assets except a small quantity will remain. They
will cultivate with force what you have planted with love. At that time
you will only sigh for there will be nothing that you can do because you
were blind and could not see the truth. They will oblige you because you
have turned your faces from the right way and you did not accept it."

Why has Fatima been misunderstood? Why have our women been lost to
either outdated forms or new imports? Why has she been exploited?
Shariati tells us in the words of Hazrat Ali, "two parties are required
in order to bring about oppression. One is the oppressor and the other
is the one who accepts oppression. Oppression cannot be one sided. An
oppressor cannot perform oppression in the air. Oppression is like a
piece of iron which is formed by the striking of the hammer of the
oppressor upon the anvil of the oppressed." Thus, women themselves
partici­pated in the attack upon their values by allowing them­selves to
be oppressed and by not searching out their roots.

With the awareness which Shariati brings to us, our coming to know
Fatima brings about a responsibility and a commitment to those who first
ask, "Who am I" and then search out the answer in the authenticity and
genuineness of their own culture. The responsibility and commitment
grows through love and faith. Our know­ledge becomes illuminated because
Shariati has awakened this responsibility within us. With Fatima as our
model, we learn to fight injustice and oppression. We turn from
ourselves to others. We become actively involved in society's ills
because she as she really was, is our symbol, our model, our heroine.

This is not to deny the spiritual presence and essence of Fatima who has
inspired thousands of artists, poets, writers and artisans. At one point
we learn that the Pro­phet gave her a prayer instead of the domestic
help that she had asked for. She grew from this for this nourished her
spirit and strengthened her commitment to God and His people. But it is
rather to complement it for as Jalal al‑din Rumi tells us, "The physical
form is of great im­portance; nothing can be done without the
consociation of the form and the essence. However often you may sow a
seed stripped of its pod, it will not grow; sow it with the pod, it will
become a great tree."[^4]*.* And as every artisan knows, it is the clay
itself which deter­mines the forms that can be created.

Having awoken and become aware to the real Fatima presented by Shariati,
Iranian women were able to arise and play a major role in the Islamic
Revolution of Iran. They fought against oppression and injustice side by
side with the men. Clothed in the modest dress of what Fatima might have
worn, they found no impediments to their freedom to act, to fight, to
resist.

After the Revolution, Iranian women who had asked themselves Shariati's
question, "Who am I?," are trying to come to know themselves as being
\`like Fatima' for one must remember that only Fatima is Fatima.

Laleh Bakhtiar  
 June, 1980.

[^1]: A Husayniyyeh is a traditional religious center where the people
gather to see passion plays, in particular, those related to the third
Shi'ite Imam, Imam Husayn, and his martyrdom at Karbala. The
Husayn­iyyeh Ershad, referred to here, is located in Tehran. It is a
center built in the late 60's and has extended the meaning to include a
center for lectures about Islam. Ali Shariati was one of the first
people to lecture here and drew crowds in the thousands; and people
gathered in the streets and surrounding areas to hear him. But as the
former regime began to fear his effect, they closed down the center for
several years. It was re‑opened after the Revolution.

[^2]: The letter (‘a) which fol­lows the name of Hazrat Ali or Hazrat
Fatima or the other Imams is the abbreviation of \`alayhi salam, (peace
be upon them).

[^3]: The letter (‘s) which follows the name of the Prophet Muhammad
(‘s) is a customary abbreviation for the bene­diction salli \`aLah
\`alih wa alihi, (\`may the blessings of God be upon him and his
family').

[^4]: Fihi ma fi, p. 19‑21


