The Social Customs of Hejaz
===========================

The Social Customs of the Hejaz
-------------------------------

Fatima is the fourth and youngest daughter of the Prophet of Islam. She
is the youngest daughter of a house­hold to which no sons survived. She
is a girl born into a society where both the father and the family place
special value upon a son.

The social order of the Arabs had passed beyond the Age of the Matriarch
centuries before Islam. During the Age of ignorance, prior to the
mission of the Prophet, the Arabs had established the Age of the
Patriarch. Their gods had become masculine whereas their idols and their
angels were feminine (that is, daughters of the great god, *al-lah*).
The tribes were governed by \`white beards' and the family was ruled by
the grandfathers. Essentially, their religion was a kind of ancestor
worship. They adhered to whatever beliefs and practices their fathers
had had.

It was against the religion of ancestral fathers that the great
prophets, mentioned in the Qur’an, revolt. When con­fronted with the
revolt against ancestor worship and myths which sought out their first
fathers, the tribes stood for the preservation of the masculine
traditions. It was a kind of inherited, imitative worship based upon the
principle of father worship.

The Prophets bring a revolutionary message. They try to awaken a thought
based on the principle of worshipping God. Beyond this, the difficult
life of the tribes of the dry desert is filled with hostility between
one tribe and another, for the basic principles of life are 'defend and
attack' and \`keep your promises'. In this society, the son plays a
special role which is based upon the \`uses and needs' of the society's
social and military principles.

According to a universal principle of sociology, where profit is
substituted for value, being a son is by and of itself of the highest
essence. It means embodying virtues, meaningful social and ethical
values and human nobility. For this very reason, being a girl or having
a daughter is humbling. Her frailness is substituted by \`being weak'.
Her \`being weak' pushes her towards slavery and slavery causes her
human values to lessen.

She becomes a creature who is the slave of a man, the disgrace of her
father, the toy of a man's sexual urges and the 'goal' or slave of the
home of her husband. Finally, this creature always shakes her man's
sense of honor because she is the highest form of shame and disgrace.
For the betterment of society and the relief of one's mind, how much
better to kill her while still a baby so that the honor of her fathers,
brothers and ancestors, all men for that matter, is not stained. As
Ferdowsi tells us in the *Shah­nameh:*

*It is better to bury women and dragons in the earth.*  
*The world will be better off if cleansed of their existence.*

An Arab poet tells us, 'if a father has a daughter he wants to remain,
whenever he thinks of her future, he should think about three different
son-in-law’s: one, the house which will hide her; two, the husband who
will keep her and three, the grave which will cover her! And the last
one, the grave, is the best.'

The idiom which refers to the grave as being the best son-in-law, has
existed in all languages of the wealthiest and most honorable men. All
of the indigenous and honorable fathers and brothers who are bound to
and place em­phasis upon their family, father and male ancestors, all of
those who understand the ideals of name and honor are ready for and live
in anticipation of dying so that they' can seek the hand of their sister
or daughter in marriage. The bride and the frightening groom are united
either by their own hands or the best possible son-in-law is chosen for
the bride. A poet reminds his daughter of the most beloved of
son-in-law’s, \`The most beloved son-in-law is the grave.'

This is that very same poem that says women and dra­gons are both better
to be covered by the earth because it is a means of exchange. \`Covering
the girls with earth is a way of preserving honor.' This is, why the
Qur’an, in the strongest terms, warns of the dangers of this frightening
'highest honor' when it says: *'He hides himself from the people of the
evil for the tidings given him. Should he keep her with disgrace or bury
her alive in the dust? Behold, evil is what they de­cide. ' (16:59)*

The sensitive point which a contemporary Islamic writer has found in the
Qur’an is that the tragedy essential­ly has economic roots because of
society's fear of poverty which was prevalent in the Arab Age of
Ignorance.

The principal belief, which most of the sociologists today accept and
confirm, is the nobility in having a son and the disgrace and baseness
in having a daughter. This ethical and spiritually based belief, this
feeling and sensi­tivity, stems from the discussion of spiritual values
about honor, integrity, dignity, respect and the virtue of man and woman
or soil and daughter. Girls have been buried alive because of the fear
that they may bring dishonor in the future by marrying an unsuitable
husband or they fear falling into the hands of an enemy during a war and
then becoming slaves in a strange land. All of these are secon­dary
phenomena or, as they say, they are the apparent facts which result from
transformed realities which have taken on a new form. But the basic
reason is an economic one.

As we previously indicated, in the tribal system, peo­ple are faced with
the hardships of life and production (particularly in the deserts of
Arabia) and the constant difficult relationships among the tribes. Such
a life requires a strong and powerful support. Automatically, a son
be­comes an important factor in the economic and social situation as
well as in the defense of his family or tribe. He is a necessary social
element of a family or tribe. A son brings bread but a daughter eats it.
It is natural that the sexual differences cause class differences. Men
fall into the class of ruling and owning and women fall into that of the
ruled and the owned.

The relationship between a man and a woman is like that between a
landowner and a peasant. A man and a wo­man, as economic entities, have
a different human and spiritual value placed upon them. As an economic
landlord brings about a blood‑line, an inherited nobility for his
fa­mily, as well as ethical and essential values, virtues and great
generosity; the opposite is true of a peasant or a woman.

Poverty sends all the male gains or can gain to the four winds. This is
why she could become the cause of the family losing self respect. The
possibility always exists that she will disgrace the family by marrying
someone who is not at the same level as this family. In my opinion, this
fear, which is an ethical phenomenon, is related to a clear economic
factor, that is, to preserve the ownership of land and to assure the
continuation of centralized wealth for ‑the next generation of the
family.

In patriarchal societies, when the father dies, the oldest son inherits
everything, not only the land, but also the wives of his father,
including his own mother! It was for this very reason that the daughters
did not inherit so that the wealth of the father would not be divided up
and be distributed to other families through the daughters. This is the
reason why in our old wealthy families there is still a very strong
emphasis placed upon the daughter marrying within the family. They
pledge an uncle's daugh­ter to an uncles' son \`in heaven' so that the
uncle's daughter does not take her inheritance out of the family which
would be the case if she were to marry a stranger in City Hall.

This is why ancient historians and modern scholars who write the history
of religion, have different explana­tions for the burying alive of
female children in the Age of Ignorance. Beginning with the fear of
shame, disgrace, scorn, prejudice and fear of marriage with an
unsuitable person, or, scorn, as some of the scholars say, in primitive
religions, girls were sacrificed for the gods. But the Qur’an most
strictly and clearly says that the fear was the fear of poverty. In
other words, it was an economic factor. The other explanations are just
words.

In my opinion, this clear interpretation and des­cription is not only to
express scientifically, the reason for these murders, but also to
emphatically disgrace and degrade people who talk about the ethical,
chaste and noble responsibility a tribe had in burying new born fe­males
alive. Their crude, cruel action resulted from their baseness, vileness,
fear of poverty and love of wealth It was a direct result of their fear
and weakness, their drawing of the curtains of deception to hide their
deed by trying to explain it with the noble words of honor, integrity,
chastity, respect.

The Qur’an emphasizes, *'Do* not *hill them from fear of poverty for We
will provide for you and your children.* (6:1 51). It expresses the main
reason for the tragedy. It awakens people. Secondly, it negates the
false, ethical and human explanations. It directly and straightforwardly
says that this practice is neither ethical nor noble but rather, one
hundred percent economical. It stems from greed and wealth, from
weakness and fear.

Before this, the public was not aware of their real feelings. Other than
the deprived class, the majority of the people believed it to be a
reaction of the public conscien­ce: They believed it showed a brave
spirit and that it pro­tected the family honor. The Arab tribal society
gave all the human values to a son, whereas a daughter was consi­dered
to lack all virtues and human authenticity.

A boy is not only capable of earning his livelihood, but he is also a
help to his father, a protector of his family, the family and tribal
hero as well as the pride of his ancest­ry, the bearer of the values of
his heritage, the continuer of the existence of society, the spirit of
his family, the owner of a name, the protector of institutions and the
flame which lights the family lamp upon the death of his father.

A daughter is an element within the family, a living piece of furniture.
After she marries, her personality dis­solves in a stranger's house. She
becomes the furniture in another house where she cannot even retain her
family name. Her children belong to a stranger. They carry his name and
are inheritors of a heritage, both of which are strange.

A boy has the material power of economic capital, he aides society and
assists in the patriarchal system. He decorates life; he has prestige,
fame, value and spiritual credit. He supports the authenticity of the
family. He is the giver of security and subsistence and the future
authority of that family. But a girl: nothing. She is the total private
parts of the house, the bearer of a family. She is so weak that she must
always be protected.

Like a bird whose foot is tied to a stone that pre­vents it from flying
freely, she, like the stone, prevents a warrior from freely attacking
the tents and castles of the enemies. And when defending his tribe, the
warrior is al­ways anxious that she not be taken as a slave. His
slightest negligence may put her into the hands of the enemy. Then the
entire tribe would suffer the shame of her enslavement.

During times of peace, the family must be careful that she doesn't cause
them shame. After all of these troubles, efforts, sufferings, expenses,
anxieties, a stranger comes and takes her away. She is like a field that
another cultivates and bears off the crops. This is why the best
solution is naturally none other than that at the moment she is placed
in her mother's arms, she should be given over to her death or at an
early age, she should be given away in wedlock and call the cold grave,
'son-in-law'.

A man who has no sons is called 'cut‑off'. He has no progeny and no
continuation; he is barren. Yet the word *kawthar* in the Qur’an means
fullness, advantages, blessings as well as meaning having progeny and
many children. God in answer to the disbelievers who called His beloved
Pro­phet 'cut‑off' gave him the good news that he will have many
progeny.

In such an environment, the moment is ripe for fate to render aside the
veil which conceals it. It is the time to participate and direct the
state of things. Life had be­come a quiet, spoiled lagoon. It is time
for a serious, creative revolution. It is the moment for a strong wind
to blow. Suddenly an amazing plan is put into action, sweet but
difficult. Two people are selected to carry out this plan, a father and
a daughter. Muhammad (the father) must carry the heavy load and Fatima
(the daughter) must reflect within herself the newly created
revolutionary values.

The Birth of Fatima
-------------------

The largest Arab tribe is the Quraish. The Kaaba is in their hands
which, naturally gives them tribal nobility. They are divided 'into two
families, the Bani Omayyad and the Bani Hashimi. The Bani Omayyad are
the wealthiest but the Bani Hashimi are the most honorable for they are
in charge of looking after the affairs of the Kaaba.

Abdul Muttalib is from this family but at this time, he is dead and his
son, Abu Talib, the leader of the Bani Hashim, does not have the power
that his father had. He has gone bankrupt in his trading. He is living
in poverty and has distributed his children to be cared for among his
family.

A very strong rivalry has broken out between the two tribes. The
Omayyad’s are trying to gain control of all of the property and honors
of the Quraish. They wanted to, at the same time, break the spiritual
hold of the Hashimis. Among the Hashimi tribe, the family of Muhammad
has received new credit. The grandson of Abdul Muttalib has just married
Khadijah, a wealthy, well respected widow of Mecca. This gives him a
stronger social position.

The personal standing and personality which Muhammad shows, the trust
and credibility which he has among people and, in particular, among all
the Hashimis and the leaders of the Quraish, makes everyone aware of the
fact that he reflects the honor of Abd Manaf and is the protector of the
nobility of the Hashimis. In particu­lar, they sense he will be the
activator of the honor and nobility which Abdul Muttalib had had.

Hamzeh is a youth; an athlete. Abu Lahab is a man without credit. Abbas
is wealthy, but without character. Abu Talib is honorable, but without
money. It is only Muhammad, who along with his wife, have character. He
has youth as well. They have a respectable amount of wealth and are part
of the family tree of the Bani Hashimi. Great developments should be
strewn from this family. Their shadow will fall over Mecca.

Everyone is awaiting the sons to be born of this fa­mily, sons to bring
strength, credit and nobility to the fa­mily of Abdul Muttalib.

The first child born is a girl, Zaynab.

But the family is anticipating a son.

The second child is a daughter, Roqiyyeh.

The anticipation grows stronger and the need also in­creases.

The third, a girl, Umm Khulthum.

Two boys, Qasem and Abdullah are born. They hold great promise. But they
do not blossom. They die in infan­cy. Now there are three children in
this house, and all three are girls.

The mother has aged. She is over 60 years old. The father, although he
loves his three daughters, shares his tribe's feelings and their
anticipation.

Can Khadijah, who is almost at the end of her life, bring forth another
child? Hope has become very dim.

Yes! Happiness and hope once again fill the house. The excitement
reaches a peak. This is the last chance for the family of Abdul
Muttalib, the last hope.

But once again, a daughter.

They name her Fatima.

The happiness and hope of the Hashimi tribe falls to the Omayyad’s. The
happiness of the enemies! Whispering bad names and screams of 'Muhammad
is cut‑off', the man who is the last link in his family chain has four
daughters. Nothing more.'

How sad. What a beautiful and strange game fate is playing. Life passes
on and Muhammad drowns in the storm of his mandate and his being
appointed as the Prophet of God. He conquers Mecca and frees al the
Quraish prisoners. All of the tribes are under his leader­ship and his
shadow is thrown throughout the whole of the Arabian Peninsula. His
sword crushes the faces of the Emperors of the world. His song rings
through the heavens and the earth. In one hand, strength, and in the
other, prophecy, the full honors which would never even enter the heads
of the Omayyad’s, the Hashimi tribe or all of the Arabs and non Arabs.  
 And now, Muhammad is the Prophet. In the city, fil­led with the most
significant waves of happiness, he has the power and greatness which a
human being could never conceive? A tree, which does not grow from Abd
Manaf nor HasNimi nor Abdul Muttalib, but rather, grows from a light
under a mountain, \`Hira'. It extends from one end of the desert to the
other, from horizon to horizon of the earth. Till the end of time, it
encompasses and will conti­nue to encompass all of the future until the
end of history.

And this man has four daughters.

But no, three of them died before he did. And now, he has only one
child, a daughter, the youngest, Fatima.


