Islam Revolutionized the Position of Women
==========================================

The Qur’anic Word, Kawthar
--------------------------

Muhammad is heir to all of them, the family’s honor, and in­heritor of a
new kind of wealth which is neither based upon blood nor earth nor money
but the phenomenon of revelation. Born of faith, jihad, revolution,
thought and humanity, he is a beautiful weave. Of the values, he
receives the highest spirit. Muhammad is joined to the history of
mankind, not to that of Abdul Muttalib, Abd Manaf, the Quraish nor the
Arabs. He is the inheritor of Abraham, Noah, Moses and Jesus and Fatima
is his only heir.

***We gave you kawthar, oh Muhammad For your Creator, establish the
prayer and sacrifice a camel. It is he, that very hated enemy of yours
who is cut‑off.***

He, your enemy with ten sons is cut‑off. He is useless, cut‑off without
the highest form of inheritors. \`We gave you Kawthar, ‑ Fatima.' It is
in this way that Revolution appears in the depths of the conscience of
time.

Now, a daughter becomes the owner of the values of her father, the
inheritor of all the honors of her family. She is the continuation of
the chain of great ancestors, the continuation which began with .Adam
and passes through all of the leaders of freedom and consciousness in
the his­tory of mankind. It reaches Abraham and joins Moses and Jesus to
itself. It reaches Muhammad. The final link in this chain of Divine
justice, the rightful chain of truth is Fatima, the last daughter of a
family who had anticipated a son: Muhammad had known what the hands of
fate had in store for him. And, Fatima, also, had known who she was.
Yes! This school of thought created such a revolution. A woman, in this
religion, is freed like this. Isn't this the re­ligion of Abraham and
they, his heirs?

The Honor Bestowed Upon a Female Slave
--------------------------------------

Nobody has the right to be buried in a mosque. The greatest mosque in
the world is the Masjid al haram in Mec­ca. The Kaaba. This house
belongs to God. It is devoted to God. It is the direction to which all
of the ritual prayers are oriented. The house is ordered by Him and
Abraham builds it. It is a house which the Prophet of Islam is honor­ed
with the mandate of freeing. He frees this \`House of Freedom',
circumambulates it and goes down in prostra­tion towards it. All of the
great prophets of history are servants of this house. But no prophet has
the right to be buried here. Abraham built it but he is not buried there
and Muhammad frees it but he is not buried there. In the whole history
of humanity, there is only one and one per­son only who has been given
this privilege. God of Islam honored one person with this honor to be
buried in His particular house, to be buried in the Kaaba. Who?

A woman. A slave. Hagar [the second wife of Abra­ham and mother of
Ismail]. God orders Abraham to build the greatest house of worship of
humanity and, alongside it, the grave of this woman. Humanity must
forever gather around the tomb of Hagar and circumambulate there.

The God of Abraham, chooses a woman from among this great human society
as his unknown soldier, a mother, and she, a slave. In other words, God
chose a creature who, in all systems of humanity, lacks nobility and
honor.

The Honor Bestowed Upon the Prophet's Daughter
----------------------------------------------

Yes, in this school of thought such a revolution took place. In this
religion, a woman is freed in this manner. This is how Islam appreciates
the position of womanhood. And once more the God of Abraham has chosen
Fatima. Fatima, a girl, replaces a son as the inheritor of the glory of
her family, maintaining the honorable values of their ancestors and
continuing the family tree and credibility.

In a society that feels the birth of a daughter to be a disgrace which
only burying her alive can purify, where the best son-in-law a father
could hope for her to have is called \`the grave': Muhammad knows what
fate has done to him and Fatima knows who she is.

This is why history looks in amazement at the way Muhammad behaved
towards his young daughter, Fatima, the way he spoke with her and the
way he praised her.

We Will come to see that the house of Fatima is next to the house of
Muhammad. Fatima and her husband, Ali, are the only people who live next
to the Prophet's mosque. They are of the same house as he is and there
is only a courtyard of two meters separating the two houses. Two
windows; facing each other, open the house of Muhammad to the house of
Fatima. Every morning the Prophet opens his window and greets his young
daughter.

We will see that whenever the Prophet goes on a jour­ney, he knocks at
the door of Fatima's house and he says good‑bye to her. Fatima is the
last person who bids fare­well to him. Whenever he returns from a‑
journey, Fatima is the first person he seeks out. He knocks on the door
of her house and he asks how she is.

In some of the historic documents, it is recorded that the Prophet would
kiss the face and hands of Fatima. This sort of behavior is more than
just the relationship of a kind father and his daughter. A father kisses
the hands of hit daughter, and that, his youngest daughter! Such
behavior in such an environment strikes a revolutionary blow to the
families and inhumane relationships of that environment. \`The Prophet
of Islam kisses the hands of Fatima.' Such a relationship opens the eyes
of important people, politicians and the majority of the Moslem people
gathered around the Prophet in amazement towards the greatness of
Fatima.

This sort of behavior on the part of the Prophet of Islam teaches
humanity and mankind to come and to release themselves from the habits
and the fantasies of history and traditions. It teaches man to come down
from the Pharaoh like throne, to put aside his pride and rough
oppression and to bow his head when confronted by a woman. It teaches a
woman to reach towards the glory and beauty of humanity and to put aside
her old and new feelings of inferiority, humility and baseness.

This is why the words of the Prophet not only show the kindness of a
father but also bring out her responsibi­lities and strict duties. He
shows his appreciation for her and speaks about her in the following
terms: \`The best women in the world were four: Mary, Assiyeh [the wife
of Pharaoh who brought up Moses], Khadijah and Fatima.' \`God is
satisfied with her contentment and becomes angry from her anger.' \`The
contentment of Fatima is my con­tentment, her anger is my anger.
Whosoever loves my dau­ghter Fatima loves me. Whosoever makes Fatima
content makes me content. Whosoever makes Fatima unhappy makes me
unhappy.' 'Fatima is a part of my body. Whoso­ever hurts her, has hurt
me, and whosoever hurts me has hurt God.'

Why all this repetition? Why does the Prophet insist upon praising his
young daughter? Why does he insist upon praising her in front of other
people?'Why does he want all of the ,people to be aware of his special
feelings towards her? And finally, why does he so emphasize the
content­ment and anger of Fatima? Why does he so often repeat the word
\`hurt' in relationship to Fatima.

The answer to this is very sensitive and important. It is clear. History
has answered it all: The secret of these wondrous actions will be
unveiled in the near future, in the few short months after the death of
her father.

The Mother of her Father
------------------------

History not only always speaks of the \`great ones', it only attends to
them. Children are always forgotten. Fatima is the youngest child in the
family. Her childhood passes in a storm. Her birth date is debated.
Tabari, ibn Ishaq and Sirah ibn Hashim mention five years before the
Prophet's mission. Morravej al Zahib Masoudi mentions the opposite, five
years after the Prophet's mission. Yaqubi takes the middle, but not
exactly, by recording, \`after the revelation'. Thus, there is a
difference of opinion among the recorders of the Traditions. The Sunnis,
then say, five years before the mandate of the Prophet and the Shiites
say five years after his mission.

We leave this discussion to the scholars so they can enlighten us as to
the exact date of her birth. We are con­cerned with Fatima herself and
the reality of Fatima. Whether she is born before or after the mission
of the Prophet does not concern us here. That which is clear is that
Fatima remained in Mecca alone. Her two brothers die when they are
infants and Zaynab, her oldest sister, who acts as the mother of this
beloved child, goes to the home of Abi al Aas. Fatima bitterly accepts
her absence. Then it is Roqiyyeh and Umm Khulthum's turn. They marry the
sons of Abu La­hab, and Fatima remains even more alone. This is if we
ac­cept her birth as having been before the mission of the Pro­phet. If
we accept the second, then, essentially, from 'the time she opened her
eyes, she was alone. At any rate, the beginning of her life coincides
with the heavy mandate of the Prophet. It is filled with great
struggles, difficulties and punishments whose shadows fall upon the
house of the Prophet.

While her father bears the mandate of consciousness for mankind upon his
shoulders and suffers the enmity of the enemies of the people, her
mother nurses her beloved husband. With the initial experiences of
childhood, Fatima tastes the suffering, sadness and anger of life.
Because she is very young, she can move about freely. She makes use of
this freedom to accompany her father. She knows her father has no life
of his own to be able to take hold of his child's hand and walk freely
and easily down the streets and into the bazaar. He always goes alone.
In the wave of the town's enemies and enmity, he swims with dangers on
all sides. The ‑small girl, who knows her father's fate, never lets him
go alone.

Many times she sees her father standing amidst a crowd of people. He
speaks to them softly and they, in turn, harshly send him away. Their
only answers are to make fun of him and show him enmity. He feels lonely
and friendless again: But quietly and patiently, he gathers, another
group together. He begins his speech all over again. At the end, tired
and having brought forth no result, like fathers of other children who
return home from their jobs, he also returns home seeking a bit of rest
and then returns once more to his work.

History reminds us that once when he had gone into the Masjid al haram,
and is called bad names and is beaten, Fatima, a small child, is
standing alone a short distance from the scene. She watches and then
returns home with her father.

The day when he has prostrated himself in the mosque and his enemies
throw the intestines of a sheep at him, suddenly, little Fatima, reaches
towards her fa­ther, picks it up and throws it away. Then with her
small, loving hands, cleans her father's head and face, comforts him and
returns him to their home .

People who see this thin, weak girl, alone, beside her champion father,
see how she comforts him. She sup­ports him through his troubles and
sufferings. With her pure, child‑like behavior, she sympathizes with
him. It is because of this that she comes to be called ummi *abi­ha,*
the mother of her father.


