The Confinement
===============

The black and difficult years of hunger begin in the valley of Abu
Talib. The Hashimi and Abdul Muttalib families are imprisoned with the
exception of Abu Lahab who has joined the enemies. Men; women and
children are placed in this hot, dry valley. A notice is written by Abu
Jahl in the name of all the wealthy people of the Quraish and it is
placed on the Kaaba wall:

\`No one, should have any contact with the Hashimi tribe and Abdul
Muttalib. All relationships with them are cut‑off. Do not buy anything
from them. Do not sell any­thing to them. Do not marry any of them.'

They are forced to live in this stony prison until loneliness, poverty,
hunger and the difficulties of life make them surrender to either the
idols or death! They all have to bear the torture, both those who have
accepted the new religion and those who have not as yet turned to the
new religion.

Those who have not yet embraced Islam, but have a sense of freedom,,
even though there is a difference of thought with Muhammad and face to
face with Oneness, they put up a united front towards the enemies. They
de­fend him and even though they do not know Islam and therefore do not
have faith in it, they know Muhammad. They have faith in his purity.
They know he is not inte­rested in personal gain. They sense his faith.
They hear what he has to say about the worship of the Truth. They know
he sincerely wishes to free the people.

They are worth far more than the intellectuals who are filled with fear,
men who are conservatives like Ali ibn Omayyad, who, having discovered
progressive ideo­logy; supposedly oppose reactionaries and the bearded
men who hold onto the foulness of aristocratic society as well as the
classical Arab regime with its class distinctions. But, at the same
time, knowing all of this, in order to pro­tect the wealth of their
fathers, the luxuries of their fa­mily, their social position and
physical health and in order to avoid any headaches, they remain on the
side of Abu Jahl and Abu Lahab. They watch the torture of Balal, Ammar,
Yasser and Somayyeh. They do not move their lips in objection.

Throughout these difficult years, they leave their compatriots and their
friends in this small compound, alone. They busy themselves with their
lives in the city, bazaar, their homes and families. They pass their
time with the pagan leaders. They even join hands. They leave be­hind a
tradition. They open a way. Years later, followers of this way and their
religion contain more people than the followers of the religion of the
Prophet himself.

The real Shiites are Ali, Abu Dharr, Fatima, Husayn, Zaynab and all of
the Emigrants and Companions. But those like Ali ibn Omayyad are the
first Moslems to conti­nue the practice of dissimulation (pious fraud)
even th­ough the Prophet had forbidden it. They remain, loyal to this
beneficial principle and do not relinquish it until their death.

It is when the fire of a new faith alights upon their spirits and a
movement full of danger begins in society, based upon experiment, choice
and obligatory tests where one speaks to the self clearly and without
deceit that the wonders of humanity appear. The glories are accompanied
by feelings of inferiority, contempt, strengths as well as weaknesses.
All these are hidden within the spirit and all of them reveal
themselves.

Now in this frightening compound, there are people who are not Moslems,
and yet bear the difficulties with patience, silence and three years of
hunger and loneliness. They share the shadow of danger. They also take
part in God's great revolution of humanity. In this most sensitive
moment of the beginning of the history of Islam, they share the pain,
understanding the position of Muhammad, Ali and their Companions.

But the black cloud of ignorance covers the comfor­table and happy city
which is filled with conservatism, contradiction, painlessness and
shamelessness. Some Mos­lems can be seen among them whose skirts are
contamina­ted and their hands are frail. They are busy gaining secu­rity
and comfort. Are they the viewers or the players in this tragedy? The
question arises because in their imagi­nation they believe they have
religion. They love religious people. They feel themselves to be
enlightened.

The families of the Hashimi and Abdul Muttalib tribes cut themselves off
for three years from their city, their people, their freedom and even
their means of liveli­hood and live in this confinement. Is it possible
to leave the valley in the middle of the night and , hidden from the
eyes of the spies of the Quraish, get some food for the hungry who are
waiting in jail? Could it be that a liberal family member or friend
might out of kindness bring them some bread. Hunger sometimes reaches
the point that they take on the image of 'black death'. But as they had
prepar­ed themselves for a 'red death', they are patient.

Sa’ad ibn Ali Vaqas, who is confined with the others, writes, 'Hunger
has brought on such dizziness that, if at night I kick at a soft and wet
material, without even realizing it, I put it in my mouth and suck it.
Two years later, I still do not know what it was.'

One can see, under these conditions, what passes for the family of the
Prophet, even if history said nothing. All of this family bears the
difficulties of hunger, loneliness and poverty for the sake of the
Prophet. The Prophet personally assumes responsibility for them. When a
child cries from the pain of hunger, whenever a sick person cries from
lack of medicine and lack of food, whenever an aged person, man or
woman, reaches their limits of bearing difficulties and pressures
suffered from three years of hunger, physical torture and the tortures
of this valley, they hide all they bear within themselves. The light and
blood drained from their faces, they deny any pro­blems when confronting
Muhammad.

At the same time, in spite of all of the difficulties, they remain loyal
and generous in faith and love. All of this shows the expressions of the
spirit, of faith and human life which greatly affected the sensitive
heart of the Prophet.

Know for sure that whenever food arrives in the dark­ness of the night
and it is given into the hands of the Pro­phet to be spread among the
people, the share of his wife and daughter is the least of all, in order
that they not fear for their lives.

The family of Muhammad in this compound consists of Khadijah and his
small daughter, Fatima, her sisters, Umm Khulthum and Roqiyyeh,
daughter-in-law’s of Abu Lahab. After the mission of the Prophet, he
orders his sons to divorce them in order to hurt and show con­tempt for
the Prophet. But Osman, who is a young, weal­thy, handsome man, marries
Roqiyyeh and from the point of view of society, the act of Abu Lahab is
answered. Roqiyyeh then immigrates to Ethiopia with Osman. Umm Khulthum,
whose life had fallen apart and who had given up her happiness because
of her faith in her father, now found herself in the compound,
preferring hunger and remaining with her generous and heroic father in
the way of faith and freedom to living in comfort and ease with her
malicious and conservative husband, Otaybeh.

The days pass with difficulty in this compound. At night, the black tent
of darkness falls upon the residents of this mountainous area separated
from life. Weeks, months and years pass with hardship, they pass slowly
over their tired bodies and spirits but all continue to step in
sympa­thy with each other and with the Prophet.

The family of the Prophet has a special position in the midst of this
group. The head of the family holds the heavy weight of their bitter
fate upon his shoulders. Umm Khulthum, her happiness destroyed, has
moved from the home of her husband to that of her father. His other
daughter, Fatima, is still a young girl either two or three years old or
twelve or thirteen. At the same time that she has a weak constitution,
she has a sensitive spirit, full of feelings. His wife, Khadijah, very
aged, perhaps seventy years old, having lived through the ten years of
the Prophet's mission and three years in the compound, having suffered
hunger, having witnessed the constant torture of her husband and
daughters, and bearing the death of her two sons, has not given up
patience, but the flow of strength to her body has been stopped. At
every instant death appears to her.

In this state, the hunger in Muhammad's house cries out so loud that the
aged, sick Khadijah, who has lived her life in wealth and has now given
everything in the way of Muhammad, puts a bit of leather in water and
holds it be­tween her teeth.

Fatima, the young, sensitive girl is worried about her mother and her
mother is worried about her last, frail daughter whose love for their
mother and father is a com­mon expression among the people.

A day among the last days of their imprisonment, Khadijah, who senses
the approach of her death, is bedrid­den. Fatima and Umm Khulthum are
sitting beside her. Her father has gone outside to distribute the
rations.

Khadijah, aged, weak, sensing the difficulties she has lived through,
says with a sense of regret, \`If only my approaching death could wait
until these dark days pass and I could die with hope and happiness.'

Umm Khulthum, crying, says, 'it is nothing, mother, do not worry.'

'Yes, for me, by God, it is nothing. I am not worried about myself, my
daughter. No woman among the Quraish has tasted the blessings that I
have tasted. There is no woman in the world who has received the
generosity which I have received. It is enough for me that my fate in
this life, in this world, has been to be the beloved wife of God's
choice. As to my fate in the other world, it is enough that I have been
among the first who believed in Muhammad and that I am called \`the
mother of his followers'.' Then whispering to herself, she continues,
'Oh God, I cannot count the blessings and kindnesses that you have given
me. My heart has not grown narrow because I am moving to­wards you, but
I do wish to be worthy of the benefits you gave me.'

The shadow of death falls upon the house. Silence and deep sorrow fill
Khadijah, Umm Khulthum and Fatima. Suddenly, the Prophet appears
illuminated with hope, faith, strength and victory. It is as if three
years of loneliness, hunger and heavy spiritual asceticism have had no
effect upon the body and spirit of the Prophet other than to increase
his courage, will power and faith.


