A New History Begins
====================

After the death of Abu Talib, enmity and hatred reaches its peak. A
group of the Companions and followers of the Prophet go to Ethiopia
while another group suffer loneliness and poverty under the increasing
torture of the Quraish. Muhammad, who had reached fifty years of age,
whose life had been spent in difficulties without any security, is
living alone with Fatima, his young daughter.

But ...no. The hand of fate brings a son to this house and no one knew
what role he would play.

Yes. Ali does not stay in his father's house and grow up there. From
childhood he lives beside Fatima. He is raised in the home of Fatima's
father. The fate of this young boy is strangely connected to the fate of
this father and this girl.

History is taking its course. In the mysterious quiet which is full of
ambiguity, the stormy design of thought is nourished so that tomorrow,
the stone idols are broken, that create barriers for the seekers of
monopoly and that create discrimination. The first of the deceitful
priests of the royal court die in the fire temples of the Persians. The
great, frightening palaces of Madaen are pulled down. The lustful,
blood‑thirsty Emperor of Rome is pushed into the sea.

But the greatest of all to fall, to be erased in the hearts and minds,
is the rusted traditions and the chains of habit, the pus of
superstitions and rotted myths, preju­dices, feelings and discriminatory
beliefs that are against humanity.

They are disconnected and washed. The previous values and honors are
turned upside down and changed. In an environment polluted with bruised
fairy tales of racism and pride, aristocracy and power, epics of
judgment and plunder, the worship of the earth, blood and idols always
cause the earth to revolt against the gods because all these things,
large or small, prevent freedom, equality, justice, spiritual struggle
and self-awareness for the unknown mas­ses who lack glory and tribe.
Instead of seeking history in rotted bones and fallen gravestones and
rulers of the sword who hold the gold, seek history in the blood, life
and motions of the people!

Seek the line which begins with the heirs of the last Chosen Prophet!
Each one is to have a finer cloak of martyrdom than the' previous one.
Each one either spent their life in the battlefield or teaching people
or in the pri­son of the oppressors. This important mandate in history
begins with Fatima and in carrying out this work, history needs an Ali.

This is why the kind hand of poverty causes the child of Abu Talib, even
though he had a father, to go to the house of his uncle's son so that
his spirit does not become polluted by his own family's ignorance when
the revelation arrives. He is present from the time of the first
revelation. He is there from the moment that the mission begins. He
lives through the fire of difficulties, problems and thoughts so that he
can play the difficult role he has to play in the migration, so that he
can participate in the battles of Badr, Ohud, Khaybar, Fath and Hunayn
and thereby guarantee the victory of the Islamic Revolution, so that he
can grow up close to Fatima and finally, so that with Fa­tima, he can
establish the \`exemplary family' and in the continuation of the work of
Abraham, begin a new his­tory.

Migration
---------

Thirteen years of difficulty, resistance, confinement and, torture in
Mecca end. Fatima, from early childhood, patiently stood alongside her
father, in the‑ city, in their home and in their imprisonment. With her
weak constitu­tion, she withstood the angry blows of envy and the
diffi­culties of resistance in the savage environment of ignoran­ce.
With her little hands, she caressed her hero father like a mother.

The migration begins. Moslems go to Medina. The Prophet and Abu Bakr
secretly leave Mecca. Fatima and her sister, Umm Khulthum also leave
Mecca. Suddenly, one of the evil men of the Quraish who had a history of
having caused the Prophet difficulties catches up with them and
violently throws them down.

Fatima who essentially had a weak constitution and who had suffered from
the effects of three years in prison is greatly affected by this event.
She suffers pain the entire way to Medina. This uncalled for act of
Huirath ibn Naqiz had such an effect upon Moslems and, in particular,
the Prophet and Ali that even eight years later when conquering Mecca,
they had not forgotten what he had done. His name is mentioned among
those who should not be spared. They said that even if he is hanging on
the cloth of the Kaaba, he should be killed. It was no accident that Ali
carried out this order.

In Medina
---------

Now they are in Medina. The Prophet has built his mosque and next to it,
the house which he built from mud and the leaves of palm trees. Then he
announces the cere­mony of \`the covenant of brotherhood'. \`Every two
should become brothers in the way of God.' Jaffar ibn Abu Talib became
the brother of Ma'az ibn Jabal, Abu Bakr, the brother of Khareje bin
Zahir, Omar ibn Khattab, the brother of Ottabai ibn Malek and Osman, the
brother of Uss bin Sabet and ...\`I am his brother.'

Muhammad is the brother of Ali.

Once again, from among all the figures, Ali is placed beside Muhammad.
Ali takes another step closer to Muhammad. Fatima bint Assad, the mother
of Ali, nursed Muhammad. Abu Talib, the father of Ali, protected
Muhammad. Muhammad grew up in the house of Ali. A4i grew up in the house
of Muhammad beside Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad. Ali was nourished
in the lap of Khadijah, the mother of Fatima. The son of the uncle of
Muhammad, child of Muhammad has now become the brother of Muhammad.

The Sealing of the Link
-----------------------

There remains one more step until Ali can reach the final stage which is
foreseen for him in the fate of Muhammad and the honor of Islam.

Fatima has kept her promise. In the home of her father, she lives
quietly and alone. She rejects Omar and Abu Bakr's offers of marriage.
All of the Companions know that Fatima has a very special fate and they
know that the Prophet will never give her hand in marriage without
consulting her.

Fatima grows up with Ali. She sees him as a dear, old­er brother and as
a beloved butterfly around her father. Fate throws these two together
for very special reasons. Neither one of them are tied to the age of
ignorance. They both grow up from the beginning with the mission. They
develop under the light of the revelation.

What feelings does Fatima have towards Ali? What appears from the great,
brave, courageous feelings of Ali towards Fatima? It is possible that we
could conceive of them but the words to express it are missing. How can
we draw the complicated feelings which arise from faith, love, spiritual
strength, worship and the kindness of a bro­ther and a sister who share
the same belief and the familiarity of two spirits. They share the
difficulties and troubles of fate together. Being fellow travelers, step
by step, mo­ment by moment for their whole lifetime, they encounter
kindness and inspiration mixed with faith.

Why is Ali silent? He is twenty-five years old. Fatima has reached
puberty. She is either nine years old or nine­teen.

In my opinion, the obstacles before Ali are clear. Fatima has endowed
herself to her father. She knows her­self to be the mother of her father
and the person who runs his house. How could Ali take her from this
house where the daughter is so attached to her father, to the extent
that they cannot be separated? Ask Muhammad for her hand in marriage?
Ali shares the same feelings as Fatima does.

Suddenly the picture changes. Aiesha comes into the house of the
Prophet. The Prophet, for the first and last time in his life, takes a
young, alive, desiring girl as his wife.

Fatima, little by little, senses that her father's young bride will
replace Khadijah and hers; if not in his heart but undoubtedly in his
house. Ali also senses that the moment which destiny has prepared for
them has arrived.

But he has nothing.

A boy who has grown up in Muhammad's house, who has spent his youth and
struggling in the way of his beliefs. He did not have an opportunity to
gather or save things. The only capital he has in the world is the
sacrifices he has made upon the way of Muhammad, through his faith in
Muhammad. Capital? Not even a house or a piece of furniture. Nothing.

At the same time we see that he approaches the Pro­phet. He is seated
next to him. He has put his head down and speaks with his beautiful
shyness.

'What do you want son of Abu Talib?'

With an answer full of shame and inner peace, 'I want to take the name
of Fatima, daughter of the Prophet.'

The Prophet answers, 'Wonderful! Congratulations!'

The next day in the mosque the Prophet asks him, 'Do you have anything?'

'Nothing, oh Prophet.'

'Where is the shield I gave you in the battle of Badr?'

'It is with me.'

'Give that.’

Ali quickly went, got the shield and returned and handed it to the
Prophet.

The Prophet ordered that it be sold in the bazaar and with its small
price, he should begin his life. Osman bought the shield for forty-seven
dirhams. The Prophet called his Companions together and he himself
performed the wedding ceremony.

'Fatima, daughter of the Prophet, according to the ruling traditions, is
given to Ali.'

They prayed for their sound progeny and then they brought out the dish
of dates. And this was the wedding ceremony. The list of Fatima's
.property? A hand mill, a wooden bowl and a cotton rug.

At the beginning of the second year of the migration, Ali found a house
beside the Mosque of Ghoba and he took Fatima there to his home. Hamzeh,
one of the first martyrs, the great hero of the religious crusades and
uncle of the Prophet and Ali, sacrificed two camels and invited the
people of Medina to his home for the wedding celebra­tion.

The Prophet instructed Umm Salameh to accompany the bride to Ali's
house. Then Balal called the people to the evening prayer. After the
prayer, the Prophet went to Ali's house. He asked for a bowlful of water
and while he recited some verses from the Qur’an, he asked the bride and
groom to drink from that water. He then made his ablu­tion with it and
sprinkled it upon both of their heads. He wished to leave when Fatima
began crying. It was the first time that she was to be separated from
her father.

The Prophet comforted her with these words, 'I am leaving you with a
person of the strongest faith, a man who is the most knowledgeable among
those with know­ledge, the most ethical among those with ethics and the
highest of spirits among the spiritual.'

Struggles Continue to Renew the Spirit
--------------------------------------

This departure from Muhammad begins the second part of her life. Destiny
brings new difficulties and sorrows to this most beloved and precious
beings of humanity. Fatima, who has grown up in poverty and with the
hard­ships of the home of her father, now has come to the home of Ali, a
home where its only decoration and furni­ture is love and poverty.

The difficulties of life in Ali's house begin. But the greatest
difficulty of all is that Fatima had the same responsibilities she
previously had, but they are now in connection with Ali. A youth whom
she had, until yester­day, looked upon as a brother and today; as a
husband. Fa­tima knows that the life of Ali will remain as this. She
knows that he only thinks about jihad, God and people. He will return
home with only empty hands. Fatima finds herself more responsible here
than when she was in her father's home. She has the responsibility of
being the wife of a man who is more serious than lucky and who is
grea­ter than life.

Fatima grinds the wheat herself. She bakes the bread. She works in the
house and is seen hundreds of times bringing water from outside her
home. Ali, who knows the generosity and majesty of Fatima, and more than
loves her for multiple reasons, knows the difficulties that she has
grown up with which have made her weak and is thereby sorrowed by all of
the work and labor which she must perform.

One day in a tone of sympathy, he says, 'Fatima Za­hra, you have placed
yourself in so many difficulties that my heart breaks for you. God has
made many workers of Moslems. Ask the Prophet to give one of them to
you.'

Fatima seeks out her father.

'What is it my daughter?'

'I came to see how you are.'

She returns home and tells Ali she is too ashamed to ask anything of her
father. Ali, who is struck with wonder, calls Fatima and they return
together to the Prophet and he himself asks the question.

The Prophet answers without hesitation, 'No! By God I will not give you
even a prisoner of war. The stomachs of the Companions are hungry and if
I find nothing to give them, I have to exchange them and then feed the
hungry Companions.'

Ali and Fatima thank him and, with empty hands, return home. It is
recorded. The husband and wife return home to an empty house. Both
remain silent thinking about what they had asked of the Prophet. The
Prophet thought all day about the answer he had given his be­loveds.
Suddenly the door opens and the Prophet appears. It is not only the
darkness of the night but also its cold­ness which causes Ali and Fatima
to shiver. He sees that they had placed a thin cloth upon themselves. It
is so short that when they pull it up over their heads, their feet are
exposed and when they cover their feet, their heads are exposed.

Softly he commands them, 'Do not move from your places.'

Then he adds, 'Don't you want to know about some­thing which is better
than what you had asked of me?'

'Of course, oh Prophet of God.'

'It is something which Gabriel has brought for me which I now share with
you. After every ritual prayer, say *Allaho Akbar* (God is Greatest) ten
times. Say *Alhamdulillah* (Praise belongs to God) ten times and
*subhana­'llah* ten times. When you have quietly crawled into bed, say
allahu *Akbar* thirty-five times, *Alhamdulillah* thirty-three times and
*subhana‑'l‑Ilah* thirty three times.'

Once again, Fatima takes this as a lesson. Once again, with a gentle
blow, she learns something which reaches the depths of her being: She is
Fatima.

This is a lesson which she knows. Although she has learned it from
childhood, such lessons should follow con­tinuously. They require
successive teachings and learning. This is not a lesson of knowledge but
rather a lesson in be­coming. 'Becoming Fatima' is not easy. She is a
holy trust. It requires that she ascend many steps and fly many flights
into higher worlds while being step by step and wing to wing with Ali.
She must share with Ali in his sorrows and in his difficulties. She has
the greatest responsibility in the history of freedom, jihad and
humanity. She is the link in a chain which extends from Abraham to
Muhammad, from Husayn to the 12th Imam, survivors to the end of history.

Fatima has the responsibility of being the link be­tween prophecy and
imamate. These are the values of Fatima herself. For her to 'be Fatima'
obliges the Prophet to be strict with this special and exceptional
companion. She should not have a single moment of peace in life for that
might keep her from constant 'becoming'. Sorrow and loneliness are the
water and earth of this girl who must grow under the light of revelation
and bear the bur­dens of freedom and justice. She is the beginning of
the \`pure roots', where each branch which grows is appointed to take
the 'fire of God' like Prometheus from heaven and give it to the people
on earth. They must, like Atlas; carry the heavy globe of the earth upon
their shoulders and 'bear it'.

This is why Fatima must always be learning, a learn­ing which, like
light and air and food; never ends for a tree, but rather, is lasting.

A Word instead of a servant! Only this wonderful bride and groom can
understand that one can live by a word. They were happy, drank it and
ate it and were filled by it.

These words, like the rain, must continue to fall and only these two
thirsty creatures who have grown from among the highest form of
humanity, are obliged to drink it and grow with it. The sudden sound of
Muhammad in that dark night and the meaningful silence held the call of
this rain water.

It is not without reason that Ali, a man engaged in religious struggle,
full of effort and work, the man who prays not out of habit, and who is
not just busy with moving his tongue and chin, twenty five years after
this night, says, \`May God be my witness that from the night. that I
received this lesson from the Prophet, I have not for­gotten it for a
single night.'

In amazement, they ask, 'Even the night of Siffin?'

And Ali says again, emphasizing even more, 'Even the night of Siffin.'

Fatima also lives with this lesson until she dies. These prayers are
registered in her name. It is these hea­venly words which come to help
her in her home instead of a servant. They are the wedding present he
himself gives his daughter.

The Prophet is very strict with his beloved daughter, Fatima. He has
learned this method from God. There is no Prophet in the whole of the
Qur’an who is so punished and so criticized as Muhammad. Why? Because
none of the other Prophets were so beloved in the eyes of God and none
of them were so responsible to the people.

One day like any other day, the Prophet enters Fatima's home. His eye
falls upon a patterned curtain. He frowns, says nothing and leaves.
Fatima senses it. She knows what her sin is. She also knows what
repentance is.

She immediately takes the curtain from the wall and sends it to her
father so that he can sell it and give the money to the needy of Medina.
Why so rough and strict?

Why so rough and strict? Zaynab, her sister, lives in luxury and
splendor in Abul Aas's house. Her other sisters, Roqiyyeh and Umm
Khulthum live in a wealthy and comfortable house. Fatima never heard
that her sisters were reproached for their wealth and splendor. From the
way of expression and the type of discipline of the Prophet upon her, it
is clear that Fatima is something else, another kind of daughter, so the
Prophet addresses her:

\`Fatima, work now, because tomorrow 1 can do no­thing for you.' You can
see the distance between this Islam and the Islam which says, 'One tear
for Husayn will put out the fires of hell,' or \`Even if one's sins are
greater than the foam of the oceans, the grains of sand and the stars in
the sky, they will be forgiven, ' or \`Friendship with Ali will turn all
of one's sins into benefits on the Day of judgment.'

This means essentially that anyone who does not sin in this world or who
sins little, is a fool, because they will have nothing which cannot be
changed into benefits in the next world. More terrifying than this are
the words which God is supposed to have said, \`The friends of Ali are
in heaven even if they disobey me. The enemies of Ali are in hell, even
if they obey me!'

Intercession
------------

Two institutions do not exist ‑ that of God and that of Ali, two record
books and two beliefs. The system is very strict. The Prophet cannot
even support Fatima when she stands for God's judgment in the other
world, in the presence of the Creator. He cannot protect her from
devia­tion. Fatima must become Fatima herself. Being the dau­ghter of
the Prophet does not mean anything there. It may be useful here in order
for her to become Fatima and if she does not become Fatima, she has
lost.

Intercession means this, not cheating at an exam or owing the right
people or being at the mercy of one's family or walking a tightrope or
relating to family relation­ships in accounting for the truth and
justice of God or changing the numbers in the record book according to
human nature in this world and bringing in relatives from over the wall
or through hidden doors to paradise. Accord­ing to the Qur’an, the
Prophet and Imams can only inter­cede with God's permission which is
only given to those who are capable.

Fatima knows this. The Prophet has taught her. He has also taught
others. It is this intercession which takes the books and
responsibilities which religion brings into account. It is quite
different from the intercession refer­red to in the Age of Ignorance,
where they appealed to their idols to intercede for them. They committed
murder and thousands of dirty deeds, then offered a cow or a camel to
Laat, Eeza or their other large and small idols and through cries of
regret or pleas of sympathy, sought intercession from it.

I not only accept the intercession of the Prophet but also that of the
Imams, Fatima and even the intercession of the Companions and great
martyrs. What are we saying? I also believe that visiting the grave of
Imam Husayn re­moves sins and it is such that it influences the spirit
and thoughts of a human being who thinks about these great examples of
human beings and their faith brings about a revolutionary change in
them.

It transforms people. It kills weaknesses, fears, tremors, idol
worshipping, worshipping of one's character and the worshipping of one's
own character. From this spring comes the inspiration for human wisdom,
beliefs and virtues. It inspires institutions to the spirit of jihad,
permanence, sincerity and the blossoming of spiritual meanings. It
brings about a new set of values. It streng­thens human values. It does
away with sicknesses of the will and habits and kills sinful and bad
attitudes which are in the depths of one's conscience. It builds a great
person and it is natural and logical that the past errors belong to the
past and no longer exist and will never again be.

Horr, the great hero or Karbala, through the inter­cession of Husayn,
came out of the hell of slavery and was saved from being a sinner and
murderer and with just a few steps he reached the highest peak of
liberty, truth and humanity.

And Fatima, through the intercession of Muhammad became Fatima. In
Islam, intercession is the means of reaching 'the most worthy of
salvations' not a means of 'saving the unworthy'. It is the individual
who must receive the intercession of an intercessor and through this
means change his or her fate, in other words, change their charac­ter
and behavior so that they become worthy of changing their destiny. Yes,
an individual takes that from an inter­cessor. But an intercessor does
not give that to an indivi­dual. No polluted and valueless man can pass
the exam of the Day of Judgment unless he has learned in this world how
to pass through to that world by using the techniques of life, struggle,
work and service.

An intercessor is one of these teachers, not a support­er of the
illegal. Imam Husayn acts as an intercessor for people who love him,
have faith in him and who remem­ber him and his story, recall his having
been a martyred warrior and nourish him through the recollection. He
guides those who are wandering in the ways of ignorance.

'Fatima, work today because tomorrow I can do no­thing for you.' Fatima
was like Muhammad. No exceptions are made for her in God's system of
justice and‑ the laws of Islam. She is also responsible in her position.
She must answer for every step that she takes. One day a Quraishi woman,
who had become a Moslem, stole something. The Prophet hears of this.
\`Her fingers must be cut‑off,' he said. Many people's hearts bled for
her. The large families of the Quraish, who were the wealthiest of the
Arab tribes, counted this as an insult, the stain of which would remain
with their tribe. They went forward to seek intercession.

They asked Fatima to intercede with God for this woman. She did not
accept. They went to Usamah ibn Zeid. Usamah was the son of Zeid who was
the step‑son of the Prophet. The Prophet loved Zeid and his son, Usamah,
very much. His special kindness towards the young Usamah is famous in
history. Usamah, with all of his personal capital, kindness, and special
closeness which he had to the Prophet, his reputation for loyalty and
sacrifice and that of his father who had been Khadijah's servant and the
dear one of the Prophet, had come from, the Quraish to ask that the sin
of this poor woman be over‑looked. He asked the Prophet to forgive her.

The Prophet answered in no uncertain terms, \`Do not speak to me,
Usamah. Whenever the law is in my hands, there is no way of escape. Even
if she were the daughter of the Prophet, Fatima, her fingers would be
cut‑off.'

Why did he choose the closest among all of his be­loveds, the daughter
of Muhammad? And why the name Fatima? The answer to this question is
clear. When he spoke of his calling, he chose his youngest daughter,
Fa­tima from among all of his close family. It was only to her that he
spoke of Islam.

With his clear announcement, Fatima was to become one of the four
highest images of women in the history of humanity: Mary, Assiyeh,
Khadijah and finally, Fatima. Why the last? Because she is the last
complete link in the chain of evolution, among all of the creatures, for
the whole duration of time and for all of the cycles of history, the
last, and among the saints, the last, Fatima, an ideal image of the Day
of Judgment.

The value of Mary ties with Jesus Christ whom she delivered and
nourished. The value of Assiyeh, the wife of Pharaoh, lies with Moses,
whom she nourished and be­friended. The value of Khadijah lies with
Muhammad whom she befriended and with Fatima whom she gave birth to and
nourished.

And the value of Fatima? What can I say? To whom does her value belong?
To Khadijah? To Muhammad? To Ali? To Husayn? To Zaynab?

**To herself!!**


