Her Final Struggle
==================

Why Not Ali?
------------

Everything becomes clear. Why had the Prophet upon his return from his
last pilgrimage and prayer at Ghadir Khom introduced Ali in front of all
of the groups of Mos­lems who had accompanied him to the gathering and
have them admit that the leadership of Ali was the same as his
leadership?

Why was it that when the Prophet had not yet enter­ed the city, a group
of 12 people circled the mountainous road so that he and perhaps Ali
would be killed? And this plot which came about after Ghadir relates to
it be­cause the elections were no accident.

And why is it that, although the Prophet is informed about the plot
before hand and orders them to be taken away after the event, he does
not reveal their names? It is not a small accident especially
considering the particular interest of the Companions of the Prophet who
have even the least important events of his life recorded with care.

Why did the Prophet in his last battle, the Battle of Tabuk, accept
considering his age and the age of his great and elder Companions and
those who were not mil­itary men, who were not men of the sword but more
pol­itical elements that they go to this battle to fight the powerful
foreign Romans in the north of the country where the danger of death was
very great? Why did he single out Ali, and, against the will of Ali, the
reproach of the Jewish people and the hypocrites, keep Ali in Medina
even though Ali is known as a man of the sword, the hero of many
battles, the bearer of the flag and the conqueror of the famous and
great battles of the Prophet? He says to him, \` I leave you for that
which I left behind in Medina. Are you not satisfied that your
relationship to mine is the same as the relationship of Moses' with that
of his brother Aaron?'

Why did he, at the time of his death, send an army to attack the Romans
and not because of an emergency and/ or for defense? Why does he send
Abu Bakr, Omar and the other great men and politicians who had influence
along with the army? Why, with such an army, does he choose the 18 year
old Usamah to lead the army while these great men are among the common
soldiers? Why, when there is objection to his leadership because of his
youth, does the Prophet get angry and in strong terms criticize those
who think age is more important than worthiness?

And why when he is feverish and at the door of death, does he insist and
persist, pray and insult so that the army would move quickly, the elders
would move and he kept Ali in Medina? Why, at the last moment of his
life does he ask for a tablet and pen and say, 'I want to write down
something so that you will never go astray.' Why do those who had just
been elected not allow him to write anything down? They even argue in
front of him and create uproar. They bother him. They even insult and
protest to his wives who were crying behind the curtain saying, 'The
Prophet wants to leave his last will and testament. Bring him a tablet
and a pen.' They delay. They call themselves friends of Joseph until the
Pro­phet, in anger says, 'All of those women are better than you.' and
then he asks to be left alone.

Why at the end of his life, when the Prophet says, 'I have three pieces
of advice for you,' he mentions only two of them and the third one,
which is about Ali, remains un­said? Why when Balal says, 'it is the
time of ritual prayer,' and he is not able to rise from his bed, he
says, ‘Tell Ali to come.' Suddenly both of them appear in answer to the
message of his daughter and the Prophet sees all three of them at one
time and then, without saying anything, asks ail three to leave.

Why? Why? Why?

Why was it that the Prophet, who at the most diffi­cult time of battles,
face to face with the power of the enemy, and he lacking power, filled
with loneliness, always spook full of hope and strength, certain of the
future? Why during the last days of his life when he is on the edge of
his victory is he so afraid and worried?

Why the last night of his sickness before his death, in the middle of
the night, alone with his man helper, does he go to the graveyard and
spend a long time whispering to the silent corpses, with the greatest of
pain, saying, 'May God bless you all. How lucky you are to be dead and
therefore not facing this present situation.'

Why is it that as he gets closer to death he repeats more and more often
that plots and conspiracies like parts of the black night are now
continuously appearing? Yes. Now all of these whys are answered. A part
of that black night has passed by. Ali has finished burying the Pro­phet
and the great Companions, at the same moment, bury his rights.

They come from Saqifah to the mosque so that the Caliph can announce his
leadership in a message to the people. Ali returns from the empty home
of the Prophet to Fatima's home to begin 25 years of silence, full of
pain, loneliness and blackness.

And it is Fatima who must bear the weight and anger of this unmerciful
blow along with her delicate soul. Her father, her refuge, her dearest
beloved, has gone. Ali, her brother, husband, friend and only familiar
family and sym­pathizer, sad and broken, remains at home and, like her,
remains alone. It seems like in a space of a few short hours, they all
became strangers. Medina no longer recognizes them.

And Islam?
----------

And Islam? This faith endows devotion in the soul of Fatima so that from
her childhood onwards, in spite of her young years and delicateness, she
can perform the jihad for the establishment of Islam during the lifetime
of her father at the time of the first mujahids [warriors, those who
fight to defend the faith]. The endowment also includes that she suffer
difficulties, poverty, the barriers of life and sorrow throughout her
childhood and her youth so that her soul may move upon the way. With her
delicate and fragile feet, she steps along the way with the first
mujahids and real pilgrims.

She paves this difficult and bumpy way for those who follow her. With
all her faith, power and feelings, she helps so that the message of her
father can find perma­nence amid this group, so that correctness, the
worship of Truth, freedom, justice, piety, equality, the roots of
brotherhood among all creatures cab become strong and so that this young
community, which is without power and without awareness, where the germs
of old diseases are hidden in the depths of corpses, can take root in
the powerful way of knowledge, awareness, justice and human chastity.
She leads upon the way that the unlettered Pro­phet took her. She did
the things that he had ordered be done and had made part of the
Traditions.

But now for Fatima we could say all things have be­come silent. All the
walls, foundations, watch towers and ramparts which are built with all
that effort, suddenly fall into ruins.

The fate of Islam is decided in Saqifah without the presence of Ali,
Salman, Abu Dharr, Ammar, Meghdad and others. Now, these people have all
gathered in Fatima's home, sad and angry. Why have they remained
faithful to Ali. They are not from among the aristocrats of the Ous­sand
Khazraj tribes. They have no family or hold no pres­tige in Medina. They
are not from among the original Quraish family whose luxury of blood,
family and class has given them station and position. They do not desire
to have the slightest part of the Caliphate of the Prophet.

These are people who are either strangers like Salman who was Iranian,
or Abu Dharr who came from the desert, or Ammar whose mother was a black
African slave and his father had come from Yemen or other unknown people
without any prestige or any claim to being high class. They are simple,
deprived people like Meitham who sold dates.

These people, in the eyes of the Prophet, were dear and beloved but now
that he has gone, they have been ob­liged to return to a permanent state
of humility. Values have changed again.

Ali is the Only Refuge
----------------------

Their only refuge is Ali. Ali himself has the same pos­ition they do in
Medina. He also suffers from the renewed regime of old values. His story
goes like this: He is a young man, thirty some years old (in comparison
to the elders of the community). He is a man empty handed, without
class, without the shackles of politics or tribal bonds. He holds only
the pious virtues of knowledge, bravery, and persistence upon the way,
high thinking and awareness. He has the power of speech and the sword.
His entire fortune is amas­sed from and consists of the dangers he met
remaining loyal to the Prophet as well as his sword which was raised in
jihad and the great amount of blood which was drawn from the hatred of
yesterday's enemies who have 'surrendered' to the 'decree' of the
Prophet.

Those values, consciousness of self and the unaware­ness of provoking
the jealousy of friends, sacrifices and courage, created hatred in his
enemies which could never be made up for. Both friends and enemies alike
joined hands and stories in attacking and condemning Ali. They slandered
him, humiliated him and finally they ostracized him and left him alone.

When a spirit rises above the level of his time and grows beyond the
container of the patience of the people of its time, it is left alone.
The profundity, beauty and richness of his 'being' of and by it, humbles
the empty, trivial ugliness of others. Whenever one humbles oneself,
friend and foe alike, consciously and unconsciously join together to
negate or destroy the spirit of the great person­ality or else they try
to destroy its distinct rights. They mutually benefit each other. Then,
friends, companions and those who have the same thoughts, because of the
greatness of 'being', show contempt. They create a vacuum in their
personalities. They suffer. They try by negating or denying his virtues
to contaminate the personality, to feign closeness in order to reduce
the space which is causing them to suffer. Since they can never reach
the spirit directly, they try to pull it back so that they can reach it
in this way. It is in this effort that they join with the enemies and
find mutual interests. When this happens, friends also find a need to
destroy that spirit. They un­knowingly become the toys of the enemy.
They become the representative of murder. They become amateur servants
of oppressors. This is why Ali must be humiliated.

This is why the 0mayyid tribe, who are the enemies of the Emigrants,
Helpers and Ali advertise that, 'All is the son of the earth." All does
not perform his ritual pray­ers.' The Omayyad’s are writers of
revelation, who have gathered the Qur’an and the uncles and relatives of
the Prophet. The daughter of Abu Sufiyan is the wife of the Prophet, so
his house is a sacred place. It is an area where fighting is forbidden.
It is in the immense palace of Abu Sufiyan which, in the eyes of the
Prophet like the house of God in Mecca is a place of refuge for all.
Whosoever seeks refuge there is safe.

How is it that Ali is killed in the mihrab [the place which gives the
direction of prayer] of a mosque? What sort of news is this? What was
Ali the 'father of dust', 'the man who' supposedly, 'does not perform
his prayers,' doing at the mihrab? Ali performing his prayers? How could
that be?

Others Are Busy Destroying Him
------------------------------

Everyone knows that this hatred of Ali resulted from his heroic deeds at
Badr , Khandaq and other such battles. But a friend? The sore becomes
infected with those who participated in the battles of Badr and Khandaq
against the Omayyad’s, now join them and sing the same tune. Why?

The well known of the great Companions were obliged to lower their heads
at the Battle of Khandaq where Ali, a young man, twenty seven years old,
struck such fear into the enemy through his sword and the cries of
*allaho Akbar* which issued forth from him that the Pro­phet praised
him, 'The blows of Ali in the battle of Khan­daq are worth more than the
worship of all the men and jinn.' The blows of his sword made them happy
and they grew eager for confrontation, but, hidden, nevertheless, was a
jealousy which planted itself in their unconscious conscience. It grows
later on without they themselves being aware of it. The seed grows into
branches bearing leaves which eventually cover their whole spirit and
thou­ghts. Its roots form in the depths of their bones.

At Khaybar where Abu Bakr carried the flag of the Prophet and went
forward to conquer the citadel, and after great effort, he returns
broken, then Omar goes and returns defeated, the Prophet says,
\`Tomorrow, I will give the flag into the hands of someone who loves
both God and His Prophet and both God and His Prophet love him.'

The next day he gives the flag to Ali. Ali amazingly conquers one
citadel after another. He opens a citadel up and people enter in to
plunder and he moves on to attack another citadel.

At Badr, at Ohud the great ones, the Companions who consider themselves
from the point of view of age and position in society, to be at the
highest level, either run away or else go and sit in a corner, afraid
and hopeless. It is Ali who, like lightening and wind, passes through
the scenes and creates a new front amidst the fear and defeat. When he
carries the flag towards victory at Hunayn, while the great influential
and respected Companions run away from the narrow strait and Abu Sufiyan
cries out, 'The way they are running away, they will not stop until they
reach the Red Sea!', Ali, like a rock, closes the mouth of the strait.

This sword creates hatred in the enemies as well as in the friends. Even
though they are fighting for the same thing, jealousy and contempt
arises. This is how friends and enemies join into one front whenever the
character, virtues or strength of Ali is spoken about. This is when a
friend needs an enemy and an enemy needs a friend and they both work
together. This is why the reaction to the greatness of Ali is
compensated for by showing contempt for Ali.

How? By not taking his Islamic virtues into account and by not
emphasizing them. Even though it is unmanly, they describe him in terms
which are contrary to what he really is. They express words or spread
stories in a way which is slander. If they do not reach this low level,
they just keep quiet as to his values. If they mention his weak points
whenever they get the chance, they exaggerate them and make mountains
out of molehills. They oppress his rights and destroy the Truth. They
admit the rights of Ali to the extent of Abu Bakr or Omar, but they do
so in order to destroy his rights. They act from a motive.

The Result: His Chances Are Destroyed
-------------------------------------

'Ali? Yes. But he is still young. Let some years pass for him.'

'Ali? Yes. But he is a man of the sword, devoted, knowledgeable, but he
knows nothing however about poli­tics. He is brave but he does not know
the science of war.'

'Ali? Yes. But he jokes too much.'

'Ali? Yes. But at the present time it is not advisable for Islam that he
be elected. He has many enemies. At the time of the Prophet, during the
wars, he killed many of the great and influential Arabs. The hatred is
still warm. It is not advisable.'

'Ali? Yes. But he is too sure of himself.'(Their infer­iority complex
becomes obvious).

'Ali? Yes. If the Caliphate were to be given to him, he would run this
camel firmly in the right direction. But is he really serious about
that?'

The result? The result is that Ali is destroyed both at the hands of the
Bani Omayyad’s as well as at those of Omar, who is the enemy of the Bani
Omayyad and of the same rank as Ali. Othman is victorious with the help
of Omar and also the Bani Omayyad who are the enemies of Omar and the
family of Othman.

Fatima knows all these things very well. She under­stands them. She is
not someone who sits at home aware of nothing which is going on. Fatima
has learned how to walk through struggles. She knows how to cut through
propaganda. Her youth had been spent in the heart of the movement's
storm and her maturing years in the political fire of her times. She is
a Moslem woman: a woman whose ethical purity does not prohibit her from
social responsibi­lity. Now, a few hours have passed since the Prophet
has been buried. Ali is in his home surrounded by some of the Bani
Hashimi and the beloved Companions of the Prophet who had remained loyal
to him. They have joined together in their opposition to what had
happened at Saqifah and in their disobedience to the allegiance which
had drawn people to it. The decree of the Caliph has been read at the
mosque. People have also pledged allegiance to him. Omar, a political
agent, tries relentlessly to gather the remain­ing votes so as to pave
the way.

Saied ibn Obadeh, the leader of the Khazraj, a man of influence who was
the candidate of the Helpers at Saqifah, did not accept the Caliphate of
Abu Bakr. Out of pro­test, he left Medina. He headed towards Damascus.
News reached them that half way there he had been attacked and killed by
a jinn! Who has assassinated him? They even knew the jinn who killed him
because a poem circulated in praise of that jinn. But soon murmurs were
heard that he had been murdered by command of Omar Khalid ibn Valid.

The fate of the tribes is still unknown. There is a possibility that
they will not accept Abu Bakr as Caliph. But the most dangerous focal
point is at Fatima's house. Yes. From this day on, the house of Fatima
becomes a center, dangerous to governments.

Three Centers of Patience
-------------------------

Now in Medina, history shows us three important centers of great
patience: the mosque, the home of Fa­tima, and next to it, the Prophet's
home, which has now been silenced. It is strange that these three are
all located in one place, wall to wall. Yes. Only the distance of a wall
separates them.  
 Omar is very angry about this single point of strength in opposition to
the new leaders. He who has struggled a great deal to establish Abu
Bakr's leadership and who has removed hundreds of obstacles, cannot now
bear the fact that there is a group in this house which has been
establish­ed to resist, who gather together to put aside that
allegi­ance. And still more important is the fact that this house is
next to the mosque.

The mosque is the Parliament of the Caliphate, the house of government.
Fatima's house is in the corner and the faces of those who were until
yesterday the dearest and most beloved of the Prophet can be seen there.

Fatima, like a wounded bird, is pressed between two heavy tragedies: the
death of the Prophet and the defeat of Ali. Her head is .bowed with the
weight of the black sor­row. She thinks about the past. She thinks of
her father who had always been so worried about the future as to what
would the fate be of the religion of justice and its leadership. Bitter
sweet memories fill her mind and her spirit. Like a bird that flaps its
wings within its cage, wing to wing of her father, flying through the
past horizons, she is able to find peace for a few moments from the
anger of the tragedy which has most recently fallen upon her and
destroyed her home. Suddenly, a loud uproar comes from the mosque.
Fatima, in the midst of the uproar, cries and confusion, hears the voice
of Omar ibn Khatab saying, 'I will burn this house to the ground with
all its inhabitants.'

She hears these words of attack loud and clear. They have come closer
now. The door of Fatima's house opens to the mosque. She hears the words
of someone in amaze­ment, asking, \`Even if Fatima is in there?'

And Omar answers, 'Even if she is in there.'

It is true that Omar's servant brought fire to the mos­que. The fire is
now at her door. In the midst of the confu­sion, Omar shouts out, 'Ali
come out!'

Inside the house there is great commotion. The fla­mes of fire are
close. They are visible from between the cracks in the door. The cries
of Omar grow louder and more violent by the moment. Suddenly the cry of
Fatima is heard. She is standing behind the door. Her cry holds within
it all of the sorrow of the world.

'Father, Prophet of God! After you; what have I not seen from Omar and
Abu Bakr!.'

The followers of Omar take several steps backwards. These are the cries
and anger of the beloved daughter of the Prophet! A group can not
contain themselves. They begin to cry and wail out loud. Another group
remains looking fixedly upon the home of Fatima and the Pro­phet.

They say they were all fixed with shame. Omar, who had remained alone,
stands confused for a moment. He does not know what to do. Then he
returns to Abu Bakr. Everyone gathers around Abu Bakr. They relate the
story of Fatima to him. Some of them tell it as if they are speak­ing of
a tragedy.

Abu Bakr returns to Fatima's house followed by Omar and others, but this
time they go softly and quietly. One says, 'Abu Bakr cuts with cotton
[i.e. his policy is softness] whereas Omar cuts with the sword [his
policy is rough].'

Fatima is used to difficulties. She has grown up in the cradle of
resistance and struggle. She now finds herself fac­ing the most
difficult of her tragedies when she senses her­self to have the least
strength. She stands alone behind the door bf this home like its guard,
gathering together all of her strength before she falls to her knees
under the pres­sure and weight weighing down upon her. She is trying to
protect Ali who is now all alone.

They ask permission to enter. She does not give per­mission. Ali, whose
patience is hard to conceive of, comes out. He asks Fatima to give them
permission to enter. She does not resist Ali. But she remains silent, a
silence which is overflowing with anger. Ali asks them to enter. They do
so. They greet Fatima. Fatima, in anger, turns away from them and does
not answer. She creates a distance between herself and them. Because of
her anger, she places herself beyond a wall. Abu Bakr sense that
Fatima's anger and dis­gust is beyond limit. He does not know what to
say or how to begin.

Shame and silence create a shadow upon the heads of the two leaders. It
is difficult for them at this moment to be present between Fatima and
Ali. Ali is sitting beside them. They say there is only one host,
silence. And Fati­ma, next to the wall, is pouting, full of anger. She
has hid­den herself from them so she will not see them. It is a wall,
the distance between which is never removed from that time forward.

Abu Bakr tries to have a positive encounter. He tries to find the
strength so .that he can speak at this difficult moment. Moments pass
and the silence which is full of words remains fixed in this house. Abu
Bakr, with a face full of deep and apparent sorrow and in a tone
trembling with sympathy, begins in a friendly voice.

'Beloved daughter of the Prophet, I swear that the family of the Prophet
is dearer to me than my own fam­ily. You are dearer to me than my own
daughter, Aiesha. The day your father died, I had wished that I had died
so that I would not remain after him. You see that I know you and I
admit your virtue and nobility and if I were to take the rights and
heritage of the Prophet of God from you, it is only because I had heard
him, peace be upon him, say, 'We Prophets do not leave a legacy. That
which remains from us is charity.'

Abu Bakr grows quiet. Omar is also silent. They wait to see the effects
of these soft and praiseworthy words upon Fatima's spirit. Fatima,
without hesitating for a mo­ment, in answer, begins with a quiet
introduction full of reason, without any anger or cries. 'If I were to
quote the words of the Prophet of God to both of you, would you admit
them to be his word$ and follow them?'

They both answer in one voice...'Yes...'

She says, '1 hold you both to your oath to God. Did either of you not
hear the Prophet say, 'Fatima's content­ment is my contentment and
Fatima's anger is my anger. That which my daughter, Fatima, likes, I
like. That which contents Fatima contents me. That which brings about
Fatima's anger brings about my anger.'

They both answer, 'Yes. We heard these words from the Prophet of God.'

She immediately continues, 'Then I have authority from God and the
angels to tell you that you both brought me to anger and you have not
given me contentment. When I see the Prophet of God, 1 will tell him
about you. I will complain to him about you.'

Abu Bakr begins to cry. He senses that neither does he have the strength
to speak nor does Fatima have the strength to listen. He arises and Omar
behind him. He enters the mosque. Full of confusion and tears, he cries
out with anger and pain to those gathered there that ....

Fadak is Confiscated
--------------------

The power structure and the policy making agents convince Abu Bakr that
it is in in the best interests of the community for him to move aside.
With deep sor­row and after much disagreement, he is convinced. He
accepts their advice and is tamed. He imagines that by accepting the
Caliphate, he will be able to continue the victory of Islam and
implement the Traditions of the Pro­phet. The first decision he makes is
to confiscate Fadak, the grazing area which belonged to Fatima.

Ali is personally and economically paralyzed by this act. His income now
depends completely upon what he received from the public purse. They
leave Ali alone. Those who had gathered around him are dispersed either
through force or by their own decision. In this way, there is no danger
of revolt from his non allegiance and disobe­dience. They know that as
long as Fatima is alive, they cannot get Ali's allegiance. Ali cannot
give his allegiance be­cause Fatima opposes a power or force which does
not know the meaning of right. She has not the least bit of softness for
them. She holds her strict position until her death. The feeling of
anger does not leave her. She attacks what she has in relation to them.
She does not let go for a moment.

The Prophet dies. Ali remains at home. Fatima's le­gacy, which is the
only means of income for herself, her husband and her children, is
confiscated. Power falls into the hands of Abu Bakr and Omar. The fate
and future of Islam is given into the political hands of men such as
Ab­dul Rahman ibn Ouf, a worshipper of money, the aristo­crat, Othman,
the careless, Khalid ibn Valid and Saied ibn Vaqas, a man without piety.
They become the principal agents of the Caliphate of the Prophet.

Ali remains at home. He spends his time gathering together the Qur’an
because he fears for the future. Balal has to leave Medina. He goes to
Damascus and remains silent forever. Salman retreats to a corner. He
tells those who are hurriedly and victoriously returning from Saqifah,
'You did what you shouldn't have done and you didn't do what you should
have done.' Then, full of sorrow, having lost hope, he returns to Iran.
He dies at Madayen. Abu Dharr, the close Companion of the Prophet and
Ammar remain idle.

Fatima Does Not Give Up
-----------------------

But Fatima does not sit down. Under a mountain, full of sorrow, bearing
her bereaving spirit, she continues her resistance and her struggle
against the oppressive Caliphate. She believes the Caliphate to be
unworthy. In order to get back Fadak, she does not stand still. Her
efforts are always to attack and criticize. She tries to prove to
everyone that the Caliph was taking out political revenge upon her and
striking an economic blow to Ali with this act of taking Fadak. Fadak is
a small grazing area and even if it had been larger, it would have still
been too small for Fatima to get involved with. But Fadak has taken on
the importance of showing the usurpation and force of the new regime. By
keeping the problem of Fadak alive, she tries to condemn the regime. She
proves what rights they deny in order to serve their own purposes. They
do not refrain from devia­ting from a saying of the Prophet or its
meaning. She wants the thoughts of people to know to what extent these
people who call themselves \`followers of the custom of the Prophet' and
who actually establish their own Ca­liphate on this basis, oppress the
family of the Prophet. They cut off the right which each and every
Moslem child has to receive and every father has the right to give.

They say the Prophet has children, but leaves no legacy. Fadak becomes a
political issue for Fatima and a means of rebellion. Fatima's insistence
is because of this, not because of its economic value as her conscious
enemies and unconscious friends announce.

Fatima does not give up. Even though the death of the Prophet has burned
her spirit and strongly hurt her. Each blow follows upon the other. The
majority of the great Companions and Emigrants of the Prophet who have
reached a number which can be counted on one hand, all have given their
vote to the Caliph or they have accepted the election and coup d’état of
Saqifah.

Fatima has no real hope to be able to get back any power. She knows that
Ali has lost his rights. The chosen powers, which have pre-designed and
pre-planned the whole thing, have become fixed. She must fight and
struggle with the little hope that she has. She must rebel against the
ruler. Even if she cannot defeat him, she will at least have condemned
him. If it does not fall, it can, at least, be dis­graced. If the truth
cannot be implemented, it can be proven and designed so that time will
come to know it. It can be kept alive, so that people come to know that
the ruling forces do not represent the truth. They are op­pressive. It
is truth, justice and freedom which have been defeated and imprisoned.

This is why Medina now witnesses one of the most wonderful views of
history. Next to the mosque of the Prophet, in the heart of the dark
night, a woman in mour­ning, sitting upon a horse, being led by a man,
passes thro­ugh the dark empty streets of the town.

Ali walks. Fatima, the beloved and rebellious daugh­ter of the Prophet
rides. Every night they leave their home with the same purpose. Ali goes
with her to seek out the Helpers. They are more sincere and impartial
than the Emi­grants who are mainly from the Quraish tribe. They sup­port
each other. An aged political structure brings them to­gether. Now the
Caliph, from among them, is their influen­tial master. All of them share
in his leadership. But the Helpers play no role in the present
leadership. Their candi­date has been Saied ibn Obadeh who left Medina
and was assassinated on his way to Damascus.

They give in although they disagree with Abu Bakr's reasoning. Abu Bakr
had been an emigrant, a relative of God's Prophet and the elder of the
Quraish. They surrendered when he said that the Prophet wished for the
Caliph to be from his Quraish family, from among the re­latives and
family of the Prophet. Out of respect for the saying of the Prophet and
his family, they submitted and overlooked their differences. They gave
leadership to Abu Bakr who was from the Prophet's tribe and the father
in­ law of the Prophet. He had shown himself to be among the loyal
followers and family of the Prophet. He received the majority vote.
These are the present people of Medina.

Now Fatima goes to them personally. Every night she accompanies Ali to
their sessions. She speaks with them. She speaks of each and every one
of the desires of the Prophet. She accounts one by one for Ali's
worthiness, virtues and superiorities. Through her influential spirit,
with her great human personality, her political awareness, with the
4ccurate knowledge she had of Islam, its spirit and goals and finally
with the power of logic and reasoning, she proves the rightfulness of
Ali and the wrongfulness of the election. She shows the deception. She
counts the results and makes them apparent. She shows how they will
suffer from this superficial and hurriedly determined decision of
political negligence. She frightens them with the dark and unstable
future which awaits Islam with their leadership of the community.

Not even one historian has mentioned this story. No one has retold the
fact that no one opposes the logic of Fatima to argue with her
interpretation and reception of the event. They stand by her. All give
her the right. All admit their great error. All accept the virtues of
Ali and the superiority of his leadership. Fatima is asking them to
support Ali and help him get his rights.

But their answers? 'You should see the Prophet's dau­ghter now that we
have given our allegiance to Abu Bakr.' 'The affair is finished. If your
husband, your cousin, Ali, had taken the lead and mentioned all of this
sooner, we would certainly have elected him. We prefer him to any­one
else.'

Ali, surprised and in a tone of protest, asks them, 'Do you really
believe that I should have left the dead body of the Prophet in his
home, neglected his funeral ceremonies, come out of the house, and
fought for a legacy?'

Fatima, seeing that once again Ali is sacrificed because of his loyalty
to the Prophet, says, 'Ali has done nothing other than what he should
have done. He did the noble thing, but what did they do? God will punish
them and will take care of them.'

The Promised Gift is Sent
-------------------------

Now everything has ended. Fatima is content to await death. She feels
more alone than she ever thought she could. She sees all the familiar
faces who for so many years surrounded her father, who went everywhere
with him and who have now turned into strangers.

The Companions are now breathing another air. Me­dina is no longer the
city of the Prophet. Policy and sovereignty are now governing the 'City
of Faith'. The great and powerful spirit which had spirited the
Bedouins, that is, feelings, generosity, worship of the truth, standing
for the truth, sensitivity towards human values and the beau­ties of a
life of spiritual struggle, faith and piety are gone.

Instead there is a burning and destroying of and a rebuilding based upon
ancient customs, tribal traditions, blood relationships, selfishness,
pride, self worship, tribal killing, inferior political games and
conservatism. All of this opposes the lashes of his words which are
lashes of certainty containing the fire of the revolution, commitment
and engagement in social action, responsibility, pro­gress,
manifestations of the spirit, meaning and the con­stant chance of life
and resistance to oppression.

Ali Remains Silent
------------------

Now he is silent. He is settled inside Fatima's house, His dearest
friends are left out as well, they who had lived a classless existence
and who had found a high place in the eyes and the heart of the Prophet.
They who had earned their nobility and respect through their faith,
sincerity, awareness and resistance had fallen from the eyes of the new
political leaders. Those who are clever and eye catch­ing, move forward.

Ears are so busy with talk of power, leadership and self protection that
one can no longer hear the softness of emotions, friendship and
sincerity. The personality of Abu Bakr, harshness of Omar and the sword
of Khaled and the genius of Amr al Aas suddenly build a high wall around
Medina, and the people, frightened and/or attracted, and the Companions
aware and/or unaware, are taken into the middle of the wall. But
Fatima's house is left out of it. Fa­tima's voice reaches no one!

The enemies of Fatima are much stronger than those whom they resisted
and fought against in Mecca. Her father fought alone in Mecca with only
his young daughter as his companion and support. In the Masjid al Haram,
the place of the power of the enemy before Islam, the Prophet and his
daughter faced the Quraish senate together. The Prophet has been calling
the 300 idols, the worshipped and intercessors of the Quraish, and all
Arabs, dumb, idiots. Without hesitation and weakness, he cries out that
he will break all of them with God's help. He compares their ancestors
to fools and that which they hold sacred as being superstition.

But we see that the Prophet, at the height of his power, when he was
more loved, more powerful and more influential than ever before, during
the last days of his life, cannot move Usamah's army. Even though he
gives strict commands, prays and curses, tired and sick with fever, on
the verge of death, he cannot move the army standing in Jazaf, near
Medina.

What can I say? Even in his own house, among his nearest companions, he
could not write a letter, he could not announce his testimony. If he
were to simply say it, it would not be safe from alteration and
deviation.

Her husband, Ali, the hero of the day, the man who in the battle of
Khandaq where all of the enemy tribes had joined together to attack
Medina, where both profane and religious groups had gathered to attack,
that is, Arabs and Jews, joined in a single unit to destroy the young
Is­lamic movement entirely, to crush Muhammad's support and the
revolution upon the heads of its warriors, and, as they said, 'to take
Medina's soil with the feed bags of their horses', while Ali, a young
man, twenty or so years old, with one blow, changed the whole fate of
the battle.

The man, who at the Battle of Ohud when the Quraish occupy the valley
and the Moslems are dispersed and. fleeing, when the great Companions
are hidden, having lost hope and the Prophet is wounded and defenseless
in his position, circles around the Prophet like a whirlwind, returns to
the battlefield and scatters the front of the enemy which is pressing
forward, progressing towards the Prophet over the bodies of the martyrs.
He returns to Muhammad to circle around him once again. As he goes back
to the battlefield, closing the way of escape, shouting to the scattered
forces to form a new front, he regroups the defeated, hopeless,
deserters and forms a resistance group which forces the Quraish, full of
joy at hearing the news of the death of the Prophet, seeing the mass of
martyrs, the defeat of the warriors and drinking the blood of Hamzeh,
the Prophet's uncle, to retreat from the battlefield.

The men who guaranteed the victory of Khaybar, the man who upon the
battlefield uses his sword like a sickle which moves through the wheat
fields at harvest time, harvesting heads and blood and amasses the army
of the enemy and lays them in front of his horse, now sits in the corner
of a house.

Where is His Sword?
-------------------

What has happened to the famous sword of her hus­band, Ali? Whenever he
returned from battle, it was full of blood and was given to her along
with the sword of the Prophet. Ali would say to her in a voice full of
honor, glory and pride, 'Fatima, wash these!' Now, he is becoming
lifeless and after ten years of constant struggle, he is laying down in
bed.

She also sees that they are attacking Ali's house, but he does not leave
his silent corner. Thus, in the battlefield where the Prophet could not
succeed, Ali, the warrior, the champion who gave glory to the field of
battle, has been defeated and Fatima is alone. What can she do?

Always fighting in the battle front, he is more severe and causes more
misery than the front in which the external enemy is standing opposite
him. Now a battle has begun where Abu Lahab, Abu Jahl, Abu Sufiyan, Hind
and Otbeh Omiyeh ibn Khalaf and Akarmeh are not op­posite him. These
visages are well known as lacking any respect or human desires. It is
obvious that they fight only to protect their power, interests, force,
strength, business caravans, slave markets and not because of poverty,
spiri­tual meaning, faith and human wishes. It is a battle be­tween
despotism and revolution, slavery and freedom, captivity and salvation,
humiliation and lordship, purity and filth. Finally, it is a war against
the guardians of ignorance and darkness in human disguise by the
messen­gers of awareness and enlightenment.

What is it? On one side are Ali and Fatima as it was in Mecca, Badr,
Ohud Khaybar, Fath and Hunayn. But, on the other side is Abu Bakr, the
first person who, outside the Prophet's home, joins him, his friend, his
companion on the migration, and father of his wife. A person who gives
him friendship when the Prophet has no one and is alone who spends all
of his wealth in the way of the Pro­phet, and, as a result, in Medina,
he is so poor that it is said that he had to work for Jews and strange
and despised people. He was a person whom people had seen for 23 years,
that is, from the first year of the mission of the Pro­phet until his
death of the Prophet, beside the Prophet.

Omar, the 40th person who in the hidden Shel­ter of the Prophet,
accepted Islam. With his joining and that of Hamzeh, the first few weak
friends gained power and appeared among the people to announce Islam.
From that time on, he gave all of his power towards the progress of the
movement. He is from among the closest friends and most distinguished of
the Emigrants of the Prophet. He was the father of Hafaseh, one of the
other wives of the Prophet and people accept him as one of the leaders
and great Companions of the Prophet of God.

Othman, an Emigrant who had made two emigrations in the way of Islam was
the son in law of the Prophet who had married two daughters of the
Prophet. He had an eye catching, sacred personality and he belonged to
two of the great families of the Quraish. He had a great wealth which he
distributed among the poor friends of the Prophet and had actively
participated in social services and helped the people a great deal. The
masses of the people call upon him as one of the Companions, great
Emigrants, friend and family of the Prophet.

And Khalid ibn Walid, who is a hero in the religious struggles against
the enemies of Islam. At the Battle of Mu­teh, where he is a simple
soldier, he breaks nine swords over the heads of Romans. He is known as
'the sword of God'. Amr al Aas is one of the four famous Arab geniuses
who had become a Moslem many years before. He showed the power of Islam
to the Emperor of Rome at the Nort­hern borders. Saied ibn Vaqas , the
first person who in Islam fires an arrow at an enemy, takes Moslems from
the position of defense and shows them how to attack. He shows the
enemies what attack is all about and at the Battle of Ohud he carefully
released several arrows and saved the life of the Prophet who was in
great danger. He had defended himself so bravely that the Prophet
praised him.

There were many, many more including great Emi­grants, Helpers, all the
army, leaders and builders of the foundation of Islam and closest
friends and pioneers of the Prophet among them.

Their Slogan is Islam
---------------------

And their slogan? Not idol worship, disbelief, poly­theism, myths,
protection of the business of the Quraish nor the nobility of the tribe,
but establishment of unity and the spread of Islam, the gathering and
propagation of the Qur’an, piety, the negating of the gathering of
wealth and gold, helping people, seeking of the satisfaction of God, the
implementation of religious law and finally, the putting of the
Prophet's Traditions into effect and most important of all, promoting
Unity and the uniting of Mos­lems.

In the middle of this, a right is easily and quietly dis­carded: The
rights of Ali. How? Very easily and with a very understandable logic
because of sympathy towards the community and because of the fate of
Islam and the danger of internal rebellion, pressure of the foreign
ene­mies and the fear of separation among the Moslems and, in short, it
is because it is advisable for the moment.

A young man, thirty some years old, often harsh, whose background does
not stand well with the majority they are jealous of him. His behavior
is of a type that causes the influential, effective personalities and
groups to not be optimistic towards him.

\`It is still too soon for Ali. It is not advisable for Islam at the
moment.' Yes. Advisability! The inauspicious blow which is always used
against the Truth. Advisability, a sword used by clever people to
sacrifice the Truth. It is done in accordance with the Divine Law: face
the *qiblah* and say, \`In the Name of God', a clean and pure
sacri­fice, a permissible meat.

How simple! Without any noise. Without anyone understanding. Without any
who are asleep, awakening: Without the people rebelling. Without anyone
to bring awareness to the people. Without anyone being able to
distinguish the rights which are asleep under the blows of advisability,
they silently die and are forgotten. Finally, without any effort, or
protest, to be able to save the Truth and stand against the power which
is armed with \`advisability', the struggles, cries, protests, moaning
anti: even objections of Fatima go unheeded. When, a society is covered
under advisability, nothing can be done.

The greatest tragedy in human history takes place. It. is a silent and
defenseless tragedy which sacrifices Ali and Fatima and later on we see
their successors and one by one all of their posterity. Fatima sensed it
had begun and she could do nothing about it.

Suddenly she felt the exhaustion of a whole lifetime of resistance,
bearing of miseries patiently, tortures, pover­ty, difficulties and the
bitterness of her life. She becomes convinced that all has been lost.
She senses that she can do nothing to keep what the Prophet could not
keep and what Ali could not protect.

All of the nights become blurred in her eyes, nights which come
successively. Her father, during the last days of his life, gave news of
it to her. The time has come. What will happen tomorrow? What will
become of the great efforts of her father in the cold winds of policy
and ad­visability which have now begun? What is the future of this young
community? Into whose hands will the future of these people fall whose
fate is to be sacrificed because of policy? The smell of aristocracy,
nobility and tribal ties once again has arisen. Allegiance replaces the
com­mandment. How can the votes of the tribes who elect their leader or
the Quraish who elect their elders be more acceptable than the vote of
the Prophet?

What kind of people are these who at Saqifah first give their allegiance
to Saied and then with one word from Abu Bakr, give their allegiance to
him? Do they have sufficient growth and awareness so that the Prophet
does not need to interfere in their politics? These people are the
people of the Prophet's city who have lived near him and next to him.

Fear for the Future of Islam
----------------------------

They have performed the jihad together. They have learned of Islam from
the Prophet but they have chosen Abu Bakr. Tomorrow when Islam spreads
beyond Medina and this generation passes, what fate will this allegiance
bring to the leader of the people? Who will vote and who will be chosen?

'Now that the most sacrificed visages of the Emi­grants and Helpers of
the Prophet of the first generation of Islam and the pioneers of faith
have put Ali aside because of policy and he is forced to sit in his
home, what will tomorrow's generation do to my children? What will
tomorrows policies be when people have not grown up in the atmosphere of
faith, piety and jihad?' Even now the future of Hassan, Husayn and
Zaynab can be seen and one can be certain what their future will be.

The beginning of Ali staying at home is the beginning of a frightening
and bloody history. The allegiance of Saqifah, which began quietly and
cleverly, will be followed by bloody allegiances and the problem of
Fadak will be the beginning of extortions and the oppressions of
tomorrow. Tomorrow is black, frightening and bloody. Successive
tomorrows will bring plunder, murders and torture.

The Caliphate of tomorrow will be a great tragedy to Islam and a serious
tragedy to humanity. But now what can be done? Fatima does everything
her strength will allow to try and see that the first stone which is
laid is not laid crooked. She can do nothing. She senses that the ears
of the Medina of the Prophet are deaf to her cries. Her heart is made
heavy by the silence of Ali, a silence which would cause any heart which
has any feeling, who under­stands Ali and knows the times, to heat up
and burn.

How difficult and merciless is selfishness to be able to express itself
with faith, particularly when it is armed with policy. It causes the
faithful and devoted Companions to sacrifice the rights of the people
and to kill Ali's rights.

Fatima is exhausted after a lifetime of bearing patiently the weight of
the mission of her father and the difficulty of resistance when faced
with the ignorance of her tribe, with a life from beginning to end full
of torture, danger, poverty and efforts because the wishes are far from
the despots of the time. In the misery of mourning for the death of her
father whose life had been mixed with hers and saddened by the
unbearable fate of Ali, who after a lifetime of jihad with the enemy, is
forced to sit at home by the hand of a friend, not that of an enemy. He
is the sacrifice of a force which has come into existence with the power
of his faith, sword, sacrifice and sincerity. She is defeated and
without hope. She falls to her knees as her last efforts put forth to
get back Ali's rights proves fruit­less.

It is not only further effort which is difficult, but she finds the
bearing of it patiently to be impossible, not for that which was going
on outside but rather, patiently bear­ing what she sees within her home
and finally, the bearing patiently of the frightening silence which is
taking over the house neighboring her is the house of the Prophet.

Now the window is also closed, the window from which every day would
open onto hers, where they would smile at each other, where kindness and
faith would fall upon the simple house of Fatima. Now one of those
win­dows is closed. Death closed it forever upon Fatima. Poli­tics
closed the one in her own home. And she is now im­prisoned in this
house, next to Ali, who sits like a moun­tain of sorrow and is silent.
It is a silence which holds the fire of a volcano within itself. He
reads in the innocent and sorrowful faces of the children of the
Prophet, the frighte­ning fate of the tomorrow of each one of them.

To remain alive is too painful and unbearable for her.

'To remain' is a heavy load. It is a load which is too heavy for the
tired shoulders of Fatima to bear. Heavy time slow­ly moves upon her
wounded heart and passes by her. Every moment, every minute, and every
step is heavy and slow.

She Seeks Out the Soil of Her Father's Grave
--------------------------------------------

Now the only meaning she finds in life is the kind soil of her father's
grave and the hopeful news he, gave her when he said, 'Fatima, you will
be the first person to join me from among my family.'

But when? What an exciting anticipation!

Her suffering spirit, like a wounded bird whose wings have been broken,
is imprisoned and impatient from three sides: the silent and sorrowful
visage of her husband, the saddened faces of her children and the
silent, cold earth upon her father in the corner of Aiesha's house.

Whenever the pain in her heart increases and she loses her breath from
crying, she senses that she is in need of the kindness and condolences
of her father. She seeks him out. She falls upon the silent earth of her
father. She stares at his grave and suddenly it is as if she just heard
of the death of her father for the first time. She cries out.

She pushes her fingers into the earth: She fills her empty hands with
it. She tries to see him behind the cur­tain of tears. She puts the
earth upon her face and with all of the emotions through which she loved
her father, she smells it and for a moment she is at peace, she has
found condolence, but suddenly, in a tone which breaks with tears, she
says, 'Anyone who smells the earth of Ahmad (Muhammad) has lost nothing
if they never again smell any other musk. Oh, father, what miseries have
fallen upon me after you? If they had fallen upon a bright day, they
would turn it into night.' Gradually she would grow silent. The earth of
her father's grave pours through her senseless fingers. She looks at it
with painful amazement. Then she becomes motionless and silent.

She puts all of her sorrows in the death of her father. Each day is like
the first day of his death. Her impatience grows everyday and her cries
become more painful. The wives of the Helpers gather round her and cry
with her. The pressure and pain and the wave of sorrows are pressing
upon her heart and causing her eyes to bleed. She com­plains of their
extortion and remembers what they did to her and the right they
destroyed.

Her sorrow is more disturbing than anyone can con­ceive of to be able to
console her or ask her to be patient. Nights and days pass like this.
The Companions have been warmed by their powers, richness and conquering
and Ali in his sorrow, silent and Fatima in thoughts of death. The
moment of impatience arrives, the gift her father had pro­mised her.

The Death of Fatima
-------------------

Each day that passes she becomes more impatient for death. The only way
she can bear to remain alive is if she could seek refuge in her father
and be drawn beside him when her faith and spirit overflow with
complaints and pain.

What need does she have to such a refuge, such a peace? But time passes
slowly. Ninety five days have pass­ed since her father promised her
death and death would not come.

It came. Today is Monday, the 3rd of Jamadi al‑thani, the 11th year of
the migration, the year of the death of her father. She kisses each one
of the children. Hassan is 7, Husayn is 6, Zaynab, 5, and Umm Khulthum,
3.

And now is the moment to bid farewell to Ali. How difficult it is! And
Ali must remain alone in the world for thirty more years. She sends for
Umm Rafe'a to come. She had arranged the Prophet's funeral.

She says, 'Oh slave of God. Pour water on me so that I may wash myself.
With patience and peace, she performs the ablution. Then she puts on the
clothes which she had not worn since the death of her father and had put
away. It is as if she had put aside the memory of her mourning and now
is going to see a dear friend.

She says to Umm Rafe'a, 'Put my bed in the middle of the room.' Softly
and quietly she steps into the bed. She faces the Kaaba and she waits. A
moment passes, mo­ments...

Suddenly cries are heard within the house. She closes her lids and opens
her eyes upon her beloved who was awaiting her.

A candle of fire and sorrow is extinguished in Ali's house.

And Ali remains alone, with his children.

She had asked Ali to bury her at night so that no one would recognize
her grave and so that those two elders would not follow her corpse to
the grave.

Ali did as she had asked. But no one knows how. And they still do not
know where. In her home? Or in Baqiah'? It is not clear. And where in
Baqiah? It is not clear. That which is clear is the pain of Ali,
tonight, next to the grave of Fatima.

Medina is silent in the night. All Moslems are asleep. The night is only
broken by the quiet whisperings of Ali. Ali is very much alone both in
the city and in his home without the Prophet and without Fatima. Like a
moun­tain of pain, he is sitting upon the earth of the grave of Fatima.
Hours pass. Night, quiet and silent, listens to the pain of his
whisperings. Baqiah is peaceful, fortunate. Me­dina is without loyalty
and impoverished. All remains in silence. The awakened graves and
sleeping city listens!

The wind of the night takes the words which flows with difficulty from
the spirit of Ali at the side of Fatima's grave towards the house of the
Prophet. 'To you from me and from your daughter, who fell down beside
you and who in such haste joined you; Greetings, oh Pro­phet of God.'

'My patience and my ability have weakened from the fate of your dearest,
oh Prophet of God. But how can I seek patience with such terrible
misfortune and missing you?

'I placed you in the grave but you still exist in my heart. We are all
from God and unto God we shall return. But my sorrow is eternal and my
nights, sleepless until God takes me to the same home in which you are
now.

'Right now, your daughter will tell you how your tribe joined each other
against her and took away her rights. Insist that she tell you
everything that happened. All these things happened even though not much
time has passed since your death and people have not forgotten you.

\`Greetings to both of you, greetings from a man who has neither anger
nor sorrow.'

He remains silent for a moment. He suddenly senses the exhaustion of a
whole lifetime. It is as if with every word which is pulled from the
depths of his being, he gives up a part of his existence.  
 He is alone. He does not know what to do. Stay? Re­turn home? How can
he leave Fatima here alone? How can he return alone to his home? The
city looks like a devil in the darkness of the night. Schemes,
treacheries and shame­lessness awaits him.

How can he stay? His children, the people, Truth, res­ponsibilities and
a heavy mission await him. His pain is so heavy that it destroys his
strong spirit. He cannot decide. Hesitation grips his soul. Go? Stay? He
senses that he is unable to do either. He does not know what he will do.
He explains to Fatima.

'If I leave you it is not that I do not want to stay near you and if I
stay here have I not been unfair to the fate that God promises for those
who bear patiently?'

Then he arose; stood, faced the Prophet's house, with a state which
would overflow if poured into the word, feel­ings, he wants to tell him
that he is returning that which had been entrusted to him. \`Listen to
what she says. Ask her to tell you everything precisely. Have her count
all the things that she saw after you, one by one!'


