Epilogue
========

Fatima lived like this and died like this. After her death, she began a
new life in history. Fatima appears as a halo in the visages of all of
the oppressed that later be­come the multitudes of Islam. All of the
usurped, extort­ed, oppressed, sufferers; all of those whose rights have
been destroyed and sacrificed by pressure and have been deceived: had
the name of Fatima as their slogan.

The memory of Fatima grew with the love, emotions and wonderful faith of
the men and women, who through­out the history of Islam, fought for
freedom and justice. Throughout the centuries they were nourished under
the merciless and bloody lashes of the Caliphates. Their cries and anger
grew and overflowed from their wounded hearts.

This is why in the history of all Moslem nations and among the deprived
masses of the Islamic community, Fatima is the source of the inspiration
for freedom, the desire of that which is a right, the seekers of
justice, the resisters of oppression, cruelty, crime and discrimination.

It is most difficult to speak about the personality of Fatima. Fatima is
the woman that Islam wants a woman to be. The concept of her visage is
painted by the Prophet himself. He melted her and made her pure in the
fire of difficulties, poverty, resistance, deep understanding and the
wonder of humanity.

She is a symbol in all the various dimensions of being a woman.

The symbol of a daughter when facing her father.

The symbol of a wife when facing her husband.

The symbol of a mother when facing her children.

The symbol of a responsible, fighting woman when facing her time and the
fate of her society.

She herself is an Imam, a guide, that is, an outstand­ing example of
someone to follow, an ideal type of woman and one who bears witness to
any woman who wishes to 'become herself' through her own choice.

She answers the question of how to be a woman with her wonderful
childhood, her constant struggling and resis­ting on two fronts, inside
and out, in the home of her father, in the home of her husband, in her
society, in her thoughts and behavior and in her life.

I do not know what to say. I have said a great deal. Still much remains
unsaid.

In the expression of all of the amazing aspects of the great spirit of
Fatima, that which causes the most wonder in me, is this that Fatima is
the traveling companion, steps in the same steps, flies together with
the great spirit of Ali, through the ascension of humanity towards
completeness and the stages of the descent of the spirit and the psyche.

She was not just a wife to Ali. Ali looked upon her as a friend, a
friend who was familiar with his pains and his great wishes. She was his
endless refuge, the one who listened to his secrets. She was the only
companion of his loneliness. This is why Ali looked at her with another
look and also at her children.

After Fatima, Ali took other wives and he had child­ren from them. But
from the beginning, he separates the children who were from Fatima from
his other children. The latter are called 'BaniAli',[that is, sons of
Ali] and the former, 'Bani Fatima' [the children of Fatima].

Isn't it strange! When face to face with their father, and he, Ali, the
children are related to Fatima. And we saw that the Prophet also saw her
with different eyes. From among all of his daughters he would only
discipline Fatima. He only relies upon her. From an early age, she
accepted the great invitation.

I do not know what to say about her. How to say it? I wanted to imitate
the French writer who was speaking one day in a conference about the
Virgin Mary. He said, 'For 1700 years all of the speakers have spoken of
Mary. For 1700 years, ail philosophers and thinkers of various nations
of the East and West have spoken of the values of Mary. For 1700 years,
the poets of the world have expressed all of their creative efforts and
power in their praise of Mary. For 1700 years, all of the painters and
artists have created wonderful works of art showing the visage and
states of Mary. But the totality of all that has been said, thought and
the efforts of all the artist throughout all of these many centuries
were not able to sufficiently describe the greatness of Mary as these
words, 'Mary was the mother of Jesus Christ'.'

And I wanted to begin in this manner with Fatima. I got stuck. I wished
to say, 'Fatima is the daughter of the great Khadijah.' I sensed it is
not Fatima. I wished to say, 'Fatima is the daughter of Muhammad
(*‘s*).' I sensed it is not Fatima. I wished to say, 'Fatima is the wife
of Ali (*‘a*).' I sensed it is not Fatima. I wished to say, 'Fa­tima is
the mother of Hasan and Husayn.' I sensed it is not Fatima. I wished to
say, 'Fatima is the mother of Zaynab.' I still sensed it is not Fatima.

No, these are all true and none of them are Fatima.

**Fatima is Fatima**


