To My Beloved Daughters
=======================

**Mani and Iran**  
**May They Grow In the Light of Fatima**

**In the Name of God**  
**The Compassionate, the Merciful**

To the spirit of my mother, Zahra, the mirror of humility, emotions, and
chastity, for whom life was only sorrow, while her existence, for me,
was all kindness.

The words you are about to read are from a lecture I gave at the
Husayniyyeh Ershad. To begin with, I had wanted to comment upon the
research of Professor Louis Massignon about the personality and
complicated life of Fatima (*‘a*). I had wished to refer to the deep and
revolu­tionary influence her memory evokes in Moslem societies, and the
role she has played in the breadth of Islamic trans­formations. These
words were, in particular, for the univer­sity students participating in
my various classes: \`History and Knowledge of Religions', \`The
Sociology of Religions', and \`Islamology'.

As I entered the gathering, I saw that, in addition to the university
students, many others had come. This spoke of the need for a more urgent
response to the problem. I agreed to answer the pertinent question of
womanhood which is extremely important today for our society.

Women who have remained in the \`traditional mould' do not face the
problem of identity and women who have accepted the \`new imported
mould' have solved the pro­blem for themselves. But in the midst of
these two types of ‘molded women', there are those who can neither
accept their hereditary, traditional form nor surrender to this imposed
new form. What should they do?

They want to decide for themselves. They want to develop themselves.
They need a model, an ideal example, a heroine. For them, the problem of
'Who am I? How do I become?' is urgent. Fatima, through her own 'being',
ans­wers their questions.

I would have been satisfied with giving an analytical description of the
personality of Fatima. I found that book shops had no books about her
and thus, our intel­lectuals know nothing about her life. I was obliged
to com­pensate for this lack to a certain extent. Thus this present
essay, is the same lecture, but expanded to include a biography based
upon documented, traditional sources about this beloved person, who has
remained unknown or misinterpreted. In this bibliography, I particularly
drew from historical documents. Whenever I reached a problem of faith
and explicitly Shiite views, I chose Sunni sources, since Shi’ism grew
out of the origins of Sunnism, and from the scholar's point of view,
they are irrefutable.

I cannot say that this lecture is without need of criticism. Rather, the
reverse is true. It is in great need ‑waiting for those with pure
hearts, those who enjoy to guide, those who are willing to serve, rather
than those who show hostility, abuse and make use of slander.

Ali Shariati  
 June, 1971


