Introduction
============

On this sacred night, it was not planned that such an unsacred person as
myself speak. 1 have gained much from my contact with the work of
Professor Louis Massignon. He was a great man and well known Islamic
scholar who had written about Fatima.

I was greatly influenced by her blessed life, as well as her effect upon
the history of Islam. Even after her death, she kept alive the spirit of
those who seek justice and op­posed oppression and discrimination in
Islamic society. She is a manifestation and a symbol of the Way and
es­sential direction of 'Islamic thought'.

As a student, I played a small role in the preparation of this great
work, especially at the beginning of the re­search and gathering stage.
The documents and informa­tion which existed had been recorded over a
period of fourteen hundred years. They were written in all languages and
local Islamic dialects. The historic implications in the various
documents and even the local odes and folk songs were studied. I was
asked to summarize this work here.

I said to myself, 'I will offer this work here today be­cause it has yet
to be published and the great man who be­gan it, has left this world
having left this work uncomple­ted.' People unfortunately do not know
about this work. Even Europeans, who are familiar with Islam, do not
know about this study. This has also affected our own scholars, who are
familiar with Islam through the writings of Euro­peans, and , therefore,
remain uninformed of this work.

I accepted this invitation and I said to myself, \`I will describe the
manuscripts to my students, in particular, those who participate in my
classes at the Husayniyyeh Ershad. I will give them the scientific and
historic results of the deep research of this great man.'

But now I see and sense that the face of the gathering differs. It is
not a group gathered for a sermon or a dis­course. The women and men who
are now here are all in­tellectuals and educated representatives of the
needy of today's generation of this society. They have not come to hear
me speak of Fatima in order to gain spiritual reward from this gathering
tonight. They have not come to hear a dry, scientific, historic lecture
as they have a newer, more urgent, more alive need which is to answer
this most sen­sitive question for those who are affected by our
contem­porary fate: Who am I?


