Who Am I?
=========

In our society, women change rapidly. The tyranny of our times and the
influences of institutions take her from \`what she is'. All her
traditional characteristics and values are taken away from her until
they make her into a creature \`they want', \`they build', and we see
that \`they have built'! This is why the most important and relevant
question for the awakened woman at this time is, \`Who am 1?', knowing
full well that she cannot remain what she is. Actually, she does not
want to accept modern masks to replace the traditional ones. She wants
to decide for her­self. Her contemporaries choose for themselves. They
con­sciously decorate their personalities with awareness and
independence. They thoroughly ornament themselves. They manifest a
design. They reflect a sketch, but, they do not know how. They do not
know the design of the real human aspect of their personality which is
neither a reflec­tion of their heritage nor their artificially imposed
imitative masks. Which of these do they identify with?

The second question which arises from amidst this, stems from the
following reasoning. We are Moslems, wo­men of a society who wish to
make decisions through rea­son and choice and relate them to a history,
culture, reli­gion and society which received its spirit and origins
from Islam. A woman who is in this society wants to be herself. She
wants to build herself, \`herself'. She wants to be re­born. In this
re‑birth, she wants to be her own midwife.

She neither wants to be a product of her heritage nor have a superficial
facade. She cannot remain heedless of Islam and she cannot remain
indifferent to it.

Thus, it is natural that this question should arise for the Moslem
woman. Our people continue to speak about Fatima. Every year, hundreds
of thousands of Moslems cry for her. There are hundreds of thousands of
gather­ings, prayer meetings, festivals and mourning ceremonies in her
memory. There are ceremonies of praise, joy, honor and majesty for her
where her generosity is expressed through unusual customs. They hold
rituals of lamenta­tion where they re‑create her sorrows and speak ill
of and damn those who offended her. In spite of all of this, her real
personality is not known. The only things, unfortuna­tely, that our
people know of this great, sacred person are these few items as follows:

'Fatima was the beloved daughter of the Prophet and detested by Aiesha
[the wife of the Prophet after Khadijah's death and the daughter of Abu
Bakr, the first of the Orthodox Caliphs]. After the death of the
Prophet, Abu Bakr took her grazing land in Fadak. Omar attacked her home
with a group of his men. They struck her in her side and she, six months
pregnant, aborted her son, Mohsin. From then on her days passed with the
taking of her children's hands and walking outside of the city to a
place called 'House of Sorrows'. There she would sit and cry. She would
speak ill of the usurpers of Ali's rights. She would cry and lament for
hours. She spent her short life crying and cursing her fate until she
died. She requested in her will that she be buried at night so that
those who thought ill of her would not follow her funeral and they would
not know where she was buried.'

This is the extent of the information about this great person that
exists in the memories of our people. Yet, in spite of the little they
know about her, the people accept her majesty and power with their whole
hearts. They offer her their hearts with all the spiritual strength,
faith and will that a people could have or a human community could
build.

Be Authentic and Seek Out the Truth
-----------------------------------

The greatest honor, in my opinion, which has been bestowed upon our
Iranian society is bestowed when it chooses Imam Ali, in spite of the
sorrow, depression and difficulties which it suffers because of this
choice. Our people show us discernment and deep thought; they show us
how to oppose oppression and deceit. They open the fists of powerful
men, treacherous, dominating people who take away the rights of human
beings. They rebel against force and oppression. They come to know
deceit, lies and traitors. They oppose oppressive regimes. They do not
allow themselves to become attached to or influenced by advertisements
and religious leaders who had attached themselves to the institutions of
the Caliphate: They discover unknown truths. They seek out the strange,
the weak, hidden behind useless curtains. They find strong currents.
They are the cause of this society withstanding all it does. They choose
Ali (*‘a*).

It is true that our people came to Islam through the various Caliphates,
but we must recognize their insurrec­tions against both the Caliphs and
their institutions includ­ing those of the Omayyad’s, Abbasids, the
Khans, Turkish Khaghanis, Tazis and Mongols. We must distinguish
be­tween the people and the Iranians who are attached to their
institutions under the name of 'Islam', 'Qur’anic Gov­ernment',
'Prophetic Traditions', 'The Front of Truth' and 'The Truth of
Religion'.

All the expressions of the beliefs and the new found­ed wisdom of Islam
come from the Caliph's institutions: their words from the pulpits and
minarets, their books and commentaries upon the traditions, their
orations, adver­tisements, philosophies, men of letters, poets,
historians, warriors and even companions and associates of the
Com­panions of the Prophet. Every single one of these groups were
extensions of the Caliph or Sultan's institutions.

Loud speakers, transistor radios, films, television, magazines,
newspapers, advertisers and theoreticians are extensions of the rulers'
class. Those in power who form the times and who are the relatives of
the official leaders. relatives of the Prophet and the Imams who are
legally appointed in the name of Divine Rule and Traditions are all
extensions of the Caliph or Sultan.

These amazing people of ours, under the bombard­ment of publicity,
without having any sort of security, be­hind the thick, black clouds of
the accepted sciences, architecture, theology, government, religion,
culture, his­tory, interpretations, jurisprudence and traditions which
incidentally happen to coincide with the ruling Caliphate, and confirmed
the governing institutions, without even knowing the official language
of Islam, cleverly enough know, however, that these are all lies. They
know that the Truth is not attached to these eye catching forms.

Rather, the Truth belongs to a man who is alone, who has his home in a
corner near the Prophet's mosque and who is surrounded by the ignorance
of his tribe. He lives amidst the great political sacrifices of the
friends of the Prophet and the great thinkers of Islam.

Beyond the green palace of Damascus and the hang­ing noose of the fairy
tale Caliph of 1001 Nights of Bagh­dad, Iranians find the abandoned, mud
built house of Ali and Fatima and discern that Islam is in ‑this
sorrowful, abandoned, silent abode.

The Iranian people who enter and become acquainted with Islam through
the sword of the Caliph, see this truth and know it to be a truth even
in the midst of invitations from the religious leaders belonging to the
official Islamic Caliphate, whereas the people of Medina and the
contem­porary Arabs and the Companions of the Prophet do not see or do
not want to see it. The great schools and univer­sities of Damascus and
Baghdad are also ignorant of this truth.

This is a most difficult and wonderful choice on the part of our people.
It manifests the birth of a thought and an awareness which is contrary
to any customs they had had. It reflects the greatness and firmness of
their spirit. It shows their worship of the Truth. It reveals the
spiritual courage of these people who rebel against history and the
worldly government of the Caliphate.

The Caliphate, more than any other previous historical political system,
governs their institutions. It is always the Caliphate which possesses
the powerful military and political forces. It holds the strings to the
huge religious capital of thoughts and the unlimited wealth of culture,
literature and endowed knowledge.

Our people negate the Caliphate in the midst of all of the confusion of
war and jihad (inner and outer spiritual struggle). They never lose
their fervor, in spite of the dis­putes which arise from conquests, the
defeats they suffer, the destruction which takes place, the constant
building and clamor, knowledge and thought, culture and civiliza­tion,
revolution and distractions full of cries of religion and the world.
They deafen the ear of history and cause the earth to tremble under
their feet. These strangers, far away and unknown, hear and know the
cries of a lonely man, a man who is a 'stranger in his own town', Ali!

Ali speaks to himself far from the eyes of the town and the ears of the
people of the town, in the depths of the night, in the date palm gardens
of Bani Najjar, outside of Medina. He tells himself of the pain he feels
seeing the destruction of all which he had helped to make. He is afraid
when he remembers the lies, luxury and plunder. He knows the force and
deceit which have been imprinted upon the familiar faces of the
disgraced and condemned Caliphs and Caesars. They are talking of
building a new society, covering over religion.

For centuries more, God's creatures will continue to remain deluded.
What dirt must be eaten. What efforts must be made so that the Truth be
known once again. Truth has been hidden behind those pseudo sacred new
clothes and newly created beauties. You see that the first sacrifice of
this bleeding and weakening of the weak by the strong in Islam are the
\`people' and \`the fate of the people'. The symbol of both of these is
the sacrifice of 'he himself' and before him, \`his wife' and with
tomor­row's generations of Islam, \`his family' and generation after
generation, 'his children'.

Without a doubt, this decision, this discernment by our people is the
most difficult, dreadful and frightening moment in history. It has not
been easy for us to grasp. All these generations of heroes show
intelligence, alert­ness, persistence of character, personal courage and
love of virtues. They indicate how to become familiar with and
understand the beauty of mankind and the greatness and majesty of the
spirit. They come to know the best values;­ they learn to descend into
the depths and to rise upon waves. They continue to seek the Truth
amidst thunder­storms of oppression and terror. All of these generations
of angelic heroes live and move against the judgment of history. They
themselves create another law. They respond to all the minarets, pulpits
and mihrabs. Facing all the great Companions, theologians, judges and
traditional religious saints, they rebel. Against the cries of the
swords for blood in order to break their strength, in both the East and
the West, day and night, all one hundred percent say, \`Yes. Say nol'

When intelligence and thought are added to their faith, they become
addicted to blood. They seek after sacrifice and the victory of Truth.
They acquire a sense of abundant generosity and courage. They have to
suffer sorrow and they have to have the ability to survive punish­ment,
whippings, insults and the pain and terror of impri­sonment,
wretchedness and loneliness. They require a special kind of sincerity.
They need a keen sense of vision to bear treachery, the force of power
and fanaticism and yet, remain patient. They sacrifice self worship and
fanati­cism and games people play with the Caliphate, and the desire to
have both God and His fruit. They put aside fear, pious fraud
(dissimulation), pretentious sacredness and os­tentatious open
mindedness...and many other things.

These are a few of the principal elements of Shi'ite experiences ‑
Alavite Shi'ism, not Safavid Shi'ism, that is, not the Shi’ism of the
Safavid Shah Abbas, not the Shi’ism which trembles in history when
opposed by force and op­pression, not that which supports oppression and
force, but the religion of justice and innocent government. We are not
referring to the Shi’ism which supported the re­pressed historic
collection of ideas or the tribal hatred or verbal love and grudges full
of suggestions (not intelligent and practical); Safavid Shi’ism refers
only to the Caliph and not to the Caliphate; it pertains to the past and
not the present; it relates to that which is beneficial after death and
not before death.

It is the purpose of the sanctity of the Alavis to free the Shiites from
injustice, governments of force and ignor­ant leaders. The Alavis give
freedom, not the sanctity of the Sufis which is mixed with doubt and is
neither useful to God nor to the people of God.

Shi’ism is nothing other than Islam ‑ not that which they tell us:
\`Islam in addition, to other things'. No! Shi'­ism means pure Islam,
Islam minus the Caliphate, pseudo Arabness and those who live in luxury.
Shi'ism does not take the two principles of justice and imamate
(religious leadership) and add them to Islam ‑ Islam without justice and
Imamate is the same as the religion of Islam minus Islam. The same is
true for Christianity, Judaism, Zoroas­trianism, Vedantism, Buddhism and
Taoism.

It is this \`new ignorance' which adds 'government', \`race' and
\`classes' to Islam. The wars between the Shi'ites and Sunnis which took
place in the past (not in the present where it has become a war of
words, history and tribes) are wars for the ideas of imamate and justice
against despotism and oppression. The differences in faith and historic,
philosophic and religious interpretations all develop from the same
front.

Ali has not been added to Muhammad(*‘s*). We have taken Ali in order not
to lose Muhammad. The descen­dants of the historical Caesars, Kings,
Pharaohs all spoke from Muhammad, yet there is a difference in what they
stood for.

We do not replace the Traditions (sunnah) of the Prophet with the family
of Ali, nor do we add to them. Very simply and straight forwardly, this
is his family. We seek to know, through the Traditions, what he said,
what he did and what he wanted but with the help and guidance of his
family.

Contrary to what both enemies and lovers today think, Shi'ism is the
most traditional sect of Islam. The major difference stems principally
from whether or not Ali and the real Shiites tried consciously and
correctly, from the beginning, in opposition to innovations and he­resy,
to remain traditional and retain the traditions.

We see how everything has been mixed with every­thing else. We see that
during the black centuries, filled with blood, while the world is
awe‑struck by the power of the government of an oppressive Islam and the
Caliphate, the Islam of justice and imamate is drowned in the blood of
.martyrdom. Shiites accept martyrdom and there. by negate the Caliph's
power. This most difficult choice does not come easily!

The cruel punishments enacted by the families of the Omayyad’s, the
Abbasids, Saladin the Turk and the Mongols bear witness to the fact that
the great theologians, the champions of liberty, the seekers of death,
and the majority of the worshippers of truth and the desirers of justice
and the lovers of virtue have committed themselves to this way and to
freedom. The way passes through the Caliphates of Damascus and Baghdad
into the land of fire, blood, prison and punishment. It is attached to
that small house of Ali which is as large as all of humanity. What
things do they not do? Which ones of them do they not kill?

To speak about Ali and Fatima in the history of Islam has not been easy.
Poets who have defended this family say, 'I have been carrying the rope
of my execution on my back for 50 years.'

This is the fate of all the men and women who have written the history
of Shi'ism, a history where each line, each word, has been written with
the blood of a martyr.

These courageous front runners of Shi'ism are not familiar with the new
philosophy which has been created for us :'Wait. Be in a state of
anticipation, awaiting the hidden Imam. He will come himself and make
everything right. He must come himself and restore the religion of his
ancestors. The only thing is for us to use 'pious fraud' and have
patience.'[The author is referring to a particular way of thought used
by the Caliphate institutions to keep people subdued. The idea is to
wait for the end of the world and the return of the 12th Imam, marking
the time when all the world will be ruled by justice] .

lbn Sakit was a great man of letters; he was not among the warriors or
champions of justice, but a literary man and an expert in language. His
hidden sympathies were with Shi'ism. The Caliph, Mutawakil Abbasi chose
him to teach his children. Little by little, Mutawakil's children began.
to side with Ali and his family. 'Perhaps,' he thought to himself. 'this
is the work of their teacher.' One day the Caliph visited the classroom.
He sat down and began complementing Ibn Sakit and praising him. He told
him how pleased he was with the progress of his children. Then, in the
same tone, he asked, 'How do you see my children?' lbn Sakit, in
answering, praised them very highly. Then Mutawakil suddenly asked, 'Ibn
Sakit, in your opinion are my children better or Hassan and Husayn, the
children of Ali?'

Ibn Sakit had to make a choice. The use of 'pious fraud' here would be
weakness and treason. In Alavite Shi'ism, pious fraud is a tactic in
order to preserve faith and not as it is used today to preserve the
believer.

He did not pause. In his normal voice, in the same tone in which
Mutawakil had asked, he answered, 'Qambar, the servant of Ali, is worth
more than both you and your children.' Mutawakil ordered that the tongue
of Ibn Sakit be cut out. It is these tongues which come back to scourge
the tyrants of history.

If the Shi'ites are not conquered, they are tried, Their desire for
justice and freedom never dies in their hearts, nor their need for
equality, awareness and revolutionary leadership against the enemies who
are attached to the institutions of oppression, wealth and hypocrisy.
They never forget. They do not let this sacred fire die out. It is not
forgotten in the conscience of the people.

The People and the Theologians
------------------------------

Two groups carry this heavy responsibility on their shoulders. These two
groups hold the rope of death in their hands for centuries. One is the
great, conscious

Shiites who know imamate to be a continuation of prophethood, and
wisdom, the continuation of imamate. The second group are the pure,
faithful people of ours. They express widespread silence. They suffer
punishment at the hands of the Arab Caliphate's household and the
Turkish Sultans. Behind their bloodied and peaceful faces is a strength
and virility which makes their executioners ashamed. In the midst of
government whip lashes, these people are like hard rocks of patience and
they say they do not sense any anguish.

Wisdom and Love
---------------

Each religion, school of thought, movement or revo­lution is made up of
two elements: wisdom and love. One is light and the other is motion. One
gives common sense and understanding, the other, strength, enthusiasm
and motion. In the words of .Alexis Carrel, 'Wisdom is like the lights
of a car which show the way. Love is like the motor which makes it
move.' Each is nothing without the other. A motor, without lights, is
blind love, dangerous, tragic and infers death.

In a society, a movement of thought or a revolutio­nary school of
thought, men of letters who are clear thin­kers, aware and responsible,
show, through their works, that there is a way to come to know a school
of thought or a religion. They show that there is a way to give
awareness to the people. The responsibility of the people, on the other
hand, is to give their spirits and their strength to a movement. They
are responsible for giving the starting push.

A movement is like a living body. It thinks with the brain of scholars
and gives love through the hearts of its people. If faith, sincerity,
love and sacrifice are at a mini­mum in a society, people are
responsible. But where cor­rect understanding of a school of thought is
at a minimum, where vision, awareness, logical consciousness, deep
fa­miliarity with the goals of a school of thought are lacking, where
the meaning, purpose and truths of a school of tho­ught are missing, the
scholars are responsible. Religion, in particular, needs both since
religion is a type of lover’s consciousness or love of consciousness.

In religion, knowledge and feelings are not treated as separate entities
because they are transformed into un­derstanding and faith by means of
common sense and the coming to know something.

This is Islam. More than any other religion, it is a religion of the
recitation of the book, a religion of jihad, a religion of thought and
love. In the Qur’an, one cannot find the boundaries between love and
faith. The Qur’an considers martyrdom to be eternal life. It swears one
to the pen and writing.

This is particularly true in Shi'ism as its history and culture has
shown. Shi'ism is a place from which love, en­thusiasm, blood and
martyrdom emanate. Shi\`ism is a cen­ter of the inflamed. Feelings boil.
At the same time, it includes meditation and wisdom. It embodies
cultural and intellectual sciences. It is a distinguishable movement of
revolutionary thought. It is an accident in the fate of man. It is
knowledge, love and truth in the name and na­ture of Ali. The worship of
truth is such that truth, with­out worship, is philosophy and knowledge,
and worship without truth is idol worship and lust.

Tears Should Bear Witness to Love
---------------------------------

Shi\`ism is thus historically born and continues to exist. Its thinkers
and scholars, who are manifestations of those religious warriors, seek
profundity and logic. They guard the spirit and the Truth. It is they
who give the cor­rect orientation to the beginnings of the true Islam.
They are to find the inner meaning of things. They come to know
endurance. They complete the meaning of faithful­ness. They protect the
truths of Islam.

Then, in the dizzying arena of life, they lose their way when they begin
to write in the name of philosophy, Sufism, science, literature and
false asceticism. Public thoughts are stricken by Greek and pseudo
Eastern in­clinations.

All of the Shiite people are a manifestation of the truth to which they
remain loyal. They follow sincerity, love, common sense and sacrifice.
It is they who give up their lives in the way of Ali. They follow the
way of Ali during the times when force, punishment and public mur­ders
are running the whole of the government. They con­tinue even though lips
which are opened in his name are closed and blood which is heated by his
light is spilt. Speaking about the family of the Prophet in the supposed
\`Caliphate of the Prophet' is answered by being skinned alive and
burned.

But today the mass of people still give so much love. They are still so
loyal to this house. After the passing of many centuries, full of
changes, the birth and death of faith, love and thought, people do not
go to the door of the palaces of Baghdad. They do not orient themselves
to another direction. We see that they still find their way to the walls
of Fatima's house, and cry in pain. Each drop of these tears is a word
which our cordial and loyal people use to express their never ending
love of the members of this household. This is the language of the
common man. Is there a language more simple, more pure, more lacking in
hypocrisy than tears, the language without words and without lines? Each
element of it is a painful cry, the cry of a desiring lover.

Isn't it true that the eyes express the truth more than the tongue?
Aren't tears the most beautiful of poems and the least twisted of loves?
Don't they reflect the most consuming of faiths, the warmest of desires
and the most fevered of feelings? Aren't they the purest form of
speak­ing and the most subtle form of love? These are mixed all in one
heart of love. They mix together, fuse and form a warm drop. This they
name a tear.

We see then that our people still 'speak', they speak their thoughts
well. Don't be surprised that sometimes I defend crying and other times,
I criticize the programs of lamentation in prayer meetings.

Yes! These words of mine are not in opposition. The crying that I praise
is something more than 'a program for crying' or 'something to do' or 'a
duty' or 'a means to reach a goal' or 'a principle' or 'a rule'. It is
something else. Crying is the natural emanation of a feeling. It is a
compulsory and instinctive response to love, anguish, desire or sorrow.

As Regi De Bre, the famous French revolutionary, said, 'A person who
never cries and who does not know how to cry, lacks the feelings of
humanness. He is a stone, a wild, dry spirit.'

Tears which flow, 'cries which are cried, weeping which grows little by
little in the heart, then suddenly ap­pears in the throat and stops
one's breath and by necessity bursts, is the sincere and natural
language of desire and grief, pain and love which all exist in one human
being.

But we can sense, without doubt, that one who plans a 'program' around
crying and knows it to be a 'goal' and a 'rite', a 'tradition', a
'religious duty' or a 'principal job' or a 'means for gathering profit'
or a 'means towards ward­ing off losses' or a 'means allowing one to
continue to vio­late' or 'continue to fail', those who know it to be a
'means to a goal' and worthy of 'spiritual reward', deludes us.

People who are lovers, people who are apart from their beloved, or
people who are in mourning because the death of a loved one has broken
their hearts, cry, and are sad. Whenever their hearts recall their
beloved, and their tongues speak, their hearts are set afire and their
faces shine; their eyes reflect the same pain. Tears flow and all of
these are signs of the subtleness and purity of their deep faith and
real love.

There is a person, on the other hand, who can be described in the
following terms. He sits in the bazaar, his eager eyes looking after
profit or in his office, speaking nonsense. He seeks after hypocrisy,
usury and work or looks with flattery towards the boss, enlarges himself
in front of subordinates and takes on Pharaoh like qualities towards
others. At noon ‑he goes home and sleeps comfor­tably and peacefully,
eats, drinks, sleeps and laughs. In the afternoon, he seeks out his
'health clubs' and the thousand unhealthy ones. When we see him in the
late afternoon, according to his calendar, and according to his previous
arrangement, he goes to a meeting with a group, from 6:30 to 9:00 P.M.,
Tuesdays, the first day of the month. They sit down and begin to feel
sad. Through much pres­sure and effort, he manages to make himself cry
and if possible, shed tears. After the 'program' and 'crying' and
'mourning' and other things related to them, he drinks coffee and tea
and smokes the water pipe. Then, with a lightened spirit and victorious
conscience, and with the feeling that he has accomplished an important
task and taken a step towards his beliefs and his faith or love, he
arises and goes after his work and continues his daily schedule until
once again it is time for his 'crying program' and the 'mourning
program' according to his plan and design. Would you call such a person
who looks so sad, a lover who has seen pain and undergone great
difficul­ties?

Crying which does not contain an obligation, awareness, a knowing of the
beloved, an understanding and sensing of faith, is something which is
only useful as an eyewash, to cleanse it from the pollution of the air.
Don't forget that one of the first people who cried for the great Imam
Husayn was Omar Sa'ad [who had ordered his kill­ing] and the first
person who forbid and condemned this kind of \`crying for Husayn' was
the great Zaynab [Imam Husayn's sister].

But our people cry because they are lovers. They cry so that they can
bind their hearts deeply to this be­loved family. It is a real pantheon,
a real Olympia where several lords live who know no language other than
tears. People are neither scholars nor philosophers but rather full of
feelings. They are prepared to be sacrificed.

No religion, history or nation has a family such as this, a family where
the father is Ali and the mother, Fat­ima and their sons, Hassan and
Husayn and their daughter, Zaynab. They all live under one roof at one
time and are one family. At the same time, there has never been so much
love, sincerity, faith, poetry and blood given to a family by a nation.

Our people gather a culture around the door and roof of Fatima's house.
Through this family comes a history, full of excitement, movement,
courage and virtues which have continued to the present time. This
history is like a pure river, life giving for all the past generations
of our people, and now in the depths of their spirit, our con­science
continues to flow.

These are the only people in humanity who have remained faithful to the
sorrow of their beloved family. They are the only ones who mourn for the
freedom of their champions of justice. Their faith extends through­out
their history. They have not .forgotten their virtues, crushed under the
feet of sorrow. They continue to mourn. Virtues are destroyed. Truths
are tried. Governments create tragedies. They commit murders. But the
people continue to seek this movement throughout its history. The fate
of their heroes has not been forgotten.

But all this love remains barren, like the rain which falls on a salt
marsh. Grass does not grow in this desert. All the sacrifices,
investments, readiness, assembling, human strengths, powers and precious
energy giving opportunities are useless efforts.


