Who Is Responsible?
===================

Scholars! It is they who do not perform their respon­sibilities in
respect to the people. They should give aware­ness, consciousness and
direction to the people and they do not do so.

All our geniuses and great talents occupy themselves with philosophy,
theology, Sufism, jurisprudence, princi­ples, literature, meanings,
expression, novelties, conjuga­tion and syntax. Through all the years of
research, thought and their own scholarly anguish, they write nothing
other than \`practical treatises' on how to achieve cleanliness for the
ritual prayer, types of uncleanliness, the rules of men­struation, and
the doubts which arise in ritual prayer.

They leave aside writing treatises on how to speak with people,
treatises on how to communicate the religious truths and the philosophy
of the pillars of the religion, treatises on how to communicate
consciousness and aware­ness to people, treatises on the understanding
of the tra­ditions of the Prophet and the personalities of the Imams,
treatises on the revolutionary purpose behind Karbala, introductory
treatises on the family of the Prophet and the Shiite movement,
treatises on the expression of thou­ghts and treatises on the faith of
the people. All of these treatises are written, but all of them are
written without responsibility, without the role of a commander. They
pass their responsibilities on to the ordinary speakers in the mosques,
not to the mujtahids (religious leaders whose directions for the
practice of the faith are fol­lowed).

This is why the task of introducing the Prophet's family, the task of
the advertisement of religion and the study of the truths of Islam fall
prone to the \`failures of the old schools of religion'. It is for this
reason that a group of young people, in order to study Islamic sciences
(and to carry jurisprudence forward), enter the schools. If talented,
through great efforts, they become jurispru­dents or mujtahids or faghih
[theologians]. This group is imprisoned as teachers and removed from the
com­munity. Those who do not succeed in studying properly, because they
do not have the ability, talent or spiritual strength, but, in exchange,
have warm, often artistic, voices, are obliged to propagate and
advertise the truths of the religion. The third group, who have neither
this nor that; neither the science nor at least a voice, take the third
way. They become dumb and speechless. They take them­selves to the
'sacred door' and, as things would be, they move ahead of both mujtahids
as well as the speakers in the mosques.

In the midst of this, be just! What will the fate of the people be? What
is the fate of their religion? It is not necessary to think very hard.
No. Just look.

It is this. A country which is full of faith and love, a nation which
has the Qur’an and the *Nahjul Balaghah* of Ali, a people who have Ali,
Fatima, Hassan, Husayn and Zaynab, have a red history but a black fate.
They have a culture and the religion of martyrdom, but it is dead.

We see a dream appeared to Joan of Arc, a sensitive and imaginative
girl, for her to fight in order to have the king returned. For
centuries, her dream has given the inspi­ration of freedom, sacrifice
and the sense of revolution and courage to the enlightened, aware and
progressive French people.

Whereas Zaynab, the sister of Imam Husayn, who takes a heavier mandate,
the mandate of Husayn in her Ali‑like hands, continues the movement of
Karbala, which opposed murders, lying, terror and hysterics. She
continues the movement at a time when all of the heroes of the
revolu­tion are dead and the breath of the forerunners of Islam has
ceased in the midst of our people, when commanders of the Islam of
Muhammad and the Shi'ism of Ali are gone. But she has been turned into
\`a sister who mourns'.

I hear reproachful cries towards the scholars who are responsible for
these beliefs, ideas and thoughts of the people. I do not know whether
these cries come from the throat of Ali or from the depths of the
unconscious consciences of the people.

What are you busy with? Where do you speak from? Why do you not speak?
Throughout all of these years, where is one book for people telling them
what is in the Qur’an? In place of praise, eulogy, prayer, poetry, song,
lamentation and spider webs about the love of Rumi, why have you sealed
the lips of Ali among people? A Persian speaking person cannot easily
understand what Ali has said, but all of the works of La Martine, the
French lover, can be read in Persian, that do you say? All the songs of
the ancient Greek woman, Bilitis, with dubious morals, can be read in
Persian but the words of Ali, one saying of Ali, cannot be read.

Where is one small, short, correct, recital about the real lives,
beliefs and behavior of the Imams? You speak so much about their
essences, generosities and mira­cles but where are the books about them?
You breathe their miracles and for their birthdays and days of their
deaths you have festivals and mourning ceremonies. Where are the
treatises for the Shiite people, enamored of Ali, that say who Ali was
and who Fatima was and how their children lived and how they thought,
what they did and what they said?

Our people, who spend their lives in love with the Shiite saints and who
cry over the difficulties they faced', who serve them for months and
years, who glorify their name, spend money, give their sincerity and
their patience to them, deserve to know the real lives of each one of
their Imams. Their lives should serve as examples for each one of them.
Their lives, thoughts, words, silences, freedoms, their imprisonments,
punishments, martyrdoms, should give awareness, life, chastity and
humanness to people. But people know them only by their number. [That
is, the 6th Imam, the 8th Imam, etc.].

If an ordinary person mourns for Imam Husayn and on the anniversary of
his death *('ashura*) strikes his head with his dagger and bears the
pain even with pleasure, and still knows Husayn in an oblique way and
misunderstands Karbala, who is responsible? If a woman cries with her
whole being, if the recollection of the name of Fatima and Zaynab burns
her to her bones and if knowing it is worth­while, she would, with
complete love, give her life for them, and yet, if she does not
thoroughly know Fatima and Zaynab, who is responsible?

Neither this man nor this woman knows one line of their words. None of
them have read one line about their lives. They can only recall Fatima
beside her house at the moment when her side was struck and they only
know Zaynab from the moment when she leaves the tents to go together the
bodies of the martyrs. They only know her from the morning of the day of
'Ashura up until noon, from then on they lose her. Their awareness of
Zaynab ends the day when her work and great mandate, the legacy of
Husayn, just begins. Their knowledge about Zaynab ends here. Then, who
is responsible?

And, thus, educated and open minded boys and girls judge the situation
and say, 'What is the use of this religion of crying and lamentation?
What can such a religion do?' Mat knots do all this excitement, love,
lamentation and cries for Husayn, Fatima and Zaynab untie for a
backwards, imprisoned nation which needs awareness and commitment to
negate oppression and in order to seek freedom.

'What pain does this 'religion of remorse', these \`ancient wounds',
\`historic lamentations and cursing' treat for our deprived, illiterate
women who want their freedom and clear vision. Does one reach the heart
of the problem by doing away with love and hatred? People are busy with
feelings which passed centuries ago in foreign lands. They relate to
lives passed living among strangers. They do not know persecution. They
have not sensed the chains of oppression around their necks, nor the
oppression which, when falling upon their human shadow, causes them
pain. They have never burst in anger or become boiling hot under the
remembrance of the chains of oppression which a Caliphate one day hung
around the neck of a sick person.

They have not thrown up their hands and struck their daggers upon their
heads until they leave their senses. They have not seen them when their
consciousness returns, when their heart grows quiet, when their sins
become pure, when all responsibility falls from their shoulders, when
they even cheat at the scales of Divine justice and when they tamper
with their deeds for the afterlife.

\`As a result, when they have performed enough dirty deeds to compare
with stars in the sky, foam of the waves of the sea and sands of the
desert, with a small amount of surgery, by striking their dagger upon
their heads, they completely change their situation and become as
innocent as the moment when they were born from their mother's womb,
then even God owes them something.'

If people believe that the advantage of the friendship of Ali and their
faith in the sanctity of Ali will result in a chemical and acidic
reaction which accords with the Qur’an:

 ***'God will change their evil deeds into good deeds. (25:*****71),**

in other words, the soul of this very treason which they commit in this
world will change its essence in the other world and it will take the
form of good deeds, then who is responsible?

If this imamate and sanctity of Ali, which has for centuries had the
strength of a movement desiring justice, seeking freedom and a fighting
spirit opposed to oppres­sion and despotic institutions, and if this
movement can free awakened and aware people and give them liberty,
justice, chastity, independence and motion and if it could change them
both socially and individually and if the movement could bring about an
intellectual revolutionary leadership which fights against classes and
gives life and consciousness to a society and they have not shown this,
who is responsible? If the value, influence and effect of following Ali,
Fatima and the Imams are transferred from this world to another world
and its effect is only measured after death, then who is responsible?

If the promises and covenants of our fathers to this family have had no
effect upon their thoughts, their time, their lives and society and if
their sons, seeing this inef­fectiveness, remain cut‑off from their
promises and links with this religion and this family, then, who is
responsible?


