What Did They Miss?
===================

The Family of Ali: Intellectuals vs. the People
-----------------------------------------------

Is it that this family is without effect, or is it that our young
generation and intellectuals are in error? Or have our mothers and
fathers failed in their responsibilities?

Ali is the most manifest of truths and represents the most progressive
school of thought which has ever taken human form. It is not a myth. It
is a human reality or should be from that which it could be and isn't.

And his wife, Fatima, is a perfect example of an ideal woman; of what a
woman could be and no one has be­come. Husayn and Zaynab, the sister and
the brother, who brought such a deep revolution in the history of
mankind, give a sense of honor to freedom and disgrace to despotism and
oppression.

The house of Ali is like the Kaaba in which children and the inheritors
of Abraham reside. The Kaaba is a sign, a symbol and it is real. It is
made of stone whereas they are human beings. The Kaaba is the place of
circumambula­tion for Moslems only whereas the house of Ali is the
des­tination of every heart which understands beauty, knows the majesty
of humanity, freedom, justice, love, sincerity, strength, encourages
jihad and sacrifices to preserve the lives and freedom of the people.

From another point of view, in the difficult and con­fused space of
history, among the palaces, with the Caesars, as history always breathes
from them; culture, civili­zation, religion, thought, discipline and art
are turned around. Our intelligent, loyal, lovers of virtue who have
known this household, luckless and quiet, have always been sacrificed
through oppression and deceitfulness. Our people have tied eternal links
to them. All their faith, longing, thought and feelings have been
devoted to them. Now, even their language admires them and their means
of proof say this. Their hearts beat for them. Their eyes cry with their
sorrow. They sacrifice themselves and their possessions upon the way.
They withhold nothing.

Look at these poverty stricken, starving people who show their feelings
and the faith which they have in each individual member of this beloved
family. What things have they not done and what things will they still
not do for them?

The spending of money often shows with more cla­rity the power of faith
and sincerity. Let us account for all the time, endowments, and money
which people have spent for this family. Even today, where materiality
has gained strength, religion has been weakened and economic attractions
have pulled hearts to themselves, and we see that the poverty among
people is so advanced that the problems of their bread and water,
children's milk and medicine for the hospitals are the most important
things in their life, still, any time and under any circumstances which
relate to this family, we see that over one million ceremonies are held
in their honor.

Over 150,000 clergy exist for reciting the congrega­tional ritual
prayers along with speakers of that prayer. There are more than 700,000
seyyids [descendents of the Prophet's family] who speak at the
lamentation ceremo­nies along with eulogists and lamenters whose task it
is to restore the memory of this family. How much is spent on the
building of the *Husayniyyehs* [buildings for the ceremo­nies related to
Imam Husayn], *tekiyehs* [places where the passion plays are performed],
*heyats* [neighborhood clubs where young men meet to form a group which
participates in religious ceremonies], *dastehs* [the generic name of
the groups], that which is endowed for lamentation ceremo­nies and food,
that which is held in the name of taxes *(khums),* the religious
leaders' share, that spent in good works and feeding poor people, is
above and beyond coun­ting. It is particularly important when we
consider that this country is one of the economically backward
coun­tries. Income, according to head count, is minimal.

If we pay attention, in particular, to the great dif­ferences in classes
which exist in Islamic societies, we see that half of the capital of the
country is in the hands of a few thousand people. We see that two thirds
of whatever there is, is at the disposal of only 10% of the population.
We see that, as opposed to the past, capital has been taken from the
former landlords and the former merchants of the bazaar and has been put
into the hands of new capital­ists, new industrialists, modern bourgeois
companies and middle men who sell foreign goods or produce new pro­ducts
themselves.

We see that the money has escaped from their hands and has changed its
place from village storage areas, from the shops of the old merchants
under the old roofs of the bazaar, from the hands of local handicrafts
and traditional jobs and workers, from the hands of money exchangers and
indigenous professional guilds, from traditional indus­tries and
classical professions to the banks, stock exchange, foreign companies,
agencies, distributors, contractors and factories. This new class, a
newly created group- are cha­racterized by foreignness and
modernization. They breathe at the door of the West. They are not
religious. If any of them had a memory of or inclination towards
religion, it has long since been ironed out. Luxury, ceremony, sea­sonal
things, pretentiousness and foreignness prevail in their work. All of
this plus their Islam, in the words of Seyyid Qutb, is an American
Islam.

People who follow religion without responsibility, without expending,
without effort, most often give their opinions and present their
objections without acting or investing anything. Intellectuals are
brought into being who expend no money. Young girls and boys have for
years had 'plage' parties, dancing parties in Switzerland, Paris,
England, America and Austria upon their lips. They have been most
generous to these things.

They and their wives go abroad once or twice a year with their money
bags overflowing with money. In the stores and Moulin Rouges, they put
money into the po­ckets of the capitalists, clever people, and milkers
of money. They are no more than domesticated cows, seen by deceiving
dealers as donkeys with money, coming out of the backward countries.
They place their wealth into the cleft of expensive dancers. The wealthy
go slum­ming, and then they return .to their country, until once again
they gather up enough money to go there once again and be milked. They
do all this very naturally and without any mistake or error, even
holding their heads high. With lies, they turn people in circles. They
also put people under obligation. They call this progress, modern living
and a sign of civilization.

At the same time, a small merchant or villager gets ready for his
pilgrimage (Hajj) to Mecca or Karbala after a lifetime of work and
anguish and production. He goes on the principle that this is the only
thing in his life which will be both a time of rest as well as pleasure,
a journey, a \`tour', traveling abroad and coming to know other
coun­tries. He will be seeing the world and renewing his faith, his
beliefs and his union with his history. He unites with his culture. He
makes the pilgrimage to his beloved peo­ple. He comes to know the
remains of his civilization. He sees art which relates to him. Because
of the truth of his love, his desires and the longing of his spirit, his
feelings and needs and finally, the duty of his religious faith, once in
a lifetime, he intends to make the pilgrimage. He takes $ 700. He has to
pay $ 400 for his plane ticket and the rest he uses for his expenses
there and to buy gifts which he takes back home. That which he spends
there is the money and he pays to rent a tent or a bus and buy a few
days of food supplies. The total of all this does not reach the cost of
one night of Mr. and Mrs. Champagne in the Lido or one of their caviar
breakfasts in the George V Hotel. It is even cheaper.

When the memory of this pseudo intellectual, he who supposedly
understands the subtle points of things, this most recently reborn
(financially), open minded man, with a brand new wallet, recalls a
little merchant or a villager, who lacks splendor and sophistication,
all of the human feelings of this \`gentleman', his worthwhile
knowledge, class perception, the sense he has for his coun­try, the
sympathy he feels towards society, his national pride, his economic
information, his progressive ideas and the remains of his being an
intellectual, spills out at one time with such venom that even Che
Guevara could not stop him.

We see with the changes in this particular class, side by side with
general economic poverty, that town dwellers and village dwellers have
become poorer, entangled with affliction and hunger and the class of
minor landowners and merchants has become weak and dispersed in face of
the growth of new classes. The majority of them have remained in the
same class and minority of people change classes and move to a new one.

We see only two groups, modern types and traditional types, those loyal
to their beliefs and religious rights ‑in a sense are part of these two
groups. Because of these identi­cal and perceptible socio‑economic
changes, the loyal ones remain quietly in the same class with few
economic changes, or else they are forced into weakness. The streng­th
of religion which they participated in, and the great expenses which are
incurred in respect to rites and the inaugurating of places for
gatherings or buildings for reli­gious purposes, all are a sign that the
binding of our peo­ples' spirit with the Prophet and Ali's family is
unbeliev­ably deep and strong. It shows to what extent their faith and
sincerity is strong and pure.

It is after considering these things that the question, \`Who is
Responsible?' suddenly drops upon your head like a sledge hammer. A
person who has until now followed the problem and with precise study,
logically and clearly uncovered all sides of the issue, studied it .and
phase by phase has seen that all is correct, takes a good look at Islam
and Shi'ism.

Islam
-----

Islam, the last historical, religious school of thought and the most
perfect, Muhammad, the Qur’an, the Compa­nions and their histories are
models of life, chastity and civilization. They bring law, progress,
strength and culture to society.

Shi'ism
-------

The religion of imamate and justice, followers of Ali and his children,
Shi'ism has had a history full of jihad. Its believers show
perseverance. They are inspired by freedom and justice. They are an
unacceptable fire for despots and for the prejudiced. They have
submitted to the way. Link­ed to the anger of Truth, its followers are
enemies of any­thing which conceals the Truth. They are enemies of a
politics which reduces one to slavery. They are enemies of economic
exploitation and spiritual despotism.

To see the issue from another point of view, our people, warm with
faith, melting with love, with more than a religious belief, with truth
in thought, give their love to this family. Their name raises their
spirits. The mere mention of them makes blood boil in their veins. In
their longing for sacrifice, pure blood flows to their. They are ready
to be martyred out of their love for them. They cry in pain from their
sorrow. They are full of sorrow because they were not present on that
bloody day of 'Ashura. Then bloodied tears run. Sometimes, insane like,
they draw their daggers and strike it upon their heads. They lament all
year long. Their sorrow is real. All year they think. about those who
went before them then full. Full of praise for their positions and the
description of their titles, united as lovers, head to toe dressed in
black, from one end to the other, drowned in tears and pain. They long
with their whole being to play with their lives. Their love brings on
thirst, restlessness, anguish and it finally consumes them.

From yet another point of view, our enlightened thinkers are sensitive
people, awakened, aware of the fate of the world and the fate of their
society. They are famili­ar with the spirit and movement of time. Their
timely demands are in need of a boiling faith. They seek out
revolutionary thought. They think about freedom, equal­ity and awareness
of people. They attempt to bring about feelings, movement,
responsibility and self-awareness among their people. They see their
people and the religion of Husayn, Zaynab, justice, imamate, strength,
theology, jihad, torture, martyrdom, Karbala ...and they wonder...

Why are there no vestiges when each one of these could give life,
awareness, enthusiasm and encouragement to those who are faithful to
these ideas which overflow with life and liberty? Why do these loyal
forms, whose origins lie in the majesty of humanity, not bear fruit?

Then, who is responsible? In one word: scholars. It is they who should
have made Ali understandable. It is they who should have taught the
thoughts of Ali.

In Islam, the scholars are not wise people who gua­rantee nothing. They
do not have a handful or a bucketful or a truck full of knowledge.
Science does not consist of hundreds of pieces of information and
knowledge. In their hearts, there is a ray of light, the Light of God.
It is not a question of a Divine science, illumination or Gnosticism. It
is also not chemistry, physics, history, geography, jurispru­dence,
principles, .philosophy or logic. These are all types of scientific
knowledge.

A science becomes illuminated with light when the knowing of it brings
about a responsibility, a guiding knowledge, a science of ideas. In the
Qur’an, this is called jurisprudence, but today it is known as 'the
science of rules of the Divine Law and things related to it'. This
science should not remain in or with darkness. Rather, it lightens space
and breaks the night apart. It shows the way.

It is not the normal teacher of students, the selected sage. It is the
teacher of people. Its knowledge is not Pla­tonic, academic knowledge;
it is the knowledge of the mandate of the Prophet. It is these learned
people who will be the inheritors of the Prophets. The 'knowledge of
known’s' is a kind of power and the 'Knowledge of light' is guidance.
The enlightened sage is an intellectual with clear vision. Intellectuals
should be thinkers who sense a respon­sibility when expressing their
thoughts in relationship to their own beliefs or the beliefs of their
people.

The responsibility of the Shi'ite sage is even more important and clear.
He is the vice‑gerent of the Imam. With his knowledge, he accepts the
responsibility of the imamate and the imamate brings with it the
responsibility of prophecy.

The learned Shiite is the vice‑gerent of the Imam. He takes the
religious taxes on behalf of the 12th Imam. The most evident of his
responsibilities is to have people come to know who the Imam is. Who
were the Imams and what did they think? What did they say? What did they
do? How did they live? What role did they play in history? What was
their school of thought? Against what thought, what crime, what order
and what regime did they live and did they resist?

And if we see that these thoughts are not made avail­able to people, not
written in their tongue, if we see that the extent of books that there
are about a European film star, there are not books about all of the
Shiite saints, the scholars are, then responsible.

If an educated Shiite today knows the desires and playful games of
Bilitis, the ancient Greek whore, through a beautiful Persian
translation of her most enchanting songs and poems, whereas a good
translation of Ali's words cannot be found, if our people only know a
few names of some of the ancient Shiite leaders and they know a few
miracles, good deeds, phrases of praise, and virtues of each of their
Imams and, from their whole lives, they only know the day of their birth
and the night of their death and nothing more, then, the scholars are
res­ponsible.


