What Should be Done?
====================

Ali distributes freedom. People are in love with Ali and yet, the young
intellectuals are aware of the weaknes­ses and the decline of Ali's
followers. The main reason for this contradiction is \`not having come
to know'. It is coming to know which has value. Love and faith have no
value if they precede coming to know and choosing or commitment. If the
Qur’an is read but is not understood, it is no different from a blank
book or white notebook. Ali gives his followers awareness, greatness,
chastity and free­dom when they know who he is. When a book is read in
our language which does not correctly give his character, when a book
with his sayings is not given to his longing people, what effect can
loving him, praising and eulogizing him have?

Love and faith follow coming to know something. It is that which moves
the spirit and brings up the nation. This is why the face of Fatima has
remained unknown be­hind the eternal praise, eulogies, crying and
lamentations of her followers.

In Iranian and other Islamic societies there are three visages of women.
One is the visage of the traditional wo­man. Another is the visage of
the new woman, European­ like, who has just begun to grow and introduce
herself. The third is the visage of Fatima which has no resemblance
whatsoever to that of the traditional woman. The visage of the
traditional woman which has taken form in the minds of those loyal to
religion in our society, is as far away from the face of Fatima as
Fatima's face is from the modern woman.

The reality which we are facing in the world today, in the East, and in
particular, in an Islamic and Iranian society, the contradiction which
has appeared, the crises, the change, comes from the breaking down of
human qua­lities. It comes from the creation of a very strong agitation
which affects the way a society behaves and its way of thinking.
Principally, the changing human form has pro­duced a particular type of
intellectually educated man and woman, modernists, who contradict the
traditional man or woman. This contradiction had to come into being.
There was no one potent enough to stop it. It was a com­pulsion which no
power could have prevented.

This is not to confirm this change or to deny it. That is not within the
scope of this discussion. Rather, we refer to the change in society, the
change in the dress of man, his thoughts, his lifestyle and his
direction in life. Women also follow this change. It is not possible
that she remain in her traditional mould.

In previous generations, a son was inclined to fit exactly into his
father's mould. His father had no fear or apprehension that his son may
be other than him. There was no difference between them. There were such
strong feelings and ties between them that no doubt or indecisive­ness
could be heard in their words. But today it is not like this. One of the
peculiarities of our generation, whether in the East or in the West, is
the distance between the two generations. From the point of view of
'calendar time', their distance is 30 years, but from the point of view
of society's time, 30 centuries.

Yesterday, society was permanent. Values and social characteristics were
incapable of change. In a period of 100, 200, 300 years, nothing
changed. The foundation of society, the forms of production and
distribution, type of consumption, social relationships, government,
type of religious publicity, religious ceremonies, created things,
negative and positive values, art, literature, language, and all other
things were the same during a father's and a grandfather's lifetime as
in the time of their children and grandchildren.

The Worthy and the Unworthy
---------------------------

In such fixed worlds and closed societies, where so­ciety's time stands
still, men and women are of a perma­nent type. It is perfectly natural
that a daughter be an exact copy of her mother. If there is a difference
of opinion between a mother and her daughter, it only rela­tes to
extraneous things in life or it arises from daily con­flicts. If it has
its roots in the difference between a forbid­den or corrupt personal
ethics, it would have been some­thing which all groups and all social
types agree to. They all agree to and accept the same things as being
corrupt­ion. It is not the case that one group considers such and such
an action to be proper whereas another group con­siders its description
alone to be corruption as is the case now.

But in the world today, a girl, without having gone astray, without
having fallen into corruption, creates a distance between herself and
her mother. They are strang­ers to each other. An age difference of 15,
20 or 30 years separates them into two distinct people, two human beings
attached to two different social cycles, attached to two histories, two
cultures, two languages, two visions and two lives. Their relationship
is such that only their home ad­dresses are the same.  
 In the external forms of society we see the same con­tradiction and
historic distance between two generations, two types of visions. Just as
we see flocks of sheep grazing on the asphalt streets of Tehran, with
the shepherd milking the sheep in front of the consumer resident of the
capital, at the same time, pasteurized milk is available in the stores.
Or, you see a camel standing next to an automatic shift Jaguar sports
car. The distance is the same as that which separated Cain and Abel from
the electronic age and auto­mobiles.

We see a mother and daughter, with this distance be­tween them, walking
shoulder to shoulder down the street, one eating a traditional Iranian
ice cream and the other chewing gum.

When you add these two together, you do not get a natural, permanent
sum. It is obvious that the mother is beginning the last years of her
life. She is pulled and pre­served by habit. The daughter, on the other
hand, is just beginning the first days of her life's journey. It is
clear that the days of the traditional ice cream will set in to­morrow's
mother, but she will never return to the type who eats traditional ice
cream.

The mother and daughter will eventually become identical. The distance
in terms of social time will become one. It will be exactly the same
relationship that her mother had to her grandmother. Her daughter will
be a 'worthy' child, a copy similar to the original.

The change from the traditional type of 'mother' to the new type of
'daughter' is inevitable. Face to face with this reality (whether it be
the truth or an erroneous reality, it is certain), beginners who think
and begin to write about this phenomenon of change, just hit the tip of
the issue. They have not sensed the abusive language, accusations,
aspersions, anger, fighting, pressure, punish­ments, inflictions and
deprivations. They have not sensed the chains and irons around their
necks; they have never screamed or cried out in pain; they have never
fainted from loss of strength.

While these observers of change in society are just beginning to touch
upon these issues, and predict them, they occur. The work has been done.
They are wasting their efforts. As the change is swift, their results
are worth less than zero. The opposition's front is strengthened.  
 Those who act as guides, who give explanations, and suppositions in the
name of faith; belief, religion and char­ity are also mistaken in trying
to save each type of form which has been inherited from the past. They
try to pre­serve old traditions and habits, and are referred to in the
Qur’an as 'tales of the ancients', \`the ancients,' \`legends of the
ancients', 'legends of the ancients', 'fathers of old', 'fables of the
ancients', 'stories of yore.'

These words all refer to the first traditions, first myths and first
fathers. But they see old as being synony­mous with tradition. As a
result, they call every change, including even change in dress or
hair‑do, 'infidelity'. They mistakenly believe that the spiritual source
and the belief in submission (Islam) can only be preserved through the
worship of tradition and anything which is old. They turn away from
anything new, from any change and from any re‑birth.

Woman, in their view, must also remain as she is today because, simply
enough, her form exists in the past and has become part of social
traditions. It may be 19th century, 17th century or even pre-Islamic,
but it is con­sidered to be religious and Islamic, therefore it must be
preserved. They accept this view because it has become part of their way
of life or because it suits their interests. They try to remain the same
and hold onto things of the past forever. They say, 'Islam wanted it to
be this way. Religion has taken this form. It should remain like this
until judgment Day.'

But the world changes. Everything changes. Mr. X and his son change. But
a woman must retain her perma­nent form. In general terms, their point
of view is that the Prophet sealed women into this form and she must
retain the inclinations which make Haji Agha, [her husband], happy. He
has molded her.

This type of thinking tends to lead us astray. If we wish to keep the
forms because of our own inexperience, the inconsiderate speed of time
itself will run us over. We must realize that destruction is also a
reality. The insis­tence upon keeping these forms will bear no fruit
because society will never listen. It cannot listen because these are
mortal customs.

They try to explain social traditions, which have come into being
through habit, in religious terms. Ancient customs cannot be retained by
the force of religion for if this were so, it would mean that religion
is mortal. When we equate religion and social traditions, we make Islam
the guardian of declining forms of life and society. We mistake cultural
and historical phenomena with inherited, super­stitious beliefs. Time
comes along, and as it moves in haste, it changes habits, forms of life,
social relationships, indige­nous, historical phenomena and ancient,
cultural signs. We mistakenly believe the Islamic religion to be these
social traditions. Aren't these great errors being committed to­day?
Aren't we seeing them with our own eves?

Three Clear Methods of Problem Solving
--------------------------------------

There are three well known methods of problem solving:

Conservatism is the method of approach used by the traditionalists and
the guardians of the Traditions. It is used by a leader who guards
society, preserving a pheno­menon with his or her total being. Knowing
all the super­stitions of society, he or she still preserves them
because of the more important role of guardian.

The logic of the conservative is this: If we change the customs of the
past, it is as if we had separated the roots from the body of a tree.
The social relationships which are preserved in that custom are
connected to the body of society like a hierarchy of nerves. That
society will sudden­ly fall into anguishing difficulties which are very
danger­ous.

It is exactly because of this that after a great revolu­tion, anguish
and confusion and/or dictators come into being. They are the binders and
the bound of each other. Hastily digging out the roots of social,
cultural and tradi­tional phenomena in a quick, revolutionary manner,
will cause society to face a sudden void. The results of this void will
be made apparent after the revolution subsides.

Revolutionist is a method used by a leader who strongly and
unconsciously tears out the roots of a phe­nomena because it is a custom
based on old superstitions thereby making it reactionary and rotten.

The reasoning of the revolutionary runs like this: By retaining
out‑dated customs, we keep society out­dated, living in the past. We
will preserve stagnation. Thus a revolutionary leader says that we
should do away with all forms we inherited from the past which clamp
themselves like chains around our wrists, feet, spirit, thoughts, will
and vision. We should suddenly break away and face everyone. All of our
relationships to the past which were the least bit despotic or which
were simply habit should be done away with. New rules should replace
them. Otherwise, society remains behind, fanatic, and stagnant, bound to
the past.

Reformism is a method put into effect by a person who believes in
gradually changing a tradition. This person lays the groundwork for a
gradual change in social condi­tions. This is a middle way between the
other two.

The reasoning of the reformer is just as weak as that of the other two
methods. He takes a third way believing that changes should be quiet and
gradual. This method saves society from the stagnation of customs.
Changes should be very gradual so that the different factions do not
oppose each other.

If change is gradual, the foundation of that society, their thoughts,
will not take on a revolutionary form but rather will change over a long
period of time. Programs should be phased to reach this end.

But the method of reformism and gradual evolution usually faces the
difficulty of negative, strong reactionary forms ‑in the hands of
internal and external enemies which occur during the long time period
required by this method. The goal and purpose gradually changes. These
forces either stop it or destroy it.

If, for instance, we wished to change the ethics of our youth, or if we
wanted to enlighten the thoughts of all people, we would be destroyed
before we could reach our goal. Or, perhaps, corrupt, provocative
circumstances would dominate and deceive society and would paralyze us.
A leader who tries to gradually bring about change in society through a
relatively long period of time, believes that he used logic in
calculating his programs but that which he does not take into account is
the program of a neutralizing power which is against the changes. This
force does not always give the time necessary in order to leisurely
implement the gradual changes. The factors which were considered minor,
are seeking an opportunity to make themselves manifest. Then the
conciliation begins to slowly spin the roots and the tables are turned.

The Particular Method of the Prophet Stemming from his Traditions
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The Traditions of the Prophet, which are so impor­tant in Islam, consist
of the words which he spoke, the laws he brought, his conduct in
relationship to the deeds he performed, things he remained silent about
or did not disagree with and deeds he actually performed in his lifetime
without telling others that they should perform them. The Traditions of
the Prophet, then, are his words and his conduct. These become the rules
of Islam which are divid­ed into two groups: First, that which existed
before Islam which was confirmed by the Prophet (signed rules); sec­ond,
that which had not existed previously and Islam established (created
rules). Other than these two, in other words, signed and created rules,
or the words and deeds of the Prophet, the principle of a third one can
also be under­stood. It is my belief that it is the most sensitive. It
is the \`method' that the Prophet uses.

The Prophet preserves the form, the container of a custom which has deep
roots in society, one which people have gotten used to from generation
to generation, and one which is practiced in a natural manner, but he
changes the contained, the contents, spirit, direction and practical
application of this custom in a revolutionary, decisive and immediate
manner.

He is inspired with. a particular method which he uses in social combat
as a leader of society. Without producing negative results, without
containing any of the weak points of the other methods, his method
contains the positive characteristics of the other three. Through the
customs of society which apply the brakes, he quickly attains his social
goals. His method is this: He maintains the contain­er of a social
tradition but inwardly changes the contents, that which it contains, in
a revolutionary manner.

He uses this method in reconciling social phenomena. He adopts a process
and method which is a model for all problem solving. The method can be
applied to two prob­lems or two phenomena which in no way resemble each
other. Recognizing how important this is, we cannot fully develop it
here. We can only clarify it by a few examples.

Before Islam, there was a custom of total ablution which was both a
belief and a superstition. The pre-Islamic Arabs believed that when a
person had sexual intercourse, he or she incarnated the jinn [spirits
which inhabit the earth] and their body and soul would be made unclean.
Until they found water and performed a total ablution, they could not
rid themselves of the jinn.

Take as another example, for instance, the pilgrimage to Mecca. Before
Islam, it was an Arab custom, full of superstitions ancestor worship. It
was a glorified type of idol worship which. held economic advantage for
the Quraish tribe. It had gradually come to assume this form from the
time of Abraham. Islam 'keeps the pre-Islamic custom within the context
of the Abrahamic tradition, for at the same time that the pre-Islamic
pilgrims had used it for their idol worship; they believed that Abraham,
the Friend of God, had built it [that is, the \`house'; Kaaba, which
held their idols] .

The basis of the pilgrimage had been twofold : To protect the economic
interests of the Quraish merchants in Mecca, and to create an artificial
need among the Arab tribes for the Quraish nobility. It was revealed to
the Pro­phet of Islam to take the form and change it into the lar­gest,
most beautiful and deepest rite founded upon the Unity of God, the
oneness of mankind.

The Prophet, with his revolutionary stand, takes the rite of the
pilgrimage of the idol worshipping tribes and changes it into a custom
completely contrary to, and opposite of, its original use. It is a
revolutionary leap and notion. As a result, the Arab people undergo no
anguish nor separation by going back to the time of Abraham, no loss of
having their values thrown together, no loss of their beliefs, but
rather, they sense the revival and truth or cleansing of their eternal
customs. They move easily from idol worship to unity whereas centuries
of history exist between them. Suddenly, and more unexpectedly than any
cultural or intellectual revolution, society does not realize that it
had left the past; it is not aware of the fact that the buildings and
foundations of its idol worship have been torn down. This leap, this
social method found with­in the Traditions of the Prophet is a
revolution within a custom which preserves the outer form but changes
the content. [That is, maintaining the container as the per­manent
element while changing and transforming that which is contained].

Thus the conservative, at whatever cost and in what­ever form, tries, to
the last bit of his strength, to keep his customs, even if , it means
sacrificing himself and others. The revolutionary, on the other hand,
wants to change everything into another form at one time. He wants to.
annihilate everything and then suddenly jump, whether or not society is
prepared to leap in their direction and move from phase to phase. But if
they bear up under it all, and the only possibility is that of a
revolution, they must turn to anger, dictatorship, judgment and
extensive public murders not only against a person who opposes the power
of the people but also against the people them­selves. A reformer always
gives a corrupter the opportunity to destroy. The Prophet, through the
inspired method of his work, shows us that if we understand, and if we
put his method into action, we will have accepted a most enligh­tened
and correct way.

A clear visioned intellectual, who is confronted by unused customs,
ancient traditions, a dead culture and an unbelievable metamorphosis in
their religion and social order, takes up the mandate of the Prophet
rather than submit to the prejudices and beliefs which remain from the
past and which put one to sleep. It is with this method that one can
reach revolutionary goals without forcibly bearing all the conclusions
and customs of a revolution and without opposing the basis .of faith and
ancient social values. By doing so, one does not remove oneself from
people, nor does one become strangers to them so that people then turn
around and condemn one, because the Prophet received knowledge from the
Divine Infinite and asked for the help of revelation and made use of it.

Realism: A Means of Serving Idealism
------------------------------------

One of the peculiarities of Islam is that it accepts both beliefs which
are identical to it as well as coercive beliefs of society. It admits to
the existence of both. Here the perception of Islam is special.

The idealistic schools of thought lean upon the high­est values, the
absolute and most desirable ideologies. Each and every reality is
categorically rejected if it does not suit them. They have no patience.
They deny realities and dig out the roots of anger. Anger, violence, the
seeking of pleasure and lovers of wealth are realities which exist.
Moral idealism or religious idealism (i.e. Christianity) ignores them
and denies their existence. They are con­demned in any form.

On the other hand, schools of thought who are based on realism accept
all things as the basis of reality. For instance, sodomy is accepted in
England or in Chris­tianity, due to religious idealism, not reality,
divorce is prohibited because of not wanting to destroy family order and
believing that marriage is an ideal, sacred link.

But reality is other than this. Some human beings cannot preserve the
first, sacred marriage and remain loyal to each other. It so often
happens that human beings grow apart during their lifetime. They become
strangers. They live together like two pitiful people. That which has
joined them is' not love, it is the ties of the law. They are two
inflicted people. They might even become lucky with someone else. This
is a reality which has existed in the past, exists in the present and
will exist in the future. Civilized and uncivilized people, the
religious and the non­religious have felt it and continue to feel it.
Statistics show it, but Christianity denies the reality. They bind
marriage to the sacred. They force a family to stay together even when
there is a real hell behind the doors and the family has become a center
of murder, adultery and corruption. The door of divorce has been closed
but thousands of windows of swindle and illegality have been opened.

Concubines: Foreign siqehs
--------------------------

Social realities are such that if we do not open doors to them, they
will spring out from the windows. Forbid­ding divorce brings about a
type of concubinage. That is, a man who cannot live with his legal wife,
actually sepa­rates from her, without being able to get a divorce. The
same is true for a woman. She cannot get a divorce but she lives
separately. They each live for years separated from each other with
another man or woman. The children which are born out of this situation
are natural but illegal. They have sick beliefs and complexes. They
become frigh­tening murderers. Their spirit is anti‑social.

A woman and her legal husband become strangers. They begin opposing each
other. They reach the same con­clusion. Their relationship of husband
and wife is not just sleeping together. It cannot continue. They cannot
even live as neighbors. It is natural that they separate. The man leaves
the household and goes looking for the type of woman he always wanted.
Love, the need for a family life, and the pull of sex, one way or the
other, helps him to find a natural tie. They find a place and live
together. The wife's life takes exactly the same pattern and the same
fate. As a result, we see that nature and reality builds two new
families, two incompatible types who are repla­ced by another two.

But Christian ideology does not accept this reality. Therefore, no one,
including that man and woman, is res­ponsible. They close their eyes so
as not to see it. As a result, it accepts , in legal terms, a decomposed
house which has no external existence. Its materials have all been used
to make another house. It is the former house which they know as
official and they deny these two natural families.

Here we see the distance between common law, civil law and religious law
and how natural forces, realities and oppositions arise. As a result,
families, which are religious or Christian, do not actually exist and
families which are real and natural are considered to be corrupt and
sinful. Christianity, by denying this reality, causes the family which
comes into being to be illegal. The children which are born out of this
union of concubinage are also illegal. From the point of view of a
religious society, they are criminals and murderers. They do not have a
share in the kindness of the family nor the purity of society. Society
looks upon them as sinners. Complexes arise within them. They suffer an
anger and an anguish which is beyond the imagination. They take their
revenge on society.

All these crimes which occur in Europe and, in par­ticular, in America,
do not exist in backward and under­developed countries. The reason is
that in these Western societies, even though they have civilizations in
the sense that they have culture, ethics, nourished minds, freedom of
thought, the individual, society and religion, there is also something
born into this generation which fills up their beliefs and makes them
take revenge upon society in the worst of forms.

An Englishman had built something which resembled a very small bow and
arrow. ‑He had attached this to a box upon which he had displayed
cigarettes, selling them along the streets and at movie houses. He shot
a tiny poison­ tipped arrow into a group of people which either blinded
or killed them. The police could not find the killer. They were looking
for a motive connecting the murderer and the murdered. But the murderer
had no particular reason for murdering those people. He murdered simply
because they were accepted by society and he was not.

Such a murder can be explained according to the principles of society.
It is the effect of complexes which the church refuses to accept and
closes its eyes to. It has had a hand in bringing it about. Fortunately,
we have not yet seen such complexes because there is divorce in our
society, there are no illegal families and because there is divorce
there is no family which is a non‑entity because families are not forced
to live with each other through common law. They do not bind them
together through the force of law.

A child wanted to go out of a room, but a samavar, a teapot and various
dishes were in the way. He closed his eyes and tried to pass through. He
thought all the obstacles were gone. Idealism is like a child who does
not see reality. It does not want to see reality. It closes its eyes to
that which it does not want to see. Because it does not see them, it
thinks they do not exist.

The opposite of idealism is realism. Its followers see everything, no
matter how ugly or unpleasant, simply because it has an external
existence. They accept a thing, attach their hearts to it and find
faith. They oppose and reject, however, all beauty, truth and
correctness, simply because these do not agree with existing realities.
They reject them because these are ideal and through this re­jection,
they become unbelievers.

One of my students, who was among the pseudo­-enlightened of this
country, drew only one conclusion from our conversations. As he was a
supporter of dialectic materialism and l was religious, a believer in
Islam, he re­jected whatever I said because of his pre‑conceived
notions. Even if I said something which agreed with Marx­ism (and which
he too should have agreed with) as I didn't explain to him whose idea it
was, he rejected it.

One day I was speaking about the murders committed by the Omayyad’s and
the disagreements which existed between the classes. They had a
political dictatorship which dominated religion in order to explain
their situa­tion. They wanted people to believe that whatever hap­pened
was God's will. This, they said, was particularly true about their own
government. ‑1 spoke about the people who opposed them and resisted the
situation. I saw how my student suddenly became unhappy. I was opposing
the Omayyad’s and praising Ali, Fatima, Abu Dharr, Hojr and Husayn as
leaders of a movement for justice and human free­dom, and against
prejudices, oppression and ignorance. What could this first class
enlightened thinker do? He yel­led out, \`The despot is history!' That
is, according to the Marxist philosophy of history, society must move
through historic phases and it had to reach this stage in order for it
to be a historical reality. Ali, Husayn and Abu Dharr were ideologists
who opposed the despotism of history. I said, \`The Mercy of God be upon
this enlightened one.'

I see that I was right in re‑iterating the fact that when the level of
thought and vision of a society is transformed, the religious,
non‑religious, enlightened, reactionary and ignorant scholar are all the
same. When a religious view prevails, when it comes upon an unknown and
uncompre­hended fact, it calls it fate and destiny, meaning the Divine
despot. It believes that whatever occurs is the Will of God.

When a society becomes Marxist, it believes in the despotism of history.
It believes that whatever happens is beyond human will. Whatever exists,
is accepted because it is a reality which results from the despotism of
history the despot. of society. I said, 'No. look my friend, the sword
is the despot here, not history.'

We see that realists believe that whatever exists sho­uld be as. it is!
The members of the Parliament in England defend the laws of
homosexuality because it is an objective reality which exists in
society. Therefore, it must be made legal.

To oppose this realism is to worship idealized fantasies which form the
basis of politicians and pseudo­ intellectuals. You do not hear them
argue that Israel is a reality (Yes! It is ). But the settlement of the
Palestinian people in lands occupied by Israel shows the manifestation
of someone who worshipped the ideal even though it it? Wrong. It is a
reality which must be accepted. Although it moves against the grain of
humanity, although it is mur­der, it exists. Politicians and
intellectuals accept it and officially recognize it.

A magazine entitled \`This Week' has recently been published for young
people. All the articles, translations, news items and photographs are
the total writings of two or three well known writers using pen names.
These writers visit whore houses and then, damn them. They write for our
young people giving them a point by point description of events which
take place. One of the top writers, who is knowledgeable, is a
politician who officially represents Is­lamic culture! He advises women
who are overweight and unhappy because of it, in order to develop a
better form, become better looking and prevent the growth of further
layers of fat, they should find an illicit lover for awhile. This is all
a reality. Most probably the committee of wri­ters had themselves first
scientifically experienced this and had practically gained from it.

The weakening of the weak by the strong is also a reality. Oppression
and suppression of certain classes is also a reality. Reality seekers
are completely objective viewers. They see the external form which is a
scientific and sensible reality. Then they judge. They face no
dif­ficulties with imagination, ideology and ideas which are not
translated into real forms.

We see that an idealist, a thinker, a reformer is called towards mental
desires, ideals and sacred values, goodness and the highest of needs and
he denies or rejects the reali­ties which deviate from his beliefs and
act as existing bar­riers. It is impossible to negate them. He turns his
back on them, or else, through inexperience, rejects them. He pulls,
himself away from realities. He thinks in terms of imagery. He occupies
a sacred place but does not realize that he is in an idealistic
environment. He drowns himself in objec­tive and sensible phenomena and
the existing situation.

A realist, on the other hand, kills flights of thought, mounted spirits,
visions, efforts, longing desires and the seeking of perfection. A
realist keeps everything (as it is). He builds walls around the
framework of existing values and within the existing situation. He
paralyzes creative thought, rebellion and the deep changes of life. The
changes in the coercion of history and social condi­tions are
desensitized along with changing ways of tho­ught, the type of needs and
desires and the present, exter­nal purposes of mankind. They surrender
to realities and nourish that which exists.

Neither Idealism nor Realism: Both
----------------------------------

Islam is a pure tree which belongs neither to the East nor the West and
has its roots in the heavens and its bran­ches reaching towards the
earth. Contrary to idealism, Is­lam recognizes the existing realities in
life, in the body, and in the spirit of an individual, as well as in
those found in community relationships, those which reach the depths of
a society and can be seen in the motion of history.

Islam, as with the realists, admits to their existence, but as opposed
to realism, it does not accept the status quo but changes them. It
changes their essence in a revolu­tionary way. It carries realities
along with its ideals. It uses realities as a means to reach its
idealistic goals, its real desires, which are non‑existent by them.
Unlike realists, Islam does not' submit to realities, but rather, it
causes the realities to submit to it. Islam does not turn away from
realities as idealists do. It seeks them out. It tames them. Through
this means, Islam uses that which hinders the idealists as a composite
for its own ideals.

Take concubinage, for instance, which in Europe is considered to be an
illegal, abhorred and an unclean mar­riage. But it exists. It exists
throughout Europe and Ame­rica and in very religious societies and
groups as well. But Islam accepts divorce, a new marriage contract and
tem­porary marriage in certain very exceptional cases. Islam accepts
divorce in certain social circumstances. If it did not accept divorce,
divorce would still exist, but it would be outside its control. By
accepting an unavoidable, natural reality, it makes it into a legal
form. As a result, one can conquer the sense of guilt one has in the
eyes of God and society. Thus, their contract is based upon ethical
princi­ples and religion is preserved. These people can nourish their
environment. Society does not look upon them as sinners or at their
children as illegal and impure.

Islam succeeded the day it admitted the existence of these social and
human realities. Because of this, it can control its results. It can
give realities a legal form. It can correct their form. It can give them
an ethical and reli­giously accepted form. By confirming and admitting
the existence of a reality, Islam gains strength. It can then control,
guide and dominate the reality within a frame­work.

If we deny realities, they will dominate us. Without knowing it, we will
be pulled wherever they want us to go. As can be seen, realism is
drowned in existing realities, whether good or bad. On the other hand,
realism can be seen running away from those very same realities.
Idea­lists sacrifice more as they are imprisoned in the chains of
useless customs. Realists move along with realities and accept them,
whereas idealists, who do not recognize them, do not see them and deny
them through their igno­rance and their attachment to imaginary ideals.
Idealists then face an attack; they fall on their knees because they are
defenseless, inexperienced and weak. They will be destroyed.

We don't see the form that girls who are raised in very strict religious
homes take. We don't see her when she covers her face so that, God
forbid, the fish in the court­yard pool do not see her. What happens
when she enters the ocean of society? She vigorously swims but she is so
afraid that she loses control of herself and drowns. In order to make up
for what she lacks now, she pays her fine a thousand times over.

The same is true for young men who grow up in a pious society. The
nouveau riche has just moved from the former world of their idealistic
pseudo religious environ­ment. There they were prohibited from learning
physics or chemistry, or studying, at the university. The women are
forbidden to have a high school or college education. The men do not
shave their beards; they sit in coaches instead of in buses or in taxis.
They wear no neck‑tie; they do not let their hair grow long; they do not
change the form of their clothes or their hair‑style. They neither buy
radios nor do they spread the word of the Qur’an through a microphone!
Suddenly, these young people face the new world of realities, full of
twists and turns.

You see what confusion it has caused. He sees the pretense. He has
learned certain airs through having had them translated in films into
Persian. He learns about showing off luxury and being silly. He sees the
exaggera­tion of it all. It is so exaggerated that even foreigners laugh
about it. Why? Because they exist side by side with reality whereas we
deny them before we even come to know them. This is why we have been
captured.

This new civilization has attacked all boundaries and watch‑towers of
the world. They have been made to fall down. The new generations have
been caught by the speed of the wind of the Renaissance, the
intellectual move­ments, the great French revolution and the
industrialized life styles as they blow continuously. These changed the
weather of the world. The changing of the atmosphere of our, country is
also a reality. It is a most certain reality. It is clear that sooner or
later the lightening will strike. V1hen it does, machines, printing
presses, universities, democracy, radios, television, movies,
newspapers, books, schools, women's education, new techniques, new
sciences, and many other new things will come and will change them.

The leaders of the people, those responsible for their ethics, those who
have been given the responsibility of guiding their lives and thoughts,
those who stand face to face with unavoidable realities, have closed
their eyes. They have given their hearts to mental ideologies and to
their ancient thoughts. They have tried to preserve their horse drawn
carriages side by side with taxis.

And they still light lamps, having electricity. They are aware. They
even correctly predict this truth. They pre­dict the phenomenon of the
rush to the inferior world. They know it will bring about the decline of
much of the beliefs, faith, piety, health and independence. They know
that corruption will find a home deep within people's brains. But face
to face with this coercion and this rush to­wards a new phenomenon,
knowing the order and relation­ship which it imposes when it reaches the
furthermost points and the most backward tribes of society, even those
in the depths of the desert, they only say one thing and one thing only:
Forbidden! Radios? Don't buy one. Movies? Don't see them. Television?
Don't watch it. Loud­speaker? Don't listen. University? Don't go. The
new science? Don't study it. Newspapers? Don't read them. Vote? Don't
give it. Office work? Don't do it and ... women? Shhh ... Don't mention
that word!

Face to face with the flood of industry which covers the world and the
changes which have taken place in .the world order, seeing a
civilization which sells refrigerators to the Eskimos, they stand to
prevent it from coming about by completely defending the past. Their
total army and defense consist of two things only, a word along with a
negative command: \`Forbidden!' and \`NO!'.

What is the result? What we see is what happens. Events and realities
break the barriers and tear down the watch‑towers. Realities tear down
the bricks of the walls and destroy the defenseless defenders of the
past who are hidden behind them with their eyes closed or who have
turned their faces away as a sign of their disapproval.

The force of these realities ruins everything at once. They attack the
city's inhabited areas, the bazaars, mos­ques and even our homes like
wild bulls, wolves and chain­ed dogs. They plunder everything. But they
do not leave. They come, they kill, they burn and they take, but they do
not leave as the army of Ghengis Khan had done. Why?

Because no one even sees them. Our border guards, our watchmen, don't
like them. They are so exasperated that they don't even bother to look
at them. They don't want to go and separate the good from the bad and
correct them. They don't want to adapt them to the climate and the
people of our country. They don't want to choose among them. They don't
want to shame, control and do­minate them. They stand in the middle of
the road facing a driverless car. They are run over and crushed.

They is why veiled women who want to give birth to their children,
scream, \`Why men physicians? Why should women not be treated by women
physicians?' She wants her child to go to school and to the university.
Her cries increase ‑ is this the faculty of literature or a fashion
show? Is this an Islamic university? Is this an Islamic soc­iety? Does
this school smell just a bit of Islam? Does it contain a bit of ethics
and meaning? Is this the radio of a religious country or just a noise
box? What kind of a tran­slation is this from one culture to another ‑
this television, this publication, this gathering, these laws which act
as balancing scales, these banks? What film is this? What theater? What
art? What craft? Really, what kind of a civiliza­tion is this? But then
again, as Hafez [the great Iranian poet] has said,

*As our destiny has been made in our absence if just a little bit is not
according to our wishes, don't worry*

And, in our case, we have to say:

*if all of it is not according to our wishes don't worry!*

When these realities come and find a place for them­selves, when they
begin to work, you are absent. You have run away. When you, a pious man,
a religious, ethical Moslem, sensitive to people's feelings, responsible
for the spirits and thoughts of society, preserver of the Islamic
culture, sulk and retire into a corner, you allow a Khan, [Reza Shah] to
bring and to put a new civilization into effect and employ a new
industry and science for your society.

It takes great effort to effectively interfere in events which unfold.
Yet it is only through this effort that you can guide the determined
motion of society. People who believe we should preserve that which is
incapable of being preserved and that which is dying, and who are in a
pos­ition to advise those who inspire, those who appease and those who
give condolences, do not recognize the dangers. They create believers
from among those who accept the unacceptable. They delude the majority
of society. They keep them in a state of bending forward, silent, weak
and submissive.

Those who seek a flowing and active society and want a better human
life, acknowledge realities. They know pain. They take their strength
from these realities in order to heal their wounds. This does not
include those who, as demigods, defend that which is incapable of being
defended, nor those who take the public into their own hands, nor those
who follow the styles of the day, nor those who praise according to what
is fashionable, nor those who try to attach themselves to something.

Those who acknowledge realities are people who know time moves. They
know that society has a skin which it sheds. They feel that the strong
forces of the world have turned to us to make us change. Neither are
they sufficiently without pain to sit down and watch, nor are they
without shame to be able to take. whatever job is handed to them. They
are not so stupid as to react in such a way that when they see a flood
has come to cover their town, they should try to protect only their wife
and chil­dren, keep them safe and pull their own carpet from the water,
because they know it is a wrong and useless act. They know that today is
not like the past where families were living in a closed society. Now,
even if you hide your daughter in the back room of your house, national
and international television will follow her, find her and show her the
attractions and shows of the outside world.


