Which Mould Do They Fill?
=========================

Traditional or Absurd
---------------------

In reality, in our society, those who ask, \`Who am I? 'Who should I
be?' or \`What is my identity?' are of two types. One type is a person
who is attached to out‑dated, existing traditions that are called
religion and ethics, which that person wants to impose upon others. He
can't. Even though he knows he can't, he still sticks with them, he
still retains them. He tries to impose them upon the young people.

There is another type who is afraid to act even under the pseudo name of
intellectual, modern or freedom seeker because he thinks, 'If I
interfere or if I negate or agree and control the \`ifs', I will be
condemned as being old-fashioned, eastern, backward and religious. So
against the social changes, changes in the types of young men and women,
he plays the role of a \`dead person'. In other words, his child acts
while the mother and father create possibilities for him. They are
called intellectual parents. But their silence and surrender does not
stem from their intellectual abilities. It does not come from their
beliefs but rather from their impotency and weakness. He says to
himself, 'if I interfere, I will give up my outer, external strength and
my inner emptiness will show.' Prestige, Papa!

These are two types, two types of people who can be molded. One is
attached to the traditions of the Chahar Bagh in Isfahan ‑ huge, ugly,
crooked and decayed. The second is a product of European brick kilns ‑
straight; subtle, without endurance, hollow and absurd.

These are two types and two ways, both are incorrect and lost. Why? One
stands against the roaring flood of realities which is about to ruin
everything. He tries to turn back the waters with his hands. He tries to
stop the flow. He swears, cries out, laments, sobs, and cries at the
flood which builds up and flows out and takes everything in its way.

The other one stretches himself out next to the flood waters, like a
dead person, like a useless observer. This dear man who has no
personality of his own, is quiet, works from morning until night,
commits murder, rips people off, is a pickpocket, performs a thousand
dirty deeds, praises, tricks people and then fills his pockets in order
to have them emptied by foreign companies and to have himself poured
into their pockets.

Women ‑ We Cannot Know
----------------------

There are only some European women whom we have the right to recognize.
It is they whom we always have to refer to. They are the women
introduced through films, magazines, television and sexy movies by
writers who have given them sex. They are introduced to us as a
uni­versal type of European woman.

We have no right to get to know the European girl who at the age of 16
went to the deserts of Nubi, Africa, the deserts of Algeria and
Australia. She spent all of her life in wild places. She lived with the
threat of sickness, death and wild tribes. Throughout her youth and old
age she studied the waves emitted from the antennae of ants and the
antennae which receive them. When she grew old, her daughter carried on
her work. The second generation of this European woman returned to
France at the age of 50. At the university she said, 'I discovered the
language of the ants and I learned some of their signs of
communi­cation:'

We have no right to come to know Madame Guashan who spent her whole life
studying and finding the roots of philosophical ideas and the wisdom of
Avicenna, ibn Rushd, Mulla Sadra and Haji Mulla Hadi Sabzevari in Greek
philosophy and many of the works of Aristotle and then compared them.
She showed what our philoso­phers received from them. She corrected that
which they had badly translated and incorrectly understood for the 1000
years of Islamic civilization.

We have no right to know the Italian Mme. De la Vida. One of her works
was to edit and complete the \`Science of the Soul' of Avicenna from the
ancient Greek manuscript of Aristotle on the soul.

We have no right to know Mme. Curie who discover­ed quantum and
radioactivity or Resass Du La Chappelle who knew more about the sanctity
of Ali than all the Is­lamic scientists and even all the Shiites who
claim today to be aware of Ali and the Alavis. She was a young,
beau­tiful, free Swedish girl, born far from Islamic culture. She was
distant from Shiite behavior and beliefs. From the beginning of her
youth, she devoted her life to knowing that spirit which had remained
unknown in the structure of Islam. She followed a man who had been
covered over by the hatred of his enemies, and caught in traps laid by
hypocrites and embellished by poetic praises and meaning­less friends.
She discovered the most correct manuscripts about Ali. She came to know
the most subtle waves of his spirit, the depth of his feelings and his
highest leaps in ideas. For the first time, she felt his anger, pain,
loneliness, brokenness, fear and needs. Not only did she show Ali in the
Battles of Ohud, Badr and Hunayn, but she found Ali praying in the
mihrab of the mosque in Kufa. She dis­covered his nights and his
complaining around the wells of Medina. She gathered together the
*Nahjel balagah* which the Arab Moslems have access to through the
litera­ry edition of Muhammad Abduh, the great Sunni Mofti, whereas
Shiites have the lectures of Javad Fazel which is related to Ali or the
Faiz translation (which is correct but has to be read with the help of
the Arabic text!).

This girl ‑ a disbeliever destined for hell ‑ who gathered all of the
writings of Ali in this and that book, notebook or recorded in a
manuscript, hidden here and there. She read all of them and translated
them and inter­preted them. The most beautiful and deepest writings ever
written about someone flowed from her pen. For 42 years she has
continued to study, think, work and research Ali.

We have no right to know Angela; the American girl in prison who is not
only the hope of two countries, but of all the free people of the world,
of all the wounded, all those condemned through humanity's racial
discrimi­nation ‑ the oppressed.

We should not know that foreign women are not just toys of the Don Juans
who take money, unattractive things and jewels ‑ female slaves serving
men as long as they want them, as long as they are interested. We should
not believe that they are only worthy of the attention of their
pleasures, desires and lusts. After that period, they are like machines
that have become out‑dated. Rather, the foreign women have progressed to
the point of becoming the embodiment of an ideology of a country and
place, of salvation (escape), pride, and the honor of a generation. But
we have no right to know them.

We only have the right to know Mme. Twiggy! And as the final level of
the ideal manifestation of Western civilization, the Queen of \`71, and
along with her, the highest form of European woman, Jacqueline Onassis,
who uses her money as a means of exchange for every­thing, B.B. and the
Queen of Monaco and all of the 7 female guards around James Bond. They
are the sacrifices of the departments of the production of Europe. They
are the toys and wind‑up dolls of the wealthy and the slaves of the new
civilization for the houses of the new mer­chants.

We Iranians only have the right to know them to be examples of women of
European civilization. I have never seen photographs from Cambridge, the
Sorbonne and Har­vard University showing and telling about female
.univer­sity students who go to the library and work on 14th and 15th
century manuscripts and artifacts from 2500‑3000 years ago in China, or
who bend over Qur’anic manuscripts based upon Latin, Greek, Cuneiform
and Sanskrit texts without moving and without allowing their eyes to
rove. They don't take their heads out of their books until the librarian
takes their books away or asks them to leave.

You men and women, seekers of knowledge, scholars, researchers, have
you‑ ever heard of the famous contem­porary German scholar, Frau
Hunekeh? Have you heard that she has recently written a very
comprehensive study of Islam and its influence upon European
civilization which has been translated into Arabic and is entitled *The
Arab's Sun Spreads over the West.*

These are not today's women and they should not be known. Why? Because
one group is old fashioned. They are tradition seekers. The other is
superstitious and hidden and at the same time known and apparent. If
they join hands, they will awaken us. They will destroy everything we
have. So people are obliged to take the form of tamed consumers and
quiet slaves.

These two old fashioned, traditional and newly wealthy, for all
practical purposes, work together so that a new type comes into being,
one under the name of ethics and religion and the other under the name
of freedom and progress. The old-fashioned worshippers of tradition hit
women with prejudicial fanaticism and push her, leaving her without
bread and water. They show her anger. They have no compassion. They
treat her so badly that the woman, half crazy with her eyes and ears
closed, throws herself into the skirts of those with cylindrical hats
and goat like beards, who welcome her, take off their hats respectfully
and with correct manners, bend their heads forward politely and with a
smile upon their faces, treat her gently.

This very European woman whom we have come to know is a woman. of today.
She delivered herself but she is the progeny of the Middle Ages. She is
reacting to the in­human treatment and fanaticism of the priests of the
Mid­dle Ages, who, in the name of Christianity and religion, misguided
women and cursed and enslaved them. They even showed her to be hated by
God. They were the acti­vators of corruption. She was the main cause of
Adam's fall from Paradise to the earth!

In the Middle Ages, they asked the priest: ‘If there is a, woman in a
house, should a man, who is not related, en­ter?’ They said, \`Never.
Because if the man is not related and he enters the house where there is
a woman, even if he does not see the woman, still he has sinned.' In
other words, if an unrelated man goes to the second floor of the house
and a woman is in the basement, sin occurs. It seems that the sins of
women spread through the air.

St. Tomas Dakin said, 'If God should see the love for a woman upon a
man's face, even if the woman is his wife, he becomes angry because no
love, other than the love of God, should sit upon his heart. Christ
lived without a wife and a man can be a Christian, never having touched
a woman. This is why Christian brothers and spiritual fathers and even
Christian sisters never marry, because marriage is a tie which arouses
God's anger. We should only join with God through Jesus Christ because
two loves do not fit into one heart. Only those who remain unmarried can
carry the Holy Ghost.'

In Christianity, the first sin was the sin of woman. Every man, as the
child of Adam, who, turns towards a woman, even if that woman be his
wife, as Eve was the wife of Adam, repeats the first, primordial sin.
The sin and disobedience of Adam is renewed in the memory of God!

Thus one must do something so that God will forget Adam and his sin!
This is why a woman in the thoughts of the people of the Middle Ages is
so hated, weakened and held back from the ownership of anything. It even
exten­ded to the point that when a woman, owning property, went to her
husband's house, she lost the rights to her own property. Her ownership
was of itself transferred to her husband. A woman had no legal status.
The effects of this can still be found in European civilization, which
is com­pletely unacceptable to us.

Even today, if a woman marries, she changes her name. This is not just
for use in her home or unofficially. Her education certificates, her
identification, her passport, everything is replaced from carrying her
father's name to her husband's name. This means that a woman herself is
nothing. She has no essential existence. A name is signi­ficant. A
creature who lacks significance stands through others. In her parent's
home, she uses her father's name. She lives with her first owner. When
she goes to her hus­band's home, the name of another man, her new owner,
distinguishes her. She does not possess sufficient value or credit to
have a name. This tradition has also influenced Iran because it is a
European tradition. Their traditions are better than ours. Even if it is
a tradition from the slave age, even if it is nonsense, a detested and
ugly action, the very fact that it has a foreign mark upon it, is
suffi­cient for our modernists, characterized by their impotent
imitation.

In imitating, whether a modernist or a traditionalist, reflection in
choosing. There is no questioning or judg­ment about good or bad, no
distinction between the use­ful and the useless. The basis of their
imitation is the prin­ciple that 'whatever defect the King accepts, is
art.' They confirm him until it reaches the point where if he says, 'Day
is night', they add, 'Yes. I see the moon and the stars.'

In the official European marriage forms, the two people to be married
are asked, 'Name?' Secondly, girl's family name. In answering the first
question, the family name which will be taken after marriage, that is,
the family name of the husband to be is recorded. In an­swer to the
second question, her unmarried family name, the name of her father, is
recorded.

In other words, a woman belongs to the owner of the house. Even if a
house had originally belonged to her, she could not continue to own it
because she is a woman. In her father's house, it was his name and in
her husband's house, it is his name which is used. This is why she
official­ly changes her name through marriage.

Our modernists have recently become aware of this foreign tradition. She
also changes her first name after marriage ‑ she does not change her
family name, but rather her first name! This is ridiculous. This is just
an ex­ample which our pseudo foreigners take from the foreign 'better
race'. Whatever that race does is copied without even knowing its
reason, purpose or value, because our modernists have no common sense.

This idiot ridiculously, unconsciously acts and thinks like a foreigner
because he or she cannot distinguish. This is why we say pseudo
foreigners have been born into our modern society who do not resemble
foreigners and pseudo Europeans have come into existence for which no
example in Europe exists.

According to the present divorce law in France, when a woman separates
from her husband, she has absolutely no right to her children. Whereas
in Islam, from the very beginning, the purest form of Islam, not the
pre­sent composite form of Islam, she is completely indepen­dent in
respect to woman's rights. She can even seek pay­ment from her husband
for nursing her child. She can car­ry on her own businesses without any
interference from her husband. She can work. As to production, she can
in­dependently and directly put her capital into effect. She has the
most economic independence of any member of society.

All of the anti‑human and pseudo religious pressures committed against
women in the name of religion have caused a reaction among European
women. This reaction by women is directed against the Middle Ages. The
me­mory and thought of it has remained with her. In Italy and Spain
where religion is still strong, women are denied many of their human
rights in spite of the signs of freedom and emphasis upon human rights
and other such grand jokes.

We are talking about human freedom and social rights, not sexual freedom
and sexual rights. We see with what speed the latter becomes prevalent.
In return for the second world's (the previous third world) oil,
diamonds, rubber gum, copper, coffee and uranium which inexpen­sively
enters Europe, Europe exports freedom, ethics, tech­niques, culture,
art, literature and, in particular, sex, to this hungry, plundered world
‑ freely and with genero­sity. All means of communication and
advertisement, soc­ial, technical, artistic and educational
possibilities of an underdeveloped country come into the service of
pro­paganda, promotion and distribution. These things are all other than
freedoms and the rights of man!

Sexual freedoms are deceiving. It is part of a new ex­ploitation, a type
of limitless deception, which the impure system of Western capitalism in
today's world, causes both the East and West innocently and of itself to
reach out towards it until it gets to the point that the influence of.
Western people and the influenced Eastern countries find a secure and
safe environment for themselves and find continuity.

The young generation, in particular, those who con­tain both the
elements of rebellion and audacity and those who lack patience as well
as those who are not stupefied by religious stipulations and have
released the hereditary chains of traditions which crimp their thoughts
because they find they do not relate to their sensitivities. At any
moment it is possible that, based upon rebellion, they take up a notion
contrary to their interests and as a result put their heads into an
inexpensive foreign lovers cesspool and become so drowned and giddy in
the artificial freedom as presented by capitalists that they no longer
know what the world is about. They so completely saturate themselves
with it that they no longer sense their poverty and slavery. This is why
we see to what extent the internal conditions of despotism in Asia,
Africa and Latin America result. in an insane like emphasis, seriousness
and insistence upon the rights and freedom of sex by the Western
capitalists. It is emphasized and strengthened so that the groundwork is
laid for its daily increase.

We can, with a little bit of caution and discernment, come to know what
is behind these attractive forms of the thunder struck, sexuality which
is none other than the denial of the modern world. We have to come to
know these great idols and the three faces of the contemporary religious
trinity: exploitation, colonialization and despo­tism. They make Freud a
prophet of lies. From Freudism they build a scientific and human
religion. From sexuality, an ethical conscience, a real institution and
finally, from lust, a blessed temple is built. They build this place of
worship and create a powerful servanthood. The first sac­rifice recorded
in the threshold of this temple is woman.

Who is the Contemporary Woman? Serving Oneself vs. Serving Others
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In the 15th and 16th centuries, following the Renais­sance, 'with the
passing away of traditions and ancient re­ligion, the thoughts of
Descartes and the logic of analytical science replace natural
sensitivities and religious feelings.

According to Durkheim, the concept of individual­ism, in other words,
individual independence in one's rela­tionship to one's society (family,
tribe or country) or the serving of oneself replaces the spirit and
unity of society and the serving of others (the socialism of Durkheim).
Uti­lity replaces values. Realism replaces idealism. Instincts replace
spiritual‑ efforts. Welfare and the problems of life replace the seeking
of perfection, consciousness of God and self sufficiency. Intelligent
logic is consciously chosen on credit to substitute for the sacred,
spiritual and cultural roots which, through an unacceptable process of
analysis are related to a kind of eternal pleasure.

Finally, known and suitable phenomena, capable of analysis and
synthesis, which are reasonable, can be con­sidered to be relative and
materialistic, in totality, form the world as they accept change. They
form the people, life, culture, all of the dimensions of the earth,
elements of society and the unlimited attractions of the new spirit.
They replace the essence of inspiration and the composite truths of
values which are above one's individual will. They do away with anything
which is only understood by the super intellectual, that is, everything
which is beyond the intellectual continuity of logical science such as
the eter­nal, the hidden and the Platonic.

The roots of these things exist in the depths of being. Since the
beginning of humanity, they have poked their heads through. They are
enigmatic attractions from ano­ther ‑world. They are from the essence of
fate. They are absolute. Their source is divine destiny. Finally, nature
replaces metaphysics. Science replaces inspiration. Pleasure replaces
chastity. Happiness replaces perfection. Tranqui­lity replaces piety. As
interpreted by Francis Bacon, \`Power has replaced Truth.'

This spiritual and intellectual change in the deep evolution of human
values, the change in the main direc­tion of culture, knowledge and
feelings, the new means of earning a livelihood in families, new views
of love and the relationship between men and women, the place of women
in society and their relationship to men, has left revolu­tionary
effects upon the roots of the fabric of life, litera­ture, art and
sensitivities.

All things are analyzed according to the science and logical vision of
Descartes. This includes the sacred and ethical principles which people
have always looked at with the view that they were values above human
knowledge, that is, divine virtues. These are now analyzed as material
things. Among the values are women and love which had previously existed
together in a halo of sanctity. They were hidden in the imagination,
spirit, inspiration and common sense, where these forms remained
untouched. They place them upon a blackboard and analyze them.

One of the people responsible for this is Claude Ber­nard who saw human
beings as corpses without a spirit. Freud considers the spirit to be a
sick pig, and in the view of the bourgeoisie, life is money. The result
of their re­search is what we see now.

Opposed to these were the Christian priests. Next to their laboratories
were churches. They had nothing to offer other than 'excommunication'.
They were club wielders whom on one feared. Compared to these people who
at least reasoned and gave‑ examples, they simply cried out, \`Religion
is dying!' They issued unreasonable cannon laws. They constantly threw
the fire of hell into the faces of their parishioners but to no avail.

A woman, as far as her life was concerned, was part of a family. Even
though she had no independent human personality, at least she could
easily be dissolved within the family, which was one spirit. Little by
little she be­came economically independent. She began working out­side
of the home. With industrialization in full motion and full of new
twists, with the daily progress and improve­ment in social occupations,
women were pulled out as well and went to work.

From society's point of view, economic indepen­dence has also made her
socially independent. There­after she finds individual existence beside
her husband and children. Today, before marriage and setting up a
household, she has individual independence. Because she has developed
intellectually and logically, this has of itself altered her
relationship with others a man, her lover, her father and with her
family. It is no longer based on sen­sitive feelings or instinctive
attractions or deep, uncon­scious, spiritual efforts but rather upon the
policy of intel­lectual accounting and detailed calculation. She has
been freed from many social, family and religious chains thro­ugh her
accountant's vision of the situation. She is now capable of seeing
reality, being able to analyze and intel­lectualize, seeking the self,
finding her own interests and individual profits and spending for
herself. She authen­tically seeks pleasure, encounters things, and looks
for tranquility, intelligence and happiness. At the same time, however,
many of her deep feelings have been taken away from her. Her hereditary
feelings, which are other than the intellectual, have been removed. Her
humanness has suffer­ed (and has left her lonely). But it has made her
indepen­dent.

Durkheim has shown that in the past, the social spirit was strong.
Whenever economics and individuality grew, from the economic point of
view, individuals cut their family roots, their sensitivities, their
traditional ideas and their spirit. They became independent. This
independence gave them multiple possibilities. The very fact that an 18
year old girl can very easily get her own apartment and live alone
without any supervision is one of them.

A woman is allowed many freedoms in her home be­cause of economic
reasons. Whenever she becomes angry over life, she can flee from her
situation as she has indivi­dual rights. Because she has economic
independence and because she exemplifies an intelligent behavior, having
the patience to bear the sorrow of another does not fit with a healthy
intelligence, therefore, whenever she must make a sacrifice, or give in
abundance, she closes her eyes.

For peace of mind, pleasure, freedom, and for any­thing which affects
her own well‑being, she opens her eyes. This is because things like
loyalty, sacrifice, genero­sity, gratitude, pledges, contracts and love
are all spiritual and ethical things. They are not capable of
intellectual and logical reasoning.

\`Sacrifice my life so that others may live,' or 'bear sorrow so that
others may have peace,' are transactions which do not pay off no matter
how you account for them. 'I have no need of him!'

Then who can answer her question, \`Why should I sacrifice myself for he
who needs me? Why should I re­main loyal to him? Why should I remain
with this ugly, weak man because 'of a promise, an agreement, an
agree­ment that was made when he was handsome, strong, and he was the
only creature around me at that time? I bore him patiently. Why should I
now close my eyes to the handsome, strong man who is available and who
under­stands my spirit and, my goals?'

Sartre presents an example. A woman is the wife of a man who has no
attractive qualities. In comparison to him, there is an attractive man
who loves her. The intel­ligent way is clear. Both men need her. One
needs her as a wife, the other as a lover. The woman does not need the
first man but rather the second.

By remaining loyal to her husband, two needs are sacrificed and one is
satisfied.. In fleeing from him and letting, him go, two needs are
satisfied for one. The duty of this woman is clear. Her intelligence
makes the decisive decision, a clear mathematical formula. The reason
behind why a woman would sacrifice two needs for one is not simply an
intellectual, logical Descartian or Freudian one. An intelligent woman
thinks and acts logically. Economic reasoning and social rights present
her with the possibility of doing it. She does it.

Children come into the world. A child restricts the freedom of her
mother and father. Intelligence cannot accept the fact that the peace of
mind and freedom of two people be sacrificed for one person. They either
do not bring children into the world or they leave them with a nurse or
in an institution. Among all of these impractical roots, illogical
feelings, ethical and traditional binds, there is a conscience, a spirit
which a woman holds onto. She solves it by immersing herself into the
fabric and spiritual depths of a family.

There are a hundred unclear, irrational and impracti­cal
rationalizations which encourage her to choose forgive­ness, suffering,
sacrifice for her husband, children, home, family, relatives, principles
and the sensitive values of life which have all been disconnected.
Because of economic and social independence, a logic which may underlie
fee­lings and seeing reality in her search for truth, she had de­veloped
an individual spirit and independence instead of gaining a social spirit
where the individual is dissolved.

Loneliness
----------

Loneliness is the greatest tragedy of the century. Durkheim has analyzed
the situation in his book entitled, 'Suicide. Suicide in the East is an
exception. It is not a common accident. In Europe it is not looked upon
as an accident but as a social phenomenon. It is not a happen­ing or an
accident. It is a reality. Its curve grows higher and higher everyday in
developed societies. The rate of suicide in Spain, which is an
underdeveloped country, is less than in other European countries. In
Northern Europe it is more and in North America it has the highest rate.
This same curve exists in a country between the villages and the urban
centers, within an urban development between the developed areas and the
more underdeveloped areas and within a society between the
non‑religious, mod­ern group and the old-fashioned religious group. Why?
Be­cause people are lonely.

Religion ties people together. It causes a common spirit which is born
in its followers to be shared. It nou­rishes a sympathy between each
individual and God. In the past, each individual was linked through
hundreds of connections with others ‑ family, friends and tribes. Social
and economic self sufficiency makes them each needless of the other.

It used to be society which gathered individuals together. Now instead
of gathering individuals, the family, neighbors, mothers, fathers,
children, friends and relatives, defend the individual and his or her
material needs. In­tellectual growth and logic attack the spiritual and
tradi­tional religious connections. Intellectual growth, the logic of
mathematics, the spirit of materialism, innate changes and encounters
cause the spiritual connections to become unstable and other than
intellectual.

The individual became independent. Individual rea­soning of necessity
becomes self-seeking. It becomes need­less of others and then it stands
alone. Because others have become as this and no longer needing an
individual, they uproot themselves from them, each person then seeks out
his or her own interests and benefits. Individuals are alone on their
islands. Then the thought of suicide attacks them (because suicide is
the neighbor of loneliness).

Women choose their men and men, their women. But the very fact that men
and women are both independent and powerful and without need, causes
them to move to­wards each other only because of sex. Other factors such
as feelings, love, kindness, social and traditional roots, inclinations
towards friendship and sympathy, friendly companionships are not taken
into consideration. Today, these sorts of invitations have died. Then
what remains? A frail intellectual calculation without light, a logical
neces­sity or a force.

Sexual freedom in men and women's thoughts, which officially begins at
puberty but for all practical purposes begins whenever one wants, brings
a phenomenon into being. That is, in order to satisfy a sexual urge the
only re­quirement is the sexual urge. And, if it is weak, its weak­ness
can be eliminated with money. Only money is ne­cessary. At different
levels or with different amounts of money, the sexual urge can be
satisfied. One can at any time and under any government be a Don Juan or
an Ona­ssis. The First Lady of America can also be bought for a price.
The difference between her and those who stand on the street is one of
rate. Since boys and girls both enjoy sexual freedom, neither one wants
to restrict themselves for the whole of their lives. It is not to their
interest to restrict the power of their sexual urges.  
 And here, none of the answers of logic or wisdom justify an individual
choosing one person for one's whole life thereby restricting all of the
freedoms of choice as to pleasure, beauty and attractive things in life.

Forming a Family
----------------

At the present time, men and women freely satisfy their sexual urges in
universities, restaurants, outings, and various gatherings of this kind.
They continue until a wo­man comes to herself and sees that it is empty
around her.

No one any longer seeks her out and if they do it is to re­view, to
revise the memory of the past. When a man has passed the freedom of his
sexual cycle, when he has picked a flower from every garden and from
each flower, its per­fume, and it has passed, there is nothing any
longer for him which is interesting or new. His sexual urges have
subsided. It has been replaced by attachment to his posi­tion and his
money. He seeks fame and worships position. His inclinations are now
towards getting a house and form­ing a family. These feelings appear in
his being.

A woman, face to face with the reality that she is no longer busy, and
that no one seeks her out, and, a man, exhausted from his freedoms and
forbidden endless sexual experiences which have finally turned his
heart, confront each other. They reach out towards each other at the end
of a long and tiring road. They want to form a family.

A family is formed but that which drew these two together, that which
caused them to join hands, is the fear on the part of the woman of
bankruptcy and no longer be­ing attended to. The man is‑ tired and no
longer interested in anything. A family has been formed but in place of
love and the 'intensity of an ideal, instead of creating feelings,
pulsations, happiness and imagination together, exhaustion and
fed‑up‑ness sets in so that nothing is new. They know what is there.
Nothing!

There is nothing which their hearts beat for. They know why they have
found each other. They know what needs they have from each other. Both,
completely con­scious, calculating, aware, seek each other out. Each
knows what the other meant by the words, 'be my divine sacri­fice'. Each
has achieved their means. Both sacrifice for the other. Both die for the
other, but in the opposite way from which we normally understand it.

This is why on the day of their wedding; the main hall of City Hall is
filled because they are not allowed inside the churches. Someone from
City Hall, with a medal on his coat, looking like an employee of City
Hall, attends to them, not a clergyman who is a symbol of the spirit,
faith, reverence and sainthood. Each couple is called for­ward exactly
like molded sugar cones. Their names are read from a list. They answer,
'Yes.' Often several child­ren standing behind the bride and groom also
answer yes. It shows their existences have influenced the 'yes' of their
mothers and fathers. They pay their money. They sign the register. The
ceremony is over. Each returns to their mould, their home. The
interesting part is here. From among the 200‑300 brides only 20‑30 wear
a bridal gown. Most of them say, 'What, at my age, in my condition, it
would be degrading to wear a bridal gown. It is not right.' Then the
wife goes to work and the man as well. They have a rendezvous with their
friends to meet at noon in a restaurant and eat lunch together. This, of
course, only happens when the wedding to some extent has been full of
happiness and excitement. Otherwise they forget what had happened and
what event had occurred. Most often, outside City Hall after the civil
ceremony, the bride and groom, who have been living together for a year
or years and each one has spent a year or even years living with someone
else, give each other a cold look as if to say, 'So what? Where should
we go? Fun? We've gone out a thousand times together. Embrace each
other? We've tasted each other a thousand times and we've fled from the
taste. Home? We came from home. What appeals to them? Do they excite
each other's imagination and feel­ings? Not at all. Then it’s best if
each continues their work each day like always.

Families are formed in this way. Both the man and the woman, with good
scheming, found each other and they formed an economic company, or else,
they were married because of the pressure of the law. Perhaps a child
was born causing the father and mother of the child to become a bride
and groom. They show no understan­ding, feelings and desires towards
each other. They do not sense any secrets in each other, any paradox in
their union. Nothing begins. Nothing changes. No imaginary points, no
heart beats. Not even a smile upon their lips. This is why the
foundation of a family becomes frail. Once the foundations have
weakened, the children in that family no longer see understanding,
warmth and attractions. Because the mother and father cannot sacrifice
all of their free­doms for their children, they put their child in a
school or pension and they only give it money so that they can con­tinue
their free life.

Afterwards, having formed a logical and deceitful partnership according
to the laws and having created a family, they then separate from each
other and the spirit and those possibilities continue for the man who
has experienced thousands of warm and young embraces. How can this woman
who is tired and fallen in spirit and whose masculine dominated actions
cause disgust in the man, satisfy his needs? And keep him? And vice
versa? A woman who can make a thousand comparisons, takes the worn out
man into her arms. Through her comparisons, his number is up. In such a
situation, within a household which lacks understanding, feelings,
novelties, and is as unattractive as always, with the loss of embraces,
he turns to cafes, fra­ternities, new experiences, official and
unofficial centers. Once again, contrary to the original invitation, the
factor which keeps these two within the same household is an illogical
one.

Women in the Consumer System: Sex instead of Love
-------------------------------------------------

Societies which only authenticate things in the eco­nomic terms of
production, consumption, consumer goods and products only understand
economics. Women are no longer creatures who excite neither the
imagination nor speakers of pure feelings. Neither are they the beloveds
of the great lovers nor do they have sacred roots. They are no longer
spoken of in terms of mother, companion, and center of ins­piration and
mirror of life nor are they faithful. Rather, as an economic product,
women are bought and sold accor­ding to the positive negative qualities
of their sexual attrac­tions.

Capitalism, as a result of having developed leisure time, has shaped a
woman to serve two purposes. )n the first place, she fills the time
between two jobs which is part of the fate of society. The bourgeoisie
exploit her and create a dry and absurd future for her without any
pur­pose whatsoever. Should she not ask, \`Why am I working?' \`Why am I
living?' \`Whom am I suffering for?'

Secondly, women are used as an instrument for enter­tainment. As the
only creature who has both sex and sex­uality, has been put to work so
that workers, office em­ployees and intellectuals can think about ways
of spending their capital during their leisure time instead of thinking
about the ideas of classlessness, for instance. Women have been put to
work to fill every empty moment of the life of society. Art quickly
joins the market so that they can meet the orders of the capitalists and
the bourgeoisie. The main purpose of art has always been beauty, spirit,
feelings and love which have now been changed into sex. The market of
Freudism, the worship of the most vile and wretched sex has been given
as an intellectual philosophy. Realism is presented today in the form of
an intellectually aware person. Imagination, poetry and feelings of
idealism have been emptied and sex is introduced as the virtue behind
contemporary art. This is why we find instant paintings, poetry, films,
theater, stories, novels and plays surrounding us in the framework of
sexuality.

Capitalism encourages people to consume more in order to make people
more dependent upon it. It is also to increase the amount consumed and
the products produced. Women are presented only as creatures who are
sexy and other than this, nothing. In other words, .she is used as a one
dimensional creature. She is placed in adver­tisements and used as
propaganda for creating new values; new feelings and drawing attention
to new consumer products. They bring about the necessity of artificial
fee­lings in people. In order to kill the feelings which endanger the
profits of capitalism, women are thrown in. (n order to kill the great
and spiritual feelings which destroy ca­pitalism, she participates to
prevent capitalism's death.

Sexuality replaces love. Woman, the imprisoned creatures of the Middle
Ages, has taken the form of free slaves in the new age. In history, it
is in great civilizations with progressive religions that women have
held a high place through the kind of love she can give, in people's
feelings and ‑in the arts even though she does not have absolute unity
or a direct relationship with art. But, she is looked upon as the point
of inspiration, feelings and spiritual characteristics. Now she has
taken the form of an instrument employed for serving social and economic
purposes. She is used to change the form of society. She is used to
destroy the highest values of the traditional societies. She is used to
change ethics. She is used to change a traditional, spiritual, ethical
or religious society for the sake of an empty, absurd, consuming
society. She is used to transform art which had been the theophany of
the divine spirit of humanity. She is changed into an instrument for
sexuality in order to change the type of humanity.

But in the East
---------------

Now it approaches the East. It is our turn. Here its work is very easy.
Since the Middle Ages, especially in the West, in Sweden, Norway and
even France and Ger­many, the sexual feelings of boys develops late so
that at 17 or 18, a boy feels no attraction towards the opposite sex,
whereas girls are at the peak of their sexuality and seek out the boys.
That is why men get the feeling of wanting to‑ escape and women take on
the offensive. It is this condition which causes disgust in men and
brings about a deviated sexual life which, until the end of their life,
hangs around their necks and even has an effect upon their home.

It is because of this that sociologists and psycholo­gists of northern
European societies have many plans and designs‑ about awakening the
sexual urges of young Euro­pean men with artificial stimulation and
natural sex urges by means of women.

In the East, this is not a problem. Young eastern boys, before they
reach the age of puberty, reach sexual puberty and it is this very early
sexual awakening which causes eastern sociologists and psychologists to
face many other problems. But where .is the owner of this generation who
thought about them? There is a war between two groups. And because of
other things, conversations lead to type of clothes, special behavior,
habits and tastes. Human problems, whether they are new or old, do not
concern either side. The war is between being old-fashioned and modern.
Winning is to the advantage of neither of them. One, lying, is called
civilized and the other, lying, is called pious, religious. Neither one
of them relate in the least to either civilization or religion. One, the
ideo­logical type, calls out, Fatima, Zaynab and the other, \`European
woman'. Both are insulting to each other. Either they are lying to each
other or their own ideologies are innocent and even separate from
themselves.

Europeans want to change eastern societies so that they can plunder our
property, ride upon our thoughts and our feelings. They want to take the
food from our mouths as well as to destroy our common sense values.
Without destroying these things, they cannot take the food from our
mouths; they cannot take our property.

Thus we must first empty ourselves and leave our moulds. We must forget
all of our human values and all of our traditions which were the very
things which kept us upon our own feet. We must give these up and break
them within ourselves. Once, empty headed with an impo­tent spirit,
crippled and without content, we must become exactly like garbage cans
which are filled with dirty and useless things and then are emptied.

With the brain and the spirit of the East, they are doing this. They
empty their contents. When they have no faith in anything, they‑ have no
intelligence or awareness so that they have no hero, they think their
past is complete­ly without value. When they believe their religion to
be empty and full of myths, they feel spiritual meanings to be old
fashioned, reactionary and that way of life to be ugly and detestable.
They either do not know themselves, their children and their
spirituality or else they know it badly. So what form do they change?
They come out empty and thirsty and in need of the orders of the
exploi­ters. Whatever the exploiters want to pour into their in­terior,
in whatever order they choose, they get to work plundering.

It is because of this that they assign permanent slo­gans to plundering
the East, emptying the minds of Mos­lems, Buddhists, Hindus, Iranians ,
Turks, Arabs, Blacks and Whites. All must take one form. They should
only have one dimension. They must be consumers of Western economic
products and have thoughts, but not think for themselves.

Insistence upon old values, human values, tradition and religion which
are full of meaning, close the way to the West and guard the East.
Insistence upon traditional values stands like a watch‑tower with a
strong spirit against the West. They defend Islam and independence.
Foreignness does not penetrate. Moslems are overflowing with honor,
spiritual meaning, values and pride. Their history, people, culture,
faith and religious characteristics give them independence, greatness
and something to hold their heads up high for.

They see the Westerners as nouveau riche and newly civilized. They
criticize them, humiliate them and con­front them. But the West falls
upon the soul of the Easter­ners like termites. Little by little they
empty out the con­tents. They even destroy all of the forces of
resistance which remain. In place of the brave guardians of the
watch‑towers, full of spirit and pride, they build a people empty of
common sense, perseverance and pride. The Eas­terners even forward to
meet the enemy. They take whatever the West gives and do whatever they
want them to do. They become exactly as Westerners had willed they would
be.


