Fatimah (S.) At Her Father’s Side
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول اللّه(صلى الله عليه وآله): «انّ اول شخص يدخل علي الجنة فاطمة
بنت محمد»
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The first person to come to me in Heaven is Fatimah the daughter of
Muhammad.**”*** [^1]

At the time when the Muslims were spending their readiness period in
Mecca, their living environment was severely stormy, and the conditions
were extremely critical.
It was the beginning of Islam and the Muslims were in strict minority,
while all of the power, might, wealth, and sovereignty was in the hands
of the ruthless; irrational enemies of Islam, and they did whatever they
wished to do.

There was no form of torment that was not brought upon the Muslims,
while there was no boldness or insult that they didn’t allow in respect
to the exalted position of the prophet.

At this time there were two people who devoted them selves and showed
great generosity;

From among the women was “Khadijah” who dressed the wounds of the
prophet’s with her self - sacrificing, her affection and pleasantness,
her sympathy and compassion.

The other was “Abu Talib” the great father of “the Commander of the
Faithful” Ali (a.s.), who had much respect and influence among the
people of Mecca and was possessed of extraordinary intelligence,
prudence, and wit; he made himself a powerful shield before the Prophet
(S) and was the kind friend, helper and protector of the Prophet.

But it is extremely regretful that these two self- sacrificing friends,
and two great personalities and generous human beings, in the tenth year
of the prophet’s mission, within a short period of time closed their
eyes to the world, making the Prophet (S) mournful in their deaths.

And in this respect, the Messenger of God remained alone. The extremity
of the prophet’s sorrow in the mourning of these two personalities, both
of whom played a considerable part in the progress of Islam, becomes
clear for us in that the year of their death was named “Am-ul-Hozn”
meaning “the year of sorrow and grief”.

But since God replaces the blessings that he gives his preferred
servants with other blessings. Each of these two great persons left a
child as a memorial, who exactly filled their places.

Ali (a.s.) just as his father was the friend and helper, protector
(supporter) and defender of the Prophet (S), he was also previously such
helper; but, after Abu Talib, he filled his empty place.
And “Khadijah” left her daughter “Fatimah” as a memorial, a girl who
was kind, generous, brave and self - sacrificing and who was always at
the side of her “father”, cleaning away the dust and dirt of suffering
and hardship from the pure heart of her father.

“The commander of the Faithful” Ali (a.s.) according to well known
hadith had not aged more than five years in her blessed life. It is
interesting here to note that both lived in the house of the prophet.
And were his companions in his hours of loneliness.

There were still three years left before the Hejira, three years full of
unpleasant incidents and severe storms of life, full of suffering and
weariness, persecutions and contempt and the continued efforts of the
enemy for the elimination of Islam and the Muslims.

Sometimes a hard-hearted enemy would throw dirt or ashes on the head of
the Prophet (S). when he returned home Fatimah would clean away the dirt
or ashes from his head and face while tears filled her eyes. The Holy
Prophet (S) would then say:

“*My daughter, don’t be sad and don’t shed tears, God is the Protector
and Guardian of your* *father!*”[^2]

Sometimes enemies would gather at the Stone of Isma’il and swear to the
idols that wherever they find “Muhammad” they will kill him.

Fatimah (s.a.) would hear of this and inform her father so that he would
be more careful.

And this shows us that not only inside the home but also outside,
Fatimah (s.a.) thought of her father’s defence and salutation.
In one of these very years, Abu Jahl encouraged a group of Makkan
ruffians to throw the paunch of a sheep on the Prophets head while he
was bowing in prayer at the “Masjid al-Haram”. When this was done Abu
Jahl and his companions began laughing, ridiculing and mocking the
Prophet.

Some of the Prophet’s supporters saw this scene but the ruthless enemy
was so prepared that they did not have the power for defence. When this
news reached the ears of his little girl Fatimah (s.a.), she rushed to
the “Masjid al-Haram” and took the paunch and with bravery particular to
her, punished Abu Jahl and his supporters with the sword of her tongue,
and cursed them.

Yes, in that place where some of the courageous men did not have the
nerve of defending the Prophet (S); this brave young girl was present
and went to the defence of her father.

This period of time, whatever it was, passed. The Holy Prophet (S) set
out on his hejira to Medina. Fatimah (s.a.) must be temporally separated
from her father, remaining at home alone until the time that permission
for hejira would be given to her. This all happened when she was not
more than eight years old. But just as Ali (a.s.) in the critical,
sensitive moments of the hejira slept in the bed of the prophet, thus
passed his test in self - sacrifice and generosity, putting his body in
exposure to the swords of the enemy, Fatimah (s.a.) also with out
complaint or impatience announced her readiness to accept this new
mission.

But the period of her separation couldn’t be too lengthy, and she must
always stay at her father's side, and in the environment of Medina just
as in Mecca, continue her defence, and wash away the dust and dirt of
sadness and difficult incidents from the sparkling heart of her father.
Therefore, after a few days in company of Fatimah bint Omais and another
Fatimah of Bani Hashem, accompanied by Ali(a.s.) she came to Medina.

Fatimah (s.a.) not only on normal days (even though the Prophet (S) had
very few of these days), but even on stormy days of war in the range of
tasks that she was commissioned to perform, defended the holy Prophet
(S).

When the war of Uhud came to an end and the enemy troops had just left
the scene, while the prophet (S), with an injured forehead and a broken
tooth, was still in the field, Fatimah (s.a.) rushed quickly to Uhud
and, even though she was still a young girl of a few years of age, she
traversed the distance from Medina to Uhud on foot and with great
eagerness. She washed her father’s face with water, cleaning his
countenance of blood, but the wound on his forehead was still bleeding.

She burned a piece of mat and poured the ashes on the wound and stopped
the bleeding. What is even more surprising is that, for the conflict
that occurred the following day, she prepared arms for her father[^3].

In the war of Ahzab, which was one of the most painful of the Islamic
wars with the infidels, and during the events of the conquest of Mecca
on the day that the victorious Islamic Army, with the necessary
precautions, took the last fortification of polytheism from the
Polytheists, cleansing the House of God of the contamination of the
existence of idols.

We again see that on both, occasions Fatimah (s.a.) was at her father’s
side. During the war of Ahzab, she came to the trench and prepared a
simple meal that was nothing more than a loaf of bread for the Prophet
(S) who had remained hungry for several days. And at the time of the
conquest of Mecca, she put up his tent and prepared the water for his
ablutions, so that he could wash the dust and dirt from body, put on
clean clothes, and proceed to the “Masjid al-Haram”.

[^1]: أورده «الكليني» في «الكافي» وطائفة من علماء العامة في مصادرهم من
قبيل «كنز العمال» و «ميزان الاعتدال»، كما نقله آخرون. This Tradition was
reported by “Kulainy” in the book of “Kafi” and a group of sunni
scholars in books such as “Kanz-Al-Ommal” and “Mizanul-etedal” and
other.

[^2]: Sirreh-e ibn-e Hisham; vol. 1 pg. 416

[^3]: The war with the infidels was called “Hamra’e -Al-Asad” in which
the polytheists returned to Uhud to finish the job they had begun. But
God wanted them to leave disappointed, therefore when they met up with
the brave Muslims and even those they had wounded the day before, they
became afraid, and left.


