Introduction - Religion and Spirituality
========================================

In the past few decades much has been written about an emerging
spirituality in Western social contexts which is evident in the
different expressions and pathways followed by individuals in their
ongoing search for meaning and purpose, and their answers to questions
such as: Why am I here? or Where am I going? Since much of this is
happening outside traditional frameworks of religion and/or family, it
has led to a burgeoning commercial enterprise in the shape of books,
courses, lifestyles and so on, all on offer and which promise some
progress, understanding and even enlightenment on the ‘spiritual’
journey.

In particular, attention has been given to the way in which religion and
spirituality have developed separate identities in the contemporary
context, and while they are undoubtedly linked for many, for others,
spirituality is perceived as quite a distinct entity from religion.
Nonetheless, in the perceptions of many educators involved in religious
education, spirituality is still closely bound with religiosity so that
the expressions of each become blurred, one into the other.

The spirituality of young people has been of interest to researchers for
several years now and writings and discussions have continued to revisit
and redevelop explanatory theories and concepts. One feature that has
been highlighted in understanding contemporary spirituality especially
as it pertains to Generation Y (as some researchers have identified
them), is the individualistic nature of the search for meaning and the
subsequent expressions of spirituality (for instance, see the latest
findings of Mason, Webber, Singleton and Hughes, 2006). Previously,
theorists appear to have contradicted this view when they have discussed
aspects of young people’s lives in terms of both individual and communal
yearnings. This could be because of the particular samples of young
people used in different studies, some of which have been more or less
restricted to particular groups, while others have included a large
variety of young people from different religious, cultural and social
backgrounds. For instance, Richard Eckersley’s (1997) study of young
Australian’s perceptions of the future found that their dreams of their
future were of a society where less emphasis was placed on the
individual, on competition and material wealth and on enjoying ‘the good
life’. Instead they desired more focus on community and family,
cooperation and the environment. Some expressed their wishes in terms of
a greater recognition of the ‘natural’, ‘human’ or ‘spiritual’ aspects
of life. Further, Hugh Mackay (2001) identified this theme when writing
about young people. He suggested that their ‘tribal identity’ often
meant more to them than their personal identity and claimed that when
their experience of family life was one of fragmentation or when their
traditional sources of identity were lost or blurred, this generation
didn’t retreat into isolation; it connected and searched for a new
framework to help them make sense of life in an uncertain world:

*For some the new framework is spiritual. For others, it is based on the
desire to reconnect with ‘the herd’, so that individuals obtain a
stronger sense of identity and of emotional security from re-creating
communal*

*connections that simulate the ‘village life’ to which so many
Australians aspire (p. 5)* .

As well, Maria Harris (Harris & Moran 1998) described the vital element
in the spirituality of young people as:

*… its connectedness, its relational and communal character, which is in
contrast to a privatized and individualistic spirituality. The impulse
towards connectedness places the practice of justice in a special and
privileged place, with justice understood as ‘fidelity to the demands of
all our relations’. Such justice includes not only our relations to
other human beings; it includes our relations to the nonhuman universe
as well: to the other animals, the trees, the ocean, the earth, and the
ozone layer (p. 46).*

Harris’s focus on connectedness was supported by British researchers Hay
and Nye (1998) who discussed the relationality of children’s lives in
terms of a ‘relational consciousness’ as the essence of children’s
spirituality, that is, the relationship of I-Other, I-Self, I-World and
I-God. Once again, themes of individuality and connectedness underlie
these respective theories.

Indeed, several years ago I referred to the individual and communal
expressions that appeared to be constants in the way young people saw
their needs and their futures (de Souza, 2001). I drew on the reports
from the youth forums that were held during Youth Week Victoria in 2000
and which included 2250 students from 162 Victorian schools. These
reports identified major issues in 12 areas that affected young people
(Youth Forum Report 2000) and for each they proposed a list of
recommendations for action by government agencies, schools and community
groups. There were two common threads that ran through these lists. The
first was a focus on the value of community and cooperation and the
second was a focus on valuing youth and individuality.

The contradictions inherent in these different writings would suggest
that there is some confusion about the understanding of the nature of
individualism.  One argument that helps to illuminate these differences
was offered by Moffett (1994):

The nature of individualization has also been evolving, some stages of
which are selfish and narcissistic, attained by the majority now,
further stages of which, attained by a leading minority, are empathic
and compassionate. The latter seem to return to the original group
solidarity, but there is a world of difference between the primal herd
feeling, which is unconscious and incapable of personal thought or
action, and the expanded consciousness of the individual who has
parlayed self-cultivation into transcendence (p. 10).

Certainly, young and middling adults today were born into a lifestyle of
the sixties, seventies and eighties that favoured the individual over
the community since it is one that their parents, and in some cases,
their grandparents have maintained. Accordingly, individuality has
become such a strong and essential ingredient of their self-expressions
that many may reject the tendency to have labels attributed to them,
such as Generation X or Y, the Echo-boomers, and Screenagers, which have
been variously applied to them by previous generations. At the same
time, as Moffett

argues, they appear to be comfortable with the concept of an
individuality that can exist within a communal context. If we were to
accept Moffett’s argument, there are implications for all educators,
that is, a need to raise our awareness of the respective roles of
individuality and community in the lives of young people since it is
probable that both would provide frameworks for their relationality and
therefore be closely connected to their expressions of religiosity and
spirituality. As well, it could be expected that if a characteristic of
Generation Y’s spirituality was centred on relationality and
connectedness, they would have a tendency to be more tolerant of
diversity which would, in turn, correspond to a lesser tendency towards
being judgemental.

However, these findings for the most part, relate to a generation that
has already or has nearly passed through existing educational
structures.  Accordingly, they have less relevance for current classroom
practitioners and new research is clearly needed to guide and inform
decision making and planning in future educational programs and
environments. Certainly, there are other factors that have crept into
modern day scenarios which, potentially, could be of greater concern and
which, I believe, may be contributing to the development of a less
tolerant society, including less tolerance for religious and cultural
diversity. This issue relates clearly to the generation that currently
fills primary and secondary classrooms as well as those who are entering
tertiary institutions today; and it is a significant element that needs
consideration in any educational program. Today’s children and young
people, born around 1990, have grown up against a backdrop dominated by
media coverage of continued tension between the US and the Middle East,
particularly Iraq. Our eighteen year-old, first year university students
were around 3 or 4 years when the Gulf War dominated our media, and they
lived through the subsequent news coverage of tension in the Middle East
and Afghanistan through the nineties. Thus, their formative and
impressionable years were lived in the context of continuing news items
about radical and extremist adherents of Islam culminating, when they
were around 13 years old, in the terrorist attacks on the twin towers
and the ensuing war against terrorism. Accordingly, they have grown up
in a context of fear generated by media commentaries and political
invective associating terrorism with Muslims without any discussion
about the differences within Islamic perspectives and practices, which
may be likened to the differences within Christianity. Not surprisingly,
this has encouraged clear signs of divisiveness through society; a
divisiveness that stems from a lack of knowledge about social, cultural,
religious and racial aspects of different groups of people with the
unfortunate result being the development of an attitude of ‘them’ and
‘us’.

Both the factors that have been discussed so far, that is, the
separation of spirituality and religion and the associated decline of
religious influence, as well as the signs that we are becoming a less
tolerant society, have provoked a reactionary stance from religious and
political leaders alike so that there have been calls for a return to
more conservative and traditional frameworks which, it is hoped, will
take us back to a period of greater uniformity and stability, and within
which a more authoritarian leadership style would

preside. Pertinent, here, is Law’s (2006) discussion of education from
an authoritarian stance where he suggests that the human person has a
tendency towards tribalism and that we are particularly attracted to
‘them and us’ thinking:

*By holding up the twisted looking-glass of tribalism, in which ‘they’
appear dirty, smelly, amoral, and perhaps even less than fully human,
while ‘we’ take on a noble countenance (we may even find ourselves
reflected back as ‘the chosen people’ or ‘the master race’), an
Authority can foster still deeper feelings of loyalty to the group, its
leadership and its beliefs, making it still more difficult for its
members to question them (p. 30).*

Without doubt, one may be able to detect certain overtones that support
the above contention if one conducts an analysis of some of the
political diatribe that has seared our consciousness in recent years,
with comments like ‘we don’t want people like that’ from the children
overboard scenario to the coining of a new word, ‘un-Australian’, or
indeed, the more recent calls for all migrants to adopt ‘Australian
values’, no matter that these words themselves come down heavily on the
side of ambiguity rather than clarity.

Indeed, it could be argued that an attitude of ‘them and us’ may have
become an unconscious element in the nature of Australian identity and
behaviour since it was clearly evident for most of the first two hundred
years of its history of white settlement in Australia, even though there
was only one dominant culture, Anglo Saxon/Celtic, and one dominant
religion, Christianity. Within such a mono-cultural/religious context,
the Catholics with their Celtic origins were a marginalized people and,
in the setting up of their own schools, they promoted their Catholic
identity as distinct from other Christian denominations and, as is often
the case with marginalized people, they turned inwards for strength and
support. Such a tendency may often lead to the development of
communities where close engagement with other tends to be restricted to
those who are of like background and culture. Indeed, if one examines
the patterns of leadership within contemporary Australian
Catholic/Christian communities, there would appear to be lingering
traces of this insularity since it is dominated by people of Anglo
origins with little evidence of the multiculturalism that is apparent in
the wider society.

A relevant theory linked to a lack of engagement with those who are
different is offered by Wilson (2002) who argues that nonconscious
processing of information or learning experiences is a significant
element in the development of prejudices. In general, people unknowingly
develop two attitudes to everything: one is at the conscious level but
the other level is non-conscious. This is what Wilson calls the
‘adaptive unconscious’. Wilson’s theory does have implications for the
attitudes people may develop towards minority groups because if
prejudice exists at conscious and unconscious levels, it can and will
affect the way they behave towards people who are different from
themselves. Thus, if children grow up with constant exposure to media
presentations or parents’ attitudes which demonstrate particular
viewpoints, it is not surprising if they absorb these at a non-conscious
level. If, at a conscious level, they learn, through education or wider
experience that there may be another way of perceiving things,

they may make a conscious effort to overcome their previous attitudes.
However, at a non-conscious level, these original perceptions and
attitudes may prevail which will, ultimately, impact on their attitudes
and behaviours, and this is particularly so if the context is tense or
uncomfortable. Accordingly, Wilson states:

*The adaptive unconscious might have learned to respond in prejudiced
ways, on the basis of thousands of exposures to racist views  in the
media or exposure to role models such as one’s parents. Some people
learn to reject such attitudes at a conscious level, and egalitarian
views become a central part of their self-stories. They will act on
their conscious, non-prejudiced views when they are monitoring and
controlling their behaviour, but will act on the more racist disposition
of their adaptive unconscious when they are not monitoring or cannot
control their actions (p.190).*

It is a contention here, that Wilson’s theory about the adaptive
unconscious may have a role in the negative public views that have been
recently expressed towards particular religious groups by some prominent
Australian Christian religious and political leaders. If we draw on the
earlier discussion, which pointed to the fact that many Australians who
grew up in the fifties and sixties did not experience or engage with
cultures different from their own. As well, they were more inclined to
expect newcomers to assimilate and learn to be ‘Australian’ in the sense
of the mainstream culture and this was promoted by government policies
for assimilation. It is more than possible, then, that many older
Australians may not  have developed real understanding of or empathy
with people who are different. Unfortunately, the fact that most
Australians perceive themselves to be a fairly tolerant people may
actually make them complacent and, possibly, hinder the development of
any perceptive insights about some of the overt incidents of racial
intolerance which have begun to occur. Instead, these may be treated as
isolated incidents and nothing more serious. Consequently, little may be
done to address these elements in ways that are likely to have a
significant impact on the wider community or to promote serious
engagement with the other who is different, and which may be a way
forward from tolerance to empathy.

The above discussion highlights various issues that need to be addressed
by educators, particularly in the field of religious education. However,
before that, another emerging feature of the contemporary western world,
which has been identified by some writers, has relevance here and is
examined next.


