9. Feeling the presence of Imam (a.t.f.s.)
==========================================

Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.) is attentive towards all the believers
-------------------------------------------------------------

On the basis of traditions, Shias believe that Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.) is
aware of all actions and conditions of Allah's creatures, whether they
are on the earth, in the skies, in the solar system or any other part of
the universe. And out of everything he observes, he has special
attention and consideration towards the believers. This is evident from
the incident outlined below that highlights the concern of the Imam
(a.s.) towards his Shias.

Ramila says: I became very sick during the reign of Ameerul Mo'mineen
(a.s.). On Friday, I felt a little relief. I said to myself that the
best thing to do was to sprinkle a little water on my face and go and
pray behind Ameerul Mo'mineen (a.s.). So I went to the mosque. When Imam
(a.s.) went on the pulpit, my condition worsened again. When Imam (a.s.)
returned from the mosque and entered a place called 'Qasr' I entered
along with him. He turned towards me and said: O Ramila I saw that you
were uneasy. I replied: Yes and revealed my illness and explained my
objective of attending the prayer. Imam(a.s.) declared:

'O Ramila, no believer becomes ill except that we also fall ill due to
his illness and he does not become sorrowful that we also become
sorrowful due to his sorrow. And he does not pray except that we say
Amin to his supplication. And when he remains silent we pray for him.

I said: O Amirul Mo'mineen! May I be sacrificed upon you. Whether this
is also concerning those believers who are in قصر? What about those who
are around the earth? He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا رُمَيْله، لَيسَ يَغيبُ عَنَّا مؤمِنٌ في شَرقِ الأرض و لا في
غَربِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'O Ramila! No believer in the east or west of the earth remains
concealed from us.'[^1]

What can be more fortunate for a Shia than to have such an Imam? Then
what is more beneficial for him that he prays for the hastening of
reappearance and surrenders his desires to Imam (a.t.f.s.). Imam al-Asr
(a.t.f.s.) is nobler than this that his Shia remembers him, while he
himself neglects him. Imam (a.t.f.s.) wrote to Sheikh Mufid (r.a.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّا نحيط علماً بأنبائكم، ولا يعزب عنّا شيء من أخباركم.. إنَّا غير
مهملين لِمُراعاتِكُم ولا ناسين لذكركم
  </p>
</blockquote>

'We are aware of everything that happens to you, and your information is
never hidden from us. We are not negligent about looking after you and
we do not forget your remembrance.[^2]

From the above letter, it is apparent that although Imam (a.t.f.s.) is
hidden from the eyes of the people, the actions of the people are not
concealed from his vision. He is aware of the conditions of the people
in east and the west and with regards to the believers, he pays special
attention.

In fact , it mea ns that while he is identity is not apparent to the
people, he witnesses all the people - their bodies and souls, in such a
way that nothing from the apparent or unseen is hidden from his eyes and
no one is beyond his domain.

As we recite in ziyarat on Friday:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلامُ عليكَ يا عَيْنَ الله في خَلقِه
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Peace be upon you, O eye of Allah amongst His creation'.[^3]

In light of the above, how can one conclude that he is not aware of the
condition of Allah's servants?

The important thing here is that man should realize the reality of this
fact and should feel the presence of Imam's (a.t.f.s.) holy existence
everywhere, at all times. In this situation, for him occultation is
tantamount to witnessing Imam (a.t.f.s.) and he always feels Imam's
(a.t.f.s.) presence. Then such a person will sincerely and genuinely try
to observe the respect and honour towards his Imam's (a.t.f.s.)
existence. And by this, he will embrace the path of certainty in the
period of Imam's (a.t.f.s.) occultation. For experiencing such a
condition (i.e. feeling presence of Imam al-Ghaib (a.t.f.s.)), there is
only one way and this is evident from the tradition of Imam Sajjad
(a.s.) to Abu Khalid:

'O Abu Khalid, certainly the people of the time of His (Imam Mahdi
((a.t.f.s.)) occultation who believe in his Imamat and are awaiting his
reappearance are better than the people of all times. This is because
Allah has given them such intelligence understanding and recognition
that occultation for them has become akin to his presence.'[^4]

Yes, achieving this condition is possible through a deeper and a more
perfect sense of recognition of all fundamentals of religion. The base
and the root of every recognition is recognition of Allah, which man
must realize. If man is able to realise Allah's Unity (Tauheed) as is
outlined in traditions, his actions and behaviour will automatically
fall in line with Allah's wishes. Similarly, the recognition of
Prophethood and Imamat should be correct, i.e. it should be in
conformity with the Quran and traditions, without any reliance on one's
own intellect and rationale. Amongst all these beliefs, recognition of
Imamat possesses special importance.

In addition to correct beliefs, actions also play a crucial role in
acquiring certainty. Actions are equally essential and are a sign of
Imam's (a.t.f.s.) recognition and therefore should be pursued with more
efforts. Gradually more and more similarity will be found between the
Imam(a.s.) and the follower. This spiritual similarity will prepare the
ground for feeling the presence of Imam al-Ghaib (a.t.f.s.) at all times
as outlined in Imam Sajjad 's (a.s.) tradition to Abu Khalid.

At times Imams (a.s.) used to lift the veil of the unseen and manifest
the reality to the Shias so that they may realise the concept. Abu Basir
(r.a.) quotes: I entered the mosque along with Imam Baqir (a.s.), while
people were entering and leaving. Imam (a.s.) said to me, 'Ask the
people whether they are able to see me?' Then whoever passed from there
I asked him: 'Do you see Imam Baqir (a.s.)?' He used to reply in the
negative while he was standing right beside me. Abu Haroon who was blind
entered the masjid. Imam (a.s.) said: 'Ask him.' I said: 'Did you not
see Imam Baqir (a.s.)?' He said: 'Is he not standing here?' I inquired:
'How did you come to know?' He replied: 'How would I not know while he
is a shining light?'

Abu Basir (r.a.) narrates: 'I heard Imam (a.s.) conversing with a man
from Africa - How is Rashid? The African replied: 'I left him alive,
while he had correct belief and he has conveyed salam to you.' Imam
(a.s.) said: 'May Allah have mercy upon him!' The African asked, 'Did
Rashid pass away? Imam (a.s.) said: 'Yes' He asked: 'When?' Imam (a.s.)
said: 'Two days after you left.' He said: 'I swear by Allah, Rashid was
not sick nor was he in any sort of trouble and a man usually dies under
the effect of sickness or disease.' I (Abu Basir) asked: 'Who was this
person?' Imam (a.s.) said: 'He was one with my Mastership and love.'
Then Imam (a.s.) asserted:

'If you think that I am not seeing you and hearing you then you have
imagined wrongly. I swear by Allah, none of your actions are hidden from
us. Therefore always consider me present[^5] and make yourself
habituated to good work and be from the good doers so that you are known
by it. I recommend this to my children and my Shias.'[^6]

Yes, it is possible that a blind person feels the presence of his Imam
(a.s.) while a person with eyes is unable to see him. Imam (a.t.f.s.) is
a brilliant light and seeing him is not dependent upon the apparent
eyes. If a person's heart sees, he will be able to see Imam (a.t.f.s.)
and feel his presence.

What is important is a spiritual bond and communication between us and
Imam's (a.t.f.s.) holy existence. Imam Baqir (a.s.) has guided us
towards this spiritual bond by recommending that we always feel the
presence of our Imam and try to do good deeds so as to be habituated to
goodness and perform it consistently so that we are recognised with
piety and associated with virtue.

[^1]: Basair-ud-Darajaat, Chap. 16, Tradition 1

[^2]: Ihtejaj al-Tabarsi, Vol. 2, Pg. 323

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 2 Pg. 215

[^4]: Kamaluddin, Chap. 31, Tradition 2

[^5]: It obviously means: consider me present and feel my presence.

[^6]: Al Kharaaej al-Qutb al-Rawandi, Pg. 92


