10. Precautious Piety
=====================

**Precautious Piety** **(وَرَعْ)**

Observing traditions of the Imams (a.s.) by the Shias in occultation
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Those who feel themselves in Imam's (a.t.f .s.) presence at all times,
to the extent that they possess his true recognition, abstain from all
acts that incur Imam's (a.t.f.s.) wrath and displeasure. At the same
time they do not leave any action that will earn his pleasure and
satisfaction. In fact, this is one of the most evident signs of Imam's
(a.t.f.s.) true recognition in his occultation. Ameerul Mo'mineen
(a.s.):

'O Allah, You always have Your Hujjat (proof) on the earth for the
creatures. The Hujjat guides them towards Your religion and teaches them
Your knowledge, so that Your servants are not scattered (in
misguidance). At times Your Hujjat is manifest, but is not obeyed, and
at times they are concealed due to fear and their reappearance is
awaited. The Hujjat maybe in occultation even in peace due to an unjust
government, but his knowledge does not remain concealed from the people.
His teachings are etched in the hearts of the believers and they act
upon it.'[^1]

Two critical points are highlighted in this tradition with a lot of
emphasis. One is referring to knowledge and teachings of Imams (a.s.)
and the other point is about the Shias acting upon their exhortations
and their way in all walks of our life. And both these tasks are
possible in occultation, although not to the same extent as in the
presence of Allah's Hujjat. Therefore just because Imam (a.t.f.s.) is in
occultation it does not mean in any way that these two critical tasks
are ignored. As regards the necessity of referring to the teachings and
traditions of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) in all walks of life, we have already
discussed this in the preceding chapters. The following discussion shall
cover the other point.

اداب is plural of ادب and means 'affairs' and 'habit' (according to
Firozabadi) and we have translated as morals, and by this we mean
attributes, habits and morals, which have reached us from our Imams
(a.s.). We are not meant to simply believe in these teachings but to
actually act upon it. Believing in these teachings and acknowledging
them with the heart constitutes the first stage and implementing these
in our lives marks the second stage, which is as important as the first
one. That is the reason why so much importance has been placed on
implementing the teachings of the Imams (a.s.) under the topic of
إجْتِهاد and وَرَعْ so much so that these teachings should be deemed as
the fundamentals (ارْكان) of religion.

A blind person approached Imam Mohammad Baqir (a.s.) and asked: 'O son
of Allah's messenger, are you aware of my love, my submissive heart and
my Mastership towards you?' Imam (a.s.) replied,  
 'Yes.'

The blind man remarked, 'I have a question to ask you. Please answer it
keeping in mind that I am blind and cannot travel too often (to meet
you). Imam (a.s.) said,  
 'You may ask.'  
 He said, 'Please tell me the religion by which you and your Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) worship Allah, so that I worship Allah with the same religion.'

'You have stated a small thing, but have propounded a big question. I
swear by Allah, I reveal to you, my religion and the religion of my
forefathers by which we worship Allah, i.e. testifying to Allah's Unity,
Messengership of the prophet of Islam (s.a.w.s.), accepting everything
that was revealed upon him from Allah's side, friendship with our
friends, distancing oneself from our enemies, submitting to our orders,
awaiting our Qaim's (a.t.f.s.) reappearance, seeking and striving to
observe the obligatory, and refraining from the prohibited acts and
assuming piety.'[^2]

Acknowledging everything that has been revealed upon the Prophet (
s.a.w.s.) from Allah's side and submitting to it with one's heart, is
aspiritual condition, and is among the cornerstones of the belief in
Imamat and Mastership of the Imams (a.s.). أجتهاد and ورع also have
their origin in the hearts and therefore implies a spiritual condition.
However these two traits are also manifested externally and their signs
cannot be ignored.

**إجْتِهاد** (ijtehad) is derived from the word جهد (jahada) which means
to search, to try. In other words, it implies to put in effort in
observing/refraining from halaal/haraam (حلال/حرام) of the Islamic
shariat and not to take its laws lightly. Carelessness in observing
matters of the shariat will never make one completely obedient which is
a necessary condition for submission and accepting Mastership of Allah,
His Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and the Imams (a.s.). Therefore, the more one is
particular in respecting the laws of the shariat and complying with its
articles, the more perfect will be his obedience and submission towards
Allah and His Prophet (s.a.w.s.). Conversely, when one is careless with
regards to religious duties, his submission and Mastership will be weak
and flawed.

Good end through Precautious Piety
----------------------------------

Safe guarding and protecting one's religion is called as Precautious
Piety. Man should give the highest priority to protecting his own
religion. For instance, when a valuable object is handed over to someone
and he accepts responsibility for it, then what is that person's
approach in safeguarding the object? Certainly he will preserve it so
that no calamity reaches it and no danger threatens it. If the object is
put in a place where there exists even a remote possibility of danger,
the person will never place the object there. Then when one observes
this for his religion, which is his most prized and valuable possession,
it is called ورع (Precautious piety).

Therefore مُتَوَرِّع is that person who not only abstains from
prohibited actions, but even doubtful ones. He is worried that if he
performs even doubtful actions, his religion may come to some harm. He
chooses to act in a manner that gives him satisfaction about the safety
and security of his religion. Such a person is always careful about
venturing in to doubtful places and takes utmost precaution under such
circumstances. This is comparable to a person who passes by a steep
cliff and keeps away from it, because he knows that every step towards
the cliff is an invitation towards danger and peril. So he distances
himself from the cliff until he is satisfied that he will not fall into
it.

Therefore, Precautious Piety is like the string of a rosary (tasbeeh)
which connects all the beads and prevents them from being scattered. So
long as the thread is safe and secure, all the beads will be cohesive
and interconnected. However, once the string breaks down, the beads will
scatter instantly in all directions and the rosary will lose its very
existence. Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) reveals

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الورع نِظامُ العِبادةِ. فاِذا انقطع الورع، ذهبت الديانة. كما انه اذا
انقطع السلك اتبعه النظام.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Precautious Piety is the like the string that unites all the acts of
worship. If Precautious Piety is severed, religion will vanish, just
like all the objects attached to a string get scattered, if the string
is severed.'[^3]

Therefore observing the obligatory acts and refraining from the
prohibited acts, which becomes possible with اجتهاد, should be glued
together with the cohesiveness of ورع, so that it protects one's
religion. Therefore traditions underline the futility of اجتهاد
withoutورع In this regard Imam Sadiq (a.s.) asserts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إعْلَمْ اَنَّهُ لا يَنْفَعُ اجْتِهادٌ لا وَرَعَ فيْه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Know that struggle without precautious piety is not beneficial.'[^4]

The 'benefit' mentioned in the above tradition refers to the protection
of religion which is not possible only with اجتهاد unless ورع is
accompanied with it. A person asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.) - Which action
stabilises a person's faith?'  
 Imam (a.s.) replied,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذي يُثْبِتُهُ فيه الوَرَعُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'ورع keeps a person's faith steadfast.'[^5]

Thus it is evident from the traditions highlighted above, that اجتهاد
and ورع are two distinct traits and a person needs to combine both these
traits in himself if he has to safeguard his religion. Another point
underlined by traditions is that ورع is superior to اجتهاد . اجتهاد at
the highest level is abandoning sins, while the highest form of ورع is
abandoning even the doubtful matters (that even hint at sins). Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اورَعُ النَّاسِ مَنْ وَقَفَ عِنْدَ الشُبْهَةِ..... اَشَدُّ النَّاسِ
اجْتِهاداً مَنْ تَرَكَ الّذُّنوب؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

'The person with maximum ورع desists from committing even doubtful acts.
And the person with maximum اجتهاد leaves all sins.'[^6]

At the end of the discussion we would like to remind readers about a
point stressed earlier, i.e. foundation of religion is belief in Imamat
and Mastership of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and submission to their traditions
and that this is reality of Islam and faith. What protects this
foundation from being destroyed is observing Allah's laws. And ورع is
man's best companion in protecting religion. It is due to this reason
that the Imams (a.s.), who have announced themselves to be the helpers
in Allah's affairs and a means of salvation for their friends, have
strongly recommended ورع for their Shias. As declared by traditions,
Shias help their Imams (a.s.) by adopting ورع

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اللهِ اِنَّكُمْ لَعَلى دِينِ اللهِ وَ مَلائِكَتِهِ. فَاعينُونا على
ذلك بِوَرَعٍ و اجْتِهادٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'I swear by Allah, you are on the religion of Allah and the religion of
angels. Then help us through ورع and اجتهاد '[^7]

Imams (a.s.) exhort us to adopt ورع so that by doing this we can help
them in protecting our religion. Protecting religion is our concern and
not that of the Imams (a.s.). However, as the Imams (a.s.) are inclined
towards the Shias and consider themselves as our guardians and masters,
they cannot be indifferent to the condition of our religion.

Their grace and bounty helps their friends, who are attached to them and
possess their Mastership, with which their religion remains free from
blemishes and flaws and their faith remains protected from errors and
lapses. Our duty over here is to adopt ورع and اجتهاد so that we may
assist ourselves in our own salvation. We must avoid sinning as this
will preserve our religion and save our Imams (a.s.) a lot of
embarrassment from seeing their Shias sinning constantly. Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) exhorts:

'It is necessary for you to observe Precautious Piety. Certainly
Precautious Piety is that religion to which we are bound and through
which Allah is worshipped. And we expect the same from those who possess
our Mastership. Do not put us in difficulty, while interceding for you
(on the Day of Judgment).'[^8]

Ultimately the cause of our salvation and good fortune in the hereafter
is certainly the intercession of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). When Allah's
close angels, His prophets (a.s.) and the examined believers are in need
of intercession in the hereafter, then what can we say about sinners
like ours elves. Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) advises:

'When you want something from Allah, then say: 'O Allah, I ask you by
the right of Muhammad and Ali. Surely on the Day of Resurrection none
among the close angels, the prophets sent by Allah and believers will
remain, but they will all be in need of both of them.'[^9]

Of course, the infallibles, be it angels or prophets (a.s.), will be in
need of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), not for salvation from Allah's
chastisement, but for an elevated status near Allah, which can be
guaranteed to them only with the intercession of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
and Ali (a.s.) In short, no creature is needless of the intercession of
the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Ali (a.s.) in the hereafter. In this regard
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) reveals:

'No one from first to last will be there except that he will be in need
of intercession of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).'[^10]

Of course intercession of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is not distinct from the
intercession of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and the intercession from
any member of the Prophet's (s.a.w.s.) household is like the Prophet's
(s.a.w.s.) personal intercession. All our hopes and aspirations in a
providential end in this world and good fortune in the hereafter hinges
on the assistance and intercession of the Ahlul Bait (a .s.).

Then we should abstain from doing actions that will embarrass them while
interceding for us in the hereafter. This is the reason the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) have recommended ورع for us, so that by adopting it, we make
ourselves eligible for their intercession, rather than distressing them
with our sins and transgression.

Summary of the Shias' most important duties during the period of occultation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the end of this section we summarise the discussion covered in the
preceding chapters, by recapitulating the important duties, so that this
can serve as a timely reminder to the readers.

1. Possessing correct belief in line with the Quran and traditions

2. Complete submission to whatever has reached us from Imams (a.s.) (in
traditions)

3. Love and attachment towards the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)

4. Friendship with the believers and fulfilling their needs

5. Enmity with the opponents of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)

6. Living with the remembrance of Imam-e –Asr (a.t.f.s.)

7. Acquiring knowledge of Imams (a.s.) and teaching it

8. Awaiting for Imam's (a.t.f.s.) reappearance

9. Considering the reappearance as proximate without affixing a time for
it

10. Firm intention to assist Imam (a.t.f.s.) at the time of reappearance

11. Renewing the allegiance with Imam (a.t.f.s.) at frequent intervals.

12. Praying intensely for the earliest reappearance of Imam (a.t.f.s.)

13. Helping Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) in every possible way

14. Feeling the presence of Imam (a.t.f.s.) at all times in occultation

15. Adopting piety and اجتهاد in religion

These are the most important traits that a person, with recognition of
Imam (a.t.f.s.) and Mastership of Imams (a.s.) must possess in the
period of occultation. By observing these duties, a person will be
secure from the death of disbelief and even if he does not get the
reappearance of Imam (a.t.f.s.) his faith will be safe.

For more details regarding duties and responsibilities in occultation,
readers can refer to the 8th chapter of 'Mikyalul Makarim fi favaide dua
lil Qaim' by Sayed Muhammad Taqi Musavi Isfahani (may Allah's mercy be
on him).

[^1]: (Ghaibat al-No'mani, Chap. 8, Tradition 2)

[^2]: (Usul al-Kafi, Kitabul Iman wal Kufr, Chap. of Da'ae mul Islam,
Tradition 10)

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 70, Pg. 308

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 70, Pg. 296

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 70, Pg. 304

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 70, Pg. 305

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 70, Pg. 306, Tradition 27

[^8]: Behar ul Anwar, Vol. 70, Pg. 306, Tradition 29

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 8, Pg. 59

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 8, Pg. 62, Tradtion 31


