The Prayer in the End
=====================

Finally we quote the supplication, which the first representative of
Imam (a.t.f.s.) in Ghaibat al-Sughraa,- Abu Amr Uthman bin Saeed Amri
(r.a.) has dictated and ordered the Shias to recite in occultation.
Sayyid Ibne Taoos (r.a.) has included this supplication among the
rituals (aa'maal) of Friday after Namaz al-Asr. The subject matter of
this supplication highlights to a great extent the duties of those who
are living their lives awaiting the reappearance of Imam (a.t.f.s.).

'O Allah, due to the lengthening of the period of occultation of Imam
(a.t.f.s.), do not take away certainty from us. And do not make us
forget his remembrance, awaiting for him, believing in him, our
certainty about his reappearance and praying for him and invoking
blessing for him. Let not the prolonging of the occultation, disillusion
me from his rising. And let my certainty in this regard be like the
certainty in the rising of Allah's Messenger (s.a.w.s.) and whatever was
revealed upon him.'

'Strengthen my heart with belief in him, so that You can put me, through
his hand, on the highway of guidance, the manifest passage and the
straight path.

Strengthen me in his obedience and make me steadfast in following him.
Admit me in his creed and among his friends and helpers and among the
ones with whose work he is pleased. Do not deprive me of this condition
throughout my life and in my death. And until I am in this world, do not
make me from those who doubt (about him) and break the promise (with
him) and turn away (from him) and deny (him).'[^1]

[^1]: Jamalul Usboo', Part 47, Pg. 316, Kamaluddin, Chap. 45, Pg. 43


