1. True Recognition
===================

The most critical characteristic of recognition that can deliver man
from deviation and regression is its correctness. If the recognition is
not correct, then the underlying expectation that the possessor of
recognition will remain steadfast on the Mastership of Imams will not
hold true.  
 Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) prophesied,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وانّ للقائم منا غيبتين، أحدهما أطول من الأخرى فلا يثبت على إمامته،
إلاّ من قوى يقينه وصحت معرفته ولم يجد في نفسه حرجا مما قضيناه ، وسلم
لنا أهل البيت 
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Indeed our Qaim has two occultation, one of which is longer than the
other. This period (of occultation) will extend to such an extent that
most people who believe in him will turn away. None will remain
steadfast save those whose certainty is strong and recognition correct.
Then he will not have any hesitation in accepting our decrees and will
submit to us - the Ahle Bait (a.s.).’ [^1]

The condition mentioned in the last statement is critical for all kinds
of recognition, be it Allah's recognition, the Prophet's (s.a.w.s.)
recognition or the Imam's (a.s.) recognition. This recognition should be
correct from all religious aspects and in a way that Allah desires.

Given the above conditions, the most obvious question is - what are the
criteria for correct recognition, and how can one be sure of the
correctness of his recognition? This question is best replied by
referring to the definition of recognition as outlined by the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.). Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) while addressing his son declares,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يا بني اعرف منازل الشيعة على قدر روايتهم ومعرفتهم، فإن المعرفة هي
الدراية للرواية، وبالدرايات للروايات يعلو المؤمن إلى أقصى درجات
الايمان، إني نظرت في كتاب لعلي (عليه السلام) فوجدت في الكتاب أن قيمة
كل امرئ وقدره معرفته
  </p>
</blockquote>

'O my son, know the level of the Shias from the number of traditions
they narrate and from (the level of) their recognition. For surely
recognition is the comprehension of traditions. And by comprehending
traditions, a believer scales the highest level of faith. Then surely I
have seen the  
 Book of Ali (a.s.) and I found in it that the value of a man is in
proportion to the measure of his recognition.'[^2]

As highlighted by this tradition, recognition is nothing but the
comprehension of traditions, and this is the scale for discerning
between true and flawed recognition. Then true recognition of a subject
implies comprehension of all traditions related to that subject. For
instance, true recognition of Tauheed involves comprehending all
traditions related to the topic.

This underlines the necessity to refer to the traditions of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s) in order to acquire recognition on any subject and there by scale
the peaks of faith. Every believer's faith enjoys a status proportionate
to the depth of his insight of traditions of the infallibles (a.s.).

So, if any believer in his pursuit of recognition acquires his knowledge
from other than these traditions, he will never attain his goal, i.e.
recognition. Ameerul Mo'mineen (a.s.) declares that the value of a
believer is related directly to the level of his recognition. The
standard of recognition is referring only to the traditions of the Imams
(a.s.) as true knowledge is only with them.

Divine knowledge is always correct and guiding, while it is human
knowledge that is flawed and misleading. Allah has made the pure and
immaculate hearts of the 14 infallibles (a.s.) as the fountainhead of
divine knowledge. He then commanded those in thirst of this knowledge to
turn only to the infallibles (a.s.) for their queries. As Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) revealed to Yunus b. Zabyan

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 إن أردت العلم الصحيح فعندنا أهل البيت فنحن اهل الذكر الذي قال الله عز
وجل فاسألوا اهل الذكر ان كنتم لا تعلمون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'If you desire true knowledge, then it is with us, the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.). Then we are the 'People of Remembrance', those regarding whom
Allah declares – 'so ask the followers of the Reminder if you do not
know.' (16: 43)***[^3]

There is no source of divine knowledge other than the People of
Remembrance. Had there been any other source, surely Allah would have
commanded us to refer to it. That is why Imam Baqir (a .s.) narrates,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله لا يوجد العلم الا من أهل بيت نزل عليهم جبرئيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘By Allah, Knowledge cannot be found from any other source other than
Ahlul Bayt (a.s) – Jibrail (a.s.) (himself) has descended upon them.’
[^4]

Therefore if a new branch of knowledge has been discovered, its origin
is in the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) although we may not pay attention to this
fact at the time of discovery. Imam Baqir (a.s.) discloses,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما إنه ليس عند أحد من الناس حق ولا صواب إلا شئ أخذوه منا أهل البيت
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Then surely there is no truth and reality with the people, except that
it has been acquired from us, the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).'[^5]

The root of true information and correct knowledge is only with the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Anything from other than the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is
flawed and misguiding. It is with respect to this that Imam Baqir (a.s.)
narrates,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل ما لم يخرج من هذا البيت، فهو باطل
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Everything that has emanated from other than this House (of Revelation)
is invalid.'[^6]

Therefore the highest level of faith is attained by only taking
knowledge from the House of Revelation and submitting to its members
unconditionally. If a Shia acts on this precept, he will achieve the
honour of being from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)

As Ameerul Mo'mineen (a.s.) reveals to Kumayl b. Ziad Nakhaee,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا كميل، لا تأخذ إل عنّا، تكُن منّا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'O Kumayl! Do not acquire except from us so that you may become from
us.'[^7]

This high status is reserved only for the friends of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.). In this period of occultation, although a Shia is deprived of
his Imam's (a.t.f.s.) presence, he can be in close proximity to the
Ahlul Bayt (a. s.) by referring to them as the only source of knowledge.

So if one wishes to acquire true recognition, must reject all the other
sources of knowledge and focus only on the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). He should
not taint the knowledge acquired from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) with
information acquired from other sources. And if he is successful in
doing so, his recognition will reach a station whereby he is protected
with the power of certitude from all doubts and suspicion. His faith
will reach to such a level of surety that mountains may move, but not
his faith. And this is what Ameerul Mo'mineen (a.s.) informed Muhammad
b. Hanafiyya,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تزول الجبال و لا تزل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Even if mountains move, you don't move.'[^8]

This advice of Ameerul Mo'mineen is of particular relevance in the
context of faith and beliefs. The emphasis over here is to acquire one's
beliefs from the correct source (Ahlul Bayt (a. s.)) and not from the
ignorant. This is the only way to guarantee that our beliefs remain
secure from doubt and uncertainty. It is the only way to ensure that our
faith remains unshakeable even if gigantic mountains are unable to
remain firm.

Then the only route to safeguard one's faith from doubts and Satanic
whisperings is to acquire knowledge from the channel recommended by
Allah Himself. Therefore if one is anxious of his faith then he must pay
minute attention to this detail and should only collect his beliefs from
the side of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من اخذ دينه من كتاب الله وسنة نبيه صلى الله عليه واله زالت الجبال قبل
ان يزول ومن اخذ دينه من افواه الرجال ردته الرجال
  </p>
</blockquote>

'If one takes his religion from Allah's Book and the Sunnah of His
Prophet (s.a.w.s.), mountains may move, but he will not move. And one
who takes his religion from the mouths of the people, the people will
turn him away (from religion).'[^9]

The intelligent ones are not those who refer to the views of the people,
but intelligence in the Quranic verse is attributed to those who have
found themselves to be ignorant and have turned to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
for guidance. The intelligent ones are those who have submitted
themselves completely to the traditions of the Ahlul Bayt (a .s.)
without any objection or modification in its interpretation. They do not
doubt the sayings of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and never advance their
opinion against that of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). It is here we realise the
importance of the Ahlul Bayt (a. s) in the acquisition of correct
recognition.

The Ahlul Bayt's (a.s.) school of thought is nourished with divine
revelation, which offers man deliverance and liberation from all
fallacies. Their proximity to divine sources of knowledge reassures man
of their guidance. He feels he can refer to them in moments of doubt and
indecision and is comforted with their response that guides him towards
certitude and conviction. This can be compared to the similitude of a
very sick person who refers to a specialist doctor, one in whom he
enjoys complete confidence. This sick person will not like to experiment
with a doctor of whose credentials he is not so sure.

Then if a man attaches so much importance to his health and physical
well-being, the significance he accords to his spiritual well – being
should be considerably higher. This is because the soul must be dealt
with more care and caution than the body. So, just like he would never
surrender his physical well-being in the hands of an incompetent doctor,
he must never submit his spiritual well-being to the opinions of
incompetent people. He must surrender his spiritual well-being only to
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) - the spiritual doctors assigned by Allah Himself.

[^1]: Kamaluddin, Part 31, Tradition 8

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 2 Pg. 186

[^3]: Wasa’il ush-Shi’ah, Vol. 18, Pg. 49, taken from Rejaal al-Kashi

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 2, Pg. 91

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 2, Pg. 94

[^6]: Wasa’il ush-Shi’ah, Vol. 18, Pg. 50

[^7]: Wasa’il ush-Shi’ah, Vol. 18, Pg. 16

[^8]: Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 11

[^9]: Preface of Usul al-Kafi


