2. Submission
=============

Recognition of Imam (a.t.f.s.) cannot be acquired except with
submission.

One of the necessary conditions for acquisition of recognition is total
submission to the desires of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). In fact it would be
not be an exaggeration to state that acquiring recognition is possible
only and only through complete submission to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انكم لا تكونون صالحين حتى تعرفوا. و لا تعرفون حتى تصدَّقوا. و لا
تُصَدِّقون حتّى تُسلِموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

'You cannot become from the virtuous ones until you have recognition.
You will not have recognition until you have believed and confessed. You
have not believed and confessed until you submit.'[^1]

Thus affirmation leads towards recognition (of Imam) and submission
leads towards affirmation. When a man has all these traits (of
submission and affirmation) he will be included among the virtuous ones.
This is because virtuous actions spring from pure hearts and recognition
and this is attained only through submission. Then the one who does not
possess these traits will find himself deprived of recognition and
mastership and will be most distant from any virtue. For, testimony is
equal to belief and confession by heart. And till such a time that the
person inculcates this in himself, he will never taste certainty in
recognition.

Thus these four criteria - submission, testimony, recognition and good
deeds are critical for every believer, and unless these criteria
converge in a person, he will never know the reality of faith. The
lowest level of recognition of Imam (a.t.f.s) is in submission to his
exhortations and prohibitions. As traditions declare:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يكون العبد مؤمناً حتى يعرف الله و رسوله و الائمة كلّهم و إمام زمانه
و يرد إليه و يسلم له.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'A worshipper cannot become a believer unless he recognizes Allah and
His Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and all the Imams (a.s.) and the Imam of his age
and turn to him and submit to him.'[^2]

While unconditional submission was always crucial in the acquisition of
recognition, it assumes even more significance in this era of
occultation. That is why traditions reiterate the concept of submission
thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و لم يجد في نفسه حرجاً ممّا قضينا و سلَّمَ لنا أهل البيت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And he does not find any straitness in his heart as to what we have
decided and submit to us - the Ahlul Bayt.[^3]

Submission over here implies heartily submission and not superfluous
obedience. This means that the believer should submit to the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) cheerfully and willingly and not grudgingly and reluctantly.
Satisfaction and contentment in submission are vital. This is because
even if a man believes in the apparent of religion but does not find
submission in himself, he will be far from faith, and can possibly
venture into polytheism (shirk). The degree of one's faith is directly
related to the degree of one's submission to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). To
the extent this submission is weak, faith will be weak, dragging man
towards idolatry. This is exactly what Imam Sadiq (a.s.) explains in
this tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لو أن قوما عبدوا الله وحده لاشريك له
وأقاموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة وحجوا البيت وصاموا شهر رمضا ثم قالوا لشئ
صنعه الله أوصنعه النبي (صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم) ألا صنع خلاف الذي صنع
أو وجدوا ذلك في قلوبهم لكانوا بذلك مشركين
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Surely if a nation worships Allah associating naught with Him, and
establishes prayers, pays zakaat, performs Hajj, fasts in the month of
Ramazan, (then in spite of all this) say why did Allah not do this or
why did the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) not do this, instead of doing that, or
they have some doubt (although they do not voice these doubts) then due
to this they turn polytheists.'

Then Imam (a.s.) related the following verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا وَرَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىٰ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ لَا يَجِدُوا فِي أَنفُسِهِمْ حَرَجًا مِّمَّا قَضَيْتَ
وَيُسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

'But no! by your Lord! They do not believe (in reality) until they make
you a judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement among
them, and then do not find any straightness in their hearts as to what
you have decided and submit with entire submission.'

Then Abu Abdillah (Imam Sadiq) (a.s.) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فعليكم بالتسليم
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Submission is obligatory upon you.'[^4]

The above tradition reveals that the condition of submission is attained
when the heart is completely satisfied with everything that the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) has done or commanded us to do, and has no reservations in
accepting it. Indeed this is the reality of faith and the soul of
religion. Imam Sajjad (a.s.) declares,

'Certainly the religion of Allah, the Almighty, cannot be acquired by
deficient intellects and false opinions and erroneous conjecture, it is
achieved only through submission. Then one who submits to us is safe and
one who follows us is guided. One who acts based on their own opinion
and conjecture is destroyed. One who objects to a thing that we have
said or decreed has disbelieved in the One who has revealed the Seven
Verses (Sura al-Hamd) and the Holy Quran, while he is unaware (of his
disbelief).'[^5]

The great danger to one's faith is when one commits a mistake without
being aware of its consequences, which are so dangerous that he turns
into an apostate, while he considers himself to be a believer. Then
safety for man's faith lies in his submission to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
without corrupting it with his own opinion and conjecture.

This, by no means is an easy task, more so in the period of occultation,
when there is no direct contact with Imam (a.t.f.s.). The only possible
way to reach Imam (a.t.f.s.) in this era is through the traditions of
the Imams (a.s.). We must refer to the Imams (a.s.) in all our problems,
religious as well as worldly.

Submission to Imamite traditions in occultation
-----------------------------------------------

One of the signs of submission to Imam (a.t.f.s.) in the occultation is
submission to the traditions of the infallible guides (a.s.).

Submission to the Imams (a.s.) should be with respect to all traditions
that have reached us from their side, particularly those that are not
compatible with our existing knowledge. In such a scenario, submission
demands that we try to conform our existing knowledge to the tradition
and not try to conform the tradition to our existing knowledge. In other
words, we must change our mindset to fit into the tradition and not try
to change the interpretation of the tradition to fit into our mindset.

The reason behind this is that so often we are not aware of the deeper
meaning of the tradition, although it may not be in conformity to what
we already know. This is because all branches of science and knowledge
are restricted to the Imams (a.s.) and their insight is perfect, while
our knowledge is imperfect and flawed. So if a tradition contradicts our
existing knowledge then we should rectify our knowledge on the basis of
the tradition. If we cannot do this, it is necessary that we refer to
the Imams (a.s.) themselves, but under no condition are we permitted to
reject the tradition.

True submission demands that we accept a tradition under all conditions
regardless of whether the tradition is compatible with our existing
knowledge or not. We must not take a tradition to be weak simply because
of its incompatibility with our knowledge, which is flawed and
defective. Rather we must seek an explanation from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
themselves. It is quite possible that by referring to the scholars of
the traditions of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) one may become enlightened. And
finally if such scholars are not available, then the only option for him
is to be patient and accept the tradition, and insha’Allah he will be
guided by the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) themselves and the meaning of the
tradition will become clear for him.

The most beloved companions of the Imams (a.s.) are those who understand
their traditions well and with their deep understanding accept it. And
the worst of them are those who when they do not understand its meaning
reject it simply because it is incompatible with their existing
knowledge.

Embracing Mastership implies that the Shia considers his Master (Imam)
as possessing more authority over himself as compared to all others.
Then Mastership demands that one gives preference to his Master's views
and his desires over that of his own.

A person must constantly beseech the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and approach them
with a lot of mediation (tawassul) and seek their help alone, so that
all our actions are under the constant supervision and direction of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and nothing happens without their grace and blessings.
Particularly in the field of knowledge and learning nothing is more
critical than this supervision and direction. For, there is more danger
directed towards the scholars by Shaitaan, than other groups of people.

So the course undertaken by the scholars and religious thinkers is
ridden with pitfalls and perils. It is for this reason that scholars
need to have a higher level of faith and their mediation (tawassul) with
the infallibles with particular reference to Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.) must
be more intense. The scholars must firmly believe that their progress in
the field of knowledge is only with their belief in Imamat and
Mastership of Imam (a.t.f.s.).

If a person observes that he has comprehended the minute details of a
tradition, he must acknowledge that it is only because of the grace and
bounty of Imam (a.t.f.s.). By keeping this point in mind, we must
understand the importance of tawassul - so as to draw Imam' s (a.t.f.s.)
attention in the pursuit of religious knowledge.

Submission to Allah while seeking early reappearance
----------------------------------------------------

Allah is very pleased with the supplications of His servants and accords
it the status of the highest form of worship and therefore it is the
best means to draw His attention. Imam Ali (a.s.) while recommending
supplications to Imam Hasan (a.s.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمْ، أَنَّ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ خَزَائِنُ السَّموَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ
قَدْ أَذِنَ لَكَ فِي الدُّعَاءِ، وَتَكفَّلَ لَكَ
بِالإِجَابَةِ،أَمَرَكَ أَنْ تَسْأَلَهُ لِيُعْطِيَكَ، وَتَسْتَرْحِمَهُ
لِيَرْحَمَكَ، وَلَمْ يَجْعَلْ بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَهُ مَنْ يَحْجُبُكَ
عَنْهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Know that the One in Whose hand is the treasure of the sky and the
earth has permitted you to pray to Him and has guaranteed you a reply,
and commanded you to beseech so that He bestows. Seek mercy from Him so
that He showers mercy upon you and so that there is no barrier between
you and Him.'[^6]

Supplication suggests recitation and question (سؤال) indicates request.
It is possible that one combines supplication with questioning.
Sometimes t he worshipper seeks something from Allah and at other times
he prays as well as requests Him and both these conditions please Allah
and are among the actions that Allah has recommended for His servants .
Worship higher than this, is persistent beseeching, which Allah loves in
a worshipper. About this Imam Sadiq (a.s.) reveals:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الله كره إلحاح الناس بعضهم على بعض في المسألة و أحب ذلك لنفسه
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Allah does not like the people to be persistent in their beseeching
with each other. However, He loves that for Himself.'[^7]

So Allah not only likes His servants to beseech Him, rather He loves His
servants persistently seeking their demands only from Him and not from
anybody else.

Allah has deemed this beseeching and pleading as the highest form of
worship. Therefore praying and beseeching Allah for removal of
difficulties is in fact submission to His order.

Occultation is the biggest calamity that we are facing today. Allah has
destined occultation so that people are afflicted with separation from
their Imam (a.t.f.s.) in such a manner that their entire existence cries
out in pain and suffering and they despair from all people, places and
things and in such a state of helplessness they turn towards Allah,
begging and pleading with Him to hasten the reappearance of their
master. This crying and begging for the reappearance of Imam (a.t.f.s.)
is itself worship and is effective in alleviating the calamity through
reappearance.

Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) declares with regards to the role of
supplication in shortening calamities,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 ما من بلاء ينزل على عبدٍ مؤمنٍ فيلهمه الله الدّعاء ، إلاّ كان كشف ذلك
البلاء وشيكاً ، وما من بلاء ٍينزل على عبدٍ مؤمن ٍفيمسك عن الدعاء إلاّ
كان ذلك البلاء طويلاً ،فإذا نزل البلاء فعليكم بالدّعاء و التضرع الى
الله عزَّ و جل
  </p>
</blockquote>

'No calamity reaches to a servant, but Allah inspires him with
supplication (for removal of that calamity), except that the easing of
that calamity is near. And no calamity reaches a believer, and he
refrains from praying for its removal, but the period of that calamity
is lengthened. Then when the calamity descends, you should pray and be
humble in front of Him.'[^8]

The term (inspiring an invocation) الهام دعا that is ascribed to Allah
in the above tradition underlines the fact that when calamity descends
upon a believer, he is reminded to turn to Allah with pleading and
beseeching. Such a believer must realize that this is a grace and bounty
from Allah, which He does not bestow upon everyone in their calamities.
Therefore the essence of prayer at the time of calamity is an indication
that the afflicted person is under the domain of Allah's grace and
bounty. And when the believer gets the grace توفيق to pray he must
realize that the calamity will soon be lifted, insha’Allah. Allah with
inspiration إلهام of supplication only wishes to arrange for some
channel for the removal of the calamity, provided that man understands
the value of this gift.

From this we can conclude that praying to Allah for the early
reappearance of Imam (a.t.f .s.) is perfectly valid. On the same lines,
there are several examples that highlight the fact that praying to Allah
can alleviate an entire nation's calamity. For instance, Bani Israel
received salvation after intense supplication and pleading. According to
a tradition of Imam Sadiq (a.s.), Allah had destined salvation for the
children of Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) that were from the lineage of his wife
Sara (viz. Bani Israel) after 400 years of oppression at the hands of
Firaun. The salvation was to come in the form of Hazrat Moosa (a .s.)
and Hazrat Haroon (a.s.). But Bani Israel managed to reduce this period
of tyranny and oppression after pleading and begging in front of Allah.
Imam's (a.s.) original phrase is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لما طال على بني إسرائيل العذاب ضجوا وبكوا إلى الله أربعين صباحا فأوحى
الله إلى موسى وهارون يخلصهم من فرعون ، فحط عنهم سبعين ومائة سنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Then when the period of chastisement on Bani Israel lengthened, they
cried in front of Allah for 40 mornings so that Allah reveals up on
Moosa and Haroon to give salvation from the (evil of) Firaun. Due to
this (persistent crying), 170 years from the destined oppression was
reduced.

Then Imam Sadiq (a.s.) declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هكذا أنتم لو فعلتم لفرج الله عنا فأما إذ لم تكونوا فان الامر ينتهي إلى
منتهاه 
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Your salvation is similar. If you also do it (cry intensely), Allah
will hasten your salvation (faraj). And if you don't do it (cry), the
matter of salvation will reach to the last limit.'[^9]

Beware it is strange that if the believers desire salvation from Allah,
(through reappearance of their Imam), they should know the way which is
defined by the previous Imams (a .s.) and they should be serious and
make preparation in this regard.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi, Chapter. of 'recognition of Imam and turning to him'
Tradition 6

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi, Kitabul Hujjat, Chap. of recognition of Imam
Tradition 2

[^3]: Kamaluddin, Chp. 31, Tradition 8

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi Kitabul Imaan wal Kufr, Chap. of Shirk, Tradition 6

[^5]: Kamaluddin, Chap. 31, Tradition 9

[^6]: Nahjul Balagha, Letter 31

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, Kitabod Dua, Chapter-Ilhaao fi Dua, Tradition 4

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi, Kitabud Dua, (chapter of Ilhaamod Dua), Tradition 2

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 52, Pg. 131, Tradition 34


