4. Remembrance
==============

Being engrossed in the remembrance of Imams (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------

Another effect and sign of Imams' (a.s.) recognition is remembering them
on different occasions. In fact this remembrance should be perpetual as
this is the effect of the love of Imams (a.s.). When a person is
attached to someone intensely, he is not oblivious to him and remembers
him constantly. The more intense the attachment, the harder it is for
him to forget the person, till such a time that the remembrance of the
person becomes etched in his heart and an inseparable part of his
existence. Therefore those who have faith and recognition of Imam
(a.t.f.s.) in occultation, wherein they are deprived of seeing him
(a.t.f.s.), they must never forget him in their hearts.

A person asked Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) about the Quranic verse,

***'And apparent and hidden bounties are completed upon you. (31 :
20)***

Imam (a.s.) said,

'Apparent bounty is the apparent Imam and the hidden bounty is the
hidden Imam.'

Then the narrator asked, 'Do the Imams (a.s.) go into occultation?'  
 Imam (a.s.) declared:

'Yes he gets concealed from the eyes of the people, however his
remembrance does not disappear from the hearts of the believers and he
will be the twelfth from us.'

It is possible that the unbelievers may forget Imam (a.s.), because they
don't know him. But the one who knows him and recognizes him and has his
Mastership cannot forget him. In occultation, the attachment of the
believer with his Imam should be so strong, that nothing should make him
oblivious of his presence and nothing should hinder him from Imam's
(a.s.) remembrance.

To quote Ayatullah Syed Muhammad Taqi Musavi Isfahani (r.a.), author of
Mikyalul Makarim fi favaaedu dua lil Qaim (a.t.f.s.):

"The believers are in various grades and levels in the remembrance of
their master. Their grade is in direct proportion to their level of
faith, recognition and certitude. The condition of some of the believers
in remembering their master is such, as the poet declares,

'Allah knows that I don't remember you  
 Because how can I remember you, when I never forget you?'[^1]

Then the author elaborates on how we can enliven the remembrance of Imam
(a.t.f.s.) day and night. We have translated below the relevant passage.

'When you mourn, remember that this life that Allah has gifted you is
with the blessing and mediation of Imam (a.t.f.s.). So, thank Allah and
Imam (a.t.f.s.) for it. And be careful not to employ this bounty in
actions for other than Allah's satisfaction, because by earning Allah's
displeasure, you are aggrieved and burdened. Then when you are in a
place of sin and disobedience, remember that your master is observing
you in that condition (of sin). Then out of his respect and honour,
abandon the sin.

Similarly if you come across a good action, then take precedence in
acting upon it, and understand that it is a bounty from Allah's side
that He has bestowed out of our attachment with our Imam (a.t.f.s.).
Thank Allah for it and gift it to Imam (a.t.f .s.) by performing it in a
manner befitting it. Thus, request Imam (a.t.f.s.) like the brothers of
Yusuf (a.s.), pleading,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أَيُّهَا
الْعَزِيزُ مَسَّنَا وَأَهْلَنَا الضُّرُّ وَجِئْنَا بِبِضَاعَةٍ
مُّزْجَاةٍ فَأَوْفِ لَنَا الْكَيْلَ وَتَصَدَّقْ عَلَيْنَا إِنَّ
اللَّـهَ يَجْزِي الْمُتَصَدِّقِينَ. 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'O chief! Distress has afflicted us and our family and we have
brought scanty measure (funds). So give us full measure and be
charitable towards us. Surely Allah rewards the charitable.' (12 :
88)***

And be humble and fearful of him, like a slave who lowers his head
before his master. Every morning and evening salutes him with the
salutation of a slave who is eager to see his master and who melts in
pain due to his separation. Salute him with the sincerity of one who is
so moved with this separation that tears flow down his cheeks, as he is
aware that he is standing in the presence of his master.

When the time of namaz draws near, remember the condition of your master
(a.t.f.s.) as he stands in front of His Lord. Follow your master
(a.t.f.s.) with presence of heart and a humble gait, closing your eyes
to everything except Allah and understand that the taufiq for this has
come only with the blessings of your master (a.t.f.s.). This worship is
not accepted from you except with your master's (a.t.f.s.) consent,
after you have obeyed him and acquired his recognition. As your
recognition of Imam (a.t.f.s.) increases, Allah will enhance your
status, reward and rank near Himself.

When you are finished with namaz make Imam (a.t.f.s.) a mediator between
Allah and yourself, so that He accepts that namaz out of your love and
attachment towards him. And when you raise your hands for supplication
begin by asking for his relief, before your own, because he has the
highest authority over you and his favours upon you are boundless. And
when you are confronted with a seemingly impossible situation with no
way out, plead your case in front of him and wail before him, so that he
may mediate with Allah for the solution of your problem. He is after all
a means towards Allah's satisfaction and a door towards His Mercy. We
have been commanded to enter the house only from its door:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأْتُوا الْبُيُوتَ مِنْ أَبْوَابِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'Enter the house from its door.' (2 : 189)***[^2]

If someone has even a little recognition of Imam (a.t.f.s.), he knows
that remembering Imam (a.t.f.s.) is among the highest form of worship.
And it is due to its importance that we have been commanded to beseech
Allah thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تُنْسِنا ذِكْرَه...
  </p>
</blockquote>

'O Allah, don't make us forget his remembrance.'[^3]

Remembrance of Imam (a.t.f.s.) means immersing oneself i n his
remembrance as well as constantly discussing and reflecting on his
condition. The first condition is spiritual in nature while the second
is external. The first condition is for man himself, while the other is
for those around him. Man should always be in search of reasons to
enliven Imam's (a.t.f.s.) remembrance for himself and his friends.

Attending gatherings in the remembrance of Imams (a.s.)
-------------------------------------------------------

Our Imams (a.s.) have encouraged organising of and participating in
gatherings for the remembrance of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
says to Dawood b. Sarhan,

'O Dawood, convey my salaam to my friends and give them my message - May
Allah have mercy upon a servant who when is with some other person
mentions about our affair (mastership). In such a situation, the third
among them is an angel who seeks forgiveness for them. No two persons
gather for remembering us expect that Allah takes pride in them over His
angels. Then whenever you gather, proceed with our remembrance. Because
your gathering and your remembering is to enliven our affair. And the
best after us, are those who discuss about our affairs and invite
towards our remembrance.'[^4]

It is indeed noteworthy that how much blessing and good fortune exits in
organising gatherings for the remembrance of Ahlul Bait (a.s.). Thus, if
a gathering is organised and due to negligence and inattention, the
remembrance of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is overlooked, then one can only
imagine the misfortune and remorse of those participating in that
gathering.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:  
 'Every gathering that is organised in which Allah's remembrance and our
remembrance is missing, that gathering will be a cause of regret to its
organizers.'[^5]

Remembrance of Imams (a.s.) is enlivened by discussing their limitless
virtues and indescribable calamities and that too in their own words and
traditions. That is why it is highly recommended that believers should
visit each other frequently to discuss the extra-ordinary traits and
life sketches of the Imams (a.s.). The aim behind this recommendation is
that they should be engaged in the narration of the excellence and
tribulations of the Imams (a.s.). Imam Sadiq (a.s.) exhorts:

'Visit each other because that enlivens the heart and is the medium of
remembering our traditions because our traditions make you merciful
towards each other. Therefore, if you act on it, you will get guidance
and find success. And if you leave it you will be deviated and get
destroyed. Therefore take benefit from our traditions and I guarantee
that you will find success.'[^6]

Surely acting on the traditions of the Imams (a.s.) is not possible
without Allah's guidance and good fortune. Gatherings and assemblies
organised for the remembrance of the Imams (a.s.) is one medium to
achieve this guidance and good fortune. In reality remembrance of the
Imams (a.s.) is food for the heart and soul. For, Allah has made
Mastership and love of the Imams (a.s.) a foundation for the enlivening
of hearts. Hence, one who wishes to keep his heart alive should keep
Mastership alive in his heart.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) asked Fuzail:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَجلُسون وَ تَتَحَدَّثُون؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Do you sit and narrate traditions for each other?

Fuzail replied: Yes.' Imam Sadiq (a.s.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 إن تلك ألمجالس أحبها فأحيو أمرنا يافضيل ! فرحم الله من أحيا أمرنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'I like such gatherings. Then O Fuzail, keep our affairs alive. May
Allah have mercy on the one who keeps our affairs alive?'

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يافضيل من ذكرنا أو ذٌكرنا عنده فخرج من عينه مثل جناح ألذباب غفر الله
له ذنوبه ولو كانت أكثر من زبد ألبحر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'O Fuzail, one who remembers us or our mention is made in his presence,
then if tears flow from his eyes even to the extent of the wing of a
fly, then Allah will erase all his sins even if they are to the extent
of the foam of the ocean.'[^7]

This crying may be due to intense love and restlessness of the heart or
due to severe grief at separation from Imam al-Ghaib ( a.t.f.s.) or due
to strong attachment to, and Mastership of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Regardless
of the reason, crying purifies the heart and washes away the sins, no
matter how sinful he may be.

Imam Ridha’ (a.s.) says

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن ذكر بمصابنا فبكى وأبكى لم تبك عينه يوم تبكي العيون، ومن جلس مجلسا
يحيى فيه أمرنا لم يمت قلبه يوم تموت القلوب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'One who remembers our calamities, then cries and makes others cry, his
eyes will not cry on the day, when other eyes will be crying. Anyone who
sits in the gathering wherein our affairs are enlivened, his heart will
not die on the day when other hearts will die.'[^8]

[^1]: Mikyalul Makarim, Vol. 2, Pg. 358

[^2]: Mikyalul Makarim, Vol. 2, Pg. 443-444

[^3]: Kamaluddin, Chap. 45, Tradition 43

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 1, Pg. 200

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, Kitabul Imaan wal Kufr, Chap. of 'Necessity of
Allah's remembrance in all gatherings', Tradition 2

[^6]: Usul al-Kafi, Kitabul Imaan wal Kufr, Chap. of 'Discussion with
brothers', Tradition 2

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 44, Pg. 282, Tradition 14

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 44, Pg. 278, Tradition 1


