5. Knowledge
============

Learning and imparting the knowledge of Imams (a.s.)
----------------------------------------------------

From the preceding pages, we have learnt the superiority of enlivening
the affairs of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Now it follows that we learn one
of the best ways of acquiring this virtue, which the Imams (a.s.)
themselves have determined for us. Indeed this is one of the most
important necessities and a sign of Imam's (a.t.f.s.) recognition in his
occultation

Imam Ridha’ (a.s.) declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحِمَ اللهُ عَبْداً أَحْيا أَمْرَنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

'May Allah have mercy upon the slave who enlivens our affairs?'

Hirvi who is the narrator of this tradition asked Imam (a.s.), 'How can
we enliven your affair?' Imam (a.s.) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يتعلّم علومنا ويعلّمها الناس ، فإنّ الناس لو علموا محاسن كلامنا
لاتّبعونا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Learn our knowledge and teach it to the people. For certainly, had the
people known the goodness of our statements, they would have surely
obeyed us.'[^1]

Thus the emphasis is on learning and disseminating the knowledge of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and our approach to this crucial task can be
accomplished by referring and stating their traditions. Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) advised his Shias:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تلاقُوا و تحادثوا العلم. فإن الحديث تُجلى القلوب الرانية. و بالحديث
إحياءُ امرنا. فَرحم الله من احيا امرنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Visit each other and discuss the concepts of knowledge with each other.
With the medium of traditions, hearts become pure and our affair is
enlivened. May Allah have mercy on the one who enlivens our affair?'[^2]

Knowledge that emanates from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is the only real and
correct source of knowledge. This knowledge makes man pure and helps him
attain true prosperity and good fortune. At the same time, this
knowledge has in it, tremendous magnetism that attracts the hearts of
the pure ones towards the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). If the tradition of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is conveyed to the people correctly, people will see
the wisdom, beauty and freshness that is extremely striking when
compared to the speech of others. They will find the tradition of Imams
(a.s.) penetrating their hearts like the speech of no other mortal.

They will realise that traditions of Imams (a.s.) appeal to human nature
(fitrat) and are in conformity with it. When they absorb these points,
they will be drawn towards the personalities who have narrated these
traditions. Is there anything better than inviting people towards these
personalities so they can examine their sayings and teachings and
understand their status vis-à-vis other leaders of the world?!

Therefore the Shias must always be in search of tradition of the Imams
(a.s.) and after learning them, must teach others and invite the m
towards the teachings of the Imams (a.s.). This is one of the most
important duties of the Shias, more so in the time of occultation.
Indeed there cannot be anything better for the Shias because the period
of occultation will be marked with indifference (towards faith), as a
result of which irreligiousness will envelope the people. Consequently
no one will be safe from doubt and skepticism. Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.)
reveals:

'If during the occultation of our Qaim, there were no learned scholars
who call the people towards him and guide them towards him and defend
the religion with divine arguments and save the weak servants of Allah
from the traps of Shaitan and his rebellion and from the traps which are
laid by enemies of Imams (a.s.) (in the path of guidance of people),
certainly no one would remain except that he turns away from the
religion of Allah. Those who hold the reins of the hearts of the weak
Shias, are like the sailors who guide their ships by controlling the
steering wheel. These are the best people in front of Allah.'[^3]

In this tradition, Imam (a.s.) has very explicitly outlined the duties
of the learned at the time of occultation. The learned should more than
anything else invite the people towards Imam-e-Ghaib (a.t.f.s.).This
duty can be performed by enlivening his remembrance, announcing his
virtues and narrating traditions regarding Imam Asr (a.t.f.s.). This is
a very crucial task entrusted by the Imams (a .s.) to the learned in
occultation, and anyone who treasures the Mastership of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) cannot ignore this task.

The scholar at the time of occultation should not invite the people
towards his own devotion, virtues, and recognition. Rather he should be
like a bridge over which friends of Imam (a.t.f.s.) can traverse and
reach their desired destination, i.e. the Mastership and recognition of
Imam (a.t.f.s.).

Attachment and friendship with Imam-e-Asr (a.t.f.s.) is not in need of
any medium, that any one may invite the people towards himself on this
pretext, and present his own greatness in front of them before the
greatness of Imam (a.t.f.s.). The role of the scholar is in kindling the
light of love and Mastership of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.) in the heart of
the one who has forgotten his master - the bestower of bounties upon him
is perplexed and in a state of confusion, searches for an asylum running
from pillar to post.

By reminding such a conf used person of his Imam (a.t.f.s.), narrating
about him (a.t.f.s.) and kindling his recognition, the scholar will
introduce the light of Imam's (a.t.f.s.) remembrance in the heart of
that misguided person and the latter will then be able to traverse the
path towards Imam's (a.t.f.s.) recognition. Removing doubts and
obstacles is the duty of the scholar, but rectification and changing the
condition of the heart is the work of Imam (a.t.f.s.) himself. The true
scholars should find these characteristics in themselves and feel
privileged about it, because in that condition they will be the best
creatures in front of Allah.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 2 Pg. 30

[^2]: Mikyalul Makarim, Vol. 1 Pg. 320

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 2 Pg. 6


