6. Awaiting
===========

Awaiting the reappearance of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.)
---------------------------------------------------

Among the most important signs and essentials of recognition of Imam
al-Asr (a.t.f.s.) (may Allah hasten his appearance) is awaiting his
reappearance. In traditions awaiting the reappearance is described as
the best worship. Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفْضَلُ العِبادةِ انتِظارُ الفَرَجْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'The best worship is awaiting the reappearance.'[^1]

Awaiting for all solutions from Allah's side is propounded as worship.
When this matter is in relation to the Imams (a.s.), that too in the
time of occultation, it assumes special status and becomes the highest
form of worship as underlined by traditions. We have brought some of
these traditions to impress our point. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) asserts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات منكم وهو منتظر لهذا الأمر كمن هو مع القائم في فسطاطه
  </p>
</blockquote>

'One who dies while he is awaiting this matter (of reappearance), he is
like the one who was with Qaim (a.t.f.s.) himself in his tent'.

Then Imam (a.s.) paused for a few moments and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا، بل كمن قارَعَ مَعَهُ بِسَيْفِهْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Nay, he is like the one fought along with him (Qaim (a.t.f.s.)), with
his sword.'

Then Imam (a.s.) added:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا واللهِ اَلا كَمَنْ اُسْتُشْهِدَ مَعَ رَسُولِ الله (ص).
  </p>
</blockquote>

No by Allah! He is not but like the one who was martyred in front of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).[^2]

But this will not be the case with every Shia, and not all of them will
enjoy such an esteemed position. Only that person will enjoy this
exalted status who has complete understanding and deep recognition about
his Imam (a.t.f.s.) and his occultation, and is not superficial in his
beliefs like others. Only then will he be better than the people of all
times. In this context, Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) declares:

O Abu Khalid, certainly people in the time of his occultation, who have
belief in his Imamat and are awaiting his reappearance, are the best
people of all times. For Allah has given them wisdom, understanding and
recognition with which occultation for them is like seeing Imam (a.s.)
in person. Allah has made them such as if they have fought in the way of
Allah with sword in front of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). These are the
true believers and the real Shias who call towards Allah's religion
secretly and openly.'[^3]

These people who are the best of all times have two characteristics -
they acknowledge the Imamat of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.) and they await his
reappearance, which makes them true Shias as they invite others towards
Allah's religion openly and secretly.

Allah's religion implies more than anything else the pure existence of
Imam al-Zamana (a.t.f.s.) and calling others towards his recognition and
love. Indeed one of the most evident signs of waiting in the period of
occultation is this very act of calling others openly and secretly
towards Imam al- Asr (a.t.f.s.).

Considering the reappearance as near
------------------------------------

Awaiting is purely a spiritual relationship, linked with one's heart.
And this spiritual relationship will reach its perfection only when man
does not become disappointed of Imam's (a.t.f.s.) reappearance under any
condition and does not consider it as a very distant possibility. The
awaiting one is attentive and his eyes are focused at Imam's (a.t.f.s.)
reappearance every morning and evening and he never considers it as a
distant eventually. Keeping such a ready disposition towards
reappearance at the time of occultation is the cause of Allah's
satisfaction and pleasure. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) declares,

'That person is closest to Allah and Allah is most happy with him, when
he has lost his Imam who is not evident, rather he is hidden from him,
and he does not know his whereabouts while he knows that his proofs and
signs have not vanished. Then at such a time he should await the
reappearance every morning and evening.'[^4]

Considering reappearance as very proximate is a spiritual feeling and
underlines the unshakeable certainty and strong faith of the person in
relation to the promise of reappearance not being fixed and the
possibility of its occurrence at any time, morning or evening.
Considering reappearance as near is from the signs of submission because
Allah is satisfied with it and the Imams (a.s.) have strongly
recommended it.

Those who consider reappearance as near are safe and sound. We recite in
Dua al-Ahad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ يَرَوْنَهُ بَعِيدًا، وَنَرَاهُ قَرِيبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

'...they (the opponents) consider reappearance of Imam (a.t.f.s.) as
distant while we consider it near.'[^5]

Of course, believing reappearance as near does not tantamount to fixing
a time for it. Because forecasting their appearance incites Allah's
wrath and displeasure and is far from the Sunnat of Imams (a.s.). The
Imams (a.s.) have also castigated those who fix a time for reappearance
and have considered them as liars. Once a person asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
about the time for reappearance. He asked, 'May I be sacrificed for you,
inform us about this affair, which we are awaiting. When will it
occur?'  
 Imam (a.s.) warned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَبَ الوقَّاتون. و هَلَكَ المُسْتَعجِلونْ. ونَجا المُسَلِّمون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Those who fix the time are liars, those who hasten are destroyed and
those who submit are safe.'[^6]

Then those who make claims about reappearance being very near, to
attract the people towards Imam-e-Zamana (a.t.f.s.) and provide some
background for reappearance in the name of ظهور صغرا (minor
reappearance), are themselves deviated and misguide others. The duty of
the awaiter is to submit to Allah's destiny with regards to the time of
reappearance and never despair of Imam's (a.t.f.s.) reappearance at
morning or evening and consider it to be very near. But he must not fall
prey to hastening and not to pull oneself or others towards deviation
and doubt by creating a false and deceptive atmosphere of reappearance
being very near. Therefore, considering reappearance as near should
never lead one to forecast the time of reappearance. The former is
praised and the latter condemned and both are totally distinct from each
other.

Intention of awaiter to help Imam (a.t.f.s.)
--------------------------------------------

The awaiter of reappearance prepares himself for helping Imam (a.t.f.s.)
at the time of his reappearance. He fulfills this important
responsibility by making a sincere intention from the depth of his heart
in the time of occultation. The value of intention in the performance of
good deeds is highlighted by the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نيَّةُ المؤمِن خيرٌ من عمله
  </p>
</blockquote>

'The intention of a believer is better than his action'.[^7]

At times a believer decides to do a good deed, but is unsuccessful in
doing so. And often with respect to some good deeds he falls prey to
ostentation and showoff, which affect his sincerity. Thus the intention
behind the deed is very important. As per traditions, intention of a
good deed is better than the deed itself and Allah the High, due to His
grace and obligation upon believer rewards him just for the intention,
regardless of whether He actually performs the action. Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
says:

'Surely the poor believer says: O Lord give me sustenance so that I do
such and such good deeds. Then since Allah knows that his intention is
true, Allah writes the reward equal to that deed as if he has actually
performed it. Surely Allah's nobility is boundless.'[^8]

On this basis, correct and sincere intention for a believer assumes
extraordinary importance. The intention of a believer should be purely
for Allah's and Imam's (a.t.f.s.) pleasure. On the same basis, Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) has considered himself as a helper of Sayyadush Shohada
(a.s.) in Karbala and believes he will be rewarded like the martyrs of
Karbala.

'I do consider myself as one of the martyrs of Karbala and do not
consider my reward lesser than their reward. This is because my
intention is that if I was present in those days, I would certainly have
helped Imam Husain (a.s.). And similarly our Shias are (considered as
martyrs), though they may die in their beds.' [^9]

Therefore one who passes the day in awaiting the reappearance of Imam
al-Asr (a.t.f.s.), and if he is sincere in his awaiting, and helps Imam
(a.t.f.s.), then even if he does not find the era of reappearance, it
will not make any difference to him. This is because he gets the reward
of attaining the reappearance and being present along with Imam
(a.t.f.s.) and fighting his enemies without actually lifting a sword. He
gets this reward in the period of occultation itself.

The rationale behind this reward is that as far as helping the Imam
(a.t.f.s.) is concerned, all that the Shia is capable of doing is his
intention and spiritual preparation from the heart. As for the
actualization of his intention, it is an affair beyond his control and
depends on Allah's decree. Then although Allah has deprived him of this
taufiq (of helping Imam (a.t.f.s.)), but due to His boundless grace and
mercy, He has not deprived him of the reward of intending to help his
Imam (a.t.f.s.).

One of the awaiters of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.) was a person by the name
of Abdul Hamid Waasti who lived at the time of Imam Baqir ( a.s.). Once
after narrating his condition of awaiting and discussing about the
reappearance of Qaim al-Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), he asked Imam (a.s.): 'If I
die before meeting the Qaim (a.t.f.s.), what will happen?'

Imam (a.s.) soothed him by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ القائل منكم إن أدركت القائم من آل محمد نصرته كالمقارع معه بسيفه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Anyone of you who says (from his heart): If I attain the time of Imam
al-Zamana (a.t.f.s.), I will help him, he is like the one who wields the
sword alongside him.'[^10]

Finding such a belief is the outcome of true recognition regarding Allah
and the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Imam (a.t.f.s.), and cognizance of their
rights. Amirul Mo'mineen (a.s.) says:

'Do not venture out (i.e. stay in your house) and be patient in
calamites. Do not draw the sword as per the wishes of your tongue and do
not be hasty in whatever Allah has not hastened for you. For whoever
amongst you dies on his bed while he is aware of the right of Allah, his
Lord, and the rights of His Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and the rights of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), he dies a martyr and his reward is with Allah and he
will find the reward of the good action which was in his intention and
that intent ion will be considered (for reward) even if he has not
(actually) lifted the sword. And for everything a period and its expiry
is fixed.'[^11]

A noteworthy point in this tradition is the importance of recognizing
the rights of Allah, His Messenger (s.a.w.s.) and Imam (a.t.f.s.), which
arises only from their recognition. The level of this recognition of
rights varies to the extent of man's recognition about them. His
recognition of their rights upon him will enable him to understand his
duties better and consequently he will perform these duties in the
desired manner. Thus the key to man's actions lies in the depth of his
recognition of Imam (a.t.f.s.).  
 Therefore, the true awaiter in the time of occultation is the one who
claims with his tongue as well as his heart:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُصْرَتي مُعَدَةٌ لَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

'My help is ready for you.'[^12]

And if all the followers of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.) in the time of
occultation have such a condition, then they will not remain deprived of
seeing him. Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) in a signed letter (tauqee') to Shaikh
Mufid (r.a.) has promised:

'If our followers - may Allah give them taufeeq of His obedience - are
united in fulfilling with their hearts, the covenant which they have
upon their necks, the bounty of seeing me will not be delayed for them
and soon they will achieve the good fortune of our visit with true
recognition from their side in relation to us.'[^13]

Expressing intention of helping through renewal of allegiance (bay'at)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

For keeping alive the intention of helping Imam (a.t.f.s.), indeed how
nice would it be if man brings his intention to his tongue and binds
himself by promising Allah that he will never be negligent of this
intention. It is with this objective that we are discussing the matter
of allegiance (bay'at) to Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) in the time of
occultation. Bay'at is in fact expressing with the tongue and the heart
the intention of obeying Imam (a.t.f.s.) and helping him at all times.
We repeat this action on several occasions, to renew our intention
through a fresh bay at. For instance, renewal of bay'at in Dua al-Ahad
every morning is done thus:

'O Allah I renew today morning and on all other days that I am alive,
the bay'at for him, which is upon my neck, in such a way that I shall
never turn back from it and shall not desist from it. O Allah make me
from his friends and helpers, those who defend him, hasten in fulfilling
his needs, are obedient to his orders, protect his holy existence, take
precedence in fulfilling his wishes and attain the bounty of martyrdom
in front of him.'[^14]

The promise covers the wishes and aspirations of the awaiter, which he
expresses every day. This brings about a transformation in him and every
day that he renews his bay'at, his intention becomes stronger and he
finds himself more prepared and equipped than earlier in fulfilling his
promise towards his master.

One who nears the end of his life in this condition and finds himself
confronted with death, while his master has not reappeared, his entire
existence burns and is filled with regret. Such a person is overwhelmed
with feelings of disappointment and is distressed at praying and waiting
for his entire life for his master, only to find death at his doorstep,
while his master still has not reappeared. He is left with a feeling of
remorse and emptiness at not being able to help his master and considers
his life unsuccessful and meaningless.

Consequences of awaiting the entire life for reappearance
---------------------------------------------------------

Let us see how Imams (a.s.) approach the one who is sincerely awaiting
reappearance. Mas'adah narrates, 'I was with Imam Sadiq (a.s.) when an
old man, stooping and leaning heavily on a stick entered and did salaam
to Imam (a.s.). Imam (a.s.) replied to his salaam. The old man said, 'O
son of Allah's Messenger, give me your hand so that I may kiss it.' Imam
(a.s.) obliged. The old man kissed it and began crying. Imam (a.s.)
asked, 'O Shaykh, why are you crying?'

He replied, 'May I be sacrificed for you, it is now 100 years since I
have been faithful to the feet of your Qaim. I keep saying he will
reappear this month, this year. But now my age has increased, my bones
have become fragile and my death is approaching. And whatever I see
about you (i.e. Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)), I do not like. I see you being
killed and rendered homeless and on the other hand, I see your enemies
dominant. Then why should I not cry?'

The old man's words moved Imam (a.s.) to tears. He said to the old man:

'O Shaykh, if Allah keeps you alive so that you see our Qaim, you will
be at an elevated position. But if death overtakes you (and you do not
see the time of Qaim (a.s.)) then on the Day of Judgment you will be
raised along with the weight **ثقل** of Hazrat Mohammed (s.a.w.s.) and
we are his weight. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said so often: 'I am
leaving behind you two weighty things. Then fasten to these two things
so that you are never deviated: the Book of Allah and my progeny, who
are my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).'

The old man said, 'After hearing this news, I am not afraid and my he
art has become tranquil.' He did not know who would be the Qaim of Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.). Therefore, Imam (a.s.) introduced him to the Qaim
(a.t.f.s.) and said that the Qaim (a.t.f.s.) will be the son of Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s.), from the progeny of Hazrat Hadi (a.s.) and he will
be (a descendant) of my son.'

Then Imam (a.s.) said:  
 'O Shaykh! I swear by Allah! If from the age of the world, only one day
remains, Allah will lengthen that day so that the Qaim of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) reappears. Remember that our Shias in the time of occultation
will be involved in severe examination and distress. In that period,
Allah will keep steadfast in his guidance, those who are sincere. O
Allah help them (Shias) in this matter (of sincerity and
steadfastness)'[^15]

A similar incident occurred with another old man in the time of Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.). Hakam b. Otaibah who witnessed this incident
narrates: 'I was with Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and the house was
filled with people. At that moment, an old man entered, leaning on his
staff. He stood at the door of the room and said - Salutation to you, O
son of Allah's Messenger, and may His mercy and blessings be upon you.
Imam (a.s.) replied,

"Peace be upon you and His mercy and blessings."

Thereafter the old man did salaam to those who were present in the
gathering and they also replied to him.

Later, the old man turned his face to Imam Baqir (a.s.) and said: O son
of Allah's Messenger, please give me a seat near you, may I be
sacrificed for you. I swear by Allah that I love you and I love your
friends as well. I swear by Allah, my love for you and your friends is
not for the sake of the world. I keep enmity with your enemies and I am
disgusted with them, and I swear by Allah, keeping enmity and disgust
with regards to them is not due to any jealousy between them and me. I
swear by Allah, I consider your permissible (halaal) as permissible and
your prohibited (haraam) as prohibited and I am awaiting the
reappearance of your affair. Now while it is as I have said, may my life
be sacrificed for you, what hope (and glad tidings) do you have for me?'

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said:  
 'Come, come by my side and Imam (a.s.) pointed at a place near him.
Then he (a.s.) said to him: O Shaykh, a man came to see my father, Ali
b. Husain (a.s.) and asked him the same question (as you have asked). My
father replied to him thus:

'If you die (in this condition) you will join the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) and Ali (a.s.) and Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) and Ali b.
Husain (a.s.), your heart will turn cool, your eyes will become bright
and you will be welcomed along with the honorable angels, Ruh and
Rayhan, as soon as your soul reaches here - and he (a.s.) indicated by
his hand to the throat. And if you remain alive, you will see whatever
delights your eyes, and reach to the highest grade along with us.'[^16]

When the old man heard this statement, he said:  
 'O Abu Jafer what did you say?' Imam (a.s.) repeated the statement of
his father. The old man exclaimed **اللهُ أَكْبَرُ** 'If I die I will
join Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Ali (a.s.) and Hasan (a.s.) and Husain
(a.s.) and Ali b. Husain (a.s.) and my heart will turn cool, my eyes
will become bright and I shall be welcomed along with the honorable
angels, Ruh and Rayhan as soon as my soul reaches here (i.e. throat).
And if I remain alive I shall see whatever delights my eyes and I shall
reach at the highest grade along with you?!"

Saying this, the old man starting weeping and lamenting till he
collapsed. When others in the crowd saw his condition, all of them cried
and wept. Imam Baqir (a.s.) wiped the old man's tears with his own
hands. The old man raised his head and said to Imam (a.s.): O son of
Allah's Messenger, may Allah sacrifice me upon you, give your hand to
me.' Imam (a.s.) gave his hand to him. He kissed his hand and rubbed it
on his eyes and cheeks. Then he lifted his dress over his stomach and
chest and put Imam's (a.s.) hand over it.

Then the old man rose, did salaam and left. When he had turned his back,
Imam (a.s.), looking towards him, turned the people in the gathering and
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحَبَ أن ينظُر الى رَجُلٍ مِنَ الجنَّةِ فَلْيَنْظُرُ الى هذا
  </p>
</blockquote>

'If anyone likes to see a person from the people of Paradise, he should
look at this man.'

Hakambi n Otaibah said: 'I have not seen any gathering wherein the
people were wailing like this.' (i.e. all people were crying very
intensely)

Yes, this is the end of the one who has passed his life with the love of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and their friends, and hatred and hostility towards
their enemies. He accepts whatever is made permissible and unlawful by
the Imams (a.s.) and awaits the reappearance of Qaim al-Ahlul Bait (a
.s.) with intense fervor and anticipation.

Then let us beseech Allah that he never deprives us of the fervor of
awaiting for our beloved Imam (a.t.f.s.) and that separation from him
(a.t.f.s.) never makes us forgetful of his remembrance!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و لا تُنْسِنا ذِكرَهُ و انتِظارَهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

(O Allah), do not let me forget his remembrance and his awaiting.'[^17]

This is one sentence from a dua, which has reached us from the first
deputy of I mam al- Asr (a.t.f.s.). Those who await the reappearance of
Imam (a.t.f.s.) must recite it after namaz al-Asr on Fridays in the
period of occultation.

[^1]: Muntakhabul Athar, Part 15, Chp. 2, Tradition 16

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 52, Pg. 126, Tradition 18.

[^3]: Kamaluddin, Chap. 31, Tradition 2

[^4]: Kamaluddin, Chap. 33, Tradition 17

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 102, Pg. 112

[^6]: Ghaibat al-No'mani, Chap. 16, Tradition 11

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, Kitabul Imaan wal Kufr, Chp. of Niyyat, Tradition 2

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi, Kitabul Iman wal Kufr, Chap. of Niyyat, Tradition 3

[^9]: Mikyalul Makareem, Vol. 2, Pg. 228 quoted from Sharh Sahife
Sajjadiyah of Sayyed Naimatullah Jazaeri

[^10]: Rauza al-Kafi, Pg. 81, Tradition 37

[^11]: Nahjul Balagah, Sermon 190

[^12]: Ihtejaj al-Tabarsi, Volume 2, Pg. 317, Ziarat al-Aale Yasin

[^13]: Ihtejaj al-Tabarsi, Vol. 2, Pg. 325

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 102, Pg. 112

[^15]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 36, Pg. 408

[^16]: Rauza al-Kafi, Pg. 76, Tradition 30

[^17]: Kamaluddin Chp. 45, Tradition 43


