7. Praying
==========

Importance of praying for hastening of Imam Zamana's (a.s.) reappearance
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the one whose sole objective in life is awaiting for the
reappearance of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.), salvation with the reappearance
of Imam (a.t.f.s.) is his most ardent desire in life. Then the actions
that make him most sad and grievous are the difficulties and discomforts
caused to Imam (a.t.f.s.) during the period of occultation. Therefore he
considers it as his duty to find a solution for the removal of Imam's
(a. t. f. s) sorrows, difficulties and calamities. To achieve this aim
he is not negligent in doing whatever he is called upon to do.

By paying attention to the point highlighted above we can understand
that the best and the most important relief (faraj) for Imam al- Asr
(a.t.f.s.) is nothing but the permission for his reappearance from
Allah, which apart from being his own salvation is also the salvation of
Allah's Prophets (a.s.) and His friends (awliyya) (a.s.). And the most
effective medium for achieving this aim is supplication for the
hastening of Imam's (a.t.f.s.) reappearance, which is among the
necessary conditions and one of the most evident indications of his
recognition in the time of occultation, without which all claims of
recognition and Mastership of Imam (a.t.f.s.) will sound hollow.

This excellent practice (of dua) is highlighted by Imam (a.t.f.s.)
himself at the time of his birth. Hakima Khatoon (a.r.), the respected
paternal aunt of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) saw that immediately after
coming to this world, Imam (a.t.f.s.) put his head down in prostration
and raised his index finger towards the sky and recited thus:

'I give witness that there is no God except Allah, He is One and has no
partner and I bear witness that my great grandfather (s.a.w.s.) is the
Messenger of Allah and my father is Ameerul Mo'mineen (a.s.). Then he
recited the names of all other Imams (a.s.) till he came to his own
name. Then he prayed to Allah thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم أنجز لي وعدي و أتمم لي أمري وثبت وطأتي و إملأ الأرض بي عدلاً
وقسطا
  </p>
</blockquote>

'O Allah! Implement that which You have promised me and complete my
affair and make my step steadfast and fill the earth with justice and
equity through me.'[^1]

And the practice of beseeching Allah for the hastening of Imam's
(a.t.f.s.) reappearance (faraj), is evident even in the lives of the
earlier Imams (a.s.). From the traditions of Imam Sadiq (a.s.), we see
that in the morning of the 21st of the month of Ramazan, after praying
the Namaz al-Subh, he used to go in prostration, and then recite a
particular dua, at the end of which he used to plead loudly to Allah:

'O Allah! By the greatness of Your Majesty, I ask from You by the right
of all that I asked You and also by whatever I did not ask, which had I
known I would certainly have asked, that send blessings on Mohammed
(s.a.w.s.) and his progeny and give permission for the salvation of the
one with whose salvation is the salvation of all your friends and chosen
ones from Your creation. Then remove the oppressors through him and
destroy them. O Lord of the universe! Hasten this matter!'

The narrator (of this tradition) says: After Imam (a.s.) raised his head
from prostration, I asked: May I be sacrificed upon you, I heard you
praying thus: Are you not that one? He (a.s.) informed:  
 'No, he is Qaim al-Ale Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).'

Then Imam (a.s.) recommended:  
 'Anticipate the affair (reappearance) of your master day and night.
This is because Allah manifests an affair every day and the
manifestation of one affair does not prevent Him from manifesting other
affairs. This is Allah, Lord of the universe.'[^2]

The last sentence is a pointer towards the fact that the time of
reappearance of Imam (a.t.f.s.) is subject to change (**بِداء**).

An interesting point in this tradition is the question asked by the
narrator to Imam (a.s.). It serves to remind us that supplication for
hastening the salvation of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f. s.) is in fact a
supplication for the salvation of all the chosen ones of Allah, from the
best of the creation - Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) till his (s.a.w.s.)
successors and the angels of Allah, as all of them are awaiting the
reappearance of Imam (a.t.f.s.). In Dua al-Ahad, we ask from Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّـهُمَّ وَسُرَّ نَبِيَّكَ مُحَمَّداً صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
بِرُؤْيَتِهِ وَمَنْ تَبِعَهُ عَلى دَعْوَتِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

'O Allah! Make your Prophet Mohammed (s.a.w.s.) rejoice and those who
follow his call by the sight of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.).'[^3]

But the most important benefit of praying for the reappearance of Imam
al-Asr (a.t.f.s.) is that if the believer truly acknowledges his Imamat
and testifies in his Mastership, his faith is protected in the period of
occultation, and his religion is safeguarded from destruction. This is
the glad tiding that Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) gave to Ahmed b. Ishaaq:

'O Ahmed b. Ishaaq! His example in the nation is like the example of
Khizr and Zulqarnain. I swear by Allah, occultation will be there (for
him) in which (period) no one will be saved from destruction, except the
one whom Allah keeps steadfast on belief of his Imamat and to whom Allah
gives taufiq during the period of occultation to pray for the hastening
of his appearance.'

Next day when Ahmed b. Ishaaq went again to see Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s.), he asked: 'What is the sunnat of Khizr and Zulqarnain, which
will be continued in him (Qaim)?'

Imam replied:  
 'Yes, I swear by my Lord! He will be in occultation, until most of
those who believe in him will turn away (from faith). None will remain
steadfast except the one from whom Allah has taken the covenant of our
Mastership and upon whose heart Allah has established faith and
strengthened him with the angel Ruhul Quds from His side.'[^4]

It must be pointed out that in this tradition, supplication for
hastening the reappearance of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.) in the period of
occultation has been put at par along with the belief in his Imamat
which is the root and axis of one's faith. The second point is that both
these pillars i.e. belief in Imamat and supplication for hastening of
reappearance of Imam (a.t.f.s.) is subject to grace (taufiq) from
Allah's side.

And when Allah bestows someone with this taufiq, it shows that Allah
wants to protect him in the period of occultation from the dangers of
irreligiousness. He gives this taufiq of praying for the hastening of
salvation to whomsoever He pleases. One who is not granted this vital
grace and bounty will slip and deviate from the straight path.

Therefore one should constantly seek guidance and taufiq from Allah and
should never make the blunder of relying upon him. This is because if
Allah leaves someone on his own, he will lose the medium of salvation
i.e. belief in Imamat and Mastership. At the end of the tradition it is
underlined that believers in Imamat will forsake their belief. Reverting
from the belief of Imamat is very simple and easy so much so that it may
actually happen without the person even realising it. It is not
necessary that a person may refuse Imamat explicitly and object to it.
Often he may memorise the names of the Imams (a.s.) but his belief about
Imamat under the guise of faith and certainty, may actually be
distorted, and deviate him far from the true belief of Imamat and
Mastership.

This could be because he has taken his knowledge independently, not
derived on the basis of revelation and traditions of Imams (a.s.). In
this case, he may totally miss the essence of Imamat and the reality of
Mastership. The standard for correct belief in Imamat is not simply
knowing and memorising names of Imams (a.s.). Rather, the true essence
and belief in Imamat should be derived from only the Book and
traditions.

This alone will safe guard man from irreligiousness as most of the
disbelief stems from a distorted belief in Imamat. Therefore this point
is very delicate and one should address it very carefully. Our emphasis
on the first condition of possessing correct recognition is to save us
from this hidden peril of deviation. Man should always check his belief
with the standard of the Book and traditions and his learning should
never rely on anything other than traditions of the infallibles (a.s.).

Often we see that one invalid statement and one deviated belief
contaminates the thinking and rationale of a person in such a way that
he explains even Quranic verses and traditions under the effect of the
same improper line of thinking. Consequently although he cites
traditions, but he has not taken the essence of his own belief from
Imams (a.s.). He has simply brought the concept from somewhere else and
has given it the colour of traditions. This is not how correct
recognition ought to be. In a way, this amounts to deviation from the
belief of Imamat.

The bottom-line in the preceding discussion is that we should never let
Allah leave us to fend for ourselves and that we should never refer and
rely on any house except that of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) - Ahlul
Bayt (a.s). So those who remain steadfast on the belief of Imamat and
Mastership and combine this belief with supplication for the hastening
of reappearance of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.), will remain secure from
destruction in the period of occultation. Therefore we should give the
supplication for hastening of reappearance a place of pride in our lives
and pray for it with the intensity and effort that it deserves.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أكْثِرُوا الدُّعاءَ بِتَعْجيلِ الفَرَجِ فَإنَّ ذَلِكَ فَرَجُكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Pray more for the hastening of reappearance, because in it lies your
salvation.'[^5]

More than anything else, the most important reward for the one who prays
for the salvation of Imam al-Asr (a.t.f.s.), is his end in safety of
religion, at a time when most of the believers in Imamat will turn away
from religion. Of course, there are spiritual and material benefits,
which Allah grants him due to the blessings of the supplication for
salvation of Imam al-Zamana (a.t.f.s.).

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 51, Pg. 13

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 98, Pg. 158

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 102, Pg. 112

[^4]: Kamaluddin Chp. 38, Tradition 1

[^5]: Kamaluddin Chp. 45, Tradition 4


