The Second News Conference
==========================

After the conclusion of the Seventh court session which was the longest
and most important of sessions as well as the most emotional which
engaged the public opinion and the spectators all over the world, a
second news conference then took place after 2hrs with both the
prosecution and defense teams.

The conference hall was filled with attendees from all the media and
international news correspondents. We have been told that that the
defense team once again excused themselves at the last minute from
attending this news conference due to their engagement in preparing for
their defense rebuttal in the next court session.

The Prosecutor who has amazed the world with his competence,
personality, and exceptional performance entered the hall. Signs of
sadness and emotional distress were clear on his face, but he always
maintained an air of respect and a strange light radiating from his
face. After greeting and expressing gratitude, he started to receive
questions from the different representatives of the media.

Correspondent: Do you think that you are getting very close to reaching
the guilty verdict after your great performance in today’s long court
session?

Prosecution: I think that we are getting closer with every court session
in conveying to the judges and jurors the reality and horrendousness of
what transpired in Karbala and thank you for your compliment which I
don’t deserve, and for us the trial is still ongoing till the final
verdict is pronounced.

Correspondent: Sir, I am a Sunni Muslim, but for the first time in my
life I learn about the reality of what has happened in Karbala.

We know that the grandson of the Prophet (S) was slaughtered in Karbala,
but there are many, like myself, who do not know about all the dramatic,
disgraceful, surprising, and shocking events which you narrated. In your
opinion, who is responsible for concealing this truth from the Islamic
nation and why was the truth concealed?!

Prosecutor: I share with you the regret for the ignorance of the Islamic
nation regarding what has happened in Karbala. The ones responsible for
this ignorance are the Muslim scholars and the historians, and Islamic
activists who invite people to Islam. They intentionally concealed the
truth to avoid focusing on the negative aspects in the history of Islam,
and in an attempt to draw a beautiful and idealistic picture of the
Islamic history, and to avoid facing the reality of history.

By doing that they think that they are serving Islam, but in reality
they are harming Islam by letting the Muslims become a prey to ignorance
of their real history, whether it is bitter or sweet, black or white.
This has caused a great negative effect on the nation, so it became
incapable of accepting criticism at both the individual and societal
level. Its state of mind says that so long as the past of the nation was
flowery, then its present must also be ornamented and without any
mistakes.

This is a serious problem which the nation suffers as it tries to appear
every minute in a perfect and beautiful appearance in everything. But
the means they use to do so is by keeping quiet on the past and present
failures and hiding the mistakes as well as cover up for the
wrong-doers. That’s how we reached to what the state of affairs are
today in the Muslim world.

This is despite the fact that the Holy Quran has criticized the past
nations and the Muslims in many different places and occasions during
the revelation. Examples are in the Battle of Uhud and Hunayn as well as
many other events yet no one saw that as something negative or
insulting. After all, nations are supposed to learn the lessons from its
past mistakes and failures, and a nation that refrains from doing so
will continue to be ignorant, backwards, and scorned.

Correspondent: Sir, I am also a Muslim and I would like to ask you a
question which I hope you answer me honestly. Did the events that you
narrated in the courtroom really take place? Are you sure about the
authenticity of all that? I am confused and cannot believe that it could
happen, for the matter is very grave and I cannot believe that a Muslim
can commit all these crimes after only 51 years since the demise of the
Holy Prophet (S), so do you have an answer?

Prosecution: Yes sir, everything we said in the court has happened by
consensus of all of the history books of Muslim historians. Historical
research done by the oriental Europeans researches who studied Islamic
history also confirm that. Keep in mind that we do not present except
only the events which there are consensus about, and we stay away from
the events which are not agreed upon by all the historians.

That is why you can fully trust the authenticity of what we have
presented so far about Karbala. It is truly a very grave matter and the
whole Islamic nation in particular must know it and face the reality and
condemn it without confusion or hesitation! As for the second part of
your question, I share with you in your surprise and wonder. However, I
suggest that you study the Holy Quran very well and contemplate over
it…I am sure that you will find the answer.

Correspondent: Is it true that some of those in the Kufan army of Umar
ibn Sa’d were among those who fought with ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib in the
Battle of Siffeen against Mu’awiya, the father of Yazid?

Prosecutor: Yes, that is true. Many of those who fought against
Al-Husayn (as) and joined the army of Ibn Sa’d also fought with Imam
‘Ali (as) in Siffeen like Shebth ibn Reb’ee, Hajaar ibn Abjor, Shimr ibn
Dhil Jawshan and others. But they turned on their backs and chose to
fight against Al-Husayn (as) even though they were the ones who invited
him to Al-Kufa.

They changed their position out of fear of the aggression of Ibn Ziyad,
as we mentioned during the court proceeding. He used to threat to kill
anyone in Al-Kufa who refuses to fight against Al-Husayn (as). Many of
them were hypocrites too.

Correspondent: Are you ready to face the defense rebuttal case in the
next court session?

Prosecution: Yes, and I don’t know how anyone can defend these evil
killers who have ridden themselves of all human values! It is surely a
very tough task for them and I sympathize with the defense team in this
impossible task.

Correspondent: But sir, the barbarism which we heard from you regarding
the events of Karbala and especially the killing of Al-Husayn (as) and
his family members can not be a result of threat from Ibn Ziyad only as
he was not physically present in the battlefield! So how can you explain
that?

Prosecution: It can be explained in two ways:

**First:** The Caliphate of Muawiya ibn Abi Sufyan which continued on
for about 19 years has filled the Islamic nation with negative
propaganda against the family of the Prophet, and especially the two
Imams, Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn. It reached to the point that cursing the
household of the Prophet became a religious ritual and common practice
performed in the Jum’ah prayers and other congregational prayers as well
as in celebrations!

This resulted in the raising of generations whose hearts have filled
with hatred and animosity towards the household of the Prophet (S), and
all that hatred manifested itself and came out in the land of Karbala.

**Second:** There were many revenge claims deep-rooted in some of the
Iraqi tribes against Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) due to those among
them who have been killed on his hands while they were fighting against
the Prophet (S) and after him against Imam ‘Ali, especially in the
battles of Jamal / Camel, Siffeen, and Nahrawan. So they found in
Karbala a great opportunity to take these revenges and vent these
animosities.

Correspondent: During the court proceedings, we notice that you often
quote the words and speeches of Imam Al-Husayn (as) before and during
the battle, despite its lack of relevance to the charges directed
against the defendants. What is the reason for that?

Prosecutor: Allow me to disagree with you. The speeches and words of
Imam Al-Husayn (as) which we presented help us understand the condition
and the atmosphere in the battlefield before and after the battle. This
is very important in proving the guilt of the defendants to the
respected judges and jurors and conveying the truth of what has happened
in Karbala.

These speeches and words have been agreed upon by the historians and the
narrators even more than the events themselves! So, presenting them as
they are with all their indications, hints and direct accusations surely
has a direct correlation with the allegations against the five
defendants!

Thank you all and I apologize. I need to stop here due to time
constraints and see you next time after the next court session by the
will of Allah. Thank you and Salam Alaikum!


