The Eighth Court Session
========================

First Tragic Scene: “The Defense Struggles”
-------------------------------------------

Chief Justice: Court in order! The defense, you have submitted a motion
to the court requesting to invalidate this trial and claiming that the
prosecution has exceeded their limits in presenting their case which has
caused an irreversible damage and a great effect on the jurors that
cannot be repaired.

I ask that you specify in writing these limits which has been exceeded
so that we look into it. I request that you submit that today so that it
doesn’t interrupt the procession of the trial. And if you have any other
motions, please also submit that by the end of the day. And now, are you
and the defense team ready?

Defense: Yes your Honor. But, first I would like to clarify the reason
behind our request for invalidating and nullifying this trial since the
harm that happened cannot be fixed.

Chief Justice: No, no (interrupting) present everything you want to say
along with your written motion to the court and we will look into it. No
need to waste the court time as well as the time of the respected
jurors. Don’t forget that they are sequestered and we don’t want to
lengthen that burden on them. So if you are ready to rebut the
prosecution case, you may proceed now.

Defense: Yes, your honor. Dear respected judges and jurors. In the last
court session, the prosecution went into a long review of details
relating to the events which led to the killing of Al-Husayn (as), and
he intentionally used a smart, well-directed dramatic theatre
presentation to influence you. If we also used this method to describe
what usually happens in any battlefield, past or present, you will
surely be shocked and emotionally impacted!

Indeed, it is typical for a battlefield to result in tragedies and
death, and the military soldiers recognize that very well. Once the
battle begins the soldiers forget themselves and only preoccupy
themselves with the desire of survival of the fittest, anger, killing,
and lack of compassion, because once they have compassion, their enemy
will not have mercy on them. So the whole matter at that moment is
either to kill or be killed. So why give the whole matter more than what
it deserves?

The soldiers only carried out the orders of their commanders, and the
commanders were obeying the orders of the governor. And the governor was
obeying the orders of the Caliph. And the Caliph, according to his
understanding, wanted to maintain the unity of the Muslim nation and
avoid mischief / *fitna*.

And if Al-Husayn (as) remained in Al-Madina or Makkah and didn’t go out
to Iraq, no one would’ve harmed him due to his high position in the
hearts of the Muslims. To prove my words, I present to you this document
which was a will written by Muawiya ibn Abi Sufyan when he was on his
deathbed to his son Yazid, the First defendant. As it was cited in
Maqtal Al-Husayn by Al-Khwarizmi, Muawiya said in his will to his son
Yazid the following:

“As for Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, Oh Yazid! What can I say to you about him?
Do not harm him, and be lenient with him. Let him go wherever he wants
and don’t bother him. Threat and yell only but don’t hurt him, confront
him openly or fight him by sword, nor strike him with a spear.

Rather, give him bounties, bring him closer to you, and respect him. My
son, beware that you meet Allah with his blood on your hands! Or else
you will be from the losers, for Ibn Abbas has narrated to me that
Rasulullah (peace be upon him) at the time of his death hugged Al-Husayn
to his chest and said, ‘He is the good of my nation, the righteous one
of my household and the best of my progeny; may Allah (SWT) not give
blessings to he who does not treat him good after me!’

Then the Prophet (S) added: ‘Oh Husayn, your killer and I will meet at
the Day of Judgment in front of Allah and I will be the adversary on
your behalf. I am very lucky that Allah (SWT) made me be a plaintiff to
your killers on the Day of Judgment.’ Oh Yazid, this is the narration of
Ibn Abbas and I narrate to you that the Prophet (S) has said: ‘One day
my beloved Jibrael came to me and said, ‘Oh Muhammad! Your nation will
kill your son Al-Husayn. And his killer is the cursed one of this
nation.’

And the Prophet (S) also cursed the killer of Al-Husayn numerous times,
so beware! Beware that you bother or harm him, for he is the beloved of
the Messenger of Allah and he has a great right upon you. You did see
how I used to have patience with him during my lifetime and I gave him
my neck out of submission even though he confronts me with bad talk
which hurts me.

But I do not respond to him and cannot do anything to him since he is
the only progeny of the Prophet on this earth. I have done my job in
warning you!” Then Muawiya said to the commanders of his army: “Bear
witness on my words, for by Allah, if Al-Husayn did to me the worst that
can be done, I will have patience with him so that Allah would not
question me about his blood. My son, do you understand my will to you?”
So Yazid answered, “Yes Oh Ameer Al Momineen I understand.”

Ladies and gentlemen, this was the place of Al-Husayn in the eyes of
Muawiya. Yazid would not have objected if Al-Husayn stayed in the city
of his grandfather. But when he went out to Al-Kufa, its people were in
the midst of mischief at that time and conspiracies against the state.
Yazid has ordered his governor Ibn Ziyad to put an end to that mischief
in any way for the sake of protecting the religion of Islam.

This is how the events have started until it ended, but I assure you
that no one intended for the whole matter to end up in this tragic way.
Rather it is due to the nature of the battlefields and their traditions
and natural consequences including inhumane and barbaric events which
come from some people who perhaps outside the battlefield are very
compassionate and are in the peak of their humanity and softness!

We see this everyday around us and we hear it from those who go out to
fight in the military and confront the enemy. Yes, there were many
mistakes which took place, but they were mistakes which usually happen
when there is military confrontation with the enemy. But they were not
war crimes or mass murder! And they were not even crimes committed
against humanity! The presence of women and children in the place of
confrontation and the battlefield without a doubt exposes them to harm
and serious causalities. Here, it is difficult to say that this killing
is “intentional” or “by mistake”, or “by chance”.

There is no evidence to prove pre-meditated and intentional perpetration
of war crimes or crimes against humanity. The people accused were all
religious with good manners, so how can we expect that from them?! None
of the five defendants had the intention of killing Al-Husayn (as);
rather, they wanted to stop the mischief / *fitna*.

Hence, before the start of fighting they requested from him to give his
pledge of allegiance to Yazid and to end this conflict. But the matter
escalated till it reached the point of military confrontation and then
whatever happened has happened. So I ask you, respected judges and
jurors, not to judge with your hearts and emotions, but with your minds.
Is there any real strong proof without reasonable doubt that war crimes
or mass murder or crimes against humanity were committed intentionally
in the battlefield?

And I repeat – intentionally!

As for things taking place accidentally or randomly or due to the
circumstances of war, that is not considered to be war crime or mass
murder or crimes against humanity which are required for them to be done
intentionally and premeditated without any doubt such that these five
innocent ones represented by the dummies in front of you would be judged
as guilty beyond reasonable doubt.

Let us leave the judgment to the divine Creator whom they are now in His
hands, for He is more capable in knowing their true intentions and their
inner selves. There is no benefit behind this trial and all these great
huge costs. There are many other things which deserve our attention much
more than this case. Thank you, thank you Your Honor.

Chief Justice: Thank you Mr. Lawyer. Mr. Prosecutor, would you like to
response to the defense rebuttal?

Prosecutor: Yes of course if you allow me to, Your Honor!

Chief Justice: Go ahead Mr. Prosecutor. The podium is yours…

Prosecutor: Respected judges, respected jurors…I have never heard in my
life the ludicrousness which I am hearing now from the defense! I don’t
know if he really intends to influence you such that you forget or
ignore all what you heard throughout the last seven long court sessions
from narrations, events, documents, speeches, letters, and statements –
all of which are authentic and cited in most of the historical
references which we agreed upon its validity.

The defense tries to ignore everything and insist that Al-Husayn (as)
left Al-Madina by his own will, seeking to fight the ruler and revolt
against him. By that, the defense is ignoring all what we presented from
documents cited in the Muslim history books which clearly indicate
without any doubt that Al-Husayn (as) was forced to leave, and did not
leave out of his own free will! He was forced to leave under the threat
of being executed and I do not wish to repeat what I already explained.

It is up to the defense team to refer back to the past court sessions
and review the evidence presented. And I am sure, oh respected judges
and jurors that you will not need that since your memory is strong,
thanks to God. Nonetheless, everything that was presented so far is
recorded and available in front of you audio and visually, as well as
all the documents which you can refer to at anytime.

But what is most peculiar is that document which the defense presented
which is supposedly the will of Muawiya to his son the First defendant
Yazid. If it is authentic, then it stands as strong incriminating
evidence and we thank the defense for presenting it to us. If we analyze
this letter, we will find the following:

**First:** It clearly indicates the father’s knowledge of his son’s
nature (the First defendant), he knows very well how this son will deal
with Al-Husayn (as) and how he will act, due to his foolishness and lack
of wisdom. Thus, he advices his son and warns him not to act in such
way. It is as if Muawiya foretells the future when he says, “let him go
anywhere he wants” which means not to persecute him or force him to stay
at one place. Now, did Yazid really do that?! This is the testimony of a
father against his son, so is there any testimony more clear than that?!

**Second:** The document clarifies and enumerates the virtues of
Al-Husayn (as) and his high position in Islam and in the eyes of his
grandfather, the Holy Prophet (S). So if you, Oh Muawiya, recognized his
high position very well and heard it with your own ears from the
Prophet, then why did you take the pledge of allegiance for your son as
Caliph when you knew with certainty that Al-Husayn (as) is better than
your son, and there is not even room for comparison between the two?!!

**Third:** And Oh Muawiya, if you have suspicion and felt that your son
will be the killer of Al-Husayn, and you knew that the Prophet (S) has
said that the killer of Al-Husayn (as) is the cursed one of this nation
and that the Prophet (S) will be the plaintiff against him on the Day of
Judgment, then, if you truly believe in Islam and the Holy Prophet (S),
then you would not have exposed your son to that danger in his
Hereafter, especially since you fear that he may commit it.

You should not have appointed him as Caliph and successor, so that you
protect him from the evil of his self, and so that he doesn’t ever
become the killer of Al-Husayn! But Oh Muawiya, you did not do that…you
did not do that…!!!

**Fourth:** Oh Muawiya, if you knew and were sure that Al-Husayn (as) is
the only remaining progeny of the Prophet (S) on earth, then how could
you make your son become commander over him and request from Al-Husayn
to give your son his pledge of allegiance??!

**Fifth:** When Muawiya spoke these words, did he for a minute think
that Al-Husayn (as) was going to give his pledge of allegiance to his
son, the First defendant, regardless of the circumstances?

After all, he himself admitted that Al-Husayn (as) has confronted him
with tough talk many times even though he was at the peak of authority
and tyranny. So how can one imagine that Al-Husayn (as) would give his
pledge of allegiance to his son?

So, Muawiya gave this advice to his son because he knew very well that
Al-Husayn (as) would never give his pledge of allegiance to his foolish
son. Therefore, he requested Yazid to treat Al-Husayn with respect and
softly, even if he didn’t give him his pledge of allegiance.

So, in spite of Muawiya’s prior knowledge of Al-Husayn’s rejection for
his son to assume the position of Caliph over the Muslim state, he still
advices his son not to harm Al-Husayn (as) due to his lofty position in
Islam and among the Muslims.

**Sixth:** And Oh Muawiya, why are you having your army commanders bear
witness on your will to Yazid regarding Al-Husayn? Unless you knew
certainly that your son will not follow your advice or carry out your
will! Rather, he will step on it with his feet even before you enter
your grave! Hence, you want to vindicate yourself from what your son
will commit, by having witnesses.

**Seventh:** Oh Muawiya, if you are a true believer in the religion, how
can you accept the position of Caliph over the Muslims while you know
very well all these virtues of Al-Husayn which you admitted, how can you
accept to govern the nation when you know there is no one else in the
whole nation like Al-Husayn (as) in terms of nobility, dignity, and
revered position?!

All that is assuming the narration is authentic to begin with! This
narration is doubtful and the proof of its falsification is obvious in
its own text. For Muawiya to admit and acknowledge the virtues of
Al-Husayn and his revered position in the religion and to the nation, in
front of his son and his commanders…that act would be invalidating his
own authority over the nation, as well as the successorship of his son
after him.

Muawiya was not dumb or foolish so that he fall in this grave mistake
which can affect his rule as well the successorship of his son after
him. For these reasons, this whole narration is illogical, but we accept
it because it contains evidence that proves the guilt of Yazid ibn
Muawiya and the conviction of Muawiya, the father of Yazid!

As for the defense argument regarding the battlefield and its laws and
setbacks, allow me to pose this question to the defense:

Can we consider a confrontation between 20 or 30 thousand soldiers with
100 or less who are in a civilian caravan containing women, children,
elderly, and sick…is this confrontation considered to be a battlefield?

Or can we instead call it an execution field or butcher place?! Is there
any compatibility or equality in terms of number, equipments and
supplies such that we can call it a battlefield and accordingly apply
what is usually applied to a battlefield?!

Ladies and gentlemen, what took place in the land of Karbala was not a
battlefield; rather it was a court of execution, and the only difference
is that those who are sentenced to death are typically chained and
handcuffed, while in this case, they were free and have an opportunity
to defend their selves to death.

Sure enough, they defended themselves till they were killed as heroes.
But the idea of execution or mass murder still remains, so don’t be
fooled by the defense argument about the laws and nature of a
battlefield.

There was NO battlefield to begin with! If a gang of 200 armed gangsters
stopped three persons for robbing them, then the three victims defended
themselves till they were all killed. Shall we then call that a
battlefield? And if among these three individuals were a woman and a
child, is killing them considered to be a mistake simply because they
were present in the battlefield?!

Was the slaughtering of Abdullah the suckling infant on the chest of his
father Al-Husayn…was that considered to be a mistake? Keep in mind that
at that moment, there was no fighting going on as the supporters of
Al-Husayn (as) were all killed, so where is the mistake in that? We had
previously mentioned that the Fifth defendant Hurmala committed the
crime after the commander of the army Umar ibn Sa’d requested that from
him. So where was the mistake?

Furthermore, was the killing of Abdullah ibn Al Al-Hasan, the eleven
year old child, considered to be a mistake? He was killed while
defending his uncle who was breathing his last and about to die, and
with the same shot by the Fifth defendant. So how was that action a
mistake?

Let the defense explain if they are able to, as there was no any
fighting or fighters available at that point to confront the opposing
army of Ibn Sa’d. Didn’t that army intentionally commit all these crimes
which we have mentioned only a few of? Do you mean to say that they were
all mistakes? What nonsense is this and how ridiculous is that?!

Moreover, was the killing of the injured Al-Husayn a mistake and not
unintentional? Here is Ibn Sa’d saying to his soldiers, “Go to him and
finish him up”, so they carry out that heinous crime on an injured man
who is about to die, instead of giving him a sip of water and treating
him for his injuries if possible. Weren’t all these events war crimes
and mass murder and crimes against humanity? If it is not, then what
exactly do we call them? Mistake? Accident? Random?

The defense wants you to believe all that and disregard your intellect,
memory, and human logic. No way that this would happen unless we choose
to abandon our humanity and leave our minds behind us and follow
whatever the defense says without thinking!!

Surely, all of the proofs and evidences for the conviction of the five
defendants in committing war crimes and mass murder and crimes against
humanity are clearly present in all the events and authentic documents
and statements we presented which you may refer to them.

Now let’s address the claim that the five defendants are now facing
divine justice. Our goal is to either we vindicate or convict them in
this world using our human logic and court system, while giving the
defendants all their rights as we are doing now.

The divine justice in the Hereafter does not replace or suffice the
human justice in this world. Otherwise, why are we placing the serial
killers, criminals, and robbers under trial, despite our knowledge that
they will never escape divine justice?!

The benefit of this trial is great and imperative in establishing human
justice on earth, without which there is no value or meaning for the
presence of any human civilization on this planet! In the animal world,
there is only divine justice present and no animal justice, and that is
a big difference between humans and animals.

So we must seek the establishment of justice as humans and bring the
rights for the oppressed and the victims, whether in the past or
present. By successfully achieving justice even if after a big time
span, mankind proves its dignified human values and foundations and it
escalates as its Creator desired for it to be. Thank you, your Honor.

Chief Justice: The defense team, would you like to rebut the
prosecution’s argument?

Defense: No thanks your Honor.

Chief Justice: So, the court will be in recess for a half hour. Court is
dismissed.

Second Tragic Scene: “The Horrifying Scene”
-------------------------------------------

Chief Justice: Court is now in session after the break. Mr. Prosecutor,
are you ready to continue presenting the rest of the evidence?

Prosecutor: Yes, your Honor.

Chief Justice: You may begin and the podium is yours.

Prosecutor: Your Honor, respected judges and jurors…after the hero of
Karbala fell down as a martyr drenched in his blood suffering from his
numerous injuries and…after the men and youth in his family as well as
his companions and supporters were martyred and…after his head was
chopped and raised on a spear to announce the end of this heinous
mission… after ALL that, the horrifying scene began!

The victorious army under the commandership of the Third defendant and
by direct order from the Fourth defendant proceeded towards the camp of
Al-Husayn (as) the Martyr. The tents which shelter the women, children,
the sick, and contain their personal belongings were attacked. The
soldiers started looting and plundering everything and they competed in
robbing the women of the Prophet’s household of their clothes and
accessories!

It was to the point that a woman, according to Al-Tabari, would be
looted from her veil, her ring, her earring, and her bracelet…such that
those women ran away without head covering and in tears!!

Ladies and gentlemen, you can very well imagine this horrendous scene in
which the huge army consisting of thousands were attacking, looting, and
hitting women who no longer have a guardian or protector! Then they set
the tents on fire which terrorized the children and women, and everyone
went out running in every direction out of fear of the fire which
started to spread quickly everywhere.

All that happened in front of the Third defendant, the commander of the
army who was doing nothing to intervene and stop this horrendous scene!
Doesn’t this scene represent a war crime with all its conditions and
represent a crime against humanity?!!

Finally, the soldiers reached ‘Ali ibn Al-Husayn (as) who was the only
one left from the sons of Al-Husayn (as) since he was very ill and could
not participate in fighting. They found him bed-ridden, so the Fourth
defendant Al-Shimr took out his sword wanting to kill this young sick
man. As it is cited in Tarikh Al Tabari, someone said to him,

“Are you going to kill the boys too?! He is only a sick young man!”

So Shimr responded, “Ibn Ziyad has ordered to kill all the sons of
Al-Husayn.”

Ladies and gentlemen, here, the Fourth defendant Al-Shimr confesses that
his master the Second defendant issued orders to his army not only to
kill Al-Husayn (as), but also to kill his sons, big or small without any
exception!

This happened before the confrontation even started. So was there any
sincere intention or serious attempt to negotiate peace and avoid
fighting? Wasn’t it a pre-meditated intention to get rid of Al-Husayn
and his sons, and all of the progeny of the Prophet of Islam, whom the
defense claim that this army went out fighting Al-Husayn (as) and his
companions out of abidance to the religion which that Prophet came with?
What type of hypocrisy, forgery, and contradiction is this?!

It was only at this point that Ibn Sa’d the Third defendant intervened
to prevent Al-Shimr after he saw Zainab bint ‘Ali, the sister of
Al-Husayn (as) saying: “He will not be killed until I am killed first!”
It was only at this point that they refrained from killing him.

Ladies and gentlemen, is the attempt of killing the sick people during
and after war considered to be a crime which calls for the human
conscience? Isn’t it a war crime or not?! Isn’t it a crime against
humanity or not? And isn’t the instructions of the Second defendant to
kill all of the children of Al-Husayn (as) considered to be a genocide
and mass murder or not?!

Finally, the commander of the army, the Third defendant Ibn Sa’d came
and when the women saw him, they screamed and cried at his face, so he
finally issued his very belated orders to his army and said:

“No one is to enter the shelter of these women, and no one is to harm
this sick young man. Whoever took something from their belongings should
return it.”

Narrators are in consensus that they stopped attacking, but none of them
returned any of the belongings that they confiscated from the women.

Following that, another tragic scene took place which was an
unbelievable heinous crime against humanity! Ibn Sa’d, out of his
obedience to the orders of his butcher master, the Second defendant as
we mentioned before, called out to his army saying:

“Who of you would like to be assigned to trample and stampede over the
chest and body of Al-Husayn with horses?”

Ten horsemen volunteered and they trampled over the body of Al-Husayn
with their horses till they smashed his chest and back! You can imagine
this horrendous scene, oh respected judges and jurors! These people were
not satisfied with brutally killing Al-Husayn and cutting off his head
and raising it on a spear!

They were not content with looting his body and leaving him naked on the
dust of Karbala! Now they are even stepping over his torn up and naked
body with the hooves of their horses! How terrible is that…how boastful
is that…and what type of humans are they?! What type of crime against
humanity can that be categorized as?!

There is no doubt as you are imagining that scene that you will feel
extreme disgust and disdain and I apologize for that but it is the truth
which you must picture and imagine so that your verdict on these
inhumane blood-shedders would be just, direct, and decisive.

If Ibn Sa’d the Third defendant did not obey that specific order of Ibn
Ziyad, no one would’ve ever blamed him, not even Ibn Ziyad himself! But
the strong desire of the Third defendant to please Ibn Ziyad and to win
the governorship of Al-Rayy’ state (which covers most of Iran today)
made him not hesitate from carrying out such heinous inhumane,
un-Islamic, and immoral act. So he carries full responsibility of this
act, in addition to the responsibility which his master Ibn Ziyad holds!

Following that, another horrendous scene took place. The Third defendant
Ibn Sa’d ordered that all of the heads of the martyrs be severed and
they were distributed between different tribes in order to please the
Second defendant Ibn Ziyad.

All of that happened in front of the women and children and you can very
well imagine the state of these women and children as they witness the
heads of their fathers, husbands, sons, and brothers being cut and
raised on spears to be presented to Ibn Ziyad! Ladies and gentlemen, can
you imagine how much pain, suffering, and grief affect the hearts of
these orphaned children and widowed, grievous, devastated women in the
mist of that barren desert in the land of Karbala?! I don’t think anyone
can even begin to imagine or comprehend all that pain and suffering!!

After that, Ibn Sa’d ordered to send the severed head of Al-Husayn (as)
as well as his companions to Ibn Ziyad in Al-Kufa. He spent his night in
Karbala and on the 11th day of Muharram, he gathered the bodies of his
dead ones and prayed on them and buried them.

But he abandoned the dead body of Al-Husayn (as) as well as those of his
family members and companions in the desert without Ghusl/ablutionary
bath or shroud or burial. Now is that a humane act from him or isn’t it
a crime committed against humanity?! And did his leader Ibn Ziyad also
order him to do so?

Or wasn’t that a criminal act that was a personal initiative from him,
out of desire for more pleasure from his masters in Al-Kufa and
Damascus? Surely, this act has no resemblance! Humanity does not accept
to leave a dead animal without burial, so how can it accept to do that
with innocent human beings and martyrs who simply rejected oppression,
corruption, and tyranny?!!

Finally, the criminal Ibn Sa’d left in the afternoon of the 11th day of
Muharram to Al-Kufa and he ordered that the sisters, daughters, wives,
and children of Al-Husayn (as) be taken along as well as the rest of the
families of the martyrs. Accompanying them was ‘Ali ibn Al-Husayn (as)
who was suffering from severe illness at that time. They forced all the
captives to ride on camels without saddle. Here, we must note a few
things:

**First:** It is very painful for a person to ride a camel or any other
animal without a saddle. The body of such person will be in direct
contact with the skin, hair, and body of the animal which causes sores
and inflammation in his body, especially with extreme heat of the
desert. It is an unbearable situation also considering the long distance
of travel.

**Second:** During that time, it was the habit of Arabs to resort to
this practice in order to show extreme disgrace and humiliation to those
who undergo this punishment.

**Third:** This type of practice used to be given to the captives of the
enemies of Islam only. However, this act was not Islamic at all and it
was not ever imagined that it would be practiced against the family
members of the Prophet and Messenger of Islam. Now isn’t this considered
to be maltreatment of war captives? And are women, children, and widows
considered to be war captives to begin with? Furthermore, isn’t this
practice considered to be a war crime in which the Third defendant is
responsible of?

The women requested from their captors to allow them to pass by the dead
bodies of their loved ones before departing the place. They let the
captives pass by the torn, headless bodies of the martyrs which were
left for the beasts and birds to devour on the land of Karbala.

The women witnessed this awful and heart-breaking scene and they saw the
bodies of their husbands, brothers, sons, and fathers in this pitiful
state as they were headless, naked, slaughtered, surrounded by pools of
blood, and encircled by hovering birds! In that heart rendering state,
the women screamed, lamented, yelled, and many of them fainted! We can
imagine their extreme state of grief, sorrow, and anguish as well as
pain, fear, and terror which they experienced!!

Naturally, one of the most women affected by this unbelievable scene was
Zainab bint ‘Ali (as), the sister of Al-Husayn, and Sakina (as), the
daughter of Al-Husayn, who both embraced the purified body of Al-Husayn
(as) which made everyone cry from sympathy, pain, and grief. The
soldiers had to strike Zainab with the whip by direct orders from the
Fourth defendant Al-Shimr, to force her to abandon the body of Al-Husayn
(as); then they dragged her away.

Ladies and gentlemen, is that a humane act, or is it a barbaric and
aggressive behavior committed against the mourning and grievous women
whose hearts were broken from the loss of their loved ones?! Instead of
being compassionate to them, they went on striking the women with the
whips and dragging them across the desert!

What type of military honor, chivalry, or humanity is that?! And where
was the commander of the army Ibn Sa’d when that happened? Didn’t he
know about it?! If he didn’t know, then shame on him! And if he knew,
then he is responsible for all the behaviors of the Fourth defendant and
the suffering of those civilians in captivity, in addition to the
responsibility of the Fourth defendant himself.

The army of Ibn Sa’d drove the women of the Prophet’s Household as
captives who were led in the worst of conditions till they reached
Al-Kufa where the people came out to stare at them. When the common
people realized what was done to the household of their Prophet (S),
they went on wailing, crying, and lamenting.

As we mentioned before, it was known that the city of Al-Kufa was the
homeland of Shi’ism and support to the Household of the Prophet of
Islam, before it turned on its back 180 degrees due to the pressure and
terror of the Second defendant Ibn Ziyad.

When the people of Al-Kufa surrounded the caravan of the captives of the
Household of the Prophet (S) and they were in awe of what they
witnessed, the sister of Al-Husayn (as), Zainab bint ‘Ali, delivered a
great historical speech which I’d like to recite to you and include it
to the record as well as the sermon of ‘Ali ibn Al Al-Husayn Al Sajjad
(as).

Defense: I strongly object your Honor! These speeches have nothing to do
with the indictment of the five defendants. All what is meant from it is
only to inflame the emotions of the judges and jurors against the
defendants.

Keep in mind that these speeches were directed to and against the people
of Al-Kufa. And the people of Al-Kufa are not the ones who are being
tried in this court. So what is the point of wasting the court time by
presenting these speeches?!

Prosecutor: Your Honor, the Second, Third, and Fourth defendants have
denied that the people of Al-Kufa have sent to Al-Husayn (as) inviting
him. These speeches contain a response to them with clear proof and
evidence. Furthermore, the defense team is trying to portray Al-Husayn
(as) as the one who revolted against Yazid.

But these speeches testify that Al-Husayn (as) was forced to leave and
that he sought refuge in Al-Kufa escaping Yazid, after its people
invited him and promised to protect and support him. Then they broke
their promise and changed their loyalty.

Furthermore, these speeches portray the frustration of the household of
the Holy Prophet (S) from the people of Al-Kufa which confirms the
severity of the oppression that the Second defendant practiced against
the people of Al-Kufa, to the point that he transformed them from a
supporter of Al-Husayn (as) to a soldier in his army!! So, this is also
a strong evidence of the crimes of the Second defendant Ibn Ziyad.

Chief Justice: Objection overruled, and I’d like to direct the attention
of the judges and jurors to focus their attention in these speeches only
on what can incriminate the five defendants or what can vindicate them
from the charges, putting aside the emotional reaction. You may proceed,
Mr. Prosecutor.

Prosecutor: Thank you your Honor. Ladies and gentlemen, we start by
presenting the speech of Zainab bint Ameer Al Momineen ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib (as), the sister of Al-Husayn (as). She signaled to the grievous
and lamenting crowd to be quiet, so there was pin-drop silence. As it is
narrated in most of the references which we previously referred to,
after praising Allah (SWT) and praying on Prophet Muhammad (S) and his
Household, she then said:

“Oh People of Al-Kufa! You are the companions of treason and betrayal!
Do you weep?! May your tears never dry, and may your cry never stop! You
are like she who unravels her yarn, disjoining it into thin filament
after she has made it strong. You take your oath as means of deceit
between yourselves?!

Verily, you only own cowardliness, false pride, obstinance, hypocrisy,
deceit, flattery, and backbiting. You are like a herd of lambs that came
to bad grassland to eat! What a bad deed you present to yourselves which
will incur Allah’s wrath upon you, and eternal torture!

Do you cry and wail?! May Allah make you weep a lot and laugh little!
You did carry all the shame and the disgrace on your shoulders and you
will never be able to wash that away from yourselves.

And how can you ever wash away the killing of the grandson of the Seal
of Prophets, and the Master Youth of the Paradise, your protector and
your shelter in tough times, your lighthouse and the best on your
tongues. What a wrong you committed! Woe to you, your effort has failed,
your hands have perished, your deal is lost, and you gain only the anger
of Allah, indignity and humiliation.

Oh People of Kufa, woe be to you! Do you know which blood for the
Messenger of Allah you have shed, which female related to him you have
captured, and which sanctity for him you have violated,

***“Indeed you have put forth a monstrous thing! Might the heavens be
broken down in front of it, and the earth cleaves, and the mountains
fall down in fragments!” [Surah 19, Verse 89-90]***

You have committed an obvious black, horrendous, unbelievable, terrible,
and very serious crime!

Do you wonder that the sky has rained a bloody rain, but the torture in
the Hereafter is much worst and humiliating and you will then be from
the losers! So don’t be deceived that Allah gives you ample time as He
the Almighty does not rush to punish because He does not abandon the
revenge. Truly your Lord is watching, so wait for the beginning of Surat
Al Nahl, and the end of Surat Saad.

Narrators described the people of Al-Kufa to be confused and overcome
with grief and regret. Their women have exposed their hair and slapped
their own faces and cheeks. The people surrounded ‘Ali ibn Al Al-Husayn
(as) who was handcuffed, his hands were chained to his neck, and blood
was on his face. So he pointed to the people to be quiet, and when they
were silent, he praised and thanked Allah (SWT) and prayed for the
Prophet (S) then he said:

“Oh people, whoever knows me, he knows me. And whoever doesn’t know me,
I am ‘Ali ibn Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib. I am the son of he whose
sanctity was violated and whose bounty was confiscated and whose wealth
was seized and whose children were taken as captives! I am the son of he
who was slaughtered by the Furat river without heritage or a crime. I am
the son of he who was killed in execution style and that is enough of an
honor!

Oh people, I ask you by Allah, don’t you know that you have written
letters to my father and deceived him?! You gave him promises,
covenants, and pledge of allegiance! Then you fought and killed
him…curse be upon you for what you committed and your poor judgment!
With what face will you meet the Prophet when he says to you, ‘You have
killed my progeny and have violated my sanctity, so you are not from my
nation!’”

Chief Justice: I think that many of you are exhausted now and are in
need for rest, so I will conclude this session and we’ll resume after
the weekend on Monday at 10AM. Thank you, court is dismissed.


