The Third News Conference
=========================

After a one hour break, the journalists and press correspondents as well
as the media and TV representatives gathered for a Third news conference
with the prosecution and defense teams. As usual, the hall was crowded
with journalists and correspondents.

The defense representative entered while accompanied by two members of
his defense team. Everyone was anxious as this was the first time that
the defense attend a news conference after excusing themselves twice
before. Some expected that they would also excuse themselves this time,
but to everyone’s surprise the defense representative attended and the
questions started trickling in.

Defense: Please…please…silence please so that we can answer your
questions. Yes, go ahead (and he points to one of the correspondents).

Correspondent: How do you evaluate the court proceedings so far? And do
you think that you are heading towards loosing the case?

Defense: Generally-speaking good, however I want to express our
frustration due to the rejection of the Chief Justice to many of our
motions and objections, with all due respect to his professionalism and
expertise and his handling of the court proceedings.

I do think that the prosecution is given the opportunity to use some of
the unauthentic events and statements to emotionally influence the
judges and jurors in order to gain their sympathy and support. It was
necessary for the judge not to allow him that. We have attempted
numerous times to direct the attention of the Chief Justice to that by
objecting again and again, but unfortunately these objections were
overruled.

As for the claim that we are on our way to loose, I do not think that at
all and I believe that the truth will impose itself at the end, and the
judges and jurors will become convinced and will realize that the whole
trial has no meaning or necessity.

Another correspondent: Do you really believe that the defendants are
innocent? And do you think that the Chief Justice is biased against you?

Defense: Yes, we believe that the defendants are innocent from
intentionally committing what happened. All of the events which took
place was a result of the circumstances, confrontation, stubborn minds,
and military mistakes in the battlefield. As for your question regarding
the Chief Justice being biased, I don’t think that at all and he enjoys
a high level of professionalism which we highly respect.

Another correspondent: The media is in consensus that the prosecution
represented by the personality of the Prosecutor takes the focus and
attention of the jurors. Do you agree with that? And if true, how will
that affect your efforts in persuading the jurors to declare a “not
guilty” verdict?

Defense Rep: No, I do not agree with that. I have full confidence that
the respected judges and jurors are listening very well to both
prosecution and defense teams. In the end, they’ll judge using their
minds and conscience in evaluating what each team presents from
reasonable evidences, away from any emotional issues or attempts to move
their feelings. We will continue to focus only on the materialistic
evidence in front of the respected judges and jurors. The burden is on
the prosecution to prove the charges against the defendants without
reasonable doubts.

Correspondent: Sir, the evidence presented so far proves and
incriminates the five defendants without any doubt and proves their
participation and involvement in committing war crimes, mass murder, and
crimes against humanity. So how will you face all these evidences in the
courtroom?

Defense reply: I totally disagree because all of these evidences are not
authenticated and are just historical narrations that are conflicting
with each other. At least 50% of doubt is present and that is enough for
a “not guilty” verdict! Even if that doubt reached only 1%, the jurors
should still issue a “not guilty” verdict. We will try to clarify and
prove this point in front of the jurors to convince them about the
innocence of the defendants from the crimes and the grave charges which
they are facing.

Correspondent: So far, how do you evaluate the idea of past historical
trials, being that this trial is considered to be the first of these
types of trials?

Defense: I regret to say that this experience is not encouraging as the
job of prosecution and defense in these cases are very difficult. The
further away in history the case is from the present time, the more
challenging the mission due to lack of availability of evidence to
incriminate or vindicate, and also due to the many doubts which
accompany these evidences.

However, the idea that justice does not disintegrate with time is valid,
and we support it 100%. Verily, supporting the oppressed is from the
foundations of our religion. However, we believe that the Just God alone
is the one who establishes justice since He is knowledgeable of the
whole truth. There will be a day of Judgment in the Hereafter where
Allah (SWT) will take the rights of every oppressed, and every oppressor
will pay the price for his oppression and transgression. I will stop
here…thank you.

(The defense team quickly leaves the hall and after about 10 min, the
Prosecutor entered, accompanied by two of his team members and they were
surrounded by journalists. He requested from them all to be seated and
he took his place at the podium and said):

Prosecutor: Due to shortage of time, I’ll only take three questions and
I apologize to all of you for that. Go ahead (and he points to one of
the correspondents).

Correspondent: How do you respond to the accusation of the defense
against you that you attempt to influence the jurors emotionally by
presenting some of the details which are not authenticated, and that the
Chief Justice allows you to do so?

Prosecutor: This is a totally false accusation; rather, the defense
ignores the nature of the case which is 100% humanitarian and tragic!
For that reason, we are in this trial and we place the defendants on
trial for committing crimes against humanity and war crimes against
civilians and children, as well as mass murder. In all of these crimes,
you cannot separate the humanitarian aspect from the criminal aspect,
for they are both two sides of one coin.

As for the claim that what we present is not confirmed or authenticated
evidence, that is left for the respected judges and jurors to decide and
thank God that this decision is not left for the defense. The jurors and
judges are the ones who will finally deliberate and decide if the events
and evidences which we presented are enough to convict the defendants or
not.

As for the Chief Justice of the court, he is surely distinguished by his
great expertise and respected personality. Many times, he restricts us
from saying what we want in front of the jurors. I believe that the
defense also testified to the high proficiency, caliber, and
impartiality of the Chief Justice.

News correspondent: How do you explain or justify the overturn of the
people of Al-Kufa against the household of their prophet, even though
the Kufans themselves were their supporters and followers? How did the
matter change in that way while we have seen later their regret after
they witnessed the captives and the women of the

Prophet’s household confined in chains, and they realized the evil that
they have committed?

Prosecutor: There are many reasons for that; the most important are the
following:

The high level of oppression and persecution which the authority of Ibn
Ziyad practiced on the people of Al-Kufa. He targeted the leaders of the
true (Shias) supporters of Al-Husayn (as). This was particularly true
after his success in putting down the revolt of Muslim ibn ‘Aqeel and
killing him. The people feared a lot from his tyranny and were forced to
go out and fight against Al-Husayn (as) although most of them were
reluctant.

The presence of hypocrites among the Kufans was a factor. They took part
in the mischief against the government of Ameer Al Momineen ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib (as) and were the direct reason behind the widespread of the
rebellion of Muawiya ibn Abi Sufyan against the legitimate leader and
later, the tragic assignation of that legitimate leader (caliph), Imam
‘Ali (as). These hypocrites assisted Ibn Ziyad in getting rid of the
true Shias / supporters of Al-Husayn (as), and they were the ones who
directly coordinated and led the fighting and killing of Imam Al-Husayn
(as).

The presence of Al-Khawarij (The Outlawed) in Al-Kufa as well as in the
tribes surrounding it was another major factor. Those people harbored
extreme animosity to the household of the Prophet (S) and the progeny of
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) whom they considered to be the cause of their
defeat in the Battle of Al-Nahrawan.

So they took this opportunity and saw in Karbala the place to take the
revenge from the Alawi family, as it was the custom of the Arabs to take
vengeance of previous losses. Shimr ibn Dhi Al Jawshan, the Fourth
defendant, was among those Khawarij as well as Shebth ibn Reb’ey and
Muhammad ibn Al Ash’ath and many others who directly participated in the
killing of Al-Husayn (as) and his companions.

The widespread of extreme religious ignorance in the tribes and clans
played a major role too.

The hostile propaganda against AhlulBayt (the household of the Prophet)
which became widespread in the state all throughout the era of the
caliphate of Muawiya ibn Abi Sufyan, which continued for about 20 years.
This led to the appearance of a new generation of youth who has been
raised on the hatred and animosity towards the family of the Prophet.

They were led to believe at a young age that the Prophet’s household
were a source of mischief and so one must get rid of them in order to
stabilize the state, and that this is a religious duty.

The presence of grudges and animosities in many of the tribes in Al-Kufa
and its surrounding area towards Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) who killed
many of their leaders, chiefs, and known warriors in the battles of
Jamal, Siffeen, and Nahrawan in addition to the battles he fought beside
the Prophet (S).

These tribes would seek vengeance and wait for the right opportunity to
take revenge from the Household of Imam ‘Ali (as). The Caliph Yazid ibn
Muawiya, the First defendant used to take pride in his poetry after
Karbala that he took revenge for his infidels chiefs and ancestors who
were killed by Muhammad (S) and ‘Ali (as) on the day of Badr.

Then we can very well imagine the feelings of these tribal members as
many of their nobles and sons were killed by the hands of ‘Ali too. In
fact, they were also Muslims who participated in Siffeen, Jamal, and
Nahrawan against Imam ‘Ali (as)!

Correspondent: Do you have more incriminating evidence to present and
when do you expect to conclude your case?!

Prosecutor: We are quickly approaching the end, but I cannot

give you an exact time because that depends on many factors which are
not in our hands. For example, the defense response, the legal
proceeding, and official holidays, etc. But I assure you that the end of
the prosecution case is very near. Thank you all and see you next time
God-willing. Salam to everyone. (He exits the hall and the audience
begins to depart).


