The Eleventh Court Session
==========================

First Tragic Scene: “The Defense Attacks!”
------------------------------------------

Chief Justice: Court is in session. Defense team, today is your day and
the podium is yours. We are all listening, so are you ready to present
your rebuttal to the evidence which the prosecution presented until now?

Defense: Yes your Honor, we are ready.

Chief Justice: You may begin.

The Defense: Your Honor, respected judges and jurors. The prosecution
has done a fine job in twisting the truth and moving the feelings and
emotions! At the same time, he intentionally ignored some of the facts
and historical texts which contradict what he wants to portray to you. I
will give you examples of that:

**First:** Looting and burning of the tents of Al-Husayn (as) was a
spontaneous act from the soldiers who jumped to collect what they
thought were spoils of war to them. This is clearly a big mistake on
their part and a deviation from the religion without a doubt.

But when Umar ibn Sa’d, the commander of the army learned of this, he
immediately ordered for it to stop and he instructed to protect the
tents, the women, and the sick. He ordered to return everything that was
looted and commanded to set up other new tents to replace the ones that
were burnt or harmed.

**Second:** Cutting the heads of those killed in the battlefield was a
custom of the Arabs and it was their only way to prove that they killed
their victims, as there was no other way to prove it. This act had been
practiced in all the battles and also after the emergence of Islam.

**Third:** As for the incident of the sons of Muslim ibn Aqeel, the
person who has killed them is the one who is responsible for their
murder. Ibn Ziyad issued orders to arrest the boys due to their escape
from the prison and he promised a reward for he who arrests them. But
the person who found the boys killed them and Ibn Ziyad punished that
person by executing him as you’ve heard which proves that he wasn’t
pleased of their deaths.

**Fourth:** There is no any historical evidence which proves that Caliph
Yazid ibn Muawiya issued any orders to hold celebrations in every town
which the caravan of captives passed by. There is exaggeration in this
matter and if it did happen, then it was initiated by the people of that
particular village or city.

**Fifth:** As for sending the captives to Al-Sham, this also was an Arab
custom. The captives were usually sent from the place they’ve been taken
as captives to the capital of the state and to the rulers or caliph of
the Muslims. For example, the Persian captives were sent to Umar ibn Al
Khatab from Al-Mada’en to Al-Madina, and captives were sent to the
Caliphs of Banu Umayyad and Banu Al Abbas. So this was a custom which
the Arabs were used to.

**Sixth:** As for the speech of Zohr ibn Qais, it is filled with
exaggeration and embellishment for the purposes of pleasing the Caliph.

Therefore, one cannot depend or rely on it.

**Seventh:** As for the poetic verses which the prosecutor recited to
prove the infidelity of Yazid and his revolt against the religion which
he was ruling the state under its name, these verses do not belong to
Yazid. They were actually verses which Abdullah ibn Al Zobori recited on
the day of the Battle of Uhud and he was at that time among the
nonbelievers who were fighting against the Muslims. When AlHamza, the
uncle of the Prophet (S) was killed, Ibn Al Zobori recited these verses.

**Eighth:** As for the story of Ruqayyah the daughter of Al-Husayn (as),
it is not a verified incident and most of those who narrate it are from
the “rejecters” / rafeda. As for those who narrate this story from the
Sunni sources, they are very little. Therefore, we can not draw
conclusions based on it since there is a doubt; and doubt is to be
interpreted always for the benefit of the defendant!

Dear Ladies and gentlemen, the Prosecutor has concealed from you some
narrations which were cited in the same references which he used and
which are in favor of the First defendant Yazid. For example, it has
been narrated in Maqtal Al-Husayn Lil Khwarizmi Al Hanafi that after
Yazid heard the words of Zohr ibn Qais, he paused for awhile, and then
he raised his head and wept while saying:

“By Allah, oh man I would’ve been pleased with your obedience without
killing Al-Husayn (as). By Allah, if he had come to me, I would’ve
pardoned him. But may Allah degrade Ibn Murjana (the Second defendant)!”

Then Yazid said, “Yes, may Allah curse Ibn Murjana for killing a person
like Al-Husayn ibn Fatima. By Allah, if I was attending there, I
would’ve given him anything he asked for and would’ve protected him with
all my might, and sacrifice my own sons to defend him!

However, when Allah wills something, there is no change to it.”

It has also been narrated in the same book that Hind, the daughter of
Abdullah ibn ‘Amer, the wife of Yazid, opened the curtain while she had
exposed her hair as a sign of anger, and she rushed to Yazid exclaiming,

“Is the head of the son of Fatima crucified on the door of my house?!”

Yazid hastened to cover her and said, “Yes! So mourn on him Oh Hind! And
weep on the grandson of the Prophet. Ibn Ziyad was haste in killing him,
may Allah kill him!”

It was narrated too that Yazid hosted the captives to his private home
and he would not eat lunch or dinner without having ‘Ali ibn Al-Husayn
(as) accompany him. It was also narrated that Yazid offered that they
reside in Damascus, but they rejected that offer and instead requested
to return to their home in Al-Madina. So Yazid said to AlNu’man ibn
Basheer who was from Al Ansaar:

“Equip them with resources and send with them a good man from Al Sham as
a guardian. Provide them with horses and servants.”

Then he provided them clothes and bounties, and he called for ‘Ali ibn
Al-Husayn (as) and said to him:

“May Allah curse Ibn Murjana! By Allah if I was with your father, I
would’ve given him anything he asked for and would’ve protected
Al-Husayn with all might even if I sacrifice some of my sons. However,
Allah willed what happened so write to me if you need anything.”

Doesn’t all of that indicate that the whole matter was not
premeditated?! Rather, it was the result of unfortunate circumstances,
poor judgment, and mistakes on the soldier’s part. And in the end of the
day, it is Allah’s will.

We do not deny that it is a horrendous tragedy; however, it was not
planned or arranged. Rather, it was a mistake that was due to poor
judgment. Who among us do not commit mistakes or make poor judgment in
his life? Are we to be placed on trial and be charged for that?! No,
ladies and gentlemen!

Furthermore, the First defendant was a young Caliph who wanted to
establish the cornerstones of his new government and secure it, which is
his right in order to face the enemies of the Islamic state both
internally and externally and this is for the best interest of the
nation. The ultimate goal and public interest may explain some of the
limits that were crossed.

As for the Second defendant, he was a clever and decisive governor who
was appointed to put a halt to mischief. So he simply carried out his
duty and if the state of affairs demanded from him to be supertough,
then likewise, the public interest excuses some of the limits that were
crossed.

As for the Third defendant, Umar ibn Sa’d, as a military commander of
the army he was forced to take the leadership of the army though he was
reluctant. He carried out the duty he was appointed for, just like any
military commander, whether he likes it or not! So what is he being
tried for?!

As for the Fourth defendant, he was also obeying orders issued to him by
those superior to him. He was stubborn in his opinion but he didn’t have
the last decision. Perhaps he was rude at times, but in the end, he is
only an appointed soldier who carries out what he is ordered. Also,
please do not forget that he himself was once a soldier in the army of
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) in the Battle of Siffeen against Muawiya, the
father of Yazid.

As for the Fifth defendant, the same justification applies to him. He
was also a soldier and he was simply a sniper carrying out what is asked
of him and he had no choice but to obey the orders, whether he likes it
or not. So what are we putting him on trial for and why are we charging
him?!

Ladies and gentlemen, the world is filled with tragedies and perils
which lead to the presence of victims, pain, tears, and grief! If we
established court trials for each of these cases, then we will need to
have courtrooms and judges in every corner and street!

The earth would be filled with court trials, prosecutors, lawyers, and
defendants! That would surely be overwhelming so we must leave justice
for God of heavens and earth! He is the absolute Justice and He
possesses knowledge of the whole truth. Let us free ourselves for other
more important matters in our lives and religion for we have a lot to
fix and take care of!

The Prosecutor has relied on stirring the emotions and influencing the
feelings to force you to convict the defendants. All of the prosecution
evidences are only narrations in books which may be correct or
incorrect. There is a lot of doubt in them and they are not certain
facts which you can depend on for conviction. For this reason, these
evidences are not qualified by nature to incriminate the five
defendants. Thank you ladies and gentlemen.

Chief Justice: Thank you Mr. Lawyer. Mr. Prosecutor, would you like to
respond to what was presented in the defense case?

Prosecutor: Yes, of course your Honor.

Chief Justice: Would you like to start now or shall we break for a
recess and start after the break?!

Prosecutor: As you like, your Honor and I leave the matter up to you.

Chief Justice: I think it is better that we take a break now so that we
don’t interrupt your case with a break. Court session is now in recess
for half an hour and shall resume afterwards to hear the prosecution’s
response to the defense rebuttal.

Second Tragic Scene: “The Attack Fails”
---------------------------------------

Chief Justice: Court is now in session after recess. Mr. Prosecutor, are
you ready to respond to the defense case?!

Prosecutor: Yes, your Honor.

Chief Justice: You may proceed.

Prosecutor: Respected judges and jurors, the defense did not find any
way to face the overwhelming truth and the strong historical evidence
which incriminates his defendants without a doubt…except to resort to
what we call “confusing the case”. It is a well-known tactic which
lawyers often use to defend their client when they are stuck and can not
find any hope in vindicating their client due to the devastating
evidences which incriminates them.

In the lawyer’s language, “confusing the case” means to portray the
crime as one that is not a crime, and that it is only due to bad luck
and the will of God, claiming that it is due to an unqualified
individual(s).

Their hope is that when the jurors become convinced that there is no
crime, they will then see no value to any evidence and no meaning to
having defendants in the case as there is no case. Hence, there is no
need for a trial to begin with, or judge or courtroom, and so there is
hope in winning the case in that way.

Despite the fact that the statistics point to the fact that this defense
tactic does not give a result greater than 10% success of cases due to
the fact that most jurors do not buy or get convinced by this method
when there is a strong clear evidence available. Despite that, the
defense team resorts to the same old tactic hoping that it will affect
you! But I have strong confidence in you like my confidence in myself
and my case.

I know very well that this maneuver will not work with you and they
cannot deceive you, for you are much more intelligent and wiser than
that! Here I feel somewhat pitiful for the desperate position that the
defense team are in as they couldn’t find any other way to rescue their
case except this unsuccessful path!

However, I assure the defense that there is no way out in this very
clear case! Despite that, I would like to clarify the following facts:

**First:** We do not stir up or arouse any feelings or emotions. Rather,
the nature of this case is humanitarian since it is filled with torture,
pain, and everything inhumane and even animalistic! So how can feelings
and emotions not be aroused, and how can the nonliving things not weep
even before humans?!

The emotional influence is not from us, but is from the nature of the
heinous crimes committed and what these five defendants perpetrated. If
the defense wants to direct blame for that emotional influence, then let
them blame their clients whom they’re defending!

**Second:** The burning and looting of tents of the women and children
and the sick is the responsibility of the commander of the army, even if
it was an accidental act from the soldiers. He is the one responsible of
them and it is not a valid excuse for him to say that he didn’t know. At
the end, that is his army, he is its commander, and he is completely
responsible of what his soldiers do.

This is the logical judgment of the human intellect. If these soldiers
were directed before the battle that they are about to fight the
household and progeny of the Prophet (S) and so it is not permissible
for them to loot belongings or attack tents or take spoils of war from
them, they would not have dared to do what they did.

On the contrary, we have seen that the Fourth defendant was also one of
those who attacked the tents and wanted to kill the sick among them! Now
did the commander of the army give such instructions to his soldiers
before the battle, just like ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) did before the
battles of Jamal, Siffeen, and Nahrawan? No he didn’t! By failing to do
so, he carries full responsibility of what has happened to the women and
children after the battlefield.

**Third:** The severing of heads was a barbaric custom among the Arabs,
but when Islam emerged, it prohibited mutilation of dead bodies. Let the
defense give us any example from the battles which the Prophet (S)
participated in, where he cut the heads and raised them on spears, or
had ordered them to be transported to him in Al-Madina.

This degrading and harsh act was practiced before sending Muhammad as
the Messenger of Allah (SWT), then he prohibited that act after the
commencement of the message and it was non-existent until Muawiya became
Caliph (ruler) and then he killed Amr ibn AlHamq who was from the
companions of the Holy Prophet (S)!

He ordered to cut his head as we mentioned previously and to have it
sent to him in Damascus. Hence, it became the first head in Islam to be
severed and paraded in the cities! After Muawiya innovated this heinous
Sunnah, his son Yazid followed that same practice after him. Then all of
the Umayyad and Abbasid Caliphs followed it as well as those who came
after them. But it was never a part of Islam, nor from its teachings!

**Fourth:** As for the sons of Muslim ibn Aqeel, if the person who
killed them knew that their murder would not please the governor, he
wouldn’t have killed them. But he killed them because the governor’s
command was to reward the person who brings them or their heads to him.
When Ibn Ziyad executed the criminal who killed the boys, he did so not
because he wasn’t pleased with his action. Rather, he executed him to
cover up his crime which he himself has committed when he ordered that
the two boys be arrested and brought to him, whether dead or alive.

**Fifth:** It is known that under a dictatorship system, no one can run
celebrations or organize processions in multiple cities and villages
without the approval of the ruling authority, and this is observed
around us. Even if it was not the authority itself who organized and
sponsored these events, at the least it didn’t oppose or prevent them,
and therefore, this authority is responsible of them!

**Sixth:** As for the issue of sending captives, if it was an Arab
custom then Ibn Ziyad wouldn’t have needed to consult his master Yazid
in Damascus about what he would do with them. Furthermore, Islam has
nullified such Arab customs. According to the defense’s statement, the
family of the Prophet (S) was treated as war captives. Now is that
appropriate or permissible? And was there any war taking place such that
there would be a Muslim captive?

It has never been heard before or after, that Muslim war captives were
driven in that manner from country to country until reaching the capital
of the Umayyad in Damascus. Those who were sent to the Caliphs were
captives who were enemies of Muslims, not Muslims themselves! This was
the only event in which Muslim captives were driven from country to
country until Damascus!

In fact, the religion of Islam has encouraged the good treatment of
captives who are non-Muslims. As for the Muslims themselves, they cannot
be captives in the hands of Muslims and it is supposed that they are all
brothers.

Seventh: As for the speech of Zohr ibn Qais, how did the defense assume
that it is filled with exaggeration and falsehood? What is the proof for
that when there are enough facts available to us from other sources
which verified what Zohr ibn Qais had said?!

**Eighth:** It is true that the first poetic verse which Yazid recited
belonged to Ibn Al Zaba’ri on the day of Uhod. But the rest of the poem
was innovated by Yazid himself! This is clear in his statement
particularly in the last two verses which were innovated by Yazid, and
that’s why some scholars concluded that he is a nonbeliever. To begin
with, why is he reciting the words of a poet which belong to an infidel
on the day of Uhod, while he is “Ameerul Momineen / Commander of the
Believers”? That is only a question to think about…

**Ninth:** The story of what happened to the little daughter and orphan
of Al-Husayn (as), Ruqayyah is an actual reality. Ladies and gentlemen,
whomever of you wishes to visit her holy shrine in Al-Sham (Syria), you
can do so and you can inquire the people there to whom does that shrine
belong to.

They will inform you about the tragedy of Ruqayyah (as), the little girl
who was killed by Yazid when, with all beastliness, he ordered that the
head of her father be placed in front of her! He did not have any mercy
to her childhood nor compassion to her orphan status. Now what type of
human beast was that person, that is, if we can actually describe him as
a human being!

**Tenth:** When Yazid realized his heinous act and its grave
implications…and when he saw with his own eyes in the capital of his
state the amount of influence and uproar which the tragedy of Karbala
and the killing of Al-Husayn (as) caused, whether from the living
companions of the Prophet (S) or the common people…he chose to put the
blame of what has happened on the shoulders of Ibn Ziyad the Second
defendant to deny responsibility of the murder of Al-Husayn (as) and his
family and his companions.

So, we see him using phrases with cunningness and foxiness such as, “Woe
be to Ibn Murjana!” (the Second defendant), “Curse of Allah be upon Ibn
Murjana”, “Ibn Ziyad was haste in killing him”, “May Allah kill him!”
etc. He did so to place the whole blame on Ibn Ziyad and vindicate
himself from the blood of the grandson of the Prophet (S).

Unfortunately, many of the Muslim historians were deceived by this
tactic. Under the pressure of the ruling authority, they went on
propagating these narrations to vindicate Yazid from the blood of
Al-Husayn (as) and to throw the responsibility on the shoulders of Ibn
Ziyad the Second defendant.

All of the narrations that we previously presented regarding the letters
from Yazid to the governor of Al-Madina ordering him to take the pledge
of allegiance from Al-Husayn or to kill him and send his head,
contradict that claim. All of the letters and documents we presented
confirm that the whole responsibility falls directly on the First
defendant in terms of conspiring, planning, and issuing orders to the
massacre of Karbala.

This great amount of evidence cannot be doubted with one or two
narrations which may be fabricated for political reasons under pressure
from the ruling authority in order to vindicate the Caliph and throw the
blame on others. That’s why we refrained from presenting these
ridiculous and fabricated narrations which were clearly propagated under
political pressure on the writers and narrators.

Furthermore, let us not forget that Yazid feared the presence of the
Prophet’s family in Damascus due to the unrest it may cause in making
people revolt against him once the news spreads about this tragedy.

So he insisted to make them leave Damascus soon and to make a show of
honoring them at the end so that he convinces the people that he is not
responsible for what has happened in Karbala and that it was the mistake
of his governor Ibn Ziyad. By that, he presents something for the
historians after him to vindicate him despite the great amount of
overwhelming evidence against him.

Here we pose a question. If Yazid was really innocent and if it was
really the mistake of Ibn Ziyad, then why didn’t he immediately fire him
from the governorship of Al-Kufa and Al-Basra and summon him to his
headquarters so that he punish him for what he has committed? Did Yazid
act in that manner which is logical if he is really innocent?

No, he didn’t do any of that! Rather, he kept Ibn Ziyad in his position,
so where is the punishment of the wrong-doer especially when the wrong
committed has led to the bloodshed of the holy household of the Prophet
and Messenger of Islam and a great personality like that of Al-Husayn
(as)! We did see before that Yazid had fired his cousin, the Governor of
Al-Madina, when he failed to carry out his orders of killing Al-Husayn
(as) there! So, why he didn’t do the same thing with the Second
defendant?!

The defense also tries to portray Yazid to you in a picture that is
different from the truth and far away from what happened in Karbala.

Ladies and gentlemen, do you know that after one year from the massacre
of Karbala, Yazid committed another massacre in the holy city of
Al-Madina, the city of the Messenger of Allah (SWT)?!

This happened in the Battle of Al-Harra which is mentioned in all of the
Muslim history books, where hundreds of people in Al-Madina and many
companions of the Prophet (S) were killed. Then Yazid sent his army to
take part in yet another massacre in Makkah, in the sacred Haram of
Allah (SWT) and he attacked the Holy Kaaba with the cannonball!

He killed hundreds of Muslims and the hero of all these massacres is the
same person – Yazid ibn Muawiya – the First defendant! Perhaps the time
will come in the future to put him on trial for these massacres too.
Hence, Sa’eed ibn Al Mussayab who was one of the famous scholars and the
Tabe’een (the Second generation) who is known for his knowledge and
piety once said, “The years of Yazid were all miserable! In the first
year he killed Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali and the holy household of the Prophet
(S). In the Second year, the event of Harra took place and the holy
sanctuary in Al-Madina was violated. And in the Third year, he attacked
the Kaaba with cannon and burned it!”

So this is the reality of Yazid whom the defense wants to hide and make
a cosmetic surgery to give the matter a new look so that you are
misguided from the clear truth and to confuse the whole case in your
eyes! Here I say to the defense, ‘No sir, this tactic of planting doubt
will not work! At the least, not on this day and not in this case! And
not with these judges and jurors!’

Dear respected judges and jurors, the First defendant was a young ruler
who was arrogant, a reckless dictator who resembled his father. He
wanted to rule the countries by policy of “iron and fire” and to rule by
force over the people so that he can enjoy the luxuries of life. He did
not care about public interest or the nation’s interest.

On the contrary, his care and concern was his own personal interest and
his dictatorship rule. For that sake, he was ready to shed any blood,
kill anyone, and destroy anything so long as that would guarantee to him
the security of his authority and stability of his regime.

As for the Second defendant, he was a bloody transgressor tyrant who had
no religion or conscience or manners. He was ready to do anything to
stay in power and acquire wealth and please his masters.

He didn’t care about the public interest or to put a stop to mischief or
anything else. All his ambitions were for the power and authority which
cannot be achieved except by attaining the pleasure of the caliph in
Damascus. And so he took the First defendant as a Lord and God whom he
obeys to attain his pleasure and receive his blessings!

As for the Third defendant, he was a slave of wealth and the life of
this world. He sold his religion and his conscience in exchange for the
governorship of Al-Rayy’ State. So he killed, shed blood, obeyed the
oppressors, and supported the tyrants; hence, he became one of them and
lost both this life and the hereafter!

As for the Fourth defendant, he was a cruel stone-hearted person who was
a puppet of the ruling authority. He plays on what he thought was the
winning horse. He bears long-lived hostility and envy to the Holy
Prophet (S) and his household. And he found in Karbala an opportunity to
express his animosity, so he went on practicing all types of killing,
deceit, instigation, and other war crimes with all dedication, devotion,
and sincerity.

As for the Fifth defendant, he was only a hired serial killer who lacked
military honor. He kills in exchange for reward and doesn’t care whether
he kills a child, infant, injured, or he who is breathing his last or an
unarmed man!

This last defendant is the worst of all of them and the lowest of them!
He sells his religion not for his best interest in this life, but for
the interest of others. He kills the most valuable of people for a cheap
price and puts his weapon under the service of those who can pay more.
Woe and shame be to him!

Ladies and gentlemen, these five individual are an extreme disgrace to
humanity! Their inevitable fate in this life is the trashcan of history
and in the Hereafter, their fate is eternal Hell-Fire!

Thank you ladies and gentlemen for your attention and patience and thank
you your Honor.

Chief Justice: Thank you, the defense, would you like to respond to the
prosecution?

Defense: No, thank you your Honor.

Chief Justice: Then court will be dismissed and will resume next session
on Thursday where we’ll hear the closing statements from each of the
prosecution and the defense teams. Afterwards, the door will be open for
questions from the judges and jurors, if they have any. Subsequently,
deliberations will begin between the judges and the jurors to reach a
verdict of “guilty” or “not guilty” in the case. Thank you all and see
you at 10AM on Thursday. Court is dismissed.


