The Fifth News Conference
=========================

Everyone was anxiously looking forward to attend this news conference
that was announced after the end of the 11th court session which is
considered to be one of the most heated sessions. There seemed to be a
display of talents of the defense and prosecution teams, and that young
attractive prosecutor became the talk of everyone in the world. He did a
great job such that everyone started speculating about the critical
situation that the defense was in.

Due to the fact that the previously scheduled news conference was
canceled, everyone was anxious for this news conference. The hall became
crowded with journalists and news correspondents from everywhere as they
awaited the arrival of the representatives of the prosecution and
defense teams. Then the young prosecutor walked in with tranquility and
self-confidence accompanied by two members of his team. He took his
place in front of the podium and the news conference began…

Correspondent: How do you feel now as you approach the end of this
trial? And how do you evaluate your performance at the end of this
journey?

Prosecutor: We feel a sense of comfort and tranquility as we have done
our duty thanks to God! I think that a great number of people in the
world now realizes the magnitude of this tragedy which Imam Al-Husayn
(as) and his family has been subjected to. They now know what happened
in Karbala and who was responsible for it and the facts behind it.

This is indeed the true gain! As for our performance, it is a personal
honor for me to be appointed by my colleagues to take lead of
prosecution in this case. It is a privilege, honor, and pleasure for me
to stand in the courtroom defending the rights of the victims of
Karbala, most notably Imam Al-Husayn (as), in a just trial leading to
convictions and punishment of criminals.

I feel that I should have exerted more effort in this case, and I also
feel far off from what I should do in this case. So I apologize to Imam
Al-Husayn (as) for my shortage in this regards and I hope that he
forgives me.

Correspondent: Do you feel that you are approaching the final victory?

Prosecutor: Yes, without a doubt and I have full confidence in the
respected judges and jurors.

Correspondent: Sir, allow me to ask this question…are you a Sunni or a
Shia?

Prosecutor: I support truth and justice. I love righteousness and
justice. I am a follower of both of them and am loyal to them.

Correspondent: Sir, why do you reject the possibility that Yazid ibn
Muawiya was really innocent from shedding the blood of Al-Husayn and
that the whole responsibility falls on the shoulders of Ibn Ziyad
regarding what happened in Karbala?

Prosecutor: Because that contradicts the reality and the evidence which
we presented and you can refer to them as you like. All of the letters
and documents from Yazid to his governor in Al-Madina and to Ibn Ziyad,
as well as his expression of joy and the poetry which he recited when he
received the captives…all of that clearly proves that he is the primary
criminal and the chief delinquent responsible for what happened in
Karbala!

Correspondent: There is a group of Muslims who vindicate Yazid from the
blood of Al-Husayn (as) and consider Yazid to be one of the ‘companions’
of the Prophet. For that reason, they sanctify him and whenever they
mention him, then say “May Allah be pleased with him”. So why don’t they
view the case the way you see it?

Prosecutor: Sir, that is due to historical deception which affects the
human thought process; hence man follows misguidance thinking that it is
truth, and supports fabrication believing that it is reality. This
historical deception was fabricated and propagated by the political
power and authority during the Ummayad era through suffocating the
truth, terrorizing the narrators, and threatening them.

In exchange for endorsement of fabricated narrations, these untrusted
narrators were given privileges and brought closer to the ruling
authority. As a result, fabrication of historical facts grew and
increased with time; then the future generations followed one after the
other.

Another key factor was blind imitation, when a person’s mind becomes
blind and becomes a tool for fanaticism and bias for the beliefs of his
forefathers, ancestors, and elders, even if what they say contradict
logic, truth, and historical events. These two factors are the reasons
for the presence of this group of Muslims, unfortunately.

Correspondent: If you were in the shoes of the defense, what can you do
to save their case?

Prosecution: It is not possible and I cannot accept the idea of being in
the position of one who defends a criminal, a cold-blooded killer, and
an oppressor! Those are not in need of defenders; rather, they are in
need of executors!

Correspondent: It is said that Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali is one of your
grandfathers and that you are from his progeny. Is that true?

Prosecutor: Al-Husayn (as) is the father of every freeman anywhere.
Every person who loves righteousness, supports the oppressed, seeks
justice and equity, and searches for the truth, his father then is
Al-Husayn, his grandfather is Al-Husayn, and such person is from the
tree of Al-Husayn!

I will stop here and thank you all. (The prosecutor leaves the hall,
then the defense lawyer enters accompanied by two members of his defense
team and he stands behind the microphone in preparation to receive
questions of the media).

Correspondent: Sir, do you still have hope in winning this case and what
is the probability of winning it?

Defense Lawyer: Yes, yes we have a lot of hope. Rather, we are confident
of winning it and I think that our message has reached the jurors and
judges and that they understand it. I can say that we think we are on
our way to achieving victory by at least 90% if not more.

Same correspondent: Sir, don’t you think that you are exaggerating a lot
in your confidence and predictions, for the majority of us see that you
are on your way to losing this case.

Defense lawyer: Praise be to Allah that you are not among the judges and
jurors! I think that they have a different opinion than yours, and thank
God once again that the media are not the ones who will decide the fate
of this case!

Correspondent: Sir, why didn’t Yazid fire his governor Ubaidullah ibn
Ziyad, try him, and punish him if he really thought that he is the cause
behind the massacre of Karbala?

Defense Lawyer: He did not fire him because Al-Kufa was still unstable
and filled with mischief after the murder of Al-Husayn (as). Only few
months passed and the revolt of the Repenters / Tawabeen took place
under the leadership of Sulaiman ibn Sard Al Khuza’iy. So he could not
fire him until Yazid himself died.

Correspondent: Is the majority of the Sunni Muslims with your opinion in
vindicating Yazid from the blood of Al-Husayn (as)?

Defense: Yes, those of them who possess the knowledge of Ahl Al Sunna
Wal Jama’a. As for the ignorant, they follow any rumor and those who
fabricate narrations. We do not deny that some of the early Muslim
scholars blamed Yazid and criticized him for killing Al-Husayn, but in
the end they said that he repented and made his repentance apparent by
treating the family of Al-Husayn in a positive manner and arranging them
to be escorted back to the holy city of their grandfather the Prophet
(S) in an honorable and dignified way.

Another correspondent: Does your position of defending the murderers of
Al-Husayn (as) indicate that you are against Al-Husayn and his mission?
And by the way, just a small correction, the rebellion of the repenters
(Al Tawabeen) took place almost five years after Karbala and after the
death of Yazid!

Defense: Not at all! There is no person in the whole Islamic Nation who
doesn’t respect Al-Husayn. As for the talk about his murder and
murderers, this only aroused the mischief / *fitna*. And we have been
ordered not to arouse mischief because it is not for the benefit of the
nation and it creates disunity, and thank you for the correction!

Correspondent: Don’t you think that Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali was more worthy
of the Caliphate than Yazid?

Defense: The matter is not about my opinion and what I think. It is
about the Islamic law, and Yazid was given a legitimate pledge of
allegiance. Sure, Al-Husayn was more worthy of the Caliphate, but what
happened has already happened and Yazid has become the Caliph, hence his
obedience becomes obligatory.

Same correspondent: Even if his behavior is unIslamic and he openly
disobeys and indulges in corruption, and drinks wine??!

Defense: This is not confirmed and it has been introduced by the enemies
of Islam.

Same correspondent: Rather, it is confirmed and repeatedly narrated in
many books!

Defense: I think we have deviated from the topic. I apologize for I’ll
need to end this news conference due to our many engagements in
preparation for the next court session as it will be a decisive session.
Thank you all and salam alaikum!

(He walked out quickly with his team members and everyone started to
depart. Every 2 or 3 persons were conversing and discussing…and everyone
was anxiously waiting for Thursday’s court session which will witness
the closing statements for both the prosecution and the defense teams.
It will be the semifinal stage of this suspenseful and exciting trial)!


