Translator’s Foreword
=====================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
” هل من ناصر ينصرنا هل من معين يعيننا هل من ذاب عن حرم رسول الله صلى
الله عليه واله"
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Is there anyone to help me? Is there anyone to support me? Is there
any defender to defend the Household of the Messenger of Allah?**

That was the call of Husayn ibn ‘Ali, the grandson of the Holy Prophet
(S) on the day of Ashura, year 61 A.H. (which coincides with October
9th, 680 A.D.) after all his family members and close companions were
killed on the plains of Karbala.

Did Imam Husayn (as) get any response? Did anyone answer his call? Did
anyone even bother to quench the thirst of his infant baby?

Sadly there was no answer, no response, no support, and no water! The
only reaction he got was a shower of arrows, spears, and stab wounds!

The departed souls of his close companions and family members could only
watch sorrowfully from the heavens as they wished to return back in
human form once again to sacrifice themselves in his defense!

Their utmost pleasure was not in Paradise, but in giving their blood and
body parts out of love to their divinely appointed Leader. And the souls
that were not yet created regretted not being alive on this day to offer
a helping hand or a cup of water, or at least bury his trampled, naked,
and headless body.

Imam Husayn (as) was left alone on the day of Ashura without anyone to
help him and he met his fate with full submission and surrender to His
Lord.

This everlasting call of Husayn in Karbala is not specific to the day of
Ashura in 61 A.H. but it is a call resonating everyday till the end of
time. This plea is not only directed to those present in the battlefield
in Karbala; it is aimed for all of us today as well as future
generations to come. The universal message of Imam Husayn (as) is
echoing beyond the plains of Karbala…so long as there is oppression and
injustice in this world, his mission to fight injustice and oppression
will eternally live. It was Imam Husayn (as) and his family who
sacrificed all they had for the sake of upholding the truth!

• Among the questions which beg itself to each one of us today are:

• What exactly are we doing to answer that universal call of Imam Husayn
(as)?

• How are we offering him support, helping him, and shielding his family
from harm?

• Are our hearts with Husayn, yet our swords against him (by action)? Or
are we playing deaf to Husayn’s appeal while we claim to be his
followers?

• We recite in our Ziyarah to Imam Husayn (as),

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا لَيْتَنَا كُنَّا مَعَكُم فَنَفُوزُ فَوْزاً عظيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**We wish we were with you and so we would have won the greatest
victory!**

Yet, what are we doing to prove that we really wish to be with him?

• What is our strategy in enjoining the good and forbidding the evil and
how are we supporting the truth and fighting oppression?

• Last but not least, what steps are we taking to pave the road for the
reappearance of the Imam of our Time (may Allah hasten his
reappearance)? Or will we shamefully be among those who disbelieve and
deny him when he reappears, God-willing?

When identifying the master criminals of the tragedy of Karbala,
authenticated history points its fingers to five main cursed culprits
who carefully conspired behind the scenes, designed, and planned the
murder of Husayn, the son of Fatima who is the Master Lady of all Worlds
according to the Last Messenger (S).

They perpetrated and committed multitude of heinous crimes in this
catastrophe which has no like in the history of mankind, whether in the
past or the future. In the order of their criminal offense starting with
the chief delinquent, their names are**: Yazid ibn Muawiya, Ubaidullah
Ibn Ziyad, Umar ibn Sa’d, Shimr Ibn Dhil Jawshan, and Hurmala ibn
Kahel** (may Allah deprive them of His Mercy).

They are the wicked villains who tainted their hands with the purified
blood of the most righteous one on earth during their time, the grandson
of the Holy Prophet (S), Husayn ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as)!

The crimes they committed are not like any other crimes. And the victims
in this case are not like any other victims. Hence, their status as
criminals and offenders is certainly not like any other criminal and
offender!

They surely deserve to be condemned, convicted, and sentenced at the
very least like any other criminal and much more!

Quite surprisingly and unfortunately, we still find in the Muslim world
today those who give regards and respect to the killers of Imam Husayn
(as). We find those who defend them with the pretext that they are among
the ‘companions’. We find those who refuse to condemn their actions and
instead blame the victims. We find those who equate the perpetrators of
the tragedy of Ashura with any wrong-doer who simply made a ‘mistake’
and have ‘repented’.

We find those who intentionally try to hide the facts of history and
drive the spotlight away from the truth. We find those who belittle what
happened in Karbala to protect certain political figures, perhaps out of
fear for their own personal interests and material gain.

There is an inclination among some people to mix the good and bad forces
in the same pot hoping for a chemical reaction to yield a good product.
What they don’t realize is the mathematical law which dictates that
positive multiplied by negative equals nothing but negative! One cannot
equate Husayn (as) with Yazid (LA)[^1] or ‘Ali (as) with Muawiya (LA)!

As stated in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا يَسْتَوِي الْخَبِيثُ وَالطَّيِّبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, the evil and the good are not equal…” (5:100)***

Hence, we cannot claim to bear love of Husayn and ‘Ali in the same heart
which bears love or leniency towards Yazid and Muawiya! The result is
clear hypocrisy which leads to none other than absolute darkness and
misguidance.

The Satanic forces that were present on the day of Ashura are also here
with us today as they aim to cover up the truth and present it in a
sugar-coated form. The Yazidi supporters of Kufa are living among us on
this earth disguised in the dress of Islam. The Kufans whose hearts were
with Husayn yet their swords were against him…are also existing today!
Their hearts may be with Husayn today but these same hearts are already
tainted with the love of the enemies of Husayn, or if not, they lack
hatred and condemnation of these enemies!

Perhaps the opportunity is not there today for them to unsheathe their
swords against Husayn. But if history was to repeat itself, they will be
the first to rush to Yazid’s support and may even be worse than their
predecessors whom they blindly follow. In fact, the reality of today
tells us that they are indeed unsheathing their swords to support the
Yazid-of-today against the upholders of truth and justice.

Brothers and Sisters in humanity, our proposal today is to place these
five cold-blooded killers under trial for the multitude of war crimes
and mass murder committed in the massacre of Karbala. In this historical
trial, we can scrutinize the overwhelming evidence that is cited in many
of the well-known books and references authenticated by the majority of
the Muslims.

Even though these criminals are not alive today, we can still attempt to
establish an iota of justice for the victims of Karbala by placing these
villains on trial for the crimes they committed hundreds of years ago.
Our idea is to create an International Tribunal where a court composed
of judges and jurors from all over the world listen to the heart-aching
story of Karbala and make the judgment themselves to decide whether
these defendants are guilty or not.

This final decision would be purely based on the humanitarian aspect
(without need to delve deep into the religious aspect) as the case of
Imam Husayn (as) is filled with many atrocious crimes that go against
the basic principles of humanity and civilization.

What does the Geneva Convention say about the rights of prisoners of
war, the wounded, the sick fighters, and the treatment of civilians
during the time of war? In fact, the Third and Fourth Geneva Convention
considers war crimes to be ‘grave breaches’ when it involves willful
killing, torture, inhuman treatment, compelling one to serve in the
forces of a hostile power, taking of hostages, extensive destruction and
appropriation of property not justified by military necessity and
carried out unlawfully and wantonly, as well as unlawful deportation,
transfer, or confinement.

Let us analyze the actions of these criminals in light of the Nuremberg
Principles which set the guidelines for determining what constitutes a
war crime. Why not present this tragic case of Imam Husayn (as) to key
organizations which claim to work for and support human rights such as
the United Nations, International Human Rights group, Amnesty
International, and World Organization for Human rights, etc.?!

Let the whole world judge based on the evidence and facts whether these
defendants violated any or all of these laws during and after the
massacre of Karbala. Let mankind use its own intellect and logic to
establish justice and defend humanitarian rights!

We envision that the judges in this international court tribunal would
be carefully selected to represent all different cultures and religions
across the globe. The evidence which incriminates these five defendants
is available in the approved references of the common school of thought
of Islam which will act as ‘witnesses’ in this case. After hearing out
the details of the litigation, the jurors will issue a final verdict to
be stamped in history till the end of time.

If these defendants are found to be “guilty” and convicted based on a
unanimous verdict, they will then be sentenced and placed in the garbage
and trash of history, just like world-dictators such as Hitler and his
cronies, Milosevic, and Saddam Husayn. Thereafter, no one can dare to
ever give them respect or regards and they will be cursed till eternity!

We cannot bring back the lives of the victims nor can we compensate
their families. And the fire of love and grief in the hearts of

Husayn’s devotees will NEVER EVER cool down! However, the least that we
can do as an intellectual society is bring an iota of human justice for
the victims in the case of Imam Husayn’s cold-blooded murder, even if it
is much later in time and even if the perpetrators have departed this
world long time ago. Hence, we recite in Ziyarat Ashura,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…طَلَبَ ثَارِي مَعَ إِمَامِ هُدىً ظَاهِرٍ نَاطِقٍ بِالْـحَقِّ
مِنْكُمْ،…
  </p>
</blockquote>

**I ask Allah to provide me the opportunity to fight for justice and
seek your vengeance under the leadership of the rightly-guided leader in
your progeny who will surely come and speak the truth….**

We know that divine justice will ultimately be established by the
Absolute Justice and the Almighty Creator on the Day of Judgment. But in
the meanwhile, it is our responsibility as human beings to set the stage
for establishing justice in this life to the best of our ability till
the reappearance of the awaited Mahdi (may Allah hasten his
reappearance) who will fill the earth with justice and equity after it
has been filled with tyranny and oppression.

Without justice and punishment of the oppressors this world will surely
turn into a jungle of beasts and predators and there will be no
difference between animals and human beings!

Dear fellow humans, to every person in the world who possesses a sound
intellect and judgment regardless of your religion, education, race, or
culture…Let us go ahead and accomplish our goal of establishing human
justice in the murder case of Imam Husayn (as)! It is up to us to find
the means and resources to appeal to the whole world about this most
peculiar and extraordinary anti-humanitarian case which spews tears of
blood from rocks and breaks the heart of even the wildest beast out
there!

Dear brothers and sisters in humanity; let us take the steps today to
pave the path for this dream to come true…the dream of establishing an
**“International Court Tribunal against the Killers of Husayn ibn
‘Ali”**!

The mock trial presented in the following pages is the way that our
simple minds imagine or fantasize for it to take place in the modern-day
world. It is up to us to turn these pages into reality instead of a mere
thought locked up in the mind or words jotted on paper! Let the
merciless criminals earn their punishment in this world before they earn
it in the next!

Let their conviction be pronounced in front of all creation in this life
before the Day of Judgment!

Let us put an end to all words of praise and/or defense on these
inhumane beasts! Let these five heartless criminals be placed in the
filthiest garbage and trash of history …until the awaited Mahdi and
chosen Imam of our Time (may Allah hasten his reappearance) resonates
his call:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا لِثَارَات الحُسَيْن
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Revenge on [the killers of] Al-Husayn!”**

Whether we are Muslim or non-Muslim, black or white, rich or poor…

Let us ALTOGETHER answer to the universal call of Imam Husayn (as) on
Ashura with words that are complemented by actions!

Let us call out in our loudest of voices which transcends time and
space, “**Yes my Master Husayn, we are here with you and we jump to your
support which is driven by our utmost love and devotion to you!”**

Let us say to our beloved leader from the bottom of our grieving
hearts**, “Oh Husayn, you didn’t have any helper on the day of Ashura
and we wish that we were there with you on that dreadful day…but here we
are today revisiting the plains of Karbala with our swords unsheathed
against your enemies!”**

[^1]: (LA) = May that person be deprived of God’s Mercy


