Urgent Call!!!
==============

Dear Lovers and Devotees of Imam Husayn (as):

Who among you will be the chosen one to take the first step and adopt
this idea?

Who among you will volunteer to initiate this trial for the killers of
Imam Husayn (as)?

Who among you love Imam Husayn (as) so much so as to turn this mock
trial into reality?

Who among you would like to be among the blessed companions of Imam
Husayn (as) by making this case against his killers?

Who among you would like to please Allah (SWT) by pleasing Imam Husayn
(as)?

Who among you would like to please the Holy Prophet (S) by pleasing he
who is from him and part of him?

Who among you would like to please the mother of Imam Husayn, Fatima Al
Zahra (as) the Master Lady of all Worlds?

Who among you would like to express condolences to Lady Zaynab (sa) by
participating actively in this project?

Who among you would like your prayers accepted by the Gateway of Needs,
Abul Fadl Al Abbas (as)?

Who among you would like to be qualified to become a soldier of the Imam
of Our Time (may Allah hasten his reappearance) by proving your devotion
to his grandfather Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as)?

With the help of Almighty Allah (SWT), all what we need to achieve this
dream is our determination, perseverance, and resources! The finances
should not be a problem as thanks to Him, Allah (SWT) has granted the
devotees of Imam Husayn (as), whether governments or people, a wealth of
resources.

What we simply need is a person or a group of committed individuals to
take this mission on their shoulders and proceed with it till the goal
is accomplished. You now have this book available as your “roadmap” to
achieve this dream.

If others were able to set an international tribunal to try the killers
of their loved ones with their wealth of resources, then we also can and
should certainly accomplish the same and more for the holy grandson of
the Seal of Messengers (S), Imam Husayn ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as)!!


