The Fourth Court Session
========================

First Tragic Scene: “Beginning of The Sad Journey”
--------------------------------------------------

Chief Justice: Court in order. Mr. Prosecutor, you may continue
presenting your evidence. (The awe-inspiring prosecutor stands up with
confidence, faith, and tranquility while his eyes shine with an
extraordinary light having a characteristic look which indicates
determination and certainty).

Prosecutor: Your Honor, respected judges, and respected jurors…
Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) left Makkah only one day before the rituals of
Hajj was to start due to the conspiracy plotted against his life as we
mentioned before and as cited in Tarikh Al Tabari. He left heading
towards Iraq after he received multitude of letters from the people of
Al-Kufa inviting him to come so they can support, protect, and provide
him a safe haven and this is cited in all of the historical texts in
front of you. He did not want his blood to be shed in the Sacred House
of God in Makkah and he said, “To be killed in Iraq is better to me than
being killed in Makkah.”

Al-Husayn (as) went out with his women, children, and 82 men from his
family, relatives, companions, and supporters in a civilian caravan that
did not have any soldiers, military equipment, or preparations for war.
The sad journey commenced from Makkah in Hijaz to Al-Kufa in Iraq.

When the First defendant Yazid learned of the leniency of the people of
Al-Kufa towards Al-Husayn (as) and their letters to him, and when he
knew the arrival of Muslim ibn Aqeel to Al-Kufa, who was the ambassador
sent by Al-Husayn to verify the authenticity of its people books to
Al-Husayn and the seriousness of their commitment to support him…

Yazid then decided to appoint the Second defendant Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad
as the governor of Al-Kufa in addition to Al-Basra which he was already
governing. Yazid particularly chose the Second defendant because he was
known for his rough personality, toughness in ruling, and his thirst for
bloodshed and lack of morals or principles, whether religious or
humanitarian. Yazid wanted to benefit from these traits in the Second
defendant in order to regain control over Al-Kufa and stand up against
Al-Husayn (as). This has been confirmed by all the history books which
have been approved by the defense team.

Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad, the Second defendant, is the son of Ziyad who is
referred to as “the son of his father”. Ziyad was an illegitimate
half-brother of Muawiya. The father of Yazid, Muawiya, later
acknowledged Ziyad to be his biological brother, which was in contrary
to the laws of Islam. This outlawed action by Muawiya stirred a lot of
resentment and opposition from the companions of the Prophet (S) and the
scholars. But Muawiya did not care because he wanted to use the skills
of Ziyad ibn Abeeh in oppression and blood-shedding to follow,
persecute, and kill the Shias (followers) of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) in
Al-Kufa and Iraq...

Defense: Objection your Honor, this type of talk violates the sanctity
of lineages and family reputation which is not acceptable at all and is
irrelevant!

Prosecutor: Your Honor, it is imperative to address and clarify this
issue so that the respected judges and jurors can understand the nature
of the relationship between the Second defendant and the First
defendant, and to realize why the Second defendant submitted with all
sincerity to carry out the desires and orders of the First defendant.

Chief Justice: Objection overruled, you may continue Mr. Prosecutor.

Prosecutor: As I mentioned, the Second defendant then, is the cousin of
the First defendant and they share the same grandfather who is Abu
Sufyan. Muawiya, the father of the First defendant had done a favor to
the father of the Second defendant by publicly recognizing him to be his
biological brother. It was a decision which the First defendant could
easily nullify at any time, and if that were to happen, the image of the
Second defendant would be degrading and dishonoring since he would
become one who has no lineage.

This explains to us the blind obedience of the Second defendant towards
the First defendant and his sincerity in carrying out all his orders
without hesitation out of fear that the First defendant may withdraw his
acknowledgement of him as his cousin. If that were to happen, he would
return back to the life of misguidance and loss of lineage which is a
great shame among Arabs.

In order to clarify the matter further, I present to you the following
historical document which is a letter written by the First defendant
Yazid to the Second defendant Ibn Ziyad appointing him as the governor
of Al-Kufa in addition to Al-Basra.

This document is cited in Maqtal Al-Husayn Lil Khwarizmi Al Hanafi,
Tarikh Al Tabari, Tarikh Al Ya’qoobi, Tarikh Ibn Al Atheer, and they are
all references approved by the defense team. This letter is one of the
most important evidences that we present to you against the First and
Second defendant, and I request for it to be added to the record. The
letter reads:

*“From the servant of God, Yazid Ameer Al Momineen to Ubaidullah ibn
Ziyad…Peace be upon you. He who is praised may be scorned one day, and
he who is scorned may be praised one day. You have what you have and
what is against you is against you. And you have been promoted to the
highest position.*

*I have been informed that the people of Al-Kufa have written letters to
Al-Husayn inviting him and that he has left Makkah heading towards
there. From all times, your time has been tested with Al-Husayn. From
all towns, your town has been tested with Al-Husayn, and from all
governors, you have been tested with Al-Husayn! You better kill him or
else you will return to your old lineage and to your claimed (unreal)
grandfather Ubaid! So beware that you lose him! If you achieve this
mission, you will be free, or else you will become a slave like any
other slave! My supporters in Al-Kufa have informed me that Muslim ibn
Aqeel is gathering supporters and disuniting the Muslims.*

*A great number of people from the followers of Abi Turab (‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib) have responded to his call. So when you receive this letter, go
straight to Al-Kufa and regain control over it. I have added it to your
governorship in addition to Al-Basra. Go after Muslim ibn Aqeel and when
you arrest him, take his pledge of allegiance or kill him if he refuses.
You have to know that I will not accept any excuse so hasten and hurry
up and do what I ordered you! Wasalam.”*

Ladies and gentlemen, as you see this letter stands as clear evidence
which proves that the First defendant directly ordered his governor the
Second defendant to kill Al-Husayn, without any doubts! The order to
kill which was issued to the governor in Al-Madina is the same one that
was issued to the new governor in Al-Kufa!

And the target is the same person, Al-Husayn (as) and this proves that
the first order in Al-Madina was not simply just a threat or just for
terrorizing as the defense claims. Since the First defendant has failed
to accomplish the killing of Al-Husayn (as) in Madina and then in
Makkah, now he is issuing the order to his new governor in Al-Kufa to
kill Al-Husayn (as) without negotiations or peace talks.

Rather, killing is the ultimate goal and this clearly proves what
Al-Husayn (as) was always certain of, that the goal is to kill and get
rid of him, so that the First defendant can freely practice a
totalitarian dictatorship without any opposition or protest or change.

Furthermore, the First defendant here directly threats the Second
defendant that if he doesn’t follow his instructions, he will then
withdraw the acknowledgement of the biological relationship which
Muawiya gave to his father, and as a consequence, Ibn Ziyad would return
back to the unknown lineage and the shameful origin.

Yazid knew very well that this is indeed what the Second defendant fears
the most and would therefore do anything asked of him in order not to
disappoint the First defendant.

If we come to know that the Second defendant was well-known for his
tyranny, oppression, and bloody-thirsty dictatorship style and bloody
personality as a ruler and governor, and if we add to that his fear of
the threat of the First defendant, we can then predict how this fear
will be converted into a destructive and violent force that knows no
limit to please his master, the First defendant.

Furthermore, take a look at how the First defendant urges the Second
defendant not to have mercy and to be tough on the Shias (followers) of
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) in Al-Kufa and to kill the ambassador of
Al-Husayn in Al-Kufa, Muslim ibn Aqeel. It is no wonder then that the
Second defendant Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad immediately left to Al-Kufa after
he has received that letter to carry out the mission and obey the orders
of the First defendant with all aggression and violence.

As soon as he arrived in Al-Kufa, a wave of terror, killing,
imprisonment, mutilation, and torture began and heads were severed by
orders of Ibn Ziyad. Crucifixion started and limbs as well as tongues
were cut off. Confiscation of money and property, and fierce persecution
took place to all those accused of supporting Al-Husayn or opposing the
First defendant, even if there’s just a slight doubt. It also included
those who failed to obey the orders of the new ruling tyrant oppressive
authority.

The innocent victims fell dead one after the other and among them were
Maytham Al Tammar, Hani ibn ‘Urwa, Muslim Ibn Aqeel, Abdullah Ibn
Yaqtor, Abd Al Alaa Ibn Yazid Al Kalby, Imara ibn Salkhab Al Azadi, Qays
ibn Meshar Al Saidawi, and Abdullah ibn ‘Afeef Al Azdi and others.
That’s not to mention those who were being tortured in prison and those
who escaped or who were exiled. All this happened in a very short time
which set the stage for the great massacre planned to take place against
Al-Husayn (as) and his companions

in obedience to the direct orders of the First defendant.

Afterwards, preparations were made to recruit and equip the military
forces and prepare them to fight Al-Husayn (as) and kill him. This was
not an easy task to accomplish in Al-Kufa especially considering the
many supporters of the household of the Holy Prophet (S) who inhabited
that city, and Al-Husayn (as) was the only one left from that household
of the Prophet (S).

Chief Justice: Court will now take a 30 minute recess and will resume
afterwards.

Second Tragic Scene: “The Defense Defends”
------------------------------------------

Chief Justice: The defense team, would you like to comment on what the
prosecution presented so far?

Defense: Yes, your Honor.

Chief Justice: You may proceed.

Defense: You Honor, respected judges and jurors. The Prosecution insists
on twisting the events and incidents to draw the picture which he wants
you to see and believe, and he resorts to exaggeration and
over-estimation! It is very natural for my client, the First defendant,
who has actually become the ruler of the nation, to prevent any division
from happening. It is logical for him to fear mischief especially since
the enemies of the Islamic state during that time were many, both
internally and externally, and were waiting for any opportunity to
inflict harm.

Those who seek to create mischief and take advantage of it are waiting
for the right opportunity to strike and induce instability. It is the
job of any ruler to maintain the regime and secure its stability and
security, especially in the beginning of a change in power. This made
Yazid ibn Muawiya appoint a strong governor who is capable of putting an
end to the mischief and division in Al-Kufa and to protect the unity of
the nation as a whole.

Hence, the Second defendant Ibn Ziyad was appointed by Yazid for this
mission, but Yazid did not tell him to kill the innocent or punish a
person without charge. He left the matter to the judgment of Ibn Ziyad
to figure out the method which he sees fit and necessary to stop the
mischief before it breaks out. This is a natural action which any new
ruler in his place would take if he faced what my client faced. If he
did otherwise, he would then be negligent of the state affairs as well
as its people. I’ll now hand it over to my colleague, the lawyer of the
Second defendant to speak representing his client.

Second Lawyer: (A thin, bearded man stands up with a frown on his face
and a look of concern). He says:

Your Honor, respected judges and jurors…The only fault of my client
Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad is that he was a governor with strong character who
placed the interest of the nation and its unity above anything else.
This is actually a positive thing on his behalf and not against him. At
the end of the day, he was only carrying out the orders of the higher
authority and you saw for yourself the letter addressed to him by the
First defendant Yazid ibn Muawiya, the Caliph of the Muslims.

So he went ahead and obeyed the orders issued to him without paying heed
to the critics or blamers. He is like a soldier who obeys the orders of
his commander; so what responsibility lies on him after that?!

And when he arrived to Al-Kufa, he found a state of chaos and revolt
against the state and the legitimate Caliph. How do you expect for him
to act in such a case?! He acted in a way which any governor in his
place would’ve done in such circumstances which he faced. There was no
other way to face the situation and stop the revolt against the
legitimate government. Thank you your Honor.

Chief Justice: Prosecution, would you like to comment on what the
defense stated before resuming the presentation of your evidences?

Prosecutor: Yes, your Honor. Dear ladies and gentlemen, respected judges
and jurors. I will briefly respond to the defense in the following
points:

**First:** We present to you the events and incidences as it happened
and was narrated in the books of history and the approved references, as
well as the historical documents. So we are not twisting any event, nor
are we trying to draw pictures; rather, we leave that for you to judge
as it is your job and role. We are only helping you through presenting
the historical events, documents, and facts to identify and locate where
the truth is, then you can decide whether to convict the defendants or
not.

**Second:** If we accept the logic of the defense in justifying the
actions of the First defendant that it was for the sake of preserving
the security of the government and maintaining the stability of the
regime, then we are also justifying the actions of Hitler, Mussolini,
Stalin, and other world dictators. They too used the same logic to
defend their injustice and tyranny against their own people.

How is that acceptable! And would humanity accept this justification? If
we were to accept that, then we would be opening the door wide open for
every tyrant in the future to use that same excuse in justifying his
oppression against his people, with the pretext that he is protecting
the security and stability of the government!

**Third:** When the First defendant Yazid appointed the Second defendant
Ibn Ziyad to become the governor of Al-Kufa, he did not appoint him
because he was decisive and capable. Rather, Yazid chose him because he
knew very well that Ibn Ziyad was a bloody man and reckless killer
without any conscience or compassion or mercy or any religious or moral
values. That is why Yazid did not ask him to follow a specific policy
because he knew that Ibn Ziyad would act by his bloody and barbaric
nature which he was known for. Hence there was no need for him to give
instructions as he knows his way very well.

Despite that, Yazid directly ordered him to kill Al-Husayn (as) as well
as Muslim Ibn Aqeel and that is clear from the letter. As for the
mischief which the defense mentioned, the First defendant was the one
responsible of it due to his oppression, tyranny, and his insistence to
take the power illegally without any opposition and without the
legitimate process of the Islamic state.

Yazid stirred mischief by his decision to kill Al-Husayn in Al-Madina if
he refused to give his pledge of allegiance. This decision led to the
sequence of events after that. So Yazid was responsible for the mischief
/ *fitna*, if we gave it that name, while it was really a revolt and
rebellion against an oppressive and tyrannical regime which has lasted
for 20 years with the father, and now it would continue with the son!

Fourth: As for the claim that Ibn Ziyad, the Second defendant placed the
interest of the state and its unity over everything, that is surely the
distortion of the truth and an attempt to draw a fake picture to deceive
you. A person who is truly concerned about the unity and best interest
of the nation should first and foremost be concerned to have a just,
fair and qualified head of the state, one who is accepted, legitimate,
and loved by the people. Now, was the First defendant Yazid such a
person?

Verily, a just, legitimate, and wise head of the state is the only
guarantee to maintain the unity and security of a nation. And an unjust,
oppressive, and foolish ruler is the one who pays no heed to the
interests of the nation and instead disrupts its unity and spreads
division and mischief.

Therefore, the support of the Second defendant to the First defendant
was totally against the best interest and unity of the nation. Ibn Ziyad
only cared to take hold of many high positions in the government and
gain the trust of oppressive rulers like him so that he continues to be
in power over the helpless and oppressed people. That was his aim even
if the price for that was the bloodshed of hundreds of people and the
beheading of many heads. He is no different in that than Himmler,
Goring, Gobbles, and others like them who serve the oppressors and the
dictators!

**Fifth:** The defense claims that Ibn Ziyad was like a soldier who
obeyed the orders of his commander-in-chief and is therefore not
responsible of anything, and that the First defendant is the only one
responsible….at the same time the lawyer representing the First
defendant tries to throw the responsibility on the shoulders of the
Second defendant claiming that Yazid did not order him to kill Al-Husayn
(as).

This is a huge contradiction in the lawyers’ argument which is intended
to confuse you and shift the responsibility between the two defendants
till it becomes lost. Each one throws the burden of accountability on
the other, and this is a well-known defense tactic which lawyers have
used in past trials such as Nuremberg, Saddam Hussein, and Milosevic and
other war criminals, and you cannot be fooled by it.

**Sixth:** As for the claim that Ibn Ziyad found a state of rebellion in
Al-Kufa, yes that is true, but what is the reason behind that? It was
certainly due to the injustice and the oppression of the new tyrant
ruler; hence it was a legitimate rebellion. Now, is it proper to face
this state of rebellion by implementing the policy of “iron and fire”?
Or is it better to be calm, resort to dialogue, implementing justice,
reform, and to take the side of the oppressed, even if that meant facing
the unjust tyrant in Damascus?

In other words, the Second defendant should have refrained from
accepting that new post if he is not able to handle it, and that is the
least that one can do. However, the Second defendant chose to stand with
and support the injustice against justice, falsehood instead of truth,
and to be with the oppressor instead of the oppressed. This is very
natural for him and an expected thing from him to do, keeping in
consideration his bloody and unjust personality that goes after its
ambitions and aspirations of attaining power and authority!

Defense: Objection your Honor, on resembling the defendants with
historical figures such as Hitler, Mussolini, Goebbels, Himmler, and
others! This talk is intended to influence the judges and jurors.

Chief Justice: Objection sustained. I request the jurors to disregards
these resemblances. Mr. Prosecutor, you may continue your presentation.

Prosecutor: Your Honor, respected judges and jurors. We present to you
the following document in response to the false claims of the defense.
This letter was sent by the Second defendant Ibn Ziyad to his master the
First defendant Yazid after concluding the first wave of terror in
Al-Kufa.

He desired to send some of the heads of the victims to Damascus in order
to win the pleasure of Yazid, the First defendant, and among those heads
were the heads of Muslim ibn Aqeel and Hani ibn ‘Urwa. Ibn Ziyad sent
these heads with two of his devils, Hani ibn Hayta Al Wada’ey, and
Al-Zubair ibn Al Arwah Al Tamimi.

He sent along with them the following letter which is available in front
of you and I’d like to include it in the record with the other
evidences. As cited in Tarikh Al Tabari, Maqtal Al-Husayn Lil Khwarizmi,
Tarikh Al Mas’oodi, Irshad Al Mufeed, Tarikh ibn Al Atheer, Maqtal Al
Talibeyeen, and Tarikh ibn ‘Asaker, the letter reads:

*“To the servant of Allah, Yazid Ameer Al Momineen (Commander of the
Believers)…from Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad. Praise be to Allah who gave the
right to Ameer Al Momineen and protected him from his enemy.*

*I inform Ameer Al Momineen that Muslim ibn Aqeel have sought refuge in
the house of Hani ibn ‘Urwah Al Muradi. I have sent spies on them and
conspired against them until Allah (SWT) enabled me to arrest them, I
then beheaded both of them and sent their heads with Hani ibn Abi Haya
Al Wada’ey and Al-Zubair ibn Al Arwah Al Tamimi and both are among the
followers of the Prophet’s traditions and the company (Ahl Al Sunna Wal
Jama’a) who are obedient to you. So you can ask them what you wish
because they are knowledgeable, truthful, and righteous. Wasalam.”*

Ladies and Gentlemen, see how the severed heads are being transported
from city to city! What type of rulers are they and what legitimacy they
have?! Here, the Second defendant Ibn Ziyad is explaining the method by
which he conspires against his enemies.

Now are these methods honorable and is it acceptable by the Islamic
religion or any other religion? Furthermore, he confesses that he issued
an order to kill and behead without trial! Now do you see him mentioning
anything in his letter about the best interest of the nation or its
unity,

as the defense claims? All what we observe is detestable flattery and
sweet talk from the Second defendant to the First defendant as he tries
to please him by cutting the heads of his enemies and sending it to him!
What’s strange is that he actually describes those who are carrying and
transporting heads of the Muslims from city to city as knowledgeable,
trustful, and righteous! What type of knowledge, righteousness, or
truthfulness is that?!

When the letter arrived to the First defendant along with the severed
heads, he became happy and ordered that the heads be placed and
displayed at the gates of Damascus to terrorize anyone who even thinks
about revolting or rebelling against him in the future. Now is this the
just ruler who was chosen by the people and who is concerned about the
welfare of the state? Is this the way to prevent mischief and maintain
the order and stability of the state, as the defense claims?!

The First defendant sent a letter in response to the Second defendant’s
letter thanking him and congratulating him on a job well done and urging
him to shed more blood. Here we present to you the text of this letter
as it was cited in the previous references. We request that this also be
included in the record. The letter reads:

“You did what I liked, and you have done a great courageous job! You
have fulfilled my expectations and confirmed my opinion about you. I
have questioned your messengers and found them to be as you described. I
have granted ten thousand dirhams (the currency at that time) to each of
them. So take good care of them. It has come to my attention that
Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali has headed towards Iraq. So send your spies, patrol
guards, and keep your eyes open. Imprison anyone you suspect, kill those
who are charged, and update me every day in this matter.”

Respected judges and jurors, you now see how the head of the Islamic
nation congratulates his governor for shedding blood of the innocent and
severing heads without any fair trial or even the simple right to defend
oneself! He blessed the acts of his governor and encouraged him to do
more of the same. He makes him believe that this will bring him more
satisfaction.

He urges him to be prepared to fight Al-Husayn (as). In the end, he
reminds him of the pillars on which his regime and that of his father
before him was built on. It is the pillars of oppression, tyranny,
dictatorship, aggression, and bloodshed! This was represented in his
expression, “Imprison anyone you suspect, kill those who are charged.”
So, mere doubts were enough for anyone to be imprisoned, punished,
tortured, tongues severed, and limbs amputated!

If you are simply charged with supporting Al-Husayn (as) and not
supporting the First defendant, you will get executed immediately,
beheaded, and your severed head will be sent to Damascus where the
Caliphs are waiting to enjoy hanging more heads on the gate of Damascus!
These were the laws and instructions of the tyrant ruler as he wrote
down to his governor the Second defendant.

So, is there any wonder after that why Al-Husayn (as) refused to give
his pledge of allegiance to such an oppressive ruler to govern a state
that was built on a divine religion which calls for justice, mercy,
equality, fairness, and recognizes human rights in an honorable and
respectable way!

A religion that prohibits killing; except for a death sentence for a
killer that comes after a fair and just trial and after following the
principle, “No guilty verdict in the presence of reasonable doubt.”

Now are there any principles left in this religion under the
governorship of this reckless tyrant Caliph?! Didn’t this religion
descend from the heavens to eradicate such types of rulers at any time
and place? Sure it did, then how did a person like Yazid take the seat
of rulership of a state built essentially to get rid of people like him?

This is indeed a great wonder and irony! And I feel sympathy to my
colleagues in the defense team how they can defend this great deviation
and overturn in history such that an oppressive ruler was able to take
the seat of rulership on a nation which calls for establishing justice
and supporting the oppressed against the oppressive rulers?

Suddenly, such nation became a victim itself for one of these oppressive
rulers. Or let us say…the worst of them! To be an oppressive ruler in an
oppressive state or a regular state, this is understandable. But what is
not understandable and totally reversed and surprising is to be an
oppressive ruler on the top of a divine, religious, and just state! For
an oppressive caliph to rule over a just and disciplined nation…that is
surely the reversed situation and the biggest of ironies!

Chief Justice: I think everyone needs some rest and would like to stop
here, so I will call for dismissal so that we resume next Monday at 9AM
sharp. Thank you, court is dismissed.


