The First News Conference
=========================

The first news conference of this historical trial took place after the
conclusion of the sixth court session at a big conference hall reserved
specifically for this purpose. We entered the hall at exactly 3PM along
with a big number of journalists and correspondents from all over the
world who came to cover this unique and thrilling event which increases
in excitement every day.

We had requested for these news conferences with the prosecution and the
defense representatives to speak with them directly about the case, but
our request was postponed for different reasons until we were finally
notified of this first news conference, with the assurance that it will
not be the last.

The hall was very crowded and after a little while, two of the
prosecutor’s assistants entered and requested everyone to keep quiet and
for the questions to be related only to the case, while reserving the
right of the prosecution to reject answering any question which may
affect the case proceeding or the evidences presented so far or has yet
to be presented.

Silence prevailed, then that awe-inspiring prosecutor who was the talk
of everyone entered with his neat, attractive, and humble appearance as
light radiated from his face. He stood in front of the podium then he
said in a calm, humble, and respectful voice:

Prosecutor: I thank you all for your attendance today and I have about
30 minutes only to take your questions and answer them. I request that
these questions be brief and non-redundant. The first question (and he
pointed to one of the correspondents), go ahead…

Correspondent: What is your opinion regarding the court proceedings so
far? Are you satisfied with it?

Prosecutor: We believe that the trial is proceeding very well so far.
The Chief Justice of the court is conducting his job in a very
professional and adept way, and he gives a fair opportunity for everyone
to present his case. We are satisfied with our progress so far and we
believe that we are moving slowly but with steady steps towards
establishing the guilt of the five defendants. Go ahead (and he pointed
towards another correspondent)...

Another Correspondent: Do you think the judges and the jurors are
somehow sympathetic to your case? And do you feel that they are
following you carefully and understanding what you are communicating? In
other words, do you feel a connection between you and them?

Prosecutor: Yes, without a doubt. In fact, we often observe emotional
reactions, sadness, and anger clear on their faces. I am sure that they
are following the sequence of events with all concentration and
attention, as it is expected from them.

Correspondent: Do you feel that they are leaning towards a guilty
verdict? And are they all as you described?

Prosecutor: I don’t know whether they are leaning towards a guilty
verdict or not, and I think it is too early now for us to conjecture on
that, as there are a lot more facts and evidences that have yet to be
presented. We believe that everyone is focusing and following the events
of the case. Go ahead (and he points to another correspondent)…

Another correspondent: What is your assessment of the performance of the
defense team so far? And do you feel that they are a foe to you whom you
fear and are on your guard?

Prosecutor: I will not comment on the performance of the defense.
However, they carry out their job in a professional manner and due to
the nature of their role, they are a foe to us of course. We do not fear
them; however, we stand against their trials to belittle and invalidate
the evidences we are presenting. Go ahead (and he points to another
correspondent)…

Another correspondent: This is the first time that a prosecutor takes on
a historical case which took place hundreds of years ago. I personally
had thought that this task was impossible, but honestly today I say that
you have proved by your unique performance that the impossible have
become possible and within reach! We bear witness that you are the
pioneer in this field and you will become part of history by this work.
My question to you is: How do you find this challenging mission to be?
And how did you prepare for it? What is your perspective regarding the
establishment of historical court tribunals in the future?

Prosecutor: Thank you for your comments. In reality, the mission is
tough and challenging since there are no living witnesses and we can
only depend on historical witnesses represented in different history
books. This requires careful collection of facts which has a high degree
of authenticity, as well as correlation of the facts together so that
they are presented as strong, irrefutable, and incriminating evidence.

We believe that we have presented a paradigm which can be followed in
future historical court tribunals. The goal here is to fill the earth
with justice and fairness after it was filled with oppression and
tyranny. We take pride and honor in being the pioneers in this effort
and an example and in the forefront in this field. This is our role and
we thank God that He chose us for this responsibility.…go ahead (and he
points to another correspondent).

Another correspondent: Are you comfortable with the security measures
and organization of this event?

Prosecutor: Yes, we are very comfortable and we would like to take this
opportunity to direct our thanks to the organizers of the court
proceedings and we express our utmost appreciation of their hard work in
conducting the court sessions in this honorable form till now. Go ahead
(and he points to another correspondent).

Correspondent: We sometimes notice your emotional engagement in the
events of this case such that we often see tears in your eyes and detect
sadness in your voice. Isn’t that an odd observation from a prosecutor
who is simply carrying out his job? And is that reaction intended to
influence the judges and jurors? Or is there another reason for it?

Prosecution: The tragedies which transpired in Karbala are the source of
great misery and pain for all those who love and support truth, justice,
goodness, and humanity. All of that was represented in the character of
Imam Al-Husayn (as). The barbaric and aggressive attack on him is in
essence an attack on all the values of truth, justice, goodness, and
humanity.

We do not deny that we are personally affected by this case for reasons
which I prefer not to share and it is out of our will. It is absolutely
not meant to affect or influence the judges and jurors. Our personal
feelings regarding this case is what made us take on the mission and
role of prosecution as we hope to reach to the conviction of the
defendants by the end of the trial. Go ahead (and he points to another
correspondent).

Correspondent: With all due respect to the personality of Al-Husayn
(as), do you not see that he was mistaken to subject himself to
confrontation with this huge army and expose himself to harm while he
was all alone in that estranged state?

Prosecution: Sir, it seems that you have not been following the events
of this case as we have presented with its supporting evidence. I hope
that the jurors are not also asking the same question you’ve posed.
Indeed, Al-Husayn (as) was forced to go out as he was persecuted and his
head was sought for any price. Thus, he did not expose himself, rather
he was forced to this confrontation!

He did not leave to Al-Kufa except after he received their letters
promising to protect him and his family. However, they betrayed him
under the pressure and terrorism of Ibn Ziyad. To verify that, you may
listen to the following statement of Al-Husayn (as):

“They will not leave me alone until they kill me! When they did so,
Allah will send upon them those who would humiliate and disgrace them
such that they become the most inferior of nations.” Also listen to him
saying, “Bani Umayyad confiscated my property and I was patient. They
cursed me and I was patient. Then they sought to shed my blood, so I
escaped.” From this, it is clear that Al-Husayn (as) was forced to have
this confrontation and did not seek it. Go ahead (and he points to
another correspondent).

Correspondent: The defense team was supposed to also hold a news
conference right after your news conference. However, we were suddenly
told that their news conference would be cancelled. Do you have an
explanation for that?

Prosecution: No, and you may direct that question to them when you see
them. I will stop here and thank you all. See you next time soon
God-willing. Salam Alaikum!


