Man and Evolution
=================

** **  
 Out of all the natural phenomena with which we are a conversant, the
living beings have a comparatively more complex and marvelous mechanism.
It may be said that life is the apex of perfection on the scale of
natural motion.  
  

Life
----

No thinker belonging to any school of thought has any doubt about the
fact that‑ living beings have characteristics which are not found in the
non‑living beings.  
    
 The main' characteristics of a living being are self‑defense,
adaptation to the environment, growth and pro­creation. The living
beings of higher categories move from one place to another and those of
still higher category are gifted with feeling and consciousness. That is
why the laws of organic chemistry are different from those of inorganic
chemistry, or for that matter of geology.  
    
 So far as observation and scientific experiments show, a living being
is born only by another living being and not by lifeless matter.
Similarly no living being is born suddenly and automatically. At the
same time it also cannot be doubted that a living being appeared only at
a special stage of the evolution of nature, which was naturally that of
the beginning of life. Hence a question arises as to what is the origin
of life?  
    
 In this respect various theories have been put forward. Some of them
are as follows:  
    
 a. At first, life came to the earth from some other planet in the form
of living cells.  
    
 b. The material necessary to form a living cell conse­quent on
receiving the required energy under certain conditions, was accidentally
transformed into a living being and from that life spread to the whole
earth.  
    
 c. The first living being appeared suddenly by the will of God. Now all
the developed living beings are His progeny.  
    
 d. Every species of the living beings appeared on the earth
independently. Life to each one of them was granted by God. There are
some other theories also.  
    
 We do not want to involve ourselves into the discussion as to which of
these theories is correct, for a very extensive scientific investigation
is necessary to come to a definite conclusion in this respect.  
    
 What we would like to point out is that the life of every living being,
whether it is the result of any evolutionary process or not, is a sign
of Allah. That is what has been emphasized by the Qur'an.  
    
***"There are significant signs in your own selves. Can you not
see?"*****(Surah** ***al‑Zariyat,*** **51:21).**  
** **  
***"Allah sends down water from the sky and it brings the dead earth to
life. Indeed in this there is a sign for those who pay attention" .***
**(Surahal‑Nahl 16:65).**  
** **

Manufacture of living cell
--------------------------

if one day the scientists succeed in manufacturing a living cell, the
doctrine of those who believe in Allah will not be affected, just as the
flight of man to other planets, the making of artificial rain, the
grafting of one man's limbs to another, the manufacture of an electronic
brain and so many other small and big inventions do not mean a clash or
a rivalry with Allah. Such things only mean fructifying the human
creative power and exploitation of natural material and its hidden
forces. The Qur'an itself urges to make use of ideas and skills and to
utilize the gifts of nature.  
    
 As we have repeatedly said, scientific progress is a move­ment in the
direction of divine guidance and is not in conflict with it.  
    
 Anyhow, it should not be forgotten that human creativity does not mean
the invention of a totally new phenomenon or a norm. It only means the
exploitation of the material and energy available in nature and the
bringing about of the conditions necessary for the utilization of the
laws and norms relating to them.  
    
 If really there is a possibility of the production of life by combining
natural material under certain conditions still not known to man, then
he may in future discover the law of the origination of life and the
conditions and norms pertaining to it. If that happens, this discovery
will‑ not be different from the discovery and utilization of so many
other laws already made in the fields other than that of life.  
    
 Obviously the discovery of a law and its utilization does not in any
way lower the position of the law‑maker.  
    
 At a lower level we see that the pair of a male and a female pave the
way for the birth of a child. But do they affect Allah as the creator? A
farmer cultivates his land. But does he replace Allah as the real
creator of the crop?  
    
 If it is discovered that life can be produced from matter under certain
conditions, that will only mean that matter in its evolutionary motion
can go to the extent where it receives life and then can go further to a
higher stage.  
    
 It is interesting to note that the Qur'an, describing the birth of man,
expressly says:  
    
***"One of His signs is that He created you o f clay" .*** **(Surah
al‑Rum, 30:20).**  
    
 In fact clay becomes man, the highest living being, after passing
through so many developments.  
    
 The Qur'an also talks of the birth of man from *\`black clay'* and
*Mastic clay'.* (Surah al‑Hijr, 15:28 and Surah al-­Saffat, 37:11).  
    
 It also says:  
    
**" W*****e made every living thing o f water".*** **(Surah al‑Anbiya,
21:30).**  
    
 When the Qur'an has such a wide horizon, there is no reason why a
Muslim who follows it, should be narrow-­minded.  
  

Life, a Divine phenomenon
-------------------------

It may be pointed out that the Qur'an expressly ascribes life to Allah.

***"It is He who created death and life" .*** **(Surah al‑Mulk, 67:2).**
***"It is He who created you to die".*** **(Surah al‑Hajj, 22:66).**  
    
 Do such verses mean that no one else can make a living being? In reply
it may be said:

Firstly, the Qur'an ascribes to Allah all natural changes, from coming
down of rain and taming rivers and mountains to the birth of a man.  
    
 On some other ‑occasions it ascribes these very changes to natural
factors also. These two groups of verses are not contradictory, but
corroborate each other, because the scientific laws which govern natural
changes are simply the norms prescribed by Allah. His will does not mean
that He directly brings about all changes and natural events. In fact he
has created a system of natural changes. That is His will.  
    
 Secondly, if in the case of life we find that the Qur'an has given
special attention to it, that is only a sign of its importance and high
value. Allah describes it as the infusion of divine spirit. While
discussing man, we will explain what is meant by that.  
    
 Thirdly, every evolutionary movement is a manifestation of Allah's will
and His creative design, especially if the change is such that a
material organism reaches a stage where it may receive life, become a
living being and may at last attain human life.  
  

Man and Evolution
-----------------

The theory of evolution on the whole has a long history. Lamarck
enunciated certain principles in this connection. But it was Charles
Darwin, who carried out extensive studies of the living organisms and
the way of their birth, and gathered enough scientific evidence to show
that evolution has taken place actually. He held that:  
    
 (a) Every living being, wherever it may be, gradually adapts itself to
its environment, and meets its natural needs, such as obtaining food and
defending itself in accordance with the conditions prevailing in that
environ­ment. This effort sometimes causes changes in its body, like the
appearance of the web uniting the toes of the duck when it was forced by
its environment to swim in order to look for its food in the lakes, or
the lengthening of the neck of the giraffe when it was forced to make
use of the branches of lofty trees.  
    
 (b) Though these organic changes take place gradually over many
generations, they later pass from parents to offspring.  
    
 (c) Among the living beings there is a severe struggle for the
continuation of their life, for procuring food and for selecting a
suitable mate. This struggle for existence, that is a clash with the
factors of the environment of life and rivalry with other living beings,
is a firm principle in the life of the animals and the plants and is one
of the factors which lead to the change of their form.  
    
 (d) As the result of this struggle only those organisms survive which
can adapt themselves better to their environ­ment and can obtain the
conditions necessary for their life in their natural abode. The weaker
and the less suitable organisms gradually die out.  
    
 This way gradually the various species are transformed, and only the
fittest ones among them survive. That is how the evolution of the
species takes place.  
    
 The dissemination of the theory of the development of the living
organisms, including man, on the basis of these principles, roused a
great deal of controversy during the time of Darwin and afterwards, and
views in support of it and against it were openly expressed. At some
times the tone of the debate in this connection was scientific but on
other occasions it was rooted in religious or anti‑religious prejudices,
for it was said that what Darwin had asserted was in conflict with the
Biblical account of the beginning of the world and the birth of man as
given in the book of Genesis.  
    
 Anyhow, with new discoveries in archaeology and the expansion in the
field of experiments, the theory of evolution has been considerably
modified since the time of Darwin, especially in regard to the questions
relating to anthropology.  
    
 Many new questions in regard to almost every principle mentioned by
Darwin have arisen. For example, it is asked whether the appearance of a
new organ or for that matter any other organic change, always results
from the use of that organ and the attempt to adapt it to one's
environment or it may be due to mutation or any other cause?  
    
 The acquired qualities are hereditable as a principle or genetic
investigations have rejected this theory?  
    
 The organic changes, whatever may be their cause, are always aimed at
survival and evolution or sometimes they may be due to the inconsistency
with the environmental conditions and may culminate in death and
extinction?  
    
 Natural selection is or is not like artificial selection which leads
the existing generation to evolution? We find that the wild animals and
plants are alike and of average type, whereas the artificial selection
gives the animals and plants more variety and leads them to better
evolution.  
    
 There are many other questions of this sort.  
    
 Anyhow, in spite of all the objections raised to discredit it, the
theory of evolution has been accepted by the scientists as an objective
principle of natural sciences. At the same time it is also certain that
prominent and unbiased naturalists do not consider this theory to be
final and incontrovertible. The way to further scientific investi­gation
is not closed. All that they say is that the scientific inquiry has not
so far discovered any new principles which may take the place of the
principle of evolution.  
    
 Now it may be said that if an unbiased investigator care­fully examines
the results of the observations in regard to the genesis of the living
organisms, he will come to the following conclusions:  
  

Principles which may be discovered
----------------------------------

(1) The living organisms in accordance with their degree of evolution
have a historical succession. In other words, the more developed species
have usually appeared over history after the less developed ones.  
    
 (2) This historical succession is similar to that found in all other
things of the world. The entire cosmos has evolved from a simple state
and gradually galaxies. and solar systems have been formed in the
environment devoid of all traces of life. Conditions conducive to the
appearance of life have developed gradually. Similarly development has
taken place successively from the plants to the developed animals. On
the whole, the more complex organism have followed the simple ones.  
    
 (3) There exists complete organic similarity between the first living
organism and the most developed living organism known to us.  
    
 (4) The stages through which a human embryo passes during its embryonic
development are fully akin to the stages through which living organisms
have passed over history.  
    
 When we put all this evidence together, we can scientifi­cally presume
that the various species of the living organisms are the progeny of one
another (transformism) and have not come into existence independently
(fixism).  
  

Scientific presumption, not incontrovertible principle
------------------------------------------------------

Anyhow, it would be fair to say that the conclusions at which we have
arrived are no more than a scientific guess corroborated by some
evidence. They cannot be regarded as decisive and final, for if an
unbiased investigator looks carefully at the history of the origin of
machinery, he will find that the development of various machines is not
incongruous with the four conclusions mentioned above, though the origin
of the machines was not on the basis of transformism in its modern
sense, and the various kinds of machines have not been born of one
another.  
    
 In fact the scientific study of the origin of machinery also leads to
the following conclusions:  
    
 (1) The machines in accordance with their evolution have historical
succession, for the more developed ones appeared after the less
developed.  
    
 (2) This historical succession is akin to the origination of all other
things of the cosmos.  
    
 (3) There is complete organic resemblance between the first machine and
the most developed machine.  
    
 (4) The stages of the manufacture of the latest developed machine on
the whole resemble those of the development of other machines, though in
a compressed form.  
    
 In spite of all these four points, everybody knows that the origination
of the more developed machines in the wake of the simple ones has not
come about on the basis of transformism. In other words the more
developed machines are not the progeny of the more simple ones.  
    
 The evolution of the machines is the result of man's initiative, his
efficiency and the evolution of his thinking. It is the outcome of the
experience he has gained. But the machines of superior kind are not born
of those that existed before them.  
    
 It is true that in the case of machines basically it is not possible
that a more developed one is born of a simpler one, but in the case of
living beings such a possibility does exist. But this possibility can
only support a scientific guess. It is no proof that such a thing has
actually happened, for mere possibility of a thing is not a proof of its
actual occurrence.  
    
 We come across some other cases of evolution, in which the historical
succession of their stages is related to the evolution of the thinking
of the maker, and is the result of the gradual increase in an already
existing ability.  
    
 An example of such an evolution is the gradual attainment of knowledge
from childhood to later years.  
    
 In contrast, the evolution of the power of learning a foreign language
is connected with the development of the capability of him who learns
it, and not with that of the person who teaches him.  
  

Conclusion
----------

An unbiased investigator, whether he supports the theory of evolution or
opposes it, has to admit that:  
 (1) As far as we know, all the existing things of the world, including
the living organisms, have a historical succession in accordance with
the degree of their evolution.  
    
 (2) We are aware of many cases in which a more developed organism is
the progeny of a less developed one.  
    
 (3) There are indications on the basis of which it may be presumed that
this is a general rule applicable to all existing things.  
    
 (4) But still this is no more than a mere scientific guess, and the way
to further investigation on the basis of contrary evidence, as mentioned
above, is still open.  
    
 (5) On the basis of the doctrine, that the world has an Almighty
Creator, who has brought the universe into existence and who manages it,
there is a complete possibility that certain developed species might
have come into existence independently in the same way as we have
described the case of the machines. Of course, in this case the creation
of the developed species is not to be the outcome of any mental
development of the Creator or His gaining any experience. It is to be
only on the basis that evolutionary motion exists in the creative design
of the world. In other words, it is the will of Allah that gradually
more and more developed species should come into being, in the same way
as there exists an evolutionary motion in the development of an
embryo.  
  

Emergence of man
----------------

According to their general line of thinking, the scientists hold that
man has evolved from the primates, which existed before him. We leave
the study and evaluation of this evidence and other indications to the
anthropologists, and confine ourselves to making a few general remarks
in regard to the origin of man.  
    
 (1) What we have said about the theory of evolution is also applicable
to what has been or is being said on the basis of this theory about the
ancestors of the first man, but as we have already pointed out, this
theory is no more than a scientific guess. It is still subject to
further investi­gation and should not be considered to be one hundred
per cent final.  
    
 (2) Anyhow, it is important to note that the emergence of man on the
basis of evolution from other primates is not in conflict with the
teachings of the revealed religions, especially with the belief of an
Almighty Creator of the world. We have repeatedly mentioned in *Islamic
Teachings* that Allah, as described by the Qur'an, is the Creator and
Disposer of nature. Therefore the perfect system of nature is one of His
signs and not an arrangement parallel to Him or negating Him. All the
scientific discussions and efforts are aimed at only finding out this
system of nature as it actually exists.  
    
 (3) The only point which has given rise to the conception that there is
a contradiction between religion and the general principles of evolution
is that the book of Genesis of Old Testament and certain verses of the
Qur'an apparently indicate that all men existing on the earth are the
progeny of Adam, who was created independently and not evolved from any
previous living beings.  
    
 In this connection the following points are worth con­sideration:  
    
 (a) What, in this respect, is mentioned in the book of Genesis cannot
be taken seriously from religious point of view, because the genuineness
of many parts of Old Testament is historically doubtful.  
    
 (b) The Qur'anic verses connected with the birth of Adam generally
emphasize the point that his birth was an important event and that
Divine spirit was infused in his material body made of clay. This kind
of birth may only be described as mutation.  
    
 Thus a being made of clay came into existence. He was destined to be
the master of the earth and no other visible or invisible being could
place a total restriction on his leaning towards Allah or towards his
base desires.  
    
 (c) There is only one verse in the whole Qur'an which describes the
birth of Adam as somewhat miraculous. This verse says:

**"*****Surely Isa is*** ***like*** ***Adam in the sight of Allah. He
created him of clay, then said to hire: \`Be! and he was".*** **(Surah
Ale Imran, 3: 59)**  
    
 This verse has come in the wake of other verses relating to the Prophet
Isa. The Qur'an invariably stresses that Isa was created by Allah and
that he was not His son. The fact that he was born of Virgin Maryam and
had no father is no proof of his being the son of Allah. His birth was a
super­natural event, which took place by Allah's will, in the same way
as another supernatural event, that is the birth of Adam, the living
being having Divine spirit, occurred earlier.  
    
 It may be observed that this very verse shows that the birth of Adam
and that of Isa are alike.  
    
 Can anybody claim that what the Qur'an has said concerning the birth of
Isa repudiates the general procedure of the birth of men all over
history? Does it deny that they are normally born of father and mother.
Not at all.  
    
 In dozens of verses the Qur'an declares the system of reproduction and
procreation to be a sign of the power and the wisdom of the Creator of
the cosmos.  
    
 Hence from the Qur'anic point of view the miraculous birth of Adam, the
first living being gifted with Divine spirit, should not be construed to
mean that the Qur'an is opposed to the theory of the emergence of the
existing things of the world or the birth of living organisms on the
basis of evolution. All that it means is that the emergence of man in an
extraordinary way was a special favor of Allah.  
  

Exceptional Organisms
---------------------

Irrespective of all that relates to the birth of Isa or Adam, a
naturalist may be asked whether it is possible or not that in the course
of the emergence of usual organisms, some exceptional ones also come
into existence?  
    
 We all know that as a rule every hand and foot of a man has five
fingers; but we also know that some children are born with six.  
    
 Similarly we know that every human child is born with one head, but you
must have read in newspapers that there have been some exceptional cases
in which children were born with two heads.  
    
 When you put up such exceptional cases to the naturalists, they do not
deny their existence, but explain them away simply as freaks of
nature.  
    
 The credulous people easily accept this explanation, but those who have
a critical mind ask: If it is true that the evolutionary emergence of
the world and man is the result of the domination of the laws of nature
over all the particles of this world and if these laws hold good
everywhere, what is that factor which disturbs them?  
    
 Does an outside factor disturb the working of nature and the system of
its laws, or the laws of nature themselves disturb their own working? In
the first case, we must acknowledge that there exists some superpower
trans­cending nature. In the case of the second alternative, a question
arises as to why the possibility of the occurrence of some exceptional
events, sometimes called miracles, should be so vehemently denied and
considered to be contrary to the system of nature?  
    
 The above discussion shows that there is not the least contradiction
between the general principle of evolution in respect of the world and
man, and the teachings of the revealed religions, and what the Qur'an
says concerning the birth of Adam and man. Incidentally the principles
of evolution are still subject to further scientific investigation, for
they are faced with much criticism especially as they were enunciated by
Darwin.  
    
 As we have now finished the discussion of the origin of man, we take up
a more basic question. The most impor­tant question, which is being
overlooked in our times is: What is the true nature of man, what is his
value and what way he should go?  
    
 First we refer briefly to the position of man in the West and then we
propose to study the man of the Qur'an, so that keeping in mind the
views of the contemporary schools, we may know the approach of Islam in
this respect.  
  


