Names and Attributes of Allah
=============================

** **  
 Many names and attributes of Allah have been mentioned in the Qur'an.  
    
***"He is Allah, besides whom there is no god. He has know­ledge of
everything, whether perceptible or imperceptible. He is the Beneficent,
the Merciful. He is Allah, besides whom there is no god, the Sovereign
Lord, the Holy One, the Giver of peace, the Keeper of faith, the
Supreme, the Mighty one, the All powerful and the Majestic. Exalted be
He above what they associate with Him. He is Allah, the Creator, the
Originator, the Fashioner. His are the most beautiful names. All that is
in the heavens and the earth gives glory to Him. He is the Mighty, the
Wise".*** **(Surah al‑Hashr, 59:22** **‑ 24).**  
    
***"His are the most beautiful names".***  
* *  
 The main feature of the names and the attributes of Allah has been
mentioned in this verse. The highest degree of every virtue and every
excellence belongs to Allah. For example, power and ability to do things
is a good quality. Allah is the most powerful and the most efficient and
can do anything. The Qur'an says:

***"Surely Allah can do all things".*** **(Surah al‑Ankabut, 29:20).**  
** **  
 Knowledge is a virtue. Allah has the highest degree of knowledge.

***"Allah is aware of all things ".*** **(Surah al‑Tawbah, 9:115).**  
    
***"He is the Knower of the invisible and the visible. . . ".***
**(Surah al‑R'ad, 13:9).**  
    
 Sagacity is another virtue. The holy Qur'an says:

***"Allah is Knower, Wise" .*** **(Surahal‑Mumtahanah, 60:10).**  
    
 Kindness to others is a good quality. Allah is

***"the Bene­ficent, the Merciful". "He is the Most Merciful of those
who show mercy".*** **(Surah al‑Hamd, 1:3; Surah Yusuf, 12:64).**  
** **  
 Hence you are at liberty to call Him by any of these most beautiful
names:

***"Call Him Allah or Rahman*** **(*****Beneficent*****)*****. It***
**is** ***the same whichever you call. His are the most beautiful names"
.*** **(Surahal‑Isra, 17:110).** ***"Allah bas the beautiful names.
Invoke Him by them, and keep away from those who prevent them. They
shall soon be repaid for what they do ".*** **(Surah al‑A'raf,
7:180).**  
** **

Allah is Independent
--------------------

As Allah has the highest degree of every kind of virtue and perfection,
He is naturally free from every fault, defect and deficiency. A number
of the Qur'anic verses, extolling Allah, emphasize this aspect of His
glory.  
    
 The Qur'an declares Allah to be free from every kind of deficiency and
need. It regards this freedom as an important principle of the
cognizance of Allah, by means of which a number of doctrinal and
ideological deviations which have taken birth regarding Allah may be
detected.  
    
***'Musa said to his people: If you and all those who are on the earth
prove to be ungrateful, Allah does not at all need your thanks. He is
Laudable" .*** **(SurahIbrahim, 14:8).**  
    
 Man should remember that because of Allah not being in want of
anything, He is not in need of our faith, worship and obedience. If He
wants us to be faithful and obedient, that is for our own benefit and
not for His. If the whole world becomes unbeliever, that cannot do Him
the least harm.  
    
 Not being subject to any need, Allah is free from the limitations of
time and space. He is above them. A being who occupies space, naturally
needs it to exist, and one who is confined to time, can exist only under
certain conditions at a particular time. A being not time‑bound can
always exist and is not dependent upon the special conditions of time.  
    
 Allah is All‑knowing  
 The Creator of the world knows everything. So far as we are concerned
there are two kinds of things in the universe viz. open and hidden,
perceptible and imperceptible.  
    
 However Allah is aware of both of them. On principle there is nothing
unknown to Him. Nothing is hidden from Him.

***"He is the Knower of the unseen and the seen. He is the Supreme the
Most High".*** **(Surah al‑Ra'd, 13:9).**  
    
***\`Nothing in the earth or in the heavens is hidden from Allah ".***
**(Surah Ale Imran, 3: 5).**

He is aware of the minutest details. He knows all that we do.

***"Surely Allah knows all that you do" .*** **(Surahal‑Nahl,
16:91).**  
  

Allah is All‑powerful
---------------------

He controls everything and can do anything.

***"Surely Allah can do everything".*** **(Surah al‑Baqarah, 2:20).**  
    
 He is so powerful and dominating that whenever He wants a thing to come
into existence or wants something to be done, He simply says: *"Be!"*
and immediately it *will \`be'.* The Qur'an says:

**"His** ***command, when He decrees a thing, is to say to it: \`Be' and
it is".*** **(Surah Yasin,** ***36:82*****)*****.***  
  

Will and Volition of Allah
--------------------------

Normally all beings endowed with intelligence and power can achieve all
or at least a part of what they intend. They at least try to fulfill
their desires. When we knowingly plan to achieve our object we say that
"we are determined to accomplish such and such task". Hence,
determination consists of an intentional and strong will which is
effective in the achievement of our desire.  
    
 Out of all the multifarious things existing in this world, the animals
or at least the advanced animals are more or less endowed with this
quality that when they feel an urge, they try knowingly to fulfill what
they want. Out of all the animals known to us man has the most developed
will­power. That is why knowledge has a more creative role in his life
than in the life of other animals. Anyhow, he apparently does not
exercise his will while performing many acts. His circulatory,
respiratory and digestive system and his big and small glands which
produce the necessary chemicals, all work without the aid of his will.  
    
 There is no doubt that all these systems are connected with the nervous
system, and modern physiology has been able to discover for each of them
a centre of command in some part of the brain, still every act having
some connec­tion with brain cannot be called intentional and
deliberate.  
    
 It has been reported that some persons consequent on certain exercises
and long practice have been able to control the circulation of their
blood. Even if such reports be true, they can at best be described as
exceptional cases.  
    
 Anyhow, the field of the activity of man's will is after all limited.
For example, so far his will has not been able to influence the rotatory
system of the heavenly bodies. We also see that every human being has
some hereditary traits in the selection of which his conscious will has
no part to play.  
    
 Hence, the influence of human will and volition is after all limited.
That is why it often happens that man intends to do a thing, but he does
not succeed, or certain factors beyond his control prevent the
fulfillment of his many desires. But Allah who is All‑knowing and
All‑powerful, accomplishes all that He wants.

***"Surely, Your Lord does what He pleases".*** **(Surah Hud, 11:107).**

***"Only Allah can bring punishment on you, if He will, and you cannot
frustrate His plan ".*** **(Sura** ***Hud*****, 11:*****3 3*****)**
***.***  
    
 His will rules over the whole world, but that is not the case with that
of others.

***"Allah will judge with fairness, and those whom they invoke besides
Him can judge nothing".*** **(Surah Mu'min,** ***40:20*****)*****.***  
    
 All others whosoever and whatsoever they may be, move within a limited
framework decreed for them by Allah, who has destined everything.

***\`Allah has set a measure for everything ".*** **(Surah al‑Talaq,**
***65: 3*** **etc.)**  
    
 This is the universal law which applies to man also. As such his power
is limited, but still he can choose his way of life within the framework
ordained for him. Allah wants him to use his discretion and determine
his future, whether good or bad, himself. Anyhow, even within this
framework man, or for that matter any other being, should not consider
himself to be in possession of absolute power. If Allah wants, He can
make his efforts ineffectual.

There are many cases in which He frustrated the efforts of some
conceited individuals or groups against all their expecta­tions to
remind them and others that even within their own sphere of power they
should never be oblivious of the Divine power which controls
everything.  
    
 The Qur'an mentions several examples of such a situation. The Surah
al‑Qalam, 68:17 ‑ 3 2 illustrate this point.  
** **  
***"We have tried them as We tried the owners of the garden when they
vowed that they would pluck its fruit next morning. But they made no
exception for the will of Allah. As a result a visitation from your Lord
visited their garden while they were sleeping. And in the morning it was
as if it bad been plucked. They called out to one another in the morning
saying: Rush to your garden if you want to pluck the fruit. So they set
out, saying to each other in low tones: No poor*** ***shall enter the
garden today without your permission. They set out early determined to
stop the poor. When they saw the garden, they exclaimed: Surely we were
wrong. In fact we have been ruined. The best among them said: Did I not
tell you: Why do you not glorify Allah? Then they said: Gloried be our
Lord. No doubt we have been wrong‑doers. Then they began to blame***
***one another. They said: Alas for us! Surely we were outrageous. We
hope that our Lord will give us better garden in its place. To our Lord
we humbly turn".***  
  

Allah is Beneficent and Forgiving
---------------------------------

Allah is Beneficent and Merciful to all His creation. He has bestowed
endless bounties on all. He has provided all of us with ample
opportunities to pass our life. He is Forgiving.  
    
 If a sinner repents and wants to adopt the way of virtue, the door is
not closed to him, provided he is earnest in doing that.  
    
 Throughout the world there are innumerable signs of the mercy of Allah.
Like all other existing things min also enjoys the Divine blessings, but
with one important difference. He has been blessed with the special
favor of being the master of his destiny. He is endowed with the power
of distinguishing between right and wrong and good and bad, and is able
to choose consciously either of them. He can exercise this power only if
it is admitted that some of his actions are desirable and rewarding and
some others leading to pain and punishment.  
    
 The anxiety for not losing the reward of desirable acts and for
escaping the punishment of undesirable ones is a Divine blessing in
itself, for it impels man to be virtuous and upright. The Qur'an has
repeatedly warned against the wrath of Allah.  
  

Allah is just
-------------

Allah does not do injustice to anyone. He wants us also to be just in
our behavior. He has created everything accor­ding to a plan. The whole
world is homogeneous. He has organized recompense and retribution in the
next world, according to a well‑planned system of action and reaction.
Everyone will reap there what he has sown here. There, the personality
of man will be a reflection of his performance here. Whatever comfort or
pain he receives in the Hereafter will be the exact outcome of his own
deeds, and no injustice will be done to anyone. The everlasting future
of everybody depends upon his own efforts to improve himself and his
environment.  
    
 This is the gist of the information which the Qur'an, the divine Book,
gives us about Allah. This information is based on revelation, but it
can also be obtained through pondering over His signs, and His names and
attributes. It not only as far as possible satisfies those who seek
cognition, but also helps us to solve the biggest problem of giving a
direction to our life.  
    
 A man inspired by such realistic and constructive knowledge of Allah
leads a vigorous life full of zeal, hope and effort. He adheres to his
own views and his own way of life, but co‑operates with others and
respects their ideas also. A man bound to Allah neither sells himself to
others nor does he endeavour to subdue them to his own wish. He loves
his own freedom as well as that of others. He himself is pure and likes
others to be pure. He seeks truth wherever he finds it. He is always
with truth and at war with falsehood.  
  


