Patience
========

Patience is an essential cause of success. It has been recommended in
religion.

Allah the Most High said: ***“O you who believe, seek assistance through
patience and prayer; surely Allah is with the patient.”***

He also said: ***“And give good news to the patient. Who, when a
misfortune befalls them, say: ‘Surely we are Allah’s and to Him we shall
surely return.’ Those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from
their Lord, and those are the followers of the right course.”***

He also said: ***“And give good news to the humble. To those whose
hearts tremble when Allah is mentioned, and those who are patient under
that which afflicts them, and those who keep up prayer, and spend
(benevolently) out of what We have given them.”***

He also said: ***“And as for those who believe and do good, We will
certainly give them abode in the high places in gardens beneath which
rivers flow, abiding therein; how good the reward of the workers! Those
who are patient and on their Lord do they rely.”***

He also said: ***“Indeed, the patient will he paid back their reward in
full without measure.”***

He also said: ***“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. I
swear by the afternoon. Most surely man is in loss. Except those who
believe and do good, and enjoin on each other truth, and enjoin on each
other patience.”***

He also said: ***“And how many a prophet has fought alongside whom were
many worshippers of the Lord; so they did not become weak-hearted on
account of what befell them in Allah’s way, nor did they weaken, nor did
they abase themselves; and Allah loves the patient.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“There are three kinds of
forbearance: Forbearance in misfortune, forbearance in obedience and
forbearance against disobedience.”*

He (S) also said: *“If you can have both patience and certainty, then
have them; and if you cannot have them both, then have patience; because
patience in difficulties brings about much* *goodness. Know that victory
is with patience, and salvation is after hardship;* ***‘Surely with
difficulty is ease. Surely with difficulty is ease.’***[^1]*”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“The role of
patience in actions is like the role of the head among the organs of the
body. If the head is gone the organs become useless and if patience is
gone actions are useless.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“There are two kinds of forbearance: One of them
is forbearance in misfortune; it is admirable and good. Another one,
which is better than that, is forbearance in what Allah has forbidden.”*

Imam ‘Ali Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.) said: *“The relation between patience
and belief is like the relation between the head and the body. There is
no belief for him who has no patience.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“I have patience with this boy of
mine and with my household with a complete tolerance. Indeed he who is
patient will have the reward of him who prays all the night and observes
fasting on days, and the position of a martyr who has (ought along with
the Prophet Muhammad (S)”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“The relation between patience and
belief is like the relation between head and the body. There cannot be
any belief without patience, in the same way that there cannot be a
living body without head.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Keep on having patience in all of your affairs.
For when Allah sent Muhammad He commanded him to have patience and
tolerance:* ***‘And bear patiently what they say and avoid them with a
becoming avoidance. And leave Me and the rejecters, the possessors of
ease and plenty.’***[^2] *Repel (evil) with what is best, then he
between whom and you was enmity would be as if he were a warm friend.
And none are made to receive it but those who are patient and none are
made to receive it but those who have a mighty good fortune.”*[^3]

[^1]: The Qur’an 94:5-6.

[^2]: The Qur’an 73:10-11.

[^3]: The Qur’an 41:34-35.


