Having a Good Opinion of God
============================

A believer must keep two things in his heart: a fear from the
consequences of his faults, and a hope for the mercy of Allah
accompanied by a good opinion of Him. Having a suspicion about Allah or
a despair of His mercy is a grave (mortal) sin.

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) quotes Allah as saying: ***“Those who work
for My reward should not rely on their works. For, even if they try
their very best to worship Me throughout their lives, they fall short of
My due worship, seeking honour, bliss and high ranks in My presence.
They should be sure of My mercy and hopeful of My favour, having a good
opinion of Me. In this case My beneficence, mercy and forgiveness
envelop them. For I am the Beneficent, the Merciful, as I am called.”***

He (S) also said: *“I swear by Allah besides Whom there is no god, that
no believer can ever attain the benefits of this world and the world to
come except by his good opinion of Allah, his hope, having a good nature
and by abstaining from backbiting believers. I swear by Allah besides
Whom there is no god, that no repenting believer will be punished except
for his suspicion about Allah, being in despair, having an ill nature
and backbiting believers. I swear by Allah besides Whom there is no god,
that no believing servant has a good opinion of Allah except that He
will behave duly towards His believing servant. For Allah is generous
and graceful. When His believing servant has a good opinion of Him, He
does not fail to do according to it. So have a good opinion of Allah and
wish for Him.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“A believing servant must retain
two lights in his heart: a light of fear and a light of hope, and these
lights must be equal.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“A believer cannot be called such
unless he is fearful and hopeful; and he cannot be fearful and hopeful
unless he acts according to his fear and hope.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“You should not hope for Allah’s mercy in a manner
that encourages you to commit sins; nor should you fear from Allah’s
punishment in a manner that brings you disappointment.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Having a good opinion of Allah means that you
must not hope in anyone except Him and you should not fear for anything
except for your sins.”*


