Truthfulness
============

Islam has laid stress on telling the truth and avoiding lies.

Allah the Most High said: ***“Surely the men who submit and the women
who submit, and the believing men and the believing women, and the
obeying men and the obeying women, and the truthful men and the truthful
women, and the patient men and the patient women, and the humble men and
the humble women, and the almsgiving men and the almsgiving women, and
the fasting men and the fasting women, and the men who guard their
private parts and the women who guard, and the men who remember Allah
much and the women who remember - Allah has prepared for them
forgiveness and a mighty reward.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Three things are the signs of
hypocrisy: breach of trust, lying and breach of promise.”*

He (S) also said: *“He who has these three things should be counted a
hypocrite, even if he performs the daily prayers, observes fasting and
thinks that he is a Muslim: breach of trust, lying and breach of
promise. Allah the Most High said:* ***‘Surely Allah does not love the
treacherous;’***[^1] ***‘The curse of Allah be on him if he is one of
the liars;’***[^2] ***‘And mention Ismail in the Book; surely he was
truthful in (his) promise and he was an apostle, a prophet.’***[^3]*”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“O people, be
truthful, surely Allah is with the truthful; and avoids lying, for it
stands far from faith.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“A servant of Allah does not taste faith unless he
gives up lying earnestly or jokingly.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“Lies destroy faith.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“Keep on having fear of Allah,
truthfulness and trustworthiness.”*

In another saying he listed lying among grave (mortal) sins; the same
thing being found in an epistle of Imam ‘Ali al-Rida (a.s.) to the
caliph al-Ma’mun.

[^1]: The Qur’an: 8:58.

[^2]: The Qur’an 24:7.

[^3]: The Qur’an: 19:54.


