Upholding Justice
=================

Religion calls upon people to do justice and seriously prohibits them
from doing injustice.

Allah the Most High said: ***“Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice
and the doing of good (to others) and the giving to kindred, and He
forbids indecency, evil and rebellion; He admonishes you that you may be
mindful.”***

He also said: ***“O you who believe, when you deal with each other in
contracting a debt for a fixed time, then write it down; and let a
scribe write it down between you with justice; ... but if he who owes
the debt is unsound in understanding, or weak, or is not able to dictate
himself, let his guardian dictate with justice.”***

He also said: ***“Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their
owners and that when you judge between people you judge with justice;
surely Allah admonishes you with what is excellent; surely Allah is
Seeing, Hearing.”***

He also said: ***“O you who believe, be maintainers of justice, bearers
of witness for Allah’s sake, though it may be against your own selves or
(your) parents or near relatives; if he be rich or poor, Allah is nearer
to them both in compassion; therefore do not follow (your) low***
***desires, lest you deviate; and if you swerve or turn aside, then
surely Allah is aware of what you do.”***

He also said; ***“O you who believe, be upright for Allah, bearers of
witness with justice, and let not hatred of a people incite you not to
act equitably; act equitably, that is nearer to piety, and be careful of
(your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is Aware of what you do.”***

He also said: ***“And if two parties of the believers quarrel, make
peace between them; but if one of them acts wrongfully towards the
other, fight that one which acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah’s
command; then if it returns, make peace between them with justice and
act equitably; surely Allah loves those who act equitably.”***

He also said: ***“And give full measure and weight with justice - We do
not impose on any soul a duty except to the extent of its ability; and
when you speak, then be just though it be (against) a relative.”***

He also said: ***“And help one another in goodness and piety, and do not
help one another in sin and aggression.”***

He also said: ***“And whoever among you is unjust, We will make him
taste a great chastisement.”***

He also said: ***“And do not incline to those who are unjust, lest the
fire touch you, and you have no guardians besides Allah, then you shall
not be helped.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Indeed injustice is an evil which
brings its punishment most quickly.”*

He (S) also said: *“The best of people is he who is helpful to people;
and the worst of people is he who is harmful to people. Worse than him
is he who is respected for fear of his evil.”*

He (S) also said: *“When a man walks with a wrongdoer to support him and
he knows him to be so, he leaves faith.”*

He (S) also said: *“He who harms a believer will be harmed by Allah, and
he who grieves him will be grieved by Allah.”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“You must be
enemies of the oppressors and defenders of the oppressed.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“He who is unjust, his injustice will destroy
him.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“He who is unjust destroys himself.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“He who wrongs Allah’s servants, Allah will be his
enemy besides His servants; and he whose enemy is Allah, will be
condemned and punished in this world and the world to come.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Keep far from injustice; for it is the greatest
guilt and the gravest sin.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“The injustice of man in this world makes his
unfortunate fate of the Last Day.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“The injustice of this world brings
the darkness of the world to come.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“He who wrongs people can not be
counted as a Shi’ite (i.e. a follower of Imams).”*


