Fulfilling Promises
===================

The fulfillment of promise is a virtue, which Islam recommends. The
breaking of promise is a vice, which it prohibits.

Allah the Most High said: ***“O you who believe, why you say that which
you do not do? It is most hateful to Allah that you should say that
which you do not do.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“He who believes in Allah and the
Day of Judgement must fulfill his promises.”*

He (S) also said: *“He who has these three things should he counted a
hypocrite, even if he performs the daily prayers, observes fasting and
thinks that he is a Muslim: breach of trust, lying and breach of
promise.”*

He (S) also said: *“Anyone who does not wrong people in his behaviour
towards them, does not lie in his talks with them, and does not break
his promises to them; he is among those whose* *manliness is complete,
whose justice is manifest, whose brotherhood is indispensable, and whose
backbiting is forbidden.”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“Breach of promise
brings the hatred of Allah and of people. Allah says:* ***‘It is most
hateful to Allah that you should say that which you do not do.’***[^1]”

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“A promise which a believer makes to
his brother is a vow that has no expiation; so he who fails to fulfill
it, his failure will he counted against Allah and he will he exposed to
His hatred. Allah says:* ‘***O you who believe, why do you say that
which you do not do? It is most hateful to Allah that you should say
that which you do not do.’***[^2]*”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“A believer is a brother to his believing fellow,
an eye and a guide for him. He never betrays wrongs or tricks him, nor
does he make to him a promise which he breaks.”*

[^1]: The Qur’an 61:3.

[^2]: The Qur’an 61:2-3.


