The Purpose of the Prophets’ Mission
====================================

As everybody can clearly understand from the Holy Quran and the
traditions of Islam, an important purpose behind the mission of the
prophets, especially the Last Holy Prophet Muhammad (S), is to guide
people to the reformation of their morality and the purification of
their souls; that is to say, to make them grow through commands and
rules which guarantee their felicity and happiness in this world and the
world to come, and to protect them against wickedness, psychological
difficulties and ill-treatment.

Allah the Most High said: ***“Even as We have sent to you an Apostle
from among yourselves who recites to you Our communications, and
purifies you and teaches you the book and the wisdom, and teaches you
that which you did not know.” (2:151)***

He also said: ***“Certainly Allah conferred a benefit upon the believers
when He raised an Apostle from among themselves, reciting to them His
communications, and purifying them and teaching them the book and
wisdom, surely before that they are in manifest error.”(3:164)***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“I was not sent but to perfect good
behaviour.”*

He (S) also said: *“Keep on practicing good ethics; because, for such
Allah has sent me.”*

Imam Ali the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) said: *“O people! When
Allah created men, He wanted them to obtain valuable qualities and noble
behaviour. He knew that it could not happen except by explaining what is
good and what is bad; which in actuality He has explained through
religious commands and prohibitions.”*


