Trustworthiness
===============

Trustworthiness to the good and to the bad is one of the Islamic duties
and all Muslims are required to keep it carefully.

Allah the Most High said: ***“But if one of you trusts another, then he
who is trusted should deliver his trust, and let him be careful (of his
duty to) Allah, his Lord.”***

He also said: ***“Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their
owners.”***

He also said: ***“Successful indeed are the believers... Those who are
keepers of their trusts and their covenant.”***

He also said: ***“Surely Allah does not love the treacherous.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“There is no belief for him who is
not trustworthy.”*

He (S) also said: *“He who is unfaithful to a trust and does not deliver
it to its owner until he passes away, his death is with a religion other
than what I brought and Allah will meet him angrily.”*

He (S) also said: *“Don’t he unfaithful to anything that anybody
deposits with you and trusts you with,* ***‘Surely Allah commands you to
make over trusts to their owners.’***[^1]*”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“A Muslim is not
untrustworthy when trusted with something nor does he break a promise
which he makes.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Keep away from untrustworthiness; for it is the
worst sin and he who has it will be punished in hell.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Keep away from untrustworthiness, for it is an
opposition to Islam.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“O Kumail, we do not permit anyone to break
trusts. He who quotes us otherwise, he is wrong and sinful, and he will
be punished for his forging of lies. I swear that the Messenger of Allah
told me at his death thrice: ‘Be trustworthy to the good and to the bad
in small and large things even in needles and thread.’”*

Imam ‘Ali Zayn al-’Abidin (a.s.) said: *“Keep on being trustworthy; I
swear by Him who sent Muhammad (S) as a truthful Prophet, that if the
man who killed my father (al-Husain) deposits his dagger with me, I will
certainly make it over to him.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“Be pious and trustworthy to anyone
who deposits a trust with you. Indeed, if the killer of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.)
deposits anything with me, I will make it over to him.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Be trustworthy, even to the killer of Imam
al-Husain (a.s.).”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Keep en ‘being pious, trustworthy and truthful.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Three things must be regarded in any case:
trustworthiness to the good and to the bad, keeping covenants for the
good and the bad, and doing good to parents whether they are good or
had.”*

[^1]: The Qur’an 4:58.


