Some General Rules for Transactions
===================================

Allah the Most High said: ***“Woe to the defrauders who, when they take
the measure (of their dues) from men, take it fully, but when they
measure out to others or weigh out for them, they are deficient. Do not
these think that they shall be raised again on a Mighty Day?”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“He who deceives harms or betrays a
Muslim cannot be counted as a Muslim.”*

He (S) also said: *“He who deceives a Muslim in buying or selling, he is
not of us; and on the Day of Judgement he will be among Jews; because
they are the most deceitful group to Muslims.”*

He (S) also said: *“Anyone who passes a night intending a deception on
his Muslim brother, he passes that night and the day after it in the
anger of Allah until he repents; and if he dies, his death is with a
religion other than Islam.”*

He (S) also said: *“Trickery, cheating and dishonesty cause the fire (of
hell).”*

He (S) also said: *“He who is a Muslim abstains from trickery and
cheating.”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“O businessmen,
First religious jurisprudence, then business! First religious
jurisprudence, then business! I swear by Allah that usury in the Islamic
community is more hidden than the trail of the ants on granite. Have
your oaths accompanied with truthfulness. Businessmen are sinful, and
the sinful are in the fire; except those who take what is lawful and
give what is lawful.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“O businessmen, be careful of your duty to
Allah... Refrain from oaths, abstain from telling- lies, avoid
oppressing others, be just to the oppressed, do not draw near to usury;*
***‘Give full measure and weight fairly, and defraud not men their
property, and do not act corruptly in the land, making
mischief.’***”[^1]

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“Keep on being truthful in your
speech, do not hide any deficiency in your goods, do not cheat any one
who trusts you, because this action is forbidden, do not want for people
any thing which you do not want for yourself, give what is lawful and
take what is lawful and do not wrong anyone... Businessmen are sinful,
and the sinful are in the fire; except those who take what is lawful and
give what is lawful.”*

Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s.) said: *“Selling in the shadows is a kind of
fraud and fraud is not lawful.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Cursed be any one who defrauds, cheats or tricks
a Muslim.”*

[^1]: The Qur’an 11:85.


