Benevolence
===========

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Anyone who wants to be far from
fire and enter paradise, his life should end while he still confesses
that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah and while he seeks to behave with people in the same manner that
he expects them to behave with him.”*

He (S) also said: *“One of the rights of Muslims is to like for each
other the good things that they like for themselves and to dislike for
each other the bad things that they dislike for themselves.”*

He (S) also said: *“The worst of people with Allah on the Day of
Judgement are the two-faced.”*

He (S) also said: *“The worst of people are the two-faced and the
double-tongued.”*

Imam ‘Ali Zayn al-’Abidin (a.s.) said: *“The rights of your
co-religionist is to intend for him peace and mercy... and to like for
him what you like for yourself and to dislike for him what you dislike
for yourself.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“Love your Muslim brother. Like for
him what you like for yourself and dislike for him what you dislike for
yourself.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“I advise you to be careful of your
duty to Allah and to do good to your Muslim brother and to like for him
what you like for yourself and to dislike for him what you dislike for
yourself.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Anyone who meets believers with two faces and two
tongues, he will have two flames on the Day of Judgement.”*

Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s.) said: *“Bad people are the two-faced and the
double-tongued: they who praise their brethren in their presence and
backbite them in their absence; they who envy their brethren for their
favours and abase them in their afflictions.”*


