Resisting Anger
===============

Islam warns against inappropriate anger, and considers it a dangerous
vice. It recommends the suppression of anger.

Allah the Most High said: ***“And hasten to forgiveness from your Lord,
and a Garden, the extensiveness of which is (as) the heavens and the
earth; it is prepared for those who spend (benevolently) in ease as well
as in straitness, and those who restrain (their) anger and pardon men,
and Allah loves the doers of good (to others).”***

He also said: ***“So whatever thing you are given, that is only a
provision of this world’s life, and what is with Allah is better and
more lasting for those who believe and rely on their Lord. And those who
shun the grave sins and indecencies, and whenever they are angry they
forgive.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Anger corrupts faith in the same
way that vinegar destroys honey.”*

He (S) also said: *“Any one who suppresses an anger which could be
brought into operation and is patient, Allah will give him the reward of
a martyr.”*

He (S) also said: *“Any one who suppresses an anger which could be
brought into operation, Allah will give him a security and a tasteful
faith in return for it.”*

He (S) also said: *“The wisest of people is he who is the most moderate,
and the most provident of people is he who suppersses his anger the
most.”*

He (S) also said: *“Indeed, by patience one can attain the position of
him who prays at nights and observes fasting on days.”*

He (S) also said: *“Among the best paths to Allah are the suppression of
anger and having patience with afflictions.”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“Anger is a vice
that, when followed, causes destruction.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Anger is an enemy of yours, so do not admit it
into your soul.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Anger paralyses the intellect, and keeps you away
from truth.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Beware of anger, for it is a blazing fire.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Be far from anger, because it begins with madness
and ends with sorrow.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“What a bad fellow anger is! It shows
deficiencies, creates evil and annihilates good.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“He who is overcome by anger and lust, his
position is like that of animals.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“Indeed, Allah loves the modest and
the patient.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Any one who restrains his anger from people,
Allah will restrain the punishment of the Day of Judgement from him.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“Anger is a key to all bad deeds.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Any one who has no control over his anger has no
control over his intellect.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Any one who suppresses his anger, Allah will add
to his honour and authority in this world and the world to come.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Any one who suppresses an anger which could be
brought into operation, Allah will fill his heart with His pleasing till
the Day of Judgement.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Any one who suppresses an anger which could be
brought into operation, Allah will fill his heart with security and
faith till the Day of Judgement.”*


