Fair Speech
===========

Religion recommends fair speech and prohibits abuse. Abuse is a vice
that causes hatred.

Allah the Most High said: ***“And you shall speak to men good words.”***

He also said: ***“Kind speech and forgiveness is better than charity
followed by injury; and Allah is self-sufficient, forbearing. O you, who
believe! Do not make your charity worthless by reproach and injury.”***

He also said: ***“And do not give away your property, which Allah has
made for you a (means of) support, to the weak of understanding, and
maintain them out of (the profits of) it, and clothe them and speak to
them words of honest advice.”***

He also said: ***“And when there are present at the apportionment
relatives and the orphans and the needy, give them (something) out of it
and speak to them kind words.”***

He also said: ***“And let those fear who, should they leave behind them
weakly offspring, would fear on their account; so let them be careful of
(their duty to) Allah, and let them speak right words.”***

He also said: ***“And say to My servants (that) they speak that which is
best; surely Satan sows dissension among them; surely Satan is an enemy
to man.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Surely of the most wicked people
are those whom others hate because of their abuse.”*

He (S) also said: *“Surely Allah abhors those who are impudent and
abusive.”*

He (S) also said: *“He whose tongue people hate will go to hell.”*

He (S) also said: *“The most wicked is he whom people respect for fear
of his ill-treatment and to remain safe from the harm of his abuse.”*

He (S) also said: *“The worst of people with Allah on the Day of
Judgement are those whom people honour for fear of their wickedness.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“Tell people the best of what you
expect them to tell you.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“My followers, be an ornament for us,
and do not be a shame on us; tell people good words; guard your tongues
and keep them back from idle talk and evil words.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Fear Allah and keep your tongues except from fair
speech.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Surely impudence, abuse and shrewdness are of the
signs of hypocrisy.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Surely the most hated man with Allah is he whose
tongue people fear.”*


