Maintaining Brotherhood and Avoiding Hatred
===========================================

Enmity and hatred are among bad characteristics prohibited in Islam, and
they sometimes result in other vices such as backbiting, lying,
accusing, scorning, abuse, offence, injustice, envy and niggardliness.
They destroy man in this world and in the hereafter.

Allah the Most High said: ***“And let not hatred of a people – because
they hindered you from the Sacred Mosque – incite you to exceed the
limits.”***

He also said: ***“And let not hatred of a people incite you not to act
equitably; act equitably that is nearer to piety.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Do not sever your relations even
with those who break them with you.”*

He (S) also said: *“Indeed, hating each other causes uprooting, not of
your hair, but of your faith.”*

He (S) also said: *“No Muslim is permitted to break with his brother for
three days; he who returns first will enter paradise first.”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“Give up envy,
lying and hatred; because these three bring shame to religion and
destroy man.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“When two men of our follower are
in a conflict and have broken with each other, the wronged one between
them should go to his fellow and say: ‘My brother, the fault lies with
me,’ so that they become friendly. Surely Allah is a good Judge; He will
administer justice to the wronged one.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Magnify your fellows and pay tribute to them. Do
not argue with each other; do not harm each other; do not envy each
other; keep away from niggardliness; and be sincere servants to Allah,”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“If a Muslim comes to another Muslim to visit him
or for a request to be granted and asks permission at his house and is
not received or met, on the latter is the curse of Allah until they
meet.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“He who sows the seeds of hatred will
reap his sowing.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“A believer is a gift of Allah to his Muslim
brother; so if the latter makes him happy and befriends him, it is
considered as the acceptance of Allah’s gift; but if he breaks with him
and hates him, it is considered as the rejection of Allah’s gift.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Allah never accepts the good deeds of any
believer who intends an improper action for his Muslim brother.”*

Imam ‘Ali al-Rida (a.s.) said: *“The believers are like brothers who
have the same parents. He is cursed, he is cursed, he who accuses his
brother; he is cursed, he is cursed, he who deceives his brother; he is
cursed, he is cursed, he who does not intend good for his brother; he is
cursed, he is cursed, he who hides himself from his brother; he is
cursed, he is cursed, he who backbites his brother.”*


