Reformation of the Mind
=======================

The most important pillar for the reformation of individuals is the
reformation of their minds. If man’s actions are for the sake of Allah
the Almighty and to show obedience to Him, or at least, to obtain the
reward of the world to come and to be saved from its punishment, they
will bring about well-being and felicity in both the worlds for him, and
he will he fruitful for the society, On the contrary, if his actions are
only for material goals, they will not have elevated results.

Indeed the most excellent aim behind people’s efforts is that which is
for the pleasure of Allah, the Most High. A society with such a
prominent goal does not yield to any kind of aggression and
transgression, nor does it surrender to immorality. For this reason the
Holy Quran and the Islamic traditions lay stress on the reformation of
the mind.

Allah the Most High said: ***“Surely sincere obedience is due to Allah
(alone).” (39:3)***

He also said: ***“And they are not enjoined anything except that they
should serve Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience, to be upright,
keep the prayer and pay the poor-rate; and that is the right religion.”
(98:5)***

He also said: ***“Whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he should do good
deeds, and not join any one in the service of his Lord.” (18:110)***

He also said: ***“And among men is he who sells himself to seek the
pleasure of Allah; and Allah is Affectionate to (His) servants.”
(2:207)***

He also said: ***“And the parable of those who spend their property to
seek the pleasure of Allah and for the certainty of their souls is as
the parable of a garden on an elevated ground, upon which heavy rain
falls, so it brings its fruit twofold; but if heavy rain does not fall
upon it, then light rain (is sufficient); and Allah sees what you
do.”(2:265)***

He also said: ***“And whatever good thing you spend, it is to your own
good; and you do not spend but to seek Allah’s pleasure; and whatever
good thing you spend shall be paid back to you in full, and you shall
not be wronged.” (2:272)***

He also said: ***“There is no good in most of their secret councils
except (for he) who enjoins charity or goodness or reconciliation
between people; and whoever does this seeking Allah’s pleasure, We will
give him a mighty reward.”(4:114)***

He also said: ***“Whoever desires the gain of the hereafter, We will
give him more of that again; and whoever desires the gain of this world,
We give him of it, and in the hereafter he has no portion.”(42:20)***

He also said: ***“Whoever desires this world’s life and its finery, We
will pay them in full their deeds therein, and they shall not be made to
suffer loss in respect of them. These are they for*** ***whom there is
nothing but fire in the hereafter and what they wrought in it shall go
for nothing, and vain is what they do.”(11:15-16)***

He also said: ***“Whoever desires this present life, We hasten to him
therein what We please for whomsoever We desire, then We assign to him
hell; he shall enter it despised, driven away. And whoever desires the
hereafter and strives for it as he ought to strive and he is a believer;
(as for) these, their striving shall surely be accepted.”(17:18-19)***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Indeed, actions are evaluated with
intentions, and man is rewarded due to his mind. So if one sets out for
jihad to make Allah pleased with him, one will have what is with Allah;
and if one goes to the battle-fronts for material benefits or spoils,
one will not have more than that.”*

He (S) also said: *“Any one who learns a science to attract the
attention of people to himself will not scent the odor of paradise.”*

He (S) also said: *“Indeed, every truth has a reality; and a servant of
Allah does not attain the reality of sincerity except when he does not
like to be praised for anything he does for Allah.”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“Salvation can be
obtained by sincerity alone.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“If a servant of Allah performs a
religious duly for His sake and for the world to come, but he mixes it
up with someone else’s pleasure, he makes the latter a partner with
Allah.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“Surely Allah will raise people on
the Day of Judgement according to their state of mind.”*

Concerning ***“Whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he should do good deeds,
and not join anyone in the service of his Lord,”***[^1] he (a.s.) said:
*“When somebody does a righteous work not for the sake of Allah, but for
self-praise, so that the people may hear of it, he has fallen into shirk
(polytheism).”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Any one who learns the traditions of religion for
the benefit of this world, will not have any share in the world to come.
But anyone who learns them for the reward in the world to come, Allah
will give him in both the worlds.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“All kinds of showing off of one’s spiritual deeds
are shirk (polytheism). Indeed, anyone who works for people, his reward
is with people; and anyone who works for Allah his reward is with
Allah.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Allah says:* ***‘I am the Most Independent of
partners; so I accept of the people’s actions those which are for Me
alone’.**”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Your sincere action is that for which you want to
be praised by no one except by Allah.”*

[^1]: The Qur’an, 9: 110.


