Despising Backbiting
====================

One of the actions severely prohibited in Islam is backbiting.
Backbiting is to narrate and display a deficiency or the negative action
of (believing person, which he would not like to be disclosed. On the
other hand, to disclose something, which is evident, which the doer
himself does not hide is not forbidden. Also if an oppressed person
narrates about the oppressive actions of his oppressor or if someone
speaks about a person who has made an innovation in religion, it is not
forbidden. There are other instances where narrating the negative
qualities of someone is not forbidden and they are discussed in books of
Islamic law. Listening to backbiting is also forbidden and the listener
should defend the victim.

Allah the Most High said: ***“O you, who believe, avoid most of
suspicion, for surely suspicion in some cases is a sin, and do not spy
nor let some of you back-bite others. Does one of you like to eat the
flesh of his dead brother? Verily you abhor it; and be careful of (your
duty to) Allah, surely Allah is Oft-returning (to mercy), Merciful.”***

He also said: ***“Surely those who love that scandal should circulate
respecting those who believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement in
this world and the hereafter; and Allah knows, while you do not
know.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Backbiting is worse than
fornication.”* He was asked: “O Messenger of Allah, why is it so?” He
(S) replied: *“The fornicator may repent and Allah accept his
repentance; but although the backbiter may repent, Allah will never
accept his repentance until his victim pardons him.”*

He (S) also said: *“I swear by Allah besides Whom there is no god, that
no believer can ever attain the benefits of this world and the world to
come except by his good opinion of Allah, hope, good nature and
abstaining from backbiting of the believers. I swear by Allah besides
Whom there is no god, that no repenting believer will be punished except
for his suspicion about Allah, despair, ill nature and backbiting of the
believers. I swear by Allah besides Whom there is no god, that no
believing servant has a good opinion of Allah except He will behave duly
towards His believing servant. For Allah is generous and graceful, When
His believing servant has a good opinion of Him, He does not fail to do
according to it. So have a good opinion of Allah and wish for Him.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“Anyone who narrates about a believer
what his eyes have seen and his ears have heard, he is of those about
whom Allah has said:* ***‘Surely those who love that scandal should
circulate respecting those who believe, they shall have a grievous
chastisement in this world and the hereafter.’**”*


