Avoiding False Accusations
==========================

False accusation is worse than backbiting. It is to falsely attribute a
deficiency or an offence to a believing person. It is certain that this
transgression is the most wicked of attacks upon the prestige of a
believer.

Allah the Most High said: ***“And whoever commits a fault or a sin, then
accuses of it one innocent, he indeed takes upon himself the burden of a
calumny and a manifest sin.”***

He also said: ***“Surely (as for) those who speak evil of Allah and His
Apostle, Allah has cursed them in this world and the hereafter, and He
has prepared for them a chastisement bringing disgrace.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Backbiting is speaking about your
brother what he does not like to be mentioned.”* And he added: *“Know
that if you mention what is actually in him, this is backbiting; and if
you mention what is not actually in him, this is a false accusation.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“Backbiting is saying about your
brother what Allah has hidden for him. But mentioning what is not
hidden, for example, a coarse personality or hastiness, which is open
characteristics, is not backbiting. However false accusation is
mentioning negative qualities that are not in him.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Anyone who falsely accuses a believer, male or
female, of what is not in him on the Day he will be raised he will
remain in ‘tinat khabal’ until he is released from it.”* Someone asked:
“What is tinat khabal?” He (a.s.) said: *“It is a kind of pus that is
secreted from the sexual organs of prostitutes.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Anyone who falsely accuses a believer Allah will
imprison him in the pus from the sexual organs of prostitutes, until he
is released from what he said.”* He also added: *“Backbiting is saying
about your brother what Allah had hidden for him; but if you say what is
not in him, then it is what Allah said in His Book:* ***‘He indeed takes
upon himself the burden of a calumny and a manifest sin.’***[^1]*”*

[^1]: The Qur’an 4:112.


