Peace and Reconciliation
========================

Not only does Islam forbid all kinds of aggression and injury between
individuals (as we have observed until now), but also it teaches that
individuals in the society are brothers to each other and they must
observe peace and reconciliation among themselves. They must help and
assist each other in securing the good things of life whether material
or spiritual. According to Islam people are like the members of one
family: the old men and women are like our parents, the youth are like
our brothers and sisters, and the young ones are like our children.
Furthermore, in goodness, kindness, compassion and mutual help they must
be like members of one body, such that when one of its members is
hurting, the other members are concerned.

Believers must be friends, helpers and guides to each other. They must
be concerned about each other’s situation, be beneficent, benevolent and
servants to each other. They must work hard to fulfill each other’s
needs and like for their brothers what they like for themselves, and
dislike for them what they dislike for themselves.

Allah the Most High said: ***“The believers are but brethren, therefore
make peace between your brethren and be careful of (your duty to) Allah
that mercy may be had on you.”***

He also said: ***“There is no good in most of their secret councils
except (in his) who enjoins charity or goodness or reconciliation
between people; and whoever does this, seeking Allah’s pleasure, We will
give him a mighty reward.”***

He also said: ***“And help one another in goodness and piety, and do not
help one another in sin and aggression; and be careful (of your duty to)
Allah; surely Allah is severe in requiting (evil).”***

He also said: ***“And (as for) the believing men and the believing
women, they are guardians of each other; they enjoin good and forbid
evil and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate, obey Allah and His
Apostle; (as for) these, Allah will show mercy to them; surely Allah is
Mighty, Wise.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Anyone who goes to make peace
between two persons, the angels of Allah send blessings upon him until
he returns and he will be given the reward of the Night of Destiny
(Laylat al-Qadr).”*

He (S) also said: *“Anyone who enters the morning not concerned about
the affairs of the Muslims, he is not a Muslim. And anyone who hears one
who says: ‘O Muslims!’ and he does not respond to him, he is not a
Muslim.”*

He (S) also said: *“People are the dependents of Allah; so the most
beloved by Allah is he who benefits the dependents of Allah most.”*

He (S) also said: *“People are all the dependents of Allah; so the most
beloved by Allah is he who benefits them most.”*

He (S) also said: *“The best of people is he from whom people benefit”*

He (S) also said: *“Surely the greatest of people in status to Allah on
the Day of Resurrection is the one who travels most on the earth in the
path of benevolence to the people,”*

He (S) also said: *“Each one of you should be benevolent to his brother
as he is to himself.”*

He (S) also said: *“The believers are brothers, some of them fulfill the
needs of others and by virtue of fulfilling each other’s needs, Allah
will fulfill their needs on the Day of Resurrection.”*

He (S) also said: *“Accompanying a Muslim brother for the satisfaction
of his needs is more beloved to Allah than two months retreat (i’tikaf)
in the Masjid al-Haram.”*

He (S) also said: *“Believers in doing good to each other and in being
merciful and compassionate to each other are like one body. When one
part is in pain the other parts echo its distress in sleeplessness and
fever.”*

Imam ‘Ali Zayn al-’Abidin (a.s.) said: *“And the rights of your brother
in religion is to intend peace and mercy for him... and that the aged
must be like your parents, the youth like your brothers and sisters, and
the young ones must be like your children.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“A believer is a brother to his
believing fellow, an eye and a guide for him. He never betrays wrongs or
tricks him, nor does he make to him a promise which he breaks.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“A Muslim is a brother to another: he is his eye,
his mirror and his guide; he does not betray, cheat, or oppress him;
neither does he tell him a lie or backbite him.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“The Messenger of Allah was asked: ‘Who is the
most beloved of Allah’.’’ He said: “The most beneficial of people to the
people.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Continue being benevolent for the sake of Allah
towards His people; for you will never find any action more meritorious
than it.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“It is incumbent upon a believer to be benevolent
to other believers, whether in their presence or their absence.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Believers are servants one to another.”* He was
asked how they could be servants to each other. He replied: *“Some of
them are beneficial to others.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Accompanying a Muslim in order to satisfy the
latter’s needs is better than seventy circumambulations of the Ka’bah.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Surely satisfying the needs of a believing man is
more beloved to Allah than twenty pilgrimages (hajj) in each of which
one pays a large amount of money.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Allah the Almighty says: people are My dependent;
and the most beloved of people to Me is the one who is most merciful of
them to them and the one who is the most diligent in fulfilling their
needs.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Anyone who is diligent in fulfilling the needs of
his Muslim brother and he does his best in accomplishing it and Allah
makes him successful in satisfying it, such a person. Allah will record
for him the reward of one pilgrimage (hajj). One minor pilgrimage
(‘umrah), two months retreat (i’tikaf) in the Masjid al-Haram and two
months of fasting. Bui if he tries until Allah does not let him he
successful in satisfying if, Allah will record for him one pilgrimage
and one minor pilgrimage.”*

Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s.) said: *“Surely Allah has some servants in the
earth who try to satisfy the needs of people. They are those who are
safe on the Day of Resurrection; and he who cause happiness for a
believer. Allah will make his heart happy on the Day of Resurrection.”*

Imam Hasan al-’Askari (a.s.) said: *“There are two merits above which
nothing is higher: belief in Allah and the benefiting of brothers.”*


