Exhorting Good and Forbidding Wrong
===================================

One of the great commands and everlasting obligations of Islamic society
is exhorting good and forbidding wrong. This command leads to well-being
and felicity in this world and the hereafter, and other religious laws
and obligations are established upon it.

Allah the Most High said: ***“And from among you there should be a party
who invite to good and enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and
these are the ones that shall be successful.”***

He also said: ***“Of the followers of the Book there is an upright
party; they recite Allah’s communications in the night-time and they
adore (Him). They believe in Allah and the Last Day, and they enjoin
what is right and forbid the wrong, and they strive with one another in
hastening to good deeds, and those are among the good.”***

He also said: ***“Why do not the learned men and the doctors of law
(among Jews) prohibit them from their speaking of what is sinful and
eating of what is unlawfully acquired? Certainly evil is that which they
work.”***

He also said: ***“And surely Allah will help him who helps His cause;
most surely Allah is Strong, Mighty. Those who, should We establish them
in the land, will keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and enjoin good
and forbid evil; and Allah’s is the end of affairs.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“When my people shirk the
responsibility of exhorting good and forbidding wrong and say that
another should do it, they must wait for an affliction from Allah the
Exalted.”*

He (S) also said: *“Surely Allah abhors any weak believer who is a
coward, that is, he does not forbid what is wrong.”*

He (S) also said: *“It is forbidden for any believing eye which sees
that Allah is disobeyed, to shut itself to it unless it changes the
situation.”*

He (S) also said: *“You should exhort good and forbid wrong or else the
punishment of Allah will cover you all.”*

He (S) also said: *“My people are in felicity as long as they exhort
good and forbid wrong and help each other in doing good. If they do not
do this, grace will be taken away from them and some of them will get to
dominate over the others, and there will be no help for them in the
earth or in the heavens.”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“Do not abandon
enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong lest the wicked
among yourselves dominate over you. In that case you will supplicate to
Allah and He will not respond to you.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“What an evil people are they who
oppose enjoining good and forbidding wrong.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Surely exhorting good and forbidding wrong are
the path of the prophets and the method of the virtuous. They are major
obligations upon which the other obligations* *are established, ways are
made secure, trade is made lawful, things that which have been usurped
are returned, the earth becomes civilized, one can combat the enemy, and
affairs are corrected.*

*So you must hate and deny evil in your hearts, denounce it with your
tongues, forbid it with your hands, and do not fear the blame of anyone
in this regard for the sake of Allah. If the wrongdoers stop and return
to right action, then you will have no power over them.* ***‘The way (to
blame) is only against those who oppress men and revolt in the earth
unjustly; these shall have a painful chastisement.’***[^1]

*“So you should oppose them by your organs and abhor them in your hearts
while not seeking power or victory over them, nor any profit until they
return to obeying the commands of Allah and continue with obeying Him.”*

He (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“Woe upon a people who
do not obey Allah through enjoining right and forbidding evil.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“A man came to the Messenger of Allah
and said: ‘My mother is not a chaste woman.’ The Prophet (S) said: ‘Do
not let her out.’ The man said: ‘I did so, but it was not sufficient.’
The Messenger (S) said: “Then prevent people from coming to visit her.’
He said: ‘I did so, but it was not sufficient.’ The Prophet (S) said:
‘Imprison her; because you cannot do any better good to her than
preventing her from committing a grave (mortal) sin in front of Allah
the Almighty.”*

[^1]: The Qur’an 42:42.


