Defending Religion and Society
==============================

According to Islamic teachings, people must form a firm and unified rank
like a compact wall to defend their principles and rights. In addition
to unity, which is the basis for power, glory and success, they must be
equipped with the technology of their time to deter enemy attacks.

Allah the Most High said: ***“And obey Allah and His Apostle and do not
quarrel, for then you will be weak in hearts and your power will depart,
and be patient; surely Allah is with the patient.”***

He also said: ***“And fight in the way of Allah with those who fight
with you, and do not exceed the limits, surely Allah does not love those
who exceed the limits.”***

He also said: ***“Whoever then acts aggressively against you, inflict
injury on him according to the injury he has inflicted on you and be
careful of (your duty to) Allah and know that Allah is with those who
guard (against evil).”***

He also said: ***“And prepare against them what force you can and horses
tied at the frontier, to frighten thereby the enemy of Allah and your
enemy and others besides them, whom you do not know (but) whom Allah
knows; and whatever thing you will pay in Allah’s way, it will he paid
back to you fully and you will not be dealt with unjustly.”***

He also said: ***“Surely Allah loves those who fight in His way in ranks
as if they were a firm and compact wall.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Believers are brethren, their
lives are equal to each other and they are as one hand against their
enemy.”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“The troops by the
leave of Allah are the fortresses of the citizenry, the glory of their
rulers, the might of the religion, the means of security, and society
cannot survive without them.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“Surely Allah does abhor a servant
when an enemy invades his home and he does not fight him.”*


