Avoiding Hidden Shirk (Polytheism)
==================================

A) Shirk through Showing off
----------------------------

Islam does not allow showing off in worship and considers it as a cause
of making actions void and useless. It is a kind of shirk (polytheism).

If man’s actions are for the sake of Allah and to show obedience to Him,
to be thankful to Him, to come near to His glory, to acquire his mercy
and love, or at least, to obtain the reward of the world to come and to
be saved from its punishment, they will he correct and fruitful; but if
they are for the sake of other than Allah and to get some material
benefit, such as fame, importance, status, etc., they will be in vain
and will he fruitless.

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) was asked: ‘How could one obtain the
salvation of the Day of Judgement?’ He (S) answered: *“Salvation is that
you should not try to deceive Allah; lest He should return your
deception to you; for anyone who tries to cheat Allah, will he cheated
by Him and He will take the faith away from him. In this case man
deceives his own self, and he does not know.”*

He (S) was asked again: ‘How does a man try to deceive Allah?’ He (S)
answered: *“A person performs what Allah has ordered him, but he is
concerned about other than Him”.*

*“Fear Allah in showing off; because it is a kind of shirk (polytheism).
On the Day of Judgement he who shows off will be called with four names:
O wicked, O disbeliever, O deceitful, O loser, your work came to nothing
and your reward was lost. No salvation awaits you. Go and ask the one
for whom you have worked for salvation.”*

He (S) was asked for the interpretation of ***“Whoever hopes to meet his
Lord, he should do good deeds, and not join any one in the service of
his Lord.”***[^1] He (S) said: *“Any one who prays to show off is a
mushrik; any one who gives alms to show off is a mushrik; any one who
fasts to show off is a mushrik; any one who sets out for hajj
(pilgrimage) for showing off is a mushrik; any one who performs any duty
which Allah has commanded for showing off is a mushrik; and Allah will
never accept the work of him who shows off.”*

B) Shirk through Obedience
--------------------------

When one obeys other than Allah and disobeys Him, one falls into the
shirk (polytheism) through obedience.

Allah the Most High said: ***“And most of them do not believe in Allah
without associating others (with Him).”(12:106)*** [It means that, they,
in spite of their religious faith, obey Satan].

He also said: ***“And they have taken gods besides Allah that they
should be to them a source of strength. By no means! They shall soon
deny their worshipping them, and they shall be adversaries to
them.”(19:81-82)***

He also said: ***“They have taken their doctors of law and their monks
for lords besides Allah.”(9:31)***

He also said: ***“Have you seen him who takes his low desires for his
god?”(25:43)***

He also said: ***“Say: ‘O followers of the Book, come to an equitable
proposition between us and you that we shall not serve any but Allah and
(that) we shall not associate aught with Him, and (that) some of us
shall not take others for lords besides Allah;’ but if they turn back,
then say: Bear witness that we are Muslims.”***

He also said: ***“Did I not charge you, O children of Adam, that you
should not serve Satan? Surely he is your open enemy. And that you
should serve Me; this is the right way.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“No obedience to any creature is
allowed when it is a disobedience to the Creator.”*

Concerning ***“And most of them do not believe in Allah without
associating (with Him),”***[^2] Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: *“It
implies attributing partners in obedience, and not in worship. The sins
that people commit are of this category; in this case they obey Satan
and make him a partner with Allah in obedience.”*

Concerning this Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“It is attributing
partners in obedience and not in worship. A man obeys Satan without
knowing that; so he becomes a mushrik (polytheist).”*

Concerning ***“And they have taken gods besides Allah, that they should
be to them a source of strength. By no means! They shall soon deny their
worshipping them, and they shall be adversaries to them,”***[^3] Imam
Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“The word ‘Worship’ here does not mean
bowing and prostrating for prayer; rather, it is obedience to men.
Anyone who obeys a creature and disobeys the Creator actually ‘worships’
him.”*

In his epistle to the caliph al-Ma’mun, Imam ‘Ali al-Rida (a.s.) wrote:
*“To do good to the parents is a religious duty, even if they are
disbelievers. But when it is a cause for the disobedience of Allah
neither they nor other people should be obeyed. Because no obedience to
any creature is allowed when it is a disobedience to the Creator.”*

C) Shirk through Favours
------------------------

When one is limited in vision and, in the interpretation of each
phenomenon, concentrates on its natural causes in a manner which ignores
the will of Allah, one falls into this kind of shirk (Polytheism).

Concerning ***“And most of them do not believe in Allah without
associating others (with Him),”***[^4] Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) and
Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“It is attributing partners unto Him
in favours which are given to man.”*

Concerning the same ayat, Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) again said: *“It
is about him who says: ‘If such and such were not there, I or my family
would have perished or afflicted by misfortune as you see, he considers
a partner for Allah who provides for him and protects him.”*

The Imam (a.s.) was asked about phrases like this: ***“***Had not Allah
conferred me of His favour through such and such, I or my family would
have perished, etc.” He (a.s.) said: *“There is no blemish in an
expression like this.”*

Imam ‘Ali al-Rida (a.s.) said: *“That is a kind of shirk (polytheism)
which is less than disbelief.”*

[^1]: The Quran 18:110.

[^2]: The Qur’an 12:106.

[^3]: The Qur’an 20:81-82.

[^4]: The Qur’an 12:106.


