Observing Family Ties
=====================

Islam in commanding doing good to others, especially emphasizes doing
good to parents and relatives, and has recommended them before others.

Acting against their wishes or not loving them is a grave (mortal) sin.
A believer should never annoy or sever his relationship with his parents
or other relatives. These actions cause the punishment of God in this
world and in the world to come.

Allah the Most High said: ***“And serve Allah and do not associate any
thing with Him, and be good to the parents and to the near of kin and to
the orphans and the needy and the neighbour of (your) kin and the alien
neighbour, and the companion on a journey and the way-farer and to those
whom your right hands possess; surely Allah does not love him who is
proud, boastful.”***

He also said: ***“And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve
(any) but Him and goodness to your parents. If either or both of them
reach old age with you, say not to them (so much as) “Ugh” nor chide
them, and speak to them a generous word. And make yourself***
***submissively gentle to them with compassion, and say: O my Lord, have
compassion on them, as they brought me up (when I was) little.”***

Praising the Prophet Yahya (John) (a.s.) He said: ***“And he was dutiful
to his parents and he was not insolent, disobedient.”***

He also said: ***“Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the
doing of good (to others) and the giving to kindred, and He forbids
indecency and evil and rebellion; He admonishes you that you may he
mindful.”***

He also said: ***“And be careful of (your duty to) Allah, by whom you
demand one of another (your rights), and (to) the ties of relationship;
surely Allah ever watches over you.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Shun displeasing your parents so
much that they disclaim you, because the perfume of paradise can be
scented from the distance of 1000 years, but four types of people will
not smell it: the first is the person disclaimed by his parents; the
second is he who ignores family ties; the third is the old man who
fornicates; and the fourth is the person who, because of pride, wears
his cloths so long that they drag along the ground. Pride is proper for
Allah the Lord only.”*

He (S) also said: *“Sometimes a man might have 3 years of his life left
but because of observing family ties, Allah extends his life by 30 more
years. On the other hand, a man might have 33 years of his life left but
because he did not observe family ties, Allah will shorten his life by
30 years.”*

He (S) also said: *“Do not sever your relationship with a member of your
family even if he severs his relationship with you.”*

He (S) also said: *“When my people ignore family ties, their wealth
falls into the hands of rascals.”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“When people sever
family ties, their wealth falls into the hands of the wicked.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Surely one of the sins which hastens the coming
of death is the severance of family ties.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:
*“There are three things in which Allah does not give any permission to
any body to disregard them: trustworthiness to the good and to the bad,
keeping covenants for the good and the bad, and doing good to parents
whether they are good or bad.”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) was asked concerning: ***“And be careful of
(your duty to) Allah by whom you demand one of another (your rights),
and (to) the ties of relationship.”***[^1] He said: *“It means the
family relationship. Surely Allah the Most High has ordered it to be
regarded and has magnified it. Do you not observe that He has mentioned
it with Himself.”*

In another saying he (a.s.) listed lying among the grave (mortal) sins;
the same thing being found in an epistle of Imam ‘Ali al-Rida (a.s.) to
the caliph al-Ma’mun.

Mentioning the grave (mortal) sins, he (a.s.) included the severing of
family ties and commented that it is about such people who commit this
sin that Allah says: ***‘Upon them shall be the curse and they shall
have the evil (issue) of the abode.’***[^2]

Commenting on the Qur’an 4:1, Imam ‘Ali al-Rida (a.s.) said: *“Allah has
ordered people to be careful of their duty to Him as well as observing
family ties. A person who does not observe family ties has not been
careful of his duty to Allah.”*

[^1]: The Qur’an 4:1.

[^2]: The Qur’an 13:25.


