Yearning for the Hereafter
==========================

One matter expressly condemned in Islam is the love of the world for
itself. However, if desiring the world is for the love of God, for His
pleasure, for the hereafter or in the hope of its rewards, this is not
love for the world, but, in reality, it is the love of God and for the
world to come.

Allah the Most High said: ***“Are you contented with this world’s life
instead of the hereafter? But the provision of this world’s life
compared with the hereafter is but little.”***

He also said: ***“O men, surely the promise of Allah is true, therefore
let not the life of this world deceive you, and let not the
arch-deceiver deceive you respecting Allah.”***

He also said: ***“Know that this world’s life is only sport and play and
gaiety and boasting among yourselves, and a vying in the multiplication
of wealth and children, like the rain, whose causing the vegetation to
grow pleases the husbandmen; then it withers away so that you see it
become yellow, then it becomes dried up and broken down; and in the
hereafter is a severe chastisement and (also) forgiveness from Allah and
(His) pleasure; and this world’s life is naught but a means of
deception.”***

He also said: ***“Nay! But you love the present life, and neglect the
hereafter.”***

He also said: ***“Woe to every slanderer, defamer, who amasses wealth
and considers it a provision (against mishap). He thinks that his wealth
will make him immortal. Nay! He shall most certainly be hurled into the
crushing disaster.”***

He also said: ***“Then as for him who is inordinate, and prefers the
life of this world, then surely hell, that is the abode.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said to one of his companions: *“O Ibn
Mas’ud, what Allah has said:* ***‘That He may try you - which of you are
best in deeds,’***[^1] *means he who is the most ascetic with respect to
the world. It is the house of deception, and the home of those who will
have no home in the hereafter. The foolish hoard their wealth for it.
Surely the most stupid of people is he who seeks after the world.*

*Allah the Most High has said:* ***‘Know that this world’s life is only
sport and play and gaiety and boasting among yourselves, and a vying in
the multiplication of wealth and children, like the rain, whose causing
the vegetation to grow pleases the husbandmen; then it withers away so
that you see it become yellow, then it becomes dried up and broken down;
and in the*** ***hereafter is a severe chastisement and (also)
forgiveness from Allah and (His) pleasure; and this world’s life is
naught but a means of deception.’***[^2]”

He (S) also said: *“Anyone who loves the world harms his life to come.”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“Surely the
example of this world is like the example of a serpent whose feel is
soft but within it is a fatal poison. A wise person avoids it, but an
ignorant child is attracted to it.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“The greatest sin is the love of this world.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“If you love Allah expel the love of this world
from your hearts.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“You will never meet Allah the Glorious with an
action that is more harmful for you than the love of the world.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“The love of the world is the source of troubles
and the root of afflictions.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“The love of the world destroys the intelligence,
deafens the heart from the voice of wisdom, and causes a painful
punishment.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“In the same way that the sun and the night cannot
come together, the love of Allah and the love of this world do not come
together.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Surely this world and the hereafter are two
confronting enemies and two divergent ways; anyone who loves this world
and befriends it hates the hereafter and shuns it. They are like the
east and the west; so if anyone goes to one, he will be remote from the
other. They are like rival wives.”*

Imam ‘Ali Zayn al-’Abidin (a.s.) said: *“There is no action after
knowing Allah and His Messenger whose reward is greater than the
shunning of this world.”*

Commenting on ***“a sound heart,”***[^3] Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.)
said: *“It is a heart which is secure from the love of this world.”*

Commenting on the same phrase, he (a.s.) said: *“It means when a
believer meets his Lord and there is no one in his heart but Him.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“The love of this world is the source of all
sin.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“By Allah, anyone who loves this world can never
love Allah.”*

Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s.) said: *“The fear of the hereafter leaves the
heart of anyone who loves this world. No learned servant of Allah grows
in his love for the world without increasing his distance from Allah and
as a result, Allah’s anger upon him will increase.”*

[^1]: The Qur’an 67:2.

[^2]: The Qur’an 57:20.

[^3]: The Qur’an 26:89.


