Shunning Conceit
================

Conceit means to have an exaggerated opinion of oneself, to be pleased
with oneself, vanity, egoism; all of these because of some superiority
in one’s thought or success in one’s action. It is a harmful quality and
has been condemned and forbidden by religion. The origin of conceit in
most of people is ignorance. A conceited man has come up short in
knowing about the Lord and His greatness and in realizing his own need
and dependence on God. For this reason he is proud of his material and
spiritual capabilities and boasts about his successfulness in thought
and action. He is unaware of the fact that all kinds of perfection and
capacity as well as material favours are from God; and all sorts of good
deeds and success in man’s life come from Him.

Allah the Most High said: ***“And whatever favour is (bestowed) on you
it is from Allah.”***

He also said: ***“Say: ‘Shall We inform you of the greatest losers in
(their) deeds? (These are) those whose labour is lost in this world’s
life and they think that they are well-versed in skill of the work of
hands.”***

He also said: ***“And were it not for Allah’s grace upon you and His
mercy, not one of you would have ever been pure, but Allah purifies whom
He pleases, and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.”***

He also said: ***“Whatever benefit comes to you (O man), it is from
Allah, and whatever misfortune befalls you, it is from yourself.”***

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said: *“Three things destroy man’s spirit:
following his desires, being greedy and conceit,”*

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“Conceit is a sign
of deficiency in one’s intellect.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“It is enough for a sign of ignorance to be
conceited in knowledge.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“An evil deed which causes sorrow in your spirit
is better in Allah’s sight than a good action which brings you
conceit.”*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: “*Two men went into a mosque. One of
them was pious and the other was sinful. When they came back the pious
man was sinful and the sinful man was pious! The one who was pious
boasted about his worship and remembered his good actions; for this
reason he fell. The one who was sinful felt shame and sorrow for his
evil and bad deeds, remembering his sins and asking forgiveness from
Allah; for this reason he was purified.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Three things destroy man: magnifying his actions,
ignoring his sins and being conceited for some correct ideas,”*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“He who yields to conceit will
perish.”*

Imam Musa Al-Kazim (a.s.) said: *“Conceit has degrees. One of them is to
decorate evil actions to seem good. In this case, conceit causes man to
think he is doing good. Another variety of it comes to a believer when
he tries to remind Allah of his belief; while Allah has the right of
reminding him of His favours to him.”*


