Resisting Envy
==============

One of the most offensive vices and faults is envy. It is a feeling of
ill will and dislike for some favour given to someone and wishing it to
be removed from him. Any action, which comes from this evil motive, has
been disapproved and forbidden in religion. Another feeling which is
almost similar to this, i.e. emulation, which is accompanied by no
dislike, should not be counted a vice. The morality contrary to envy is
benevolence.

Allah the Most High said: ***“Do they envy the people for what Allah has
given them of His grace?”***

He also said: ***“And do not covet that by which Allah has made some of
you excel others; men shall have the benefit of what they earn and women
shall have the benefit of what they earn; and ask Allah of His grace;
surely Allah knows all things.”***

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the Commander of the Faithful said: *“Envy is the
master of deficiencies.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Envy is the head of vices.”*

He (a.s.) also said; *“The envious will never be in the forefront.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“The envious are ill, even if they are bodily
sound.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“The fruit of envy is troubles in this world and
in the next.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Beware of having envy; for it is the worst of
characters and the ugliest of natures.”*

Explaining the second ayat mentioned above, Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.)
said: *“It means that nobody should wish that some favour and luxury
bestowed on a certain person were given to him; but one can ask God to
be endowed with the like of it.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“The disasters of faith are envy, conceit and
pride.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Envy negates faith as quickly as the fire negates
the dry grass.”*

He (a.s.) also said: *“Believers are emulous, but not envious; and
hypocrites are envious, but not emulous.”*

He (a.s.) also said; *“Avoid the punishment of Allah and do not envy
each other.”*

Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s.) said: *“The best thing for bringing man near
to Allah, besides knowing Him, is praying, doing good to parents, and
quilting envy, conceit and pride.”*


