Introduction
============

**1. Doctrine of the Necessity for Seeking Knowledge**

We believe that Allah has endowed us with the faculty of the intellect
('aql), and that He has ordered us to ponder over His Creation, nothing
with care the signs of His power and His Glory throughout the entire
universe as well as ourselves. It is stated in the Qur'an:

We shall show them Our signs on the horizons and in themselves, till it
is clear to them that it is the Truth. (41;53) Allah has shown His
disapproved of those who blindly follow the ways of those who were
before them:

They say: "No, but we will follow such things as we found our father
doing." What! And if their fathers had no understanding of anything.
(2;170)

and he has shown his dislike for those who follow nothing but their own
personal whims:

They follow naught but an opinion.

Indeed, our intellect forces us to reflect upon Creation so as to know
the Creator of the universe, just as it makes it necessary for us to
examine the claims of someone to prophethood and to consider the truth
of his miracles. It is not correct to accept the ideas of someone
without criticism, even if that person has the gift of great knowledge
or holds an esteemed position. The reason that the Quran has urged us to
reflect upon Creation and

to study the natural world and acquire knowledge is so that it may
confirm in us mankind's instinctual freedom of thought upon which all
sages are in agreement, in other the power of human understanding and
thinking may be so enlightened that it may fulfill the function for
which it was created.

Thus it is wrong for a man to neglect the fundamentals of his faith and
to put confidence in what his instructors or other persons have said to
him. On the Contrary, it is necessary for him, on account of his natural
intellegence as confirmed in the Qur'an, to search for, examine and come
to clear understanding of the fundamentals of his religion (usul
ad-din), Prophecy (nubuwwah), the Imamate (imamah) and the Resurrection
(ma'ad). One who follows the dictates of his forbears or any other
person in these matters has, in truth, committed an error and has
wandered from the straight path, and there can be no excuse for such an
action.

In short, there are two points:

(a) that it is necessary to examine and understand the fundamentals our
beliefs and not to follow what anyone else might say.

(b) that this is a requirement that stems from reason, and not one that
we must accept the religion (i.e. such knowledge is not only to be
gained from religious texts, even if, as we have seen, it is confirmed
there, but it is also to be obtained through the exercise of the
intellect). The meaning of a requirement that stems from reason is that
reason enjoins us to acquire such knowledge and to examine these matters
for ourselves.

**2. Doctrine of the Necessity for Imitation**

(taqlid) in the Various Branches of the Religion (furu' ad-din)

By the branches of the religion we mean those religious laws which
govern our actions (shari'ah), but concerning which not everyone is

required to exercise juristic reasoning (ijtihad). However, it is the
duty of everyone to take one of the three following ways in regard to
them:

(a) he should exert himself in study until he becomes a mujtahid,
(b)he should exercise juristic precaution (ihtiyat) if he is able to,
(c) he should follow one who is a recognized mujtahid, who must be a
man of wisdom and justice, "who keeps himself from sin, not following
the dictates of his own desires, but obeying the commands of Allah"

It follows that one who is neither a mujtahid, nor exercise ihtiyat,
nor follows a mujtahid, does all the actions of his din in vain, and
that neither his prayer nor his fasting will be accepted by Allah, even
though he has carried out his duties in these matters for the whole of
his life;unless he begins to follow a mujtahid, in which case, those of
his actions prior to his following the mujtahid which were done for the
sake of Allah will be accepted.

**3. Doctrine of the Necessity for Juristic Reasoning**

We believe that ijtihad in matters of religion is a sufficient
necessity (wajib al-kifa'i) for all Muslims in the absence of the Imam.
that is to say that should one of them become proficient in ijtihad and
become a mujtahid it is enough for them to follow the mujtahid in all
the branches of the religion.

All Muslims must strive to gain knowledge and to ascend to the position
of mujtahid, or, if that is not possible. they must give all their
encouragement to one of their number to attain this position. If no-one
living holds the position of mujtahid, it is not permissible to follow a
dead mujtahid.

Ijtahid is the examination of the sources of the shar'ah to reach
knowledge of the commandments (al ahkam al-far'iyyah) which the prophet
brought with him, and which do not change or alter with changes in time
or situation according to the hadith:

What Muhammad (S.A) made halal will be able halal till the Day of
Judgement, and what he made haram will be haram till the Day of
Judgement.

These sources for the shari'ah are the Qur'an the sunnah (of the
Prophet and the Imams), concensus (ijma) and reasoning ('aql), as have
been mentioned in the texts of usul al-fiqh. Attaining the position of
mujthaid requires many years of study and acquiring knowledge, and this
is not obtained except by one who tries his utmost.

**4. Doctrine Concerning the Position of mujtahid**

We believe that a fully qualified mujtahid is a representative of the
Imam, in the case of the latter's absence. Thus he is an authority over
Muslims and he performs the functions of the Imam as regard judgement
and administration among the people. Because of this, Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq said:

To deny the authority of mujtahid is to deny the authority Imam, and to
deny the authority of the Imam is to make an objection to the authority
of Allah, and this is tantamount to polytheism (shirk).

Therefore the qualified mujtahid is not one who issues fatwas, but he
also has general authority over Muslims who must consult him if they
require judgement, this being obtainable only from him. It is
correspondingly wrong for anyone to give judgement except him or one who
is appointed by him, as no-one can pass sentence without his permission.
Also, all that which belongs to the Imam should be given to the
mujtahid.

Such authority has been bestowed upon the qualified mujtahid by the
Imam so that he may represent him in his absence ; hence he is known as
the representative of the Imam (na' ib al-imam).

PART ONE :TAWHID

**5. Doctrine of Belief in Allah**

We believe that Allah is One (wahid), Alone (ahad), Peerless (laysa
kamithlihu shay'), Eternal (qadim), Without Beginning or End; He is the
First and the Last (al-awwal wa al-akhir).He is the All-knowing
(al-'alim),the Wise (al-hakim), the Just (al-'adil), the Living
(al-hayn), the Omnipotent (al-qadir),Independent of all things
(al-ghaniy), the All Hearing (as-sami'), the All-Seeing (al-basir). He
is not to be likened to substance nor form; He is neither heavy nor
light, neither moving nor motionless ; He has no place nor any time, and
no-one can point to Him as there is nothing like Him. Nothing is equal
to Him, nor has He any opposite. He has no wife, no child, no partner
and there is none comparable to Him.

Vision does not perceive Him, yet He perceives everything. Anyone who
likens Him to His creatures, for example one who supposes that lowest
heaven, or that He will appear to the people of paradise like a moon,
and so forth, he is as one who does not believe in Allah and is ignorant
of the true nature of Allah. Who is above all deficiency. Yet everything
we imagine will be a creature like ourselves. As Imam Baqir (A.S)
said:

He is far greater than the explanation of the wise, and far beyond the
research of discriminative knowledge (ilm daqiq). Similarly, one who
believes that He will be seen by His creatures on the Day of Judgement
is an unbeliever, even though he does not liken Allah to anyone in
appearance. Such pretenders have merely accepted the letter of the
Qur'an and the hadith without using their intelligence

Indeed, they have chosen to ignore their intelligence for they have not
taken note of the use of figures of speech which the nature of language
necessitates. Thus they have misunderstood the true meaning of the
Qur'an and the hadith.

**6. Doctrine of Divine Unity (tawhid)**

We believe that Unity of Allah (tawhid) must be in all respects, just
as for His Unity of Essence (tawhid dhati) we believe that Allah must be
One in His Essence and in their Necessity of His Existence (wujub
al-wujub). Secondly, His Essence must be one with His various
attributes, as we shall explain below. Likewise, nothing is similar in
trs attributes to Him. His Knowledge and Ability are unparalleled and He
has no partner in Creation nor in Providing for His creatures; therefore
none is like Him in any of His Perfections. Thirdly, His unity must
exist in the worship of Him, and worship of any other than Him is not
permitted. Nothing must be made a partner to him in worship, whether the
worship be obligatory (e.g salat) or not (e.g. du'a'). One who ascribes
a partner to Him in worship is a polytheist, like one who pretends to be
worshipping for the sake of Allah but is in fact worshipping for the
sake of some other being. In the eyes of Islam he is kin to an idolater,
and both of them are polytheists.

However, pilgrims to scared place, such as the graves of the Holy
Prophet (S.A) or the Imams (A.S), and mourning are not kinds of
polytheism, as some people who have attacked the shari'a have alleged.
These people have not looked to the reason behind the pilgrimages, for
they are a way of approaching near Allah through good deeds, in the same
way as we can approach near to Allah by the performance of such goods
acts as visiting the sick, escorting a funeral, visiting our brothers in
Islam and helping poor Muslims. For example, visiting a sick person is a
good act through which a believer obtains nearness to Allah. It is not
for the glorification of the sick person himself; therefore it is not an
act of polytheism the same way, other good acts, such as pilgrimage,
mourning, attending a funeral and meeting with our brothers are not

kinds of polytheism. Moreover, it is known from religious jurisprudence
('ilm al-fiqh) that pilgrimage and mourning are among the good deeds of
the religion, but this is not a place to go into an exposition of this.
In brief, these actions are not kind of polytheism as some people
suppose, neither behind them that of worshipping the Imams (A.S).
Rather, their meaning is to bring the deeds of the Imams (A.S) to life
again, to renew their memory in the minds of the people and to glorify
the rites of the religion. And whoever venerates the rites of the
religion, that is of the godliness of their hearts. (22,32)

It has been shown in the law (shar') that these acts are mustahab. If a
man performs these actions with the intention of pleasing Allah, he
deserves to be rewarded for them.

**7. Doctrine of the Attributes of Allah**

We believe that Allah's primary, positive attributes (as-sifat
athubutiyyah al-haqiqiyyah), which we call the attributes of Beauty and
perfection (al-jamal wa al-Kamal), such as Omniscience ('ilm),
Omnipotence (qudrah), Self sufficiency (ghina), Divine will (iradah),
Everlasting Life (hayah), are identical with His being and are not in
addition to Him, and that His attributes are not part from His Being.
Thus His Omnipotence is dependent on His Everlasting life, and His
Everlasting Life is dependent on His Everlasting Life, and His
Everlasting is dependent on His Omnipotence. His is Powerful because His
is Living and His is Living because His is powerful. In fact, there is
no duality either between Him and His attributes, or between the
attributes of perfection themselves: they must be considered as a unity.
They differ in their meaning and their sense,but not in their substance
and existence. For, if they differed in their substance, and given that
they are eternal to assume that the self-Existence of Allah had number,
and the very foundation of tawhid would be destroyed.

However,the positive attributes other than the attributes of
perfection

(the secondary, positive attributes, as-sifat ath-thubutiyyah
al-idafiyyah), such as those of being the Creator (khaliqiyyah), the
provider (raziqiyyah), being Without Beginning (taqaddum) and being the
First Cause (illiyyah), are all contained within one attributes which is
His Self-Subsistence (qayyumiyyah), and we extract these other
attributes from the central attribute when we observe the several
effects (athar) of its manifestation (e.g when we observe His
self-Subsistence in its Creating aspect, we call Him the Creator).

In contrast to this, negative attributes, which are called attributes
of Majesty (jalal), are contained in only one negative attribute which
is the negation of the possibility (imkan) of these things. This means
that He has no body, no appearance, no movement, nor is His motionless;
He has no heaviness, nor any lightness, etc.; in reality He has no
imperfection. The result of the negation of these possibilities is a
return to the Necessity of His Being (wujub al-wujud), which is one of
the positive attributes of perfection. So the negative attributes of
Majesty ultimately refer back to the positive attributes of perfection,
and Allah is One in all respects ; there is no number in His Holy
Existence, and there is nothing compound in His Essence.

It is not surprising that some persons, accepting that the positive
attributes are, as it were, reflected in the negative attributes, but
failing to understand that Allah's attributes are One with His Essence,
have imagined, in other to reassure themselves of the Unity of Allah,
that the positive attributes depend on the negative ones. However, in
this way have permitted a great wrong, for they suppose that Allah's
Essence,which is Absolute Being without the Possibility of imperfection,
is complete negation and therefore non-existence.

Neither is it surprising that some persons say that His positive
attributes are in addition to (idafah) His Essence, therefore saying
that His attributes are pre-existence like His Essence, the result being
that they are partners of His being. Similarly, others say that Allah is
a compound of His attributes, but Allah is far above these things. As
the first Imam, Amir al-Mu'minin, 'Ali (A.S) said:

The perfection of His purity is to deny Him attributes, because every
attributes is a proof that it is different from that to which it is
attributed, and everything to which something is attributed is different
from the attributes. Thus, whoever attaches attributes to Allah
recognizes His like, and whoever recognizes His like regards to Him as
two, and whoever regards Him as two recognizes parts for

Him, and whoever recognizes parts for Him has mistaken Him.

(Nahj al-Balaghah, Khutbah 1)

**8. Doctrine of the Justice of Allah**

We believe that one of Allah's positive attributes is that He is Just
beyond all injustice ('adil ghayr zalim). He does not treat His
creatures without justice, nor does He rule them unfairly or cruelly, He
rewards His obedient servants and punishes them for more than the sins
they have committed.

We believe that He does not omit to do any good act, nor does He
perform an evil one, because it is in His power to do every good act and
to abstain from every evil one. For, since He knows the excellence of
good and the badness of evil, He is not constrained to leave what is
good and to do what is evil. Again, since doing good cannot harm him,
there is no reason for him not do it. Moreover, since evil is not
constrained upon Him, He is not forced to do evil. But Allah is Wise and
His works must display His Wisdom, and they must be arranged in the best
possible way.

Now, suppose that He treats a creature with cruelty or commits an evil,
then it must be because of one of four reasons. (1) He is ignorant of
the action. and does not know that it is evil.; (2)He knows what He
does, but He has been compelled to do it, and is unable to desist from
it; (3) it is necessary for Him to do it; (4) He does it at His
pleasure, without cause, or to do it, and neither is it necessary for
Him to do it.

Each of these is an impossibility for Allah, as each one entails a
deficiency in Him. But He is Absolute Perfection; therefore we must say
that He is glorified from oppression and from doing what is evil.

Nevertheless,there are Muslims who say that Allah can do evil. They say
that Allah can punish the obedient and bring the evildoers and the
unbelievers into paradise. They also say that Allah can order His

servants to perform actions which are beyond their capabilities and
endurance, and, at the same time, that He can punished them for not
doing those things. In short, they say that Allah can be an oppressor,
can do what is in error, can deceive His servants, and do things which
are without interest, purpose or benefit, because He is not asked about
that which He has done, but they will be asked. (21;23)

Let is be known that this is blasphemy concerning Allah for he has said
in His Book, the Qur'an:

Allah does not desire injustice for (His) servants. (40; 31)

and

Allah does not love corruption. (2; 205)

and

We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between
them in jest. (21; 16)

and

I have not created the jin and mankind except to serve Me. (51; 56)

and He has said similar things in other verses.

Glory be to thee who did not create without aim. (3; 190)

**9. Doctrine of the Commands of Allah**

We believe the Allah does not command His servants without there being
evidence for the command, nor dose He require them to do that which they
cannot endure or which they do not understand, because it would be an
injustice to give a command to somebody who is unable to

do it or who has not been warned even though he had previously carried
out his duties. However, somebody who is ignorant and has failed to
carry out his obligations to Allah is in error for his omission and he
will be punished, for it is incumbent on all mankind to learn the
necessary duties of his din.

We believe that Allah has commanded his servants and given them laws
for all that is in their interest to know, and that He guides them to
the way of everlasting goodness and prosperity, and that He similarly
makes them tremble before that which is aagainsttheir interest and that
which is harmful to them. This is an example of His Grace and Mercy
(lutf wqa rahmah) towards His servants, who are unaware of most of what
is in their interest, and do not know what is harmful for them.

Allah is the Beneficent, the Merciful in his Essence. His Mercy and His
Grace are of His Absolute perfection and One with His Essence. and it is
impossible for them to be separated form Him. The disobedience of the
disobedient does not cause Him to without His Mercy and Grace and Grace
from His creatures.

**10. Doctrine of al-qada (predetermination)and al-qadar (Divine
Decree)**

The sect of the Mujabbirah maintained that Allah was entirely
responsible for the actions of His creatures: that he forced them to do
evil and then punished them for it, and forced them to do geed and then
rewarded them for it. They maintained that the actions of people really
His actions, but that they were figuratively attributed to people
because humans are the locus of Allah's activity.

The reason for this view was that the Mujabbirah denied natural causes
(as-sababiyyah at tabi'iyyah) between things. and said that Allah was
the real cause (as-sabab al-haqiqi), there being no other cause besides
Him.

They denied natural causes between things because they supposed that
this followed from the necessity of believing that Allah is the Creator
without any partner, But one who has made such a claim has in truth
attributed injustice to Allah.

Another sect, the Mufawwidah, maintained that Allah had given full
power to His creatures for their actions, and that the power,
force-ordaining and decree of Allah had no part to play. The reason they
held this belief was because they considered that the attribution of
man's actions to Allah necessitates attributing imperfection to Him, and
that all existing things have particular causes (asbab al-khasah), and
that this can be trace back to the cause of causes, the first cause,
which is Allah.

However, those who made this claim had separated Allah from His Power,
and had given Him partners in His Creation.

Now our belief in this matter follows the teachings of our Imams, that
the reality is between these two extremes, a middle way between the two
opinions, something which understood by these disputants in theology
(ahl al-kalam) who have gone some one extremes, some to the other.
Knowledge and philosophy were unable to clarify this matter until after
many centuries, so it is not surprising that those are not familiar with
the wisdom of our Imams (A S) and their sayings suppose that our belief
comes from an investigation of the most recent western philosophers,
whereas the truth is that our Imams were ahead of them by ten centuries
in this matter.

Imam Sadiq (A S) truly said in clarifying the middle way that:

There is no compulsion (jabr) (from Allah), nor is there absolute
delegation of power (tafwid) (from Allah to man), but real position is
between the two extremes.

What marvellous significance lies in this saying, and how exact is its
meaning! It points out that our actions are, from one angle, really our
own actions, and we are the natural cause so that they are under our
control and subject to our free choice; and from another angle they are
decreed by Allah and re subject to His power, because it is He Who gives
existence. He does not compel us in our actions in such a way that He
wrongs us by punishing us for evil deeds for we have the power and the
choice in what we do. But He has not delegated to us the creation of our
actions so that they become beyond His power, for to Him belongs
Creation, Judgement and Command. He is Powerful over all things. and He
has complete authority over people.

For, after all, our belief is that predetermination (qada') and Divine
decree (qadar) are one of the secrets of Allah. and if someone can
understand them as they should be understood, without going to either of
the extremes, he is correct. Otherwise, it is not necessary for him to
force himself to understand them exactly, for he may then be lead

astray, and his belief may be corrupted. It one of the most difficult
topics in philosophy which can only be understood by a few people, and
because of this many theologians (mutakalimun) have been led astray. The
obligatory to arrive at an understanding of this matter is an obligation
which is too great for the understanding of an ordinary man. It is
enough for someone to believe in this in a general way following the
sayings of our Imams (A S); that it is a reality between the two
extremes, i.e. there is neither compulsion nor absolute free-will.
Anyway, this matter in not one in which it is necessary to have faith
based on investigation and profound thinking.

**11. Doctrine of bada'**

The meaning of bada' for a man is this: the appearance (bada' literally
means' appearance') of an idea about some action which the man did not
have previously, in such a way that it changes his intention do to that
action. That is to say that something happens which alters his
understanding and knowledge about that action, so hat he conceives the
intention for leaving the work after he had previously intended to do
it. This is due to man's ignorance concerning what is of benefit to him,
and because he comes to regret doing or having to do what he had
intended to do.

Bada' in this sense is impossible for Allah, because ignorance and
imperfection are the cause of it, and this is impossible for Allah. The
Imamites do not believe in this. Imam Sadiq (a s) said:

Someone who suppose that bada' occurs to Allah about some matter,
causing Him to regret, is considered by us to be an unbeliever in Allah.
(kafir)

And he also said;

I will keep at a distance from me someone who supposes that bada'
occurs to Allah about some matter which He had not realized
previously.

Some traditions have related from our Imam which have caused people to
suppose that we believe in bada' in the sense described above. For
example, Imam Sadiq (a s) said:

There was no bada' for Allah like the bada' in the case of my son
Isma'il.

Because of such traditions, some writers of certain Islamic sects have
accused the Imamites of belief in bada' attacking our group and the way
of the Household of the Prophet (ahl al-bayt), and using this supposed
belief to denounce the Shi'a.

The correct aspect of this question is according to what revealed in
His Book:

Allah blots out, and He establishes whatsoever He will; and with Him is
the Essence of the Book

(13; 39)

And the meaning of this is that Allah makes something appear on the
tongue of the Prophet or his wali or in some other way according to the
situation because of some benefit which calls for this revelation, then
he abolishes that revelation so that it becomes other than what it was
before, although Allah knew about this from the beginning. We can see an
example of this in the incident of Isma'il when his father Ibrahim saw
in his dream that he was slaughtering his son. The meaning if the saying
of Imam Sadiq is that Allah has not revealed any matter as He had done
in the case of Isma'il (the son of Imam Sadiq), by taking his life
before He took his father's. This was so that people would understand
that Isma'il was not the Imam, although it had appeared in the situation
as if he were, because he was the eldest son.

And similar to this meaning of bada' is the abrogation of previous
shara'i (pl. of shari'ah) by the arrival of the shari'ah of our prophet
(as), and even the abrogation of some of th commandments which were
brought by Muhammad (S.A.)

**12. Doctrine of Religious Ordinances**

We believe that Allah has sent His ordinances in the interest of His
servants; that whatever is greatly to our advantage he has made
incumbent

pon us (wajib); that whatever is to our disadvantage he has forbidden
to us(haram): and that whatever is to our advantage, but not greatly so,
He has made mustahabb, and has recommended us to do it. And this is of
His Justice and Mercy.

It is clear that Allah must give His commandments to cover any
eventuality, and that nothing can be found which is outside the scope of
His commandments, although we may not be in a position to understand
this.

We also say that it is impossible for Him to order something of which a
part is evil, or to prohibit something of which a part is good. But some
Muslims say that evil is what Allah prohibits, and good is what He
commands, and that therefore there is no intrinsic good or evil in the
acts themselves.

This is not in accord with reason, however, as the same people also say
that Allah can do things which are evil; thus He can order what includes
evil and prohibit what includes good. It has previously been mentioned
that this opinion is erroneous, because it requires that Allah is
ignorant and unable to do certain things; far be He glorified and
exalted above what they say!

In short, the correct belief is that there is neither interest nor
benefit to Allah in His commandments to us, but that they interest and
benefit is entirely for ourselves, or to forbid that which contains no
evil, because none on His laws are without aim, and He has no need of
His servants.


