Introduction Part Two : the Prophethood
=======================================

**13. Doctrine of Prophethood**

We believe that prophethood is a Divine duty and a mission from Allah;
He appoints to it those whom He selects from among His good servants,
from those who are exalted among mankind. He sends them to the rest of
humanity to be a guide to what is of benefit to them and is in their
interest in this world and the next; to purify them from immorality,
evil deeds and harmful customs, and also to teach people wisdom and
knowledge and the ways of happiness and goodness until they attain to
the perfection for which they were created, and reach the highest
position in both wolds.

We believe that the Grace of Allah (lutf) requires that He send His
messenger to His servants to guide them, to carry out reforming work,
and be intermediaries (sufara', pl. safir) between Allah and his gerents
(khulafa', pl. of khalifah).For we believe that Allah does not allow
mankind to appoint, nominate or select a person as a prophet: indeed
only Allah can choose and appoint someone as a prophet, because:

Allah knoweth best with whom to place His message. (6; 125) It follows
that people have no right to dispute over those whom Allah sends as
guides, bringers of good tidings and warners of what is to come, nor
over that which they bring, i. e. the commandments and religious laws.

**14. Prophecy is from Divine Grace (lutf)**

Man is a changeable creature, a complex structure containing his being,
his nature, soul and intelligence. Every individual personality is
similarly of a complex nature, in which there are causes of good and
evil. On the one hand, man has been created with emotions and instincts,
such as self-love, desire and pride; he obeys the call of his desires,
has a natural disposition to show his superiority over others, to own
things, and to take for himself that which belongs to others; he rushes
recklessly at the objects and ornaments of this world. As Allah has
said:

Lo! Man is in the way of loss. (103;2) and:

Surely man waxes insolent, for he thinks himself self-sufficient. (96;
6&7)

and also:

Surely the soul of man incites to evil. (12; 53)

There are other verses which clearly talk about and point to the
desires and feelings of the human soul which was created with man.

On the other hand, Allah has given intelligence (aql) to man to guide
him to what is in his interest and to the way of goodness, and He has
also bestowed on him a conscience which prevents him form doing evil and
oppressing others, and which also upbraids him when he has sinned.

There is continual enmity and struggle between man's desires and his
intelligence. One whose intelligence overcomes his desires will attain
the highest position among mankind and a perfect spirituality, but one
whose desires to conquer his intelligence will be among the great
losers, the lowest of mankind and comparable in nature to the beasts.

The desires and their legions are stronger than intelligence and its
armies, and this is why most people go astray and wander far from the
straight path of guidance, through obeying their desires and answering
the call of their emotions. As is said in the Qur'an:

And though thou try much, most men will not believe. (12; 103)

Besides, men is reluctant and unaware of all the facts and secrets of

the world around him, and since he is also ignorant of his own self,
how can he know all that will make him prosperous and what will make him
suffer; how can he know everything that is in his own interest or in the
interests of mankind as a whole? Whenever he advances with a new
discovery, he sees his own ignorance and realizes that he knows nothing.
It is because of this that Man has an insistent need for someone to show
him the clear, straight path to prosperity and to give support to his
intelligence, so that it may overcome its unruly, persistent enemy, and
so that he may prepare to fight his emotions.

Man is desperately in need of someone to help him to the path of
goodness and happiness, especially when his emotions deceive him,
disguising his bad actions as good and his good actions as bad, as a
result of which his intellegence is confused and cannot find the right
path to prosperity and distinguish between the real good and the real
evil. Everyone of us has succumbed on tis battlefield, either
consciously or unconsciously, except the man whom Allah protects. It is
difficult for an enlightened, civilized man to attain the way of
goodness and happiness, so how much more difficult is it for an
ignorant, unschooled man!

When all people co-operate and consult with one another and deliberate
together they are still unable to understand what is useful and what is
harmful for themselves and for society. So Allah thorough His Grace and
Mercy for mankind sends them a messenger. The Qur'an says:

He it is who sent among the unlettered ones a messenger of their own,
to recite unto them His signs, and to purify them and to teach them the
Book and Wisdom. (62;2)

and he (the messenger) warns them concerning what is evil and gives
glad tidings to them about what is good for their welfare. (The giving
of) this Grace is necessary for Allah, because it is a sign of His
perfection, and His is Kind and Generous to His servants. When a man
deserves His Mercy and Grace, Allah must grant to it to him, because of
"necessary for Allah" is not that anyone forces Him to act in this way
and that it is necessary for Him to obey, but it means that this is an
inseparable attribute of Allah, i.e. Mercy and Grace cannot be separated
from Him, in the same way as we say that His Existence is inherent in
Him, or that He is necessarily Existent, i.e, His Existence is
co-existent (with Him) and cannot be separated (from Him).

**15. Doctrine of the Prophetic Miracles**

We believe that when Allah appoints someone as a leader and a messenger
for His creatures, He must point him out to them. In the perfection of
His Grace and Bounty, He must give His Prophet some evidence and a
testimony for His Messenger to show the people, and this must be of a
kind that is only within the capability of the Creator of all beings and
provider for all creatures, and beyond the ability of man. This evidence
He hands through His Messenger, so that He may introduce him to
humanity, and this evidence we call a miracle.

It is also necessary that the prophet should manifest his miracle to
people when he calls them to his prophecy, and similarly it should be
clear (i.e. all people should know that is beyond the ability of man),
and such that all men of knowledge and all the experts of his time are
unable to perform anything like it, much less the ordinary people. Also,
the miracle must coincide with the time of his claim to prophecy so as
to constitute evidence of his calling.

When the men of knowledge and the experts are unable to repeat the
miracle, people can understand that it is beyond human ability and that
it is 'supernatural', and thus that the prophet, is above mankind.
Consequently, when such a prophet brings his miracle and calls people to
his prophecy, it is incumbent upon all to accept his call, believe in
his message, and obey his command; but some shall believe and some shall
deny him.

We therefore see that the miracles of each prophet are in accordance
with the important arts and sciences of his time. For example, the
miracle of Musa (A.S) was a rod which swallowed up the lies of te
magicians, for magic was the most popular art of his time. His rod
destroyed what the magicians had done, and they understood that it was
beyond their ability and their skill, and humanly impossible, and that
science and art were worthless in comparison with it. Also the miracle
of Isa (A.S) was his curing of those born blind and leprous and his
restoring to life the dead, because he lived in times when medical
science was well thought of among the people, and scientists and
physicians held high esteem in society. But all their science could not
equal his miracle.

The miracle of our prophet, Muhammad (S.A), is the glorious Qur'an,
which silenced by its eloquence and fluency all those who were

eloquent, at a time when rhetoric was the art of the day and orators
were held in high esteem. The Qur'an humiliated and astonished them,
warning them that they were unable to produce anything like it, and they
surrounded to it. The occasion for their inability was when the Qur'an
challenged them to produce ten comparable surahs, but they could not;
then it challenged them to produce one such surah,and they could not. We
know that they failed the challenge to produce a surah like those
contained in the Qur'an, and we know that they took refuge in fighting
with the sword instead of the tongue. We understand that the Qur'an is a
miracle and that Muhammad (S.A) brought it with him calling the people
to his message. So we know that he is Allah's messenger, and that he
brought the truth.

**16. Doctrine of the Infallibility of the Prophets**

We believe that all the prophets are infallible, and also that the
Imams (A.S) (the successors to the prophet of Islam) are infallible, but
some non-Shi'a Muslim do not believe in the infallibility of the
prophets, let alone of the Imams. Infallibility means purity from all
sins, both major and minor ones,and from mistakes and forgetfulness. It
is necessary that a prophet should not even do what is contrary to good
manners: that is, by laughing aloud, or by doing anything which may be
unacceptable to public opinion.

The reason for the necessity of the infallibility of a prophet is that
if he commits a sin or mistakes, or is forgetful or something similar,
we have to choose between two alternatives: either we obey his sins and
mistakes, which too is wrong, or we must not obey his idea of
prophethood where obedience is necessary; besides, if everything he says
or does has the possibility of being either right or wrong, then it is
impossible for us to follow him. The result is that the benefit of his
mission is lost; it becomes unnecessary , and the prophet become like

ordinary people whose acts and speech do not have the excellent worth
that we seek, with the result that there will be no obedience and his
actions will be unreliable.

The same reason is adduced for the infallibility of the Imams (A.S),
because we believe that the Imam is appointed by Allah as the Prophet's
representative (khalifah) to guide mankind. This will be explained in
the section on the Imamate.

**17. Doctrine of the Attributes of the Prophet**

Just as we believe in a prophet's infallibility, so also we believe
that he must be endowed with the most perfect attributes -bravery
(ash-shaja'ah), diplomacy (as-siyasah), sagacity (at-tadbir), patience
(as-sabr), intelligence (al-fitnah), and quick-wittedness (adh-dhaka'),
so that there is no-one who excels him in such qualities. Otherwise, it
is not fit that he should lead people and administer the affairs of the
whole world. He must be of good descendency, honest, truthful and free
from all vices, from before the beginning of his prophecy as well, so
that people can trust in him and so that he may deserves this great,
Divinely-given position.

**18. Doctrine of the Prophets and their Books**

We believe, in general, that all prophets follow the right path, are
infallible and pure, and that to deny their prophecy, to revile or
deride them, results in a loss of faith and insincerity in belief. For
the denial of them entails the denial of our prophet Muhammad (S.A) who
spoke concerning them and confirmed them.

As for the prophets whose names and shara'i' (pl. of shari'ah) are
well-known, i.e. Adam, Dawud, Sulayman, Musa, 'Isa and others are
mentioned in the Qur'an, we must believe in each of them. In truth, one
who denies one of them has denied them all, and he has especially denied
the prophethood of our own prophet.

Likewise, we must believe in their books and in what has been revealed
to them. But the Torah (Turah-the Book of Mus (A.S)) and the Gospels
such as we have them in our hands now have been proved not to be what
was revealed to Musa and' Isa (A.S). Some persons who were confused by
their own desires and by covetousness have changed them by adding to
them, so that most of them, or all of them, were compiled after their
time by some of the followers of the prophets Musa and' Isa (A.S).

**19. Doctrine of Belief in Islam**

We believe that:

The true religion with Allah as Islam (3;18)

and that is the true, Divine shari'ah that has abrogated all previous
shara'i. It is the most perfect shari'ah, according with man's happiness
and containing all that is in his interest, in this world and in the
next. It can never become obsolete, and will last for ever; it is not
challengeable and will not be transformed in any way ; it contains all
that mankind needs: individual, social and political rules. For it is
the last shari'ah, and there is no hope for another religion to come and
reform humanity, which is sinking into oppression and corruption.
Therefore the day must come when the Islamic religion will become strong
and its justice and laws will be spread over the entire world. When all
the people of the world act correctly in accordance with all the laws of
Islam, peace and prosperity will increase and spread among mankind, and
man will attain the highest peak which he can imagine; well-being,
dignity, plenitude, contentment and ideal morality will arise, and
oppression, poverty and indigence will disappear from the surface of the
earth to be replaced by love and brotherhood among men.

The reason that at the present time we see such a shameful condition
among the people who call themselves Muslims is that their behaviour,
from the very beginning, has not been truly in accordance with Islamic
law. This dishonorable state has continued and has become worse and
worse. The acceptance of Islam has not been the cause of the disgraceful
situation of backwardness among Muslims. On the contrary, it has been
caused by their disobedience of its teachings, their negligence of
Islamic laws.

the prevalence of oppression and the enmity of their rulers towards the
poor and of certain groups towards the common people, and this it is
that has paralyzed their progress, weakened them, broken their sprit and
brought calamity and tragedy upon them. Allah has destroyed them by
their sins:

That is because Allah never changes the Grace He has bestowed on any
people until they first change what is in themselves.(8:53)

Thus does Allah treat His creatures.

Lo! the guilty never are successful. (10;17)

In truth, they Lord would never destroy their cities unjustly while as
yet their folk were doing right. (11;117)

Even thus is the grasp of the Lord when He grasps the cities while they
are doing evil. Lo! His grasp is painful, terrible. (11;102)

How can we except the religion to save the community from the depths of
perdition. when the teachings of the religion are just ink on paper and
people do not act little bit in accordance with them?

The basic foundations of Islam are: faith in Allah, honesty,
truthfulness, sincerity, good behaviour and generosity, and a Muslim
must want for his brother what he wants for himself. But Muslims left
this all behind them a long time ago.

Daily we see them (the Muslim) dispersing into various sects and
groups, competing for the things of this world, each one attacking and
accusing the other of impiety for unknown or imaginary reasons, or for
useless purposes, ignoring Islam and the interests of both themselves
and society. Thus do they dispute: Is the Qur'an created or not? Have
paradise and hell been created (in the future)? and so on. The nature of
these disputes shows that they have deviated from the right path which
they have been shown,and are heading towards

ruin and destruction, and day by day they deviate further. Ignorance
and perversion surround them, but they occupy themselves with useless
and superficial matters, superstitious and imaginary things. Fighting,
bickering and boasting cause them to descend further into the bottomless
abyss. At the same time, the West, ever vigilant, but a persistent enemy
of Islam, has become powerful and colonised Islamic territory, while
Muslims remain unaware and half-asleep. Only Allah can know the extent
and the end of these misfortunes.

In truth the Lord would never destroy their cities unjustly while as
yet their folk were doing right. (11;117)

There is no alternative for assuring the success of the Muslims either
today or tomorrow, but for them to wake up, consider well what they do,
educate themselves and their generation by correct Islamic teachings and
thus remove the oppression and cruelty. In this way can they save
themselves from this great calamity. It is their responsibility to
establish justice throughout the world, after having done away with
oppression and cruelty, just as was affirmed by Allah and His Messenger.
For their religion is the last religion, and the world cannot be set
right again without it. Of course, people are in need of an Imam to
erase imaginings, innovations and deviations from Islam, and to save
mankind and rescue them from complete corruption, continual oppression
and enmity, and contempt for morality and human life. May Allah hasten
his reappearance.

**20. Doctrine of the Lawgiver of Islam**

We believe that the message of Islam is contained in the person of
Muhammad ibn Abdillah (A S) and that he is the last prophet, the Seal of
the Prophets, the Chief among messengers, and the best of them, just as
he is at the apex of all humanity, and none can compare with him in
excellence and grace, generosity and intellect, and no-one can approach
him his virtuousness. Verily he has a lofty moral behaviour, and no-one
will be like him up to the Day of Judgement.

