21. Belief in the Qur'an
========================

We believe that the Qur'an was Divinely inspired, and revealed by Allah
on the tongue of His honorable Prophet, making clear everything, an
everlasting miracle. Man is unable to write anything like it because of
its eloquence, clarity, truth and knowledge, and no alteration can be
made to it. The Qur'an we have now is exactly what was sent to the
Prophet, and anyone who claims otherwise is either an evil-doer, a mere
sophist or else a person in error, and all of them have gone astray,
because it is the speech of Allah, and:

Falsehood cannot come at it from before it or from behind.(41;42)

One of the testimonies to the miraculous nature of the Qur'an is that,
as time moves on and the arts and sciences advances, it remains as fresh
and harmonious as ever, its supreme aims and ideals preserved. There can
be no grounds for dispute with it, nor does it contradict true
scientific facts, and there is nothing in it contrary to positive
philosophical thinking, On the contrary, it is the books of scientists
and even the greatest of philosophers, at the pinnacle for learning,
which contains ta least a few trivialities and contradictions and even
incorrect assertions. Moreover, with advances in scientific research and
with modern scientific theories, even the greatest philosophers of
Greece, such as Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, whom all those who have
come after have recognized as the fathers of science and the masters of
thought, have been shown to have made some errors.

We also believe that we must respect and give dignity to the Glorious
Qur'an, and this both in word and in deed. Therefore, it must not be
defiled intentionally, not even one of its letters, and ti must not be
touched by one who is not tahir. It is said in the Qur'an:

None can touch it save the purified. (56; 79)The subject is dealt with
in books of Islamic law.

Neither is it permitted to burn it or to be impious toward it by any
behaviour which is deemed to be insulting, such as throwing it, making
it unclean, or putting one's foot on it; not is it permitted to put it
in a filthy place, If someone intentionally does any of these things or
anything similar, he is not a believer in the Qru'an and its sanctity,
and he is considered

to be an unbeliever, In fact he has rejected the Lord of all the
worlds.

**22. The Proof of Islam and the Previous Religions**

If someone (a non-Muslim) should argue with us and ask for reasons to
demonstrate the truth of Islam, we could prove it through the eternal
miracle of the Qur'an, and by reference to its miraculous nature, as we
have explained before.

Here however, it is our intention to satisfy our own minds, in the
event that we should wish to find assurance concerning the truth of
Islamic ;for sometime it happens that such a question arises on the mind
of a liberal-thinking man, when he desires to strengthen his faith.

As for the previous religious such as Judaism and Christianity, there
is no way to prove the truth of them or to satisfy ourselves or anyone
else who doubts them, without there being faith in Islam ; for they have
no eternal miracle like the Qur'an. And the miracles of the former
prophets which their followers bring forward as evidence are
unacceptable, because the variety of the narration is suspect. The books
of the former prophets which have been handed down to us, that is to say
the books which are related to these prophets such as the Torah and the
Gospels, are in no way an eternal miracle which can be put foreword as a
convincing reason for the truth of their religious, which nevertheless,
have been confirmed by Islam.

It is clear that when we accept and believe in Islam, we must also
believe in whatever it has brought and confirmed, and one of its
teachings is the prophethood of many previous prophets, as we have
described above. It therefore follows that a Muslim, after he has
accepted the teachings of Islam, is not required to evaluate the truth
of Christianity or Judaism or other such religions, because belief in
Islam necessarily entails belief in the former religions and prophets.
What is

more, the Muslim does not need to verify the truth of the miracles of
the former prophets.

However, if someone investigates the Islamic religion, but is not
convinced of it, it is incumbent on him, as a rational necessity, to
evaluate the truth of christianity, because it is the last religion
previous to Islam. Then if he is not convinced by christianity he must
consider Judaism, because it is the religion previous to Christianity
and Islam, and he must continue in this way until he finds a religion
about whose truth he feels certain.

By similar reasoning, it is clear that someone who has grown up
believing in Judaism or Christianity must consider other religions to
which people have been called by a prophet who came after their own
prophet. for example. For example, the Jews must evaluate Islam and
Christianity according to what was said previously about the necessity
to consider religions rationally, and Christians must consider the truth
of Islam. It follows neither of them can be excused for believing in
their own religions while ignoring the subsequent religions because
there is nothing in Judaisms and Christianity which could contradict
these religions, for neither Musa (A.S) nor 'Isa (A.S) stated that no
prophet would come after them. It is surprising how christians and Jews
can be sure in their belief and in their religions without considering
the truth of the subsequent and last religion.

Wisdom dictates that the weight the truth of the subsequent religion or
religion. And if the truth is not established, then they should continue
with their original beliefs. The Muslim, on the other hand, as we stated
earlier, because of his belief in Islam, has no need to consider the
truth of the previous religions or of any future ones. As for the
previous religions Islam has confirmed them: however; the Muslim should
not follow their commandments or their books, because Islam has
superseded them. And as regards future religions,the Holy Prophet of
Islam, Muhammad (A.S) said:

No prophet will come after me.

Since in the eyes of a Muslim the Prophet is honest and truthful, and
as Allah has said:

Nor does he speak from his own desire. This is nought but a revelation
(53;3-4)there is no need to prove the falsity of nay new religion.

Now it is the duty of a Muslim, when a long period has elapsed since

the time of the prophet, and many opinions, beliefs and sects have
arisen, to choose the way which he can be sure will guide him to the
commandments of Allah as they were sent to Muhammad (S.A), because the
Muslims must carry out all the commandments as they were revealed to the
Prophet. So how can he be sure that these commandments are the same as
were revealed to the Prophet? Just as Muslim are divided into different
sects on the basis of their opinions, so their prayer, worship and
behaviour vary. What, then, should he do?what school should he follow in
his worship and in such matters as marriage, divorce, inheritance,
buying and selling, punishment, blood-money and the like?

It is not correct that he should follow his father, family or friends,
for he must be certain of what he believe in. There can be no
insincerity, partiality or fanaticism in religion. He is obliged to
select rationally the way he believes to be the best, so as to be sure
of his religious obligations and his responsibility towards Allah, and
so that Allah will not punish him or approach him for what he has done,
believing it to be correct. Also, he should no listen to those listen to
those who deride him for following the true path. Allah has said:

Does man think that he is to be left aimless. (75;36)And also he has
said: Nay man shall be proof against himself. (75;14) and Lo! this is a
rejoinder, that whosoever will, may choose a way unto his Lord.
(76;29)

The first question he must ask himself is whether the way of the
Household of the Prophet, or another way,should be followed. Then if he
chooses the way of the Household of the Prophet, he must choose between
the ithna' ashariyyah and other sects. Or, if he chooses the Sunni path,
he must choose which of the four madhhab (pl. of madhhab) he should
follow. All these questions arises for a liberal-mentioned person. so he
should keep a clear mind and not be confused.

Let us therefore consider the Imamate, on which the beliefs of the
ithna' ashariyyah depend.

PART THREE:THE IMAMATE

**23. Doctrine of the Imamate**

We believe that the Imamate is one of the fundamentals of Islam (usul
ad-din), and the man's faith can never be complete without belief in it.
It is wrong to imitate our fathers, family or teachers in this matter,
even if we respect them, for it is just as necessary rationally to
consider the Imamate as it is to consider tawhid and nubuwwah. If a man
does not believe in it, and supposes that it is not a fundamental of
Islam, he should, nevertheless, examine the concept of the Imamate, if
only to absolve himself of responsibility in this matter. The reason for
this consideration is that, since we do not receive commands concerning
our religious duties directly from Allah, we must refer in this matter
to someone in whom we can trust, by following whom we may be sure that
we will not be held responsible by Allah for having committed errors.
According to our belief, the members of the Household of the Prophet
fulfil such requirements.

We believe that, just as it is necessary for Allah to send someone as a
prophet, so it is also necessary for Him to appoint an Imam. It is
necessary that all times there should be an Imam to represent the
prophet, and that he should perform the duties of the prophets, such as
guiding the people, and showing them the way of goodness and prosperity
in this world and the next. He ought also to hold the highest position
as a public to increase among them and eliminate enmity and oppression
from between them.

The Imamate is therefore a continuation of the prophethood, and the
reasoning which proves the former's necessity is the same as that which
proves the latter's.It is for this reason that we may say that the
appointment of someone

as Imam can only be accomplished by the Will of Allah through the
Prophet or through the previous Imam. People cannot choose someone as an
Imam because they have no authority to do so, and, should they seek to
depose him: "He who dies without knowing the Imam of his time, it is as
if he dies in jahiliyyah (the time of ignorance)". It will be seen from
the above it is impossible for there to be a time without an Imam
appointed by Allah, and that it makes no difference if human beings deny
him or not, help him or not, obey him or not, or if he is absent from
people's sight. Just as the prophet was absent from people in the cave
and in the mountain pass, so is it possible for the Imam to be absent,
It also makes no difference, logically, if the absence is long or
short.

Allah has said:

And there is a guide for every people (13;7)and There is not a nation
but a warner has passed among them. (35;24)

**24. Doctrine of the Infallibility of the Imam**

We believe that, like the prophet, an Imam must be infallible, that is
to say incapable of making errors or doing wrong, either inwardly or
outwardly, from his birth to his death,either intentionally or
unintentionally, because the Imams are the preservers of Islam and it is
under their protection. Their position in regard to Islam is the same as
the prophet and the reasoning which necessities their infallibility is
the same difference between them in these matters.

An Arabic verse says:"For Allah it is not impossible :to unite all the
world in one person"

**25. Doctrine of the Attributes of the Imam and knowledge of the
Imam**

We believe that the Imam, like the prophet, must be the best among
mankind, and that he must excell in all human qualities, such as
bravery, generosity, chasteness, truthfulness, justice, prudence,
reason, wisdom and morality. The reason for this is the same as that
which we gave for the prophet's superiority. He derives his education,
the Divine commandments and all his knowledge from the prophet or from
the previous Imam. When a new question arises, he knows the answer from
Divine Inspiration through the pure mind that Allah has given him. If he
gives attention to some matter in order to know it, he will obtain a
perfect understanding with no error, for the Imams do not derive their
knowledge from methodological reasoning, or form the teachings of men of
knowledge, although it is possible for their knowledge to be increased
and strengthened. For the Prophet said:

O Lord, increase my knowledge!It has been shown by psychological
investigations that every man has, during his lifetime, one or two
moments in which he is able to understand something by intuition. In
fact, this is a kind of inspiration from Allah. This power has not been
given to mankind equally, but in different degrees, according to their
capacities. At such a time the human mind is capable of discovering
certain facts without thinking or reasoning, and without guidance from
someone else, Everyone acknowledges this condition from his own personal
experience many times during his life.

Therefore it is possible that a human may attain to the highest degree
of this state, one which both ancient and contemporary philosophers have
described. We maintain that the powers of the Imams to receive
inspiration have reached the highest degree of excellence, and we say
that it is a Divinely-given power. By this means the Imam is able to
understand information about anything, anywhere, and at any time, and he
understands by means of this Divinely -given power at once, without
recourse to methodological reasoning or guidance from a teacher. When he
desires to know about some matter, it is reflected in his pure mind as
if in a polished mirror. It is clear from the histories of their lives
that, like the Prophet. the Imams were not trained or taught by anyone
at all, not

even in reading and writing, from their childhoods to the maturing of
their minds. No author or teacher was seen to instruct one of them, but
they were incomparable masters of knowledge, so that they were never
asked about any problem without being able to answer it immediately, and
they never said that they did not know. They never required time to
consider a question before replying.

In comparison with this, it has never been said of any Islamic scholar,
narrator or scientist, in his biography, that he did not study or was
not educated by some other scholar, or that he never had any doubts
about any problem, for human nature has always been thus.

**26. Doctrine of Obedience to the Imams**

We believe that the Imams have authority, and that Allah has ordered
people to obey them. They are witnesses for mankind, doors opening the
way of Allah, guides to Him, guarding of His knowledge, interpreters of
His revelation, pillars of His Unity, and custodians of His Wisdom. They
are the cause of peace among the inhabitants of the earth, just as the
stars are for the heavens. And so the prophet said:

My household is like the ark of Nuh; whosoever embarks upon it will be
saved, and hoover turns away from it will be drowned. In accordance with
the Qur'an, the Imams are:

Honoured servants who speak not until He has spoken and act by His
Command. (21;26-7)

those whom he has kept away from uncleanness and cleansed with a
thorough cleansing.

We believe that their orders and prohibitors are Allah's orders and
prohibitions, that obedience and disobedience to them, friendship or
enmity towards them, are all the same as if towards Allah. It is a sin
to deny them, for everyone who denies them in fact denies the Messenger,
and that is the same as denying Allah.

It is incumbent on all people to submit themselves to the Imams, to

follow their commandments and to obey their sayings. So we believe that
all commandments must be learned from their pure teachings, and that if
one refers to another person concerning a commandment of the din, one
will not be cleared of responsibility towards Allah and will not be sure
that he has correctly performed his duty. Like the ark of Nuh, everyone
who goes on board is saved, but whose who remain behind are drowned in
the stormy sea of doubt, wandering, pretension and strife.

We do not seek at this time to prove that they were the legal khulafah'
and that they possessed Divine authority, because this is not the place
to do so, and discussing this question cannot bring back times gone by,
nor restore things to their rightful owners. We only mean to show that
we are obliged to refer to them to obtain the Divine commandments and to
find out what the prophet truly said.

The path of those who were not educated by the Imams, or whose minds
are not enlightened by knowledge of the Imams is in deviation from the
straight path of Islam,and such a person will never be sure that his is
free from the obligations and necessary duties that were revealed by
Allah; for, granted that there are differences in opinion between Muslim
groups as regards the commandments of the din, and that there is no hope
that they will agree with each other to consider each one until one
gains positive assurance of the truth from one of them and is sure that
he is doing what Allah commanded him to do. For if one is under an
obligation, one must clear oneself of that obligation with certainty
through rational means.

Clear reasoning thus obliges one to refer to the Household of the
Prophet. We must refer to them concerning Islamic doctrine and
legislation as they were revealed to the Prophet. The prophet said:

I leave two great and precious things among you; the Book of Allah and
my Household. If you keep hold of both of them,you will never go astray
after me. One of them is greater than the other. The Book of Allah is
like a rope hanging from heaven to earth, and the other is my Family and
Household. Remember, these two will never be separated from each other
until they encounter me a Kawthar (in Paradise).

This tradition is narrated by Sunni and Shi'a traditionalists alike. If
you consider it carefully, you will be amazed and convinced by its good
sense and by its excellent expression, because at first it says "if you
keep hold of both of them, you will never go astray after me". What
the

Prophet left among us were two worthy things; together be considered
them to be one, and he did not say that one only hold on to one of them,
but that one should on to both of them so as to be misled. He explained
the reason in the next phrase very clearly : "these two will never be
separated from each other until they encounter me at kawthar". So, if a
man separates from separates them and takes hold of only one of them, he
will never be rightly guided. So they are the ship of Nuh, and peace for
the inhabitants of the inhabitants of the earth. All those who do not
take refuge with them will be drowned in the depths of perdition.

It is not correct to say that the meaning of this tradition is that it
is necessary merely to love the Household of the Prophet, without
following and obeying them, no-one can apply this interpretation unless
he be a fanatic or totally ignorant,because this is in incorrect
interpretation of the Arabic sentence.

**27. Doctrine of Love for the Household of the Prophet**

Allah said:Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I do not ask of a wage for
this except love of my kinsfolk. (42;23)

We believe that in addition to the obligation to hold fast to the
Household of the prophet, it is necessary for every Muslim, from the
point of view of his din, to love them, for Allah, in this verse, has
told mankind to love them.

It is narrated from the prophet: Love of them (my Household) is a sign
of belief, and to show enmity towards them is a sign of unbelief.
Whosoever loves them, loves Allah and His Messenger. And whosoever shows
enmity towards them shows enmity towards Allah and His Messenger.

Naturally we must love them; it is one of the necessary Islamic duties
over which there can be no dispute or doubt. All the sects of Islam
have

accepted this, apart from a few people who are recognized to be enemies
of the Household of Prophet, and they have been given the derisive name
of Nawasib3 (i.e those who have planted enmity of the Household in their
hearts). They are counted among those who deny one of the necessary
beliefs of Islam.

One who denies one of the Islamic commandments about which there is no
doubt,such as the obligation to pray or to pay zakat, undoubtedly ranks
with a denier of prophethood, even though he may utter the two
testimonies of the Islamic faith (i.e ashhadu an la ilaha ila' llah wa
ashhadu ana muhammadan rausl Allah. I testify that there is no god but
Allah, and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah). Enmity towards
Muhammad's Household is a sign of the unbelief, and love of them is a
sign of faith. Therefore enmity towards is the same as enmity towards
Allah and His Messenger.

Allah has ordered us to love the Imams, because they merit this, and
because of their high degree of obedience to the commands of Allah their
high position in the presence of Allah, their purity form polytheism,
sin and that which keeps His servants away from the Mercy of Allah.

It is impossible that Allah should enjoin us to love someone who
commits sin and does not obey Him as he should be obeyed; for all
mankind are His slaves and created equally, and none have a special
relationship or friendship with Him. The noblest of them in the sight of
Allah is the best in conduct. So, if He instructs all people to love
someone, that person must be the best among them in virtue and above
them all, otherwise he would not deserve to be loved, and Allah would
never prefer some person to another for no reason, or if that person had
no merit.

**28. Our Belief in the Imams**

We do not exaggerate about the Imams as some sects have done;A
monstrous word it is, issuing from mouths. (18:5)

but we believe that they are human beings like ourselves, i.e that if
they do good they are rewarded and if they commit sin they are punished.
Indeed, they are honoured servants and Allah has given them great
dignity and authority, for they have the highest perfections, namely
knowledge, goodness, bravery, generosity, chastity and every virtue and
worthy quality. Nobody can equal them as far as morality is concerned.
Thus, they deserve to be Imams; guides and authorities after the Prophet
in those matters in which people require help: religious commandments
(ahkam), judgement (hukum), legislation (tashri'), and the commentary
(tafsir) and interpretation (ta'wil) of the Qur'an.

Imam Ja'far Sadiq said:Whatsoever is reported about us, if it is
possible for one of mankind and you do no understand or comprehend it,
do not deny it, but you can attribute it to us. However, if it is
possible for anyone of mankind, then deny it, and do not attribute it to
us.

**29. The Imamate must be from Allah**

We believe that the Imamate, like the prophethood, must be an
appointment from Allah, through His Messenger, or an appointed Imam.
From this point of view, the Imamate is the same as the Prophethood.

It is wrong for People to dispute against him whom Allah has sent as a
guide and leader for all people, for they cannot elect him. One who is
able to bear the responsibilities of the Imam of the people and the
guide of mankind can only be recognized and appointed by Allah. We
believe that the Prophet declared who was to come after him (his
khalifah) and that he appointed his cousin' Ali ibn Abi Talib as the
Commander of the Faithful (Amiru al mu'minin), guardian of the
revelation and Imam for the people on several occassions. The prophet
obliged everyone to take an oath to agree to' Ali succession on the day
of Ghadir.4 and he said at that time:

O faithful! for whomsoever I am his master (mawla) and the authority
whom he obeys, 'Ali will be his master. O Allah! be friendly towards the
friends of' Ali; help those who help him, and hinder those who hinder
him, and the Truth always be with him. The first place in which the
Prophet declared the Imamate was when he had gathered his close
relatives and kinsfolk and said them:He ('Ali) is my brother, inheritor
(wasi) and vicegerent (khalifah).

You must listen to him and obey him.At time the Prophet said this, 'Ali
had not yet come of age.The Prophet spoke many times on this matter:O
'Ali! your place in relation to me is the same as that of Harun in
relation to Musa; except that there will be no prophet after me.

Other traditions indicate that 'Ali had guardianship over the people,
as do the verses in the Qur'an such as:

Your friend is only Allah and His Messenger, and the believers who
perform the prayer and pay the aims while they do ruku' (5;55)

The last part of this verse was revealed about 'Ali who gave his ring
to a beggar while doing ruku' in prayer. Naturally we are not able, in a
book such as this, to quote all such traditions and verses, and to
consider them.

Imam 'Ali publicly declared the Imamate of Hasan and Husayn, and the
latter declared the Imamate of his son' Ali Zayn al-'Abidin, and
similarly each Imam was appointed by the previous one.

**30. Doctrine of the Number of the Imam**

We believe that the Imams are twelve in number; that the prophet
publicly announced them by name; and that each of them announcing his
successor. They are:

We believe that the Imams are twelve in number ; that the prophet
publicly announced them by name; and that each of them announced his
successor. They are:

1) Abu 'l-Hasan 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, al-Murtada.

Born 23 years before the hijrah (601 A.D.), died in the year 40 A.H.
(661 A.D).

2) Abu Muhammad Hasan ibn 'Ali, called Zakiy. (2-50/623-670).

3) Abu Abdillah Husayn ibn 'Ali called Sayyid ash-Shuhada'.
(3-61/624-680).

4) Abu Muhammad 'Ali ibn Husayn, called Zayn al-Abidin.
(38-95/658-713)

5) Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn' Ali, called al-Baqir. (57-114/678-732)

6) Abu 'Abdillah Ja'far ibn' Ali, called as-Sadiq. (83-/-148/702-765)

7) Abu Ibrahim Musa ibn Ja'far, called al-Kazim. (128-183/745-799)

8) Abu 'l-Hasan 'Ali ibn Musa, called ar-Rida. (148-203/765-818)

9) Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn 'Ali, called al-Jawad. (195-220/810-835)

10) Abu 'l-Hasan 'Ali ibn Muhammad, called al-Hadi. (212-254/827-868)

11) Abu 'l-Qasim Muhammad Hasan,ibn' Ali called al-Askari.
(232-260/846-870)

12) Abu 'l-Qasim Muhammad ibn Hasan, called al-Mahdi. (256-/870-)

