40. Doctrine of Non-participation in Oppressive Government
==========================================================

Since our Imams have firmly warned us not to help oppressors, even to
the extent of giving them half a date, and not to hope for their lives,
the

situation of one who cooperates with them and joins their government is
indeed a bad one. Similarly, for one who is in their employment, or is
one of the founders of their state, or is devoted to preserving their
government. Because:

being loyal to an oppressive completely undermines the truth, and
rehabilitates and propagates falsehood, iniquity and corruption. This is
related from Imam Ja'far Sadiq (A.S).

However, joining the oppressors or their government is permitted by our
Imams if, by so doing, we can increase justice and perform the commands
of Allah, if it is for the good of the believers, encourage what is
right or forbids what is evil. Imam Musa (A.s.) said:

Verily, there are among the company of the oppressors those through
whom Allah has made bright His path. He gives them the power to protect
His friends and to resolve the difficulties of the Muslims. They are
among those who truly believe. They are the guides of Allah and a light
among His slaves.

Many traditions have been passed down concerning these things, which
have clarified the duties of governors and government employees, who
should act in accordance with them. For example, (the letter which) Imam
Sadiq wrote to Abdullah al-Najashi, the governor-general of Ahwaz.

**41. The Imams call people to Islamic Unity**

It is well known that the Household of the prophet tried hard to
preserve the rites of Islam, to call Muslims to restore its glory, to
unify their beliefs, and that they also strived to maintain the
brotherhood of Islam and to remove malice and enmity from the hearts of
the Muslims.

We cannot ignore Imam' Ali's dealings with his predecessors to the
Khalifah. He treated them with consideration although he believed that
they had taken what was his right. He agreed with them and kept his
peace with them, and refrained from expressing his opinion about his

own right in public until after he had attained to it. Then he called
together the remaining followers of the Prophet (those who were still
alive and who had been present on the day of Ghadir when the Prophet had
appointed' Ali as his khalifah), so that they could bear witness to his
appointment to the khalifah.

He never withheld his opinion about what was helpful or in the interest
of Islam and the Muslims, and he often said: I was afraid lest I should
not help Islam and the Muslims, and that they would fail.

He said and did nothing against the position, power and authority of
the Khulafa', but kept himself to his house and remained silent, despite
the fact that he saw what they were doing.

He acted thus for the sake of Islamic interests, up to the point where
he was famous for his admirable qualities. The second khalifah' Umar ibn
Khattab, said many times: "I would never encounter a difficulty without
Abu 'I-Hasan being there to contribute to its solution, "And" if it were
not for 'Ali, 'Umar (himself) would never perished."

History cannot forget the way Imam Hasan (A.S) dealt with Mu'awiyah. He
made peace with him, because he realized that if he continued to fight,
the light of the Qur'an and just government would be extinguished, and
moreover the name of Islam would vanish for all time, the Divine
shari'ah would be lost and the Imams that were to come would be
obliterated. So he chose to protect the edifice of Islam and its name.
For this reason, he made peace with Mu'awiyah, who was a resolute enemy
of the religion and Muslims and who hated Imam Hasan and his followers.
He knew that Mu'awiyah would deal unjustly with him and his companions,
and, although he could have counted on his family and followers to fight
for their sights and defend themselves, he believed that the highest
interests of Islam were above all these things and more important than
them.

It was for the same reason that the third Imam, Husayn, the Holy
Martyr, rose up against the Banu Umayyah; for he realized that if they
continued in their vicious ways without anyone taking arms against them
and proclaiming their wicked intentions, they would eradicate Islam and
its glory, so as to expose their evil plans against the Prophet's
religion. Naturally, events turned our as had been predicated. If it had
not been for his holy campaign, Islam would have been recorded as a
religion of the past, and it would have been though a false religion.

In completing his holy campaign, following through and pursuing his
sacred aim against iniquity and oppression, the Shi'ah revive and
remember the tragedy at Karbala every year and it various ways, as the
Imams have commanded.

We should obtain a better and clearer understanding of how the
Descendants of the Prophet tried hard to preserve the glory of Islam if
we study the behaviour of Imam Zayn al-'Abidin towards the Umayyid
kings, despite the fact that this family had been killed and that his
reputation had been destroyed by them. He was continually despondent and
heart-broken over the murder of his father and family by the Umayyids at
Karbala, but, in spite of these things, he always prayed that the armies
of the Muslims would be victorious, and secretly asked Allah to keep the
Muslims in safety and to ensure the increase and glory of Islam. He
propagated knowledge of Islam, and by means of prayer alone he taught
his followers how they should ask Allah for victory for the Muslims. He
said in his famous du'a for the guardians of the frontiers of Islam:

O Allah! Send down peace upon Muhammad and his Family, increase their
numbers, sharpen their swords, protect their homes, preserve their
country, cause friendship to spread among them, improve their
conduct,provide them with sustenance and the means of livelihood,help
them, bestow on them patience, teach them the ways of cleverness ...(and
then after calling for the wrath of Allah on the unbelievers)O Allah! In
this way strengthen the people of Islam,protect their lands, increase
their property,let the soldiers of Islam be free from fighting that they
might worship Thee privately.Let nothing be worshipped over the whole of
the earth but Thee.Let no-one prostrate himself before anyone but
Thee.

Thus he continued his du'a (it is one of his longest), telling of the
duties of the Muslims armies, how they must behave and be of good
character and have good equipment. It contains teachings on the Holy War
(jihad), showing its purpose and its results, warning Muslims to attacks
and defend themselves. It also contains instructions on their
obligations, such as continual remembrance of Allah, avoidance of
unlawful things and keeping the jihad pure for Allah.

Likewise, other Imams have dealt with the kings of their times,
although they were being tortured and cruelly and severely maltreated by
these kings with many kinds of suffering and pain. When they realized
that an Islamic government was not going to be re-established, they
tried best to teach the religion to the people, pointing out to them the
excellence of Islamic Knowledge. No insurrection which happened either
through some of their family or through others during these times was
ordered by them; on the contrary, these were in opposition to their
explicit orders, because they made the utmost effort to protect the
government of Islam. No-one, not even the 'Abbasid khulafah harder than
them to protect it.

It is enough just to look at the advice of Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (A.S)
to his followers:

I charge you to obey your king and not to lose your strength through
disobedience. If he his just, ask Allah his life; if he is an oppressor,
ask Allah to reform him. For your interests are identical with his
interest. Verily, a just king is really like a father -wish for him what
you wish for yourselves, and do not wish for him what you do not wish
for yourselves.

This is one of the best sayings on the subject of the protection of a
king by his people: "wish for him you wish for yourselves, and do not
wish for him what you do not wish for yourselves."

Compare with this the great offence some writers who are contemporary
with us have committed. They have spoken of the Shi'as as a hidden
destructive group,as a band of revolutionaries and avengers. Now, it is
correct that every Muslim who obeys the teachings of the Household
should, from the moral point of view, despite oppression and oppressors,
keep clear of them and their evil deeds, feel repugnance and contempt
for them and their fellows and helpers and dislike them all. The Shi'a
have had these feelings engrained in their souls from generation to
generation. However, they are not rebels. Nor do they like to stir up
trouble or foment insurrection against a rebellious government which
says that it is an Islamic government, neither secretly nor openly.

The teachings of the Imams do not allow them suddenly to take the like
of someone who is a Muslim,or to betray him, although his beliefs may
differ from theirs, But, according to their teachings, a Muslim who
profess tawhid and the nubuwwah ofMuhammad (A.S) is to be respected; his
blood, his property and his family is secure, "It is now right to take
the property of a Muslim except by his leave. "All Muslim are

brothers to each other, and to each of them belong the rights of
brotherhood, as we shall now explain.

**42. Doctrine of the Rights of Brotherhood between Muslims**

One of the highest and most excellent instructions of Islam to all
Muslims is brotherhood without distinction of birth, rank or position.
But, unfortunately, Muslims have always neglected this. One of the
smallest duties of Islamic brotherhood is that a Muslim should wish for
his brother what he wishes for himself, and that he should not wish for
his brother what he does not wish for himself, as we shall point out in
a tradition from Imam Sadiq.

One must study this duty well, it is accounted a very small one in the
opinion of the Descendants of Muhammad. One sees that Muslims find it
difficult to fulfill this small duty, for their morals and behaviour are
not in accordance with the Islamic spirit. Concentrate carefully on this
small responsibility; if people were to repeat it, neither oppression,
nor enmity nor theft, nor falsehood, nor back-biting, nor informing
would be found anywhere among them. If they realized the result of this
and be found anywhere among them. If they realized the result of this
and were careful in carrying out this duty, oppression and enmity would
disappear; they would live as brothers with each other and attain the
highest of happiness among themselves. Madinah al-Fadilah 10 of the
ancient philosophers would become a reality, no government would be
needed, no court of law, not police, prison or criminal law; they would
be free from colonizers and tyrants; oppressors could not force their
iniquity on them; ad the earth would become paradise.

Furthermore, if Islamic brotherhood reigned among people, as Islam has
said it should, then the word justice would disappear from our
dictionaries, justice and its laws would not be needed, and brotherhood
alone would suffice to ensure goodness, peace, happiness and pleasure
among us. For humanity, in such a situation, would have no need for
justice and its laws; these are only needed when there is a lack of love
between people. A mother is kind and good towards her children

because of her love and compassion, not because of the commandments of
justice. We can understand why a man loves only himself and that which
is agreeable to him; it is impossible for him to love something for
someone unless it belongs to him. And when he does love something or
someone, it is impossible for him to give them to someone else whom he
dislikes, unless three exists a principle which is stronger than his
desires, like a belief in justice and kindness, and in this case, he may
devote his interests to someone else whom he does not like.

Such an ideal,when it dwells in the human mind, keeps it ina position
above all material things, so that it is able to realize the superiority
of justice and goodness, and to show kindness to others. It will be seen
that man needs such superior ideals when there is no kindness and
brotherhood between him and his fellow men. That is to say that as long
as he lacks the feeling of brotherhood -and the fact that he does is
because of his egotism and desires -as long as this feeling is missing,
he must believe in the goodness of justice and kindness, following the
guidance of Islam. And if he fails to believe in this as well, then he
does not deserve to be thought of as a Muslim; such a man, even in name,
is not a friend of Allah; he has done nothing for the sake of Allah, as
well see in the tradition of the Imam which follows. Usually human
desires overcome man, and ti is difficult for him to prepare himself
even to believe in justice, and so it is much more difficult for him to
attain that perfect belief through which he cam vanquish his desire.

We can see that the brotherhood of man is very difficult to obtain as
long as its desirability is not sensed. For this reason, Imam Sadiq did
not wish to explain to al-Mu'alla ibn Khunays more than he could
understand, because Ha'far was afraid to teach him what he could not put
into practice. Mu'alla asked:

What does one Muslim owe another?There are seven duties incumbent upon
him, Should he neglect but done nothing for the sake of Allah.

'What may these things be?'I feel compassion for you. I am afraid lest
you learn them, but you neglect to put them into practice, or you
cannot. There no power but in Allah.

Mu'alla then relates that the Imam told him the seven: 'First, the
smallest duty is that you should wish for your brother

what you wish for yourself, and that you should wish what you do not
desire for yourself should not befall your brother.' So, this is a small
duty! Do we find this easy? That is to say, we present-day Muslim? May
those who call themselves Muslims but do not act in accordance with this
small but strict duty find themselves disgraced.

It is amazing that the backward state of the Muslims should be ascribed
to Islam. while the only reason for it is the behaviour of the Muslims,
that is those who call themselves Muslims but do not carry out this
humble duty.

Having reminded ourselves and mentioned our present circumstances, we
shall now list the seven duties as related by Mu' alla from Imam Ja'afar
(AS).

(a) Wish for your bother what you wish for yourself, and wish that what
you do not desire for yourself should not befall your brother.

(b)Do not make your brother angry, but seek to please him and obey his
wishes.
(c)Help him with your soul. your tongue. your hands and your feet.
(d) Be his eye to see by, his guide to lead him and his mirror.
(e)Do not eat your fill when he is hungry, nor drink and clothe
yourself when he is thirsty and naked.
(f)If he has no servant, but you do, it is incumbent on you to send
your servant to him to him to wash his clothes, cook his food and spread
out his mattress.
(g)Accept his promise and his invitation; visit him when he is sick,
attend his funeral, and see to his needs before he asks, hurrying to do
them if you can.

When he had finished, Imam Ja'far:

If you fulfil these duties you can call yourself his friend, and he
will be your friend also.

There are many traditions told from our Imams, and most of them are
collected in' Kitab al-Wasa'il'11 in the relevant sections.Some people
have imagined that the Imams meant brotherhood only among the Shi'a.,
but if they were to read the traditions they would understand that their
imagination is deceiving them, although the Imams did not follow their
guidance, Let is us mention here the conversation of Imam Sadiq with
Mu'awiyah ibn Wahab.

'How should we treat those who do not follow our ways?'

'Look to your Imams whom you obey, and obey them and imitate them. They
visit them (i.e those who are mot Shi'a) when they are sick, go to their
funerals, give evidence for or against them, and repay their trust.'

No, the brotherhood that the Imams envisaged among their followers is
higher than ordinary Islamic brotherhood, sand it has been mentioned
briefly in the introduction. It will suffice to read the following
conversation between Imam Sadiq and Aban ibn Taghlab.

Aban relates: While I was circumambulating the Ka'bah with Imam Sadiq,
one for our friends signalled to me that I should immediately go with
him to help him. The Imam noticed and said to me O Aban, does he mean
you'?'

I replied: Yes.'

'Does he believe in what you believe in?'

Yes.'

Then go with him and break your circumambulation.

I asked if it was incumbent on em to do so, and he said that it was,
Then I went with the man to help him, and after doing so I returned to
the Imam and asked him about the rights of the believers.

Do not ask me concerning them, he said.But I insisted.Give your brother
half of what you own, he told me, and looked at me. He understood my
surprise and said:' O Aban! Do you know that Allah admires those
believers who prefer others to themselves? I replied; Yes.

'When you give your brother half of what you own you do not prefer him
above yourself, but only when you give him the other half do you really
prefer him above yourself.

If we feel shame at this, then really we should not call ourselves
believers. We are quite remote from the teachings of the Imams. Everyone
who reads this tradition becomes astonished as did Aban, but then he
pays no further attention to it and forgets it, as if he were not the
person addressed, and as if he were not responsible.

PART FIVE: ESCHATOLOGY

**43. Doctrine of the Resurrection**

We believe that Allah. the Exalted. will revive all people after their
death on a certain day which he has promised them. and that He will then
reward the obedient and punish the wrong-doers. In this simple form,
this is what all the Divine religions and philosophies have accepted,
but Muslims must believe in it because it is contained in the Qur'an
which our Prophet brought, and one who believe in Allah and Muhammad,
His Messenger must also believe in what is related in the Qur'an:
resurrection on the Day of Judgement, reward and punishment, paradise
(al-jannah) and its blessings (as-na'im), the Fire (an-nar) and Hell
(al-jahim).

About one thousand verses in the Qur'an have mentioned the Day of
Resurrection. There is no reason to doubt it, unless one doubts Allah,
His Power and His Messenger. In fact this amounts doubting all
religions.

**44. Doctrine of Bodily Resurrection**

This one of the fundamentals of Islam, as is said in the Qur'an:

What! Does man reckon We shall not gather his bones, Yes, indeed, We
are able to shape again his fingers. (75;4)

If thou wouldst wonder, surely wonderful is their saying: what, when we
are dust shall we indeed then be raised up again in a new creation
(13;5)

To state it succinctly. bodily resurrection means man's terrestrial
body will be revived after having been destroyed, and it will return to
its first form after if has-rotted in the earth. It is not necessary to
believe in resurrection in its details, and more than has been revealed
in the Qur'an. But we must believe in those particulars which are
mentioned in the Book, such as al-hisab (the reckoning), as-sirat12 (the
bridge), al-mizan (the balance), al-jannah (Paradise) and an-nar (Hell),
ath-thawab (reward) and al-iqab (punishment).

"Knowledge of these subjects in detail is not incumbent upon us:
whether these earthly bodies will return or identical ones; whether
souls will be lost like bodies or whether they will wait to join their
bodies on the Day of Resurrection ; whether resurrection is only for
humans or if it is for all animals as well; whether resurrection will
happen suddenly or gradually. As long as we believe in Paradise and
Hell, it is not necessary for us to know if they have already been
created or whether they will be created or whether the will be created
in the future ; if they are in the sky, or on the earth or in various
different places. Similarly, when we believe in al-mizan, it is
unnecessary to know if it is a spiritual entity or a physical one with
two pans, nor is it necessary to know if as-sirat is a thin material
object or a spiritual straightness".

So Islam has stated these things about the resurrection in outline. If
someone wants to question about them further then their mention in the
Qur'an, in order to satisfy himself and removed doubts which have been
raised by those who seek a rational explanation or to understand these
things through the senses, such a person does wrong, and will fall into
difficulties and disputes that have no end. There is nothing in the
theologians have filled their books. Nor is there any religious, social
or political necessity which causes them to fill their books with such
writings and discussions. There is no use in these enquiries, unless it
is to consume energy by thinking. It is enough to say that the details
of resurrection raise doubts which are unable to dispel and problems
which are beyond our understanding.

That the resurrection will come is beyond doubt, because Allah, Who is
Omniscient and Omnipotent, has announced it. Human knowledge,
experiments or other methods of verification are incapable of
discovering

anything which is beyond human experience, and man can neither observe
nor see the resurrection until after his death and his removal from the
terrestrial world to the everlasting world, so how can he prove or deny
it independently by thought or experiment? And he is even less capable
of understanding its details and peculiarities, because he depends for
this on prediction, intuition, and mere fascination with amazing and
surprising things. This is what human nature is accustomed to do with
anything with which it is unfamiliar through its sense or through the
sciences.

It is the same with the man shows his ignorance concerning the
strangeness of resurrection. So Allah has mentioned his amazement in the
Qur'an:

Who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed. (36;78)

The only reason for his amazement is that man has never seen any
decayed or rotten corpse that has been brought back to life, but he
forgets how he was when he was created in the first place, when he was
nothing, and the components of his body were scattered here and there.
Then they were collected from the earth, from this place and that, so
that he became a perfect, intelligent man possessing speech. The Qur'an
says:

Has not man regarded how We created him of a sperm-drop ? Then lo, he
is a manifest adversary. And he has struck for us a similitude and has
forgotten his creation. (36;77-78)

It should be said to such a man:

Say, He shall quicken them (the bones) Who originated them the first
time; He knows all creation. (36;79)

While he profess faith in the Creator of all beings, His Power, His
Messenger and what he brought, how can he deny the resurrection? His
science is so limited that he does not know he was created and how he
changed from a sperm -drop which has no sense, will or wisdom, into
higher states, climbing gradually ; how he was built up from different
particles so that he became a perfect man possessing wisdom, foresight,
sense and feeling. So, after nothing these facts, how can he still find
it so strange that he will be resurrected after having rotted away? Is
it so very surprising that, with his limited knowledge and experience,
he cannot understand what he can see? There is no away, except he must
believe,

submit and profess this truth which has been taught by the Disposer of
all beings, Who is omniscient and Omnipotent and has created man from
nothing.

Every discussion about seeking knowledge which is impossible to find,
and which present knowledge is unable to discover, is as useless as a
man who is lost in the desert, or who wants to distinguish between two
colors in pitch darkness, Man who has discovered radar, electricity and
split the atom still hasn't discovered the true nature of either
electricity or the atom. If someone had mentioned these discoveries in
previous centuries, man would have thought them impossible and ridiculed
them at once. So how can he hope to investigate Creation?or discover the
facts about resurrection?

He must, after accepting Islam, avoid following his desires, and start
doing that which has value for his hereafter and this world, and that
which will raise his rank in the presence of Allah,the Exalted. He
should think about that which can help him when he dies, and those
difficulties which he will encounter in his grave and at his
resurrection, when he will find himself in the presence of the
Omniscient King. So he should:

beware of a day when no soul for another shall give satisfaction, and
no intercession shall be accepted from it, nor any compensation be taken
from it, neither shall they be helped. (2;48)

