Appendix
========

**The life of ash-Shaykh Muhammad Rida al-Muzaffar**

The writer of this book comes from a respected family called by the
name of al-Muzaffar. This family of academics and scholars has been
recognized by this name in Najaf since the twelfth century of the hijra.
Some members of the family reside in al-Jaza'ir, which is in the
district of Basra (in Iraq).

The father of ash-Shaykh Muhammad Rida al-Muazffar, ash-Shaykh Muahmmad
ibm' Abdullah, a jurist and a mujtahid, was a marja' at-taqlid. Born and
educated in Najaf, he spent his youth in studies, his only other
activity being prayer and teaching, until he had distinguished himself
as a great jurist. He wrote a very comprehensive commentary on the
'Shara i' al-Islam'13 which he named' Tawhid la-Kalam.'

Muhammad Rida al-Muzaffar was born on the 5th of Sha'ban, 1322 AH, 1904
AD. five months after the death of his illustrious father. Since his
father died before he was born neither could meet each other, and
Muhammad Rida grew up under the guardianship of his elder brother
ash-Shaykh' Abdu n-Nabi, who devoted os much love and affection on the
child that he did not feel the avsence of his father.

Ash-Shaykh al-Muzaffar grew up in the learned atmosphere of Najaf. He
took part in the meetings of its groups and circles of learning, as well
as attending lectures and classes. He took part in the most
advancedseminars, and received recognition of the highest order from the
most the most celevrated jurists and teachers.He developed his full
potentiality within one of the most scholarly familiewss in Najaf, umder
the guardianship of his two elder brothers, ash-Shaykh ;Abdu n-Nabi and
ash-Shaykh Muhammad Hasan.

After he had completed the sullabus which is customarily taught in the
Islamic madrassahs in Najaf, and after he had achieved great
destinction, he attended the classes given by his brother, ash-Sahykh
Muhammad Hasan, as well as the calsses of ash-Shaykh Aqa Dia'd-din
al-'Iraqi in Islamic jurisprudence, and the lectures of Miraz Muhammad
Husayn Na'ini in law (fiqh) and jurisprudence. However, he was most
deeply impressed by the classes of ash-Shaykh Muhammad Husayn
al-Isfahani and was most particular in attending all the talks and
lectures of theis eminent scholar of law, jurisprudence and philosophy.
He was so impressed by this teacher that he never failed to pay him the
highest tributes whenever the occasion presented itself.

He followed the nethod of this scholar in the arrangement of his own
famous work on Ialmic jurisprudence,' Usul al-Fiqh. His keen interest in
his studies was noted by all his teachers, and by the authorities of the
religious academies of Najaf, so he was fiven the gighest degree of
ijtihad. It will be remembered that all throughout his studies,
ash-Shaykh al-Muzaffar remained an active teacher of law, jurisprudence
and philosophy. However, his chief occupation was the establishment of'
Muntada in-Nashr', an institute for the publication of books on modern
lines, with the purpose of renovating the sullabus of the madrassahs. He
devoted his life to the growth and development of this institute, the
need for whixh hw qas most aware of because he had undertaken rto
acuaint himself with modern ways of thiking and intellectual trends
right from the very begining.

He made it the main purpose of his life to bring about a rebirth of
Islamic learning, and to achievce this hes was extremely successful. He
conbined beauty of expression with exactitude of meaning, and he had
such a command over words he nither sacrificed his simple style to the
exigencies of the subject matter, nor a correct exposition of his themes
to the demands of style. He wrote with a fluency and conviction that
carries the reader along with him wherever he wants to take him. He is
at the height of his powers in his book 'Ahlam al-Yaqzah' (The Waking
Dream) where he enters into a kind of communion with his spiritual
teacher Mulla Sadra (ash-Shirazi). This book places him securel among
the masters of metaphysics, for in it he puts, questions before his
mentor and then supplies answers on his bahalf, clarifying the deepest
metaphysical problems by means of the most beautiful anecdotes. He
manages to preserve this same superb style in his book on logic
'al-Mantiq'.

No less remarkable is his ability as a story-teller when he relates the
eventful meeting as the Saqifah of the Banu Sa'idah after the death of
the Holy Prophet, which has proved to be the cause of all the
dufferences and divergences among Muslims. Eventually, as-Shaykh al-
Muzaffar, because of his zeal to improve the educational and academic
status of the traditional Islamic teachers and speakers, became a most
active member of all organisations formed for this purpose. Because of
his sincere efforts, he succeeded in descovering the cause of the
prevailing mental lethargy, and took positive steps to eliminate it. He
felt that reform was necessary not only in the academic field but also
in the field of the propagation of Islam.

It should be poited out here that the teaching in the madrassahs of
Najaf comprises two stages. The first stage is a preparatory one in
which tthe main text are taught so as to prepare the student to move n
to the second stage in which he must attend the classses of the leading
teachers and acquire specialised knowledge. It was the pregatatory stage
which was need of reshaping and revising. Muzaffar realised that new
books had to be written and new subjects added to the curriculum, and in
furtherance of his aims he founded Kulliyah al-Fiqh, the College of
Islamic Studies.

As far as the persentation of Islamic thought is concerned, this also
consists of two branches: speaking and writtng, and ash-Shaykh
al-Muzaffar paid dattention to both of them. Through his Muntada
an-Nashr, the institute mentioned above, he was able to form a new
generation of speakers and teacher, and puclish a new style of books,
The College, Kulliyah al-Fiqh, also mentioned above, was founded in 1355
A.H, and in 1376, Muzaffar managed to lay the foundation stone of a
complete educational institute, which obtained government recognition
from the Minstry of Education in 1377 A.H. Both of these establishments
remained his responsibility up to the end of his life, and he spared
neither energy nor money to see his institutes flourish and prosper.

As a man he was free from egotism, and never held any grudge against
any person, He rendered hsi services to the Creator alone, and paid no
attention to rewards from others. His selflessness knew no bounds, It is
fitting to end this short biography with ihs own words.

"We are prepared for new sacrifices, we are readyto resigh and give up
our activities as soon as we find someone else tro take on these
responsibilities, all the more so if this were to result in a widening
of these institutions. These people should be confident.

**NOTES TO TEXT**

**page 21**

1. the major sins (al-kuba'ir) from the point of view of Islam are,
according to some, seven, but according to others uncountable. the
Latter say that they are arranged in dgrees. They include shirk
(associating anything or anybody with Allah) which is the greatest sin
and cannot be forgiven by Allah (see Qur'an, 4;48 & 116), killing a
believer unjustly, fleeing from jihad, causen destress to one's parents,
falsely accusing a woman of adultery. usury, appropriating the property
of orphans. The punishment for these is mentioned in the Qur'an.

**page 32**

2. When the prophet fled from Madinah to Mecca, he spent three days in
a cave (Thawar) with Abu Bakr. He was pursued from Mecca by the Quraysh,
but they were unable to find him even though they approached the cave,
for a spider had built its web across the mouth of the cave and they
went away thinking it impossible for someone to have entered. A few
years before the Hijrah, the Quraysh decided to cut off all relations
with Muhammad (AS) and his followers, and to have no exchange with them
of any kind. the Peophet moved with his followers to a mountain pass
near Mecca where they stayed for nearly three years. They suffered many
hardships, and the only time they could communicate with the outside
world was during the months of truce.

**page 37**

3. This is not a particular group, but is used in general for anyone
who insults or shows direspect for the family of the prophet

**page 38**

4. 18th Dhu'l Hijjah 10. H.

**page 41**

5. The Kaysaniyyah were followers of Kayasn, a freed slavve fo' Ali inb
Abi Talib and supposedly a student of his son Muhammad inb
al-Hanafiyyah, They exaggerated in their velief about him, ascribing
complete knowledge ot him. Thy held an esoteric belief that religion
involved following a human, that Muahmmad inb al-Hanafiyyah was immortal
and the Mahdi. There were suvbsequent division into the
Mukhrtariyyah,the Hashimiyyah, the Bayaniyyah and the Razamiyyah
sects.

**page 62**

6. Amir al-Muminin (AS) said: "Clean yourselves by water from affensive
odours and examine your bodies carefully. Surely Allah detests those of
his servants who are not clean, so the when people sit with them they
are repelled by their odours"

**page 64**

7. This does not only mean verbal renenbrance of Allah such as say'
'Subhanullah wa'l-hamdulillah" (Glory be to Allah, and praise be to
Allah). and the such -like repeatedly, but it means what Imam Ja'far
Sadiq (AS) said in interpretation of the remembraned of Allah: "We do
not only say suhanullah wa-hamdulillah wa la illaha illa' lla wa allahu
akbar although this is a means of remembering Allah, but rather Allah
should be remembered everywhere whether we obey him or not.

**page 66**

8. In illustrating the same point, Imam' Ali, Amir al-Muminin, (AS)
said in his sermon known as alQasi'at; Verily, for all creatures of the
heaven and the earth His command is the same, and there is no leniency
in His law between Allah and anyone. so that may do unlawful things."

**page 68**

9. "It is said that a man from Sahm saw Imam Hasan riding and began to
insult in, but the Imam did not answer him. When the man had finshed
Imam Hasan looked at him and smiled and said: 'O Shaykh! I think you are
astranger and perhaps you have some misunderstanding (about us), so if
you have some criticisms we shall accept what you say, and if you ask
for something we shall give it to you, and if you want guidance we shall
guide you, and if you want to ride we can give a you

mount, and if you are hungry we can feed you,k and if you fhave no
clothes we can provide you with some; if you need somthing we can help
you, and if you have no refuge we can protect you, if you have any aim
we can assist you, and if you come and be our gust until such time as
you wish to leave irt will be an excellent idea because we have a large
property with many servants and provision. When the man heard this he
wept and said: I testify that you are vicegerant of Allah on earth-
Allah knows best where to put His message. You and your father were the
most hated of men for me, but now you are the most beloved of creatures
for me. He took his baggage to the Imam's house and was hid guest until
the time that he continued his journey, and he believed in and loved the
imams."

**page 75**

10. The Virtuous City/State Notably the ideal in government and
politics as described by al-Farabi (259-339/872-950), and modelled by
him on Greek political theory.

**page 77**

11. Wasa'il ash-Shi'a. The largest and most widely referred to
collection of Shi'a tradition relevant to all branches of fiqh, compiled
by Muhammad Hasan al-Hurr al-Amili (d. 1104/1693) the latest printing in
Iran is in 20 vols.

**page 20**

12. As-sirat is the way of Allah as in the first surah of the Qur'an,
Al-Hamd; but such things, it is believed will take a material form on
the Day of Judgement, and there are hadith which which describe it then
as a brige. Shaykh Saduq said; "our belief about siraf is that it is
true, and that it is the brige over Hell, and that over it all people
shall pass. Allah has said: 'Not one of you there is, but he shall enter
it (Hell); that for thy Lord is a thing decreed, determined.' (19;71)

**page 83**

13. By Najm ad-Din al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli (d,676/1277). A text in fiqh
used in teaching to this day.

