1. Goals and Methods
====================

After the martyrdom of al-'Imam al-Husayn (A) the objective of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A), as we see it, was two-fold. Firstly, their goal was to
protect Islam against corruption, forgery and mis-interpretation. This
was done in several ways. The foremost of them was to establish the
authentic Sunnah in the face of other claims which were influenced, to a
lesser or greater degree, by the inclinations of existing regimes and
the heresies (ahwa') of those in control of them during the Umayyad and
the 'Abbasid eras.

Since the corruption (tahrif) on the Qur'anic text was out of question,
the most dangerous phenomenon that confronted Islam from within was the
narration of forged and corrupted traditions ascribed to the Prophet
(S). The meanings of certain Qur'anic verses were distorted -
particularly those concerning the most important political and social
concepts - by the means of fabricated and corrupted hadith. Therefore,
the Imams (A) did their best to spread the hadith among the people and
employed all the means to extend the range of its circulation throughout
the various regions.

Secondly, their objective was to protect the followers of the authentic
Islamic path, and those who were close to it in various degrees, from
ignorance, deviation and the danger of physical liquidation. Their
protection from ignorance was secured by strong emphasis on the
diffusion of Islamic teachings among them, through dispatching
missionaries to them, founding centres of religious instruction in
various regions, and establishing a rightly-guided authority for them,
and these affiliated them to the path of the Ahl al-Bayt (A). This
affiliation was a conscious one, based on knowledge (ma'rifah) and
conviction, which guaranteed continuity and resistance in the face of
trials and difficulties, not one based only on emotional attachment or
merely on taqlid, for that could not ensure the perpetuity and
invincibility of a revolutionary political and ideological movement as
sought by the Ahl al-Bayt (A).

They were protected from deviation (fitnah) by being persistently and
repeatedly prohibited from being assimilated into the infrastructive of
an oppressive and irreligious political authority, and by being enjoined
to keep aloof from it without dissociating themselves from the rest of
the Islamic community. They were instructed to keep close relations with
all the Muslims, on the basis of coexistence with the authorities while
abstaining from entering their organization or participating in its
establishment so far as it did not harm the general order of the society
or go against the basic vital interests of the community following the
path of the Ahl al-Bayt (A). They were also protected from deviation by
being constantly prohibited to take sides with this or that rival party
from among the oppressors who struggled for power.

They, as individuals or groups, were protected from being persecuted in
their districts or from being exiled or executed by the prescription of
taqiyyah. We basically understand taqiyyah as being an ordinance aimed
at the protection of the lives of individuals and their personal
interests, so long as that does not violate the basic principles and
political commitment to society. However, when taqiyyah leads to the
abandonment of the principles or deviation from them in a political
issue, or when it goes against political commitment to society, then it
is not lawful, because it was introduced to protect the individuals
upholding and defending the principles. Thus it should be noted that
taqiyyah was prescribed to safeguard the principles and to insure their
success in the future. It is not reasonable, therefore, that it should
become a cause of the weakening or even the destruction of those very
principles for the sake of protecting the interests of the
individuals.

This objective manifested itself on the plane of practice and reality,
after the martyrdom of al-Husayn (A), in the form of a balance between
three elements: (1) taqiyyah on the individual level, (2) preservation
of the general order of the Islamic society and the Muslim community in
respect of administration and public services, (3) refusal to grant
political legitimacy to the oppressive regime. The Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A) dealt with the existing regimes within these limits. This
balance resulted in the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) working with the
existing system on an administrative level, in so far as that would
preserve the general order of society and provide an atmosphere
conducive to safety and freedom of movement for them and their
followers. Thus the goal of safeguarding the ultimate prophecy from
corruption would be achieved while preserving the political stand
opposing the oppressive regimes, which characterized the path of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A), in a live and active state.

A situation such as this has always been a painful one for those
Islamic activists who, by virtue of their stand, have various
responsibilities towards the society and yet work at a socio-political
stage in history during which immediate and complete revolution is not
possible. It was necessary for them to ensure, firstly, that political
opposition does not damage the foundations of society and upset its
general order.

On the other hand, it was necessary to exercise thorough vigilance at
every stage so that the fulfilment of those requirements would not lead
to the granting of political legitimacy to the oppressive or irreligious
government. The guidance offered by the lives of the Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A) in direction of political activism, either at the level of
the Ummah or that of specific communities within it, will protect the
activist from errors and confusion while considering the limits within
which he must remain.

When we examine the nature of this goal, the characteristic of both
aspects of which have been recorded and demonstrated in the lives of the
Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A), we find that, on the one hand, it has the
fundamental characteristic of propagating the ultimate prophetic message
and safeguarding Islam from distortion. On the other hand, we find that
it has a defensive characteristic shown in the protection of the
followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) from the afore-mentioned dangers.

The most profound significance of both the aspects of this goal lay in
the preparation of the Ummah and the renewal of its foundations, after
its relapse in the early period of Islam and the consequent deviation in
political matters and issues pertaining to government, which in turn
were followed by deviation on the legal front. This deviation was
regarding the source and authority of the Sunnah, which is the second
source of legislation in Islam after the Book of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

The object of this preparation was to safeguard the healthy nucleus
constituted by the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) and to enable it to
expand by attracting a larger number of Muslims to its circle. This
would facilitate the establishment of a state on the basis of Islam,
following the creation of a wider Islamic base for it. This base would
be committed to the idea of the Islamic state; it would promote it and
serve as the point of departure towards it, until God, the Exalted,
fulfils His ultimate promise through the appearance of the Mahdi
(Baqiyyat Allah), may God's peace be upon him and may He hasten his
appearance.


