2. the Central Issue
====================

In order to understand this goal, one must study the social, political
and legal aspects of the life of each of the Infallible Imams (A). Here
we will study one aspect of the political life of al-'Imam 'Ali al Rida
(A), his designation to the heir apparency of the 'Abbasid caliph
al-Ma'mun - which was perhaps the most significant phase in his
political life - and the issues related to it.

We will see that al-'Imam al-Rida (A) played the role of an active
leader in giving direction to the events even in his situation where he
could only react, for his responses stemmed from a precise and universal
plan that enabled him not only to counter the problem that he faced but
also to carry out his duties of supreme leadership in the Ummah.

Here the discussion revolves around the question of succession, which
was the central problem of the Islamic polity after the demise of the
Prophet (S). This problem had grown steadily in significance until it
reached a climax following the martyrdom of Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali (A).
It exploded with the revolution of al-Husayn (A) into a series of crises
of political legitimacy throughout the era of the Imams (A) up to the
occultation of the Awaited Imam (A). In the period of occultation it
assumed other forms of expression.

In the Umayyad and 'Abbasid regimes - as well as other regimes
contemporaneous with the 'Abbasids, such as the Umayyad regime in
Andalusia, the Fatimid caliphate in North Africa - and other regimes
that came after them in various parts of the Islamic world through the
ages up to the time of the Ottoman caliphate and the Safavid sultanate -
all the rulers identified their regimes, in character and origin, as
being Islamic. They ruled in the name of Islam and governed over the
people in matters of peace and war, the economy, politics, the
judiciary, social organization and other matters of socio-political life
on the basis of their governments being Islamic systems which
implemented Islamic laws. The legitimacy of these governments was based
on the claim of their being derived from Islam. But what was the source
of the legitimacy of actual leadership?

On a theoretical and abstract level, the issue is dissolved, for all
claim to be Islamic and apply Islam according to their own understanding
of it, in different ways, without being faithful to the Qur'anic text
and often disgracefully violating the spirit of the Qur'anic text.

However, on a practical level, there are two very different view-points
about the source of the legitimacy of leadership: firstly, the view
based on designation ( nass ); secondly, the view which disregards
designation (nass) and is based on the principle of allegiance (bay'ah)
. The conflict between these two views dominated the Islamic Ummah after
the demise of the Noble Messenger (S) up to the end of the Umayyad era,
when the 'Abbasid missionary activity ( da'wah) began.

The principle of designation ( nass ) had been firmly established in
the minds of the Ummah as a result of the activities of the Imams of the
Ahl al-Bayt (A) and their companions in educating them, firstly, about
the issue of designation, secondly, about the cause of the perverseness
of the Umayyad regime and its deviation from Islam on a theoretical and
practical level, and thirdly, about the reason for the Umayyad rulers
implementing the principle of designation ( nass ) in their own
particular way. For example, Mu'awiyah implemented it by means of
designating his heir apparent and seeking prior allegiance (bay'ah) for
him. Due to all that, the principle of nass became the sole basis in the
minds of a large section of Muslims, and came to be regarded as the most
preferable choice among the rest as the source of the legitimacy of rule
on the basis of actual and practical leadership. The principle of bay'ah
became invalid as the only source of legitimate rule and was no longer
anything but a complementary aspect of the principle of nass.

When 'Abbasid da'wah began, it confronted this reality in the political
domain as well as in the mind of the Ummah. It also used all the
suggestions and concepts of the past to allude to the principle of nass
, without making an explicit commitment to it, for the fear that such a
commitment would entail handing over power to the legitimate ruler.

Thus the 'Abbasid missionaries exploited the names of the 'Alids and
the Ahl al-Bayt (A), and the term 'itrah (progeny). They constantly used
an ambiguous expression which had been used earlier by certain people
who had revolted against the Umayyads after the revolution of al-Husayn
(A): the call to "al-rida min aal Muhammad".

This expression was a new endorsement of the position based on the
principle of nass - and it was aimed to exploit all the political
potential that this principle carried with the Ummah - without
explicitly committing to it. This would enable them to make an
about-face in a massive publicity operation aimed to misguide the Muslim
public opinion. The 'Abbasid missionary activity advanced under this
banner, and when it implemented its political plan to overthrow the
Umayyad regime and establish the 'Abbasid state, it was based on the
principle of nass .

From the very first speech of Abu al-'Abbas al-Saffah, after he was
acknowledged as the leader in Kufah, the 'Abbasids claimed that they had
implemented the political plan of the Ahl al-Bayt (A), the family of
'Ali (A), the Banu Hashim and the descendants of the Prophet (S).

With the implementation of the 'Abbasid plan, three different ideas in
the Islamic political thought were alternately used, in order to address
the main question in the Islamic political problem during the era of the
Infallible Imams (A). The question dealt with the source of the
legitimacy of actual leadership after the expiry of all Islamic
political entities which traced their origins to Islam and claimed to
practise it.

1. The principle of nass. This was the principle of the Imams of the
Ahl al-Bayt (A) who devoted themselves to establish it firmly in the
mind of the Ummah and to create an awareness in it through it, so that
it became, as mentioned, generally acceptable to all the Muslims,
whether as the sole formula for legitimacy of rule or as the most
preferable one.

2. The principle of bay'ah. It completely ignored the principle of nass
and did not acknowledge it, directly or indirectly.

3. The principle of "al-rida min aal Muhammad". It was the formula on
which the 'Abbasid missionary activity was based and which was
politically implemented. This principle, which in essence was the
principle of bay'ah, was actually, as we have said, a distortion of the
principle of nass aimed to exploit its political potential on one hand,
and to escape from its political implications on the other. The
political implication of the principle of nass is government by the
Infallible Imam. This was what the 'Abbasids did their utmost to
prevent. However, for the success of their missionary activity, they
urgently needed the political benefits of the principle of nass; hence
the slogan of "al-rida min aal Muhammad".

Other expressions used by them were: "'Alids", "Hashimites", "Ahl
al-Bayt," "the Offspring of the Prophet" (dhurriyyat al-Nabi)", and "the
Progeny" ( 'itrah ). These were the ideological and political tools they
used to achieve their aim, and they accomplished it in the following
way. In the mind of the Ummah the principle of nass was associated with
the Ahl al-Bayt (A). Mentioning nass would make one immediately think of
the pre-eminent right of the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A), and speaking
of the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) in a political context would call to
mind the principle of nass.

The 'Abbasid missionary activity took advantage of this association and
connection between nass and the Ahl al-Bayt (A), who were regarded as
being the embodiment of the principle of nass in Islamic society. After
their victory, the 'Abbasids developed the ideology that served as the
basis of vindicating their rule in order to counter the difficulty
created by the discovery of the truth by some of the senior leaders of
the da'wah, who believed that they were active against the Umayyads on
the basis of the principle of nass . The 'Abbasids had used the slogan
'revenge for the family of Muhammad (S)', as a justification for holding
on to political power. They also used the terms 'right' (al-haqq) and
'inheritance' (irth) to vindicate their ideological stand. This was a
political message understood by the people, and it suggested the
principle of nass to certain groups of people who did not have strong
links with the Ahl al-Bayt (A). The evil 'ulama' and venal thinkers were
able, by intellectual and theological maneuvering, to misguide the
people about the true meaning of the principle of nass .


