4. the Problematical Aspect of Heir Apparency
=============================================

One aspect of this problem is that it is completely natural and
understandable that a ruler who unlawfully holds power, as a result of
which he is plagued by dangers and difficulties, should authorize the
handing over of power after him to the rightful and lawful nominee who
is twenty-two years older than him. This would be carried out in a
carefully planned operation by the actual ruler who wished to overcome
his difficulties in this way. The explanation of this aspect of the
problem is simple after the circumstances, aims and precautions are
clarified in light of our knowledge of the central issue in the Islamic
political problem.

However, that which is difficult to understand is why the lawful, older
nominee should accept this succession. Such an acceptance may imply an
acknowledgement of the legitimacy of the de facto ruler, helping to put
an end to his difficulties, in exchange for the promise of handing over
the government. Naturally, it was not possible to fulfil such a promise
in view of the difference in the ages of the ruler and his heir
apparent, in view of the constant possibility of assassination, and
especially in view of what was indicated by al-'Imam al-Rida (A) when he
said: "It is a matter that will not be accomplished" and his awareness
that al-Ma'mun's moves were not motivated by any conviction that the
right to rule should be returned to those worthy of it, but only out of
necessity. This is the problematic aspect of the issue.

To solve this problem, we must return to the fundamental aim of the
Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) after the martyrdom of al-Husayn (A). In
the light of that we will understand why al-'Imam al-Rida (A) first
refused and then accepted the bay'ah of succession to al-Ma'mun.

As we said, this aim was twofold: firstly, to protect Islam from being
distorted, falsified and misinterpreted; secondly, to protect the
followers of the authentic Islamic path, the followers of the principle
of nass and those Muslims close to it, from ignorance, deviation and
liquidation. Al-'Imam al-Rida (A) in his refusal and acceptance, and in
his term as the heir apparent, adopted a stand appropriate for this aim
and took steps which led towards its fulfilment, in the midst of the
varying reactions of amazement, resentment and expectation.

He was aware that the allegiance offered to him was the allegiance of
death. He was aware of the difficulty of al-Ma'mun and the 'Abbasid
caliphate, of the aims of al-Ma'mun in offering him the heir apparency,
and of his own dilemma in this offer, which held the danger of
acknowledging the legitimacy of al-Ma'mun's rule and thus acknowledging
the legitimacy of the 'Abbasid caliphate. He was aware of the traps
which would be set in his way, not the least dangerous of which would be
the attempt to involve him in the apparatus of a government and an
administration which he had not himself set up, and which were not in
keeping with his views, his policies, and his character.

He was aware of all that. That is why his first stand towards the offer
was to reject it. Al-Ma'mun and his party continued their efforts to
persuade him, and he continued to refuse it until he faced veiled and
open threats of death, whence he accepted the heir apparency, "tearfully
and sorrowfully", according to many reports. This was how al-'Imam
al-Rida (A) explained his acceptance at various times to some of his
companions.

The refusal was understandable. It was in keeping with his general
situation, since he was aware of al-Ma'mun's aims and of his own aims in
his lifetime. However, the acceptance requires an explanation. The
threat of death, inasmuch as it was a threat to a personal life, was not
a sufficient reason, in our view, for the acceptance. The position of
al-Rida (A) resembled in certain aspects the position of al-Husayn (A),
in a form that was in conformity with al-Ma'mun's personality and era,
and al-Husayn (A) had made the choice of martyrdom. We must discover the
reason, deeper than that of preservation of personal life, which lay
behind al-'Imam al-Rida's acceptance of the heir apparency and which was
more fitted to his personality as an Infallible Imam and more in keeping
with the firm aim of the Infallible Imams. In fact, we see that
preserving personal life was not one of the real reasons for the
acceptance, for al-Ma'mun's offer of heir apparency itself amounted to a
sentence of death for al-'Imam al-Rida (A).

We believe that the Imam was aware of it, and perhaps because of that,
he did not take any of his family to Marv, presuming that the same fate
that was in store for him would befall them.

He was under a sentence of death if he did not accept, and he was under
a sentence of death if he did. The difference between the two conditions
was that either the sentence would be put into effect or postponed. We
believe that his refusal was aimed to reveal further elements of
al-Ma'mun's plans and intentions as well as the network of contacts
which directed the operation of succession (wilayat al-'ahd). His
rejection of the heir apparency was not merely a simple reaction.

We believe that al-'Imam al-Rida (A) in his stand - taking into account
the difference in eras and the nature of the opposition -strongly
resembled the stand of al-'Imam al-Hasan (A). The difference between the
two was that al-Hasan (A) faced an immediate or deferred death sentence
by witholding what was in his power to give. Al-Rida (A) faced immediate
or deferred sentence, on the basis of the false offer that he would gain
his usurped rights in the future. But in order to negate the legitimacy
of this right, he chose deferment - like al-'Imam al-Hasan (A) - since
it was more suited to the aim of the Imams (A). Al-'Imam al-Husayn (A)
chose immediate death since it was more in keeping with his
circumstances and the circumstances of the Ummah of his time, more
closely connected to the firm aim of the Infallible Imams, and more
destructive of his enemy, Yazid and the Umayyad regime.


