5. the Causes
=============

In order to understand the underlying cause for al-'Imam al-Rida's (A)
acceptance of the fatal allegiance, we must look for the answers on two
levels. Firstly, what might have happened if he did not accept, and
secondly, what was his aim when he did accept?

Firstly, what might have happened if al-'Imam al-Rida (A) did not
accept the fatal allegiance? We believe that which might have happened
is as follows:

a. Death. It was necessary for him to avoid being killed, not to
preserve his own life, for the Imams did not value their own lives and
consider them important except as a means of serving the Ummah. His
death would open the door wide for tribulations for the followers of the
Ahl al-Bayt (A), who would then have no refuge or guide. We must link
the avoidance of death with the essence of the issue of Imamate and its
timing, when we note how young al-'Imam al-Jawad (A) was at the time the
offer of heir apparency was made. His life was committed to achieving
the aims and to avoiding the dangers.

He explained his acceptance to one of his companions who asked him
about it, saying: "I chose acceptance over death." To another companion
who asked him: "What made you become involved in the (matter of) heir
apparency (wilayat al-'ahd)?" he answered: "That which made my
grandfather (i.e. 'Ali [A]) to become involved in the council
(shura)?"

We must note that he (A) was compelled to give this simple explanation,
acceptable to the people, that he being on his guard against being
killed, or the ambiguous explanation in which he made al-'Imam 'Ali (A)
his precedent. We must also note that he gave explanations of saving
himself from being killed in some of his other discussions. However, we
must be aware that he was compelled to give this kind of explanation,
for he was not in a position to speak openly about the reasons
underlying his acceptance, in order not to disclose his plan, the
reasons why it was necessary, and his actual objective.

He was under surveillance; his conversations and his letters were
controlled. He lived in the same conditions as al-'Imam al-Hasan (A) and
bore its agonies, as when he heard someone say to him: "Peace be on you,
O humiliator of the believers", without being able to explain his ordeal
to the people, not even to many of his confidants. He had to suffer
martyrdom every day while he still lived, protecting those whom he loved
and defended with his life, while they misunderstood and misinterpreted
his actions!

This and other similar situations reveal to us how forlorn the
responsibility of leadership was, isolated as he was even from the
people closest to him, sad and distressed even in the radiant moments
when difficult decisions were taken without being able to explain their
reasons. How many agonies and pains did the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A)
suffer because of that, especially Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali ibn Abi Talib
(A) who had the greatest share of this kind of suffering!

b. It was possible that he might not have been killed, but even then it
was certain that there would be an increase in the repression,
persecution and exile of the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (A). In this
way, al-Ma'mun would be able to put pressure on him and take his
revenge.

c. It was possible that his rejection of the heir apparency might have
led al-Ma'mun's enemies to exploit the situation, which would have added
to the stormy revolutionary reactions on the Islamic scene at that time.
Moreover, al-Ma'mun's overthrow was in the interests of the hard-line
'Abbasids, the party of al-'Amin, with their attitude to the 'Alids and
their hatred of the Iranians; for the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (A)
did not have the ability to take over the government and replace
al-Ma'mun after his downfall.

d. It was possible that the refusal might have led to a wide-ranging
propaganda against the Imam (A), to the effect that he had let a
valuable opportunity pass by, and that in turn might have led to
confusion and disarray among the people following the Ahl al-Bayt (A),
who would have been subjected to persecution, exile, and intimidation.
The inevitable question would have been raised in this dilemma: 'Why
didn't he accept when the caliphate was offered to him?', instead of the
question:

'Why did he accept?' We may recall circumstances similar to this in the
issue of the arbitration after Siffin and that which took place in
regard to the issue of the truce (sulh) with al-'Imam al-Hasan (A).

e. Finally, we may ask: Had al-'Imam al-Rida (A) insisted on refusing
the offer, wouldn't al-Ma'mun have been able to find an 'Alid
substitute, an important member of society, whom he could appoint as
successor? There were personalities among the Zaydis who were prepared
for such an undertaking. There were also independent 'Alid personalities
ready to accept this position. If this occurred, it was certain that the
results would have been totally negative, and no new, positive
achievements would have been realized by rejecting the offer. This is
what such an occurrence could have led to, together with the
disagreement that could arise among the followers of the principle of
nass.

Secondly, what was his aim when he did accept?

a. It was to avoid all the negative results which would have ensued
from his refusal. He had removed the sentence of death on himself, thus
avoiding the occurrence of a change in the leadership of the Ahl al-Bayt
(A) during a critical period. He had also avoided a new wave of terror,
exile and execution against the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (A), and
prevented the hardline 'Abbasid faction from taking full control of the
regime. In fact, he had created circumstances suitable for destroying
this faction and had neutralized its capacity for political activity and
its influence on the course of events.

He had prevented confusion and disorder among the followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A).

Finally, he had prevented al-Ma'mun from substituting him with 'an
'Alid successor, through whom he could exercise a policy of repression
against the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (A), using the principle of
nass as an excuse.

b. By his acceptance, he was able to get in touch with people who would
not have dared to communicate with him, had he not been the heir
apparent. Thus, there gathered around him the Murji'ites, the Ahl
al-Hadith, the Zaydis, the Ahl al-Sunnah and all the Shi'ite sects.

Through this contact, he was able to work with them on the basis of the
principle of nass . Through it, he also enabled the traditionists and
theologians on the path of the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) to come into
safe and free contact with these opposing sects, and put forward
intellectual and political issues for calm, objective, and learned
discussion. Al-'Imam al-Rida (A) himself practised this kind of
wide-flinging intellectual activity. We should not underestimate the
positive intellectual and political results which were achieved in the
interest of the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) from this contact and
interaction.

c. He enabled the intellectual leadership on the path of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A) to communicate and interact, freely and safely, with all
classes of people, on the basis of the principle of nass. Thus the
principle of nass became more deeply rooted in the minds of the people
and more effective in confronting the evil and misleading designs of the
government and the corrupt religious scholars who aided it. It also
gained greater acceptance among the upper classes. These positive and
negative causes were not all defensive, but were a combination of
defensive and offensive. Some of them were defensive and precautionary,
while others were aggressive and penetrative.

Thus, after knowing the reasons for al-Ma'mun's offer, these are the
possible causes for al-'Imam al-Rida's (A) acceptance of the offer of
the heir apparency. What were the results, as far as achievement of the
aims was concerned?

