6. the Results
==============

Al-Ma'mun had achieved his immediate and urgent objectives but had
failed to achieve his strategic objective. Al-Rida (A) had achieved his
immediate and urgent objectives, and was successful in achieving his
strategic objective as well.

1. Al-Ma'mun had achieved his aim of restraining revolutionary
activities against the 'Abbasid regime, whether within groups following
the principle of nass , or within the dissenting opposition who did not
accept that principle. Providing the revolution with revolutionaries
depended, in both the cases, on the hostile Muslim population. They saw
in the acceptance of the heir apparency by al-'Imam al-Rida (A) a clear
sign for the need to establish a truce between themselves and the
regime, and so realized that armed revolutionary activity during that
period was unreasonable. Perhaps some revolutionary leaders had also
reconciled with that because they no longer had the means to arouse the
people and to mobilize them for the revolution.

2. Al-Ma'mun had achieved his aim of creating a wider base for the
political acknowledgement of his caliphate, since the allegiance to
al-Rida (A) necessitated a renewal of allegiance to al-Ma'mun and an
allegiance by many who had not previously acknowledged him. Thus, as a
result of the allegiance to the successor, a united stand was taken by
all during al-Ma'mun's rule. We may notice here what al-Ma'mun wrote in
the document of heir apparency: "The family (Ahl al-Bayt) of the Amir
al-Mu'minin (i.e. al-Ma'mun) paid allegiance to the Amir al-Mu'minin and
to al-Rida (A) after him, as did the commanders and troops of the city,
and all the Muslims."

He clearly asked for a renewal of allegiance to himself on this
occasion, not only for allegiance to the heir apparent. However, he
demanded sole obedience to himself from those who paid allegiance, as he
stated in his document: "And hasten to obedience to Allah and obedience
to the Amir al-Mu'minin". He did not include his successor in this
statement and this reveals some of the hidden aspects in his plan.

3. He achieved his aim of creating great confusion among his enemies in
the 'Abbasid household and their Arab supporters, who were partisans of
al-'Amin. This made them too weak to resist him and struggle against his
regime. They became fragmented, since the people moved away from them,
and the popular base which no longer had an issue to fight over, broke
up.

These were the urgent and immediate aims of al-Ma'mun on which the
survival and stability of his rule depended. The continuance of
revolutionary activities against him, the existence in many regions of
the empire of many groups of Muslims who had not paid allegiance to him,
and the conspiracies of the 'Abbasid household against him - these were
factors which could have led to the downfall of his regime. Al-Ma'mun
achieved these aims and ensured the stability and survival of his
regime. Al-'Imam al-Rida (A) also achieved his urgent and immediate aims
by accepting the heir apparency, the allegiance of death. His aims
justified this, and all or most of them were realized.

On the strategic level, however, al-Ma'mun had failed while al-Rida (A)
had been successful.


