7. Success and Failure
======================

Al-Ma'mun's strategic aim had been to make his own caliphate, and the
caliphate of the 'Abbasids in general, an expression of the principle of
nass in the minds of the Muslims in general, and in the minds of the
followers of the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) in particular.

This was one of the oldest plans on which 'Abbasid missionary activity
(da'wah) and thereafter the 'Abbasid state were based, for among the
claims which were the basis of the da'wah and the state was the
declaration about the wasiyyah from 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (A) to Muhammad
ibn al-Hanafiyyah, to Abu Hashim 'Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah, to 'Ali ibn 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas, to his son Muhammad
ibn 'Ali, to Ibrahim, the Imam. Al-Saffah referred to this declaration
in his first speech after allegiance was paid to him in Kufah. It was
also quoted in Kufah, Madinah, and other places by Dawud ibn 'Ali and
various other 'Abbasid leaders.

This was al-Ma'mun's strategic aim. When that was impossible for him to
achieve, there was a substitute strategic aim, i.e., to remove the
principle of nass as an ideological, doctrinal principle bound to the
core of religious belief, and to turn it into a mere political formula
devoid of any ideological or doctrinal content - a formula like that of
other political and religious groups and parties fighting on the Islamic
stage.

This aim of al-Ma'mun is evident in the many debates arranged by him
between al-'Imam al-Rida (A) and the many groups of religious scholars,
theologians, philosophers, and men of letters. He summarized it in a
statement of his to al-'Imam al-Rida (A): "I consider the differences of
our Shi'ah concerning that - the legitimacy of rule - to be a result of
heresy (hawa) and bigotry."

The first aspect of this aim made use of the unity of the Hashimite
house with its 'Alid and 'Abbasid branches, and then its political
unity, to make it, in its appearance and meaning, a firmly rooted
reality in the mind of the Ummah. The second aspect of the aim tried to,
show al-'Imam al-Rida (A) as a political, wordly, and maneuvering
figure.

The achievement of this aim enabled political interaction with the
principle of nass, and made it possible to make an alliance with it,
enter into settlements with it, and to shape it like any other political
formula. This was the strategic aim of al-Ma'mun, while the strategic
aim of al-'Imam al-Rida (A) was to prevent al-Ma'mun from achieving his
objective.

All al-Ma'mun's actions in the issue of succession were directed
towards achieving this aim. The negative stand adopted by al-'Imam
al-Rida (A) was to frustrate al-Ma'mun's conspiracy regarding the
principle of nass while his positive stand was to firmly root the
principle of nass in the mind of the Ummah, as it was closely linked to
Islamic belief and was not merely a political formula.

We find in the life of al-'Imam al-Rida (A), before and after the fated
allegiance, attitudes and statements which illustrate his plan of
protecting himself from falling into the trap of al-Ma'mun's plan and
which are the signs of confrontation in this silent battle about the
strategic aim of each one of them. In what follows, we will present some
of these signs. To form a complete or an approximate picture of the
efforts of al-'Imam al-Rida (A) in this battle, we need to make a
comprehensive examination of all his words and deeds in the legal field
and in the field of intellectual guidance.

1. We come across following statements in history concerning al-Rida's
continued rejection and then his acceptance of the heir apparency after
al-Ma'mun and his aides began to make death threats: "He accepted the
heir apparency, woefully and sorrowfully"; "He was in severe distress
and under a great trial"; "He remained saddened and grieved until his
death." "He would pray: 'O Allah, if my release (from suffering) lies in
death, then hasten the hour for me.' ""He said to one who rejoiced at
the ceremony of allegiance: 'Do not rejoice, for it is a matter which
will not be accomplished.'"

This is the picture of the Imam's condition as seen by the
traditionists and historians after his decision to accept, and these
were some of his statements.

In this and similar ways, he expressed his dislike and distaste of this
matter, and spread it among the people by speaking and writing of it to
his confidants, so that everyone became aware of it. Historians and
traditionists have reflected its wide knowledge among the people.

2. His stand in Neyshapur when he dictated the famous hadith to
thousands of religious scholars and traditionists, and to the rest of
the people:

"The declaration (kalimah), 'There is no god but Allah', is My
stronghold; whoever enters My stronghold is secure from My punishment."
Then he (al-'Imam al-Rida) said: "On its conditions (i.e. conditions of
the 'kalimah'), and I am one of its conditions."

In this way he made a public announcement, while on his way to the heir
apparency, of the principle of nass and his position on it. It is for us
to estimate the profound and wide-spread reactions caused among the
masses and the political and educated circles by such an announcement.

3. When he was paid allegiance to as the heir apparent, he stipulated
its conditions to al-Ma'mun completely divesting the heir apparency of
its power and political content, which al-Ma'mun had hoped al-Rida (A)
would exercise so that he could achieve his strategic aim. He imposed
the following conditions on al-Ma'mun: "That he would not appoint or
dismiss anyone, or abolish a practice, or alter anything in existence,
and that he would be an advisor on the matter from a distance."

After being appointed heir apparent, the Imam resisted all attempts of
al-Ma'mun to force him into activities of power and draw him into the
administrative affairs of the 'Abbasids. The climax of those attempts of
al-Ma'mun was his offer to al-Rida (A) to go to Iraq, in order to manage
the affairs of the caliphate from there. The conditions laid down by the
Imam reflected a profound and comprehensive awareness of the nature of
the situation from its objective, ideological and political aspects.

As regards the objective aspect, the 'Abbasid regime was made up of
ruling and administrative organizations controlled and linked by a
network of alliances which had become corrupt. These organizations and
alliances guarded themselves against all intervention from the outside
and either absorbed such intervention or destroyed it, or, if that were
not possible, removed it. When they were unable to absorb the Imam, they
tried to destroy him or remove him from their circle.

As regards the political and ideological aspects, the participation of
the Imam would mean his receiving instructions and guidance from
al-Ma'mun, and recognizing the latter as "Amir al-Mu'minin" and the
legitimate ruler of the Islamic Urnmah. This is what al-Ma'mun wanted in
order to achieve his aim of being included in the nass formula so as to
apply and regulate it himself, with the Imam as a representative of the
political formula with which the existing government would be allied.


