Abstract
========

Although the Iranian Revolution, in 1979, sparked a debate about the
rise of Islam and Islamic fundamentalism, international relations and
human security scholars mostly continued to isolate it as a factor in
understanding current international and inter-cultural conflicts.
Likewise, even though the concept of ‘ummah’ is crucial in Islam, there
has been lack of research done to understand it from the Western concept
of human security. Nevertheless, the end of the Cold War-first marked by
the reunification of Germany in 1989-in addition to longstanding
conflicts among ethnic and religious groups in many Muslim countries,
the unexpected September 11, 2001 tragedy in the US, and increasing
transnational threats-i.e. human, weapons and illicit drug trafficking
and smuggling-have together given new impetus for scholars to reexamine
how religion, particularly Islam, acts as an ideational factor in
humanity's overall quest for peace and security of the region and the
world. It is the purpose of the paper to explore how Islam explains and
understands human security, in particular the concepts of peace,
security, justice, hu                           man rights and
development. In order to gain a comprehensive overview of the approach,
both secondary and primary data will be collected. In-depth interviews
was conducted with scholars in the field of international relations,
security and in Islamic studies. By analyzing human security approach
from the Islamic perspectives, it is hoped that the research will
contribute to the contemporary debates concerning human security,
thereby helping to enrich the disciplines and perhaps add to the
knowledge base available to address some of today's most serious world
conflicts.

Keywords: development; human rights; human security; justice;
peace;*ummah*


