1. INTRODUCTION
===============

Is human security universal? Like other religions and cultures
throughout the world, Islam has been seen by many to play only a minor
role in scholarly efforts to explain many security issues in
international relations. However, in reality, there are many cases of
conflict involving Islamic countries and Muslims throughout the world.
Furthermore, its historically and geographically close connections with
two other major religions in the world, Christianity and Judaism, makes
the study of Islam especially significant as a subject for study today.

For many years, religion, like culture in general, has tended to be
studied as a domestic factor, rather than an external factor in
explaining security issues. Although the Iranian Revolution in 1979
sparked a debate about the rise of Islam and Islamic fundamentalism
(Piscatori 1986; Esposito 1991) in world politics, IR theorists have
generally continued to isolate religion as an important factor in
explaining international conflicts. Beginning with the reunification of
Germany in 1989, and in addition to the longstanding ethnic and
religious conflicts in many Muslim countries, plus the unexpected
September 11, 2001 tragedy in the US, all together have once again given
reason for IR scholars to reassess how religion- particularly Islam -
plays a significant role as an ideational factor in the ongoing quest to
explain peace and security issues of the world.

Focusing on Asia, in particular SE Asia and Malaysia, this research is
designed to examine how IR scholars can gain a better understanding of
human security by incorporating a religions perspective, focusing in
particular on Islam- in their IR theory discourse. The research has two
major objectives: 1) to assess and to document security and human
security discourse in Asia-in terms of both traditional security
concepts and the newer concept of human security; 2) to analyze how
treating Islam as an ideational factor in security issues may help to
form an updated alternative IR theory.


