2. (STATE) SECURITY
===================

As we all know, security studies have been dominated by the traditional,
or Realist, paradigm in explaining war, peace and security. The famous
phrases, "to be at peace, prepare for war," and "the more weapons, the
better’ (Sagan and Waltz 1995) are commonly accepted among proponents of
the Realist school of thought. Realists, and later Neorealists, (i.e.,
Waltz 1979) have always seen security as only partial and temporary,
because "war is inevitable." They believe the world is anarchical - that
there is no world government above that of the states or nations.
Furthermore, because they see the state as the highest authority, the
security of states is the most important factor in seeking peace.
Realists therefore defined peace as the absence of war and security as
the absence of threats.

Thus, security has meant “national security” at least among those who
were concerned with political science, government and international
relations.  It has referred to a set of defense mechanisms intended to
protect a state (country), so that it can continue to exist as a
sovereign entity. That of course includes protection from attacks and
threats that originate from outside its national boundaries, and also
usually includes protection from any actions that may seriously threaten
the country’s ruling regime from within. It has been assumed that such
attacks could come at anytime, in any shape, but always in a military
form, and therefore a standing military force is necessary. We are said
to be “at peace,” since neither war nor other armed conflict is
occurring; and therefore, we are supposed to be “secure.”

In Southeast Asia, the extended concept has been called “comprehensive
security.” Many non-state actors, including the NGOS, play influential
roles in developing this concept. Comprehensive security goes beyond the
traditional threats that come in a military form, or even in the form of
internal violence and disorder such as that which arises out of ethnic
conflicts. Comprehensive security includes threats that come in the form
of environmental degradation, for example, a threat that carries
security consequences far into the future. It also includes such things
as drug abuse and drug trafficking, economic crises, the problems of
illegal immigration, forced migration, and so on (Hassan 1996; Yamamoto
1996). The literature on security, however, has been dominated by a
traditional point of view that defines security strictly in terms of
military [and political aspects], which have been historically, almost
by definition, chiefly the province of males, “to be at peace, prepare
for war.”

Challenging this Realism and Neorealism, scholars argue that conflict
can be avoided and war can be prevented through the formation of
international organizations. This "Idealist" school of thought-later
known as Neoliberal Institutionalism - proposes that international
organizations, e.g., the United Nations and ASEAN, can help to manage
conflict and keep it from escalating into war. The establishment of the
League of Nations in 1917, was partly due to the influence of this
Idealism school of thought (Keohane 1989; Zarina 2006).

Nevertheless, World War II broke out in 1939 in Europe and then in East
Asia, and that ended the life of this international organization.
Following World War II, the United Nations was formed by the major
powers of the US, Britain, France, Soviet Union and China. The aim of
the UN was to maintain “peace and security” of the world, and the
increasing interdependence, that escalated even more from the 1970s
onward, has seemed to many to have validated this Neoliberal approach.
The UN has become an important mechanism, challenging the Realism and
Neorealism views about peace and security.

Yet, recent events, such as the September 11, 2001 attack on the World
Trade Center in New York, have once again caused scholars to reevaluate
their theories of international relations, especially concerning
violence conducted by non-state actors towards not only states but
towards people in general - i.e, ultimately toward the whole human race,
in as much as all people everywhere are now threatened by forces that
are beyond the control of any state. Focus has largely remained on the
state as the main entity to be protected. What we seem to be having
trouble understanding is the growing interconnectedness. Issues that are
important for one country so often have a spillover impact onto other
countries.


