3. HUMAN SECURITY
=================

The idea of protecting survival of states was challenged, when the UN
published its*Human Development Report 1994.* In the report human
security as a concept emerged and began to attract academia and
government officials attention. Since then, its slogan “freedom from
fear and freedom from wants” became famous world wide. Human security
refers to a kind of security that does not focus on either the
traditional “national security” nor even on the expanded “comprehensive
security,” both of which are concerned first with the entity of the
state. It focuses instead on the importance of protecting the well-being
of the human race - not just the security of one’s own people, but of
all-cutting across distinctions and boundaries of nationality and
ethnicity, class and culture, gender, and religion. UN human security
included seven categories of security and wellbeing that are necessary
to ensure those two freedoms: food, health, economic, environmental,
personal, community and political security.

Following that in 1999, (at the state level) a group of foreign
ministers met in Norway and formed Human Security Network (HSN). The
aims of HSN is “… to energize political process aimed at preventing or
solving conflicts and promoting peace and development”
(http://www.humansecuritynetwork.org/principle\_e.php)(visited
5/07/2007). The shifting paradigm from protecting of the state to the
protecting of the people continue to invite a hot debate among the
academia. By focusing on people, human security does not mean that we
totally exclude state, since many of the human security issues require
state’s action and commitment. What is needed is the serious commitment
of state to protect the people, the backbone of a state. Other than the
fourteen members of HSN, Japan is another major player that has adopted
the human security approach in its foreign policy formulations. Unlike
Canada, which has focused on human rights as important elements of human
security, Japan’s approach of human security has been more on
development which has been exemplified in its Official Development
Assistance (ODA) as well as displaced people and refugees. In 1999,
Japan’s initiatives has also helped to launch the United Nations Trust
Fund for Human Security, where the funding goes to human development
area such as education, health, and small scale infrastructure
development (http://ochaonline.un.org/webpage.asp?MenuID=9432&Page=1505)
(visited 5/7/2007).

In the following year, at the UN Millennium Summit, Commission of Human
Security was established. The aim is to address critical and pervasive
threats to human security, among others.  Interestingly, although
visioning a world where human are more secured, Japan is not member of
HSN. In 2003, Commission of Human Security submitted its report, “Human
Security Now,” which has emphasized “ … protecting people from critical
and pervasive threats and situations, building on their strengths and
aspirations. It also means creating systems that give people the
building blocks of survival, dignity and livelihood. Human security
connects different types of freedoms - freedom from want, freedom from
fear and freedom to take action on one's own behalf. To do this, it
offers two general strategies: protection and empowerment”
(http://www.humansecurity\_chs.org/finalreport/Outlines/outline.pdf)(visited
5 July 2007). Human Security Now thus is concerned about future
generations.

In Southeast Asia, Thailand remains the only member of HSN. Following
Asian Economic Crisis, between 1997-1998, that hit hard the region,
Thailand established what is known as Ministry of Social Development and
Human Security which is in charged the country’s social affairs,
including eradicating poverty. In 1998, at the ASEAN Post-Ministerial
Conference (PMC) in Manila, ASEAN created an ASEAN-PMC Caucus on Human
Security. Later another ASEAN-PMC Caucus was established on Social
Safety Nets. ASEAN further took a proactive approach when it announced
ASEAN Vision 2020, focusing on human security within a context of
societal security (http://www.aseansec.rg/184.htm) (visited 20/6/2006).
ASEAN continue to assimilate the approach of human security when it
includes it in Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting in
Bangkok 2003.  Therefore we can sum up that even though human security
focus on the survival of human, there is no common approach. In general,
it can be conclude that SE Asian (in particular ASEAN) states have been
especially concerned abut their sovereignty.

In SE Asia, the human security discourse appears to be a critique
towards comprehensive security (Acharya 2002; Anthony 2002). States in
Southeast Asia adopted the concept to defend their national boundaries
from both military and non military threats. Malaysia, an Islamic
country, for instance, declared illicit drug, what is today’s
nontraditional security issue, as a threat to its national security in
1983, during the Cold War. Closer assessment revealed that while many
nontraditional issues, including HIV-AIDS, considered as threats, but
there appears to be no common understanding of what human security is
all about.

Similarly, the problems of diluting the concept of human security by
making all issues somehow relate to it, presents another challenge. Like
others, the author tends to agree that there should be a boundary to
differentiate what constitute threats. As discussed, human security is
about protection of the people. The author has mentioned elsewhere that
threat to security of the people at least can be grouped into three
categories. First, societal security, which includes security for the
most vulnerable groups such as the impoverished, the disabled, ethnic
minority groups, and women and children. The second category refers to
the threats to human security due to the unevenness of globalization.
The third refers to threats to the survival of individuals which include
the preservation of the quality of life (Zarina 2006). In addition to
those categories, in Asia, we should add another important term. This is
what this author refers to as “human safety.”

An important question that needs to be examined is the vulnerability of
the people due to the many natural disaster such as volcanic eruptions,
floods, tsunamis, hurricanes and may more. It is proposed that threats
to these people can not be grouped under human security rather they are
the victims of human safety.[i] Thus based on this definition, we can
sum up that human safety refer to the safety of the people due to the
unintended threats while human security refers to the intended
(controllable) threats one of which is the armed conflicts, illegal
activities of organized crime, landmines, and others.  Following the
above definition, threats to human security is therefore preventable.
(The above discussion can be summarize as follows)

Characteristics of Comprehensive Security and Human Security

![](http://alhassanain.org/english/books/0824-human_security_in_islam/images/image001.jpg)

Source: Zarina Othman, “Human Security Concepts, Approaches and Debates
in SE Asia” (AFES Press2007).

![](http://alhassanain.org/english/books/0824-human_security_in_islam/images/image002.jpg)


