5. ISLAM HADHARI: MALAYSIA’S APPROACH OF HUMAN SECURITY
=======================================================

Islam Hadhari, or civilizational Islam emphasizes the need for balanced
development, which covers both physical and spiritual development. This
means Islam Hadhari emphasizes developing a thinking society, social
harmony, and economic progress. It is an effort to bring the*Ummah* back
to basics, back to the fundamentals, as prescribed in the*Qur’an*
(Muslims Hollybook) and the*Hadith* (Prophets Muhammad pbuh words), that
form the foundation of Islamic civilization. Islam Hadhari is merely an
approach to foster an Islamic civilization built upon the noble values
and ideals of Islam (Badawi 2006). It emphasizes development that is
consistent with the tenets of Islam and that focuses on enhancing the
quality of life for every citizen, regardless of his or her religion.
Thus it suggests that Islam Hadhari is about empowering people or human
security. This approach is also inspired by the Malaysian Muslims’ firm
belief that the tide of radicalism and extremism can be checked and
reversed with good governance, healthy democratic practices, and
employment of the citizenry through education, as well as equitable
sharing of the benefits of economic growth.

There are ten main principles, which Muslim nations and communities must
demonstrate, namely, 1. Faith and piety in Allah; 2. A just and
trustworthy government; 3. A free and independent people; 4. Mastery of
knowledge; 5. Balanced and comprehensive economic development; 6. A good
quality of life; 7. Protection of the rights of minority groups and
women; 8. Cultural and moral integrity; 9. Protection of the
environment; 10. Strong defenses

The main characteristics of Islam Hadhari are as follows:

Universality: It is based on Islam, a universal message for mankind that
is based on mercy; Godliness: It is based on divine scripture and works
on bringing people closer to their Lord. Hence, it is a godly end and
means, and has a divine source and reference; Morality: Its ultimate
concern is maintaining a good character and good human relations;
Tolerance: Tolerance is essential to create a society based on peace,
stability, unity, cooperation, and solidarity among all it segments and
with all its different traditions and beliefs. This kind of tolerance is
based on trying to genuinely understand the other and respect cultural
and religious convictions (ibid.).

In addition , Islam Hadhari also presents:

Comprehensiveness: It integrates both scripture-based sciences and
modern sciences. Another feature is its all encompassing program to deal
with the individual, society, and the state.

Moderation: This is the main methodology for the perspective, which is
based on gradualism and easiness in implementation. Through this
implementation, there will be a balance between the interests of all -
the individual and the society, spiritual and worldly needs, and ideals
and reality.

Diversity: The context of Islam Hadhari is wide ranging; it covers a
wide range of interests on different levels; it is open to new
adjustments and to other human experiments and experiences

Humanity: As a call, Islam Hadhari is focused upon people.

It is clear that the Islam Hadhari concept contributes towards overall
human progress that is balanced between spiritual and material, between
progress and moral values, between religion and worldly concerns. Islam
Hadhari has the potential to curb the militant instincts among religious
detractors. It is important for the Muslim Ummah to be guided in
understanding and practicing Islam as a comprehensive way of life, as a
means to build a civilization. A wholesome way of life will create the
balance between a person’s responsibilities in this world and in the
Hereafter.


