6. CONCLUSION
=============

As discussed, there has been a shifting paradigm from state to human
security. Yet, the dilemma continues as who are responsible to promote
security to the people. In other words, the idea of human security does
not ignore the importance of state entities. Rather, it holds the
perspective that in the long run human security is essential to the
well-being of the state itself. One entity cannot exist in a sustainably
secure state of being without the other.  When the people of a country
suffer from a lack of safety, health, and overall well-being - in other
words, when as individuals and groups they do not experience a state of
being secure- then the country as a whole, including its sovereignty and
ability to protect against outside threats, is put at risk. When there
is poor health among the populace-not only their physical and mental
health, but also poor economic and social health- then the health of the
nation itself is also threatened. Providing protection and security to
the people is thus seen as an essential means of providing security to
the state.

The human security approach tells us that peace can no longer be defined
as the absence of war. What is more important is the quality of life for
people. The contribution of religion, in this paper - Islam, has helped
to empower human (ummah). It also suggests that ummah is about the
survival of people (human race). Thus, it is concluded that human
security is universal because it cuts across national boundaries, etc.
Malaysia’ Islam Hadhari provides one of the empirical evidences about
the important roles played by religion in human security thus help to
bridge the gap between the western concept of human security and the
Asian concept of human security.


