APPENDIX.
=========

What follows concerning the Royal Game of Chúgán comes from the Appendix
to Vol. 1. of Sir William Ouseley's Travels in the East.

Firdúsi tells of Siavesh and his Iranian (Persian) Heroes astonishing
Afrasiáb of Turán with their Skill at this Game 600 years before Christ;
and Gushtasp (Hystaspes), to the sound of Drum and Trumpet, drives the
Ball Invisible with his Blow. Nizámi sets Shírín and her Maidens playing
at it, against her King, Khusrau Parvíz, and his Ministers;

"On one side was the Moon and her Stars,

"On the other The Shah and his Firmán-bearers."

Ouseley however (allowing for Poetic License) believes the Game was
played "through almost every Reign of the Sassanian Dynasty-as much
esteemed by the Mahommedan Kings as by their Fire-worshipping
Predecessors."

"We find the Greek Emperor, Manuel Commenus, with his Byzantine Princes
and Nobles, enjoying this Amusement on Horse-back in the 12th Century;
the Wooden Ball having been exchanged for one more soft, form’d of stuff
'd Leather; and the Stick, or Wand, instead of a Hammer-like Head,
terminating in a Hoop; which, as our Battledores or Tennis-rackets,
presented to the Ball a reticulated space. This Imperial Sport is well
described by the Historian Cinnamus, who probably was a Spectator." It
went by the slightly altered name Tsukanisterion-which word, however,
since Chúgán means the Bandy-stick employed, more properly signifies, I
suppose, the Ground played on; and equally related to the Persian, had
they chosen to affix, as so often, the Verb common to themselves, the
Greeks, the Latins, and us, and called the place of Exercise
Chúgán*istán* ; or Chúgán-*stand* .

Piétro della Valle, who saw it played in Shah Abbas’ time (1618), calls
it "Pallamaglio," and found both Game and Name subsisting in the
Florentine "Calcio"-only that the Florentine played a-foot, and the
Persian "piu nobilmente a Cavallo." The Spanish Jesuit Ovalle found it
also (also on Foot) under the name of "Chueca," in South America, in
1646.

Ducange finds Name and Game also in the "Chicane"of Languedoc, from
which he naturally thinks it borrowed; not daring to push Derivation to
the English word "Chiquen," he says, "qui signifie un Poullet; en sorte
que ‘*Chiquaner* ’ seroit imiter les Poullets qui ont coutûme de courir
les uns apres les autres pour arracher les morceaux du Bec," etc.

Englishmen know the Game well (on Foot too, and with such Leather Balls
as the Persians perhaps knew not how to harden), under many Forms and
Names-Golf, Stow-Ball, Shinty, Hocky, Bandy, etc. And now with regard to
the Frontispiece. It is "accurately copied" from an Engraving in Sir
William's Book, which he says (and as those who care to look into the
Bodleian for it may see), is " accurately copied from a very beautiful
Persian MS., containing the Works of Hafíz, transcribed in the Year 956
of the Hejirah, 1549 of Christ; the MS. is in my own Collection. This
Delineation exhibits the Horsemen contending for the Ball; their short
Jackets seem peculiarly adapted to the Sport; we see the Míl, or Goals;
Servants attend on

Foot Holding Chúgáns in readiness for other Persons who may join in the
Amusement, or to supply the place of any that may be broken. A young
Prince-as his Parr, or Feather, would indicate-receives on his Entrance
into the Meidan, or Place of Exercise, a Chúgán from the hands of a
bearded Man very plainly dressed; yet (as an intelligent Painter at
Ispahan assured me, and as appears from other Miniatures in the same
Book) this Bearded Figure is meant to represent Hafíz himself," etc.

The Persian legend at the Top Corner is the Verse from Hafíz which the
Drawing illustrates;

Shahsuvára Khúsh bemeidán ámedy gúiy bezann.

Though the Sticks, or Bats, are here represented*long* , they really
were (as Chardin and others report) so short as to cause the Rider to
stoop below the Saddlebow to strike; which, the Horse going full gallop,
was great part of the Difficulty. And Tabri describes Events in the
Eighth Century (just before his own Time), when Harun Alraschid was
still little, so that when on Horseback, "he could not reach to strike
the Ball with a Chúgán." Ouseley also, judging from the Illustration (in
which Persian Artists are not very accurate), thinks the Chúgán sticks
were only*generally* , or partially. semicircular at the striking End.
But that they were so (varying perhaps a little in degree as our Bandy
sticks do) is proved by the Text of the Present Poem, as also by a
previous line in the Original, where-

"The Realm of Existence is the space of his Meidan,

"The Ball of Heaven in the Crook of his Chúgán."

And passages in Hafíz speak of his Heart as being carried off by his
Beloved's Eyebrow; which no Persian Lover ever dreamt of but as arched
indeed.

As the "Fair One" of Persian Mysticism is the Deity's Self-so the Points
of that Beauty (as in our Canticles) adumbrate so many of the Deity's
Attributes; varying however with various Poets, or their Commentators.
Sir W. Jones speaks of The Hair as emblematic of "The Expansion of
Divine Glory"-The Lips as of "Hidden Mysteries"-The Down of the Cheek as
"Spirits round the  Throne," whose central point of excessive Light is
darken’d into the Mole upon the Cheek!-Tholuck, from a Turkish
Commentary, interprets the Ringlets as "The Divine Mysteries;" the
Forehead their Manifestation, etc.

The Beauty of Absál, though Sensual, yet seduces Salámán (The Soul) with
its Likeness to the Divine; and her Tresses, as we see, play their part,
involving him in their Intricacies. The following Ode of Jámi's on the
subject very happily entangles the Ear with its repetitions of that
mysterious Zulf which closes the first two, and every alternate Line, to
the End. "Le Texte de cette Ode," says De Saçy, "est d’une Charme
inexprimable que l’on chercheroit inutilement dans une Traduction." The
Persian therefore is here vocalized as nearly as possible in English
Notes, to give the Reader a Notion of the harmony which is its chief
Merit. But I subjoin for the Lover of literal Translation a very literal
one, which he can if he chooses place word for word under the Persian,
and, if he will accept a very little help at starting, may construe into
what form he pleases: supplying for himself a Verb and a Point where the
Reader of the original has to do so.

The apostrophized*’i* (here written, but in Persian only pronounced)
either denotes that the following Noun, Pronoun, or Adjective belongs to
it as Genitive or Epithet-as in the first line "*dil’i man* " ="heart of
I (Me);" or acts merely as a*passing Note* of harmony (with a People who
hate all harshness but in Deed) between any two Consonants and a third,
or between any consonanted long Vowel and a succeeding Consonant, unless
that long Vowel's Consonant be*n* . "Tamám ’i zulf" in line 3 is an
instance of the*’i* in its latter use. In both cases it is common in
quantity.

The ra in the 5th and last lines mark the Dative.

Ay dil’í man sayd’i dam’í zulf’i tó

Dám’i dilhá gashta nám’í zulf’i to

Banda shud dar zulf’i tó dilhá tamám

Dam ŭ band ámad tamám’í zulf’i to

Dád’i tashríf’ í ghŭlám’ í-bandará

Zulf’i tó ay man ghŭlám’ í zulf’i tó

Láik’í rukhsár’i gulrang’ í tŏ níst

Juz nikáb’ f mushkif’ám’ í zulf’i tó

Ram kunand az dam’ i murghán way ajáb

Ján’ i bí árám’i rám’í zulf’ i to

Zulf’i tó bálá’i mah dárad makám

Bas buland ámad makám ’i zulf’i to

Subh’i íkbál’ ast’i tálí’ har nafás

Banda-Jámí-rá zi shám’i zulf’i tó.

Ah heart I prey snare Ringlet You

Snare Hearts become name Ringlet you

Bound are in Ringlet you Hearts wholly

Snare and bond become wholly Ringlet you

Give honour Slave-bound p. 59

Ringlet you Ah I Slave Ringlet you

Worthy cheek rose-colour’d you not is

Except Veil musky-natured Ringlet you

Escape make from Snare Birds Ah strange

Soul without peace obsequious of Ringlet you

Ringlet you above Moon has place

Very high is place Ringlet you

Dawn Bliss is revealed every breath

Bondman-Jámi from Night Ringlet you.

### NOTES

###

Page 1. LAILA, MAJNÚN.-all well-known Types of Eastern Lovers. SHÍRÍN
and her Suitors figure in Sec. XX.

Page 1. To COZEN THE WORLD.-the Persian Mystics also represent the Deity
Dice-ing with Human Destiny behind the Curtain.

Page 2. CENSOR.-"the Appollonius of Keat's Lamia."

Page 2. NO ROOM FOR TWO.-This Súfí Identification with Deity (further
illustrated in the Story of Sect. XIX.) is shadowed in a Parable of
Jelaladdín, of which here is an outline. "One knocked at the Beloved's
Door; and a Voice asked from within, 'Who is there?' and he answered,'
It is I: Then the Voice said, This House will not hold Me and Thee.' And
the Door was not opened. Then went the Lover into the Desert, and fasted
and prayed in Solitude. And after a Year he returned, and knocked again
at the Door. And again the Voice asked, 'Who is there?' and he said, 'It
is Thyself!' and the Door was opened to him."

Page 3. THE POET'S NAME.-the name "JAMI," also signifying "A Cup." The
Poet's YÚSUF and ZULAIKHA opens also with this Divine Wine, the
favourite Symbol of Hafíz and other Persian Mystics. The "Tavern" spoken
of is The World.

I listen in the Tavern of Sweet Songs,

And catch no Echo of their Harmony:

The Guests have drunk the Wine and are departed,

Leaving their empty Bowls behind-not one

To carry on the Revel Cup in hand!

Up JAMI then! and whether Lees or Wine

To offer-boldly offer it in Thine!

Page 4. OLD STORIES.-"Yúsuf and Zulaikha," "Layla and Majnún," etc.

Page 4. GLASSES TURN’D TO FOUR.-first notice of Spectacles in Oriental
Poetry, perhaps.

Page 4. "The Master," whose Verse is quoted, is Jellalladdín, the Great
Sufi Teacher. The "King Himself" is Yacúb Beg, whose Father's Vision
appears in the next Section.

Page 7. SHÁHZEMÁN.-"Lord of the World, SOVEREIGN; HASAN, BEAUTIFUL,
GOOD." HASAN BEG of Western Persia, famous for his Beauty, had helped
Jámi with Escort in a dangerous Pilgrimage. He died (as History and a
previous line in the Original tell) before Salámán was written, and was
succeeded by his Son YÁCÚB.

Page 8. YÚN.-or "YAVAN," Son of Japhet, from whom the Country was called
"YÚNAN,"-IONIA, meant by the Persians to express GREECE generally.
Sikander is, of course, Alexander the Great, of whose Ethics Jámi wrote,
as Nizami of his Deeds.

Page 9. KÁF.-the Fabulous Mountain supposed by Asiatics to surround the
World, binding the Horizon on all sides.

Page 9. SERÁB.-miráge; but, of two Foreign Words, why not the more
original Persian? identical with the Hebrew Sháráb; as in ISAIAH XV. 7;
"The SHÁRÁB (or MIRÁGE) shall become a Lake;"-rather, and better, than
our Version, "The parched Ground shall become a Pool."-See GESENIUS.

Page 11. THE DELUGE: in the Kúran God engages to save Noah and his
Family meaning all who believed in the Warning. One of Noah's Sons
(Canaan or Yam, some think) would not believe. "And the Ark swam with
them between waves like Mountains, and Noah called up to his Son, who
was separated from him, saying, 'Embark with us, my Son, and stay not
with the Unbelievers.' He answered, 'I will get on a Mountain which will
secure me from the Water.' Noah replied, 'There is no security this Day
from the Decree of God, except for him on whom he shall have Mercy.' And
a Wave passed between them, and he became one of those who were drowned.
And it was said, 'Oh Earth, swallow up thy waters, and Thou, oh Heaven,
withhold thy Rain!' And immediately the Water abated and the Decree was
fulfilled, and the Ark rested on the Mountain Al Judi, and it was said,
'Away with the ungodly People!'-Noah called upon his Lord and said, 'Oh
Lord, verily my Son is of my Family, and thy Promise is True; for Thou
art of those who exercise Judgment.' God answered, 'Oh Noah, verily he
Is not of thy Family; this intercession of thine for him is not a
righteous work.'"-Sale's KURÁN, Vol. II. p. 21.

Page 13. A RING TO LEAD BY.-'MIHAR,' a Piece of Wood put through a
Camel's Nose to guide him by.

Page 14. SULAYMAN AND BALKÍS.-Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.

Page 15. "MUSSULMAN" is very usually derived from the same "SALEM"
element as "SALÁMÁN." So "Solomon," etc.

Page 16. THE EYE'S BABY: literally, MARDUMAK-the MANNIKIN, Or PUPIL, of
the Eye, corresponding to the Image so frequently used by our old Poets.

Page 17. YEARS AND COURAGE: the same Persian Word serving for Both.

Page 17. THE BALL.-the Game of CHÚGÁN, for Centuries the Royal Game of
Persia, and adopted (Ouseley thinks) under varying modifications of Name
and Practice by other Nations, was played by Horsemen, who, suitably
habited, and armed with semicircular-headed Bats or Sticks so short the
Player must stoop below the Saddle-bow to strike, strove to drive a Ball
through a Goal of upright Pillars. See FRONTISPIECE and APPENDIX.

Page 18. FITTING THE CORD.-bows being so gradually stiffened, to the Age
and Strength of the Archer, as at last to need five Hundredweight of
Pressure to bend, says an old Translation of Chardin, who describes all
the Process up to bringing up the String to the Ear, "as if to hang it
there" before Shooting. Then the First Trial was, who could shoot
highest; then, the Mark, etc. "Premièrement, à bander l’arc; dont l’Art
consiste à le bien tenir, à le bander, et à laisser partir la Corde à
l’aise, sans que la main gauche qui tient l’arc, et qui est toute
étendue, ni la main droite qui manie la Corde, remuent le moins du
monde. On en donne d’abord d’aises à bander; puis de plus durs par
degrès. Les maitres de ces Exercises apprennent à bander l’arc devant
soi, derrière soi, à coté de soi, en haut, en bas-bref, en cent postures
différentes, toujours vite et aisement. Ils ont des arcs fort difficiles
à bander, et, pour essayer la force, on les pend contre un mur à une
Cheville, et on attache des poids à la Corde de l’arc à l’endroit où
l’on appuie la coche de la

Flêche. Les plus durs portent cinque cents pesant avant d’être bandés,"
etc.-Sir JOHN CHARDIN, Vol. III. 437. He elsewhere says, "La bonté d’un
Arc consiste, comme on le dit en Perse, en ce que d’abord il soit rude à
bander, jusqu’ à ce que la Flêche soit à moitié dessus; et qu ’ensuite
il soit mou et aisé, jusqu’ à ce que le bout de la Flêche soit entré
dans la Corde."

Page 19. THE PLEIADS.-i.e. compactly strung, as opposed to Discursive
Rhetoric, which is compared to the scattered Stars of THE BIER AND ITS
MOURNERS, or what we call THE GREAT BEAR. This contrast is otherwise
prettily applied in the Anvari Soheili-"When one grows poor, his
Friends, heretofore compact as THE PLEIADS, disperse wide asunder as THE
MOURNERS."

Page 19. HÁTIM'S BOUNTY.-The Persian Type of Liberality, infinitely
celebrated.

Page 20. AN ALIEN SHAH.-the Hero of the Story being of YÚNAN-IONIA, or
GREECE generally, (the Persian Geography not being very precise,)-and so
not of THE FAITH.

Page 21. ADORNING THE BOWS: with dark Indigo Paint, as the Archery Bow
with a thin Papyrus-like Bark.

Page 21. A GRAIN OF MUSK.-a 'PATCH,' sc.-"Noir comme le Musc."-De Sacy.

Page 23. FORTUNE'S SHADOW.-alluding to the Phœnix, the Shadow of whose
wings foretold a Crown upon the Head it passed over.

Page 27 and elsewhere-THE THRONE is spoken of as 'under Foot.' The
Persepolitan Sculpture still discovers its King keeping his Chair as
Europeans do with a separate Footstool. But in Jámi's time The Throne
was probably of the same Fashion that Chardin saw Solíman twice crowned
on 200 years after-perhaps the very same-"Un petit Tabouret carré," 3
feet high, Golden and Jewelled, on which the Prince gathers up his feet
in Oriental fashion, so as it serves for Throne and Footstool too. "Ce
Tabouret, hors le Temps qu’il sert à cette Céremonie se garde avec grand
Soin dans le Trésor Royal qui est au Donjon de la Forteresse d’Ispahan,"
where also, to prove the Conservatism of Persia so far as Habits go,"
J’ai’vu," he says, "des Habits de Tamurlan; ils sont taillés tout comme
ceux qu’on fait aujourd’hui, sans aucune difference." So the Mirrors
used in Persia 200 years ago were commonly of polished Metal, just as
Jámi so often describes. [Solíman's 2nd Coronation came about because of
his having fallen so ill from Debauchery, that his Astrologers said his
first must have taken place under an Evil conjunction of Stars-so he
must be crowned again-which he was-Chardin looking on both times.]

Page 27. RAKHSH.-"LIGHTNING.' The name of RUSTAM'S famous Horse in the
SHAH-NAMEH.

Page 27. "KAI" which almost signifies "Gigantic King," properly belongs
to Khusrau, 3rd King of the Kaianian Dynasty; but is here borrowed for
Parvíz as a more mythical Title than Shah or King.

Page 27. KHUSRAU PARVÍZ (Chosroc The Victorious), Son of NOSHÍRAVAN The
Great; slain, after Thirty Years of Prosperous Reign, by his Son
SHIRÚEH, who, according to some, was in Love with his

Father's Mistress SHÍRÍN. See further, Section XXI., for one of the most
dramatic Tragedies in Persian History.

Page 28. The Pen of "KÛN"-"Esto!"-The famous Passage of Creation stolen
from Genesis by the Kurán.

Page 28. SEVEN AND FOUR: Planets?-adding Sun, Moon, and the Nodal
Dragon's Head and Tail; according to the Sanscrit Astronomy adopted by
Persia.

I have proposed "The Planets" for those mysterious "SEVEN AND FOUR." But
there is a large Choice, especially for the ever mystical "SEVEN"-Seven
Commandments; 7 Climates; 7 Heavens, etc. The "FOUR" may be the 4
Elements, or even the 4 acknowledged Mahommedan Gospels-namely, The
Pentateuch, Psalms, New Testament, and Kurán. For Salámán, though fabled
'not' of THE FAITH, yet allegorically represents The Mirror of all
Faith, and as The original Form of the Human Soul might be intuitively
enlightened with all the Revelations that were to be-might even be, in
esoteric Sufíism, The Come and Coming Twelfth Imám who had 'read' all
the previous Eleven; it being one Doctrine in the East that it is ever
the 'Last' and most perfect Prophet who was 'First' Created and reserved
in the Interior Heaven nearest to God till the Time of his Mission
should come.

Sir John Chardin quotes Seven Magnificats written in gold upon azure
over Shah Abbas’ Tomb in the great Mosque at Kóm-composed, he says, "par
le docte Hasan-Cazy," mainly in glory of ALI the Darling Imám of Persia,
but of which the First Hymn "est tout de Mahomet." This has some
passages so very parallel with the Sage's Address to SALÁMÁN, that
(knowing how little worth such parallels are, especially in a Country
where Magnificent Titles of Honour are stereotyped ready to be lavished
on Prophet or Khan) nevertheless really seemed borrowed by "le docte
Hasan-Cazy," who probably was hard set to invent any new. They show at
least how Jámi saluted his 'Alien' Prince with Titles due to Mahomet's
Self, and may perhaps light any curious Reader to a better understanding
of these Seven and Four. He calls Mahomet "Infaillible Expositeur des
Quatre Livres"-those Gospels;-[So Sir John: but the Kurán being one,
this looks rather addrest to Ali than Mahomet.]- "Conducteur des huit
mobiles" the 8 Heavens of the Planets, says the Editor; "Gouverneur des
Sept Parties" the Climates; "Archetype des Choses créées; Instrument de
la Creation du Monde: le plus relevé de la race d’Adam. Ce Peintre
incomprehensible, qui a tiré tout d’un seul Coup de Pinceau 'KOUN
FIKOUN,' n’a jamais fait un si beau portrait que le Globe de ton
Visage."

Page 29. THE TEN INTELLIGENCES.-this passage finds its explanation in
the last Section.

Page 32. GAU AND MAHI.-The Bull and Fish-the lowest Substantial Base of
Earth. "He first made the Mountains; then cleared the Face of Earth from
Sea; then fixed it fast on Gau; Gau on Mahi; and Mahi on Air; and Air on
what? on NOTHING; Nothing upon Nothing, all is Nothing-Enough." Attar
quoted in De Sacy's PENDNAMAH, XXXV.

Page 32. The Sidereal Dragon, whose Head, according to the Pauránic (or
Poetic) Astronomers of the East, devoured the Sun and Moon in Eclipse.
"But WE know," said Ramachandra to Sir W. Jones, "that the supposed

Head and Tail of the Dragon mean only the NODES, or Points formed by
Intersections of the Ecliptic and the Moon's Orbit." Sir W. Jones’
Works, Vol. IV. P. 74.

Page 33. "Iram Garden." "Mahomet," says Sir W. Jones, "in the Chapter of
The Morning, towards the end of his Alcoran, mentions a Garden called
'Irem,' which is no less celebrated by the Asiatic Poets than that of
the Hesperides by the Greeks. It was planted, as the Commentators say,
by a King named Shedád,"-deep in the Sands of Arabia Felix-"and was once
seen by an Arabian who wandered far into the Desert in search of a lost
Camel."

Page 34. WÁMIK.-Another Typical LOVER OF AZRA, A VIRGIN.

Page 35. A MIRROR.-mythically attributed by the East-and in some wild
Western Avatar-to this Shah's Predecessor, Alexander the Great. Perhaps
(V. Hammer thinks) the Concave Mirror upon the Alexandrian Pharos, which
by Night projected such a fiery Eye over the Deep as not only was fabled
to exchange Glances with that on the Rhodian Colossus, and in Oriental
Imagination and Language to penetrate "THE WORLD," but by Day to Reflect
it to him who looked therein with Eyes to see. The Cup of their own
JAMSHÍD had, whether Full or Empty, the same Property. And that Silver
Cup found in Benjamin's Sack-"Is not this it in which my Lord drinketh,
and whereby indeed he DIVINETH?-Gen. XLIV. 5. Our Reflecting Telescope
is going some way to realize the Alexandrian Fable.

Page 35. THE CUP OF HAPPINESS AND TEARS. κρατηρα μακρον ἡδονης καὶ
δακρυων κιρνωντες εξεπινον αχρις ες μεθην.

Page 36. HURL’D HIM, ETC.-One Story is that Khusrau had promised if
Firhád cut through a Mountain, and brought a Stream through, Shírín
should be his. Firhád was on the point of achieving his Work, when
Khusrau sent an old Woman (here, perhaps, purposely confounded with
Fate) to tell him Shírín was dead; whereon Firhád threw himself headlong
from the Rock. The Sculpture at Beysitún (or Besitún), where Rawlinson
has decyphered Darius and Xerxes, was traditionally called Firhád's.

Page 36. WILL DISCHARGED.-He Mesmerizes Him!-See also further on this
Power of the Will in Sections XXIII. and XXVI.

Page 38. THE MINION.-"Shah" and "Sháhid" (Mistress)-a sort of Punning
the Persian Poets are fond of.

Page 41. ANGUISH.-

"When the Cloud of Spring beheld the Evil Disposition of Time,

"Its Weeping fell upon the Jessamine and Hyacinth and Wild Rose."-HAFIZ.

Page 44. "ZUHRAH." The Planetary and Celestial Venus.

Page 45. THE SPIRIT.-"MAANY." The Mystical pass-word of the Súfís, to
express the Transcendental New Birth of The Soul.

Page 46. MY SON.-one sees Jámi taking Advantage of his Allegorical Shah
to read a Lesson to the Real-whose Ears Advice, unlike Praise, scarce
ever reached unless obliquely. The Warning (and doubtless with good
Reason) is principally aimed at the Minister.

Page 49. The Story is of 'Generals,' though enacted by 'Particulars.'

Page 50. "These Intelligences are only another Form of the Neo-Platonic
Dæmones. The Neo-Platonists held that Matter and Spirit could have no

Intercourse-they were, as it were, 'incommensurate.' How then, granting
this premise, was Creation possible? Their answer was a kind of gradual
Elimination. God the "Actus Purus," created an Œon; this Œon created a
Second; and so on, until the Tenth Œon was sufficiently Material (as the
Ten were in a continually descending Series) to affect Matter, and so
cause the Creation by giving to Matter the Spiritual 'Form.'

Similarly we have in Sufíism these Ten Intelligences in a corresponding
Series, and for the same End.

There are Ten Intelligences, and Nine Heavenly Spheres, of which the
Ninth is the Uppermost Heaven, appropriated to the First Intelligence;
the Eighth, that of the Zodiac, to the Second; the Seventh, Saturn, to
the Third; the Sixth, Jupiter, to the Fourth; the Fifth, Mars, to the
Fifth; the Fourth, The Sun, to the Sixth; the Third, Venus, to the
Seventh; the Second, Mercury, to the Eighth; the First, The Moon, to the
Ninth; and THE EARTH is the peculiar Sphere of the TENTH, or lowest
Intelligence, celled THE ACTIVE.''
