The Reason For Writing This Book and the Writer's Style
=======================================================

Some of my learned friends joined me in a noble and scholarly
gathering. Discussions followed concerning the authencity of traditions
until it took us to the subject of the 'AWAITED MAHDI' - a subject which
we (the twelve Imami'ah Shias) believe and which constitutes one of the
principles of religion. Then, some of those present asked: "What do our
Sunni brethrens say in this regard and whether any tradition(s) has been
narrated from their sources which are compatible with our traditions or
not?"

I replied: "Yes. As per their own research, they are possessing
diffused (Mustafiza) and authentic (Mustawatir1) traditions and some
among them have also written books in this regard. However, a few of
them have spoken about this subject from the viewpoint of its
originality, characteristics and other points, which we believe.

Yes, to them there exists controversies and (uncertainties')
improbabilities which one generation usually inherits from the previous
one and they speak about them and mention them in their books or
writings with differences only in wordings but similar in meaning.

Thereafter one inquired: "Can you write an article with regard to this
matter and restrain yourself in your writing to only those traditions
which have also appeared in their references and then mention those
difficulties and improbabilities (which they are disturbed with) and
then give its reply?" I replied: "Entering into such kind of affair will
cause the lines of friendship to tear apart and I do not wish such a
split to happen especially at present when we are in need of unity among
the Muslims."

Then one of them said: "Discussions in matters pertaining to knowledge
will not bring any harm if such a discussion proceeds through observing
the rules of debate and if one's words do not go beyond the boundaries
of courtesy and morals. In fact no one has any right to speak harshly or
rebuke the others. Indeed, man is free in his views and doctrines and it
is his right to stand by them. However we see in this respect that some
have harmed others through their words and hence should bear the
responsibility."

Thereafter I replied: "I accept your reasoning and shall enter this
field by depending on the Strength and Power of Allah and by observing
the customary etiquettes. Indeed Allah guides to the right path whomever
He whishes.

From among the books written by our Sunni brothers in this respect
which will be made use only a few in my possession. I examined all of
one after the other and how inquiringly I my task! In most of them, the
traditions have not been mentioned in the specific I collected a
sufficient number of the traditions 1-A mutawatir tradition is a
tradition where all climes of its narrators -right from the time of the
Holy Prophet until now- are in such great number that one is bound to
accept its authenticity. On the other hind a 'Mustifiza' tradition is a
tradition which even though does not possess the level of certainty and
authenticity of a 'Mutawatir' tradition, yet it enjoys a high level of
credibility.

needed to serve our objective and arranged them under specific topics.
I wrote every tradition under the specific topics, which were related to
them and with regard to those traditions, which comprise of many points;
I have brought each one of those points under the same related topics
and then mentioned the severance of the traditions.

Let it not remain unsaid that I have narrated the afore-mentioned
traditions from the very books which I had (those traditions) in my
possession and with regard to those particular books which were not in
my possession, I have narrated them by relying on their respective
honorable scholars. Furthermore, in narrating the traditions, I have
confined myself only to those books, which have been printed in Sunni
printing houses. Moreover I have avoided narrating from those books
which have been printed in Iran such as
'AL-BAYAN-FI-AKHBAR-SAHEB-E-ZAMAN','AL-FUSOOL-AL-
MUHIMME-FI-MA'RIFAT-UL-A'IMMA' and 'TAZKERAT-UL-UMMAH-
FI-AHWAAL-A'IMMA' - except for some points extracted from the book of
'TAZKERAT-UL-AIMMA'.

Similarly I have refrained myself from narrating traditions from our
own great scholars and from what has been deposited in our own books and
writings for the simple reason that perhaps it may become a cause of
suspicion (i.e. they might think that the quoted tradition is false and
fabricated). However I have used some references from the book
'AL-DURAR-AL-MUSUWIA-FI-SHAR- AL-QA'ED-AL-JAFARIA' written by our Master
Ayatullah Abi Muhammad Sayyid Hassan-al-Sadr Kazemi who has a great
right and to whom we owe a lot. I have used his references not with the
intention of reasoning and argumentation but only as a means of
supporting the subject at hand.

I bear witness to God that I have treated these traditions and the
sayings of the past prior people from the view-point of justice only and
avoided the path of injustice and deviation. I deemed it necessary upon
myself to confirm my belief to reason and not adapt reason to whatever I
believe. Anyone who reads and examines the contents of this book shall
agree to what I have said. Indeed, it is incumbent upon everyone,
particularly in religious matters, to release oneself from following the
track set by others and from delusions or assumptions. One should be on
guard against prejudice and bigotry and only the truth should be kept in
mind. What is advisable is the truth and if anyone finds it at any
place, it shall embrace him.

**A Glancing View**

A researcher who does research in the books of great scholars in
matters such as 'Usul-e-Din' (fundamentals of religion) or 'Furu-e-Din'
(subsidiaries of religion), particularly the books of our Sunni
brethrens will find less an issue like Mahdaviyat which has been
discussed from all aspects-creditability, reliability and
innumerableness of its narrators who are the leading authorities in
traditions irrespective of their differences in status and standards.

Indeed, there are many topics, which are a matter of consensus and
rather unanimously accepted by both sects whether in 'Usul'
(fundamentals) or 'Furu' (subsidaries). Among them the most widely
written topic by Ahl-e-Sunnat is the topic of 'MAHDI'. It is surprising
to note that they have discussed and spoken about the matter of
'Mahdaviyat' for days and nights.

Indeed, as per their own research they have narrated traditions about
'MAHDI' from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) himself, some from his noble
companions and some from his wives with the differences in the length of
the traditions.

They have taken out lengthy and brief traditions concerning 'MAHDI'
from their leading traditionists such as Bukhari, Muslim, Nesa'ee, Abu
Dawoud and Ibn-Maaja. And among the experts of traditions we may mention
such names as Imam Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal, Abul Qasim Tabarani, Abu Naeem
Esfahani, Hamaad-ibn- Yaqub Raujani and Hakem, the author of
'Mustadrak'.

Similarly names such as Ganji, Sebt-ibn-Jauzi, Khaurazmi, Ibn Hajar,
Mulla Ali Muttaqi, the author of 'Kanzul-Ummal', Shablanji and Qunduzi
too cannot be overlooked.

Some of their books in this regard are: 'Manaqib al-Mahdi', 'Fourty
traditions from Abu Na'eem Esfahani, 'Bayan-Fi-Akhbar-Saheb-uz-Zaman'
from Abi Abdulla Ganji, 'Al-Burhan-Fima-Ja'a-Fi-Saheb-uz-Zaman' from
Mulla Ali Muttaqi the author of Kanzul-Ummal, 'Akhbar-al-Mahdi' from
Hamaad-ibn- Yaqub Raujani 'Arf-ul-Wardi-Fi-Akhbar Mahdi' and 'Alamaat
al-Mahdi' both from Jalaluddin Suyuti and the book of
'Al-Qaul-ul-Mukhtasar-Fi-Alamaat Mahdi Muntazar' from
Ibn-Hajar-Asqalani.

Indeed traditions from the Holy Prophet about 'Mahdi-e-Muntazar' and
the Qa'em from the progeny of Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) which have been
narrated through the Sunni sources are numerous in number. Rather they
are 'Mutawatir' (authentic) regarding their own statements. Such says
Ibn Hajr on Page 99 of 'SAWA'EQ' 'Abul Hussein Abri says that the
traditions which have come from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) about the
advent of 'MAHDI' and the fact that he is from Ahl-ul-Bait have come
from successive transmitters.

Shablanji, on Page 231 of "Nur-ul-Absar" says: "The tradition from the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) stating that Mahdi is from my progeny and shall
fill the earth with Justice has come from successive transmitters."

In the second volume of "Futouhat-e-Islamiah" on Page No.322, Zaini
Dehlaan says: "The traditions which speak about the advent of Mahdi are
many in number and are 'Mutawatir' (authentic). Among them there may be
traditions which are 'Sahih' (correct), 'Hassan' (favorable) or 'Za'eef'
(weak). However considering the numerousness of such ('Sahih')
traditions and the multiplicity of its narrators, one cannot but accept
them to be authentic.

In the second volume of the same page he mentions that Allama Sayyid
Muhammad-ibn-Rasul-Barzanji has specified in the end of his book
"Ashshat- Fi-Ashraat-e-Sa'ah", that traditions about MAHDI are
'Mutawatir' (authentic). He also says: 'The fact that the matter of
'Mahdaviyat' is decisive and that he shall be from the progeny of
Fatemah (A.S.) and he shall fill the earth with justice are all
authentic.2

What we have said has been a part of specification of such scholars
about the authenticity and reliability of the traditions concerning
MAHDI, the Awaited one. On this basis, as per the fixed principles in
traditions, there remains no room for any doubt, leave aside denying
them. If we do away with those specifications and testimonies and
examine the traditions of this chapter from the view-point of the chain
of transmission and significance, we can divide them into three parts: -
First Part: Those traditions whose chain of transmission and expression
are evident and are devoid of any doubt. Moreover, as per the research
undertaken by leaders of Ahl-e-Sunnah and their leading authorities (in
traditions) they have confessed in the authenticity and reliability of
such traditions. Hakem in his 'Mustadrak' has acknowledged the
authenticity of some of them, based on the views of Bukhari and Muslim3
and there is no doubt in the necessity of accepting such traditions and
acting upon them.

Second Part: Those traditions where their chain of transmission are
incorrect and their falsity evident and moreover the fixed principles
(of traditions) also necessitates us to accept them because on the one
hand they are as strong as the first part and, on the other hand,
accepting them appears to be more common and general. Rather its
contents have been verified by common consensus.

Third Part: Those traditions which include both aspects-correctness as
well as weakness. However, due to its incompatibility with all the other
authentic traditions, they need to be rejected and not taken into
account. In other words, if it is not possible to esoterically interpret
them so that they come in agreement with all other traditions, like the
ones which express the name of Mahdi to be Ahmad or his father's name to
be the same as the name of the Holy Prophet's father or that he will be
from the progeny of Abu Muhammad Hassan Zaki and not Abu Muhammad Hassan
Askari, are all to be rejected. Moreover, as far as research shows, such
traditions are few in number and what is generally known is that they
have been turned aside.

It is possible to say that the first point (i.e. Mahdi's name) may have
sprung 2-The author of Arf-ul-wardi on Page 85 narrates from Abul-Hasaan
Muhammad-ibn-Hussein ibn Ibrahim ibn- Aasim Sahri that he too has
acknowledged the authenticity of the traditions about Hazrat Mahdi
(A.S.).

3-Suyuti writes: According to Bukhari and Muslim a tradition can be
considered to be a true tradition if its transmission leads to one of
the famous companions where two people narrate from him. Thereafter he
says: 'This is the first measure of correctness and such kinds of
traditions do not exceed even one thousand. Al-Haavi- L-Fatavi Page
114.

due to the traditions specifying that the name of Mahdi is the same as
the Holy Prophet's name. Then it was thought that by the Holy Prophet's
name is meant Ahmad; although what we derive from the diffused
traditions is Muhammad. Similarly it is believed that the second and
third points too have been forged and shortly you shall come to know of
its details and facts.

The point, which we are compelled to mention in this regard is that a
few traditions of the first and second parts (apparently one or two
traditions) comprises such contents that it necessitates their rejection
and history as well as examination of such traditions will testify to
their falseness. The fixed principles in the code of fundamentals
stipulates that whenever a tradition includes some sentences where each
one possesses independence or conveys its own meaning and the general
consensus rejects a part of them, the very sentence has to be discounted
and the rest of the tradition is to be kept. Although Faazel Farid Vajdi
Afandi, the author of 'Da'eratul-Ma'aref' (a Sunni scholar) has
repudiated this principle and considers it incumbent to cast away the
full tradition, we, too, shall agree with him (although our opinion
differs) and disregard such traditions. The remaining traditions will be
sufficient enough to prove our point.


