Chapter Eight : Virtue of Awaiting For Mahdi
============================================

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" (page 493) narrates from 'Khawrazmi'
(book of "Manaqib") that Imam Muhammad Baqir has narrated from his
father who has narrated from his grand-father who has narrated from
Amirul- Mumineen that the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) said: -
"Awaiting for the 'Faraj' (deliverance) is the best act of worship." The
author of 'Manaqib' says: Awaiting for the 'Faraj' means awaiting for
Mahdi's emergence.

Author says: Shii'te traditions corroborate the afore-mentioned
tradition. MEANING OF 'INTEZAR' (AWAITING): 'Intezar' means gaining and
achieving an affair for which one awaits. The reformatory affair with
regards to Mahdi's emergence is not hidden and concealed for any
individual let alone the social board, especially the Shia-Immiyahs.
Firstly, 'Intezar' (Awaiting) by itself invites the satisfaction of
Mahdi so much so that it is said:

'Intezar' is more sever than killing. The essential condition for
Awaiting for the 'Faraj' is employing the mental faculties and fixing
the mind in the direction of the affair for which one is awaiting. This
matter will forcibly become the cause of two affairs: One that the
mental faculty will bring an increase in power and the other that man
can concentrate his entire power on one affair. Moreover than those two
affairs, are amongst the most important things required by man for his
subsistence and future life.

Secondly, the suppression of misfortunes will become easy for man
because he knows that these misfortunes are subject to amends and
provisions. A vast difference exists between those misfortunes which are
known by man to be capable of amendment or not, especially when he
presumes that soon everything will be prepared and Mahdi by his
emergence will fill the earth with Justice and equity.

Thirdly, the necessary condition, for 'Intezar' is this that man should
adore being amongst the companions and Shias of Mahdi and rather amongst
his helpers. This requires that Mahdi's Shia should strive in rectifying
his own self and making good his morals so that he can be worthy enough
of becoming Mahdi's companion and engaging in holy war for him. Verily,
this prosperity requires such ethics, which is scarce today amongst us.
Fourtly, just as 'Intezar' becomes the cause of rectification of the
self and rather the cause of rectification of others, it also becomes
the cause of preparation of the rudiments for Mahdi's victory over his
enemies. The essential condition for this victory is that one should
acquire knowledge and insight especially so when man knows that Mahdi's
victory over his enemies would take place through ordinary channels.

These were some of the effects, which would arise from the act of
'Intezar' (Awaiting) - if at all 'Intezar' is done in its true sense.
Besides, Intezar discovers good and pleasing qualities, which are as
follows:

Firstly, it explores the perfection of wisdom and verity of perception
because a 'Muntazir' (i.e. an Awaiter) believes that an Imam should
exist at all times and knows that the Imam of today is MAHDI. Thus he
brings faith in Mahdi without having seen him. In short; one could
believe in Hazrat without coming into contact with him.

Secondly 'Intezar' for deliverance discovers such affairs as love for
establishment of truth and justice, implementation of Divine Commands
and limitations, execution of the affairs on the basis of a correct and
fundamental pivot and man's achievement of the goals for which he has
been created. Thirdly, it would reveal the veracity of man's love and
friendship towards Ahl-e-bayt and kin of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
because it is by Mahdi's emergence that the Government of Ahl-e-bayt
will be embarked upon, the act of command and prohibition will be at
their liberty and their rights will return back to them.

Fourthly, it reveals the veracity and virtue of man's faith in Mahdi
and his filling of the earth with equity and justice and in his Imamate.
Fifthly, it reveals man's affection towards his fellow creature and his
desire for rectifying them because the goodness and prosperity, which
would arise from Mahdi's emergence, would be experienced by all the
creatures. Most of the points that we have mentioned have come down in
traditions too such as: Important affairs, which arise from 'Intezar'
(Awaiting) of Mahdi's emergence and the good qualities which are
discovered by means of his emergence. Mentioning one of the traditions
or rather one sentence of it causes great surprise in me.

In the book "Kamaluddin", Shaikh Saduq has narrated from Ammar Sabaaty
a lengthy tradition where Imam Sadiq (A.S.) says: 'Ibadat' (worship)
during the rein of a wicked Government is better and more virtuous than
worship during the rein of a right Government. Moreover, reward of
worship is much more under a wicked Government than under a right
Government.

Ammar says: I told Imam: May my life be sacrificed for you. Is it that
we should not desire to be amongst the Qaem's companions at the time of
the emergence of truth? Is it that our actions under the bond of your
leadership and obedience are more virtuous than the actions of
companions during the true Government!?

Imam Sadiq (A.S.) replied: Glory be to Allah! Do we not wish that
Allah, the Blessed, the Sublime should make the Truth and Justice appear
in the lands? That the common condition of the people improves? That
Allah should cause (people's) speech to harmonize and that Allah should
invite the diverse hearts of people? That they should not disobey Allah
on the earth? That His restrictions should apply among His creatures and
that Allah should return the rights to His people so that it may become
manifest, so that nothing of the truth might be concealed through fear
of any one of (His) creaturesâ€¦

**Forsaking the Matter of Fixing the Time of Emergence**

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" (on page 456) has narrated from the
author of Fara'ed-ul-Semtain who has narrated from Ahmad-ibn-Ziyad who
has narrated from Debel-ibn-Ali Khuza'ee a tradition wherein Debel
approaches Imam Ridha (A.S.) and recites his ????? ode and refers, in
some places of his ode to Mahdi and Imam's reply to Debel is as such:
Gebriel has spoken through your tongue. Do you know who that Imam is? He
is the one for whom people will await and they will be submissive to him
at the time of his emergence...107 Regarding the time of Mahdi's
emergence, my father has narrated from his father and they from the
Messenger of Allah as such: The example of Mahdi is like the example of
Oiyamat, which will not come but all of a sudden.

The author says: In some of the traditions about occultation it has
come down that Mahdi shall emerge like a glittering star. Yet some other
traditions mention that God would set right Mahdi's affairs in one
night. It appears that all these sayings refer to this fact that Mahdi's
emergence is unknown and except for the one who has created him, none
are aware of the time of his reappearance. Verily, amongst the affairs
which has greatly been emphasized in the tradition for us (i.e. the
Shias) is the non - fixation of the time of Mahdi's emergence and
leaving this matter to Almighty Allah. Yet some traditions mention that
those who ordain a time for his emergence are liars.

It can be said that the philosophy of not fixing his reappearing at any
time and in any year, month and on any Friday may be due to the
following: Firstly, the divine 'Bada' (change) in which we Shias believe
plays interference in the matter of Mahdi's emergence and is resolute.
Verily, the Will of Allah proceeds in all the Divine Destinies and it is
proper to reverse the order and bring change in His Destinies. Mahdi's
emergence too falls in the category of those incidents in which 'Bada'
is akin to occur just as the same has been clearly stipulated in the
Shiite traditions. As a matter of fact, if the time of Hazrat's
emergence had been fixed and the matter of 'Bada' (too) would have
played its role, then the very matter of (tradition of) emergence along
with its narrator would have been subject to doubt and suspicions. The
Imam (A.S.) has said: "We have not fixed the time of Hazrat's emergence
nor shall we do so in the future."

Secondly, refraining from ascertaining the time of emergence and
leaving it to Divine discretion of and considering the possibility of
Mahdi emerging today or tomorrow forcibly creates an urge and desire in
praying for his early reappearance since it is possible that his
emergence may be linked to 'dua' (Praying) and insistence in request.

Thirdly, the period of Mahdi's emergence is known and the people are
aware of this matter even though they may belong to the few special
class, it would mean that Hazrat has to emerge forcibly and the special
and ordinary class of people especially those desirous of this matter,
must recognize him and the enemies themselves right form the beginning
of his emergence in killing him. Amongst the impossible affairs is this
that on the day of Mahdi's emergence, his 107-A (?????) ode is an ode
which ends with (???) (t) powers will be the same as the powers of his
enemies.

Fourthly, when the affairs of the people are in Imam's hands, he would
be the pivot of the millstone of the Muslims and the focal point of
their social body. Undoubtedly Imam's occultation even though for a
short period will bring the movement of that society to a standstill.
However if the people bring faith in his emergence and have hope in his
return especially so in the near future, it would then be possible for
that society to remain protected from disorder. Fifthly, Awaiting for
emergence at any period will bring an acceleration in the reformity
movement. A person who awaits the arrival of his companion will be bound
to make speed in the preliminary preparation for his arrival lest his
friend arrives suddenly and he may not have fulfilled hi duty.

Truly if 'Intezar' (Awaiting) for Mahdi's emergence is based on
sincerity and non-fixation of time (of his emergence) it would indeed be
regarded as two important factors for the salvation and comfort of a
society. I wish that the author of 'Tafseer-e-Al-Minar' would take back
some of his words in this regard.

**Mahdi's Emergence at the End of Time**

The author of "Esa'af-ur-Raghebeen" (on page 148) narrates from Hakim
(from the book of Sahih) who narrates from the Messenger of Allah
(S.A.W.A.) as such: - At the end of time, a severe calamity shall
overtake my nation... Allah will send a man from my progeny or he said:
from my Ahl-e-bayt who shall fill the earth with equity and Justice.

Ibn-Hajar in "Sawa'eq" (page 98) has narrated from Ahmad and Muslim who
in turn have narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) as saying:
'At the end of time, a Caliph will be present who would distribute
wealth without any account...

The author of "Esaaf-ur-Raghebeen" has narrated the same tradition on
page 149 of his afore-said book. The author says: 'Caliph' in the above
tradition refers to Mahdi as per the context of some other traditions.
The author of "Eqdud-Durar" narrates from Imam Abu Omar Mada'eni who
narrates from Abu Sa'eed Khudri that the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.)
said: At the end of time a youth with a handsome face and protracted
nose shall emerge from my progeny and he shall fill the earth with
equity and Justice just as it was previously filled with cruelty and
tyranny. The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" (on page 430) narrates from
the author of "Mashkat-ul-Masabeeh" who narrates from Muslim (from his
book 'Sahih') and Ahmad (from his book 'Musnad') who narrate from
Jabir-ibn-Abdullah Ansari that the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) said:

"At the end of time, a Caliph will be present who would distribute"
wealth without any 'account'. Yet another tradition says: At the time of
the end of my nation, a Caliph will come who would distribute wealth
without any reckoning. The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" narrates from
the author of "Fara'ed-ul- Semtain" who narrates from Ali-ibn-Hallal who
narrates from his father that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: "Mahdi
will come at the end of time and will fill the earth with equity and
Justice just as it was previously filled with cruelty and oppression."

The author says: In most of our Shi'ite traditions as well as the
traditions of our Sunni brethrens the word of (the end of time) and the
occurrence of some of the important events, the greatest of them being
the emergence of the Promised Mahdi can be seen. However it is a fact
that sometimes it is said: The word and its meaning is literal as can be
understood from these two words i.e. before 'Oiyamat'. Sometimes too, it
is said: refers to some part of a time which when compared to the past
times is placed at the last. Just as we say: Hazrat
Muhammad-ibn-Abdullah (S.A.W.A.) is the Prophet of (the end of time)
i.e. the period of his Prophethood Messengership, Precepts and laws is
put last as compared to the period of Messengership of the previous
Prophets. Thus in absolute terms, the Holy Prophet is the last Prophet
which means that the Prophet should come after him, otherwise he will
not be called the Last Prophet.

Sometimes is used and it refers to the last period of the Holy
Prophet's Messengership. In other words, if we divide the period of his
Prophethood into certain portions, the last portion of it would be the
(?????????) (end of time) and the Holy Prophet's sentence: "The nation
wherein I am placed in the beginning Mahdi is the middle and Isa in the
end will never be destroyed" refers to the same.

Now that you have understood these meanings it should be said that such
sayings as: Mahdi will emerge in (end of time) or that: He is the Caliph
of refers to the last meaning which means that the last part of the
period in which Mahdi is supposed to emerge is the last part from the
parts of time. The author of "Eqdud-Durar" (in chapter seven) narrates
from Hafez Abu Abdullah (from the book of Mustadrak) who narrates from
Abu Sa'eed Khudri that the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) said: Mahdi
shall emerge with the sword at the time of the end of my nation. Allah
shall send rain, the land will cause its own plants to grow, (Mahdi)
will bestow wealth in the right manner...

Hakim says: This tradition is correct as far as its chain of
transmission is concerned but Muslim and Bukhari have not narrated it.

**Mahdi's Qualities on the Day of His Emergence**

The author "Eqdud-Durar" (in chapter three) narrates from Hafez Abu
Na'eem from the book of Sefat al Mahdi of Abu Imamah that the Messenger
of Allah (S.A.W.A.) mentioned in one tradition all that was to occur
before and after Mahdi's emergence. A person called Abdul-Qais said: 'O
Messenger of Allah who would be the Imam of the people on that day? He
replied: He would be Mahdi from my progeny who would be then forty years
of age...

Again, the author of "Eqdud-Durar" in the aforesaid chapter narrates
from Hafiz Na'eem-ibn- Hemad (from the book 'Fatan') that Amir-ul-
Mumineen Ali (A.S.) said in one tradition about Mahdi as such: 'Mahdi
will rise when he would be thirty or forty years of age... In the same
chapter of the afore-said book its author narrates from Abu Abdullah
Mada'eni and Abu Bakr Baihaqi that Ibn-Abbass said: I have hope that
days and nights will not pass until Allah will appoint a youth from us,
Ahl- e-bayt while conspiracies will not befall him and he too will not
be entangled in conspiracies. He will establish the affairs of this
nation just as Allah commenced the affairs of this nation through us. It
is my expectation that the affairs would end too in us.

Narrator says: I told Ibn-Abbass: Are your aged helpless in this matter
that you have hope in your youths? He replied: Allah does whatever He
wishes. In the same chapter of the same book, its author narrates from
Imam Hussein- ibn-Ali (A.S.) as such: When Mahdi will emerge; the people
will deny him because he will have returned to them looking like a
youth. The greatest calamity is that their master will approach them in
the state of youth while they would think him to be old and senile...

In section one, chapter four of the same book, its author narrates from
Hafiz Abu Abdullah (from the book of Mustadrak) who narrates from Sanban
that the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) said: - Three offspring of a
Caliph will be killed near your treasure... When you see him (i.e.
youth) swear allegiance to him because, he is Mahdi, the Caliph of
Allah. Hakim says: 'This tradition is an authentic tradition provided it
has been narrated by Bukhari and Muslim.

In the seventh chapter of the same book, its author narrates from Hafiz
Abu Abdullah Na'eem-ibn-Hemad (from the book 'Fatan') who narrates from
Ishaaq-ibn Yahaya-ibn-Talha that Ta'oos said: Omar-ibn-Khattab bid
farewell to his family and said: What is wrong if I spend the treasures
of the Ka'aba and the weapons in the way of Allah? Ali said: 'O Amir-ul
Mumineen! Refrain from such thoughts. You are not the owner of Ka'aba.
The owner of Ka'aba is a youth from Quraish who will donate the wealth
of Ka'aba in the way of Allah at the end of time.

The author says: The manifestation of this tradition is such that it
cannot be denied and evidences and contexts too exist for them. Some of
the traditions mention: The one who will see Mahdi on the day of his
emergence will reckon him to be a youth of forty or his age to be
between thirty and forty. However it does not mean that this is his true
age.

**Place of Mahdi's Emergence**

The author "Eqdud-Durar" (chapter two) narrates from Jabir-ibn-Yazid
Tuafi a lengthy tradition from Imam Muhammad Baqir where after
mentioning the signs of Mahdi's emergence and the sinking of Sufyi's
army he said: Sufyani will dispatch troops to Medina as a result of
which Mahdi will flee towards Mecca. News of Mahdi's flight will reach
Sufyani's commanders who will send an army in pursuit of Mahdi but they
will fail to find him until Hazrat will enter Mecca in a state of fear
and will wait as per the 'Sunnah' of Musa-ibn-Imranâ€¦ The author of
'Esaaf-ur-Raghebeen' (on page 150) narrates that the Messenger of Allah
(SAWA) said: "Discord will arise at the time of a Caliphs death. A man
will flee from Medina to Mecca. Some of the inhabitants of Mecca will
approach him and will send him out for allegiance (while not being
satisfied) and will swear allegiance to him between Rukn and Maqaam. An
army would be despatched in their direction from Syria, which would zink
in the ground of 'Baidah' which is between Mecca and Medina."

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" (on page 431) has narrated from the
author of "Jawahar al-Aqdain" who has narrated from Ibn-Dawoud who has
narrated from Imam Ahmad and Hafiz Baihaqi the afore-mentioned
Tradition. The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" (on page 448) narrates from
the author of "Fara'ed-us-Semtain" who narrates from Hassan-ibn-Khalid a
tradition from Ali-ibn-Moosa Ridha (A.S.) about Mahdi's occultation and
the fact that he is the fourth from his progeny until he says: Mahdi is
the same one with regards to whom a caller will call out from the
heavens and all the inhabitants of earth will hear the call as such: Be
aware that Allah's representative has emerged in the House of Allah.
Follow him as truth is with him.

**Place of Mahdi's Allegiance**

The author of Eqdud-Durar (chapter two) narrates from Abul Hassan
Malaki who narrates from Huzaifaibn-Yaman that the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) said: If a single day remains from the age of this world then
Allah will raise a man from my progeny whose name will be the same as my
name and his Impression will be the same as mine and his agnomen is Abu
Abdullah. People would swear allegiance to him between Rukn and
Maqaamâ€¦

In section two, chapter four of the afore-said book, its author
narrates from Abu Dawoud (from his book of "Sunan"), Tirmidhi (from his
book of "Jama'e"), Ahmad (from his book of "Musnad"), Ibn-Maaja (from
his book of 'Sunan'), Baihaqi (from "Be'sath-wa-Nushoor") and some
others who narrate from Umm-Salma that the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.)
said: At the time of a Caliph's death discord will arise and a man from
Medina will flee towards Mecca. Some of the inhabitants of Mecca will
approach him and will send him out (while not being satisfied) and will
swear allegiance to him between Rukn and Maqaam...

Author says: The appendix of the tradition refers to Mahdi. In chapter
five of the afore-said book, the author narrates from Abu Abdullah
Na'eem-ibn-Hemad (from the book 'Fatan') who narrates from Abdullah-ibn-
Masoud a lengthy tradition mentioning therein Sufyani's uprising and
Mahdi's emergence from Medina towards Mecca and his allegiance until he
reaches to the point where he says: Mahdi will sit between Rukn and
Maqaam and will stretch out his hand. People will give allegiance to him
and Allah will reserve love for him in the people's heart.

The author of "Eqdud-Durar" (in chapter seven) narrates from
Na'eem-ibn- Hemad (from the book "Fatan") who narrates from Abu Huraira
that people would give allegiance to Mahdi between Rukn and Maqaam.
Mahdi will not awaken anyone who is asleep nor will he shed any blood.
Author says: It refers to repose at the time of priority of allegiance
and not when Hazrat would wish to dominate and rectify the world.

Ibn-Hajar in his book "Sawa'eq" (page 98) has narrated from Ibn Asaker
who has narrated from Ali (A.S.) the tradition about Mahdi fleeing from
Medina towards Mecca and added: Some of the inhabitants of Mecca will
approach Mahdi and will send him out (while not being satisfied) and
will swear allegiance to him between Rukn and Maqaam...

The author of 'Eqdud-Durar' in section two and chapter four has
narrated from Jabir-ibn-Yazid who has narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir
about Mahdi's flight from Medina to Mecca and says: People will swear
allegiance to him between Rukn and Maqaam. "O Jabir! Mahdi is from the
progeny of Hussein."

**Rudiments of Mahdi's Triumph**

The author of "Eqdud-Durar" (chapter five) narrates from a group of
traditionists such as Ahmad in Musnad, Ibn-Maaja in Sunan, Baihaqi Abu
Omar Mada'eni, Na'eem-ibn-Hemad, Abul-Qasim Tabarani and Abu Na'eem
Esfahani who narrate from Amir-ul-Mumineen Ali-ibn-Abi Talib that the
Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) said: "Mahdi is from us - the Ahl-e-bayt.
Allah will set right his affairs in one night" Ibn-Hajar in "Sawa'eq"
(page 98) has narrated from Ibn-Maaja as such: "A group of people will
rise from the East and they will make preparations for Mahdi's rule."

The author of "Eqdud-Durar" (in chapter five) has narrated the same
tradition from Ibn-Maaja and Baihaqi. The author of "Eqdud-Durar" (in
chapter five) has narrated from Abu Na'eem (book of Sefat-ul-Mahdi) who
has narrated from Sauban that the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) said:
When you see black flags coming from the direction of East, hasten
towards them even if you have to crawl over ice because Mahdi who is
Allah's representative will be amongst them.

Narrator says: Hakim Abu Abdullah in "Mustadrak" and Imam Abu Omar in
"Sunan" and Hafiz Na'eem-ibn-Hemad in "Fatan" have narrated the contents
of this tradition. Perhaps the saying: Mahdi who is Allah's
representative will be amongst them means that the rudiments of Mahdi's
rule would be in their hands just as the same was mentioned in the
tradition of Abdullah-ibn-Harith. In the same chapter of the afore-said
book, its author narrates from Sa'eed- ibn-Musaiyeb that the Messenger
of Allah (S.A.W.A) said: A man from Bani Abbass will rise from the East
and will remain on the land until Allah wishes. Thereafter a group with
small black flags will emerge and they will battle with the people from
the progeny of Abu Sufyan and his followers and will prepare the ground
for Mahdi's obedience and submission.

Author says: Some of the traditions, which speak about the appearance
of black flags from the East, refer to the invitation of Abbassid and
uprising of Abu Muslim Khurasani. Yet, some other traditions signal out
the uprising of a group from the East who would invite (the people)
towards Mahdi (A.S.) and the tradition of Sa'eed-ibn-Musaiyeb which was
mentioned before, refers to this account. The possibility, which we
mentioned previously about the traditions (in this regard) being
fabricated, refers to the first type of interpretation. So do not be
heedless about them.

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" (page 448) narrates from the book
"Fara'ed-us-Semtain" which narrates from Hafiz Abu Naeem that Imam
Muhammad Baqir (A.S.) said: Allah has set fear in the hearts of our
friends and followers. When our 'Qa'em' who is Mahdi will emerge, one
person from our followers will be more courageous than a fierce lion and
sharper than the point of a spear.

Author says: Undoubtedly, a group which loses its leader also loses its
will- power and aim and rather its very progress as against a group
possessing a leader with an upright will-power, earnest aim and firm
power. This is because such a state eventually leaves an impression on
the conduct and morale of that group. It seems that the afore-mentioned
tradition too refers to this very matter and the reason why God has set
fear in their hearts is to protect them.

**Incidents Which Will Occur in the Near Future**

How often this thought passes through some mind and rather how often it
is pronounced though some tongue that if fear from enemies is the cause
of Mahdi's occultation then how would this fear be obviated considering
that day by day various powers and arms are on the rise!? How would it
be possible for Mahdi to face these powers and aims which have filled
the land and sea and would tighten the sphere the day of his emergence
without Mahdi having a access to any of those weapons because of lack
adequate supporters and ample means!?

In reply we say: It's possible that the incidents which are about to
take place in this world and the probable events may actually occur
which could be amongst the strongest means of Mahdi's emergence and a
medium for doing away with his occultation until he real emerges. In
number he may become like one of the ruling powers and thereafter he
would strive in strengthening and increasing his powers and weapons.

Firstly, amongst the events which are not improbable is this that the
moral and spiritual reforms perfection of training and literary and
material Sciences in Some classes of people and rather in all of them
will prevail over a special class. Thus when Mahdi emerges and proclaims
his plans and announces the Islamic teachings for which he would rise
and that particular class witnesses his truthfulness, trustworthiness
and resoluteness they would become submissive towards Hazrat. They will
assist him in Jihad and become obedient to him and will give him the
reins of the government. A large number of people would obey him and
become submissive to him such that one cannot eat them with contempt.
The same had occurred for his great grand-father, the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) since a large number of people had brought faith in him due
to his virtuous aim and objective just as the incident of 'Najashi'
(Negus) bears witness to this fact

Secondly: Before Mahdi's emergence, multitude of people will gather
together and call the others towards Mahdi. They will take pledge (from
them) for the victory of the day of his emergence. It is likely that the
emergence of preachers in common gatherings and the distribution of
those things for which Mahdi will upraise namely exercising of worldly,
spiritual, social and individual reforms are amongst the strongest means
for, the preparation of multitude of people for Mahdi's emergence.

As mentioned before, the main motive of awaiting Mahdi's emergence is
preparing and making ready the rudiments and necessities of Hazrat's
emergence. I can say that Mahdi strives and such endeavor is the
responsibility of every reformist who wishes to bring a reform.
Previously it was told to you that Mahdi's occultation does not hinder
him from uprising for such kind of affairs.

Thirdly: Break-up of the present world order and every city of the
world into smaller states and every ruler of those states will possess
independent powers until Mahdi emerges. Cities and governments will have
dispersed to such extent that Mahdi too would be like one of them in
power and preparedness. He will rise for that which Allah has appointed
him and will strive for increasing and perfecting his own power.

Fourthly: The ruling powers will render the people completely
submissive and obedient towards themselves and every society and rather
every group, individual animal and vegetation will groan day and night
due to such a life and state of affair. However he will become restless
of the cruel and oppressive system while none would be able to see him.
He will beseech and complain but only to his Lord. Thus when the caller
will call out between the heaven and the earth that Allah has obviated
oppression from you, has made you successful, has set your freedom and
deliverance in Mahdi's hands and Mahdi has emerged in Mecca then
multitudes of people will hasten towards Mahdi for the purpose of reform
and their own goodness.

In all probability, the meaning of the tradition saying: Mahdi will not
emerge but after the earth has become filled with cruelty and oppression
is the same as what we have just said. In short, Mahdi (A.S.) will
emerge at the time when people and society will be in due need of a
reformist. Fifthly: The world wars will put the cities out of action and
weaken the physical bodies and powers. Thereafter, Mahdi (A.S.) will
emerge while from the view - point of number and group, he will be
similar to one of those (group of) people. Then, very soon he will
swiftly strive to increase and perfect his own powers in addition to
those powers and tools which he would avail himself of as booty.

Sixthly: Some of the Islamic sects will accept Hazrat's call on the day
of his emergence and will join the forces of his companions and helpers.
They will fight for Mahdi in the battle - field and will swear
allegiance to him. In all respects, they will find confidence in him.
Moreover Almighty God will confirm him through the Angels just as He
confirmed his great grand - father i.e. the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.). He
will confirm Hazrat by Isa-ibn-Maryam's (A.S.) descension the details of
which we shall God-willing mention later on. These were incidents whose
occurrence cannot be denied and history too guides us to the occurrence
of such incidents and bears testimony to this fact that reformists have
made use of similar means. Man is not aware of what might occur
tomorrow. Verily the events which took place in the 14th century A.H.
and 19th century AD bears witness to the possibility of occurrence of
what we have mentioned. God is All-Aware of what has occurred and what
is going to take place in the future.

**Mahdi's Helpers**

Ibn-Hajar in "Sawa'eq" (on page 98) has narrated from Ibn-Asaker that
Ali (A.S.) has said: When the 'Qae'm' from the progeny of Muhammad
(S.A.W.A) will emerge, Allah will gather together the inhabitants of the
East and West. His companions will be from Kufa and the brave ones who
would assist him would be from Syriaâ€¦

The author of "Eqdud-Durar" (section two, chapter four) has narrated
from Jabir-ibn-Yazid Jua'fi who has narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(A.S.) a lengthy tradition where he has mentioned in it some of the
signs of Mahdi's emergence: the revolt of Sufyani, Mahdi's escape from
Medina to Mecca until he says: Allah will gather together for Mahdi 313
of his companionsâ€¦ In the same book (section one, chapter four) its
author narrates from Hakim Abu Abdullah (from his book 'Mustadrak') that
Muhammad-ibn-Hanafia said: We were in the presence of Ali. A person
asked Hazrat some questions about Mahdi. Hazrat (A.S.) replied: Alas!
And he repeated the word seven times and then said: Mahdi will emerge at
the end of time when those who would call out the name of Allah would be
killed.

Thereafter Allah will gather together a group whose sagacity and
agility will be like a cloud and He will make their hearts intimate
towards each other. They will neither fear anyone nor will they flee.
Their number will be equal to the number of the companions of 'Badr'.
Neither the people of the past took precedent over them nor will the
people of the future comprehend them. Their number will be equal to the
number of the companions who crossed the river with the Saul â€¦

Narrator says: Hakim has said: This tradition is an authentic tradition
provided that Bukhari and Muslim have narrated the same. However they
have not narrated it.

In the seventh chapter of the same book, the author narrates from Abu
Amro Osman-ibn-Sa'eed Muqarri (from his 'Sunan') who narrates from
Huzaifa-ibn-- Yaman that the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A) while
narrating about Mahdi and his emergence has said: Courageous men from
Syria will hasten towards Hazrat along with their followers while sober
men from Egypt too will join him. Yet another group will proceed from
the East until they reach Mecca and swear allegiance to him â€¦

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" (on page 449) has narrated from Ganji
who in turn has narrated from Ibn Athim Kufi that All (A.S.) has said:
Bravo! To the people of Thaleqan because Allah has hidden treasures
amongst them which are neither gold nor silver. Rather they are those
people who have recognized Allah in the true sense and they will be
Mahdi's helpers at the end of time.

The author of "Es'aaf-ur-Reghebeen" (on page 150) says: It is true that
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said:

Discord will arise at the time of a Caliphs death. Thereafter he
mentioned about Mahdi's emergence at Mecca, the allegiance which people
will swear to him at Mecca, the sinking of Sufyanis army at 'Baidah' and
then said: When people will witness this miracle from Mahdi the brave
men from Syria and groups of people from Iraq will approach Hazrat and
swear allegiance to him..

**The Angels Will Assist Mahdi**

The author of "Eqdud-Durar" (chapter five) narrates from Abu Amro
Osman- ibn-Sa'eed Muqarri (from his "Sunan") who in turn narrates from
Huaaifa-ibn- Yaman that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: Allegiance
will be sworn to Mahdi between Rukn and Maqaam. He will proceed towards
Syria with Gibra'eel in front of him and Micha'eel on his right...

In section one, chapter four of the same book, its author narrates from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (A.S.) a tradition wherein he mentions about Mahdi's
emergence and his allegiance between Rukn and Maqaam and then says:
Gibra'eel would be on his right and Micha'eel on his left â€¦

Again, in the seventh chapter of the afore-said book, the author
narrates from Abu Amro Osman-ibn-Sa'eed Muqarri (from his 'Sunan') who
in turn narrates from Huaaifa-ibn-Yaman that the Messenger of Allah
(S.A.W.A.) while mentioning about Mahdi's emergence and his allegiance
between Rukn and Maqam says: Mahdi's attention will be directed towards
Syria while Gibra'eel would be in front of him and Micha'eel on his
left.


