Chapter One : the Holy Verses
=============================

Nahjul Balagha: Wise Sayings of Ali (A.S.) - No 205: "The world would
bend towards us after having been refractory just as the biting
she-camel bends towards its young." A metaphoric remark that just as
during the time of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) the apparent and esoteric
'Vilayat' (Mastership) were both found in his household, in the same way
and at the time of the reappearance of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.), the apparent
Government and esoteric 'Vilayat' will be made ready for that leader)

. Thereafter, he recited this verse:

(And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and to make them the Imams, and to make them the heirs.) Ibne
Abil Hadeed Mo'tazali in his commentary on Nahjul- Balagha says on Page
329 Vol. 4 as such: "Our companions mention that is this verse, Allah
has promised the Imam and leader that he would have possession of the
land and gain control over all the nations.

In the seventh chapter of "Eqdud-Durar", Abu Abdulla Na'eem-ibn-Hemad
narrates as such:

"Imam Abu Ishaaq Salbi in 'tafseer' (interpretation) of the Divine
saying of Hamaasaq) has quoted Ibn-Abbass as saying: (?-the'h') refers
to the battle between Ouraish and the slaves in which the Ouraish would
be the victors; (?-the 'm') refers to the kingdom and Government of
Bani-Umayyah; (?-the 'aa') is the sign of exaltation and honor of
Bani-Abbass; (?-the 's') refers to the age of Mahdi and (?-the 'q') is a
symbolic sign of the coining of Isa at the time of Emergence of Mahdi.
The author says that some have interpreted (?) as the brightness of
Mahdi and (?) as the power of Isa-ibn-Maryam. (I.e. Jesus Christ) Ibn
Hajar in his Sawa'eq (Page 16) interprets the Divine saying as such:

"Among the exegetists, Maqatel-ibn-Sulaiman and his followers have said
that this verse has been revealed in favor of Mahdi. Es'aaf-ur Raghebeen
too has written the same on Page 156.4 The author of 'Nur-ul-Absar' on
Page 228 has narrated from Abu Abdullah Ganji as such: "About the
interpretation of Allah's words:

Sayyid-ibn-Jubair says: "It refers to Mahdi from the progeny of
Fatemah - the one who, by decree of this verse shall dominate over all
other religions."

In "Yanabi-ul-Mawadda" Page 443 it is narrated from Manaqib-Khawrazmi
from Jabir-ibn-Abdulla Ansari a lengthy incident wherein a Jew
approaches the Holy Prophet(S.A.W.A.) and asks him various questions
which results in his converting to Islam. One of the questions which the
convert had asked was about the successors to the Holy Prophet himself
and the Prophet's reply that they were twelve in number.

He counted each one of them by name until he got to the name of Imam
Muhammad Hassan Askari. Thereafter he said: "After him shall come his
son Muhammad who will be known as Mahdi, Qa'em and Hujjat.5 Then he will
disappear temporarily, reappear again and when he does so he shall fill
the earth with equity and justice. Since by then the earth would have
been filled with cruelty and oppression. Blessed are those who are
patient during the period of his occultation and blessed are those who
are steadfast in. their love towards him. They are those whom Allah has
praised in His Book with such words-

[Quran is a guide to those who guard (against evil), those who believe
in the unseen i.e. Mahdi and his occultation.] Also, Allah says: -

[They are those who belong to the Party of Allah; Know that the Party
of Allah are the victorious ones.] (Tradition ends)

In the afore-said hook, on Page 448 he quote: from the book of
"Fara'ed-us- Semtain" a tradition which Hassan-ibn-Khalid has narrated
from Abu Hassan Ali-ibn-Musa Reza (A.S.) about Mahdi where he mentions
that he would be the fourth from his descendants and that when he
reappears, the earth would be engulfed with the Divine Light. Thereafter
Imam continued as such: He is the one whose reappearance shall coincide
with the call of a caller from the sky such that all the inhabitant:

of the land shall hear this cry: - "Know that the Hujjat
4-Tafseer-e-Ruh-ul-Ma'ani vol. 25 pg. 95 interprets the afore-said verse
and follows: -What is that ha will descend in Damascus when the people
will be busy in their morning prayers. Then Imam will stand behind and
lie is the Mahdi. Thereafter ha will give priority to him and will pray
while standing behind him. He will then say People have not stood up but
only for thee. Tafseer-e-Seraj-ul-Munir vol 3 pg. 462 too has
interpreted the verse in this same manner but has not specified the name
of Mahdi. Nur-ul-Absar too (on Page 146) has narrated from the book of
Ganji the same as Ibn-Hajar.

5-Hamuini in "Fara'ed-us-Semtain" chapter 31 has mentioned in this
regard a tradition narrated by Ibn-Abbass from the Holy Prophet.
Nasaye-al-Kaafiya, pg. 24.

(Proof) of Allah has appeared near the House of Allah. So follow him
since the truth is in him and with him. The word of Allah too refers to
the same. [If We please, We should send down upon them a from the
heavens so that their neck: should stoop to it.]

Naishabouri in his "Tafseer" (Vol. 1.) in interpreting the verse of
says: Some of the Shias believe that ??? (i.e. unseen) in this verse
refers to Mahdi, the Awaited one; the one who Allah has promised about
him in His Book as such:

[Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do well that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth.]

Moreover, about him the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) has said the
following:

"If there remains not more than a day from the life of the earth, God
Almighty will set the day so long, until a person from my progeny who
carries the same name as mine, shall appear and fill the earth with
Justice opposite the ext1ent it had been filled with injustice and
oppression.6

Naishabouri further says that according to the Ahl-e-Sunnat, the
afore-said verse gives indication to the Imamate of "Khulafa-e-Rashedin"
(rightly-guided Caliphs) because the word of ((????) Menkom) in the holy
verse indicates 'part' (of) and it is necessary for this 'part' (of) to
be present at the time of addressing. Also, it is well - known that
those four caliphs (Abu Bakr, Omar, Osman and Ali) were men of faith and
virtue and at that time were present. Consequently the matter of
Caliphate and victory was certain for them. Therefore it becomes
necessary to say that this verse refers to them.

Thereafter he says: A group has gone against them arguing why it is not
permissible to say that the word of (??) denotes exposition. They
consider succession over the earth to mean possession and domination
over it just as it was so in the case of Bani-Isra'il.

Again he says: Let's accept that the term (??) denotes the meaning of
'part' but on what basis is it not permissible to consider that 'part'
is to denote the caliphate of Ali and say that (??) has been used here
in its plural form just to show the honor and great position of Ali or
as a reference to Hazrat and his eleven offsprings after him.7

6-In Tafseer Raazi vol. 1 Page 166 too, the verse of (?????? ??????
?????) has been interpreted in a similar manner.

7-It is narrated in Arf-ul-Wardi Page 57 from the Jafseer (Exegesis) of
Ibn-Jarir from Sadi that in interpreting the verse he says: By unjust
people and debarers who disallowed the taking of the name of Allah in
the mosques and the From The Sayings of the Holy Prophet Abu Dawoud in
his 'Sahih' on Page 87, Vol. 4 narrated from Abdulla a tradition from
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as follows: "If there remains not more than
a day from the life of the earth, God Almighty will set the day so long
until He appoints a person from my progeny."

Thereafter he says-Similarly it has come in Hadith Sufyan that the Holy
Prophet has said: "The life of this world shall not end until an Arab
from my progeny will rule over the world."8

The same book on the afore-said page and volume mentions a tradition
from All (A.S.) who narrates from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as
follows: "If there remains not more than a day from the life of the
earth, surely God shall appoint a person from my progeny."

Tirmidhi in Vol. 2 of his 'Sahih' on Page 270 narrates a tradition from
Abdullah who narrates from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) that he said:
"The life of this world shall not cease to exist until an Arab from my
progeny shall come and rule." Tirmidhi says: This tradition is (???)
(acceptable) and (????) (correct) and the same has also been narrated
from Ali, Abu Sa'eed, Umm-Salma and Abu Huraira.

Also, in the afore-said book on the same page of the same volume, a
tradition has been narrated by Abu Hurair from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) as follows: "If there remains not more than a day from the
life of the earth, God Almighty will set the day so long until a person
from my progeny shall come and rule." Then he says: This 'hadith' is
(???) (acceptable) and (????) (correct).9 Ibn-Hajar in his "Sawa'eq" on
Page 97 says: Abu Ahmad, Abu Dawoud, Tirmidhi and Ibn Maaja have
narrated from the Holy Prophet (SA.W.A.) as saying:

"If there remains not more than a day from the life of the earth,
surely God shall appoint on that day a person from my progeny."
Es'aaf-ur-Raghebeen too has narrated the same on Page No. 147.10

Ibn Hajr in the afore-mentioned book on Page 97 writes: Abu Dawoud and
Tirmidhi narrate from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) as such: - not enter
Baitul-Muqqddas but with fear and anxiety from being killed or paying
the 'Jazia' (tribute). Thereafter he says- However their (???) (despise)
which is referred to in this verse will be at that time when Mahdi shall
reappear and gain victory over Constantinpole. Then they will kill him
and this very act shall be their despise. 8-The same has been narrated
in "Arf-ul-wardi" Page 58 from Ahmad, Abu Dawoud and Tirmidhi.

9-Suyuti in Arf-ul-Wardi Page 64 and Ja'ame-Sagheer vol. 2 Page 277
tradition No 7491 too have narrated the same and add that this person
(i.e. Mahdi) shall become a master of the hills of Deylam and
Constantinople. The same can be found in "Nur-ul-Absar" Page 148.
Thereafter he writes: "These are the words of Hafiz Abu Na'em and he
says that the person mentioned in the tradition is none other than
'Mahdi'."

10-Arf-ul-Wardi Page 59 - narrated from Ibn-Abu-Shaiba and the
afore-said names and Jaa'me-Sagheer vol. 2 Page 377 - Tradition No.
1489.

"If there remains not more than a day from the life of the earth,
surely God will set that day so long until He makes a person appear from
my progeny."

Esa'af-ur-Raghebben too has narrated the same on Page 148. Ibn Hajr, in
the afore-mentioned book on Page 97 says: Abu Dawoud and Tirmidhi have
narrated from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) as such: -

"The life of this world shall not cease to exist until a person from my
progeny shall come and rule."

Es'aaf-ur-Raghebben too has narrated the same on Page 148. Ibn Hajar in
'Sawa'eq' (Page 97) writes: Abu Dawoud and Tirmidhi have narrated from
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as such:

"If there remains not more than a day from the life of the earth, God
will set the day so long, until He appoints a person from my progeny."
Es'aaf-ur-Raghebeen too has narrated the same on Page 148.11 In
'Nur-ul-Absar' Page 229 a tradition has been narrated from Ali (A.S.)
who narrates from the Holy Prophet (S.A.WA.) as such:

"If there remains not more than a day from the life of the earth,
surely God will make a person from my progeny to appear" (on that day).
Then the author continues: "This hadith has also been narrated by Abu
Dawoud in his 'Sunan'.

In the same book on Page 231, it is narrated from Abu Huraira who
narrates from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) that:

"Qiyamat shall not be established until a person from my progeny comes
and rules.12 On Page 151 of Es'aaf-ur-Raghebben it is mentioned that
Ahmad and Mawardi have narrated from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) who
said: "Glad- tidings to you (all) about Mahdi." The same has come in
'Nur-ul-Absar' Pg. 151. Author of 'Nur-ul-Absar' writes on Page 230 as
such: Ahmad narrates from Abu Sa'eed Khudri that the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) has said: "I give you glad- tidings about Mahdi."

In "Yanabi-ul-Mawadda" (Page 432) it is narrated from Qetaada who said:
"'I asked Sa'eed-ibn-Maseeb: "Is there any truth in Mahdi?" He replied,
'Yes, he is the truth and he is from the progeny of Fatemah.'"13

In the same book, on the afore-said page it is narrated from Ali (A.S.)
who 11-The same has been narrated in Arf-ul-Wardi Page 59. Also on Page
62 it is narrated from Tabarani and Abu Na'eem Esfahani and they from
Abu Sa'eed Khudri who said: 'I heard the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
saying:

"There shall come a man from my progeny who will speak in accordance
with my 'Sunnab'. God shall send rain for him and the earth will throw
out its bounties. He will fill the earth with equity and Justice just as
it had been filled with cruelty and oppression. Also, on Page 63 it is
narrated from Ahmad and Abu Na'eem who narrate from Abu Sa'eed Khudri
that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) has said: 'The world shall not cease to
exist until a person from my progeny shall come and rule and he will
fill the earth with equity and Justice just as it had been filled with
cruelty and oppression.

12-Arf-ul-Wardi, Page 62.
13-Arf-ul-Wardi, Page 74.

has narrated from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) that: "If there remains
not more than a day from the life of the earth, indeed God shall make a
person from my progeny to appear."

Thereafter he writes: "This hadith has also been narrated by Abu
Dawoud, Ahmad, Tirmidhi and Ibn-Maaja." Also, in the same book on Page
432, a tradition is narrated from 'Musnad' of Ahmad who has narrated
from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as such: - "Qiyamat shall not be
established until the earth is filled with cruelty and oppression. Then
a person from my progeny shall appear and fill it with equity and
Justice."14

Again, in the afore-mentioned book on Page 440 he writes: Mufeq-ibn-
Ahmad Akhtab narrates a sermon of Khawarazm who takes reference from
Abdur-Rahman-ibn-Abi Laili who narrates from his father who said:

- "In the battle of Khaibar, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) handed over
the banner to Ali (A.S.). Then Allah ordained victory by his hands.
Later, at Ghadir-e-Khum he reminded the people that Ali was the 'Maula'
(Master) of all believing men and women and continued until he expressed
few sentences about the virtues of Ali, Fatemah, Hassan and Hussein."
Thereafter he said: "Gabriel has informed me that after my departure
they shall be subject to injustice and oppression and this oppression
shall continue until a movement is brought about by their "Qa'em" and at
that time their creed will be raised high, people shall turn towards
their friendship, ill-speaking towards them shall diminish, those having
unpleasantness for them shall be degraded and those eulogizing them
shall increase. Such kind of events will occur when cities shall collide
with each other and people become weak and helpless of respite. At that
time shall appear the (Qa'em) (Mahdi) from my progeny and God will
manifest the truth through him and extinguish the falsehood by his
sword." Thereafter he said: 'O people, glad- tidings to you of relief
and respite. Surely the promise of Allah is true and He never breaks it
and His decree never gets refuted. He is All - Aware and All- seeing and
the victory of Allah is near.15

In the same book on Page 447 he narrates from the book of "Fara'ed-us-
14-On Page 65 of "Ad-ul-Wardi" it is narrated from Haskem who narrates
from Abu Sa'eed that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) has said: "A severe
calamity shall befall my nation at the end of the Appointed Time, by the
hands of the rulers of their time such that life shall become difficult
for them. Then God Almighty shall manifest a person from my progeny who
shall fill the earth with equity and Justice just as it had been filled
with cruelty and oppression.

15-Ibn-Abi Shaiba, Na'eem-ibn-Hemaad, Ibn-Maaja-and Abu Na'eem have
narrated from Ibn-Masood who said:

- I was in the presence of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) Suddenly a group
of youngsters from Bani-Huhim appeared before us. When the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A) saw them his eyes became full of tears and the colour of his
face changed. I said: 'O Prophet, I see that you are sad. He replied: We
are a family which God preferred for us the next world over this world.
After me, my Ahl-e-bait shall he subjected to persecution by the people
until a group from the East will appear with black flags. Then, they
shall wish to reign but others will stand in their way. Later, they will
fight and win and will receive what they desired. But they will refuse
to accept and entrust it to a person from my progeny who shall fill the
earth with Justice just as it had been filled with oppression. So any
one who perceives the situation of that time will join them over though
he may haul himself over ice.

Semtain" from Shaikh Abu Ishaaq Ibrahim-ibn-Yaqub who narrates from
Jabir- ibn-Abdulla Ansari that the Holy Prophet (S.AW.A) has said: -
"The one who denies the emergence of Mahdi has surely disbelied to
whatever God has revealed upon Muhammad and the one who denies the
coming of Isa (Jesus) has surely become a disbeliever and the one who
denies the revolt of Dajjal has surely become a disbeliever."16 From The
Sayings of Ali (A.S.)

Nahjul-Balagha - Sermon No.91 - Statements of Ali (AS.) about Mahdi
(AS.). It is a part of the Sermon which he delivered with regards to
Bani-Ummayid and their mischief towards the people until he reached to
the point where he said: "Thereafter, Allah shall unpleasantly widen
difficulties and other occurrences upon you and (only) when the skin is
cut off and the flesh is peeled off, the calamities will be obviated."
Then he continued: 'Allah shall bring this freedom and salvation through
a person whose behaviour with that tribe will be harsh and severe and he
shall make them suffer and he will quench them with bitter cups (of
hardships) and not extend them anything but sword.17

Mutazali on exegetist, in the second volume of his book (Page 178),
under the afore-mentioned Sermon says: 'This Sermon has been
commemorated by a group of historians and it is common, recounted and
reached the level of Estefaze) (superabundance).

After the battle of Nahrawan Ali (A.S.) spoke in such words: No one
except me had the courage to remain steadfast and withstand those
seditions and turbulence. (Perhaps steadfastness at that time is
referred to the Khawarij because, when the companions of Muawiya by the
tricks of Amr-Aas fixed the Quran on top of spears and by this way
wanted to save themselves from the blow of Hazrat's sword, the soldiers
of Ali (A.S.) by witnessing such scene hesitated in obeying his commands
and in fact opposed him stating: We should not dare draw our sword on
these people. Or perhaps it refers to the battle against the people of
Jamal where those participating in it were such personalities like
Ayesha, Thalha and Zubair who were enjoying esteemed status and position
in the eyes of the Muslims. For this reason they did not have the
courage to fight them except Ali (A.S.) who fought and defeated them.)
Then Ibn-Abil Hadeed says: A statement which Razi has not mentioned is
an address which he delivered about Bani-Ummayid, the contents of which
are as follows: -

"Then surely Allah will liberate the people by the hands of a person
from our chaste family. May my father be sacrificed for him, whose
mother is the best 16-In Arf-ul-Wardi (Page 83) a narration has come
from Fawa'ed-ul-Akhbar -Abe Bakr Es'aaf that the Holy Prophet has
said: - "The one who reckons Dajjal to be false has surely become a
disbeliever and the one who thinks Mahdi to be false has surely become a
disbeliever.

17-The author of "Arf-ul-wardi" on Page 73 has also narrated almost the
same contents.

amongst the ladies of Paradise." Thereafter he confesses to this point
that Ali (A.S.) in this statement is referring to Mahdi, the Awaited
one.

Nahjul-Balagha - Sermon No.148 - Amongst the statements which Hazrat
has spoken about the news of the unseen is the following sentence: - "O'
people, this is the time for the occurrence of every promised event and
the approach of things which you do not know. Know that whoever from
among us (Ahle Bait - the family of the Holy Prophet) in the future will
continue in our way with a burning lamp and will tread on the footsteps
of the virtuous, in order to unfasten knots, to free slaves and to unite
the divided. He would be in concealment from the people such that a
track-finder would not find his footprints even though he may pursue
him."

Mutazali in the second volume of his book on Page 436 under this Sermon
says: "Hazrat here is referring to Mahdi, the Awaited one and his
concealment." Nahjul-Balagha - Sermon No.180: Amongst the sermons which
Ali (A.S.) pointed out to the people of Kufa is the following sermon: -
However, before narrating the sermon it is good to mention that Nufil
Bukali relates that Ali (A.S.) delivered this sermon standing on a stone
which Joda-ibn-Hubaira Mukhzumi had erected for him. Ali (A.S.) had a
woolen apparel on his body, the belt of his sword was made of leaves and
the sandals on his feet too were of palm leaves. His forehead had a
hardened spot like the knees of a camel. He spoke as such: -

"He would be wearing the armor of wisdom, which he would have secured
with all its conditions, such as full attention towards it, its
(complete knowledge and exclusive devotion to it. For him it is like a
thing, which he had lost and which he was now seeking, or his need,
which he was trying to meet. If Islam is in trouble he would feel
forlorn like a traveler and like a (tired) camel beating the end of its
tail and flattening its neck on the ground. He is the last of Allah's
pleas and one of the vicegerents of His Prophets." Ibn-Abil Hadeed who
has written a commentary on Nahjul-Balagha writes on Page 535 of his
second volume as such:

"Each group has interpreted these sayings according to their own
expedient beliefs and the twelve Imamiah Shi'ites reckon that the person
who has been referred in Hazrat's speech is none other than Mahdi."
Thereafter he writes: "As I see it, it does not appear difficult to
believe that reference over here has been made to 'AL-Q'AEM' from the
progeny of Muhammad (S.A.W.A)."

The author of 'Yanabi-ul-Muwadda' on page 46 narrates from the book
'Durrul-Munazzam' as such: Amongst the sayings of Amir-ul-Mumineen
(A.S.) about Mahdi and/or Qa'em from the progeny of Muhammad is the
following sermon: -

"The standard-bearer of Muhammadi and the ruler of Government of Ahmadi
shall be manifested. He is someone who will revolt with his sword,
straighten the crooked, conquer the earth and revive the forsaken
aspects of religious obligations and Sunnah."

The author of 'Yanabi-ul-Muwadda' on Page 467 writes: Some of the men
of intuition and vision have narrated from Amir-ul-Mumineen as having
said: "Soon God shall bring forth a group whom He Loves and they too are
His lovers and the one who is like a stranger amongst them shall take
over the Government. Verily, he shall be the 'MAHDI'; his face rosy and
hair golden in color. He will fill the earth with justice without any
difficulty. In his very childhood, he shall get separated from his
mother and father and from the viewpoint of training he shall be rare
and matchless. He shall rule over the Muslim countries with utmost calm
and security and time shall be favorable and friendly towards him.

His words will be accepted; the young and old shall humbly obey him. He
shall fill the earth with Justice just as it had been filled with
oppression. Then, at that moment his Imamat shall reach its perfection
and Viceregency will be established for him. Moreover, Allah will make
the dead to rise from their graves and return them back to this world.
Then, like people who get up from their morning sleep, they shall see
nothing but their own houses. The land will flourish and by blessing of
his (i.e. Mahdi's) existence, it shall become fresh and fruitful.
Seditions and disturbances shall vanish and blessings and welfare will
increase manifold.18

**From The Sayings of Scholars**

Mo'iddin Arabi, in the 3rd volume of his "Futuhaat Makkia" (Chapter No.
366) says: "Certainly Allah possesses a Vicegerent who shall appear when
the earth will be filled with cruelty and oppression and then he shall
fill it with equity and Justice. If there remains not more than a day
from the life of the earth, Allah will set the day so long until this
Vicegerent from the progeny of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and offspring
of Fatemah (A.S.) appears."

Author of "Eqdud-Durar" in the preface of the afore-said book, after
reproaching about the situation at that time and the excessiveness in
seditions and disturbances says: Some reckon that these circumstances
will always continue whereas such kind of people have followed the
superficial or external aspect of (only) some of the traditions. Then I
said -These traditions are worthy of our acceptance and we ire bound to
accept and follow them. However, there is nothing in these traditions
which give indication to him continuity of those 18-Ibn-Abil-Hadeed in
the first volume on Page 93 writes:

(And Hazrat at the end of his Sermon says: - "It shall end in Us, not
you people" reference is made to Mahdi, the Awaited one who shall appear
at the end of time and most of the scholars of hadith are of the opinion
that he is from the offspring of Fatemah (AS.). Mu'tazilites do not deny
his existence. They have mentioned him in their books and their Sheikhs
too have acknowledged him. Then, after a few more words he says -
Oazi-ul-Qaza'at (Supreme Judge) narrates from Kafi-ul-Kata'at Abil
Qassim Isma'eel-ibn-Eba'ad whose reference is connected to Ali, that
Hazrat himself said: He is from the offspring of Hussein. He shall
possess a broad forehead, a protracted nose, a broad stomach and broad
thighs. His front teeth will be separated from each other and on his
right cheek will appear a spot. Ibn-Abil Hadeed continues: This
tradition has also been narrated by Abdulla-ibn Qatiba in his book
'Al-GHARIB'.

circumstances until the Day of Qiyamat (the Last Day). It seems that
the obviation of seditions and appearance of comforts will occur at the
time when Imam Mahdi shall manifest himself because, many traditions
which the 'Ulemas' and scholars have brought in their books have given,
glad-tidings of his manifestation and the fact that God hall appoint a
person who will be provided for his kingdom, such means which could
shake the mountains and his kingdom will spread far and wide.

So he shall rule the entire earth and fill it with equity and Justice.
At that time will be revealed the hidden treasures and when the powerful
appear, he hall present them to the people...

Author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 410 writes: Shaikh Kamaluddin-
ibn-Thalha in his book "Durrul-Munazzam" says as such: 'As per research,
there is for Allah a Vicegerent who shall appear at the end of time when
the earth will become filled with cruelty and oppression and indeed he
shall fill it with equity and Justice. If there remains not more than a
day from the life of the earth, He shall make this Vicegerent to appear
from the offspring of Fatemah Zahra. Men of disposition shall recognize
him by his protracted nose, black eyelashes and a spot on his right
cheek. His name shall be Muhammad; his height above medium, his face
handsome and his hair beautiful in appearance. Through him,

Allah shall soon destroy the innovations (in religion), make upright
every living thing and satiate his soldiers from the land of Eden. The
most prosperous before him will be the people of Kufa. He shall
distribute the booties equally and deal with people righteously and
during his time altercations shall vanish. The clouds shall not allow
but rains to descend and the land except to flourish. This Imam is the
same Mahdi, the Upholder of the Commands of Allah to such extent that he
will banish all the false religions. Then there shall remain no religion
but the pure one(s)...

Author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on Page 432 has narrated from Sharif Mama
Samhoudi from his book "Jawahar-ul-Nagdin" the following: 'As per
research, blessing of the Holy Prophet's prayers at the time of Ali's
marriage with Fatemah has been manifested in the offspring of Hassan and
Hussein because, from their generation were those who have passed away
and are those who shall come (in future). And if nobody comes in the
future except Imam Mahdi it will be sufficient (i.e. for fulfillment of
the promises and bringing into order the chaotic conditions).

Ibn Athir Jazari in his book "Nehaya" while explaining the word "??-
Jala" writes: "About the qualities of Mahdi it has been said that he is
"????? ???? Ajlal- Jibha" and that is the delicate hair between the eyes
and ears from above and he will be the one who shall put up his hair
from his face." Also, in explaining the word of "???-Huda", he says:
Mahdi is the one who has been guided by Allah towards the truth. This
quality has been utilized in names to such extent that it has become
like the names which out of prevalence, have found nominal meaning and
for this reason has been named as Mahdi, the one whom the Holy Prophet
has given glad-tidings about his coming at the end of time.19

In the second volume of Fotouhat-e-Islamiah, on page 322 the author
after specifying this point that traditions about Mahdi are to such
extent that takes one to the level of certitude, says: "What is sure in
this regard is that his manifestation is certain. Surely, he shall be
from the offspring of Fatemah and he will fill the earth with Justice."
Thereafter he says: Sayyid Muhammad-ibn- Rasul Barzanji has referred to
this very matter in his book "Al-Asha'ah".

Ibn-Abil Hadeed in his commentary of Nahjul-Balagha in the second
volume on Page 535, while mentioning some of Hazrat's speeches (which
was previously narrated and we hinted in them the subject of Mahdi) he
says: As per research, all the Muslim sects are unanimous in their
opinion that the world and obligation shall not end but after the advent
of Mahdi who shah come at the end of time.

**Poetry and Prose about Mahdi**

The author of 'Yanabi-ul-Muwadda', on page 438 has attributed a poem to
Amir-ul-Mumineen Ali (A.S.) where Hazrat says (to Imam Hussein): "O
Hussein! When you shall find yourself alien in some place, associate
yourself with its habit and custom! As if I see my soul and my children
in Karbala and its battle scene. Our beards will be dyed with blood just
as the dress of a bride gets dyed. I see that calamity but not with my
naked eye. The key of its worth has been given to me. May Allah grant a
good given to me? May Allah grant a good reward to our 'Qaem' who is the
Upholder Justice?"

"O Hussein! Qaem shall seek revenge for my blood. Rather he shall seek
revenge for your blood too. So be patient upon your hardship and
suffering!" On page 439 of the same book, he narrates from Ali-ibn-Abi
Talib (A.S.) the following poem: "May Allah shower this Mercy and divine
Grace upon that valiant Imam who shall make the army divisions of the
polytheists object with his victorious sword? He shall manifest this
religion on every part of land and will disgrace the polytheist
oppressors. I have not spoken these words out of pride and vaunt. Rather
it has been given to me by the chosen one of Al-e-Hashim (i.e. Holy
Prophet)."

Again, in the same book, on page 454 he narrates the famous ode from
De'bel Khuza'ee who recited it before Imam Reza (A.S.). He quotes De'bal
as saying: I 19-"Nehaya" Vol.4 Page 359. Also "Taj-al Arous" vol. 10
Page 408 and "Lesan-ul-Arab" Vol. 20 Page 229 have narrated the same.
Abu Umraani has narrated in his Sunan from Ibn Shudab as such: - The
reason that he has been named as 'Mahdi' is that he is being guided. He
shall bring out the pages of 'Torah' from the hills of Syria and by
means of that he shall argue with the Jews. Then a few amongst them will
become Muslims. "Arf-ul- Wardi" Page 81.

recited my ode till I came upon this part: "The emergence of the Imam
who shall rise in the name of Allah and His blessings is inevitable. He
shall distinguish the truth and falsehood for us and reward the virtuous
and punish the evil." Imam Reza (A.S.) shed tears and then said: 'O
De'bel, the Trusted Spirit has spoken through your tongue...

In Vol. 3, Chapter 366 of 'Al-Fotouliat-ul -Makkiyah' we see the
following poem: 'Know that the last of the Saints shall be martyred and
the light of universe shall become extinguished. He is the Mahdi,
Al-e-Muhammad. He is like the Hindi sword, a destroyer. He is the sun's
rays which brightens every cloud and the darkness. He is the first drop
of rain, which bestows munificence and bounty.

The author of 'Yanabi-ul-Muwadda' narrates on page 416 a poem from the
book 'Durrul-Maknun' of Moyiddin Arabi. It is as follows: "When time
shall move ahead by means of the letters of 'Bismillah', Mahdi shall
emerge. After keeping fast, he shall emerge from the Ka'aba. Send
greetings to him on my behalf."

The author of 'Eqdua-Durar', in Section 4, writes: 'We and this chapter
by a few lines of the valuable ode said by Allama Adab
Abdullah-ibn-Bashar wherein he has mentioned about Al-e-Muhammad and the
killing of 'Nafs- Zakkiyah':

On the occasion of killing of 'Nafs-Zakkiyah' there are true signs for
the one who remembers it. Another 'Nafs' which is at work and who shall
be killed near Ka'aba, will emerge and invite (the people) towards Imam
and he shall inform that at sun-rise when a part of the day has passed,
a fire shall be kindled in Kufa along with a flow of blood. Consequently
Kufa shall burn. The people of Syria shall dispatch towards 'Baida'h'
and army against them and they shall be swallowed in the land. Horsemen
with valiant men (like the wind, which moves dust and smog) shall move
forward. Shoaib-ibn-saleh who is the herald and vanguard shall take them
towards a Sayyid who shall emerge from amongst Al- e-Hashim - that
sayyid who on the right of his face i.e. between eyes and ears exists
spot.

Also, in the preface of the same book its author has brought a poem in
praise of Mahdi but has not mentioned whether the poem belongs to
himself or someone else. The poem is as follows:

"It is by blessings of Mahdi that the goodness of religions shall be
put in order. It is by blessings of Mahdi that degradation of religions
shall be put to an end. It is through his help that the deserts too will
become void (of cruelty and oppression). It is through Mahdi's goodness
that the darkness of cruelty and oppression shall be obviated.

Greetings and salutations of Allah be upon Mahdi on each day." The
author of 'Yanabi-ul-Muwadda' on page 466 writes: This poem is from
Shaikh Abdul-Karim Yamani: - "Its people are living in prosperity and
tranquility and you shall see the light of guidance who is from the
progeny of 'Haider' and Ahl al-Bayt appears by means of (???) He shall
be called as 'Mahdi' and will emerge for the truth. First and foremost,
he shall give commands based on the 'Sunnah' of the best creature .e.
Hazrat Muhammad (S.A.WA.).

In the same book, on page 461 he narrates the following poem from
Shaikh Abdul-Rahman Basthami, author of 'Durrat-ul-Ma'aref': The eminent
(???) and the great one from the progeny of Ahmad shall emerge. First of
all he shall manifest the Divine Justice amongst the people just as the
same has been narrated by Hazrat Abul-Hassan Reza (A.S.) and has also
been recorded in the Treasure of Knowledge." The following poem too has
been narrated by Basthami on the afore-said page:

The letter of (???) after its (??) shall triumphly emerge in Mecca from
the Holy Ka'aba. This is the same Mahdi who shall emerge with truth and
soon he shall be sent by Allah for the truth. He shall fill the entire
earth with equity and Justice. First of all, he shall erase and destroy
the darkness of cruelty and oppression. His custodianship for the Divine
affairs is from Allah's side. He has been chosen by Allah to be the
Caliph and the successor of the best Prophet. Again, in the
afore-mentioned book, on page 468 he narrates the following poem in
praise of Mahdi from Shaikh Sadruddin Qunawi:

'Mahdi shall emerge and rise on the earth for the sake of Divine
affair. Besides, he will destroy all the infidel Satans. The destruction
of all mean persons shall occur by his hands; by the mighty sword which
if you would know its true worth it would make you fall sick. The
reality of this sword and this 'Qaem', who has been appointed for the
establishment of religion on the true path, is a Divine affair.

Once again, in the book of 'Yanabi-ul-Muwadda' on page 474 Quanduzi has
narrated (????? ?????) (an ode which an end with (???) from which is as
follows: - 'How often they ask me about love of Ahl al-Bayt - should I
now conceal or deny them? I swear by Allah that love of Ahl al-Bayt has
been mingled with my flesh and blood. They are the torches of guidance.
After Hazrat (i.e. Holy Prophet) came Haider and Hasnain. After them,
came Ali, Muhammad, Jafar Sadiq and Musa. After Musa came Ali who is the
place of refuge for the people i.e. Ridha. After him came his son
Muhammad and after him came his virtuous son Ali and then Hassan and
Muhammad. They are my Imams and my master although a group has rebuked
and reproached me (for having this belief).

They are the Imams whose names we often hear. They are the Hujjat
(proof) of Allah upon His slaves. They are at the path of guidance
towards Allah. They are Imams who keep fast during the day for the sake
of Allah and pass their nights by bowing and prostrating before Allah.
They are a group to whom belongs Mecca, Abtah, Kif, Jama and the
graveyard of Baqi. They are a group to whom belongs Mina, the two sacred
monuments, the two 'Marwa' and mosque. They are a group who possesses a
tomb in every place. Nay, rather they are having a tomb situated in
every heart.

Muhammad-ibn-Thalha Shafa'ee says in 'Matalib-us-Su'ool' as such: [In
the twelfth Chapter while giving account of Abul-Qasim Muhammad-ibn
Hassan- ibn-Ali-Ibn-Muhammad-ibn-Ali-ibn
Musa-ibn-Jafar-ibn-Muhammad-ibn- Ali- ibn -Hussein-ibn-Ali-ibn-Abi Talib
that he is the 'Mahdi', 'Hyjat' 'Khalaf-e- Saleh' and 'Muntazar'.]

He is the successor and 'Hujjat' (proof) who has been approved by
Allah. Moreover, Allah has guided him on the true path and given him His
temperament and raised his status. Allah has bestowed upon him the
ornament of His Grace and he too has put on the dress of virtue. The
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) has said something, which has been narrated for
us and the one who becomes aware of the Prophet's saying will comprehend
its meaning. A learned person knows that news about the signs of Mahdi
(A.S.) has come and the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) has revealed the same,
lineage and qualities of Mahdi. Suffice it is to mention the saying of
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) who said: 'The light on Mahdi's face will be
from my light. The one whose place of care is Zahra (a part of his own
self), none shall receive a position similar to the position which I
have bestowed upon Mahdi. Then, the one who says that he is the Mahdi
has spoken the truth.

Apart from what we have written, there are yet other poems in Persian
and Arabic, which anyone investigating into them will become
enlightened. The author of 'Yanabi-ul-Muwadda' has narrated many such
poems like the poems of Shaikh Ah mad Jaami, Shaikh Athar Naishabouri,
Shaikh Jamaluddin Rumi and others. However what we have narrated is
adequate.


