Chapter Two : Mahdi Is From the Arab Descent
============================================

Author of "Eqdud-Durar" in Chapter one section 4 narrates from Abu
Abdullah Na'eem-ibn-Hemaad (from his book "Al-Fatan") who is turn
narrates from Ali (AS.) who said: - "The kingdom of Bani-Abbass is such
that if the Turks, Deylamites, and the inhabitants of Indus valley and
India were to attack them they would fail to destroy them and
Bani-Abbass would continue to be successful until they become aggressive
towards the slaves and the weak. Then God will make a 'Gusale' (the
wicked one who will revolt against Bani-Abbass and destroy them) to
dominate over them which shall come out from a place where their kingdom
will be disclosed. He shall not pass any city but that which conquers;
no flag will be hoisted before him but that which he destroys and he
will not come across any bounty but that which he misuses. Woe be to the
one who takes his side. This shall continue until victory is achieved by
the hands of an Arab who shall rise fore the truth and act upon it."

It is apparent that 'on Arab' in the above sentence refers to Mahdi,
the Awaited One who shall appear at the end of time and his signs are
the very ones which have come in the same chapter of the aforesaid book
which has been taken from the book of "Al-Fatan", where its author, Imam
Abu Abdulla Na'eem-ibn -Hemaad narrates from Abi Qabil as such: "People
shall always be in comfort until the kingdom of Bani-Abbass comes to an
end. Then they will live in disturbed conditions until the advent of
Mahdi."

Author says: History bears witness that right from the time of Holaku's
revolt; the East has not enjoyed liberty. Disturbed conditions and
discord among the rulers and kings has always continued to exist. Thus
Ali's saying that: Until he gains victory and hands it over to an Arab
is perhaps referring to this point that that discord and disturbed
conditions are all incidental to the coming of Holaku and his subsequent
revolt and it shall remain till the advent of Mahdi.

Thus, as one of the causes and means of Mahdi's victory and his success
in inviting the people (towards his mission) and his domination over the
cities is the discord and disturbed conditions which shall follow the
revolt of Holaku. It is like this that Holaku himself will surrender the
affairs of Government to Hazrat (A.S.). Another factor, which shows that
Mahdi is from an Arab line, is the diffused traditions which have come
with regards to determination of his family and relatives. Ragheb in his
"Mufradaat" says: "Arab (???) are the children of Ismail (-Ishmaeel) and
(?????) (-Aarab) its plural form. Later on, the nomads were called by
that name."

The author of "Saba'ek-uz-Zahak", on page 4 says:

"The city-dwellers are called as "??? - Arab" and the desert - dwellers
as Aarab" and what is common is that the word of is used for both
groups." Jauhari in "Sihah" says: " - Arab" a tribe and they are the
city-dwellers. They have been called Arabi by the title of
A'raab-e-Erabi. But what is commonly used is the word of "(???)-Arab" at
all levels. The same has been written in the dictionaries."

The author of "Ebar" says: 'The word of Arab " -Arab" is constructioned
from " - Aarab" and its meaning of expression (speech) has been taken
from those who say: - At the time when a person expresses and describes
his need and since they possess the faculty of expression and eloquency
in speech they have been called by this name. So know that every
non-Arab - whether Iranians, Turks, Romans or Europeans are all "-
Ajam - non-Arab" and it is not what the people commonly believe that the
word of is particular to the Persian - speaking nation. Rather, the
people of West have hitherto used this word for the French and those who
fall in the same category. However the word of (by an addition of " -
A") is used for the one who does not clarify his speech even though he
may be an Arab.

**Mahdi is From This "Ummah" (Nation)**

Tirmidhi is his "Sahih", on page 270 narrates from Abu Sa'eed Khudri
who said: 'I feared that after the Holy Prophet, something bad might
take place, so we asked the Prophet and he replied as such: "Indeed
Mahdi is from my 'Ummah' and he shall emerge from amongst them." The
magazine "Hudal-Islam" in its 25th publication, line No. 3 has narrated
the same tradition from Ibn-Maajah who in turn has narrated it from Abu
Sa'eed.

The author of "Eqdud-Durar", in the first chapter narrates from Abu
Muslim Abdur-Rahman-ibn-Auf and him from his father and him from the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) who said: -

"Surely God shall appoint a man from my "Ummah" (nation). He continued
to the point of saying: He shall fill the earth with Justice." In the
3rd chapter of the same book, the author narrates from the book of
"Sefat-ul-Mahdi" written by Hafez Abu-Na'eem who in turn narrates from
Abu Sa'eed Khudri and he from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) who said:

'Mahdi is from us, the Ahl-ul-bait (i.e. People of the House). He is
from my 'Ummah'. The author of 'Fusu1 al-Muhimma' narrates from Abu
Dawoud and Tirmidhi and these two from Abdullah-ibn-Mas'oud and he from
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) who said:

"If there remains not more than a day from the life the earth, God will
set the day so long until a person from my "Ummah" and progeny who
carries the same lame as mine appears (and fills the world with
Justice.)" The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" has narrated (on page 433
of his afore- said book) a tradition from the book "Jawaher-ul-Aqd'ain"
of Abu Sa'eed Khudri. In that tradition the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
says: - 'Mahdi is in my Ummah'. Also the afore-said author narrates from
Abu Abdullah Na'emm-ibn- Hemaad (from his book of "Al-Fatan" and he from
Hisham-ibn-Muhammad and he from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) who said: -
"Mahdi is from this "Ummah" and he is the one who shall lead
Isa-ibn-Maryam.20"

Ragheb in his 'Mufradaat' says: 'Ummah' is any group of people which is
formed through things like custom, time or place - making no difference
whether that thing brings them together voluntarily or involuntarily and
the plural of " - Ummah" is "(???) - Ummam."

One group has said as such: - 'The "Ummah" of every Prophet are his
followers and the one who does not follow his custom will not be
included in his "Ummah" even though he may have lived during his time.
Therefore, the "Ummah" of Islam are those people who follow the Islamic
rules and all that the 20-A similar tradition to this effect has come in
"Arf-ul-wardi" page 65 narrated from Ibn-Sireen.

Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) has brought making no difference whether he has
visited him or not or whether he has lived during his time or not.
Moreover this applies to all, without any difference in families or
tribes even though they may differ from each other from the view-point
of language, time and place.

The Author is of the opinion that: 'It is apparent that the "object of
making known" i.e. ('L') in (Al-MAHDI) is for covenant; meaning that
Mahdi - the one who has been remembered in the heavenly books and about
whom the Prophets have given glad-tidings to their nations, - shall be
from this same blessed "Ummah" and not from any other "Ummah". So this
"Ummah" deserves to rejoice and be happy for being honored such a
virtue. It is true that in some of the exceptional and less common
traditions we find such contents like this one - "Mahdi is not but
Isa-ibn-Maryam (A.S.)".

Ibn-Hajar has written (this tradition) in "Sawa'eq" on page 89.
Ibn-Maaja and Hakem have brought one tradition from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) as such: - 'It will not be long when difficulties and
problems will dominate the people and the world shall turn away from its
inhabitants and the people will resort to greediness. The Hour shall not
be established but upon the wicked and Mahdi is not but
Isa-ibn-Maryam.

Ibn-Hajar quotes Hakem as saying:

"These traditions did not disturb me as such but rather astonished me
greatly." Baihaqi says: "Only Muhammad-ibn-Khalid has narrated this
tradition." Hakem says: "He (i.e. Muhammad-ibn-Khalid) is unknown and
there exists differences in the chain of transmission of traditions
narrated by him." Nesa'ee too rejects such traditions.

In the 10th Volume of Da'erat-ul-Ma'aref (page 475) the author after
narrating the afore-said tradition mentions the views of Ibn-Maaja as
such: Imam Qurtabi says: - 'This tradition is not inconsistent with what
the previous traditions have mentioned about Mahdi because; this
tradition only aims to respect the dignity of Isa-ibn-Maryam (A.S.) over
Mahdi. That is to say, there is no Mahdi but Isa from the viewpoint of
is position of Immaculateness and perfection. So it does not contradict
existence of Mahdi. It is identical to this saying that there is no
stalwart but Ali. Moreover, this view can be supported with the
tradition which says that Mahdi is from my progeny; he shall fill the
earth with Justice and will e merge along with Isa (A.S.) who shall help
him in the killing of Dajjal at a place called "Lad" in the land of
Palestine.

Indeed, he shall rule over this 'Ummah' and Isa-ibn-Maryam will pray
behind him and God Almighty is All -Knowing.21

21-The author of Arf-ul-Wardi too has narrated the views of Qurtabi on
page 86 of his afore-said book Thereafter he has mentioned the identical
view: of Ibn-Kathu in explanation of the afore-mentioned tradition. He
then writes as such: Qurtabi says - The chain of transmitters of this
tradition is weak and the traditions which have come from the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) about Mahdi and (the fact) that he is from the
progeny of the Holy Prophet and Fatemah are more firm and sound than
this tradition Thus one has to judge in accordance with them and not
others. He further writes: Abul Hassan Muhammad ibn Hussein
ibn-Ibrahim-ibn Aasim Sehri says - The author of "Eqdud-Durar" in the
preface of his afore-mentioned book writes as such: 'And amongst the
people, there are those who reckon that Mahdi is none other than
Isa-ibn-Maryam, the pure and holy.

So I told them - The one who denies the emergence of Mahdi is not
actually referring to Hazrat Isa because there is no reason to believe
that that reference is made to him and the one who thinks that Mahdi is
the same as Isa-ibn-Maryam and insists on the authenticity of this
tradition has indeed made the zeal of prejudice and error to bring him
to the point of precipice. Thereafter he says: - "Even though this
tradition may be proverbial among the people yet, how can it be
considered authentic when the traditionists have rejected it." After
accurately examining its references and deliberating on its authorities
if a person still relies on this tradition, it will be a matter of grave
fallacy.

The proof of this statement is that Imam Abu Abdur-Rahman has
emphasized on its denial and his view is worthy of acceptance because
the tradition returns back to Muhammad-ibn-Khalid Jundi. Moreover, Imam
Abul-Faraj Jauzi narrates in his book 'Elal-Mutanahiya' the weakness of
this tradition from the words of Hafez Abi Bakr Baihaqi who said: -
'This tradition is connected to Jundi and he is an unknown person.
Moreover, Jundi narrates from Aba'an-ibn - Myaash and he too is a
rejected and un-laudable person. Aba'an too narrates from Hassan and he
from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and there is an interval in his
transmission (i.e. all the sources have not been narrated). Anyhow,
there is no reason to consider this tradition to be authentic.

Baihaqi narrates from his master, Hakem Naishabouri (and his words are
sufficient enough to make you understand the technique of tradition and
the position of its narrators) as follows: -

'Jundi is an unknown person and Ibn-Aaiyaash, a rejected one and with
such transmitters this tradition is severed. Almost all the scholars of
traditions have brought traditions about Imam Mahdi and all have
mentioned his name and remembered him and for those who are
clear-sighted and are also aware, it is clear that a part of those
traditions are a rectification for the other parts and this is the
highest proof of those traditions being better than this rejected
tradition. Also, Hafez Abu Abdullah Hakem has spoken on this subject in
his 'Mustadrak' which has (also) been mentioned in 'Sahiain' and this
makes us needless of other talks.

He reminds that if a tradition has been narrated by a large number of
people it is having priority over those traditions which are not as such
and while coming across this tradition he discusses its position from
the view-point of credibility and un-credibility. Thereafter he
writes:

With respect to the overwhelming number of transmitters with regard to
the tradition of the Holy Prophet we have to admit that it is on a wide
scale. The tradition is as follows: - "Mahdi shall come and he is from
my progeny … He is someone other than Isa-ibn-Maryam. Rather Isa will
pray along with him and assist him in the killing of Dajjal."

"The reason I have brought this tradition is not to argue upon it but
to express my surprise." This statement of Hakem finally proves his
inattention towards this tradition. He further says: "Better than this
tradition is the tradition of Sunan Suri and his adherents."

Thereafter, he mentions the tradition of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
which says; "His name is the same as my name" and then writes as such: -
"The eminent scholars are of the view that what Hazrat intends to say by
this statement is that Mahdi's name is the same and similar to his
name." Thus the above statement reveals the truthfulness of this
statement that Mahdi is someone other than Isa-ibn-Maryam (A.S.).
Besides, even if we assume this tradition to be correct, we cannot take
it in its apparent form. Rather, we should resort to its esoteric
interpretation, since we have not found any reason for giving up those
genuine traditions which are in opposition to this tradition and perhaps
its esoteric interpretation may be like the esoteric interpretation of22
from this angle that a part of the wordings of the two traditions are
near to each other and the number of such traditions are numerous. Thus
rejection is not the factual aim so that we may conclude that Mahdi is
the same as Isa-ibn-Maryam. Rather, it should be said that this sentence
has come in honor of Hazrat Mahdi and / or Isa or perhaps it might be
having some other interpretation.'

Author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 434 says:

'Indeed the fabrication of this tradition from Ibn-Khalid is apparent
from various aspects: -

Firstly, if this tradition was correct then the oppression and cruelty
which was prevalent during the time of Yazid and Hajjaj should have
increased manifold and until today there should have not remained any
goodness in this world. However, after the afore-mentioned period, that
is from the time of Omar-ibn- Abdul Aziz and the Abbasside Caliphs up to
now, peace and goodness has been settled by the Grace of Allah.

Secondly, before the appointment of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) to the
position of Prophethood, the subject of Mahdaviyat was not prevalent
among the Arabs so that it could possibly reject this saying (there is
no Mahdi but Isa-ibn- Maryam).

Thirdly, God has hinted about Mahdi in many verses of His Book and as
such the Holy Prophet too has given glad-tidings about him to his
followers just as the previous Prophets (AS.) had given glad-tidings to
others about the coming of our Prophet and the circumstances concerning
Mahdi. I have collected and mentioned these glad-tidings in a book
entitled "Mashreq-ul-Ekwan". (End) 22-"For the one who 13 a neighbor to
the mosque there is Do Salat except in the mosque." Its esoteric
interpretation will be as such: If a person does not perform his Salat
in mosque his Salat will not be a perfect one and not that there is no
Salat for him at all.

What we can derive from the sayings of these great men in reply to the
afore- mentioned tradition is the following: -

Firstly, it is a fabricated one; secondly it is null and void and hence
weak; thirdly it is contradicting the widely transmitted tradition and
fourthly its actual interpretation differs from its apparent meaning.

It is possible to conclude from this tradition that the advent of Mahdi
and the descending of Isa from the heavens are two related affairs
connected to each other where none can be separated from the other.
Therefore it is correct to say that reference to one applies to the
other and it seems that both are one and the same or it can be said that
something is missing from the tradition and in reality it was as such:
(Mahdi is not but that Isa is with him) Moreover, the diffused
traditions prove this meaning to be correct. Thus Isa is one of the
signs of authenticity of the subject of Mahdi (AS.).

**Mahdi is From Kanane**

Author of "Eqdud-Durar" in his first chapter narrates from 'Sunan' of
Imam Abu Amro Osman-ibn-Sa'eed Muqari who narrates from Qatada who said:
"I asked Sa'eed-ibn-Maseeb whether Mahdi is the truth and he replied:
'Yes, he is the truth, I then asked: 'To which tribe does he belong? He
replied: "To the Kanane." I again asked: 'To which clan does he belong?
He replied: 'To the Quraish' I further asked: To which family does he
belong? He replied: 'To the Bani-Hashim' Again I asked: 'To which one of
the families does he belong? He replied: "To the progeny of Fatemah."

Author says: "By Kanane is meant the same son of Kazima, who was the
son of Madraka, son of Elyaas, son of Mazar, son of Nezar, son of Sa'ad,
son of Adnan."

Author of "Saba'ek al-Zahab" says: 'Banu Kanane is a family from Mazar
and Mazar had a son in whom the lineage of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
terminated and he was called as Nezar. Moreover Mazar had children who
were from the Holy Prophet's lineage and they were: Malik, Malkaan,
Haaris, Amr, Aamer, Saad, Ghanam, Auf, Mujraba, Jarwal, Jazaal and
Gurwaan. Abu Ubaid says: 'They were all from Yemen' and in the book
called "Ebar" it has come that their place of stay was in the outskirts
of Mecca.'

**Mahdi is From Quraish**

In the first chapter of "Eqdud-Durar", the author narrates from Imam
Abu Abdullah Na'eem-ibn-Hamad who narrates from Ibn-Wa'el who narrates
from Imam Abul Hussein Ahmad-ibn-Jafar Manawi who narrates from Qatada
who said: 'I asked Sa'eed-ibn-Maseeb whether Mahdi was on truth and lie
replied: 'Yes'. I asked: 'To which tribe does he belong? He replied:
'Quraish'. I asked: "To which clan does he belong?" He replied:
'Bani-Hashim'. I asked: "To which family does he belong:" He replied:
"He is from the offspring of Abdul- Muttalib." I asked: "Which one of
the families?" He replied: "From the progeny of Fatemah." I asked:
"Which one of her sons?" He replied: "That is enough now."

Also, the afore-mentioned book narrates (in the seventh chapter) from
the book "Al-Fatan" of Hafez Abu Abdullah Na'eem-ibn-Hemaad which in
turn narrates from Ishaaq-ibn-Yahya-ibn-Thalha who narrates from Ta'oos
who said: - Omar-ibn-Khattab was on death-bed and bidding farewell to
his family members. He then said: 'I do not know of any treasure, which
I can bestow. The house and all that it contains from wealth and weapons
should be spent in the way of Allah.

Then Ali (May Allah be satisfied with him) said: "O Amir-ul-Momineen,
leave aside this matter because you are not the owner of (this) wealth.
Rather its owner is a young man from the tribe of Quraish who shall, at
the end of time distribute it in the way of Allah."23

Ibn-Hajar writes on page 99 of his book "Sawa'eq" as such: - 'Ahmad and
Maawardi have brought a tradition from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) who
said: Glad-tidings be to you about Mahdi. He is from the Quraish; from
my progeny.24 Esa'af-ur-Raghebeen too has narrated the same in his book
on page 151. The author believes: 'Quraish is the same Nazr-ibn-Kanane.
In Ja'ame-ul-Latif we read as such: "Know that there exist differences
in Quraish as to why they were called by this name. So it is said: They
were titled in the name of a beast living in the sea - a beast which
eats and itself is not eaten; conquers and itself is not conquered (a
metaphoric remark signifying power and magnificence) and this tribe too
is similar to that beast due to their toughness and significance." In
Madarek we read: Quraish is a mighty beast which plays with the ships
and except for fire it cannot be repulsed by any other thing. Its
diminutive form is due to reverence."

Some others say: The reason they were called as Quraish was that the
leader of their tribe Ibn-Yakhled Ghalib-ibn-Fahr was named as Quraish.
Thus it was said: The tribe of Quraish came; the tribe of Quraish went
and in this way they became famous by this name.

Still some others have said: Qusi (???) who was one person belonging to
their tribe gathered them together and brought them to Mecca and
"(???) - Qurash" means "to gather together". Thus, as he gathered them
together he was named as 23-A tradition similar to this has been
narrated in Arf-ul-Wardi on page 78 but in this version - Omar entered
the Public Treasury and said: I swear by God that I do not know whether
I should leave aside the public treasury and all the arms and wealth
that It contains or that I should distribute them In the way of God....
And on page 73 it is mentioned that Ali said: - Mahdi is from me, from
the Quraish.

24-In Kanzul-Ummal vol. 7, Page 186 and Arf-ul-Wardi Page 58 the same
has been narrated from Ahmad, Maawardi and Abu Na'eem. Also, Suyuti in
Arf-ul-wardi Page 79 writes: "Ka'ab says - Mahdi is not but from the
tribe of Quraish and caliphate is not but in them."

(gathering) just as we saw in the poem of Fazl-ibn-Abbas-ibn-Utba and
also in his following poem:25 It is also said that Quraish was the name
of Qusi and it was because of this reason that his tribe was named as
Quraish. What is more common however is that his name had been Zaid just
as it was previously mentioned? Yet others have said: The word of (????)
is derived from (????? which means "to earn" and because they were
carrying on business and earning they were called as Quraish.

It is also said that since "Nazr" was called as Quraish, his family too
became famous by this name. Some say: They were called as Quraish
because they were doing "Taqrish" of goods of the pilgrims going for Haj
and "Taqrish" means 'to inspect'. Thus they erected inspection points in
their way and prevented them from moving ahead unchecked. The proof that
this statement is correct is the saying of Haaris-ibn -
Khulatul-Yashkari who says:26

**Mahdi is From Bani-Hashim**

The author of "Uqdud-Durar" in the first chapter of his book, narrates
from Imam Abul-Hussein Ahmad-ibn-Jafar Manawi and Imam Abu Abdulla
Na'eem- ibn-Hamad and these two from Qatada who said:

I asked Sa'eed-ibn-Maseeb: "Is Mahdi the truth?"
He replied: "Yes."
I asked: "To which tribe does he belong?"
He replied: "To the Quraish."
I asked: "To which clan does he belong?"
He replied: "To the clan of Bani-Hashim."
I asked: "From which of its families?"
He replied: "From the offspring of Abdul-Muttalib."
I asked: "From which one of them?"
He replied: "From the offspring of Fatemah."
I asked: "From which one of her offspring?"
He replied: "That is enough now."

The author says: Hashim was the same son of d-Munaf who was the son of
Qusi, son of Kalab, son Marra, son of Ka'ab, son of Lui, son of Ghalib,
son Fehr, son of Malik, son of Nazr, son of Kanane. 25-We were the
residents of Mecca from Quraish and it was due to us that the tribe of
Ouraish was called by this name.

26-'O' the speaker who investigates us in front of Amr; Is there for us
any to affair be faithful upon? In Ja'ame-ul-Latif it has come as such:
Hashim's name was Amrol-Ala and the reason he was called by name was
that during the period of famine he used provide food and water for his
tribe.

In generosity and beneficence he had reached to such high level that he
used to provide food to the beats and birds and slaughter camels for
them on top mountains. Whenever a famine would occur in Mecca, he would
feed its people by his own doing and persuaded the rich men of Mecca to
donate their wealth to the poor and indigent up to the time when God
caused rain to descend.

Thereafter, he traveled to Syria, went to Caesar (king) and took from
him an order vouching the freedom of Quraish. He also sent
Abdul-Muttalib towards Yemen and in this way took a letter of trust from
the king of that place. Thereafter he ordained the traders and merchants
of Quraish to move out in the winter and summer seasons for the purpose
of trading. Thus, they would move towards Syria in summer and proceed
for Yemen in winter. As such, from then on their subsistence and means
of livelihood got extended through such trading and by blessings of
Hashim, God delivered them from fear of (loss of) life and hunger.
ABD-MUNAF was the father of Hashim who was named as the "moon of the
fourteenth night" because of his good-looking face and beneficence.
After him, Qusi succeeded him and the post of ruling and giving water to
the pilgrims was transferred to him. He was called by the name of
Mughaira and his agnomen was Abu Abd-Shams the name of Qusi (father of
Abd-Munaf) was Zaid and also Yazid. The reason he was called as (???)
(Qusi) was that he along with his mother Fatemah daughter of Sa'ad, left
the tribe of Bani-Uzra and started living with his uncles and distanced
himself from Mecca. Thus, for this reason he was named as (???) and this
word is derived from (????), which means "distant". It also carried the
meaning of "gathering" because, when he grew up and returned back to
Mecca he gathered the Quraish who had been scattered in the deserts and
got them back to Mecca and then expelled the tribe of Khaza'e.
Fazl-ibn-Abbass-ibn-Abu Lahab says:27

**Mahdi is From the Progeny of Abdul-Muttalib**

The author of "Eqdud-Durar", in the seventh chapter narrates from the
books of a group of traditionists such as Imam Abu Abdulla-ibn-Maaja in
his Sunan, Hafez Abul-Qasum Tabarani in his Mu'ajam and Hafez Abu Na'eem
Esfahani and others like Anas-ibn-Malik who said: The Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) said: "We seven, (i.e. Ali, my brother, Hamza, my uncle,
Jafar, Hassan, Hussein, Mahdi and myself) the sons of Abdul-Muttalib are
the leaders of Paradise."

27-Your father named as , (gathering) because God gathered the tribe of
'Fehr' through him. The author says: This denotes the subject which had
previously been mentioned in the tradition of Qatada narrated from
Saad-ibn-Maseeb. In Ja'ame- ul-Latif it is written as such: -

Abdul-Muttalib's name was "Shaibat-ul-Hamd' and sometimes he was also
called by the name of Aamer. He was called 'Shaibat-ul-Hamd' because of
the appearance of signs of whiteness on his hair. Abul-Haaris was his
agnomen since he had a son by the name of Haaris and he was called as
Abdul-Muttalib because, when his father Hashim who was living in Mecca
was about to die, he told Muttalib, his brother as such: "Take care of
your"???" (servant) in Yathrib." So from then on he was called as
Abdul-Muttalib. Some say that when his uncle Muttalib was taking him to
Mecca he had an undeserving appearance.

For this reason when Muttalib was asked about his nephew's condition he
felt ashamed to say that he was his nephew and instead said: He is my
"???" (slave or servant). Later on when they entered Mecca itself and he
had put on a decent look Muttalib revealed that he was his nephew. In
this way he became famous by the name of Abdul-Muttalib. It is said that
he had a pale face and so when he left for Mecca with Muttahb, people
were under impression that he was his "???"(slave) and were saying:
Muttalib has brought one"???" , (slave). As such he became famous by the
name of Abdul-Muttalib.

**Mahdi is From the Progeny of Abu-Talib**

The author of "Eqdud-Durar" in the fourth chapter of section No.3
narrates from Saif-ibn-Omaira who said: 'I was near Abu Jafar Mansoor.
He addressed me as such: -

O Saif! It is inevitable that a caller from the heavens shall call out
in the name of a man from the offspring of Abu Talib. I said: "May I be
sacrificed for you 'O Amirul-Momineen. Are you narrating what you just
said?" He replied: Yes, I swear by the One in whose Hand is my life. I
am narrating exactly what my ears have heard. I said: "But until now I
had not heard such a tradition." He said: "O Saif, Indeed he is the
truth and at the time when this affair takes place we will be more
worthy than others in answering (his call). However Mahdi will be
someone from our cousins." I said: "Someone from the offspring of
Fatemah!" He replied:

'O Saif, if I had heard it from someone other than Abu Jafar (Hazrat
Baqir) I would have not narrated it for you and indeed I was told about
this matter by the wisest person on earth. In Saba'ek al-Zahab we read
as such: Ibn Ishaaq says: "Abu-Talib's name was Abd-Munaf while Hakem
Abu Abdullah says: 'Abu-Talib's name and agnomen is one and the same."

The author of "Tazkerat-ul-Aimma" writes: - 'With regards to his
lineage we have mentioned that he is the son of Abdul-Muttalib and when
the latter was about to die, he recommended Abu Talib about the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.). In the book of "Tabaqaat" Muhammad-ibn-Saad narrates
from a group of Ulemas (scholars) such as Ibn-Abbass, Mujahida, Atha,
Zahri and the like of them that Abdul-Muttalib passed away in the second
year of "Aam-ul-Feel" (the Year of the Elephants) and the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) at that time was eight years old. In fact, Abdul-Muttalib
passed away at the age of one hundred and twenty and was buried in
Hejwan.

Umm-Aiman says: I saw the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) walking and crying
under the coffin of Abdul-Muttalib, while it was being carried away.
According to another saying, Abdul Muttalib was eighty years when he
left this world. However the first saying appears to be more correct.
Mujahid has narrated from Ibn-Abbass that when a group of people from
the tribe of "Qaafa" from 'BANI-MUZHAQ' saw the footsteps of the Holy
Prophet they told this child, for we have not seen any footsteps which
are similar to the holy prophet's footsteps resembling those in
position.

Then Abdul-Muttalib turned towards Abu-Talib and said: "listen to
whatever they have said. Indeed there shall be a kingdom for this son of
mine." From then on, Abu Talib stood up, in the best possible manner, to
help the Messenger of Allah and made himself responsible for assisting
him in his affairs so much so that he would never get separated from
him. He was so much attracted towards him that he would give more
preference to him than his own sons and would sleep only when Hazrat was
besides him. He would tell him: "You are well-paced and your future is
bright."

In the book of "Tabaqa'at", Ibn-Sa'ad writes: Once Abu Talib went to
"Zil- Mujaaz" along with the Messenger of Allah. When the latter felt
thirsty, Abu Talib said: "O nephew, you have become thirsty and there is
no water." Then the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) came down and striked the
ground with his heels. Very soon, water gushed out and Hazrat drank from
it. Historians have written that as Abu Talib arose to support Hazrat
and would often drive off the enemies from him, the Quraish once
approached him and said: "Your nephew has insulted our gods, called our
great men as insane and reckoned our fathers to be deviated one.
Therefore, you surrender him to us or else, there shall occur a war
between us."

Abu Talib replied: "May your mouths be shut forever. I swear by Allah
that I shall never surrender him to you."

They said: "Emara-ibn-Walid-ibn-Mughaira is the most handsome and noble
young man among the Quraish. You may keep him as your son instead of
Muhammad and surrender Muhammad to us so that we can kill him. Let us
exchange our man with your man." Abu Talib replied: "Woe be upon you
people. May Allah turn your face dark and gloomy? I swear by Allah that
you have indeed spoken the evil. Do you mean that I should hand over my
son to you so that you can kill him and will give me your son m exchange
so that I take care of him! I swear by Allah that if I do so, I would be
but an evil man."

Thereafter he said: I would like you to separate the baby-camels from
their mother. If the mother camel gets attracted towards the other
baby-camels (and not her own ones) then, I shall hand over Muhammad to
you. He then recited a poem.

Then, from the eighth year of his birth until the tenth year of his
appointment, which totally amounts to forty-two years, Abu Talib stood
up in support of Hazrrat and prevented the enemies from harming him. He
spared no effort in taking care of him till the end of his life. In the
"Nur-ul-Absar", the author mentions the date of demise of Abu Talib to
be the first of Zilqada after the removal of economic sanctions, which
lasted for 8 months and 21 days.

In "Mawaheb-ul-Ladnia", the age of Abu Talib at the time of his demise
is mentioned to be eighty-seven. It was in the same year that
Umm-ul-Mumineen, Khadija passed away and the Holy Prophet (S.A.WA) named
that year as the year of sorrow (Aam-ul-Huzn). For knowing more about
Abu Talib please refer to historical books like Seera- ibn-Hisham and
Tarikh-e-Tabari and to recent writings, especially the book of "Bagyat
at-Talib-Fi-Ahwal-Abi Talib" by Zaini Dehlan who is also the author of
Al-Fotouhat-Islamiah. Also refer to the book of 'Shaikh-ul-Abtah'
written by our cousin Sayyid Muhammad Ali Sharafuddin Aamali which
thought to be the best book in this regard.


