Mahdi Is From the Descendant of Muhammad
========================================

Abu Dawoud in the Fourth volume of his 'Sahih' (page 87) narrates from
Abdulla-ibn-Masoud that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: "If there
remains not more than a day from the life of the earth, God will set the
day so long until He appoints a person from my descendant."

In the afore-mentioned book on page 81, he narrates from Abu Sa'eed
Khudri that the Holy Prophet (SAWA) said: "Mahdi is from me." The author
of "Nur-ul-Absar" on page 230 narrates from Tirmidhi who narrates from
Abi Sa'eed Khadri who in turn narrates from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
one such similar tradition. Thereafter, he writes that Tirmidhi has
reckoned this tradition to be firm and genuine and that Tabarani and
others too have narrated this tradition.

Ibn Hajar in his "Sawa'eq" on page 98 has written that Ruyani, Tabarani
and others have brought a tradition from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as
such: "Mahdi is from my progeny." In "Es'aaf ur-Rhagebeen" (page 149)
and "Nur-ul-Absar" (page 230) the same tradition of the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) has been narrated from shirviya who in turn has narrated from
Hazaifa-ibn-Yamaan.28 Also, the author of "Nur-ul-Absar" on page 231 has
narrated from Ali-ibn- Abi Talib as such: "I asked the Holy Prophet
whether Mahdi would be from us, the descendants "??" of Muhammad or from
others" and he replied: "He is from us."29

The author of "َMatalib-uَs-Su'ool" writes: 'I have reviewed the views
of the people about the exegesis of "??" (descendants) and found out
that a group believes that by "??" is meant his family-members. Another
group says: (??) of the Holy Prophet are those upon whom "Zakat"
(alms-tax) is forbidden and instead "Khums" (one-fifth levy) is
permissible. Yet another group says: (??) refers to those personalities
who follow his religion and adhere to his manners.

Thereafter he says: "These are the three views, which are more famous
than all other views in this regard. However the reason that the first
view is correct is a tradition which Qazi Hussein-ibn-Mas'oud Baghwi has
brought in his book "Commentary of Sunnat ar-Rasul" (which is a
collection of all those traditions which are in agreement) and he quotes
its reference from Abdur-Rahman-ibn-Laili who said: - 'Ka'ab- ibn-Ajza
met me and said - "Should I present you with something which I heard
from the Messenger of Allah?" I replied: 'Yes give it to me.' He said: I
asked the Holy Prophet as to how one should send salutations upon them -
the Ahlul-Bait. The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) replied:

('O Allah, send salutations upon Muhammad and his descendants just as
Thou sends salutations upon Ibrahim and his descendants and send
blessings upon Muhammad and his descendants just as Thou sends blessings
upon Ibrahim and his descendants. Surely Thou art All -Praiseworthy and
All- Glorious).

Thereafter he says: - The Holy Prophet interpreted his Ahlul-Bait as
his "??- Aâl" Thus both are similar as far as their meaning is concerned
and Hazrat interchanged one word for the other in a manner that his (??)
are his Ahlul-Bait and his Ahlul-Bait are his (??). Therefore, on this
basis, "??-Aâl" and "??? - Ahl" are similar in meaning. The reality of
this affair can be discovered from here that 28-The author of
Kanz-ul-Ummal (vol. 7, pg. 186) and Arf-ul-Wardi (page 66) apart from
mentioning two other traditions from Ruyani and Abu Na'eem have
mentioned the afore-said tradition from Na'eem-ibn-Hemad and
Ibn-Asaker.

29-Arf-ul-wardi page 61 - narrated from Tabarani, Na'eem-ibn-Hemad and
Abu Na'eem.

the root of had been and - h' was changed to for this reason that the
letter of "- h" becomes "Tasgheer -dimunitive form and 30 Tasgheer of
becomes as per this rule which states that "Tasgheer"? returns back
every noun to its original form.

The reason that the second view is correct is a tradition, which the
traditionists have brought in their books. Moreover, Imam
Muslim-ibn-Hajjaj, Abu Dawoud and Nesa'ee are unanimous in the
authenticity of this tradition and each one of them have, in their
respective 'Sahihs' narrated from Abdul- Muttalib-ibn Rabiya-ibn-Haaris
as such: 'I heard the Holy Prophet (SAWA) saying: -

It is not that alms is filth and is not permissible for Muhammad and
his (??), to eat from it. Moreover, they have supported their view by a
tradition which Malik-ibn- Anas has narrated in his "Mutha" referring to
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as saying: "Alms is not permissible for (??)
(descendants) of Muhammad because they are the dirt and filth of
people." Thus, he made alms specifically un- permissible for his (??)
and those upon whom alms is forbidden are Bani- Hashim and
Abdul-Muttalib. It was asked from Zaid-ibn-Arqam as to who are the (??)
(descendants) of the Messenger of Allah upon whom alms are forbidden and
he replied: - (??) of Ali, (??) of Jafar, (??), of Abbass and (??) of
Aqeel and this second view is nearer to the first view. However the
reason which the supporters of the third view give is the sayings of
Exalted Allah:

(Except (??) of Lot; We will most surely deliver them all) where, as
per the consensus of the exegetists, (??) in this verse refers to those
who have turned towards him and followed his path. Thereafter he says:
Now, keeping in view all that has been said about (??), it becomes
apparent that its meaning comprehensively fits them because they are his
Ahlul-Bait. "Zakat" (alms-tax) is forbidden for them and they have
followed his religion and adhered to his path. Ascribing them with (??)
and naming them with this word is accidentally true.

**Mahdi is From the Progeny of the Holy Prophet**

Abu Dawoud, in the fourth volume of his 'Sahih' on age 87 has written a
tradition which has been narrated by Umm-Salma from the Holy Prophet as
such:

30-'Tasgheer' in dictionary means 'to reduce the meaning of the word by
adding the signs of 'Tasgheer'. In "Esaaf ur-Rhagebeen" Page 147 a
similar tradition from the Holy Prophet has been narrated by Nesa'ee,
Ibn-Maaja, Baihaqi and others.31 Ibn Hajar in 'Sawa'eq' on page 98
writes: Abu Na'eem has brought a tradition from the Holy Prophet as
such: - "Indeed, God will send a man front my progeny." Thereafter he
said: - "He shall fill the earth with Justice." The same has also come
in "Es'aaf ur-Rhagebeen" page 149.32 In the afore-mentioned book on page
97, the author writes: Abu Dawoud, Tirmidhi and Ibn-Maaja have brought a
tradition from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as such: - "If there remains
not more than a day from the life of the earth, indeed God will make a
man to appear from my progeny."

In another tradition the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) says: "He is from my
progeny, the one who shall fill the earth with Justice just as it had
been filled with oppression."

The same can be seen in "Es'aaf ur-Rhagebeen" on page 147.33 The author
of "Mataleb-us-Su'ool" writes: - 'The meaning of (progeny) in Arabic is
said to be(family) and as per the saying of others it means (offspring).
Thereafter he says: - "Both the meanings can be found in them because
they are his family as well as his offspring. However they are
considered to be his (????) (family) because are the near kinsmen and
they too were as such. They are reckoned to be his (????) (offspring)
for this reason that (????) are considered to be children of a daughter
and they were as such because Allah speaks about Ibrahim as follows:"

Thus Allah, the Exalted placed all the afore-mentioned personalities
including Hazrat Isa among the offspring of Ibrahim where the relation
of Isa with Ibrahim is only through his mother Maryam and no one else.

Thereafter he writes: - 'It has been narrated that Shobi who was one of
the Sunni 'Ulemas' living at the time of Hajjaj-ibn-Yusuf Saqafi was
among the lovers of Hassan and Hussein such that whenever he would
remember them he would say: "Those two are the children and offspring of
the Messenger of 31-Kanzul-Ummal vol. 7, Page 186; Jaame-Sgheer vol. 2,
Page 579; Tradition No. 9241. 32-The author of Kanzul-Ummal (vol. 2; Pg.
188) narrates a tradition from the Holy Prophet where in the end, Hazrat
... until Mahdi appears from my progeny. He also writes that the Holy
Prophet said: "The hour shall not be established until the earth is
filled with cruelty and op oppression. Then, Mahdi shall emerge from my
progeny and he shall fill the earth with equity and Justice just as it
had been filled with cruelty and oppression. 33-The author of
"Arf-ul-Wardi" on page 74 narrates from Ali who in turn narrates from
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as saying: - "Mahdi is from my progeny. He
shall fight for my Sunnah' just as I fought in the path of
revelation."

Allah." Later some of the people informed Hajjaj about this matter as a
result of which he became angry and started to imprecate him. Once
Hajjaj called him in one of his gatherings where the aristocrats and
'Ulemas' (scholars) of Basra and Kufa and the Quraish were present.
Shobi entered and greeted but Hajjaj did not pay any heed and did not
reply his greetings which was indeed the right of Shobi. When he sat
down, Hajjaj said: 'O Shobi, Do you know what I have heard about you
which indeed proves your foolishness?

Shobi replied: What is it?

Hajjaj said: Don't you know that sons of men are those who are allied
to him and kinship is only through fathers. Thus, on what basis do you
say that the sons of Ah are the children and offspring of the Holy
Prophet! Except for their mother Fatemah, are they having any other
connection with the Holy Prophet considering that kinship is not from
the daughters' side but rather from the fathers' side. Shobi put down
his head for some time until Hajjaj exceeded the limits in his disavowal
and notified the others in the gathering about this matter. Shobi
continued his silence and the more Hajjaj witnessed his silence the more
he rebuked him. Thereafter, Shobi raised his head and said: 'O Amir, I
do not see you but a speaker who is ignorant of the Book of Allah and
the 'Sunnah' of the Holy Prophet and one who has grown weary of them.
Then the anger of Hajjaj intensified and he addressed Shobi as such:
"Woe be upon you, how dare you speak to me in these words!"

Shobi replied: Yes, those present in your gathering -the Chanters (of
Quran) from Egypt and the bearers of knowledge of the Book who are dear
before you are all aware of what I say. Is it not that when Allah wishes
to address His slaves (i.e. servants) He says: - 'O Bani (sons of) Adam
or 'O Bani-Isra'el. About Ibahim, Allah says ......????? ?? ? (and from
his offspring) until He mentions Yahya and Isa. Therefore, 'O Hajjaj how
do you see the relationship of Isa with Adam, Isra'el and Ibrahim? Is it
through his father or any of his forefathers? Is it not that he is
connected to them only through his mother Maryam! Moreover, as per the
genuine narrators, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) with regard to Hassan has
said: Indeed my son (and he pointed out to Hassan) is "Sayyid" (Chief).
When Hajjaj heard such reasoning he lowered his head in shame. Later he
showed kindness and politeness towards Shobi and felt ashamed of those
present in the gathering.

Now that the matter has become clear (????) (progeny) is the very
offspring, children and family of the Holy Prophet and in reality, all
the meanings are applied to them.

**Mahdi is from the Family of the Holy Prophet**

Abu Dawoud, in the fourth Volume of his "Sahih" on page 17 has brought
a tradition which has been narrated by Ali (A.S.) from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) as such:

"If there remains not more than a day from the life of the earth,
indeed God will make a man from my family to appear."34 Tirmidhi, in the
second Volume of his "Sahih" on page 270 has brought a tradition which
has been narrated by Abu Huraira from the Holy Prophet (S.AW.A) as
follows: -

"If there remains not more than a day from the life of the earth, God
will set the day so long until a person from my family shall appear."
Thereafter he says: 'This is a good and authentic tradition; Moreover, a
similar tradition from the Holy Prophet with a slight variation has been
narrated by Ibn Hajar (on page 97 of his Sawa'eq) and Shaikh Saban (on
page 148 of Esaaf ur-Rhagebeen) from Abu Dawoud and Tirmidhi.35 The
magazine "Huda-Islam" No. 2, in the third of its weekly publication No.
25 mentions:

Ibn Maaja has brought a tradition narrated by Ali (A.S.) from the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as such:

"Mahdi is from my family."36 Shaikh Saban on page 148 of "Es'aaf
ur-Rhagebeen" and Ibn-Hajar on page 99 of "Sawa'eq" have written that
Ahmad, Abu Dawoud, Tirmidhi and Ibn- Maaja have brought a tradition from
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as such: 'If there remains not more than a
day from the life of the earth, God shall indeed make a person from my
progeny to appear. As per some other traditions, we find the words 'my
family'.37

Ibn-Hajar on page 97 of "Sawa'eq" and Shaikh Saban on page 148 of
"Esaaf ur-Rhagebeen" have written that Ahmad, Abu Dawoud, and Tirmidhi
have brought a tradition from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as follows: -
"The world shall not pass, or perhaps he said: The world shall not cease
to exist until a person from my family comes and rule."38 The author of
"Nur-ul-Absar" on page 231 has brought a tradition narrated by Abu
Dawoud who in turn has narrated from Zar-ibn-Abdullah that the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) has said: "The world shall not pan until a person
from my family comes and rules among the Arabs". Thereafter he said: -
"He shall ml the earth with Justice."39

In the afore-mentioned book, the author writes on page 229 as such:

34-The same has come in "Kanzul-Ummal" vol. 7, pg. 187 and
"Jaame-Sagheer" vol. 2, pg. 377 tradition No.

7489. The afore-said hooks also mention that the tradition is an
acceptable one.

35-Kanzul-Ummal vol. 7 pg. 186 narrated from Ibn-Masood.

36-Kanzul-Ummal vol. 7 pg. 186.

37-Arf-ul-Wardi pg. 64.

38-Arf-ul-Wardi pg. 63 - Narrated from Ahmad and Abu Na'eem who in turn
have narrated from Abu Sa'eed.

Kanzul-Ummal page 186.

39-The same has come in Arf-ul-Wardi pg. 58 - narrated from Ahmad, Abu
Dawoud and Tirmidhi who in turn have narrated from Ibn Masoud, who has
been narrated from the Holy Prophet. Tirmidhi reckons this tradition to
be good and authentic.

Abu Dawoud has narrated from Ali (may Allah be satisfied with him) who
in turn has narrated from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) who said: "If there
remains not more than a day from the life of earth, God will indeed make
a person from my family to appear on that day and fill the earth with
Justice just as it had been filled with oppression.40

The author of "Matalib-ul-Su'ool" in the chapter of "Asking one's whish
from Ahlul-Bait" writes: Some have said that "Ahlul-Bait" refers to
those people who are nearer in relation to a person in ancestorship.
Some others have said that "Ahlul-Bait" are those who gather together in
one womb. Still others have said: Ahlul-Bait are those who are attached
to him by kinship and relation. All of these meanings can be found in
them because, their lineage returns back to the Holy Prophet's
grandfather, Abdul-Muttalib.

Also they have gathered together with him (i.e. the Holy Prophet) in
one womb and they are connected to him through kinship as well as
relation (son-in- law).

Thus they are in fact his (??) (progeny) and (??) and (???)(Ahlul-Bait)
are one and the same whether they differ in meaning or not. Thus the
meanings of these two terms are fixed for them. Muslim in his 'Sahih'
narrates from Zaid-ibn-Hasaan who said: 'I went with Hasain-ibn-Seera
and Omar-ibn-Muslim to visit Zaid-ibn-Arqam. When we sat down, Hasain
began to speak and said: 'O Zaid, Verily, now that you have numerous
good actions in your record, have seen the Holy Prophet, have heard
traditions from him, have fought beside him and prayed behind him, so
narrate for us what you have heard from the Messenger of Allah
(S.A.W.A). Zaid replied: "O brother, surely I have turned old and my
memory has become worn out. As a result, a part of what I have acquired
from the Holy Prophet has been forgotten by me. So accept whatever I
narrate to you and do not bother me about what I do not narrate to
you."

Thereafter he said: 'Once the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) stood near a
place called "Hema'a" situated between Mecca and Medina and delivered a
sermon. After praising and extolling God Almighty and then exhorting the
people, he said:

'O people, I am a human being and it seems that my Lord's emissary
(i.e. Izra'eel) is going to come and take away my soul. I am leaving
amongst you, two precious things. The first of them is the Book of Allah
wherein you will find guidance and light. So take hold of the Book of
Allah; In this regard, he incited and exhorted the people toward the
Book of Allah. Thereafter he said: The other is my Ahlul-Bait. I remind
you of Allah with regards to my Ahlul-Bait. I remind you of Allah about
them.

40-Arf-ul-Wardi, pg. 59 - Narrated from Ahmad, Abu Dawoud and Ibn-Abu
Shuiba. Then Hasain told Zaid-ibn-Arqam as such: 'O Zaid, who are his
Ahlul-Bait? Are his wives the Ahlul-Bait!?

He replied: 'No, his Ahlul-Bait are those upon whom alms is
forbidden.41

**Mahdi is From Kinsfolk**

When it is proved that Mahdi (A.S.) is from the progeny, descendant and
family of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and from the offspring of Ali,
Fatemah, Hassan and Hussein then it is automatically proved that he is
from " Zolghorba" (Kinsfolk) where their friendship has been made
obligatory upon all. The author of 'Yanibiul-Muwadda' narrating from
Bukhari and Muslim writes on page 106 of his book as such: ''t was asked
from Ibn-Abbass that to whom in the verse of "- Alghorba" referred to?
Then Sa'eed-ibn- Jubair said: They are the near ones of the progeny of
Muhammad (S.A.W.A). The author of 'Matalib-us-Su'ool' narrates from
Tafseer of Imam Abul- Hassan Ali-ibn-Ahmad Wahadi (the chain of
transmission which ends. in Ibn- Abbass) as such: When the verse:

was revealed, it was asked: 'O Messenger of Allah! Who are these people
whom Allah has commanded us to love? The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
replied: "Ali, Fatemah and their children." Ibn-Hajar in his "Sawa'eq"
(page 101) and Qunduzi in "Yanibi-ul-Muwadda" (page 106) have brought a
tradition (bearing the same contents) under thc afore- said verse
narrating from the great Mu'ajam of Tabarani, Tafseer-e-ibn-Abu Hatim,
Manaqib of Hakem, Waseet of Wahadi, Helyat al-Aulia of Abu Na'eem,
Tafseer-e-Sualabi and Fara'ed as-Semtain.

Ibn-Hajar in "Sa'waeq" (page 101) narrates from Zain-ul-Abedeen at the
time when he was taken as captive after his lather Hussein was killed;
and on the way to Syria some of the foul-mouthed people said: All praise
be to Allah for having caused the killing of you all, turning you into a
wretched state and severing the root of sedition. He replied: Haven't
you read (the Book) where Allah says: They said: "Is it that refers to
you people!?" He replied: "Yes."

The author of "Matalib-us-Su'ool" writes:

41-Apart from what has been written, Suyuti on page 58 of Arf-ul-Wardi
has narrated two traditions from Ali (A.S.) and Abu Sa'eed; on page 59
he has narrated two traditions from Ibn-Masoud; on page 62 he has
narrated two traditions from Abu Sa'eed Khudri and Abu Huraira; on page
63 he has narrated two traditions from Abu Saeed and Ibn-Masoud and on
page 64 he has narrated one tradition from Huzaifa where the Holy
Prophet (SAWA) has said: - "Mahdi is a man from my family and his name
is the same as mine. He shall fill the earth with Justice and equity
just as it had been filled with cruelty and oppression."

'Know that those in the verse who have been asked to be loved are
indeed the .Therefore any one who is bestowed with the attribute of "???
ghorba" deserves love as per specification of the afore-mentioned verse
because if there is a decree for any particular case and at any other
occasion, that case stipulates that the same decree too will be
applicable and with regards to love towards those who have been
mentioned in the verse even though they themselves are associates to
each other (from the view-point of their similarity in a case which is
expedient for love) yet, love posses different levels. Therefore, anyone
who is the more nearer to the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.), that case will
become more firm in him. As per research, the consensus of "Ulemas" is
firm in this regard that the matter of level of love and friendship does
indeed carry priority over all other levels such that in their writings
and compositions they have specified that: 'If a person endows or makes
a will to the most nearest person to Zaid and if Zaid does not have a
father, the most preferable person with regards to the endowment and
will are his children as compared to his other near ones.

If he has a father, then there exists a difference as to whether the
children are having priority over father or are equal to him. Through
this reasoning it becomes clear and obvious that Fatemah possess the
highest level in the matter of love and being the (????? ???)
(kinsfolk). When it becomes apparent to what has been written about the
pleasing expressions and attractive statements about Fatemah (A.S.),
(especially her purity) and the fact that the superfluous virtue and
lofty position which the Imams behold is through her means, then we are
helpless in being loyal to her right in such affairs just as we are
bound to do so in the subsequent chapters about the circumstances of
Imam and the days of their birth and death.'

**Mahdi is From the Offspring of the Holy Prophet**

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 234 narrates from the author
of Firdaus who narrates from Jaber-ibn-Abdullah Ansari who said:

Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: Indeed Allah, the Exalted placed the
offspring of every Prophet from their own rear and placed my offspring
from the rear of Ali-ibn-Ali Talib. The author says: - The explicitness
of this valuable, tradition is that the children of Ali-ibn-Abi Talib
Amir-ul-Mumineen (A.S.) from Fatemah (A.S.) are indeed the offspring of
the Holy Prophet (S.AW.A) and there is no difference between Hassan and
Hussein. Verily, as Mahdi, the Awaited one is from this particular house
and this pure offspring, he is therefore counted to be from the
offspring of Muhammad (S.A.W.A) (as per research and previous
explanation of the meaning of offspring).

The author of "Tuhuful-Uqool" has brought a lengthy tradition in this
regard from Musa-ibn-Jafar's conversation with Haroon ar-Rashid and we
shall produce here only that portion which serves our discussion. He
writes:

'Hazrat Musa-ibn-Jafar approached Haroon for the reason that the letter
wished to inquire from him the (false) things which people have ascribed
to Hazrat before Haroon. So he took out a lengthy scroll which contained
accusations about his Shias and read it out. Then Hazrat said: 'O
Amir-ul- Mumineen, we are a family which have been afflicted with such
accusations and Allah is 'All-Forgiving' and 'One veils the vices' and
He refrains from lifting the veil from the deeds of His servants except
when He will be taking their account and that will be the Day when
wealth and children shall be of no avail and only the one who comes in
the presence of Allah with a pure heart shall benefit. Thereafter he
said: 'My father narrated (for me) from Ali who in turn narrated from
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) as such: (Whenever the ties of relationship
are felt and maintained with the other; there occurs some movement and
excitement and then it calms down." If Amir-ul-Mumineen (i.e. Haroon)
deems it advisable to maintain relationship and shake hands with me, he
can do so.

Then Haroon came down from his throne and stretched out his right hand
and caught hold of Hazrat's hand. He embraced him and made him sit
besides him and said: I bear witness that you are truthful and your
father and grand - father too were truthful. When you came to inquire I
was the most harshful person towards you because of the hatred and anger
which I had acquired about you.

Since you spoke to me in the manner which you did and so shook hands
with me, the feeling of hatred and anger has disappeared from my heart
and I have become satisfied with you. Thereafter, he felt silent for
some moment and then said: 'I wish to ask you something about Abbass and
All. On what basis was Ali more worthy of inheritance (from the Holy
Prophet) than Abbass, the Uncle of the Holy Prophet?

Hazrat replied: "You excuse me from this matter." He said: "I swear by
Allah that I shall not excuse you until you answer me."

Hazrat replied: "if you do not excuse me then grant me safety." He
said: "I gaurantee your safety." Hazrat said: "Surely, the Holy Prophet
did not nominate as heir the one who was able to migrate but did not
migrate. Indeed, Abbass your father was amongst those who brought faith
but did not migrate and Ali brought faith and migrated too. Allah
says:

Haroon turned pale and then said: 'On what basis do you relate yourself
to the Holy Prophet and not Ali notwithstanding the fact that Ali was
your father and the Holy Prophet your grand - father!

Haarat replied: Surely Allah related Isa-ibn-Maryam to Hazrat Ibrahim,
His "Khaleel" through Isa's mother who was a virgin. As Allah says: Thus
He related Isa to Ibrahim through Mary- only, just a: He related
Sulaiman, Ayub, Yusuf, Musa and Haroon to their father and mother. From
the view-point of excellence of Isa which concluded In him only from his
mother's side without any other person' it has come in the holy Quran in
the verse below that:

('O Maram! Surely Allah has chosen you and purified you and He has
chosen you above the women of the world) because of Messiah. So in the
same manner, Allah chose Fatemah and purified her and made her superior
to all the woman of the world through Hassan and Hussein, the two
youthful Chiefs of Paradise.

**Mahdi is From the Progeny of Ali (A.S.)**

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 494 narrates from "Manaqeb"
of Khawrazmi (the chain of transmission which ends in Sabeth-ibn-Dinar)
who narrates from Sa'eed-ibn-Jubair and he from Ibn-Abbass (may Allah be
satisfied with them) who said: 'The Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) said:
"Indeed Ali is the Imam of my 'Ummah' (nation) after me and it is from
his children that the 'Qaem' will come and whenever he emerges, he shall
fill the earth with Justice and equity just as it had been filled with
cruelty and oppression."

The author of "Eqdud-Durar" in the first chapter, narrates from 'Sunan'
of Abu Dawoud, 'Jaame' of Tirmidhi and 'Sunan' of Nesa'ee from Ibn
Ishaaq as such: Ali (may Allah's blessings be upon him) looked at his
son, Hussein, and then said: - 'Surely my son is a 'Sayyid' (Chief) just
as the Holy Prophet named him so. Very soon shall emerge the one from
his rear. His name will be the same as your Prophet's flame. In creation
he is the same as the Prophet but in morals he is not so. He shall fill
the earth with Justice.42

In the second chapter of the afore-mentioned book, the author narrates
from the book of "Ba'as -Wa-Nushur" of Baihaqi a similar tradition until
he comes to the section where Ali says: In manners, he is not similar to
the Prophet.

Moreover, in the second chapter of the afore-mentioned book, the author
writes: 'Abu Wa'el says: Ali looked at Hussein and then said: Indeed my
son is "Sayyid" (Chief) just as the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) named
him so. Very soon a person, whose name shall be the same as your
Prophet's name will emerge from Hussein's rear. He shall emerge at the
time when people will be negligent and un-aware. A time when the truth
will be dead and oppression will be in force. The inhabitants of the
heavens and earth will rejoice from his

42-The same has come in "Arf-ul-wardi" (page 54) narrated from Abu
Dawoud and Na'eem-ibn-Hemad. emergence. He will be having a broad
forehead, protracted nose, broad stomach, broad thighs, a spot on his
right cheek and his front teeth seperated from each other. He shall fill
the earth with Justice just as it had been filled with cruelty and
oppression.43

**Mahdi is From the Progeny of Fatemah (A.S.)**

Abu Dawoud in the fourth Volume of his 'Sahih' on page 87 writes: Umm-
Salma says: 'I heard the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) saying: Mahdi is from
my progeny; from the children of Fatemah.44 Ibn-Hajar in his "Sawa'eq"
(page 97) and Shaikh Saban in "Es'aaf ur- Rhagebeen" (page 148) have
brought the same tradition from Muslim, Abu Dawoud, Nesa'e, Ibn-Maaja
and Baihaqi. The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 430 narrates from
"Mashkut al- Masabih" from Abu Dawoud from Umm-Salma who said: 'I heard
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) saying: - Mahdi is from my progeny, from the
children of Fatemah.

Again, the same author on page 223 of his afore-said book narrates from
Ali- ibn-Hallal who narrates from his father who said: 'I was honored by
visiting the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) at the time when he was feeling
unwell and Fatemah was crying besides him. Then the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) said: 'O my daughter, what causes you to cry? She replied: I
fear that after you, harm shall befall me.

The Holy Prophet (S.AW.A.) replied: 'O my beloved one, Allah put the
rein of care on the inhabitants of the earth. Then, amongst them, He
appointed your father and then bestowed upon him the Messengership.
Thereafter, He showed another care. He appointed your husband Ali and
revealed to me that I should give your hand in marriage to him. 'O
Fatemah, we are such an Ahlul-Bait that Allah, the Exalted has given us
privilege of seven things which others do not possess. Neither those
before us nor those who will come after us will have the privilege of
those seven things.

I am your father, the Last of the Prophets and the most hondurable
among them before Allah and my "Wasi" (legatee) is your husband, the
best of the legatees and the most beloved amongst them before Allah. Our
martyr Hamza, the loved uncle of your father as well as your husband, is
the best of the martyrs and the most beloved amongst them before Allah.
Moreover, the one who possesses two wings is from us. He shall fly with
them in Paradise along with the angels to whichever place he wishes. He
is your father's cousin and the 43-The author of 'Arf-ul-Wardi' On page
62 writes: "Tabarani in 'Ausath' narrates from Ibn-Omar that the Holy
Prophet caught hold of Ali's hand and said: soon a youth shall emerge
from the rear of this man. He shall fill the earth with Justice and
equity. When you shall witness this, it is upon you to support the
Tamimi youth. Verily, he shall come from the East and he will be the
standard-bearer of Mahdi.

44-Kanzul-Ummal vol. 7 pg. 186; Arf-ul-Wardi Page 58 Narrated from Abu
Dawoud, Ibn Maaja, Tabarani and Hakem.

brother of your husband. The two "Sebt" (offsprings) of this "Ummah"
(nation) are from us and they are Hassan and Hussein, the two Chiefs of
the youth of Paradise and they are your sons. I swear by the one Who
rightly appointed me to the station of the Prophethood that Mahdi is
from your sons. He shall fill the earth with Justice just as it had been
filled with oppression. The author of 'Yanabi' mentions that Hafez
Abul-Ala Hamadani has brought this tradition in the "Forty traditions"
(which has been written about Mahdi).

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 434 narrates from "Ausa'th"
of Tabarani who narrates from Abaya-ibn-Raba'ee who in turn narrates
from Abu Ayub Ansari who said:

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) told Fatemah (May Allah's peace be upon
her) as such: The best of the Prophets is from us and he is your father.
The best of - the Wasi's (legatees) is from us and he is your husband.
The best of the martyrs is from us and he is Hamza, your father's uncle.
The one who possesses two wings is from us. He shall fly with them to
whichever place he wishes in Paradise and he is Jafar, your father's
cousin. The two "Sebt" (offsprings) of this 'Ummah' and the two Chiefs
of the youths of Paradise are from us and they are Hassan and Hussein,
your two sons. Moreover, Mahdi is from us and he shall be from your
children.

In the afore-mentioned book, the author on page 490 narrates from the
book "Faza'el as-Sahabah" of Abu Muzaffar Sam'ani who in turn narrates
from Abu Sae'ed Khudri a tradition almost similar to the one which was
just mentioned. The author says: Traditions in this regard (which you
came across in the preface of this book) are "Mustafiza" traditions.
Rather they are wildly transmitted traditions and what we have written
shall be adequate.45 Mahdi is From the Progeny of "Sebtain" (i.e. Hassan
and Hussein) The author of "Eqdud-Durar" in the third chapter of section
No.3 narrates from the book "Sefat al-Mahdi" of Hafez Abu Naeem Esfahani
who in turn narrates from Ali-ibn-Hallal who narrates from his father as
such:

'I received the honor of visiting the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A) at
the time when his soul was about to depart and Fatemah was crying
besides him. He 45-The author of Arf-ul-Wardi on page 66 narrates from
Abu Na'eem who narrates from Hussein who narrates from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) as such: "O Fatemah, Mahdi is from your children." The author
of 'Maqatel at-Thalabin' (vol. 1, pg. 143) has narrated the same from
Zuhri who has narrated from Ali-ibn-Hussein who has narrated from his
father who in turn has narrated from Fatemah.

Moreover, Suyuti in arf-ul-Wardi has narrated from Ibn-Asaker who has
narrated from Hussein who in turn has narrated from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) as such: "Glad-tiding be to you 'O Fatemah. Mahdi is from
you." Also, on page 71 he reluctantly writes; Zuhri says - Mahdi from
the sons of Fatemah shall emerge from Mecca. Then he shall be given
allegiance. On page 74, he writes: Qatada says - I asked
Sa'eed-ibn-Maseeb whether Mahdi was on truth and he replied in the
affirmative. I asked: "Who shall he be from? He replied: 'From the
children of Fatemah." On page 78, he writes: It has come from Zubri that
Mahdi is from the children of Fatemah. On the same page, he writes that
it has come from Ali who said: Mahdi is from our family, from the
children of Fatemah. The author of Seerah-Halabi in vol. 1 pg. 185
writes: As per research, it has come in traditions that Mahdi is from
the progeny of the Holy Prophet and from the children of Fatemah.

recited the afore-said lengthy tradition and in the end of it he said:
'O Fatemah, I swear by the One Who rightly appointed me that Mahdi of
this 'Ummah' will be from those two (i.e. Hassan and Hussein).

The world will become such that chaos and disturbances will be
intensified all path (of solution) will be served and people will
fiercely fall upon one another such that neither the elders will show
mercy upon the young nor the children will honor the old. When this
happens, Allah will appoint someone (i.e. Mahdi) who shall conquer the
deviated castles and open out the sheathed hearts (a metaphoric remarks
that Hazrat shall dominate over the false religions and tame the
deviated hearts towards Islam). Indeed he shall revolt at the end of
time just as I revolted at my time. He shall fill the earth with Justice
just as it had been filled with oppression.

The author says: This tradition has been narrated by Ganji from the
book "NETAI-MAHDI" of Abu Na'eem Esfahani and "Mu'ajam Kabeer" of Abul
Qasim Tabarani and most of the experts of tradition too, have narrated
this tradition in their respective books with slight differences in
wordings. In some of them, the words 'from us' has been written instead
of 'from those two'.46 The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 432
writes: 'The author of Jawaher al-Aqdain says; 'As per research, the
effects of the Holy Prophet's 'dua' (invocation) at the time of marriage
of Ali and Fatemah (peace be upon them) became apparent in the offspring
of Hassan and Hussein. Thus, from their offspring are those who have
passed away and those who are still to come. If there will not come
anyone in the future except Mahdi, suffice it will be for the invocation
of the Holy Prophet to have come into effect.

In this regard, the author says: 'Just as we saw in the tradition of
Ali-ibn- Hallal, Hazrat's swearing, in spite of being truthful and
trustworthy was only to emphasize the matter. From amongst the
seven-fold characteristics, Hazrat has set aside Mahdi and sweared by
him only, showing the importance of this matter.

However the reason that Mahdi (A.S.) is from the sons of "Sebtain"
(A.S.) (offspring of Ali) is that Hazrat Baqer's mother (i.e. Fatemah)
was the wife of Hazrat Ali-ibn-Hussein Zain-ul-Abedeen (A.S.) and
daughter of Hazrat Abu Muhammad Hassan Mujtaba (AS.) and about this
woman, Imam Baqer has said:

'Fatemah is a righteous woman. So Abu Jafar Muhammad-ibn-Ali Baqer is
from the sons of Hassan and Hussein and he and his honorable sons are
amongst those who have attained this honor. Mahdi, the Awaited one too
is from this propitious splendor and blessed family tree because, he is
Muhammad-ibn- Hassan- ibn-Jafar-ibn-Muhammad - ibn - Baqir-ibn-Ali-ibn
Hussein-ibn-Ali- ibn-Abi Talib Amir-ul-Mumineen (A.S.)

46-The author of Arf-Wardi too has narrated the same on page 66 from
Abu Naeem and Tabarani.

**Mahdi is From the Offspring of Hussein (A.S.)**

In the first chapter of "Eqdud-Durar" its author narrates from Hafez
Abu Na'eem from his book "Sefat al-Mahdi" who in turn narrates from
Huzaifa-ibn - Yamaan who said: 'The Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A)
delivered a sermon. Then, he disclosed for us all that was sure to take
place till the Day of Judgement. Thereafter he said: If there remains
not more than a day from the life of the earth, God Almighty will set
the day so long until a person from my progeny who carries the same name
as me shall appear. Then Salman stood up and said: 'O Messenger of
Allah, from which of your progeny he shall come? The Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) replied: 'He shall be from this son (and he put his hand on
Hussein's head) of mine.

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 49 says: In the commentary on
Nahiul-Balagha (most probably he is referring to commentary of Ibn-Abil
Hadeed) Qazi-ul-Quza'at narrates from Kafi-ul-Kufa'at, Abul-Qasim
Ismail- ibn-Ebad a tradition where the chain of transmission is linked
to Ali (A.S.) who mentioned something about Mahdi and then said:

'Verily he is from the children of Hussein.47

The author says: Traditions in this regard are "Mustafiza" traditions.
Rather, the consensus amongst we Shia Imamiah is the same and what is
famous among the scholars of our brethren Sunnis too is the same.
However in some of the rare traditions (very few) we find something
which is opposite to this meaning. Among them, Abu Dawoud in his 'Sahih'
(vol. 4, pg. 89) narrates from Abu Ishaaq who said:

Ali (may Allah's peace and blessing be upon him) looked at Hassan and
Said: "Surely my son is 'Sayyid' (Chief) just as the Holy Prophet called
him by this name. Soon a person will emerge from his rear. His name
shall be the same as your Prophet's name. In creation he will be similar
to the Prophet but in behaviour he will not be so. He shall fill the
earth with Justice." Some of Sunni 'Ulemas' have reckoned Mahdi to be
from the children of Abu Muhammad Hassan Mujtaba (A.S.)

Amongst them, Ibn Hajar in his 'Sawa'eq' on page 99 writes: "Abu Dawoud
in his 'Suaan' has narrated a tradition that Mahdi is from the children
of Hassan and its mystery lies in this that Hassan waived his Caliphate
for the sake of Allah and his affection for his people. Thus Allah
placed the 'Qa'em' (who shall emerge at the time of dire strait) amongst
his children so that he fills the earth with Justice. The traditions
which say that he is from the children of Hussein are weak."

The author says: 'As per the prescribed rules in 'Usul-e-Fiqh'
(Principles of Jurisprudence) relying on the afore-said tradition is not
correct for the following 47-The author of Yanabi-ul-Muwadda on page 372
narrates from Ali who narrates from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as such:
'The world shall not cease to exist until a person from the progeny of
Hussein shall emerge in my 'Ummah'. He shall fill the earth with Justice
just as it had been filled with oppression.

reasons:

Firstly, there exists a discrepancy in the narration of Abi Dawoud as
the author of 'Eqdud-Durar' narrates from 'Sunan' of Abi Dawoud that All
looked towards Hussein.

Secondly, a group of experts on traditions have narrated the same
tradition in its exact form except that Ali looked at Hussein. Thirdly,
there is the possibility of an error because the words of Hassan and
Hussein are sometimes erroneously written for one another especially in
the Kufi script. Fourth, the tradition is contrary to what is famous
among the Sunni Ulemas. Fifth, the said tradition is contradicting most
of the other traditions, which are more authentic in their chain of
transmission and more evident in expression. Some of these traditions
have already been mentioned and Allah - willing, the rest too will be
mentioned later on.

And sixth, this tradition is probably a false and fabricated one for
this reason that they wanted to get near to Muhammad-ibn-Abdulla known
as 'Nafs-e- Zakiyah'. Thus they resorted to fabrication merely to please
him. Mahdi is From the Ninth Descendant of Hussein (A.S.) The author of
"Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 493 narrates from "Manaqib" of Muwaffaq-ibn-
Ahmad Khawrazmi who narrates from Sulaim-ibn-Qais Hallali who narrates
from Salman Farsi who said: 'I got the honor of visiting the Messenger
of Allah (S.A.W.A.). What I saw was Hussein-ibn-Ali sitting on his lap
and the Holy Prophet kissing over his eyes and licking his clothes and
then saying:

You are a Chief, son of a Chief and brother of Chief. You are an Imam,
son of an Imam and brother of Imam. You are a divine proof, brother of a
divine proof and father of nine Divine Proofs, the ninth of them being
the "Qaem". The same too can be seen in "Uqdud-Durar".

In the afore-mentioned book on page 258, the author narrates from the
tenth chapter of "Mawaddat-ul-Qurba" as such:

It has come from Salim-ibn-Qais Hallali that Salman Farsi said: When I
went to meet the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) I saw Hussein sitting on his
lap and kissing over his eyes and licking his clothes. Thereafter the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: You are a Chief and the son of a Chief You
are an Imam and the son of an Imam. You are a divine proof and the son
of a divine proof and the father of nine Divine Proofs, the ninth of
them shall be the Qaem. Besides these one, there are still other
numerous traditions and Allah-willing, we shall soon narrate them.

The author says: - It does not seem likely that anyone amongst the
Muslims is ignorant of these nine personalities and has not known them
by name. With this description there is no holding back to mentioning
their names out of benediction and remembrance. The first of them is
Abul-Hassan Zain-ul- Abedeen, followed by his son Abu Jafar Muhammad
Baqir, followed by his son Abu Abdulla Jafer Sadeq, followed by his
Abul-Hassan Musa Kazim, followed by his son Abul-Hassan lih ar-Reza,
followed by his son Abu Jafar Muhammad Jawad, followed by his son
Abul-Hassan Ali Haadi, followed by his son Muhammad Hassan Askari,
followed by his son Abul Qasim Muhammad Mahdi who is the ninth of them
and the "Qaem".

**Mahdi is From the Offspring of Sadeq (A.S.)**

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 499 has narrated from
"Arba'een" of Hafez Abu Na'eem Esfahani (which is a collection of forty
traditions about Mahdi). Amongst them is a tradition, which he has
narrated from 'Laghwi' better, known as Ibn 'Khesbab'.

He said: Abul Qasim Thaher-ibn-Haroon-ibn-Musa Kazim narrated for me a.
tradition from his grand - father who said: my master
Jafer-ibn -Muhammad said: 'The pious successor shall be from my progeny
and he is the Mahdi. His name is Muhammad and his agnomen is Abul-Qasim.
He shall emerge at the end of time. His mother is named as Nargis and
above his head is a cloud, which shall provide a shadow for him from the
sun. It shall accompany him wherever he goes and will call out in an
eloquent voice: This is Mahdi, so obey him.' Besides this, there are
some other traditions which Allah-willing we shall acquaint you with
very soon.

Ibn-Hajar in "Sawa'eq" on page 120 says: Muhammad-ibn-Ali Baqer left
behind six sons which the most learned and perfect amongst all is Jafar
Sadeq. It was for this reason that he was made as his father's successor
and legatee and people have narrated so much knowledge from him that his
fame (of excellence) had engulfed all the places.

Great Sunni scholars like Yahya-ibn-Sa'eed, Ibn-Jareeh, Malik,
Sufyanin, Abu Hanifa, Shuaba and Ayub Bakhtiyani have narrated
traditions from him...

Under the verse Imam Fakhr Raazj says: 'Among the meanings of 'Kauthar'
(river in Paradise) one meaning can be that of 'offspring' because, this
Sura was revealed in refutation of those who were rebuking the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) for not having a son and then Allah provided him a
generation which would continue to remain in the course of time. Thus,
you may see for yourself that how many an offspring of the Holy Prophet
have been killed and yet the world is full of their existence whereas
not even one has remained from Bani-Ummayid. Once again, you may see for
yourself that those who are from his Ahlul-Bait like Baqir, Sadeq,
Kazim, Reza (A.S.), 'Nefs- Zakiyah' and their likes are great
scholars.


