Chapter Three : Mahdi and His Looks
===================================

Abu Dawoud in his 'Sahih' (vol.4 Pg. 88) has narrated from Abu Sa'eed
Khudri as such: - Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) said: Mahdi is from me
having a sparkling forehead and protracted nose.51 On page 98 of
Sawa'eq, Ibn-Hajar has narrated from Abu Na'eem a tradition from the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) as such: - "Verily Allah shall make a person to
appear from my progeny. His front teeth is spaced a little and his
forehead sparkling with light." The author of "Es'aaf-ur-Raghebeen" too
has narrated the same tradition of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) from Abu
Na'eem.

In the afore-mentioned book, Ibn-Hajar narrates (on page 98) from
Ruyani and Tabarani and they two from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as
saying: - 'Mahdi is from my progeny. His face is like a twinkling star;
his color 'Arabi' and his figure like the figure of Isra'eel. (Speaking
allusively of his wheatish complexion, tall height and stoutness). The
same tradition can be seen in "Es'aaf-ur-Rhagebeen" (page 149). Author
of "Es'aaf-ur-Raghebeen" on page 140 narrates from "Huliat-ul- Aulia" of
Abu Na'eem Esfahani as such: - "It is said that Mahdi is a youth with
black eyes, extended eye-brows, protracted nose, curly beard and a spot
on his right cheek and right hand."

Author of "Nur-ul-Absar" narrates on page 229 from Abu Dawoud and
Tirmidhi and they two from Abu Sa'eed who said: - 'I have heard that the
Holy 51-Kanzul - Ummal vol.7 Pg. 186; Arful-wardi Page 58 - narrated
from Abu Na'eem; Jaame-Sagheer vol.2, tradition No.9244 and adds that
the Holy Prophet said: "His face is like a twinkling star' and in
tradition No.9245 the Holy" Prophet says: "Mahdi is from me. His face is
like a twinkling star." After mentioning these two traditions, Suyuti
confirms their authenticity.

Prophet (S.A.W.A.) used to say: Mahdi is from me, having a sparkling
forehead and protracted nose. In the afore-said book, the author on page
230 narrates from Ibn-Shirwiya and he, from Huzaifa - ibn - Yaman and
he, from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) who said: 'Mahdi is my 59n. His
color is the color of 'Arabi' (wheatish complexion) and his figure is
like the figure of Isra'eel.52 Author of "Eqdud-Durar" narrates in the
third Chapter from Ali (A.S.) who, while describing the disposition of
Mahdi said: -

'He is a man with sparkling forehead, protracted nose and broad thighs.
There exists a spot on his right cheek and there are gaps between his
teeth.53 In the same chapter of the afore-said book, the author narrates
from Abu Jafar Muhammad-ibn-Ali Baqer (A.S.) who said: -

'Amir-ul-Mumineen Ali-ibn-Abi Talib was asked about Mahdi's physical
appearance and he replied: He is a youth with an average stature and a
handsome face with hairs falling over his shoulders and light gleaming
from his face.54

**Mahdi and His Character**

Ibn-Hajar in "Sawa'eq" (page 98) has narrated from Rauyani and Tabarani
and they too from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as such: "Mahdi is from my
progeny." Thereafter he said: 'The inhabitants of the heavens and the
inhabitants of the earth are happy with his reign.55 Tabarani adds: and
the birds of the sky.

The same tradition can be found in "Es'aaf-ur-Raghebeen" on page 149.56
Author of "Es'aaf-ur-Raghebeen" on page 151 has narrated from Ahmad and
Mawardi that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: - "Glad tidings be to you
about Mahdi." Thereafter he said: - "The inhabitants of the heavens and
the inhabitants 52-Arful-Wardi page 66 - narrating from Rauyani and Abu
Na'eem adds that the Holy Prophet said: "On his right cheek is a
spot."

53-Commentary of Nahjul-Balagha Ibn - Abil Hadeed Vol. 1, Pg. 93
narrating from 'Qazi-ul-Quzaat' and Ibn- Qutaiba.

54-Author of Arful-Wardi on page 63 narrates from Abu Na'eem a
tradition from the Holy Prophet (S.AW.A.) who said: Allah shall appoint
from my progeny a person who shall have gaping teeth, sparkling
forehead.... Also, in Arful-Wardi page 63 and Kanzul-Ummal, vol. 7 pg.
187 it is narrated from Abu Na'eem that the Holy Prophet, in sequel of a
tradition about Mahdi said: 'He is from my offspring. He is a youth of
forty with a face similar to the luminous moon. On his right cheek is a
black spot and on him are two Qathwani cloaks. He shall look as if he is
someone from the Bani-Israel.

Author of Kanzul-Ummal in vol. 7, Page 188 narrates from the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as such: 'The hour shall not be established until a
person from my household becomes the master of the earth. His forehead
will be sparkling and his nose a protracted one.

In Seera Halabi vol. 1 pg. l86 we read as such: Mahdi's face is like
the luminous star and on his right cheek is one spot.

In Saba'ek-uz-Zahab chapter 6, pg. 78 it is written that Mahdi
possesses a tall figure with good appearance and hair, protracted nose
and handsome face.

55-The author of "Arful-Wardi" too has narrated on page 65 the same
tradition of the Holy Prophet from Hakem. Moreover, on page 82 he has
brought the same contents in a lengthy tradition narrated from Daani
from Shar-ibn -Hushab from the Holy Prophet.

56-Arful-Wardi page 66 - narrating from Rauyani and Abu Na'eem.

of the earth are happy with him. He shall distribute the wealth
equally, free Muhammad's 'Ummah' from need or want and comfort them with
his righteousness."

The author of "Eqdud-durar" in the eighth chapter of his book narrates
from Ta'oos as such: "The sign of Mahdi is that he shall be harsh with
rulers, generous with the people in distributing wealth and gentle with
the helpless in caressing them." Thereafter he writes: 'This tradition
has been taken from Abu Abdulla Na'eem-ibn-Hemad from the book of
'Fatan'57 In the third chapter and the ninth section of the
afore-mentioned book, the author narrates from the book of "Fatan" of
Hafez Abu Abdullah Na'eem-ibn -Hemad who narrates from Abu Rumiyah as
follows: "Mahdi shall feed the helpless."

Author of "Nur-ul-Absar" narrates (on page 230) from 'Musnad' of Imam
Ahmad who narrates from Saeed Khudri who said: - 'Messenger of Allah
(S.A.W.A.) said: - "I give you glad-tidings about Mahdi."

Thereafter he said: - 'The inhabitants of the heavens and the
inhabitants of the earth are happy with him. He shall distribute wealth
equally amongst the people and will fill the hearts of Muhammad's
'Ummah' with needlessness (a metaphoric remark of making the people
wealthy). He shall comfort them with his righteousness.58

Furthermore, in the afore-mentioned book the author on the same page,
narrates once again from 'Fatan' from Huzaifa-ibn-Yamaan that the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: "Mahdi is my son." Thereafter he said: "The
inhabitants of the heavens, the inhabitants of the earth and the birds
of the sky are happy with his reign."

**Mahdi Resembles the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.)**

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" on page 493 narrates from "Manaqeb"
of Khawrazmi who in turn narrates from Jafar-ibn-Muhammad Masroor who
narrates from Hussein-ibn-Muhammad Aamer who narrates from his Uncle
Abdullah-ibn-Aamer who narrates from Muhammad-ibn-Abu Omair who narrates
from Abu Jumaila Mufazzal-ibn-Saleh who narrates from Jaber-ibn- Yazid
who narrates from Jaber-ibn-Abdullah Ansari who said: 'The Messenger of
Allah (S.A.W.A.) said: - 'Mahdi is my son. His name as well as his
agnomen shall be the same as mine. Amongst all the people, he shall
resemble me the most in creation and morals.59

57-The author of Arful-Wardi has narrated (on page 78) from Hafez Abu
Na'eem that Ta'oos has said: 'If at any time Mahdi shall come, he will
donate wealth, will be firm with the government official and will caress
the indigent.

58-The author of "Arful-Wardi" has narrated the same from Ahmad,
Bawardi and Abu Na'eem. The author of "Kanzul-Ummal" too has narrated in
vol. 7 Page 186 from Ahmad and Bawardi.

59-The author of "Arful-Wardi" on page 63 narrates from Mu'ajam of
Tabarani and Abu Na'eem that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: - "There
shall emerge from my progeny a person whose name shall be the same as
mine and his morals will be the same as mine.

In the afore-mentioned book, the same tradition of the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) has been narrated from Abu Baseer who has narrated from
Hazrat Sadiq Jafer-ibn-Muhammad who in turn has narrated from his father
Amir-ul- Mumineen (A.S.).

The author of 'Al-Fotouhat-al-Makkiyah' in the 366th chapter writes
about the characteristics of Mahdi as such: - 'He is similar to the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) in creation. However in morals, he is similar to the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) to a lesser degree because none can be like
Hazrat in morals as Allah says:

The author says: 'Two persons being alike from any viewpoint (whether
creation or morals) is impossible habitually. However such remarks show
the nearness of one (amongst them) to the other just as the same meaning
can be derived from the first tradition which says: Amongst all the
people, he resembles the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) the most. That is to
say, if at all the creation and morals of the people is to be compared
with the creation and morals of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) then amongst
all, Mahdi (AS.) is the one who resembles the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
the most and he is the one who is nearest to him. This matter is not
incompatible with the matter of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) being
(Majestic in creation) and the fact that no (character) is similar to
his .

**Mahdi and His Disposition**

Abu Dawoud narrates on page 88 of his "Sahih" a tradition from Umm-
Salma, the wife of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and she from the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) while speaking about Mahdi and his allegiance between
'Rukn' and 'Maqam' he said: "The people shall act according to the
manners of their Prophet and Islam will be established and its precepts
will expand all over the earth."

The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" narrates (on page 437) from
Ali-ibn-Abi Talib, Amir-ul- Mumineen (AS.) who said about Mahdi's
characteristics as such: -At the time when they (i.e. the people) shall
suit the guidance to follow the desires, Mahdi shall alter the desires
to follow the guidance. At the time when they shall interpret Quran to
follow their (own) prudence, Mahdi shall realign (their) prudence to
follow the Quran. Mahdi shall demonstrate to you the Justice. Mahdi
shall enliven the commandments of the Quran and the Sunnah, which was
until then, dead and lifeless.

On page 98 of "Sawa'eq", Ibn-Hajar says:

Ibn-Hemad narrates one tradition, which its chain of transmission
culminates in the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.). Hazrat says: "Mahdi is from
my race. He shall fight for my 'Sunnah' just as I fought for the
revelation of Allah."60 The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" narrates on
page 445 from Hamuani who narrates from Ibn-Abbass as such: 'The
Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.A.) said: - "Verily Allah resolved this
religion by the hands of Ali. Then, when he is killed, the religion
shall deteriorate until Mahdi comes and rectifies it." The author says:
Traditions about Mahdi that he shall fill the earth with equity and
Justice after it has been filled with cruelty and oppression come to the
level of 'Mustafiza'. Allah - willing, you shall soon come across these
and other traditions.61

**Mahdi and His Knowledge**

In the third chapter of "Eqdud-Durar" its author narrates from
Harith-ibn- Mughaira Ansari that he asked Abu Abdullah Hussein-ibn-Ali
as such: By what sign should we recognize Mahdi?

He replied: 'By (his) calmness and (his) dignity. Once again I asked:
By what sign?

He replied: By recognizing the 'forbidden' and 'permissible' affairs
and the need of the people towards him and his own needlessness from
others. On page 401, the author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda" narrates from the
book of "Durra-tul-Ma'aref" as follows: "Mahdi shall bring out from the
cave of 'Anthakia' the books and shall bring out from the lake of
'Tabariah' the Zaboor which contains all that the family of Musa and
Haroon have left behind and which was carried by the Angels and contains
the Tablets (pieces of stone or wood on which divine matters have been
written) and the cane of Musa (A.S.). Moreover Mahdi is superior to all
the people in knowledge and insight."62

In the afore-mentioned book, the author narrates from Khawrazmi where
the chain of transmission leads to Abu Jafar Baqir (A.S.) who, while
speaking, about Mahdi and his resemblance to the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
said: "And he shall bring out all that the Prophets have stored." The
author of "Eqdud-Durar" narrates (in chapter 3, Section 9) from
Abdullah-ibn-Atha as such: 'I asked Hazrat Abu Jafar (Baqir) to inform
me 60-Arful-Wardi Page 74- narrating from Ali (A.5.) who in turn
narrates from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.).

62-The author of Arful-Wardi brings a tradition On page 62 from Abu
Na'eem from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) as such: - 'There shall emerge a
person from my progeny who will speak but my 'Sunnah'. Allah will send
rain for him from the heavens and the earth shall throw out its bounties
for him. He shall fill the earth with equity and Justice just as it had
been filled with cruelty and oppression…

On page 64, he narrates from Abu Na'eem that the Holy Prophet while
mentioning about the injustices and seditions of despotic rulers says:
'1f there remains not more than a day from the me of the earth, Allah
will set the day so long until a person from my progeny comes and rules.
Then great events shall take place through his bands and Islam shall
manifest itself…

62-On page 75 of Arful-Wardi ills written that Ka'ab-ul-Akhbar says: -
'Mahdi shall bring out the Ark of Covenant' from the cave of Anthakia.
Also it is written: The reason he lass been called as Mahdi is that he
shall be a guide to the secret affairs. Then, he shall bring out the Ark
of Covenant from the cave of Anthakia. about 'Qaem' and he replied: - 'I
am not that 'Qaem' and neither the one whom you have perambulated
around. I asked him about Mahdi's behaviour and he replied: "Just as the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) used to behave."

**Mahdi and His Justice**

In the third chapter of "Eqdud-Durar" its author, narrates from
Ka'abul- Akhbar who said: "I have found in the Books of Prophets about
the characteristic of Mahdi and that his commands are not oppressive and
violatary in nature." Thereafter he writes: 'Imam Abu Omar and Muqqari
in their 'Sunan' and Hafez Abu Na'eem Abdullah-ibn-Hemad too have
narrated this tradition.63 About the characteristic of Mahdi, the author
of "Fotouhat al-Makkiyah" writes in chapter No. 363 as such:

"He shall distribute wealth equally, will execute Justice among the
people and bring to a halt the altercations." The author of
"Es'aaf-ur-Raghebeen" narrates on page 161 of his afore-said book from
"Fotouhat al-Makkiyah" as follows: 'As research goes, Hazrat Mahdi shall
give command to those things which the Angel of inspiration shall give
and surely he shall be revealed the creed of Muhammad. The same matter
can be seen in one of the traditions where the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
says: - "Mahdi shall follow me and he is free from every error."

Thus the Holy Prophet made us realize and recognize Hazrat Mahdi in
this regard that his commands are the very commands of the Holy Prophet
and are not innovations. Moreover it shows that he is infallible and
will not issue any order but that which the truth is.

Thereafter he says: Notwithstanding that Allah inspires him to the
truth, his comparison is forbidden. Rather, some of the researchers have
forbidden comparison for all men of conscience and men of God for this
reason that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) is present in their sight. Thus,
if they should occasionally doubt the authenticity of a tradition or
decree, they ought to refer to Hazrat and he in turn shall inform them
about the true and manifest affairs. The one who possesses such a status
is not in need of following any leaders save the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A).

**Mahdi and His Generosity**

The magazine "Hudal-Islam" in its 25th weekly publication in its third
year narrates from Ibn-Maaja who narrates from Abu Sa'eed Khudri that
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A) said: -

"Verily Mahdi shall be from my Ummah." Thereafter he said: - "A person
63-Arful-Wardi, Page 77.

shall approach him and say Mahdi grant me something." Then he shall
pour wealth unto him to the extent, which he can carry.64 The author of
"Es'aaf-ur-Raghebeen" on page 149 has narrated from Abu Dawoud and Abu
Abdullah Hakem Naishabouri; the author of "Yanabi-ul-- Muwadda" on page
431 from Tirmidhi and all three from Abu Sa'eed the same tradition of
the Holy Prophet in its exact form.

Ibn-Hajar in his "Sawaeq" on page 98 narrates from Abu Na'eem that the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: - "Allah shall appoint a person from my
progeny." Thereafter he said: - "He shall bestow wealth abundantly." The
same has been narrated in "Es'aaf-ur-Raghebeen" on page 149. Also,
Ibn-Hajar on page 98 of his "Sawaeq" writes that Ahmad and Muslim have
brought a tradition from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) stating: - "In the
end of time, there shall be a Caliph who will bestow wealth abundantly
and unlimitedly."

The same tradition has been narrated on page 149 of
"Esaaf-ur-Raghebeen".65

**Mahdi and His Rule**

The author of "Eqdud-Durar" narrates from 'Tarikh' of Abu Abdullah-ibn-
Jauzi and he from Abdullah-ibn-Abbass and he from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) as saying: - 'The rulers of the earth are four- two of them
believers and two apostates. The two believers are Zul-Qarnain and
Sulaiman while the two apostates are Bukht-un-Nasr (Nebuchadnezzar) and
Nimrod. Soon a person from my progeny shall gain control over it (i.e.
the earth).66 The author of "Es'aaf-ur-Raghebeen" on page 152 says: "It
has come in traditions that Mahdi will become the Master of the earth
from East to West." 64-The same can be found in Kanz-ul-Ummal Vol 7 Page
186 and Arful-Wardi page 59 - from Abu Sa'eed. 65-Tarikh Ibn-Asaker
(vol. 1 pg. 186), Kanzul-Ummal (vol. 7 pg. 186) narrating from Jaher and
on page 187 from Abu Sa'eed and Arful-Wardi (page 60 & 61) narrating
from Jaber and Abu sa'eed have brought the same and instead of 'end of
time' the word of 'Ummah' lass been used. Also, the authors of
Kanzul-Ummal (vol.7 pg. 189) and Arful-Wardi (on page 62) have narrated
from Abu Humira and Abu Sa'eed as such: - The Holy Prophet said: 'Mahdi
is from my 'Ummah'. If he endures short, it will be seven, eight or nine
years. At that time, my Ummah shall enjoy such bounties which the good
and evil amongst them had never enjoyed before. The heavens shall pour
for them and the earth shall throw out its wealth without keeping
anything in store. At that time, there will be no esteem for wealth such
that a person will rise and say: "O Mahdi bestow me something" and he
will say: 'Take'.

Moreover, the authors of Arful-wardi and Kanzul-Ummal have narrated on
page 58 and page 186, vol. 7 respectively, a tradition from the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as such: - 'A caller shall cry out on behalf of
Mahdi: "Is there anyone having some wish? If so, then come forward."
Then none shall come except for one person who will ask something from
him. He will say: 'Bring the vessel'. When it is brought he will bestow
him so much so that he will be unable to carry. Then he shall take away
the amount, which he is capable of carrying but afterwards will
repentantly come back to return the wealth. Hazrat will say: We shall
not accept the thing, which we have already bestowed...

The author of Arful-Wardi on page 63 narrates from Abu Na'eem and on
page 64 from Ibn-Abu Shuiba and all three from Abu Sa'eed that the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: - "At the time a seditions shall occur, Allah
will send at the end of time a peon from my progeny whose munificence
will be at ease." In some copies the words 'will be swift' is written.

66-Arful-Wardi, page 81.

The author says: In some of the traditions it is mentioned that his
rule will envelop the East and West. The author of "Yanabi-ul-Muwadda"
narrates from the author "Jawahar-ul- Aqdain" and he, from Ali who
said: - "When the 'Qaem' from the progeny of Muhammad (SAW.A.) Emerges,
Allah will gather for him the inhabitants of the East and West."

**Mahdi and His Reforms**

In vol. 4, pg. 87 of 'Sahih' Abu Dawoud narrates from Ali (Peace be
upon him) that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: 'If there remains not
more than a day from the life of the earth, Allah will appoint a person
from my progeny. He shall fill the earth with equity and Justice just as
it had been filled with cruelty and oppression.67

The author of 'Nur-ul-Absar' has narrated (on page 231) from
Ali-ibn-Abi Talib (A.S.) as such: - 'I asked the Messenger of Allah
(S.A.W.A.): Will Mahdi be from (our) progeny of Muhammad or will he be
from some other progeny? He replied: No, he shall be from us. Allah
shall bring the religion to completion through his hands just as he
expanded it through us. By our blessings they (i.e. the people) shall be
released from turbulence just as they got released from polytheism. By
our blessings Allah will unite their hearts after conspiratorial
animosity just as He united their hearts after polytheistic animosity.
By our blessings, they shall turn into brothers in faith after having
become enemies to each other.

Some of the scholars reckon this tradition to be 'Hassan' (acceptable)
and superior in the chain of transmitters and the experts m traditions
have written them in their respective books. However Tabarani has only
rememorated books. However Tabarani has only rememorated it in his
'Mu'ajam' (Ausath), Abu Na'eem has only narrated it in his
'Huliat-ul-Aulia' and Abdur-Rahman has only mentioned it in his
'Awaali'.68

**Mahdi and Allegiance**

The author of "Eqdud-Durar" in chapter 1 section 4 narrates from Abu
Jafar Muhammad-ibn-Ali who said:

'Mahdi shall emerge on the day of 'Ashura' (and that is the day when
Hussein-ibn-Ali will be martyred perhaps on Saturday the tenth of
Muharram) between 'Rukn' and 'Maqam' and on his right will be Gibra'eel
and on his left 67-The author of "Ja'ame-us-Sagheer" vol. 2 pg. 277 as
well as Suyuti in Arful-Wardi Pg. 63 have narrated from Hakem and Abu
Na'eem that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said: - 'Mahdi shall emerge from
my Ummah. Allah shall send and inspire him for the rescue of the people
such that the nations will enjoy the bounties and the four- legged will
live in freedom...

68-Suyuti has brought this tradition on page 63 of his book Arful-wardi
narrating from Na'eem-ibn-Hemad from Makhool from Ali (A.S.). Moreover,
he lass narrated another tradition with similar contents from 'Ausath'
of Tabarani who lass narrated from Amro-ibn-Ali from Ali (A.S.)

Micha'eel. Allah will gather his Shias around him from everywhere and
the earth shall roll up for them.69

In Chapter 2, Section 4 of the afore-mentioned book, the author
narrates from "Mustadrak" of Abu Abdullah Hakem who narrates from
Umm-Salma (peace be upon her) who said: 'The Messenger of Allah
(S.A.W.A.) said: People shall give allegiance between 'Rukn' and 'Maqam'
to the person who is amongst my followers and their number shall match
the number of people of 'Badr'. Again, in Chapter 7 of the same book its
author narrates from the book "Al- Fatan" of Na'eem - ibn -Hemad who
narrates from Abu Huraira as such: - 'Allegiance will be given to Mahdi
between 'Rukn' and 'Maqam' without a person being awakened from neither
his sleep nor a drop of blood being shed. The author of
"Fotohat-al-Makkiyah" after mentioning (in the 366th Chapter) about
Mahdi and the fact that he is from the offspring of Fatemah and is
similar in name to the Holy Prophet and his great grand-father
Hassan-ibn-Abi-ibn-Abi Talib says: -'People shall give him allegiance
between 'Rukn' and 'Maqam'.

**The Awaited Mahdi is Unique**

In the first Chapter of this book, while mentioning the expressions of
scholars (regarding Mahdi) we had produced the following statement of
Ibn-Hajar from his book "Al-Qual-ul-Mukhtasar-fi-Alamat Mahdi
al-Muntazar": "The expected Mahdi is one and not several." The word of
Ibn-Hajar is a valuable discourse. Indeed it has achieved the purpose
and enformed to the realities.

Verily, the awaited Mahdi and the 'Qaem' from the progeny of Muhammad
(S.A.W.A.) is the very same person which Allah has mentioned in His
Glorious Book. His honorable Prophet has given glad-tidings of his
coming and the Prophet's 'Ahl-ul-Bait', companions and followers and
scholars have informed that he (i.e. Mahdi) is a single and a unique
person. He is not several although his name and title are many.

The traditions, which we had mentioned before and those which we shall
mention in the coming chapters are, by the simplest indication the proof
to this matter. Indeed, these traditions will obviate every kind of
misgivings such that there shall remain no doubt in the mind of any
skeptic that Mahdi, the Expected one is one.

The traditions, which we have written and the traditions, which we
shall mention gives indication to the characteristics and those things,
which introduce, verify and distinguishes Mahdi, the Expected one. As
such, it is not rational to consider multiplicity and number for him.
Now, we may mention those characteristics and distinguishing features as
follows: -

**First, the specification of his house and family**

69-A tradition, almost similar to the above has been mentioned in
'Qarmani' (page 118) narrating from Abu Baseer from Hazrat Sadel.
Thereafter it say: A person will stand in front of him and shout -
covenant, Covenant. Then, his followers will hasten towards him from all
sides and will conclude allegiance to him.

Second, the specification of his fathers and fore - fathers
Third, the identification of his father and mother by name
Fourth, the specification of his name, agnomen and title
Fifth, the specification of his qualities and signs
Sixth, the specification of his morals and behaviors
Seventh, his occultation and its lengthy period
Eighth, his emergence at the end of time
Ninth, the things that will occur at the time of his reappearance
Tenth, the coming of Dajjal and Sufyani at the time of his
reappearance
Eleventh, Allegiance to him between 'Rukn' and 'Maqam'
Twelfth, the coming down of Isa (Jesus) and his prayers behind him
Thirteenth, his reform programs
Fourteenth, the blessings of his emergence
Fifteenth, the things which he shall command amongst the people
Sixteenth, his battles and victories
Seventeenth, the expansion of his Government and rule
Eighteenth, the period of his Caliphate and leadership
Ninteenth, the circumstances of his demise or assassination
Twentieth, the return to life of some of the dead after his emergence
The position of lineage and familial dignity, truthfulness and
rectitudes, the demeanors and signs, the favors and munificences, the
occurrences and unpleasantness, the hardships and harsh reminiscences
and the finally such affairs are not, as per exigencies rational enough
to levy for even two people let alone more. Maybe it is applicable after
the end of this world and its lapse and then it's coming into existence
from the beginning. However, even though this interpretation is
acceptable from the view - point of Power of Allah, yet the traditions
are apparently inconsistent with the occurrence of such an affair
because what they evidently reveal is that after the time of Mahdi the
Day of Judgement shall commence. Verily, saying that Mahdaviyat is an
affair pertaining to the kind and it is possible to have multiple Mahdis
with all the afore-said characteristics where each one will be
possessing one of those characteristics will be a claim contrary to the
common sense.

In the two testaments (old and new) of Torah and Bible (Ingeel), some
of the characteristics of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) have been stated.
Amongst the characteristics mentioned are his ways, behaviour, insight,
lineage and family and none from the East or West have reckoned these
insights and specifications to be referring to Muhammad of various
kinds. Thus, this much difference exists between these insights and the
insights of Mahdi so that the possibility of kinds and numbers may be
correct for Mahdi but not so for the Holy Prophet! The author says: My
imagination (although imagination does not make one free from want of
truth) is that the source of claiming Mahdaviyat of various kinds is one
of the following three: -

Firstly, it may be instigated from the part of those fascinated by rule
and Government and those desirous of kingdom and Caliphate. Secondly, it
may have appeared in some of Sufi sect because when they became helpless
in claiming the position of special deputyship, they resorted to
devising Mahdaviyat of various kinds.

Thirdly, as some of the adherents of Bani-Ummayyid came across
traditions wherein the name of Mahdi was mentioned and concluded that if
they were to believe in Mahdi who was a distinct person, they would be
compelled to pronounce that he is from the progeny of the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) and offspring of Fatemah and Hussein or still the son of
Hazrat Hassan Askari. This was something unpleasing for them and
irreconcilable with their aims. As a result, they started believing in
Mahdaviyat of various kinds.

In this regard, other sayings can be found which, from the view - point
of logic are worthless such as the saying that; Mahdi is from the
offspring of Abbass or from the children of Hassan Mujtaba (A.S.) or
that he shall be born afterwards. The root cause of all these and such
other talks about Mahdi is one of the afore-said three points.

In 'Mataleb-us-Su'ool', Muhammad-ibn-Thalha writes as such: - 'If
anyone objects to these traditions of the Holy Prophet (where they are
many in number and great emphasis has been laid to each one of them.
Moreover there is a consensus in the correctness of its chain of
transmission as well as in its narration from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) with correct and explicit proof that Mahdi is from the
progeny of Fatemah and from the lineage of the Holy Prophet and his name
is the same as the Prophet's name. Besides, he shall fill the earth with
Justice and equity, he is from the generation of Abdul-Muttalib and
amongst the leaders of Paradise and there this manner that they do not
indicate this fact that the Mahdi which the Holy Prophet depicted (which
we have already mentioned regarding his signs and qualities is the same
Abul-Qasim Muhammad-ibn-Hassan, the virtuous 'Hujjat (Definitive
Proof)'.

This is because the children of Fatemah are many and till the day of
Qiyamat anyone who comes into existence from her generation will be true
to him that he is from the pure progeny of Fatemah and the Holy Prophet.
Therefore, with such exposition of the traditions, which we have
previously mentioned, we should have with us a proper proof, which
indicates that that Mahdi is the same Hujjat-ibn-Hassan.

We reply - The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) depicted Mahdi (A.S.) with some
qualities like mentioning his name, lineage and his ancestry to Fatemah
(A.S.) and Abdul-Muttalib and the fact that he possesses a sparkling
forehead and protracted nose and counted many other comprehensive
characteristics (which we have previously mentioned) which all of these
reveal that anyone possessing those characteristics and signs will be
the same person called as Mahdi and he will be having some authority
upon us as per what we have previously mentioned (like the necessity of
following and obeying him). We found those afore-said characteristics
only in Abul-Qasim Muhammad, the virtuous successor. Thus it is
essential to substantiate these decrees for Hazrat and he becomes the
possessor of those characteristics. Otherwise, how is it possible that
sign and reasoning exist but not their purport! If the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) introduces some thing as the sign and proof of something else
but does not consider the result as the desired goal, there has occurred
a contradiction in his sayings (i.e. he mentions some signs for
something but rejects the result which is according to his own
prestipulated criterion). If someone objects and says: -

'Signs alone are not sufficient, we should ascertain the one who
possesses those signs and characteristics and attribute those
characteristics exclusively to him. However, until the exclusiveness and
uniqueness of that person to those characteristics is not known, we
cannot say that those signs are applicable to him and it is certain that
right from the time of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) until the time of the
birth of the virtuous successor Hujjat Muhammad (AS.), none (other than
him) from the progeny of Fatemah has been found to be exhaustive of
those characteristics. However, the time of his movement and sovereignty
will be at the end of time, when Dajjal shall appear and Isa (Jesus)
shall descend from the heaven. These shall occur after a lapse of a
lengthy period and till then, there are new and novel times in between
and in the pure generation of Fatemah many will be born, one after the
other. Therefore it is possible that from now onwards, a person from the
pure offspring and generation of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) shall be
born who is exhaustive of these characteristics and he will be the same
Mahdi whom you talk about and who is referred to in the afore-said
traditions. In spite of this possibility how is it that your reasoning
can be exclusively attributed to Hujjat Muhammad (A.S.)?

We reply: If you acknowledge that before and after birth of the
virtuous successor, nobody except him has been found to possess all
those characteristics and signs then this very acknowledgement will be
sufficient enough to substantiate these afor-said signs and
characteristics for Mahdi.

Moreover, you're saying that in the future there exists the possibility
of the coming someone appearing form the progeny for the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A) who would possess the afore-said signs, does not bring any
damage in the effect of reasoning, nor acts as any obstacle. This is
because the existing proof is preferred (due to its manifestness) than
the possibility of appearance of (another) proof which is against it.
Thus it is not advisable to forsake the preferable proof. Otherwise it
will not be possible to act upon the existing ans form proof because
there exists no reason but the possibility of an opposite proof being
found against it in the 'Ulemas' (scholars) the appearance of an
opposite proof cannot serve as an obstacle to the existing proof (from
being put into practice).

An example, which can perfectly clarify and accentuate this matter, is
the saying of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) to Omar-ibn-Khattab (just as
Imam Muslim-ibn-Hajjaj has narrated the same in his 'Sahih'). It goes as
follows:

Owais-ibn-Aamer who belongs to the tribe of 'Murad' shall come to you
with the people of Yemen in the future. Moreover, a person from
'Qarran', having been cured from his leprosy (except for one spot) will
approach you. Owais is indeed a good man living with his mother. If
Owais vows to Allah then that person will be fully cured from his
leprosy. If possible, ask him to seek forgiveness on your behalf.

Here, the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) has mentioned Owais-ibn-Aamer's name,
lineage and qualities and set them as the sign and proof such that if
anyone is found possessing this name and quality and if he swears by
Allah, then that person will be cured. Moreover, he would be competent
enough to seek forgiveness and this is a very great position and status
before Allah. After the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and Abu Bakr passed
away, Omar-ibn- Khattab used to inquire from someone amongst the people
of Yemen about the person who was endowed with those characteristics.
This continued until harbingers came from Yemen and Omar-ibn-Khattab
asked them about that person. Omar was informed about his coming and did
not stop from acting upon those signs and guidelines which the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) had set forth. Rather, he took action and contacted
that person.

He asked him to seek forgiveness. He believed that he was the same
person who had been pointed out by the Holy Prophet (S.AW.A.). In spite
of this possibility that perhaps in the near future, another person
could appear with those characteristics which the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A)
had referred to, (not withstanding that the tribe of 'Murad' was many in
numbers and their offspring rapidly multiplying). Omar did not stop. The
same possibility, which you give for Mahdi, can be given here too.

The incident of Khawarij too is the same since the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) had introduced their attributes and characteristics and
issued judgement about them. Thus, in the incident of Harawra' and
Nahrwan, when Ali-ibn-Abi Talib (AS.) became sure that they are those
same ones, which the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) had described he fought and
killed them. Therefore, Ali-ibn-Abi Talib acted upon those reasoning and
qualities which the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) had some other group in
mind. Examples of such kind of reasoning and the necessity of acting
upon them (in spite of the possibility of opposite reasoning) are many.
Thus, it became obvious that one cannot forsake a superior reasoning for
the sake of an inferior one.

We further say: The necessity of affirmation of a decree, (with the
existence of signs and reasonings, which are found in someone) is an
affair, which is essential to be acted upon. The one who forsakes it and
says: (Perhaps the one who is endowed with these characteristics and is
worthy of this decree be not that intended person. And on the contrary,
it is some other person who will come in the future) has indeed deviated
from the truth and made himself worthy of rebuke.

The incident mentioned in Torah too denotes this matter on the occasion
when Allah revealed (a sign) upon Musa and said: An Arab Prophet, who
will be the Last of the Prophets, shall be appointed at the end of time.
He described Hazrat by some qualities and made those signs as the sign
and indicator of his Messengership and Prophethood. As such, the 'Ummah'
(nation) of Musa remembered the Prophet of Islam by those qualities and
knew that he would be appointed in the future. When the time of his
emergence and appointment drew near, Musa's nation threatened the
polytheists and said: 'A Prophet with such and such signs and qualities
shall soon come. We shall join him and seek his help in fighting and
campaigning against you.

However, when the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) got appointed and they
discovered in him, all those signs and qualities which were the proof of
his Messengership and Prophethood, they denied him and said: "This is
not the same Prophet which we often talk of Rather, he is someone who
shall come afterwards." When they acted upon something, which was
probable and left the existing proofs, God too turned away from them
(for forsaking the afore-said signs and reasoning of Torah and acting
upon the probable).

This account of Torah is the greatest and strongest proof for acting
upon the existing proofs and substantiating the decree for the one who
is endowed with these qualities. Thus, when these qualities which are
the proof of substantiation of the afore-said decree, are present in
Hujjat and Khalaf-e-Saleh i.e. Muhammad, then that Mahdi, whom we spoke
about will be verified without paying any regard to the possibility of a
new Mahdi coining in the future.


