Imam Ghazzali's Declaration That Abu Hanifa Didn't Read the Salat of Rasulullah (s)
===================================================================================

Ghazzali said that all should know that Abu Hanifa did not read the
namaz read by Prophet Muhammad Taken from Asthaghsa al Ahfaam quoting
Munkhaul, by Allamah Ghazzali Tusi al Iraani page 209 published Majmaa
al Juraayn Ludhanan (1276 Hijri)

Imam Ghazzali declaration that Abu Hanifas Fatwas are Kufr

Ghazzali said whoever follows Isthazan he has done a bad act, it is
essential we explain Isthazan. Abu Hanifas students said that it is that
Fatwa where no logic exists, to have this ideaology is kufr

Taken from Asthaghsa al Ahfaam quoting Munkhaul, by Allamah Ghazzali
Tusi al Iraani page 198 published Majmaa al Juraayn Ludhanan (1276
Hijri)

Ghazzalis cursing Fatwas against Abu Hanifa
If people were not narrow minded and short of wisdom and didnt do
taqleed of Abu Hanifa under Sharia, no rational person would have done
his taqleed, thats why Ahlul Sunnah Imams have disparaged and cursed
him.

Taken from Asthaghsa al Ahfaam quoting Munkhaul, by Allamah Ghazzali
Tusi al Iraani page 200 published Majmaa al Juraayn Ludhanan (1276
Hijri)

**Ghazzali said Abu Hanifa was kaafir worse than Yazid**

In Ibne Khalikaan has recorded Imam Ghazzali's defence of Yazid as
follows:

"cursing any Muslim is not permissible whoever does so is cursed
because Yazids being Muslim is Sahih, and his killing of Imam Hussain or
issuing his killing is not proven" Wafyaat al yan by Ibne Khalikaan page
413 "Dhikr Imam Ahl'ul Sunnah al Qiya al Harasee" Ghazzali had sought to
protect Yazeed by proclaiming that he should not be cursed, BUT at the
same time he did not not codemn the fact that Sunni Ulema cursed Abu
Hanifa! So in the eyes of Ghazzali Abu Hanifa was worse than Yazid.

**Position of Imam Ghazzali's Munhaul in Ahl'ul Sunnah eyes**

Ahlaan al Akhyaar min Fuqhaa ai Madhab al Numan at Mukhthar as cited
in: "Asthaghsa al Ahfaam" page 195 "Imam of Ahl ul Sunnah Muhammad
Sulayman Qufee said Shaykh Abul Hasan Shazli said I saw in a dream the
Prophet (s) was taking pride over Musa (as) and Esau (as) and referred
to Ghazzali asking them in your Ummah do you have an Aalim like him,
they said no". Allamah Kamaladeen Dhimeere also extolled Imam Ghazzali,
when such a great scholar condemns Imam Abu Hanifa and notes he was
cursed then it means Imam Abu Hanifa, Imam of the Deobandi Nasibis was
nothing.

**Munhaul was Imam Ghazzali's Book**

Here are those scholars who have confirmed that Muhuul was Ghazzalis
writing as cited in Asthaghsa al Ahfaam page 205: Abu Muhammad Thudhbun
Sad Al Yahfee in his book Marahthul Janaan states When Ghazzali wrote al
Muhuul and presented to the Imam of Makka Abu Maali Ziyadeen the Imam
said why didnt you wait till I died since your book has overshadowed
mine. Abdul Raheem bin Hussain Bazeenudeen Iraqi teacher of Ibn Hajar
Asqalani in Tabaqat al Mugheez confirms that it is Ghazzalis book.

Allamah ibne al Jammatha in his book Taqabat Shaafiya confirms its G.

Hussain bin Hasan Qadhi wa Muyathhe.

Hafidh Jalaladeen Suyuti confirms it.

Ibn Taymeeya cited the fact Imam Ahmad and Shafii condemned Abu Hanifas
method of Salaat In Minhajj al Sunnah Imam of the Nasibis Ibn Taymiyya
states:

The Shia Allamah Hilli cites the fact a Hanafi felt his Salaat was
correct, he read it in front of a King who subsequently abandoned his
madhab this proves that Hanafi madhabi is false. The King was Sultan
Mahmood Ghuznawi who abandoned Hanafi Madhab due to the Hanafi Salaat.
This is that Salaat that Shafii, Ahmad and Malik rejected it likewise
Minhajj al Sunnah by Ibn Taymiyya taken from "Asthaghsa al Ahfaam" page
184

Abu Hanifa's Salaat was condemned by Scholars Rislala al Mugheez al
Khulq by Abu Mualli

Wafeeyathul Ayaan Volume 4 page 113 "Dhikr Mahmood Ghuznawi"

Tarikh Yafii Miratul Jinaan Sayf ul Maslul fi Dhurbul kafaal wal
makfuul taken from Istakhza page 180

"Tarikh Yafii Miratul Jinan Ulama of Islam note Guznawi was Hanafi and
reaspected Hadith and he would hear Hadith with his people which is why
found them in accordance to Shafii Madhab something affected his heart
and he inquired which was better of the two, and he said that the two
two rakaat Salats are read before him then hed decide on which was
better.

Kafaal Muroozi read the Shaafi prayer and read it in such a way showing
it in accordance with Wudhu clean dress (under Shaafi principles). Then
Faqaal Muroozi read prayer according to Hanafi fiqh he wore coloured
dogs skin and a quarter of it was impure and yet he performed Wudu in
achohol prepare by dates, as it was summer time he was covered by flies
and mosquitos and performed each action of Wudhu in reverse, then he
looked towards Kaaba and said Takbeer in Farsi without the intention and
then read one verse in Farsi,

and performed like a cock pecking its food, in his Salaams rather
saying Tashud he farted loudly, and said Oh King this is Abu Hanifas
Salaat. King said that if this is unproven to be Abu Hanifa I will kill
you, because such a Namaaz is not accepted by any religion. Hanafis
denied that this was Hanafi Salaat. The King said present the books of
both Madhabs to me, the King gor a Christian accountant to examine both.
After research it was poroven that the Hanafi Salat was just like that
of Faqaal Ghuznawi then lefy Hanafi Madhab and became Shaafi.

This event is authentic and has even. It had been confirmed as correct
by the Hanafi scholar Abdul Razzaq Hanafi in his book Sayf Maslool fi
Dhurbul kafaal wal Mukful. His comments are cited in Astaghsa page 180
where Abdul Razzaq initially said he initially felt it was an
exaggeration but when he read Abu Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Sad al
Yahfeez Tarikh al Janaan in which the Imam of Makka confirmed the
farting episode he knew it was true.

**Mulla 'Ali Qari's anger at the farting Salaat of Imam Abu Hanifa**

In Rudh Rislala Imam al Harmain, by Mullah 'Ali Qari taken from
Asthaghsa al Ahfam page 183: Mulla Ali Qari in his commentary on Abu
Hanifas Salaat performed by Murdhooree says that he was aided by his
anus and excreted a terrible smell, Muroozee lifted the veils on
sanctity and by farting made a mockery of religion and is counted
amongst the disgraced people, how could he fart in front of the people
including the King, if anyone else did this he would have been declared
a kaafir, I wish that with his death this farting incident had been
buried with him Muroozee was appearing as a Angel

**Wafayat ul ayan Dhikr Fukaar**

Tabaqat Fuqaha Shafiiyya Chapter Dhikr Kafaal Tarikh Yaafi Dhikr Kaafa
taken from Asthaghsa al Ahfam page 186 We are quoting from Asthaghsa al
Ahfam page 186:

Imam Yaafii states that Hadhrath Naasir Umri states that Imam Abu Bakr
al Kafaal Muroozee Abdullah bin Ahmad Shaafi was a high ranking Shaafi
scholar who died at the age of 90. No scholar of Fiqh has been born like
him, we deem him to be an Angel appearing as a man. Imam Shaafi states
that this is the same Muroozee who read the farting Namaz in front of
Mahmood Ghuznawee and Ibne Khalkaan in Wafeeyath ul Iyan states that
Allamah ibne Jamaata (check spelling) cited this at length in Tabaqat
Fuquha Shaafiya, this Salaat will be remembered as a mockery till the
Day of Judgement

**Suyuti condemnation of Imam Abu Hanifa**

In "Jazeel al Muwahib fi Ikhtilaab al Madhaib" by Suyuti page 184:
Suyuti said:

The most praised Madhab is Shaafi due to its precautions. Due to this
whoever reads Shafii Salaat will feel confident. Whoever reads Hanafi
Salaat will be confused because it is questionable, on account of the
following:

He considers it permissible to perform ablution with alcohol fermented
by dates

You can wear dog leather in Salaat

If a part of your clothes has urine on it you can continue with the
Salaat.

In Salaat if your penis or anus is exposed you can continue to pray.

If you read Qur'an wrong in Salaat its okay

You can read the Qur'anic verses in Salaat in Farsi

In Ruku and Sujud "Thumaanyeeyuth" is okay

It is permissible to end Salaat by breaking wind"

**Imam Abu Yusufs condemation of Abu Hanifa**

Munkuul as Istaghza page 241 quoting Imam Mullah Alis Qari Risala in
refutation to the Imam of Makka Qamus did unusual thing by extolling Ibn
Arabi to such an extenet that the illiterate would assume he was the
greatest of creations and with regards to Imam Abu Hanifa he refused his
accept his merits.

Dhahabi condemned Abu Hanifa In Meezan page 265 Volume 4 Dhahabi
said:

Imam Abu Hanifa is the Imam of Qiyas and Imam of Ahlul Sunnah Nasai and
Ibn Adi and other Ulema have rejected him Abdul Qadir Jilani condemned
Abu Hanifa

Al Ghaneeya page 90 Volume 1 Part 2 Rasul said my Umamh will be divided
in the 73 Sects only will attain Paradise others in Hell.of the 73 Sects
there are 10 including la Marhaba.la Marhaba is the 10th Fiqh including
Fiqha Hanafi

Shaykh Abdul Qadir Jilanis deemed Abu Hanifa and his followers to be in
the fire Whilst discussing the Sects that are in the Fire, Shaafi
scholar- Ghaneeyuth al Talibeen pages 62 63 (printed in Egypt):

There exist 12 sects of the marijee the Jahimiyya, Saleheeya,
Shamneeya, Yunuseeya, Yuhnaaniya, Bukharia, Gilania, Shahbibeeya,
Hanafeeya, Mahzeeya, Muriseeya, Kharameeya. These are all Marijee as
they believe that once an individual has recited the Shahada, no matter
how many sins you then commit, you will attain paradise, since iman is
connected with heart not woth ones deeds, practices are a part of the
Sharia iman reamains stagnant. People cannot supercede others on iman,
the iman of Prophets, Angels and ordinary people are equal, iman neither
goes up nor down, it does not lessen by words that are recited, even an
indivisual fails to practice he remains a momin. Imam Numan bin Thabit
stated that iman comprises of recognising Allah, his Rasul (s) and
Angels.

**Ibn Qutayba condemned Abu Hanifa In al Maarif page 168, Ibn Qutayba
said**

Abu Yusuf and Muhammad bin Hasan are the people of Marhaba (Zindeeq -
sinners) Ibraheem Timmee, Abu Muawiya and Abu Hanifa and his two student
Qadi Abu Yusuf and Muhammad bin Hasan In Istakhsa page 224 Ibn Jauzi
states Marhaba are Zindeeeq In Istakhsa page 228 quotes a comment that
if Abu Ysus allowed acohol via Qiyas if he lived a little longer he
would allow relations with women and men ie homosexuality).

Hanafis and Hanbalis have issued takfeer against each other Ishthaksa
page 264 quoting Sharh Aqaid Azdeeya Muhsin Kashmiree and Shahabodeen
Gazrooni that the Ashari Sunnis have called Hanabali Sunni Kaafir and
Hanbalis have called Hanafi kaafir.

**Hanafi Fatwa cursing those that oppose Abu Hanifa**

Maulana Abdul Hai in his book Fatwa page 155, chapter Taqleed wal
ijtihaad states: Ibne Maalik had stated that on matters of Fiqh the
people adhere to Abu Hanifa - may Allah curse be on those that have
mocked his Fatwas This encompasses the other three Imams who condemned
Abu Hanifa.

Wahabies believe everyone else is kaafir In Kitab Shaamee page 339
Volume 3 (Printed Egypt): Abdul Wahabs followers left Najd and illegally
occupied Makka and Madina. These Najdis claimed to follow Ibn Hanbal but
in fact their aqeedah is that only they are Muslim whoever does not
follow their aqeedah is kaafir. It was on the basis of this aqeedah that
they considered it halaal to kill the Ulema of Ahlul Sunnah.

Why did we cite these references?

We have in this section sought to prove how divided the Ahlul Sunnah
are themselves and shown that throughout history those from different
madhabs have spent theit time insulting one another, Muslims have been
divided because of these baseless attacks and it is sad that these
Nasibis are now seeking to continue this atmosphere of division by
targeting the Shia with their campaign of takfeer against them. They go
to enormous lengths collecting fatwas against Shia by doing so they feel
that they are carrying out some religious duty for the Sunnis, but their
mission is without foundation.

**The true position on the Shia**

The Nasibi Takfeer campaign against the Shia cannot
be supported by the Quran or Sunnah
The Nasibi can collect as many fatwas against the Shia from the Salafi
/ Deobandi Imams as they like, the fact of the matter is that these mean
nothing since they cannot be supported by the Quran and Sunnah:

We read in Surah Hujuraat verse 14, Allah (swt) says:

"The bedoins say: 'We have believed'. Say to them 'You have not
believed, say instead 'We have acceoted Islaam' for true belief has not
entered into yout hearts. But if you obey Allah and his Messenger you
will not lose any of your good deeds for verily Allah is most forgiving
most merciful". These bedoins clearly had defects in their faith and
even Allah (swt) did NOT even declare them Kaffir so could you explain
to me how your Ulema have issued takfair on millions of Muslims?

**Defining a Momin**

Furthermore we would appeal to those with open minds to ponder over
Surah Baqarah verses 1-5 where the Almighty has defined the meaning of
Al-Muttaqin (the righteous). "Alif Lam Mim. This is the Book whereof
there is no doubt, a guidance to those who are righteous, who believe in
the unseen, and offer prayer, and spend of what We have provided them,
And who believe in that which is revealed to thee (Muhammad) and that
which was revealed before thee, and who are certain of the Hereafter.
They follow the guidance (which comes) from their Lord; and they are the
ones who will prosper." These Qur'anic verses inform us of the
requirements which, if a person fulfills them, he will be of the
righteous people, and whoever is righteous, is a Muslim and a
believer.

These requirements are the following:

To believe in the unseen (as we believe in the Creator and the
Hereafter without seeing them).

To offer the five daily prayers.

To spend, in the way of God, a portion of the wealth God had provided
us (by paying Zakat).

To believe in that which God has revealed to His Messenger Muhammad.

To believe in that which was revealed to all Messengers before
Muhammad.

To believe in the Hereafter.

Thus, whoever meets these six requirements, as indicated by the first
verse, will be righteous, and as indicated by the last verse, will be
well-guided and successful.

Here, we can say that every Muslim who is committed to the principles
of Islam will meet all the requirements. Since the Shia like Ahl;ul
Sunnah bel;ieve in these principles then on what basis are these Nasibis
calling Shias kaafir?

**Defining Iman**

We read in Sahih Al-Bukhari, Volume 1, page 19 that Talhah Ibn
Ubaydullah reported that a Bedouin had the following dialogue with the
Messenger:

The Bedouin: What is Islam?

The Messenger: Five daily prayers.

The Bedouin: Do I have to add to them any prayer?

The Messenger: No, unless you volunteer. And fast in the month of
Ramadhan.

The Bedouin: Do I have to add to it any other fast?

The Messenger: No, unless you volunteer. Then he mentioned to him the
prescribed charity.

The Bedouin: Do I have to add to it?

The Messenger: No, unless you volunteer.

The Bedouin: By God, I shall not add to these; nor shall I subtract
from them.

The Messenger: The bedouin has succeeded if he is true.

These are the requirements to be a Muslim, possessed by Sunni and Shia
alike. So rather than blindly following your leaders do some homework.


The Ulema of Ahlul Sunnah have warned against issuing takfeer on
Muslims

Imam Abu Hanifa said we dont consider anyone who prays to Qibla to be a
kaafir and this is the belief of majority of Ulema (Sharh Muwafaq page
726 (Luckonow) Sharh Maqasid Volume 2 page 269 (Istanbul) Sharh Fiqh
Akbar page 189 (Kanpur)

Abu Hanifa wrote in his will The followers of Muhammad can be sinners
but they are momin NOT kaafor (al Jahur athul Maneefa Sharh Waseeyul
Imam Abu Hanifa page 6 printed Hyderabad Deccan)

Imam Shaafi I do not considfer anyone who prays to be kaafor on account
of his sins Al yawaqeeuth wal jawahir Volume 2 page 126 (Cairo) Shara
Muwaqif page 726 The Scholars of fiqh are in agreement that it is NOT
permissible to vall anyobe kaafoir whp prays in the direction of Qibla
(Lucknow)

**Shia are Muslim - Fatwa of Grand Mufti Shaltoot**

What follows is the Fatwa (religious verdict/ruling) of one of the
Sunni world's most revered scholars, Shaikh Mahmood Shaltoot with regard
to the Shia. Shaikh Shaltoot was the head of the renowned al-Azhar
Theological school in Egypt, one of the main centers of Sunni
scholarship in the world.

It should be of interest to know that a few decades ago, a group of
Sunni and Shia scholars formed a center at al-Azhar by the name of "Dar
al-Taqreeb al-Madhahib al-Islamiyyah" which translates into "Center for
bringing together the various Islamic schools of thought". The aim of
the effort, as the name of the center indicates, was to bridge the gap
between the various schools of thought,

and bring about a mutual respect, understanding and appreciation of
each school's contributions to the development of Islamic Jurisprudence,
among the scholars of the different schools, so that they may in turn
guide their followers toward the ultimate goal of unity, and of clinging
to one rope, as the well-known Quranic verse, "Hold fast to the Rope of
Allah and do not diverge" clearly demands of Muslims.

This massive effort finally bore its major fruit when Shaikh Shaltoot
made the declaration whose translation is appended below. It should be
made unequivocally clear as well, that al-Azhar's official position, vis
a vis the propriety of following any of the Madhaahib, including the
Shi'ite Imami school, has remained unchanged since Shaikh Shaltoot's
declaration.

Head Office of al-Azhar University:

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE BENEFICENT, THE MERCIFUL

Text of the Verdict (Fatwa) Issued by His Excellency Shaikh al-Akbar
Mahmood Shaltoot, Head of the al-Azhar University,on Permissibility of
Following "al-Shia al-Imamiyyah" School of Thought

His Excellency was asked: Some believe that, for a Muslim to have
religiously correct worship and dealing, it is necessary to follow one
of the four known schools of thought, whereas, "al-Shia al-Imamiyyah"
school of thought is not one of them nor "al-Shia al-Zaidiyyah." Do your
Excellency agree with this opinion, and prohibit following "al-Shia
al-Imamiyyah al-Ithna Ashariyyah" school of thought, for example?

His Excellency replied:

1) Islam does not require a Muslim to follow a particular Madh'hab
(school of thought). Rather, we say: every Muslim has the right to
follow one of the schools of thought which has been correctly narrated
and its verdicts have been compiled in its books. And, everyone who is
following such Madhahib [schools of thought] can transfer to another
school, and there shall be no crime on him for doing so.

2) The Ja'fari school of thought, which is also known as "al-Shia
al-Imamiyyah al-Ithna Ashariyyah" (i.e., The Twelver Imami Shi'ites) is
a school of thought that is religiously correct to follow in worship as
are other Sunni schools of thought. Muslims must know this, and ought to
refrain from unjust prejudice to any particular school of thought, since
the religion of Allah and His Divine Law (Shari'ah) was never restricted
to a particular school of thought. Their jurists(Mujtahidoon) are
accepted by Almighty Allah, and it is permissible to the "non-Mujtahid"
to follow them and to accord with their teaching whether in worship
(Ibadaat) or transactions (Mu'amilaat).

Signed,
Mahmood Shaltoot.

**Imam of Ahlul Sunnah Shaykh Muhammad Ghazzalis Fatwa that Shias are
Muslim**

Ghazzali writing in Dhufaa Anil Aqeedah Al Shareeya Thud Muthaan al
Mustharikeen page 256 Someone approached me in anger and said how did
that the Shaykh of Azhar give this fatwa that Shia are Muslims, I said
what do you know of the Shia after silence he said they are no on our
deen, he replied I have seen the fast and pray like we do, he then said
in amazement How?

I said to him You should know that they read the Quran and believe in
Rasul, perform Hajj, he said I heard that they believe in another Quran
and that in disrespect of the Quran they attend Makka, I said to this
man you are disabled! People say this to disgrace others.

**Imam of Ahlul Sunnah Abu Muhammad Zuhra declared the Shia to be
Muslims**

Tareekh ul Madhaib il Islameeya page 39 There is no doubt that Shia
fiqh is an Islamic one, if the Sabi Sect considers Ali God we these
people as out of Islam, Shias are a Musim Sect, for we know that the
Shia Ithna Askariyyya consider Sabais kaafir, Ibn Saba was Mohovy there
is no doubt that everything thje Shia say is based on the Quran and
hadith of Rasulullah (s)

On page 52 he says:

they sit with their Sunni neighbours and near ones with love and do not
hate them.

**Shaykh Hasan Ayubs Fatwa about the Shia**

Of the Islamic Sects Shia is the OLDEST one, there are different Sects
some have gone extreme some in the middle way praised Ali ibn abi Talib
and dont consider the other Sahaba as kaafor and liars (Tabseethul Aqaid
Islameeya page 300)

**Imam Ahmad Ibraheems Fatwa that the Shia are Muslim**

Imam Ahmad Ibraheem teacher of Shaltoot and Abu Zahra said the Shia
Imamia are Muslim they have faith in Allah, Rasul and Quran whatever
Muhammad brought (Usul ai Fiqha page 31)

**The Shia are an Islamic Sect**

Sharh Muwaqif by Imam of Ahlul Sunnah Meer Seyyed Shareeh Jurbani:

Amongst the biggest Islamic Sects the other is Shia, Shia are those
that follow Ali and believe after Rasul he was the rightful Imam and
Khalifa whether that be spiritual or physical, and they believe that
Imamate and Khlifath remains in the family od Ali page 752 (Lucknow
print) Abu Saadath Mubarak Ibn Aseer Jazari in Jami al Usul Min ahadith
ur Rasul Volume 12 oage 220-221 (gytpt Edition) We are talking about
famous Sects, that Muslims affiluiate themselves to these are as
follows, Shaafir, Hanafi, Malik, Ahmad and Imaiya.

**Fiqh Jafri is a legitimate Islamic Sect**

Imam of Ahlul Sunnah Allamah Shaykh Sharawi Azhari in his famous
Egyptian Risala Al Ahraam ul Sunnah page 103 periodical number 32932
wrote: The Imam of the Shia Imamiya is Hadhrath Imam Jafer Sadiq who was
the teacher of Imam Abu Hanifa. These are the Imamia Jafari about whom
we explained before, are those who follow a pure religion and at is with
regards to them that our Shaykh Shaltoot issued a fatwa that to adhere
to their madhab is permissible because this is a correct Islamic madhab,
that is acts as a source of guidance for its adherents, In Egypt we have
introduced certain principles of Shia on divorce and inheritance in out
Law.

Similarly Dr Umar Farokh Misree Al Faisal al Adad number 30 page 24-25
(printed 1979) said: Islam has many Sects Malikee, Hanafi Shaafee,
Hanbali and Jafri Sunni Scholar Allamah Abdul Fataah Abdul Maqsood
Misree wrote in Sabeel ul Wahdah page 514 (Egypt edition):

It is my faith that Shia Islam is the true face and sect of Ialam,
history is testament that in protecting the Deen the Shia made many
great sacrifices that day is not far when all Muslim Sects shall unite
on one front Sunni academic Allamah Muhammad Hasan Azmee Principal of
Arabic College, Karachi commented: The Shia Imami Ithna Ashariyya
testify in Tauheed - that Allah is one, neither is he begotten nor does
he beget, no one is like Him, Muhammad (s) was sent by Him, that all
Prophets were on the path of truth.

The Shia believe in these things and do not do taqleed on matters of
Usul thay believe in all the Prophets, they believe in everthing that
Prophets sent. They believe that Ali and his eleven sons were entitled
to the Imamate and Leadership (over the Ummah) and that Fatima az Zahra
is Chief of the Women of Paradise. These people are correct in their
aqeedah, since this is an aqeedah that cannot be deemed kufr nor Fisq
(Al Haqaiq ul Khafeeya un al Shia al Fatimeeya page 103 printed Cairo)


