Nasibi Alleged Dreams Prove Their Disrespect of Rasulullah (s) and His Ahlul Bayt (as)
======================================================================================

In their efforts to prove their piety to the faithful the leading
Deobandi scholars have been particularly fond of quoting alleged dreams.
Whilst hadith can be disputed the alleged recipients of these dreams
were so pleased with what they saw that they sought it fit to put pen to
paper and present these dreams to a wider audience. We would ask our
readers to look at these dreams and then decide whether this constitutes
respect for the dignity of Rasulullah (s) and his Ahlul bayt (as).

**A Deobandi Nasibi Maulana saved Rasulullah (s) from falling in to
Hell**

The Deobandi scholar Maulana Hussain Ali Bujruwee proudly alleges that
he saw the following in a dream: I saw Rasulullah (s) and he took me to
the bridge leading to Heaven, I saw him slipping from the bridge and I
saved him. Mubsuraath al Bulgha Ahraan, by Maulana Hussain Ali Bujruwee,
page 8 Rasulullah (s) came as a Mercy to the World to guide people to
the right path, to ensure that they did not suffer eternal damnation in
the next world, and here this third rate Deobandi Mullah claims he SAVED
Rasulullah (s) from the fire. Those that allege that the Shia deem their
Imams superior to Angels should take note.

**Rasulullah (s) was taught Urdu by the Nasibis**

Rashid Ahmad Gangohi, whilst extolling the virtues of the Deoband
Madrassa (The main school of learning in Nasibi ideology in the Indian
subcontinent) writes the following:

\` Once a great scholar saw the Prophet (saws) in a dream speaking
Urdu, he asked him where he learnt to speak Urdu when he was an Arabic
speaker, the Prophet (saws) replied I learnt Urdu following my contact
with the Deoband Madrassa.

Al Baraheynul Kathahaat, by Rashid Ahmad Gangohi, page 26 (published in
Kutubkhana Imdaadeyaa, Deoband, Uttar Pradesh)

Is there no level that the Nasibis will stoop in seeking to deceive the
people? They have the audacity to proclaim that they taught the Seal of
all Prophets - whose sole mission was to teach mankind. This is the
belief of scholars who claim that they and they alone are the upholders
of truth. The ordinary Muslim would view seeing the Prophet (s) blessed
shoe as better than his life and here we have a Nasibi scholar declaring
that not only did he meet the Prophet (s) in a dream but also he
attended the Madrassa of the Nasibis! We would like to pose this
question to the Nasibi since their Imam ibn Taymeeya said that the devil
can appear as the Prophet (saw), how do they know that it wasnt the
devil who appeared as the Prophet (saw) claiming to have learned urdu
from the Deobandis and not the actual Prophet? Was it not possible that
Shaythan had appeared in order to give the Deobandis a false sense of
superiority?

**Sayyida Fatima (as) embraces a Nasibi Scholar**

Allamah Ashraf Ali Thanvi claims to have been inspired by this dream:

"I dreamt that I saw Fatima (ra) taking me to her bosom, thereafter I
became good" "Hafazathul Yaumia Thanvi" Volume 6 page 37

Thanvi might not have any shame but we would urge Muslims to think
about the status of the person being defamed here, this is the daughter
of Rasulullah (s), the Leader of the Women of Paradise (this hadith can
be found in Sahih al Bukhari (English translation Volume 4 hadith number
819). Sayyida (as) exemplified piety and perfection and Muslims look to
her as the perfect role model as a mother and daughter. Yet this third
rate Nasibi claims that Sayyida Fatima (as) would embrace him, a non
mahram man! May Allahs curse be upon these people.

**The Nasibis assault on Hadhrath Ayesha**

Nasibi slander on Hadhrath Ayesha
Ibn Kathir writes the following:

Hadhrath Ayesha was accused of illicit relations. Those responsible for
spreading this allegation were Hadhrath Abu Bakrs cousin Mustha bin
Hasasa and the Prophets sister in law Humna binte Hajash and the poet
Hasan bin Thabit. The Prophet ordered that they be flogged and they were
punished accordingly"

al Bidayah al Nihaya by Ibn Kathir on page 160, Chapter "Dhir Ahfak" To
those Nasibis who say that we slander Ayesha and thus are Kaffirs we
invite them to ponder, the first to slander her were the companions
hence they are kaffirs!

If you base Iman on love for Hadhrath Ayesha then we should remind the
people that the Nasibis are guilty of this insult and yet target the
Shias. This can be proven from the next wonderful hadith.

**Nasibi attack on Hadhrath Ayeshas dignity**

Before analysing the text let us pose the following questions to those
with rational minds:

If two of your relatives went to your home and asked your mother about
how to perform Ghusl after sex how would you react? Is it not an insult
to ask such a question to your mother?

How would you feel if your mother then provided a practical
demonstration by removing her clothes and taking a bath? With this in
mind we invite you to ponder over this hadith:

Abu Salama b. 'Abd al-Rahman reported: I along with the foster brother
of 'A'isha went to her and he asked about the bath of the Apostle (may
peace be upon him) because of sexual intercourse. She called for a
vessel equal to a Sa' and she took a bath, and there was a curtain
between us and her. She poured water on her head thrice and he (Abu
Salama) said: The wives of the Apostle (may peace be upon him) collected
hair on their heads and these lopped up to ears (and did not go beyond
that).

Sahih Muslim, Book 003, Number 0626:

Perhaps the Nasibis would be so kind as to answer these questions:

As the query was with regards to Ghusl after intercourse, could the two
men not have obtained the information from one of the male companions?

As the matter was linked to Sexual intercourse both men must have been
married so why couldnt they send their respective wives to ask this most
delicate question?

Why would Aisha find it necessary to take a bath to demonstrate the
point could she not have simply relayed actions verbally with her
clothes on?

If there was a net between them that presumable acted as purdah does
this not defeat the object of Aisha removing her clothes and
demonstrating how Ghusl is performed?

The net clearly was NOT very thick, since they were able to observe
that Aisha had placed her hair over her head they could even SEE her
ears through it.

Is such a hadith not an insult on the dignity of Hadhrath Aisha?

Alhamdolillah we the Shi'a do NOT believe such hadith that attack the
dignity of Hadhrath Aisha, it is unfortunate that Nasibis regard such
traditions as Sahih. If those that slander Aisha are kaafir what about
those that regard this hadith to be Sahih?

The Shaykhain's attack on Hadhrath Ayesha

We read the following in Sahih Muslim - Book 009, Number 3506:

Jabir b. 'Abdullah (Allah be pleased with them) reported: Abu Bakr
(Allah be pleased with him) came and sought permission to see Allah's
Messenger (may peace be upon him). He found people sitting at his door
and none amongst them had been granted permission, but it was granted to
Abu Bakr and he went in. Then came 'Umar and he sought permission and it
was granted to him, and he found Allah's Apostle (may peace be upon him)
sitting sad and silent with his wives around him.

He (Hadrat 'Umar) said: I would say something which would make the Holy
Prophet (may peace be upon him) laugh, so he said: Messenger of Allah, I
wish you had seen (the treatment meted out to) the daughter of Khadija
when you asked me some money, and I got up and slapped her on her neck.
Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) laughed and said: They are
around me as you see, asking for extra money. Abu Bakr (Allah be pleased
with him) then got up went to 'A'isha (Allah be pleased with her) and
slapped her on the neck, and 'Umar stood up before Hafsa and slapped her
saying: You ask Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) which he does
not possess.

They said: By Allah, we do not ask Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon
him) for anything he does not possess. Then he withdrew from them for a
month or for twenty-nine days. Then this verse was revealed to him:"
Prophet: Say to thy wives... for a mighty reward" (xxxiii. 28). He then
went first to 'A'isha (Allah be pleased with her) and said: I want to
propound something to you, 'A'isha, but wish no hasty reply before you
consult your parents.

She said: Messenger of Allah, what is that? He (the Holy Prophet)
recited to her the verse, whereupon she said: Is it about you that I
should consult my parents, Messenger of Allah? Nay, I choose Allah, His
Messenger, and the Last Abode; but I ask you not to tell any of your
wives what I have said He replied: Not one of them will ask me without
my informing her. God did not send me to be harsh, or cause harm, but He
has sent me to teach and make things easy.

The fact that the Shaykhain attacked their respective daughters is
irrelevant BECAUSE they are Umm'ul Momineen of ALL MUSLIMS.

This being the case, Nasibis answer this:

If insulting Ummul Momineen makes you a kaafir what about those that
attack them physically?

What sort of respect is this, attacking Rasulullah (s) wives in his
blessed presence?

**Hadhrath Abu Bakr attacks Hadhrath Ayesha and declares her an enemy
of God**

Imam of Ahlul Sunnah Abdul Hamid Ghazzali records the following in his
classic Ihya Ulum-id-din:

Once there was an altercation between the Prophet and Hazrat Ayesha
when they found Hazrat Abu Bakr as judge. Hazrat Ayesha said to the
Prophet: You speak but dont speak except truth. At once Hazrat Abu Bakr
gave her such a slap that blood began to ooze out from her mouth".

Ihya Ulum-id-din by Imam Ghazali, Volume 2 page 36, Chapter The secrets
of marriage English translation by Maulana Fazlul Karim. For those
Nasibis who accuse the Shia of criticising Hadhrath Aisha we suggest
they analyse this narration carefully. Can you get any greater insult
that declaring the mother of the faithful an Enemy of God?

**The Nasibis Kufr Fatwa on Hadhrath Ayesha**

In the renowned book Mawaddathul Qurba by Imam of Ahlul Sunnah, Sayyid
Ali Hamdani we read the following:

Hadhrath Ayesha narrates the Prophet said Allah asked me Whoever doesnt
accept Alis khilafath and rebels and fights him as a kaffir and will
perish in the fire Someone asked her Why did you rebel and fight him?
She replied I forgot this Hadith on the Day of the Battle of Jamal, I
remembered it again when I returned to Basra and I asked for Allahs
forgiveness, I dont think that I will be forgiven for this sin"

Mawaddatul Qurba by S. Ali Hamdani page 32 under the chapter Mawaddatul
Saum

We will all die one day and will reply for our deeds, look at your
books and ponder over Hadhrath Ayeshas own admission. Mufti Muhammad
Qulli has also recorded this Hadith in "Tashdheed al Muthain" and the
Nasibis have expunged these words 'Wa ma asee un youqoon'

**Hadhrath Ayesha's kufr Fatwa on Hadhrath Uthman**

The pages of history are replete with these words uttered by Hadhrath
Ayesha against Hadhrath Uthman:

Kill this old fool (Na'thal), for he is unbeliever"

63 Tarikh by Ibn Athir, v3, p206

Lisan al-Arab by Ibn Masur, v14, p141

al-Iqd al-Farid, v4, p290

Qadi Burhaniddin in Sirathul Halbiyya writes:

"Ameerul Momineen Ali bin Abi Talib prior to Jamal write a letter to
Ayesha saying "Only yesterday you said kill Uthman, May Allah kill him,
Uthman has become a kaffir"

Sirathul Halabiyya Volume 3 page 356 "Muhjizatha Nabi"

Other classical Sunni sources have also recorded the same words of Imam
Ali (as).

The issuing takfir on Uthman by Hadhrath Ayesha has been eulogised in
poetry by Ubayd bin Abi Salmah:

"You ordered the murder of Uthman by stating he had become a kaffir".

Tadhkirathul Khawaas al Ummah, Ibn Jauzi page 38 "Dhikr Jamal"

Al Manaqib al Khawazmi page 117

Nasibis should know that kufr Fatwas are not just on Shias but also on
your leader Uthman by your mother Ayesha. The issuing of takfir is a
very serious matter, Abu Tharr narrates he heard Rasulullah (s) state:

"If somebody accuses another of Fusuq (by calling him 'Fasiq' i.e. a
wicked person) or accuses him of Kufr, such an accusation will revert to
him (i.e. the accuser) if his companion (the accused) is innocent."

Sahih al Bukhari, Volume 8 hadith number 71

In addition to this we also read that:

Ibn Umar related that the Holy Prophet said: If a Muslim calls another
kafir, then if he is a kafir let it be so; otherwise, he [the caller] is
himself a kafir.''

(Abu Dawud, Book of Sunna, edition published by Quran Mahal, Karachi,
vol. iii, p. 484) Since Ayesha issued takfir upon Uthman then one of
them became an infidel. The Nasibis need to decide which of them is the
kafir here.

**The Nasibi verdict that Hadhrath Ayesha hated Ali (as)**

'Ali Muttaqi al Hind records the following:

Hadhrath Ali says Hadhrath Ayesha fought me because firstly being a
woman she possessed a weak judgement and secondly she bore enmity
towards me and it would open in the same way a pot is opened. She would
have never fought anyone other than me in that way.

Kanz ul Ummal, by 'Ali Muttaqi al Hind Chapter 8 Kitab "Mawa azafee
katheeya'thul taweela" In the authentic "Umdah al Qari fi Sharh Sahih al
Bukhari", by Badr al Din Hanafi we read that:

Hadhrath Ayesha, could not bearing hearing a good thing about Ali, and
this is solid evidence of her being an enemy of Ali, for Nasibis to
proclaim that the narrators of these Hadith are weak is not a valid
excuse, because this is testified in the annals of history. "Umdah al
Qari fi Sharh Sahih al Bukhari", by Badr al Din Hanafi Sharrapage 720,
Chapter 4 "Hud ul Mareez"

**Hadhrath Ayesha's pleasure at the death of Sayyida Fatima (as)**

In "Sharh Nahj ul Balagha", Ibn al Hadid records the following:

"When the Prophets daughter died all the wives except Ayesha came to
console Banu Hashim and she said that she was unwell and the message
which she sent to Hadhrath Ali (as) clearly depicts her joy at this sad
occasion".

Sharra Nahj ul Balagha by Ibn al Hadid page 439 Chapter 2

The only way the Wahabis get round these texts is to declare them daif
(weak).

**The Shi'a position on Hadhrath Ayesha**

We do not curse Hadhrath Ayesha; rather we only quote what can be found
in the text of the Ahlul Sunnah as well as Allah (swt) words in the
Quran. It is sad that when we quote Sunni texts we are called kaffir!
Furthermore after a detailed analysis of the Quran and Sunnah it cannot
be proven that the standard for determining Iman is Hadhrath Ayesha.

Nasibis rather than attacking the Shia why not answer these
questions:

Are the Sahaba and wives of the Prophet (s) EXEMPT from Sharia? If
Allah (swt) or Rasulullah (s) state something does that apply to ALL
Muslims, or can the Sahaba and the wives of the Prophet (s) ignore these
words?

Are the Sahaba liable to punishment if they commit transgression? Now
with these answers in mind we should point out that your esteemed books
are replete with traditions that make it clear that Rasulullah (s) said:
"Loving Ali is the sign of belief, and hating Ali is the sign of
hypocrisy."

Sahih Tirmidhi, v5, p643

So Nasibis could you answer us this:

(1) Are these hadith Sahih?
(2) Does it apply to all people?
(3) Did Ummul Momineen Ayesha hate Ali?

Moving on we also find this hadith:

Zaid bin Arqam narrates:

"Allah's Messenger (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said
regarding 'Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain (Allah be pleased with them
all): I am at peace with those with whom you make peace and I am at war
with those whom you make war",

1. Sunan Ibn-I-Majah, English translation by Muhammad Tufail Ansari,
Volume 1 page 81;
2. Fada'il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p767, Tradition
\#1350;
3. al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p149

So Nasibis, answer us:

(1) Is this hadith Sahih?
(2) Does it apply to all people?
(3) What is the position of one who is at war with the Prophet, Muslim,
Murtad, Munafiq or Kaafir?


