Placing Abu Hanifa Imam of the Deobandi Nasibis Under the Microscope
====================================================================

**Wake up call for the Deobandis**

Deobandis you have been misled by your Ulema saying we are kafir
because we dont believe in Abu Bakr and Umar, we have countered this by
showing you that your Ulema have been declared kafir by the Ahlul
Sunnah! They were declared kafir even though they believed in Abu Bakr
and Umar so youre damned if you do and your damned if you dont!( see
note below) You Nasibis have done your utmost to create fitna against
the Shia, for cursing the Sahaba there is no proof from the Quran that
not believing / disrespecting or cursing Abu Bakr and Umar makes you a
kafir Your own books are replete with insults on the Sahaba.

The biggest irony is the fact that had these modern day Nasibis
bothered to read (one presumes that they can) the works of their own
classical Nasibi Imams they would have discovered that cursing Abu Bakr
and Umar does NOT make you a kafir. We have discussed this matter in our
article The creed of the Shia explained.

There are even kufr Fatwas on your beloved Imam Abu Hanifa.

**A challenge to the Deobandi Pundits**

The entire foundation of the Deobandis centres around the persona of
Imam Abu Hanifas Fatawa and the Ulema of Islam issued takfir on him! We
will now show you the position of Abu Hanifa in the eyes of the Ulema of
Islam.

**The review of the author Baghdadi and his Tarikh**

For this Chapter we will be quoting in detail from the high-ranking
Ahlul Sunnah work Tarikh by Tahir Baghdadi. Since this will naturally be
uncomfortable reading for the Deobandi Nasibis, they will seek to
dismiss the books authenticity to the innocent masses, which is why
before citing references we will present the verdicts of the Ahlul
Sunnah Ulema on this book.

In Wuzhiyaat ul Ayaan Ibne Khalikkan praises Baghdadi.

"Fayz al Qadeer Sharra Jami ul Sagheer" by Abdul Rauf Manadi likewise
heaped praise on this book.

Tarikh Maraathul Junaan Allamah Yaafi also praised the book.

Tabaqat Fuqua Shaafiya Allamah Ibne Jamaatha praised the writer and the
book.

Al Ansab Allama Sum'aani praised both writer and book.

Tarikh Safdhi both are praised

Mufti Kanzal Dhurraiya, Abu Aalim Abdullah bin Muhammad al Ayaashi al
Mughribee praises the work.

Risala Turjhee Madhab Shafee al Radhi praises the book and its
writer.

Busthan al Haditheen, Shah Abdul Aziz praises both the book and the
author.

Hafidh Abu Bakr bin Mahdhi, the Khateeb of Baghdad, was born on Thursay
27 Ziqaat 380 Hijri, concentrated on Din following the advice of his
father and visited Basra, Kufa, Nishapur, Isfahaan, Hijaaz. He was
taught by renowned names like Abu Naim writer of Hilayat al Auliya and
Abu Saeed Makeeni, Abu Hasan bin Basher. Great Ulema like Ibne Makuula
Muhaddith and Muhammad bin Marzook Zahfrani were his students. In Makka,
Allamah Barsti taught him al-Bukhari in five days. Ismail bin Ahmad
Nishapuri, had three sitting with him. His memory and intelligence was
unmatched. After inquiring knowledge he returned to Baghdad. He wrote 60
Books including Tarikhe Baghdad that is 14 Volumes. No one could narrate
Hadith without his permission.

**The Prophet was amongst those who listened to Baghdadi**

In Muftha Kanzul Dhurraya and Bistaan an Muhaditheen we read:

Imam of Ahl ul Sunnah Makki al Raimali, states that I was in Baghdad
when I saw myself in one of Baghdadis gatherings, to his right was
Shaykh Nasr bin Ibrahim and on his right was another aged person. I
inquired as to who it was and was told that it was the Prophet who had
come to hear Baghdadi

Ahmad bin Hanbal condemned Imam Abu Hanifa

In Ahlul Sunnahs recognised Imam Fakhradin Radhi, writes as follows:

"Imam Ahmad Hanbal was asked about Imam Malik. The reply his Hadith are
correct but the narrators are weak. Then someone asked him about Imam
Shaafi, the reply was his Hadith and opinion is correct. Then someone
asked about Imam Azam, he said Numan opinion is of no value, nor is his
Hadith of any value. Bahiqi writes Imam Ahmad cautioned Imam Abu Hanifa
because he would accept weak and fabricated Hadith.

"Risalaah thurjeeya Madhab Shaafee" by Imam Fakhradin Radhi, quoting
"Al Alhfam" page 233

Another attack on Imam Abu Hanifa by Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal In Tarikh al
Baghdad by Muallif Hafidh Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Ali al Khateeb Baghdad we
read the following:

"Imam Hanbal said that a goats faeces is on par with fatwas of Abu
Hanifa"

Tarikh al Baghdad Volume 13 page 411

"Ahmad bin Hassan Tirmidhi quotes I heard Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal say
that Abu Hanifa is a liar".

Tarikh al Baghdad Volume 13 page 418

Nasibi / Deobandi's we congratulate you for adhering to such an Imam!
You are liars like you Imam!

**Imam Malik condemned Imam of the Deobandis Abu Hanifa**

In "Shi'a aur Sunni" by Dr Islam Mahmood Misri, an article in an
Egyptian magazine "Mukhthar al Islami" - issue 90, 8th edition, Jamadhi
al Awwal 1406 Hijri on page 13 we read: "Imam Malik said about Abu
Hanifa that he is the worst of people and it would have been easier for
him to raise his sword against the Muslims".

Imam Maliks Fatwa that the Fitnah of the Abu Hanifa is worse than the
Fitnah of Iblis In Tarikh al Baghdad we read:

Hadhrath Imam Malik said that for the Muslims Abu Hanifas Fitnah is
more damaging than the Fitnah of Shaytaan". Tarikh al Baghdad Volume 13
page 392 Abu Hanifas Fitnah is compared to Dajjal On the same page under
the Chapter "Dhikr Numan"

Abdullah Rahman said that I dont know if after Dajjals Fitnah there
exists any bigger Fitnah than the opinions of Abu Hanifa.

**Further attacks by Imam Malik on Imam Abu Hanifa**

In the same book we read further comments by Imam Malik on the Imam of
the Deobandis:

Imam Malik bin Anas stated no one had damaged Islam more than Numan.
Tarikh al Baghdad Volume 13 page 396

Once Malik asked Walid bin Muslim: do people listen to Abu Hanifa in
your city? he said: yes. Imam Malik replied its amazing that your city
has not been destroyed.Imam Malik said Abu Hanifa mocked Allahs Deen
whoever does so is irreligious."

Tarikh al Baghdad Volume 13 page 400

Imam of Ahl ul Sunnah Idrees Shaafi condemned Imam Abu Hanifa Imam
Shaafi in "Tabaqat ai Kubra" writes:

I have read Abu Hanifa Numans books and Numan and his followers
proclaim that we believe in the Quran and Allah (swt) but they are
opposed to it. In "Isthaqsai al Ahfam" it's written:

.that there was a debate between Imam Shaafi and Muhammad bin Hasan who
was the student of Imam Azam and this is recorded by Yaqoodh Hamoowi in
Muajum al Adbha by Shah Waliyullah in Risala Insaaf fi biyaan Subu ay
Ikhthilaaf and Radhi in his Risala Tarjhi Madhab Shaafi that Shaafi said
I said to Muhammad bin Hasan that I have read you book and apart from
bismillah it is all wrong.

This is a slap in the face of the Deobandis.

**Another appraisal of Abu Hanifa In Tarikh Baghdad we read:**

"Imam Shaafi said that no-one more mischievous has appeared in Islam
than Abu Hanifa".

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 398

Again Baghdad records this:

Imam Shafii said that Imam Azams Fatwas are like a chameleon it
continually changes its colours.

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 411

Ahmad, Malik and Shaafi have attacked your beloved Imam!

**The Sunni Fatwa on The Imam of the Deobandis In Tarikh al Baghdad we
read:**

Someone asked Imam Azam if I say that I testify that the Kaba is the
truth but I dont know whether its in Makka or Madina, if someone
testifies that Muhammad bin Abdullah is a Prophet but I dont know
whether its that person buried in Madina or elsewhere whats my position?
Imam Azam replied Anyone with the above faith is a Momin. Imam Bukhari
Shaykh Hameedi said that whoever issued this Fatwa is a Kaafir. Tarikh
Baghdad Volume 13 page 370 Commenting on Abu Hanifa's views that Iman
remains stagnant in Tarikh Baghdad - Sufyan narrates: "anyone with the
above faith is a Kaafir".

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 376

**Another classic Hanafi Fatwa**

Baghdadi records this fatwa of Imam Abu Hanifa:

That if anyone worships this shoe in order to get close to Allah (swt)
it is not a sin. The Ahlul Sunnah deems this clear kufr. Tarikh Baghdad
Volume 13 page 372 On the same page we read that:

Imam Azam contradicted many verses of the Quran including the one that
makes Salat a part of Deen. The other verse is that refers to the fact
that different levels of faith.

Imam Abu Hanifas Fatwa that the Iman of Hadhrath
Abu Bakr and Iblis are the same
In Tarikh Baghdad we read that:

"Imam Abu Hanifa said that Iblis and The Great Truthful one Abu Bakr
were equal in Iman".

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 373

On the same page Imam Abu Hanifa declares:

"The Iman of Adam and Iblis is the same"

To the Nasibi who accuse the Shia of disrespecting the Sahaba, we
invite them to offer their opinions of their Imam, whose disrespect of
Allah (swt)s Prophet is such that he equates him iman is being on par
with the Iman of Shaythan.

On the same page we read that:

A man stood up urinating Abu Hanifa said why dont you sit down? He said
Murijee why dont you go away, he replied I wont because I have already
stated that your Iman is equal to that of Gibrael.

In eyes of Ahl ul Sunnah in Tarikh Baghdad we learn that:

"Hamad bin Abi Salman sent Abu Hanifah a message declaring him to be a
Mushrik"

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 380

**Imam Abu Hanifa had to ask forgiveness for Shirk, Kufr and various
evil acts In the same book we read:**

Abu Hanifa was attending a gathering a meeting of Esa bin Muslim, Abu
Hanifa said that the Quran is a creation, Esa said remove him from here
if he repents fine else kill him Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 378

In the past Ahlul Sunnah had debates over whether the Quran is
outdated; whoever said it was created was a Kaffir in Baghdad page 378
we are told that the first to hold this aqeedah was Abu Hanifa. In
Baghdad we read:

"Qaya bin Rubbee said he saw Ameer of Kufa Yusuf bin Uthman raise Imam
Abu Hanifa to a high place and made him repent for committing kufr"
Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 381 On page 382:

"Shareek asked why did he [Abu Hanifa} do tauba the answer was for
committing kufr". Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 382 On the same page we
read:

Shareek bin Abdullah Qadi narrates that Abu Hanifa twice asked for
forgiveness for his views on Allah (swt) and the Prophet (S).

The ijma of Ahlul Sunnah scholars that Abu Hanifa was misguided In
Tarikh Baghdad we read:

Muhammad bin Abdullah al Maliki said I heard Abu Bakr Subjistani
telling his followers that What do you say when to a Fatwa on which Imam
Malik, Shaafii, Imam Auzai, Hasan bin Saleh, Safyan Suhri and their
respective followers have an ijma? They [his followers] said that it
must be the most correct ruling. Abu Bakr Subjistani then said that
these individual have an ijma that Abu Hanifa evil and misguided

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 383 This must be uncomfortable reading
for the Deobandis but since they started this war of words, they deserve
a taste of their own medicine. It is time to trap this animal and hang
it.

**Imam Abu Hanifas Students did not do his Taqlid In Tarikh Baghdad, we
read:**

"Saeed bin Salman said to Qadi Abu Yusuf ' heard that the people of
Khurusan say Abu Hanifa is Jahimee and Murijee' Qadi said that this was
correct. Saeed then asked what was your relationship with him as his
student? Abu Yusuf said we went to him and he taught us Fiqh in our Deen
we did not do his taqlid" Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 386

**Deobandis Imam Azam followed Jahim bin Safwan who was a Kaffir and
thus became a Jahimee and a Murijee In Tarikh Baghdad:**

Abdullah bin Muhammad said her heard from Abu Masshur that Abu Hanifa
Imam Azam was the leader a misled sect and Qadi Abu Yusuf was asked
whether he was a Murjii he confirmed theta he was. Sahl asked was he
Jahmee Qadi said Yes. Sahl then asked What was your link with him. Qadi
said Abu Hanifa was a teacher if he said a good thing we would accept it
if he said something bad we ignored. Abu Yusuf said leave talk about Abu
Hanifa, he died a Jahmee Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 325 In "Waqqat
Damaath ai Jahimeeya" page 376 we read that: "Abu Hanifa declared that
my teacher Jahim bin Safwaan was a Kaafir". Incredible, Abu Hanifa
followed an Imam who was a Kaafir and Qadi Abu Yusuf confirms he was
Jahimee.

**Imam Abu Hanifa would mock Hadith In Tarikh Baghdad we find that:**

Someone narrated a Hadith in front of Abu Hanifa he laughed and it was
impure. Another individual quoted a Hadith Abu Hanifa said it was Sajaa,
a third quoted a Hadith Numan said its nonsense, he replied to a fourth
this tradition is from Shaytan. One man said Wudhu is half the Iman, Abu
Hanifa said do it twice so that your Iman will be complete. Tarikh
Baghdad Volume 13 page 338

Imam Abu Hanifa's fatwa that Prophet Hadith should be rubbed out with a
pigs tail (God forbid) In Tarikh Baghdad we read: "Abu Isaac al Firowzi
states that he was a student of Abu Hanifa I posed a question he
answered, but I countered this with a Hadith, he said that you should
rub this Hadith with a pigs tail". Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 387

Further on we read: "Yusuf bi Asbaat states Abu Hanifa rejected 400
Prophetic traditions" Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 390 On the same page
we read that:

When the Prophet would proceed on a trip he would make a lottery of his
wives names, the wife whose name came out would accompany him on the
journey and Imam Abu Hanifa writes that Kurra is a form of gambling
Ahl'ul Sunnah deplored the Madhab of Imam Abu Hanifa In Tarikh Baghdad
the author collates the verdicts of Abu Hanifa's contemporaries: In the
eyes of Muhammad bin Musalama:

Someone asked Muhammad bin Musalama other than Madina, Abu Hanifas
Fatwas are everywhere, why is that? He said that Madina is protected by
a dua of the Prophet that Dajjal and the plague dont enter it, and Abu
Hanifa is a Dajjal from one Dajjal.

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 395

In the eyes of Numan Abdul Rahman bin Mahdhi:
