Abu Hanifa Disrespected the Prophet in Tarikh Baghdad We Learn That
===================================================================

"Yusuf bin Asbad said if the Prophet met me he would embrace my
Fatwas"

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 387

Baghdad also records that:

Imam Abu Hanifa said If you bury a dead body and his heirs need money
it is permissible for them to open the grave and sell the shroud Tarikh
Baghdad Volume 13 page 394

On the same page Sufyan bin Ayanaa states Abu Hanifa was a person who
was the greatest opponent of Allah (swt).

Deobandis look at the Fatwas of your dear Imam and the Fatwas against
him. Look at your Imam first rather than focussing your attacks on the
Shia. Cursing Abu Hanifa in Syria In Tarikh Baghdad we read:

"Abu Masar states that the Ahl'ul Sunnah Imam from Damascus would curse
Abu Hanifa on the pulpit".

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 412

Abu Hanifas students would not send salaams on the Prophet (S) In
Tarikh Baghdad we read:

Ibne Mubarak narrates that when I attended Sufyan Suhris gathering we
would learn Quran, Hadith, I cannot recall ever hearing them saying
Salaams on the Prophet.Ibne Mubarak stated that I have rejected all that
I learnt from Abu Hanifa and have asked for forgiveness from Allah
(swt).

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 404

Abu Hanifas Students rejected his Ijtihaad In Tarikh Baghdad we read as
follows:

"Someone asked Abdullah ibne Mubarak was Numan a Mujtahid he replied he
was not a Mujtahid"

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 406

With regards to "Al Hayl" written by Imam Abu Hanifa, Tarikh Baghdad
informs us: His student Mubarak states whoever reads al Hayl will deem
haraam things halaal and vice versawhoever gives a Fatwa from this book
will nullify his marriage. Ibne Mubaraks servant stated that al Hayl
author is Shaytan and he himself stated that the writer was worse than
the Devil.

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 403

The Prophet forbade his followers
from adhering to Abu Hanifa
Again in Tarikh Baghdad we are told:

"Muhammad bin Jawad says he saw Rasul in a dream and asked whether he
could follow Abu Hanifa the Prophet replied No, no, no".

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 403 Abu Hanifa's disrespect of Abu Bakr
In Tarikh Baghdad:

"Muhammad bin Amir Tayr states that in Damascus he saw in a dream a
scholar was dragging a man by his shirt, 'This man has destroyed the
Deen of Muhammad - I asked and was told that Abu Hanifa was holding Abu
Bakr by his collar"

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 413

The Scholars of Hadith have also condemned Imam Abu Hanifa, including
al-Bukhari.

**Imam Bukhari classified Abu Hanifa as weak**

In Risala Tarjee Madhab ai Shafee Imam Ahl'ul Sunnah Allamah Fakhraddin
Radhi quoting "Asthaghsai al Ahfhaam":

Ismail al-Bukhari in his Tarikh al Kabeer, Chapter al Meem has
mentioned Muhammad bin Idiries Shaafi that died in 204 Hijri, Bukhari
was aware that he narrated many Hadith despite this Bukhari did not
classify him as a weak narrator, if Shaafi was weak he would have
mentioned him in the same way he classified Abu Hanifa as weak before
the people. Risala Tarjee Madhab ai Shafee by Allamah Fakhraddin Radhi
page 132

So al-Bukhari deems the Imam of the Deobandis as weak. Imam Muslim bin
Hajaj classified Abu Hanifa as weak In Tarikh al Baghdad page 421 Volume
13:

"Imam of Ahl'ul Sunnah Muslim bin Hajaaj said Numan bin Thabit never
narrated any important Hadith" Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 421

Bukhari and Muslim are your popes / authentic Imams and considered your
great Imam as worthless. Whilst these Shaykhs considered your Imam weak
and took no hadith from him, they considered Rafidi who you consider
kaffir, Shia (who did not adhere to the ways of Abu Bakr, Umar and
cursed Muawiya) as reliable and subsequently took hadith from them166.
Imam Bukhari in Tarikh Saghir whilst narrating Numan's death quotes the
sheer pleasure expressed by Sufyaan al-Thawri. The six Imams of Sihah
Sittah did not adhere to the teachings of your Imam. It is indeed sad
that you quote Fatwas on Shias and have failed to notify the takfir
issued against your own Imam!

By way of example we will cite the name Abd ar-Razzaq as-Sanani who was
a famous scholar of hadeeth who lived in Yemen. He died in 211 hijrah.
Adh-Dhahabi called him 'one of the most trusted traditionists among all
scholars'. [Adh-Dhahabi, Meezan al-itidal, volume 2, page 609] When
Ahmad bin Hanbal was asked whether he knew of any hadeeth reported by
one better than Abd ar-Razzaq , his answer was negative.

[Adh-Dhahabi, Meezan al-itidal, volume 2, page 614] The importance of
Abd ar-Razzaq can be gleaned from the fact that all the six books of
Sihaah narrate traditions from him with Bukhari and Muslim narrating
over 500 traditions and Ahmad bin Hanbal's Musnad containing well over
1,500 traditions. Hadith were taken from him despite the fact he was
openly Shia: Ibn Adi said: Abd ar-Razzaq had numerous hadeeth, and
reliable narrators as well as their leaders ha travelled to him and
narrated from him. They did not see any problem in his hadeeth except
that they attributed Shi'ism to him. He had narrated traditions
regarding the virtues [of ahl al-bayt] that none of the trustworthy
narrators agreed upon.

His narration of these traditions and those censuring other than them
was the reason of their criticism of him. He was a man of honour and
there was nothing wrong with him except that he had set forward
traditions in praise of the People of the Household (ahl al-bayt) and
disparaging others [and these are] abominable. [Al-Mizzi, Tahdheeb
al-kamal , volume 18, pages 60-1] Mukhlid al-Shuayri said: I was with
'Abd ar-Razzaq when someone mentioned Mu'awiya.

Abd ar-Razzaq said: 'Do not pollute our assembly by mentioning the
descendant of Abu Sufyan!'. [adh-Dhahabi, Meezan al-itidal, volume 2,
page 610] He even narrated a hadeeth from the Prophet (s): "If you see
Mu'awiyah on my pulpit then kill him!" [adh-Dhahabi, Meezan al-itidal,
volume 2, page 613]. Nasibis call Shias Kafirs whilst those they deem
Imams, the most meticulous of hadith recorders took hadith from Shias.
Would these scholars have taken hadith from Shia if they considered them
kafir?

**Ahmad bin Shuhaib an-Nasai condemned Abu Hanifa In Tarikh Baghdad we
read:**

"Imam Nasai declared that Numan Thabit Kufi is an unreliable source of
Hadith."

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 421

We also learn:

"Sufyan Suhri declared Abu Hanifa was no authority on Hadith"

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 417

On the same page we read that Abu Bakr Daud states:

"Abu Hanifa recorded 150 Hadith, half of them were false".

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 417

On the same page we read that Hanbal was asked about Abu Hanifa he
replied that Abu Hanifas opinions of no value nor the Hadith he
narrates.

Again on the same page we learn that:

"Yahya bin Zaeed states that a fistful of mud is better than Abu
Hanifa".

Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 417

In Mizan al Kubra, under the chapter "Dhikr Lughman" we read that "Imam
Nasai and Ibn Adi declared Abu Hanifa as weak".

**The Ulema celebrated when Abu Hanifa died In Baghdad we learn:**

When the news of Abu Hanifas death reached Sufyan al-Thawri he praised
Allah (swt) who relieved Islam from the Fitnah of Abu Hanifa. Numan
weakened every page of Islam. Imam of Ahlul Sunnah Uzay said on his
death said That Numan was the most harmful thing to Islam. Tarikh
Baghdad Volume 13 page 398

Abu Hanifa was born in 80 Hijri and died in 152 Hijri.

"Hasan Amara the Qadhi of Baghdad read his Janaza, someone dreamt that
he was rapped in a black shrewd and was surrounded by Christian priests"
Tarikh Baghdad Volume 13 page 422

Even if you Nasibis got together you would have no answer to the fatwas
issued against Abu Hanifa. If we rely on these Fatwas then Abu Hanifa
was a Kaafir, and Deobandi Nasibis, Tarikh Baghdad is not the only
weapon we have up our sleeve read on, if you dare.

**Imam Ghazzali said Abu Hanifa was not a Mujtahid In "al Munhaul",
Imam Ghazzali Tusi al Iraani writes as follows:**

After the fourth level of respect comes the Mujtahids, commenting upon
the authenticity of the different Mujtahids Imam Ghazaali writes, Imam
Malik was a Mujtahid, Abu Hanifa was not a Mujtahid because he acquired
no knowledge in Arabic Grammar and was illiterate, this is proven by the
fact that he read the words Babu Qays when the correct pronunciation is
Babi Qays. Abu Hanifa had no knowledge of Hadith, he would ignore
correct Hadith and would embrace weak ones, he had no capacity to
interpret the Sharia, in its opposition he practised and developed
Qiyaas (analogical reasoning).

Taken from Asthaghsa al Ahfaam quoting Munkhaul, by Allamah Ghazzali
Tusi al Iraani page 197 published Majmaa al Juraayn Ludhanan (1276
Hijri)

Imam Abu Hanifa was ignorant of Arabic
as admitted by Ibne Khalikan
In Tarikh ibne Khalikaan page 419:

Imam Abu Hanifa has many virtues as highlighted by Baghdad who also
noted his criticism better if hed avoided this but it is fact he was
ignorant of Arabic

Tarikh ibne Khalikaan page 419

Quran and Hadith are in Arabic and the one without command of both
cannot be deemed as a Mujtahid.

Imam Ghazzali declaration that Deobandis ninety
percent of Imam Abu Hanifas Fatwas are wrong
In al Munhaul Imam Ghazzali also attacks Imam Abu Hanifa as follows:

"Ghazzali copied the words of Qadhi Abu Bakr Muhammad bin Tayyib Basri
in Muhuul Volume 3 in which he discussed Qiyas he said I am not opposed
to Abu Hanifa but I am sure that Abu Hanifa made mistakes in ninety
percent of his Fatwas and in Knowledge of Usul he made mistakes".

Taken from Asthaghsa al Ahfaam quoting Munkhaul, by Allamah Ghazzali
Tusi al Iraani page 197 published Majmaa al Juraayn Ludhanan (1276
Hijri)

**Imam Ghazzalis declaration that twenty per cent of Abu Hanifas madhab
was refuted by his students In Munhaul taken from Istakhza page 192:**

"Imam Ghazzali at the end of Munul on issues of Sharia painting the
picture Abu Hanifa used his own hot mind which is why he hasmade so many
mistakes and due to this his two teacher Abu Yusuf and Imam Muhammad
said that following 20% of what he said would discredit the religion,
because they found major mistakes in his Fatwas".

Taken from Asthaghsa al Ahfaam quoting Munkhaul, by Allamah Ghazzali
Tusi al Iraani page 192 published Majmaa al Juraayn Ludhanan (1276
Hijri)

Imam Ghazzalis declaration Abu
Hanifa turned Sharia on its head
Ghazzali said Imam Abu Hanifa turned Sharia on it head and made it
questionable and changed the Sharia, and proving the falsity of Hanifa
Madhab is no secret on the issue Salat any ordinary Sunni Muslim would
not accept his explanations of how to practice Salat.

Taken from Asthaghsa al Ahfaam quoting Munkhaul, by Allamah Ghazzali
Tusi al Iraani page 192 published Majmaa al Juraayn Ludhanan (1276
Hijri)


