[Introduction]
==============

Shihab al-Din Yahya Sohravardi, known as*Shaykh al-Ishraq* (the Master
of Illumination), was born in Sohravard, a village close to the city of
Zanjan in northwestern Persia, in the year 549/1154. After his
preliminary education he went to Maragheh and studied Islamic sciences
under Majd al-Din Jili. He then went to Isfahan, where he benefited from
the teachings of Zahir al-Din Farisi. Sohravardi spent a major part of
his life traveling, meeting many sages and Sufis from whom he acquired a
high degree of knowledge and spirituality. At one point in life he
traveled to Mardin in Anatolia, and it is said that he spent some time
in the courts of the Seljuk kings. Finally, Sohravardi went to Damascus
and settled in Aleppo, where he received a warm welcome from the city’s
ruler, Malik Zahir. Sohravardi’s philosophical thoughts, expressed in
the wake of Gazali’s harsh criticism of philosophy, as well as his novel
ideas, careless statements, and persuasive power offended the
sensibilities and incited the jealousy of other clerics. Malik Zahir’s
intercession was of no use, and in the year 587/1191, at the age of 36,
Sohravardi was executed in prison, ostensibly for heresy but more likely
due to political reasons.

History indicates that Sohravardi manifested both philosophical and
mystical tendencies from a very young age. In his treatise*Fi halat
al-tufuliyyah* (“On the State of Childhood”), he speaks of his own
spiritual journey and the light and knowledge he received during his
childhood under the guidance of his spiritual master. He was a person of
seclusion and asceticism (*zuhd* ) who spent extensive time in prayer.

Sohravardi produced around fifty works, and his masterpiece is
considered to be*Hikmat al-ishraq* (“Illuminative Wisdom”). This book
contains Sohravardi’s philosophical views and spiritual findings and is
the primary text of reference in Illuminationist Philosophy. It covers
both the discursive and the visionary dimensions of Sohravardi’s
philosophy. Sohravardi claimed that this book was given to him by the
angel Gabriel in a single instant, saying that without guiding light
from this angel the book cannot be understood by the reader. In order to
study this book one must refer to a vicar of God (*khalifat Allah* ) who
has the knowledge contained in this book.  In addition, before reading
this work one should live an ascetic lifestyle of purification for 40
days (2/259).[^2] The book covers logic, metaphysics or the science of
light, angelology, cosmology, psychology, and eschatology from an
Illuminationist viewpoint. It is impossible to summarize Sohravardi’s
philosophy in this article. My intention instead is to briefly examine
Sohravardi’s epistemology. Before beginning this examination it is
necessary to talk a little about the nature of what is called
Illuminationist Philosophy.


