Illuminationist Philosophy
==========================

Prior to the appearance of Illuminationist Philosophy, peripatetic
philosophy, represented by thinkers such as Farabi, Ibn Sina, and Ibn
Rushd, was the dominant philosophy in the Islamic world. Peripatetic
philosophy is rooted in speculative reason and Aristotelian syllogistic
logic and marginalizes or pays no attention to mystical ideas and
experiences.  Mystics/Sufis of that era rejected reason or at least did
not relied upon reason and logic, emphasizing instead the spiritual
journey and immediate vision (*shuhud* ) of reality. Ghazali’s harsh
attack on philosophy is an example of the struggle against philosophy
that existed in this era; this attack went far in the weakening or
destruction of philosophy among Sunni Muslims.

Sohravardi, inspired by Islamic teachings on the importance of both
reason and spirituality and benefiting from the philosophical and
mystical heritages of Islamic culture and other ancient traditions such
as those of Greek and Persia, attempted to revive and reconstruct a
system of wisdom which in his view was one with the perennial wisdom of
prophets and sages. He revived an intellectual-spiritual tradition that
prophets and sages such as Zoroaster, Hermes (or Idris, the father of
wisdom), Pythagoras, Agathadimon, Asklepios , Empedocles, Socrates and
Plato had taught, synthesizing their teachings and the teachings of
Muslim philosophers and mystics as well as the Quran and Hadith and
Muslim philosophers and mystics into one unique system.

According to Sohravardi, this wisdom had always been present among
ancient nations including Indians, Persians, Babylonians, Egyptians and
Greeks until the time of Plato, as well as among Sufis in the Islamic
world. Through Greek philosophers this wisdom came to Zulnon Mesri and
Sahl al-Tusturi, and from Zoroaster and other Persian sages like
Keyumarth, Feraydun, Keykhosrov, Jamasb, and Bozorgmehr it came to Sufis
such as Bayazid Bastami and Hallaj. Finally these two traditions joined
together in the person of Sohravardi.

Sohravardi did not accept rationalistic thinking in isolation or the
domination of Aristotelian philosophy; therefore his philosophy is in
part a criticism of peripatetic philosophy. However he did not deny all
aspects of this philosophy; rather he accepted many of its principles.
He himself was a master on peripatetic philosophy, and some of his works
are devoted to explaining this philosophy. He was even to some extent
influenced by Ibn Sina in his discovery of Illuminationist Philosophy
and use of symbolic language. However, the founding of Illuminationist
Philosophy in the Islamic world can be attributed to none other than
Sohravardi, for Ibn Sina’s Oriental Wisdom (*al-hikmat al-mashriqiyyah*
) is not substantially different from peripatetic philosophy.

Illuminationist Wisdom is a wisdom that is given to the worthy souls,
whether these individuals are found in the East or West. Thus some Greek
philosophers are Illuminationist, even though the source of this wisdom
is in the East. This wisdom, or theosophy, is true philosophy.  Reason
is important, but the key to obtaining true knowledge is found in the
purification of heart. Illuminationist Wisdom unifies rational/natural

theology, historical/revealed theology, and the mystical theology of the
Islamic tradition into one system, which is nourished both by reason and
by the religious/mystical life. This wisdom is not limited to certain
individuals or nations; rather its door is open to all who travel this
path.

In this view, wisdom is defined as assimilation with God to the extent
that this is possible for human beings to attain. Assimilation is
accomplished through constant effort, by disobeying the dictates of the
passions, detaching oneself from that which is other than God and by
seeking knowledge. As a cold bit of iron can become white-hot by being
in fire, a human being can become enlightened by being proximate to the
source of light and become wise by drawing near to the Absolute Wise. As
the prophet Mohammad said: “He who worships Allah sincerely for forty
days, the springs of wisdom flow from his heart to his tongue.”

Illuminationist Wisdom is centered on light and marginalizes darkness.
Sohravardi strongly rejects Manichean dualism and polytheism (2/111).
His sources are the teachings of the prophets, and he refers extensively
to the verses of the Quran. The concept of light and its opposite,
darkness, is frequently mentioned in the Quran. The most famous verse in
this regard is the Light Verse, which says: “Allah is the light of
heavens and earth” (al-Nur: 34). Another verse talks about the
illumination of earth by the light of God (al-Zumar: 69). In many verses
light is used as a symbol for wisdom, knowledge, guidance, life,
insight, revelation, and luminosity, which are set in apposition to
ignorance, darkness, death, blindness, deviation, etc.


