Sense Perception
================

The forth step in Sohravardi’s epistemology is that sensory perception
is one of the sources of knowledge. Our senses are our means to knowing
the physical world. Sohravardi maintains that sensory perception is
innate knowledge (fitri) and the foundation of our knowledge of the
external world (2/104). We know physical objects only by our senses.
There are five external senses (the senses of touch, hearing, sight,
taste, and smell) and five internal senses (sensus communis “*al-hiss
al-mushtarak* ”, fantasy “*khiyal* ”, apprehension, which is the sense
that feels particular inner meanings “*wahm* ”, imagination
“*mutakhayyilah* ”, and memory “*hafizah* ”). However, he holds that
there is no reason that the number of senses should be limited to ten
(3/27-31 and 2/203, 208).

One of the sensory perceptions is visual perception (*ibsar/ru’yah* ).
Here Sohravardi departs from the peripatetic tradition and says that
seeing is a kind of knowledge by presence. When seeing, the soul
connects itself to the object seen and finds it in its presence. He
rejects the theory of intiba’ and the theory of khuruj al-shu’a’.
According to the theory of intiba’, when one sees, a ray of light
radiates from the physical object to the pupil of the eyes in which the
form of the object will be imprinted. The form is then reflected in the
sensus communis, before being seen by the soul. According to the theory
of *khuruj al-shu’a’* , one sees an object when a ray of light from the
eyes radiates on the external object in a conic way. However, Sohravardi
says that seeing occurs in neither of these two ways - that nothing goes
out from the eyes and nothing comes into the eyes. In his view, vision
takes place through the illumination of the eyes on the physical object
when it is in front of the eyes. When the luminous object is in front of
the eye and there is no barrier between them, the soul will embrace it
and see it by illumination (2/99, 34 and 1/486).


