Rational Perception
===================

The fifth step in Sohravardi’s theory of knowledge is the recognition of
rational perception (*idrak al-‘aqli* ). Sensory and imaginary
perceptions are particular perceptions and belong to senses and memory,
but rational perception is the function of reason/intellect and is
abstract and universal. Sohravardi believed in Plato’s Ideal World, but
his interpretation of universals is Aristotelian (2/15, 160). Sohravardi
argues that universals cannot exist in reality, for anything that truly
exists must be particular and distinguished from other things (2/17).
Universality attributed to ideas or arbab al-anwa’ is not conceptual and
logical universality (2/160); rather this universality is existential
and inclusive.

Sohravardi distinguishes two types of universal concepts: general
concepts of quiddities (al-mahiyyat), such as concepts like “human
being” and “horse,” and abstract concepts, such as concepts like
“existence” and “contingency.” The former have individual instances in
reality, but the latter are only in mind; they are second intentions
(2/64-73). Therefore, the concept of existence is a mental concept with
no reality in the external world. If we suppose that the concept of
existence has reality outside the mind, then we must say that existence
has existence; the same is true with regards to the existence of
existence. Hence, if we suppose that existence exists, it leads to an
infinite regress. Therefore, existence is only i’tibari, a mental
construct (1/348). On the bases of this argument Sohravardi holds the
priority of quiddity/essence over existence (*asalat al-mahiyyah* ).

Sohravardi gives two criteria for distinguishing mentally constructed
concepts from that which is real. His first criterion is that “anything
whose existence in the external world necessitates the repetition of its
species, i.e., leads to infinite regress, must exist only in the mind
and not in the external world.” His second criterion is that “every
attribute which is impossible to separate it from its subject is
constructed by mind” (1/22, 24 and 2/69). We must distinguish between
real attributes and mental attributes of things; whiteness and blackness
are real, but attributes like contingency and substantiality are only in
the mind.

Four centuries later another Iranian philosopher, Sadr al-Din Shirazi,
criticized this argument and established the theory of the priority of
existence (*asalat al-wujud* ) over essence. In his analysis, Shirazi
makes a distinction between the concept and the reality of existence. He
holds that it is essential for existence to be real and that the reality
of existence is an external reality by itself not through another
existence. Here we must distinguish between logical concepts which are
only in minds and philosophical concepts which describe external reality
(see Secondary Intelligible, chapter 2).


