Logic
=====

Since Illuminationist Philosophy accepts rational thinking, it gives
importance to logic and considers it the method employed in rational
thinking. Therefore, in his major works Sohravardi deals with logic. In
his view, all our knowledge is not self-evident. We are unaware of many
things that it is possible to know, and we learn some things which were
previously unknown to us. Nor, however, is all our knowledge acquired.
In order to acquire knowledge we need some basic self-evident knowledge.
Therefore, some of our knowledge is self-evident and some of it is
acquired. Logic is a discipline that shows how to increase our knowledge
through deducing what is unknown from what is known. Furthermore, it
teaches us how to avoid fallacies. In discussing different aspects of
logic Sohravardi criticized peripatetic philosophers and put forth some
novel ideas.

According to peripatetic epistemology, definition is the only way of
knowing general non-self-evident concepts. Through self-evident concepts
we define unknown concepts. The best definition in this view is what is
called a complete definition (*al-hadd al-tamm* ) and is comprised of
both genera and differentia. The genus is the general essential property
and the differentia is the specific essential property of an essence.
Sohravardi criticizes the Aristotelian theory of definition (2/18-21),
asking how someone can find the differentia of a thing if he/she does
not know its reality. Furthermore, he asks, how can we make sure that we
have isolated all essentials of a given thing? Thus, many definitions
that philosophers have offered are inadequate. For example, they define
substance only negatively. Simple realities such as the soul and
immaterial objects do not have known differentia. Definition by
necessary properties (*lawazim* ) is difficult as well. How can we know
these properties? Defining them through other necessary properties leads
to infinite regress.

In order to construct a useful definition of a thing, maintains
Sohravardi, one must list the qualities (*sifat* ) that together define
the subject. An example of this would be defining a bat with the phrase
“the bird that gives birth.” We know these qualities by sense and
intuition. Thus, not only essential concepts but also qualities or
attributes are also useful in defining something. Not everything is
composed of genera and differentia - accidents are one such example. For
example, color is a non - composite accident (*‘arad al-basit* ) which
cannot be defined by genera and differentia. The Aristotelian theory of
definition is not applicable in cases such as this (2/73). But according
to Sohravardi, these non-composed realities are known immediately by the
senses, and composed objects are known by knowing their parts. Some
realities are known only by intuition or illumination.


