Illuminative Knowledge
======================

The sixth step in Sohravardi’s epistemology is achieving illuminative
knowledge. As mentioned above, according to Sohravardi, we know the
material world through our external senses. We know mental and abstract
phenomena through reason and on the basis of self-evident truths,
universal concepts and logical rules. How then can we know immaterial
and spiritual realities? Sohravardi holds that we can know these
realities through internal vision. On the basis of knowledge by presence
and through the purification and cleansing of the heart one can attain
this kind of vision. Knowledge by presence in mystical knowledge and
internal vision plays a similar role to self-evident truths in
speculative knowledge; purification and piety has a function comparable
to the laws of logic. In a sense, mystical knowledge of immaterial
realities is the expansion and deepening of knowledge by presence.

In Illuminationist Philosophy knowledge is light. This accords with the
hadith that says: “Knowledge is a light that God puts in the heart of
whomever He wills.” Light is evident in itself and illuminates other
things (2/113). Nothing is clearer than light, therefore, light does not
need any definition (2/106). As light has different degrees of
intensity, so knowledge is of varying degrees. Sensory perception is one
degree of this light, and discursive knowledge and mystical knowledge
are other degrees. The human soul is an immaterial light due to its own
self-knowledge, for whatever has self-knowledge is an immaterial light
(2/110). Therefore, the soul, like any other immaterial being, is light;
and this is the reason why it is fascinated by seeing light and hates
darkness.

To the Illuminationist philosopher mystical vision is the best path to
the truth, even though discursive method is valid in its own right. In
Sohravardi’s visionary dream, Aristotle told him that people of vision
such as Plato, Bayazid Bastami and Sahl al-Tusturi were true sages and
that he preferred them over rationalistic philosophers (1/70-74).
Sensory data is the basis for scientific theories  (astronomers, for
example, use sensory data to study the stars), and the spiritual
observations of mystics are likewise valid and serve as the foundation
for illuminative wisdom and mystical knowledge of trans-physical
realities.

Shahrzouri, a commentator of Sohravardi’s Illuminative Wisdom, says that
science is of two kinds: knowledge by spiritual taste (*dhouqi* ) and
discursive knowledge (*bahthy* ). Knowledge by taste is the direct
vision of immaterial realities, not through thinking, argument and
definition, but through illuminative lights and God’s grace following
purification; and this was the way of the sages before Aristotle. This
wisdom weakened and disappeared with the post-Aristotelian philosophers,
since Aristotle engaged them with discussions and quarrels. In addition,
other factors, particularly the desire for superiority, prevented them
from paying attention to this kind of wisdom (2/5).

Real wisdom is seeing and reaching the Upper World through ascending and
connecting to archetypes of humanity through the archangel Gabriel. This
wisdom comes from the world of holiness for those who are deserving and
enter this world. The illumination of holy lights envelops the wayfarer

sage and makes him unaware of himself. This is the eternal holy wisdom
which is the foundation of all of mankind’s genuine traditions of
wisdom. Sohravardi claims that in a revelatory rapture he witnessed the
world of light and luminous essences which was the very world that
Plato, Zoroaster and Keykhosrov had witnessed.

Only through works of devotion, casting off of worldly attachments, and
living a mystical and religious life can one achieve this wisdom. This
disengagement from worldly charms must be cultivated to such an extent
that one not only liberates himself from low appetites but also is
easily able to escape from the bonds of his/her corporeal frame.
Sohravardi believed that Plato had this ability and maintained that the
one who is not capable of escaping his/her body whenever he/she wishes
does not deserve to be called a sage (1/113, 503). One must become
similar to the world of lights and spirits in order to be able to
witness them. The material world is the realm of darkness, and real
knowledge is not found there. Therefore, in order to seek knowledge one
must leave this world and migrate to the world of lights. These
realities can be known only by inner senses, and these senses are only
enlivened when one turns away from this world. When one does this, one
witnesses the Divine lights and embarks on a journey which has no end.

Sohravardi gives five practical suggestions for the wayfarer on this
journey: (1. fasting and experiencing hunger, for all calamity is from
overeating; (2. wakefulness in the night; (3. remembrance of God and
recollection of His names by the tongue, heart and whole being; (4.
following a spiritual guide (*murshid/peer* ) who guides and observes
the practices of the wayfarer; (5. acquiring moral virtues such as
truthfulness, compassion and sincerity (3/396-401). Truths will be seen
and the gateways of heaven opened for the one who practices these
disciplines.

According to Sohravardi, the human soul is light and acquires proximity
to the source of light and gains more light through obedience and
journeying along the Path. Subsequently the wayfarer’s knowledge and
being reach perfection, for knowledge and being are the same. Since God
is the source of all lights (nur al-anwar) and is the most intensive
light, His knowledge is all-encompassing and infinite.

Salvation/happiness is a result of the spiritual journey, inward purity
and the cleansing of the heart from vice and pollution. Through these
things, the Divine eternal light illuminates the soul and covers it with
His everlasting blessing. Enveloped by this light, one gains happiness
and cheerfulness, and things come under his control. His prayers will be
heard, and he receives healing power. The higher stages of this
experience bring an indescribable peace and tranquility that is called
sakinah in the Quran. At these stages one hears delicate voices from
paradise and gains certainty of heart (*al-yaqin* ) (3/314-332).

Sages and Sufis are those who found true wisdom and arrived at the
source of light. They are cut off from the world, liberated from
disturbing memories and always remember God. They pray through the
night, recite the Quran and enjoy subtle thoughts, continuing in their
practice of obedience until they receive divine light and peace and
experience the state of annihilation and eventually double annihilation
(1/111-114).

Beginners on this journey receive transient light and joy, those who are
midway along the path enjoy permanent light and joy and achieve
knowledge of unseen, and those who have attained the goal entered
through the gate into the luminous chamber, seeing all of the world of
lights and receiving the annihilating light (1/50, and 2/252-254).

From the standpoint of his Illuminationist view, Sohravardi introduces
four groups of sages/philosophers. The highest sage is the one who is
perfect in both rational and mystical wisdom. He is the qutb (pole), the
Imam, and spiritual leader, which gives him the right to have
external/social leadership as well. He is the perfect man and the proof
of God. Beneath him is the one who is master of mystical wisdom and
mediator of rational philosophy. Then is the one who is master in
mystical wisdom though not a person of rational philosophy. The earth is
never without such a person. The lowest is the one who is expert in
rational philosophy but not in mystical wisdom. This group of people
does not deserve spiritual and social leadership. History’s best times
are when a man of God has leadership and its worse times are when such a
person does not have leadership (2/11-12).

Reason is imperfect without mystical vision, but it is useful as an
introduction to mystical wisdom and protects one from being misled on
the spiritual journey (1/361). Therefore, Sohravardi’s Illuminationist
Wisdom starts with logic. Logic, however, is not the goal: vision is
stronger than reason. The mystical way of life is necessary, for without
it mystical vision is impossible (3/317). Sohravardi claims that his
philosophy was formed through mystical revelation, not through reason,
and that only later did he rationalize and systematize it, mainly for
the sake of others (2/1).

Sohravardi divides reality into two realms which he calls variously
light and darkness, the realms of knowledge and ignorance, and presence
and absence. God is pure light, and the physical world is the realm of
darkness. The human body belongs to the world of darkness, and the soul
belongs to the world of light. In this life the soul is in the
cage/prison of body and far from its homeland. Its happiness lies in
shedding itself of the body and returning to its real home. By living a
spiritual life and detaching oneself from material concerns one becomes
able to fly from the Occident of matter to the Orient of light (2/252
and 3/107). The Illuminationist sage attempts to become independent of
his/her body before death, transferring itself into the realm of light
and attaining salvation.

One of the characteristics of Illuminative Philosophy is the extensive
use of symbolic language. In some of his writings, especially some of
his Persian works, Sohravardi presents his philosophy through symbolic
narratives. In his Risalat al-tayr and Safir-i simurgh he talks about
spiritual flying; in Qissat al-ghurbat al-gharbiyyah, the spiritual
leader Hadi Ibn Khayr-i Yamani guides the lost wayfarer. In ‘Aql-i surkh
he speaks of a hawk that soars into the heavens, seeing wonders and
becoming aware of the secrets of Qaf mountain. In*Ruzi ba jama’at-i
sufiyan* as well Sohravardi teaches the principles of journey towards
wisdom, truth and light, and in fi haqiqat al ‘ishq he writes of the
presence of love in all things.


