Imaginal World
==============

In regards to the hierarchy of being, Sohravardi divides reality into
four realms: 1) the world of sovereignty*(‘alam al-jabarut* ) or
intellects (al-‘uqul), 2) the world of celestial and human souls*(‘alam
al-malakut* ), 3) the imaginal world*(‘alam al-muthul* ), and 4) the
material world (‘alam al-mulk), which includes the spheres and the
physical elements.

Sohravardi claims that he unveiled these worlds through a genuine
mystical experience. The most important of these realms in regards to
our present purposes is the third realm, the imaginal world (or mondus
imaginalis, as Henry Corbin has called it). This realm is one of
Sohravardi’s great contributions to spiritual cosmology, and he calls it
by various names including*nakuja abad* (Utopia, or “Land of nowhere”).
It is a world of wonders where the mysterious cities of Jabulqa, Jabulsa
and Huvarqalya are located.

This theory of the imaginal world is one of the essential elements of
Sohravardi’s philosophy on which many of his epistemological and
cosmological views are based. The imaginal realm, which is beyond
matter, time and place, is the realm of immaterial forms and it is the
origin of the forms and shapes of the material objects. Objects in this
world have form and shape, but not material content. Mirror images,
imaginary forms, and the images in dreams as well as those of genies and
devils, belong to this world. Only those souls who follow the ascetic
life, pass the mysterious cosmic mountain of Qaf and find enlightenment
are able to experience this world. The imaginal realm is a real world
and should be distinguished from the realm of images which exists only
in the human mind. By creative imagination we can apprehend the imaginal
world.

Sohravardi’s imaginal world must also be distinguished from the ideal
world of Plato. Plato’s Ideas are unchangeable luminous realities,
whereas Sohravardi’s forms are without substance and have manifestations
in the material world. Sohravardi explains resurrection, formal visions
and the miracles of saints in terms of this world (2/229-235).

In summation, Sohravardi, like other philosophers, accepts self-evident
truths, sensory perception and the principles of logic as foundations of
speculative thinking and thus accepts speculative philosophy. However,
he sees knowledge by presence as the key of solving the problem of human
knowledge and gives a new interpretation of sensory perception and of
some principles of logic. He maintains that speculative philosophy is
valid but insufficient, and like mystics believes that purification of
heart, attention to God and pious living is the only way to achieve
experiential knowledge and ultimate salvation and happiness. Thus he
offers a comprehensive epistemology in which human beings by the help of
their primordial awareness, sensory perceptions, reason, purification,
and illumination can attain knowledge of self, the world and God,
thereby achieving perfection. On the basis of this epistemology he
offers a vision of the world that is comprised of different realms.
Above and beyond the world is God, who is absolute light. Farthest from
this source of light, at the lowest level of the world, is the physical
world. Between these two are other realms of reality, which benefit from
the light according to their proximity to its source.

Human beings, through the wisdom and obedience, can ascend from the dark
world of nature up towards the worlds of light.


