The First Example Some Examples of Slanders Against Shi’ites
============================================================

After this introduction I will get into the essential idea at which I
aim. I.e giving some examples of what had been attributed to shi’ites in
order to expel them from Islam, alienating moslems from them, and to
finish them off. I will confine to three examples to be taken as
criterion by which so many of what has been attributed to shi’ites can
be compared:

The first example: The slander of saying that Quran is distorted.

The Holy Quran is Allah’s revealed speech which includes no vain at
all, it is the source of our civilization and constitution, it is the
well spring from which the nation drinks, it has a sacredness at the
heart of evry moslem which cann’t be equated by anything.

As it is the main source of islamic legislation to which all other
sources end the moslim can not be sure of the soundness of “Ahkaam” with
saying that perversion has come over it, as additions or decrease or
playing with its words and sentences (we have revealed Quran and we
preserve it), because of this dignity evry moslem feels towards Quran so
every sect or group says that there is a perversion in Quran they will
be considered as a strange body or organ in the structure of the nation,
they will be the place of indignation.

For that reason the first thing the kitchens of rule had cooked and
asked their agents to market it was attributting the view of distortion
in the Holy Quran to shi’ites, we shall see soon the verity of this
attribution and what sunnis say in this concern in order that the
trueness of what was attributed to shi’ites becomes clear.

Our jurisprudents and explainers have concured to disavow this
attribution, to refute this slander in more than one of the source books
of shi’ites so that you don’t come acroos a book of shi’ites which deals
with the subjects and sciences of Quran without finding a research in
which he refutes Quran distortion.

As it is not my aim here to inspect what has been written I only want
to direct reader to some of the resources which explain Imameiah’s
viewpoint plainly, in a sufficient amount to prove so I mention what
satisfies the occasion:

The viewpoint of shi’ites public is that Quran is protected from
distortion of any kind of addition or deficiency in its beginning until
its end, circulated among moslems, one can be sure of that by turning to
the introduction of “Tefseer El-Tebian by Sheikh Al-Toosi, and the
introduction of Mejmeaelbaian by Tebressi,

and “keshfel kheta’a” by Sheikh Ja’afar in the chapter of Quran, and
“ha’kul yakeen” by Muhsin Feiz kashani, “A’ala’ arrehmaan” by sheikh
Mohammad Jawad elbalaghi, “Albaian” by seied Abul Qasim Khuei that was
the view point of Mufeed, Behaei and Khazzi rather it is the viewpoint
of All our researchers, as to what Is attributed to Alsheikh Al-kuleini
in his book “Alkaafei” he mentions some narrations which state that
there is perversion in Quran he himself controverts them, that is
assured by the foolowing matters:

1) The Hadeeths which give the impression of mentioning perversion
stated by Alkuleini are cited by him in the chapter of uncommon
Hadeeths, the meaning of uncommon Haddiths is the odd Hadeeths which are
not considered in practice, an odd Hadeeth when it contradicts with the
Book and sunneh or when it is right in itself but it is opposed with
another narration which is more common among narrators than it,

it is not considered, this is what our scholars adopt in the chapter of
“Alta’adul waltarajeeh” since the narration of wrench contradicts with
the Book and sunneh and it is contrasted with a more common and
acceptable narration it is not put into effect.

2) It is stated in the issue of distinction between right and wrong
narration that the narration is compared with the Book and sunneh if it
agrees with them it is accepted, if it doesn’t it is discounted, and
this is an evidence that those narrations are disregarded but they were
narrated just as Bukhaari and Moslem have narrated the informations of
alteration.

3) He stated the narration of Sa’adel Kheir in Rawzatel kafee”, it
denies frankly any shortage in Quran, as AlBaqir (A.S) said to Sa’adel
Khair: (one aspect of their casting off the Book was that they protected
its letters and wasted or violated its laws) and it is clear of the
completeness of the letters of Quran.

4) It is not necessary that the narrator who states a naration accepts
its purport as it is stated in different branches of sciences.

This is only a mere sammurized idea about the distortion of the Holy
Book and shi’ites attitude towards that, it is very plain, we have many
evidences stating that shi’ites don’t say that Quran is distorted,
rather those who maintain distortion in Quran in the meaning of addition
or dimination other than shi’ites.

As for distortion in the meaning of altering the meaning of words,
verses, and the reasons of revealation, shi’ites have a frank viewpiont
in this concern, they say that distortion in this meaning has taken
place by many narrators and explainers for unhidden motives.

We, after that, return to the viewpoint of a group of Ahlulsuneh who
say that there is a decrease in Quran (according to their resources):

It is strange that those who say that there are diminutions in Quran
are Ahlilsunneh their views are frank about the decrease in the Quran
which is circulated among moslems to day disregarding whether they
consider the corollaries of this view or not – they got as in the habit
of adopting the view without complying with its corollaries, here is not
the place of proving that, it has another place and research, we may
deal with it in another occasion, I say that their views about that are
frank but they charge others with it as we shall see in the coming
examples.

Let as review some of their views concerning their professing
distortion in Quran, these are merely examples as to that who wants more
details we shall refer to some of their resources:

1 – Al-sayoti stated in his book “Aletkhan Fi U’lum el Quran” in the
chapter dealing with the numbers of surahs, words, and letters of Quran
some narrations cited from the Caliph Au’mer Ibn el Khattab as saying
“the letters of Quran are a thoausand thoausands and twenty seven
thousands letters.

And Al-Tabarani stated that in a confident title with reference to Umar
bin Al-khattab.

2 – The Author of “kenzelu’maal” narrated, from Zer Ibn Hubbeish” as
saying: Aubei said to me: “O, Zer how do you read “Suretel Ahzaab” I
replied 73 verses, he said: it has been equal to “Suret el Bakarah” or
it had been longer than it.

The significance of these two narrations is that according to the
caliph’s narrations, the present number of the letters of Quran are less
than third of the original number, and the significance of the second
narration is that the actual “suretel Ahzab” is athird of the revealed
sureh”.

3 – Ahlil sunneh stated that the two surehs of “Alhafid walkhale’a” are
of the short surahs of Quran that were not cited in Quran, the caliph
Aumer Ibn elKhattab, these two missed short surehs has been read by him
when he submisses to Allah in his prayer, they are as follows: (O Lord
we depend on you and ask your forgiveness, ealogize you,

we don’t disbelieve in you, we take off and leave who disbelieve in
you) (O Lord we worship you, pray to you and kneel, strive to you, we
hope your mercy and fear your wrath, your torture will befall
disbelievers) look up Alsayouti, the chapter of the nmuber of suras He
narrated that from different ways. Although these two surahs are not in
Quran.([^1])

4 - Ahmed Ibn Henbel stated in his “Mesned” in the first volume,
narrating from Ibn Abbas Quoting Aumer Ibnel Khattab saying: Allah had
sent Mohammad (s.w.a) by right and revealed to him alkitaab”, Ayatel
rejem”.

“Do not be away from your fathers, it is infidelity on you to be away
from your fathers”.

So the prophet threw stones and we threw after him we had been reading
(wala terkhebo an A’abaeikum En kefera bek up Anter khebu an
A’abaeikum”, this verse is not in Quran.([^2])

5) Alsayuuti stated in “Aletkhan” narrated from nafe’a from Ibn Aumer:
Anyone of you must not say that I have taken (read) all the Quran as he
doesn’t know what is the whole Quran, so much of Quran has been
wasted.

But let him say I have taken what remained, appeared.([^3]) As it was
narrated from A’aeisha the prophet’s wife she said: The sureh of Ahzaab
had been read at the prophet’s time two handred verses, when Authmaan
wrote Qurans we did not read of it but what we read now, these two
narrations are very frank.

6)Imam Moslem narrated in his “Seheeh” in the third volume from Abiherb
Ibn eabi elaswad from Abamous’al asha’ari, said to readers of Basrah: we
had been reading a sureh like sureh Barra’h in length and violence, I
for got it but I memorized of it, if man has two vallies of possessions
he would seek a third valley, nothing can fill man’s abdomen but dust,
we had been reading a sureh we likened it to one of “almusebbehat” I
forgot it but I memorized of it,

o believers why do you say what you don’t practice, as it is written as
a witness against you and you will be liable for it in the day of
resurrection” nothing of these two surehs or “Aayeh” he cited is there
in Quran, they are wasted according to his views, this is in addition to
what we presented of examples.

The way Quran has been collected and written as it is narrated by
Ahlisunneeh, their belife that its Telawa (recitation) abolishes some
verses of Quran whether “Hukum” Abrogated or not, all that results in
believing that Quran has been distorted t.e, it has decrements.

7- Ibn Majeh narrated from A’aeish the prophet’s wife as saying: the
verse of pelting with stones and the verse of nursing baby until ten
were revealed, these verses were written on a leaf under my bed stead,
when the prophet died we were busy with his death, a poultry entered and
ate it, this is also narrated by Al-Dumeiri in his book “Hayaat el
Haiwan” in “Daajin” Our scholars elaborated in many of their books on
discussing those who accept distortion in Quran and refuted their
views,

one can look up the resources we mentioned, inspite of all that we
illustrated only some examples, we have other resources enough to
compose books and books in Ahlilsunneh and their professing to
distortion but in spite of all that as we stated slanders don’t stop at
a limit rather it is continous following the proverb “she accused me of
what she has and went.

I believe that what we write and explain to refute these slanders
doesn’t benefit but so little of those objective faithful persons who
are searching for truths, as to the majority of our people aren’t truth
seekers, they insist on falsitude and wrangling to the limit of calling
sun as the black stone but our comfort is that we present our effort to
that who searches for truth, may Allah benefit by it whom he wishes.

([^1]) Aletqan fi U’ulum el Quran: 1/ 143.

([^2]) Mesned Ibn Hanbel 1/58, Dar of kutub al elmera beirut 1993.

([^3]) Aletkhan 2/52.


