Precedence and Priority
=======================

In Nahj al-Balaghah this matter has been rationalized on three
principles:

1) The will and designation of the Holy Prophet.

2) The worthiness of Amir al-­Mu’minin, (A.S.) and the fact that the
robe of Caliphate was suitable only for him.  
 3) The close genealogical and spiritual relation that Hazrat had with
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.).

1) Will and Designation
-----------------------

Some reckon that the matter of designation has not been mentioned in
Nahj al-Balaghah at all and what is referred to is only the matter of
competency and worthiness. Such reckoning is incorrect because first of
all, just as it was mentioned in the previous chapter, in Sermon No.2,
‘Ali (A.S.) very explicitly says about Ahl al-Bayt:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ فِيهم الوَصِيَّةُ وَ الْوِراثَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

i.e. *the testament and the inheritance of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A)
are concerning them*.

Secondly, ‘Ali (A.S.) on many occasions has spoken about his right in
such manner that one cannot explain them save by the mailer of
appointment and clarification of his right to the seat of Caliphate by
means of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.). In those talks, ‘Ali (A.S.) does
not wish to say that why they have kept him aside and appointed others
in spite of comprehensiveness of the conditions. By his talks it is
meant that they have robbed his certain and definite right. It is
evident that it is only by designation and previous appointment by the
Holy Prophet that one can speak of certain and definite right.
Competency and worthiness establishes potential right and not actual
right and in the case of potential right it is wrong to speak of
snatching away of certain and decisive right.

Now we shall mention some instances where ‘Ali (A.S.) reckons the
Caliphate to be his just right. For example it is mentioned in sermon
No.6 that at the beginning of his Caliphate when he became aware of the
revolt of Ayesha, Talha and Zubair and decided to confront them, he said
(after mentioning a few points on the current state of affairs) :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَاللهِ مَا زِلتُ مَدْفُوعاً عَنْ حَقِّي، مُسْتَأْثَراً عَلَيَّ،
مُنْذُ قَبَضَ اللهُ تعالى نَبِيَّهُ صلى الله عليه وآله حَتَّى يَوْمِ
النَّاسِ هذَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“By Allah, from the day the Prophet passed away until today, I have
been continually deprived of my right, with others being given
preference to me.”*

In Sermon No.170 which is in effect not a sermon and it would have been
better if Sayyid Razi (may Allah exalt his position) brought it under
the section of maxims of ‘Ali (A.S.), he narrates an incident which is
as follows: ‘­In the presence of some people, a person approached me and
said: “O son of Abu ­Talib! You are greedy of Caliphate.”  
 I replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ أَنْتُمْ وَ اللَّهِ لَأَحْرَصُ وَ أَبْعَدُ وَ أَنَا أَخَصُّ وَ
أَقْرَبُ وَ إِنَّمَا طَلَبْتُ حَقّاً لِي وَ أَنْتُمْ تَحُولُونَ
بَيْنِي وَ بَيْنَهُ وَ تَضْرِبُونَ وَجْهِي دُونَهُ فَلَمَّا
قَرَّعْتُهُ بِالْحُجَّةِ فِي الْمَلَإِ الْحَاضِرِينَ هَبَّ كَأَنَّهُ
بُهِتَ لَا يَدْرِي مَا يُجِيبُنِي بِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Rather, you are,* *by Allah, greedier although more remote, while I am
more suited as well as nearer. I have only demanded it as my right while
you are preventing me from it and turning me away from it.” When I
rebuked him with (my) argument (and proof), he rose up as if bewildered,
not knowing what reply to give me about it.’*

It is not known who the person making such an objection was, and when
this objection was made. Ibn Abi al-Hadeed says:- The person who
objected was Sa’d b. Abi Waqqas and it was on the day of the “Shura”
(Assembly). Thereafter he says: However the Imamiah believe that the
person who objected was Abu ‘Ubaydah and it was on the day of Saqifah.

Following these sentences, it has been mentioned that ‘Ali (A.S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اني استعديك علي قريش و من اعانهم فانهم قطعوا رحمي و صغَّروا عظيم
منزلتي و اجمعوا على منازعتي امرا هولي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah, I seek Thy succor against the Quraysh and those who are
assisting them because they have denied me (the rights of) kinship, have
belittled my high position and are united in opposing me on a matter
(Caliphate) which is my right.”*

Below these sentences, lbn Abi al-Hadeed says:- “Sentences like the
above sentences of ‘Ali based upon grievance against others and the fact
that he has been unjustly deprived of his certain right has been
narrated to the extent of successive transmission and is in conformity
to the views of Imamiah who say that ‘Ali has been appointed by
indisputable designation and nobody had any right to take the seat of
Caliphate under any circumstances.

Ibn Abi al-Hadeed himself is the supporter of ‘Ali’s superiority and
excellence. According to him, inasmuch as the sentences of Nahj
al-­Balaghah impart the purport of the Imam’s priority, it is needless
to explain it. However the above sentence according to him needs to be
justified since it has been stipulated that the Caliphate has been the
special right of ‘Ali (A.S.) and this cannot be conceived but by
appointment and the fact that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) has fixed the
responsibility and clarified the right on behalf of God.

One of the companions of ‘Ali (A.S.) belonging to the tribe of Bani-Asad
asked ‘Ali (A.S.) as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
­ » كيف دفعكم قومكم عن هذا المقام و انتم احق به «
  </p>
</blockquote>

“How is it that your people have deprived you of this station
(Caliphate) whereas you were most worthy of it?”

Amir al-Mu’minin (A.S.) responded to this question and his reply is the
same as what has come down in Sermon No. 160 in Nahj al-Balaghah. ‘Ali
(A.S.) explicitly states that greed and avarice on the one hand and
negligence (of the interests of the people) on the other hand were the
only factors leading to such a situation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
» فانها كانت اثرة شحت عليها نفوس و سخت عنها نفوس آخرين«
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It (the matter of the Caliphate) was an act of appropriation (of
something) for which some became greedy and others relinquished”.*

This question and answer took place during ‘Ali’s Caliphate at the time
when he was involved (in opposition) with Mu’awiya and his wiles. Amir
al-Mu’minin (A.S.) disliked discussion of this matter under such
circumstances. So, before replying, he reproved him saying that every
question has its own appropriate place and time and that it was not
proper to discuss the past at that moment. He told him that the issue of
the day was that of Mu’awiya.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و هلم الخطب في ابن ابي سفيان...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Come now to the affair of Ibn Abi Sufyan (Mu’awiya)…”.*

Anyhow, just as it was his usual temperate method, he did not refrain
from answering and clarifying the past realities. In the Sermon of
Shiqshiqiya, he explicitly says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أرى تراثي نَهباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I witnessed the plundering of my inheritance..”*.  
 It is obvious that by inheritance he did not mean family or kinship
inheritance but spiritual and divine inheritance.

2) Virtue and Superiority
-------------------------

The second issue after the subject of distinct designation and definite
right is the subject of virtue and superiority. This matter too has
repeatedly been mentioned in Nahj al-Balaghah. In the Sermon of
Shiqshiqiya, ‘Ali (A.S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و اما و الله لقد تقمصها ابن ابي قحافة و انه ليعلم ان محلي منها القطب
من الرحي ينحدر عني السيل و لا يرقي الي الطير
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“By Allah, the son of Abu Quhafah (Abu Bakr) dressed himself with it
(the Caliphate) while he certainly knew that my position in relation to
it was the same as the position of the axle in relation to the mill. The
torrent (of knowledge and virtue) flows down from me and birds cannot
rise up to (the loftiness of) my position.”*

In Sermon No.195, he first recalls the level of his submission and faith
towards the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and then recounts his sacrifices and
help in various instances. Thereafter, he narrates the incident of the
demise of the Holy Prophet when his head rested on his chest, and then
mentions the event of giving ‘Ghusl’ (Ablution) to the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) with his own hands while the angels were assisting him in
this work and he could listen to their humming voices and perceive the
manner in which a group amongst them would come and another group
amongst them would depart while sending salutations upon the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.A.). And right until the last moment of the Holy
Prophet’s burial, the murmuring of the angels did not cease reaching
‘Ali’s ears.

After recalling his various special positions - the position of his
submission and belief, (contrary to some of the other companions) his
unequalled sacrifices, his relationship with the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
and the fact that the Holy Prophet breathed his last on his very lap, he
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمن ذا أحق به مني حيًا و ميتًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Thus who has greater rights with him than I, during his life or after
his death?”*

3) Relationship and Lineage
---------------------------

Just as we are aware, moments after the Holy Prophet’s demise, Sa’d b.
‘Ubadah al-Ansari claimed the Caliphate and a group amongst his tribe
gathered around him. Sa’d and his followers chose the place of Saqifah
for this very purpose. However Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and Abu ‘Ubaydah
al-Jarrah reached there and prevented the people from falling for Sa’d
b. ‘Ubadah’s plot and instead took allegiance from the people in Abu
Bakr’s favor.

In this assembly, words were exchanged between the Muhajirin and Ansar
and various factors played their role in determining the ultimate fate
of this gathering.

One of the so-called winning cards, which the Muhajirin and the
supporters of Abu Bakr played, was that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.A.) was
from Quraysh and that they themselves belonged to the Holy Prophet’s
clan. In the commentary of Sermon No.65, Ibn Abi al-Hadeed says:  
 ­  
 ‘Umar addressed the Ansars: “The Arabs will never agree to have you as
the head of the state since the Prophet was not from amongst you.
Certainly the Arabs will not oppose if the Caliphate is allowed to one
in whose house rests the Prophethood .... Who can oppose us in
connection with rulership and inheritance of Muhammad whereas we are his
ones and his relatives.”

Again, just as we are aware, during that very moment, ‘Ali (A.S.) was
fulfilling his personal responsibility of burying the Holy Prophet’s
body. After the termination of this event, ‘Ali (A.S.) enquired from
those present in that gathering about the reasoning put forth by both
the opposite groups and after listening to them he criticized and
rejected the reasoning of both the groups. In this connection, the
sayings of ‘Ali (A.S.) are the same which Sayyid Razi has mentioned in
Sermon No.65.

‘Ali (A.S.) asked: “What did the Ansars say?” They replied: “There
should be one chief from us and one from amongst you.” Amir al-Mu’minin
said: “Why did you not argue that the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) had instructed
that whoever is good amongst the Ansars should be treated well and
whoever is bad he should be forgiven!”

The people said: “What proof is there against them in this?”

Amir al-Mu’minin said: “If the government was (to be) from among them,
there would have been no instruction (to others) for them.” That is,
giving instructions to others about them is proof that the government
belongs to other than them.

Then he said: “What did the Quraysh plead?” The people said: “They
argued that they belong to the lineal tree of the Prophet.” Then Amir
al-Mu’minin said:-

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
احتجوا بالشجرة و اضاعوا الثمرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“They defended themselves with the plea of the tree but neglected the
fruit.”*

­In other words, if the tree indicates true relationship where others
are the branches of that tree and the Prophet is one of those branches,
then Ahl al-bayt of the Prophet are the fruits of those branches.

In Sermon No.160, a part of which was narrated earlier, there is a
repertoire of questioning and answering between one Asadi man and ‘Ali
(A.S.) wherein the latter argues in connection with the matter of
relationship too. His expression is as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما الِاسْتِبْدَادُ عَلَيْنَا بِهَذَا الْمَقَامِ وَ نَحْنُ
الْأَعْلَوْنَ نَسَباً وَ الْأَشَدُّونَ بِالرَّسُولِ الله صلى الله عليه
واله نَوْطاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“As for the predominance over us in this station (of Caliphate), when
we are the loftiest in lineage and the strongest in relationship with
the Messenger of Allah (s)….”*

The reasoning of relationship set forth by ‘Ali (A.S.) is a kind of
logical dispute. Taking into account the fact that others had fixed the
matter of genealogical relationship as the main argument and proof, ‘Ali
(A.S.) would say:

“Leaving aside all other matters like designation, virtue and
worthiness, if we take into consideration the same lineage and
relationship which others wish to rely on, I would still be more worthy
than the other claimants to the seat of Caliphate.”


