8. Were The Sahabah Expecting Abu Bakr’s Reign?
===============================================

Or, was it a sudden affair for them? The Ahl al-Sunnah often insist that
Abu Bakr’s alleged leadership of *salat* was effectively his appointment
by the Prophet, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*, as the first *khalifah*
over the *Ummah*. Normally, if this had been the case, then all of the
Sahabah would have regarded Abu Bakr’s “succession” to the Messenger a
natural process. In fact, every single one of them would have considered
Abu Bakr the *khalifah*-designate; and they all would have been shocked
if he had not become the ruler after Muhammad. However, it seems that
the reverse was the reality. The Sahabah were surprised when they learnt
that Abu Bakr was claiming the *khilafah*. They apparently were not
expecting him to be their next ruler. This is what Imam al-Bukhari (d.
256 H) reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد العزيز بن عبد الله حدثني إبراهيم بن سعد عن صالح عن ابن شهاب
عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله بن عتبة بن مسعود عن ابن عباس قال : كنت أقرئ
رجالا من المهاجرين منهم عبد الرحمن بن عوف فبينما أنا في منزله بمنى وهو
عند عمر بن الخطاب في آخر حجة حجها إذ رجع إلي عبد الرحمن فقال لو رأيت
رجلا أتى أمير المؤمنين اليوم فقال يا أمير المؤمنين هل لك في فلان ؟
يقول لو قد مات عمر لقد بايعت فلانا فوالله ما كانت بيعة أبي بكر إلا
فلتة فتمت فغضب عمر ثم قال إني إن شاء الله لقائم العشية في الناس
فمحذرهم هؤلاء الذين يريدون أن يغصبوهم أمورهم … فجلس عمر على المنبر
فلما سكت المؤذنون قام فأثنى على الله بما هو أهله ثم قال أما بعد … إنه
بلغني قائل منكم يقول والله لو قد مات عمر بايعت فلانا فلا يغترن امرؤ أن
يقول إنما كانت بيعة أبي بكر فلتة وتمت ألا وإنها قد كانت كذلك ولكن الله
وقى شرها وليس فيكم من تقطع الأعناق إليه مثل أبي بكر من بايع رجلا من
غير مشورة من المسلمين فلا يتابع هو ولا الذي تابعه تغرة أن يقتلا وإنه
قد كان من خبرنا حين توفى الله نبيه صلى الله عليه و سلم أن الأنصار
خالفونا واجتمعوا بأسرهم في سقيفة بني ساعدة وخالف عنا علي والزبير ومن
معهما واجتمع المهاجرون إلى أبي بكر فقلت لأبي بكر يا أبا بكر انطلق بنا
إلى إخواننا هؤلاء من الأنصار فانطلقنا نريدهم فلما دنونا منهم لقينا
منهم رجلان صالحان فذكرا ما تمالأ عليه القوم فقالا أين تريدون يا معشر
المهاجرين ؟ فقلنا نريد إخواننا هؤلاء من الأنصار فقالا لا عليكم أن لا
تقربوهم اقضوا أمركم فقلت والله لنأتينهم فانطلقنا حتى أتيناهم في سقيفة
بني ساعدة فإذا رجل مزمل بين ظهرانيهم فقلت من هذا ؟ فقالوا هذا سعد بن
عبادة فقلت ما له ؟ قالوا يوعك فلما جلسنا قليلا تشهد خطيبهم فأثنى على
الله بما هو أهله ثم قال أما بعد فنحن أنصار الله وكتيبة الإسلام وأنتم
معشر المهاجرين رهط وقد دفت دافة من قومكم فإذا هم يريدون أن يختزلونا من
أصلنا وأن يحضنونا من الأمر . فلما سكت أردت أن أتكلم وكنت قد زورت مقالة
أعجبتني أردت أن أقدمها بين يدي أبي بكر وكنت أداري منه بعض الحد فلما
أردت أن أتكلم قال أبو بكر على رسلك فكرهت أن أغضبه فتكلم أبو بكر فكان
هو أحلم مني وأوقر والله ما ترك من كلمة أعجبتني في تزويري إلا قال في
بديهته مثلها أو أفضل منها حتى سكت فقال ما ذكرتم فيكم من خير فأنتم له
أهل ولن يعرف هذا الأمر إلا لهذا الحي من قريش هم أوسط العرب نسبا ودارا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. ‘Abd Allah – Ibrahim b. Sa’d – Salih – Ibn Shihab –
‘Ubayd Allah b. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Utbah b. Mas’ud – Ibn ‘Abbas:

I used to teach *qirat* to some men from the Muhajirun, among them were
‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Awf. So, while I was in his house in Mina, and he was
with ‘Umar b. al-Khattab during the last *Hajj* which he performed, ‘Abd
al-Rahman came to me and said, “If only you had seen a man who came to
Amir al-Muminin today, saying: ‘O Amir al-Muminin! What do you say about
so-and-so? He says, “**When ‘Umar dies, I will pledge allegiance to
so-and-so, for, I swear by Allah, the pledge of allegiance given to Abu
Bakr was nothing but an error and it succeeded**.”’ So, ‘Umar became
angry. Then, he said, *‘Insha Allah*, I will stand before the people
tonight and will warn them against these people who want to usurp their
affairs…”.

So, ‘Umar sat on the pulpit, and when the muezzins became silent, he
stood up. He praised Allah as He deserved. Then he said:

“Now then … **I have been informed that a speaker amongst you says, ‘I
swear by Allah, when ‘Umar dies, I will pledge allegiance to so-and-so.’
One should not deceive oneself by saying that** **the pledge of
allegiance given to Abu Bakr was an error** **and it succeeded.** **NO
DOUBT, IT WAS SURELY LIKE THAT. However, Allah saved from its EVIL**.
And there is none amongst you towards whom throats are slit like Abu
Bakr. **Whosoever pledges allegiance to anyone without consultation with
the Muslims, then neither that person nor the person to whom the pledge
of allegiance was given, is to be supported. Rather, they both should be
killed**.

And, verily, there was someone who informed us when Allah took the life
of His Prophet, peace be upon him, that **the Ansar opposed us and
gathered, all of them,** **at Saqifah Bani Sa’idah; and ‘Ali, al-Zubayr
and whoever was with them both, also opposed us; and the Muhajirun
gathered towards Abu Bakr**.

.
So, I said to Abu Bakr, ‘O Abu Bakr! Let us go to these brothers of
ours from the Ansar’. As a result, we went, seeking them. When we
approached them, two righteous men from them met us, and informed us of
the final decision of the people, and both of them said, ‘O group of
Muhajirun, where are you going?’ Then, we said, ‘We are going to these
brothers of ours from the Ansar.’ They said, ‘You should not go near
them. Decide your affair.’ So, I said, ‘I swear by Allah, we will go to
them.’ Therefore, we went until we reached them at Saqifah Bani Sa’idah.
There was a wrapped man amongst them. Then, I said, ‘Who is that?’ They
said, ‘This is Sa’d b. ‘Ubadah.’ Then, I said, ‘What is wrong with him?’
They said, ‘He is sick.’

After we had sat for a little period, their speaker testified. He
praised Allah as He deserved. Then, he said, ‘Now then, we are the Ansar
(Helpers) of Allah and the battalion of Islam, and you Muhajirun are a
small group. Some people from your people have come, seeking to cut us
off from our root and to prevent us from authority.’ When he became
silent, I intended to talk and I had prepared a speech which I really
loved. I intended to deliver it in the presence of Abu Bakr, and I used
to avoid provoking him. So, when I wanted to speak, Abu Bakr said, ‘Wait
a while’, and I hated to make him angry.

Therefore, Abu Bakr spoke, and he was more patient and more dignified
than I was. I swear by Allah, he did not miss a sentence that I really
loved from my prepared speech, except that he said the like of it or
better than it spontaneously, until he fell silent. So, he said, ‘What
you stated about yourself in terms of good things, you truly deserve it.
**And this authority will never be recognized except for this living
person from Quraysh. They are the best of the Arabs in terms of lineage
and family**.’”[^1]

‘Umar, who told his staunchly pro-Abu Bakr version of what happened,
nonetheless gives us insights into the state of the *Ummah* immediately
after the death of its Prophet. The Sahabah were divided into three
political camps:

(a) the camp of Abu Bakr and his supporters;

(b) the camp of ‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*, supported by al-Zubayr, and
their supporters; and

(c) the camp of the Ansar.

The Ansar held the military advantage, being the overwhelming majority
of the Islamic soldiers. The Muhajirun were only a small group, with
little or no numerical or military significance. Yet, they were
nonetheless divided into the opposing camps of Abu Bakr and ‘Ali. What
we get from all this, is that the Ansar – who had numerical and military
strength – were united while the Muhajirun – despite their serious
numerical and military disadvantages – were divided.

Naturally, whoever controlled the Ansar would hold the real political
and military powers. ‘Umar was well aware of this. Therefore, instead of
going to the camp of ‘Ali to resolve the political dispute, he took the
party of Abu Bakr to the Ansar, to try to win them over. Moreover,
looking at the arguments of Abu Bakr against the Ansar, one understands
fully why he would never have gone to ‘Ali anyway, even if the latter
had had the numerical and military advantages. Abu Bakr argued on the
strengths of lineage and family. The tribe of Quraysh were of the best
human lineage, and they were the best family. So, the Muslims –
especially those in other parts of Arabia – would never recognize the
rule of a *khalifah* from the Ansar. This tactic was clearly to make the
Ansar see the futility of their political efforts. They were not from
Quraysh, and the generality of the Muslims would never accept the rule
of a non-Qurayshi. The strategy worked, and the Ansar backed down, and
supported Abu Bakr instead.

As for ‘Ali, he was also from Quraysh. As such, Abu Bakr’s arguments
about lineage and family would not have worked in his case. In fact,
they would have backfired terribly. Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) documents
that the Messenger of Allah had declared the Banu Hashim as the best of
Quraysh:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمد بن مهران الرازي ومحمد بن عبدالرحمن بن سهم جميعا عن الوليد
قال ابن مهران حدثنا الوليد بن مسلم حدثنا الأوزاعي عن أبي عمار شداد أنه
سمع واثلة بن الأسقع يقول سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم يقول إن
الله اصطفى كنانة من ولد إسماعيل واصطفى قريشا من كنانة واصطفى من قريش
بني هاشم واصطفاني من بني هاشم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Mihran al-Razi and Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Sahm –
al-Walid b. Muslim – al-Awza’i – Abu ‘Ammar Shaddad – Wathilah b.
al-Asqa’:

I heard the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, saying: “Verily,
Allah chose Kinanah from the children of Isma’il, and chose Quraysh from
Kinanah, **and He chose Banu Hashim from Quraysh, and He chose me from
Banu Hashim**”.[^2]

Commenting on this *hadith*, Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذا كله بناء على أن الصلاة والسلام على آل محمد وأهل بيته تقتضي أن
يكونوا أفضل من سائر أهل البيوت وهذا مذهب أهل السنة والجماعة الذين
يقولون بنو هاشم أفضل قريش وقريش أفضل العرب والعرب أفضل بني آدم وهذا هو
المنقول عن أئمة السنة كما ذكره حرب الكرماني عمن لقيهم مثل أحمد وإسحاق
وسعيد بن منصور وعبد الله بن الزبير الحميدي وغيرهم وذهبت طائفة إلى منع
التفضيل بذلك كما ذكره القاضي أبو بكر والقاضي أبو يعلى في المعتمد
وغيرهما و الأول اصح فإنه قد ثبت عن النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم في الصحيح
أنه قال لأن الله اصطفى كنانة من ولد إسماعيل واصطفى قريش من كنانة
واصطفى هاشما من قريش واصطفاني من بني هاشم
  </p>
</blockquote>

All of this is based upon the fact that sending *salat* and salam upon
the family of Muhammad and his Ahl al-Bayt establishes absolutely that
they are better than all other people. **And this is the position of the
Ahl al-Sunnah wa al-Jama’ah, who say that Banu Hashim are the best of
Quraysh, and that Quraysh are the** **best of the Arabs, and that Arabs
are the best of the Children of Adam. This is narrated from the Imams of
the Sunnah** - as Harb al-Kirmani mentioned from those who met them -
**such as Ahmad, Ishaq, Sa’id b. Mansur, ‘Abd Allah b. al-Zubayr
al-Humaydi and others**. A group are of the opinion that superiority
cannot be established through that, as stated by al-Qaḍi Abu Bakr, and
by al-Qaḍi Abu Ya’la in *al-Mu’tamad*, and others. **However, the first
opinion is more correct, for it is authentically narrated in the**
***sahih*** ***hadith*** **that the Prophet**, peace be upon him, said,
“Verily, Allah chose Kinanah from the children of Isma’il, and chose
Quraysh from Kinanah, **and He chose Hashim from Quraysh, and He chose
me from Banu Hashim**”[^3]

Meanwhile, Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi Talib was from Banu Hashim like
the Messenger, while Abu Bakr was not. Therefore, in terms of lineage,
‘Ali was superior to Abu Bakr.

Moreover, Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) further records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبى ثنا أبو نعيم عن سفيان عن يزيد بن أبى زياد عن
عبد الله بن الحرث بن نوفل عن المطلب بن أبى وداعة قال قال العباس بلغه
بعض ما يقول الناس قال فصعد المنبر فقال من أنا قالوا أنت رسول الله فقال
أنا محمد بن عبد الله بن عبد المطلب ان الله خلق الخلق فجعلني في خير
خلقه وجعلهم فرقتين فجعلني في خير فرقة وخلق القبائل فجعلني في خير قبيلة
وجعلهم بيوتا فجعلني في خيرهم بيتا فأنا خيركم بيتا وخيركم نفسا
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Abu Na’im – Sufyan
– Yazid b. Abi Ziyad – ‘Abd Allah b. al-Harith b. Nawfal – al-Mutalib b.
Abi Wada’ah – al-‘Abbas:

The words of some people reached him. So, he climbed the pulpit and
asked, “Who am I?” They answered, “You are the Messenger of Allah.” So,
he said, “I am Muhammad, the son of ‘Abd Allah, the son of ‘Abd
al-Mutalib. Verily, Allah created the creation and put me among the best
of His creation. He made them into two groups, and put me in the best
group. **He created the tribes and put me in the best tribe. He created
homes and put me among those of them with the best home. So, I am of the
best home among you, and I am of the best personality among you**.”[^4]

Shaykh al-Arnaut comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن لغيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is *hasan* due to supporting evidence[^5].

‘Allamah al-Albani also says concerning the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^6]

Here, we know that Quraysh – the tribe of Muhammad – is the best of all
tribes. Of course, Banu Hashim are the best of the clans of Quraysh.
Also, we equally know from the *hadith* that the house of Muhammad – his
family – is the best of all families. ‘Ali belonged to this same house
of the Prophet, and Abu Bakr did not. So, ‘Ali beat Abu Bakr completely
on lineage and family. No wonder, Abu Bakr made no attempt to go to him.
Instead, he rushed to the camp with weaker claims in terms of lineage
and family, and defeated them on both accounts.

Interestingly, the fact that the Ansar submitted to Abu Bakr’s arguments
about lineage and family shows that the generality of the Sahabah
considered both as the primary criteria for the *khilafah*. Moreover,
the fact that they would not recognize the authority of any *khalifah*
from the Ansar - however pious, knowledgeable and competent - reveals
that they viewed the *khilafah* only as a dynasty, the dynasty of the
offspring of Quraysh. In order to make this clearer, if the Ahl
al-Sunnah were to choose a *khalifah* today, they would only pick a man
from Quraysh even if there are millions of far better candidates within
the *Ummah* from the other tribes and races. This tells that the most
very first criterion for leadership in Sunni Islam is the tribe of the
ruler; and that is exactly why it is a dynasty.

The Prophet of Allah also limited the *khilafah* to a specific family
within the Quraysh. Therefore, if you are not from that family, you are
not a legitimate *khalifah*. Imam Ibn Abi Shaybah (d. 235 H) reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو داود عمر بن سعد عن شريك عن الركين عن القاسم بن حسان عن زيد بن ثابت
يرفعه قال : إني تركت فيكم الخليفتين كاملتين :كتاب الله وعترتي، وإنهما
لن يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Dawud ‘Umar b. Sa’d – Sharik – al-Rukayn – al-Qasim b. Hassan – Zayd
b. Thabit – the Prophet:

“**I have left behind over you the two all-comprehensive**
***khalifahs*****: the Book of Allah and my offspring**. Verily, both
shall never separate from each other until they meet me at the
Lake-Fount.”[^7]

The annotators declare:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحديث صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

The *hadith* is *sahih*.[^8]

Imam Ibn Abi ‘Asim (d. 287 H) has recorded it as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا أبو بكر، ثنا عمرو بن سعد أبو داود الحفري، عن شريك، عن الركين عن
القاسم بن حسان، عن زيد بن ثابت قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم:
إني تارك فيكم الخليفتين من بعدي، كتاب الله وعترتي أهل بيتي وإنهما لن
يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr – ‘Amr b. Sa’d Abu Dawud al-Hafari – Sharik – al-Rukayn –
al-Qasim b. Hassan – Zayd b. Thabit:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “**I am leaving behind
over you the two** ***khalifahs*** **after me: the Book of Allah and my
offspring, my Ahl al-Bayt**. Verily, both shall never separate from each
other until they meet me at the Lake-Fount.”[^9]

And ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حديث صحيح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is a *sahih* *hadith*.[^10]

Apparently, if you are not from the offspring of Muhammad, from his Ahl
al-Bayt, you are nothing but an illegitimate *khalifah*. It is that
simple and straightforward. Abu Bakr, without any doubt, was NOT from
the offspring of the Prophet, neither by blood nor by special
designation. As for ‘Ali, he was *specially* included within that
blessed offspring by the Messenger himself, on the Command of Allah, for
the specific purpose of the *khilafah*. Ibn Abi ‘Asim (d. 287 H) again
documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا محمد بن المثنى، حدثنا يحي بن حماد، عن أبي عوانة، عن يحيى بن سليم
أبي بلج عن عمرو بن ميمون، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم لعلي: أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنك لست نبيا وأنت خليفتي
في كل مؤمن من بعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. al-Muthanna – Yahya b. Hammad – Abu ‘Awanah – Yahya b.
Sulaym Abu Balj – ‘Amr b. Maymun – Ibn ‘Abbas: The Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him, **said to ‘Ali**: “You are to me of the status of
Harun to Musa, with the exception that you are not a prophet. **And you
are my** ***khalifah*** **over every believer after me**.”[^11]

Dr. al-Jawabirah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسناده حسن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^12]

And ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) backs him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^13]

So, obviously, the Prophet had already fully settled the issues of
*al-khilafah* before he died:

(a) ‘Ali was the first *khalifah* immediately after him;

(b) then, the *khilafah* passes, after ‘Ali, to the children of Fatimah
till the Day of *al-Qiyamah*.

This was the Decree of Allah, and it shall be in force till the end of
our planet. Clearly, there was never any vacancy in the *khilafah* at
all, and there will never be. The very moment that the Messenger of the
Lord departed, all his powers, authorities and leadership
responsibilities naturally passed to Amir al-Muminin, his publicly
designated successor. However, Allah had also revealed to His Prophet
that the *Ummah* generally would betray ‘Ali after him. Imam al-Hakim
(d. 403 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو حفص عمر بن أحمد الجمحي بمكة ثنا علي بن عبد العزيز ثنا عمرو
بن عون ثنا هشيم عن إسماعيل بن سالم عن أبي إدريس الأودي عن علي رضي الله
عنه قال إن مما عهد إلي النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم أن الأمة ستغدر بي بعده
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Hafs ‘Umar b. Ahmad al-Jamhi – ‘Ali b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz – ‘Amr b. ‘Awn
– Hushaym – Isma’il b. Salim – Abu Idris al-Awdi – ‘Ali, may Allah be
pleased with him:

“Verily, part of what the Prophet, peace be upon him, told me is that
**the** ***Ummah*** **would soon betray me after him**.”[^14]

Al-Hakim says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain.[^15]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^16]

Al-Hakim also reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن حيان الأسدي سمعت عليا يقول قال لي رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم إن
الأمة ستغدر بك بعدي وأنت تعيش على ملتي وتقتل على سنتي من أحبك أحبني
ومن أبغضك أبغضني وإن هذه ستخضب من هذا يعني لحيته من رأسه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Narrated Hayyan al-Asadi:

I heard ‘Ali saying: The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said to
me: “**Verily, the** ***Ummah*** **will soon betray you after me**; and
you will live upon my religion, and you will be killed upon my *Sunnah*.
Whoever loves you loves me, and whoever hates you hates me. Verily, this
will soon be painted from this”, he meant: his beard (will be drained
with blood) from his head.[^17]

Then he again declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^18]

And al-Dhahabi, once more, concurs with him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^19]

Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani (d. 852 H) copies as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا الفضل هو أبو نعيم ، ثنا فطر بن خليفة ، أخبرني حبيب بن أبي ثابت،
قال: سمعت ثعلبة بن يزيد، قال :سمعت عليا رضي الله عنه، يقول : والله إنه
لعهد النبي الأمي صلى الله عليه وسلم: سيغدرونك من بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Faḍl, Abu Na’im – Fitr b. Khalifah – Habib b. Abi Thabit – Tha’labah
b. Yazid:

I heard ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, saying: “I swear by Allah,
verily, the *Ummi* Prophet, peace be upon him, told me: “**They will
soon betray you after me**.”[^20]

The Salafi annotator, ‘Abd Allah al-Shahri, comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فالحديث حسن لغيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

The *hadith* is *hasan li ghayrihi*.[^21]

And they *did* betray him immediately after the death of the Messenger
of Allah, exactly as prophesied. The Ansar opted to take advantage of
their numerical and military powers by installing one of their members,
instead of pledging allegiance to the divinely designated *khalifah*.
They were staging a coup. But, they did not succeed, thanks to the early
intervention of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. Meanwhile, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar
themselves were supposed to be on their way to faraway Palestine at that
very moment, as foot soldiers under the command of Usamah. They both
however defied the Prophet’s conscription order, and refused to leave
al-Madinah or to join the marching army. Moreover, rather than pledging
allegiance to the *khalifah* of the Messenger, the duo successfully won
the Ansar to their side and seized the political *khilafah*! To use
contemporary terms, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, with the backing of the Ansar,
staged a successful coup against ‘Ali, who had earlier been declared
*khalifah* by Muhammad himself – apparently, on the Order of Allah. No
wonder, Imam ‘Ali called both Abu Bakr and ‘Umar traitors and dishonest
liars. Imam Muslim quotes ‘Umar saying to him (i.e. ‘Ali) and ‘Abbas:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلما توفي رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم قال أبو بكر أنا ولي رسول الله
صلى الله عليه و سلم ... فرأيتماه كاذبا آثما غادرا خائنا والله يعلم إنه
لصادق بار راشد تابع للحق ثم توفي أبو بكر وأنا ولي رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم وولي أبا بكر فرأيتماني كاذبا آثما غادرا خائنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

When the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, died, **Abu Bakr said:
“I am the** ***wali*** **of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him”
... So both of you (‘Ali and ‘Abbas) thought him (i.e. Abu Bakr) to be a
liar, sinful, A TRAITOR and dishonest**. And Allah knows that he was
really truthful, pious, rightly-guided and a follower of the truth.
**Abu Bakr died and I became the** ***wali*** **of the Messenger of
Allah**, peace be upon him, and the *wali* of Abu Bakr. **So both of you
thought me to be a liar, sinful, A TRAITOR and dishonest**.[^22]

But, is that why someone said this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو قد مات عمر لقد بايعت فلانا فوالله ما كانت بيعة أبي بكر إلا فلتة
فتمت
  </p>
</blockquote>

When ‘Umar dies, I will pledge allegiance to so-and-so, for, **I swear
by Allah, the pledge of allegiance given to Abu Bakr was nothing but an
error and it succeeded**.

It was undeniably an “error”. However, it succeeded. In other words, it
was illegal. The *Ummah* should not have done it. But, it succeeded and
gave him power nonetheless. So, the people obeyed him. What is more
interesting here is ‘Umar’s response to this statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا وإنها قد كانت كذلك ولكن الله وقى شرها
  </p>
</blockquote>

No doubt, IT WAS SURELY LIKE THAT. However, Allah saved from its EVIL.

This is the man, who was the most instrumental in bringing Abu Bakr to
power, confessing that the pledge of allegiance given to him was surely
an “evil” error. However, according to him, Allah saved from its “evil”.
So, that somehow justifies it, in his view! But, has Allah *really*
saved the *Ummah* from the “evil” of the pledge of allegiance given to
Abu Bakr? When one considers how it has divded us into sects, some
killing the others because of it, then one sees that its “evil” clearly
still lives with us.

Meanwhile, even though the word used *faltah* (**فلتة**) truly means
“error”[^23], the Ahl al-Sunnah do not like that meaning. They prefer
one of its other meanings, as al-Hafiz does:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله) فوالله ما كانت بيعة أبي بكر إلا فلتة (بفتح الفاء وسكون اللام
بعدها مثناة ثم تاء تأنيت أي فجأة
  </p>
</blockquote>

His statement (I swear by Allah, the pledge of allegiance given to Abu
Bakr was nothing but a *faltah*), **meaning a SURPRISE**.[^24]

In other words, the pledge of allegiance given to Abu Bakr was “a
surprise” to the generality of the Sahabah. When they heard about it,
they wondered: how come? Well, even this meaning of *faltah*, which the
Sunnis prefer, still supports our position. Why was the rise of Abu Bakr
to power “a surprise”, as ‘Umar himself testified? If he had been
leading the Sahabah in *salat*, and this had somehow translated into his
appointment as *khalifah*-designate, why then would anyone find the
pledge of allegiance given to him surprising?

After all, all the Sahabah would have been expecting him to assume the
*khilafah*, if the Sunni claims had been true. In fact, it would have
been the other way round: they would have been surprised if anyone else,
other than Abu Bakr, had received the pledge of allegiance. So,
apparently, the Sahabah were NOT expecting Abu Bakr to be the *khalifah*
immediately after the Messenger of Allah. This was why it was “a
surprise” to them when they heard his name being linked with the
*khilafah*! However, he had already secured the allegiance of the
Islamic army, and literally held the military power of the *Ummah*.
Therefore, the Sahabah were presented with only a *fiat accompli*.

But, this definition of al-Hafiz does not explain the evil nature of Abu
Bakr’s authority. The fact that something is a “surprise” does not
necessarily make it “evil”. By contrast, when it is “illegal”, then it
is necessarily “evil”. ‘Umar himself described the pledge of allegiance
sworn to Abu Bakr with evil:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا وإنها قد كانت كذلك ولكن الله وقى شرها
  </p>
</blockquote>

No doubt, **IT** WAS SURELY LIKE THAT. **However, Allah saved from ITS
EVIL**.

These words of ‘Umar are extremely significant, indeed. He was the
staunchest supporter and defender of Abu Bakr’s rule. The fact that even
he qualified that same regime of his role model with “evil” reveals that
the matter was so glaring that denying it would do no good. He instead
merely offered a blind defence: Allah saved from “its evil”. Of course,
its evil still rules the world of Islam today – with rapidly growing
sectarian killings spreading everywhere. Everything, all this evil,
stemmed from the pledge of allegiance given to Abu Bakr, by the Ansar,
at Saqifah on that fateful day.

‘Umar also added:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإنها قد كانت كذلك ولكن الله وقى شرها وليس فيكم من تقطع الأعناق إليه
مثل أبي بكر من بايع رجلا من غير مشورة من المسلمين فلا يتابع هو ولا
الذي تابعه تغرة أن يقتلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

No doubt, it was surely like that. However, Allah saved from its evil.
And there is none amongst you towards whom throats are slit like Abu
Bakr. **Whosoever pledges allegiance to anyone without consultation with
the Muslims, then neither that person nor the person to whom the pledge
of allegiance was given, is to be supported. Rather, they both should be
killed**.

Here, he mentioned the exact method through which Abu Bakr came to
power. ‘Umar, his colleagues and the Ansar pledged allegiance to him
*without* consulting the other Muslims. The son of al-Khattab then
recommended the death sentence for whosoever achieved the *khilafah*
again through the “Abu Bakr” method. Such a *khalifah* and all his
supporters should be executed. This is very telling, especially on the
meaning of *faltah* in the *athar*. If the “Abu Bakr” method had been
legal, then whosoever adopted it would not have deserved death. So, it
was illegal, and therefore “an error”, which bore “evil” for this
*Ummah*.

In any case, whether *faltah* is translated as “error” or “surprise”,
the direct implication is still that the Sahabah were not expecting Abu
Bakr to become their *khalifah*. Imagine: would this have been the case
if all those Sunni claims about Abu Bakr – including his alleged
leadership of *salat* and its overstretched implications – had been
true?

[^1]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
6, p. 2503, \# 6442

[^2]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 4, p. 1782, \# 2276 (1)

[^3]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, pp. 243-244

[^4]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 1, p. 210, \#
1788

[^5]: Ibid

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(Al-Maktab al-Islami), vol. 1, p. 309, \# 1472

[^7]: Abu Bakr ‘Abd Allah b. Abi Shaybah, Musnad Ibn Abi Shaybah
(Riyadh: Dar al-Watan; 1st edition, 1418 H) [annotators: ‘Adil b. Yusuf
al-‘Azazi and Ahmad b. Farid al-Mazidi], vol. 1, p. 108

[^8]: Ibid

[^9]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Ḍahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, pp. 350-351, \#
754

[^10]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 351, \# 754

[^11]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Ḍahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (Dar al-Sami’i li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’)
[annotator: Dr. Basim b. Faysal al-Jawabirah], vol. 1, pp. 799-800, \#
1222

[^12]: Ibid

[^13]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Ḍahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 565, \# 1188

[^14]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
150, \# 4676

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Ibid

[^17]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 153, \# 4686

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Ibid

[^20]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliyah bi
Zawaid al-Masanid al-Thamaniyyah (Riyadh: Dar al-‘Asimah; 1st edition,
1420 H) [annotator: ‘Abd Allah b. Zafir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Shahri], vol.
16, p. 64, \# 3919

[^21]: Ibid, vol. 16, p. 67, \# 3921

[^22]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 3, p. 1376, \#1757

[^23]: Dr. Rohi Baalbaki, al-Mawrid: A Modern Arabic-English Dictionary
(Beirut: Dar al-‘Ilm li al-Malayin; 7th edition, 1995 CE), p. 833; Hans
Wehr, A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, ed. J. Milton Cowan
(Ithaca, New York: Spoken Languages Services; 3rd edition, 1976 CE), p.
725

[^24]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 12, p. 129.


