Bibliography
============

1. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. Abi Shaybah Ibrahim b. ‘Uthman b. Abi Bakr
b. Abi Shaybah al-Kufi al-‘Ubsi, Musannaf Ibn Abi Shaybah fi al-Ahadith
wa al-Athar (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1409 H) [annotator: Prof. Sa’id
al-Laham]

2. Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo: Muasassat
Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut]

3. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata]

4. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah al-Bukhari
al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn Kathir; 3rd
edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha]

5. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, al-Mujtaba min al-Sunan
(Halab: Maktab al-Matbu’at al-Islamiyyah; 2nd edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

6. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Sahih Abi Dawud (Kuwait: Muasassat al-Gharas
li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1423 H)

7. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(Al-Maktab al-Islami)

8. Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih
Sunan al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

9. Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani, Minhaj
al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim]

10. Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H)

11. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah
(Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H) [annotator: ‘Ali
Shiri]

12. Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi]

13. Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn
Asakir al-Shafi’i, Tarikh Madinah Dimashq (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri]

14. Abu Bakr ‘Abd Allah b. Abi Shaybah, Musnad Ibn Abi Shaybah (Riyadh:
Dar al-Watan; 1st edition, 1418 H) [annotators: ‘Adil b. Yusuf al-‘Azazi
and Ahmad b. Farid al-Mazidi]

15. Abu Bakr Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. ‘Abd al-Khaliq al-Bazzar, Musnad al-Bazzar
(Madinah al-Munawwarah: Maktabah al-‘Ulum wa al-Hukm; 1st edition)
[annotator: ‘Adil b. Sa’d]

16. Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Ḍahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

17. Abu Dawud Sulayman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijistani al-Azdi, Sunan (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

18. Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti, Mashahir
‘Ulama al-Amsar (Dar al-Wafa li al-Taba’at wa al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Marzuq ‘Ali Ibrahim]

19. Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b. Ma’bad
al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, Sahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn Balban
(Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnaut]

20. Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, Musnad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad]

21. Abu Zakariyah Yahya b. Sharaf al-Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim (Beirut:
Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1407 H)

22. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H) [annotators:
Shaykh ‘Adil Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Shaykh ‘Ali Muhammad Ma’uḍ]

23. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliyah bi Zawaid
al-Masanid al-Thamaniyyah (Riyadh: Dar al-‘Asimah; 1st edition, 1420 H)
[annotator: ‘Abd Allah b. Zafir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Shahri]

24. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut: Dar
al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd
al-Qadir ‘Ata]

25. Dr. Rohi Baalbaki, al-Mawrid: A Modern Arabic-English Dictionary
(Beirut: Dar al-‘Ilm li al-Malayin; 7th edition, 1995 CE)

26. Fatawa al-Lajnah al-Daimah li al-Buhuth al-‘Ilmiyyah wa al-Ifta,
compiled and arranged by Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Razzaq, al-Duwaysh

27. Hans Wehr, A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, ed. J. Milton
Cowan (Ithaca, New York: Spoken Languages Services; 3rd edition, 1976
CE)

28. Muhammad b. Sa’d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra (Beirut: Dar al-Sadir)

29. Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Salihi al-Shami, Subul al-Huda al-Rashad fi
Sirah Khayr al-‘Ibad (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition,
1414 H) [annotators: ‘Adil Ahmad ‘Abd al-Mawjud and ‘Ali Muhammad Ma’ud]

30. Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, Asl Sifat Salat al-Nabi (Riyadh:
Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1427 H)

31. Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, Sahih Sunan Ibn Majah (Maktabah
al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1417 H)

32. Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 9th edition, 1413 H)

33. Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H)

34. Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition)


