Preface
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Let us imagine that an authentic *hadith* of the Prophet, *sallallahu
‘alaihi wa alihi*, reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو بكر خليفتي في كل مؤمن من بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr is my *khalifah* over every believer after me.

How would the Ahl al-Sunnah have interpreted it?

What about this one:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو بكر ولي كل مؤمن بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr is the *wali* of every believer after me.

Or this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو بكر أخي وصاحبي ووارثي ووزيري
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr is my brother, and my companion, and my inheritor and my
*wazir*.

We have absolutely no doubt that the Ahl al-Sunnah would cite these
statements as unassailable proofs of Abu Bakr’s legitimate *khilafah*
over the *Ummah* immediately after the Messenger of Allah. However, as
we have discussed in our second book, *On the Khilafah of ‘Ali over Abu
Bakr*, the above *ahadith* and similar others actually exist with
reliable chains in the Sunni books – except that instead of “Abu Bakr”,
it is the name of Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, *‘alaihi al-salam*,
that is mentioned in them. This is why the Ahl al-Sunnah do not like,
and always struggle against, them.

When we quote the actual *ahadith* with the name of ‘Ali to our Sunni
brothers, they usually instinctively respond with a tired
counterargument: the Prophet deputized Abu Bakr to lead the *salat*
during his fatal illness. To them, that, in a weird way, is a stronger,
and more explicit, proof of *khilafah* than any of the *ahadith* about
‘Ali! Apparently, the world is indeed a very strange place. When the
Messenger of Allah said “ ‘Ali is my *khalifah* over every believer
after me”, Sunnis think he was NOT naming ‘Ali as his *khalifah*! But,
when he *allegedly* appointed Abu Bakr to lead *salat* as he had
similarly appointed many others before him – to our brothers from the
Ahl al-Sunnah - he was somehow naming him his *khalifah*!

In this book, we are thoroughly investigating the Sunni reports on the
alleged leadership of *salat* by Abu Bakr during the fatal illness of
the Messenger. We will be analyzing the bewildering contradictions
between the so-called “sahih” Sunni *ahadith* on the claim; and we will
be questioning the historicity of the whole episode. In particular, we
will be examining the correct implications of leadership in *salat*,
according to orthodox Sunni Islam. Does it indicate superiority? Does it
confer the *khilafah*? Do our brothers from the Ahl al-Sunnah really
have any case, even if the tale about Abu Bakr had been true?

We seek Allah’s Help in this effort, and we implore Him to forgive us
all our mistakes in it, and to accept it as a worthy act of *‘ibadah*.
And may Allah send His *salawat* and *barakat* upon our master, Muhammad
b. ‘Abd Allah, and upon his purified offspring.


