1. An Exclusive “Merit”?
========================

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكان إذا سافر عن المدينة استخلف من يستخلفه يصلي بالمسلمين كما استخلف
ابن أم مكتوم تارة وعليا تارة في الصلاة واستخلف غيرهما تارة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأما في حال غيبته ومرضه فلم يستخلف إلا أبا بكر لا عليا ولا غيره
واستخلافه للصديق في الصلاة متواتر ثابت في الصحاح والسنن والمساند من
غير وجه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whenever he (the Prophet) left Madinah on a journey, he would appoint a
*khalifah* (to govern the city on his behalf). Whoever he appointed as a
*khalifah* would lead the Muslims in *salat*, as he once made Ibn Umm
Maktum a *khalifah*, and also ‘Ali once, to lead the *salat*. He equally
appointed others apart from them both as *khalifahs* at other times.

However, during his absence or illness, he never appointed anyone as
*khalifah* except Abu Bakr – neither ‘Ali nor anyone else. **And his
appointment of al-Siddiq as** ***khalifah*** **to lead** ***salat***
**is** ***mutawatir***, and authentically narrated in the *Sahih* books,
and the *Sunan* books, and the *Musnad* books through many routes.[^1]

Basically, our Shaykh confesses to the following points:

1. Abu Bakr was NOT the first or the only to lead Muslims in *salat* in
the mosque of the Prophet, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*, in Madinah.

2. Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*, and Ibn Umm Maktum,
*raḍiyallahu ‘anhu*, were among those Sahabah, *raḍiyallahu ‘anhum*, who
also led the Muslims in *salat* in that mosque *on the order* of the
Messenger of Allah.

But, our Shaykh then proceeds to make some garbled remarks:

i. Abu Bakr was the only one ever deputized to lead *salat* in the
mosque of the Prophet during his *absence* from Madinah.

ii. He was also the only one ever commanded to lead the *salat* in that
mosque during the Messenger’s illness.

Somehow, Ibn Taymiyyah thinks that these were “*exclusive* merits” of
his first *khalifah*, Abu Bakr. But, when the Messenger of Allah
appointed Imam ‘Ali, Ibn Umm Maktum and others as *khalifahs* over his
Madinah, was he then not also “absent” from the city?! The Shaykh
himself answers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكان إذا سافر عن المدينة استخلف من يستخلفه يصلي بالمسلمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whenever he (the Prophet) LEFT MADINAH on a journey, he would appoint a
*khalifah* (to govern the city on his behalf). Whoever he appointed as a
*khalifah* would lead the Muslims in *Salat*

With this admission, one wonders: on what basis then was Abu Bakr the
only one ever appointed *khalifah* to lead *salat* in Madinah *during
the Prophet’s absence*? How on earth did that submission of Ibn
Taymiyyah even ever make any sense to him at all?! Why do these people
suddenly lose their simple logic whenever discussions involving Amir
al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi Talib come up?

As for our Shaykh’s insistence on the “uniqueness” of Abu Bakr’s
*khilafah* in *salat* during the Prophet’s illness, then, there are two
issues. One, as we will demonstrate in this book, there is NO reliable
proof of it - to begin with! All that our Sunni brothers can muster
together are nothing but a set of severely contradictory *riwayat* which
only muddle up the entire picture. Such kinds of irreconcilable reports
are never accepted as valid testimonies. Two, even if it is agreed, for
the sake of argument, that Abu Bakr ever led the *salat* on the order of
the Prophet, then there is very little “merit” in it for him, if any at
all. He then would have been a *khalifah* in *salat* only, which was the
weakest form of *khilafah*. He would have had no authority whatsoever to
give commands to the Muslim soldiers, or to administer the Muslim
society, or to pass judgments in disputes. Basically, he had no
administrative, military or judicial authority in his alleged
*khilafah*. By contrast, when Amir al-Muminin was made the *khalifah* of
Madinah by the Messenger during the Battle of Tabuk, the former had full
authority to lead Muslims in *salat* in the Prophet’s mosque, command
the Muslim armed forces stationed with him in the city, administer the
affairs of its inhabitants and give judgments in any disputes that arose
among them! How can anyone rationally consider the largely empty
*khilafah* of Abu Bakr as superior to that of ‘Ali? How do these people
reason?

The issue of Abu Bakr’s alleged appointment as prayer-leader is usually
raised by our brothers from the Ahl al-Sunnah in debates over
*khilafah*. Their logic always is – since the Prophet deputized Abu Bakr
to lead the *salat* in his mosque, then he was automatically declaring
the latter, implicitly, as his *khalifah* after his death. However, even
Ibn Taymiyyah is unable to completely ignore the fallacy of this
mainstream Sunni premise:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ليس كل من يصلح للاستخلاف في الحياة على بعض الأمة يصلح إن يستخلف بعد
الموت فإن النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم استخلف في حياته غير واحد و منهم من
لا يصلح للخلافة بعد موته
  </p>
</blockquote>

Not all who are qualified to be appointed *khalifahs* during the
lifetime (of the Muslim ruler) over part of the *Ummah* are equally
qualified to be appointed as *khalifahs* after the death (of the ruler).
**The Prophet, peace be upon him, appointed during his lifetime many
people as** ***khalifahs*****, and among them were those who were not
qualified for the** ***khilafah*** **after his death**.[^2]

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 8, p. 558

[^2]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 339


