5. Was Abu Bakr Even Qualified To Lead?
=======================================

Apart from the severe contradictions in the *ahadith* on Abu Bakr’s
alleged leadership of *salat* during the Prophet’s fatal illness, there
is also the question of its factual possibility. It is one thing for
something to be possible; it is another for it to have truly occurred.
Where it is impossible, then all reports of its occurrence are false by
default. However, where it is possible, then additional, *consistent*
and authentic evidence of its actual occurrence must be produced by
whoever seeks to rely on that fact. With regards to Abu Bakr’s alleged
leadership of the *salat*, there are only conflicting, irreconcilable
“proofs” of it. As such, there actually are none. In this chapter, we
seek to explore the *possibility* of it even ever happening. This way,
we bury it for good.

Without a doubt, the very first step in determining the possibility of
Abu Bakr’s leadership of the *salat* is to establish or discredit his
qualification for it. Unless it is proved that he was qualified to lead,
then every effort to claim that he did is futile. If he was not
qualified, apparently his appointment as prayer leader by the Prophet,
*sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*, would have been impossible. However, if
he was qualified, it would, in that case, be at least possible. Then,
additional, unquestionable evidence would become admissible to establish
its factual occurrence.

So, was Abu Bakr qualified to lead the Messenger of Allah in *salat*?
Moreover, was he equally qualified to lead the Sahabah in *salat* in the
Prophet’s mosque?

The answer to the first question is in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تقدموا بين يدي الله ورسوله واتقوا الله إن الله
سميع عليم
  </p>
</blockquote>

O you who believe! **Do not lead in front of Allah and His Messenger**,
and fear Allah. Verily, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.[^1]

This effectively makes it absolutely *haram* to lead the Prophet of
Allah in anything – including in battles and *salat*. Imam
al-Mubarakfuri (d. 1282 H) also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حكى ذلك القاضي عياض قال ولا يصح لأحد أن يؤم جالسا بعده صلى الله عليه
وسلم قال وهو مشهور قول مالك وجماعة أصحابه قال وهذا أولى الأقاويل لأنه
صلى الله عليه وسلم لا يصح التقدم بين يديه في الصلاة ولا في غيرها ولا
لعذر ولا لغيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is narrated from Qaḍi ‘Iyaḍ. He said, “It is not correct for anyone
to lead in *salat* in a sitting posture other than him, peace be upon
him.” He said, “And this is the famous statement of Malik and the
majority of his companions.” He said, “And this is the most correct of
the opinions, **because it is NOT correct to lead in front** **of him
in** ***salat*** **or in anything else, whether due to an excuse or
otherwise**.”[^2]

Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H), while relating the submissions of Qaḍi Iyaḍ,
reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واحتج أيضا بأنه صلى الله عليه وسلم إنما صلى بهم قاعدا لأنه لا يصح
التقدم بين يديه لنهى الله عن ذلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

He cited as proof also the fact that he, peace be upon him, led them in
*salat* in a sitting posture, **because it is NOT correct to lead in
front of him, due to the prohibition of that by Allah**.[^3]

In simpler words, it was absolutely impossible that Abu Bakr ever led
Muhammad in *salat* or in any anything else. Allah has totally forbidden
that; and so, Abu Bakr was NOT qualified in any way or by any means to
lead the Messenger in *salat* or in any other situation or circumstance.
Even Abu Bakr too realized this, as documented by Imam Muslim (d. 261
H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أبو بكر ما كان لابن أبي قحافة أن يصلي بين يدي رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr said, “It is NOT for the son of Abu Quhafah (i.e. Abu Bakr) to
lead *salat* in front of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him.”[^4]

So, all the reports about how the Prophet was led in *salat* by Abu Bakr
or anyone else from this *Ummah* are fallacious and hold no truth at
all. The Book of Allah rejects them, and Abu Bakr too denounced them.
There is also an element of high blasphemy in those *ahadith*. The only
way Abu Bakr could have legitimately led the Messenger of Allah in
*salat* was if the latter had lost or forfeited his *risalah*
(messengership) *and* had become inferior to the former in many areas.

Moreover, we ask our Sunni brothers: who was the ruler of Madinah at
that moment when – as your sect claims - Abu Bakr led the Prophet in
*salat*? Was it the Messenger? Or, was it Abu Bakr? This question is
crucial in the light of some authentic narrations in your books. For
instance, Imam al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا هناد حدثنا أبومعاوية عن الأعمش عن إسماعيل بن رجاء عن أوس بن ضمعج
عن أبي مسعود أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم قال لا يؤم الرجل في
سلطانه ولا يجلس على تكرمته إلا بإذنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hanad – Abu Mu’awiyah – al-A’mash – Isma’il b. Raja - Aws b. Ḍam’aj –
Abu Mas’ud:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**No one can lead a
man in** ***salat*** **in his place of authority**, and no one can sit
in his place of honour except with his permission.”[^5]

Al-Tirmidhi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث حسن صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *hasan sahih*[^6]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) also comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^7]

Imam al-Nasai (d. 303 H) also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا إبراهيم بن محمد التيمي قال حدثنا يحيى بن سعيد عن شعبة عن
إسماعيل بن رجاء عن أوس بن ضمعج عن أبي مسعود قال قال رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم لا يؤم الرجل في سلطانه ولا يجلس على تكرمته إلا بإذنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibrahim b. Muhammad al-Taymi – Yahya b. Sa’id – Shu’bah – Isma’il b.
Raja – Aws b. Ḍam’aj – Abu Mas’ud:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**No one can lead a
man in** ***salat*** **in his place of authority**, and no one can sit
in his place of honour except with his permission.”[^8]

And ‘Allamah al-Albani declares again:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^9]

So, if the Prophet of Allah was really still the *amir* of the Muslims
*at that moment*, then Abu Bakr was further disqualified from ever
leading him in *salat* ! Whoever insists that Abu Bakr was his Imam is
telling us that he (the Messenger) had lost authority over Madinah.
Meanwhile, the authority of the Prophet was, and still is, tied to his
*risalah*, among others. As such, if he had lost authority over Madinah,
then he must have lost *all* his divine ranks. The direct implication of
this is – the only way Abu Bakr could have been the Prophet’s Imam was
if the latter was no longer a messenger of Allah, at the least!
Therefore, whoever claims that Abu Bakr led him in *salat* has thereby
rejected his (i.e. the Prophet’s) *risalah*! There is simply no second
way to it.

In other *ahadith*, the Messenger of Allah mentions some other
conditions with farther reaching implications. Imam Muslim records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحدثنا أبو بكر بن أبي شيبة وأبو سعيد الأشج كلاهما عن أبي خالد قال أبو
بكر حدثنا أبو خالد الأحمر عن الأعمش عن إسماعيل بن رجاء عن أوس بن ضمعج
عن أبي مسعود الأنصاري قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم يؤم القوم
أقرؤهم لكتاب الله فإن كانوا في القراءة سواء فأعلمهم بالسنة فإن كانوا
في السنة سواء فأقدمهم هجرة فإن كانوا في الهجرة سواء فأقدمهم سلما ولا
يؤمن الرجل الرجل في سلطانه ولا يقعد في بيته على تكرمته إلا بإذنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr b. Abi Shaybah and Abu Sa’id al-Ashja’ – Abu Khalid: Abu Bakr –
Abu Khalid al-Ahmar – al-A’mash – Isma’il b. Raja – Aws b. Ḍam’aj – Abu
Mas’ud al-Ansari:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**The people should be
led in** ***salat*** **by the best reciter of the Book of Allah among
them**. But, if they are equal in recitation, then the one who is the
most knowledgeable among them concerning the *Sunnah*. If they are equal
regarding the *Sunnah*, then the earliest of them to do the *hijrah*. If
they are equal in the *hijrah*, then the earliest of them to embrace
Islam. **No man can lead another in** ***salat*** **in a place where the
latter has authority**, or sit in his place of honour in his house
without his permission.”[^10]

There is need to quickly highlight a point here. Where someone is the
ruler or administrator of a place, as long as he is a Muslim, none can
lead him in *salat* in it. He is the *automatic* Imam, even if he is not
the best of them in Qur’anic recitation, or in knowledge of the
*Sunnah*. His political authority overrides all the other set
conditions. However, where none in the mosque is the ruler of its area,
then the various criteria are examined in the specified order. Imam
al-Mubarakfuri (d. 1282 H) confirms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي رواية مسلم لا يؤمن الرجل الرجل في سلطانه ... ولذا كان ابن عمر يصلي
خلف الحجاج وصح عن ابن عمر أن إمام المسجد مقدم على غير السلطان
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the report of (Imam) Muslim, it is stated “No man can lead another in
*salat* in a place where the latter has authority.”... **This was why
Ibn ‘Umar used to offer** ***salat*** **behind al-Hajjaj.** It is also
authentically narrated that Ibn ‘Umar stated that the Imam of the mosque
leads (only) the non-ruler.[^11]

These facts reveal that leadership in *salat* is no indicator of
superiority before Allah at all. Ibn ‘Umar was superior – in the eyes of
Sunni Islam – over al-Hajjaj in all ways and by all means. So, even a
drunken Sunni governor can validly be the Imam for a saint of Allah. The
other criteria in the *hadith* are of the same effect as well. The best
reciter in the *Ummah*, who is the most qualified to lead the *salat*
after the ruler or governor, may – just like the executive leader - not
necessarily be the best of the Muslims, or their most knowledgeable.
Something we wonder about though is – how many of the Sunni kings,
sultans, emirs, presidents and sheikhs today lead *salat* in their grand
mosques?

Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا محمد بن جعفر ثنا شعبة عن إسماعيل بن رجاء
قال سمعت أوس بن ضمعج يقول سمعت أبا مسعود يقول قال لنا رسول الله صلى
الله عليه و سلم يؤم القوم أقرؤهم لكتاب الله تعالى وإقدمهم قراءة فان
كانت قراءتهم سواء فليؤمهم أقدمهم هجرة فان كانوا في الهجرة سواء فليؤمهم
أكبرهم سنا ولا يؤمن الرجل في أهله ولا في سلطانه ولا يجلس على تكرمته في
بيته الا ان يأذن له أو بإذنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father – Muhammad b. Ja’far – Shu’bah –
Isma’il b. Raja – Aws b. Ḍam’aj – Abu Mas’ud:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said to us: “**The people
should be led in** ***salat*** **by the best reciter of the Book of
Allah the Most High among them**. But, if their recitations are equal,
then the earliest of them in *hijrah* should lead them in *salat*. If
they are equal in the *hijrah*, then the oldest of them should lead them
in *salat*. **No man can be led in** ***salat*** **among his family
members or in a place where he has authority**, or none can sit in his
place of honour in his house without his permission.”[^12]

Shaykh al-Arnaut comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط مسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of (Imam) Muslim[^13]

It is undisputed that Abu Bakr was not the ruler over the Messenger of
Allah at any point in time. Therefore, he was automatically and
absolutely disqualified from ever leading his Prophet in *salat*.
Besides, was Abu Bakr a better reciter of the Qur’an than the Messenger
of Allah? Was he more knowledgeable of the *Sunnah* than the Prophet?
Did Abu Bakr do the *hijrah* before him? Was he older than his
Messenger? Did he accept Islam before his Prophet? We ask – on what
basis *exactly* was Abu Bakr ever qualified lead the Master and Best of
all creation in *salat*? Apparently, there is none, and there can
*never* be any! As such, all the Sunni *riwayat* about how he supposedly
was the Imam of the Messenger are only Sunni exaggerations and
hallucinations!

Interestingly, Abu Bakr was equally unqualified to lead even the other
Sahabah! In order to be qualified, he had to be their best reciter. But,
was he? Imam al-Bukhari (d. 256 H) records the answer of ‘Umar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عمرو بن علي حدثنا يحيى حدثنا سفيان عن حبيب عن سعيد بن جبير عن
ابن عباس قال قال عمر رضي الله عنه: أقرؤنا أبي وأقضانا علي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Amr b. ‘Ali – Yahya – Sufyan – Habib – Sa’id b. Jubayr – Ibn ‘Abbas:

‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said: “**The best reciter among us
is Ubayy**, and the best judge among us is ‘Ali.”[^14]

‘Allamah al-Albani has equally copied the Prophetic confirmation of
this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أنس بن مالك، أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال :أرحم أمتي بأمتي
أبو بكر وأشدهم في دين الله عمر وأصدقهم حياء عثمان وأقضاهم علي بن أبي
طالب. وأقرؤهم لكتاب الله أبي بن كعب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Narrated Anas b. Malik:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “The most merciful of
my *Ummah* to my *Ummah* is Abu Bakr. The most severe of them in the
religion of Allah is ‘Umar. The most shy of them is ‘Uthman. And the
best judge among them is ‘Ali b. Abi Talib. **And the best reciter of
the Book of Allah among them is Ubayy b. Ka’b**.”[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^16]

So, it was not Abu Bakr?! Therefore, it was Ubayy who was qualified for
the leadership of the *salat* and NOT Abu Bakr! With the presence of
Ubayy among the Sahabah, Abu Bakr – the first Sunni *khalifah* – was
thereby disqualified from leading either the Prophet or his followers in
*salat* in the grand mosque of Madinah. With this, all the reports about
Abu Bakr’s leadership of the *salat* drown in the Sunni ocean of
fabrications. The Messenger of Allah would never place the wrong rod in
the right hole – neither by nepotism nor by mistake. The *Sunnah* is
that the best reciter should lead in *salat* – unless where the ruler is
present. Abu Bakr was neither the best reciter nor the ruler. Those
facts alone terminate the entire story.

[^1]: Qur’an 49:1

[^2]: Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H), vol. 2, p. 294

[^3]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 2, p. 146

[^4]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 1, p. 316, \# 421 (102)

[^5]: Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih
Sunan al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 5, p. 99, \# 2772

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Ibid

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, al-Mujtaba min
al-Sunan (Halab: Maktab al-Matbu’at al-Islamiyyah; 2nd edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 77, \# 783

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 1, p. 465, \# 673 (290)

[^11]: Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H), vol. 2, p. 29

[^12]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 4, p. 121, \#
17133

[^13]: Ibid

[^14]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
4, p. 1628, \# 4211

[^15]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, Sahih Sunan Ibn Majah (Maktabah
al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1417 H), vol. 1, pp.
67-68, \# 125

[^16]: Ibid


