The Publisher’s Word
====================

Great personalities contribute strongly to the formation of perfect
characters through their model conducts and high standards. For this
reason it has been important to introduce such characters to seekers of
perfection so that they will become acquainted with the qualifications
that authorize such characters to attain perfection and become cynosures
of humankind.

Ansariyan Publications is pleased to introduce this book to the gentle
readers, as one that deals with the personality of one of the heroes of
Islam and the exemplary man whose sacrifices, ideals, and high moral
standards took humanity many steps onwards. This perfect personality is
of al-’Abbas ibn ‘Ali upon whom the Imams (a) conferred the finest words
of praise and laudation.

In this book, the reader will find chapters covering the whole life
account of al-’Abbas in addition to a brief presentation of the
historical circumstances that led him to be on the top in the list of
the heroes of humanity in general and Islam in particular.

Undertaking the mission of the propagation for Islam, the team of
Ansariyan Publications beseeches the all-benefactor Lord to grant them
the ability to present other similar books dealing with other ideal
personalities that contributed to elevating the Islamic spirit to levels
befitting its perfection.

Thus, in the near future, the dear readers will have in possession
similar books about other personalities.

Finally, we hope this book will add new knowledge and contribute, to an
extent, in leading towards human perfection.

Ansariyan Publications, 2001


