Personality
===========

Al-’Abbas ibn ‘Ali was a whole world of virtues and merits. His
personality included each and every lofty characteristic. It is however
sufficient honor for him to be the son of Imam ‘Ali Amir ul-Mu’minin
(a) - the model of human perfection. Thus, al-’Abbas inherited all
elements of human perfection from his father and became, in the sight of
Muslims, the epitome of virtue and high moral standards. Let us now
refer to some of these elements:

Courage
-------

Since it denotes the soundness and perseverance of personality, courage
is regarded as the highest characteristic of manhood. Abu’l-Fadhl
al-’Abbas got this characteristic from his father who was the ever most
courageous. Al-’Abbas’ maternal uncles too were recognized for this
attribute among all the Arabs. He was from perfect world that was full
of valor; fear never entered his mind during battles in which he
participated with his father.[^1]

During the battle of at-Taff, al-’Abbas gave the highest examples of
heroism and courage. In fact, that battle is seen as the greatest
conflict in the history of Islam. Facing large gatherings of Yazid’s
army, al-’Abbas manifested himself so bravely that he changed their
courageous warriors into cowards and filled the hearts of their troops
with horror.

Losing ideas of how to face this great hero, they went on using
deceptive ways - they promised they would give him the general
commandment of their army if he would leave the camp of his brother, but
al-’Abbas put them down. Their promise was no more than a factor to
increase his perseverance on his principles and persistence with
defending his beliefs.

Narrators have referred to the great casualties that Yazid’s army
suffered at the hands of al-’Abbas ibn ‘Ali who kept smiling in the
midst of fighting. He filled the battlefield with the bodies of the
enemies, painted the horses with their blood, and planted horror and
terror in their hearts. His sword served as a destructive thunderbolt
that inflicted bereavement and fatality upon people of Kufa who were in
the opposing party.

The courage of al-’Abbas has astonished poets and authors who have gone
on to describe it in nonesuch styles. It has given the best examples of
heroism all over history. Since this courage was demonstrated for
defending the right and protecting the high values and principles of
Islam, its significance has been increasing over time.

Faith
-----

Faith was another major feature in the personality of al- ‘Abbas. He was
brought up in the laps of true faith, centers of God-fearing, and
faculties of obedience to God. His father, chief of the faithful and
head of the pious, fed him with the essence of faith, and factuality of
God’s oneness.

Hence, al-’Abbas grew up on the cognizant faith and the true pondering
over the secrets of creation. This giant, nonesuch faith interacted in
the mentality of al-’Abbas to change him into one of the great
individuals of faith, piety and sincerity. Out of his faith, al-’Abbas
offered his brothers, sons and himself as pure sacrifices for the sake
of God.

Al-’Abbas fought for defending the religion of God bravely to protect
the principles of Islam that were exposed to dangers of being eradicated
during the reign of the Umayyad ancestry. He aimed at nothing other than
the satisfaction of God and the attainment of the eternal joy of the
life to come.

Disdain
-------

Disdain and a sense of honor painted the personality of al- ‘Abbas so
intensely that he completely refused to live in humiliation under the
shadows of the Umayyad rulers who usurped the wealth of God and treated
people as slaves. Thus, he pushed himself in the fields of fighting,
following his brother who raised the slogan of honor and dignity. He
declared that death would be no more than pleasure, while to live with
the wrongdoers would only be humiliation.

During the battle of at-Taff, al-’Abbas represented all the concepts of
disdain and sense of honor when he rejected proudly the offer of Yazid’s
army, if he would leave the camp of his brother. As a result, he pushed
himself sincerely in the fields of the battle, felling the warriors and
harvesting his enemies’ head - all for defending his freedom, religion,
and dignity.

Patience
--------

On the day of Ashura, al-’Abbas had to encounter unspeakable crises.
Nevertheless, he did not show any item of intolerance or worry and did
not utter any single word of resentment. On the contrary, he submitted
the whole matter to his Lord the Most High and copied his brother,
al-Husayn (a), whose patience was as unshakable as heavy mountains.

Al-’Abbas saw the companions of his brother melted by the sun on the
dust of Karbala. He heard the weeping of the children out of their
thirst and heard the moaning of the harem who mourned their men. He saw
the loneliness of his brother who was encircled by the meanest of
enemies, intending to kill him so as to win the prize of the governor of
Kufa. In the midst of all these crises, al-’Abbas submitted to his Lord
completely without showing any weakness.

Loyalty
-------

Loyalty is the noblest characteristic one can have. Al-’Abbas set a
record in this field when he represented all features of loyalty
distinguishably.

Loyalty to the Religion
-----------------------

Al-’Abbas was the most faithful and the best defender of his religion.
When Islam had to encounter the danger of eradication by the Umayyad
band, who renounced Islam completely and declared war against it,
al-’Abbas dedicated himself to fighting on all fronts for defending his
religion and raising the word of God on earth. For sake of the
principles of his religion, his hands were cut and he was martyred.

Loyalty to the Nation
---------------------

As he noticed his nation sinking down under the gloomy nightmare of
humility due to the absolute despotism of the Umayyad band that played
with people’s fates, al-’Abbas understood that his mission was to
proceed for saving them from this scathing fait accompli. Along with his
brother, family members and those glorious companions, they raised the
slogan of freedom and declared holy jihad[^2] ceaselessly until they
were martyred for doing so. This in fact is the ever most elevated
loyalty to the nation.

Loyalty to the Homeland
-----------------------

One of the Umayyad rulers, once, declared: “Iraq is no more than a
garden possessed by Koreshites.”[^3] Hence, they regarded the Islamic
homeland as a garden at their disposal. On this account, poverty and
misery were the two major characteristics of the Islamic homeland.
Besides, the righteous and the free people were being subjected to
humiliation. Thus, al-’Abbas, under the commandment of his brother,
opposed this ruling regime and its authorities who thanks to the
self-sacrifices of al-’Abbas and his party, collapsed. This was the true
loyalty to the Islamic homeland.

Loyalty to his Brother
----------------------

It is incumbent upon each Muslim to swear allegiance to the Imam who
lives in his time. Hence, al-’Abbas gave the best example of being
faithful to the allegiance to the Imam of his time, al-Husayn (a). All
over history, you cannot find an item of loyalty more exalted than that
of al-’Abbas to his brother and leader. Hence, his loyalty has become an
ultimate goal that attracts every free, honest man.

Will Power
----------

Will power is one of the characteristics of the great ones whose deeds
have always been successful, since it is impossible for the weak to
achieve any social aim or any political work.

Al-’Abbas was full of determination; he joined the right camp and did
not show any negligence or shortcoming. On the stage of history, he has
shown himself as being that glorious leader who deserves pride and
immortality.

Mercy and Kindness
------------------

Al-’Abbas enjoyed the highest standards of morality. He was so kind and
merciful with the underprivileged and the persecuted. In Karbala, when
the troops of Yazid occupied the banks of the Euphrates and deprived the
other party of water, al-’Abbas showed the most clear-cut signs of
kindness and mercy when he saw his brother’s children as well as others,
pale-faced and dry-lipped because of thirst. Seeing this view, al-’Abbas
pushed himself towards the river and came back with water for those
children.

On the tenth of Muharram, Al-’Abbas also heard the children crying
because of thirst. Therefore, his kindness and mercy prompted him to
want to quench their thirst. He took the container and faced the enemies
so bravely that he could drive them away from the river. As he was about
to have a drink, he remembered the thirst of his brother and his
children. He then refused to drink before he could sate their thirst.

Has anyone ever seen, heard, or known of such feelings of mercy and
kindness at any person other than al-’Abbas who climbed to the highest
summits of glory because of the characteristics of his unique
personality?

[^1]: See al-Kibrit ul-Ahmar, 3/24

[^2]: Jihad is religious warfare or a war for the propagation or defense
of Islam

[^3]: Koreishites are sons and descendants of Koreish - the tribe to
which Prophet Muhammad (S) belonged. The Umayyads also belonged to
Koreish


