Descendants of Al-’Abbas
========================

Al-’Abbas had five sons - Ubaidullah, al-Fadhl, al-Hasan, al- Qasim, and
Muhammad, and two daughters.[^1]

Ibn Shahrashub, the famous historian recorded that Muhammad was martyred
in Karbala with his father. The mother of Ubaidullah and al-Fadhl was
Lubaba daughter of Ubaidullah ibn al-’Abbas ibn Abd-ul-Muttalib.
Genealogists have agreed unanimously that the progeny of al-’Abbas ibn
‘Ali came from his son Ubaidullah. Sheikh al- Futouni, however, added
that al-Hasan ibn al-’Abbas had sons and descendants, too.

Ubaidullah ibn al-’Abbas who died in AH 155, was one of the celebrated
scholars. Handsomeness, perfect morality and personality were ascribed
to him. He married three ladies.

Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn ul-Abidin (a), respected Ubaidullah
greatly. He, very frequently, wept when he saw Ubaidullah, saying that
this man reminded him of his father’s unique sacrifice on that day in
Karbala. Al-Hasan, son of Ubaidullah lived for sixty-seven years and had
five sons: al-Fadhl, Hamza, Ibrahim, al-’Abbas, and Ubaidullah. All of
these were honorable, virtuous and authors.

Al-Fadhl was such an eloquent, religious, and courageous personality
that caliphs respected him. He was named - ‘Ibn al- Hashimiyya son of
the Hashemite lady’-.[^2] He had three sons, Ja’far al-’Abbas, al-Akbar
and Muhammad.

Abu’l-’Abbas al-Fadhl ibn Muhammad ibn al-Fadhl ibn al- Hasan ibn
Ubaidullah ibn al-’Abbas was a famous orator and poet. He composed some
poetic verses eulogizing his forefather, al- ‘Abbas.

Hamza ibn al-Hasan ibn Ubaidullah ibn al-’Abbas copied his forefather,
Amir ul-Mu’minin. His grandson Muhammad ibn ‘Ali - the famous poet
resided in Basra and died in AH 286.[^3]  
 Ibrahim Jardaqa was another descendant of al-’Abbas. He was a
jurisprudent, man of letters and well known of his ascetics.

Abdullah ibn ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim wrote some books, such as the book titled
al-Ja’fariyya. He died in Egypt in AH 312.

Al-’Abbas ibn al-Hasan ibn Ubaidullah ibn al-’Abbas was a great
celebrity among the Hashemites. He visited Baghdad during the reign of
Harun ar-Rashid. He was one of the most celebrated poets.[^4]

Abdullah ibn al-’Abbas was also a famous personality known for his
virtue and celebrity. When he was informed about Abdullah’s death,
al-Ma’moun - the ‘Abbasid caliph said: “All people are the same after
your demise, O son of al-’Abbas!”[^5]

Abu’t-Tayyib Muhammad ibn Hamza enjoyed a good personality. He was also
well known for his regard for relatives and virtue. He had big fortunes
in Jordan where he was killed in AH 291. His descendants were called –
‘sons of the martyr.’

Ubaidullah ibn al-Hasan was the Governor and Qadi of Mecca and Medina
during the reign of al-Ma’moun.

Abu-Ya’li al-Hamza ibn al-Qasim ibn ‘Ali ibn Hamza ibn al- Hasan ibn
Ubaidullah ibn al-’Abbas ibn ‘Ali was one of the most celebrated men of
knowledge. He was a great scholar of hadith who instructed many famous
scholars and wrote many books, such as - Kitab ut-Tawhid, Kitab
uz-Ziyaraatu wel-Menasik, and many others in various fields of
knowledge, especially in Ilm ur-Rijal and Ilm ul-Hadith.[^6]

Many scholars described him with remarkable words of praise.[^7] There
is a handsome shrine which was built on the tomb of al-Hamza in a
village called ‘al-Hamza’ and lying in al-Jazira, central Iraq, between
the Euphrates and the Tigris[^8]. It has been incessantly visited by
people.

Finally, books of history are full of names of great personalities among
the descendants of al-’Abbas ibn ‘Ali.[^9]

[^1]: Quoted from Sayyid Abd-ur-Razzaq al-Musawi al-Muqarram’s al-
‘Abbas

[^2]: Quoted from Sayyid Abd-ur-Razzaq al-Musawi al-Muqarram’s al-
‘Abbas

[^3]: See I’laam un-Nas fi Fadhaail il-’Abbas

[^4]: Al-Muhammara is the Arabic name of Khorramshahr, the famous city
and port on the Shatt al-Arab southern Iran

[^5]: See Maqaatil ut-Talibiyyin, 84; Sheikh at-Futouni’s Hadeeqat un-
Nasab; Ibn Qutaiba’s al-Me’aarif, 96; and Hadaaiq ul-Uns

[^6]: Ilm ur-Rijal is the field of Islamic Sudies where the manners and
qualifications of the narrators of Hadith is studied. Ilm ul- Hadith is
another field of knowledge that classifies the words, deeds and
confirmations reported to be said, done, and made by Prophet Muhammad
(S) on criteria of authenticity

[^7]: See, for instance, Sheikh at-Tusi’s ar-Rijal, an-Nejashi’s
al-Feherest, al-Amali, Sheikh as-Saduq’s Ikmal ud-Din, and Sheikh ‘Abbas
al- Qummi’s al-Kuna wal-Alqab

[^8]: See Fulk un-Najat, Allama an-Nouri’s Tahiyyat uz-Zaair, and Sheikh
‘Abbas al-Qummi’s Al-Kuna wal-Alqab

[^9]: See, for instance, Umdat ut-Talib, at-Tabari’s at-Tarikh, Tarikhu
Baghdad, al-Hujjatu ela ath-Thahib, Thakhirat ud-Darain, Murouj uth-
Thahab, al-Isfahani’s al-Aghani, and many others


