The Pure Lineage
================

Undoubtedly the family relation with the great personalities is an honor
and dignity, especially when such a great personality is the choice of
God and the seal of the prophets. Al-’Abbas ibn ‘Ali enjoyed a close
relation with Prophet Muhammad (S) since he was the son of ‘Ali ibn
Abi-Talib who was an independent source of honor and dignity.

About ‘Ali (a), the Prophet (S) and his family, said:

*“My brother ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib enjoys innumerable merits. Neither jinn
nor can human beings count them.”*

Muhammad ibn Idris ash-Shafii, the founder of the Shafiite school of law
answered those who asked him to say his opinion about ‘Ali:

*“What can we say about a person whose partisans have had to hide his
merits because of fear, and enemies have hidden his merits out of envy?
Nevertheless between these two, his merits that have become widely known
are too numerous to be counted”*[^1]

Ibn Abi’-Hadid, the Mutazilite, says:

*“The merits of ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib are too great and familiar to be
mentioned or detailed. Even his enemies and rivalries could do nothing
but confess the unmatched virtue of this man whose eminence is
unconcealed and excellences are unrestrained.*

*Everybody knows that when the Umayyads held the reins of the Islamic
world, they spared no single effort for extinguishing the light of Imam
‘Ali and inventing flaws against him. Moreover, they issued the
decisions of cursing him openly from the mimbars of their mosques and
sentenced to death anyone who would mention any of his incalculable
merits. They also prevented people from reporting any narration that
might refer to any of his excellences.*

*Finally, they even prevented people from calling their newborns by his
name. Nevertheless, all these endeavours exalted ‘Ali’s reputation and
took him to further elevated levels. He was like musk whose perfume
spreads when it is screened, and like the sun that cannot be screened by
one’s palm, and like daylight that is seen by many eyes even if one eye
is closed against it.”* [^2]

Thus was the father of al-’Abbas who had every right to be taken pride
in and gain learning from his morals, ethics and excellences.

The Immaculate Womb
-------------------

From the maternal side, al-’Abbas was the son of a great lady namely
Umm-ul-Banin, who enjoyed excellent lineage and personality. In addition
to her high moral standards, she was well known for her loyalty to the
Ahlul Bayt[^3] and her devoutness. Therefore, she occupied an elevated
position in the sight of the Ahlul Bayt who praised her on many
occasions and showed her great respect.

Because of such remarkable care that Umm-ul-Banin took of Imam ‘Ali’s
sons and daughters, God has given her an exclusive position and made her
a means to reach Him and a way through which the supplicants’ most
complex problems are solved.

Umm-ul-Banin was brought up by her noble parents on righteous moralities
and the highest ethical standards, so that she became fit to be the wife
of Imam ‘Ali (a) and a compassionate mother for the chiefs of the youth
of Paradise.[^4]

This great lady gave birth to four courageous sons, the eldest among
whom was Abul-Fadhl al-’Abbas. He, as well as his full brothers,
acquired the qualities of courage and bravery from their mother whose
ancestors were the most courageous among the Arabs. Umm-ul-Banin then,
contributed towards forming the personalities of her four sons who
showed unmatched courage on the day of Ashura and sacrificed themselves
for their religion and its representative - Imam al-Husayn (a).

Series of Fathers
-----------------

Ancestry plays a considerable role in the formation of personalities. It
has a great influence on self-discipline and behavior. On that account,
genealogy, which is the branch of knowledge that deals with the
investigation of the details of ancestry, occupies a significant
position in the society. It is so because the influence of heredity has
been proven through many scientific researches, on the structure of both
individuals and communities.

In addition, many Islamic laws have depended mainly on genealogy,
especially in fields of inheritance, taxes, regard of relatives, and
blood money for unintentional killings etc.

A genealogist, like any other specialist to whom matters relating to his
special domain are referred to, enjoys a substantial position in the
religious, social, and ethical affairs. ‘Aqil ibn Abi-Talib was the most
celebrated in this field. In addition to his being the descendant of
that unparalleled pedigree, he was the reference to whom people
submitted their queries to in fields of genealogy. He could discern the
sources of glory, distinguish the Arab tribes, and tell between the
deep-rooted ones and the disreputable.

‘Aqil used to be surrounded by those who were interested in genealogy as
well as the history and origins of the Arab tribes in the center of the
Prophet’s Masjid[^5]; they gathered to listen to him carefully and trust
whatever he would tell.

Historians have reported uninterruptedly that Imam ‘Ali (a) summoned his
brother ‘Aqil and asked:

*“Choose for me a woman who is the descendant of the Arab heroes so that
I will marry her and she will give birth to a horseman.”*[^6]

‘Aqil answered his brother:

*“Marry Umm-ul-Banin, from the tribe of Kelab, for no Arab individual is
more courageous than her fathers and forefathers.”*

Fathers
-------

Al-’Abbas is the son of ‘Ali, son of Abu-Talib, son of Abd-ul- Muttalib,
son of Hashim, son of Abd-Menaf, son of Qussay, son of Kelab, son of
Murra, son of Kaab, son of Luway, son of Ghalib, son of Fihr, son of
Malik, son of an-Nadhr, son of Kenana, son of Khuzayma, son of Mudrika,
son of Ilias, son of Madhar, son of Nizar, son of Maad, son of Adnan…

We have to stop at him (Adnan) because we recite the Prophet’s saying,
‘When you refer to my fathers, you should stop at Adnan’, because of
seeming difficulty in pronouncing the names of the other forefathers or
because of errors that might occur in the series of their names.

Moreover, it is unacceptable to mistake intentionally the names of those
whose descendant was the great Prophet Muhammad (S).

To have little discussion about fathers of the Prophet (S), we may
refer, first of all, to the following point:

We believe that all fathers of the Prophet (S) up to Adam are pure in
birth and belief. In other words, all ancestors of the Prophet (S) were
believers as none of them had ever worshipped an idol or anything other
than Almighty God. The holy Qur’an proves this fact by saying:

***“And rely on the Mighty, the Merciful who sees you when you stand up
and (watched you during) your turning over and over among those
(ancestors) who prostrate themselves before Allah. Surely, He is the
Hearing, the Knowing”*** [^7]

Any contrary matter that may arise must be interpreted in a way
befitting this principle. For instance, the one to whom the Holy Qur’an
has referred as being Prophet Abraham’s father was not his father. He
was either his uncle or maternal grandfather. All historians have proved
that Prophet Abraham’s father was called ‘Tarikh,’ not ‘Azar’ as the
Qur’an says –

***“Consider when Abraham asked his father, Azar, Why do you believe
idols to be your gods? I find you and your people in absolute
error."***[^8]

In addition, the Holy Qur’an, in another situation, refers to the uncle
as father:

***“Were you believers there when death approached Jacob? When he asked
his sons, whom will you worship after my death? They replied - we will
worship your Lord, the Lord of your fathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and
Isaac. He is the only Lord, and to Him we have submitted
ourselves."***[^9]

Prophet Isaac was the uncle of Jacob, nevertheless, the Lord added him
to the names of ‘fathers’.

Prophet Muhammad (S) declared that all his ancestors were not
worshippers of anything other than Almighty God, and were not the
products of illegitimate copulation:

*“When Allah wanted to create us, He made us in a form of a pillar of
light in the spine of Adam. Hence, that light was shining in his
forehead. That pillar, then, moved to Shith his successor who received
the commandment of his father that he must not put that pillar in any
place other than wombs of purified women.*

*With the moving of this pillar of light, this commandment moved with
it. Hence, only the celebrities could carry that pillar of light and
only the purified women carried it. When it reached the spine of
Abd-ul-Muttalib, that pillar was divided into two parts one went to
Abdullah who moved it to the womb of Amina, and the other went to
Abu-Talib who moved it to the womb of Fatima bint Asad.”*[^10]

Let us now refer briefly to the fathers of al-’Abbas:

### Adnan

Historical reports have conveyed that Adnan, through many speeches,
foretold about the coming of Prophet Muhammad (S) who would be one of
his descendants. He also commanded the next generations to follow him.

### Maad

Maad, who was following the religion of his forefather Prophet Abraham,
was a great warrior. He used to lead campaigns against the Israelites
who had abandoned the belief of monotheism.

When Nebuchadnezzar besieged and destroyed Jerusalem, God gave His
orders to one of his prophets to carry Maad with him so as to save him
from any injury. The Lord also told, by revelation that one of the
descendants of Maad would be the seal of the prophets. Hence, Maad was
taken to Syria until that campaign ceased.[^11]

### Nizar

Historians have also told that Nizar was a famous celebrity from whose
forehead the light of prophecy shone.[^12]

### Madhar

It is related that Prophet Muhammad (S) warned against reviling at
Madhar (and Rabīa) because these were two faithful individuals who
believed in Almighty God. Besides Madhar was a wise man some of whose
maxims have been recorded in books of history.

### Ilias

Ilias ibn Madhar was the chief of his people. He was the first to offer
camels as sacrifices to the Holy House of God and the first to recognize
the standing place of Abraham after the flood that covered the Holy
House in Mecca. Finally, he was faithful monotheist. It is also related
that Prophet Muhammad (S) warned against reviling at him.

### Mudrika

Mudrika was good-looking, high-ranking celebrity. He acted as the
reference of the Arabs who used to visit him for learning from his
knowledge and virtue. He also predicted the coming of Prophet Muhammad
(S) through many speeches of wisdom that he used to deliver. History has
recorded for him many maxims.

### An-Nadhr

An-Nadhr is Koreish; hence, his descendants are called the Koreishites.
He was also man of wisdom, knowledge, and chieftainship.

### Fihr

When Hassan ibn Abd-Kelal invaded the Kaaba[^13] to take its stones for
building a similar house in Himyar, Yemen - Fihr, who was monotheist,
overcame him in a battle and took him as prisoner. Consequently, the
Arabs feared and respected him. He was also eloquent. Historians have
recorded some of his maxims.

### Kaab

Books of history have mentioned long speeches delivered by Kaab ibn
Luway regarding the prediction of the coming of Prophet Muhammad (S) and
the commandment to support him. He also composed poetic verses in this
regard.[^14] Because of his high honor and personality, his people made
a new calendar beginning with the day of his death.

### Kelab

Kelab was well known for his courage. His forehead shone with light
because of the light of prophecy.

### Qussay

Qussay was called chief of the Holy Precinct. He housed his people in
Mecca so that the other tribes would fear them. He also constructed the
Dar-un-Nidwa, in which people of Koreish used to meet to discuss their
affairs. He also founded the custom of serving the pilgrims with food
and gained the custody of the Holy House. Historians have recorded many
of his words in fields of morals and virtue. One of his speeches proves
that he warned his people against drinking wines.

### Abd-Menaf

Abd-Menaf was such glorious and honorable personality that he was
appointed as chief of his people. Because of his good looks, he was
called ‘Moon of al-Bat’haa’. He was also well known for munificence and
generosity.

### Hashim

Following the customs of his fathers, Hashim used to serve the pilgrims
with food. His situation in the year of famine is very famous.[^15] He
also enjoyed all virtues. His speeches are recorded in books of history.

### Abd-ul-Muttalib

Abd-ul-Muttalib was called ‘Shaibat-ul-Hamd’ - personality of
praiseworthiness - because people praised him so laudably for his
remarkable standing in honor, wisdom, and sagacity. To refer to his
rank, it is sufficient to mention the following saying of Prophet
Muhammad (S):

*“O ‘Ali, in the pre-Islamic era, Abd-ul-Muttalib passed five laws that
Allah enacted in Islam. He forbade sons from marrying their fathers’
women, and Allah revealed:*

***“Do not marry, from now on, the ex-wives of your fathers.”***[^16]

*As Abd-ul-Muttalib found a treasure, he gave its one-fifth as alms.
Allah revealed:*

***“Know that whatever property you may gain, one fifth belongs to
Allah, the Messenger, the kindred, orphans, the needy and those who need
money while on a journey.”***[^17]

*When he dug the Zamzam Spring, he called it ‘the watering of the
pilgrims’. Allah revealed:*

***“Do you, because you served water to the pilgrims and constructed the
Sacred Mosque, consider yourselves equal to those who have believed in
Allah, the Day of Judgment, and have fought for the cause of
Allah?**”*[^18]

*Abd-ul-Muttalib issued the law that one hundred camels should be paid
as the blood money of murdering. Allah passed the same in Islam.*

*For the Koreishites, they did not stop at a limited number of
circumambulations around the Kaaba; hence, Abd-ul- Muttalib decided
seven circumambulations for them. In Islam, Allah passed this law.*

*O ‘Ali, Abd-ul-Muttalib used to avoid dividing by casting superstitious
and gambling arrows, worshipping the idols, and having the flesh of an
animal that had been sacrificed on the stone blocks. He used to say: I
follow the religion of my father Abraham the prophet (a).*[^19]

Historians have recorded that Abd-ul-Muttalib was one of the prophets’
successors and had full acquaintance with the heavenly books. He
foretold Abu-Talib, his son, about the prophecy of Muhammad (S). In this
regard, Abu-Talib was related to have said: “My father had full
knowledge of all the heavenly books. He once said: A prophet will be
from my offspring. I wish I would catch up with his time to believe in
him. Hence, anyone of my sons who will catch up with his time must
believe in him.”[^20]

### Abu-Talib

Like his father, Abu-Talib was the chief of his people and had knowledge
of the Heavenly Books. He kept the commandments of the prophets until he
delivered them to Prophet Muhammad (S).[^21]

This great personality has become a matter of discussion among
historians some of whom, unfortunately, have given credence to the lie
that he had departed life before being a Muslim - this fabrication was
invented by the pro-Umayyads narrators for no other reason than his
being the father of ‘Ali, the first enemy of the Umayyads. Hence, they
the Umayyads - and their sycophants wanted to convince people that Abu
Suffian, the mortal enemy of Islam and the father of Muawiya, died as
Muslim while Abu-Talib was atheist.

Allama al-Mejlisi said, “Unanimously, Shia believe that Abu-Talib had
never worshipped an idol. They believe that he was one of the successors
of Prophet Abraham (a).”

Through his poetic verses that are related by all historians, people of
reason can clearly identify the reality of Abu-Talib. He was the
custodian, guardian, and defender of Prophet Muhammad (S) until he, and
the Hashemites[^22] were detained in a col to die there rejecting any
submission to the enemies of Islam.[^23]

Finally, let us refer to the following narration as quoted from Tarikh
ut-Tabari, 2/214 and as-Seerat ul-Halabiyya,1/306:

Abu-Talib, once asked his son ‘Ali: “What is this belief you are
following?”

‘Ali answered, “Father, I have believed in Allah and His Messenger, and
have given credence to him, kept to him, and followed him.”

Abu-Talib commented, “Certainly, he calls you to nothing but the good.
Hence, you must adhere to him.”

### ‘Ali

The eloquent are too tongue-tied to describe or count the
characteristics of ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib. It is, also, very difficult for
any writer to refer to Imam ‘Ali’s unparalleled personality with any
words.

Firstly, ‘Ali was the foremost to embrace Islam. He in fact had never
embraced any belief other than Islam. Prophet Muhammad (S) has said,
“‘Ali and I belong to the same tree, while people belong to different
trees.”[^24]

Since the earliest steps of his divine mission, Prophet Muhammad (S)
appointed ‘Ali as his representative, successor, and supporter. Prophet
Muhammad (S) said:

*“This ‘Ali - is my brother, successor, and representative among you.
You thus should listen to and obey him.*” [^25]

The pillars of Islam have relied on the strokes of ‘Ali’s sword. Prophet
Muhammad (S) said:

*“‘Ali’s stroke on Amr ibn Abd-Wudd is equal to the worship of both
mankind and jinn.”*[^26]

He (S) also said before the conquest of Khaybar:

*“I will hand the standard to a man who loves Allah and His Messenger
and is loved by Allah and His Messenger. He will come back with
conquest.”*[^27]

‘Ali, finally, was the most knowledgeable, most sagacious, most pious,
and most eloquent among all Muslims.

It is because of the aforementioned golden series of fathers of al-
‘Abbas that he could join the glory to honor and decency. He therefore
gained all elements of nobility that resulted in the composition of his
matchless personality.

Uncles
------

Like fathers, uncles play a good role in the structure of personalities.
According to the law of heredity, individuals may acquire some
characteristics from their paternal uncles. The paternal uncles of
al-’Abbas were such unique personalities whose lives and situations have
been matters of pride for humanity in general and Islam in particular.

### Hamza

Hamza won the badge of honor from his nephew, the great Prophet Muhammad
(S) who named him, Asadullah wa asadu Rasoulih - the Lion of Allah and
the Lion of His Messenger, for his unique bravery and courage. He
defended Islam fearlessly until he was killed during the battle of Uhud.
Hence, the Prophet (S) named him as chief of martyrs.

Moreover, many narrations confirm that Hamza had considerable knowledge
and outstanding rank in the eyes of God. Imam ‘Ali, Imam al-Hasan, Imam
al-Husayn, Imam Zayn ul-Abidin, and Imam as-Sadiq mentioned Hamza
whenever they wanted to take pride in their lineage or whenever they
wanted to refer to the foremost Muslims who defended Islam.

### Talib

Talib ibn Abi-Talib had to conceal his embracement of Islam because he
lived in Mecca. During the battle of Badr, the Meccans obliged him as
well as others from the Hashemites, to participate with them. The
Prophet (S) therefore declared: “There are some individuals who were
coerced to participate in this battle against us - hence, you must avoid
fighting them if you meet…”[^28]

### ‘Aqil

‘Aqil was one of the branches of that immaculate tree. He embraced Islam
from the beginning therefore, the Prophet (S) had great love for him:

*“I love you twice - once for your being ‘Aqil and the other for
Abu-Talib’s love for you.”*[^29]

Historians have evoked circles of suspicion around the personality of
‘Aqil because he joined Muawiya ibn Abu-Suffian. Some claim that he left
the wing of his brother Imam ‘Ali, to join Muawiya’s, because his
brother deprived him of additional salaries from the public treasury of
the Islamic State.

Anyhow, everyone agrees that ‘Aqil, during his stay with Muawiya, did
not show any loyalty to him or any disloyalty to the wing of his
brother. All indications prove that ‘Aqil had to visit Muawiya who
imposed strict blockade against the Hashemites after the death of Imam
‘Ali (a).[^30]

### Descendants of ‘Aqil

The righteous progeny glorifies the ascendants. On that account, the
descendants of ‘Aqil were high examples of heroism in defense of their
belief. Muslim ibn ‘Aqil, for instance, was that glorious personality
who fulfilled his mission so completely until he was martyred.

The other sons of ‘Aqil lost themselves defending their leader Imam
al-Husayn, during the battle of at-Taff and provided unprecedented
examples of sacrifice for their belief. Moreover, among the descendants
of ‘Aqil, there have been numerous personalities with piety, knowledge,
and authorship. Their names are well known all over the Islamic world.

### Ja’far

Ja’far ibn Abi-Talib was a great personality. The Prophet (S) chose him
for the commandment of his army at the campaign of Mu’ta. Ja’far
however, was martyred during that campaign and the Prophet (S) conferred
upon him with the eternal name ‘At- Tayyar’ when he said after that
event during which both the hands of Ja’far were severed:

*“Instead of his hands that were cut, Ja’far will have two wings with
which he will fly in Paradise wherever he wants.”*

The Prophet (S) had also said to him:

*“You are my copy in physique and morality.*[^31]

[^1]: See al-Anwar ul-Bahiya

[^2]: See Ibn Abi’l-Hadid’s Sharh Nahj ul-Balagha, The Introduction.

[^3]: The Ahlul Bayt (the people of the house), is a term dedicated to
the family of Prophet Muhammad (S). Moreover, it is dedicated to certain
individuals, namely - ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib, Fatima az-Zahra (Prophet
Muhammad’s daughter and ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib’s wife), al- Hasan ibn ‘Ali
and al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali. The nine sinless Imams (namely- ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn as-Sajjad, Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir, Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq, Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kadhim, ‘Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida, Muhammad ibn
‘Ali al-Jawad, ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Hadi, al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Askari
and Al-Mahdi the Awaited) are also included within the Ahlul Bayt.

[^4]: Prophet Muhammad (S) said, “Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the chiefs
of the youth of Paradise.” This hadith is unanimously narrated by all
historians of the two sects of Islam, Sunni and Shia.

[^5]: Masjid or mosque- is the Muslim place of worship.

[^6]: We - the Shia believe that the Immaculate Imams whose father is
‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib follow the divine directives in all their religious
and worldly conducts. We also believe that they carry supernatural
knowledge in all fields of life, because they are divinely chosen for a
special mission concerning the question of the existence of this cosmos
with all that which is in it. Nevertheless, the Imams as well as the
prophets, peace be upon them all, are required to behave as naturally as
possible and to follow the natural laws of this existence. Hence, we
notice that the Prophets and Imams (a) used their supernatural energies
in very limited situations according to the divine instructions. In this
regard, we believe that Imam ‘Ali (a) was more knowledgeable than his
brother ‘Aqil in the field of genealogy, but he sought his advice when
he wanted to choose a wife that gave birth to heroes - according to the
law of heredity, just to indicate natural laws that necessitate
following the instructions of the specialists in their fields of
specialization. To prove this matter we may cite as examples the many
reports that conveyed to us that Prophet Muhammad (S), though he was
divinely directed, used to consult his companions in many affairs and
follow their opinions after receiving a signal of acceptance from the
Heavens. In this regard, God instructs: “Only through the Divine Mercy
have you (Muhammad) been able to deal with your followers so gently. If
you had been stern and hard-hearted, they would all have deserted you a
long time ago. Forgive them and ask Allah to forgive (their sins) and
consult with them in certain matters. But, when you reach a decision,
trust Allah. Allah loves those who trust Him.” (3:159) Following the
Prophet (S), all the Sinless Imams (a) had similar situations. It has to
be added that because the Prophet and Imams have been the examples for
people, they had to behave completely naturally so that people would
follow their examples. Hence, Imam ‘Ali, in this interchange with ‘Aqil,
wanted to guide people to choose women of honorable lineages for
marriage and to avoid the inglorious, because mothers play great roles
in the natural and educational development of their sons.

[^7]: The Holy Qur’an, Surah ash-Shuaraa (26), Verses 217-20

[^8]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of al-An’aam, Verse 74

[^9]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of al-Baqara, Verse 133

[^10]: Abdullah ibn Abd-ul-Muttalib and Amina (bint Wahab) are the
parents of Prophet Muhammad, and Abu-Talib and Fatima bint Asad are the
parents of Imam ‘Ali.

[^11]: See as-Sirat ul-Halabiyya; part 1 page 20

[^12]: See ar-Rawdh ul-Anif; part 1 page 8

[^13]: Kaaba is the square-shaped building in the center of the Great
Mosque in Mecca, in the direction of which Muslims must face in offering
the obligatory prayer.

[^14]: See Subh ul-Aasha, part 1 page 211

[^15]: See as-Sirat ul-Halabiyya

[^16]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of An-Nisaa (4), Verse 22

[^17]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of Al-Anfaal (8), Verse 41

[^18]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of At-Tawba (9), Verse 19

[^19]: See Sheikh as-Saduqís al-Mawaaizh

[^20]: Refer to Bihar ul-Anwar; 9/31

[^21]: See Mir’aat ul-Uqoul, 1/326

[^22]: The Hashemites are sons and descendants of Hashim ibn Abd- Menaf

[^23]: To know more about the poetry of Abu-Talib in defence and support
of the Prophet, refer to al-Baghdadi, Khuzanat ul-Adab 1/261,
al-Hujjatu-ela ath-Thahib 45, and Ibn Abi'l- Hadid, Sharhu Nahj
il-Balagha 3/313

[^24]: Refer to Abd-ul-Husayn Sharafuddin, Al-Muraja’aat

[^25]: The whole narration is as follows: At-Tabari, in his book of
history, records that Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that ‘Ali bin Abi-Talib (a)
said after the revelation of the Verse: “And warn your nearest
relations” - the Prophet (S) summoned me and said: “‘Ali, Allah had
ordered me to warn my near relatives, but I was unable to bear this
order because I knew that they would show me detestable things if I
would approach such a matter with them. I therefore kept it secret until
Archangel Gabriel came to me and said that my Lord would punish me if I
would shun that order. Now, I want you to make some food with meat of a
ewe and bring a jar of milk for us, then gather the sons of
Abd-ul-Muttalib so that I will speak to them and convey the matter that
I have been ordered to convey.” I did as he asked me and invited them.
They were about forty men among whom there were his uncles - Abu-Talib,
Hamza, al- ‘Abbas, and Abu-Lahab. When they all attended, he asked me to
fetch that food and I did. When I put it before them, the Prophet (S)
took a piece of the meat, tore it with his teeth, threw its pieces
around the bowl, and then said: “Here you are, by the Name of Allah.”
Each one of them took it to his sufficiency completely and I could see
only the places of their hands. I swear by Allah, each one of them ate
from the quantity that I served to all of them. The Prophet (S) then
asked me to serve milk to them. I fetched that jar and they all drank
from it. By Allah I swear, each one of them drank from the quantity that
I served to all of them. When the Prophet (S) tried to speak, Abu-Lahab
overtook and prevented him from speaking. He said: “This man has
bewitched you.” Hence, they left without letting the Prophet (S) speak
to them. On the next day, he said to me: “‘Ali, that man overtook me and
said the statement that you had heard. They left before I could speak to
them. Make for us food like that which you did yesterday then gather
them to me.” I did and invited them all. He then asked me to serve them
the food. I served it for them and he repeated the same thing he had
done the previous day. Each one had to his sufficiency completely. He
then asked me to serve them with milk. I fetched the same jar and they
all drank from it to their sufficiency. Then, the Prophet (S) spoke:
“Sons of Abdul-Muttalib, I do not know any young Arab man who has
brought to his people a thing better than that which I have brought to
you. I have brought to you the goodness of this world as well as the
world to come. Allah, Exalted is He, has ordered me to call you to
accept this matter. Which one of you will support me in this regard and
he will be my brother, successor, and representative?” They all kept
silent except me. I said, while I was the youngest, “Prophet of Allah, I
will be your supporter in this matter.” I repeated this statement three
times. The Prophet (S) then took me from the neck and said: “This is my
brother, successor, and representative among you. You thus should listen
to and obey him.” They left him laughing and saying to Abu-Talib: “He
has ordered you to listen to and obey your son!” This narration is
recorded in many reference books such as: At- Tabari’s At-Tarikh
2:319-21; Ibn ul-Athir’s Al-Kamil fit Tarikh 2:22; As-Seerat
un-Nabawiyya; Al-Halabi (the Shafiite) 1:311-2; Kenz ul- Ummahl;
al-Muttaqi (the Hanafite), Mustadrak us-Sahihayn; Al- Hakim an-Nisapuri
(the Shafiite) 3:133; Ad-Durr ul-Manthour; As- Suyoutti (the Shafiite)
5:79, Al-Musnad; Ahmed ibn Hanbal (the founder of Hanbalism) 1:111,
Al-Bidaya wan-Nihaya; Ibn Kuthair 3:39; Tarikh; Abu’l-Fidaa 1:119;
Shawahid ut-Tanzil; Al-Hasakani 1:485 H.514 and 580; Tarikh Dimashq: the
life account of Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib; Ibn Asakir (the Shafiite)
1:97-105 H.133-40 and Sharhu Nahj ul-Balagha; Ibn Abi-al-Hadid (the
Mutazilite) 13:210 and 244.

[^26]: After the polytheist Meccans having defeated the undisciplined
Muslim forces at Uhud near Medina, they persuaded a number of Bedouin
tribes to join their cause. The Meccans brought a force of 10,000 men
against Medina again. Prophet Muhammad (S) then resorted to tactics - he
had a ditch dug around Medina. The Meccan horsemen were disconcerted and
soon got bored, and the coalition of Bedouin tribes started breaking up.
After an unsuccessful siege, the Meccans dispersed. Amr ibn Abd-Wudd was
the strongest horseman among the army of the Meccans. He could cross
over that ditch to challenge Muslims. Facing this horrible situation
that warned the ultimate defeat of Muslims, Prophet Muhammad (S)
declared: “I guarantee Paradise for him who will face Amr.” None of
Muslims responded to the Prophet’s call except ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib who
faced and could kill Amr by one stroke about which the Prophet (S) said
that statement.

[^27]: Two campaigns led by Abu-Bakr and Omar against the Jews of
Khaybar failed. Therefore, Prophet Muhammad (S) declared that he would
give the standard of leadership to a man who loves Allah etc. Next day,
the Prophet (S) summoned ‘Ali to give him that standard, and ‘Ali did
attack and came back with victory.

[^28]: See at-Tabari, at-Tarikh, 2/282.

[^29]: See Nukat ul-Hayman, 200; As-Sirat ul-Halabiyya, 1/304; Tathkirat
ul- Khawaas, 7; and Al-Khissal, 1/38.

[^30]: See Ibn Abi'l-Hadid’s Sharhu Nahj il-Balagha, 3/82

[^31]: See al-Bukhari, as-Sahih, 3/50; al-Hakim, al-Mustdrak, 3/220


