Umm-ul-Banin
============

Umm-ul-Banin is the glorious mother of al-’Abbas. Her name was Fatima,
daughter of Hizam. Historians have referred to her name among names of
eleven mothers each of whom were known for their glory, honor, and good
reputation.[^1] Her father too was one of the most celebrated
personalities of the Arabs, and was the chief of his people.

Historians have also mentioned many names of this great lady’s ancestors
that were well known for their horsemanship, heroism, and courage.[^2]

In conclusion, Umm-ul-Banin belonged to one of the most celebrated
families in fields of honor, open-handedness, nobility, courage, and
bravery.

Marriage
--------

When Imam ‘Ali lost his wife Fatima, the daughter of Prophet Muhammad
(S), he summoned his brother ‘Aqil who was a well- known genealogist to
ask him to search for a lady who being a descendant of heroes would give
birth to a courageous, immaculate hero whose mission would be to support
his brother al-Husayn (S) in the field of Karbala.[^3]

Without hesitation, ‘Aqil advised his brother to propose to
Umm-ul-Banin - from the tribe of Kelab because her fathers and people
had been the foremost among others in fields of heroism and courage.
Agreeing to his advice, Imam ‘Ali asked his brother ‘Aqil to go to that
lady’s father and ask her hand for him.

As soon as ‘Aqil mentioned the matter with him, Aamir - Umm-ul-Banin’s
father - welcomed and responded to it with pride.

Some historians[^4] have confirmed that Imam ‘Ali married Umm-ul-Banin
after the death of his first wife Fatima the veracious (a). Others[^5]
have recorded that Imam ‘Ali had married Imama, daughter of Zaynab
daughter of the Prophet, before Umm-ul-Banin.

Her Situations
--------------

Lady Umm-ul-Banin took care of al-Hasan and al-Husayn so remarkably well
that she had asked her husband not to call her with her name Fatima, so
that this name would not remind these two boys of their mother. They,
however, felt the extreme kindness and sympathy of this lady who could
fill a part of the great loss of their own mother whose demise had left
a deep sadness in their minds.

Emotionally, Umm-ul-Banin had great love for al-Hasan and al- Husayn
because of their perfection and unique morality. She in fact loved them
more than her own children. She also preferred them to her sons in
taking care and responsibility.

Except for this great lady, history has never seen a fellow wife act so
sincerely with her stepsons. This is because this perfect lady believed
that it was her religious duty to take care of the two Imams the love
for who is imposed by God and revealed in the Qur’an:

***Say, ‘I do not ask you for any payment for my preaching to you except
(your) love of (my near) relatives’***[^6]***.***

In the Sight of the Ahlul Bayt
------------------------------

Umm-ul-Banin had full knowledge of the actual standings and heavenly
ranks of the Ahlul Bayt, therefore, she performed her duty towards them
so perfectly. Historian have recorded that when she was carried to her
husband’s house, al-Hasan and al- Husayn were sick. As soon as she
noticed this, she willingly went on caressing them, using the nicest
language. From that time onwards, she went on treating them very kindly.
For this reason, she occupies a great position in the eyes of the Ahlul
Bayt who had immense regard for her, especially because of her unique
bearing in loyalty towards Imam al-Husayn (a).

As soon as she was back home after the tragedy of Karbala - Zaynab,
daughter of Imam ‘Ali, visited Umm-ul-Banin for condoling her for the
martyrdom of her four sons. Moreover, Zaynab used to visit her on the
Eids.[^7]

Umm-ul-Banin gave birth to four sons: al-’Abbas, Abdullah, Ja’far, and
Uthman. After the death of Imam ‘Ali, she did not marry again until she
died.

In the Sight of Muslims
-----------------------

As for the Ahlul Bayt, this lady also occupies a great position in the
sights of Muslims.

Many believe that she has a great position in the sight of God who will
surely respond to any request that is presented through the intercession
of her great position. It is natural that such a great lady occupies a
great position in the sight of God because she sacrificed her four sons
for His sake.

[^1]: See Abu-al-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil ut-Talibiyyin

[^2]: See Ibn Zaydoun, ar-Risala 1/130; Abu-al-Faraj, al-Aghani, 15/50

[^3]: See Tanqih ul-Maqal, 2/128

[^4]: Such as at-Tabari, Ibn ul-Athir, and Abu-al-Fida

[^5]: Such as Ibn Shahrashub and others

[^6]: The Holy Qur’an, Surah of ash-Shura (42), Verse 23

[^7]: See al-Shahid ul-Awwal, al-Majmou’a


