Brothers and Sisters
====================

Al-’Abbas had fifteen brothers and eighteen sisters. Their father was
the great Imam ‘Ali who brought them up on uprightness and piety.

The Two Imams
-------------

In the first place we should refer to the two Imams al-Hasan and
al-Husayn (a), from whom al-’Abbas learnt the best lessons of morality
and heroism. They are, as described by their grandfather Prophet
Muhammad (S) - “chiefs of the youth of Paradise and two Imams whether
they choose peace or choose fighting.”[^1]

Their father took pride in them whenever he wanted to prove his
precedence to the others.[^2] This fact is in itself enough to prove
their supreme worth.

So to live under the custody of such persons, after their father, is
enough to achieve perfection of personality and to acquire the highest
moralities. In addition to the divine knowledge and lore, al-’Abbas came
to possess innumerable virtues and good points because of his
brotherhood to the two Imams al- Hasan and al-Husayn (a).

Muhammad Ibn Al- Hanafiyya
--------------------------

Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya is another brother from whom al-’Abbas learnt
courage plus horsemanship and eloquence. During the battle of Siffin,
Imam ‘Ali regarded his son Muhammad as his hand. Hence, the son was
fighting bravely before his father.[^3]

Full Brothers
-------------

Abdullah, Ja’far, Uthman, Abu-Bakr, and Muhammad al-Awsat - all these
brothers were martyred during the battle of at- Taff before
al-’Abbas.[^4]

Zaynab
------

Al-’Abbas was the brother of Zaynab al-Kubra, daughter of Fatima
az-Zahra, daughter of Prophet Muhammad (S). She was older than
al-’Abbas.

Like her mother, the lady chief of the women of this world, Zaynab was
the best example of glory, honor, and perseverance to principles.
Therefore, she was the type of virtuous woman who contributes strongly
to erecting the ideal human society. She was one of the fragments of
prophecy and one of the pieces of Imamate. Besides, she was so
knowledgeable, righteous, and sagacious.[^5] Like her father, she was
very eloquent.

This lady had special attachment with al-’Abbas who engaged himself with
her guardianship during the tragic journey to Karbala.

After the martyrdom of her brothers, sons, and nephews, and after she
had been taken as captive to the palace of Yazid , Zaynab gave the best
ever example of perseverance and steadfastness when she delivered that
incomparable sermon before her enemies who tried, uselessly, to
humiliate her.

It is now not surprising for al-’Abbas, to hold all such intellectual
and spiritual virtues in his unparalleled personality, since his
forefathers, father, mother, brothers, and sisters were all models of
human perfection.

[^1]: See Keshf ul-GhUmmah, 159

[^2]: See Sheikh as-Saduq, al-Khissal, 2/551 and Sheikh at-Tusi,
al-Amali, 557

[^3]: See Sibt Ibn ul-Jawzi, Tethkirat ul-Khawaas,167 and al-Khawarzmi,
al-Menaqib, 134

[^4]: See Ibn ul-Atheer Al-Kamil fit-Tareekh, 4/31

[^5]: See at-Tabirsi Alihtijaj, 166


