in the Name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful
===============================================================

The battle of Nahrawan with all its hardships ended finally.
------------------------------------------------------------

It had been so bitter and full of painful events, much more than the
battles of Jamal and Siffeen. After that, Ameerul Mo'minin, Ali ibn abi
Talib (a.s.) with his small group of followers returned to Kufa. When he
entered the city, (or some say: the day after he returned), he went
directly to the mosque of Kufa, and before the masses of people, he
began his sermon by saying, “O people! It was I, who cut the roots of
sedition and rebellion! Something that no one had been able to do, but I
did it! Even though the waves of darkness turned to a great storm and
its difficulty increased more and more. So, before loosing me, ask me
about whatsoever that you wish to know! I swear by Allah in Whose Hand
my soul rests, that if you wish to ask me about everything that will
happen in these days to come until the Resurrection Day, I will answer
them all! Or ask me about some specific or unknown groups which shall
direct hundreds of persons in the right path, or on the contrary,
mislead them, alas! I will tell you who is their leader, where they will
set up their camp and which one of them shall die…”

After the sermon, some people stood up and asked him some questions.
Among the masses of people, there was a sad looking Jewish man. He
listened patiently to the words of Imam Ali (a.s.) and he was most
surprised about that strange pretension. He knew that this strange
request was so important “ask me before loosing me” that if somebody
should happen to talk about it, he should be either a Prophet or a
Prophet’s successor. He was deeply drowned in his thoughts. He then went
to his lonely room to think better. He was one of the great Jewish
Rabbis; a famous

man and a most wise Rabbi in the whole Arab Peninsula. A few days ago,
he had arrived in disguise to Kufa, and had taken a room for himself in
a small inn. He searched for a man with some specific characteristics
and features that he had found in Moses’ Torah and the Gospel of Jesus.

That day, when he saw Imam Ali (a.s.) for the first time, he felt that
he had known this man for many years. When he heard the words of Imam
Ali (a.s.), a strange impression came into his heart. People around him
told him that Imam Ali (a.s.) was the fourth caliph of the Muslims.
However, some other groups of men thought that he was the right caliph
and the very first Imam and the successor of the last Prophet (a.s.).

This Jewish man knew about Mohammad son of Abdullah as the holy Prophet
of Islam. He had also had heard some great things about a brave man who
had never turned his back to any war, and never escaped from any violent
combat; a man who had always stood by the Prophet (a.s.) and was known
as his dearest “brother”. He had heard about all the events that had
happened after the advent of Islam. Nevertheless, up to now, he had
never been able to see Mohammad, the Prophet of Islam, or Ali ibn Abi
Talib for that matter. Finally, he saw Ali (a.s.) that day and heard his
words… even though for a short time, but it was still enough to heal the
old wounds of his soul and answer all his complex and unanswered
questions, that which his thirsty heart and mind had formed helplessly
for do long...

On the other hand, he could not accept easily that this man was the
“one”; the same man that he had always called inside the labyrinth of
his thoughts and heart, the “one” that he had prayed Allah to find and
meet one day in the world. When he stood near one of the walls of Kufa

and looked at the blue sky, he whispered to himself: “Maybe it is truly
him that I had envisioned for so many years? How many nights did he
steal from my sleep and substituted it with extraordinary dreams!”

On the other hand, he eagerly wanted to satisfy himself that he had
found him finally! He said to himself: “It is not right! I should not
accept those feelings and satisfy myself! My mind tells me something
else. I should examine and test him more carefully. According to my
calculations, he should answer correctly to all of my questions. When he
shall answer me correctly and prove himself as a worthy man, then I will
know for sure. I am one of the noble men of the Jewish tribes, and I
know everything that is to know about the Torah and the Gospel of Jesus!
If I die like an ignorant man, anybody who believes in me, in my own
tribe, will die like me, and in the hereafter, I shall face a serious
problem. I think it is better not to anticipate the events and put my
faith on this man. I should be more patient and find a good occasion to
ask him about all my unanswered questions. I think this is a good idea,
and then my heart will accept the truth at last...”

For a moment, he felt the heat of the sun on his face. He did not know
for how long he had been staying like that on that place, so he went to
wash his face and hands.

People were scattered in the streets that were near the mosque here and
there, but now they were all ready to perform their prayer. After a few
minutes, there was nobody there. He drank some water and washed his
face. He heard the voice of the muezzin reciting: “Allaho Akbar!” That
unknown voice, affected his whole body and soul amazingly.

An unknown willingness and enthusiasm took him to the first row of
prayers. He wanted to be sure about that.

The voice belonged to him… To Ali ibn Abi Talib. He stood in the back
and gazed to his side, but he was afraid to go further. Many more
thoughts and the sunlight made him tired, frustrated, so he returned
near the pool, and imerged his head completely into the water.

After a few minutes, without thinking any further, he walked to the main
gate of the mosque. Now, he visited the mosque of Kufa and knew that it
was the best place for him to ask for his questions just among the
common people. He came into the mosque.

A few days later, the Jewish man began going to the mosque and
frequenting these men to find a suitable moment to ask his demands from
Ali (a.s.). Each time without any appropriate result, he returned
empty-handed to his hostel, because Ali (a.s.) did not come to the
mosque, or he himself was not in a good mood; or he was not able to find
a suitable time to offer his questions. Days and nights passed and he
was bothered with depression and a fatigue of mind.

That very night was very different from the previous nights. Since the
beginning of the night, he felt a bizarre emotion in his heart. A
strange feeling was forming inside his being, which made him impatient.
He could not eat or drink, and the bird of his thoughts had flown away
and the curtain of sleep was pulled away from his eyes.

He looked at the sky and stars all the night. He was waiting for the sun
to rise in order to go to the mosque. Waiting was the only thing he
could do! It was truly unbearable for him.

At the earliest moments of the new day, he got out and began walking in
the street. A cool and smooth breeze was whispering into his ears, and
touching lightly the skin of

his face. He did not look at his left or right, for nobody was there.

He did not know what he was doing in the street. He did not know from
which direction he should go toward the mosque. For a short time, he
began thinking, but he could not concentrate his mind to remember
anything, so he chose a path by chance, while drowned in his thoughts,
until he saw the earthen walls of the mosque.

The sun was rising and the weather was getting hotter. In that season,
the nights of Kufa were cool and the days were hot. He touched the walls
of the mosque. It was still cool by the night’s breeze. He chose to
relax for a little while in the shade of the same wall, and so he sat
there. He took his knees with his arms and embraced them thoughtfully,
gazing at the blue sky of Kufa, which filled his eyes with its beauty
and gave him a sense of calmness and serenity. He tried to collect his
thoughts and give them some order. At the height of exasperation, he
whispered to himself: “How tired I am! How my patience has come to its
end! O, Allah!  The All-Powerful! Help me!”

Without knowing the reason, he suddenly raised his head and gazed at the
principal portal of the mosque. He tried in vain to concentrate his
thoughts. Maybe his condition was due to his sleepless nights, his
inward agitation, and the condition in which he saw himself for some
time now. He did not know why he had come there to sit down on the
ground. He could not find any reasonable explanation for his actions and
behavior. He began to think about the recent days.

A smile appeared slowly on his face, and his eyes began to shine. He got
up quickly and entered the mosque. He rested his arm on the entry door
to look around. Some men were sitting on the ground. Some others were
sitting

under the shade, made of the palm frond, or were offering their prayers.
Some others were leaning against the wall and taking a nap.

Doves were flying here and there, some others trying to quench their
thirst from the water of the great basin situated in the middle of the
court of the mosque.

He suddenly felt pain in his temples. He closed his eyes. It appeared to
him that he was hearing a long whistling in his head. He remembered this
strange statement, “Ask me whatever you wish to ask from me, before it
gets too late…”

He got this certainty that on that same day, he could fulfill his
deepest wish and get near Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). The day he had
waited so long for its coming had finally come! And, suddenly, he knew
the reason of his torment and inward excitement; it was because he was
going to see that strange man once again! Then he could ask him all
those bothering questions that were so important to him. He knew that he
was nearing a great spiritual test, and he was very much worried and
fearful about what were to happen to him! If per chance he could not
receive his answers, then what would he do?! He already saw himself in
great desperation with all doors of the world closed before him. He knew
he was not allowed to advance too much in his desperation before his
Creator. But what if he was to receive all his answers at last?

He was going to see all his desires fulfilled in this world… and what
excellent end, was truly waiting for him!

He felt a new force inside him. Full of energy, he entered the mosque.
He reached the eastern wall which was situated exactly in front of the
principal door and sat down in the shade. Now, he only had to wait.

The sun then went high and the shade of the wall decreased. Under the
shadow in front of the mosque, a group of men gathered and they began
talking with each other. The Jewish man went to a column and sat down
near it.

He asked a man nearby, “Will your lord come today?”

The man answered in affirmative.

From that moment on, a liquid fire flowed in his veins and he could not
bear this agonizing waiting anymore! He could not keep himself serene
and calm. He gathered his clothes and got up. He sat down once again for
a while and again got up. He could not let himself stand up, because he
would have lost his place otherwise. He needed his place most urgently,
because it was very near to the pulpit of the Commander of the
Believers. He needed to be there to be able to ask his questions, and to
receive clear, precise, definite answers. He did not want to converse
with the man who sat near him on his right. He only wanted to fly high
to reach another spiritual realm.

Hot rays of the sun reached him under the palm-frond shade which
protected the people from the blinding brightness of the morning sun.

He put his head against the wooden column when he suddenly heard a
rumor. Suddenly, men got to their feet as if by a common accord. He did
the same without knowing the reason. He turned his head and suddenly saw
Ali ibn Abi Talib who was coming to ward them, very simply attired. A
deep dignity and an inner majesty enveloped all his persona. He had a
sword on his side, and his clothes were very simple. He had put on
sandals made of the fibers of palm trees.

The Jewish man, who could not endure this anymore, felt his knees
tremble. He got pale and was forced to lean on the column that was
behind him.

Ali passed among the men, sat down on the ground, and faced the public.

That day, the intimate friends of Ali were as follows; Asbagh ibn
Nabatah, Komeyl ibn Ziyad, Meytham at-Tammar, and Habib ibn Mudhahir.
They sat close to their master showing him great respect. A moment
passed in silence, and then there were questions from the people all
around. There were also men having come from other cities looking
forward to receive answers to their theological questions, or concerning
problems of their everyday life. Some others had come there to seek
justice, and they really were stupefied by the fair judgment of Ali ibn
abi Taleb (a.s.).

The Jewish man was amazed. He looked for an instant at Ali (a.s.), and
the next instant, at those men. He had not yet had an opportunity to ask
his own questions. Then, he did not have the necessary courage for this.
Time passed quickly, but he could not let that precious time to go by.

He moved himself a bit, and then collected his inward power to give
himself the courage to stand up. With this act, he provoked the
stupefaction of the men who were close to him. But then again, he did
not know what kind of demand to make to Ali. It seemed to him that he
had forgotten everything! With great difficulty, he dampened his lips,
and with a trembling voice he said, “If you permit me, I wish to ask you
some questions!”

The tone of his voice and his foreign accent made the men turn their
heads towards him. Ali with a paternal look gazed at him and declared,
“Offer your demands please!”

The man raised his head and fixed Ali’s face. He then lowered his eyes
and looked at Ali’s feet. With a mixture of modesty and hesitation he
announced, “… But no body can answer my questions except if the are
answered by a Prophet or by the successor of a Prophet…”

Maybe he had said it, just to have a confirmation… Who knows?

Ali (a.s.), with an affectionate gaze, repeated with a celestial voice,
“Offer your demands…come now! Ask whatever you want to know.” After this
cordial tone, all the particles of the man’s being were enveloped by
these two things; the voice of the Commander of the Believers and its
warm vibration! They put an end to all his agitations and uncertainties.
All the windows of his spirit and heart opened up suddenly, and he saw
himself completely enveloped and braced by the waves of a sea of
goodness and paternal kindness.

The Jewish man regained force and suddenly all his questions came forth
to his tongue. He had control over his mind. It appeared to him most
strange that he could feel this way, but he let this thought go away,
and he concentrated on the questions that he was going to ask from the
Commander of the Believers.

He coughed and, with a great serenity that was new to him said, “I have
read in the Torah that after the election of each Prophet, Allah the
Almighty, by way of His Revelation, makes his Messenger choose a man
among his intimates to be his successor and to maintain justice after
his death. The Prophet then makes him swear that he might be able to put
them in execution. I have also heard that Allah the Almighty, during the
life of this Prophet and after his death, sends down all kinds of
sufferings and calamities on his successor. Thus, I wanted to know that
if

they really have to endure trials during the Prophet’s lifetime and
after his death, and what shall be their own ends ...?”

Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, “I swear by Him Who has opened the sea for the
children of Israel and Who has revealed the Torah to Prophet Moses, that
I shall answer all your questions! But if there shall be answers to
which you will have to respond, will you do that?”

“Oh yes, I will!”

The men, who were there, saw themselves getting more stretched, because
new comers had come into the mosque, and they were searching for some
place near those, who were already there, to sit down.

Nobody had ever asked such a question. It appeared to them as a very
good, refreshing novelty to them! In fact, there were even intimates of
Ali ibn Abi Talib, who had never heard of such demands.

The Commander of the Believers got to his feet and sat on the pulpit. He
began his speech by saying, “Allah the Almighty, during the Prophet’s
lifetime, puts to trial the successor of this Prophet for seven times…
To test in fact, his faith and obedience…Then after the death of this
Prophet, Allah once again, puts this successor to trial for seven times
to come to see how far his patience and submission will go, and when
these torments and sufferings reach their end, Allah grants him the
great honor of becoming a Martyr. Thus, he could join the Prophet and
reach the absolute Bliss.”

The man said, “You have said that Allah grants them the great honor of
becoming Martyrs. Thus, they could join the Prophets and reach the
absolute Bliss. You have answered correctly, O Commander of the
Believers! Now, can you

tell me how many times have you ever been put on trial yourself by Allah
the Almighty, either during Mohammad’s lifetime (a.s.), or after his
decease, and how shall *your* end be?”

Imam Ali (a.s.) got up calmly, came close to the man and said to him,
“Come… get up, so that I could answer you in private.”

By the manner that Ali (a.s.) behaved, and by the answer he had given to
him, he showed his desire to take him to some other place to be able to
talk to him in private, and to make him some confidences without the
presence of the others.

At this moment, some of Ali’s enemies, who had had a grudge against him,
for such a long time, objected with high cries and shouts and said, “O,
Commander of the Believers! Take us with you!”

Ali (a.s.) replied, “I am afraid that you could not bear my words.”

“Why is it so?”

“Because of the many bad deeds that some of you have committed.”

Soon after, one of Imam Ali’s companions got up and with great modesty
said, “O, Commander of the Believers! Favor us too! Tell us, your
companions and those who wish you well, about these sufferings and
calamities! I swear by Allah, that apart from you, we do not know
another successor to our Prophet, and we are very well aware of this
fact. We know perfectly that Allah, after Mohammad, will not send
another Prophet. Thus, we confess that fact by obeying you. We know that
it is a moral duty and a religious prescription, which is done

after the obedience that we had offered to our great Prophet.”

After this humble request, Imam Ali (a.s.) sat on his pulpit. Those who
had got up, sat down again, and all men were ready to listen to Imam
Ali’s reply.

The Commander of the Believers, after praising Allah and thanking the
Divine Blessings, turned to the Jewish man and said to him, “When the
Prophet was alive, Allah put me on trial on seven occasions, but I do
not want to appear proud or self-conceited. However, you shall see that
in each occasion. I have always been absolutely obedient toward the
Messenger of Allah (a.s.).”

The Jewish man asked him respectfully, “May I ask on which occasions?”

Imam Ali (a.s.) recounted his sufferings and calamities in two parts,
and each one was divided in seven stages. The first one was during the
time in which the Prophet (a.s.) lived, and the other part after the
Prophet (a.s.) had left for the better world. That is from the time in
which there was a house near the Ka’aba, until that sad dawn when the
mosque of Kufa became bloody and Ali (a.s.), before his soul was taken
up to its Creator, sighed by saying, “I have won, by the Lord of Kaaba!”

1-Youmul Inthar (the day of warning)
------------------------------------

When Allah the Almighty had sent down His Revelation to our Prophet,
chosen him as His Messenger, and entrusted him with the Divine Mission,
I was the youngest member of his family. In those days, I was always
with the Messenger of Allah (a.s.). I tried to satisfy him by doing
everything well. One day, he invited the children of Abdul Muttalib,
from the oldest to the youngest one to his house.

He testified to the Oneness of Allah, spoke of his Prophetic Mission,
and invited them to accept his Divine Mission. All of them turned their
backs to him and walked away ignoring his statements.

Other people did the same as his own family and tribe did to him. His
family resisted to him. In fact, their hearts could not tolerate to
accept his Mission and their minds could not analyze the meanings of the
Pure Monotheism. The confession of these beliefs was very difficult for
them.

In this situation, I was the only one who accepted his invitation.
Without no hesitation! I was so certain about my decision, that I joined
him with all my heart and mind and felt no doubt whatsoever!

Anyway, three years passed and in these years, there was nobody on the
earth who would accept the Prophetic Mission of Mohammad (peace be upon
Him) except me and the daughter of khuwaylid (Khadijah). We were the
only three ones who offered prayers to Allah, The Most Powerful.

[The narrator of this news, Jabir al-Jo’fi narrates that at that
moment]: "Ali (peace be upon him), in front of the people, asked the men
who were listening to him: ‘Is it not true?’ Everyone said, ‘O commander
of the believers! Yes, it is true!’

The Jewish man whispered to himself: Then it is the first sign.

2-Leylatol Mabeet (the night of sleeping in  the Prophet's bed)
---------------------------------------------------------------

O, our Jewish brother, the tribes of Quraysh were always thinking about
how to kill the Prophet of Islam. To execute

their devillish plan, they did everything, until one day they gathered
in “Dar an-Nadwah; house of meeting” where Satan was also present there,
as the one-eyed man of Thaqif (A’war Thaqif).

Satan expressed and revealed the hidden intentions. He persuaded the men
of Quraysh to choose a young man from each tribe to attack and kill the
Prophet (a.s.) while sleeping. In this devilish plot, a group of men
would kill the Prophet (a.s.), and so the Hashimites [the members from
the Bani Hâchim tribe] would not be able to avenge on all the Arab
tribes. In this way, the Prophet’s blood would have been  shed in vain.

After they decided to do so, Gabriel came to see the Prophet Muhammad
(a.s.) and revealed to him about their plot. Gabriel also told him about
the exact time and the night of the execution of the plot. He helped him
leave Mecca and directed him to the cave of Hara’ in the Thour Mountain.

The Prophet Mohammad (a.s.) told me about this matter and asked me if I
would sleep in his bed and sacrifice my life for him? I delightedly
agreed to his order and I was very happy to do that.

This special and dangerous night had come and the Messenger of Allah
(a.s.) left Mecca. I slept in his bed. In the middle of the night, the
men of Quraysh, broke into the Prophet’s house, but when they opened the
door of the Prophet’s room, I got up from his bed and attacked them with
my unsheathed sword. You all know how I defended myself. Is it not
true?"

Everyone said, “Yes, It is true! You are the commander of the
believers!” The Jewish man said to himself: ‘This is the second sign.’

3- The Battle of Badr
---------------------

The two sons of Rabee’ah; Shaybah and Utbah, and Waleed Utbah’s son were
three courageous warriors of the tribe of Quraysh. They looked for equal
opponents during the battle of Badr, but nobody was able or courageous
enough to fight with them. At that time, the Prophet (a.s.) sent me to
them. I was the youngest among all the warriors in the Muslim army. By
the assistance of Allah, I could kill Waleed and Shaybah, and I could
capture many other unbelievers.

I faced many hardships during that battle and nobody in our troop faced
the same hardships. Allah bestowed His Mercy on my cousin Ubaydah ibn
Harith who fought alongside me. Is it not true?"

Everyone replied, “Oh yes! You are truly the Commander of the
Believers!”

The Jewish man accepted the third sign in his heart and mind.

4-The Battle of Uhud
--------------------

The year after, all the Arab tribes along with Quraysh gathered together
and decided to be united to avenge their men who had been killed during
the battle of Badr. They wanted to kill all the Muslims. Once again,
Gabriel by the Will of Allah, came down and revealed to the Prophet
(a.s.) their satanic plot against him.

After that, the Prophet with his followers were waiting by the mountain
of Uhud, when the polytheists of Qurasyh came and the battle began.

…In the beginning, the Muslims defeated the polytheists, but at last,
the Muslims were defeated and many heroes from them were martyred.

On those perilous moments, some of our soldiers escaped from the
battlefield and were scattered in different places. It was only I, who
stood beside the Messenger of Allah with all my heart and soul. Some
groups of the Muhajireen and the Ansar, who had escaped toward their
homes, thought that the Prophet (a.s.) and his companions had been
killed in the battle. However, Allah the Almighty and all the wise men
did not give them enough time and had gave them deadly blows! On that
occasion, I received more than seventy wounds in my body! These are the
scars caused in the past battles. I hope that Allah will reward me in
the hereafter with the best of His reward.

Is not true what I have just said?”

“Yes, it is true, and you are truly the Commander of the Believers!”

The Jewish man accepted those sings that he knew well and his face
turned slowly pale.

5. The Battle of Ahzab, in the fifth year of Hegira
---------------------------------------------------

After the battle of Uhud, the Arab tribes became stronger and fiercer
than before. They made a convention among them to collaborate in all the
affairs and not to break their allegiance to each other, in order to
defeat and kill all the Muslims of Medina, and most of all kill the
Prophet (a.s.) and annihilate all the children of Abu Talib forever.

With this wicked decision, they set the fire of anger and grudge. They
thought that their plan would bear fruit and they could kill all the
residents of Medina. These miscreants had a great trust in their war
plan.

Once again, Gabriel came down to tell the Prophet (a.s.) about the plot.
The Prophet (a.s.) along with the Muhajireen (immigrants) and the Ansar
(supporters) started to dig a trench around the city of Medina.

When Quraysh and the allies arrived at Medina, they did not know
anything about the Muslims’ ingenuity. When they came before the great
trench around the city, they were not able to make a decision as to what
they should do for that strange and complicated problem. They thought
that they were much more powerful than Muslims were. Therefore, they
were very angry about our astuteness.

On the other hand, the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) invited them to embrace
Islam and asked them gently to consider about their souls…, but it did
not affect their cruel and heartless decision. It made them, in fact,
even angrier. They insisted on their position against the believers.

On that day, their greatest warrior was a man named Amr ibn Abd Widd. He
was one of the greatest and most famous swordsmen among the Arab tribes.
When he came in the battlefield, he cried out loudly challenging the
Muslims to combat with him. He was turning his spear around his head and
for some moments, he was also turning his sword upon his head. However,
nobody had enough courage to advance and fight with him except me. Every
time the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) asked Muslims, if one of them wanted
to go to him, no one responded except me. On that critical moment, the
Prophet (a.s.) permitted me to go to the battlefield and fight with that
great hero. Before I went into the battle field the Messenger of Allah

(a.s.) put his turban on my head and gave me his sword as benediction.

I advanced to fight with Amr, and the women of Medina began to cry for
me, because they were certain that I would die. Allah the Almighty
assisted me, and I could kill one of the most famous heroes of
Arabia...! Before his death, he gave a very hard blow on my head. After
that, Allah the Almighty gave us victory and added another defeat to the
polytheists’ defeats. Is it not true?”

Everybody said, “Yes, it is true, O, the Commander of the Believers!”

The wise Jewish man found the fifth sign irrefutable. The color of his
face changed to white. He was looking at Imam Ali’s face, but after this
last sign, he began gazing at the floor.

6- The Battle of Khaybar
------------------------

I remember the day I was with the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) when we
entered the place where your brothers in religion (the Jews) lived. I
mean the fortress of Khaybar. There were some Jews and warriors were all
gathered there together. They had prepared a massive cavalry squadron.
In their invincible fortress, they were ready for war.

During a fight, they came and invited us in. Every man from our troops,
who went to fight, was killed there and then. After that, Muslims were
incited to begin general fight. Everyone thought how to save himself.
Some people looked at me saying, “O Abul Hassan, will you go on and save
us?”

The Messenger of Allah (a.s.) once again sent me towards the enemies. I
killed everyone that fought me. Like an angry lion, I attacked the
troops of the enemy, and defeated everyone obstructing my way.

The Jewish men felt the smell of defeat in the air, and escaped into
their fortress. They closed the great gates behind them, but it was I,
who plucked out the great gate of Khaybar and threw it far away! I began
walking in the fortress by myself. I fought and killed every fighter
standing against me. I defeated them all, but with Allah’s assistance.
Is it not true?”

The all said, “Yes, it is true. You are truly the lord of the Muslims!”

The Jewish man had lost the color of his face. He was still gazing at
the store ground in front of him. He was embarrassed for the bad deeds
of his fellows in religion, but he was also aware of the sufferings of
Ali (a.s.) in that war. Inside him, he praised Imam Ali (a.s.) more and
more.

7- The disavowal of the Polytheists
-----------------------------------

When the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) along with his companions were going
to conquer Mecca, he wanted once again to invite the inhabitants of that
city to Islam. So he wrote a letter in which he asked them to refrain
from cruelty and fighting, and just think of Allah and His Mercy. He
gave them hope that Allah would forgive them if they repented. At the
end of the letter, the Prophet (a.s.) pointed out to them the Sura of
Bara’ah (disavowal).

The Prophet (a.s.) proposed the task of delivering the letter to the
people around him and wanted someone to perform this duty, but all of
them refused that dangerous

mission. When the Prophet (a.s.) found no responses, he chose Abu Bakr
to carry out the task and announce the Sura of Bara’ah before the in
habitants of Mecca. When Abu Bakr went on his way, the Archangel Gabriel
came down saying to the Prophet (a.s.), “O Mohammad! No one should do
this mission except you, or a man from your family!” Then, the Messenger
of Allah (a.s.) called me and asked me to carry out and perform that
diffiwlt mission. He asked me to go after Abu Bakr without any delay,
and take that message from him, he said that I myself, should announce
the Sura before the Meccans. I went to Mecca with the Sura, but what can
I say about the people of Mecca? If they were free to do anything they
wanted to do, they would have shown me their dark and deep hatred and
grudges. They would have cut my body into pieces, and put each piece on
the top of every mountain! As you know, they were ready to sacrifice
their wives, children and wealth, to realize their wicked plots against
me! However, I achieved my mission completely and delivered them the
message of the Prophet (a.s.). After that, some groups came and
threatened me. Some people talked about appointing me in a high position
in the city and giving me a lot of money. Some others showed their old
enmity against me, but I just did what the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) had
asked me to do. Is it not true?”

All of them replied, “Yes it is true, O Commander of the Believers!”

Then Imam Ali (a.s.) looked at the Jewish man and said, “My Jewish
brother! These are the seven instances of my sufferings before the death
of the Messenger of Allah. We have not enough time to explain them
completely and fully!”

 The wise Jewish man looked at Imam Ali’s face for a while, and then
some tears came in his eyes.

The instances of Imam Ali’s sufferings after the death of the Prophet
(a.s.):

1-Patience before of the Prophet’s death
----------------------------------------

First of all, do be aware that I was not accustomed to be so close to
anyone but to the Messenger of Allah... He was the source of trust and
tranquility for me, and he was the only one that I could feel myself
close to him, for he had always been my guardian and tutor in my
childhood. He always had me with him in those days. He always helped my
family. He always relieved my sadness and loneliness. He used to provide
my daily sustenance! When poverty attacked me, it was he who provided
for my wife and children. However, these instances are nothing when
compared to his assistance to me! These were my earthly needs. The
Messenger of Allah (a.s.) helped me a lot so that, step by step, I could
finally achieve my knowledge of God.

It is obvious that the death of the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) was a
great calamity to me. A great calamity that was unbearable even for
mountains! In that time, I saw that some members of my household were
very restless, because that disaster was out of their capacity to bear.

They were desperate and impatient. They were not ready to hear or talk
about anything else... But some of the family members of Abdul Muttalib
asked them to be patient, and sympathized with my household in their
weeping and mourning. At that time, I was very lonely and sad, but I had
to persevere and be patient. I used to be silent and I obeyed the
directions of the Prophet (a.s.) left

for me to execute them properly. In fact, it was I, who washed his holy
body, enshrouded him, offered the prayer of death on him, and buried him
at last...

From then on, I had to perform my daily prayers, never wore my aba
anymore. I did that just when, until I completed the Book of Allah, and
accomplished my pledges for that holy existence.

Be aware that none of these works did impede me from performing my
obligations. I did not weep, nor did I moan, until I carried out the
rights of Allah and his Prophet, and completed my sad mission. Know that
for passing these stages in my life, I always remained patient. Is it
not true?”

Everyone said, “Yes it is true, and you are truly the Commander of the
Believers!”

The Jewish man cried a lot, and was sorry that he had not had the
privilege to see the Prophet of Islam in person.

2-The Saqifa of Bani Sa’idah**[1]**
-----------------------------------

The Prophet (a.s.) always supported me during his lifetime. He used to
introduce me as his successor. In the last time when he appeared to the
public, before a massive number of Muslims he introduced me as “Amirul
Mo’minin: the commander of the believers”, and he asked them to swear me
their allegiance and to obey me thenceforth. He asked them to convey
that important news to those who were absent on that fateful day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Saqifa means “shade”. The Saqifa of Bani Sa’idah was a very
famous place where people used to meet and to discuss their important
affairs and matters of the time.

People knew this fact well and knew that it was I, who had to explain
the directions of the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) to the others. I was the
commander of his army in all the wars and journeys that we had
accomplished together. Therefore, it was a faraway, ridiculous idea that
some people wanted to start a fight against me concerning this matter.
When the Prophet (a.s.) was ill sometime before his departure to the
better world, he directed me to prepare an army and join all the
companions to this army under the leadership of Usama ibn Zeyd to fight
the Romans.

The Prophet (a.s.) did not want to see any disagreement between the two
great tribes of al-Aus and al-Khazraj. He ordered that everybody should
go to that war. However, everyone looked at me with anger and grudge,
for in the past, I had killed their fathers, brothers, or other
relatives in different wars.

Thus, the Prophet had dispatched some people from the Muhajireen, the
Ansars, and those whose hearts were made to incline to Islam, but those
who had remained near the couch of the Prophet (a.s.) did not say
anything, so as not to disturb the Prophet (a.s.) and to prevent any
disagreement and rebellion against the command of the Prophet (a.s.).

In fact, the Prophet (a.s.) was very serious about his directions
concerning the Muslims to join Usama’s army and obey him loyally, so
that nobody might stand against his will openly.

When the Prophet (a.s.) passed away, some of the commanders in Usama’s
army gave up their important positions and clearly disregarded the
Prophet’s orders. Usama remained lonely and helpless among his soldiers.

All these disobediences and revolts were just for one reason; to return
to Medina and break the allegiance that the Prophet (a.s.) had took from
them as to my position as the Commander of the Believers.

They gathered in the Saqifa of bani Sa’idah, but did not consult with
any of the children of Abdul Muttalib, mor asked me the permission to
take off their allegiance paid to me. On that day, I was preparing the
Prophet’s holy body to be buried, because this thing was much more
important than their plots to me.

Oh, my Jewish brother! After the death of the Prophet (a.s.) - and no
one, ever since, had filled his empty place in my heart- there came a
great suffering for me… Their conspiracy against me was a very painful
betrayal! However, I was patient and did not lose my endurance. Is it
not true?”

Everyone said, “Yes, it is true, and you are truly the Commander of the
Believers!”

The Jewish man felt a pain in his heart, when once again, he heard about
the sufferings of Ameerol Mo’minin.

3-The usurped Caliphate
-----------------------

“After the death of the Prophet, Abu Bakr became the caliph instead of
me. Every time he saw me, he used to ask for my forgiveness for his
oppression against me, and he used to blame his friend Umar, for having
usurped my right, and broken their covenant with me. For all these
matters, he always asked for my forgiveness.

I said to myself that one day, his reign would terminate and I would
gain my true right, for Allah had chosen me for this position. Another
thing was that Islam was in his

first days, and I did not want to add another discord to the already
existing discords and did not want to fight those who had usurped my
true right and position, and start a war among my Muslim brothers.

In those days, my faithful and true companions were those who had a good
intention in their hearts and were benevolent for the sake of Allah and
his Prophet’s satisfaction. They believed in the Holy Quran and they
secretly invited me to take back my right from those who had usurped it.
They were ready to sacrifice their lives for my right and keep their
covenant, but I always invited them to be patient. I used to tell them:
may Allah give back my lost right, without any destructive feud between
the Muslims.

Others, on that chaotic period, were a group of people who believed
strongly in Allah, the Prophet (a.s.), the Holy Qur’an, and Islam, and
covertly or openly, invited me to restore my true right. I found them to
be true Muslims. They were ready to sacrifice their lives to prove their
loyalty to me! But I always tried to make them be more patient. I
thought that Allah would soon restore my unfairly usurped right without
any fight.

On the other hand, after the death of the Prophet, many people fell into
the trap of hesitation and they became greedy for the Caliphate. Each
tribe wanted the new caliph to be from their own clan. One thing that
was interesting was that they were against each other, but at the same
time, they supported each other to keep ME away from the Caliphate! So
when the first one (Abu Bakr) died, his friend Umar took over the
responsibility of the Caliphate for himself and did exactly like the
previous one, and did not give me back my true right.

Once again, the followers of Mohammad (peace be upon him) came to me
and, - as you now know, some of them are already dead and some others
are still alive – anyway these faithful people asked me to stand up
against Umar, but I did not change my mind, and I kept my patience.

We were the family of the Messenger of Allah (a.s.), but we lived in a
house that had no roof and the doors were made of palm fronds. There was
nothing on our mattress and no blanket to cover us in sleep…During
prayers, we often had just one garment which was used by all the members
of the family… How many days and nights we spent with hunger…!

Sometimes after a war, Allah the Almighty set aside some booty for us.
Though the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) knew of our hard condition, he gave
our shares to affluent and rich men to make their hearts incline to
Islam. I myself saw the sufferings of the Prophet (a.s.) when he invited
them to Islam, and I knew that I had a heavy responsibility to preserve
the circle of Islam and not to break it in no way whatsoever!

On the other hand, if I did some kind of revengeful actions, and
gathered some people to support me, I could gather some groups around me
with no doubt and they would be ready to fight against our enemies, but
that idea had two sides; perhaps some people might stop their support
and would then join the opposite side, or some other people might be
killed.

I knew that my deep affinity to the Prophet (peace be upon him) was like
the kinship of Aaron to Moses, and I was really afraid that the
punishment of Allah might befall on my people, like the punishment of
Moses’ people when they disobeyed Aaron. So I thought it would be better
if I drank from the cup of sorrow, held my breath, and kept

my patience, so that Allah would achieve His Will. On that occasion, my
recompense would be more, and maybe a kind of forbearance would be
considered as privilege for my people, and I knew that the Command of
Allah is a determined decree.

I had a solid background from the past and was closest to the Prophet
(a.s.) in family relationship, and as his successor. Beyond other
things, the Prophet (a.s.) on the day of "Ghadir Khom" had expressed his
strong wish about my being his successor, according to the Will of
Allah. He invited the people to pledge their allegiance to me as the
Commander of the believers after his death, and it was impossible for
people to have any bad thought against me in their minds.

 Aye… when the Prophet (a.s.) died, the government of the Islamic lands
was in his own house, not in the hands of others or in their houses! And
his progeny were definitely more deserving for the position of the
“Caliphate” or other rights than the others, because Allah the Almighty
had created us pure and innocent from the very beginning. Is it not
true?"

Everyone said, “Yes, it is true, and you are truly the Commander of the
Believers!”

The Jewish man’s heart was choked by emotions and was much paler than
before.

4-The six men assembly of the Caliphate in (the year 24 After Hegira)
---------------------------------------------------------------------

“As you know, after Abu Bakr, the one who had robbed and wore the cloak
of Caliphate instead of me, consulted

always with me in everything and always listened to me as to the many
complex matters that he had to deal with.

No one can remember a day when he (Umar) did not ask from me. So I
thought that finally I would get my right. Therefore, when Umar died
unexpectedly, it seemed he had not had enough time to choose his
successor, and I thought that I would gain my right of the Caliphate at
last, and could do many reforms among the Umma of the Prophet (a.s.).
However, the plot changed. Before his death, Umar had chosen six persons
and I was the sixth among them. The strange thing was that I did not
have an equal right as the others. He had not considered all of my
backgrounds, sacrifices, hereditary right, my kinship to the Messenger
of Allah (a.s.) and my being his brother, cousin and son-in-law! He
himself knew that well, and I was definitely much better and suitable in
all these things, than the others.

His son Abdullah was the head of this assembly. If one of us was tired
or wanted to exit from the assembly, he (Abdullah) had the right to kill
us immediately.

And you, my Jewish brother, have no idea how hard it was for me to be
patient in that time…!

They consulted for some days and believed that each of them was more
suitable for this position (the Caliphate). I was always silent. If one
of them had a question, I just talked about the past events and my
numerous assistance to Islam.

Ridiculously enough, all of them remembered all of my achievements and
efforts. I just reminded them of these things, because the Prophet
(a.s.) had taken their covenants for my becoming the rightful Caliph and
had insisted on my position after him before them all.

However, the sweet taste of authority, earthly wishes and power closed
their eyes to these truths. The most important thing was that they
wanted to restore their prominence of the past (the pre-Islamic age),
and so they usurped my right once again.

I reminded them of the Day of Resurrection, and I wanted to do anything
to stop their wrong doings, but all of them pretended to show their
acceptance in front of me, whereas in fact, they wanted to choose
themselves for the Caliphate, and they did not know that I would not
accept that. On the other hand, they knew that I would do exactly
according to the Book of Allah and the Sunna of the Prophet (a.s.) and
that my successor would be chosen by the Will of Allah and not by me.

In that chaotic time, one of these men listened to his corrupted mind
and chose Uthman, because he thought that in the near future, Uthman
would appoint him in a high position; therefore, he persuaded the others
to choose Uthman for this role… the one who was the least fit for that
important position.

During the past, Uthman often had not participated in the wars (of
Muslims), and everybody in the Arab peninsula believed that to
participate in those wars was a distinct honor. Allah had bestowed many
blessings on the Prophet (a.s.) and his family, that Uthman had nothing
to do with them… I am sure that the men, who had chosen him for this
responsibility, regretted quickly what they had done only a few hours
after their decision!

After a short time, the people who had appointed Uthman ibn Affan for
the Caliphate, believed that he was a heretic. Uthman went to see some
of his friends (from the Prophet’s companions) and begged them to
forgive him.

He said he was ready to resign because he wanted to redress his
immorality.

Oh, my Jewish friend, that problem was very difficult and greater than
the other problems, and I was at the point of overflowing the measure of
my patience…! It is hard to describe those days, but like past
situations, I did nothing, but keep silence and be patient.

Yes, after a few hours of Uthman’s being chosen as the Caliph on that
fatal day, the other members of the assembly came to see me. They wanted
me to depose Uthman and assume this position. They swore before me to be
under my command until their last breath, and support me until the day
when Allah would return my true right to me.

Anyhow, my friend! Like the previous instances, and in relation with the
former caliphs, I had no way but to remain silent, because I did not
want to witness the death of my true friends and the true companions of
our Prophet (a.s.), whereas if I had called them to death, they would
never have hesitated.

As you know well, death to me is like refreshing, cold water in a hot
sunny day in the desert! Know that my uncle Hamza, my brother Ja’far and
my cousin Ubaydah had made a covenant with Allah, and so my followers
had died while keeping their promise. I was the only one who had
remained alive, by the Will of Allah, that Allah had revealed this verse
about us,  ***(Of the believers are men who are true to the covenant
which they made with Allah: so of them, is he who accomplished***

***his vow, and of them is he who yet waits, and they have not changed
in the least)***.**[1]**

Anyway, if I remained silent in front of ibn Affan and did nothing
against him, I knew that his bad behavior and immorality would bring
others to kill him too, and stop him from committing corruption… So, I
cloistered myself and kept tolerant until that day I had predicted. I
did not say anything against or for Uthman until he died.

Aye… They finally killed Uthman, and then they came to me trying to
convince me to accept the responsibility of Caliphate (but they were not
aware that on that critical situation, and in regard with that murder
and knowing of their false intentions) I did not have any intention to
accept the responsibility of the Caliphate. I knew that they just wanted
to follow their desires, so they would not find the fulfillment of their
desires in me. I mean the worldly desires and pleasures. However, they
accepted me as their new Caliph anymore. But after a while, when Talha
and Zobayr could not find their desires with me, they started to walk in
a path opposite to mine and created seditions between the people against
me. Is it not true?”

Every one said, “Yes it is true, O Commander of the Believers!”

The Jewish man could do nothing but cry.

5-The Battle of Jamal
---------------------

Those who had pledged their allegiance to me with their freewill (Talha
and Zobayr) when they did not achieve their goals to be the governors
over two great cities in Iraq,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 33:23.

they began conspiring with Aa’isha against me. Even though they knew
that after the Prophet (a.s.), the one who had to have the
responsibility of protecting that woman was only me and nobody else.

However, these two men forced Aa’isha to sit on a camel and cover the
desert until they reached Haw’ab. After the dogs of Haw’ab had barked at
Aa’isha, the signs of repentance appeared finally on their faces. They
had pledged allegiance to me before the death of the Prophet and also
after his death, but what a wicked deed they committed against me!

They came to Bassora and were united with the people who had small
hands, long beards, slothful beliefs, and false deeds; those who were
sailors or desert dwellers (the Egyptians)… That woman (Aa’isha) had
called them from their cities, and they showed their naked blades and
then they fell into the deep sea of war.

On that occasion, I had to choose one of the two ways opened before me;
either to let them go away, but this made them continue their false
path, and they would never return to the right path again, or to stand
against them, and this way created a bad ending for them, one that I had
not wanted for them.

Therefore, before the battle began, I reminded them of everything and
told them about the harsh and hard punishment of Allah. I ended my
argument and proposed them a way to come to peace with me and
acknowledge their mistakes. I asked that woman to go back to her house,
and I wanted from the people around her not to break their allegiance to
me, and that Allah would be witness to all this.

O Allah, be the Witness of my deeds on those days!I did everything. I
even talked privately to their leaders to persuade them not to start a
war, and Zobayr accepted my words. I repeated my intention to the
others, but they just showed me their enmity and foolishness.

When they insisted on the war, I had no way but to ride on my horse and
the result of their deeds was nothing but defeat and violent death…

Yes, I had no way but to fight them. However, at the end of the battle,
I forgave them and did not kill any one of them. Before the war, I could
not have forgiven them, because I knew that they would kill innocent
people and try to spread dissension allover the country… And I also did
not want to accept the authority of that woman, because in many ways,
such as in giving testimony and inheritances, the rights of man and
woman are different, and choosing a woman as a governor was a wrong act
that old nations like the Romans, or those who had lived in the lands of
the Queen of Sheba (Saba), had once done wrongfully.

On the other hand, I had to stand for a battle that I did not like,
neither its beginning nor its ending! I just let that woman gather
troops and do everything she could, to destroy my army in a short time.
However, it was not I, who had started the war. I myself did many things
to stop the war. I delayed the moment of the battle, negotiated in many
ways, and sent many ambassadors. I also offered them many suggestions
that they even did not think about, and I even forgave them. They just
wanted the war and nothing else, and I had to fight with them. Then, I
did according to the will of Allah, and Allah the Almighty was the
Witness over me. Is it not true?”

Every one said, “Yes, it is true, O Commander of the Believers!”

The Jewish man began to cry then, and at the same time, he remembered
the war that the wife of Moses had waged against Joshua (the successor
of Moses), so he was deeply sad for Ali.

6- The battle of Siffeen
------------------------

The sixth stage was the battle against Mo’awiyya, the son of Hind who
was called “the eater of livers”, and finally to accept unwillingly the
vote of the arbitrators. It was a battle with the one who was the enemy
of Allah and His Prophet from the time of the Prophetic Mission until
our victory in Mecca.

On that day of our triumph in Mecca against the polytheists, the Prophet
(a.s.) told me that Mo’awiyya and his father Abu Sofian had pledged
allegiance to him three times.

In addition, the father of Mo’awiyya, Abu Sofian, at the beginning of
the reign of Abu Bakr was the first one who saluted me with the epithet
of “the Commander of the Believers”, and he used to tell me that I
should go and ask for my usurped right. He also used to say he was
always at my command.

So it was very strange to Mo’awiyya, when he saw that Allah had finally
restored to me my usurped right. He was so very angry that he was not
going to be the fourth caliph! He went to Amr ibn Aas and told him that
he would make him the governor of Egypt if he supported him. By the way,
even one dirham more than his own measure was unlawful, and it was
illegal for the one who had the

responsibility of the Treasury of Muslims to give him more than his
share.

Anyway, Mo’awiyya, with his followers, went to different cities and
killed all the people who were against him and freed the others, who
accepted his rule. So Mo’awiyya, with his broken oath, was trying to set
off rebellions in different places in our region. One day, the one-eyed
man of Thaqif (Moghira ibn Sho’bah) came to me and said that we should
appoint Mo’awiyya as the governor of the cities that Mo’awiyya had under
his authority.

If I could have found a right excuse about that idea before our God, it
would have been an interesting idea for my government and earthly
wishes. But when I talked about that proposal with my closest companions
and true followers, they also had the same opinion as mine, and they
believed that I should not give him any authority whatsoever.

I truly hoped that a day would not come that Allah would see me in
cooperation with the heretics and polytheists! Therefore, I sent a man
from the tribe of Bajalah and at another time, another man from the
tribe of Asha’irah to Mo’awiyya to complete my warnings to him. However,
those two men preferred the earthly comfort that Mo’awiyya had offered
to them and began serving him most humbly.

When I saw that Mo’awiyya had not respected the rights and commands of
Allah, I went and consulted with those who had participated in the
battle of Badr and in the Redhwan Homage whom Allah has been pleased
with their deeds. I also consulted with true Muslims and all of them
believed that we should fight Mo’awiyya and cut his hand from the
authority of the Islamic State.

As you know my brother, after our final decision that was to war against
Mo’awiyya, I once again sent some letters with many ambassadors to him.
I thought that he might accept to walk in the right path and accept my
Caliphate. However, on the other hand, he sent me many insulting
letters, where he asked me to accept his insolent, offensive conditions
that were against the commands of Allah, the Prophet (a.s.), and the
welfare of the Muslims nation (Umma).

One of his ridiculous conditions was that I should send him many of the
closest companions of the Prophet (a.s.), like Ammar ibn Yasir! I ask
you: where can we find a man better than Ammar?! I swear by Allah the
Almighty, that Ammar had always been close to the Messenger of Allah
(a.s.) and had always been beside Him.

Yes, Mo’awiyya in his foolish condition , wanted me to send many true
companions of the Prophet (a.s.) to him as a revengeful ransom for the
blood of Uthman. And I swear by Allah, that none of these godly,
faithful men had killed Uthman! Mo’awiyya and his tribe (the Bani
Omayya) that Allah, in the holy Quran, has called them as “the cursed
tree”, had in fact committed that crime…

So when he finally understood that I would never accept his conditions,
he gathered many cruel, people around him; brutal companions and bad
company, and gave them a lot of money and precious gifts so as to obey
his commands with closed eyes.

In contrast with that, we invited them all to Islam and asked them to
obey the directions of the Holy Quran! We talked about the severe
punishment of Allah, but all that did not affect them whatsoever. So we
fought against them and prayed Allah to grant us the final victory.

During that battle, we had the banner of the Prophet (a.s.) with which
Allah had always demolished the oppressive forces with it, whereas
Mo’awiyya had the banner which had belonged to his father and which, in
all wars, had been raised against the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) and
Islam.

Yes! Death was so near to Mo’awiyya, and he really did not know what to
do to save his life. He just sat on his horse so as to run away from the
battle, but at the last moment, his wicked friend, Amr ibn Aas, proposed
to their soldiers that each one should raise a copy of the Holy Qur’an
on their spears and claimed falsely that it should be done as the Qur’an
had commanded!

Amr told Mo’awiyya that the son of Abu Taleb and his followers were very
wise and strong. He said, “Before the war, they wanted you to do
according to the Holy Quran, but they did not receive any response from
you. But if you do it now, they will accept your offer.”

When Mo’awiyya saw that he had no any way out, either in the war or for
any escape, he ordered his army to raise the copies of the Qur’an on
their spears, and he thought that the best thing was to claim that all
should do exactly as the Holy Quran had said!

On that day, which was full of various incidents, all my soldiers
accepted alas, the false invitation of Mo’awiyya and were deceived by
his trick, except a small group of my true followers, who remained with
me.

In fact, I insisted and told them repeatedly that it was only a trick by
Mo’awiyya and Amr ibn Aas, and that they should not listen to their
tricky claims. However, it was very odd that my own soldiers insisted on
accepting their deception!

I myself heard that some of them said, “If Ali does not accept
Mo’awiyya’s offer, we shall have a bad end, just like Uthman. So we are
forced to make Ali submit to Mo’awiyya…”

Allah be my Witness that I tried my best to persuade them to listen to
my orders and let me do what was the best, but they continually rejected
my orders. They did not even give me a short break to think…

I swear by Allah that I did not fear anything, but I was afraid for the
lives of my two sons Hassan and Hussein. I was afraid that no one from
the Prophet’s progeny would remain alive, for they were the real
treasures of his blood!

I was also afraid for the lives of Abdullah ibn Ja’far and Mohammad ibn
Hanafiyya, for both of them were there because of me and they wanted to
be always beside me.

Once again, I used my patience before their wrong choice. However, after
we had put aside our arms, all of them began blaming me. They put aside
the Holy Qur’an and suggested to choose either Mo’awiyya or me.

I myself never believed that such a thing would happen, and I did not
want people to be against the Will of Allah. It was a very wicked
action, but what did I have to do then ? From among my foolish men and
Mo’awiyya, neither of them accepted anything else.

When I wanted to choose one of my relatives such as (Abdullah) ibn Abbas
or a man who had enough knowledge of Allah, the religion, the Prophet
(a.s.), and me to negotiate, someone that I could trust in, someone like
Malik Ashtar, the son of Hind (Mo’awiyya) did not accept it… alas!

Mo’awiyya was full of arrogance, so he did not accept my words. The
reason behind his pride was the help that my foolish soldiers had given
him unknowingly. Anyway, when I saw that it was an awful judgment
against me and against Islam, I prayed to Allah and let them go away
with their wrongdoings.

They chose Abu Musa Ash’ari, who had been lured with many gifts by Amr
himself, and when every one heard about it, the man did not know how to
hide his disgraceful actions. Is it not true?”

Every one said, “Yes, it is true, O Commander of the Believers!”

The moaning of the Jewish man made the people around look at him
strangely. He had read in the Holy Books of Moses (a.s.) about the
Martyrdom of the last successor of the last Prophet, so he knew that
according to the prophesies, that day was near...

7- The battle of Nahrawan
-------------------------

The Prophet (a.s.) in the twenty-three years of his Mission,  often told
me that a day would come, when some of my companions, who fasted in the
day and recited the Qur’an in the night Holy, would stand against me,
and I would be in a war with them, because they would go out of the
religion as an arrow penetrates and goes out of a game.

The Prophet (a.s.) also told me that Thul Thodayyah would be with them,
and that when I would defeat and kill them, I would fly to Paradise. We
returned to Kufa and all of them, who had insisted on arbitration, then
snubbed me and used to say, ‘Very well, we were wrong, but why *you*
Imam Ali? Why an Emir and great commander should listen to his soldiers
and assistances? An Emir like you

should have done whatever he thought was right. He should not have
feared death! Now that you listened to our ideas, so you are a heretic
and the killing of a heretic is lawful and permissible!’

All of them united and left my army. They cried out loudly that there
was no command but the command of Allah! Some of them went to Nokhaylah,
and some others went to Haroura. A third group went to the riverside of
Tigris. They wanted to go to the east as quickly as possible. Whenever
they saw a Muslim before them, first they put him to trial, and if that
Muslim had opinions like theirs, they would do nothing to him, but if he
had an opposite thought, they would kill him with all his family right
away.

At first, I started to invite the two first groups toward Allah and the
Holy Qur’an, but they did not accept my invitation, and they just wanted
to fight against me and nothing else mattered to them.

When I understood that their problem would never be solved except by the
sword, I did what Allah willed. If I did not do that, they would have
caused a great problem to Islam, but Allah had prepared a different
destiny for them.

Then, I wrote a letter to the third group, and I sent many messengers
who were all great and wise men from among my companions. However, that
group like the two previous ones, ignored me and my messengers, and
insisted on fighting us.

They continued to kill innocent Muslims who were against them.
Therefore, I closed the way to the Tigris and once again, I sent many
messengers to invite them to us. One day, I sent this man, and another
day that man, but I had no way except to kill them.

Thus, O my Jewish brother, I killed all of their four thousand men, but
only ten men from them remained alive. I searched among the dead and
found the body of Thul Thodayyah, about whom the Prophet (a.s.) had told
me before. I showed his body to everyone. Is it not true?”

They all said, “Yes, it is true, O Commander of the Believers.”

At that moment, Imam Ali (a.s.) looked at the Jewish man’s face and
said, “I talked about the fourteen instances, and now there remains just
another event that will happen in the near future.”

When Imam Ali finished his words, all of his companions began crying.
The Jewish man, while crying, said, “Please, tell us about the last
one!” With the great sorrow that he felt inside him, he was not able to
move from his place. Imam Ali (a.s.) touched his beard and said, “In the
last event, this beard will be dyed by my own blood…”

When the masses of people heard Imam Ali’s word, they began to moan and
cry, and their cries of sorrow spread everywhere in the mosque of Kufa.

It was the turn of the Jew to do as his promise and complete a
allegiance and to realize his wish that was inside him for so many
years. Yes! After the Imam finished his talk, the Jew went and kissed
the holy hand of Imam Ali (a.s.) and embraced Islam. He lived in Kufa
until the day when Imam Ali (a.s.) was killed by Abdurrahman ibn Moljam
(Allah’s curse be on him) in the year 40 AH.

When the people arrested ibn Moljam, they delivered him to Imam Hassan
ibn Ali (a.s.), where there were masses of people around him. The Jew
came to that place, and while crying, he thought to himself that It was
the

hardest day in his life. He said to Imam Hassan(a.s.), “O son of
Mohammad! Kill this man, and I hope that Allah will curse him with a
terrible Punishment! In the Holy Books of Moses, I had read that the
crime of this man is much greater than the sin of the son of Adam (Cain)
who had murdered his brother Abel, and his sin is greater than the crime
of the people of Aad who had killed the Camel of the Prophet Salih
(a.s.)...!".

So what a lucky man the Jew was! He lived with his good deeds, while
there were many Muslims who were Muslim only by name, but in their
lives, they lived and behaved just like infidels and unlike what Allah
and His Messenger (a.s.) had wanted.

It has been mentioned in a tradition, that once a man from Bassora came
to Imam Sajjad (a.s.) and asked him, “Why your grandfather (Imam Ali)
killed the Muslims?” Imam Sajjad (a.s.) began to cry painfully, and then
he wiped his tears with his hand and said, “O, you my Basri brother! I
swear by Allah that Ali (a.s.) never killed a true Muslim or an innocent
one! He fought against some people, who had the name of "Muslims" only
upon themselves, but in their hearts, they were the enemies of Allah and
the Muslims. When they found people like themselves, they united with
them against true Muslims. The true companions and followers of the
progeny of Muhammad know that the people of (the battle of) Jamal,
Siffeen, and Nahrawan were cursed by the Messenger of Allah (a.s.). So
curse be on one who fabricates lies against Allah, and His Messenger!”

In Imam Ali’s speech to the Jew, he addressed as “Jewish brother”. The
statement in Arabic is “Akhal Yahud” which means: “brother of the Jews”
which may mean “O Jew!”

An old man stood up and said, “but your grandfather Ali ibn Abi Talib
had said about them, “our "brothers" oppressed us!”

Imam Sajjad (a.s.) replied, “Did you not read this verse in the Qur’an
where Allah says, ***(and to (the people of) Aad (we sent) their brother
Hud)***?**[1]** In this situation, the people of Aad are like the
brothers that Imam Ali (a.s.) had talked about. We saw that Allah the
Almighty had assisted the Prophet Hud (a.s.) and his followers, but
demolished the people of Aad with a furious storm.”

Thus, it is not true to think that when Imam Ali (a.s.) said to the Jew:
“my Jewish brother”, he meant that he was his brother in religion.

However, there is a point of view more reliable. It is that: Imam Ali
(a.s.) had knowledge of every thing about the past, present, and the
future. Thus, he knew very well that this Jewish man, later on, would
embrace the religion of Islam. The interesting fact is that Imam Ali
(a.s.) since the beginning of his discourse with the Jew, considered him
his “brother in religion”, because he well knew that the Jew would soon
become Muslim.

***Alhamdolillahe Rabbel Alamin***

***Farid Mohammadi***

***Tehran, Ramadan 19<sup>th</sup> 1428***

***October 1<sup>st</sup> 2007***

***Mehr 9<sup>th</sup> 1386***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 7:65.
