Introduction
============

**In the Name of Allah, the All-Beneficent, the All-Merciful**

Being a relatively new father, I wanted to make sure I understood the
Islamic way of raising children. Therefore, in the fall of 2009
(*Shawwal* 1430 A.H.), I decided to call our beloved teacher, Sayyid
Muhammad Husayn Jalali of the Open School in Chicago, IL. I asked him
for some advice in regards to raising children as well as some specific
questions concerning disciplining children. While we were discussing,
Sayyid Jalali gave me the option of taking a full class on the subject,
and I took that option.

Soon afterwards, I participated in one-on-one lessons with Sayyid Jalali
on Sundays. The main text for the class was an Arabic text authored by
Sayyid Jalali himself. He would go over passages in Arabic with me, and
then we would engage in analysis and discussion in English.

Sayyid Jalali encouraged me to always think and not to accept notions
blindly. The class required that I submit a weekly written homework
assignment summarizing the respective lesson (entailing our discussions
and analysis) for Sayyid Jalali’s review.

This book is merely a compilation of my homework assignments. The
purpose of the book is to share what I gained from Sayyid Jalali hoping
that it may benefit others, nothing more. All thanks and praise is due
to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

Special Notes
-------------

1. The main text used in the class was: Jalali, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn.
Sharh al-Arba’in al-Nabawwiyah. Arabic edition 1987, pages 419-467. The
original edition was published in 1977.

2. I did not put in the time to appropriately or fully transliterate the
respective Arabic words. For proper or complete transliteration
(including appropriate markings), please refer to the Arabic
romanization tables and guidelines of the U.S. Library of Congress.

3. The *ahadith* (traditions) mentioned in the assignments below have
been paraphrased in English to convey the respective general message.
For a verbatim review of the traditions, please consult the source.

4. In my assignments, Sayyid Jalali encouraged me to expound upon
personal experiences to help me better understand the subject matter.
Accordingly, in some of the assignments, you will notice some personal
stories or points that I made for educational purposes.


