Lesson 9
========

4-8-10 The Open School Class: Explanation of Forty *Ahadith* Text:
Jalali, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn. Sharh al-Arba’in al-Nabawwiyah. Arabic
edition 1987, pages 432-435.

Summary
-------

As said before, children are the future. *Insha’Allah* (if God wills),
one can raise a child in a proper manner to become a good mature member
of society. The age of maturity may be relative to the society in which
one lives. For example, in the United States, the age of eighteen seems
to be the threshold of maturity. In Islam, however, the legal ages of
maturity for males and females are identified by jurists,[^1] and, also,
physical features may be considered when determining maturity. When a
child reaches maturity, what is his or her role towards society?

A person will become independent in thought and will have to identify
his or her role in society. For example, a person will start thinking
about what profession he or she should pursue. However, despite whatever
the person chooses, bringing peace and safety to one’s society is the
main goal. A person in a society wants to be in a safe and peaceful
environment to live his or her life and raise a family, and so that
person’s role should be to promote stability and peace.

Through our professions and way of living, we should contribute to
society and make sure our actions foster a positive environment. For
example, how should we live here in the United States? Should we go
around breaking laws? If we do, we will be put in jail and disrupt not
only the society but our families as well. This does not mean we agree
with everything the government does or that we like every law.

However, we can try to change laws and attitudes through rational
processes and techniques. Islam is a religion of reason, and the
objective is peace and security. Yes, Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon
him and his family) fought in wars, but a study of those wars will show
the necessity of such for defense and to fight against oppression.[^2]

You see, the objectives of war can be to protect and vanquish oppression
so that peace and security may be established. The objective of
terrorism, on the other hand, is only to instill fear. And even if one
argues that terrorists may use fear only as a means for whatever they
want, that is not Islam.

Extremism is not the middle road or the straight path of Islam. This is
evident by the beautiful acts of the Prophet of Islam towards the
different peoples and even his enemies. For example, by studying the
agreement between the different inhabitants of Madinah after migration
as well as the Treaty of Hudaybiyah, one can see that Islam guides
people towards peace and security.[^3]

Actually, Shaykh Ja’far Subhani in his biography of Prophet Muhammad
(peace be upon him and his family) mentions that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(peace be upon him and his family) stated, “No event during the life of
the Prophet of Islam was more useful than the Peace Pact of
Hudaybiyah.”[^4]

Accordingly, whatever path a person chooses to walk, that person should
have the goal of bringing or inviting peace and security to that
society. If you are a good neighbor and live peacefully with people,
then people tend to like you and accept you. However, if you do not
bring peace to a society, people will not like you. That is why
terrorists are rejected by society. There is no valid system in the
whole Universe that does not aim at establishing security and peace.
Islam has certain guidelines for establishing these goals.

For example, one can start by having good manners, *akhlaq*. By people
and families exhibiting good manners, the society can run peacefully in
a positive way. These good manners or practice of virtue may deal with
all parts of one’s life (*e.g.*, how to talk, walk, sit, joke, treat
people, etc.). One can learn about these manners from the numerous books
of *akhlaq*. Also, the Wise Qur’an has verses dealing with good manners.

For example, the **Qur’an (24:27-28)** states:

***O you who have faith! Do not enter houses other than your own until
you have announced [your arrival] and greeted their occupants. That is
better for you. Maybe you will take admonition. But if you do not find
anyone in them, do no enter them until you are given permission, and if
you are told: „Turn back,’ then do turn back. That is more decent for
you.*** ***And Allah knows best what you do.*** *The* ***Qur’an
(58:11)*** *further states,* *inter alia,* ***“O you who have faith!
When you are told, „Make room,’ in sittings, then do make room; Allah
will make room for you.”*** *(See Jalali, page 432).*

Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) said that *the best
of you is the person who has the better akhlaq*. (Jalali, page 433).
Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (peace be upon him and his family) said that
*associate with others so that when you die people will cry for you and
when you leave them people will miss you*.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (peace be upon him and his family) said that *you
should curb your tongue* (including not delving into personal matters of
others) *and do not talk rubbish*. Imam Ja’far (peace be upon him and
his family) also said that *a person who cannot control himself when
angry is not a Shi’ah* (follower of *Ahlul Bayt*, the People of the
House). We have to deal with all people in the proper manner regardless
of their race, color, sex, etc.

However, one should always consider a person’s *taqwa*,
God-consciousness. Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family)
said that *there is no scale except taqwa*. (Jalali, page 434). There
are good people and there are bad people. There are good Indians, and
there are bad Indians. There are good Arabs, and there are bad Arabs. We
should not generalize. Look at a person’s character. However, just
because someone does not display good character does not mean we should
lower ourselves and treat him or her inappropriately. No, we should
always act with decency and proper behavior (which may be relative to
the situation).

Yet, sometimes avoiding or dissociating from someone that displays bad
character is the proper thing to do. Also, we should not only focus on
the character of other people, but we should first try to achieve and
maintain a high level of *taqwa* ourselves. The **Qur’an (49:13)**
states, *inter alia*,

***“Indeed the noblest of you in the sight of Allah is the most Godwary
among you. Indeed Allah is All-Knowing, All-Aware.”***

[^1]: For example, Sayyid Ali Sistani and Shaykh Yusuf Sane’i indentify
the age of fifteen as the legal age of maturity for a boy (absent any
prior physical signs of maturity), but Sayyid Sistani identifies the age
of nine (see www.sistani.org) as the legal age of maturity for a girl
while Shaykh Sane’i identifies the age of thirteen (see www.saanei.org)
as the legal age of maturity for a girl (absent any prior physical signs
of maturity). Please note that the ages discussed herein correspond to
lunar years.

[^2]: See Subhani, Ja’far. The Message. Trans. Muhammad Fazal Haq.
Islamic Seminary, 1984, pages 366-506. 41

[^3]: See Subhani, pages 340-344 and 529-530.

[^4]: Subhani, page 536. 42


