Lesson 12
=========

4-29-10 The Open School Class: Explanation of Forty *Ahadith* Text:
Jalali, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn. Sharh al-Arba’in al-Nabawwiyah. Arabic
edition 1987, pages 439-442.)

Summary
-------

When talking about *amal* (practice), what kinds of practice are
important? Well, let us take a closer look at the concept of work. As
Muslims, we should not be aloof or lazy; we should work. We should not
expect to receive everything and do nothing. (Jalali, page 439). The
wise **Qur’an (51:22)** states,

***“And in the sky is your provision and what you are promised.”***

What does this mean? The verse conveys the message that everything (in
terms of provisions) is out there if you look for it. Do not say there
is nothing. For example, fish will not walk to your house, but you can
go to the sea or lake to catch fish (they are out there). Also, in
regards to the blessed Maryam (peace be upon her and her family), the
**Qur’an (19:24-25)** states,

***“Thereupon he called her from below her [saying,] „Do not grieve!
Your Lord has made a spring to flow at your feet. Shake the trunk of the
palm tree, freshly picked dates will drop upon you.”***

The dates were not automatically placed in her hands or mouth. No, she
had to shake the tree. One must work! All Prophets (peace be upon them)
tended to flocks or were shepherds at one point in time. (Jalali, page
440). This was a type of work for them in their respective communities.
Also, Prophet Adam was a peasant (agricultural worker), Prophet Idris
was a tailor, Prophet Nuh was a carpenter, Prophet Hud was a
businessman, and Prophet Muhammad was a caravan manager (peace be upon
all of them and their families). Furthermore, Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(peace be upon him and his family) entered into fair partnership-like
financial transactions (*mudharabah*).

Companions of the Prophet and the Imams (peace be upon them and their
families) also shared a similar work ethic. For example, Salman
al-Muhammadi weaved carpets. Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (peace be upon him
and his family) said that *you cannot gain anything in life by just
sitting and wishing*. He said that *you have to drop the bucket in the
well, and sometimes you may get a little water and sometimes you may get
a lot of water*.

One must work to progress. Now, I must stress again that work is not
just the concept of leaving the house to go to the office and collecting
a pay check (*e.g.*, a person may go to an office and also may not do
much work). Work is of many varieties. For example, a wife and/or mother
that makes meals and feeds her family and manages a house is doing great
and vital work. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (peace be upon him and his
family) said that *work is worship*.

For example, supporting ones family by working is fulfilling an
obligation, which is worship. Also, Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (peace be upon
him and his family) used to do some gardening type work and someone
asked the Imam to let him (the other person) do the work.

The Imam said *no as long as I am able to do the work because I want to
be close to Allah* (the Most High). Imam Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful, (peace be upon him and his family) said that *never be lazy
because if you are lazy, you may be lazy with God* (the All-Merciful).
Imam Ali as-Sajjad (peace be upon him and his family) said that *you
should do your work as if you will live forever, and you should do for
your afterlife as if you will die tomorrow*. Why? Well, focusing on the
first part, when you do work for this life, do it properly.

For example, if you are going to fix your house, fix it so that it will
not fall apart the next day. This has many advantages, such as physical
betterment and stability or security as well as other positive effects.
Personally, when I vacuum the house sometimes, I may not clean every
corner or vacuum under certain objects (maybe because I am tired).
However, I do feel the difference between doing a full complete job in
vacuuming versus when I do not do such a good job. Firstly, the house
does not look as nice or is not as clean when I do not put in the full
work, and, secondly, I do not feel as satisfied.

When someone does something, that person’s work product represents that
person in a way. As Muslims, we should do the best job at everything we
do because our work represents ourselves, our character. When Prophet
Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) was burying his son,
Ibrahim, the Prophet looked in the grave and saw a pit in a corner. In
order to level it, he smoothed the surface with his own hands and said,
“Whenever anyone of you does a job he should endeavour to do it in a
solid way.”[^1]

By doing something properly, we are trying to better ourselves, which
may bring us closer to the Lord, the All-Beneficent. Of course, one
should not get infatuated with materialism and work for the sake of mere
aesthetic and worldly pleasure (because one may get addicted to material
goals that may lead him astray). In Islam, all (no matter gender, race,
nationality, etc.) are responsible to do some work and progress within
the limits. (Jalali, page 441).

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (peace be upon him and his family) said to *never
be lazy and never complain*. So, do your work (whatever it may be to
help yourself, your family, and your society) and be thankful to Allah,
the All-Gracious. Unfortunately, a lot of us do not want to do any work,
and we just want to complain all day. That is not Islam. Every
individual is a product of his or her work.

For example, someone (such as a parent or teacher) may guide you, but
you have to put in the time and work in the end. If you do not read or
listen, how can you learn? Also, the work you do or the lack thereof may
have an impact beyond yourself. For example, if you ignore your child
and do not teach her certain values and etiquettes (meaning, you do not
do your work in raising the child), it reflects poorly on you and you
have done a great disservice to the child (which may cause the child,
you, and the community great pains).

[^1]: Subhani, Ja’far. The Message. Trans. Muhammad Fazal Haq. Islamic
Seminary, 1984, page 718.


