Lesson 13
=========

5-20-10 The Open School Class: Explanation of Forty *Ahadith* Text:
Jalali, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn. Sharh al-Arba’in al-Nabawwiyah. Arabic
edition 1987, pages 442-445.)

Summary
-------

From the concepts of *ilm* (knowledge) and *amal* (practice) stem a lot
of responsibilities for a Muslim. One of the main standards a Muslim
should maintain is the character of being easy (not difficult). Everyone
in life faces difficulties and discomfort, but one should not let the
difficult situations make him or her difficult. In the language of our
time, we say, “Take it easy.”

For example, if you have an arrangement with someone else and for some
reason the other person does not show or perform but gives a valid
excuse, then accept the excuse and take it easy. If you do not, it is
really bad for you. Your blood pressure increases, you get angry and may
say or do something you will regret, etc.

For example, look at Imam Husayn (peace be upon him and his family). In
the beginning, Hurr diverted the Imam and his companions based on his
orders, and then at the end, Hurr decided to join Imam Husayn’s camp.
Now, Imam Husayn (peace be upon him and his family) was always easy with
Hurr. When Hurr came to the Imam’s camp and apologized, the Imam did not
scold him or become furious. No, the Imam kindly asked him to sit, but
Hurr felt obligated to fight right away. If we were in the Imam’s
situation, would we act like that? Keep calm. If your spouse is shouting
at you, do not shout back. One can diffuse many problematic situations
just by taking it easy. Islam has insisted on taking it easy. (Jalali,
page 442).

Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) said that *I was
sent by God* (the Almighty) *with a religion that is easy and pure*.
Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) also said *never be
stubborn* (because the other side might have a point) *and that always
be easy with people whether they are near* (relatives) *or far* (in
terms of relation). This kind of thinking and way of life was and is
trying to destroy the tribal mentality as well as trying to build-up an
individual.

When looking at Islam, one sees the principles of manners, forgiveness,
kindness, etc. The qualities of a *Mu’min* (believer) include not being
stubborn, always keeping his or her promises (meaning you can trust him
or her), and not intentionally bothering other people. The principle of
being easy is well founded in Islam, and there are at least three ways
or means for easiness. For example, 1) giving (money, time, knowledge,
work, etc.), 2) piety or *taqwa* (God consciousness), and 3) agreeing
with whatever is good. The **Qur’an (92:5-7)** sums it up by stating,

***“As for him who gives and is Godwary and confirms the best promise,
We shall surely ease him into facility.”***

If you follow these principles, then life will be easy for you and you
can maintain easiness with others. However, on the other hand, the
**Qur’an (92:8-10)** states,

***“But as for him who is stingy and self-complacent, and denies the
best promise, We shall surely ease him into hardship.”***

Easiness is a blessing of Allah (the All-Merciful). There are people who
are always worried about every little thing. They may have nice cars,
but they are always worried if those cars will be stolen or scratched.
Even if someone says *salam* (Islamic greeting of peace) to them, they
become worried asking themselves, “What does he want now?” What kind of
life is that? No, one needs to be patient and at ease. The **Qur’an
(41:34-35)** states:

***Good and evil [conduct] are not equal. Repel [evil] with what is
best. [If you do so,] behold, he*** ***between whom and you was enmity,
will be as though he were a sympathetic friend. But none*** ***is
granted it except those who are patient, and none is granted it except
the greatly endowed.***  
 (See Jalali, page 443).

Forgiveness is also very important in regards to ease. The **Qur’an
(7:199)** states,

***“Adopt [a policy of] excusing [the faults of people], bid what is
right, and turn away from the ignorant.”***

Generally, always forgive. Forgiveness is great for many reasons, and if
you do not forgive, you really bother yourself. Allah (the All-Wise)
addresses Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) as stated
in the **Qur’an (3:159)**:

***It is by Allah’s mercy that you are gentle to them; and had you been
harsh and hardhearted, surely they would have scattered from around you.
So excuse them, and plead for forgiveness for them, and consult them in
affairs, and once you are resolved, put your trust in Allah.***

Here, forgiveness and consultation are stressed. Consultation embraces
the idea of inclusion versus exclusion. Even if you do not follow the
advice of others, the simple fact of including them makes a significant
difference in situations. Inclusion may solve many problems, and
exclusion may cause many problems. Also, forgiveness brings love and
affection between individuals, family, and society. (Jalali, page 444).

Looking at the *ahadith* (traditions) from Prophet Muhammad and the
Imams (peace be upon them all), one can see the significance of being
easy. For example, Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family)
said that *if you cannot give people money, at least have a happy face*
(do not frown).

Prophet Muhammad also said that *if someone comes with an excuse, accept
it*, and he also said that *a person who takes it easy gets along with
others*. One does not have to agree with someone else, but that person
can be easy with others. Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (peace be upon him and his
family) said that *if someone is good and does something wrong, forgive
him*.

Also, Imam Sadiq said that *to make your deeds ma’ruf* (good or
accepted) *you should* 1) *not comment on them* (meaning, do not mention
them or bring them up even if it is something big you did; because when
you make your deed appear small, it is truly large)*,* 2) *make it easy
for the other person* (meaning, if someone asks you for help, help them
in such a way in which you do not place difficulty on them)*, and* 3)
*do it right away*. (Jalali, page 445).


