Lesson 15
=========

6-2-10 The Open School Class: Explanation of Forty *Ahadith* Text:
Jalali, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn. Sharh al-Arba’in al-Nabawwiyah. Arabic
edition 1987, pages 451-454.

Summary
-------

The Qur’an is a revelation sent by God (the All-Mighty) to Prophet
Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family). Muslims believe that the
Qur’an is the last revelation to mankind. Allah (the All-Praiseworthy)
says via **Qur’an (3:4-5)**,

***“He has sent down to you the Book with the truth confirming what was
[revealed] before it, and He had sent down the Torah and the Evangel
before as guidance for mankind, and He has sent down the Criterion.”***

The Qur’an brings a message of guidance and social justice. With no
discrimination based on gender, race, nationality, age, etc., Allah (the
All-Wise) says via **Qur’an (5:15-16)**,

***“Certainly there has come to you a light from Allah, and a manifest
Book. With it Allah*** ***guides those who follow [the course of] His
pleasure to the ways of peace, and brings them out*** ***from darkness
into light by His will, and guides them to a straight path.”*** *70*

Now, the Qur’an, like the Old Testament, includes several verses of law.
When I was younger, I had a hard time understanding how the Qur’an can
have verses of peace, forgiveness, mercy, and brotherhood and, at the
same time, have verses of harsh punishment, such as flogging and cutting
of the hand (fingers). My first reaction was that the scholars are
misinterpreting the verses and such “cruel” punishment is not possible
in Islam.

However, as I grew and read more, it became clear that the verses did
relate to severe punishments. I did not truly appreciate the
significance of such verses until I studied American criminal law. Every
society that wants to progress must enforce criminal laws to keep the
society safe from danger and corruption. For example, India may have
many laws, but a lot of times those laws are not enforced or are
circumvented, and because of this, India is still experiencing a lot of
corruption and bribery on many levels (which prevents the growth and
good health of the society).

Now, truly understanding the conditions required for the respective
punishments[^1] the ways or means of enforcing Islamic laws of
punishment, and when to apply such laws (if at all during the Major
Occultation) is beyond me, but I do understand why the Qur’an includes
them. They are practical in maintaining social justice (which is a mercy
for the society). Also, the existence of the laws or enforcement thereof
is a strong deterrent and may also help in rehabilitating criminals
(*e.g.*, through tough punishment, they may see and adhere to the right
path). The truth is that the revelation of the Qur’an has changed
humanity. Whether you are a Muslim or not, you cannot deny the impact of
Islam. For example, of all the communities as a whole (not certain
individuals) that converted to Islam, how many of those communities have
reverted back to their old ways? Societies are adhering to Islam and the
Qur’an, and this is a sign of the existence of truth. The **Qur’an
(17:88)** states,

**“Say, „Should all humans and jinn rally to bring the like of this
Qur’an, they will not bring the like of it, even if they assisted one
another.’”**

This is a tremendous claim. I thought about this a lot, and with no
disrespect to the Qur’an, I challenged my faith with some straight
forward questions. I first asked, what is so special about the Qur’an in
terms of language and expression? One can look at the Qur’an as a mere
book. In light of such questions, Sayyid Khu’i gives a beautiful
explanation of the miraculous quality of the Qur’an.[^2]

For example, at the time the Qur’an was revealed, the expert poets and
masters of language were shocked and at awe by the beauty, symmetry, and
language of the Qur’an. This shows that there is something extraordinary
about the Qur’an and it must have come from a Special Source. Ok, but
what about now? Why is it not possible for someone to make verses
similar to the Qur’an? One can change some words around or paraphrase
the Qur’an using modern language techniques. However, this is just
imitation, not creation or bringing the like of the Qur’an. If someone
plagiarizes a paper and just changes some words, then that product is
not truly an original work, it is just a copy.

Also, every word of the Qur’an has a special and deep importance, and so
even changing a word would make the imitated work an inferior product.
Furthermore, the Qur’an has many levels (such as outer and inner
levels). One may try to imitate the external language, but the deeper
and hidden truths will still be beyond him or her. Our knowledge is
dependent on what Allah (the All-Knowing) allows us to know. If Allah
does not allow us to know the deeper and higher levels of knowledge, it
is not possible for us to even try to express such knowledge. Also, the
Qur’an contains truths that may be beyond our comprehension, and so how
can we ever bring the like of it.

Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) said that *whoever
searches for salvation without the Qur’an is astray*. The right path is
the Qur’an. For example, we recite so many times daily, **Qur’an
(1:6-7)**,

***“Guide us on the straight path, the path of those whom You have
blessed – such as have not incurred Your wrath, nor are astray.”***

This is universal and applies to everyone. You can break down every
action in life into the three categories: 1) the straight path, 2) the
path of those who go astray, and 3) the path of those that incur the
Lord’s wrath. For example, if I wanted to make money to support my
family, I can find Islamically permissible work (a straight path), or I
can find work that involves bad acts or is harmful (going astray), or I
can avoid work and just steal for the rest of my life (incurring wrath).
In every little action, one must find the straight path and take it
(*i.e.*, knowledge and action). As Muslims, we should read the Qur’an
every day. But, how should we read?

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (peace be upon him and his family) said that *I do
not like someone who reads the Qur’an in less than one month*. (Jalali,
page 453). Why? One can answer the question with another *hadith*
(tradition) from Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him and his family). He said
that *the Qur’an should not be read fast but, rather, should be read
with pondering and meditation*. It is important to not just move our
tongues to make the sounds but to also comprehend and think.

When I was younger, I memorized some of the shorter chapters of the
Qur’an so that I can recite them during *salah* (Islamic ritual prayer).
Arabic not being a native language for me, I was just happy to be able
to pronounce the chapters in a halfway decent manner. One day I thought
to myself that I should really know what I am saying. Standing before
the Lord (all praise is due to Him) and reciting without understanding
did not seem right. Accordingly, I forced myself to understand the
meanings of the chapters I memorized via English translations.

Truthfully, when I started praying with the understanding of the words,
my prayer felt more sincere and I felt more content. If we believe that
the Qur’an is truth and guidance, then we must ponder and attempt to
comprehend it for our own benefit. Furthermore, there are some
etiquettes and recommendations when reading the Qur’an. (Jalali, page
454). For example, 1) be pure (in heart and body), 2) recite
*ista’adhah* (seeking Allah’s protection from Satan) before reading, 3)
recite *basmalah* (“In the Name of Allah, the All-Beneficent, the
All-Merciful”) before reading, 4) ponder while reading, 5) do *du’a*
(supplication or call to God (the All-Merciful)) after you finish
reading, and 6) read with a good voice.

[^1]: After reviewing some of the numerous identified conditions
required for respective criminal punishments, I realized that they
entail a great deal of mercy. See Shirazi, Sayyid Abdul Husayn
Dastghaib. Greater Sins. Trans. Sayyid Athar Husayn S.H. Rizvi. Qum,
Iran: Ansariyan Publications, Second Reprint 2007, pages 237-239 and
420-423.

[^2]: Khu’i, Sayyid Abu al-Qasim. The Prolegomena to the Qur’an. Trans.
Abdul Aziz Sachedina. Qum, Iran: Ansariyan Publications, Second Reprint
2007, pages 69-81.


