Lesson 17
=========

6-16-10 The Open School Class: Explanation of Forty *Ahadith* Text:
Jalali, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn. Sharh al-Arba’in al-Nabawwiyah. Arabic
edition 1987, pages 459-464.)

Summary
-------

As humans, we should always be aware of the scales of justice. If you
ask a dictator why he is oppressing people or doing a certain “evil”
action, he will always give you a reason or justification. He will say
that he is not doing anything wrong. However, everyone else may clearly
claim that he is definitely committing atrocities and wrong doings. How
do we know what is right or wrong?

This is very difficult, and we must keep the concept of the scales of
justice in the forefront. Islam identifies rules to assist us. For
example, Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) said that
*you wish for that person what you wish for yourself*. In other words,
put yourself in the other person’s shoes. This forces you to know your
limits. Everything has limitations, and one should never exceed the
limit. For example, as a parent, when you see your child misbehaving,
you want to admonish him or correct his behavior.

Sometimes a parent may get very emotional and start using excessive
language or force (*e.g.*, uncontrolled beatings or very harsh yelling).
Now, if the parent, at that moment, stopped and asked himself or
herself, what if the roles were reversed and I was this child? Would I
like to be hit this many times or be yelled at in such a manner for this
minor misconduct? No, of course the parent would not want to receive
this reaction. If the parent really ponders, he or she will understand
that the limit has been exceeded and that this is not justice.

In another example, let us say person A did something wrong to person B
or caused him harm. Then later on, person A felt really bad and went to
ask person B for forgiveness and tried to compensate for the wrongdoing.
What if person B is stubborn and does not forgive person A? Person A
would feel horrible, and he would carry such a tremendous pain. That is
why one should put himself in the other’s shoes. Yes, person A did
something wrong to person B or violated his right. However, person B
would want to be forgiven if he was in the shoes of person A. Right? It
is only natural and just. In all cases, the scales of justice must be in
front of us. The **Qur’an (49:13)** states:

***O mankind! Indeed We created you from a male and a female, and made
you nations and tribes that you may identify yourselves with one
another. Indeed the noblest of you in the sight of Allah is the most
Godwary among you. Indeed Allah is all-knowing, all-aware.***

 Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (peace be upon him and his family) was the
personification (or reverse personification) of the scales of justice.
Imam Ali said that *it is not enough that you call me the commander of
the faithful and I do not know how the people are living*. He used to
worry about whether the people in the remote desert were hungry because
he was in charge. How many of our current leaders are like this? Leaders
of great nations will hold lavish dinners for other leaders but not lose
sleep over the poor and hungry of their own nation. In regards to the
scales of justice, there are three points to keep in mind: 1) do the
right thing without any tiredness (meaning, if you see something right,
go after it. You must have a clear vision on what is right.

From a legal point of view, doing *taqlid* (emulation) to a *mujtahid*
(jurist) (if you are not a *mujtahid* yourself) assists oneself in
understanding the right path.), 2) do not grab on people (meaning, do
not put pressure on people. For example, if you want to raise money, ask
the people. But if you put people in a difficult situation and do not
give them options, the pressure you are exerting may get you some money,
but that person will probably not want to see you or talk to you
anymore.), and 3) do not show off (your alleged good deeds will be void
if you do). (Jalali, page 460).

Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) said that *the best
aql* (intellect or reasoning) *is to do a good thing whether it is for a
person that is good or bad*. Listen, we are not the police. Many times
we will say that this person is good or this person is bad without even
knowing any details. If a person is sick (whether you think he is bad or
not), help him. You would want him to help you if you were sick.[^1] In
regards to doing something good, the Prophet and Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(peace be upon them and their family) said *do it immediately*.

In regards to giving money, Imam Ali (peace be upon him and his family)
said *do not say what is my small amount of money going to do*. Meaning,
do not say let the rich pay because your amount will not really have an
impact. No, you must do your part. It does not matter if your amount is
small or large. Remember, piety is found in quality, not mere quantity.
There is another *hadith* (tradition) that says that *you have to be
very gentle in communicating with others*. Also, Imam Ali (peace be upon
him and his family) said that *if you take revenge, the best revenge is
to forgive*. This is very hard to do, but this, like the other
traditions, points out basic concepts that embody the scales of justice.

The wise **Qur’an (53:39)** states,

***“[A]nd nothing belongs to man except what he strives for.”***

Also, the **Qur’an (91:7-10)** states,

***“By the soul and Him who fashioned it, and inspired it with
[discernment between] its virtues and vices: one who purifies it is
felicitous, and one who betrays it fails.”***

Imam Ali (peace be upon him and his family) said that *all of you are
from Adam* (peace be upon him)*, and Adam was from dirt*. (Jalali, page
464). Meaning, we are all going to die one day, and the only thing that
will remain are our deeds. We must be just in our actions, because that
justice will allow us to succeed.

This discussion of justice reminds me of a childhood event. When I was
in middle school (I was about thirteen years-old), I remember a day when
the teacher was handing back our graded exams. One student reviewed his
exam and discovered that the teacher made a mistake in counting the
points. Actually, the teacher gave the student too many points. Now,
this student had to decide whether to keep quiet and keep the high score
or to tell the teacher about the mistake. If he told the teacher, the
teacher would probably lower the score. This student decided to tell the
teacher the truth. The teacher was so surprised and happy with the
student’s honesty, the teacher did not reduce the score and told the
student that he deserved the extra points. This student, at that moment,
embodied or used the scales of justice. He knew what was right and acted
upon it (even though he might “harm” himself in regards to his class
grade), and his act of justice was rewarded. Being just is not only the
right thing to do, it is advantageous for us. We enter this world and
leave this world within a relatively short period of time. If we are
just during this time, it will benefit us beyond our comprehension.

[^1]: In certain cases one should avoid or disassociate from a certain
person to distance oneself from wrong doing and to avoid supporting evil
or sin. However, on a human level, if a person is hungry, sick, or
requesting help regarding a basic need, there is justice and beauty in
attending to that need. For example, looking at the lives of the
Ma’sumin (infallibles, may peace be upon them all), there are many cases
in which great personalities fed or attended to the sickness of a person
that committed harm to them and their families, and many times that
person turned to Islam or became less rigid because of such kindness.


