Lesson 1
========

11-4-09 The Open School Class: Explanation of Forty *Ahadith* Text:
Jalali, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn. Sharh al-Arba’in al-Nabawwiyah. Arabic
edition 1987, pages 419-422.

Summary
-------

Allah (the All-Wise) says via the **Qur’an** *inter alia*,

***“O you who have faith! Save yourselves and your families from a
Fire.”***[^1] ***(66:6)**,*

Here, “families” does not only mean your kin but also encompasses anyone
connected to you. The interesting point of this verse is the order in
which it addresses the believer. Allah (the All-Merciful) first mentions
saving one’s self, and then He mentions saving others. This makes
logical sense. How can one save someone else before he saves himself?
For example, if I am drowning with others, I cannot save another person
who is drowning unless I prevent myself from drowning first.

In regards to saving family (*e.g.*, one’s children), there is a
*hadith* (tradition) that says that *one should play with his children
until the age* *of seven, then for the next seven years, one should
teach his children manners, and then for the next seven years, one
should be a friend to his children.* However, if one is to follow this
paradigm, then one needs to be educated himself, which goes back to the
concept that one should save himself (the first phase of salvation,
while saving family and then saving society are the second and third
phases, respectively).

In regards to saving one’s self, we must respect other human beings and
ourselves, primarily, via manners. Allah (the All-Knowing) says via the
**Qur’an (2:256)**, *inter alia*,

***“There is no compulsion in religion.”***

We should not force others to believe something, and we ourselves should
not be forced. We should obtain and spread truth and knowledge through
intellect and reasoning. This is the proper path; the path of manners
and self-building. Furthermore, Allah (the All-Praiseworthy) says via
the Qur’an **(2:194)**, *inter alia*,

***“So should anyone aggress against you, assail him in the manner he
assailed you, and be wary of Allah.”***

 Meaning, do not exceed the limits. Do not be overpowered by emotion and
revenge. One needs to control one’s self. Additionally, Allah (the
All-Beneficent) says via the **Qur’an (24:27)**, *inter alia*,  
***“O you who have faith! Do not enter houses other than your own until
you have announced [your arrival] and greeted their occupants.”***

Meaning, one should say *salam* (peace) to others. When someone says
*salam* to another human being, one is conveying that he is at peace
with the other. Through basic principles (such as manners, respect,
control, and desire for peace) one can grow. Following such wisdom from
the Qur’an, one is able to struggle with one’s self to better and,
ultimately, save one’s self. The **Qur’an** further mentions i*nter
alia*:

***“Say, „Who has forbidden the adornment of Allah which He has brought
forth for His servants, and the good things of [His] provision?’”*** :
**(7:32 )**,

*inter alia*:

***“Those who, when spending, are neither wasteful nor tight-fisted.”
(25:67)**,*

*inter alia*:

***“O you who have faith! Eat of the good things We have provided you,
and thank Allah.” (2:172)**,*

*inter alia*:

***“O mankind! Eat of what is lawful and pure in the earth.” (2:168)**,*

*inter alia*:

***“So eat out of what Allah has provided you as lawful and good.”
(16:114)**,*

*inter alia*:

***“Allah does not task any soul beyond its capacity.” (2:286)**,*

*inter alia*:

***“He has chosen you and has not placed for you any obstacle in the
religion.” (22:78)**,*

*inter alia*:

***“Allah desires ease for you, and He does not desire hardship for
you.” (2:185)**,*

Looking at these verses and synthesizing them, one can see that Allah
(the All-Wise) wants us as individuals to perform acts to purify and
better ourselves. For example, adorning Allah (the All-Praiseworthy)
through *salat* (Islamic ritual prayer) and *sawn* (fasting), spending
money wisely and with a good heart, and eating lawful and good foods.

By knowing what to do and then doing it, one is able to better himself.
Furthermore, Allah (the All-Knowing) knows that we have limitations and
that we are human, and so He does not want to burden us. He allows us to
perform acts based on our capacity. However, He wants us to know what to
do (at our different capacities) and apply it so that we can be just to
our own souls and save ourselves. 8

[^1]: Unless otherwise noted, all translations are based on The Qur’an.
Trans. Ali Quli Qara’i. Elmhurst, New York: Tahrike Tarsile Qur’an,
Inc., 2006.


