Lesson 3
========

11-19-09 The Open School Class: Explanation of Forty *Ahadith* Text:
Jalali, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn. Sharh al-Arba’in al-Nabawwiyah. Arabic
edition 1987, pages 423-425.

Summary
-------

Women are considered extremely important and valuable in Islam.
Actually, women were rescued and given their rights by Islam. In the
time of ignorance, women were treated like property, and they did not
have a voice. Islam gave women a voice and much more. In Islam, women
are equal to men in value. For example, Islam does not allow one to
force a woman into marriage. She must consent on her own free will.
Other rights were granted as well.

For example, women were able to own property, and they also were given
rights to *baiyyah* (pledging allegiance). Prophet Muhammad (peace be
upon him and his family) would visit women or women would visit him, and
they were given the right to pay allegiance to him. Allah (the Most
High) says via the **Qur’an (60:12)**:

***O Prophet! If faithful women come to you, to take the oath of
allegiance to you, [pledging] that they shall not ascribe any partners
to Allah, that they shall not steal, nor commit adultery, nor kill their
children, nor utter any slander that they may have intentionally
fabricated, nor disobey you in what is right, then accept their
allegiance, and plead for them to Allah for forgiveness. Indeed Allah is
all-forgiving, all-merciful.***

(See Jalali, page 424). Women in the U.S. were not even given the right
to vote until the early twentieth century. However, some people argue
that Islam oppresses women. Firstly, to truly understand the Islamic
philosophy towards women and what Islam did for women, one must compare
the freedoms Islam brought with other societies at the time of the
advent of Islam.

If you compare how Islam viewed women to how the Roman society or the
Persian society viewed women at the time, one would be amazed at the
beauty of Islam and understand that Islam came to abolish oppression of
women.

Secondly, some of the “freedoms” touted by certain groups nowadays
regarding women are against the nature of women. In my opinion, the way
current societies treat and view women is actually stepping away from
freedom. For example, societies are treating women more and more as
property or pieces of meat. Women are judged based on their beauty and
how they dress rather than what they think and believe. Islam is above
such superficial concentration.

Women are not property or pieces of meat, they are equal partners to
men. Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) demonstrated
how one should honor and view women. Once a king gave a woman, Mariah,
to the Prophet as a gift, a piece of property. The Prophet accepted
Mariah but not as a piece of property, but as a human being. He married
her, and that act of marriage symbolized the elevation of women that
Islam brought. Allah (the Most High) says via the **Qur’an (4:1)**:

***O mankind! Be wary of your Lord, who created you from a single soul,
and created its mate from it, and, from the two of them, scattered
numerous men and women. Be wary of Allah, in whose Name you adjure one
another, and the wombs. Indeed Allah is watchful over you.***

(See Jalali, page 424).

Surely, women are created as men are created, and women, generally, are
equal to men in application (*e.g.,* both men and women are obliged to
pray). However, some look at Islamic practices and declare that Islam is
not fair to women. Yet, these critics do not consider the totality of
the circumstances. For example, the inheritance rulings of Islam give
double portions of wealth to a son compared to a daughter. From a
superficial look, one can say that Islam favors men because they get two
parts and women only get one part.

However, Islam is a just religion, and it takes into consideration the
concept of compensation. In Islam, a man is financially responsible for
his wife and family. He is obliged to provide for the family while women
are not obliged. Accordingly, from a fixed amount of inheritance, a
woman takes less and a man takes more because he is legally obligated to
provide for his family. When one looks beyond the surface, the beauty of
Islam is truly exposed. There are some issues that are considered
controversial, such as *hijab* (a state of modesty, entailing rules for
both sexes, that includes more clothing or covering requirements for
women than men in certain circumstances).

However, if one believes in Islam, the philosophy of *hijab*, and its
practical benefits, then there is no controversy. There will always be
critics. Yes, Islam places restrictions on women (as well as men).
However, these restrictions are placed for natural, practical, and
spiritual reasons, not because Islam views women as evil or bad. Islam
has never and will never have a negative attitude towards women. Women
are to be respected with great care as Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon
him and his family) respected women.


