Lesson 5
========

2-16-10 The Open School Class: Explanation of Forty *Ahadith* Text:
Jalali, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn. Sharh al-Arba’in al-Nabawwiyah. Arabic
edition 1987, pages 425-426.

Summary
-------

What is the role towards children? In Islam, marriage entails
responsibility, and one of the main responsibilities is raising
children. This is not necessarily just an Islamic principle, it is a
human principle. For example, every society emphasizes the importance of
raising children. It is important because the children of today will be
the leaders or adults of the future. Each adult member of a family was
once a child that grew up, and the cyclical responsibility of raising a
child falls on the shoulders of the respective parents. Now, what is the
actual responsibility?

For example, a family may hold certain values. To maintain these values
for the future, the family needs to instill them into the children, who
are the future. Accordingly, the responsibility is protecting values
through raising the children. Values of societies or families may
differ.

For example, one family may value money, and another family may value a
specific cultural way of life. However, Muslim families should value
religion (Islam), which entails many things, such as staying on the
straight path, performing obligations, and education. Prophet Muhammad
(peace be upon him and his family) said to *seek knowledge until death*.
Education is a cornerstone of Islam.

Accordingly, it is the responsibility of the parents (especially the
father) to send the children to school. The parent cannot say that I am
not responsible! The father is responsible to push the child to go to
school and get an education. Why? The child is the future, the future of
the family, the future of the society, the future of the nation, and so
on. However, a lot of times the parents themselves are not educated.

One must struggle to educate himself or herself and sacrifice (money,
time, etc.) to educate their children. Islam emphasizes the importance
of raising children in a correct manner. Normally, when a child is born,
he or she does not know anything, like a blank slate. Customs, manners,
and information are acquired via parents and society. The child adapts
to the climate. At the time of birth, the child needs to be fostered
with food/nourishment for her physical health as well as with manners
for her spiritual health.

Unlike an animal, a human being needs to pay attention to both the
physical and the spiritual. For example, a cat may steal food to
survive, but a human should not steal because it is detrimental to his
or her spirit. The parents must be there to foster the children
properly.

Imam Ali ibn Husayn as-Sajjad (may peace be upon him and his family)
said that *the duty of the father towards the child is to know that he
is part of me*. (Jalali, page 426). So a father cannot say that here is
my son or daughter, and he or she is not my problem. If the child does
good or bad, it reflects on the parents.

There are five pillars for raising children that parents should know.
Firstly, one should know that the child is a part of himself or herself
(you cannot disassociate). Secondly, the parent is the responsible party
(you are the adult and even if you are uneducated, you must allow for
the education of the child). Thirdly, the parent must teach the child
good manners. Fourthly, the parent must teach the child about faith
(*iman*) and beliefs. Fifthly, the parent must teach the child how to
worship (*shari’ah*).

Prophet Muhammad (may peace be upon him and his family) said that *every
child is born a Muslim*. (Jalali, page 426). That means that if a person
is not a Muslim, then at one point he or she changed based on influence
(or lack of influence) of the parents or society.

Accordingly, the parent needs to teach their children appropriately
(keeping the five pillars in mind) to raise a healthy child (both
physically and spiritually). This way, the child may remain a Muslim,
*Insha’Allah* (if God wills). However, parents should teach their
children from a young age. They cannot wait too long.


