Lesson 6
========

3-3-10 The Open School Class: Explanation of Forty *Ahadith* Text:
Jalali, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn. Sharh al-Arba’in al-Nabawwiyah. Arabic
edition 1987, pages 427-428.  
 Summary

*Tahdhib* in the context of the wise Qur’an and the *ahadith*
(traditions) means upbringing or raising children. Islam has guidelines
for raising children. The wise **Qur’an (18:46)** states,

***“Wealth and children are an adornment of the life of the world, but
lasting righteous deeds are better with your Lord in reward and better
in hope.”***

Wealth in itself is not a bad thing, and Allah (all praise is due to
Him) states that wealth is an adornment of this world. For example,
wealth is used to feed people, to house people, to take care of oneself
and family, etc.

Accordingly, wealth can be considered a good thing. However, if one
cheats or steals to acquire wealth, then that, of course, is not good
and is not the way of the straight path. The deeds of a person have
great importance, and if one uses righteous deeds to acquire wealth,
then those righteous deeds are actually better for that person than the
wealth itself.

The same concept applies to children. Children are adornments of this
world, but one must raise them in a good manner (*e.g.*, do not raise
them through lying or bad conduct) because the good or righteous deeds
in raising children are better for oneself. Children are considered
adornments because they represent an extension of the parents.

Parents can vicariously live through their children. Prophet Muhammad
(peace be upon him and his family) said that *when a person dies hope
goes away or his good deeds cease except if* i) *good charity work done
by that person has a continuing effect,* ii) *some knowledge was left
behind by that person, or* iii) *a child prays for him*. (Jalali, page
427). These exceptions show that an extension of that person is still in
this world and, in a sense, that person is really not dead.

Now, in terms of how to raise children, Islam places the responsibility
on the parent to raise their children according to the respective nature
of a male or a female. For example, Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him
and his family) said to *teach girls surat al-Nur* (the twenty-fourth
chapter of the Qur’an, titled the Light) *instead of surat Yusuf* (the
twelfth chapter of the Qur’an, titled Joseph (peace be upon him)). Why?
Well, *surat al-Nur* discusses the concept of chastity, which suits the
nature of a female, while *surat Yusuf* mentions a sexually driven
situation Prophet Yusuf (peace be upon him) was placed in, which does
not befit the nature of young girls.

However, one should not misconstrue this saying to prohibit women from
learning all parts of the glorious Qur’an. The saying emphasizes that
one should take into consideration the nature of a child when teaching
him or her lessons during upbringing. Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon
him and his family) also said that *the best of children are girls*.

This should not be used in the attempt to prove the inferiority or
superiority of one sex over the other. The beautiful saying highlights
girls because there is something special about girls. You see, girls
give birth and actually raise children. A mother will naturally spend
more time with a child than the father. Women have a heavy
responsibility, and they are the brains of the household.

Unfortunately, too many cultures and nations treat women badly.
*Insha’Allah* (if God wills), may we all learn from the sayings of the
blessed Prophet Muhammad and his family (peace upon them all) who were
sent by the Lord, the Master of all the worlds. Prophet Muhammad (peace
be upon him and his family) said that *whoever kisses his child gets a
reward*. Love and affection is important, and by kissing your child, you
are worshipping God the All-Merciful.

Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) also said to *teach
your child how to swim and how to shoot arrows* (archery). At first
glance, this saying seems somewhat odd, but with further investigation,
truth shines. For example, if one does not know how to swim and falls
into water, that person will die. Swimming is a form of self rescue.
Also, at the time of Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his
family), shooting arrows was a main self-defense technique.

Accordingly, teaching your child self-defense techniques (such as maybe
karate or kung fu) may be useful in saving his or her life one day.
Therefore, parents should teach their children how to rescue themselves.
Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) said that *a child
has rights that a father should fulfill, such as* i) *to pick a good
name for the child,* ii) *to teach him good manners, and* iii) *paving a
way for his success*. One example of paving the way for a child’s
success is providing a good education for the child.

Additionally, Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) said
to *teach your child how to write* (again a reference to education)*,
and when the child becomes of age, find a wife* (or spouse) *for your
child*. Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) said *when a
child is born, recite adhan* (call for prayer) *in his right ear and
iqamah* (second call for prayer) *in his left ear*. This will protect
the child from *Shaytan* (Satan). Also, Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon
him and his family) said that *one should be adil* (just) *among his
children*. (Jalali, page 428). Meaning, one should treat them fairly.
For example, if you kiss one child, kiss the other child as well.
Children will remember how you treated them.

Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family) said *when a child
makes a mess, it is just a mess*. Remember that you are dealing with a
child, not an adult. We were all children once, and we made messes and
mistakes. Treat your child as a child, do not dictate. Of course,
however, as the child grows, one must instill values and discipline
based on the age of the child. Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and
his family) also said to *love your children, forgive your children, and
when you promise something to your children, fulfill the promise*. This
way, you will give self-esteem to your children.

Also, Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (the Commander of the faithful, may peace
be upon him and his family) said to *be careful when deciding who to
hire to breastfeed your child*. In the past, when a mother did not
properly lactate, a wet nurse would be hired to breastfeed the child.
The lesson of the saying is that such milk has an effect on a child, and
the source of the milk should be analyzed to avoid any bad effects on
the child. Nowadays, however, formulas and powdered milk may be used
making the position of a wet nurse obsolete.


