Section 6 : Intercession Commentary : Verse 83.84
=================================================

None shall intercede save those who have taken the Promise from Allah -
Gravity of the abhorrence of the sin of assigning any issues to Allah

83- أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّآ أَرْسَلْنَا الشَّيَاطِينَ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ
تَؤُزُّهُمْ أَزّاً

84- فَلاَ تَعْجَلْ عَلَيْهِمْ إِنَّمَا نَعُدُّ لَهُمْ عَدّاً

83. " Have you not seen (how) We sent the Satans unto the disbelievers
to incite them with an incitement?"

84. " So make no haste against them, for We but count out to them a
number (of days)."

**Commentary:**

Here, this fact is referred to that idols not only did not cause their
honour but also disgraced them. The Qur'an by this holy verse says:

" Have you not seen (how) We sent the Satans unto the disbelievers to
incite them with an incitement?"

The incitement of Satans upon men is not an obligatory and unknown
incitement, but it is the men themselves who let Satans arrive inside
their hearts and souls.

In this holy verse, the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) is addressed being told that
he should not haste against them, because Allah will minutely count
their deeds and record them for the Day when the Divine court of Justice
will be held in Hereafter. The verse says:

" So make no haste against them, for We but count out to them a number
(of days)."

Upon the commentary of the verse there is also this probability that
the purpose of the phrase: "count out to them a number (of days)" is the
counting the days of lifetime, or the number of their breaths, which
means that the length of their life is very short so that the number the
breaths of it can be counted.

However, the Arabic term /'azz/, used in the verse, means 'to incite
severely'.


**Commentary : Verse 85.86**

85- يَوْمَ نحْشُرُ الْمُتَّقِينَ إِلَى الرَّحْمَنِ وَفْداً

86- وَنَسُوقُ الْـمُجْرِمِينَ إِلَى جَهَنَّمَ وِرْداً

85. " On the day We muster the pious unto the Beneficent (Allah) (like
the guest) of honour."

86. " And We shall drive the sinners unto Hell thirsty."

**Commentary:**

The Arabic term /wafd/ is used for 'a group of people who have just
arrived mounted for a pilgrimage or seeking something'. The Arabic word
/wird/ means 'thirst'.

In this verse, the course of 'the pious' and 'the sinners' is stated
through some short and expressive sentences. The Holy Qur'an says:

" On the day We muster the pious unto the Beneficent (Allah) (like the
guest) of honour."

Again, the Arabic word /wafd/ originally is used in the sense of 'a
mission' or 'a group' who go to some nobles in order to solve their
problems where they will be respected and honoured. Thus, this word
implicitly contains the meaning of 'esteem', and, perhaps, it is for the
same reason that some Islamic traditions denote that the pious will ride
on some easy-paced mounts and enter into Paradise with much respect.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: "Ali (a.s.) asked the commentary of this verse
from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) , and he answered: 'O' Ali! 'Al-wafd' is
surely said about those who ride on a mount. These are they who are in
awe of Allah, Almighty and Glorious. He loved them and specialized them
for Himself, and was pleased with their deeds and named them 'the
pious'."

It is cited in Tafsir-i-Ali-ibn-Ebrahim Qummi that Hadrat Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) said that Ali (a.s.) asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) who they were,
(the pious), and he (p.b.u.h.) answered: " O' Ali! They are your sincere
followers, and you are their Imam."(1)

Then in the next verse, the Qur'an says:

" And We shall drive the sinners unto Hell thirsty."

The sinners will be driven toward Hell in the same manner that some
thirsty camels are driven unto the drinking place, but, here, there is
no water, there is Fire.

It should be noted that the Qur'anic term /wird/ means a 'group of
people or animals who enter a drinking place', and since such a group
are certainly thirsty, some of the commentators have taken the word,
hare, in the sense of 'those parched with thirst'.

How long is the distance between those whom are lead to the Beneficent
Allah respectfully and with esteem in a circumstance that the angels
come to receive them and greet them, and the group whom are driven unto
Hell Fire like some thirsty animals, while they are bend there heads
because of shame, disgrace and worthlessness?

Some traditions upon Paradise and Hell, and their People:

1. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Never will enter Paradise, but the one
is a Muslim." (Kanz-ul-'Ummal, vol. 1, p. 79)

1- Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, the Commentary, vol. 3, p. 259, and
Tafsir-i-Ali-ibn-Ebrahin, under the verse.

2. The Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) said: "Verily, in Heaven, (there
are some things that), no eye has seen, no ear has heard, and no heart
has received." (Kanz-ul-'Ummal, vol. 14, p. 645)

3. Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) said: "The Messenger of Allah
(p.b.u.h.) told me 'You are the first person who enters Paradise'. Then
I said: 'O' Messenger of Allah! Do I enter it even before you?' He said:
'Yes, For you are my standard in Hereafter, the same as you are my
standard in the world, and the standard is always placed before'."
(Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol.8, p. 6)

4. Ali-ibn-Abitalib (a.s.) said: "There is no price for your selves
save Paradise, then, do not sell your self but for it." (Tauhid-i-Sadug,
p.29)

5. Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) said: "He who sells his self for other
than Paradise, he has made his affliction grievous" (Qurar-ul-Hikam,
vol. 1)

6. The Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) said: "Promise upon six things for
me, then I will promise (and guarantee) Paradise for you: Whenever one
of you speaks, he should not tell a lie; and when he is trusted, he
should not be treacherous; and when he promises, he should not breach;
and lower your eyes (from forbidden things); and hold your hands (from
wrong); and guard your modesty." (Kanz-ul-Ummal, vol. 14, p. 894)

7. The Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) said: "Paradise is enclosed by
pains and difficulties, and (falling in) Hell is enclosed by lusts."
(Sahih-i-Muslim, vol. 4, p. 2174)

8. Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) was speaking and he said: "Verily the
people of Heaven look unto the houses (and places) of our followers, as
a person looks at the stars." (Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 8, p. 148)

9. The Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) said: "A span from Paradise (in
comparison) is better than the world and whatever is in it."
(Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 8, p. 148 Kanz-ul-Ummal, vol. 14, p. 456)

10. 'Abdillah-ibn-Zayd-Mazini has narrated from the Messenger of Allah
(p.b.u.h.) who said: "There is a garden from the gardens of Paradise
between my house and my pulpit." (Sahih-i-Bukhari, vol. 2, p. 77)

11. 'Abu-Hurayrah narrated from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) who said: "There
is a garden from the gardens of Paradise between my house and my pulpit,
and my pulpit is upon my Houd." These two traditions may indicate to the
place of Hadrat Fatimah's grave. (Sahihi-Bukhari, vol. 2, p. 77)

12. Allah, the Almighty, the Glorious, said: "Surely Hell lies in
ambush", "For the transgressors a destination". (Sura An-Naba', No. 78,
verses 21 and 22)

13. Ali-ibn-Abitalib (a.s.) said: "Hell is a Fire whose flame does not
subside, whose capture does not release and whose break does not close.
Its heat is terrible, its depth is far, and its water is pus."
(Kanz-ul-'Ummal, No. 44225)

14. Again, Ali-ibn-Abitalib (a.s.) said: "Avoid the Fire whose heat is
terrible, whose depth is far, and whose ornament is iron."
(Qurar-ul-Hikam, No. 2619)

15. Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) said: "Avoid the Fire whose roar is
forthcoming, whose flame is terrible, and whose chastisement is fresh."
(Qurar-ul-Hikam, No. 2620)

16. Ali-ibn-Abitalib (a.s.) said: "How may I be patient of (Hell) Fire
that if it casts a parcel unto the earth, it will burn all its plants,
and if a person refuges to a mountain its heat will cook him thereon?
Which is better for Ali: that he becomes nigh stationed with Allah, or,
because of his sins, he, entangled in Fire, becomes far from the Mercy
of Allah, driven away and inflicted with His Wrath?" ('Amali-us-Sadug,
vol. 7, p. 496)

17 It is cited in Majma'-ul-Bayan that one of the Immaculate ones
(a.s.) upon the commentary of the Qur'anic phrase: "And when they are
cast into a narrow place in it,…" said: "By the One in Whose hand is my
life, the people of Hell will be so pressed in Fire as a nail is pressed
in the wall."(1) (Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 4, p. 8 tradition 27)

18. The Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) said: "The first person who will
enter Hell-Fire is a dominant ruler who does not administer justice, and
the rich person who does not give the due of his wealth, and the poor
who is proud." ('Uyun 'Akhbar-ir-Rida, vol. 2, p. 28, tradition 20)

Thus, the key of Paradise is piety to Allah (s.w.t.) , and the key of
Hell is sin, vice, and opposition against Allah and His Messenger.

1- Sura Al-Furgan, No. 25, verse 13


