Commentary : Verse 97
=====================

97- فإِنَّمَا يَسَّرْنَاهُ بِلِسَانِكَ لِتُبَشّـِرَ بِهِ الْمُتَّقِينَ
وَتُنذِرَ بِهِ قَوْماً لُّدّاً

97. " So We have made it (The Qur'an) easy in your tongue that you may
give glad tidings thereby to the pious ones, and warn thereby stubborn
people."

**Commentary:**

Here, the verse has referred to the Qur'an, which is a source of
training, Faith, and righteous deed. Allah (s.w.t.) in this verse
says:

" So We have made it (The Qur'an) easy in your tongue that you may give
glad tidings thereby to the pious ones, and warn thereby stubborn
people."

The term /yassarnah/, mentioned in the verse, is derived from the
Arabic infinitive /taysir/ in the sense of facilitation. This
facilitation may be from the different points of view:

1. It may be in this point of view that the Qur'an has been revealed in
Arabic, eloquent and perspicuous, whose tone is pleasant in the ears,
and whose recitation is easy for the tongues.

2. It may be from this view that Allah had given such a domination over
the verses of the Qur'an to His Prophet (p.b.u.h.) that he could apply
it easily everywhere and for removing any difficulty, and he used to
recite them to the believers munificently.

3. It may be from the point of the content of the Qur'an which, with
its deep meanings, is easy to understand. Basically, those many great
and outstanding facts which have been arranged in the frame of limited
mere verbal utterances whose meanings can be understood easily, itself
is an evidence for what is recited in the abovementioned verse and the
act of which has been performed by the help of Allah.

In several verses of Sura Al-Qamar, No. 54, including verse 17, this
phrase has been repeated: "And certainly We have made the Qur'an easy
for remembrance, but is there anyone who will mind?"

The Arabic word /ludd/ is the plural form of /'alad/ which means 'an
enemy with intensive hostility', and it is used for those who are
fanatic, obstinate, and irrational in enmity.


**Commentary : Verse 98**

98- وَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُم مِن قَرْنٍ هَلْ تُحِسُّ مِنْهُم مِنْ
أَحَدٍ أَوْ تَسْمَعُ لَهُمْ رِكْزَاً

98. " And how many a generation before have We destroyed! Do you find
any one of them or hear a sound of them?"

**Commentary:**

This is the last verse of Sura Maryam. This Sura was revealed in Mecca
at the time when Muslims were in a hard pressure. Keeping this matter in
mind, the verse was both as a comfort for the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and the
believers, and as a threat and warning against all hostile and obstinate
enemies of Islam. It says:

" And how many a generation before have We destroyed! Do you find any
one of them or hear a sound of them?"

The Arabic term /rikz/ means 'a faint sound, a whisper', and,
therefore, the things which are hidden under the ground, (as ore), in
Arabic are called /rikaz/. Thus, the verse means that these cruel
nations and the hard enemies of the truth were so destroyed that even no
faint sound is heard from them now.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.), in answer to Jabir concerning this verse, said: "The
destroyed generation is Umayyads. You may find none of them in the state
of being hopeful or free from fear and horror." Jabir has said that he
asked whether that state could take place, and the Imam replied: "It
will happen very soon." (Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 46, p.30)

**Supplication:**

O' Lord! Brighten our hearts with the light of Faith, and fill the
entire of our entity with light of righteous deeds. Appoint us, please,
among the lovers of the believers and the righteous, specially the prior
of the pious, Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali-ibn-Abitalib (a.s.), and cast the
love of us into the hearts of all believers.

O' Allah! Our large Islamic society, with those abundant people and
plenty of material and spiritual abilities, is captured in the grips of
enemies and, because of disunity and separation of their rows, has
become feeble. Please gather them all around the torch of Faith and
righteous deed!

O' Lord! As You destroyed and annihilated the former tyrannical
generations so that no faint sound is heard from them, annihilate the
most powerful unjust forces of our time, too. Remove their vice from the
oppressed communities and make the raise of believers against the
oppressors victorious! Amen. O' Lord of the Worlds!


The End of Sura Maryam


