Commentary : Verse 37.38
========================

37- فَاخْتَلَفَ الاَحْزَابُ مِن بَيْنِهِمْ فَوَيْلٌ لّـِلَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا مِن مَّشْهَدِ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ

38- أَسْمِعْ بِهِمْ وَأَبْصِرْ يَوْمَ يَأْتُونَنَا لَكِنِ الظَّالِمُونَ
الْيَوْمَ فِى ضَلاَلٍ مُّبِينٍ

37. " Then the sects did differ among themselves; and woe to those who
disbelieved because of presence on the great day."

38. " How well they will hear and see on the day they come to Us! But
the unjust (even) this day are in manifest straying."

**Commentary:**

'A party' is a group of people working with together and who have some
particular goals and position which are usually united.

The Arabic word /mas(had/ means either the site of the attendance of
people, or the place of bearing witness, because, on the Day of Judgment
both people attend there, and a lot of witnesses from angels and
prophets will testify upon the deeds of man.

Some people believed in Jesus as God, like the group of Ya'qhubiyyah;
some others said that he was son of God, like the group of NasTuriyyah,
while some other people believed in trinity, like Israilliyyah. But, on
the Day of Resurrection, all of these groups will testify to the
falsehood of their beliefs. (Tafsir-i-'Atyab-ul-Bayan)

Despite all the emphasis Jesus placed upon the subject of monotheism
and the worship of the One God, yet, after him, some groups among his
followers differed and expressed different ideas about the Messiah.
Referring to this the verse says:

" Then the sects did differ among themselves; and woe to those who
disbelieved because of presence on the great day."

The history of Christianity is also good evidence proving that after
the Christ, they differed greatly about him and about the subject of
monotheism. Some of them said: "He is God who has come down on earth and
has brought a group of people to life and has caused others to die, then
He ascended to heaven."

Others said: "He is the son of God", while others said: "He is one of
the three persons: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost."

Yet others said: "He is the third of the three. God is the object of
worship, Jesus is also an object of worship, and his mother also is an
object of worship."

Finally, some his followers said that he was the servant of Allah and
His Messenger.

Since deviation from the principle of Monotheism is counted as the
greatest deviation of the Christians, at the end of the verse they are
severely warned.

In the next verse, the Qur'an describes their state when they are
present at the gathering-place of resurrection. It says:

" How well they will hear and see on the day they come to Us! …"

But, now that they are in this life, these cruel people are in a
manifest aberration busy with their transgression. The verse continues
saying:

"…But the unjust (even) this day are in manifest straying."

In principal, the observation of that court in Hereafter and the
effects of the deeds, remove the sleep of negligence from the eyes and
the ears so that the blind-hearted ones will become aware and wise. But,
what a pity! This awareness will be of no avail to them.


**Commentary : Verse 39.40**

39- وَأَنذِرْهُمْ يَوْمَ الْحَسْرَةِ إِذْ قُضِيَ الاَمْرُ وَهُمْ فِى
غَفْلَةٍ وَهُمْ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ

40- إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَرِثُ الاَرْضَ وَمَنْ عَلَيْهَا وَإِلَيْنَا
يُرْجَعُونَ

39. " And ware them of the Day of Regret, when the matter shall have
been decreed while they are (now) in negligence and they do not
believe."

40. " Verily We inherit the earth and all that are upon it and unto Us
they shall be returned.”

**Commentary:**

The gate of all misfortunes is negligence: negligence from the Lord,
negligence from Hereafter, negligence from sins, negligence from plots,
negligence from the poor and the deprived, negligence from the history
and its courses, and negligence from adolescence, abilities, talents and
preparednesses of development.

One of the names of Hereafter is 'the Day of Regret', regret for the
missed opportunities and for the lost capitals. Death of a man in the
state of negligence and faithlessness, is a source of regret.

Therefore, this verse addresses the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and commands him
to warn the pagans of Mecca from the Day when the sinners will regret
why they had not done some more good deeds. This Day is the Day of
Resurrection. Some commentators say that in that Day only those who
deserve punishment will regret.

In Sahih-i-Muslim there has been narrated by Abu-Sa'id-i-Khidri that
the Prophet of Islam said: "When the people of Heaven will enter
Paradise and the people of Hell will enter the Hell Fire, all of them
will be called and, thus, their attentions will be attracted. Then, the
death will be shown to them and they will be told: 'Do you know death?'
They will say: 'This is the death', while they all know it. Then, the
death will be perished and the people of Paradise will be said to that
there will be no death and they are eternal; and the people of Hell will
also be said to that there will be no death and they are eternal. This
is the meaning of 'And warn them of the Day of Regret'."

The believers in Imamate have narrated this tradition from Imam Baqir
(a.s.) and Imam Sadiq (a.s.) who had added at its end that: "The people
of Paradise will become so happy that if there were death there, all of
them would die because of inconvenience." (The commentary of As-Safi,
Majma'-ul-Bayan, and Al-Burhan)

The verse continues saying:

" …when the matter shall have been decreed …"

On that Day, the affairs will become one-sided. A group of people go
into Paradise while another group will be sent into Hell. Some
commentators say that it means that the life of this world has ended and
no one will come back to this world to recompense the events of the
last; and on that Day all people will be treated justly.

"… while they are (now) in negligence and they do not believe."

In this world, people are busy with some vain affairs and often forget
the Hereafter.

0 In the next verse, Allah says that He will take up the inhabitants of
the earth from the earth and He will inherit the earth and those who are
on it, because there will remain no one on the earth to claim ownership
or to be able interfere in it. The return of them all, after death,
shall be to Him and none will govern them but Allah. The verse says:

" Verily We inherit the earth and all that are upon it and unto Us they
shall be returned."


