Section 3 : Abraham Preaches Unity of Allah
===========================================

**Abraham preaches Unity of Allah and exhorts his people to abstain
from idol-worship**

41- وَاذْكُرْ فِى الْكِتَابِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ صِدِّيقاً
نَّبِيّاً

41. " And mention Abraham in the Book; verily he was a truthful man, a
prophet."

**Commentary:**

The Arabic term /siddiq/ is applied for both the person who verifies
the truth very much, and the person whose all words and deeds are based
upon truthfulness. Such a person acts according to what he says, and
speaks according to what he acts.

This holy verse uncovers a part of the life of the hero of Monotheism,
Abraham the Friend of God, and emphasizes that the invitation of this
great prophet, as that of other Divine prophets, has begun from the
point of Monotheism.

The verse implies that Abraham should be mentioned in this Book, the
Qur'an, because he was a man of truth and an attester of the Divine
teachings and commandments. He was a prophet of Allah, too. The verse
says:

" And mention Abraham in the Book; verily he was a truthful man, a
prophet."

In fact, this meaning is the most evident epithet of the godly prophets
and the bringers of the Divine revelations that they do convey the
command of Allah to the servants of God completely.


**Commentary : Verse 42**

42- إِذْ قَالَ لأَبِيهِ يَآ أَبَتِ لِمَ تَعْبُدُ مَا لاَ يَسْمَعُ وَلاَ
يُبْصِرُ وَلاَ يُغْنِى عَنكَ شَيْئاً

42. " When he said to his father: 'O my father! Why do you worship that
which neither hears nor sees, nor does avail you in aught?"

**Commentary:**

When Abraham was preaching as a prophet, his father had died, and the
man whom has been introduced in the Qur'an as his father was his
guardian, his uncle 'A-zar, or his mother's husband. (Al-Mizan, the
Commentary).

Some Islamic traditions also denote that Abraham's father was a
monotheist, and the objective meaning of the Qur'anic word /'ab/, here,
is his uncle. In Arabic language the term /'ab/ has a vast meaning. It
is also applied for the teacher, the trainee, and even for the
father-in-law. There is also a tradition narrated from the Prophet of
Islam (p.b.u.h.) who said: " I and Ali are the fathers of this Ummah
(Muslim community).

Then, the verse points to the debate of Abraham and his father, 'A-zar.
(Father here is referred to the uncle). It says:

" When he said to his father: 'O my father! Why do you worship that
which neither hears nor sees, nor does avail you in aught?"

This short and expressive statement is one of the best evidences of the
negation of polytheism and idolatry. One of the man's motives alongside
knowing Allah is the motive of benefit and loss. Abraham says to 'A-zar
why he relies on a deity which neither removes a difficulty from him,
nor it is able to hear and see.

**Explanations:**

1. The disputations of Abraham and his uncle are worthy of mentioning
and magnifying. "When he said…"

2. In 'forbidding of wrong', you should begin from your own kin. (…O my
father…)

3. There is no age limitation for forbidding of wrong. (A son can
forbid the grand members of the family from doing evils, but he must
observe their respect and protect it.)

4. Perfection of persons does not always relate to their age. Sometimes
it happens that the child of a family understand the facts better than
the elders of that family.

5. In forbidding of wrong, it is better to begin from the creedal
indecencies. (Unfortunately we are often busy in the ethical and social
vices).

6. The path of truth should not be sacrificed for affections.
Relationship ought not to hinder the act of forbidding of wrong.


**Commentary : Verse 43.44**

43- يَآ أَبَتِ إِنّـِى قَدْ جَآءَنِى مِنَ الْعِلْمِ مَا لَمْ يَأْتِكَ
فَاتَّبِعْنِى أَهْدِكَ صِرَاطاً سَوِيّاً

44- يَآ أَبَتِ لاَ تَعْبُدِ الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ كَانَ
لِلرَّحْمنِ عَصِيّاً

43. " O' my father! There has come unto me of knowledge which has not
come unto you, so follow me, I will guide you on a right path."

44. " O' my father! Serve not Satan. Verily Satan is disobedient unto
the Beneficent (Allah)."

**Commentary:**

After that, Abraham (a.s.) invites 'A-zar, with a clear logic in order
that he follows him (a.s.) in that matter. He (a.s.) says:

" O my father! There has come unto me of knowledge which has not come
unto you, so follow me, I will guide you on a right path."

That is, I have got a lot of knowledge by means of revelation, and I
can say with certainty that I will not go on a wrong way, so I will
never invite you unto a wrong way. I desire your felicity and your
happiness, then accept my invitation to become prosperous, and, by
paving this straight path, to reach the ideal destination.

Then, in the next verse, Abraham combines this positive aspect with the
negative aspect, and the consequences that the opposition with this
invitation produces, and says:

" O' my father! Serve not Satan. Verily Satan is disobedient unto the
Beneficent (Allah)."

The objective meaning of "Serve not Satan" is the same as obeying and
following Satan which causes man to become its servant and slave.

Of course, it is evident that the purpose of service, here, is not a
service in the sense of prostration, prayer, and fasting performed for
Satan, but it is in the sense of obeying and following the command of
Satan which itself is counted a kind of service.

The meaning of 'worship, or service' is so vast that it encompasses
even the listening to the sayings of a person with the intention of
acting accordingly, and also putting the rule of a person to order, is
counted a kind of worshipping him.

It has been narrated from the Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.) who said:

"He who listens to a speaker (willingly), he has worshipped him. Then,
if the speaker speaks from the side of Allah, the one has worshipped
Allah, and if the speaker speaks from the side of Iblis, the one has
worshipped Iblis."(1)

However, Abraham wants to teach this fact to his father (uncle) that no
one can live without having a path, a policy. It may be either the path
of Allah and the straight way, or the path of Satan, the disobedient,
the astray. In this course, man should think correctly, take a decision
for himself, and, far from bigotries and blindly followings, choose his
good and benefit.

1- Safinat-ul-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 115


