Preface
=======

Thilly holds the view that the only complete systems of thought are
Western. I wish to briefly examine possible bases of the claim. The
claim is decomposable into two parts and the first is that the Western
tradition contains complete systems of thought. What does that mean? It
cannot mean that everything is known.

It must mean, then, that there is something about the Western tradition
that contains in principle completeness the establishment of a world
view of sufficient breadth and of methods that eliminate false views or
aspects of the world view. However, Western thought of the 20th century
has cast serious doubt on the completeness or possibility of completing
any system. From the psychological point of view, what would convince
one that a system of thought is complete?

There is a tendency, perhaps tacit, that probably exists within all
cultures and individuals the natural belief in or identification with
the paradigms of the culture.

Such paradigms present a picture of the world; and the systems of
thought of the culture are an elaboration of that picture. The
psychological story cannot be whole in itself. It is embedded in a
system of relations among attitudes [psychology] and the institutions of
society.

Together, these must adequately mesh with reality. The role of
psychology would then be an over-compensation so that the tentative but
otherwise valid common knowledge of society is seen as imbued with a
degree of the absolute.

To a degree this is functional; and, usually, held with some degree of
ambiguity. Thus, with a degree of success of the elaborated picture
there is a natural tendency to assume completeness. However, there is
truly no way to demonstrate this completeness because such a
demonstration would depend on another, larger, picture.

Even within the western intellectual traditions [pictures] there is
serious doubt the intrinsic limitations of empiricism [e.g. Hume,
Russell] and rationalism [e.g. Kant, GU\`?del] regarding completeness.
There is, however, a picture that casts doubt that possession of a
complete paradigm / picture of the world is an ideal.

It is the view of the community of life as an open community in an open
universe. Our presence in the universe is an affirmation that an anchor
in completeness is unnecessary; the openness affirms that
"incompleteness" is not a deficiency but may be properly taken as
positive, as an opportunity The second part to Thilly's claim must be
that there are no other complete systems of thought. That is true.
However, there may well be other systems that have depths unfathomed by
the West see the introduction to Dictionary of Asian Philosophers, St.
Elmo Nauman, Jr., 1978 just as Western science is in some ways far in
advance of other systems The open picture is a view that disaffirms the
completeness of Western thought and presents to the West a place in the
universe that is a positive opportunity it is a view of opportunity and
promise rather than gloom.

It is not a cultural relativism. It assigns different strengths to
different cultures, it validates the different cultures and it allows
for cultural ascendance. Such ascendance, however, is not obtained by
proclamation In Journey in Being, I provide a positive picture where
thought is not something that aspires to be complete within itself.
Rather, thought and being move in relation to each other.

Journey in Being provides an open picture. It also suggests the
possibility of completeness of being in the sense of "Being = universe"
rather than in the sense of completeness of any given being or thought.
That, however, is presented as a necessity rather than as an
intrinsically ideal or joyful or joyless event or condition.

Joy and other states are found in the contemplation and living out of
every day life and that includes the remote and ultimate as much as the
present There are many other sources including many that may be implicit
or forgotten I have referred to the 15th Edition of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica for many major and minor points For recent philosophy, I have
referred to Research Guide to Philosophy, by T. N. Tice and T. P.
Slavens, 1983, and One Hundred Twentieth-Century Philosophers, by Stuart
Brown, Diane Collinson and Robert Wilkinson, 1998 The temperamentalist
thesis [From A History of Philosophy, Thilly] is the thesis that
personal and cultural factors are important in philosophical thought in
addition to intellectual, logical and philosophical ones The two types
of temperament according to William James:

Rationalist ["tender-minded"]: intellectualistic, idealistic,
optimistic, religious, free-willist, monistic and dogmatic [Plato,
Aristotle, Aquinas, Descartes, Hegel]

Empiricist ["tough-minded]: sensationalistic, materialistic,
pessimistic, irreligious [deterministic, perhaps], pluralistic and
skeptical [Democritus, Hobbes, Bacon, Hume]

Of course: all philosophy is rational in its use of criticism; no
philosopher is a pure temperament; some philosophers Spinoza, Locke,
Berkeley straddle the classification; and, this simple scheme of
classification does not exhaust the possibilities for precision,
dimensionality or completeness


**The first edition**

This history of Western philosophy began as an endeavor to provide
myself with a coherent picture of philosophy. The following brief
paragraphs define the aims What is significant about the historical
approach to philosophy? A good history of philosophy, whatever its
shortcomings, will, among other things, give the reader a perspective on
philosophy: philosophy as in-process, the relations of philosophy to
life and to the other academic disciplines, show how the attempt to
understand the world must introduce radical elements of novelty. As a
consequence of the radical novelty, systems of metaphysics are relative
to one-another.

Views that eschew radical metaphysics are, therefore, based in a closed
view of knowledge and the world. In the open view, metaphysics is at
once serious and play A good history of philosophy is a contribution to
philosophy. It is a contribution to the understanding of the nature of
philosophy the study, description and demarcation of philosophy is
philosophy. And, a good history provides an environment that enhances
the quality of action.

History of philosophy provides an environment for the conduct of
philosophy The restriction to Western philosophy The restriction to
Western philosophy is practical. First, is my desire to understand a
tradition. To include other thought would have been a diluting influence
Having obtained an adequate understanding of Western philosophy and
thought,

the next step is a placement and broadening of that thought. Both these
objectives can be accomplished by, as one way, the parallel study of
Western and non-western systems. And, as stated above, "there may well
be other systems that have depths unfathomed by the West." Perhaps what
has been accomplished in the West by way of empiricism is complemented
in other systems by placement in the universal. That statement is of
course both polarized and a simplification My writing includes,
elsewhere, considerations of other systems.

When occasion arises and time permits, I will strengthen those other
writings and attempt a mesh of the following systems: Western, Eastern
and native The second edition The changes in the sections on Greek,
Medieval and Modern philosophy have not undergone significant revision
but there are numerous minor changes The following sections are
completely new as of January 2002:

Periods And Trends Or Main Influences Of Western Philosophy Error!
Bookmark not defined. is an encapsulated overview of Western philosophy
The Recent Period: The Philosophies Of The Late 19th And The 20th And
21st Centuries Error! Bookmark not defined. characterizes the recent
period and its formative influences and effects The Recent Period:
Schools And Trends Of Philosophy Error! Bookmark not defined. is an
outline discussion of close to fifty schools and trends and seven
Specialized Disciplines or Activities Within Philosophy.

Whereas the Greek and the Modern periods were presented through the
thought of the major philosophers, I thought it would be effect to
present the recent period through the schools. One motive for so doing
was in order to be able to characterize the formative influences and the
resulting trends. The section 20th Century Philosophers is a list of
recent philosophers. The source for these sections was One Hundred
Twentieth-Century Philosophers, by Stuart Brown, Diane Collinson and
Robert Wilkinson, 1998 The Recent Period: Influential Philosophers
Error! Bookmark not defined..

The purpose of this section is to discuss the thought of a small number
of thinkers who significantly influenced recent Western philosophy A
Concept Of Philosophy 104 synthesizes and broadens previous conceptions
of philosophy The Future is a discussion of trends and possibilities and
is not intended to be predictive; The Future has the following
sub-sections Philosophical nihilism considers the trend in which it is
considered to be problematic to make positive statements in philosophy.
Some of the influences or forces that resulted in this trend and the
related conceptions of philosophy and the role of philosophy are
discussed in Influences on recent philosophy and subsequent sections
including The Effect on Philosophy The obligations and needs of academic
philosophy considers some of the functions that academic philosophy
undertakes.

It is not suggested that these functions are necessary although there
is some degree of obligation that are felt by academic philosophers in
virtue of the social and economic environment of the university The
possibilities of philosophy in the Western and other academic traditions
considers the possibilities of philosophy from the point of view of its
heritage as an intellectual pursuit. The theme is elaborated in the
following sub-sections: Ways of Philosophical Understanding, Ways that
are unique to philosophy, Further considerations Journey in Being
considers an endeavor that results from a synthesis of the possibilities
of philosophy and the potential of being.

This endeavor is taken up in the author's website of the same name:
Journey in Being A section on Transcendental Logic added June 16, 2003


**1 THE PERIODS AND MAIN INFLUENCES**

In the following table, a philosopher, school or temperament e.g.
rationalism is directly influenced by the one immediately above it and,
perhaps, by others above it; these lines of influence are not shown.
Other influences are shown by deep blue arrows.


