4 the Modern Period
===================

**4.1 BACKGROUND**

The modern period has been characterized by an awakening of reflection,
a revolt against authority and tradition, a dual concern with empiricism
and rationalism where, by rational we mean the use of reason over
revelation for in the other predominant use of rationalism all modern
systems are rational in their ideal. The other use of rationalism is the
view that genuine knowledge consists of universal and necessary
judgments considered by most modern thinkers as ideal whether realized,
realizable or not.

A further concern in the modern era is the origin of knowledge and this
concern has received considerable impetus from the modern biology
starting around the intellectual trends characterized by the
publications c. 1855 by Alfred Russell Wallace and of Charles Darwin in
On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, 1859.

The approach here will be to briefly consider selected seminal and
typical modern philosophers.

**4.1.1 The Renaissance**

The Renaissance has been characterized as a period of revolt against
authority, a new humanism, a serious start to study of Plato and
Aristotle, the pantheism of Nicolas of Cusa [1401 1464], reform of
science, philosophy and logic, social and political philosophy of
Campanella and Machiavelli 1469 1527 the Renaissance is commonly used as
a label for the multifaceted period between medieval universalism, and
sweeping transformations of 17th century Europe.

This sets the Spirit of modern philosophy "as an awakening of the
reflective spirit, a quickening of criticism, a revolt against authority
and tradition, a protest against absolutism and collectivism, and a
demand for freedom in thought, feeling and action".


**4.2 The Beginning Of Modern Philosophy 1550-1670**

**4.2.1 Francis Bacon [1561-1626]**

The Reform of Science: Bacon is, in many ways, typical of the modern
spirit: He is opposed to ancient authoritieshe understood and emphasized
the importance of systematic and methodical observation and
experimentation in natural science; [the other and most important phase,
mathematics, he mentions and considers essential]

**4.2.1.1 Inductive methods**

a "novum organum": the old syllogism [syllogistic logic is useless for
scientific discovery]the only hope in knowing nature is genuine
induction: we must ascend gradually in an orderly and methodical way
from experience to propositions of higher and higher generality until we
finally come to the most general and best defines axioms.

**4.2.1.2 Programs of philosophy**

Primary philosophy busies itself with the concepts and axioms common to
several sciences, with what we now call basic scientific categories and
presuppositions of science.

**4.2.1.3 Philosophy of man**

Man is a human and political [or civil] philosophy. Human philosophy
studies body and soul and their relationin envisioning a comprehensive
science of man, Bacon founded scientific humanismthe faculties of the
soul [psychology] were understanding, reason, imagination, memory,
appetite, will, and all those with which logic and ethics are concerned:
logic treats of the understanding and reason; and ethics of the will,
appetite and affections: the one produces resolutions, the other
actions; ethics describes the nature of the good and prescribes rules
for conforming to it [right, perhaps]Man is prompted by selfish and by
social impulses.

The social good is called duty, and it is the business of the science
of government to discover the fountains of justice and public good and
to reinforce their claims even when they conflict with the interests of
the individualphilosophy in the broad sense is at the apex of
knowledge


**4.2.1.4 Bacon as an empiricist**

[Although his empiricism is not fully worked out, he can be called an
empiricist.] Teleology is banished from physics and becomes a part of
metaphysics

**4.2.2 Thomas Hobbes [1588-1679]**

"One of the boldest and most typical representations of the modern
spirit."

**4.2.2.1 Theory of knowledge**

Philosophy, according to Hobbes, is a knowledge of effects [sense
perception] from their causes [principles] and of causes from their
effectsHobbes is a nominalist, regards logic as a kind of calculationThe
problem, therefore, is to find a first principle -a starting point for
our reasoning: this is motion: everything can be explained by motion:
the nature of man, the mental world, the physical world.

The origin of all our thoughts are from the sensesbut the picture of
the world obtained through the senses is not the real worldso how do we
know the nature of the world [e.g., motion is the primary principle]?
Hobbes is not troubled by the question.

**4.2.2.2 Metaphysics**

A real world of bodies in space existssubstance and body are
identical

**4.2.2.3 Psychology**

Mind is motion in the brainHobbes subscribes to what modern writers
call epiphenomenalism: consciousness is an after appearancethere is also
a motive power: pleasure and pain arouse appetite [or desire] and
aversion: appetite is an endeavor toward something, aversion is an
endeavor away from something.

That which pleases a man he calls good, what displeases him he calls
evil.

The imagination is the first beginning of all voluntary motion. Will in
man is not different from will in other animals. A man is free to act
but not free to will as he wills, he cannot will to will.

**4.2.2.4 Politics**

Man is a ferocious anima [Homo homini lupus]competition for riches,
honor and power inclines man to contention, enmity, war because only in
this way can one competitor fulfill his desire to kill, subdue, supplant
or repel his rivals.

[But] reason dictates that there should be a state of peace and that
every man should seek after peace. The first precept of reason, or law
of nature, commands self-preservation: the second, that man lay down his
natural right and be content with as much liberty for himself as he is
prepared to allow others in the interests of peace and securityno man
can be expected to transfer certain rights such as the right to
self-dense [since he transfers his rights for the very purpose of
securing defense]The third law of nature is that men keep the covenants
they have made: this is the fountain and origin of justicethese laws are
immutable, eternalthey are [called] natural because they are the
dictates of reason; they are moral because they concern men's manners
towards one another: they are also, according to Hobbes, divine.

The only way to erect a commonwealth and insure peace is to confer the
total power and strength of men upon one man or assembly of men, whereby
all their wills, by a majority vote, coalesce into one will.

**4.2.3 Blaise Pascal [1632-1662]**

Mathematician, Jansenist, anti-Jesuit

Man has certain immediate insights space, time, movement, number, and
truth. Sense and reason deceive each other; then feeling functions,
bringing satisfaction. Religious feeling, in which alone there is peace,
is independent of understanding. Belief in God is a wager on which one
can lose nothing


