4.10.2 a Return To Idealism: Arthur Schopenhauer [1788-1860]
============================================================

Thing-in-itself is will

**4.10.3 Gustav Theodor Fechner [1801 1887]**

Pan psychism: the entire universe and its strata of various scales
[micro to macro] contain minds

**4.10.4 Rudolf Hermann Lotze [1817 1881]**

Bridged the gap between classical German philosophy and 20th-century
idealism

Reconciled: monism pluralism: mechanism teleology; realism idealism;
pantheism theism.

"Theistic idealism"included in his objective: to do justice to the
ethical-religious idealism of Fichte and the scientific interpretation
of natural phenomena ["A thinker well-fitted by training and temperament
to re-establish philosophy" after the realistic reaction to Hegelian
idealism.]

**4.10.5 Friedrich Albert Lange [1828 1875]**

German Neo-Kantian and Socialist, wrote Geschichte des Materialismus
und Kritik seiner Bedeutung in der Gegenwart [1866; History of
Materialism] in which he refuted materialism.


**4.10.6 Wilhelm Wundt [1832 1920]**


Knowledge flows from the facts of consciousness

**4.10.7 Friedrich Nietzsche [1844-1900]**

Will to power: the active principle

**4.10.8 Rudolf Christoph Eucken [1846 1926]**

German Idealist philosopher, winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature
[^1908], interpreter of Aristotle, and author of works in ethics and
religion Universal spirited process forms the ground of all being

**4.10.9 Wilhelm Windelbland [1848 1915]**

A historian of philosophy who did not systematically expound his views
but expressed them in unconnected essays. He regarded himself as in the
tradition of German idealism but did not see himself as Neo-Kantian,
Neo-Fichtean or Neo-Hegelian. His main position was that whereas science
determines facts, philosophy determines values a system of philosophy in
which value has a central role.

**4.10.10Ernst Cassirer [1874-1945]**

Noted for his analysis of cultural values.

Cassirer felt it necessary to revise Kantianianism to include a wider
range of human experience. Die Philosophie der symbolischen Formen, 3
vol. [192329; The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms], is an examination of
mental images and functions of the mind that underlie every
manifestation of human culture. Substanzbegriff und Funktionsbegriff
[1910; Substance and Function], treats concept formation to which he
brought a Kantian slant a concept is already pre-existent before any
task involving the classification of particulars can even be performed;
humankind is essentially characterized by a unique ability to use the
"symbolic forms" of myth, language, and science in structuring or
imaging experience and in understanding.


**4.11 MODERN PHILOSOPHY: FRENCH AND BRITISH NINETEENTH CENTURY
PHILOSOPHY**

Beginnings of Positivism, And its Interaction with Empiricism After the
French Enlightenment, there was a positivist reaction against
sensationalism and materialism in France, but the various movements do
not possess the vigor to satisfy an age which still held the ideals of
liberty, equality, fraternity.

**4.11.1 Claude Henri de Saint-Simon [1760-1825]: a new science of
society.** To reform society with a basis in Christian love we need to
turn away from the [then] period of skepticism negation and criticism we
need a positive philosophy

**4.11.2 August Comte [1798-1857]**

His motive: social reform requires social science. Science is natural
laws which are facts and relations which are positive knowledge

**4.11.2.1 Stages of knowledge**

According to Comte: The theological precedes the metaphysical which
precedes the positive which is real, useful [origins: utilitarianism],
exact [not mere negative, that is, criticism]


