4.11.2.2 Comte's Scheme of Sciences
===================================

Builds to the last and most complex science which, according to the
early Comte, is social science. Social science includes:

An ideal of humanity [definitive stage is positive] Antidote to
misgovernment is public opinion [he was against representative
government]

**4.11.2.3 A theory of history**

Progress to the ideal

**4.11.2.4 Ethics**

Later in his career Comte adds ethics as the seventh and highest
science:

Feelings and practice paramount Subjective method [A progression in his
view over his positivism.]


**4.12 MODERN PHILOSOPHY: BRITISH UTILITARIANISM**

We have seen the origin of utilitarianism in Comte's ideas
utilitarianism must share with positivism the idea of a positive
calculation: that a positive calculation of utility is possible and
meaningful

**4.12.1 Jeremy Bentham [1748-1832]:**

An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, 1789. The
utility principle based on pleasure and pain [sources of pleasure and
pain: physical, political, social, religious]

The Hedonistic Calculus: a quantitative measure of pleasures and pains
is to be used in determining actions. Factors or dimension are:

1. Intensity, 2. Duration, 3. Degree of certainty, 4. Remoteness, 5.
Fecundity [chance of being followed by a similar sensation], 6. Purity
[opposite of fecundity], 7. Extent [number of persons affected]

Precursor of utility theory, optimization theory as a tool.

**4.12.2 John Stuart Mill [1806 1873]**

Mill threads together empiricism and positivism [Mill's philosophy is
significantly positivist even when it is not overtly so]: Later day
British Empiricism [this includes Mill] has much in common with
positivism [and herein lies the weakness of Mill's method of empirical
logic and inductive inference, his law of causation, and rejection of a
priori truthsdespite his great prolificacy and practical influence].

Mill's interest in science, like Saint-Simon's and Comte's, is
motivated by his interest in social reform

**4.12.2.1 The external world and the self**

Mill holds that we can know only phenomena [though he admits the
thing-in-itself]Mill's metaphysics is too limited to hold present
interest


**4.12.2.2 Mental and moral sciences**

For social reform Mill calls for a reform of the mental and moral
sciences


