6.3.3 Further Considerations
============================

The data of philosophy includes: the world; that includes being and
human being and its layers of being; the civilizations and cultures of
the world, and their systems of knowledge; the Western systems: the
academic disciplines as data points in themselves and for their
content.

**6.4 A concept of philosophy**

Above, I asked, "Can philosophy free itself of the limitations imposed
by the crisis?"

The idea of philosophy instructing the other disciplines with authority
of being separate, foundational, and infallible seems wrong. There is a
point to the democracy of the disciplines it is that pure reason is not
"the answer," experience must be at least an equal partner. But, what is
philosophy? Under the sway of the traditional academic disciplines as
influenced by the culture of the individual it would seem that
philosophy is a separate discipline.

That is one view of philosophy and it is one that informs the entire
debate on the nature of philosophy in the recent period including the
views of Wittgenstein, Passmore, Rorty, Nozick and others Under such a
view it is inevitable that any attempt of philosophy to instruct is
bound to failure. And this failure, though influenced by external
factors, is necessary on grounds of limited rationality. Following is a
view of philosophy that is close to the core of [human] being.

In preliminary it accepts all foundational exercises. It locates
identities and redundancies mere variations in expressions. It sets the
exercises in opposition and where there is conflict, it resolves and, if
necessary, eliminates. It synthesizes. It abstracts but retains the
concrete in hierarchic communication with the abstract. It expands to
embrace all being in its rest and its motion.

The preliminary conception is, as stated earlier, the intellectual
endeavor that seeks ultimate understanding and knowledge.

Consider, now, the intellectual [and in what follows this will be
understood to include the academic] enterprise as a whole: in its
rational and experiential modes, its imaginative and its critical
approaches. It includes what I called, above, the communal endeavor that
labors or plays under the ideal of truth.

For those who have lost faith in truth the labor is under an ideal of
the full potential of human knowledge. Can we attach a name to this? But
more, we must go on beyond the sphere of the intellectual and reflect
upon the interaction between the domain of mind as partially and
imperfectly expressed in the intellectual sphere and the forward
movement of civilization and of being. That ultimate realm of being will
include basal levels at which knowledge and action are not merely
interactive but not conceptually or essentially distinct these levels
include the organismic and the social; and it will include the level
of,

say, the sciences where knowledge predicts and is confirmed by
experience within the laboratory. Knowledge thought is an active phase
of experience; even in these non-basal domains thought and action or
knowledge and being are not merely necessarily interactive but they do
not exist without the other. Action is a tool of, essential to all
thought and philosophy either indirectly through appeal to experience or
directly by seeking out a course or path of action in interaction with
thought.

**See Thinkers and Actors**

In The View From Nowhere [^1986], Thomas Nagel criticizes evolutionary
epistemology as follows. The concern of philosophy is with the ultimate,
the eternal, the timeless and therefore an epistemology based on the
history of knowledge is an unsatisfactory epistemology This seems to be
a misreading of how evolution and history might inform or be part of the
"timeless discourse"

Compare "timeless discourse" to the "absolute space and time" of
Newton. Then the space-time of Einstein is analogous to the timeless
discourse as informed by special disciplines: art, religion, science,
evolution and of course philosophy's own self-criticism and progress. By
embedding discourse in the real it becomes timeless.

Earlier, I noted the obligations of intellectual pursuit, of philosophy
and of the academic tradition. In various ways an obligation has been,
de facto, the justification or founding of the social order. Two
approaches to this are as follows. An approach that may be labeled
dogmatic is to regard the social order as definite and given and to seek
its justification. An alternative approach is to seek to place the
social order within the universal.

This approach would be neutral to the distinction between criticism and
justification. Further, in order to place the movement of society within
the universal stream, this alternative will require the imaginative or
speculative element, in interaction with selection through experience
and reflection, that is necessary in the absence of complete
rationality. The social order is placed in within the ultimate realm
that is revealed in-process. Such placement is a form of criticism. Such
criticism applies to all contexts including societies, individuals,
disciplines, and thought being presented here.

Radical criticism by definition avoids self-criticism and therefore is
defunct [paradoxical] as a program but is a spur to real criticism and
advance. This is why I subscribe at times to a radical criticism
especially in phases of learning and when I seek to overcome old and
established modes of thought. However, the radical criticism is balanced
by phases of speculation and construction. The constructive element is
placed in context.

I referred to "That ultimate realm of being" it is ultimate in that it
plays under the ideal of the realization of the full potential and
possibilities of the world and being. There are obligations to or
continuities with the local culture; but these are not limitations there
is a balance between immediate and ultimate "needs." This ultimate realm
that I have labeled [ Journey in Being | home ] can be thought of as
true philosophy.


**6.5 The education of the philosopher**

It may be too much to ask that a philosopher be trained in all the
disciplines sciences, arts and humanities and the professions law,
engineering and medicine.

However, much of the disaffection between science and philosophy and
much of the self-doubt within philosophy is due to the inability of
philosophers to reflect and talk comfortably on science and due to the
lack of appreciation of philosophical issues among scientists. I
emphasize science because it is with science that philosophy has the
greatest disaffection. It is true that there are distinctions among the
disciplines and that the distinctions are good and valid. However, those
distinctions are not absolute.

There is a level at which the disciplines merge even if the
practitioners can see only difference and detail. Similarly there is a
role for those who are comfortable with philosophy and, at least, a
representative range of disciplines. I believe, and this is brought out
and argued in [ Journey in Being | home ], that an "over-approach" is
essential for real knowledge and being, will further both science, arts
and philosophy will improve communication among the disciplines. I
believe that this should be true for any open system; it follows
essentially from [ Journey in Being | home ]

How will the requisite education occur? The seeds must be laid at least
as early as the first stages of higher education. A number of approaches
exist: dual degree programs, minor programs, elective course content.
Problems with implementation include lack of serious content, and lack
of serious intent these, of course, are related. A beginning might be
with a small number of programs with select teachers in selected
universities. All of this would be encouraged by a different social
climate.

All change in education is experimental. One cannot say with complete
honesty that such and such an approach will be a general improvement or
even achieve such and such a result. That is because of the limited
powers of rationality whether human or divine. But one can say, "This, I
tentatively believe; and I submit the following reason." As far as
action is concerned, one can choose between action or passivity. Action
includes thought, speech, and changes. Passivity is waiting for desired
change to come about by natural processes in the absence of human
intervention.

Thus the seeds to be sewn are: the value theoretical and practical of
an over-approach, a fully first-class education in philosophy, and
sufficient exposure and experience in a range of disciplines. This
begins in the undergraduate programs. It is something that continues
through a lifetime. This, no doubt, is why Plato suggested that
philosophy should be undertaken at the age of 50 as part of a life that
integrated academia and service. "But," someone responds, "Plato lived
about 2400 years ago, the nature of philosophy, the academic context,
society was quite different then."

According to the American Philosophical Organization, 8300 people in
the United States held philosophy Ph.D.'s in 1995 and 5900 of those
Ph.D.'s were academically employed. From 1950 to 1994, 8076 [301 in
1994] doctoral degrees and 135739 [4691 in 1994] bachelor's degrees were
awarded in philosophy in the United States. I omit world information
because it is not as readily available but I guess that there must be at
least 200,000 500,000 people worldwide with a formal education in
philosophy.

Most people want a mainstream education, would prefer not to have an
experimental program. But, with perhaps half a million degree holders in
philosophy it would seem that there is sufficient room and there would
be sufficient interest in a programs that incorporate the principles
outlined above. There are programs that approach these principles; what
is needed is a greater commitment among individuals, programs and
society.

**6.6 Journey in Being**

Journey in Being | Home page continues the synthesis described above
and begun in A Concept of Philosophy. The points from above include:
Appeal to the whole mind: modes of understanding intuition or thought
and sensing or perception

And continues to synthesize with an appeal to the whole being

Thought and knowledge as continuous with action as requiring action for
confirmation and completion and as being conceptually only partially
distinct from action: repeatable experiment is not enough, living out is
essential and this leads to a systematic exploration of modes of
perception and knowing; and to a system of experiments including the
life and choices of an individual and a society.

I will repeat the essence of the conclusion of A Concept of
Philosophy:

**6.7 True Philosophy**

Consider the intellectual enterprise as a whole, the sphere of
intellect: rational and experiential, imaginative and critical. It
includes the communal endeavor that plays under the ideal of truth and
the full potential of knowledge. Can we attach a name to this? But more
this is crucial, we must go on beyond intellect and reflect upon its
interaction with the forward movements of civilization and of being.
That ultimate realm of being will include primal levels at which
knowledge and action are not merely interactive but not conceptually or
essentially distinct these levels include the organismic and the social;
and it will include the levels of, say, the sciences where knowledge
predicts and is confirmed by experience within the laboratory.

Knowledge thought is an active phase of experience; even in these
non-basal domains thought and action or knowledge and being are not
merely necessarily interactive but they do not exist without the other.
I referred to "That ultimate realm of being" it is ultimate in that it
plays under the ideal of the realization of the full potential and
possibilities of the world and being. There are obligations to or
continuities with the local culture; but these are not limitations there
is a balance between immediate and ultimate "needs." This ultimate realm
[ Journey in Being | home ] can be thought of as true philosophy.

**7 Transcendental Logic**

I call transcendental logic the third transcendental method because I
earlier identified two others, the first or Kant's and the second or
Heidegger's transcendental methods.

Note that I have not here referred to Husserl's Transcendental
Phenomenology as a transcendental method.

The third transcendental method is transcendental logic i.e. the
possibility of derivation of synthetic / empirical proposotions by pure
logic. The third method, outlined in Metaphysics and in Journey in Being
does not truly make derivations possible by logic alone but assumes the
single fact that something exists. The possibilities for the third
method, contrary to what might be expected, are substantial. As an
alternative to derivation from from a single fact, the third method may
be regarded as an a way to generate an axiomatic system from a single
axiom and the laws of logic.

Various systems may result from additional axioms that purport to model
the nature of our world; these would include the first and second
methods. Also included would be the variety of logics. A question that
arises is "Do the laws of logic have synthetic foundation?" or "What is
the nature of the world such that logic is possible?" This may be a
starting point for the development of theories of logic. By varying both
the axioms of the third method and the systems of logic, various
axiomatic systems may result.

In Journey in Being, transcendental logic is applied to the metaphysics
of being; cosmology; the nature of existence, of categories, the problem
of substance and of spirit; the nature of mind and matter and the
classical mind-matter problem.


LATEST REVISION AND COPYRIGHT

ANIL MITRA PHD, COPYRIGHT 1988, SECOND EDITION 2002, AND REVISED June
2003


