2.3.1.6 Doctrine of Immortality
===============================

[From psychology: the part of the individual, which "knows" sense
impression and opinion, is the body; the soul knows or has genuine
knowledge or science. Because the soul possesses apprehension of ideas
prior to its contact with the world: all knowledge is reminiscence and
all learning is awakening.]

Arguments for Immortality: Epistemological: [^1] The soul has
contemplated eternal ideas and only like can know like: [^2] from the
doctrine of reminiscences. Metaphysical: [^1] From the simplicity of the
soul: it cannot be produced by composition or destroyed by
disintegration, [^2] from vitality: as the source of its own motion, the
soul is eternal [a survival of atomistic conceptions] [first cause
argument, perhaps]and various other metaphysical arguments. Moral and
Valuational: from the superiority and dignity of the soul: it must
survive the body; a variation: everything is destroyed by its
"connatural" evil; the evils of the soul [its worst vices: injustice,
etc.] do not destroy the soul hence its indestructibility. [There are
hardly any arguments advanced in the literature on immortality which are
not foreshadowed by Plato.]

**2.3.1.7 Ethics**

Ethical being is one in which the superior principles dominate:
rationality. Wisdom: reason over other impulses of the soul; bravery:
reason over emotion [fear, pain]; temperance: reason over desireJustice:
wisdom with bravery and temperance

**2.3.1.8 Politics**

Plato's theory of the state [in The Republic] is based on his ethics.
Social life is a means to perfection of individuals. Laws result from
imperfection of individuals which leads to the state. Classes in society
result from functions of the soul; harmony among the classes results
from functional relations of the healthy soul:

Ruling class: those embodying reason [philosophers]

Warriors: the spirited. Their function: defense.

Agriculturists, workers, merchants, artisans: lower appetites. Their
function: production.

Justice in state: each class functions according to its character.

The ideal society is a family: Plato opposes monogamy, private
property, recommends for the two upper castes who are to be supported by
workers communism and common possession of wives and childrenPlato
recommends: eugenic supervision of marriages and births, exposure of
weak children, compulsory state education, education of women for war
and government, and censorship.

The state is an educational institution, the instrument of
civilization; its foundation must be the highest kind of knowledge which
is philosophy. The education of the children of higher classes will
follow a definite plan: identical for the sexes during the first twenty
years: myths selected for ethicality, gymnastics for body and spirit;
poetry, music harmony, beauty, proportion and philosophical thought;
reading, writing; mathematics which tends to draw the mind from the
concrete and sensuous to the abstract and real. At 20, superior young
men will be selected and shall integrate their learning.

At 30, those who show greatest ability in studies, military officers,
etc., will study dialectic for five years. Then they will be put to test
as soldiers, militias and in subordinate civic offices. Starting at the
age of fifty, the demonstrably worthy will study philosophy until their
turns come to administer the offices for their country's sake .


