2.3.2 Aristotle [384-322 Bce]
=============================

Aristotle's Problems: Plato's system had difficulties and
inconsistencies to be overcome; it was left to Aristotle to reconstruct
it in a more consistent and scientific manner. First, the problem of
transcendent ideas and the degradation of the world of experience to
mere appearance and, second, the concept of the secondary Platonic
element matter and the gulf between form and matter provided
difficulties. Other difficulties: changing forms, immortal souls in
human bodies, makeshift nature of the Demiurge.

Aristotle claims the changeless eternal forms but as inherent, immanent
in things: form and matter are eternally togetherBecause of his realism,
Aristotle studied science sympathetically, his theories always in close
touch with it and he encouraged the natural sciences.


**2.3.2.1 Extant writings**

1. Logic: Organon includes: Categories, De Interpretationae, Prior and
Posterior Analytics [includes induction and the syllogism], Topics,
Sophistic Fallacies [Topics are largely concerned with dialectic
reasoning]

2. Natural sciences: Physics [8 books]; On the Heavens [^4]; Origin and
Decay [^2]; Meteorology [^4]; Cosmology [spurious], Botany [spurious];
History of Animals [^10]; On the Parts of Animals [^4]; On the Progression
of Animals; On the Origin of Animals [^5]; On the Locomotion of Animals
[spurious]

3. Psychology: On the Soul [3, treating sensation, memory, imagination,
thought]; Parva Naturalia [including De Memoria et Reminiscentia, On
Dreams]

4. Metaphysics: [^14] "First Philosophy"

5. Ethics: Nicomachean Ethics [^10] Eudaemian Ethics [revision of
Nicomachean by Eudaemas]; Magna Moralia, the Greater Ethics [compilation
of the two proceeding]

6. Politics: [8, apparently incomplete]; On the Constitution of Athens
[discovered 1890] [the work on economics attributed to Aristotle is not
authentic]

7. Rhetoric: Rhetoric to Theodectes [based on Aristotle's teachings];
Rhetoric to Alexander [spurious]; Rhetoric [3, the third is of doubtful
authenticity], Poetics [part of 2 books extant; concerned with principle
forms of literature: epic, tragic, comic]


**2.3.2.2 Philosophy and the sciences**

The universe is an ideal world, an organic whole of interrelated parts,
a system of eternal, unchangeable ideas or forms: these are the ultimate
essences and causesideas are, in contrast to Plato, immanent in the
world giving it form and lifeexperience is real the basis of knowledge;
starting from experience we rise to the science of ultimate
principles.

Genuine knowledge is not merely factual but consists in knowing the
reasons and causes of things. Philosophy or science in the broad sense
is reasoned knowledge. Metaphysics is concerned with being qua being.

Aristotle's classification of sciences: [^1] Logic, the method of
inquiry, [^2] theoretical sciences [mathematics, physics, biology,
psychology and first philosophy or metaphysics], [^3] practical sciences
in which knowledge is a means to conduct [ethics, politics], [^4]
productive sciences in which knowledge is subordinate to artistic
creation [poetics]

**2.3.2.3 Logic**

The creation of the science of logic is in a certain sense Aristotle's
most amazing achievement [there is no parallel case in intellectual
history where a single thinker has brought to completion a new science].
[There have been only two revolts against the Logic in recent times
Francis Bacon's advocacy of inductive method and the
nineteenth-twentieth century revolution in mathematical logic.]


