2.4 Ethical Period [about 350-200 Bce]
======================================

**2.4.1 Epicureanism and stoicism**

The following on Epicureanism and Stoicism is a brief complement to the
longer discussion on Stoicism, which is taken up again, below:

The Epicureans and Stoics. These thinkers were concerned primarily with
ethics however the ethics needed a metaphysics and cosmology and a
theory of knowledge and truth in terms of sense experience they were
pioneers of the empirical tradition in epistemology. They were
nominalists a universal is not a reality but a mark or sign: the only
realities are particulars. They were also forerunners of medieval
nominalism. Opinions and hypotheses must be confirmed by sense
experience or at least suggested by perception and not contradicted by
them.

Epicurean metaphysics is, in its essentials, a restatement of the
atomistic and materialistic mechanism of Democritus. Psychology also
derives from the emanationism of Democritus likewise soul the nimble
fiery soul atom is material; soul has a rational part, is mortal there
is no afterlife to be feared.

Epicurean ethics is hedonism based on pleasure but not a basis for
debauchery: some pleasures are followed by pains and many pains are
followed by pleasures; therefore not all pleasures are to be chosen and
not all pains avoided. Mental pleasures are greater than pleasures of
the body, mental pains worse than physical pains therefore a life of
prudence and wisdom is good and this has a naturalistic basis in the
caprice of the world.

In truth, Epicureanism is an ethics of enlightened self-interest:
Epicurus extolled the same virtues as did Plato, Aristotle and the
stoics wisdom, courage, temperance and justice but for different
reasons. [However, although the pleasure-theory of Epicurus is not a
doctrine of sensuality, it came to be so interpreted by many.].

Epicurean 341 270 BCE social and political philosophy: the enlightened
self-interest of the individual is the highest good; from here follows
justice and right, laws and institutions, practical rules of action but
only as means.


**2.4.2 Skepticism and eclecticism**

Skepticism was contemporary with Stoicism and Epicureanism. After
Socrates and the great system of Plato and Aristotle, time was right for
a new period of movement of doubt. The Skeptics filled this function:
the thought common to this school is that we cannot know the nature of
things: Pyrrho [365-270 BCE] may be called the founder but wrote
nothing: his views were set down by Timon of Phlius [320-230 BCE].

After Timon, the Skeptical school was absorbed by the Platonic Academy
and did not emerge as an independent school until the Academy called the
Middle Academy during the Skeptical period purged itself of Skepticism
under Philo of Larina and Anticus: Skepticism again became an
independent movement at the beginning of the Christian era and was later
represented by Sextus Empircus.

Eclecticism was encouraged by the growing intercourse between Greek
scholars and the Romans. The Romans had no genius for philosophy; it was
only after Rome conquered Macedonian 168 BCE and Greece became a Roman
Province [146 BCE] that interest arose in philosophical speculation. The
Romans produced no independent system:

they selected and modified according to their practical needs: "They
sought and found in Philosophy, nothing but a rule of conduct and a
means of government." Subsequently, Eclecticism made its way into nearly
all the schools, into the Academy [Plate], the Lyceum [Aristotle] and
the Stoa; the Epicureans alone remained true to their creed.


**2.4.3 Stoicism continued**

Zeno [336-264 BCE] b Citium, Cyprus, came to Athens in 314, and in 294
opened his school in the Stoa Poikile [painted corridor or porch, from
which "Stoicism"] and was founder of the school. Zeno was esteemed for
his upright character, the simplicity of his life, his affability and
moral earnestnessHe was followed by his pupil Cleanthes [264-232 BCE]
who lacked the qualities needed to defend the school against the
Skeptics and the EpicureansNext came Chrysippus of Soli, Cilicia
[232-204 BCE],

a man of great ability who clearly defined the teachings of the school,
gave unity to the system, and defended it against the Skeptics. His
pupils included Zeno of Tarsis, Diogenes of Babylon, Antipater of
TarsusStoicism as developed by Chrysippus found favor in Rome during the
Republic: Panaetius [180-110 BCE] being one of the first Roman adherents
of note. During the Empire it divided into two schools: one popular,
represented by Musonius Rufus [first century CE], Seneca [3-65 CE],
Epictitus [first century CE] and Emperor Marcus Aurelius [121-180]: the
other scientific, whose sole aim was to preserve intact and interpret
the old doctrine.


**2.4.3.1 Logic and the theory of knowledge**

The goal of Stoic philosophy is to find a rational basis for ethics:
they start with logic, the science of thoughts and discourses. Stoic
logic included grammar, and thus Stoics are founders of the traditional
science of grammarthe dialectical part of logic deals with the theory of
knowledge: of which there are two problems: [^1] what is the origin
[source] of knowledge, and [^2]what is the criterion of knowledge.

Sources: Knowledge is gained through perception. The mind has the
faculty of forming general ideas and concepts of a large number of cases
which are alike and of forming universal judgments. This faculty,
reason, is a faculty of thought and speech identical with the universal
reason which pervades the worldthe Stoics posited objected rationality
in the world and yet opposed the Platonic doctrine of ideas: only
particular objects have real existence and universals are subjective
abstractions.

Criterion: A sense image is true when it is an exact copy of the
object. A concept is true when it agrees with the qualities pervading
similar things. How shall we distinguish true from false? Man is
entitled to his conviction when he has satisfied himself that his sense
organ is in normal condition, that the percept is clear and distinct and
that repeated observations by him and others verify his first
impression.

Since true premises are deduced logically from true premises, the
faculty of drawing correct inferences is accordingly another means of
reaching the truth and dialectic an essential qualification of the Stoic
sage. Consequently, the stoics gave considerable attention to formal
logic, particularly the syllogism, which they regarded as its most
important phase [they made minor additions to Aristotle's scheme of
syllogism and revised his table of categories].


