2.4.3.2 Metaphysics
===================

Stoic metaphysics a materialistic version of Aristotelian metaphysics:
force [or form] and matter are both corporealbut force consists of a
finer kind of stuff, while matter as such is coarse, formless and
immovableOnly forces have causality the effect which results, however,
is not a cause or a force nor is it a body but a mere accidental state
of the bodyThe forces in the universe form one all-pervasive force or
fire: the rational active soul of the world.

The universe is a cosmos a beautiful, well-ordered, perfect whole. The
rational principle is related to the world as the human soul is to its
body [the pervasion of the cosmos by a rational principle is pure
pantheism]but just as the governing part of the soul is situated in a
particular part of the body, so the ruling part of the world soul, the
Deity, or Zeus, is seated at the outermost circle of the world:
pantheism and theism dwell together in the Stoic system [as in many
modern systems], however in Stoicism the pantheistic aspect clearly
prevails.

**2.4.3.3 Cosmology**

The Stoics offer a detailed description of the evolution of the world
from the original divine fire: every recurring world will resemble its
predecessors in every detail the theory of cyclic recurrence for each
world is produced by the same lawMan is free in the sense that he can
assent to what fate decrees,

but, whether he assents or not, he must obeyNow, if everything is a
manifestation of God, how shall we explain evil in the world? [^1] The
negative solution denies the existence of evil what we call evils are
only relative evils; [^2]the positive solution regards evil, such as
disease, as the necessary and inevitable consequence of natural
processes or as a necessary means of realizing the good.

**2.4.3.4 Psychology**

A man is free when he acts in accordance with reason; that is,
obedience to the eternal laws of nature. The Stoic conception of freedom
is one of rational self-determination.

The Stoic doctrine of cyclic recurrence implies that all souls
necessarily reappear with the recreation of the universe.

**2.4.3.5 Ethics**

Man is part of the universal order, a spark of the divine fire, a small
universe [microcosm] reflecting the greater universe [macrocosm]. Hence
it behooves man to act in harmony with the purpose of the universeto
reach the highest possible3 measure of perfection. To do this he must
put his own soul in order: reason should rule him as reason rules the
worldto live according to nature for a human being is to act in
conformity with reason, the logosto live thus is to realize one's self
and to realize one's true self is to serve the purposes of universal
reason and to work for universal ends. The Stoic ethical ideal implies a
universal society of rational beings with the same rights for reason is
the same in all and all are part of the same world soul.

A truly virtuous act is one which is consciously directed toward the
highest purpose or end, and is performed with conscious knowledge of
moral principle. Thus, virtuous conduct implies complete and certain
knowledge of the good and a conscious purpose, on the part of the doer,
to realize the supreme good.

To act unconsciously and without knowledge is not virtue. Virtue is
one, a unity, for everything depends on disposition, on the good will: a
man either has it or he has it not: there is no middle ground: he is
either a wise man or a foolVirtue is the only good, vice the only evil
all else is indifferent.

Evil conduct is the result of wrong judgment, or false opinion: the
Stoics sometimes regard evil as the cause, sometimes the effect of the
passions or immoderate impulses. The four such passions are pleasure,
desire, grief and fear. These passions and their many variations are
diseases of the soul which it is our business, not merely to moderate,
but to eradicate, since they are irrationalApathy or freedom from
passion is, accordingly, the Stoic ideal.


**2.4.3.6 Religion**

True religion and philosophy are one, according to the Stoics. [Little
wonder that Stoic philosophy should appeal to the Jesuits.]


**2.5 GREEK PHILOSOPHY: THE RELIGIOUS PERIOD [150 BCE 500 AD]**

Greek philosophy began in Greek religion; and after its formative
phase, described earlier, reached an apex in Socrates, Plato, Aristotle.
The subsequent ethical theories of the Epicurean and Stoic schools, the
nihilism of the Skeptics and the piece-meal practicality of the
Eclectics did not satisfy all types of mind"We come now to a period in
History when Philosophy seeks refuge in Religion"The new attitude sought
to know and see God, brought about by and expresses consciousness of the
decline of the classical peoples and their culture, "gave rise to a
philosophy strongly tinctured with religious mysticism,"

"brought to life not only Christianity, but, before its advent, pagan
and Jewish Alexandrianism and its kindred phenomena""We may distinguish
three currents to this religious philosophy: [^1] an attempt to combine
an Oriental religion, Judaism, with Greek speculation: Jewish Greek
Philosophy, [^2] an attempt to construct a world-religion upon
Pythagorean doctrines: Neophythaore4anism;[^3] an attempt to make a
religious philosophy of the Platonic teaching: Neoplatonism"Here are
some comments on the main tendencies:


