2.5.1 Jewish Greek Philosophy
=============================

The main exponent is Philo [30 BCE-50 CE]. Philo read Greek philosophy,
especially Platonism and Stoicism, into the Scriptures by the
allegorical method which was common in Alexandria [founded by Alexander
the Great in 333 BCE, which had become under the descendents of his
general Ptolemy [328-181 BCE] the leading commercial and intellectual
center of the world and the chief meeting place of Hellenic and Oriental
civilization. Here a great scientific museum with its celebrated library
of 700,000 volumes was established under Ptolemy which attracted poets,
men of science, philosophers from every region of the classical
world].

The fundamental concept in the system of Philo is God and his powers
are the Logos, the Divine reason or Wisdom, which we recognize through
the logos in ourselvesMan, the most important piece of creation, is a
microcosm which, like the universe, is composed of both soul and matter
[the source of defects and evils in the world]

**2.5.2 Neo-Pythagoreanism**

has its sources in Platonism. Plato in his old age absorbed the
number-theory and the religious mysticism of the Pythagoreans: his
immediate successors in his school emphasized these latter day
teachings. With the rise of Aristotelianism, the Academy abandoned
Pythagoreanism. The Pythagorean secret societies with their mysteries,
continued to lead a precarious existence until they were revitalized by
the religious upsurge which took possession of the Roman world in the
first century CE and the spirit of the times encouraged them to devote
themselves once more to philosophy.

The leaders in the movement, however, did not go back to early
Pythagoreanism but to the doctrine as it appeared in Platonism and
combined it eclectically with other elements of Greek philosophy,
including Aristotelianism and Stoicism. All this they naively ascribed
to Pythagoras.

**2.5.3 Neoplatonism**

Generally regarded to have been founded by Plotinus [204-169 BCE.]

derives from Pythagoreanism. Plato's system becomes the framework for a
religious worldview. The main figure is Plotinus [204-269 BCE]. His
philosophy is briefly summarized: [^1] God is the source of all being
[the One whose infinity contains all, the first causeless cause, the
unity prior to all being and beyond all being], [^2] the stages of being
are [I] pure thought or mind, [ii] soul and [iii] matter; [^3] the human
soul is part of the world soul and its freedom consists in turning away
from sensuality towards its higher nature.

If it fails to do this it becomes attached after death to another
human, animal or plant body according to the degree of its guilt. The
ideal in life is return to God this occurs only on rare occasions, [^4]
ordinary virtues do not suffice to return to God; first purification
from the sense, the body then contemplation, and finally the mystical
union with God in which the soul transcends its own thought.

Common to all these theologies, or theosophies, are: the concept of God
as a transcendent being, the dualism of God and world, the idea of
revealed and mystical knowledge of God, asceticism and world denial, the
belief in intermediary beings, demons and angels.


**2.6 The Decline Of Greek Philosophy**

**2.6.1 The closing of the school at Athens**

The period from Aristotle on is a decline in quality and
originalityNeoplatonism was revived by Procleus [410-485] the head of
the Academy at Athens. He was succeeded by Marius, Isidorius, and
Damascius. In 529 the School at Athens was closed by an edict of the
Emperor Justinian. After this time some good commentaries on the
writings of Plato and Aristotle were published by Simplicus, the younger
Olympiodorus, and by Boethius [c. 470 / 475 524] and Philoponnus.

The works of Boethius as well as his translations of Aristotelian
writings and of Porphyry [Porphyry's Introduction to the Categories of
Aristotle: Porphyry of Tyre [232-304] was a pupil of Plotinus]
contributed largely to the knowledge of Greek philosophy in the early
Middle Ages.

**2.6.2 The Consolation of Philosophy by Boethius**

written while imprisoned [he came to high political office under
Theodoric but was accused of conspiracy against Theodoric], takes its
place along with Marcus Aurelius' Meditation [Stoic philosopher, Emperor
121-180] and Thomas U\`â€ž Kempis Imitation of Christ [fourteenth century
mystic: 1380-1471] as the great documents in which religious,
philosophical and ethical ideas are applied in the personal life of
their authors.

In the sixth century, Greek Platonism was making its final desperate
attempt to maintain itself in competition with the new Christian
worldview but Greek philosophy at this period had lost its vitality, had
outlived its usefulness. The future belonged to Christianity; and by a
strange irony of fate, the Christian religion, in it attempt to conquer
the intellectual world, made an ally of the philosophy of the Greeks.

**3 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY**

**3.1 Doctrine and dogma**

While medieval philosophy is philosophy, it is dominated by Christian
themes including the formation of the fundamental doctrines and the
influence of dogma. Transition from Greek to Medieval philosophy as a
decline in Hellenism and ascent of Christianity including incorporation
of Greek philosophical and theological ideas has been discussed in the
previous pages and in the outline of periods, names and dates.

Doctrine in theology refers to theoretical component of religious
experience. Dogma refers to the first principles at the core of
doctrine, professed as true and essential by those of the faith.

**3.2 The periods of medieval philosophy**

The Patristic Period: from the origins of Christianity: the time of
Christ to the formation of the major and fundamental doctrines and the
triumph of Christianity as an organized Church [ending, philosophically,
with Augustine]

The Scholastic Period: of philosophical construction devoted to the
elaboration of a philosophy in which the subject matter and guiding
principles were determined by "dogma".


