3.3 the Patristic Period: Establishment of the Christian Church and Dogma
=========================================================================

The Patristic Period was, at least in things of the spirit, an age of
richness and promise extending from the time of Christ to the death of
Augustine in 430 or, interpreted most widely, until the Council of
Trullo in 692. Concern is with the development of dogma in this
period.

Early theology. The Acts of St. Paul. The Gnostics. The Apologists the
Logos doctrine [logos, reason, the first cause, in God]; free will and
original sin.

The period, which results from the fusion of early Christian religion
with Hellenistic philosophy, is much richer in theology than in
philosophy. St. Augustine [353-430] the greatest representative of the
age, the only figure who fully deserves the title: philosopher, has no
immediate philosophic descendents, and comes into his own much later in
an age clearly medieval.

Earliest Christian communities varied greatly in type but can be
classified as [a] Gentile, and as [b] a type still oriented largely to
Jewish religion. Very early, there emerged from these two sources:
Hellenistic Christianity, exemplified by St. Paul, in whose writing two
significant natures: [^1] exaltation of Christ, [^2] interpretation of his
person in then dominant Hellenistic conceptscontains only the germ of
the later doctrine of Trinity, and union of human and divine natures in
Christ.

The doctrine of the Trinity on which the whole theology of Western
Christianity is ultimately based, was not given definite form until the
Council of Niacea in 325, and was established as a secure and accepted
basis of the new Church until the Trinitarian disputes in controversy
between Arians and Athanasius' followers were settled by the Council of
Constantinople, 381, and further disputes on the relation between the
human and divine in Christ were ended in the West at least by the
Council of Chacedon, 451. Prior to these developments there was
considerable controversy employing Hellenistic philosophical terminology
largely Platonic.

Council of Niacea 325 turned away from Neoplatonism, and devised a
formula for the Christian conception of Jesus Christ: the son of God and
at the same time truly God incarnate. The Nicene definition established
the meaning of faith which Christians were to hold and its defenders had
recourse less to philosophical or theological speculation than to the
Scripture as they understood it.

Athanasius completed the Nicene definition in such a way as to include
the third member of the Trinity the Holy Spirit and achieved a
definition which became the starting point of a genuinely philosophical
doctrine. By doing this he set the stage for St. Augustine's formulation
of a truly Christian philosophy which made use of Hellenistic classical
Greek phraseology without being subservient to it.

Patristic philosophy provided the materials of the medieval synthesis
achieved during the Scholastic Period and thereby determined the
complexion of Western European Civilization of the Middle Ages.

Augustine's ethics: The supreme goal of human conduct is a religious,
mystical one the mind's union with God in the vision of God [to take
place in a future, true life]Rich and poor alike were capable of
salvation but possession of private property is a hindrance to the soul:
Augustine places emphasis on povertythough the highest good is the
transcendent good, a relative perfection may be obtained by performance
of external works: venial sins may be wiped out by prayer, fasting,
almsMan was free to sin or not to sinbut this was corrupted by Adam, and
the entire human race is corrupted: now it is not possible for man not
to sinGod alone can change him.

His philosophy of history: In the City of God: a universal philosophy
of history [considers temporal and historical processes in the context
of external nature and the purpose of God]: it became the prototype of
such modern though radically different philosophical interpretations of
history such as those offered by Rousseau, Hegel, Comte, Nietzsche,
Marx, Spengler, and Frobenius. The essential features: [^1] historical
process is a purposive teleological whole, [^2] the process is
predestined by God to bring about the redemption of some men and the
destruction of others [but this does not preclude free will].


**3.4 Scholastic period**

The free roaming of the human mind within the framework of dogma in
time leading to the freeing of human reason, intellect from its
theological bondage. The agenda of scholasticism: o elaborate a system
of thought which will square with dogmas.

Stages: [^1] Formative: ninth-twelfth centuries: Platonism, Neoplatonism
and Augustinianism are the dominant philosophical tendencies. Universals
are real essences and prior to things; [^2] culmination: Aristotle's
philosophy is dominant: universals are real but immanent [and not
transcendent]the period of great, comprehensive systems: Albertus Magnus
and St. Thomas Aquinas. [^3] Decline: fourteenth century. Universals are
not real but mere concepts, particulars alone are real, universals are
real only in the mind, hence after things: the Nominalism of John Duns
Scotus and William of Occam.

Problems of Scholasticism: [^1] Relation between faith and reason, [^2]
relation between will and intellect, [^3] distinction between nature and
grace, [^4] status of universals.


**3.4.1 Formative Period the Schoolmen**

John Scotus Erigena b. [Ireland 810 d. 877]: Neoplatonism.

Anselm of Canterbury [1033-1109]: first Scholastic Synthesis proofs for
the existence of God based on Platonic conception of universals existing
independently of particulars.

Peter Abelard [1079 Pallet 1142 Paris].

School of Chartres. Cathedral at Chartres.

John of Salisbury [1115-1180].

**3.4.2 Culmination**

Albertus Magnus [1193-1280]

St. Thomas Aquinas [c. 1225-1274]

At the same time as this culmination [thirteenth century],
Anti-Scholastic tendencies are developing: mysticism, pantheism, natural
science: John Fidanza [1221-1274], called St. Bonaventura, a mystic
Roger Bacon [1214-1294]: science


**3.4.3 Decline**

John Duns Scotus [b. c. 1274-1310], opposition to St. Thomas.

William of Occam [1280-1347], the great leader of this nominalist
revival. Occam's razor refers to superfluous universals.

Scholasticism declines after the thirteenth century along with the rise
of nationalism, mysticism, tolerance of natural science and the spirit
of free inquiry by the Church [as being not relevant to the province of
God]including the elevation by the Church of Aristotle's value
[originally as a conservative device].

Fourteenth Century Mysticism: the greatest figure in this movement is
Meister Eckhart, a Dominican teacher who died in the prison of his order
Leading to the modern period which begins with the renaissance and the
[religious] reformation.


