Publishers Preface
==================

  

Some years ago, while I was paying a visitation to the Holy Shrine of
the eighth Imām, my master, Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on him, I
asked myself: Is it possible for me to find favor with my Imāms, the
guides and rightly-guided ones who have said in their traditions: May
Allah have mercy on him who enlivens our affairs,? So it came to my mind
that I had to find a book on the life of the eighth Imām in order to
translate it into English. After I had asked the advice of some
professors, I chose the book entitled the Life of Imām al-Ridā by Shaykh
Bāqir Sharif al-Qarashi. Then I gave the book to Mr. Jāsim al-Rasheed in
order to translate it into English, and he agreed to this suggestion; I
thank him, and praise belongs to Allah.

After an arduous effort and diligent striving, this great book has been
translated into English, that it may be an important reference before
those who desire to study and to inquire into the lives of the Imāms of
the *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them. We ask Allah, the Great and
Almighty, to help us enliven more works about the *ahl al-Bayt*, peace
be on them, and on *Tashayyu;* surely He is powerful over everything.

  

  

  

In the Name of Allah the Merciful, the Compassionate

Surely Allah chose Adam and Noah and the descendants of Abraham and the
descendants of Umrān above the nations. Offspring, one of the other; and
Allah is Hearing, Knowing. Qurān (3: 33 -34) Allah only desires to keep
away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House, and to purify you
thoroughly. Qurān (33: 33)Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but
love for my near relatives; and whoever earns good, We give him more of
good therein; surely Allah is Forgiving, Grateful. Qurān (53:23)

  

