Al-mumūn Questions Imām Al-ridā
===============================

  

  

Al-Mamūn asked Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,  some questions. More
likely, he wanted to test him. The Imām answered these questions which
are as follows:

 Q1: Son of Allahs Apostle, do you not say that the prophets are
infallible?

Yes, replied the Imām.

 What is the meaning of these words of Him, the Exalted: *And Adam
disobeyed his Lord, so his life became evil (to him)*? asked al-Mamūn.

Ans. 1: Surely Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, said to Adam: *O  
 Adam, dwell you and your wife in the Garden and eat from it a  
 plenteous (food) wherever you wish and do not approach this tree*.  
 And He pointed to the tree of wheat *for then you will be of the
unjust*.  
 He did not say to them: Do not eat from this tree or from its kind.  
 They did not approach the tree; nor did they eat from it; they ate
from  
 other than it. When Satan whispered (evil) to them and said: Your Lord
has not forbidden you from this tree; rather He has forbidden you  
 from approaching other than it. He has not forbidden you from eating  
 from it except that you may not both become two angels or that you  
 may (not) become of the immortal. And he swore to them both: Most  
 surely I am a sincere adviser to you. Adam and Hawuā (Eve) did not  
 see before that anyone who swore by Allah in a false manner. Then he  
 caused them to fall by his deceit and they ate from the tree because  
 they trusted his swearing by Allah, and that was before Adam was  
 considered as a Prophet, and that was not a big sin through which he  
 deserved entering the Fire; rather it was one of the sins which could
be  
 forgiven and could be committed by Prophets before the revelation  
 *(wahy)* came down to them. When Allah chose him and made him a  
 prophet, he became infallible, and was not permitted to commit a sin,
minor or major. Allah,the Great and Almighty, said: *Thus did Adam
disobey his Lord and allow himself to be seduced.But his Lord chose  
*

  

  

(for His grace); He turned to him, and gave him guidance.[[1]](#_ftn235)
And He, the Great and Almighty, said: *Allah did indeed choose Adam and
Nūh, the family of Ibrāhim, and the family of Umrān above the
people*.[[2]](#_ftn236)

Q2: What is the meaning of these words of Him, the Great and Almighty:
*But when He gives them a good one, they set up with Him associates in
what He has given them?* [[3]](#_ftn237)

Ans. 2: Hawuā born Adam five hundred males and females, so Adam and
Hawuā promised Allah, the Great and Almighty, prayed to Him, and said:
*If You give us a good one, we shall certainly be of the grateful ones.*

When He gave them a good one of progeny, sound creature free from
illness and defect He gave them two types: a type of males and of
females the two types attributed partners to Allah, may His name be
Exalted, in what He had given to them, and they did not thank Him as
their parents thanked Him, the Great and Almighty. Allah, the Blessed
and Exalted, said: *But high is Allah above what they associate (with
Him)*.[[4]](#_ftn238)

Q3: I witness that you are the son of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, tell me about the words of Him, the Great and
Almighty, concerning Ibrāhim: *When the night covered him, he saw a
star. He said: This is my Lord*.[[5]](#_ftn239)

Ans. 3: Surely Ibrāhim lived in a society where three types of worship
dominated: the worship of Venus, the worship of the moon, and the
worship of the sun. That was when he came out of the cave where he was
concealed. *When the night covered him,* he saw Venus and said: *This is
my Lord*. He wanted to deny (such a type of worship) and to ask (his
fellows about it). When it (the star) set, he said: *I do  
*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F235) Qur'ān, 20, 121-122.  
 [[2]](#_F236) Ibid., 3, 34.  
 [[3]](#_F237) Ibid., 7, 190.  
 [[4]](#_F238) Ibid., 7, 190.  
 [[5]](#_F239) Ibid., 6, 76.  
  

  

  

not love those that set. That this because setting is an attribute of
the created not of the Eternal (Being). *When he saw the moon rising in
splendor, he said: This is my Lord*. He wanted to deny (such a type of
worship) and to ask (his fellows about it). *But when it (the moon) set,
he said: Unless my Lord guides me, I shall surely be among those who go
astray.* He said: Unless my Lord had guided me, I would have been among
those who went astray. When he entered upon morning and saw the sun
rising in splendor, he said: *This is my Lord; this is the greatest* 
of  Venus and the moon. He wanted to deny (such a type of worship) and
to ask (his fellows about it), not to tell them about it and not to
admit it (as a lord). When it (the sun) set, he said to the three types
of men who worshipped Venus, the moon, and the sun: *O my people! I am
indeed free from your (guilt) of ascribing partners to Allah. For me, I
have set my face firmly and truly towards Him Who created the heavens
and the earth, and never shall I attribute partners (to Allah).* By the
virtue of what he said, Ibrāhim simply wanted to indicate to them the
invalidity of their religion and to establish to them that worship did
not belong to those things like Vinus, the moon, and the sun; rather it
belonged to their Creator and the Creator of the heavens and the earth.
The argument which he used against his people was among what Allah had
inspired him and gave to him, just as Allah, the Great and Almighty,
said: *And this was Our argument which We gave to Ibrāhim against his
people*.

Q4: How good you are, son of Allahs Apostle! Tell me about these words
of Ibrāhim: *And when Ibrāhim said: My Lord, show me how You give life
to the dead, He said: What! and do you not believe. He said: Yes, but
that my heart may be at ease.*[[1]](#_ftn240)

Ans. 4: Surely Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, had revealed to Ibrāhim
that He would take one of His creatures for a bosom friend. If he asked
Him to give life to the dead, He would respond to him. Ibrāhim thought
that he would be the bosom friend, and hence he said: *My Lord,show me
how You give life to the dead,He said:What! and do you not believe.He
said: Yes,but that my heart may be at ease*.He  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F240) Ibid., 2, 26.  
  

  

  

(Allah) said: *Then take four of the birds, then train them to follow
you, then place on every mountain a part of them, then call them, they
will come to you flying; and know that Allah is Mighty, Wise*. As a
result Ibrāhim took an eagle, a peacock,  a duck and a rooster. He cut
the birds into pieces and mixed them. They were ten pieces. Then he
placed each piece of them on the mountains around him, and put the beaks
between his fingers. He put seeds and water beside him. Then he called
them by their names, so those pieces flew to each other until they
became sound bodies. Then each body came and joined its neck and head.
Then Ibrāhim, peace be on him,  released their beaks. The birds flew and
then they alighted. They drank from that water, ate from those seeds,
and said: Allahs Prophet, you have given life to us, may Allah give life
to you! Ibrāhim said: Rather it is Allah who gives life to (creatures)
and make (them) die, and He is powerful over all things!

Q5: Allah bless you, Abū al-Hasan! Tell me about these words of Him, the
Great and Almighty: *So Mūsā struck him with his fist and killed him. He
said: This is on account of Satans doing*.[[1]](#_ftn241)

Ans. 4: Mūsā entered one of Firawns (Pharaohs) cities when its
inhabitants were heedless of him. That was between the sunset and the
evening. *So he found therein two men fighting, one being of his party
and the other of his foes, and he who was of his party cried out to him
for help against him who was of his enemies.* Therefore Mūsā killed the
enemy. Allah, the Exalted, mentioned: *So Mūsā struck him with his fist*
and he died. *He said: This is on account of Satans doing*. This means
that the fighting which took place between the two men (was *on account
of Satans doing*), not the killing which Mūsā had committed. (The world)
he means *Satan (who) is an enemy, openly leading astray*.

Q6: What is the meaning of these words of Mūsā: *My Lord, surely I have
done harm to myself, so do You protect me*.

Ans. 6: This means that he put himself in other than its place when he
entered this city. *So do You protect me,* meaning conceal me  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F241) Ibid., 28, 15.  
  

  

  

from Your enemies lest they should find me and kill me, *so He protected
him; surely He is the Forgiving, the Merciful*. Mūsā said: *My Lord,
because You have bestowed a favor on me,* through the strength so that I
killed a man with striking him with my fist; *I shall never be a backer
of the guilty;* rather I shall fight on Your path with this strength
until You are content (with me). As a result Mūsā was in the city
*fearing, awaiting, when lo! he who had asked his assistance the day
before was crying out to him for aid* against another person, so *Mūsā
said to him: You are most surely one erring manifestly*. You killed a
man the day before and this day you want to kill (another man), hence I
shall hurt you. He wanted to strike him. *So when he desired to seize
him who was an enemy to them both, he said: O Mūsā, do you want to kill
me as you killed a person yesterday? You desire nothing but that you
should be a tyrant in the land, and you do not desire to be of those who
act aright*.

Q7: Abū al-Hasan, May Allah reward you well on behalf of His prophets!
What this the meaning of these words of Mūsā to Firawn (Pharaoh): *I did
it then while I was of those unable to see the right
course*?[[1]](#_ftn242)

Ans. 7: Firawn said to Mūsā when he came to him: *And you did (that)
deed of yours which you did, and you are one of the ungrateful* for me.
Mūsā said: *I did it then while I was of those unable to see the right
course* through my entering one of your cities. *So I fled from you when
I feared you, then my Lord granted me wisdom and made me one of the
apostles*.

Allah, the Great and Almighty, said to His Prophet Mohammed, may Allah
bless him and his family: *Did He not find you an orphan and gave you
shelter?* [***[2]***](#_ftn243) He (Allah) says: Did He not find you
lonely and He made the people seek shelter in you? *And find you unable
to see and show the way* to your people? *So He guided*, namely He
guided them to knowing you. *And find you in want and make you be free
from want*? He (Allah) says: He has made you free from want when He has
made your supplication accepted.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F242) Ibid., 26, 20.  
 [[2]](#_F243) Ibid., 93, 6.  
  

  

  

Q8: Allah bless you, son of Allahs Apostle! What is the meaning of these
words of Allah, the Great and Almighty: *And when Mūsā came to our
appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he said: My Lord, show me
(Yourself), so that I may look upon You. He said: You cannot (bear to)
see me*. How is it permissible that Mūsā b. Umrān, the Interlocutor of
Allah, peace be on him,  did not know that Allah, may His name be
Blessed and Exalted, could not be perceived? Why did he make such a
request?

Ans. 8: Mūsā b. Umrān, the Interlocutor of Allah, knew that Allah, the
Exalted, far above to be perceived by eyes, but when Allah, the Great
and Almighty, spoke to him *and made him draw nigh holding communion*
(with Him), he returned to his people and told them that Allah, the
Great and Almighty, spoke to him, *made him draw nigh*, and whispered to
him, but they said: *We will not believe in you* until we hear His words
as you heard them. They were seven hundred thousand men, so he chose
seventy men from them to the appointed time of their Lord. He took them
and went to Mount Sinā. He made them stay at the foot of the mountain.
As for Mūsā, he climbed the mountain, asked Him to speak to him and make
them hear His words. As a result Allah, may His name be Exalted, spoke
to him, and they heard His words from top, bottom, left, right, behind,
and before (them). That is because Allah, the Great and Almighty,
created His words in the Tree and made them come out of it to the extent
that they heard them from all directions; yet they said: *We do not
believe* that what we have heard is (His) words *until we see Allah
manifestly*. When they said this dangerous statement, became arrogant
and tyrant, Allah sent down upon them thunderbolt, and it overtook them
because of their transgression. They died, so Mūsā said: My Lord, what
shall I say to the children of Israel when I return to them and they
say: You took them and killed them, for you were not truthful when you
claimed that Allah, the Great and Almighty, would speak to you?
According, Allah gave life to them and sent them with him. They said: If
you ask Allah to make you look upon him, He will respond to you; you
will tell us how He is, then we will be fully aware of Him. Mūsā said:
People, the eyes cannot perceive Him, and He has no howness;  

  

  

rather He is recognized through His signs and is known through
arguments. Yet they said to him: *We will not believe in you* until you
ask Him. Mūsā said: My Lord, You have indeed heard the statement of the
children of Israel and You know better how to put them right. So Allah,
the Great and Almighty, revealed to Mūsā: Request from Me what they
requested from you, for I will not punish you because of their
ignorance. Then Mūsā said: *My Lord, show me (Yourself) so that I may
look upon You. He said: You cannot (bear to) see Me, but look at the
mountain, if it remains firm in its place* -while falling down- *then
will you see me; but when his Lord manifested (His glory) to the
mountain, He made it crumble and Mūsā fell down in a swoon; then when he
recovered, he said: Glory be to You, I turn to You.* He said: I have
returned to my knowledge of You and (left) the ignorance of my people of
You. *I am the first of the believers* in that none can see You.

Al-Mamūn admired the Imāms talents and abundant knowledge, saying: How
good you are, Abū al-Hasan!

Q9: Tell me about these words of Him, the Great and Almighty: *And
certainly she made for him, and he would have made for her, were it not
that he had seen the manifest evidence of his Lord*.[[1]](#_ftn244)

Ans. 9: She made for him, were it not that he had seen the manifest
evidence of his Lord, he would have made for her just as she made for
him, but he was infallible, and the infallible did not think of sin; nor
did he commit it. Indeed my father related to me on the authority of his
father al-Sādiq, who said: She intended to do, and he intended not to
do.

Q10: How good you are, Abū al-Hasan! Tell me about these words of Him,
the Great and Almighty: *And Dhā al-Nūn when he departed in wrath; he
imagined that We had no power over him*.[[2]](#_ftn245)

Ans. 10: That was Yūnus b. Matti. He departed in wrath to his people.
*He imagined*, meaning that he was sure *that We would not  
*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F244) Ibid., 12, 24.  
 [[2]](#_F245) Ibid., 21, 87.  
  

  

  

straiten him, namely We will not going to sustain him, and of it is
these words of Him, the Great and Almighty: *But when He tries him
(differently), then straitens to him his means of
subsistence*.[[1]](#_ftn246) Or straitened and ordained. *So he called
out among the shadows*, namely the shadows of the sea and of the stomach
of the whale. *There is no god but You! Glory belongs to You; I was
indeed wrong* through my leaving this worship to which You have given me
free time in the stomach of the whale, so Allah answered him, and He,
the Great and Almighty, said: *But  had it not that he was of those who
glorify (Us), he would certainly have tarried in its stomach to the day
when they are raised*.[[2]](#_ftn247)

Q11: How good you are, Abū al-Hasan! Tell me about these words of Him,
the Great and Almighty: *Till the apostles gave up hope  and  thought
that they were surely accused of lying, Our help then came to
them*.[[3]](#_ftn248)

Ans. 11: Allah, the Great and Almighty, said: *Till the apostles gave up
hope (of their people) and (their people came to) think that they proved
them to be liars, Our help then came to them*.

Q12: How good you are, Abū al-Hasan! Tell me about these words of Him,
the Great and Almighty: *That Allah may forgive your community their
past faults and those to follow*.[[4]](#_ftn249)

Ans. 12: The Meccan polytheists thought that there was none greater in
sin than Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. That is
because they worshipped three hundred and sixty  idols other than Allah.
When he (the Prophet), may Allah bless him and his family, came to them
and summoned them to the Oneness of Allah, they regarded that as big and
great, and then they said: *What! makes he the gods a single God? A
strange thing is this, to be sure! And the chief persons of them break
forth, saying: Go and steadily adhere to your gods; this is most surely
a thing sought after. We never heard of this in the former faith; this
is nothing but a forgery*.[[5]](#_ftn250)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F246) Ibid., 89, 16.  
 [[2]](#_F247) Ibid., 37, 143-144.  
 [[3]](#_F248) Ibid., 12, 110.  
 [[4]](#_F249) Ibid., 48, 2.  
 [[5]](#_F250) Ibid., 38, 5-7.  
  

  

  

When Allah, the Great and Almighty, enabled His Prophet to conquer
Mecca, He said to him: Mohammed, *surely We have given to you a clear
victory, that Allah may forgive your community their past faults and
those to follow*, (the faults) of the Meccan polytheists through your
summoning (them) to the Oneness of Allah, their past faults and those to
follow. That is because some Meccan polytheists became Muslims; some of
them went out of Mecca; as for those of them who remained were not able
to deny the Oneness of Allah against him (the Prophet) when he summoned
the people to it, so their faults were forgiven because of his mastery
over them.

Q13: How good you are, Abū al-Hasan! Tell me about these words of Him,
the Great and Almighty: *Allah pardon you! Why did you give them leave
?* [[1]](#_ftn251)

Ans. 13: This is part of that which was revealed by the virtue of: I
mean you and listen, O neighbor! Allah, the Great and Almighty,
addressed His Prophet with that, but He meant by that his community.
Similar to this (verse) is these words of Him, the Exalted: *Surely if
you associate (with Allah), your work would certainly come to naught and
you would certainly be of the losers* [[2]](#_ftn252), and these words
of Him, the Great and Almighty: *And had it not been that We had already
established you, you would certainly have been near to incline to them a
little*.[[3]](#_ftn253)

Q14: Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, went to the
house of Zayd b. Hāritha b. Sharāhil al-Kalbi for a thing he wanted. He
saw his wife washing and said to her: Glory belongs to Him who has
created you!

Ans. 14: By that he meant to free the Creator, the Great and Almighty,
from the statement of those who said: The angels are the daughters of
Allah. So Allah, the Great and Almighty, said: *What! has then your Lord
preferred to give you sons, and (for Himself) taken daughters from among
the angels? Most surely you utter a grievous  
*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F251) Ibid., 9, 43.  
 [[2]](#_F252) Ibid., 39, 65.  
 [[3]](#_F253) Ibid., 17, 74.  
  

  

  

saying.[[1]](#_ftn254) When Zayd returned to his house, his wife told
him about the coming of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family,  and his saying to her: Glory belongs to Allah! Zayd did not
understand what the Prophet meant by that. He thought that the Prophet
said that because he admired her beauty. So he came to the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, and said to him: My wife is in her
creation, and I want to divorce her. Keep your wife to yourself, said
the Prophet to him, fear Allah. Allah had made the Prophet know the
number of his wives. As for this woman, she was one of them, but he
concealed that in his own soul and did not show it to Zayd. He feared
that the people would say that Mohammed said to his retainer: Your wife
will be my wife, and that they would criticized him for that. As a
result Allah, the Great and Almighty, revealed: *And when you said to
him to whom Allah had shown favor and to whom you had shown favor: Keep
your wife to yourself and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; and you
concealed in yourself* *(what) Allah would bring to light, and you
feared men, and Allah had a greater right that you should fear Him.*

Then Zayd b. Hāritha divorced her, and she had completed her waiting
period, so Allah, the Great and Almighty, married her to His Prophet
Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, and with this regard He
revealed (a verse in) the Qurān, and He, the Great and Almighty, said:
*But when Zayd had accomplished his want of her, We gave her to you as a
wife, so that there should be no difficulty for the believers in respect
of the wives of their adopted sons, when they have accomplished their
want of them; and Allahs command shall be performed*.

Then Allah, the Great and Almighty, knew that the hypocrites would
criticize the Prophet for being married to her, so He, the Exalted
revealed: *There is no harm in the Prophet doing that which Allah has
ordained for him*.[[2]](#_ftn255)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F254) Ibid., 17, 40.  
 [[2]](#_F255) Ibid., 33, 38.  
  

  

  

With this (answer) the Imām concluded this debate, which is evidence for
his great scientific abilities and his comprehensive knowledge of the
Great Book of Allah. The Imām freed the magnified prophets of Allah from
committing transgression and established their infallibility through
this explanation backed by undeniable proof and evidence.

Al-Mamūn lauds the Imāms Talents
--------------------------------

Al-Mamūn lauded Imām al-Ridās talents and said: You have quenched my
thirst, son of Allahs Apostle, and explained what was hidden from me,
may Allah reward you well on behalf of His prophets and of Islam.

Then al-Mamūn left the session. He took Mohammed b. Jafar, the Imāms
uncle, by the hand and asked him: How did you see your nephew?

Showing his admiration toward the Imām, Mohammed said: He (Imām al-Ridā)
is a scholar; we have never seen him frequent any of the men of
knowledge.

Al-Mamūn agreed with him on this reality and said: Surely, your nephew
is from among the Household concerning whom the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, said: Verily, the pious of my family and the  good
ones of my offspring are the most forbearing of the people when they are
young and the most knowledgeable of the people when they are old;
therefore, do not teach them, for they are most learned than you. They
do not bring you out of guidance; nor do they make you enter a door to
error.  

 Then Ali b. al-Jahm related to the Imām al-Mamūns laudation and praise
and what Mohammed b. Jafar said concerning him. So the Imām smiled and
said: Do not be deceived by what you heard from him (al-Mamūn), for he
will assassinate me; and Allah, the Exalted, will take vengeance on him
out of his (evil) deed toward me.[[1]](#_ftn256)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F256) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 1, pp. 195-204.  
  

  

  

The matter was just as the Imām, peace be on him, had predicted. That is
because al-Mamūns harbored malice against him and was jealous of
excellence and abundant knowledge given by Allah to him. Accordingly,
al-Mamūn committed the most horrible crime in the history of Islam when
he put poison into food and gave it to the Imām to eat. In this manner
he was able to assassinate the Imām, who was the Prophets grandson,
source of knowledge and wisdom on earth.

Ibn al-Sikits Questions
-----------------------

Abū Yūsuf Yaqūb b. Ishāq al-Dawraqi, better known as Ibn al-Sikit, was a
great scholar in the time of the Imām. He came to Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him, and asked him the following questions:

Why did Allah send Mūsā with a white hand, Īsā with miraculous medicine,
and Mohammed with miraculous speech and oratory?

The Imām answered him about the reason for these things, saying: Allah
sent Mūsā (with the white hand) because sorcery dominated the (minds) of
the  people of his time, so he brought them from Allah something which
they never had, nor could they bring about anything like it, thus
rendering their sorcery void and proving his argument against them.

Allah sentĪsā with medicine during a period of time when chronic
diseases became widespread, and the people were in dire need of cure, so
he (Īsā) brought them from Allah something which they never had, bring
the dead back to life, healing the blind and the leprous with Allahs
permission, proving his argument against them.

Allah sent Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, with speech and
oratory during the time when speech and oratory dominated (the minds of)
the people.[[1]](#_ftn257) So he (Mohammed) brought them from Allah
warnings and precepts through which he could disprove their statements
and proved his argument against them.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F257) The narrator of this account said: "I think that poetry
prevailed them."  
  

  

  

Ibn al-Sikit admired the Imāms knowledge and said: By Allah, I have
never seen anyone like you! What is the argument against people these
days, then?

The Imām answered him: Reason. Through it can you come to know who tells
the truth about Allah, so you believe in him, and who tells lies about
Allah, so you disbelieve in him.

This, by Allah, is the (right) answer, declared Ibn
al-Sikit.[[1]](#_ftn258)

Allah created reason and made it argument over man. Reason brings about
mercy to man when he obeys it, and it brings about unhappiness to him
when he disobeys it. Through reason we can distinguish the truthful from
the untruthful, the true from the untrue.

The Imām debates a Man
----------------------

A man, whose name the historians have not mentioned, came in to Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him. When the man sat down, he turned to the Imām
and asked him: Son of Allahs Apostle, what is the evidence for the
creation of the world?

The Imām answered him with definite evidence: You were not, then you
have been. You know that you had not created yourself; nor had the like
of you created you.[[2]](#_ftn259)

The Imāms Debate Concerning the Prophets Family
-----------------------------------------------

Yet this is another debate in which the Imām has provided evidence of
that Allah chose the pure family (of the Prophet). The debate took place
in the presence of al-Mamūn and a group of scholars from Iraq and
Khurasān. Al-Mamūn asked the scholars about the meaning of this verse:
Then We gave the Book for an inheritance to those whom We chose from
among Our servants.[[3]](#_ftn260)

Surely those whom Allah chose were all Muslims, retorted the scholars.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F258) Al-Ihtijājj, vol. 2, pp. 224-225.  
 [[2]](#_F259) Ibid., 170-171.  
 [[3]](#_F260) Qur'ān, 35, 32.  
  

  

  

Al-Mamūn turned to the Imām and asked him: What do you say, Abū
al-Hasan?

I do not say as they said, replied the Imām, but I say that Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, meant the pure family (of the Prophet), peace be on
them.

The Imāms words moved al-Mamūn, and he asked: How did Allah mean the
Prophets family apart from the community?

If Allah meant the community, replied the Imām, then all of it would
enter the Garden, while He, the Exalted, says: *But of them is he who
makes his soul to suffer a loss, and of them is he who takes a middle
course, and of them is he who is foremost in deeds of goodness by Allahs
permission; this is the great excellence*.[[1]](#_ftn261)

The Imām added, saying: As a result the inheritance belongs to the
Prophets pure family, not to other than them. It is they whom Allah has
described in His Book and said: *Verily Allah intends to keep off from
you every kind of uncleanness. And to purify you, people of the House,
with a thorough purification*. It is they concerning whom Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said: I leave behind me
among you two things, if you cleave to them, you will never go astray
that is the book of Allah and my offspring from my family *(ahl
al-Bayt)*. They will never scatter (from you) until they lead you to me
at the (scared) waters (of Heaven). Take care how you will follow me
with regard to them. People, do not try to teach them, for they are more
knowledgeable than you.[[2]](#_ftn262)

The scholars hurried to say at one time: Abū al-Hasan, tell us about the
offspring *(itra)*: are they the family *(āl)* or other than the family?

They are the family *(āl)*, answered the Imām.

They opposed the Imām, saying: It has been narrated on the authority of
Allahs Apostle, who said: My community is my family*(āl)*. And these are
his companions who say with a diffused  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F261) Ibid., 35, 32.  
 [[2]](#_F262) Hadith al-Thaqalayn, definite, repeatedly stated
tradition narrated in al-Sihāh and al-Sunan.  
  

  

  

tradition which cannot be denied: The family*(āl)* of Mohammed is his
community.

The Imām indicated that the tradition was fabricated and incorrect,
saying: Tell me, is it forbidden for Mohammeds family to take alms or
not?

Yes, was the answer.

Is it forbidden for the community to take alms or not? asked the Imām.

No, came the answer.

Having proved argument against them, the Imām retorted: This is the
difference between the family *(āl)* and the community *(umma)*. Woe
unto you! Which creed do you follow? *What! shall We then turn away the
reminder from you altogether because you are an extravagant people?* Did
you not know that the tradition apparently concerned those who were
chosen and rightly guided apart from the rest of the people?

From where did you say, Abū al-Hasan? asked the scholars.

The Imām began reciting to them the excellence of the pure offspring,
saying: From these words of Allah: *And certainly We sent Nūh and
Ibrāhim and We gave to their offspring the (gift of) prophecy and the
Book; so there are among them those who go aright, and most of them are
transgressors*.[[1]](#_ftn263) So the legacy of prophecy and the Book
was confined to those who went aright apart from the transgressors. Did
you not know that Nūh ask his Lord, saying: *My Lord, surely my son is
of my family, and Your promise is surely true*?[[2]](#_ftn264) That is
because Allah had promised him to save him and his family, so Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, said: *Surely he is not of your family; surely he
is (the doer of) other than good deeds; therefore, ask  not of Me that
of which you have no knowledge; surely I admonish you lest you may be of
the ignorant*.[[3]](#_ftn265)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F263) Ibid., 57, 26.  
 [[2]](#_F264) Ibid., 11, 40.  
 [[3]](#_F265) Ibid., 11, 46.  
  

  

  

Al-Mamūn burst with anger and rage, saying: Did Allah prefer the
offspring to the rest of the people?

The Imām retorted: Allah, the Great and Almighty, preferred the
offspring to the reset of the people in the firm text of His Book.

Where is that in the Book of Allah? asked al-Mamūn.

The Imām recited to him a group of the verses which lauded the
excellence of the Household, peace be on them, saying: *Surely Allah
chose Adam and Nūh and the descendants of Ibrāhim and the descendants of
Umrān above the nations, offspring, one of the other; and Allah is
Hearing, Knowing*.[[1]](#_ftn266) And Allah said in another place: *Or
do they envy the people for what Allah has given them of His grace? But
indeed We have given to Ibrāhims family the Book and the wisdom, and We
have given them a grand kingdom*.[[2]](#_ftn267) Then after this Allah
addressed the rest of the Muslims, saying: *O you who believe, obey
Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority from among
you*.[[3]](#_ftn268) He meant those whom He made inherit the Book and
wisdom, and they were envied for them, according to these words of Him:
*Or do they envy the people for what Allah has given them of His grace?
But indeed We have given to Ibrāhims family the Book and the wisdom, and
We have given them a grand kingdom*. He meant obedience to those chosen
and pure, and kingdom here means obedience to them.

Did Allah, the Most High, interpret choice in the Book? asked the
scholars.

The Imām answered them: He interpreted choice in outward apart from the
inward in twelve places:

The first of that is the words of Allah: *And warn your nearest
relations* [***[4]***](#_ftn269)*,* and your loyal family in this manner
it is in the recitation of Ubay b. Kab, and it has been established in
the copy of the Qurān of Abd Allah b. Masūd. However, when Uthmān
ordered  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F266) Ibid., 3, 32.  
 [[2]](#_F267) Ibid., 4, 54.  
 [[3]](#_F268) Ibid., 4, 59.  
 [[4]](#_F269) Ibid., 26, 214.  
  

  

  

Zayd b. Thābit to collect the Qurān, he omitted this verse. And this is
an exalted position, great excellence, and lofty honor when Allah, the
Great and Almighty, meant the family *(āl)* by that. This is one
(verse).

As for the second verse concerning choice, it is these words of Allah:
*Verily Allah intends to keep off from you every kind of uncleanness and
to purify you, people of the House, with a thorough purification*. None
can deny this excellence except him who is obstinate, for this
excellence is clear.

The third verse: When Allah distinguished the pure from among His
creatures, He ordered His Prophet in the Verse of Contest of Prayer
*(Ibtihāl)* and said: *Say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and
our women and your women and our souls and your souls, then let us be
earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the
liars*.[[1]](#_ftn270) So the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, brought out Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn, and Fātima, peace be on
them, thus he associated their souls with his own soul.

Then the Imām turned to the scholars and asked them: Did you know the
meaning of His words: *and our souls and your souls*?

By that he (the Prophet) meant his own soul, they answered.

You are mistaken, replied the Imām, by that he meant Ali.[[2]](#_ftn271)
The proof of that is the statement of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, when he said to Ali: Let the Banū of
Wulaya[[3]](#_ftn272) refrain from (polytheism); otherwise, I will send
to them a man who is like my own soul, namely Ali, peace be on
him.[[4]](#_ftn273) This is a quality which none had before him, a merit
over which no man differ, and honor to which no creature preceded him,
for he (the Prophet) regarded Alis soul as his own soul. This is the
third (verse).

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ss = fo\> [[1]](#_F270) Ibid., 3, 72.  
 [[2]](#_F271) In addition to the proof which the Imām mentioned, it is
senseless that man calls his own soul, so there is no escape that he
meant by that 'Ali, peace be on him.      
 [[3]](#_F272) The Banū of Wulay'a, a district of Kinda.  
 [[4]](#_F273) In al-'Uyūn, by our souls he meant 'Ali, by our sons he
meant al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and by our women he meant Fātima, peace be
on them. All the interpreters of the Qur'ān have agreed on that.  
  

  

  

As for the fourth (proof), it is that he (the Prophet) brought the
people out of his mosque except the offspring. When the people spoke
about that, al-Abbās spoke and said: Allahs Apostle, you have left Ali
and brought us (out of the mosque). It was not I who left him and
brought you out, replied Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, but it was Allah who left him and brought you out. This explains
his statement to Ali, peace be on him: Your position to me is as Hārūn
had with Mūsā.

Where is this in the Qurān? asked the scholars.

That is in the Qurān, replied the Imām.

Recite it to us, they demanded.

So the Imām recited to them these words of Allah, the Exalted: *And We
revealed to Mūsā and his brother, saying: Take for your people houses to
abide in Egypt and make your houses places of worship*.[[1]](#_ftn274)
This verse demonstrates the position of Hārūn with Mūsā as well as it
demonstrates the position of Ali, peace be on him, with Allahs Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family. Besides there is a clear indication
in this statement of Allahs Apostle: It is not lawful for those who are
in a state of major ritual impurity and the menstruating to enter this
mosque except Mohammed and the family of Mohammed.

The scholars denied the knowledge of that and said to the Imām: This
explanation and this interpretation does not exist. Do you, members of
the House of Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, have
(such an explanation and interpretation)?

The Imām answered them: Who denies that while Allahs Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, says: I am the city of knowledge and Ali
is its gate. Then, one who wishes (to enter) the city of knowledge, then
he should enter from its gate. We clarified and explained (Alis) merit,
honor, precedence (in Islam), choice, and purity. Accordingly, none
denies (these outstanding qualities) except him who is obstinate. To
Allah, the Great and Almighty, belongs praise for that! This is the
fourth (proof).

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F274) Qur'ān, 10, 87.  
  

  

  

As for the fifth (proof), it is these words of Allah, the Great and
Almighty: *And give to the near of kin his due*.[[1]](#_ftn275) (This
is) a quality for which Allah, the Great and Almighty, singled them out,
and preferred them over the community. When this verse was revealed to
Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, he said: Summon
Fātima to me. They summoned her to him, and he said: Fātima! Here I am,
Allahs Apostle! she answered. None passes (through) Fadak with horses or
stirrups; it especially belongs to me apart from the Muslims; and I have
granted it to you according to Allahs command, so take it for you and
your sons. This is the fifth (proof).

As for the sixth (proof), it is these words of Allah, the Great and
Almighty: *Say: I demand not, of you any reward for it (the toils of
preaching) except the love of my relations*.[***[2]***](#_ftn276) This
is a special characteristic of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, apart from the prophets, and a special characteristic of the
Family apart from other than them. That is because Allah gave an account
of the prophets when He mentioned Nūh, peace be on him: *And, O my
people! I ask you not for wealth in return for it; my reward is only
with Allah and I am not going to drive away those who believe; surely
they shall meet their Lord, but  I consider you a people who are
ignorant*.[[3]](#_ftn277) He gave an account of Hūd, saying: *O my
people! I ask you not for wealth in return for it; my reward is only
with Him Who created me; do you then understand?* [***[4]***](#_ftn278)
And He said to His Prophet: *Say: I demand not, of you any reward for it
(the toils of preaching) except the love of my relations*. Allah has
imposed showing love for them on people because He had known that they
would never turn away from their own creed and never return to error.
Another (proof): A man may love a man, but he may hate some of his own
household, so he is his enemy and his heart is not sound. Allah loved
that there would be nothing in the heart of Allahs Apostle, may Allah
bless him  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F275) Ibid., 17, 26.  
 [[2]](#_F276) Ibid., 42, 22.  
 [[3]](#_F277) Ibid., 11, 29.  
 [[4]](#_F278) Ibid., 11, 51.  
  

  

  

and his family, toward the believers, for He imposed on them the love of
his relations. Accordingly, he who loves Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, and his Household, peace be on them, then Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, cannot hate him. He who
hates Allahs Apostle and his household, then it is incumbent on Allahs
Apostle to hate him, for he has abandoned one of the obligations imposed
by Allah. Which excellence or honor is better than this (love toward
Allahs Apostle and his household)?

When Allah sent down to His Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
(this verse): *Say: I demand not, of you any reward for it (the toils of
preaching) except the love of my relations*, Allahs Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, rose among his companions. He praised Allah
and lauded Him, and then he said: People, Allah has imposed an
obligation on you, then will you perform it? None answered him. On the
following day he rose among them and said the like of that, but none
answered him. One the following day he rose among them and said: People,
Allah has imposed an obligation on you, then will you perform it? Yet
none answered him. So he said: People, the obligation is neither gold
nor silver nor food nor drink. Say it, they demanded. He recited this
verse to them. As for this (love), we accept it, they answered. However,
most of them did not perform it.

The Imām added, saying: [My father related to me on the authority of my
grandfather on the authority of his grandfathers on the authority of
al-Husayn b. Ali, peace be on them, who said:] The Muhājirūn and the
Ansār gathered around Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his
family, and said to him: Allahs Messenger, you have the right to spend
on yourself and the delegations who come to you, then these are our
properties along with our blood, so make decisions concerning them, may
Allah be kind to you and reward you. Give whatever you desire and
withhold whatever you desire without any objection. So Allah sent down
the Trusted Sprit (Gabriel) to him, and he said: Mohammed, *Say: I
demand not, of you any reward for it (the toils of preaching) except the
love of my relations*. Do not hurt my relations after me. They went out
and a group of them said: Allahs  

  

  

Apostle left what we presented before him because he wanted to urge us
to show love toward his relations after him; and this is something which
he fabricated at his session, so Allah revealed this verse: *Nay! they
say: He has forged it. Say: If I have forged it, you do not control
anything for me from Allah; He knows best what you utter concerning it;
He is enough as a witness between me and you, and He is the Forgiving,
the Merciful*.[[1]](#_ftn279) As a result, the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, sent for them and asked: Has anything happened? Yes,
by Allah, Allahs Apostle, they replied, some of us say dreadful words
and we hated them. Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
recited this verse to them. They wept and their weeping became intense,
hence Allah, the Most High, revealed this verse: *And He it is Who
accepts repentance from His servants and pardons the evil deeds and He
knows what you do*.[[2]](#_ftn280)

As for the seventh (proof), it is that Allah says: *Surely Allah and His
angels bless the Prophet; O you who believe! call for (Divine) blessings
on him and salute him with a (becoming) salutation*.[[3]](#_ftn281) When
this verse was revealed, the obstinate from among them asked: Allahs
Messenger, we have come to know how to salute you, then how shall we
bless you? He (the Prophet) said: You say: O Allah, bless Mohammed and
the family of Mohammed just as You had blessed Ibrāhim and the family of
Ibrāhim, surely You are Praiseworthy, Glorious.

The Imām turned to the scholars and asked them: Is there any opposition
to these (proofs)?

All of them said in one voice: No!

However, al-Mamūn said: There is no opposition to them, and there is an
unanimous agreement on them. Have you anything clearer than them about
the family in the Qurān?

The Imām began giving more definite indications concerning the
excellence of the Household (of the Prophet), peace be on them,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F279) Ibid., 46, 8.  
 [[2]](#_F280) Ibid., 42, 24.  
 [[3]](#_F281) Ibid., 33, 56.  
  

  

  

saying: Tell me about these words of Allah: *Yāsin, and I swear by the
Qurān full of wisdom; most surely you are of the apostles, on a right
way*.[[1]](#_ftn282) Whom did Allah mean by His words *Yāsin*?

The scholars said: By that He meant Mohammed, may Allah bless him and
his family, there is no doubt about that.

The Imām turned to those who were present and said to them: Allah gave
Mohammed and the family of Mohammed excellence whose essence and quality
none has reached. That is because Allah never saluted anyone except the
prophets, the blessings of Allah be upon them. He, the Blessed and
Exalted, said: *Peace and salutations to Nūh among the
nations*.[[2]](#_ftn283) And He said: *Peace be on
Ibrāhim*.[[3]](#_ftn284) And He said: *Peace be on Mūsā and
Hārūn*.[[4]](#_ftn285) He did not say: Peace be on the family of Nūh;
nor did He say: Peace be on the family of Ibrāhim; nor did He say: Peace
be on the family of Mūsā and Hārūn. And He, the Great and Almighty,
said: *Peace be on Āl Yāsin* (the family of Yāsin)[[5]](#_ftn286); He
meant the family of Mohammed.

Al-Mamūn turned to Imām al-Ridā and said to him: I have come to know
that this explanation and clarification is concerning the source of the
Prophethood.

(Then the Imām continued giving proofs, saying:) As for the eighth
(proof), it is these words of Allah, the Great and Almighty: *And know
that whatever thing you acquire in war, a fifth of it is for Allah and
for the Apostle and for the near of kin*.[[6]](#_ftn287) Allah
associated His own portion with that of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, and of those near of kin. This is a difference
between the family and the community, for Allah put them in one place
and put all people in  another place, accepted for them what He accepted
for Himself, and singled them out for it. He started with Himself, then
His  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F282) Ibid., 36, 1.  
 [[2]](#_F283) Ibid., 37, 79.  
 [[3]](#_F284) Ibid., 37, 109.  
 [[4]](#_F285) Ibid., 37, 120.  
 [[5]](#_F286) Ibid., 37, 130.  
 [[6]](#_F287) Ibid., 8, 42.  
  

  

  

Apostle, then the near of kin in every place of booty, and others which
He, the Great and Almighty, accepted for Himself and accepted for them.
He said, and His words are the truth: *And know that whatever thing you
acquire in war, a fifth of it is for Allah and for the Apostle and for
the near of kin*. As a result this is a certain verification and
permanent matter for them to the Day of Resurrection in Allahs  
 Book, which speaks (of the truth), before and behind which falsehood  
 does not come, which is a revelation from the Wise, the Praiseworthy.  
 As for these words of Him: *and the orphans and the needy*, surly the  
 orphans are not included in booty when their orphanhood terminates;  
 they have no share in booty, and it is not lawful for them to take it.
As  
 for the share of the near of kin, it subsists to the Day of
Resurrection;  
 it is for the rich and the poor, for there is none richer than Allah
and  
 His Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. He appointed a  
 share of the booty for Himself and a share for His Apostle, so He  
 accepted for them what He accepted for Himself and His Apostle,  
 similar to this (booty) is the war booty gained without fighting  
 *(fayya)*. He accepted for the near of kin what He accepted for
Himself  
 and His Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. He also made it  
 permissible for them (to take a share) of booty. He started with  
 Himself, then His Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and  
 then them. He associated their own share with His own share and the  
 share of His Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. He also  
 (associated) obedience (to them with obedience to Him and His  
 Apostle), so He, the Great and Almighty, said: *O you who believe!  
 obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority from among  
 you*.[[1]](#_ftn288) He started with Himself, then with His Apostle,
then with his Household, similar to this(verse is the verse regarding)
authority *(wilāya)*: *Only Allah is you authority(Vali) and His Apostle
and those who believe*.[[2]](#_ftn289) Accordingly, He made their
authority associated with obedience to Him and the Apostle and,in
addition,He made their share(of booty) associated with that of Him and
of His Apostle.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F288) Ibid., 4, 59.  
 [[2]](#_F289) Ibid., 5, 55.  
  

  

  

When the story of alms came, He, may His name be Exalted, deemed Himself
far above it as well as He deemed His Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family and his household, far above it. Thus He said: *Alms are only
for the poor and the needy, and the officials (appointed) over them, and
those whose hearts are made to incline (to truth) and the (ransoming of)
captives and those in debts and in the way of Allah and the wayfarer; an
ordaince from Allah*.[[1]](#_ftn290) Do you find that He has appointed a
share in any of these (verses) for Himself or for His Apostle or the
near of kin. That is because when He deemed Himself far above alms, He
deemed His Apostle and his Household far above it; rather He made it
unlawful (to take alms), for it is unlawful for Mohammed and his
Household (to take) alms which are the dirt of men. It is unlawful (for
them) to take alms, for they were pure from every uncleanness and dirt.
When Allah purified them and chose them, He accepted for them what He
accepted for Himself, and He hated for them what He hated for Himself.

As for the ninth (proof), it is that we are the followers of the
Reminder, for Allah has said in the firm text of His Book: *So ask the
followers of the Reminder*.[[2]](#_ftn291)

The scholars objected this statement, saying: By that Allah meant the
Jews and the Christians.

The Imām disproved their viewpoints, saying: Is it permissible for them
to summon us (to follow) their own religion and to say that their
religion is better than Islam?

Al-Mamūn turned to Imām al-Ridā and asked him for more explanation of
what he said, saying: Have you any explanation of that which opposes
their statement?

Yes, replied the Imām, the Reminder is Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless
him  and his family, and we are the men of it, and that is clear in the
Verse of Divorce: *Therefore be careful of (your duty to) Allah, O men
of understanding who believe! Allah has indeed revealed to you a
reminder, an Apostle who recites to you clear  
*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F290) Ibid., 9, 60.  
 [[2]](#_F291) Ibid., 16, 43.  
  

  

  

communications.[[1]](#_ftn292) As a result, the Reminder is Allahs
Apostle and we, his Household. This is the ninth (proof).

As for the tenth (proof), it is that Allah has said in the Verse of
Prohibition: *Forbidden to you are your mothers and your daughters and
your sisters*.[[2]](#_ftn293)

The Imām addressed the scholars, saying: Tell me: If Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family,  was alive, was it permissible for him
to marry my daughter or the daughter of my son or the offspring of my
loins?

No, the scholars answered.

The Imām asked them again: Tell me: Was it permissible for him to marry
one of your daughters?

Yes, they replied.

Accordingly, I am one of his family, while you do not belong to his
family, said the Imām, if you belonged to his family, then it would be
forbidden for him to marry one of your daughters just as it is forbidden
for him to marry one of my daughters. That is because we belong to his
family while you belong to his community. This is another difference
between the family *(āl)* and the community, for the family belongs to
him whereas the community if it is not the family does not belong to
him. This is the tenth (proof).

As for the eleventh (proof), it is that His words in Sūrat al-Mumin
giving an account of the words of a man: *And a believing man of Firouns
people who hid his faith said: What! will you slay a man because who
says: My Lord is Allah, and indeed he has brought to you clear arguments
from your Lord?*[***[3]***](#_ftn294)  The man was the son of Firouns
uncle. He (Allah) ascribed the man to Firoun because of his lineage and
He did not add him to him because of his faith. He (Allah) has also
singled us out because we belong to the family of Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, and our lineage belongs to him, while He
generalized His religion, so this is another deference  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F292) Ibid., 65, 10-11.  
 [[2]](#_F293) Ibid., 4, 23.  
 [[3]](#_F294) Ibid., 40, 28.  
  

  

  

between the family *(āl)* and the community. This is the eleventh
(proof).

As for the twelfth (proof), it is these words of Him: *And enjoin prayer
on your family, and steadily adhere to it*.[[1]](#_ftn295) So He (Allah)
has singled us out for this special characteristic, for He ordered us
through His ordering him (the Prophet), then He has singled us out apart
from the community. Accordingly, after the revelation of this verse,
Allahs Messenger would come to the door of Ali and Fātima, peace be on
them, five times a day at the timing of the prayers and said: (Perform)
the prayer, may Allah have mercy upon you! Allah did not honor any of
the progeny of the prophets with this noble quality with which He has
honored us and singled us out along with all the members of his
Household, so this is another difference between the family *(āl)* and
the community. Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and
Allah bless His Prophet Mohammed.[[2]](#_ftn296)

With this proof we will end our talk about some of  Imām al-Ridās 
debates, which represent a side of his scientific life and his struggle
for defending Islam.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F295) Ibid., 20, 132.  
 [[2]](#_F296) Tuhaf al-'Uqūl, pp. 425-436. 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā.
Al-Majālis.  
  

