Chapter Vi
==========

  

  

HIS WORKS
=========

The historians and the narrators have reported that Imām al-Ridā, peace
be on him, compiled a group of books some of which were (compiled)
according to al-Mamūns request, in some of which he (the Imām) discussed
and explained the precepts of Islamic law as well as he recorded in some
of which the traditions transmitted from his grandfather, the greatest
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and this work was called
the *Musnad of Imām al-Ridā*, peace be on him. Yet another example of
his scientific books is what is known as *al-Risāla al-Dhahabiya fi
al-Tibb* (the golden medical dissertation), in which the Imām mentioned
what put right mans body and soul, and which is among the main, briefed
books on medicine. In the following topics we will present some of his
works:

1. His Dissertation on Islamic Law
----------------------------------

Al-Mamūn ordered his minister al-Fadl b. Sahl to have the honor of
meeting Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and to say to him: I (i.e.
al-Mamūn) would like you to gather for me the lawful, the unlawful, the
religious duties, and the *sunna* (the Prophets practices), for you are
the proof of Allah over His creatures and source of knowledge. The Imām
responded to al-Mamūns request. He ordered an inkwell and a sheet of
paper to be brought to him, and then he ordered al-Fadl to write. He
dictated to him:

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. It is
sufficient for us to witness that there is no god but Allah, Who is
Unique,  Everlasting Refuge, has not taken a consort nor a son, Self-  

  

  

subsistent, All-hearing, All-seeing, Strong, All-steadfast, Eternal,
Light, Knower never be ignorant, Powerful never be incapable, Rich never
be needy, and Just never be unjust. He created all things. *There is
nothing like Him*. There is no like with Him nor an opposite nor a rival
nor an equal. Surely Mohammed is His servant and apostle, entrusted by
Him, chosen by Him from among His creatures, the master of the apostles,
the last of the prophets, and the best of creatures. There will be no
prophet after him. His ideals will be neither altered nor changed. And
surely all what Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, brought
was the clear truth. We have believed in him and all Allahs apostles,His
prophets,and His proofs.And we have believed in His truthful Book
*falsehood shall not come to it from* *before it nor from behind it; a
revelation from the Wise, the Praised one*, that it is His Book which
has dominated all the Books,and that it is true from beginning to end.
We have believed in its clearly defined and its ambiguous,its specific
and its general,its promise and its threat, its abrogating (verses) and
its abrogated, and its giving  
 information. No creature is able to bring the like of it. After it the
proof and argument is the Commander of the faithful, who undertakes the
affairs of the Muslims, speaks on behalf of the Qurān, and knows its
precepts, who is his (the Prophets) brother, his successor, his
testamentary trustee, whose position to him was as Hārūn had with Mūsā,
Ali b. Abū Tālib, the Commander of the faithful, the Imām of the
Allah-fearing, the leader of the luminous famous ones, the master of the
faithful, the best of the testamentary trustees after the prophets;
after him were al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace be on them, one by one up
to this day of ours, who are the family of the Messenger; the most
learned of them (men) in the Book and the Sunna (the Prophets
practices), the most just of them in the case, the most appropriate of
them for the Imāmate in every age and time; they are the firmest handle,
the Imāms of guidance, the proof over the inhabitants of the world until
Allah inherits the earth and that which on it, and He is the best of the
inheritors; all those who have opposed them are straying and misleading
and leaving the truth and guidance; it is they who express the Qurān and
speaks on behalf of the Messenger with  

  

  

eloquence. He who dies and does not know their names and their fathers
names dies as those who died before Islam. Surely of their religion are
piety, chastity, truthfulness, righteousness, diligence, returning the
things deposited (with them to) to the pious and the sinners,
prostrating themselves in prayers for a long time, refraining from the
unlawful, waiting for relief by the virtue of steadfastness, good
friendship, good neighborhood, offering the good, praying by night,
turning away from harm, cheerfulness, advice, and having mercy on the
believers.

This letter gives an account of praising and glorifying Allah, the
Exalted, and mentioning some of His attributes as well as it is full of
praising the greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who
was the first to inspire man with good and virtue, whom Allah, the Most
High, chose for His message and saving His servants from ignorance, whom
Allah endowed with the immortal miracle, which is the Holy Qurān
*falsehood shall not come to it from*  *before it nor from behind it*,
which is the constitution for putting man right and solving all his
matters and problems.

Moreover, Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, presented the pioneer of the
truth and justice in Islam, the testamentary trustee of the Apostle, and
his successor after him, Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him,  the Imām of the Allah-fearing, the best of the testamentary
trustees, and he, peace be on him,  praised the pure Imāms, who guided
this community to the ways to the Garden, spoke on behalf of the
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, expressed the Qurān,
delivered the message of Allah, and explained its precepts.

After this presentation, Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, began explaining
the rules of comprehensive, Islamic law, saying: As for *wudū* (the
minor ablution), as Allah has ordered in His Book, it is washing the
face and hands, rubbing the head and feet. One is a religious duty and
two are recommended. He who increases *(wudū)* is sinful and is not
rewarded. Nothing invalidates *wudū* except flatus, urine, feces, sleep,
and *janāba* (sexual intercourse or just discharge of semen).

  

  

  

He who rubs over the shoes opposes Allah, His Apostle, and His Book, and
his *wudū* is invalid. That is because Ali, peace be on him,  opposed
rubbing over shoes and Umar said to him: I saw the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, rub (over shoes). Before or after the
revelation of Sūrat al-Māida? asked Ali. I do not know, replied Umar.
But I know, explained Ali, that Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, had not rubbed (over shoes) since the revelation of Sūrat
al-Māida.

The first act of Islamic law which Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,
presented was *wudū*, which is light and purity for man, and which is
the most brilliant of the prerequisites of prayer through which man is
exalted and have the honor of communicating with his Almighty Creator.
In his presentation of *wudū*, the Imām dealt with the following:

### 1. The acts of *wudū*

As for the acts of *wudū*, they are as follows:

A. Washing the face from the point where the hair of the head normally
grows down to the chin in length. Breadthwise, the span is that the area
which is covered by the thumb and the middle finger when they are spread
out.

B. Washing the hands from the elbow down to the finger tips.

C. Rubbing the head (with a wet hand) from the front of the top of the
head; rubbing should be over the skin (of the head) or the hair grows on
the front (of the head) on the condition that it should not exceed its
limit by the virtue of extension.

D. Rubbing the upper part of the feet from the tip of the toes to the
ankle; rubbing should be over the skin; it is not permitted to rub over
an obstacle such as shoes and socks, and he who rubs over them oppose
the Book of Allah and the Sunna (practices) of His Messenger, and his
*wudū*  is invalid, as it has been mentioned by the Imām, peace be on
him, and the successive texts (traditions) transmitted from the Imāms of
the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them.

  

  

  

### 2. Things that Invalidate *wudū*

The Imām has mentioned the things that invalidate *wudū* as follows:

A. discharge of flatus through the anus,

 B. urine,

C. feces,

D. sleep which overcomes reason,

E. *janāba* (sexual intercourse or just the discharge of semen).

These things invalidate *wudū*. He, peace be on him, said: *Ghusl* (the
major ablution) is (performed) because of *janāba* (sexual intercourse
or just the discharge of semen), wet dreams, *hayd* (regular menstrual
bleeding), and touching the corpse of the dead. (These *ghusls* are)
obligatory.

*Ghusl* (is also performed) on Friday, the two Īds, entering Mecca and
Medina, visiting (the holy shrines), entering into state of ritual
consecration *(ihrām)*, the day of Arafa, the first night of the month
of Ramadān, the 19th night of it, the 21st of it, and 23rd of it. (These
*ghusls* are) recommended.

Among marvelous, Islamic legislation, rules, and practices is *ghusl*
which protects bodies from diseases, and in the meantime it brings about
the cleanness of body and removing dirt from it, and it is of two types:
obligatory, and recommended. The Imām , peace be on him, has presented
both types as follows:

### 1. The Obligatory *Ghusls*

 *Ghusl* is obligatory in the following states:

#### A. Ghusl of *janāba*

There are two reasons for *janāba*, the first is the discharge of semen
accompanied by libido, ejaculation, and flagging, so he who has a wet
dream and this material (semen) discharges from him is in a state of
major ritual impurity *(junub)*, and *ghusl* is obligatory on him; the
second is sexual intercourse *(jumā)*  even if there is no discharge of
(semen), and it is real by the virtue of entering the glans into the
vagina or the anus without any difference between man and woman.

  

  

  

#### B. Ghusl of *hayd*

*Hayd* is blood which women experience and which Allah creates in the
womb for certain interests. It is mostly black or red with slight
straining and burning. If it happens to her and she finishes it, then
*ghusl* is obligatory on her, and it is forbidden for her during (the
period) of *hayd* to touch the name of Allah, the Exalted, the names of
the prophets, of the pure Imāms, the writing of the Qurān, to stay in
mosques and to enter them apart from passing them, and others.

#### D. *Ghusl* for touching a corpse

 *Ghusl* is obligatory when one touches a corpse after it has become
cold and before washing it. As for the animals other than man, *ghusl*
is not obligatory on him when he touches them after their death.

These are some obligatory *ghusls* which the Imām, peace be on him, has
mentioned. The rest of them are g*husl* of *istihāda* (obligatory for
women after certain kinds of irregular bleeding), and *ghusl al-maiyit*
(obligatory ceremonial washing of the corpse of a Muslim). The jurists
have mentioned them in details.

### The Recommended *Ghusls*

As for the recommended *ghusls*, they of three types: time, local, and
actual. As for the time *(ghusls)*, they are as follows:

A. *Ghusl* for Friday:

It is the most important of them, and its timing is from the rise of the
second dawn of Friday to the declination (of the sun).

B. *Ghusl* for the two Īds:

Īd al-Addhā, and Īd al-Fitr. *Ghusl* is also recommended on the Day of
al-Ghadir, which is the eighteenth day of Dhi al-Hijja, which is the
immortal day when the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
appointed as successor after him the master of his family, the gate of
the city of his knowledge, Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him.

C. *Ghusl* for the Day of Arafa

D. *Ghusl* for the first night of the blessed month of Ramadān

E. *Ghusl* for the nineteenth night of Ramadān, the twenty-first  

  

  

night of it, and the twenty-third night of it, which is the blessed
night when it is thought that the Night of the Divine Decree occurred.

As for the local *ghusls*, they are:

A. *Ghusl* for entering Holy Mecca.

B. *Ghusl* for entering Medina.

C. *Ghusl* for visiting the Holy Shrines.

As for the actual *Ghusls*, they are: g*husl* for *ihrām* (the
ceremonies of umra and hajj) or *tawāf* (the procession round the Kaba),
and others, as the jurists have mentioned.

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, has said: The obligatory (daily) prayers
are: *(salāt)* * al-zuhr* or the noon prayer is four *rakas*; *(salāt)*
* al-asr* or the afternoon prayer is four *rakas; (salāt)* * al-maghrib*
or the evening prayer is three *rakas; (salāt)* * al-ashā* or the night
prayer is four *rakas; (salāt)* * al-fajr* or the dawn prayer is two
*rakas*. So that is seventeen *rakas.*

And the recommended (prayers) are thirty-four *rakas*: eight *rakas*
before noon (prayer), eight *rakas* after it, four *rakas* after the
evening (prayer), two *rakas* in sitting position after the night
(prayer), which numbered as one (prayer), eight *rakas* in the early
morning *(sahr)*; the odd prayer *(al-witr)* [[1]](#_ftn297) is three
*rakas*, and two *rakas* after the odd prayer[[2]](#_ftn298).

This paragraph gives an account of some obligatory prayers of  
 which are the daily prayers which are five religious duties: the  
 morning prayer is two *rakas*; the noon prayer is four *rakas*; the  
 afternoon prayer is four *rakas*; the evening prayer is three *rakas*;
the  
 night prayer is four *rakas*, so they are seventeen *rakas*. It also
gives  
 an account of the daily recommended supererogatory prayers, which  
 are: eight *rakas* is the noon supererogatory prayers before the noon  
 prayer and eight *rakas* after it before the afternoon prayer (for
the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F297) His statement 'the odd prayer *(al-witr)* is three
*rak'as*' means that the first two *rak'as* are by the virtue of the
intention of the even prayer *(al-shaf')* and the other by the virtue of
the intention of the odd prayer.  
 [[2]](#_F298) His statement 'and two *rak'as* after the odd prayer'
means the morning supererogatory prayer.  
  

  

  

afternoon); four *rakas* is the night supererogatory prayer (for the
night); eight *rakas* is the late-night supererogatory prayers *(salāt
al-layl)*; two *rakas* is the even prayer after it; one *raka* is the
odd prayer after it; two *rakas* is the dawn prayer before the morning
prayer, so they are thirty-four *rakas.*

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, has said: And prayer should be
(performed) at the beginning of the timings. The excellence of the
congregational prayer over the individual prayer is one thousand *rakas*
for one *raka*. Do not pray behind the sinner, and do not imitate anyone
except men of authority *(wilāya)*.

These words contain the following:

Firstly, the Imām ordered prayer to be performed at the beginning of its
time, and concerning that repeatedly stated traditions have been
transmitted from the Imāms of guidance, peace be on them.

Secondly, the Imām , peace be on him, presented the excellence of the
congregational prayer, and indicated that one *raka* of it equaled one
thousand *rakas* of the individual prayer.

Thirdly, the Imām, peace be on him, prevented (Muslims) from praying
behind the prayer-leader (Imām) who was sinner or among unjust rulers.

He (the Imām), peace be on him, has said: And do not pray (while
wearing) the skins of the dead (animals) or those of the beasts of prey.

The Imām, peace be on him, presented some conditions of the garment of
prayer of which were that they should not be of the skins of the dead
animals; nor should they be of their parts in which life occupied,
whether they were of an animal whose meat was lawful or unlawful, that
they should not be of the skins of the beasts of prey, that they should
permissible, for it was not permissible to pray in usurped garments,
that they should be pure, for it was not permissible to pray in impure
garments, that they should not be of pure silk (this concern men), and
other conditions which jurists have mentioned.

He, peace be on him, has said: (Prayer) is shortened after (covering)
four *firsikhs*[[1]](#_ftn299) back and forth, twelve miles; and when
you shorten (your prayers), then you should break the fast.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F299) *A farsakh* (league) is about three miles.    
  

  

  

In these words the Imām, peace be on him, has discussed the travelers
prayer in which the four-*raka* prayer is shortened, that is through
omitting the last two *rakas* of them; the person must begin the journey
with the intention of covering the distance; the intended journey must
consist of a single trip of at least 44 kilometers/28 miles or a round
trip with a maximum extent of at least 22 kilometers/14 miles. The
intention of covering the distance is not the only condition; rather the
jurists have mentioned other conditions of which are: the journey should
be lawful, for example, if he/she travels for killing a respected soul
or for stealing or other unlawful things, then he/she should perform
prayer completely; of them is that intention should continue, if he/she
changes his intention before covering the 22 kilometers/14 miles, he/she
should perform his/her prayer completely; of them is that he/she should
not take journey as his/her work such as him who hires animals
*(al-imkāri)*, the trader who circles for his trade, the pilot, and the
like.

Yet the Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned a further condition of
shortening prayer, and it is that man should break his fasting, for it
has been mentioned in the tradition: It is not an act of piety to fast
during journey.

He (Imām al-Ridā), peace be on him, has said: And *qunūt* is in five
prayers: the dawn prayer, the noon prayer, the evening prayer, the night
prayer, and the Friday prayer. Every *qunūt* is before *rukū* and after
the recitation.

As for *qunūt*, it is among the recommended acts of prayer, especially
as it concerns prayers which should be performed loudly in the first two
*rakas* such as the dawn prayer, the evening prayer, Friday prayer, noon
prayer, and afternoon prayer. It is performed one time in each prayer
after the recitation and before *rukū* in the second *raka* except
Friday prayer, which consists of two *qunūts*: one before *rukū* in the
first *raka* and the other is after *rukū* in the second *raka*. As for
Īd prayer, it consists of five *qunūts* in the first *raka* and four
*qunūts* in the second *raka*.

He, peace be on him, has said: As for the prayer for the dead, it
consists of five *takbirs* (i.e. five times Allah Akbar), but it has no
*taslim*, for it has neither *rukū* nor *sujūd*.

  

  

  

The prayer for the deceased Muslims, male or female, is a general
obligation *(wājib kifāi)*. It is performed as follows: At the first
place, the worshipper should say the first *takbir (Allāhu akbar)*, then
recite the *Shahādatayn*, then say the second *takbir (Allāhu akbar)*
and call down blessing upon the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, then say the third *takbir (Allāhu akbar)* and pray for the
faithful, then say the fourth *takbir (Allāhu akbar)* and supplicate for
the deceased, then say the fifth *takbir (Allāhu akbar)* and depart. In
this prayer it is not necessary for the persons who perform it to have
done purity from ritual impurity *(al-hadath)* or filth *(al-khabath)*,
to have worn lawful clothes and covered the pudendum, as it is necessary
for them to do that in the rest of the prayers. Some jurists think that
such a prayer is a mere supplication, not a real prayer.

He, peace be on him, has said: *Bismllahar rahmānr rahim * is the
Fātihat al-Kitāb (i. e. the Opening Chapter of the Book or Surat
al-Fātiha) should be recited in a loud voice.

Among the recommended acts to which the worshipper should conform is
reciting the *basmala* in a loud voice, and that is certain in noon and
afternoon prayers in the Surat al-Hamad and the Sura (which is recited
after it).[[1]](#_ftn300)

He, peace be on him, has said: As for the obligatory *zakāt*, it is five
dirhams per two hundred dirhams, and it is not obligatory on that which
is less than that. As for increase, it is a dirham per forty dirhams,
and it is not obligatory on that which is less than forty (dirhams) and
it is not obligatory until one year has passed. It is not given (to
anyone) except to men of authority *(wilāya)* and knowledge. Half a
dinar per twenty dinars.

*Zakāt* is among the creative regulations in economic, Islamic regime,
for Islam has appointed it in order to put an end to poverty and to
spread welfare among people and in addition to that it gathers men in
the field of love and unify their ranks, for men are disposed by nature
for love those who do good for them. *Zakāt* is the clearest aspect of
charity.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F300) Al-'Urwat al-Withqā.  
  

  

  

This part of the speech of the Imām, peace be on him, shows the
following:

Firstly, the Imām, peace be on him, explains the precepts regarding
*Zakāt* due on the two coins (i. e. gold and silver): *Nisāb* (the
minimum amount of property liable to payment of *Zakāt*) is necessary.
As for the *nisāb* of silver, it is two hundred dirhams and five dirhams
is obligatory on them, and then there is one dirham payable on them when
they increase forty by forty whatever they reach. There is no *zakāt* on
the dirhams less than two hundreds nor on those less than forty dirhams.

As for the *nisāb* of gold, it is twenty dinars, and there is  half a
dinar due on them. When four dinars is an addition to them, then two
Qirats, which equals one-tenth dinar, is obligatory on them. It
*(zakāt)* is due on the addition to the four (dinars), and it is not
obligatory on the dinars less than four. One full year is necessary for
paying the *zakāt* of the two coins (i.e. gold and silver). If one year
has not passed, then there is no *zakāt* obligatory on them.

Secondly, *zakāt* may be spent on eight types of men of whom is the poor
and the needy, provided that they should not oppose the True Religion,
for it is not permissible to give *zakāt* to them.

He, peace be on him, has said: And the one-fifth tax *(khums)* is one
time (taken) from the whole wealth.

As for *khums*, it is one of the financial taxes which Islam has imposed
and which the Shiites of the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace
be on them, have adopted; none of the Islamic sects has adopted it
except them. Allah, the Exalted, has imposed *khums* for the greatest
Prophet and his progeny, may Allah increase them in honor, in place of
*zakāt;* and it is obligatory on seven items of which are: the profits
of earnings, the one years surplus of the responsible *(mukallaf)* and
his own family from among the interest of handicrafts, agriculture, 
trades, wages, and the rest of the various kinds of earnings on which
*khums* is obligatory.

Man spends some of his money on his hajj and visitations, his alms,
tightening the bonds of kin, his gifts, his vows, his religious
expiation, marrying his children, and other than these of which he is  

  

  

indeed and which he spends on lawful items. Accordingly, *khums* is
divided into two equal shares: The first share is to be paid to the Imām
, the blessings of Allah be on him, in the time of his appearance, but
in the time of his occultation it *(khums)* is given to his deputy, the
qualified just jurist, in order that he may spend it on spreading Islam,
the precepts of religion, helping the men of knowledge, and other
affairs through which he gains the pleasure of the Imām, peace be on
him.

As for the second share of *khums*, it is given to the orphans of the
Hāshimites, their needy, and their tramps. In their scientific
treatises, the Muslim jurists have mentioned many researches on *khums.*

He, peace be on him, has said: And *al-ushr* (one-tenth tax) is
obligatory on wheat, barely, dates, raisins, and all the seeds which
come forth from earth, if they are five *wasaqs* (camel-loads).
*Al-ushr* is due on them when they are irrigated by flowing water. The
half of *al-ushr*  is obligatory on them when they are irrigated by
Persian wheels; this concerns the impoverished and the wealthy. A
handful or two handfuls are taken out of the seeds. That is because
*Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent of its
capacity;* nor does He impose upon servant anything more than his
ability. *Wasaq* (a camel load) is sixty *Sās* (a measure of capacity);
*Sā* is six *Ratls* (a weight); *Ratl* is four *Mudds* (measure); *Mudd*
is two and a quarter Iraqi *Ratl*. Imām al-Sādiq, peace be on him, said:
*Mudd* is nine Iraqi *Ratls* or six Medinan *Ratls*.

In this paragraph the Imām, peace be on him, has presented the *zakāt*
imposed on these four corps, which are wheat, barely, dates, and
raisins. *Zakāt* is obligatory on these corps. As for the *zakāt* on the
rest of the corps, it is recommended, so this statement of him, peace be
on him: and all the seeds which come forth from earth is joined to the
four corps and apparently *(zakāt)* is obligatory on them, but there is
a group of authentic traditions which indicate that *zakāt* is not
obligatory (on the seeds except the four corps); there for, (the Imāms
statement) is regarded as recommended, and this is one of the sources of
bringing traditions together, as the jurists say.

  

  

  

*Zakāt* is due on the four corps when they reach the minimum amount
*(nisāb)* which is five *wasaqs*, which is in this time estimated at
eight hundred and forty-eight kilograms.[[1]](#_ftn301) The amount which
should be taken out of the *zakāt* of the corps is *al-ushr* or
one-tenth. That is when the corps are irrigated by flowing water and
rain. Half of *al-ushr*  is obligatory on them when they are irrigated
by Persian wheels, water pumps, water wheels, and the like. *Zakāt* is
obligatory on him who has such an amount of crop whether he is a farmer,
a land owner, rich, or poor.

He, peace be on him, has said: As for *zakāt al-fitr*, it is a religious
duty *(farida)* on the young and the old, free or slave. It is half a
*sā* of wheat; *a sā* of dates and raisins. It should not be given to
anyone except men of authority *(ahl al-wilāya)*, for it is a religious
duty.

As for *zakāt al-fitra*, it is the first financial obligation in Islam,
and it is called the alms of bodies *(zakāt al-Abdān)*. It is obligatory
on him who has gathered the conditions such as *bulūgh* (ritual puberty,
15 years in the case of boys and 9 years in the case of girls), sanity,
non-fainting, and non-poverty. When these conditions are available in
the evening of the night of Īd al-Fitr, then *zakāt* is obligatory on
every Muslims and their breadwinners, whether they are young or old.

A *sā* on behalf of each person should be taken out, and the amount of
*sā* is about three kilograms. The Imāmi jurists think that *zakāt
al-fitra* should be one of foodstuffs famous in that country such as
wheat, barely, dates, raisins, rice, durra, cheese. *Sā* is due on all
these items. They also stipulate that this *zakāt* should be given to
the believing follower of the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*,
peace be on them, and it is not permissible to give it to other than
him.

He, peace be on him, has said: The period of *hayd* (regular menstrual
bleeding) may not be less than three days or more than ten days. A woman
who has *istihāda* (irregular bleeding) should perform the *ghusl* and
pray. A menstruating woman should leave prayer and not perform these
prayers later on as *qadā*; she should leave fasting and compensate for
it (by fasting later on).

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F301) Minhājj al-Sālihin, vol. 1, p. 266.  
  

  

  

This paragraph gives an account as follows:

1. The period of *hayd* (regular menstrual bleeding) may not be less
than three days or more than ten days. As for bleeding which the woman
sees more than ten days or less than three days, it is not regular
menstrual bleeding or *hayd*; rather it is irregular bleeding or
*istihāda*.

2. *Istihāda* is of three kinds: light bleeding, medium bleeding, and
heavy bleeding. As for the precept of light bleeding, it is that *wudū*
is due for each obligatory prayer. As for the precept of medium
bleeding, it is that *wudū* is due for each prayer and the *ghusl*
before the dawn prayer. As for the precept of heavy bleeding, it is that
*wudū* is due for each prayer and the *ghusl*  for the dawn prayer. In
these three kinds of *istihā*da, the woman has to change the cotton
which prevents blood from flowing.

3. As for the precepts regarding the acts of worship of a menstruating
woman, it is obligatory on her to leave prayer and it is not obligatory
on her to compensate for that prayer. As for fasting, it is not
permissible for her to fast, and she should compensate for that fasting.

He, peace be on him, has said: Fasting is observed in the month of
Ramadān when (the moon) is sighted and is broken when it is sighted.

The first and end of the blessed month of Ramadān are established if the
moon is sighted. That is according to these words of him, peace be on
him: Observe fasting when you sight the moon and break (it) when you
sight it.

The first of the month of Ramadān is not established through the words
of astrologers and the like; rather it is established when thirty days
of the month of Shabān has passed. Likewise, the month of Shawwāl is
established when thirty days of the month of Ramadān has passed.

He, peace be on him, has said: And it is not permissible to perform the
*tarāwih* (the long prayers in the nights of Ramadān) in congregation.

  

  

  

As for the *tarāwih*, they were not legislated in the time of the
greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. It was Umar (b.
al-Khattāb) who originated them. They are twenty *rakas* apart from the
odd prayer *(al-witr)*. Their time is after the night prayer. It is
recommended to him who performs the *tarāwih* to sit without praying for
rest, for this reason they have been called the *tarāwih*. In them,
congregation is recommended according to the viewpoints of the four
Islamic schools.[[1]](#_ftn302) The Imām did not permit congregation in
them.

He, peace be on him, has said: And it is recommended to fast three days
in each month; (a day) in each ten days: Thursday in the first ten
(days), Wednesday in the middle ten (days), and Thursday in the last ten
(days).

Fasting (in the month of) Shabān is good and recommended. Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said: Shabān is my month,
and the month of Ramadān is the month of Allah. And if you compensate
for the past month of Ramadān in a separated (manner), it will be
sufficient for you.

The Imām, peace be on him, presented some recommended fasts of which is
fasting for three days in each month. The best method in performing
these fasts as the Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned is the first
Thursday of every month, the first Wednesday of the ten middle days, and
the last Thursday of the last ten days.

It is recommended to fast the whole month of Shabān. The Imām mentioned
that if someone missed fasting the month of Ramadān, he/she had to
choose between continuing the compensatory days and separating them, for
each of these two ways is sufficient for him/her.

He, peace be on him, has said: And pilgrimage to the House (is incumbent
on) him who is able to undertake the journey to it. And the way
*(sabil*) is journey provisions and a she-camel. It is not permissible
for him/her to make the pilgrimage except the greater pilgrimage
*(mtamatian)*. *(Hajj)* *al-ifrād* (which consists of only the major
pilgrimage without the *umra* (lesser) pilgrimage) and *(hajj
al-Qurān)*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F302) Al-Fiqh 'alā al-Madhāhib al-Arba'a, vol. 1, 340-343.  
  

  

  

which the non-Shiites *(āmma)* make are not permissible. And *(hajj)
al-ihrām* apart from *miqāt* (point and time) is not permissible. Allah
said: *And accomplish the pilgrimage and the umra for
Allah*.[[1]](#_ftn303)The castrated sacrifice is not permitted, for it
is defective. As for *al-moujū* (the sacrifice whose testicles have been
bruised), it is permissible.

The hajj is one of the five pillars on which Islam has been built. It is
a political and spiritual act of worship which results in economic,
health, and spiritual profits and interests. It is a political
conference which brings the Muslims together in the Holiest Place, that
they may know each other, discuss the economic and political problems of
their countries and nations, and the like. The holy verse refers to
that. He, the Exalted, said: *And proclaim among men the pilgrimage:
they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel, coming from every
remote path, that they may witness advantages for them and mention the
name of Allah during stated days*.[[2]](#_ftn304)

The Muslims have unanimously agreed on that it is obligatory on each
Muslim to make the pilgrimage at least one time in his span of life. In
this paragraph the Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned a group of
precepts regarding the *hajj*. They are as follows:

Firstly, it is incumbent on a Muslim to make the pilgrimage when he is
able to secure its prerequisites such as journey provisions and a
she-camel. These are the clearest two conditions of ability. Among its
condition that he/she is able to walk with healthy body, and free in
respect of action.

Secondly, the kinds of the *hajj* are three, and they are as follows:

A. *Hajj al-tamattu*:

It is the religious duty of those who live within forty-eight miles of
Mecca in all directions. The characteristics of this hajj are: *Ihrām*
(the ceremonies of umra and hajj) starts from inside Mecca, sacrifice is
obligatory on it, umra therein precedes hajj, umra connects with it to
the extent that they are as one act.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F303) Qur'ān, 2, 196.  
 [[2]](#_F304) Ibid., 22, 27-28.  
  

  

  

B. *Hajj al-Qirān*[[1]](#_ftn305)

As for *Hajj al-Qirān*, it is the religious duty of those who live in
Mecca and around it on the condition that it should not exceed the limit
which has been mentioned for *hajj al-tamatt*. Al-Qārin enters the state
of pilgrimage from the house of his family. Driving a sacrifice in this
hajj is a must and the hump of the sacrifice should be split in the
right side and stained with its blood if it is a camel *(budna)*; and a
sandal, in which he had performed prayers, should be hung around the
neck of the sacrifice if it is other than a camel *(budna)*.

C. *Hajj al-ifrād*, it this the religious duty of those who live near
Mecca just as *Hajj al-Qarān*. The pilgrim enters the state of
pilgrimage from the house of his family if it is nearer to Mecca than
al-Miqāt (point and time);otherwise he/she should enters the states of
pilgrimage from al-Miqāt. Among the characteristics of *Hajj al-Qarān*
and *Hajj al-ifrād* is that *al-umra* therein is after the *hajj*, and
he/she must have the intention of performing them separately.

Thirdly, entering into the state of ritual consecration *(ihrām)* should
start from al-Miqāt. It is not correct for him/her to start it before
al-Miqāt, and it is not permissible for the responsible *(al-mukallaf)*
to exceed al-Miqāt without *ihrām* apart from the frequent and those who
do not intend to enter Mecca during their passing by al-Miqāt.

Fourth, as for the sacrifice *(al-hadi)*, it should be perfect in
creation, so the one-eyed, the one with an ear of which something is
cut, the castrated whose testicles have been pulled out are not
permissible. As for the bruise of the testicles which is called
*al-moujū*, it is not a defect and is permissible.

He, peace be on him, has said: And as for jihad (going to fight in the
cause of Islam) is (performed) along with a just Imām, and he who fights
and is killed for his property and his luggage is a martyr.

As for jihad, it is one of the doors to the Garden; Allah has open it
for His special friends, as Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, says. It is of various kinds, which are as follows:

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F305) *Hajj al-Qirān* is pilgrimage in common, to perform two
affairs at the same time.  
  

  

  

A. Jihad against the polytheists in order to summon them to Islam.

B. Jihad against the unbelievers who attack the Muslims.

C. Jihad against him who intends to kill a respected soul or taking
money or capturing (his) wives. Perhaps this kind is called defense not
jihad.

Jihad is obligatory in the presence of the Imām or his deputy who is
appointed by him for performing jihad. He who is killed in the field of
jihad is a martyr; the precepts regarding martyr is applied to him,
hence he/she buried in his/her own clothes.

As for him who fights for his property, his baggage, his soul and is
killed, then he has the reward of a martyr; he is washed and shrouded.

He, peace be on him, has said: It is not lawful to kill any of the
infidels in the city of precautionary dissimulation *(dār al-taqiya)*
except him who is a killer or a rebel. That is when you are not cautious
of yourself or of taking the properties of men from among the opponents
and the like.

As for the infidels who enter the protection *(dhimma)* of Islam, their
blood is unlawful, and their conditions are safeguarded just as Muslims.
The infidel loses this protection when he kills a respected soul or
rebels against the religious authority in the country.

Likewise, it is forbidden to take the properties of the opponents and
the like, for Islam has safeguarded the properties of men just as it has
safeguarded their blood and honor.

He, peace be on him, has said: And precautionary dissimulation
*(taqiya)* in the city of the precautionary dissimulation *(dār
al-taqiya)* is obligatory. There is no sin upon him who takes an oath as
precautionary dissimulation through which he repels wrongdoing from his
own soul.

As for precautionary dissimulation *(taqiya)*, it was legislated in the
time when the ruling authorities employed all their organs against the
Imāms of the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, and
their Shiites. For example, in the time of the wicked pagan, Muāwiya b.
Abū Sufyān, person preferred being called infidel to  

  

  

being called a follower of Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him. Most Umayyad and Abbāsid kings followed this infidel
plan which was drawn by the son of Hind (Muāwiya). Had it not been for
the wisdom of the pure Imāms and their forcing their Shiites to cling to
precautionary dissimulation *(taqiya)*, their would have been no name of
the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them. As for Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him, he gave a religious opinion that precautionary
dissimulation *(taqiya)* was obligatory, and that there was no sin upon
him who took an oath as precautionary dissimulation *(taqiya)*.

He, peace be on him, has said: And divorce in the Sunna (the Prophets
sayings and practices) is according to what Allah, the Great and
Almighty, has mentioned, and the Sunna of His Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family. There is no divorce without Sunna; every divorce
which opposes the Book is not divorce; every marriage which opposes the
Sunna is not marriage.

Do not marry more than four women. If you divorce woman three times
according to the Sunna, it is not lawful for you to marry her unless she
marries a husband other than you. The Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, said: Beware of the women who are divorced three times, for
they shall marry husbands.

Divorce means breaking the relationship of marriage and it is among the
things which Allah, the Exalted, detests. That is because it leads to
the collapse of social cells, spread hatred and enmity among men. This
paragraph contains some precepts regarding divorce and marriage, of
which are the following:

Firstly, divorce is regarded as correct when the following conditions
are available:

A. The husband must be sane and adult, and should not be forced by
anyone to divorce his wife, for the divorce of the boy, the insane, and
the drunken who has no intention is invalid.

B. The marriage should be permanent, for the there is no divorce in the
fixed-term marriage *(mutta)*.

C. The wife should be free from *hayd *  (regular menstrual bleeding)
and * nifās* (childbirth bleeding) if the husband had already married
her.

  

  

  

D. The formula of divorce, it is that the husband should say: You are
divorced or she is divorced.

E. Two just witnesses should hear the formula of divorce.

These are some conditions which should be available in correct divorce.
As for divorce other than this such as the divorce of the joker, the
inattentive, and the heedless is invalid according to the viewpoints of
the Imāmi Shiites, whilst some Muslim schools regard it as
correct.[[1]](#_ftn306) Divorce is also invalid unless it occurs by the
virtue of these words: You are divorced or she is divorced. Some Muslim
schools regard divorce as permissible when it occurs by the virtue of
these words such as *al-firāq* (separation) *al-Sarāh* (dismissal), and
the like.

Secondly, the marriage which opposes the Sunna is invalid such as the
marriage of the woman who is forced or she who is during the *idda*
(period of waiting after the dissolution of a marriage) or she was among
the unlawful because of kinship or relationship by marriage; marrying
such women is invalid.

Thirdly, the man has no right to marry more than four women by the
virtue of permanent contract.

Fourth, when the wife is divorced three times, it is not lawful for her
husband to remarry her until she marries a husband other than him.

He (Imām al-Ridā), peace be on him, has said: And calling down blessing
upon the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, is in all
situations such as the winds, sneezing, and the like.

Showing love for the friends of Allah and for their friends, hating His
enemies, renouncing them and their leaders (Imāms) (are part of piety).

It is recommended to call blessing down upon the greatest Messenger, the
Savor of mankind and its guide to happiness and good in this world and
the next. How great his achievements toward mankind are! So it is his
own right against mankind to call down blessing upon him in all
situations.

One of Islamic manners is to show love toward the friends of Allah and
their friends, to hate the enemies of Allah and to renounce  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F306) Fiqh al-Sunna.  
  

  

  

them and their leaders (Imāms), for that is one of the elements of
reverential fear and Islamic message.

He, peace be on him, has said: And honoring the parents. If they are
polytheists, then do not obey them[[1]](#_ftn307) and keep company with
them in this world kindly, for Allah says: *Be grateful to Me and to
both your parents; to Me is the eventual coming. And if they contend
with you that you should associate with me what you have no knowledge
of, do not obey them*.[[2]](#_ftn308) The Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, said: They (parents) do not fast for them (children);
nor do they pray (for them), but they order them to disobey Allah, so
they obey them.

Then he has said: I (i.e. Imām al-Ridā) heard Allahs Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, say: He who obeys creature in other than
obeying Allah disbelieves and adopts a god other than Allah.

Among marvelous Islamic legislation is honoring the parents and showing
kindness toward them, making them occupy the second rank after the
Almighty Creator in showing obedience and submission to their orders.
That is as reward for their arduous efforts during bringing up their
children, especially as it concerns mother. Were it not for her care,
her affection, her mercy, her child would not live. It is she who feeds
him and takes care of bringing him up. Therefore, how great her right
is!

Showing obedience to the parents in other than disobeying Allah is
obligatory. As for disobeying (Him) by the virtue of showing obedience
to them is not obligatory.

He, peace be on him, has said: And the conditional slaughter of the
embryo is similar to that of its mother.

The Imām, peace be on him, has presented a precept regarding the embryo
from among the animals whose flesh can be eaten. When  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F307) In al-'Uyūn it has been mentioned: "And honoring the
parents is obligatory. If they are polytheists, then their is no
obedience to them nor to other than them in disobeying the Creator, for
there is no obedience to creature in disobeying Allah."  
 [[2]](#_F308) Qur'ān, 31, 14-15.  
  

  

  

its mother is slaughtered and it dies in its uterus, its flesh is
lawful. When it comes out alive and is slaughtered, its flesh is lawful;
otherwise, it is unlawful.

He, peace be on him, has said: And the sins of the prophets are small
and are forgiven for them by the virtue of Prophethood.

More likely, this sentence is forged and has been put in the speech of
the Imām, peace be on him, for the prophets were infallible and no
disobedience had issued from them. Moreover, the Imām himself has
established many proofs of that in some of his debates.

He, peace be on him, has said: And the religious duties are according to
Allahs command; there is no reduction in them; and none inherits along
with the parents and the child except the husband and the wife; the
possessor of the share is more entitled than him who has no share; and
*al-asaba* (males who belong to the deceased) do not belong to the
religion of Allah.

In this paragraph the Imām, peace be on him, has presented some precepts
regarding inheritances, and they are as follows:

Firstly, there is no reduction in the religious duties and inheritances
which Allah has imposed (on men). This can be explained as follows: If
the inheritors are numerous and their shares are more than the religious
share for example, if the deceased lefts behind him a wife, two parents,
and two daughters then the shares in this religious duty is one-fourth,
two one-sixths, and two one-thirds. Accordingly, the Sunnis believe in
*al-awl* (reduction); which means that reduction must include each of
the possessors of the shares according to the ratio of his share. As for
the Shiites, they say that reduction includes some inheritors, not all
of them, and they have given proofs of that in the researches on
inheritance.

Secondly, the first degree in inheritances is of two types: one of them
is the parents apart from the grandfathers and grandmothers; the other
is the children, evenif they descend, males and females. The wife
inherits along with these two types, for she inherits one-fourth when
there is no child, and the one-eighth when there is a child. As for the
husband, he inherits the one-fourth when there is a child, and the half
when there is no child.

  

  

  

Thirdly, there is no *asaba* in inheritances according to the viewpoints
of the Shiites; other than them from among the followers of the Islamic
sects also adopt this view, and example of that, when the deceased
leaves behind him one daughter, then she will have the half of what he
has left behind him according to the religious duty, and she will
inherit the second half by the virtue of distribution. The view of those
other than the Shiites is that the second half of property is given to
*al-asaba* or the males who belong to thedeceased without means or the
means of the male, and perhaps the uncles of the female, according to
their details.[[1]](#_ftn309)

He, peace be on him, has said: And *al-aqiqa* on behalf of the child,
male and female, is on the seventh day; its (the babys) hair is shaved
on the seventh day; it is given a name on the seventh day; gold or
silver equals to the weight of its hair is given as alms on the seventh
day.

The Imām, peace be on him, has presented some religious recommended acts
which must be performed on behalf of the new-born baby, and they are as
follows:

A. *Al-qiqa* (sacrifice):

It is recommended that a ram should be sacrificed on the seventh day if
the child is a male, and that a ewe should be sacrificed if the child is
female. This was legislated by the greatest Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family, when his grandson, his sweet basil, the master of
the youths of the Garden, Imām al-Hasan, peace be on him, was born.
Likewise, this was done by him when his second grandson the master of
the youth of the Garden, Imām al-Husayn, peace be on him, was born.

B. Shaving the hair of the child:

It is recommended that the hair of the child to be shaved on the seventh
day of its birth, and that gold or silver equals to its weight to be
given as alms to the needy. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, performed that on behalf of his two grandsons and his two sweet
basil, peace be on them.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F309) Minhājj al-Sālihin, vol. 2, p. 279.  
  

  

  

C. Giving a name to the child:

It is strongly recommended that a name should be given to the child on
the seventh day, and that the name should be  blessed like those of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and of his testamentary
trustees, the great Imāms.

He, peace be on him, has said: And the acts of the creatures were
created as the creation of an ordainment, not the creation of structure.

The Imām, peace be on him, has referred to the acts of the creatures,
for Allah, the Exalted, had knowledge of them, and He did not create
them as the creation of structure; otherwise they will be ascribed to
Him.

He, peace be on him, has said: Do not believe in compulsion and
authorization. These words give an account of the beliefs of the Shiites
who have disproved compulsion and authorization and clung to the
intermediate position. They have refuted compulsion and authorization.
Their Islamic books are full of proofs of that. Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him, has said: Allah, the Great and Almighty, does not punish the
innocent because of the crime of the criminal, and He does not torment
the children  because of the sins of the parents, for He said: *And no
bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another*.[[1]](#_ftn310)*And
that man shall have nothing but what he strives for*.[[2]](#_ftn311)
*And Allah forgives and does not wrong*.

Divine Justice requires that every person is responsible for his own
sins, and none other than him is responsible for them, hence Allah does
not punish the innocent out of the sins of the sinner. However, the
enemies of Allah decided the opposite of that, for example, Ziyād b.
Abih, the sinful criminal, has said: I punish the innocent due to the
guilty, and I punish because of doubt and accusation. Islam renounces
this reckless policy because it belongs to its enemies and opponents.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F310) Qur'ān, 6, 165.  
 [[2]](#_F311) Ibid., 53, 40.  
  

  

  

Another example of Allahs justice is that He does not torture the
children because of their parents sins, for He says: And no bearer of
burden shall bear the burden of another. And that man shall have nothing
but what he strives for. This is the utmost justice.

He (Imām al-Ridā), peace be on him, has said: Allah does not impose upon
the creatures the obedience to him whom He knows that he will wrong (the
creatures) and lead them astray; nor does He chooses (such a person) for
(delivering) His message; nor does He choose from among His creatures
him whom He knows that he will disbelieve (in Him) and serve Satan apart
from Him.

Surely Allah, the Most High, seeks pure justice for His creatures and
summons them to rebel against wrongdoers and dictatorial rulers. Besides
He, the Exalted, chooses for delivering His message and putting right
His creatures those who have perfection and excellence of which is that
they do not disbelieve in Allah; nor do they worship the stoned Satan.

He, peace be on him, has said: And Islam is (something) other than
faith; every believer is a Muslim, but not every Muslim is a believer.
The believer does not steal; nor does he drink wine; nor does he kill
the soul which Allah has forbidden without any right. As for *ashāb
al-Hudūd*[***[1]***](#_ftn312)*,* they are neither believers nor
unbelievers.[[2]](#_ftn313) Allah will not make a believer enter the
Fire, for He had promised him the Garden and immortality therein. He for
whom the Fire is obligatory because of hypocrisy, transgression, or a
big sin will not resurrected with the believers; nor will he be one of
them, and the Hell-Fire will encompass none except the unbelievers. He
who enters the Fire because of clinging to sin, associating something
with (Allah), disbelieving in Him, showing hypocrisy, and committing a
big sin is a sinner. And intercession is permissible for those who seek
it.

Islam is wider in circle and more comprehensive in subject than belief.
He who professes the two testimonies (i.e. I witness that there  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F312) *Ashāb al-Hudūd* are those who are punished for committing
a certain crime.  
 [[2]](#_F313) This means that they are Muslims, but they are neither
believers nor unbelievers, in this manner it has been mentioned the book
al-'Uyūn.  
  

  

  

is no god but Allah and that Mohammed is His Messenger) is a Muslim, his
blood is spared, his property and his honor are safeguarded; whether he
is a believer or a sinner. As for belief, it is a talent which prevents
man from committing sins and crimes, and prevents him from opposing
Allah, the Most High. Allah, the Exalted, has prepared for believers 
provisions and honorable position in the Abode of Immortality. He will
make them dwell wherever He desires of the Garden. As for the position
of him who commits great sins, it will be in the Hellfire, which is an
evil fate.

He, peace be on him, has said: And *al-amr bi al-marūf* (directing
others towards good) and *nay an al-munkar* (directing others away from
evil) is obligatory by the virtue of the tongue.

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned *al-amr bi al-marūf* and
*al-nay an al-munkar* which are two pillars of Islam, and lead to
establishing noble society dominated by human customs. It is incumbent
upon every Muslim to carry out his duty toward his religion and his
country, so he/she should order others to do good and forbid them from
doing evil. In their treatises the jurists have mentioned the
pre-conditions of this religious duty.

He, peace be on him, has said: And belief is performing the religious
duties and refraining from the unlawful; and belief is knowledge with
the heart, profession by the means of the tongue, and action through the
limbs.

The Imām, peace be on him, has defined belief as performing the
religious duties imposed by Allah and refraining from the things made
unlawful by Him. He has also said that belief penetrates the depths of
the heart and inner selves.

He, peace be on him, has said: And *al-takkbir* (i.e. exclaiming Allah
is Great!) in (Īd) al-Addhā is after ten prayers starting from the noon
prayer on the Day of Immolation *(al-Nahr)*, and in (Īd) al-Fitr there
are five prayers after the evening prayers on the night of (Īd) al-Fitr.

It is strongly recommended that one should exclaim *Allahuakbar* in (Īd)
al-Addhā after ten prayers, also it is recommended that one should
exclaim *Allahuakbar* on the night of   

  

  

(Īd) al-Fitr after the evening prayer and after four prayers. It is also
recommended that one should recite the supplications transmitted from
the Imāms of guidance, peace be on them.

He, peace be on him, has said: And the woman in childbed *(nifsā)* sits
(i.e. refrain from praying) for twenty days, not more than it. If she
becomes pure before that, she performs the prayers; otherwise, to twenty
days, and then she performs *ghusl*, say the prayers, and performs the
acts of the woman in the state of *istihāda*.

More likely, this paragraph is forged; it is not part of the speech of
the Imām, peace be on him, for the Imāmi jurists, who give religious
opinions according to the traditions transmitted from the Imāms of the
*ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them,   have unanimously agreed that there is
no limit to *nifās* light bleeding and the limit to *nifās* heavy
bleeding is ten days from the time of childbirth. And if she sees blood
after the ten days, she should not regard it as *nifās* bleeding, rather
as *istihāda* bleeding. The precepts for the woman in the state of
*nifās* is like those for woman in the state of *hayd*; it is forbidden
for her what is forbidden for the menstruating woman. In this connection
there are important researches mentioned by the jurists.

He, peace be on him, has said: He/she should believe in the chastisement
in grave, Munkar, Nakir, Resurrection after death, reckoning, the
Balance, and the Straight Path.

It is incumbent on the Muslim to believe in the chastisement in grave if
he has committed sins and crimes. It is also obligatory on him/her to
believe that Munkar and Nakir will question him, that he will be
resurrected after death, that he will be reckoned because of his deeds,
and that his deeds will be placed in the Balance. So he whose good deeds
are heavier than his evil deeds enters the Garden; other wise he enters
the Fire and punished according to his deeds, *and your Lord wrongs
none*. Moreover he/she should believe that they will pass through the
Straight Path. If their deeds are good, they will simply pass through
it; otherwise, they will fall into the Fire.

He, peace be on him, has said: And (he/she should) renounce the Imāms of
error and their followers; they should support Allahs friends.

  

  

  

Surely renouncing the Imāms of error and their followers, and supporting
Allahs friends are of the important elements in Islamic religion, which
condemns oppression, resists tyranny, and spreads justice among men.

He, peace be on him, has said: Little and plentiful wine is forbidden.
Every intoxicant is wine. Every thing whose muchness brings about
intoxication, its littleness is unlawful. The compelled should not drink
wine, for it kills him.

Wine is one of the blights which destroy health, for it leads to
dangerous diseases as well as it corrupts ethics and demolishes noble
ideals of which man boasts. Forbidding wine is among the most important
Islamic legislation aiming at raising the level of man. As for the Imām,
peace be on him, he has warned mankind against drinking wine whether
little or plentiful, and that is because of the dangerous harms which
result from it.

He, peace be on him, has said: Beasts and birds with claws are
forbidden; the spleen is forbidden, for it is blood; sheatfish, floating
(dead) fish, eel, pipefish, scaleless fish, and gizzardless birds are
forbidden.

Islam has forbidden meat of some animals, and that is because such meat
has some corrupt things which bring about harms to general health. The
Imām has mentioned some of these animals as follows:

1. Beasts of prey: It is forbidden to eat the flesh of beasts of prey,
whether they are wild such as lions, wolves, and tigers or birds such as
falcons, Egyptian vultures, and the like.

2. The spleen: It is forbidden to eat the spleen, for it is blood, as
the Imām, peace be on him, says. Likewise, it is forbidden to eat the
bladder of sacrifice, the placenta, the spinal cord, the glands, the
vertebra of brain, and the like which the jurists have mentioned, for
they bring about heavy harms.

3. Sheatfish: It is forbidden to eat sheatfish, which are water animals
and which dogs do not eat. Likewise, it is forbidden to eat fish
floating (dead) on water, eel, pipefish, and all scaleless fish.

4. Gizzardless birds: It is forbidden to eat the birds which have
neither gizzard nor craw nor spurs on their feet. It is lawful to eat
the birds whose flapping is more than their gliding.

  

  

  

He, peace be on him, has said: It permissible to eat the eggs whose tips
are different; it is forbidden to eat the eggs whose tips are the same.

As for eggs, they are forbidden and lawful according to the birds which
lay them. The Imām, peace be on him, has given a general rule for
recognizing lawful and unlawful eggs: If the two tips of the egg are
equal, then it is forbidden to eat it; if they are different, then it is
permissible to eat it.

He, peace be on him, has said: And (he/she should) refrain from great
sins which are: killing the soul which Allah has forbidden, drinking
wine, disobedience to parents, escaping from marching for war,
swallowing the property of the orphans unjustly, eating what dies of
itself and blood and flesh of swine and that over which any other (name)
than (that of) Allah has been invoked without any necessity for it,
swallowing down usury, ill-gotten property after evidence, game of
hazard, diminishing measure and weight, despairing of Allahs mercy,
feeling secure from Allahs plan, losing hope of Allahs mercy, helping
the oppressive and relying on them, binding oath, withholding the rights
without any pinch of poverty, vainglory, unbelief, extravagance,
wastefulness, treason, concealing testimony, amusing things which turn
(men) away from remembering Allah such as singing and playing on the
strings, and persistence on minor sins. These are the fundamental
doctrines of religion. Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the worlds;
may Allah bless His Prophet and his family and greet them with a
greeting.[[1]](#_ftn314)

With this (paragraph) we will end this excellent letter, which contains
some theological researches and basic, juristic matters.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F314) Tuhaf al-'Uqūl, pp. 415-423.  
  

