Chapter One
===========

  

  

ON INVOCATION OF ALLAH
----------------------

Having mentioned a preface concerning the necessity of mentioning the
chain of the authorities, Shaykh Abd al-Wāsi said: I have narrated this
Sahifa through the authentic chain of authorities connected with Imām
al-Qāsim b. Mohammed, peace be on him, on the authority of his Shaykh
al-Sayyid Amir al-Din b. Abd Allah, on the authority of al-Sayyid Ahmed
b. Abd Allah al-Wazir, on the authority of  Imām al-Mutahhar b. Mohammed
b. Sulaymān, on the authority of Imām al-Mahdi Ahmed b. Yahyā, on the
authority of Sulaymān b. Ibrāhim b. Umar al-Alawi, on the authority of
his father Ibrāhim, on the authority of  Ridā al-Din Ibrāhim b. Mohammed
al-Tabari, on the authority of  Imām Najm al-Din al-Tabrizi, on the
authority of al-Hāfiz Ibn Asākir, on the authority of Zāhir al-Sinjāni,
on the authority of al-Hāfiz al-Bayhaqi:

1. On the authority of Abū al-Qāsim al-Mufassir, on the authority of 
Ibrāhim b. Juda, on the authority of Abū al-Qāsim Abd Allah b. Ahmed b.
Āmir al-Tāi (in Basrah), who said: [Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on
him, related to me in the year 194 A. H. He said: My father Mūsā b.
Jafar related to me. He said: My father Jafar b. Mohammed related to me.
He said: My father Mohammed b. Ali related to me. He said: My father Ali
b. al-Husayn related to me. He  

  

  

said: My father al-Husayn b. Ali related to me. He said: My father Ali
b. Abū Tālib, the peace of Allah be on them all, amen to the Day of
Resurrection, related to me. He said: Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family, said: Allah, the Most High, said:] *There is no god
but Allah* is My fort, so he who enters My fort is safe from My
chastisement.[[1]](#_ftn343)

Surely these brilliant words are the secret of existence, lamp of the
Allah-fearing, and guide of the knowledgeable. He who says them out of
knowledge and belief enters the fort of Allah, which whoever enters wins
the good pleasure of Allah, the Exalted, and is safe from His
chastisement.

2. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He upon whom Allah
bestows a favor should praise Allah for it; he who finds slow daily
bread should ask Allahs forgiveness; and he whom a certain matter
saddens should say: There is neither might nor strength save in Allah,
the Exalted, the Almighty.

Surely the invocation of Allah and devotion to Him deserve more of His
blessings and favors; he who says these words during these situations,
Allahs mercy includes him, and he attains general good.

3. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Belief is
profession with the tongue, knowledge through the heart, and action by
the limbs.

Belief is a flame of light which lightens the heart, flows as life does
in the souls of the Allah-fearing and the knowledgeable, dominates their
sentiments and feelings.

4. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said: Allah says:] If a
creature takes refuge in a creature other than Me, I will cut him off
from the means of the heavens and the earth, so if he asks Me,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F343) In the narration of al-Tabrisi: "In its condition and its
conditions, and I am among its conditions." We will talk about this holy
tradition within this book.  
  

  

  

I will not give him; and if he supplicates Me, I will not answer him;
and if a creature seeks refuge in Me other than My creatures, I will
guarantee the heaven and the earth in respect of his daily bread; so if
he asks Me, I will give him; and if he supplicates Me, I will respond to
him; and if he asks Me for forgiveness, I will forgive him.

Failing and unsuccessful is he who hopes for those other than Allah, the
Exalted, at whose hand is the course of events. A poet said:

May the hand which asks those other than You become

poor; may the land which sees promising signs in other than the clouds
of Your munificence become barren!

So glory is forbidden except from You; money is

forbidden except from You!

If the servant devotes himself to Allah and seeks refuge in Him, he will
win good and gain bless in this world and the next.

5. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Ali b. al-Husayn, peace
be on him, related to me that a Jew asked Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on
him, saying:] Tell me about that which does not belong to Allah, that
which is not with Allah, and that which Allah does not know?

Ali, peace be on him, replied: As for that which Allah does not know, it
is your, people of Jews, statement that Uzayr is the son of Allah, and
Allah does not know that He has a son; as for that which is not with
Allah, it is that Allah has no oppression toward the servants; as for
that which does not belong to Allah, it is that Allah has no partner.

The Jew said: I witness that there is no god except Allah, and that
Mohammed is the Messenger of Allah.

Surely, Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, is the
gate of the city of knowledge of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family. He is the leading figure of this community, the pioneer of
its intellectual and scientific renaissance. It is certain that if the
cushion had been folded for him and he had undertaken the leadership of
the reign after the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, the
Jews, the Christians, and the Magians would have adopted Islam.

  

  

  

6. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The best deeds
with Allah are: belief without doubt, invasion without stealing from war
booty before it is distributed *(ghulūl),* and proper *hajj*. The first
to enter the Garden will be a martyr; a slave who worships his Lord well
and is sincere to his master; and a chaste man who abstains from what is
forbidden, has a family, and strives to secure the daily bread of his
own family. The first to enter the Fire will be a domineering Imām
(leader) who does not treat (his subjects) with justice; a possessor of
wealth of property who does not pay the right against it; and a
boastful, poor (person).

This tradition includes the best actions in reward and repayment with
Allah, the Most High;  the actions are: belief in Allah without any
doubt, invasion without stealing from war booty before it is distributed
*(ghulūl)*; for it is spent on spreading Allahs words on earth; and
making a pilgrimage to the Sacred House of Allah.

This tradition also gives an account of the best men in the view of
Allah, the Exalted, and the most honorable before Him, and they are: the
martyrs in the path of Allah, not in the path of booty or worldly
pleasures; the slave who believes in his Lord and is sincere to his
master; and the chaste man who strives to secure the daily bread of his
family.

Moreover the tradition gives an account of the most hateful person in
the view of Allah and who deserves the Hellfire. The first to enter it
are: the disobedient criminal ruler who wrongs the servants of Allah and
does not treat them with fairness and justice; the possessor of a
plentiful wealth who is miserly toward the rights of Allah (against him)
and does not help the poor; the boastful, poor (person) who boasts of
his own person and his family, shows arrogance and vainglory toward the
creatures of Allah.

7. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Allahs Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who makes my community learn
by heart forty traditions and it makes use of them, Allah will raise him
from the dead a jurist and scholar on the Day of the Resurrection.

Surely, the Prophetic traditions are a flame of light which guides the
perplexed and the errant and brighten the road (to them), for they are
some springs of wisdom. So he who circulates them among the Muslims
surely takes part in building Islamic thought; and Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, had promised him that Allah would raise
him from the dead a jurist and scholar on the Day of Resurrection.

  

  

  

8. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who gives a
religious opinion to men without knowledge, the heavens and the earth
curse him.

The ugliest and most sinful crime is giving a religious opinion to men
without knowledge, for such a religious opinion misleads men, spreads
lying among them, and ascribes falsehood to Allah.

9. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Reliance (on
Allah) and monotheism are the half of religion; make livelihood come
down from Allah through alms.

Surely, reliance on Allah and professing His Oneness are part of core of
religion and are basic elements of its entity. The Imām has urged (the
Muslims) to give alms, for it aids the poor and the deprived. Allah has
promised that He will bestow upon those who give alms.

10. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Verily Mūsā b.
Umrān asked his Lord, saying: O Lord, are You far, so I will call out to
You? Or are You near, so I will whisper to You? So Allah revealed to
him: *O Mūsā, I am the friend of him who invoke Me!*

11. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The supplication of
the children of my community is accepted unless they commit sins.

  

  

  

Certainly, the supplication of the children of the faithful is accepted,
for Allah does not refuse a supplication of theirs on the condition that
they should not commit crimes and sins.

12. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who passes by
cemeteries and recites (the sura) *Qul Huwa Allah Ahad* eleven times and
then he gives his reward to the dead, a reward equal to the number of
the dead will be given to him.

Surely, Allah doubles the reward of him who recites Surat al-Tawhid for
the dead Muslims, and He abundantly rewards him.

13. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Supplication is
the weapon of a believer, pillar of religion, and light of the heavens
and the earth. So cling to supplication and be sincere in intention.

This tradition gives an account of the importance of supplication, for
it is the weapon of a believer, pillar of religion, and light of the
heavens and earth. So supplication has occupied the highest position
with Allah, the Exalted.

14. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] If one of you wants
a need, then let him seek it early in the morning on Thursday, and let
him recites when he goes out of his house the last (verse) of *Āl Umrān,
Āyat al-Kursi, Innā Anzalnāhū fi Laylat al-Qadr,* and *Umm al-Kitāb*
(Surat al-Fātiha), for in them is the accomplishment of the needs of
this world and the next.

* *This tradition contains the program of accomplishing needs, for he
(the Prophet) has appointed the time  when the Suras of Allahs dear Book
should be recited.

15. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Six (things) are
of manhood: Three of them (is performed) in cities and towns and three
of them (is performed) on journey. As for those (performed) in cities
and towns are: reciting the Qurān, building mosques, and making friends
in Allah; and as for those (performed) on journey are: giving food
generously, good manners, and joking (in things) other than acts of
disobedience to Allah.

These six qualities give an account of mans honor, manhood, and good
inner self.

  

  

  

16. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said three times:] O Allah,
have mercy on my successors!

He was asked: Who are your successors, Allahs Apostle?

He replied: Those who will come after me, narrate my traditions and my
Sunna (sayings and practices), and teach them to men after me.

Surely, the successors of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and the closest of men to him are those who narrate his
traditions, circulate them among men, teach men the principle features
of religion and the precepts of Islam.

17. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Verily, this
knowledge is the treasures of Allah and its keys are question, so
question, may Allah have mercy on you, for four (persons) are rewarded
because of it: the questioner, the teacher, the listener, and the
answerer.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, urges the ignorant to
question about the affairs of their religious and worldly affairs which
they do not know, for, in this manner, knowledge is spread and
circulated.

18. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who recites
*Idhā Zulzult al-Ardū*  four times is like him who has recited the whole
Qurān.

Surely, reciting this Holy Verse four times leads to this great result,
which is reciting the whole Qurān.

19. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [My father Mohammed b.
Ali, peace be on them,  related to me. He said: He, peace be on him,
said:] If you enter five (things), you will not able to (perform) the
like of them: The servant should fear (nothing) except his sins, hope
for (none) except his Lord. The ignorant, when asked about something he
does not know, should not be ashamed of saying that Allah and His
Messenger know. He who does not know should not be ashamed of learning.
Steadfastness is of the same rank with  

  

  

faith as (that of) the head with the body. He who has no patience has no
faith.

Wisdom has been embodied in these matters through which man, if he
follows them, is exalted and a model of excellence and politeness.

20. Through his chain of authorities, he said:[ Al-Husayn b. Ali, peace
be on them, related to me. He said:] A tablet was found under a wall of
one of the cities *(al-Madāin)*, and therein was written: I am Allah;
there is no god save Me and Mohammed is My Prophet. I wonder at him who
is sure of death, how is he happy? I wonder at him who is certain of
(Allahs) determination, how is he sad? I wonder at him who has tried the
world, how does he feel secure wherein? And I wonder at him who is sure
of reckoning, how does he commit sins?

This tablet contains a great warning. If man carefully considers the
warning, he will turn away from every sin and do all that which bring
him near to Allah.

21. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] An angel came to
me and said: O Mohammed, verily your Lord recite (His) greetings to you
and says to you: If you want, I will make the valley of Mecca gold. He
said: So he (the Prophet) looked toward the sky and said: O Lord, make
me satisfied on one day, so I will praise you; make me hungry on
another, so I will ask you!

Indeed, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, renounced the
world, turned away from its pleasures, and devoted himself to Allah, the
most High. This is one of his special qualities which distinguished him
from the rest of the prophets.

### CHAPTER TWO

### ON THE *ADHĀN*

22. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [The Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, said:] When Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family, began learning the *adhān* (call to prayer), Gabriel
brought him the Burāq, but it was difficult for him (to  

  

  

ride it). Then he brought him a riding animal called Burāqa and it was
difficult for him (to ride it), so Gabriel said to it: Be calm, for none
more honorable than him in Allahs view has ever ridden you! It became
calm, and Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said: I
rode it until I reached the veil which was before the Merciful (Allah),
and then an angel came out from behind the veil and said: *Allahu
akbar!* *Allahu akbar!* (Allah is greater.) He (Allahs Messenger) said:
So I asked: O Gabriel, who is that angel? He replied: By Allah who has
honored you with the Prophethood, I have never seen that angel before
this hour of mine. He said: *Allahu akbar!* *Allahu akbar!* (Allah is
greater.) So he was called out from behind the veil: My servant is
truthful; I am greater; I am greater! Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family, said: The angel said: *Ashhadu anna Lā ilāha illa
llāh*, *Ashhadu anna Lā ilāha illa llāh* (I bear witness that there is
no god but Allah.) So he was called out from behind the veil: My servant
is truthful. I am Allah; there is no god but I. Allahs Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, said (that), so the angel said: *Ashhadu
anna Mohammedar rasūl allah*, *Ashhadu anna Mohammedar rasūl allah* (I
bear witness that Mohammed is the Messenger of Allah.) So he was called
out from behind the veil: My servant is truthful; I have sent Mohammed
as a Messenger. Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family,
said: The angel said: *Hayya allas-salāh*, *Hayya allas-salāh* (Make
haste to the prayer.) So he was called out from behind the veil: My
servant is truthful and summons (men) to worship Me. Allahs Messenger,
may Allah bless him and his family, said: The angel said: *Hayya allal
falāh*, *hayya allal falāh* (Make haste to salvation). So he was called
out from behind the veil: My servant is truthful and summons (men) to
worship Me. And surely successful is he who perseveres in
it.[[1]](#_ftn344) Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family,
said: Allah has completed for me the honor over the first and the last.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F344) The tradition has been mentioned in the book *Tārikh
al-Khamis* in this formula along with and addition *Hayya 'ala
khayri'l-'amal* (Make haste to the best of actions). The Shi'ite
references of hadith and jurisprudence have also mentioned it.  
  

  

  

The Shiites have unanimously agreed that it was the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, who legislated the *adhān* in this manner
which have been mentioned in this tradition or something similar to it;
whilst the Sunnis have mentioned that when the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, came to Medina, it was difficult for the people to
know the timings of his prayers. So they discussed specifying a certain
signal in order to know the timing of the payer of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, lest they should miss the congregational
prayers. Hence some suggested a bell, but the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, said: The bell belongs to the Christians. Others
suggested a trumpet, but he said: It belongs to the Jews. Others
suggested a tambourine, but he said: It belongs to the Romans. Others
suggested burning fire, but he said: It belongs to the Magus. Others
suggested setting up a banner, but that did not appeal to him, may Allah
bless him and his family. So, he may Allah bless him and his family,
stood up concerned; hence Abd Allah b. Zayd spent the night concerned
because of the concern of Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his
family, and he saw in his sleep an angel who taught him the *adhān* and
the *iqāma* (the declaration of standing for prayer), so he told the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, about that. The dream
coincided with the revelation. So the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, ordered it *(adhān)* to be performed.[[1]](#_ftn345) 

This is very impossible, for the *adhān* and the *iqāma* are of the
pre-conditions of prayer; they are like the rest of the pre-conditions
such as *tahāra* (purity), *istiqbāl al-qibla* (facing the *qibla*), and
*ibāhat al-makān* (the place should be permissible). The Revelation came
down (to the Prophet) carrying all these pre-conditions and explanations
of prayer. Then why did Abd Allah b. Zayd see the angle and the rest of
Companions (of the Prophet), who were greater than him in importance,
did not see him?

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F345) Al-Fiqh 'alā al-Madhāhib al-Arba'a, vol. 1, p. 311.  
  

  

  

### CHAPTER THREE

### ON URGING TO PERFORMING THE FIVE PRAYERS AND THE QUALITY OF THE PRAYER FOR THE DEAD

23. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Allahs Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, said:] Satan is still afraid of Adams
son as long as he keeps his prayers. However, if he neglects them, he
(Satan) dares against him and throws him into great sins.

Allah, the Most High, honored and dignified man through praying and
standing before Him during the five prayers. However, the stoned Satan
plays with man and does his best to deprive him of this excellence and
honorable rank.

24. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Allahs Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who performs a religious duty
*(farida)*, Allah responds to his supplication .

Surely, he who performs a religious duty, whether prayer or fasting or
hajj or others, Allah rewards him and accepts his supplication.

25. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] My community is
still in good as long as they love each other, return things deposited
(with them), refrain from the unlawful, entertain the guest, perform the
prayer, and pay *zakāt* (alms). However, if they do not do that, they
will be afflicted by drought.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, has summoned his
community to keep these noble qualities, and he promised that they would
be in good as long as they performed them, but if they neglected them,
Allah would afflict them with a dreadful tribulation.

26. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] If man is not able
to perform prayer in standing position, he can pray in  

  

  

sitting position. If he cannot pray in sitting position, he can pray
laying down on his back and his feet facing the *qibla*, and he makes a
sign.

The prayer is the most important of religious duties, and the
responsible is not exempted from it in all circumstances. If he is able,
he prays in standing position; if he is unable, he prays in sitting
position; and so on.

27. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Keep the five
prayers, for Allah, the Great and Almighty, will summon the servant on
the Day of Resurrection; prayer will be the first thing about which He
will ask him. If he brings it perfect; otherwise, he will be pushed into
the Fire.

Prayer will be the first thing about which the responsible will be asked
during his mustering and his raising from the dead. If he performs
prayer perfectly, he will be safe from the chastisement of Allah; if he
performs it imperfectly or neglects one of its pre-conditions, he will
be thrown into the Fire.

28. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Do not lose your
prayers, for he who loses his prayer will be mustered along with Qārūn
and Firoun and Hāmān; and it is incumbent upon Allah to make him enter
the Fire along with the hypocrites; and woe unto him who does not keep
his prayers and does not perform the Sunna of his Prophet.

Islam takes great care of prayer and distinguishes it from the rest of
acts of worship. So he who performs it is a Muslim; and he who denies it
dies the death of those pagans before Islam and will be mustered along
with the oppressive and the unbelievers.

29. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Ali, the blessings of
Allah be on him, said:] Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his
family, led us in the travelers shortened prayer and recited in the
first *(raka) al-hamd* and *qul yā ayuhā al-kafirūn*, and in the other
*(raka)* he recited *al-hamd* and *qul huwa Allahu ahad*. Then he said:
I recited to you the one-third and one-fourth of the Qurān.

  

  

  

A four-*raka* prayer is shortened during travel, and surely the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, recited *qul yā ayuhā al-kafirūn* in
the first *raka* after *al-fātiha*, and in the second *raka* he recited
*surat al-Tawhid* after *al-fātiha*; and he, may Allah bless him and his
family, made clear the reward of that when he said that he recited the
one-third of the Qurān in the first *raka* and the one-fourth of the
Qurān in the second *raka*.

30. Through his chain of authorities, he said: Mohammed b. Ali, peace be
on him, was asked about the prayer, and he claimed that his father would
shorten the prayer during travel.

As for shortening prayer during travel, it is among the necessities of
the creed of the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them;
the Book and the Sunna are two proofs of that.

31. Through his chain of authorities, he said: I saw the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, exclaim Allah is Great! over his uncle
Hamza, peace be on him, five times, and after him he exclaimed Allah is
Great! over the martyrs, so seventy times of exclaiming Allah is Great!
was the share of Hamza.

As for the prayer for the dead, it is one of the general obligations. In
other words, it is not obligatory on all Muslims to perform it; rather
it obligatory on some of them. As for its performance, it is as follows:
Five *takbirs* should be made; *al-Shahādatayn* (the two testimonies: I
bear witness that there is no god but Allah and that Mohammed is Allahs
Messenger) should be recited after the first *takbir*, calling down
blessing upon the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, should be
after the second *takbir*; a supplication for the believers, male and
female, should be recited after the third *takbir*; a supplication for
the deceased should be recited after the fourth *takbir*; the fifth
*takbir* should be recited, and then departure.[[1]](#_ftn346) In this
connection many traditions have been reported from the members of the
House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them.[[2]](#_ftn347) As for the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F346) Al-'Urwat al-Withqā, vol. 1, p. 170.  
 [[2]](#_F347) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, Chapter on the Prayer for the Dead.  
  

  

  

Sunnis, they believe that the *takbirs* are four, and the worshipper
departs after the fourth *(takbir)*.[[1]](#_ftn348)

32. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] O Ali, when you
pray over a deceased person, say: O Allah, verily this is Your slave and
son of Your bondmaid has passed away according to Your decree, and he is
not a mentioned thing. He has visited You and You are the best One whom
is visited. O Allah, dictate to him Your argument, join him to Your
Prophet, brighten his grave for him, be generous toward him during his
entering, make him firm through the firm statement, for he is in need of
You and You are in no need of him. He bore witness that there was no god
but You, so forgive him. O Allah, do not deprive us of the reward
through him and do not try us after him.

O Ali, when you pray over a woman, say: O Allah, You created her, and
You gave life to her, and You made her die, and You are more
knowledgeable of her secret and openness. We have come to You as
intercessors for her, so forgive her. O Allah, do not deprive us of the
reward through her.

O Ali, when you pray over a child, say: O Allah, make him an ancestor
and provisions for his parents, make him an intercessor (for them), make
him for them as light and guidance, and make his parents follow (him to)
the Garden. Verily, You are powerful over all things!

As for the performance of the prayer for the dead, we have already
mentioned it. As for this supplication, it should be recited after the
fourth *takbir*. As for the prayer over the child, it is as follows: If
he/she dies at the age of six years, then the prayer for the dead should
be performed over him. If he/she has not reached this age, then prayer
over them is recommended.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F348) Al-Fiqh 'alā al-Madhāhib al-Arba'a, vol. 1, p. 519.  
  

