Chapter Four
============

  

  

ON THE EXCELLENCE OF *AHL AL-BAYT*,  
 AND IT IS IN THREE PARTS
-------------------------------------

### Part one is on the Excellence of Ali Bin Abū Tālib (a.s):

33. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] O Ali, I am the
master of the messengers, and you are the commander of the faithful,
Imām of the Allah-fearing, and leader of the excellent, famous ones.

As for Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, he is
the pioneer of thought and wisdom in Islam. He is the soul of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,  gate of the city of his
knowledge, and his testamentary trustee after him. The Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, lauded his exalted rank and great
position. No tradition has been transmitted from him, may Allah bless
him and his family, concerning his praising any of his companions like
his praising Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him.
His purpose of that is to provide evidence of his succession after him.

34. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] When I was
ascended to the heaven, Gabriel took me by the hand and sat me on a
*darnūk*[***[1]***](#_ftn349) of the Garden. Then he gave me a quince
from it (the Garden), and it (the quince) and what was therein was
prepared for Imām Ali, peace be on him.

Certainly, Allah has prepared for Ali, peace be on him,  all favors of
the hereafter and made him dwell Paradise and live wherever he likes.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F349) *Darnūk* is one of the carpets of the Garden.  
  

  

  

35. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] O Ali, I asked my
Lord to give me five qualities regarding you, and He gave (them) to me.
As for the first of them, it is that I asked my Lord to split open the
ground and to dust my head and you were with me, so He (Allah) gave it
to me. As for the second, it is that I asked my Lord to let me stop by
the Scale of the Balance and you were with me, so He gave it to me. As
for the third, it is that I asked him to make you the carrier of the
standard, which was the Standard of *Allahu akbar* under which were
those who gained the Garden, and He gave it to me. As for the fourth, it
is that I asked my Lord (to let) you water my community from my pond
*(hawd)*, and He gave it to me. As for the fifth, it is that I asked my
Lord to make you the leader of my community to the Garden, so my Lord
gave it to me. Praise belongs to Allah who has bestowed that upon me!

Surely, Allah singled Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, with all noble qualities and endowed him with all virtues. He
accepted the supplication of His Prophet when he asked Him to give these
qualities and virtues to Ali.

36. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] When the Day of
Resurrection occurs, I will take hold of the *hijjza* of Allah; you will
hold my *hijjza*; your sons will grasp your *hijjza*; and the Shiites of
your sons will take hold of their *hijjza*.[[1]](#_ftn350)

Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, has a noble
rank with Allah, the Exalted. Through this rank he has gained
exaltedness over the righteous and the Allah-fearing, and through it he,
his sons, and his Shiites will be distinguished from the rest of the
people on the Day of Judgment.

37. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] O  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F350) Abū al-Qāsim al-Tā'i said: "I asked Abū al-'Abbās al-Tā'i
about *hijjza*, and he replied: 'It is means.' Then I asked Ibn
Naftawayh, the grammarian, about it, and he answered: 'It is means.'"  
  

  

  

Ali, you will be the Divider of the Garden and of the Fire; you will
knock at the gate of the Garden and enter it with out any reckoning.

This tradition has been narrated by a group of religious scholars from
among the Shiites and the Sunnis. It gives an account of the outstanding
merit of Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, and
his great importance with Allah, which none of the people has ever
reached except the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.

38. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] When the Day of
Resurrection occurs, you and your sons will be on the (backs of) piebald
horses and crowned with pearls and corundum. Allah will ordered you (to
be taken) to the Garden and the people look (at you).

How great the rank of the Imām and his pure sons with Allah is! For He
has singled them out with all noble qualities and distinguished them
from the rest of his creatures.

39. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] When the Day of
Resurrection occurs, I will be called out from inside the Throne: The
best father is your father Ibrāhim; the best brother is your brother Ali
b. Abū Tālib!

Allah singled His great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
with all kinds of excellence of which is that he was among the progeny
of Ibrāhim, Allahs bosom friend, and that his brother was Imām Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, who defended the word of
monotheism, the values and principles of Islam.

40. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Verily, Allah
ordered me to love four (persons): Ali, Salmān, Abū Dharr, and al-Muqdād
b. al-Aswad.

Surely, these four (leading figures) took part in building Islam and
carried the torch of monotheism; accordingly, Allah ordered his Prophet
to love them, for they were among the elements of piety and
righteousness.

  

  

  

41. He, peace be on him, said: [Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him
and his family, said:] O Ali, surely, Allah has already forgiven you,
your progeny, your Shiites, those who love your Shiites, those who love
the lover of your Shiites; therefore be cheerful, for you are free from
polytheism and full of knowledge.

Imām Ali, peace be on him, had great communication with Allah, the
Exalted, so Allah endowed him with this excellence of forgiving him, his
children, his Shiites, and their followers.

42. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Whomsoever I am
his Master, then Ali is his master. O Allah, be friend of one who is his
friend and be the enemy of one who is his enemy; and desert one who
deserts him and help one who helps him.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, declared these
brilliant words, which were the most expensive medals he gave to the
Imām, on the Day of Ghadir Khum, which is the most important Īd in
Islamic world, for he appointed the Imām as a successor after him and
ordered the Muslims to pledge allegiance to him. They pledged allegiance
to him, so did the wives of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. On that immortal day, the greatest favor toward the Muslims was
completed, and on it this holy verse was revealed: *This day I have
completed My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion*.

43. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] O Ali, had it not
been for you, the believers would not have been recognized after me.

Surely, Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, is the
measure through whom the believer is distinguished from the sinner; so,
he who loves him is a believer and he who shows enmity toward him is a
sinner. Āisha says:

When gold is touched by a touchstone, its cheat appears

without doubt.

Cheat is in us, and Ali, the purified gold, is like a

touchstone among us.[[1]](#_ftn351)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F351) Al-Shiblanji, Nūr al-Abbsār.  
  

  

  

44. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace
be on him, related to me. He said:] I have inherited two books from
Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family: the Book of Allah,
the Exalted, and a book concerning the sheath of my sword.

He was asked: O Commander of the faithful, what is the book concerning
the sheath of your sword?

He who kills other than his killer and hits other than his hitter, then
the curse of Allah be upon him.

Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, inherited all
qualities of the Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, of which
are what he, peace be on him, has mentioned above.

45. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:[Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] O Ali, you have
been given three (things) the like of which I have not been given.

I (i.e. Ali) asked: May my father and mother be your ransom, what have I
been given?

He, may Allah bless him and his family, replied: You have been given a
father-in-law like me; you have been give a wife like Fātima, peace be
on her; and you have been given the like of your two sons, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn.

Allah, the Most High, singled Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful,
with these three traits with which He had never endowed anyone.

46. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] On the Day of
Resurrection there will be no rider other than us, and we will be four.

A man from the Ansār stood up and asked him: O Allahs Apostle, who are
they?

He (the Apostle) replied: I will be on (the back of) al-Barāq riding
animal; and my brother (Prophet) Sālih on Allahs she-camel which was
slaughtered; my uncle Hamza on my she-camel al-Adbā; and my brother Ali
b. Abū, peace be on him, on one of the she-  

  

  

camels of the Garden and the Standard of Praise will be in his hand; and
he will say: There is no god but Allah; Mohammed, may Allah bless him
and his family, is the Messenger of Allah! So the human beings will say:
That is an angel brought nigh or a prophet sent out or the bearer of the
Throne. So an angel from the inside of the Throne will answer them: O
group of human beings, that is not angel brought nigh nor a prophet sent
out nor a bearer of the Throne; that is Ali b. Abū Tālib!

Certainly, on the Day of Resurrection, Allah, the Most High, will
manifest the position of His friend Imām Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, and his exalted rank with Him, to the extent
that He will make the prophets brought nigh, the messengers sent out,
His friends, and the rest of the creatures know the importance of the
Imām with Him.

47. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Ali, peace be on him,
said:] He who loves me finds me at his death in such a manner which he
loves; and he who hates me finds me at his death in such a manner which
he hates.

Many traditions indicate that Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, attends at the death of everyone, believer and
unbeliever. He asks the Angel of Death to treat the person gently if
he/she is a believer; and he asks him to treat the person roughly if
he/she is unbeliever.

### PART TWO

#### ON THE EXCELLENCE OF FĀTIMA (A.S)

48. He said: [Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family,
said:] She has been named Fātima because Allah, the Exalted, has
separated her and those who love her from the Fire.

This part contains the traditions which have been transmitted from the
Prophet, peace be on him, concerning the piece of him, the mistress of
the women of the world, Fātima, the chaste, the peace of Allah be upon
her. This is one of the traditions in which he has declared that Allah
has separated the Mistress of the women of the  

  

  

world from the Fire; likewise, He has separated from the Fire her
Shiites and those who love her.

49. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Verily, Allah
becomes angry because of her anger, and He becomes pleased on account of
her pleasure.

There is an unanimous agreement on this tradition, which is a proof of
the exalted rank of the Messengers piece and sweet basil (i. e. Fātima)
with Allah, the Most High. It is worth mentioning that none of believing
women has ever reached this distinguished position with Him.

50. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] On the Day of
Resurrection, my daughter Fātima will be mustered along with clothes
stained with al-Husayns blood. She will cling to a leg of the Throne and
say: O Lord, judge between me and the murderer of my son!

Allahs Messenger said: By the Lord of the Kaba, He will judge for my
daughter!

Surely the whole world shook for the tragedy of (Imām al-Husayn) the
master of the youths of heaven and sweet basil of Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family. Fātima, the mistress of the worlds women
and the Messengers piece is so bereaved of his tragedy that she will
raise his shirt stained with his pure blood before Allah, the Exalted,
and complain to Him of the tragedies her son faced.

The poet says:

Definitely, Fātima will come on the Day of Resurrection,

and her shirt will be stained with al-Husayns blood!

Abū al-Alā says:

Surely, she will come to the Mustering wearing his shirt,

seeking the help of the Merciful!

51. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] My daughter Fātima
will be mustered and there will be on her the garment  

  

  

of dignity which was already kneaded in the water of life; the creatures
will look at her in amazement. Then she will also be clothed in two of
the garments of the Garden; on each garment it will be written in green
script: Let Mohammeds daughter enter the Garden; it will be written in
the best manner, dignity, and view. So she will be carried to the Garden
in procession as the bride is carried; and seventy thousand slave-girls
will be entrusted with her.

Without doubt, on the Day of Resurrection, Allah, the Exalted, will
manifest the excellence of the mistress of women, who struggled bravely
in the path of Islam, and who established the creed of the Shiites
through her immortal orations and her heroic attitudes.

52. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] When the Day of
Resurrection occurs, a caller from in side the Throne will call out: O
group of creatures, lower your eyes, that Fātima, the daughter of
Mohammed, may pass!

This is one of the places of honoring and magnifying the mistress of
women, the peace of Allah be upon her, on the day when men will be
mustered before the Lord of the worlds.

53. Through his chain of authorities, Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him,
said: We were with the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.
While we were digging the trench Fātima, peace be on her, came and there
was along with her a small piece of bread.  She gave it to the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, and he, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: What is this small piece? She replied: I baked one loaf of
barely bread for al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and I have brought you this
small piece of it. So he, may Allah bless him and his family, said: O
Fātima, this is the first food to enter your fathers mouth for three
days.

This traditions shows that the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*,
peace be on them, helped each other, preferred others to themselves, and
renounced worldly pleasures.

54. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] An angel came to
me and said: O Mohammed, surely Allah, the Great  

  

  

and Almighty, recites to you (His) greetings and says: I have married
Fātima to Ali, so marry her to him. I have ordered the Tree of Tubā to
bear pearls, corals, and corundum. The inhabitants of the heaven have
rejoiced at that. She will bear him two sons, the two masters of the
Garden, and by the virtue of them the Garden will be adorned. Be happy,
O Mohammed! For you are the best of the first and the last.

Many traditions indicate that the Mistress of women and the piece of the
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, (i.e. Fātima) was married
to Ali according to the command of Allah, who gave through that a model
of marriage in Islam and indicated that it was based on dignity and
virtue, and that in all circumstances it had no relationship with
perishing material considerations. The Messenger, may Allah bless him
and his family, married the Mistress of women to Imām Ali, the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him, in the time when he was the poorest of
all the people, and he had nothing of the enjoyments of life except his
breastplate and his sword. So he sold his breastplate and appointed the
money as a dower for the Mistress of the women; and he bought for it the
cheapest trousseau in that time, but it was the most precious and
expensive trousseau in Islam, for is was based on virtue, honor, and
exalted character. So, peace be on the members of the House (*ahl
al-Bayt)*, who represented the essence of Islam in all their affairs and
conditions.

55. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [My
father Ali b. al-Husayn related to me. He said: Asmā, daughter of Umays,
related to me. She said:] I was with your grandmother Fātima, peace be
on her, when Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
entered; and there was a lace of gold around her neck, which Ali had
bought for her from his war booty. So the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, said to her: Do not be deceived by that the people say
that you are the daughter of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, and that the clothes of the tyrants are on you. Hence she cut
the necklace and sold it. Then she bought a slave and released him, so
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, was pleased with that.

  

  

  

The Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, wanted the Mistress
of women to be a model of virtue and self-negation; and he wanted her to
share the Muslim miserable women their poverty, so there would be no
distinction between her and them.

### Part Three

#### On the Excellence of al-Hasan and al-Husayn, their Birth, and *ahl al-Bayt (a.s)* in General

56. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Al-Hasan and
al-Husayn are the two masters of the youths of Heaven; and their father
is better than them.

Surely, the two grandsons of Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and
his family, are the two masters of the youths of the Garden and are two
lamps for them, so the peace of Allah be upon them and upon their
father, the Lord of the pure family.

57. He, peace be on him, said: [Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him
and his family, said:] A boy is a sweet basil, and my two sweet basil
are al-Hasan and al-Husayn.

The two pure Imāms were the two sweet basil of Allahs Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, and his trust with his community; hence
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, was very loyal to them.

58. He, peace be on him, said: [Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him,
related to me:] Al-Hasan and al-Husayn were playing by the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, until most of the night passed, then the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said: Go to your mother. It
flashed, and the flash shone for them until they went in to Fātima. The
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, looked at the flash and
said: Praise belongs to Allah who has honored us, *ahl al-Bayt*.

Allah, the Most High, singled the two grandsons of the Prophet, peace be
on them, with every noble quality, endowed them with his favors, and
chose them from among the rest of his creatures.

  

  

  

59. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The stars are
security for the inhabitants of the heaven; my household and my children
are security for my community.

Certainly, the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them,
are security for the inhabitants of the earth; tribulation is driven
away through them; mercy comes down and good spreads through them.

60. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The Garden is
forbidden for him who wrongs my Household, him who kills them, him who
helps against them, and him who curses them. *Surely they shall have no
portion in the hereafter, and Allah will not speak to them; nor will He
look upon them on the Day of Resurrection; nor will He purify them, and
they shall have a painful chastisement*.

Woe unto him who denies the authority *(wilāya)* of the Imāms from *ahl
al-Bayt*, peace be on him! Woe unto him who wrongs and oppose them! For
such a person brings the wrath of Allah and of His Messenger against
himself; therefore, he will be deprived of the Garden.

61. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] I will intercede
for four (persons) on the Day of Resurrection: He who honors my progeny;
he who accomplishes their needs; the one who strives for them concerning
their affairs when they are forced to them; and the one who loves (them)
through his heart and his tongue.

He who loves the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them,
honors and magnifies them will gain general good and obtains the
intercession of their grandfather, master of the prophets.

62. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] It is not lawful
for us, *ahl al-Bayt*, to take alms; and we have been ordered to perform
the ritual ablution properly, and not to ride on the shoulder of an ass.

  

  

  

It is forbidden for the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be
on them, to take obligatory alms such as *zakāt;* so is it forbidden for
the Alawides, may Allah increase their honor,  who belong to them.

63. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: He who
curses a prophet is killed; and he who curses the companion of a prophet
is flogged.

64. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The likeness of my
house among you is like Noahs Ark. He who embarked it was safe; and he
who missed it was pushed into the Fire.

Definitely, the *ahl al-Bayt* , peace be on him, are lifeboats and
security for mankind. He who follows them is safe; and he disobeys them
perishes. In this tradition on whose correctness there is an unanimous
agreement, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, has likened
them to the Ark of Noah, peace be on him, which saved his companions
from drowning when the waves surrounded those who deviated from the
truth, and they drowned therein. The believers who were on Noahs Ark
were safe; likewise, those who follow the authority of the Household of
the Prophet, the peace of Allah be upon them, will gain the Garden; he
who denies and wrongs them will fall into the bottom of the Fire.

65. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Woe unto those who
wrong my household! They will be chastised along with the hypocrite in
the bottom of the Fire!

Woe unto him who wrongs the Household of the Prophet and shows enmity
toward them, for they are the source of awareness and thought, not only
for this community but also for men in general. Surely, the fate of
those who wrong them will be the permanent chastisement in the next
world.

66. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] I have been
summoned and it is nearly the moment for me to answer. I am going to
leave among you the *thaqalayn*. If you cleave to them, you will never
go astray after me; one of them is greater than the  

  

  

other that is the Book of Allah which is a cord stretching from the sky
to the earth and my offspring from my family. They will never scatter
(from each other) until they come to me at the Pool *(hawd)*. Hence,
think! How will you treat them after me?

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, has associated his pure
family with the Book of Allah. If it had not been for that his Household
were infallible, the comparison between the Holy Qurān, *falsehood shall
not come to it from*  *before it nor from behind it*  and the pure
Family would be incorrect. Clinging to the Book is the means of
salvation, and so is clinging to the *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them.

67. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The anger of Allah
and of His Apostle is intense with him who sheds the blood of my progeny
or hurts me (through hurting) my family.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, predicted that his
family would face persecutions at the hands of the opponents and enemies
of Islam who shed their blood and poured upon them oppression and
tyranny which none has ever witnessed throughout the stages of history.

68. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Jafar
b. Mohammed, peace be on them,  said:] Saturday is for us; Sunday is for
our Shiites; Monday is for the Umayyads; Tuesday is for their followers;
Wednesday for the Abbāsids; Thursday is for their followers; and Friday
is for Allah. There is no travel on it (Friday), for Allah, the Exalted,
says: *And when the prayer is finished, so spread in the land and seeks
from Allahs favor*.

The Imām, peace be on him, divided the days of the week into these
parts, and he singled Friday with more excellence and appointed it for
Allah, the Most High. Among the special characteristics of Friday is
that it is hateful for someone to travel on it before the declination of
the sun, that the responsible may perform the Friday prayer.

69. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [My
father Mūsā b. Jafar (i.e. Imām al-Sādiq), peace be on him, related to
me. He said:] It was (engraved) in the ring of Mohammed  

  

  

b. Ali: My opinion is good in Allah, the trusted Prophet, the
testamentary trustee, possessor of favors, and the two good ones:
al-Hasan and al-Husayn.

The aspects of worship and obedience to Allah, the Most High, appear in
every aspect of the lives of the pure Imāms, the peace of Allah be upon
them. Among them is that they engraved the words of monotheism in their
own rings.

70. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali b.
al-Husayn, peace be on him, said:] The munificent are the masters of men
in this world; and the Allah-fearing are the masters of men in the next.

71. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali b.
al-Husayn, peace be on him, said:] Well-being is a hidden property.

Well-being is one of Allahs greatest favors toward man. It is the
greatest favor toward man. All the favors which man enjoys are worthless
without well-being

72. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali b.
Abū Tālib, peace be on him, said: Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, said:] He who does a favor for one of the children of
Abd al-Muttalib, and he (the child of Abd al-Muttalib) does not reward
him for it, I (i.e. Allahs Apostle) will reward him for it tomorrow when
I meet him on the Day of Resurrection.

73. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali b.
al-Husayn said:] Surely, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, performed the *adhān* (call to prayer) in the ear of al-Hasan
and of al-Husayn on the day when they were born.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, performed the religious
rites for his two grandsons, of which that he performed the *adhān* in
their right ears and the *iqāma* in their left ears, and hence this has
become a religious rite performed for every Muslim baby.

74. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [My
father Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on him, related to me. He said: Asmā,
daughter of Umays related to me. She said:] I assisted your grandmother
Fātima in giving birth to al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace  

  

  

be on them. When al-Hasan was born, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, came and said: O Asmā, bring me my son. I brought him
wrapped in a yellow piece of cloth. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, threw the piece away and said: O Asmā, did I not order you
not to wrap the baby in a yellow piece of cloth? So I wrapped him in a
white piece of cloth and gave him to him. He performed the *adhān* in
his right ear and the *iqāma* in his left ear. Then he asked: Which name
have you given to this son of mine, Ali? He (i.e. Ali), peace be on him,
replied: I do not want to precede you in giving name to him, Allahs
Messenger. I want to call him Harb. I do not want to precede my Lord in
giving name to him, answered the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. Then Gabriel, peace be on him, came down and said: The Exalted,
the Most High (Allah) recites to you (His) greetings and says to you:
Ali has the same rank with you as Hārūn had with Mūsā except that there
will be no prophet after you, so call this son of yours with the name of
Hārūns son. So he (the Prophet), may Allah bless him and his family,
asked: Gabriel, what was the name of Hārūns son? Shubbar, replied
Gabriel. My mother tongue is Arabic, explained the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. Name him al-Hasan, answered Gabriel.

Asmā added: He (the Prophet) named him al-Hasan. On the seventh day, he,
may Allah bless him and his family, sacrificed two gray rams on his
behalf. He gave a leg of the ram to the midwife; he shaved his hair and
gave gold as alms equal to the weight of his hair and perfumed his hair
with *al-khulūq*[[1]](#_ftn352). Then he said: Asmā, the blood is the
action of those who lived before Islam.[[2]](#_ftn353)

Asmā said: A year after the birth of al-Hasan, peace be on him,
al-Husayn, peace be on him, was born, so the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, came and said: Asmā, give me my son. I  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F352) A kind of perfume.  
 [[2]](#_F353) One of the customs of those who lived before Islam was
that they painted the hair of their babies with blood. As for Islam, it
forbade this custom and replaced it by perfume.  
  

  

  

wrapped him in a white piece of cloth and gave him to him. He said the
*adhān* in his right ear and the *iqāma* in his left ear. He put him on
his lap and wept.

Asmā asked: My father and mother be you ransom, what has made you weep?

I weep for this son of mine, he, may Allah bless him and his family,
said.

I (i.e. Asmā) said: He was born at this hour.

The oppressive group will kill him, he, may Allah bless him and his
family, commented, may Allah not let them obtain my intercession.

Then he said: Do not tell Fātima (about these words of mine), for she
has just given birth to him.

Then he, may Allah bless him and his family, asked Ali, peace be on him:
Which name have you given to this son of mine?

I do not want to precede you in giving name to him, Allahs Apostle. I
would like to call him Harb, answered Ali, peace be on him.

I do not want to precede my Lord in giving name to him, answered the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.

Then Gabriel, peace be on him, came down and said: The Almighty (Allah)
recites to you (His) greetings and says to you:  Call him with the name
of Hārūns son.

 What was the name of Hārūns son? he (the Prophet), may Allah bless him
and his family, asked.

Shabir, replied Gabriel.

My mother tongue is Arabic, explained the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family.

Call him al-Husayn, answered Gabriel.

He (the Prophet) named him al-Husayn. On the seventh day, he, may Allah
bless him and his family, sacrificed two gray rams on his behalf. He
shaved his hair and gave gold as alms equal to the weight of his hair
and perfumed his hair with *al-khulūq*.

He said: Asmā, the blood is the action of those who lived before Islam
Then he gave a leg of the ram to the midwife.

  

  

  

I (i.e. the author) think that a sentence of this tradition has been
fabricated, which is the wish of Imām Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, in naming his two sons Harb. This name is not
beautiful and it is the name of the grandfather of the Umayyad family,
who fought against Islam and spared no effort to extinguish the light of
Allah. Moreover Islam is the religion of peace and is the greetings of
the Muslims among themselves. The books of the Imāmi jurisprudence have
mentioned that it is hateful for Muslims to call their babies Harb.

75. Through his chain of authorities, he said: My father Ali b.
al-Husayn, peace be on them, related to me that he was called al-Hasan
on the seventh day, and al-Husayn was derived from the name al-Hasan,
and he mentioned that there was (no period) between them except the
pregnancy.

Most rites of religious birth are performed on behalf of the newborn
baby on the seventh day, of which is giving name to the baby.

76. Through his chain of authorities, he said: My father Ali b.
al-Husayn, peace be on them, related to me that Fātima, peace be on him,
sacrificed (rams) on behalf of al-Hasan and al-Husayn; she gave a leg of
the ram and a dinar to the midwife.

77. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Ali b. Abū Tālib said:]
It was as if that I saw palaces were built around the grave of
al-Husayn, and that I saw markets surround his grave. The days and
nights will not pass until (people) from the regions walk to him. That
will happen when the children of Marwān perish.

The matter happened just as Imām Ali, peace be on him,  had predicted,
for palaces and markets were built in Karbalā, the city of honor and
refusal; the grave of the great, martyred Imām has became a holy shrine
and destination for all Muslims and people who believe in humanity, for
it is the holiest shrine in all regions of the world.

78. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Jafar b. Mohammed was
asked about the visitation to the grave of al-Husayn, peace be on him,
and he said: My father told me. He said:] He who visits the grave of
al-Husayn and is aware of his right, Allah will write  

  

  

him among those who are in the highest places in Paradise. Then he said:
Surely, there are seventy thousand shaggy, dusty angels who weep over
him until the Day of Resurrection.

Many traditions have been narrated on the authority of the Imāms of
guidance, peace be on them,  concerning the visitation of the grave of
the master of martyrs and maker of human dignity Imām al-Husayn, peace
be on him, for in visiting him there is a link with the greatest Prophet
and honor for this Imām, who raised high the torch of monotheism. Had it
not been for his sacrifice, the Umayyads would have destroyed Islam and
effaced all its teachings.

79. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, said:] Surely, the murderer of al-Husayn
is in a coffin of fire; half chastisement of thepeople of the Fire (will
be practiced) against him; his hands and legs will be tied with chains
of fire; he will be turned over until he falls into the bottom of the
Hellfire. He will have a bad smell because of which the inhabitants of
the Fire will seek protection in their Lord. He will be in the Hellfire
forever and taste the painful chastisement. Whenever his skin is ripen,
Allah will change it, that he may taste the painful chastisement which
will not be flagged from him for an hour, and he will be watered from
the boiling water of the Hellfire. So woe unto him because of the
chastisement of Allah, the Great and Almighty!

Woe unto every sinful criminal who fought against the master of the
youths of Heaven who revolted for the rights of the oppressive and the
deprived and for saving them from the Umayyad terrorist regime, which
disdained the souls and dignity of men. Definitely, Allah has prepared a
painful chastisement and severe punishment, with which He shall not
punish the criminals, for those who took part in fighting against the
sweet basil of Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, 
and master of the youths of the Garden (i.e. Imām al-Husayn, peace be on
him).

80. Through his chain of authorities, he said: [Abū al-Qāsim al-Tāi
related to me. He said: Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on him, related to
me. He said: My father Mūsā b. Jafar related to me. He said: My father
Jafar b. Mohammed related to me. He said: My father  

  

  

Mohammed b. Ali related to me. He said: My father Ali b. al-Husayn
related to me. He said: My father al-Husayn b. Ali related to me. He
said: My father Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him, related to me. He
said: Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:]
Verily, Mūsā b. Umrān raised his hands and said: O my Lord, surely my
brother Hārūn has died, so forgive him. Hence Allah, the Exalted,
revealed to him: O Mūsā, if you ask me (to forgive) the first and the
last, I will respond to you except those who killed al-Husayn, for I
will not forgive them; rather I will take vengeance upon them.

  

