Chapter Five
============

  

  

ON THE EXCELLENCE OF THE BELIEVER, GOOD MANNERS, AND THE EXCELLENCE OF HIM WHOSE NAME IS MOHAMMED OR AHMED
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

81. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The likeness of
the believer with Allah is like an angel brought nigh; and the believer
with Allah is better than an angel brought nigh; and there is nothing
more lovable to Allah than a repentant believing man or a repentant
believing woman.

82. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Verily, the
believer is recognized in the heaven as a man is recognized by his own
family and children; and he is nobler with Him (Allah) than an angel
brought nigh.

83. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Gabriel came to me
from his Lord and said: My Lord, the Great and Almighty, recites to you
(His) greetings and says: O Mohammed, give good news to the believers
who do good deeds, believe in you, and love your household of the
Garden, for they have with Me good reward, and they will enter the
Garden.

The believers who have such qualities will have the noblest rank in the
Garden and live therein wherever they like.

  

  

  

84. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who treats men
and does not wrong them; tells them (about something) and does not tell
them lies; promises them and does not break (his promise toward) them is
a believer whose manhood is perfect, whose justice is manifest, love for
him is obligatory (on men), and it is forbidden (on them) to backbite
him.

If man has such qualities, he is perfect in faith, manhood, justice; and
it is obligatory on people to be loyal to him and to refrain from
backbiting him.

85. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who slanders a
believing man or a believing woman or says about them what they do not
have, Allah will make him stand on a hill of fire until he abandons what
he has said concerning them.

Definitely, the believer has sacredness with Allah, for He, the Exalted,
has made it incumbent on men to respect him, so none has the right to
disparage him or to defame his character.

86. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] An example of the
believers dignity with Allah is that Allah does not appoint a term for
his span of life. However, if he concerns about an offense, Allah makes
him die due to (His) mercy (toward him).

The meaning of this tradition is that Allah prolongs the believers life,
but if he commits a sin, Allah decreases his life. Imām al-Ridā said:
Refrain from offenses and Allah will prolong your span of life.

87. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Cling to good
manners, for the well-mannered are certainly in the Garden.

One of the most important Islamic principles is good manners, and it is
one of the most beautiful and perfect qualities of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, by which he was distinguished from the
rest of the prophets. Islam has emphasized on the necessity of having
such a noble quality. During their Bedouin life, nations were  

  

  

distinguished from each other by their bodily strength. When they
progressed, they were distinguished from each other by their knowledge.
And when they advanced, they were distinguished from one another by good
manners.

88. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] If the servant
knows what he will have due to good manners, then he will come to know
that he is in no need (of anything) except good manners.

In this tradition there is a summons to clinging to good manners and
Allah, the Most High,  has prepared abundant reward for him who has this
noble quality.

89. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] When the Day of
Resurrection occurs, Allah will manifest Himself to His servant and
shows him his sins one by one, and then He will forgive him. Allah will
not inform about the servants sins neither an angel brought nigh nor a
messenger sent out. He will cover them from everyone, and then he will
say to them: Be good deeds!

This traditions gives an account of Allahs plentiful mercy and his
inclusive pardon toward His sinful servants. We ask Him, the Most High,
to include us in His mercy.

90. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who abases and
degrades a believing man or a believing woman because of their poverty,
Allah will disgrace him on the Day of Resurrection.

Among the sins for which Allah punishes men is abasing and insulting the
believer, for Allah has raised his importance and exalted his rank;
therefore he who disdains the believer disdains Allah, the Exalted.

91. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Verily, through
good manners the servant gains the rank of one who performs  

  

  

prayer and fasting.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,  has underlined the
necessity of having this noble quality, through which the Muslim is
exalted and by which he is distinguished from the rest of men.

92. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Nothing heavier in
the Balance than good manners.

93. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Bad manners spoil
action just as vinegar spoils honey.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, warned men against bad
manners which throw man into dreadful evil as well as they spoil the
good deeds which he does.

94. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali b.
Abū Tālib, peace be on him, related to me:] Among the treasures of good
is concealing deed and steadfastness toward misfortune.

This noble quality is one of  the most distinguished qualities of man.
It is among the treasures of good and is proof of high character.

95. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali b.
Abū Tālib, peace be on him, related to me. He said:] Good manners are
the best friend; the most perfect of you in belief is the best of you in
manners.

Surely, good manners are the best friend and guard, for they protect man
from many problems and difficulties. In the meantime they are proof of
the perfect faith of a person.

96. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The title of the
Muslims page is good manners.

Good manners are the most prominent quality in the Muslims character, as
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said to his community.

97. Through his chain of authorities on the authority of Imām Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, who said: [Allahs Apostle
was asked:] Who enter the Garden more? (Those  

  

  

who have) reverential fear and good manners, he replied. Then he was
asked: Who enter the Fire more? (Those who follow) the two hollow
(organs): the stomach and the genital parts, he answered.

Fear of Allah, refraining from disobeying Him, and having good manners
are the firmest ways through which man gains Allahs good pleasure and
enters the Garden. Likewise, paying no attention to the forbidden things
and having an unlawful sexual intercourse bring about entering the Fire.

98. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The nearest of you
to me in sitting on the Day of Resurrection are those who are the best
of you in good manners, and the best of you is he who is the best of you
(in good manners) toward his family.

He who beautifies himself with good manners is the closest of all people
to the greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, on the Day
of Resurrection. Likewise, the closest of people to Allahs Messenger,
may Allah bless him and his family, is he who shows good, mercy, and
kindness  toward his family and undertakes their affairs.

99. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The best of the
people in faith are the best of them in good manners and the gentlest of
them toward their families, and I am the gentlest of you toward my
family.

This tradition emphasizes good manners and kindness to family, and this
is among the qualities of the holy Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family.

100. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] When you
name the boy Mohammed, then honor him, make room for him when sitting,
and do not show an ugly face toward him.

Islam has made it recommended for Muslims to name their boy babies with
the name of the Prophet Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family. He
who is given this name is worthy of honoring, magnifying, making room
during sitting, and receiving with cheerfulness.

  

  

  

101. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] If some
people have a consultation and someone whose name is Mohammed or Ahmed
is present with them and they let him take part in the consultation,
they will (face nothing) except good for them.

This tradition summons Muslims to name their boys with the name of the
great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and it urges them to
honor and magnify those boys who have given this blessed name.

102. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] If food is
placed and someone whose name is Mohammed or Ahmed sits at it, Allah
will sanctify that house twice a day.

### CHAPTER SIX

### ON MENTIONING FOODS, FRUIT, AND OINTMENTS

103. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Meat is the
master of the food of this world and the next. Water is the master of
the drink of this world and the next. And I am the master of the
children of Ādam. I am not proud (of anything), but poverty is my pride.

Meat is the master of foods, for it has some vitamins which are
necessary for maintaining the body; likewise pure water is the master of
drinks.

In this tradition the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, has
shown that he is the master of the children of Ādam, that poverty is his
pride, for he, may Allah bless him and his family, died and left behind
him nothing of worldly provisions. 

104. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Meat and
rice are the master of the food of this world and the next.

  

  

  

This tradition gives an account of the excellence of meat and rice, and
that they are the best masters of foods, for they have advantages which
make the body grow.

105. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] When you
cook food, increase gourd, for it strengthens the heart of the sad.

106. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali
b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him, related to me:] Cling to (eating) gourd,
for it strengthens the brain.

This tradition and that before it urge men to eat gourd, for it contains
food advantages such as vitamin (A), iron, calcium, and in addition
eating its seeds drives armed tapeworm away from the stomach.

107. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] When you eat
porridge, eat from its sides, for blessing is in the top.

This tradition summon Muslims to conform to the manners of eating, for
example, one who eats porridge should eat from the sides of the
container not from its top.

108. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali
b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him, related to me: He said: Allahs Messenger,
may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who wants to subsist, and
there is no subsistence, should eat food early, wear the shoe well, wear
light clothes, and decrease sleeping with women.

This tradition gives an account of some health pieces of advice:

A. Having food early.

B. Wearing shoe regularly.

C. Wearing light clothes.

D. Reducing sexual intercourse.

109. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [When
Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, had food, he would
say:] O Allah, make it blessed for us, and bestow upon us something
better than it. When he drank yogurt, he would say: O Allah, make it
blessed for us, and bestow upon us something better than it.

  

  

  

This tradition shows the supplication of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, when he had food and yogurt. Thus a supplication is
among the religious manners which always connect man to his Almighty
Creator.

110. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [When
Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, had milk, he would
rinse out his mouth and say:] It has cream.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, hated anything to stay
in his holy mouth even the remainder of milk, for it harms health.

111. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali
b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him, said:  A food was brought for the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and he entered his finger
into the food which was hot, so he, may Allah bless him and his family,
said:] Leave it until it becomes cold, for it is greater in blessing,
and for Allah does not feed us the hot.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, hated to have hot food,
for it severely harms health, especially the mouth and the teeth, and
other parts of the digestive system.

112. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Cling to
(eating) meat, for it makes flesh grow. He who leaves meat for forty
days, his (physical) constitution is bad.

As for meat, it is the most useful food to the body, for it contains
albuminous materials, mineral salts, calcium, protein, and other
materials which are necessary for building and soundness of the body,
especially when it is used along with vegetables, for it achieves
perfect nutrition for man.

113. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Cling to
lentils, for they are blessed and sacred; they soften the heart and
increase tear; they were regarded as blessed by seventy prophets, the
last of them was Īsā b. Maryam, peace be on him.

As for lentils, they are among rich foods; they contain food materials
such as calcium, iron, phosphorous, vitamin (B), and  

  

  

protein; so they are blessed.[[1]](#_ftn354) Lentils are equal to meat
and their protein ratio surpasses that of the rest of vegetables. One of
their advantages is that they soften the heart and increase tear.

114. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: He who
starts (his food) with salt, Allah takes away from him seventy diseases,
the first of which is leprosy.

The need for salt differs from man to another according to the regions
of their living, for example, the inhabitants of the tropics are in need
of a lot of salt because they ooze abundant sweat which contains food
salt. Perhaps the tradition concerns such a kind of people. As for the
inhabitants of the frigid zones like Sepirya, they are in no need of
salt; rather they spit it out.

115. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] There is
nothing more hateful to Allah than a full stomach.

Fullness or eating much food brings about heavy harms to the body, of
which are high blood pressure, arteriosclerosis, diabetes, and others.
For this reason the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
prevented men from eating much food.

116. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [My
father Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him, related to me. He said: Abū
Juhayfa said:] I went to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and I was belching, so he said to me: O Abū Juhayfa, stop your
belching! Verily, the fullest of the people in this world will be the
most hungry of them on the Day of Resurrection. He said: So Abū Juhayfa
did not fill his stomach with food until he met Allah, the Exalted.

In this tradition there is a warning against fullness, which is a
destructive blight.

117. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Do not ask
a foolish or blear-eyed woman to nurse (your babies), for milk conveys
disease.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F354) Al-Ghidhā' lā al-Dawā', p. 561.  
  

  

  

Certainly, milk has bad or good effects on the natures of a baby. So the
baby which feeds on the milk of a foolish or blear-eyed woman is
infected by foolishness or bleariness in his future life, and this has
been emphasized by modern medical studies. I (i.e. the author) have
mentioned this matter in detail in my book *Nizām al-Usra fi al-Islām*
(the Organization of the Family in Islam).

118. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The baby has
no milk better than that of its mother.

Certainly, the baby which feeds on its mothers milk is safe  from
diseases and enjoys good health, for its mothers milk is supplied with
all necessary food materials. As for the milk other than that of its
mother, it is liable to various kinds of diseases because it is either
not pasteurized or is not suitable for its body.

119. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:]  He who
spends (his own money) well will have a good deed.

In this tradition there is a creative summons to an Islamic economy, of
which is that there must be a balance between spending and miserliness,
and which protects man from choking economic crises.

120. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Vinegar is
the best food; the house which has vinegar does not become poor.

Vinegar has many advantages, of which is that it helps the stomach in
digesting food. It is the best of drinks, and in the past times it was
the famous drink among the people.

121. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Eat dates
before breakfast, for they kill the worms in the stomach.

Dates are rich in vitamins, for example, they have a high ratio of
vitamin (A). It is worth mentioning that this vitamin helps children
grow, that it keeps the moisture and brilliance of the eye, the
protrusion of the eyeball, and that it plays an important role in
forming the retinal purple, so doctors call it Factor of Growth.

  

  

  

Moreover dates strengthen the auditory nerves, and they have other
benefits mentioned by doctors. Islam has emphasized eating dates, for
they have great advantages.

122. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali
b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him, said:]  Gabriel, peace be on him, came to
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and said: Cling to
al-Barni dates, for it is the best kind of your dates; it brings (men)
nigh to Allah and send (them) away from the Fire.

Perhaps the reason for urging (men) to eat dates is that it makes mind
grow and purifies the soul. It is normal that when the soul is free from
imaginations, it heads for its Almighty Creator and does all that which
brings it nigh to Him. Hence the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, urged (men) to eat al-Barni dates, which is the best kind of all
dates.

123. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [My
father al-Husayn b. Ali, peace be on them, said:] (Imām Ali) the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, ordered us to rinse out
mouth three times after we had eaten (food).

This traditions gives an account of the summons to cleaning teeth after
having food, for it has an important effect on health.

124. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali
b. Abū Tālib said:] Eat pomegranate along with its flesh, for it is
tanning for the stomach.

As for pomegranate, it is among the fruit rich in vitamins, for example,
it contains lemon, sugar, vitamin (C). Among the characteristics of its
flesh is that it puts right the digestive system.

125. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Eat grapes
one by one, for it is more wholesome and easier.

As for grapes, they are among the richest fruit, for they contain
vitamins A, B, C, and play an important role in building the body and
strengthening its tissues. They are a delicious food and they are
quickly digested. They are necessary for the states of indigestion,
renal and urinary calculus, poisoning, anemia, and reduction of calcium.
Dr. Carlia said: It is necessary to give grapes to those who suffer
from  

  

  

anemia and on whom surgical operations are performed. Medical books have
mentioned other benefits of grapes.

126. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Cling to
raisins, for they remove bitterness, take away phlegm, strengthen
nerves, improve nature, make soul good, and remove worries.

As for raisins, dried grapes, they have most characteristics of fresh
grapes, of which are vitamins. We previously talked about the benefits
and characteristics of grapes, of which are those mentioned in this
tradition.

127. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] If there
is a cure in something, then it is in the slash made by a cupper or in a
drink of honey.

In the previous researches, we mentioned the great benefits of cupping
and honey.

128. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Do not
reject him who brings you a drink of honey.

129. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Perfume is
ease; honey is ease; looking at greens is ease; and riding is ease.

These things create cheerfulness and happiness.

130. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Rub with
violet, for it is cold in summer and hot in winter.

Violet is one of the beautiful, sweet-smelling plants. The tradition
contains some characteristics of its ointment, which is cold in summer
and hot in winter.

### CHAPTER SEVEN

### ON OBEYING THE PARENTS AND TIGHTENING THE BONDS OF KIN

131. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:  

  

  

[Abū Jafar, peace be on him,  related to me. He said:] The minimum
disobedience (to parents) is the (word) *uf* (ugh). And if Allah knew
that there was something easier than *uf*, He would forbid it.

He, the Exalted, said: *And do not say to them uf!* If there was a word
less than the word *uf*, Allah would forbid it, just as the Imām said.

132. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Abū
Jafar, peace be on him,  related to me. He said: Abū Abd Allah, peace be
on him, said:] Tightening the bonds of kin and good manners increase
faith.

Definitely, good manners and tightening the bonds of kin are two proofs
of mans faith in Allah and his relationship with Him.

133. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who
guarantees one (thing) to me, I will guarantee four (things) to him: He
should tighten the bonds of kin, so his family loves him; he is given
generously; his fixed term is increased; and Allah will make him enter
the Garden which He has promised.

Surely, tightening the bonds of kin is the best deed in Islam, for it
brings about correlation, unity, and solidarity of society.

134. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Mohammed b. Ali, peace be on him,  related to me. He said:] Tightening
the bonds of kin and good neighborhood increase properties.

Among the good deeds which Islam has adopted is kindness to blood
relations and neighbors. For such a deed unifies the Muslims, spreads
love and affection among them.

135. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali
b. Abū Tālib said: I heard Allahs Messenger say:] Verily, I fear for you
that you will disdain the religion, sell your government, cut the bonds
of kin, use the Qurān as pipes, and that you give precedence to one of
you, while he is not the most meritorious of you in religion.

These matters against which the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, warned the Muslims bring about the destruction of society and
make it deviate from the ideals which Islam has adopted.

  

  

  

### CHAPTER EIGHT

### ON WARNING AGAINST CHEATING, BACKBITING, AND TATTLING

136. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who
cheats a Muslim or harms him or tries to deceive him does not belong to
us.

Cheating a Muslim or harming him or trying to deceive him is never an
Islamic act, for such an action spreads hatred and mistrust among the
Muslims.

137. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Beware of
oppression, for it destroys your hearts.

Islam has fought against oppression. Authentic traditions have been
transmitted from the Imāms of guidance, peace be on him, concerning
warning against oppression, and that Allah, the Most High, is in the
watch-tower against the oppressive; He will destroy their houses and
severely punish them.

138. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [My
father al-Husayn b. Ali, peace be on him, related to me. He said: the
Commander of the faithful, the blessings of Allah be on him, addressed
us. He said:] A severe time will come upon the people; therein the rich
will seize their possessions with their own teeth (by way of
miserliness) although they have not been commanded to do so. Allah, the
Most High, says: *Do not forget generosity among yourselves*. During
this time the wicked will rise up while the virtuous will remain low;
purchases will be made from the helpless although Allahs Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, has prohibited purchasing from the
helpless.  

139. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali
b. al-Husayn, peace be on him, said:] He who refrains from (defaming)
the honor of men, Allah will release him from his stumble on the Day of
Resurrection.

  

  

  

One of the precepts of Islam is that one should refrain from (defaming)
the honor of men and not to mention it with evil, that he may keep the
unity of the Muslims.

140. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali
b. al-Husayn, peace be on him, said:] Beware of backbiting, for it is
the food of the inhabitants of the Fire.

Ali b. al-Husayn, the master of the Allah-fearing, peace be on him, has
presented the prohibition of backbiting, which is the most atrocious of
all forbidden things, for it leads to spreading offenses and obscene
words among the Muslims.

141. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Surely,
Allah detests him who does not receive the person who comes in to him.

Among the Islamic good manners is that you should honor those who visit
you in your house, not turn away from them, and accomplish their needs,
especially the needs of those who are poor and needy.

### CHAPTER NINE

### THE EXCELLENCE OF INVASION AND JIHĀD

142. Through his chain of authority, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali b.
al-Husayn, the blessings of Allah be on him, said: While the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him, was addressing the people, a young man
stood up before him and said:] O Commander of the faithful, tell me
about the excellence of the invasion in the path of Allah. He, peace be
on him, answered: I was riding behind Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family, on his she-camel al-Adbā when we came beck from the
Campaign of Dhāt al-Salāsil. I asked him about what you have asked me
about, and he answered: Surely, if the invaders intend to make an
invasion, Allah writes for them freedom from the Fire, and if they
prepare themselves, Allah vies (in glory) with the angels through them,
etc.

  

  

  

The tradition is long; the greatest Messengers, may Allah bless him and
his family, has presented therein the excellence of invasion and jihād
in the path of Allah, which is one of the gates to the Garden, and which
Allah has opened for his special friends, as it was said by the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him.

### CHAPTER TEN

### MISCELLANEOUS TRADITIONS

143. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Allah, the
Most High, says: O son of Ādam, do you not treat Me with justice? I show
love toward you through favors and you show hatred toward Me through the
acts of disobedience. My good descends to you, and your evil ascends to
Me. A noble angel always brings Me an ugly deed from you on every day
and night.

O son of Ādam, if you hear your description from other than you, and you
do not know who the describer is, you will quickly detest him.

This Holy Tradition summons men to do good deeds and warns them against
evil deeds.

144. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said: Allah, the
Great and Almighty, says:] O son of Ādam, do not let the sins of men
divert you from your own sin, nor (let) the favors of men divert you
from those of Allah toward you. Do not drive men to despair of Allahs
favor, while you hope them for your own soul.

This tradition orders man not to let the sins of men turn him away from
his own sins, for every person is responsible for his own sins before
Allah, the Exalted. In addition, it orders him not to let the favors
which Allah bestow upon his servants divert him from His favors toward
him.

145. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] I fear for
my community from three (things): error after knowledge, misleading
discords, the lust of stomach and genital parts.

  

  

  

Certainly these three temptations turns man away from Allah, the
Exalted, and throws him into dreadful evil.

146. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said concerning the
interpretation of these words of Him, the Most High: *(Remember) the day
when We will call every people with their Imām*:] He (Allah) will call
every people with the Imām of their time, the Book of their Lord, and
the Sunna (practices and sayings) of their Prophet.

This tradition gives an account of mustering men on the Day of
Resurrection. It indicates that every people will be mustered along with
their Imām (leader), the Book of their Lord, and the Sunna of their
Lord. If they obeyed them and put them into practice, they would be
successful and be safe from the severe punishment of Allah, and if they
opposed them, they would be unsuccessful.

147. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Allah will
reckon every creature except him who associates a partner with Him, for
He will not reckon him and order him (to be taken) to the Fire.

148. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Circumcise
your boys on the seventh day, for it is the purest and quickest (act) in
making flesh grow.

An example of wonderful Islamic legislation is that it summons the
Muslims to circumcise male babies on the seventh day of their birth, for
the circumcision in this age recovers quickly and the male baby does not
suffer severe pain. If the baby exceeds this age, especially when its
age exceeds three or four years, it faces difficulty and severe pain in
circumcising.

149. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The wronged
are neither praiseworthy nor rewarded.

As for the wronged, if they are ignorant, they do not deserve praise and
reward, for they neglect their dealings; and if they are knowledgeable
and adopt riches, then they are worthy of blame and dispraise.

  

  

  

150. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Do favor
for those who are worthy of it and those who are not worthy of it. If
you find those who are worthy of it, then they deserve it; and if you do
not find those who are worthy of it, then you are among those who are
entitled to it.

In this tradition there is a creative summons to doing favor and
kindness to all men. This is one of good Islamic teachings standing on
favor and kindness.

151. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] The head of
reason after religion is showing love toward men and doing favor for
both the righteous and the sinful.

Surely, showing love for men and making favor for them is a proof of
ripe mind, sound reason, and insight.

152. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Verily, your
mouths are ways to your Lord, so clean them.

This tradition summons the Muslims to clean their mouths through
refraining from obscene and abominable words, saying the truth, polite
words, and others.

153. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] He who fasts
on Friday with endurance and fore-thought is given the reward of ten
honorable, brilliant days which the days of the world do not resemble.

This tradition awakens ones desire for fasting on Friday, which is the
most honorable of the days of the week, for there is abundant repayment
and great reward in fasting on it.

154. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] Prefer the
Garden to the Fire and do not invalidate your deeds, so you will be
thrown into the Fire, bowing (your heads) and immortal therein.

  

  

  

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, summons (people) to
gain Paradise through sincere deeds and not to invalidate their deeds
through hypocrisy, and others. In addition, he, may Allah bless him and
his family, warns them against the Fire, may Allah protect us from it.

155. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] There is no
retiring into mosque for devotion *(itikāf)* except along with fasting.

As for prayer in seclusion *(itikāf)*, it stands on fasting, and it
should be in one of the mosques of Allah. As for fasting for *itikāf*,
it should be for three days; and the one who performs *itikāf*  has no
right to leave the mosque except after the three days.

156. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] If the
servant sees the moment of his death and its speed, he will hate hope
and seeking the world.

If man reflects on his fate and carefully considers his condition in the
grave and his quick departure from this world, then he will detest hope
and hate the world.

157. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali
b. Abū Tālib related to me, saying:] He who subjects himself to
accusation and entering what brings about losing his dignity, certainly
empowers mistrust over himself, and it is he who brings about that
against himself.

158. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [Ali
b. Abū Tālib said:] He who obeys a creature and disobeys the Creator has
no religion.

Surely, he who obeys a creature through disobeying the Creator has no
religion and no relationship with Allah, the Most High.

159. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Al-Husayn b. Ali, peace be on him,  related to me, saying:] Verily, the
deeds of this community are brought before Allah, the Great and
Almighty, every morning.

  

  

  

Definitely, the deeds of the Muslims are brought before  Allah, the
Exalted, every day, whether they are good or evil. So blessed is he who
does good deeds and fears his Lord!

160. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [My
father Ali b. Abū Tālib related to me concerning these words of Him, the
Exalted: *And certainly she made for him, and he would have made for
her, were it not that he had seen the manifest evidence of his Lord,*
saying:] The wife of al-Aziz (the Chief of Egypt) went to an idol and
covered the idol, and then she said: It can see us! So Yousif asked her:
What is this? I feel shame of the idol when it sees us! she replied. So
he asked her: Do you feel shame of the idol which cannot hear; nor can
it see; nor can it benefit; nor can it harm? Why do you not feel shame
of Him who has created things and has knowledge of them? So that is His
words, the Exalted: *the manifest evidence of his Lord*.

161. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [When
Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him, saw a sick person who got well, he
said:] Purity from sins congratulates you!

Many traditions have been reported from the Imāms of guidance, peace be
on them; the traditions indicate that illness purifies sick person from
the sins which he had committed, and that it increases his good deeds.

162. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said: [My
father Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him, related to me, saying:] We
have taken three (things) from three (persons): Steadfastness from Ayyūb
(Job), gratitude from Nūh (Noah), and envy from the children of Yaqūb
(Jacob).

163. Through his chain of authorities, he, peace be on him, said:
[Mohammed b. Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on them, was asked:] Why was the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, orphaned? He, peace be on
him, replied: Lest no creature should have a right against him.

Many traditions have justified the orphanage of the Messenger, may Allah
bless him and his family. Yet there is another justification as follows:
This Orphan (i.e. the Prophet) could change the course of  

  

  

the worlds history, save man from the fables and customs of those pagans
who loved before Islam, established on earth a state which raised the
torch of monotheism, brightened the regions of the world through the
truth and justice.

With this matter we will end our talk about the Musnad and Sahifa of
Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. It is worth mentioning that I (i.e. the
author) have dropped some traditions mentioned in these two books of the
Imām, for I think that they are fabricated and do not belong to the
traditions of the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on
them. Perhaps, for this reason some religious scholars have not ascribed
this book (Sahifa) to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and not regarded it
as evidence for some religious precepts.

Al-Fiqh al-Radawi
-----------------

The book *al-Fiqh al-Radawi* (al-Ridās Jurisprudence) has also been
attributed to Imām al-Ridā\`, peace be on him, and it was not known by
the early Imāmi scholars; rather it appeared afterwards, and especially
in the time of al-Majjlisi, the virtuous, who said: I was told about the
book *Fiqh al-Ridā*, peace be on him, by al-Sayyid, the virtuous
traditionalist, the ruler-judge Husayn, may Allah be Gracious to his
soil, after returning to Asfahān. He said to me: It happened that during
the time when I was neighboring the Sacred House of Allah, a group of
the residents of Qum visited me while performing their *hajj* and they
had with them an old book the date of its writing agreed with the date
during which al-Ridā, the blessings of Allah be upon him, was alive.
Al-Majjlisi continues to say: I heard my father, may Allah have mercy on
him, saying that it was written in the handwriting of al-Ridā, the
blessings of Allah be upon him, and a large group of the dignitaries
testified to the same. Al-Sayyid (Husayn) said: From these contexts, I
have come to know that the book was written by the Imām, peace be on
him; so I took the book, wrote it and corrected it. Hence my father, may
Allah hallow his soul, took this book from al-Sayyid, copied it and
corrected it. Most its sentences agree with what al-Sadūq, may Allah
have mercy on him, has mentioned in his book *Man lā Yahdarahu al-Faqih*
with out any chain of authorities, and what  

  

  

his father has mentioned in his letter to him. Our companions have
mentioned many precepts in the book without mentioning their chain of
authorities.

A group of the eminent figures of the Imāmi jurisprudence like al-Fādil
al-Kāshāni, the Author of al-Riyād, al-Muhaddith al-Bahrāni, and others
testified the book and depended on it.

Yet another group of the great religious scholars has discussed the book
and denied it. He who carefully considers the book concludes the
following criticisms:

Firstly, if this book belonged to Imām al-Ridā, it would not be unknown
for numerous centuries; the early Imāmi scholars and traditionalists
would come to know of it, for they took great care of all traditions
transmitted from the Imāms of guidance, peace be on them; yet, none of
them said even a word concerning it.

Secondly, Shaykh al-Sadūq, who has recorded all traditions reported from
Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, has not mentioned the book in his book
*Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā;* nor has he mentioned it in his other books.

Lastly, the book contains some traditions which contradict the Shiite
beliefs such as extremism which the pure Imāms disproved and regarded as
infidels those who believe in it. For example, it has been mentioned in
the book, Chapter on Istiqbāl al-Qibla fi al-Salāt: And place one of the
Imāms before your eyes. This is grievous extremism, for it is incumbent
upon every worshipper to direct his sentiments and feelings towards
Allah, the Creator of the universe and Giver of life.

These are some criticisms of the book, and they indicate that it does
not belong to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. It is worth mentioning that
the book was published by the World Conference on Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him, in the Holy City of Meshhad, that it was checked by the Āl
al-Bayt Foundation for Renewing Legacy in Qum, may Allah increase it in
honor, and that its introduction was written by the great researcher
Shaykh Jawād al-Sharistāni, who mentioned the proofs of those who
testified the book and of those who denied it.

  

