Chapter Ix
==========

  

  

THE SCIENCE OF ISLAMIC JURISPRUDENCE
------------------------------------

It is not an act of exaggeration or extremism when we say that the
Islamic jurisprudence of *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them, * *is the best
of that which has been codified in the world of legislation, for it
complies with innate and reason, does not deviate from the laws of the
cosmos; there is neither difficulty nor narrowness nor backwardness in
its items. Rather it is balanced, progressive, and perfect. It has
treated mans affairs and given to them decisive solutions in the light
of intellect and logic.

Moreover this jurisprudence has another characteristic of great
importance, and this characteristic is that it has been taken form the
Imāms of guidance who are among the pillars of awareness and guidance in
the world of Islam, for they announced that they did not give religious
edicts regarding a certain matter according to their own opinions or
their personal decisions; rather they announced that they took their
religious decisions from their grandfather the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, who supplied them with his knowledge, singled them
out with his wisdom, regarded them as lifeboats and security for
mankind, and made it obligatory on the community to follow their creed
and their example; and this has been proved by many traditions which has
been transmitted from them by the trustworthy narrators from among their
companions.

It is worth mentioning that the Shiites regard all the precepts which
have been narrated on the authority of the Imāms of *ahl al-Bayt*,  

  

  

peace be on them, as part of the Sunna, which is one of the sources of
*Fatwā* or religious edict and among the concepts of Islamic legislation
according which man should act and worship, if the way of the chain of
authorities to them (the Imāms) is authentic, and if the *fatwā* was
issued by them to explain the real precept, not for precautionary
dissimulation, and other conditions which have been mentioned by the
jurists concerning authentic traditions.

Any how, Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, was among the leading Imāms of
guidance, peace be on them; therefore, his words and actions are part of
the Sunna, for a group of legislative precepts have been transmitted
from him. We will mention some examples of them in one of the researches
of this book. Now, we will talk about his science of Islamic
jurisprudence.

Examples of his Jurisprudence
-----------------------------

In the previous researches, we mentioned one of the treatises of Imām,
peace be on him, in which he recorded excellent legislative precepts.
Another group of juristic matters has been reported from him, and it is
as follows:

### 1. The Purity of Well Water

Mohammed b. Ismāil wrote to a man who asked him to ask Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, about well water, and he, peace be on him, answered:
Well water is running; nothing spoils it except when its smell or taste
changes, so (some water) should be bailed out of it until the smell
terminates and its taste becomes good, for it has a
source.[[1]](#_ftn545)

As for well water, it has the same rank of running water; it does not
become unclean except when it changes. The Imāmi jurists have given a
religious decision on well water according to this narration (of the
Imām) and others.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F545) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 1, p. 127.  
  

  

  

### 2. Things that Invalidate *wudū*

The Imām has mentioned the things that invalidate *wudū* as follows:
discharge of urine, discharge of feces, discharge of flatus (through the
anus), and sleep (to the extent that it makes a person unaware of his
surroundings). He, peace be on him, said: *Wudū* is obligatory on the
things that discharge especially from the two parts, and sleep apart
from other things, for the two parts are the way of uncleanness. Man has
no way which brings about uncleanness to him except through them, so
they (men) have been commanded to clean themselves from this
uncleanness.[[1]](#_ftn546)

The Imām, peace be on him, also declared that vomiting, nosebleed, and
pus were not among things which invalidated *wudū*.[[2]](#_ftn547)
However, some Imāms of the Islamic schools declared that these things
invalidated *wudū*.

### 3. The Limit of the Face in *Wudū*

Ismāi\`l b. Mahrān narrated, saying: I wrote to Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him, to ask him about the limit of the face (i.e. the part which
should be washed during *wudū*), and he, peace be on him, wrote: from
the beginning of the hair to the end of the face in addition to the two
foreheads.[[3]](#_ftn548) As for the jurists, they say that one should
wash the face from the point where the hair of the head normally grows
down to the chin in length. Breadithwise, the span is that area which is
covered by the thumb and the middle finger when they are spread out.

### 4. *W*udū with a Bandage *(jabira)*

Abd al-Rahmān b. al-Hajjājj narrated, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him: How can one who has a bandage perform *wudū or
ghusl* of *janāba* or *ghusl* for the Friday prayer?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F546) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 5.  
 [[2]](#_F547) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, Chapter on *Wudū'*.  
 [[3]](#_F548) Ibid.  
  

  

  

He, peace be on him, replied: He should wash the uncovered part with no
bandage to which water reaches, and leave apart from that; he should not
remove the bandage and play with his surgery( i.e. wound, cut, burn, or
broken limb).[[1]](#_ftn549)

*Al-jabāir* are bandages (in the term of the time) or others which are
put on fractures, wounds, cuts, and abscesses; and they are either on
the area which should be washed during *wudū* or *ghusl* or on the area
which should be rubbed. If it is possible for him to wash or rub the
affected area without any harm, then it is obligatory on him to do that.
If it is not possible for him to do that because of the harm of water or
the like, then it is obligatory on him to wash the place where the
bandage *(jabira)* is, and then he rubs over it. If the bandage
*(jabira)*  on the area which should be rubbed and he cannot  remove it
to rub on the skin, then he should rub over it. It is worth mentioning
that the Imāmi jurists have mentioned important researches on these
matters.

### 5. The *Wudū* of Man and Woman

Mohammed b. Ismāil b. Buzaygh narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, who said: In *wudū* for prayer, Allah has made
it obligatory on women to start with the inward part of their hands and
on men to start with the outward part of their hands.[[2]](#_ftn550)

Mohammed b. Ali b. al-Husayn narrated. He said: [Al-Ridā, peace be on
him, said:] Allah, the Great and Almighty,  has made it obligatory on
people in *wudū* that women should start with the inward part of their
hands and men start with the outward part of their hands.[[3]](#_ftn551)

In *wudū* it is recommended for man to start with washing the outward
part of his hands; and as for woman, it is recommended for her to start
with washing the inward part of her hands. The meaning of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F549) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 11.  
 [[2]](#_F550) Ibid., p. 10.  
 [[3]](#_F551) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 1, p. 16.  
  

  

  

the word *farada*  in the two traditions is that He (Allah) has ordained
and explained (performing *wudū* in this manner*)*, and not that He has
made (it) obligatory.[[1]](#_ftn552)

### 6. Seeking of Help from others in *Wudū* is Reprehensible

Al-Hasan b. Ali al-Washshā narrated, saying: I went in to al-Ridā, peace
be on him, and there was a pitcher of water before him. When he wanted
to perform *wudū*  for prayer, I approached him to pour water on his
hands, but he refused that and said: No, O Hasan! he said. So I asked
him: Why are you preventing me from pouring water on your hands? Do you
hate that I am rewarded? You will be rewarded, he answered, but I will
commit a sin. And how is that? I asked. He replied: Have you not heard
these words of Allah, the Great and Almighty: *Therefore, whoever hopes
to meet his Lord, he should do good deeds, and not join any one in the
service of his Lord* ?[[2]](#_ftn553) Here I am! I am going to perform
*wudū*  for the prayer, which is an act of worship, and I hate that
someone helps me in it.[[3]](#_ftn554)

In the light of this narration and others which have been transmitted
from the Imāms of guidance, the Imāmi jurists have given a religious
decision that it is reprehensible for someone to seek help from others
in the prerequisites of *wudū* .[[4]](#_ftn555)

### 7. How *Tayammum* is Performed

Ismāil b. Hammām al-Kindi reported on the authority of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, who said: *Tayammum* is one stroke for the face, and
one stroke for the back of the hands.[[5]](#_ftn556)

The famous jurists believe that when *tayammum*  is performed instead of
*wudū*, then one stroke is sufficient for the face and the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F552) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 1, p. 328.  
 [[2]](#_F553) Qur'ān, 18, 110.  
 [[3]](#_F554) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 21.  
 [[4]](#_F555) Al-'Urwat al-Withqā, Hateful Things in *Wudū'*.  
 [[5]](#_F556) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 2, p. 978. Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p.
59.  
  

  

  

(back of) the hands, and that when it is performed instead of *ghusl*,
then two strokes are obligatory.[[1]](#_ftn557) The narration regards
multiplicity as absolute; and perhaps it (the narration) has been
interpreted as recommended.

### 8. *Tayammum* with Mud

Ali b. Matar narrated on the authority of one of our companions, who
said: I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him: Shall one perform *tayammum*
with mud when he finds neither water nor earth? He said: Yes, pure earth
and pure water.

The narration is clear in making it permissible (for someone) to perform
*tayammum* with mud when neither water nor earth is available.

### 9. Incapability of Performing the *Ghusl* of *Janāba*

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr asked Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him: Shall
one practice *(tayammum)* when he is impure and has wound or cut or fear
for himself of cold? He should not perform *ghusl;* he should practice
*tayammum*[[2]](#_ftn558), he answered.

The narration is clear in making it permissible (for someone) to
practice *tayammum* when he is incapable of performing *ghusl* which
brings about harm which is negated (according to these words of Him, the
Most High:) And has not laid upon you any hardship in religion.

### 10. The Skins of Dead Animals

Qāsim al-Saqi\`l narrated, saying: I wrote to al-Ridā, peace be on him:
I make sheaths from the skins of dead asses for swords, and they touch
my own clothes, and I pray while wearing them. So he, peace be on him,
wrote me: Use a garment for your prayer.[[3]](#_ftn559)

As for the skins of dead animals, they are impure. When a wet  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F557) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 59. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 2, p.
973.  
 [[2]](#_F558) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 55. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 2, p.
968.  
 [[3]](#_F559) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 113. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 2,
p. 1070.  
  

  

  

garment touches them, it becomes impure. Hence prayer is not permissible
except in pure clothes.

### 11. Gold and Silver Containers

Mohammed b. Ismāil reported, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace
be on him, about gold and siliver containers, and he regarded them as
reprehensible. So I said: One of our companions narrated that Abū
al-Hasan (Imām al-Kāzim), peace be on him, had a mirror clothed in
silver, and he, peace be on him, said: No, praise belongs to Allah, it
had a silver ring and the ring is with me. Then he said: When al-Abbās
was excused, an (iron) bar clothed in silver was made for him; the bar
was like that made for boys, and (its weight) was about ten (silver)
dirhams, but Abū al-Hasan ordered it to be broken.[[1]](#_ftn560)

Most jurists believe that it is prohibited to use gold and silver
containers. As for the reprehensibility in the narration, it is
interpreted as either prohibition or precautionary dissimulation, for a
group of the non-Shiites *(āmma)* regards them as not prohibited.

### 12. *Ghusl* On Friday

Abd Allah b. al-Mughira reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him. He said: I asked him about *ghusl* on Friday,
and he answered: It is obligatory on everyone, male or female, slave or
free.[[2]](#_ftn561)

As for *ghusl* on Friday, it is one of the strongly recommended things.
The obligation in the narration is interpreted as a certain
recommendation.

### 13. Touching the Corpse of other than Man

One should not perform *ghusl* when he touches the corpse of other than
man, for al-Fadl b. Shādhān transmitted from Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him, who said: It is not obligatory for one to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F560) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 156. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 2,
p. 1083.  
 [[2]](#_F561) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 2, p. 946. Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1,
p. 14.  
  

  

  

perform *ghusl* when he touches the dead bodies of those other than man
such as birds, animals, beasts of prey, and others, for all these things
are clothed in feathers or hair; and all these things are alive and do
not die; the only thing which is touched is the alive from among the
living and the dead (animals).

Shaykh al-Hur al-Āmili said: The justification is untrue and the
examples of it are many. It is likely that it is a justification
especially for the most dominant individual.[[1]](#_ftn562)

### 14. The Prayer for the Dead without *Wudū*

Al-Fadl b. Shādhān narrated from Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, who
said: We have made it permissible to perform the prayer for the dead
without *wudū*, for it has neither bow *(rukū)* nor adoration *(sujūd)*;
rather it is a supplication and request; and it is permissible for you
to supplicate Allah and ask Him in any state in which you are; *wudū*
(is practiced) only for the prayer which has bow *(rukū)* and adoration
*(sujūd)*.[[2]](#_ftn563)

Most Imāmi jurists believe that the prayer for the dead is a mere
supplication, and not a real prayer; for this reason neither purity nor
permissible clothes are conditions therein.

### 15. Raising the Hands during the *Takbir* for the Prayer for the Dead

Yunus said: I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: May I be your
ransom, the people raise their hands during the *takbir* (exclaiming:
Allah is Great!) for the dead in the first *takbir*, and they do not
raise (their hands) after that. Shall I confine myself to the first
*takbir* just as they do or raise my hands in each *takbir*? Raise your
hands in each *takbir*, he said.[[3]](#_ftn564)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F562) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 2, p. 936.  
 [[2]](#_F563) Ibid.,  p. 799.  
 [[3]](#_F564) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 50. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 2,
p. 786.  
  

  

  

### 16. Prayer is the best Act of Worship

Yahyā b. Habib reported, saying: I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him, about
the best prayer through which the servants seek nearness to Allah. He
answered: Forty-six obligatory and supererogatory *rakas*. I said: This
is the narration of Zarāra. Do you think that there is a person better
than him in declaring the truth? he asked.[[1]](#_ftn565)

### 17. Prayer is the Sacrifice of the Allah-fearing

Mohammed b. al-Fadl reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, who said: Prayer is the sacrifice of the
Allah-fearing.[[2]](#_ftn566)

### 18. Prayer should be performed in its  Timing

Sad b. Sad narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, who said: When it
is time for you to pray, then perform the prayer, for you do not know
what will happen.[[3]](#_ftn567)

Many traditions have mentioned that it is recommended to perform prayer
in its timing, and that it is reprehensible to delay it. In another
tradition Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, said: It is good to perform
prayer in its timing.[[4]](#_ftn568)

### 19. Timing of the Evening Prayer

Ismāil b. Mahrān narrated, saying: I wrote to al-Ridā, peace be on him,
to ask him about the timings of the prayers, especially as it concerns
the evening prayer, and he, peace be on him, wrote me: The time of the
evening (prayer) is little, and its last timing is the disappearance of
the red sky and the appearance of the white sky on the western
horizon.[[5]](#_ftn569)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F565) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 135. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 3, p.
43.  
 [[2]](#_F566) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 73. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 3,
p. 30.  
 [[3]](#_F567) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 213.  
 [[4]](#_F568) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 3, p. 90.  
 [[5]](#_F569) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 77.  
  

  

  

The Imām reflected on the best timing of prayer, not on the obligatory
time, for its timing and that of the night prayer last up to
midnight.[[1]](#_ftn570)

### 20. Timings of the Noon and Afternoon Prayers

Ismāil b. Mahrān narrated, saying: I wrote to al-Ridā, peace be on him:
Our companions have mentioned that when the sun comes near to descending
(from its midday zenith), then it is time to start the noon and
afternoon prayers; and when it sets, it is time to start the evening and
night prayers, but this (the evening prayer) is before this (the night
prayer) during travel and residence. So he wrote: Such is the time, but
the time of the evening (prayer) is narrow (little).[[2]](#_ftn571)

### 21. The Compensatory Supererogatory Prayers

Mohammed b. Yahyā reported, saying: I wrote to Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him: When will I compensate supererogatory prayers? Any
hour, you like, of night or day, he replied.[[3]](#_ftn572)

In the light of this narration and other narrations which have been
reported from the Imāms of guidance, the Imāmi jurists have given a
religious decision that it is recommended to recompensate supererogatory
prayers, and that when one is incapable of compensating them, it is
recommended for him to pay *mudd* (measure) as alms instead of each two
*rakaks*.[[4]](#_ftn573)

### 22. The Late-night Supererogatory Prayers for those who have Excuses

It is permissible for those who have excuses to perform the late-night
supererogatory prayers *(salāt al-layl)* at the beginning of night,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F570) Minhājj al-Sālihin.  
 [[2]](#_F571) Wasā'il al-Shi'a.  
 [[3]](#_F572) Ibid., vol. 3, p. 68.  
 [[4]](#_F573) Minhājj al-Sālihin.  
  

  

  

for al-Fadl b. Shādhān transmitted from Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,
who said: It is permissible for the travelers and the sick to perform
the late-night supererogatory prayers *(salāt al-layl)* at the beginning
of night because of their business and weakness; and that they may gain
their prayers. Accordingly, the sick may rest at the time of their rest,
and the travelers may prepare themselves for travel.[[1]](#_ftn574)

### 23. It is not Permissible to perform Prayer while wearing the Skins of Beasts of Prey

 It is not permissible for the worshipper to perform prayer while
wearing the skins of beasts of prey, for Ismāil b. Sad al-Ahwas
narrated, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, about
(him who performs) prayer  (while wearing) the skins of beasts of prey,
and he replied: Do not pray while (wearing) them.[[2]](#_ftn575)

### 24. Prayer  when Wearing Silk Clothing

The Imām, peace be on him, made it permissible for the worshipper to
pray wearing silk clothing, for Muammar b. Khallād reported, saying: I
asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, about the prayer when
wearing a silk garment, and he answered: Pray wearing it.[[3]](#_ftn576)

Sad b. Sad narrated on the authority of al-Ridā, peace be on him. He
said: I asked him about silk skins, and he said: This is silk (pointing
to his garment). We wear silk (clothing). So I said to him: May I be
your ransom, that is hair. If its (the animals) hair is lawful, then its
skin is lawful, he retorted.[[4]](#_ftn577)      

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F574) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 1, p. 147.  
 [[2]](#_F575) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 111. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 3,
p. 257.  
 [[3]](#_F576) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 96. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 3, p.
261.  
 [[4]](#_F577) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 242. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 3, p.
266.  
  

  

  

### 25. Performing Prayer on Roads is   Reprehensible

The Imāmi jurists have given a religious decision that performing prayer
on roads is reprehensible. One of their proofs of that is what al-Hasan
b. al-Jahm has narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace
be on him, who said: Do not pray on every road on which (men) walk. I
(i.e. al-Hasan b. al-Jahm) said to him: It has been narrated on the
authority of your grandfather that there is no harm in praying on high
valleys and lands. Perhaps, the man agrees with me on that, he retorted.
He (i.e. al-Hasan b. al-Jahm) said: I said: If the man fears for his
provisions? If he fears (for his provisions), then let him pray, he
declared.[[1]](#_ftn578)

### 26. Prayer by the Grave of the Prophet

It is permissible to perform prayer behind the grave of the infallible
or on one of its sides, for al-Hasan b. Ali b. Faddāl narrated, saying:
I saw Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā when he wanted to go out to perform Umra
(lesser pilgrimage). He came to the grave from the place of the head of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. He clung to the grave,
and then he walked until he came to the grave, so he stood and began
praying. He stuck his left shoulder to the pillar at the head of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and performed six or eight
*rakas*.[[2]](#_ftn579)

### 27. Prayer in al-Masjid al-Harām

The Imām urged (men) to pray in al-Masjid al-Harām (the holy mosque in
Mecca). In this connection, Mūsā b. Salām reported, saying: Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, made the Umra (lesser pilgrimage). When he
said farewell to the House and arrived at Bāb al-Hannātin in order to go
out of it, he stood at the yard of al-Mesjid at the back of the Kaba.
Then he raised his hands and supplicated (Allah). Then he turned to us
and said: It it the best thing  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F578) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 3, p. 445.  
 [[2]](#_F579) Ibid.  
  

  

  

through which the need is requested from Him. The prayer wherein is
sixty years and months better than the prayer in other than it. When he
reached the gate, he said: O Allah, I have gone out, but there is no god
but you![[1]](#_ftn580)

### 28. Prayer at al-Hatim

Al-Hasan b. al-Jahm narrated, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā about
the best place of prayer, and he replied: Al-Hatim, which is between the
(Black) Stone and the Gate of the House. I asked: And what follows that
in excellence? The standing place of Ibrāhim, he replied. Then what
follows that in excellence? I asked. The (Black) Stone, he answered.
Then what follows that (in excellence)? I asked. All that which is
nearby the House, he replied.[[2]](#_ftn581)

### 29. Prayer in the two Mosques

Al-Hasan b. Ali al-Washshā narrated on the authority of al-Ridā, peace
be on him, saying: I asked him: Is the prayer in the Holy Mosque (in
Mecca) and the Mosque of the Prophet the same? Yes, he answered, and the
prayer between them is equal to one thousand prayers.[[3]](#_ftn582)

### 30. Supplication during leaving the House is Recommended

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, urged (the Muslims) to cling to
supplication during leaving their houses, saying: When my father left
his own house, he said: In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the
Most Merciful. I have gone out with Allahs help and through His power! I
have neither help nor power! Rather through Your help and power, O Lord,
I seek daily bread from You, so bring it to me in
well-being![[4]](#_ftn583)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F580) Ibid., p. 53.  
 [[2]](#_F581) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 308. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 3, p.
538.  
 [[3]](#_F582) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 324. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 3, p. 550.  
 [[4]](#_F583) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 3, p. 579.  
  

  

  

### 31. Sitting between *al-Adhān* and *al-Iqāma*

Mohammed b. Abū Nasr al-Bizanti reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: I asked him about the sitting between
*al-Adhān* (the call to prayer) and *al-Iqāma* (the declaration of
standing for prayer), and he replied: There is sitting between them when
there is no supererogatory prayer.[[1]](#_ftn584)

### 32. *Al-Adhān*

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, who said: One may perform *al-Adhān* (the call to
prayer) in sitting position, and he may perform it in riding
position.[[2]](#_ftn585)

### 33. *Al-Iqāma*

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr narrated on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, who said: You may perform *al-Adhān* (the call to
prayer) and you are in sitting position, and you may not perform
*al-Iqāma* (the declaration of standing for prayer) except when you are
on the ground and in standing position.[[3]](#_ftn586)

### 34. Raising and Lowering Voice during Prayer

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, aloud recited (the suras) in the evening
prayer, the night prayer, the late-night prayer, the even prayer, the
odd prayer, and the morning prayer; and he quietly recited (the suras)
in the noon and afternoon prayers.[[4]](#_ftn587)

Men must recite the two suras in the two-*raka* prayer of the morning
aloud. Similarly, the suras in the first two *rakas* of the evening and
night prayers must be recited aloud. The suras of the noon and afternoon
prayers, apart from the Friday prayer, must be recited  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F584) Ibid., p. 633.  
 [[2]](#_F585) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 1, p. 91.  
 [[3]](#_F586) Qurb al-Isnād, p. 159. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 4, p.
630.  
 [[4]](#_F587) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 4, p. 765.  
  

  

  

quietly. If he intentionally recites the suras aloud, his prayer is
invalid; and if he recites them aloud out of forgetfulness or ignorance,
his prayer is valid. It is recommended to recite the suras of the Friday
prayer aloud.[[1]](#_ftn588)

### 35. Postponing some of the Recitation of the Supererogatory Prayer

 Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr al-Bizanti, the companion of Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him,  reported, saying: I asked him: A man wants to
recite one hundred verses or more in a supererogatory prayer, but he
fears that he may become weak or lazy. Is it correct for him to recite
them in sitting position? He replied: Let him pray two *rakas* with
whatever (verses) he likes, and then let him go; and then let him recite
the rest of the (verses) which he had wanted to recite, for that is
sufficient to replace his recitation in standing position. If it seems
to him that he wants to recite after the *taslim* [***[2]***](#_ftn589)
of the two *rakas*, then let him recite; there is no harm (on
him).[[3]](#_ftn590)

If one wants to recite one hundred *rakas* in a supererogatory prayer
and he is not forced to do that out of vow and the like, he has to
choose between praying two *rakas* in sitting position and recites
whatever verses he likes, and praying two *rakas* (in standing position)
and recite the *taslim*; and then he recites whatever verses he likes
after the prayer.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F588) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F589) The *taslim* is recited after the final *rak'a* of every
prayer. The worshipper remains kneeling after the *tashahud*, and
says:  
 السلام عليك أيها النبي ورحمة الله وبركاته السلام علينا وعلى عباد الله
الصالحين السلام عليكم ورحمة الله وبركاته  
 *As-salāmu 'alay-ka ayyuha'n-nabiyū wa-rahmatu'llāhi wa-barakātu-h.
As-salāmu 'alay-nā wa-'alā 'ibādi'llāhi's-sālihin.As-salāmu 'alay-kum
wa-rahmatu'llāhi wa-barakātu-h.*  
 Peace be upon you, O Prophet, and Allah's mercy and blessing. Peace be
upon us, and upon the righteous servants of Allah. Peace be upon you
(all), and Allah's mercy and blessing.  
 [[3]](#_F590) Al-Sarā'ir, p. 469  
  

  

  

### 36. Turning the Face during Prayer

Al-Bizanti narrated, saying: I asked him (i.e. al-Ridā) about the person
who turns (his face) during prayer: Does such a person turn aside from
his prayer? He answered: If the prayer is obligatory and he (or she)
turns his (or her) face, then he (or she) must turn aside from his (or
her) prayer, repeat it, and do not regard it (as prayer).[[1]](#_ftn591)

Certainly, turning the face changes the form of prayer, and all things
which change the form of prayer invalidate it.

### 37. *Zakāt al-Fitra*

Mohammed b. al-Qāsim b. al-Fadl reported, saying: I wrote to Abū
al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, to ask him: Does the guardian pay
*Zakāt al-Fitra* [***[2]***](#_ftn592) on behalf of the orphans who have
wealth? So he wrote: There is no *zakāt* (imposed) on the
orphan.[[3]](#_ftn593)

As for *Zakāt al-Fitra*, it is not obligatory on the orphan nor on his
guardian, who has no right to take it out of the orphans wealth, as it
is indicated by the narration through which the jurists have given a
religious edict, for there is no religious duty on the orphan until he
or she reaches ritual puberty (15 years in the case of boys and 9 years
in the case of girls).

### 38. *Zakāt* due on Deposit and Loan

Ibrāhim b. Abū Mahmūd narrated, saying: I said to Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him: The person has a deposit or a debt, but he does not
reach them, and then he takes them, when *zakāt* is payable on him? He
replied: If he takes them and a year has passed, he must pay
*zakāt*.[[4]](#_ftn594) On of the conditions of *zakāt* is that one has
the authority to dispose of wealth, for it is not obligatory on the
wealth over which its owner has no authority because of his absence from
it.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F591) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F592) *Zakāt al-fitra*: the amount (in cash or kind) paid to
the need at the end of the month of Ramadān; see text for more
details.  
 [[3]](#_F593) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 6, p. 455. Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1,
p. 153.  
 [[4]](#_F594) Al-Tahdhib, 358.  
  

  

  

For example if the owner is able to regain his deposit (and one year)
has passed, then it is due on him to pay *zakāt*. Similarly, he must pay
the *zakāt* due on his loan after he has received it and one year has
passed.

### 39. *Zakāt* on Crops

Sad b. Sad al-Ashari narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: I asked him: When *zakāt* is due on wheat,
barley, dates, and raisins? He answered: When they are reaped and
assessed.[[1]](#_ftn595)

The famous jurists think that *zakāt* is due on wheat and barley when
they become ripe; on dates when they become yellow or red; on grapes
when they are unripe; and other than that is said.[[2]](#_ftn596)

### 40. Alawides *zakāt* is for the Alawides

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported from al-Ridā, saying: I asked him
about alms (*zakāt*): Is it lawful for the Hashimites to take alms
(*zakāt*)? No, he replied, but it is lawful for them to take alms from
each other.[[3]](#_ftn597)

### 41. *Zakāt* must be paid when due

 Sad b. Sad al-Ashari narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: I asked him about the person on whom *zakāt* is
obligatory three times a year, shall he delay them to pay them at one
time? No, he answered, pay it (*zakāt*) when it becomes
due.[[4]](#_ftn598) If the person has numerous items on which *zakāt* is
payable such as the crops, the livestock, gold, and silver, he must pay
the *zakāt* of each kind when it becomes due.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F595) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 147.  
 [[2]](#_F596) Al-'Urwat al-Withqā.  
 [[3]](#_F597) Qurb al-Isnād, p. 163. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 6, p.
190.  
 [[4]](#_F598) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 147. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 6,
p. 213.  
  

  

  

### 42. The *Fitra* on behalf of him who does not belong to the Family

Abd al-Rahmān b. al-Hajjājj narrated, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, about the man who spends on a man who does not
belong to his own family, but he finds difficulty in spending on him and
his clothing, is his *fitra* obligatory on him? No, he answered, the
*fitra* of his family is obligatory as alms on him apart from him (i.e.
the man who does not belong to the family. Then he said: The family are:
the child, the slave, and the wife who is the mother of the
child.[[1]](#_ftn599)

*Zakāt al-fitra* is obligatory on the responsible and his family when
the night of (Īd) al-Fitr comes. There is no difference between those
whose expenditure is obligatory on him and other than them, between the
young and the old. It is not obligatory on him to pay *fitra* on behalf
of those who do not belong to his own family, and in whose clothing and
expenditure he finds difficulty. Generally speaking, *fitra* is paid on
behalf of the person when actually belongs to the family, as the jurists
have mentioned.

### 43. The One-Fifth Tax *(Khums)*

Ali b. al-Husayn b. Ali b. Faddāl reported on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, who
said (in a tradition): Abd al-Muttalib had five practices *(sunan)*,
which Allah, for him, put into effect in Islam: He (Abd al-Muttalib)
made it prohibited for sons to marry their fathers women, specified one
hundred camels as blood money, circumambulated the House (the Kaba)
seven times, found a treasure and took out the one-fifth of it, and
called (the well) Zamzam when he dug it as a watering place for
pilgrims.[[2]](#_ftn600)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F599) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 1, p. 64.  
 [[2]](#_F600) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 6, p. 345.  
  

  

  

### 44. *Khums* on Treasure

Shaykh al-Mufid narrated through his chain of authorities, saying: Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him, was asked about the amount of treasure on
which *khums* is obligatory, and he replied: *Khums* is obligatory on
the thing on which *zakāt* is obligatory; *khums* is not obligatory on
the thing which does not reach the minimum amount of property liable to
payment of *zakāt*.[[1]](#_ftn601)

Treasure is the property stored in the earth; whether it is of the
coined and uncoined gold and silver or of other than them. One of its
conditions is that it must reach the minimum amount which is twenty
dinars. If it does not reach this amount, then there is no *khums* on
it.

### 45. *Khums* must be given to the Imām

Mohammed b. Zayd al-Tabari reported, saying: A Persian merchant, who was
a follower of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, asked him to exempt
him from *khums*, and he wrote to him: In the name of Allah the Most
Gracious, the Most Merciful. Surely Allah is All-embracing, generous. He
has guaranteed reward according to work. No property is lawful except
through the way which Allah has made lawful. Surely *khums* helps us
(serve) our religion, our family, our followers, spend freely, and
protect our honor from him whose power we fear. So do not cut us off
from *khums*, and as far as possible do not deprive yourselves of our
supplication. Surely giving *khums* is a key to your daily bread,
forgiving your sins, and what you pave for yourselves for the day of
your neediness. The Muslim is he who fulfills what Allah has entrusted
to him; the Muslim is not he who responds through his tongue and opposes
through his heart. Greetings.[[2]](#_ftn602)

### 46. *Khums* should be paid to the Imām

Mohammed b. Zayd narrated, saying: A group of people from Khurasān came
to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and asked him to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F601) Al-Maqna'a, p. 46.  
 [[2]](#_F602) Ibid. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 6, p. 375.  

  

  

  

exempt them from *khums*, and he said: I do not exempt (anyone from)
this. You show sincere affection toward us through your tongues, while
you deprive us of the right which Allah has apportioned to us and
appointed us for it, which is *khums*. We will not exempt anyone of you
from it.[[1]](#_ftn603)

This tradition and the one before it indicate that *khums* should be
paid to the present Imām, and in the period of his occultation
*(ghayba)* it should be given to his deputy, who is the general
authority of Islamic world.

### 47. Religious Expiation on breaking the fast through the Lawful and Unlawful

Abd al-Salām b. Sālih al-Harawi reported, saying: I said to al-Ridā,
peace be on him: O son of Allahs Apostle, it has been reported from your
fathers that there are three religious expiations on him who has a
sexual intercourse in the month of Ramadān or breaks the fast during
it;  it has also been narrated from them that there is one religious
expiation, then which of the two traditions should we follow? Both of
them, he replied, When the man has a sexual intercourse with a
prohibited woman or breaks the fast through the unlawful, then three are
three religious expiations due on him: releasing a slave, fasting two
successive months, feeding sixty needy ones, and compensating that day;
and if he indulges in lawful intercourse or breaks the fast through the
lawful, then there is one expiation obligatory on him; and if he is
forgetful, then there is nothing due on him.[[2]](#_ftn604)

In the light of this narration and other narrations transmitted from the
Imāms of guidance, the Imāmi jurists have given a religious decision
that if one breaks the fast through the unlawful during the day such as
drinking wine or eating a usurped thing or the like, he is subjected to
all the religious expiations, which are: releasing a slave, fasting two
successive months, feeding sixty needy ones, and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F603) Al-Maqna'a, p. 46. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 6, p. 375.  
 [[2]](#_F604) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 4111. Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih,
vol. 2, p. 121.  
  

  

  

compensating that day; and if he breaks the fast through a lawful thing
such as drinking water, then he has to choose between these three
religious expiations.

### 48. Liquid Enemas

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr al-Bizanti narrated that he asked Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him, about one who had a liquid enema in the month
of Ramadān, and he, peace be on him, answered: It is not permissible for
him to have a liquid enema.[[1]](#_ftn605)

The Imāmi jurists have depended on this narration and other narrations
reported from the Imāms of *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them, hence they
have given a religious decision that a liquid enema is one of the things
which invalidate the fast.

### 49. Brushing Teeth in the Month of Ramadān

Mūsā b. Abū al-Hasan al-Rāzi reported on the authority of al-Ridā, peace
be on him. He said: One of those who were sitting in his presence asked
him about cleaning teeth with the stick *(al-Siwāk)* in the month of
Ramadān, and he replied: It is permissible. So one of them declared: The
wetness of the stick goes down, what do you say about the wetness of the
stick  which goes down? He (the Imām) replied: The water of gargle
moistens (the mouth) more than the wet stick does. If someone says that
water is necessary for gargle according to the *Sunna*, then the stick
is also necessary according to the *Sunna* which Gabriel brought to the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.[[2]](#_ftn606)

### 50. Intention for Travel at Night

In a tradition Safwān narrated on the authority of al-Ridā, peace be on
him, who said: If one wants to go to al-Nahrwān and returns from it,
then he should make an intention for travel and breaking the fast at
night. If he enters upon morning and has not make the intention  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F605) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 8, p. 39.  
 [[2]](#_F606) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 416. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 8, p. 133.  
  

  

  

for the travel (at night) and it seems to him (that he has not made the
intention) after he has started the travel, then he should shorten (his
prayers) and should not break (the fast) of that day of
his.[[1]](#_ftn607)

In the light of this narration, Imām al-Khūi has given a religious
decision that the traveler should make an intention for travel at night.
If he does not make the intention and travels before the declination (of
the sun), then it is obligatory on him to  complete the fast and to
compensate for (it).

### 51. Recommended Fast is not compensated

Al-Marzbān b. Umrān reported, saying: I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him:
I want to travel, then shall I fast the month of mine in which I shall
travel? No, he answered. Then I asked: Shall I compensate for it when I
return? No, he replied, you do not compensate for it just as you do not
fast it.[[2]](#_ftn608) Similar to this narration is what has been
reported by Sad b. Sad al-Ashari on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him. He said: I asked him about the three-day fast
in (each) month: Is it obligatory on the traveler to compensate for it?
No, he answered.[[3]](#_ftn609)

### 52. Fast on the Day of Doubt

Mohammed b. Sinān reported, saying: I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him,
about the day of doubt, and he answered: Surely my father would fast on
it, so fast on it.[[4]](#_ftn610)

If one doubts whether the new moon of the month of Ramadān has appeared
or not: The Imām (al-Ridā), peace be on him, ordered (the Muslims) to
fast on it; and the intention for the fast is according to what the
jurists have mentioned that one makes intention as (a day) of Shabān as
recommendation or compensation. If it appears that it (the day) is of
Ramadān, then it is sufficient for him, but if one fasts on it through
the intention of Ramadān, then his fast is invalid.[[5]](#_ftn611)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F607) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 416. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 8, p. 133.  
 [[2]](#_F608) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 168. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 7, p.
133.  
 [[3]](#_F609) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 198.  
 [[4]](#_F610) Al-Maqna'a, p. 48.  
 [[5]](#_F611) Minhājj al-Sālihin, Chapter on Fasting.  
  

  

  

### 53. If a Fast of Ramadān is Missed

In a tradition al-Fadl b. Shādhān narrated on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, who said: If someone says: If  one becomes sick or
travels in the month of Ramadān, and he does not end his travel or does
not recover from his illness until another month of Ramadān comes, then
why should he pay redemption and should not compensate for (it)? If he
recovers or resides (in his homeland), then why should he compensate
(the fast) and should not pay redemption? It is said: Because that fast
was obligatory on him in this month in that year. As for him who does
not recover, he, as the whole year has passed and Allah has overcome him
and not helped him to perform the fast, then he must not fast. Likewise,
all those whom Allah overcomes such as one who faints for a day and a
night, then it is not obligatory on him to compensate the prayers, just
as al-Sādiq, peace be on him, said: If Allah overcomes him, then he has
an excuse. For the month has come, and he is still ill, so it is not
incumbent on him in the month of him and the year of him because of the
illness in which he is; but it is obligatory on him to pay redemption
just as Allah, the Exalted, says: *Let him fast for two successive
months; then as for him who is not able let him feed sixty needy ones*,
and just as He says: *So a compensation by fasting or alms or
sacrificing*. So He has put alms in the place of fasting when it is
difficult for him to fast. If it is said that one was not able then and
now he is able, it is said: As another month of Ramadān has come to him,
it is obligatory on him to pay redemption for the past (Ramadān); if he
is in the rank of him upon whom it is incumbent to fast as a religious
expiation, but he is not able, then redemption is due on him; and if
redemption is obligatory on him, then he should not fast; the fast drops
but redemption is a must. If he recovers between them (i.e. between the
past and the present months of Ramadān) and he has not fasted the past
month of Ramadān, then redemption is obligatory on him because he has
neglected it, and (also) the fast because he has been
able.[[1]](#_ftn612)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F612) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 7, pp. 246-247.  
  

  

  

If one misses the month of Ramadān or some of it because of an illness
and the excuse continues to the next Ramadān, he should not fast it but
he should pay a *mudd*  (750 gms) of food as alms for each day. However,
if he misses it because of an excuse other than illness, then both
compensation and redemption are obligatory.[[1]](#_ftn613)

### 54. Recommended Fasts

Ismāil b. Dāwud narrated, saying: I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him,
about the fast (i.e. recommended fasts), and he answered: Three days in
a month: Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday.[[2]](#_ftn614)

### 55. The fast on the Day of Īd al-Ghadir

Al-Fārid b. Mohammed b. Amr al-Tūsi narrated that he saw Abū al-Hasan
Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on him, on the Day of al-Ghadir along with
a group of his special companions whom he had invited to break the fast.
He sent to their houses food, wheat, gifts, clothing, rings, sandals,
and the like. He changed their conditions and those of his retinues. He
changed the rites familiar before that day, and then he mentioned the
excellence and precedence of that day. They following are some of his
words:

My father al-Hādi related to me on the authority of his father, on the
authority of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, that
al-Ghadir occurred on Friday in his time, so he went up on the pulpit
for five hours at the daytime of that day, and then he, peace be on him,
mentioned his long sermon until he said: Then Allah, the Most High, has
brought together for you, O group of the believers, on this day two
great Īds; none of them stands except through its companion, that His
beautiful favor toward you may be perfect. Then he mentioned a great
deal of the excellence of al-Ghadir until he said:

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F613) Al-Imām al-Khū'i, Minhājj al-Sālihin. As for Imām
al-Hakim, he gave a religious decision that compensation is obligatory
apart from redemption, and he said: "If it is possible to add travel to
illness, then it is a strong precaution to perform both compensation and
redemption."  
 [[2]](#_F614) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 438.  
  

  

  

So the dirham on it (al-Ghadir) equals one hundred dirhams, and the
increase is from Allah, the Exalted; and the fast on this day is one of
those fasts which Allah, the Most High, has made recommended, and placed
great reward from Him for it, to the extant that if one of the servants
worships during youth from the beginning of the world to its end,
fasting by its daytime performing prayer by its day, if the faithful is
sincere to his fast, the days of the world will fall short of being
equal to it. He who aids his brother of his own accord and does good to
him willingly wins the reward of him who fasts on this day and performs
prayer on its night; and he who breaks a believers fast on its night, it
is as if that he broke the fast of one hundred thousand prophets, very
truthful ones, and martyrs. Just imagine how much more is (the reward)
of him who maintains a number of the believers, male and female; and I,
on behalf of Allah the Exalted, guarantee him safety from unbelief and
poverty. He who dies by its night or daytime or after it, then his
reward is from Allah. He who borrows a loan for his brothers and helps
them; then I guarantee him before Allah; if He keeps him alive, then he
pays it (the loan); and if He makes him die, He undertakes it. When you
meet each other, then shake hands through greetings, grant the blessing
to each other on this day, let the present inform the absent (of it),
let the rich visit the poor, and the strong (visit) the weak. Allahs
Messenger had ordered me (to do) that. Then he, peace be on him,
continued his sermon, regarded his Friday prayer as Īd prayer, then he
took his sons and his followers (Shiites) and went to the house of
al-Hasan b. Ali, peace be on him, where food had been prepared; the poor
and the rich took their gifts and went to their families.[[1]](#_ftn615)

Surely al-Ghadir Īd is one of the most important Islamic Īds, for, on
this immortal day, Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
installed Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, as his successor
after him, and an authority for his community. Many traditions have been
transmitted from the Imāms of guidance concerning the recommended fast
and celebrating a festival on it. The  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F615) Musbāh al-Mutahajjidin, p. 524. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 7, p.
326.  
  

  

  

Imāmi Sect has been successful in commemorating it, holding literary
festivals in which wonderful poems and marvelous words are read in
praising the excellence of Abū al-Husayn (i.e. Imām Ali), peace be on
him. Likewise, thousands of people visit his Holy Shrine in order to
commemorate this day.

### 56. Summoning the Believers to make a Pilgrim is Recommended

Al-Hasan b. Ali al-Daylami, the retainer of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him, reported, saying: I heard al-Ridā say: He who summons the believers
to make a pilgrim certainly buys his own soul from Allah, the Great and
Almighty, for the money.[[1]](#_ftn616)

This tradition is a proof of that summoning the believers to perform the
*hajj* and spending on them is the best act which brings man nearer to
Allah.

### 57. Hajj on behalf of the Dead

Mohammed b. Abd Allah narrated, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, about the person who died and asked someone else to
perform the *hajj* on his behalf, from where the *hajj* is perform on
his behalf? He replied: According to his money; if his money is
plentiful, then (the *hajj*) is performed from his house; if his money
is not plentiful, then from Kufa; and if his money is not enough (to
perform the *hajj*) from Kufa, then from Medina.[[2]](#_ftn617)

### 58. Hiring Someone to perform the Hajj

Mohammed b. Īsā al-Yaqtin narrated, saying: Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace
be on him, sent a parcel of clothing, and servants to me, my brother
Mūsā b. Ubayd, and Yunus b. Abd al-Rahmān; he ordered us to perform the
*hajj* on his behalf; there was one hundred dinars and we (divided it)
among us.[[3]](#_ftn618)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F616) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 1, p. 77. Wasā'il
al-Shi'a.  
 [[2]](#_F617) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 250. Al-Wasā'il vol. 8, p.
117.  
 [[3]](#_F618) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 261. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 8, p. 147.  
  

  

  

The jurists have depended on this narration and the like regarding that
it is permissible for living one to hire someone else to perform the
recommended *hajj* on his behalf; likewise, they have given a religious
decision that it is permissible for  living one to hire someone else to
perform on his behalf the obligatory *hajj* such as the *hajj* of Islam
*(hujjat al-Islām)*; that is when one is unable to perform the *hajj*.

### 59. *Al-Ihrām* before the appointed Time and Place

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, said: *Al-Ihrām* (the ceremonies of
*umra* and *hajj*) is not permissible before *al-miqāt* (the appointed
time and place).[[1]](#_ftn619)

### 60. Passing through *al-Miqāt*

Safwān b. Yahyā reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace
be on him. He said: I wrote to him (al-Ridā) that some of your followers
perform *al-ihrām* from Batn al-Aqiq, that there was neither water nor a
house in that place, that there was a hard provisions against them, and
that their companions and their camels hasten them; fifteen miles from
beyond Batn al-Aqiq, there was a station wherein water, and which was
there station at which they stopped; so do you think that (it is
permissible for them) to perform *al-ihram* from the place of the water
as a sign of mercy to them and lightness toward them? Hence he wrote:
Surely Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, has
appointed the times and places for its people and those other than its
people who pass through them; he who has an illness is permitted (to do
so); so none should break the appointed time and place *(al-miqāt)*
except him who has an illness.[[2]](#_ftn620)

All those who pass through the appointed time and place *(al-miqāt)* and
intend to go to Holy Mecca should perform *al-ihram*, just as it has
been indicated by this narration and others.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F619) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 8, p. 232.  
 [[2]](#_F620) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 324.  
  

  

  

### 61. How *Umrat al-Tamattu* is Performed

Ahmed b. Mohammed narrated, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace
be on him: How shall I perform *umrat al-tamattu* ? He answered:
Exclaim: Here I am at Your service! Make a solemn intention for *umrat
al-Tamattu*. When you enter Mecca, circumambulate the House; perform two
*rakas* behind the Standing place *(al-Maqām)*; run seven times between
al-Safā and al-Marwā; and then shorten and regard it as  *umrat
al-Tamattu*.[[1]](#_ftn621)

This narration is a proof of that it is permissible for one to make a
solemn intention for the *hajj* and *al-talbiya* (exclaiming: Here I am
at Your service!) through which *al-ihrām* is valid; and then he
performs the rest of the ceremonies such as circumambulating the Holy
House, praying behind the Standing place of Ibrāhim, running seven times
between al-Safā and al-Marwā; shortening and regarding it as *umrat
al-Tamattu*.

### 62. Ceasing *al-Talbiya*

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, that he was asked: When will one who performs *umrat
al-Tamattu* cease *al-talbiya* (exclaiming: Here I am at Your service!)
? He (al-Ridā) replied: When he looks at the bowers of Mecca, Aqabat Dhi
Tiwā. The Houses of Mecca? I (Ahmed) asked. Yes, he
replied.[[2]](#_ftn622)

When the *hajji* performs *al-ihram* from one of the appointed places,
it is recommended for to continue *al-talbiya* throughout the time until
he arrives in Mecca. When he sees its houses, he ceases *al-talbiya*.

### 63. *Al-Muhrim* can buy female Salves

Sad b. Sad al-Ashari al-Qummi narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: I asked him (al-Ridā) about
*al-muhrim* (one who has entered the state of ritual consecration): Can
*al-muhrim* buy and sell female slaves? Yes, he replied.[[3]](#_ftn623)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F621) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 471. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 1, p. 31.  
 [[2]](#_F622) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 9, p. 57.  
 [[3]](#_F623) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 267. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 9,
p. 92.  
  

  

  

It is prohibited for *al-muhrim* to marry a woman; likewise, it is
prohibited for him to make the contract of marriage for those other than
him. As for buying and selling female slaves, it is not forbidden, as it
is indicated by this narration.

### 64. It is Permissible for *al-Muhrim* to wear a Ring

Mohammed b. Ismāil b. Buzaygh reported, saying: I saw Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, wearing a ring while he was in the state of
ritual consecration *(muhrim)*.[[1]](#_ftn624)

### 65. *Al-Muhrim* can walk in Shade

 Mohammed b. Ismāil b. Buzaygh narrated, saying: I wrote to Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him: Is it permissible for *al-muhrim* to walk in
the shade of the double camel-litter *(al-Mahmal)*? Yes, he, peace be on
him, wrote.[[2]](#_ftn625)

One of the things from which *al-muhrim* should refrain is casting a
shadow over him. As for walking in shade, it is not forbidden. This
matter has raised many questions, for al-Tabrasi narrated, saying:
Mohammed b. al-Hasan questioned Abū al-Hasan Mūsā b. Jafar, peace be on
him, in the presence of (Hārūn) al-Rashid when they were in Mecca. He
asked him: Is it permissible for *al-muhrim* to walk in the shade of the
double camel-litter *(al-Mahmal)*? It is not permissible for him (to do)
that willingly, the Imām answered him. Is it permissible for him to walk
in shade willingly? asked Mohammed b. al-Hasan. Yes, he replied him.
Mohammed b. al-Hasan laughed at that, hence the Imām asked: Do you
wonder at the *Sunna* (practices) of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, and ridicule it? Surely Allahs Messenger, may Allah
bless him and his family, removed his shade during his *ihrām* and
walked in the shade while he was *muhrim*. Surely Allahs laws, O
Mohammed, are not compared. So he who compares them to each other
deviates from the straight path.[[3]](#_ftn626)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F624) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 9, p. 127.  
 [[2]](#_F625) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 262.  
 [[3]](#_F626) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 9, p. 51.  
  

  

  

### 66. Religious Expiation for killing a Bird in the Holy Shrine

Safwān b. Yahyā narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace
be on him, who said: He who kills a bird in the Holy Shrine (of the
Prophet) while he is in the ritual state of consecration *(muhrim)*
should pay the value, which is one dirham, and buy food for the pigeons
of the Holy Shrine.[[1]](#_ftn627)

### 67. Redemption for casting Shadow

 Sad b. Sad al-Ashari reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: I asked him (al-Ridā) about *al-muhrim* (one
who has entered the state of ritual consecration) who cast a shadow over
himself, and he asked me: Is there an excuse? The heat of the sun hurts
him when he is in the state of ritual consecration *(muhrim)*, I
answered. It is an excuse, he explained, he can cast a shadow over
himself and should pay a redemption.[[2]](#_ftn628)

Ibrāhim b. Abū Mahmūd narrated, saying: I asked al-Ridā, peace be on
him: Is it permissible for *al-muhrim* to cast over himself a shadow
from his double camel-litter *(al-Mahmil)* and pay a redemption when the
sun and rain hurt him? Yes, he replied. How much is the redemption? I
asked him. A ewe, he answered.[[3]](#_ftn629)

### 68. Supplication by al-Rukn al-Yamāni

 Sad b. Sad al-Ashari reported on the authority of al-Ridā, peace be on
him, saying: I was with him (al-Ridā) during circumambulating (the
Kaba). When we approached al-Rukn al-Yamāni, he raised his hands towards
the heaven, and then he said: O Allah! O Keeper of well-being! O Creator
of well-being! O Provider with well-being! O Benefactor through
well-being! O Munificent with well-being! O You who have obliged me and
all Your creatures  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F627) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 536.  
 [[2]](#_F628) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F629) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 9, p. 287.  
  

  

  

through well-being! O Most Gracious in this world and the next and Most
Merciful in both of them! Bless Mohammed and the family of Mohammed,
provide us with well-being, completing well-being, giving thanks for
well-being in here and the hereafter, O Most Merciful of the
merciful![[1]](#_ftn630)

### 69. Obligatory Circumambulation

He (al-Ridā), peace be on him, said: One should say nothing during
obligatory circumambulation except supplication, invocation of Allah,
and reciting the Qurān. As for the supererogatory (i.e. recommended
circumambulation), there is no harm in it (when) one meet his brother
and talks with him about one of the affairs of the world.[[2]](#_ftn631)
This precept is not obligatory; rather it is recommended; and it is
recommended for *al-muhrim* to say nothing during his circumambulation
except the invocation of Allah, the Most High.

### 70. Stone-Throwing

Ismāil b. Hammām reported, saying: I heard Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace
be on him, say: Do not throw stones on the Day of Great Sacrifice (i.e.
the Day of Īd) until the sun rises.[[3]](#_ftn632) The surface meaning
of this order is the prevention from throwing stones before the sunrise.

### 71. Animal for Immolation is sufficient for a Group of People

Sawāda and Ali b. Asbāt narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him. They said: We asked him (al-Ridā): May we be
your ransom, the sacrifices in Mecca have become expensive; is it
sufficient for two persons to take part in a sheep? Yes, he replied and
(it is sufficient) for seventy (persons).[[4]](#_ftn633)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F630) Ibid., p. 417.  
 [[2]](#_F631) Ibid., p. 465.  
 [[3]](#_F632) Ibid.  
 [[4]](#_F633) Ibid., vol. 10, p. 114.  
  

  

  

This narration concerns the recommended *hajj*. As for the obligatory
*hajj*, one sacrifice is not sufficient except for one person, nor is it
sufficient for two persons.

### 72. Clothes should not be sold for buying an Animal for Immolation

Ali b. Asbāt reported on the authority of one of our companions, on the
authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him. He said: I said to
him (al-Ridā): A man has performed *hajj al-tamattu*, and there are some
clothes in his bag, shall he sell some of them in order to buy a
sacrifice? No, he answered, the believer should adorn himself with them.
He should fast and not sell any of his clothes.[[1]](#_ftn634) When the
pilgrim is unable to buy a sacrifice, he should fast for three days
during the *hajj* and seven days when he comes back to his homeland.

### 73. Visiting the Prophet is Recommended

Al-Hasan b. al-Jahm narrated, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him: Which is better the man who comes to Mecca and does not
go to Medina or the man who comes to the Prophet and does not go to
Mecca? In which thing do you believe? he asked me. We believe in
al-Husayn, peace be on him, I replied, then what about the Prophet?
Since you said that, he retorted, Abū Abd Allah (al-Husayn), peace be on
him, witnessed Īd in Medina, came to the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, and greeted him, and then he said to those present: We
are better than the people of all the cities, Mecca and other than it,
for we have greeted Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his
family.[[2]](#_ftn635)

### 74. Running away from Fighting in the Way of Allah is Prohibited

Allah has prohibited escaping from fighting in His path, for it leads to
undermining the religion; disdaining the just prophets and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F634) Ibid., p. 114. Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 348.  
 [[2]](#_F635) Kāmil al-Ziyārāt, p. 331. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 10, p. 273.  
  

  

  

Imāms; leaving helping them against the enemies who should be punished
for their leaving professing the Lord to whom they are summoned, (and
who are summoned to) establishing justice, leaving oppression, and
deadening corruption. Moreover it encourages the enemies to (attack) the
Muslims, and (this attack) results in murdering (them), taking them as
prisoners, and abolishing the religion of Allah, the Great and Almighty,
and (this attack leads to) other corrupt things.[[1]](#_ftn636)

Islam has prohibited running away from fighting in the way of Allah, for
it brings about dangerous harms to the Muslims, of which is that the
unbelieving forces dominate Islam, destroy the Muslims, and severely
punish the believers.

### 75. Adopting the Bedouin Customs after the Emigration is Prohibited

Mohammed b. Sinān narrated that Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him,
wrote to him in response to his questions: And Allah has prohibited
adopting the Bedouin customs after the Emigration, for it brings about
withdrawal from the religion, leaving supporting the prophets and the
proofs (Imāms), peace be on him, corrupting and invalidating the rights
of those who have rights, because of the residence of the Bedouins;
likewise, if one fully knows the religion, it is not permissible for him
to live with men of ignorance, for fear that he may leave knowledge and
adopt the customs of men of ignorance and go too far in
that.[[2]](#_ftn637)

Islam has prohibited adopting the Bedouin customs after the Emigration,
for it brings about withdrawal from the religion and acquiring the
manners of the ignorant, for social life is the life of effect and being
affected, so every person is affected by his surroundings, and he
produces an effect on them; for this reason Islam has prohibited living
with men of ignorance. This prohibition concerns those ignorant from
among the Muslims. However, it does not  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F636) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 11, p. 65.  
 [[2]](#_F637) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 188. Wasā'il
al-Shi'a, vol. 11, p. 75.  
  

  

  

concerns those who have knowledge and virtue, for they do not follow the
manners of the ignorant.

### 76. Buying Infidel Captives is Permissible

Mohammed b. Abd Allah reported, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, about a group of people who went out (in mutiny),
killed a group of Muslims, and demolished the Mosques; and Hārūn, who
was in charge (of the Muslims), sent for them, and they were taken and
killed, the women and the boys were taken prisoners is it permissible
(for us) to buy some women of them and marry them? There is no harm in
buying their commodities and taking them prisoners, he
replied.[[1]](#_ftn638)

Zakariyā b. Ādam narrated, saying: I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him,
about a group of the enemies who made peace, and then they broke their
promise; perhaps, they broke their promise because they were not treated
with justice is it permissible to buy some of their captives? He, peace
be on him, answered: If they were from among the enemies whose enmity is
manifest, then buy from them; and if they are estranged and wronged,
then do not buy their captives.[[2]](#_ftn639)

In the second tradition the Imām, peace be on him, talked about those
who mutinied against the basic government: if they mutinied against it
because they suffered from oppression or it did not accomplish its
treaties and broke its promises, then there would be no way to buy some
of their captives; and if their mutiny was as a sign of enmity toward
Islām and malice toward the Muslims, then it was permissible for the
Muslims to buy their captives.

### 77. The Precepts of *al-Khrājj*

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, detailed the precepts of land tax
*(al-kharājj)* through his talk with Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr, who
said: I mentioned *al-kharājj* before Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on
him, and how the members of his household behaved toward it,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F638) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 1, p. 99.  
 [[2]](#_F639) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 53.  
  

  

  

and he said: One-tenth and half a one-tenth is due on him who adopts
Islam willingly; his land is left in his hand; and one-tenth and  half a
one-tenth is taken from  him concerning what he has reformed from it. As
for that which he has not reformed, it is taken by the governor who
accepts it from him who reforms it, and it belongs to the Muslims.
Nothing is due on that which less than five camel-loads *(awsāq)*. As
for the land which is taken by the sword, it is up to the Imām, who
accepts it with what he sees; just as Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, did toward Khaybar; he accepted its land and its
date-palms; and the people say: The acceptance of the land and the
date-palms is not good when whiteness (barren land) is more than
blackness (fertile land); and certainly Allahs Messenger, may Allah
bless him and his family, accepted Khaybar and (specified) one-tenth and
half a one-tenth as due on their portions.[[1]](#_ftn640)

### 78. *Al-Amr bi al-Marūf* and *al-Nahy an al-Munkar*

He (al-Ridā), peace be on him, said: You should direct others towards
good and direct them away from evil; otherwise, He (Allah) will employ
your evil ones over you, so your good ones supplicate (Him) but He does
respond to them.[[2]](#_ftn641)

And he, peace be on him, said: Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, would say: When (the members of) my community depend on each
other concerning a*l-amr bi al-marūf* and *al-nahy an al-munkar*, then
they will face a punishment from Allah.[[3]](#_ftn642)

Surely *al-amr bi al-marūf* and *al-nahy an al-munkar* are two main
Islamic bases on which the development of the community, its security,
and its safety from discords and deviation (from the truth) are built.

And he, peace be on him, said: *Al-amr bi al-marūf* and *al-nahy an
al-munkar* are two obligatory (things) when it is possible and there is
no fear for the soul.[[4]](#_ftn643)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F640) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 11, p. 383.  
 [[2]](#_F641) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 343.  
 [[3]](#_F642) Ibid., p. 344. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 11, p. 364.  
 [[4]](#_F643) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 11, p. 402.  
  

  

  

Surely *al-amr bi al-marūf* and *al-nahy an al-munkar* require
conditions of which is that there should be no fear for the soul, the
family, and the wealth. When these conditions are not available, then
this religious duty drops.

### 79. Making Use of the fat Tails which are cut off from Living Sheep

Al-Bizanti, the companion of Imām al-Rida, peace be on him, narrated,
saying: I asked him (al-Ridā) about the person who cuts off the fat
tails of his living sheep is it permissible for him to make use of them?
Yes, he answered, he should melt them, light (a lamp) through them, but
he should not eat them; nor should he sell them.[[1]](#_ftn644)

This narration is a proof of that it is permissible for one to make use
of the fat tails which are cut off from living sheep, but this use is
confined to illumination only.

### 80. Wage for Writing the Qurān

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, was asked about the wage for writing the
Qurān, and he, peace be on him, replied: There is no harm in
it.[[2]](#_ftn645)

### 81. *Al-Maysar* is a Game of Hazard

Islam has prohibited *al-maysar* (game of hazard) and associated it with
wine. As for Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, he explained *al-maysar*,
saying: *Al-maysar* is a game of hazard.[[3]](#_ftn646) And he, peace be
on him, said: Surely, chess, game at dice *(nard)*, fourteen *(arbaat
ashar)*, and all things used as gamble are *maysar*.[[4]](#_ftn647)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F644) Qurb al-Isnād, p. 115. Al-Sarā'ir, p. 469.  
 [[2]](#_F645) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 11, p. 117.  
 [[3]](#_F646) Tafsir al-'Ayyāshi, vol. 1, p. 336.  
 [[4]](#_F647) Ibid., p. 339.  
  

  

  

* *

### 82. Work for Tyrannical Ruler

Sulaymān al-Jafari reported, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace
be on him: What do say about work for the tyrannical ruler (Sultan)? He
answered: O Sulaymān, work for tyrannical rulers, helping them, and
striving for accomplishing their needs are equal to unbelief; likewise,
looking at them deliberately is one of the great sins because of which
one deserves the Fire.[[1]](#_ftn648) Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,
made it permissible for a tyrannical ruler to undertake authority,
provided that he should benefit the believers and drive harm away from
them. He, peace be on him, said: Surely Allah has friends along with the
(tyrannical) ruler, through whom He drives (harm) away from His
friends.[[2]](#_ftn649)

Al-Hasan b. al-Husayn al-Anbāri narrated on the authority of Abū
al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: I wrote to him (al-Ridā) for
fourteen years and asked him to permit me in order to work for the ruler
(Sultan); in the last letter I wrote him and mentioned that my neck
would be struck off, that the ruler said to me that I was a Rafidite
(apostate), and that I refused to work for the ruler because of my being
a Rafidite.

So Abū al-Hasan (al-Ridā), peace be on him, wrote me: I have understood
your letter and what you have mentioned concerning the fear for your
soul. If you become a governor,   work according to the orders of Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, your helpers and scribes
follow your creed, and you help the poor believers to the extent that
you become one of them, then it is okay; otherwise, no.[[3]](#_ftn650)

### 83. Option of Animals

Ali b. Asbāt reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be
on him, saying: I heard him (al-Ridā) say: The buyer has the right of
option of an animals for three days; as for (the things)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F648) Ibid., p. 238. Al-Wasā'il, vol. 12, 138.  
 [[2]](#_F649) Al-Maqna'a, p. 31.  
 [[3]](#_F650) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 359. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 12,
p. 145.  
  

  

  

other than animals, (the right of option terminates) when they leave
each other.[[1]](#_ftn651)

In the light of this narration and others, the jurists have given a
religious decision that the buyer has the right of option of an animals
for three days; and as for the things other than animals, the right of
option terminates when they leave each other; and that is called option
of meeting place.

### 84. Changing Coins

Yunus narrated, saying: I wrote to al-Ridā: I owed a man three thousands
dirhams; the people used those dirhams in those days; they do not use
them nowadays shall I take the same dirhams or the dirhams which the
people use nowadays? So he wrote me: You have the right to take from him
the dirhams which the people use just as you gave him the dirhams which
the people used.[[2]](#_ftn652)

### 85. Selling unripe Fruit

Al-Hasan b. Ali al-Washshā reported, saying: I asked Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him: Is it permissible to sell unripe dates? No, he
replied, it is not permissible to sell them until they grow. May I be
your ransom, what is the growth *(zahw)*? I asked him. When they become
red or yellow or the like, he answered.[[3]](#_ftn653)

### 86. Buying the Children of the protected People is Prohibited

Zakariya b. Ādam narrated, saying: I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him,
about one of the protected people *(ahl al-dhimma)* who faced famine and
brought me his boy, saying: This (boy) belongs to you; feed him and take
him as a slave for you. So he (al-Ridā) declared: Do not buy a free man;
nor do buy one of the protected people, for it is not permissible for
you (to do that).[[4]](#_ftn654)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F651) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 390.  
 [[2]](#_F652) Ibid., p. 401. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 12, p. 481.  
 [[3]](#_F653) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 387.  
 [[4]](#_F654) Ibid. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 13, p. 28.  
  

  

  

The protected people *(ahl al-dhimma)* are free, and it is not
permissible to buy them.

### 87. The Imām pays the Debts of the Debtors

Mohammed b. Sulaymān reported on the authority of a man called Abū
Mohammed from al-Jazira. He (the man) said: A man asked al-Ridā, peace
be on him. The man said and I could hear him: May I be your ransom,
Allah, the Great and Almighty, says: *And if (the debtor) is in
straitness, then let there be postponement until (he is in) ease*. Tell
me about this postponement which Allah, the Great and Almighty, has
mentioned in His Book: Is there any fixed period for it, that the
creditor may wait for this impoverished one, who has taken the creditors
money and spent it on his family,  and who has neither a crop nor a debt
nor an absent wealth?

He (al-Ridā), peace be on him, replied: Yes, he (the creditor) must wait
until the Imām hears of his news; and he pays his (the debtors) debt
from the share of the debtors. That is when he (the debtor) had spent it
(debt) on the acts of obedience to Allah, the Great and Almighty. If he
had spent it on the acts of disobedience to Allah, then he would have
nothing against the Imām. I (i.e. the man) asked: What about this man
who entrusted (his money) to him while he did not know whether he spent
it on the acts of obedience to Allah or on acts of disobedience to Him?
He (al-Ridā) answered: He (debtor) should strive for him concerning his
money and humbly return it to him.[[1]](#_ftn655)

### 88. Buying Debt

Mohammed b. al-Fudayl narrated, saying: I said to al-Ridā, peace be on
him: A man bought a debt against a man, and then he went to the owner of
the debt (the debtor) and said to him: Pay to me what so-and-so has
against you, for I have bought it (the doubt) from him. He (al-Ridā)
said: He (debtor) should pay to him what he has paid to the owner of the
debt (the creditor); he against whom the money is is free from all what
has remained against him.[[2]](#_ftn656)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F655) Tafsir al-'Ayyāshi, vol. 1, p. 155. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol.
13, p. 91.  
 [[2]](#_F656) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 355.  
  

  

  

### 89. The Debtor should not be oppressed

Ali b. Ismāil reported on the authority of a man from Syria (al-Shām)
that he (the man) asked al-Ridā, peace be on him, about a man against
whom there was a heavy debt, who associated with the people, whom was
entrusted (with money), and who bought surplus food and drink is it
lawful for him (to do that) or not? There is no harm in what he eats,
the Imām, peace be on him, answered.[[1]](#_ftn657)

The surface meaning of the tradition is that the creditor should not
straiten the debtor even if he is able to buy his food requirements.

### 90. Employing Worker before Specifying his Wage is Reprehensible

Sulaymān b. Jafar al-Jafari narrated, saying: I was with al-Ridā, peace
be on him, for a certain need. When I wanted to go home, he said to me:
Go and spend the night with me. So I went with him. When he entered his
house, he saw his retainers carrying mud. There was a black man among
them. Who is that man among you? he asked them. He is helping us, and we
will give him something, they replied. Did you specify his wage? he
asked. No, they answered, he is satisfied with what you will give to
him. He became so angry that I said to him: May I be your ransom, why
have you become angry? I ordered them several times that if one wanted
to work with them, they should specify his wage, he replied, know that
if one works for you without fixing his wage and you give him three
folds of it, I think that you have decreased it. If you define his wage
and give it to him, he will thank you for honesty. If you increase him
something, he will thank you for it and know that you have increased
him.[[2]](#_ftn658)

One of the good acts of Islamic legislation is that you should specify
the workers wage before you let him work. If you do not specify it, he
will not be satisfied with whatever you give to him, and this brings
about quarrel and dispute.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F657) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 61. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 13, p.
115.  
 [[2]](#_F658) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 414. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 13,
p. 245.  
  

  

  

### 91. Rent does not invalidate Selling Property

Yunus reported, saying: I wrote to al-Ridā, peace be on him, to ask him
about a man who accepted a land or other than that from a man for some
known years. Then the owner of the land wanted to sell his land before
the termination of the fixed years does the tenant have the right to
prevent him from that? He (the land owner) has the right to sell it if
he had made it a condition on him, he, peace be on him,
answered.[[1]](#_ftn659)

The owner is not objected when he wants to sell his rented property, but
he should inform the tenant of that. He can sell it to him without an
interest until the rent terminates. If he does not inform him of that,
he (the tenant) has the stipulated right of cancellation.

### 92. Revoking Grant before Receiving it

Safwān b. Yahyā narrated, saying: I asked al-Rida, peace be on him,
about a man who had property and he granted it to his eldest son. The
man mentioned to him the property which he had against him, so he said:
There is nothing of it against you in this world and the next (namely,
he granted it to him) is it permissible for him to do that while he had
granted it (the property) to his son? Yes, he answered it is permissible
to him to grant it to him, and then he revokes (it) and gives it to
another son.[[2]](#_ftn660)

Surely it is permissible to revoke grant before it is received; and it
is one of the permissible contracts which one can revoke. As for grant
given to womb relatives, it is obligatory after receiving not before it.

### 3. A Magian orders his Wealth to be given to the Poor

Abū Tālib Abd Allah b. al-Salt reported, saying: Al-Khalil b. Hāshim
wrote to Dhū al-Riāsatayn[[3]](#_ftn661), the governor of Nisābūr, that
a  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F659) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 13, p. 267.  
 [[2]](#_F660) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 378.  
 [[3]](#_F661) Al-Fadl b. Sahl, nicknamed Dhū al-Ri'āsatayn (the man
with two offices) because he was in the charge of the military and civil
administration under the Caliph al-Ma'mūn.  
  

  

  

Magian ordered some of his wealth to be given to the poor. When he died,
the judge of Nisābūr took it and divided it among the poor Muslims. So
al-Khalil wrote to Dhū al-Riāsatayn about that, and he asked al-Mamūn
about that, and he said: I have nothing concerning that. So he asked Abū
al-Hasan, and he said: The Magian did not order his wealth to be given
to the poor Muslims, so he (the judge of Nishābūr) should take an amount
of money from the alms equal to that amount and distribute it among the
poor Magians.[[1]](#_ftn662)

A narration similar to this has been reported by Ali b. Ibrāhim on the
authority of Yāsir al-Khādim, who said: From Nisābūr he wrote to
al-Mamūn that a Magian was about to die and ordered his great wealth to
be divided among the miserable and the poor, but the judge of Nishābūr
distributed it among the poor Muslims, so al-Mamūn asked al-Ridā: What
do you say about that? The Magian did not give (his wealth) as alms to
the poor Muslims, answered al-Ridā, peace be on him, so write to him to
specify an amount from the alms of the Muslims equal to that amount and
give it as alms to the poor Magians.[[2]](#_ftn663)

### 94. A Muslim Woman orders two Beds to be given to the Christians

Al-Rayyān b. Shabib (b. al-Salt) reported, saying: Marida ordered two
beds to be given to a group of the Christians, so our companions said:
Divide them among your believing companions. So I asked al-Ridā, peace
be on him, and said to him: My sister ordered (two beds) to be given to
a group of the Christians, and I wanted to divide them among a group of
our Muslim companions, so he, peace be on him, replied: Carry out the
will as you had been ordered, for Allah, the Exalted, says: *Whoever
then alters it after he has heard it, the sin of it then is only upon
those who alters it*.[[3]](#_ftn664)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F662) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 238. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 13,
p. 415.  
 [[2]](#_F663) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 13, p. 415.  
 [[3]](#_F664) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 238.  
  

  

  

### 95. The Orphan should take his Wealth when he becomes Adult

Sad b. Ismāil narrated on the authority of his father, who said: I asked
al-Ridā, peace be on him, about the guardian of the orphans: He orders
his orphans to take their properties when they become adult, but they
refuse to accept them, what shall he do? He should return their
properties to them and force them to take them, he
answered.[[1]](#_ftn665)

When the orphan becomes adult, then the guardian has no power over him.
He should take his wealth; and if he refuses to take it, then the legal
judge should force him to accept it.

### 96. A Man orders a Share of his wealth to be given to the Imām

Safwān and Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported, saying: We asked
al-Ridā, peace be on him, about a man who ordered a share of his wealth
to be given to him, and we did not know what the share was, and he,
peace be on him, said: Have you anything of what you heard from Jafar
and Abū Jafar? We have not heard our companions say anything about this
(matter) on the authority of your fathers, we replied. So he retorted:
The share is one per eight (shares, i.e. one-eighth), until he mentioned
these words of Him the Exalted: *Alms are only for the poor and the
needy, and the officials (appointed) over them, and those whose hearts
are made to incline (to truth) and the (ransoming of) the captives and
those in debts and in the way of Allah and the wayfarer*. Then he
knitted the eight fingers of his hand and said: Likewise, Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, divided it into eight
shares; therefore, it is one-eighth.[[2]](#_ftn666)

### 97. A Man orders a Sword to be given to a Man

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr narrated on the authority of Abū Jamila,
on the authority of al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: I  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F665) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 13, p. 436.  
 [[2]](#_F666) Ibid., p. 438.  
  

  

  

asked him (al-Ridā) about a man who ordered a man to be given a sword in
a sheath inlaid with jewels, but the inheritors said to him: Only the
blade belongs to you, and the sword does not belong to you. So he, peace
be on him, said: No, rather the sword and what it includes (belongs to
him).[[1]](#_ftn667)

### 98. The Precept of Will concerning Disowning a Child

Sad b. Sad reported, saying: I asked him (al-Ridā), peace be on him: A
man claimed that he had a boy. The man disowned the boy and excluded him
from the inheritance, and I am his executor, then how shall I do? He,
peace be on him, answered: The boy belongs to him because of his
confession in the presence of the people; the executor does not turn him
away from anything which he has known.[[2]](#_ftn668)

Surely when the man confesses that the child belongs to him, then it is
incumbent on him to take care of him; and he has no right to disown him.

### 99. Good Wife

Safwān b. Yahyā narrated on the authority of  Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, who said: The servant gains nothing more useful than a
good wife; when he sees her, she pleases him; and when he is absent from
her; she keeps him regarding herself and his property.[[3]](#_ftn669)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F667) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 282.  
 [[2]](#_F668) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 13, p. 476. Man lā Yahdarahū
al-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 282.  
 [[3]](#_F669) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 14, p. 22.  
  

