100. It Is Permissible To Marry A Woman Along With The Slave Wife Of Her Father
===============================================================================

  

  

### 100. It is Permissible to marry a Woman along with the Slave-wife of her Father

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: "I asked him about a man who married a
woman and married the slave-wife of her father,  

  

  

and he, peace be on him, answered: 'There is no harm in that.' Then I
said: We have been informed on the authority of your father that 'Ali b.
al-Husayn, peace be on him, married the daughter of al-Hasan b. 'Ali,
peace be on him, and the slave-wife *(umm walad)* of al-Hasan, so he
said: 'It is not as you say; 'Ali b. al-Husayn married the daughter of
al-Hasan and the slave-wife of 'Ali b. al-Husayn, the one who was killed
in your country.'[[1]](#_ftn670)"

### 101. It is Reprehensible for a Woman to marry an Ill-natured Man

Al-Husayn b. Bashshār al-Wāsiti narrated, saying: "I wrote to Abū
al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him: An ill-natured man from among my
relatives has proposed (to marry my daughter), and he replied: 'Do not
marry (her to) him if he is an ill-natured man.'[[2]](#_ftn671)" This
prohibition is explained as reprehensible not as unlawful.

### 102. Marriage at Night

Al-Hasan b. 'Ali al-Washshā' reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: "I heard him (al-Ridā) say concerning
marriage: 'It is an act of the Sunna is that marriage should be at
night, for Allah has made night for rest; and women have been (made) for
rest.'[[3]](#_ftn672)"

### 103. Giving Food at Marriage

Al-Hasan b. 'Ali al-Washshā' narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: "I heard him (al-Ridā) say: 'When
Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, proposed to marry
Āmina, daughter of Abū Sufyān, and married her, he called for food, and
then he said: 'Surely, one of the practices *(sunan)* of the messengers
is giving food at marriage.'[[4]](#_ftn673)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F670) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 15.  
 [[2]](#_F671) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 131.  
 [[3]](#_F672) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 14, p. 62.  
 [[4]](#_F673) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 26.  
  

  

  

### 104. Looking at the Hair of unrelated Woman is Prohibited

He (al-Ridā), peace be on him, said in what he wrote to Mohammed b.
Sinān, as answer to his question: "Looking at the hair of married and
single women is forbidden, for it excites men, and this excitement leads
to corruption and committing the unlawful; likewise, (it is forbidden to
look at those things) like hair except what Allah, the Most High, has
said: *And (as for) women advanced in years who do not hope for
marriage, it is no sin for them if they put off their clothes without
displaying their ornaments*, namely other than the garment; there is no
harm in looking at the hair of the like of them.'[[1]](#_ftn674)"

### 105. Looking at the Hair of Sister-in-law is not Permissible

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: "I asked him (al-Ridā): is it permissible for a
man to look at the hair of his sister-in-law? 'No,' he replied, 'except
when she is one of the women advanced in years.' Then I asked him: Are
his sister-in-law and unrelated woman the same? 'Yes,' he
answered.[[2]](#_ftn675)"

### 106. A Person claims that he has married a Woman

'Abd al-'Aziz b. al-Muhtadi narrated, saying: "I asked al-Ridā, peace be
on him: May I be your ransom, my brother died and I married his wife,
but my uncle came and claimed that he had married her secretly; so I
asked her about that and she strongly denied it, and then she said:
'There was nothing between me and him.' Hence he, peace be on him,
replied: 'Her confession binds you (to believe her), and her denial
obligates him (to say the truth).'[[3]](#_ftn676)" This means that the
truth was what the woman said, and her denying the right of the uncle
was valid.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F674) Al-Wasā'il.  
 [[2]](#_F675) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F676) Qurb al-Isnād, p. 160.  
  

  

  

### 107. Marriage Contract with the Intention of Joke is invalid

Ibn Abū Nasr reported on the authority of al-Mashriqi, on the authority
of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. He said: "I asked him (al-Ridā): What
do you say about a man who claimed that he proposed to marry a woman
with (the intention of) joke, and that he asked her about that and she
replied, 'Yes,'? So he answered: 'It is nothing.' I asked: 'It is lawful
for the man to marry her?' 'Yes,' he replied.[[1]](#_ftn677)"

### 108. It is Permissible for Son to marry the Daughter of his Father's Slave-wife

'Ali b. Idris narrated, saying: "I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him: I had
a slave-wife; I had a sexual intercourse with her. Then I emancipated
her and she gave birth to a slave-girl. Is it lawful for my son to marry
her? 'Yes,' he answered, 'before and after the sexual
intercourse.'[[2]](#_ftn678)"

### 109. It is unlawful to marry two Sisters at the same Time

 Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: "I asked him (al-Ridā): 'A husband has a wife,
is it lawful for him to marry her sister as a fixed term marriage
*(mutt'a*)?' 'No,' he answered.[[3]](#_ftn679)"

It is not permissible to marry two sisters at the same time, whether the
marriage contract is temporary or permanent, but if his first wife dies
or he divorces her irrevocably and the *'idda* [[4]](#_ftn680)
terminates, then it is permissible for him to marry her sister.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F677) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 77.  
 [[2]](#_F678) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 240.  
 [[3]](#_F679) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 14, p. 367.  
 [[4]](#_F680) *'Idda* is the prescribed period of waiting after the
dissolution of marriage during which a widow or a divorced woman may not
arrange another fixed-term or permanent marriage. Its purpose is to
leave no doubt about the paternity of a child born after the dissolution
of the marriage.  
  

  

  

### 110. It is Lawful to marry Midwife

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: "I asked him (al-Ridā): 'A midwife helped a
woman with childbirth, and the woman gave birth to a boy, is it lawful
for the boy to marry the midwife of his mother?' 'Glory belongs to
Allah,' he replied, 'What of that is unlawful for him?'[[1]](#_ftn681)"

### 111. Contracting a Fixed-term Marriage with a *dhimmi* [[2]](#_ftn682)Woman

Al-Hasan al-Taflisi reported on the authority of al-Ridā, peace be on
him, saying: "I asked him (al-Ridā): 'Is it permissible for a Muslim to
marry a Jewish or a Christian woman for a fixed term marriage?' 'He can
marry the believing, free woman for a fixed term marriage, while she is
more sacred than her,' he answered.[[3]](#_ftn683)

### 112. If Wife becomes a Muslim

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr narrated on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: "I asked al-Ridā: 'A man has a Christian wife
and she has become a Muslim, is it lawful for her to reside with him?'
'If she becomes a Muslim, it is not lawful for her to reside with him,'
he replied.[[4]](#_ftn684)"

### 113. Choosing Trustworthy Woman

In a tradition Mohammed b. Ismā'il reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, who said: "You should marry no woman except a
trustworthy one, for Allah, the Great and Almighty, says: *The
fornicator shall not marry any but a fornicatress or idolatress, and (as
for) the fornicatress, none shall marry her but a fornicator or an
idolater; and that is forbidden to the believers*.[[5]](#_ftn685)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F681) Qurb al-Isnād, p. 17.  
 [[2]](#_F682) *Dhimmi* is a non Muslim subject at home.  
 [[3]](#_F683) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 14, p. 415.  
 [[4]](#_F684) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 200.  
 [[5]](#_F685) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 44.  
  

  

  

### 114. Man should believe Woman when she denies Husband

Mohammed b. 'Abd Allah al-Ash'ari narrated, saying: "I asked al-Ridā,
peace be on him: 'A man married a woman and imagined that she had a
husband, how is he sure of that?' 'If he asks her about a proof (of
that),' he replied, 'she will witness that she has no
husband.'[[1]](#_ftn686)"

### 115. Contracting a Fixed-term Marriage with Bond maid

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: "I asked him (al-Ridā): 'Is it permissible for
a Muslim to marry a bond maid for a fixed-term marriage with the
permission of her family? 'Yes,' he answered, 'for Allah, the Great and
Almighty, says: *So marry them with the permission of their
families*.'[[2]](#_ftn687)"

### 116. The *'Idda* [[3]](#_ftn688) of *Mutt'a*

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, who said: [Abū Ja'far said:] "The *'idda* of
*mutt'a* is forty-five days, and the precaution is forty-five
nights.[[4]](#_ftn689)"

### 117. The Period of *Mutt'a*

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: "I asked him (al-Ridā): 'Is it
permissible for a man to marry a woman for one year or more or less?'
'If it is a fixed thing for a fixed period.' 'Does it terminate without
divorce?' I asked him. 'Yes,' he replied.[[5]](#_ftn690)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F686) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 187.  
 [[2]](#_F687) Tafsir al-'Ayyāshi, vol. 1, p. 134.  
 [[3]](#_F688) See note on 109.  
 [[4]](#_F689) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 45.  
 [[5]](#_F690) Ibid.  
  

  

  

### 118. No Inheritance in *Mutt'a*

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, who said: "*Mutt'a* is a marriage with or
without inheritance. If you make it a condition, then there is (an
inheritance); and if you do not make it a condition, then there is no
(inheritance).[[1]](#_ftn691)"

### 119. Moving the Woman of Fixed-term Marriage from one City to another

Mu'ammar b. Khallād reported, saying: "I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him: 'Is it permissible for a man to move the woman of a
fixed term marriage from one city to another?' 'It is permissible in the
other marriage,' he answered, 'but it is not permissible in this
(marriage).[[2]](#_ftn692)"

This tradition is a proof of that it is permissible to move her from one
city to another; there is no objection in that.

### 120. It is Lawful for the Wife to grant her Female Slave to her Husband

Ismā'il b. Buzaygh narrated, saying: "I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him,
about a wife who granted her female slave to her husband, and he
replied: 'That is up to him.' 'If he feared that she was joking?' I
asked him. 'If he knew that she was joking, then no,' he
answered.[[3]](#_ftn693)"

### 121. It is Permissible for the man to take Grant from his Salve-wife

Ismā'il b. Buzaygh reported, saying: "I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him,
about a man who took from his slave-wife what he had granted to her such
as servants and provisions Is permissible for him to do that? 'Yes,' he
replied, 'if she was his slave-wife.'[[4]](#_ftn694)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F691) Ibid., p. 47.  
 [[2]](#_F692) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 14, p. 494.  
 [[3]](#_F693) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 147.  
 [[4]](#_F694) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 309.  
  

  

  

### 122. Giving Dower more than that in the Sunna

Al-Washshā' narrated on the authority of al-Ridā, peace be on him,
saying: "I heard him (al-Ridā) say: 'If a man married a woman and
appointed her dower as twenty-thousand (dirhams) and appointed for her
father ten thousand (dirhams), the dower would be permissible, and what
he appointed for her father would be void.'[[1]](#_ftn695)" As for that
which he appointed for her father, it was part of the dower and he was
not worthy of it, for this reason it was invalid.

### 123. A Precept for him who stipulates that he and his Wife should not inherit each other

Sa'd b. Ismā'il reported on the authority of his father, who said: "I
asked al-Ridā, peace be on him, about a man who married a woman and had
stipulated that they should not inherit one another, and that he should
not ask her for a child; and he, peace be on him, answered: 'I do not
like (that).'[[2]](#_ftn696)" The narration is a proof of that this
condition is not obligatory; and it is not obligatory for one to fulfill
it.

### 124. Congratulation on Child on the seventh Day

Al-Husayn b. Khālid narrated, saying: "I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, about the congratulation on a child when will it be?
'When al-Hasan b. 'Ali, peace be on him, was born,' he replied, 'Gabriel
came down to Allah's Messenger to congratulate him on the seventh day;
and he ordered him to give him a name and a *kunya*, to shave his hair,
to sacrifice a ram on his behalf, and to pierce his ear. Likewise, when
al-Husayn was born, he (Gabriel) came down to him on the seventh day and
ordered him to do the same.'[[3]](#_ftn697)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F695) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 23.  
 [[2]](#_F696) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 15, p. 51.  
 [[3]](#_F697) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 90.  
  

  

  

### 125. The Period of Suckling Baby

Sa'd b. Sa'd al-Ash'ari reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: "I asked him about baby is it
permissible for it to suck more than two years? 'Only two years,' he
answered. 'If it sucks more than two years, then is there anything of
that against its parents?' I asked. 'No,' he replied.[[1]](#_ftn698)"

### 126. Preferring a Child to the rest of the Children

 Sa'd b. Sa'd al-Ash'ari narrated, saying: "I asked Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him: 'Is it permissible for a man to love a child
more than the rest of the children and prefer him to them?' 'Yes,' he
replied, 'Abū 'Abd Allah, peace be on him, did that when he gave a gift
to Mohammed; and Abū al-Hasan did that when he gave something to Ahmed;
and I stood up and gave it to him.' Then I asked: 'What about the man
who loves his daughters more than his sons?' 'The daughters and sons are
the same,' he answered, 'they are equal in the view of Allah, the Great
and Almighty.'[[2]](#_ftn699)"

### 127. Keeping Woman in good Fellowship

Abū al-Qāsim al-Fārisi reported, saying: "I said to al-Ridā, peace be on
him: May I be your ransom, Allah says in His Book: *Then keep (them) in
good fellowship or let (them) go with kindness*. What does He mean by
that? 'As for *keeping (them) in good fellowship*,' he replied, 'means
refraining from harming them and spending on them; and as for *letting
(them) go with kindness* means divorce according to what has been
revealed in the Book.'[[3]](#_ftn700)"

### 128. Spending generously on Family

Mohammed b. 'Ali b. al-Husayn narrated, saying: [Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, said:] "One should spend generously on his family lest
they should wish for his death.[[4]](#_ftn701)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F698) Ibid., p. 63.  
 [[2]](#_F699) Ibid., 95.  
 [[3]](#_F700) Tafsir al-Qummi, p. 686.  
 [[4]](#_F701) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 15, p. 249.  
  

  

  

### 129. Divorce lacking Conditions is Invalid

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: "I asked him about a man who divorced his wife
with two just witnesses after he had slept with her, and he replied:
'This is not a divorce.' 'How is the divorce of the Sunna?' I asked him.
'He should divorce her (in the presence) of two just witnesses when she
is pure from her menstruation and before he sleeps with her,' he
answered, 'if he opposes that, he should refer to the Book of Allah, the
Great and Almighty.' 'If he divorces her in the presence of one man and
two women?' I asked. 'The testimony of women is not permissible in
divorce,' he replied.[[1]](#_ftn702)"

### 130 The Divorce of the Drunk

Zakariya b. Ādam narrated, saying: "I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him,
about the divorce of the drunken, the boy, the mad, the one whose reason
is overcome, and the one who has not gotten married yet; and he
answered: 'It is not permissible.'[[1]](#_ftn703)"

The divorce of these people is not correct. As for the drunk, his
divorce is not correct, for he has no awareness. As for the boy and the
mad, the pen has been raised from them; therefore their divorce is not
correct. As for him who has not gotten married yet, namely has not made
a marriage contract with his wife, his divorce is invalid.

### 131. The Divorce of the Dumb

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr al-Bizanti reported, saying: "I asked Abū
al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, about a man who has a wife, but he
keeps silent and does not speak; and he asked me: 'Is he dumb?' I
replied: 'Yes, and I know that he detests and hates his wife is it
permissible for his guardian to divorce her on his behalf?' 'No,' he
answered, 'but he should write and make (two just witnesses) bear
witness to him.' Then I asked him: 'He neither writes nor hears, so how
will he divorce her?' 'Through his acts which are recognized  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F702) Ibid., p. 276.  
 [[2]](#_F703) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 270.  
  

  

  

just as you have mentioned concerning his detesting and hating (her),'
he replied.[[1]](#_ftn704)"

### 132. The Correctness of Divorce before those Present

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr narrated on the authority of Safwān, on
the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him. He (Safwān)
said: "He (al-Ridā) was asked about a man whose wife was pure from her
menstruation; and he (the man) said: 'So-and-so is divorced;' and a
group of people heard his words; but he did not say: 'Bear witness.'
Does divorce occur against her? 'Yes,' he (al-Ridā) replied, 'this is a
testimony.'[[2]](#_ftn705)"

### 133. A Three-time Divorce after *'Idda*

In his letter to al-Ma'mūn, al-Ridā, peace be on him, said: "When women
is divorced three times after *'idda*, it is not lawful for her husband
to remarry until she marries a husband other than him.[[3]](#_ftn706)"

### 134. *Al-Muhalil* [[4]](#_ftn707) should be Adult

'Ali b. al-Fadl al-Wāsiti reported, saying: "I wrote to al-Ridā, peace
be on him: 'A husband has divorced his wife with the divorce in which it
is not lawful for  him to remarry her until she marries a husband other
than him; and a minor has married her?' 'No,' he answered, 'until he
becomes of age.' Then I wrote to him: 'What is the period of maturity?'
'According to the periods which Allah has made obligatory on the
believers.'[[5]](#_ftn708)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F704) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 168.  
 [[2]](#_F705) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 101. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 15,
p. 302.  
 [[3]](#_F706) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 15, p. 317.  
 [[4]](#_F707) *Al-muhalil* is he who marries a divorced woman in order
to dismiss her, so that the first husband may marry her again.  
 [[5]](#_F708) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 103.  
  

  

  

### 135. The Castrated cannot be *Muhalil* [[1]](#_ftn709)

Mohammed b. Mudārib narrated, saying: "I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him:
'Can the castrated be *Muhalil?'* 'No, he replied, 'he cannot be
*Muhalil*.'[[2]](#_ftn710)"

### 136. Witnesses for Returning to Wife

Sa'd b. Sa'd al-Ash'ari reported on the authority of al-Marzbān, who
said: "I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, about a husband
who said to his wife: 'Be in *'idda*, for I have released you', namely
he has divorced her with a divorce including all the pre-conditions.'
Some days ago, he made (two just witnesses) bear witness to his
returning to her; and then he was absent from her before he slept with
her; and then some months after *'idda* passed. So how do you order him?
He answered: 'If he had made (two just witnesses) bear witness to his
returning to her, then she would have been his wife.'[[3]](#_ftn711)"

### 137. Second Divorce without having Sexual Intercourse

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr narrated, saying: "I asked al-Ridā, peace
be on him, about a man who divorced his wife in the presence of two
witnesses, and then he returned to her and did not have a sexual
intercourse with her until she became pure from her menstruation, and
then he divorced her in purity and in the presence of two witnesses did
the second divorce occur against her, while he had returned to her and
not taken a sexual intercourse with her? 'Yes,' he
replied.[[4]](#_ftn712)"

### 138. Driving the Woman with Revocable *'Idda* out of her House

Al-Ma'mūn asked al-Ridā, peace be on him, about these words of Him, the
Great and Almighty: *Do not drive them out of their  
*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F709) See the note on *al-muhalil*.  
 [[2]](#_F710) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 15, p. 369.  
 [[3]](#_F711) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 102.  
 [[4]](#_F712) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 15, p. 378.  
  

  

  

houses, nor should they themselves go forth, unless they commit an open
indecency, and he answered: 'By *the open indecency* He meant that she
harmed the family of her husband. If she does that, then he has the
right to drive her out (of her house) before her *'iddā*
terminates.'[[1]](#_ftn713)"

### 139. The Difference between the *'Idda* of Divorce and that of Death

 Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: "Safwān asked him (al-Ridā) in my presence
about a man who divorced his wife and he was absent. Some months ago,
and he replied: 'If a proof was established that he divorced her from
so-and-so (month) and her *'idda* terminated, then it was lawful for her
to marry.' He (Safwān) asked: 'What about her whose husband died?' 'This
is not similar to that,' he answered, 'this (woman) should start her
*'idda* from the day when she hears of the news (of his death), for she
should mourn.'[[2]](#_ftn714)"

### 140. If *al-Mukhtala'a* [[3]](#_ftn715) returns to her Husband

In the tradition of *al-Khal'*, Ismā'il b. Buzaygh narrated on the
authority of al-Ridā, peace be on him, who said: "And if she wants him
to return to her what he had taken from her and to be his wife, then she
can do.[[4]](#_ftn716)" If *al-mukhtala'a* returns to her husband and
takes what she had given to him, then the divorce is revocable, and the
husband has the right to return to her.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F713) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 110.  
 [[2]](#_F714) Qurb al-Isnād, p. 159. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 15, p.
445.  
 [[3]](#_F715) *Al-Mukhtala'a* is the woman who pays compensation to her
husband in order to divorce her.  
 [[4]](#_F716) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 15, p. 499.  
  

  

  

### 141. *Al-Zahār* [[1]](#_ftn717) does not occur due to Anger

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, who said: "*Al-zahār * does not occur because of
anger.[[2]](#_ftn718)" *Al-zahār* is correct when it occurs because of
willingness and consent; it is incorrect when husband is angry or
forced.

### 142. *Al-Zahār* occurs against Bond maid

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr narrated on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: "I asked him about the man who likened the back
of his bond maid to that of his mother *(zāhara)*, and he answered:
'*Al-zahār* occurs against the free woman and the bond
maid.'[[3]](#_ftn719)"

### 143. Precepts for him who likens the Back of his Wife to that of his Mother

Al-Husayn b. Mahrān asked al-Ridā, peace be on him, about a man who
likened the backs of four wives to that of his mother, and he replied:
"He should pay a religious expiation on behalf of each of them." Then he
asked him about a man who likened the back of his wife and of his
slave-wife to that of his mother, and he, peace be on him, answered: "He
should pay a religious expiation on behalf of each of them: releasing a
slave or fasting two successive months or feeding sixty needy
ones.[[4]](#_ftn720)"

### 144. Abandoning Bond maid for Swearing

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: "I asked him about the man who abandoned his
bond maid because of his swearing, and he replied: 'No, why has he
abandoned her while she is not divorced?'[[5]](#_ftn721)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F717) *Al-Zahār* means putting away the wife by likening her
back to that of his mother's back.  
 [[2]](#_F718) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 128.  
 [[3]](#_F719) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 15, p. 527.  
 [[4]](#_F720) Ibid.  
 [[5]](#_F721) Qurb al-Isnād, p. 160.  
  

  

  

### 145. Releasing old Salves

Ibn Abū Sa'd al-Imkāri went in to Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him,
and said to him: "A man was about to die and he said: 'All my old slaves
are free for the pleasure of Allah,' and he (al-Ridā) said: 'Yes, for
Allah says in His Book: *till it becomes again as an old dry palm
branch*, so all his slaves who spent sixth months are free and
old.'[[1]](#_ftn722)"

### 146. A Man had anal Sexual Intercourse with his Pregnant Female-slave

Al-Hasan b. 'Ali al-Washshā' narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: "I asked him (al-Ridā) about a man who
had an anal sexual intercourse with his pregnant female-slave, and he
answered: 'If he knew what was in the womb of the female-slave, then it
had the same rank of her; and if he did not know, then what was in her
womb was a slave.' [[2]](#_ftn723)"

The supposed question concerning the female-slave with whom the man had
an anal sexual intercourse and to whom he said: 'You are free after my
death,' should be as follows: She was made pregnant by someone other
than him; otherwise, if she was made pregnant by him, then she was a
slave-wife and would be released after his death by her child's share.

### 147. A Precept for unpromissory Oath

Ismā'il b. Sa'd al-Ash'ari reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: "I asked him about a man who swore (by
Allah) to cut the ties of the womb, and he replied: 'Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, said: 'There is no vow for an act of
disobedience (to Allah), nor is there an oath for cutting the ties of
the womb.'[[3]](#_ftn724)"

Oath and vow are promissory when the thing is acceptable; and they are
unpromissory when the thing is unacceptable.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F722) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 40, p. 16.  
 [[2]](#_F723) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 6, p. 184.  
 [[3]](#_F724) Ibid., vol. 7, p. 440. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 16, p.
157.  
  

  

  

### 148. False Oath

 In a tradition Ismā'il b. Sa'd al-Ash'ari narrated on the authority of
Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: "I asked him about a man
whom the ruler (Sultan) made swear by divorce or other than that, and he
swore; and he (al-Ridā) replied: 'No blame is put on him.' Then I asked
him about a man who swore (by Allah) to save his property from the
ruler, and he answered: 'No blame is put on him.' Then I asked him:
'Does one swear (by Allah) (to save) the property of his brother just as
he swears (to save) his own property?' 'Yes,' he
replied.[[1]](#_ftn725)"

Oath is promissory when one swears by Allah, the Most High. As for oath
by divorce without mentioning the name of Allah, it is unpromissory. It
is permissible for one to swear by Allah before the unjust ruler in
order to drive oppression away from his own soul and his brothers; and
there is no religious expiation against him.

### 149. Hunting Birds at Night is lawful

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of al-Ridā,
peace be on him, saying: "I asked him about hunting birds in their nests
by night, and he answered: 'There is no harm in it.'[[2]](#_ftn726)"

Yunus b. 'Abd al-Rahmān narrated on the authority of al-Ridā, saying: "I
asked him: 'May I be your ransom, what do you say about hunting birds in
their nests and wild animals in their places by night, for the people
hate that?' 'There is no harm in that,' he replied.[[3]](#_ftn727)"

### 150. Hunting Birds belong to someone

 Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported, saying: "I asked Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, about a man who hunted a bird which equaled
many dirhams and whose wings are even; and who knows its owner or its
owner comes and asks it from him without any accusation; and he
(al-Ridā) answered: 'He has no right to keep it; he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F725) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 7, p. 440.  
 [[2]](#_F726) Ibid., vol. 6, p. 215.  
 [[3]](#_F727) Wasā'il al-Shi'a.  
  

  

  

should return it to him.' Then I asked him: 'What do you say about a man
who hunted a bird whose owner he did not know?' 'It belongs to him (the
hunter),' he replied.[[1]](#_ftn728)"

### 151. *Rabithā* is Lawful

Mohammed b. Ismā'il narrated, saying: "I wrote to Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him: 'The people have differed over *rabithā* (a kind of
fish), what do you say about it? He, peace be on him, wrote: 'There is
no harm in it.'[[2]](#_ftn729)"

### 152. The Meat of Vulture is Prohibited

Sulaymān b. Ja'far al-Hāshimi, reported, saying: [Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, related to me:] "One night we visited Ibn Abū Maryam
while Hārūn was in Medina, and he said: 'Tonight Hārun has an ache in
his waist. We asked someone to send us some meat of a vulture, and he
sent it to us.' So he (al-Ridā) said: 'We do not eat such a thing; nor
do we bring it to our houses; and if we have such a thing, we will not
give it (to anyone).'[[3]](#_ftn730)"

### 153. Mutton

Sa'd b. Sa'd narrated, saying: "I said to Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be
on him: 'My household eat the meat of goats and do not eat the meat of
sheep.' 'Why?' he asked. 'It excites the gallbladder,' they say. 'If
Allah had known that there was something better than sheep,' he
answered, 'He would have sacrificed it for Ishāq
(Isaac).'[[4]](#_ftn731)"

### 154. Wine is Prohibited

Mohammed b. Ahmed reported on the authority of al-'Amraki, who said: "I
said to al-Ridā, peace be on him: Ibn Dāwud said: 'You said that one who
drank wine was an unbeliever.' So he (al-Ridā) replied: 'He was right; I
said that to him.'[[5]](#_ftn732)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F728) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 6, p. 222.  
 [[2]](#_F729) Al-Tahdhib. Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 16, p. 407.  
 [[3]](#_F730) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 9, p. 20.  
 [[4]](#_F731) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 6, p. 310.  
 [[5]](#_F732) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 17, p. 256.  
  

  

  

### 155. Beer is Prohibited

Mohammed b. 'Īsā narrated on the authority of al-Washshā', who said: "I
wrote to him (al-Ridā), peace be on him, to ask him about beer, and he
wrote: 'It is prohibited; and it is wine.'[[1]](#_ftn733)"

### 156. Selling the Pasture within a Personal Property

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr reported on the authority of Mohammed b.
'Abd Allah, who said: "I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him, about a man who
had a productive land which was about twenty miles, and a man came to
him and said: 'Give one of the pastures of your land, and I will give
you so-and-so dirhams. 'There is no harm in it if the land belongs to
him,' he replied.[[2]](#_ftn734)"

### 157. The nearest Woman inherits Property when there is none except her

Al-Qāsim b. al-Fadl narrated on the authority of al-Ridā, peace be on
him, concerning a man who died and left none but his close wife behind
him; he (al-Ridā) said: "All the property is given to
her.[[3]](#_ftn735)"

### 158. The Testimony of Women

Mohammed b. al-Fudayl reported, saying: "I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him: 'Is it permissible for women to bear witness to
marriage, divorce, and stoning?' He replied: 'It is permissible for
women to bear witness to that at which men cannot look and there is no
man with them. It is permissible for them to bear witness to marriage
when there is a man with them. It is permissible for them to bear
witness to the prescribed punishment for fornication when there are
three men and two women. As for the testimony of two men and four women
regarding fornication or stoning, it is not permissible; and it is not
permissible for women to bear witness to divorce or
murder.'[[4]](#_ftn736)" 

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F733) Ibid., p. 287.  
 [[2]](#_F734) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 5, p. 276.  
 [[3]](#_F735) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 17, p. 480.  
 [[4]](#_F736) Ibid., 18, p. 259.  
  

  

  

### 159. The prescribed Punishment for him who wars against Allah

'Ubayd Allah al-Madā'ini narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan
al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: "He (al-Ridā) was questioned about
these words of Him, the Exalted: *The punishment of those who wage war
against Allah and His apostle and strive to make mischief in land is
only this, that they should be murdered or crucified or their hands and
their feet should be cut off on opposite sides or they should be
banished from the land*. When does one deserve one of these four
punishments? He, peace be on him, replied: 'When he wages war against
Allah and His apostle and strives to make mischief in the land and kills
(someone), he should be murdered. If he kills (someone) and takes (his)
property, then he should be murdered and crucified. If he takes the
property and does not kill (someone), his hand and his feet should be
cut off on opposite sides. If he draws the sword, wages war against
Allah and His apostle, strives to make mischief in the land, but he does
not kill (someone) nor does he take the property, he should be banished
from the land.'[[1]](#_ftn737)"

### 160. Banishing the anti-Islam Warrior

In the tradition of warrior *(hadith al-muhārib*) 'Ubayd Allah
al-Madā'ini reported on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be
on him, saying: "I asked him: 'How is he banished? What is the
prescribed punishment for banishing him?'

"He, peace be on him, answered: 'He is banished from the city in which
he does what he does, and it is written to the people of that city that
the person is banished, so do not sit with him nor deals with him nor
marry him nor eat with him nor drink with him. This is done toward him
for a year, but if he comes out that city to other than it, then it is
written to them in the same manner until the year terminates.' I (the
asker) asked: 'If he heads for the land of polytheism  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F737) Furū' al-Kāfi, vol. 7, p. 246.  
  

  

  

in order to enter it?' 'If he heads for the land of polytheism in order
to enter it, then a war should be waged against its people', he
answered.[[1]](#_ftn738)"

### 161. The Blood of a Thief is not protected by the Law

Mohammed b. Fudayl narrated on the authority of al-Ridā, peace be on
him, saying: "I asked him (al-Ridā) about a thief who went in to a
pregnant woman and killed what was in her womb, hence the woman took a
knife, stabbed and killed the thief. So he (al-Ridā) replied: 'The blood
of a thief is not protected by  Islamic law.'[[2]](#_ftn739)"

### 162. Precept for him who helps and kills a person

Mohammed b. Sulaymān and Yunus b. 'Abd al-Rahmān reported, saying: "We
asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, about a man whom a group of
people asked for help in order to save them from a group of people who
attacked them in order to take their properties and capture their
children, so the man went out running and carrying his weapon in the
dark night. He passed by a man standing by the brink of a well and
drinking water out of it. He pushed him unintentionally and without
awareness, so the man fell into the well and died. However, the man went
on running and saved the properties of those people who asked him for
help. When he came back to his family, they asked him: 'What have you
done?' 'The people departed from them, and they are safe and sound,' he
replied. 'Did you know that so-and-so fell into the well and died?' they
asked him. 'By Allah, I pushed him,' he answered. 'How?' they asked. 'I
went out running and carrying my weapon in the dark night. I feared that
I might miss the people who asked me for help, so I passed by so-and-so
who was standing and drinking out of the well. I pushed him without any
intention, and he fell into the well and died,' he replied.' Therefore,
who should pay blood-money?

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F738) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 18, p. 539.  
 [[2]](#_F739) Man lā Yahdarahū al-Faqih, vol. 4, p. 122. Wasā'il
al-Shi'a, vol. 19, p. 42.  
  

  

  

"He (al-Ridā), peace be on him, answered: 'His blood-money should be
paid by the people who asked the man for help, and he helped them and
saved their properties, their women, and their children. If they had
given him a wage (to help them), then he and his family would have paid
the blood-money apart from them. That is because an old woman came to
Sulaymān b. Dāwud and asked him for help against the wind, saying: 'O
Prophet of Allah, while I was sleeping on the roof of mine, the wind
dropped me and broke my hand, so help me against her.' So Sulaymān b.
Dāwud summoned the wind and asked her: 'What made you do this toward
this woman?' 'You are right, O Prophet of Allah,' the wind answered,
'surely the Lord of mightiness, the Great and Almighty, had sent me to
the ship of the children of so-and-so in order to save it from drowning.
So I went out according to the laws, and Allah, the Great and Almighty,
hastened me to what He had ordered me, so I passed by this woman while
she was on her roof, and I stumbled across her; and I had no (ill)
intention toward her, so she fell and broke her hand.' So Sulaymān said:
'My Lord, how shall I judge against the wind?' He revealed to him: 'O
Sulaymān, decide the blood-money of the broken hand of this woman
against the owners of the ship which the wind save from drowning, for
none of people is wronged before Me.'"

With this matter we will finish our talk about some precepts which have
been reported from Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and which have
included most chapters of the science of Islamic jurisprudence such as
the acts of worship, dealings,  contracts, and others from among the
Sunna on which the Shi'ites depend and in whose light the Imāmi jurists
give religious decisions.

It is worth mentioning that Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, has another
group of traditions regarding religious precepts; this group has been
mentioned in the encyclopedias of demonstrative jurisprudence, but it
requires a study and contemplation. The books of jurisprudence have
objectively presented them, but I (i.e. the author) have not presented
them because this book is not one of the jurisprudence books; I have
mentioned these examples of jurisprudence as proofs of the Imām's
scientific wealth and of that he was the highest authority of religious
decisions in the Islamic world of his time. 

  

