a Foreword By His Eminence,
===========================

  

Imām al-Sayyid Abd al-Alā al-Sabzwāri, may his blessings last
=============================================================

In the Name of Allah the Merciful, the Compassionate,

Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. Blessing and peace be
on the noblest of His creatures Mohammed and his Household, the good,
the pure. The pure Imāms, peace be on them, are the mediations of the
Holiest Grace, the means of Divine mercy, and the testamentary trustees
of Allah, may His name be exalted, on earth. Allah, the Glorified and
Exalted, has endowed them with knowledge and cognition through which
they set the foundations of the religion and pillars of Sharia. The
gallant, affectionate, infallible Imām Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on
him, was unique in being able to affirm Divine knowledge through
debating with the leading scientists of religions and followers of false
beliefs. He established right and refuted wrong, and his holy words have
become the axis of studies and foundation of perfection. A group of
scholars-may Allah, the Exalted, reward them with the best reward-has
undertaken the task of collecting, interpreting, and explaining these
words. Among those whom Allah, the Most High, has singled out for this
great dignity is, Shaykh of traditionalists, the Hujja, Shaykh Bāqir
al-Qarashi, whom Allah, the Exalted, has endowed with His special favor
and placed him among those who are guides to the righteous Imāms, peace
be on them, and explain their words and their characters. May Allah, the
Most High, appreciate his efforts and grant him success to exalt the
word of the truth and to manifest the reality. Verily, He is
All-hearing, and answers to prayers!

 Jamādi al Thāniya 26th, 1412 A. H.

Abd al-Alā al-Sabzwāri

  

