Chapter X
=========

  

  

REASONS FOR SOME RELIGIOUS PRECEPTS AND OTHERS
==============================================

The Addliya[[1]](#_ftn740) from among the Shia and the Mutazilites have
unanimously agreed that every precept issues from the Holy Legislator
(Allah) is never spontaneous; rather it concerns an inclusive individual
and social interest which brings about to them general good, whether
this precept is obligatory or recommended; likewise, if the precept is
unlawful or reprehensible, for surely it includes an inseparable
corruption or not inseparable corruption which causes heavy harm to man,
and it is impossible that a precept issues from the Great Legislator and
is void of interests or has some acts of corruption, for surely that
requires impugning the wisdom of the Legislator; likewise, it requires
the voidness and uselessness of legislation. The Asharites have opposed
that and maintained that all precepts of the Legislator are spontaneous
and devoid of wisdom and interests. The weakness of this view is clear,
for many corrupt adhesions result from it and they have been mentioned
in the theological books.

Any how, the Imām, peace be on him, has announced that it is necessary
for religious precepts to include interests in the side of the
obligatory and acts of corruption in the side of the unlawful. He stated
that during giving answers to the reasons of some precepts about which
al-Fadl b. Shādhān asked him. He, peace be on him, said:

If a questioner asks: Is it permissible for the Wise One (Allah)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F740) The 'Addliya are those who believe in Divine Justice.  
  

  

  

to charge a servant with one of the acts (of worship) without a cause or
a meaning? It is said to him: That is not permissible, for He is wise,
not frivolous nor ignorant. If a sayer says: Tell me: Why has He charged
the creatures (with acts of worship)? It is said: For many reasons. If a
sayer says: Tell me about these reasons: Are they known and available or
are they neither known nor available? It is said: Rather, they are known
and available with their people.[[1]](#_ftn741)

Any how, many questions about the reasons for some theological
researches spread in the time of the Imām. Other questions about the
reasons for legislating some religious precepts were also asked. Yet
other questions about the conditions of the prophets and the affairs of
the bygone communities were asked. The Imām, peace be on him, was asked
about these questions and he answered them. Mohammed b. Sinān asked him
about a group of them, and al-Fadl b. Shādhān heard some of the Imāms
answers to them. The questions are as follows:

Theological Questions
---------------------

As for the theological questions whose reasons the Imām, peace be on
him, has mentioned, they are as follows:

### A. The Reason for ordering the

### creation to profess Allah

The Imām, peace be on him, has stated the firm reason why it is
obligatory on servants to profess Allah, the Most High, His messengers,
and what has been brought from Him. He, peace be on him, said: If a
sayer says: Why have the creatures been ordered to profess Allah, His
Messenger, His argument, and what has been brought from Allah, the Great
and Almighty?

The Imāms answer is as follows: It is said: For many reasons, of which
are: If men do not profess Allah, the Great and Almighty, do not refrain
from disobeying him, do not abstain from committing great sins, do not
fear anyone regarding what they desire and enjoy of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F741) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 99.  
  

  

  

corruption and oppression, they will be corrupt, attack each other, rape
women, plunder properties, shed blood, and killed each other without
right. Without doubt, this results in the ruin of the world, the
destruction of the creation, the corruption of the tilth and the stock.

Yet of which are: Surely Allah, the Great and Almighty, is wise. None is
wise and described by wisdom except him who bans corruption, enjoins
righteousness, restrains (men) from oppression, and prevent (them) from
atrocities. Banning corruption, enjoining righteousness, and preventing
atrocities are not (available) except after professing Allah, the Great
and Almighty, and recognizing the one who enjoins and forbids.

If the people were left without professing Allah, the Great and
Almighty, and without knowledge of Him, then neither enjoining
righteousness nor preventing corruption was established. For there is no
one who enjoins (men to do good) and forbids (them from doing evil). Yet
some of which are: We have found that the creatures may be corrupt
through hidden, covered affairs. So were it not for professing Allah and
fear of Him in secret, none, when he is alone with his desire and will,
fears anyone regarding giving up sin, violating sacredness, and
committing great sins. That is when his deed is covered from the
creation and none sees it. So through that is the difference between all
creation. Therefore, straightness and righteousness do not occur except
through their professing the Omniscient, the All-aware, Who knows the
secret and what is yet more hidden, enjoins righteousness and forbids
corruption, from Whom no secret remains hidden, that through that they
may prevent themselves from all kinds of corruption when they are alone
with them.[[1]](#_ftn742)

Surely the firmest deed for uprooting crime, driving it away from
individual and society, purifying the earth from sins and offenses is
planting the faith in Allah, the Exalted, in the depths of souls and
hearts, and the faith in that Allah watches him who commits crime or sin
with respect to his own soul and his society, and that He will severely
punish him because of it.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F742) Ibid., p. 100.  
  

  

  

As man loves his own soul and seeks good for it, he normally refrains
from any sin which leads to destruction and misery.

Crimes have increased during these time; terrorist deeds such as killing
the innocent, hijacking, and the like from among crimes and offenses
have also increased because of the weakness of the faith in Allah and
the paucity of the religious restraint in souls.

Surely the forces of good and peace are built on faith in Allah, the
Most High. The faith in Him is the firmest way for spreading justice,
security, and welfare among men. So man will increase in affliction and
misery because he has little faith in Allah or he has no faith in Him.

### B. Professing Allahs Oneness

The Imām, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has it been made
incumbent on them (men) to profess and recognize that Allah is One and
Unique?

It is said: For reasons of which is that if He did not make profession
and knowledge (of Him) obligatory on them (men), then it would be
permissible for them to imagine (that there were) two directors or more
than that; and if that was permissible, they would not distinguish the
One Who created them from other than him, for every human being of them
did not come to know (of Him), for he worshipped the one other than Him
who created him, and obey the one other than Him who ordered him, so
they were not sure of their Maker and Creator; neither the command of
the commander nor the prohibition of the prohibiter is established with
them; therefore, the commander himself is not known; nor is the
prohibiter (distinguished) from other than him.

Of which is that if it was possible for two (creators to exist), one of
the two partners was not worthier of worship and obedience than the
other; if it was permissible to obey that partner, then it was
permissible not to obey Allah; and if it was permissible not to obey
Allah, then that would result in: disbelief in Allah, all His messengers
and His Books; establishing all kinds of falsehood; leaving all kinds of
right; making lawful all kinds of the unlawful; making unlawful all  

  

  

kinds of the lawful; entering all acts of disobedience; coming out of
all acts of obedience; permitting all kinds of corruption; and
invalidating all kinds of right.

Yet of which is that if it was possible for more than one (creator to
exist), then it would be possible for Iblis to claim that he was that
other (one), that he might oppose Allah, the Exalted, in all His decrees
and make the servants incline to him, so, through that, there will be
the greatest unbelief and the most intense hypocrisy.[[1]](#_ftn743)

This part gives an account of the necessity of faith in the Oneness of
Allah, the Most High, and the impossibility of existence of a partner
along with Him. The Imām, peace be on him, has stated his wonderful
proofs of that, and that the existence of a partner along with Allah,
the Exalted, results in the disorder of the regulation, the corruption
of the world, and the absence of balance in these worlds.

### C. There is Nothing like Allah

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why it has been made
incumbent on them (men) to confess that there is nothing like Allah?

It is said: For reasons of which are that they should not mean other
than Him by acts of worship and obedience, and that the affair of their
Lord, their Maker, and their Provider is not vague for them. Of which is
that were it not for that they knew that there was nothing like him,
they would come to know that their lord and maker were those idols,
which their forefathers had installed for them, the sun, the moon, and
the fires. If it was possible for Him to be vague to them, then that
would result in corruption, leaving all acts of obedience to Him, and
committing all acts of disobedience to Him according to what came to
their knowledge of the stories of these lords, their order and their
prohibition. Of which is that were it not for that it was incumbent on
them to know that there was nothing like Him, then it would be
permissible for them to subject Him to the same (qualities)  
 of the creatures such as incapability, ignorance, change,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F743) Ibid., p. 102.  
  

  

  

disappearance, extinction, lying, and aggression. He who is subject to
these things, none can give security to his extinction, have confidence
in his justice, be sure of his saying, his order and his prohibition,
his promise and his threat, his reward and his punishment; and that
results in the corruption of the creation and invalidating
lordship.[[1]](#_ftn744)

In this part the Imām has mentioned the firm reasons why it has been
made incumbent on servants to believe that there is nothing like Him.
For if there was something like Him, then He would be subject to
servants qualities such as incapability, ignorance, extinction, and the
like; and that results in the corruption of the creation and the
invalidity of Lordship.

### D. The Cause for Charging Servants

### (with Religious Duties)

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has Allah, the Exalted,
enjoined and prohibited servants?

It is said: Because their existence and their righteousness are not
except through the order, the prohibition, the ban from corruption and
usurping each other.[[2]](#_ftn745)

The Imām, peace be on him, means that the cause for the religious duties
from among the obligatory and the unlawful is the subsistence of man and
the continuation of his existence, for therein are his righteousness,
keeping his security, his interests, and his happiness; and in leaving
them are his misery and his destruction.

### E. The Cause for Knowledge of the

### Messengers

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why it has been made
incumbent on them (people) to know the messengers, to profess them, and
to yield to them through obedience?

It is said: As that through which they complete their interests is not
in their creation and their forces, the Maker is far above from  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F744) Ibid., p. 103.  
 [[2]](#_F745) Ibid.  
  

  

  

being seen, their frailty and their feebleness to attain Him is
manifest, there is no escape for them from an infallible messenger
between Him and them (in order to) convey to them His order, His
prohibition, and His good manners, and to inform them of that which
leads to their profits and their harms. So if it was not incumbent on
them to know and obey him (the messenger), then there would for them no
profit nor fulfilling a need in the coming of the messenger, and his
coming not for profit nor righteousness is vanity; and this is not one
of the attributes of the Wise (Allah) Who has mastered all things.

This part gives an account of the reason why it is obligatory on men to
know the messengers, to acknowledge their Prophethood, and to believe in
them; otherwise knowledge of them is vanity and nonsense.

### F. The Reason for Obeying Rulers

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why He has appointed rulers
and ordered (men) to obey them? It is said: For many reasons of which is
that when the creatures have been ordered to stop by a limited limit and
have been ordered not to exceed that limit, because therein is their
corruption, that is not established nor stands except through that He
must appoint among them a trusted one who prevents them from exceeding
and entering that from which He has banned them, for if that was not,
then none would leave his pleasure and his profit because of the
corruption of other than him, so He has appointed over them a custodian
in order to prevent them from corruption and to administer among them
the punishments and the precepts.

Of which is that we do not find a sect from among the sects nor a people
from among the peoples subsist and live except through a custodian and a
head, and as there is no escape for them from him (the ruler) regarding
the affairs of the religion and the world, then it is not permissible in
the wisdom of the Wise to leave the creation without him whom He knows
that there is no escape for them (the creation) from him (the ruler);
nor do they subsist except through him, so they through him fight
against their enemy and divide their booty, and he  

  

  

establishes for them their gathering and their community, and prevents
their oppressive from their oppressed.

Yet of which is that if He does not appoint for them an Imām custodian,
trusted, protector, and gentle, then the community will be effaced, the
religion be removed, the laws and precepts will be changed, the
innovators will increase it (the religion), the infidels will decrease
it, and make that as vague errors for the people, for we have found the
creatures incomplete, needy, not complete, along with their difference,
their different caprices, and their scattered manners. If He does not
appoint for them a custodian keeping what the Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family, has brought, they will become corrupt, as we have
explained, laws, practices, precepts and faith will be changed; and in
that will be the corruption of the creation in general.[[1]](#_ftn746)

In this part the Imām, peace be on him, talks about that the Imāmate is
necessary, and that it is a basic element for establishing Islamic life,
administering the punishments and precepts of Allah, the Exalted. The
Imām has given many causes and reasons for that.

### G. The Imām is from among the Progeny of the Prophet

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why is it not permissible
that the Imām is from other than the progeny of the Messenger, may Allah
bless him and his family?

It is said: For many reasons of which is that as obedience to the Imām
is obligatory, there is no escape from an indication which indicates
him, and he is distinguished by it from other than him, and it (the
indication) is the famous relationship and the manifest testament, that
(the people) may distinguish him from other than him and find the right
way to him. And of which is that if it was permissible (to entrust the
Imāmate) to other than the progeny of the Messenger, then He (Allah)
would prefer him who was not a messenger to the messengers, for He would
make the sons of the messengers follow the sons of His  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F746) Ibid., p. 100-101.  
  

  

  

enemies such as Abū Jahl and Ibn Abū Miyat, for it might be permissible
for that (i.e. the Imāmate), according to their claim, to pass to their
sons if they were believers. So the sons of the Messengers became
followers; the sons of the enemies of Allah and the enemies of His
Messenger became followed; therefore, the Messenger was worthier of this
excellence than other than him.

Surely, if the creation acknowledged the message of the Messenger and
yielded to obedience to him, then none of them would show haughtiness
toward following his own son and obeying his own progeny, and that would
not intensify in the souls of the people. And if that (i.e. the Imāmate)
was (entrusted to) other than the progeny of the Messenger, then each
one of them (the people) would feel that he was worthier of it (the
Imāmate) than other than him; out of that they would be haughty and
would not obey those inferior to them; therefore, that would lead to
corruption, hypocrisy, and difference.[[1]](#_ftn747)

The Imām, peace be on him, has established these firm reasons for the
necessity that the Imām should belong to the grandsons and progeny of
the Prophet, for he would be better for unifying the community and
protecting it from the calamities of discord and difference like those
occurred when the pure family (of the Prophet) was removed from
government and responsibility, so the community differed; caprices
spread among it; discords and enmities dominated it; and that was among
the disasters and misfortunes which befell the community.

The Causes of the Religious Precepts
------------------------------------

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, has stated many causes for the religious
precepts and the reasons of their legislation. That was in the answers
which he wrote to the questions of Mohammed b. Sinān; al-Fadl b. Shādhān
has transmitted these answers from him. These researches are wonderful
and useful, for they highlight the firm reason why the Almighty
Legislator has legislated His holy precepts, and that is as follows:

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F747) Ibid., p. 102.  
  

  

  

### The Ghusl of Janāba

The Imām talked about the reason why the Legislator has made the *ghusl*
of *janāba* obligatory. He, peace be on him, has said: The reason for
the *ghusl* of *janāba* is cleanness and mans purifying his own soul
from its harm which befalls him and purifying his entire body, for the
*janāba* comes out of all the body, so it is obligatory on him to purify
his entire body.[[1]](#_ftn748)

The Imām, peace be on him, has explained the sublime purposes for which
Islam has legislated the *ghusl* of *janāba*, and they are as follows:

#### A. Cleanness

Islam takes great care of cleanness and regards it as part of faith, for
it is among the most modern means of prevention from diseases which
results from dirt; and wash *(ghusl)* is among the most manifest means
of purity and cleanness of the body.

#### B. Returning Vitality to the Body

Surely *janāba* (the ejaculation of semen) brings about the emaciation
and withering of the body, so wash (*ghusl)* returns activity and
vitality to it, and this has been emphasized by the modern medical
researches.

### The *ghusl* for the two Īds and Friday

In his answers to the questions of Mohammed b. Sinān, the Imām, peace be
on him, said: The cause for the *ghusl* for the two Īds, Friday, and
other *ghusls* is that, through it, the servant magnifies his Lord,
receives the Generous and the Great (Allah), and asks Him to forgive him
his sins, and that it may be for them a known Īd when they gather in
order to mention Allah, the Exalted, so *ghusl* has been appointed
therein in order that it may be magnified, preferred to all days, and an
increase in the supererogatory prayers and the acts of worship. And that
purity for it (the body) should be from Friday to Friday.[[2]](#_ftn749)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F748) Ibid., p. 88.  
 [[2]](#_F749) Ibid., pp. 88-89.  
  

  

  

It is recommended to wash on the day of Īd al-Addhā, Īd al-Fitr, Friday,
and other religious occasions such as the day of Īd al-Ghadir, the
visitation to the Shrines of the pure Imāms, peace be on them, and other
than that from among which the jurists have mentioned. The Imām, peace
be on him, has shown the reason for legislating *ghusl* on these
occasions as follows:

1. It *(ghusl)* makes man magnify His Great Creator when he asks pardon
and forgiveness from Him, the Exalted.

2. It makes the Muslims magnify the Īds and urges them to associate with
each other.

3. The Muslims must prefer these days to the rest of the days of the
year, for this great occasion occurs in them.

4. They must increase the acts of worship and to celebrate these days
through mentioning Allah, the Exalted.

5. As for the reason for the *ghusl* for Friday, it is that the body is
pure and clean from Friday to Friday.

### *Ghusl* *al-Maiyit*

The Imām, peace be on him, has given two reasons for that *ghusl
al-maiyit* [***[1]***](#_ftn750) is obligatory:

Regarding the first reason, he, peace be on him, said: The cause of
*ghusl al-maiyit* is that he is washed, for he becomes pure and is free
from the dirt of his illness and all kinds of maladies which befall him,
for he will meet the angels and associate with the people of the
hereafter. When he goes to Allah, he meets the pure people; they touch
him and he touches them, then it is recommended for him to be pure and
clean, that they may turn to Allah and to intercede for him with Him.

Regarding the second reason, he, peace be on him, said: Yet another
reason is that the semen from which he had been created comes out of
him, so he is impure, and accordingly he is washed.[[2]](#_ftn751)

Islam takes great care of the dead Muslims; it summons the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F750) *Ghusl al-maiyit:* obligatory ceremonial washing of the
corpse of a Muslim.  
 [[2]](#_F751) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 89.  
  

  

  

Muslims to escort them to their final resting places and to console
their families on their misfortunes; it has made it incumbent,
sufficient necessity, to wash them, to payer over them, and to bury
them. The Imām has justified washing them as follows:

A. The dead should be cleansed of dirt and the germs which are in his
body and which result from his illness, and that is through washing him
with water mixed with leaves of nabk tree *(sidr)* and camphor which are
among the things which sterilize the body.

B. Surely after washing, the dead are pure. If they are believers, then
they will shake hand with the angels and the believers from among the
inhabitants of the next world.

C. The last thing which comes out of the bodies of the dead is the sperm
from which they had been created. For this reason it is obligatory to
wash them. Some modern theories have emphasized this meaning, and they
believe that the sperm from which man is created remains living, and
that from it he will be raised from the dead on the Day of Resurrection.

Any how, Islam has legislated for the dead the most wonderful precepts
such as washing *(ghusl)* and burying in the ground.

### *Ghusl* for Touching a Corpse

He, peace be on him, said: And the reason for his washing because of
washing him (the dead) or touching him, so it is purity of what befalls
him of the sweat of the dead, for when the soul comes out of him, most
of his blight remains, so he must cleanse himself of it and he becomes
pure.[[1]](#_ftn752)

When one touches the cold corpse of the dead, he should wash his body.
The Imām, peace be on him, has justified this *ghusl* saying that it is
obligatory because man becomes a mass of germs after his death;
therefore,  it is obligatory on him who touches the cold corpse of the
dead to wash his body in order to get rid of germs.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F752) Ibid.  
  

  

  

### *Ghusl* for Urine and Feces is not obligatory

He, peace be on him, said: And the reason for decrease regarding urine
and feces because they are more abundant and lasting more than *janāba*,
so *wudū* has been made obligatory for them, for they are abundant,
hard, come without any will, and no libido results from them; *janāba*
does not occur except through their practicing pleasure and forcing
their own souls.[[1]](#_ftn753)

The Imām, peace be on him, has given reasons that *ghusl* for urine and
feces is not obligatory, and that it is sufficient to cleanse the two
places, for making *ghusl* for them obligatory is an intense and
unbearable difficulty, so the Legislator has raised it.

### *Wudū*

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why have they (men) been
order to perform *wudū* and to start with it?

It is said: Because the servant is pure when he stands up before the
Almighty (Allah), says whispered prayers to Him, obey Him regarding what
He has ordered him, pure of dirt and uncleanness;  in addition to that
*(wudū)* drives away inactivity, dismisses drowsiness, and purifies the
heart before the Almighty.[[2]](#_ftn754)

The Imām, peace be on him, has justified *wudū* through the following
spiritual reasons:

A. Surely *wudū* is the precondition and essence of the prayers; it is
coming to Allah, the Creator of the universe and Giver of life. It is
obligatory on the worshipper to rid himself of the concerns of life, to
come through his feelings and sentiments to Allah, the Most High. When
Imām al-Hasan the master of the youths of the Garden and sweet basil of
Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family stood up for
prayer, he would shake with fear of Allah and his skin would turn
yellow. He was asked about that, and he answered:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F753) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F754) Ibid.  
  

  

  

I am going to stand before the Almighty King. So *wudū* is a
precondition for this great act of worship, and it means freeing the
body from dirt and uncleanness, and this is of that which suits the
greatness of the prayers.

B. Surely, *wudū*  dismisses inactivity, takes drowsiness away, and
prepares the worshippers for the prayer with activity and vitality.

C. Surely, *wudū*  purifies the heart and soul, for it is a precondition
for standing before Allah, the Exalted.

Moreover, it leads to the spiritual profits which the Imām, peace be on
him, has mentioned. In other words it results in health profits of great
importance of which is that it protects the eyes from Trachoma, for they
are washed with clean water several times a day.

Of which is washing the nose with cool water which protects (man) from
cold, which is the key to diseases.

Of which is washing the face and the hands in order to protect them from
skin diseases and inflammations, for it has been mentioned in modern
medicine that many microbes bring about diseases to man through
penetrating his skin, and especially as it concerns parasites. Without
doubt washing the uncovered parts of mans body frequently is an
important way to get rid of parasites.

And of which is that the germs which enter mans body through the mouth
result from the pollution of the hands, so if the hands are washed and
always clean, then it will be the best way to get rid of
germs.[[1]](#_ftn755)

#### The Acts of *Wudū*

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has He made it
obligatory to wash the face and the hands, appointed the rubbing to the
head and the feet, and has not made that full washing or full rubbing?

It is said: For various reasons of which is that the greatest act of
worship is *rukū* (bow) and *sujūd* (adoration) which one performs
through the face and the hands, not through the head and the feet.

Of which is that the creatures cannot every time bear washing  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F755) Dr. 'Abd al-'Aziz, al-Islām wa al-Tibb al-Hadith, pp.
62-63.  
  

  

  

the head and the feat, and that it is difficult for them (to perform
that) during cold, travel, illness, and times of the night and the day.
Washing the face and the hands is easier than washing the head and the
feet. He (Allah) has imposed the religious duties according to the least
of the healthy people in obedience, and then He has made them (religious
duties) include both the strong and the weak.

Yet of which is that the head and the feet are not every time apparent
and manifest like the face and the hands, because of wearing the turban,
the sandals, and the like.[[1]](#_ftn756)

*Wudū* in the viewpoint of the *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them, is
washing the face, the hands, rubbing the head and the feet. As for the
Imām, peace be on him, he has mentioned the reasons for the acts of
*wudū* as follows:

A. The main parts of the prayer, for which *wudū* has been legislated,
are *rukū* and *sujūd,* which one performs through the face and the
hands, so washing is for them, not for other than them.

B. Surely, washing the head and the feet brings about intense
difficulty, especially during the days of cold, travel, and illness. So
the Legislator is content with rubbing them.

D. The apparent limbs in mans body are the face and the hands apart from
other than them, so washing is for them only.

In his answers to the questions of Mohammed b. Sinān, the Imām, peace be
on him, has given another reason for *wudū* similar to the one mentioned
above, saying: And the reason for *wudū* for which the washing of the
face and the hands, rubbing of the head and the feet has been
(legislated) is because of his standing before Allah, the Great and
Almighty, his receiving Him with his apparent limbs, and his meeting
with them the noble scribes.

So washing the face is for *sujūd* and submission, washing the hands for
receiving (Allah) with them, to ask (Him), to fear (Him), to devote
himself (to Him) with them. Rubbing is for the head and the feet because
they are apparent and uncovered, and he receives with them (Allah) in
all his circumstance, and there is (nothing) in them of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F756) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 104.   
  

  

  

submission and devotion to (Allah) just as that in the face and the
hands.[[1]](#_ftn757)

### The Prayer

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why have they (men) been
ordered to perform prayer?

It is said: Because through prayer one professes Lordship, and it
(profession) is general righteousness, because therein is deposing
equals before the Almighty (Allah) with submissiveness, yielding,
submission, humility, profession, asking forgiveness from the past sins,
placing the forehead on the ground by day and night; that the servant
may praise Allah, not forget Him, be lowly, afraid, abased, seeking,
desirous for an increase in the religion and the world, along with
refraining from corruption. The prayer has become obligatory on the
servant by day and night lest he should forget his Lord and his Creator
and standing before his Lord; and it (the prayer may) restrain him from
the acts of disobedience and prevent him from all kinds of
corruption.[[2]](#_ftn758)

The believer can use prayer as a ladder to ascend to the heaven, and
through it the Allah-fearing can seek nearness to Allah. The Imām, peace
be on him, has stated some interests in legislating prayer as follows:

A. Some profits and fruit of prayer are: The worshipper absolutely
professes Allah, the Exalted, the Almighty Creator, *nothing like a
likeness of Him*. He increases in lowliness, submission, and abasement
before Allah. He asks Him to pardon him and to forgive him his sins
which he has committed during his lifetime.

B. Prayer protects man from acts of disobedience, prevents him from evil
deeds, and guides him to good, on the condition that he should perform
it in the right manner and conform to its preconditions.

C. If man repeats prayer every day, he will have firm and constant links
with his Creator and Director of his affairs. In addition  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F757) Ibid., p. 89.  
 [[2]](#_F758) Ibid., p. 103-104.  
  

  

  

to these profits which the Imām, peace be on him, has stated, prayer is
the best way of providing society with creative, spiritual forces.

If man spiritually communicate with his Creator, then he feels no
loneliness and depression. So prayer helps him communicate with the
Generous Creator. It removes from him fear, loneliness, and depression.
Moreover it supplies him with spiritual forces through which he can face
all difficulties and hardships.

#### The *Adhān* of Prayer

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Tell me about *adhān* (the
call to prayer): Why have they (people) been ordered to say it?

It is said: For many reasons of which are: It reminds the inattentive
(of prayer), calls the attention of the heedless (to it), makes him who
is ignorant of time and forgets prayer know (it), and summons (men) to
worship the Creator. It makes (men) desirous of prayer, profess His
Oneness, declare faith publicly, announce Islam. It calls him who
forgets it (prayer to perform it). It is said that he is a *muadhin*
because he says the *adhān* (the call to prayer).[[1]](#_ftn759)

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned the reasons for legislating the
*adhān* or call to prayer as follows:

A. It reminds the inattentive of prayer and draws the attention of the
heedless, that they may perform this religious duty.

B. It makes the Muslims know the timing of prayer, that they may prepare
themselves for performing it individually or in congregation.

C. It summons men to worship the Great Creator and to profess His
Oneness.

##### The Phrases which make up the *adhān*

The Imām, peace be on him, has given an account of the reasons for the
phrases which make up the *adhān* as follows:

A. Starting with *takkbir* or exclaiming Allah is Great!:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why does he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F759) Ibid., p. 105.  
  

  

  

*(muadhin)* starts it *(*the *adhān)* with *takkbir* (Allah is Great!)
before *tahlil* (there is no god but Allah)?

It is said: Because he wants to start with His name, for the name of
Allah, the Exalted, is in the first letters of *takkbir*, and in
*tahlil* (Hi name) is in the last letters, so he starts with the letters
in which the name of Allah is at the beginning, not at the
end.[[1]](#_ftn760)

The Imām, peace be on him, has shown the reason for starting the *adhān*
with exclaiming *Allahu akbar* (Allah is Great!) before starting it with
*lā ilāha illallāh* (there is no god but Allah). That is because the
*muadhin* (the person who recites the *adhān*) may start the *adhān* and
open it with His name, the Exalted, and that is contrary to *tahlil*,
for His name, the Exalted, is at the end of it, and this is not
appropriate for starting the *adhān.*

B. *Al-takkbir arbaan* or exclaiming Allah is great! four times:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has the *takkbir* at the
beginning of the *adhān* been made four (times)?

It is said: Because the *adhān* starts suddenly, and there is no speech
before it in order to call the attention of the listeners to it, so it
has been made (four times) in order to call the attention of the
listeners to that which is after it in the *adhān*.[[2]](#_ftn761)

The purpose of the *adhān* is to draw the attention of the Muslims in
order to prepare themselves for performing prayer, and for this purpose
the *takkbir* therein has been made four times, just as the Imām, peace
be on him, says.

C. The phrases which make up the *adhān* are said two times by two
times:

He, peace be on him, said: Why has it (the *adhān*) been recited two
(times) by two (times)?

It is said: Because it is repeated in the ears of the listeners and is
emphasized for them. If someone is headless of the first (time), he is
not heedless of the second (time). And because prayer (is performed) two
*rakas* by two *rakas*, and for this reason (the phrases of) the *adhān*
(are recited) two (times) by two (times).[[3]](#_ftn762)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F760) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F761) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F762) Ibid.  
  

  

  

Surely each of the phrases which make up the *adhān* summons men to
good, salvation, and success. So repeating them fixes these concepts in
the minds of the listeners.

D. Regarding the *shahādatayn* or twin formulae of faith: I bear witness
that there is no god but Allah. I bear witness that Mohammed is the
Messenger of Allah.

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has He placed the
*shahādatayn* after the *takkbir?*

It is said: Because the first (part) of faith is Oneness and professing
the Oneness of Allah, the Great and Almighty, and the second (part of
faith) is professing the message of the Messenger, may Allah bless him
and his family, that obedience to them and knowledge of them are
associated (with each other), and that the origin of faith is the
*shahādatayn* (the twofold testimony), so He has placed the
*Shahādatayn* just as He has placed *Shahādatayn* (two testimonies) in
the rest of the rights; therefore, if one professes the Oneness of Allah
and the message of the Messenger, then he professes the entire faith,
for the origin of faith is professing Allah and His
Messenger.[[1]](#_ftn763)

The *adhān* is opened with the *Shahādatayn* after the *takkbir:*
bearing witness that Allah is One and that Mohammed, may Allah bless him
and his family, is His Messenger, and these two witnesses are the origin
and slogan of Islam, so he who believes in them enjoys all the Muslims
rights such as sparing his blood and protecting his property. As the
rest of the rights are established by these two testimonies, Islam is
established by them.  

E. The Call to Prayer *(haya alāsalāh)*:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer say: Why has He placed the call to
prayer *(haya alāsalāh)* after the *shahādatayn*?

It is said: Because the *adhān* has been placed for prayer, and it is
the call to prayer, so the call has been placed in the middle of the
*adhān*. The *muadhin* says four (phrases) before it: the two *takkbirs*
and the *shahādatayn* (two testimonies). Then he says four (phrases)
after it calling (men) to salvation *(falāh)* urging (them) to kindness
and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F763) Ibid.  
  

  

  

prayer. Then he calls (them) to the best of actions *(khayr al-amal)*
making them desirous of it (prayer), its action, and its performing.
Then he calls through the *takkbir* and the *tahlil*, that he may
complete after it four (phrases) just as he completes four (phrases)
before it, and that he may complete his speech through mentioning the
name of Allah just as he opens it through mentioning the name of Allah,
the Exalted.[[1]](#_ftn764)

Islam takes great care of prayer, so it has placed it among its foremost
religious rites, and legislated the *adhān* as a sign for entering the
timing of prayer, that the Muslims may prepare themselves for performing
this great, religious duty. It has placed *hayya alas salāh* (make haste
to the prayer) after the *shahādatayn* (the two testimonies), and it
*(hayya alas salāh)* is a call to begin prayer. Similarly, the call to
salvation *(falāh)* and the best of actions *(khayr al-amal)*, which are
two of the phrases of the *adhān*, include prayer; therefore, prayer is
part of salvation*(falāh)* and of the best actions *(khayr al-amal)*.

F. The *tahlil* at the end of the *adhān*:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has He placed the
*tahlil* at the end of it (prayer), and not placed the *takkbir* at the
end of it just as He has placed the *takkbir* at the beginning of it?

It is said: Because the name of Allah is at the end of the *tahlil*, so
Allah, the Exalted, desires to end the speech with His name just as He
has opened it with His name.

Surely, the *tahlil* (there is no god but Allah) at the end of the
*adhān* means negating all kinds of gods except Allah, the Most High,
the Originator of the universes and Creator of life. The *adhān* is
started with *Allāhu akbar* (Allah is Great!) just as it is ended with
*lā ilāha illallah* (there is no god but Allah).

G. The *tasbih* instead of the *tahlil*

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why He has not placed the
*tasbih* (glory belongs to Allah), the *tahmid* (praise belongs to
Allah), and the name of Allah instead of the *tahlil* at the end of it
(the *adhān*)?

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F764) Ibid.  
  

  

  

It is said: Because the *tahlil* is professing the Oneness of Allah and
removing the equals other than Allah; it is the beginning of faith and
is the greatest of the *tasbih* and the *tahmid*.

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned the reason for placing the
*tahlil* at the end of the *adhān* in stead of the *tasbih* (glory
belongs to Allah) and the *tahmid* (praise belongs to Allah), for it is
the greatest of them in professing the Oneness of Allah, the Most High,
and negating all gods except Him. As for the *tasbih* and the *tahmid*,
they do not give this meaning.

### The Phrases which make up the Prayer

The Imām has mentioned the reasons for most parts and conditions of
prayer as follows:

1. The seven *takkbirs:*

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has He made the
*takkbir* at the beginning seven times?

It is said: He has made that because the *takkbir* in the first *raka*,
which is the origin, is seven times: the *takkbir* for the commencement
which is *takkbirat al-ihrām* through which the prayer is commenced the
*takkbir* for the *rukū* during bow down two *takkbirs* for *sujūd*. So
if man mentions the *takkbir* at the beginning of prayer seven times,
then he achieves the entire *takkbir*. If he forgets some of them or
leaves them, then there is no decrease in his prayer.

For this purpose the seven-time *takkbir* has been legislated during
commencing prayer, one of these *takkbirs* is *takkbirat al-ihrām*.

2. Reciting the Qurān:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why have they been ordered
to recite (the Qurān) in prayer?

It is said: Lest the Qurān should be deserted and lost, and that it may
be kept, so it will not disappear; nor will it be unknown.

For this reason men have been ordered to recite surat al-Fātiha and
another sura of the Qurān in the first and second *raka* of prayer.

3. Reciting Surat al-Fātiha:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why does he (the  

  

  

worshipper) starts (prayer) with reciting (surat) al-Hamad (al-Fātiha)
apart from the rest of the suras?

It is said: Because there is nothing in the Qurān and the Speech has
brought together good and wisdom just as surat al-Hamd has done, and
that is according to these words of Him, the Exalted:

*Praise belongs to Allah* means the thanksgiving which Allah, the
Exalted, has made incumbent on His servants, and (also means) showing
gratitude (toward Him) for the good through which He has given success
to His servant.

*The Lord of the Worlds* means glorifying, praising, and professing Him,
and means that it is He who is the Creator and Master.

*The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful* means seeking sympathy,
mentioning His boons and favors toward all His creation.

*Master of the Day of Judgment* means acknowledging before Him the
Resurrection, the Reckoning, the repayments, regarding as obligatory
that here and the hereafter belong to Him.

*You do we serve* means (seeking) wish and nearness to Allah, the Great
and Almighty, (and means) sincerity in work for Him apart from other
than Him.

*And You do we beseech for help* means asking Him for more success and
acts of worship, asking Him for continuing what He has bestowed upon him
and made him see.

*Guide us to the right path* means seeking guidance to His good manners,
holding fast by His covenant, seeking more knowledge of his Lord, His
tremendousness, and His magnificence.

*The path of those upon whom You have bestowed favors* means an emphasis
on the request and the wish, mentioning His previous benefits, His
favors toward His friends, and a wish for such favors.

*Not (the path) of those upon whom Your wrath is brought down* means
seeking refuge (in Allah) from being one of the stubborn unbelievers who
disparage Him, His command, and His prohibition.

*Nor of those who go astray* means seeking protection from being one of
those who go astray who have lost the (right) path without knowledge,
while they think that they do well.

  

  

  

So it (Surat al-Hamd) contains inclusive good and wisdom regarding the
affairs of this world and the next to the extent that nothing can
contain them (more than it can).

Because of these great requests and sublime meanings, the Legislator has
ordered prayer to be commenced by Surat al-Fātiha, not by other than it
from among the Suras of the Holy Qurān. It has been reported from Imām
al-Ridā that there is no prayer except through the opening sura of the
Book. This negation is the negation of the essence; if prayer is
commenced by a sura other than al-Fātihā, then it is incorrect.

4. The *tasbih* in the *rukū* and the *sujūd:*

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why the *tasbih* (glory
belongs to Allah) has been placed in the *rukū* and the *sujūd?*

It is said: For reasons of which is that through his submission, his
lowliness, his worship, his piety, his yielding, his abasement, his
humbleness, and his (seeking) nearness to Allah, the servant must call
Him holy, praise Him, glorify Him, magnify Him, thank his Creator and
Provider, that thinking and wishes do not take him to other than Allah.

Because of these exalted meanings, the *tasbih* has been placed in the
*rukū* and the *sujūd* apart from the rest of the phrases through which
Allah is mentioned.

5. The *rukū* and the two *sajjdas*:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why have one *raka* and two
*sujūds* been specified?

It is said: Because the *rukū* is one of the actions of the *qiyām*
(standing position) and the *sujūd* is one of the actions of the *julūs*
(sitting position); the prayer of one who sits is the half of that of
one who stands, so the *sujūd* has been doubled that it may be equal to
the *rukū*, so there is no difference between them, for prayer consists
of *rukū* and *sujūd*.

For this reason the *sujūd* has been doubled so that it may equal the
*rukū*, just as the Imām, peace be on him, has stated.

6. The supplication in the *Qunūt:*

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has the  

  

  

supplication been placed in the first *raka* before the recitation? And
why the *qunūt* has been in the second *raka* after the recitation?

It is said: Because it is recommended for him (the worshipper) to start
his standing and his act of worship for his Lord with praise,
sanctification, wish, and fear; and he ends them with (phrases) similar
to these; and he must stand a longer time during the *Qunūt*.

The Imām, peace be on him, has shown the reason for that it is
recommended to recite a certain supplication before entering prayer.
That is because one must show absolute submission to Allah, the Most
High. The supplication during the *qunūt* must be longer, that one may
show obedience to Allah, the Exalted.

7. The loud and quiet recitation:

  He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why are some prayers
(recited) loudly, while others are not?

It is said: Because the prayers which are performed loudly are performed
in dark times, so it is incumbent on him (the worshipper) to perform
them loudly, that the passer-by may know that there is a group of people
here. So if he (the passer-by) wants to perform a prayer, he can perform
it. If he cannot see a group of people pray, he hears and knows that
because of hearing. As for the prayers which are not performed loudly,
they are performed by daytime, and in bright times. So he understands
that because of vision and is in no need of hearing.

As for the prayers which are performed loudly, they are the morning
prayer, the evening prayer, and the night prayer. They are performed in
such a manner, that the passer-by in the dark may be attentive and
prepare himself for performing the prayer, just as the Imāms
justification. As for the prayers which are performed quietly, they are
the noon prayer and the after noon prayer. There is no reason for
performing them loudly, and that is because there is no darkness during
their timings.

8. Raising the hands during the *takkbir:*

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why does he (the worshipper)
raise his hands during the *takkbir?*

It is said: Because raising the hands is a kind of supplication  

  

  

and imploring. As for Allah, He wants His servant to supplicate and
implore Him when he mentions Him. And because raising the hands means
that the intention is present and the heart attends to what he says and
means.

As for raising the hands during the *takkbir*, it is a kind of the
absolute submission to Allah, the Most High as well as during it is the
intention, which is the beginning of entering prayer.

9. The timings of the prayers:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why have the prayers been
confined to these times? And (why) are they not advanced or delayed?

It is said: Because the famous and known times include the people of the
earth in general, so the ignorant and the learned know (that they are)
four: the setting of the sun is famous and known, the evening (prayer)
is obligatory during it; the falling of the evening twilight is famous
and known, the night (prayer) is obligatory during it; the daybreak is
famous and known, the dawn (prayer) is obligatory during it; the
declination of the sun is famous and known, the noon (prayer) is
obligatory during it; and there is no known time for the afternoon, so
its time (i.e. the time of the prayer) is after finishing the payer
before it.

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned the causes of the timings
specified for the prayers, and that they are famous and known with the
entire people of the earth regardless of their different languages. As
these times are exact, they have been appointed for the prayers.

The Imām, peace be on him, added another cause to the timings of the
prayers, saying: Yet there is another cause: Surely Allah wants men to
start every act with obedience to Him in the first place. He has ordered
them to start the day with worshipping Him; and then they can spread
regarding what they like of the affairs of their world. He has made the
dawn prayer obligatory on them. When midday comes and men leave their
work and it is time for them to take off their clothes, take a rest,
busy themselves with their food and their siesta, Allah has ordered them
to start first of all with remembering and worshipping  

  

  

Him, so He has made the noon prayer obligatory on them, then they can
turn to what they like of that. When they finish their wish and want to
spread for work to the end of the day, they should also begin with an
act of obedience to Him. Whey they attain what they like of that, He has
made the afternoon prayer obligatory on them, then they can spread for
what they like of the affairs of their world. When the night comes and
they leave their embellishment and return to their houses, they should
start in the first place with worshipping their Lord, then they can
return to what they like of that, so He has made the evening prayer
obligatory on them. When the time of sleep comes and they are free from
that with which they are busy, He wants them to start first of all with
worshipping and obeying Him, then they can attend to what they attend of
that; therefore, they start every work with obeying and worshipping Him,
so He has made obligatory on them the night prayer; therefore, if they
do that, they do not forget Him and are not heedless of Him, their
hearts do not become cruel, and their desire does not decrease.

The Imām has shown the reason why the prayers have been legislated in
these specified times and not in other than them. He has also shown the
benefits of these times.

10. The afternoon prayer:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Therefore, why is there no
famous time for the afternoon prayer like these times? Why has He not
made it obligatory between the night prayer and the early morning one or
between the early morning prayer and the noon one?

It is said: Because there is no time lighter nor easier nor better than
this time, that He may include the weak and the strong through this
prayer. And because all people work in commerce and dealings at the
beginning of daytime; they go to accomplish (their) needs and reside in
the markets. So He does not desire to divert them (through prayer) from
seeking their daily bread and the affairs of their world. And (because)
not all creation are able to rise for the night (prayer); nor do they
feel it; nor are they aware of its time if it is obligatory; nor are
they capable of that, so Allah has decreased (that for) them. He has not
placed it in the most difficult times for them; rather He has placed  

  

  

it in the easiest time for them; just as He, the Great and Almighty,
says: *Allah desires ease for you, and He does not desire for you
difficulty*.[[1]](#_ftn765)

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned the cause for extending the
time of the afternoon prayer up to the end of daytime. That is because
Allah desires to relieve people, though an excellent time has been
appointed for performing the afternoon prayer, and it is that when the
shade is equal to two sevenths of the stake *(shākhis)*, and that the
excellent time ends when the shade is equal to four sevenths of the
stake.[[2]](#_ftn766)

11. Congregational prayer:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why He (the Legislator) has
(ordered prayer to be performed in) congregation?

It is said: Because sincerity, Oneness, Islam, and acts of worship to
Allah are apparent, uncovered, famous; because  manifesting them is an
argument for only Allah, the Great and Almighty, against the people of
the east and of the west;  because the hypocrites and those who
disparage Islam and believe in it apparently are kept under observation;
because the people can bear witness to each other through Islam and
their witness is permissible and possible; and because performing prayer
in congregation includes help, kindness, Allah-fearingness, and
protection from the acts of disobedience to Allah, the Great and
Almighty.

Congregational prayer is the most important act of worship in Islam, for
the Muslims take advantages of it, for example, they know each other;
love and friendship spread among them; and they appear as one rank in
front of their enemies. In this part of his speech,  the Imām, peace be
on him, has mentioned the reason why prayer is performed in
congregation.

12. *Salāt al-sunna* or supererogatory prayers:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has *salāt al-sunna*
been confined to thirty-four *rakas?*

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F765) Qur'ān, 2, 185.  
 [[2]](#_F766) Minhājj al-Sālihin, vol. 1, p. 113.  
  

  

  

It is said: Because the obligatory (prayers) are seventeen *rakas*, so
*(salāt) al-sunna* has been specified twice as much as the obligatory
(prayers), as the perfection of the obligatory (prayers).

As for *salāt al-sunna*, which is the daily supererogatory prayers, is
eight *rakas* before the noon prayer, eight *rakas* before the afternoon
prayer, four *rakas* after the evening prayers, two *rakas* in sitting
position and regarded as one *raka* after the night prayer, eight
*rakas* for the late night prayer, the two *rakas* of the even prayer
after it (the late night prayer), the *raka* of the odd prayer after it
(the even prayer), and two *rakas* before the dawn prayer, so they are
thirty-four *rakas*. The Imām, peace be on him, has justified that
through making *salāt al-sunna* twice as much as the obligatory prayers,
that it may  perfect them.

13. *Salāt al-sunna* or supererogatory prayers are performed in various
times:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has *salāt al-sunna*
appointed in various times, and has not appointed in one time?

It is said: Because the best times are three: during the declination of
the sun, after the evening, and the early mornings, so He desires him
(the worshipper) to pray for Him in all these three times, that is
because if *(salāt) al-sunna* is separated into various times, then
their performing is lighter and easier than gathering them together in
one time.

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned the reason for separating the
times of *salāt al-sunna*, for they have appointed in the most excellent
time and the most lovable of them to Allah, the Most High. In addition
to that, performing them in one time brings about confusion and
difficulty.

14. Prayer is ended by the *taslim:*

He, peace be on him, has said: Why has the *taslim* been made (as means
for) ending prayer? (Why) has neither the *takkbir* nor the *tasbih* nor
another kind has been placed in stead of it?

It is said: As the speech of the creatures is unlawful during entering
prayer (that they may) turn toward the Creator, it is lawful and they
can return (to the previous state) and begin speaking after the
*taslim*.

  

  

  

For this reason speech is lawful after the *taslim;* the Legislator has
made it unlawful on the worshipper to speak during prayer and other acts
of worship. As for this prohibition, it ends after the *taslim*.

The Friday prayer:

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, has mentioned some reasons for the Friday
pray as follows:

A. The Friday prayer is two *rikas:*

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why does the Friday prayer
consist of two *rikas* if it is performed by the Imām? And why does it
consist of two *rikas* and two *rikas* (i.e. the worshipper performs the
noon prayer) if it is performed by other than the Imām?

It is said: For various reasons of which is that the people come from
distant (places), so Allah, the Great and Almighty, desires to decrease
it for them because they are tired when they arrive at the place (of the
prayer).

Of which is that the Imām prevents them from going, that he may deliver
his sermon and make them wait for the prayer, for he who waits for the
prayer performs a complete prayer.

Of which is that the prayer performed by the Imām is more complete and
more perfect because of his knowledge, his understanding, his justice,
and his excellence.

Yet of which is that Friday is Īd, and the Īd prayer is two *rikas*, and
it (the Friday prayer) is not shortened because of the two sermons.

The Friday prayer has been shortened and become two *rikas* for this
reason and the reasons which have been mentioned by the Imām, peace be
on him.

B. The cause for the sermon in the Friday prayer:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has the sermon been
determined?

It is said: Because the Friday (prayer) is a general view, so He (Allah)
desires the Imām to be a cause for preaching to them in order to make
them desire the acts of obedience, fear the acts of disobedience, aware
of what He desires (to do) for the interest of their  

  

  

religion and their world, and to tell them about harm and profit which
he has gained from the times and the conditions

Surely the greatest interest in the Friday prayer is the sermon which
the Imām delivers, for it spreads political and religious awareness
among the Muslims, develops good inclinations in their souls, and guides
them to the right path.

C. Two sermons in the Friday prayer:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has two sermons been
determined?

It is said: Because one (sermon) is for lauding, praising, and
sanctifying Allah, the Great and Almighty. And the other is for needs,
excuses, warning, supplication, and what he (the Imām) desires to teach
them of His command and prohibition including righteousness and
corruption.

The Imām has stated the reason for legislating two sermons in the Friday
prayer, so the first sermon is regarding lauding Allah, the Most High,
the Creator of the universe, and Giver of life, explaining his
tremendousness concerning what He creates of His marvelous creatures. As
for the second sermon, it concerns explaining that which set the Muslims
right in this world and the next.

D. The Friday sermon is before the prayer:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has the Friday sermon
been determined before the prayer while it has been determined after the
prayer on the two Īds?

It is said: Because Friday is an everlasting condition; it is several
(times) in the month and many (times) in the year. So if the people
regard it (the sermon) as many, they pray and leave it; they do not
persist in it and scatter from it. So it (the sermon) has been
determined before the prayer so that they may wait for the prayer, may
not scatter and go away.

As for the two Īds, they are twice in the year; they are greater than
Friday; the congregation therein is more (than that on Friday); and the
people are more desirous of them. So if some people scatter, then most
of them remain. They (the two Īds) are not so many that they (the
people) are tired of them or disparage them.

  

  

  

Shaykh al-Sadūq, may Allah rest him in peace, has commented on this
tradition, saying: The tradition has been mentioned in this manner; the
two sermons on Friday (are before the prayer); (the two sermons of) the
Īd are after the prayer because they are with the same rank to the two
final *rakas*, and that Uthmān b. Affān was the first to advance the two
sermons. Because he  had done what he did, the people did not persist in
the sermon and said: What have we to do with his sermons while he had
done what he did? As a result he advanced the two sermons, that the
people might wait for the prayer and not scatter from him.

E. The Friday prayer is obligatory on those who live with in two leagues
(about six miles):

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has the Friday (prayer)
been made obligatory on him who (lives) within two leagues, not more
than that?

It is said: Because the distance in which the prayer is shortened is two
*barids* (24 miles) going or one *barid* (12 miles) back and forth. And
the *barid* is four leagues, so the Friday (prayer) is obligatory on him
who (lives) within half a barid because of which shortening (the prayer)
is obligatory. And that is because he (the traveler covers) two leagues
when he comes and two leagues when he goes. So that is four leagues, and
it is the half of the road of the traveler.

For this reason stated by the Imām, peace be on him, the Friday prayer
is obligatory on those who live within two leagues, not more.

F. The Friday supererogatory prayer:

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has four *rakas* been
added to the Friday supererogatory payers?

It is said: Because this day should be magnified and distinguished from
the rest of the days. It is recommended to perform twenty *rakas* as
supererogatory prayers on Friday. So four *rakas* has been added to the
sixteen supererogatory prayers which are performed during the rest of
the days. It is recommended for (the worshipper) to perform six
*(rakas)* of them during the extension *(inbisāt)* of the sun, six
during its rising, six before the declination (of the sun), and two
*rakas* during the declination.

  

  

  

### The Travelers Shortened Prayer

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has prayer been
shortened on journey?

It is said: Because the obligatory prayers are ten *rakas*, and the
seven *(rakas)* was later added to them. So Allah has decreased that
increase for them because of his (the travelers) place of travel, his
tiredness, his pains, his taking care of his affairs, his departure, and
his residence, lest he should busy himself with (something other than)
that which is his livelihood. (This is) mercy and sympathy from Allah,
the Great and Almighty, toward him (the traveler); except the evening
prayer, it is not shortened, for it is originally a shortened prayer.

The Imām, peace be on him, has displayed the reason for the travelers
shortened prayer, and that is because the traveler faces during his
journey troubles and difficulties, especially as it concerns those times
when travel was confined to animals and ships which caused to him
hardships and sufferings. So the Legislator has shown favor and mercy
toward servants when He omitted for the traveler the half of the four-
*raka* prayer.

#### The distance making shortening prayer obligatory

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has shortening prayer
confined to eight leagues, no less, no more than that?

It is said: Because eight leagues is a days travel for the commoners,
the caravans, and the baggage, so it is obligatory to shorten (prayer)
during a days travel.

The Imām, peace be on him, has explained the reason for that the
Legislator has determined eight leagues as a distance for shortening
prayer, then he, peace be on him, has commented on that, saying: If a
sayer says: So why is it obligatory to shorten (prayer) during a days
travel, not more?

It is said: Because if it was not obligatory (to shorten prayer) during
a days travel, then it would not be obligatory during a years walk, and
that is because every day which follows this day is like this  

  

  

day. So if it was not obligatory (to shorten prayer) on this day, then
it was not obligatory on the like of it if the like of it was similar to
it, and there was no difference between them.

The Imām, peace be on him, has stated that if the distance for
shortening prayer was not determined in eight leagues, which is a days
walk, then the distance necessary for shortening prayer would be on the
following day, for it is the like of the previous day and has no
excellence over it; like this is on the days that follow, and this leads
to the vicious circle.

The Imām added, saying: If a sayer says: Walk may be different, so why
has a days travel confined to eight leagues?

It is said: Because eight leagues is the walk of camels and the
caravans, and it is the distance which covered by the camel-drivers and
those who hire animals.

#### Daytime supererogatory prayers are canceled

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why does the traveler leave
the daytime supererogatory prayers and does not leave those are by
night?

It is said: Because you do not leave the supererogatory prayers of every
prayer which you do not shorten. And that is the evening prayer is not
shortened, so the supererogatory prayers after it are not shortened;
likewise, the dawn prayer is not shortened, so the supererogatory
prayers before it are not shortened.

The Imām has stated that the daytime supererogatory prayers are
canceled, and that the night ones are not canceled. The reason for that
is that the supererogatory prayers are canceled when the prayer is
shortened. As the evening prayer and the dawn one are not shortened,
their supererogatory prayers are not canceled. Then he commented on
that, saying: If a sayer says: The night prayer is shortened, so why is
its two-*raka* (supererogatory prayer) not canceled?

It is said: These two *rakas* are not of the fifty (supererogatory
prayers); rather they are an addition to them, that each two *rakas* of
the supererogatory prayers may complete one *raka* of the obligatory
player.

  

  

  

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned that the night prayer is
shortened during journey while its supererogatory prayer, which is two
*rakas* in sitting position,  is not abolished. So the Imām, peace be on
him, answered: Surely in the viewpoint of the Legislator, the
supererogatory prayer of the night prayer is equal to one *raka* in
standing position. And the reason for that is that each two *rakas* of
the supererogatory prayers are in stead of one *raka* of the obligatory
prayer. As a result the traveler has no right to cancel the
supererogatory prayer of the night prayer as well as he must perform the
late night prayer at the beginning of the night.

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why is it permissible for
the traveler and the sick to perform the late night prayer at the
beginning of the night?

It is said: Because they are busy and weak, that they may attain their
prayer, so that the sick may take a rest at the time of their rest, and
the traveler may busy himself with his works, his departure, and his
journey.

### The Prayer for the Dead

The Imām, peace be on him, talked about some reasons for the prayer for
the dead as follows: If a sayer says: Why have they (the people) been
ordered to pray over the dead?

It is said: Because they intercede (with Allah) for him and asked (Him)
to forgive him. Because he is not at any of those times more needy of
intercession (with Allah) for him, asking, and seeking forgiveness than
that hour.

Surely the supplication of the believers who pray over the dead is the
most important thing which the dead need, that Allah may respond to
their supplication, pardon the dead, forgive them their sins, and give
to them His good pleasure.

#### The five *takkbirs* over the Dead

  He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has five *takkbirs*,
and not four or six, been determined (for the dead)?

It is said: Surely the five *(takkbirs)* have been taken from the five
prayers by day and night.

Surely, the five *(takkbirs)* stands for the daily prayers, which are
five.

  

  

  

#### The Prayer for the Dead without *wudū*

He, peace be on him, said: Why has He (the Legislator) made it
permissible to pray over the dead without *wudū?*

  It is said: Because it has neither *rukū* nor *sujūd;* rather it is a
supplication and an asking. It is permissible for you to supplicate
Allah and ask Him in all circumstances; *wudū* is obligatory on (men
when they perform) the prayer which has *rukū* and *sujūd*.

#### The Prayer for the Dead is at all Times

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why have you made it
permissible to pray over the dead before the evening and after the dawn?

It is said: Because this prayer is obligatory at the time of the
presence, and that is because it (the prayer) is not timed like all the
prayers; rather it is the payer which is obligatory when an event
occurs; regarding it man has no option; rather it is a right which is
performed; and it is permissible to perform the rights at any time if
the right is not timed.

The Legislator has not appointed a certain time for the prayer for the
dead. Rather the people pray over them at any time, for the prayer is
one of their rights against the living, and the right is performed at
any time.

#### Ghusl *al-maiyit*

We have already talked in detail about this matter.

#### Shrouding the Dead

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why have they been ordered
to shroud the dead?

It is said: Because they (the dead) will meet their Lord and their
bodies are pure, lest their private parts should appear before those who
carry and bury them; lest the people should come to know about some of
their conditions, their ugly view, the change of their smell; lest the
heart should not be cruel out of looking many times at the like of that
of handicap and corruption, and that they may be more  

  

  

agreeable to the souls of the living; that a bosom friend may not detest
them, so he will cancel their names and his love (for them), so he will
not maintain them in what they have left behind, willed, and ordered;
whether it is obligatory or recommended.

For these firm reasons of great importance, the Great Legislator (Allah)
has made it incumbent on men to shroud the dead as a sign of respect for
them and covering their corpses which the living hate and disdain when
they look at them.

#### The Burial of the Dead

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why have they been ordered
to bury the dead?

It is said: Lest the people come to know about the corruption of their
corpses, their ugly view, the change of their smell; lest the living
should be harmed by their smell, their illness, and their corruption,
that they may be covered from the friends and the enemies, so their
enemies will not gloat over them; nor will their friends be sad for
them.

For these firm reasons, it has been made incumbent on the living to bury
the dead. For if their corpses decay and their bad smell spread, the air
is polluted and diseases spread. In addition to this, their view is
ugly, their smell is abominable, and the like from that which the Imām,
peace be on him, has mentioned.

### The Prayer for an eclipse of the Sun

He, peace be on him, said: If a sayer says: Why has  prayer for an
eclipse (of the sun) been determined?

It is said: Because it is one of the signs of Allah, the Great and
Almighty. None knows whether for a mercy or a punishment it appears. So
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, desired his community
to resort to its Merciful Creator during that (time), that He (Allah)
may drive away its evil from it (the community) and protect it from its
ordeal just as He had driven away (the punishment) from the people of
Yunus when they pleaded to Allah, the Great and Almighty.

  

  

  

For this reason the Legislator has ordered a prayer to be performed
during an eclipse of the sun or the moon, during heavenly or earthly
fearful things such as the black and red winds, an earthquake, and the
like from among that which the jurists have mentioned.

  

