The Reason For The Performance Of The Prayer For Unusual Natural Events (Yāt)
=============================================================================

  

  

#### The Reason for the Performance of the Prayer for Unusual Natural Events *(Āyāt)*

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: "Why has it (the prayer)
been determined in ten *rak'as?'*

"It is said: 'Because the obligatory prayer which was first sent down
from the heaven to earth regarding the day and the night was ten
*rak'as*. So prayer was gathered together, and the *sujūd* was
determined in it, because every prayer which has the *rukū'* has the
*sujūd*, and that they may also complete their prayer with the *sujūd*
and submission. It (the prayer) has been determined in four *sujūds*,
because every prayer whose *sujūd* is less than four *sujūds* is not a
prayer, because the least religious duty in prayer is *sujūd*, and it is
not (correct) unless it is four *sujūds* (i.e. prostration four
times).'"

The prayer for unusual natural events *(Salāt al-Āyāt)* consists of two
*rak'as*; each of five *rukū's*; the worshipper should rise after each
*rukū'*. After the worshipper has risen for the fifth *rukū'*, he should
perform two *sajdas*, recite the *tashahud* and *salām*. The Imām has
given an account of the reason for determining this prayer in ten
*rukū's*, and that it represents the ten -*rak'a* prayer which was first
imposed on servants.

### *'Īd al-Fitr*

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'Why has the day of fast
breaking been regarded as 'Īd?'

"It is said: 'That the Muslims may have a meeting place in which they
meet, appear for Allah, the Great and Almighty, so they praise Him for
what He has bestowed upon them, so it is the day of 'Īd, the day of
meeting, the day of fast breaking, the day of *Zakāt*, the day of
desire, and the day of supplication, and because it is the first  

  

  

day of the year in which eating and drinking is lawful, for the first of
the months of the year with the people of the Truth is the month of
Ramadān, so Allah, the Great and Almighty, desires that they may have a
meeting place in which they praise and sanctify Him.'"

For these reasons which have been mentioned by the Imām, peace be on
him, the day of fast breaking has been regarded as 'Īd for the Muslims;
they gather together therein and congratulate each other on that Allah
has made them successful in fasting the blessed month of Ramadān.

#### The 'Īd Prayers

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'Why has the *takkbir*
therein ('Īd prayers) been made more than that in the prayers other than
it?'

"It is said: 'Because *takkbir* is for Allah and is glorification (for
Him) for guiding (them) and (giving them) well-being, just as Allah, the
Great and Almighty, has said: *That you should complete the number and
that you should exalt the greatness of Allah for His having guided you
and that you may give thanks*.[[1]](#_ftn767)'"

The Imām, peace be on him, has expressed the reason for making the
*takkbir* in the 'Īd prayer more than that in the other prayers, and
that is because this excellent day is great with Allah, the Most High.

### Fasting

The Imām, peace be on him, talked about the reason for legislating
fasting, and about some reasons for the legislation concerning the
blessed month of Ramadān.

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'Why have they been ordered
to fast?'

"It is said: 'That they may come to know about the pain of hunger and
thirst, so they conclude the poverty in the hereafter, and that the
fasting person may be lowly, abased, miserable, rewarded,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F767) Qur'ān, 2, 185.  
  

  

  

relying (on Allah), and patient toward that which befall him of hunger
and thirst, so he is worthy of reward, in addition to refraining from
desires, and this may be a preacher for them in the immediate, a trainer
for them against what He has entrusted to them, and a guide for them to
the deferred, and that they may know the severity of that (hunger and
thirst) against the people of poverty and misery in the world, so they
give to them what Allah has apportioned as a religious duty in their
properties.'"

The Imām has mentioned the profits which result from fasting of which is
showing sympathy for the poor, for when the fasting person becomes
hungry, he feels the pain of hunger, and this urges him to show
affection toward the poor and the needy. Among the reasons for fasting
is equality between the rich and the poor in this religious duty.

Yet another reason for it is that it strengthens man's will, and that is
through his refraining from eating and drinking. Jihārdat, a German
author, has written a book on building and strengthening will through
fasting. He believes that fasting is the effective means for the
authority of the soul over the body, and that man lives holding the
reins of his own soul and is not a captive to his material inclinations.

These are some reasons of fasting. As for the Imām, peace be on him, he
has mentioned many profits of it.

### The Month of Ramadān

He, peace be on him, said: 'If a sayer says: 'Why has fasting been
appointed especially in (the month of Ramadān) apart from the rest of
the months?'

"It is said: 'Because (the month of Ramadān) is the month in which
Allah, the Exalted, sent down the Qur'ān, and therein is a distinction
between right and wrong, as Allah, the Great and Almighty, has said:
*The month of Ramadān is that in which the Qur'ān was revealed, a
guidance to men and clear proofs of the guidance  
 and the distinction.*[[1]](#_ftn768) In it Mohammed, may Allah bless
him  
 and his family, was appointed as a prophet, and in it is *Laylat
al-Qadr*,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F768) Ibid., 2, 185.  
  

  

  

*which is better than a thousand months, therein every wise affair is
distinct;* it is new year; He ordains therein what is in the year of
good and evil, harm or profit, provision or death, and for this reason
it has been called *Laylat al-Qadr.*'"

For this reason Allah, the Most High, has made fasting obligatory in
this blessed month and distinguished it from the other months.

#### Fasting is confined to the Month of Ramadān

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'Why have they been ordered
to fast the month of Ramadān, not less than that nor more (than it)?'

"It is said: "Because it is the strength of worship through which He
includes the strong and the weak; Allah has made religious duties on
most things, and He has included the strong, then He has given
permission to men of weakness, and make men of strength desire for
excellence, and if they are set right by the less than that, then He
will decrease them, and if they are in need of more than that, He will
increase them.'"

Surely Allah's wisdom and His directing things require that the interest
of servants is in fasting thirty days, and if the interest was less than
that, he would decrease them; likewise, if the interest was more than
that, he would increase them.

#### The menstruating Women leave Fasting and Prayer

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'Why does the menstruating
woman not fast nor  pray?'

"It is said: 'Because she is in the limit of uncleanness[[1]](#_ftn769),
so Allah desires that she does not serve Him except (when she is) pure,
and because one who does not pray does not fast.'"

For this reason the menstruating woman does not fast; nor does she
perform prayer. However, she has to compensate for fasting when she is
pure.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F769) Perhaps the correct is: She is in the state of
uncleanness.  
  

  

  

#### The menstruating Women have to compensate for Fasting

He, peace be on him, said: "Why has she to compensate for fasting and
has not to compensate prayer?'

"It is said: 'For various reasons of which is that fasting does not
prevent her from serving herself, serving her husband, setting right her
house, undertaking her affair, and fulfilling her livelihood, while
prayer prevents her from all of that, for prayer is several times by day
and night, so she is not able to (do) that, while fasting is not as
such.

"'Of which surely there are suffering and tiredness in prayer and the
limbs are busy, and there is nothing of that in fasting; rather it is
refraining from eating and drinking, and the limbs are not busy therein.

"'Of which is that when a time comes, on her obligatory is a prayer new
in day and night, while fasting is not as such, because it is not
whenever a day comes fasting is obligatory on her, and whenever a time
comes prayer is obligatory on her.'"

For these firm reasons, the Legislator has not ordered the menstruating
woman to compensate prayer, for performing it causes difficulties and
tiredness to her, and it is contrary to fasting, for compensating for it
causes to her neither difficulties nor tiredness.

#### Compensating for the Month of Ramadān

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'If a man falls ill or
travels in the month of Ramadān  and does not end his travel nor does he
recover from his illness until another (month of Ramadān) comes to him,
then a redemption for the first (month) is obligatory on him and the
compensation drops. If he recovers or rises between them and does not
compensate for it, then (both) compensation and redemption are
obligatory on him?

"It is said: 'Because that fast was obligatory on him in that month, in
that year. As for him who does not recover during the whole year, and
Allah, the Exalted, overcame him and made a way for him to perform it,
then it is not obligatory on him to perform it; likewise,  

  

  

those whom Allah overcomes such as the one who faints for a day and a
night, so it is not obligatory on him to perform the prayer; just as
al-Sādiq, peace be on him, has said: 'If the servant is overcome by
Allah, then he has an excuse, for the month (of Ramadān) has come while
he is still ill, so it is not obligatory on him to fast in the month of
him nor in the year of him because of the illness in which he is, and
redemption is obligatory on him, for he is with the same rank to him on
whom fasting is obligatory but cannot perform it, so redemption is
obligatory on him.' Just as Allah, the Great and Almighty, has said:
*Let him fast for two months successively; then as for him who is not
able, let him feed sixty needy ones.*[[1]](#_ftn770) And as Allah, the
Great and Almighty, has said: *A compensation by fasting or alms or
sacrificing*.[[2]](#_ftn771) So He has put alms in the place of fasting
when it is difficult for him (the worshipper to fast).'"

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned those whose illness lasts from
a month of Ramadān to another, and they do not recover, so compensation
for fasting is not obligatory on them; rather redemption is obligatory
on them. As for those who recover during the year and have not fasted
yet, it is obligatory on them to compensate for the fast, for they are
able to fast as well as redemption is obligatory on them.

Then the Imām commented on that, saying: "If a sayer says: 'If he (the
worshipper) was unable (to fast) at that time and is able now?'

"It is said: 'As another month of Ramadān has come to him, then
redemption for the past (months) is obligatory on him, for he is with
the same rank to him on whom fasting in religious expiation is
obligatory, but he was not able to fast it, so redemption is obligatory
on him. And if redemption is obligatory, then fasting is not obligatory;
fasting is not obligatory but redemption is obligatory. If he (the
worshipper) recovers between them (the two months of Ramadān) but had
not fast it, then redemption is obligatory on him, because of his
negligence, and fasting because he was able (to fast).'"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F770) Qur'ān, 58, 4.  
 [[2]](#_F771) Ibid., 2, 196.  
  

  

  

#### Fasting instead of Releasing a Salve

He, peace be on him, said: "Regarding the religious expiation due on him
who cannot find, why is it obligatory on him to release a slave, fasting
apart from the hajj, prayer, and the like?

"It is said: 'Because prayer, the hajj, and all the religious duties
prevent man from being changeable in the affairs of his world and
interest of his livelihood, in addition to those reasons which we have
mentioned regarding the menstruating woman who has to compensate for
fasting and has not to compensate prayer.'"

For these reasons the Legislator has decided fasting instead of
releasing a slave, and He has not decided prayer, the hajj, and the like
instead of it, for this requires stopping works and makes man unable to
get his daily bread.

#### Fasting two successive Months

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'So why has He  made it
obligatory on him (the worshipper) to fast two successive months, and
has not made it obligatory on him to fast one month or three months?'

"It is said: 'Because the religious duty which Allah has made incumbent
upon people is one month, so He has doubled the religious expiation of
this month as sign of emphasizing strictness.

#### The Succession in fasting two Months

He, peace be on him, said: "Why has the two months been made successive?

"It is said: "Lest he (the worshipper) should find it easy to perform
(them), so he disparages it (fasting). Because if he compensate them
separately, then compensation (for fasting) is easy for him.'"

Surely the succession in fasting the two months is a punishment on him
who intentionally breaks the fast and violates the things made unlawful
by Allah, the Most High. So Allah, the Exalted, is severe with him
regarding that.

  

  

  

### The Hajj

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned the reason for legislating the
hajj and the reasons for some precepts concerning it.

#### The Hajj is obligatory

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'Why has He ordered them
(to perform) the hajj?'

"It is said: 'The reason for the hajj is to seek to be the guest of
Allah, to request more blessings, to part with past sins, to feel
repentant about the past, and to look forward to the future. It is due
to spending on the trip, seeking nearness to Allah, tiring the body,
abstaining from pleasures and desires, seeking nearness to Allah by
worshipping Him, yielding and submitting to Him, looking up towards Him
in cases of hot weather and chilling cold, during security and fear,
incessantly doing so, and due to all the benefits in it in the east and
west of the earth, and those who are in cold and heat[[1]](#_ftn772),
from among those who perform the hajj and from among those who do not
perform the hajj, from among the merchants, the importers, the sellers,
the buyers, the tradesmen, the needy, those who hire animals, the poor,
and accomplishing the needs of the people of the outskirts in the places
in which it is possible for them to collect expenses and reporting the
news of the Imāms, peace be on him, to every region and district, just
as Allah, the Exalted, has said: *Why should not then a company from
every party from among them go forth that they may apply themselves to
obtain understanding in religion, and that they may warn their people
when they come back to them that they may be cautious?*
[***[2]***](#_ftn773)*'"*

The hajj is a general conference aiming at great purposes and important
benefits brining about general good to Islamic world, and Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, has stated some of them. If we desire to mention the
fruits and benefits of the hajj, the book will be unduly  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F772) Perhaps the correct is in the land and on sea.  
 [[2]](#_F773) Qur'ān, 9, 122.  
  

  

  

long. Any how, the most important thing in the hajj is that the Muslim
peoples come to know about each other, that they may reach an exalted
level among the peoples and communities of the world, and, in addition,
it is useful from economic point of view, for every Muslim country has
industries and products which are not available in other than it, and
through the hajj it is possible for the Muslim countries to make
commercial agreements in order to exchange such industries and products.

Any how, the hajj aims at raising the level of the intellectual,
scientific, and economic life of the Muslims; therefore, it is a unique
conference in the world.

#### The Hajj is one Time

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'So why have they been
ordered to perform the hajj one time, not more than that?'

"It is said: 'Because Allah, the Exalted, has decided the religious
duties according to the minimum (degree) of the people, just as He, the
Great and Almighty, has said: *Whatever offering is easy to obtain*
[***[1]***](#_ftn774), namely one ewe, that the strong and the weak may
be able to perform it; likewise, all the religious duties have been
decided according to the minimum strength of the people, so one of these
religious duties is the hajj which is obligatory one time, then He has
made the men of strength desire for (more than one time) according to
their ability.'"

The obligatory hajj in Islam is one time, and performing the hajj many
times is not obligatory according to the reasons which have been
mentioned by the Imām, peace be on him, and of which is that Islam has
legislated its religious duties and precepts according to the least of
the people in strength, and the least of them in body and property is
not able to perform the hajj more than one time.

For this reason it is incumbent on everybody to perform the hajj one
time, yes, the hajj may be obligatory through vow, hiring, and the like
from among that which the jurists have mentioned.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F774) Ibid., 2, 196.  
  

  

  

#### The *Ihrām* [[1]](#_ftn775)

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'Why have they been ordered
to enter the state of ritual consecration *(ihrām)?'*

"It is said: 'Because they become humble before they enter the sanctuary
and security of Allah, the Great and Almighty; lest they should amuse
and busy themselves with one of the affairs of the world and its
embellishment, that they may be earnest regarding that which is among
them, heading for it, walking toward it thoroughly, and, in addition,
they magnify Allah, the Exalted, and His House, abase their own souls
during their heading for Allah, the Exalted, for they are His guests,
hoping for His reward, fearing His punishment, going towards Him,
walking towards Him with abasement, submission, and yielding.'"

If the pilgrim enters the state of ritual consecration, then he has to
abstain from desires and pleasures; it is unlawful for him to practice
the means of luxury and embellishment such as women, wearing sewn
clothes, and perfume. He has to have his hair cut and to abstain from
obscene words, for their is neither sexual intercourse nor fornication
nor quarreling during the hajj.

Surely the *ihrām* trains soul to bear exertions and hardships, to
magnify Allah, the Most High, and to be humble before Him, and the like
from among the reasons which have been mentioned by the Imām, peace be
on him.

#### The Procession round the Ka'ba

In his answer to Mohammed b. Sinān, the Imām, peace be on him, wrote:
"The reason for the procession round the Ka'ba is that Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, said to the angels: *And when your Lord said to the
angels, I am going to place in the earth vicegerent, they said: What!
Will You place in it such as shall make mischief in it and shed
blood*.[[2]](#_ftn776) So they answered Allah, the Exalted, with this
answer; then they repented, sought refuge in the Throne and asked  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F775) *Ihrām*  is entering into the state of ritual
consecration.  
 [[2]](#_F776) Qur'ān, 2, 30.  
  

  

  

(Allah) for forgiveness. Allah, the Great and Almighty, desired
(servants) to serve Him with such an act of worship. He placed a House
called al-Durāh in the fourth heaven, then He placed in the heaven of
the world a House called al-Ma'mūr beside the inhabited House. Then He
ordered Ādam to go round it and he did, so Allah, the Great and
Almighty, forgave him, and this (procession) has been put into practice
by his (Adam's) sons till the Day of Resurrection."

Surely the circumambulation round the Holy Ka'ba consists of high
lessons of which are: It immortalizes the Magnified Place which was
built by the Shaykh of the prophets, Ibrāhim, peace be on him, that men
may wherein serve Allah, the One and the Compeller. That was in the time
when there was no place of worship except it. And of which is that
circumambulation round the Ka'ba is a ladder for the believer like
prayer, for through it soul becomes sublime and communicates with the
Great Creator, and the like from among the fruits and benefits.

#### Kissing and Touching the Black Stone

He, peace be on him, said: "And the reason for kissing and touching the
(Black) Stone: Surely when Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, took a
promise from the children of Ādam, he fed him the stone, and then He
entrusted the people with undertaking that promise, and then it is said:
'I have accomplished my trust and the promise I have undertaken by the
(Black) Stone, that it may bear witness that I am truthful.' Yet of
which is the statement of Sulaymān: 'Surely the (Black) Stone will come
on the Day of Resurrection like Abū Qubays having a tongue and two lips
bearing witness to the sincerity of him who comes to it.'"

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned the reason for kissing and
touching the Black Stone, which is the place of sanctification and
magnification with the Muslims. That is because the Messenger, may Allah
bless him and his family, had honored and kissed it. Without doubt this
indicates the exalted position of this Stone, which will bear witness to
the sincerity of him who comes to it on the Day of Resurrection.

  

  

  

#### The Hajj in Dhu al-Hijja

He, peace be on him, said: "If a sayer says: 'Why has its time been
appointed on the tenth of Dhu al-Hijja?'

"It is said: 'Because Allah, the Exalted, desires to be served with this
act of worship during *ayyām al-tashriq* [[1]](#_ftn777) and it was the
first time when the angles performed the hajj (to the Ka'ba) and
circumambulated it. As for the prophets: Ādam, Nūh, Ibrāhim, Mūsā, 'Īsā,
and Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, they performed the
hajj at this time. So their children have regarded it as *sunna* (a
religious practice) until the Day of Resurrection."

For these reasons the hajj has been appointed at this blessed time, and
not at a time other than it.

#### Philip Hatti's Statement regarding the Hajj

It is worth mentioning that we end this research on the hajj with the
statement of Dr. Philip Hatti, who has said: "And the hajj is still
throughout the ages a system with which (no system) competes for
strengthening the ties of Islamic understanding and harmony among the
different classes of the Muslims; and thanks to it that it is possible
for every Muslim to be a traveler at least one time during his lifetime,
to meet with other than him from among his believing brothers at a
brotherly meeting, and to unify his feeling with the feeling of other
than him from among those who come (to Mecca) from the parts of the
earth. And by virtue of this system, it is easy for the Negroes, the
Barbers, the Chinese, the Persians, the Turks, the Arabs, and the like,
whether they are rich or poor, great or paupers to harmonize with each
other in language, faith, and thought. Islam has made a success which no
religion in the world has made in abolishing differences due to gender,
color, and nationality, especially among its followers, for it does not
recognize any difference among mankind except that which stands between
the believers and unbelievers. Without doubt the meeting in the season
of the hajj has rendered a great service in this path.[[2]](#_ftn778)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F777) *Ayyām al-tashriq* are the days following the day of
immolation.  
 [[2]](#_F778) Tārikh al-'Arab (2nd edition), vol. 1, p. 187.  
  

  

  

### *Zakāt*

In his answer to Mohammed b. Sinān's  questions, the Imām, peace be on
him, said:

"And the reason for *zakāt* (alms) is for the sake of the food of the
poor and fortifying the properties of the rich, for Allah, the Blessed
and Exalted, has entrusted the healthy with undertaking the affairs of
the sick and the afflicted; just as Allah, the Exalted, has said: *You
shall certainly be tried respecting your wealth and your
souls*.[[1]](#_ftn779) Respecting your wealth is through giving *zakāt;*
respecting your souls is through adjusting the souls to patience; in
addition to showing gratitude toward the blessings of Allah, the Great
and Almighty, craving for an increase, showing affection and mercy to
the weak, sympathizing with the miserable and urging to help them,
strengthening the poor and helping (them) with the affairs of the
religion, for they are an exhortation for the rich and a lesson for
them, that they may be shown the way to the poor of the next world
through them; and this urges them to thank Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, for what He has entrusted them with and given to them; (*zakāt*
urges) them (the rich) to supplicate and plead (Allah) and to fear (Him)
lest they should be like them (the poor) in many affairs; they should
pay *zakāt* and alms, tighten the bonds of kinship and do favor."

*Zakāt* is a creative, social system which keeps balance among the
classes of the community and puts an end to poverty which is the cause
of all crimes. Extreme creeds and wild deeds spread among the
communities who lead a poor life.

Surely *zakāt* removes from souls miserliness, cruelty, selfishness,
greediness, and the like from among dirty, social vices which lead to
discords, hatred, and enmities. As for the Imām, peace be on him, he has
talked about *zakāt* which leads to general, social benefits.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F779) Qur'ān, 3, 185.  
  

  

  

The Reasons for some unlawful Things
------------------------------------

In his answer to the questions of Mohammed b. Sinān, the Imām, peace be
on him, has mentioned the reasons for some unlawful deeds in Islam as
follows:

### 1. Killing the Soul

He, peace be on him, said: "And Allah has made it unlawful to kill the
soul, for if He made it lawful, then it would lead to the corruption of
the creation, their annihilation, and the corruption of direction."

Premeditated murder is the most dangerous one, for it disturbs peace. As
for Islam, it has forbidden it and legislated a severe punishment on him
who commits it. In this connection Allah, the Most High, has said: "And
there is life for you in (the law of) retaliation, O men of
understanding.[[1]](#_ftn780)" If this crime was made lawful, then it
would result in the corruption and annihilation of the creation.

### 2. The Disobedience of Parents

He, peace be on him, said: "And Allah has made unlawful the disobedience
of parents because therein is the violation of reverence."

Surely Allah, the Most High, has associated the rights of parents with
His rights and obedience to them with obedience to Him. The ugliest and
most unlawful thing is the disobedience of parents and denying their
kindness to their children.

### 3. Adultery

He, peace be on him, said: "And adultery is prohibited due to the
corruption it causes such as murders, loss of lineage, child desertion,
chaos regarding inheritance, and other such aspects of corruption."

Adultery is among the ugliest kinds of vice; Allah, the Most High, has
described it in the Qur'ān as an indecency, saying: "And go not nigh to
adultery; surely it is an indecency and evil is the way.[[2]](#_ftn781)"

As for the adulterer, he causes crime to society. For if  a child  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F780) Ibid., 2, 179.  
 [[2]](#_F781) Ibid., 17, 32.  
  

  

  

results from him, then the child will have no father to look after him,
commit the most horrible crime and, in addition, adultery results in the
loss of lineage. As for lawful marriage, it is a natural law which makes
it incumbent on one to sacrifice his own life for educating his own
children with righteous education, that they may be the delight of his
eye.

### The Punishment for Adulterer

He, peace be on him, said: "And the reason for flogging adulterer with
the severest flogging is due to his committing adultery in which the
whole body takes pleasure, so flogging has been determined as a
punishment for him and a lesson to other than him; and it (adultery) is
the greatest crime."

An example of the good Islamic legislation is this heavy punishment for
this vice, which is one hundred lashes for the single adulterer and
stoning for the married one. In this respect Allah has said: "(As for)
the adulterer and the adulteress, flog each of them, (giving) a hundred
stripes, and let not pity for them detain you in the matter of obedience
to Allah, if you believe in Allah and the last day, and let a party of
the believers witness their chastisement.[[1]](#_ftn782)"

#### The Testimony which establishes Adultery

He, peace be on him, said: "And the reason for the witness of four
(witnesses) regarding adultery and two (witnesses) respecting all the
rights is due to the severe punishment of the married, for therein is
killing, so the witness regarding it (adultery) has been doubled due to
killing his soul, the loss of the lineage of his children, and the
corruption of the inheritance."

Surely the punishment is not established except through four just
witnesses. So if one of them fails to attend, then the three witnesses
are liable to the punishment of slander. The witness has been made
strict lest people should carelessly accuse each other.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F782) Ibid., 24, 2.  
  

  

  

### 3. Sodomy and Lesbianism

He, peace be on him, said: "And the reason for prohibiting males for
males and females for females is due to that which has been created in
females and that which males have by nature, and due to the cessation of
progeny, the corruption of planning, and the destruction of the world
which happens when males (practice sodomy) with males and when females
(practice lesbianism) with females."

As for sodomy, it is among immoral crimes and leads to  deviation from
the laws of nature, and Allah has named it  indecency. He, the Exalted,
has said: "And (We sent) Lut when he said to his people: Most surely you
are guilty of an indecency which none of the nations has ever done
before you.[[1]](#_ftn783)"

The punishment for sodomy is killing, because this crime leads to the
loss of lineage and the destruction of the world, as the Imām, peace be
on him, has said.

As for lesbianism, it is among immoral vices and leads to deviation from
the law of Allah, the Most High, and man's nature.

### 5. Looking at the hair of women

He, peace be on him, said: "Looking at the hair of married and single
women is prohibited, for it excites men, and this excitement results in
(committing) the unlawful; likewise (looking at) that which is like hair
(is unlawful) except that concerning which Allah has said: *And (as for)
women advanced in years who do not hope for a marriage, it is no sin for
them to put off their clothes without displaying their
ornaments*.[[2]](#_ftn784) He means other than the garment; there is no
harm in looking at the hair of such a kind of women."

Surely looking at woman's hair excites man and motivates him to commit
the unlawful. As for looking at the hair of  women advanced in years, it
does not excite man, so Islam has made it permissible.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F783) Ibid., 29, 28.  
 [[2]](#_F784) Ibid., 24, 60.  
  

  

  

### 6. Usury

The Imām, peace be on him, explained the reasons for prohibiting usury
*(ribā)* as follows:

A. He, peace be on him, said: "And as for the reason for prohibiting
usury is because Allah has prohibited it; because it corrupts funds, for
when one buys a dirham for two dirhams, then the price of the dirham is
a dirham, and the price of the other is injustice, so the sale of usury
is any how a loss for the buyer and the seller. So Allah, the Blessed
and Exalted, has prohibited usury because of the corruption of funds
just as He has prohibited fund to be given to the fool until his sane is
perceived. For this reason Allah has prohibited usury and the sale of
the two dirhams hand in hand."

B. He, peace be on him, said: "The reason for prohibiting usury after
the evidence because it (makes the usurer) disparage the unlawful, and
it is a great (sin) after the explanation, and the prohibition of Allah,
the Exalted, for it. And that does not occur through him (the usurer)
except disparaging the unlawful; and disparaging that (means) entering
unbelief."

C. He, peace be on him, said: "The reason for prohibiting usury is
because it eliminates favors, ruins funds, causes greed for profit,
causes people to abandon their dealing with loans to each other or in
paying with cash, or when they do one another favors, and due to all the
bad consequences of corruption and oppression and the exhaustion of
funds."

Islam has inclusively prohibited usury and regarded it as the most
excessive of all kinds of oppression. Usury opposes the Islamic
teachings which summon men to help each other and have mercy on one
another. It brings about enmity and hatred, spreads misery and poverty
among men.

It has been established that usury is a means for colonizing and
occupying peoples, for some colonists double the profits against loans,
accordingly those who take such a kind of loan are unable to repay them
and fall into the net of the colonists who plunder their wealth and
spread poverty in their countries.

  

  

  

Usury has decisively been prohibited in the Qur'ān. Allah, the Exalted,
has said: "O you who believe, do not devour usury, making it double and
redouble.[[1]](#_ftn785)" He, the Exalted, has also said: "O you who
believe, be careful of (your duty to) Allah and relinquish what remains
(due) from usury, if you are believers. But if you do (it) not, then be
apprised of war from Allah and His Messenger; and if you repent, then
you shall have your capital; neither shall you make (the debtor) suffer
loss, nor shall you be made to suffer loss.[[2]](#_ftn786)"

Islam has cursed the capitalist, the creditor, the scribe, and the
witness, for they help the usurer with that which Allah has prohibited.

### 7. Swallowing the Property of the Orphans

He, peace be on him, said: "Swallowing the property of the orphans
unjustly has been prohibited for many reasons of the aspects of
corruption. The first of that is that if one swallows the property of
the orphan, surely he helps with killing him, for the orphan is not free
from need; nor does he undertake his own soul; nor does he know his
affairs; nor has he anyone to take care of him and spare him as his
parents do. So if one swallows his property, he kills him, makes him
poor and needy.  And due to that Allah, the Great and Almighty, has
frightened (men) through the punishment He has decided in these words of
Him, the Great and Almighty: *And let those fear who, should they leave
behind them weakly offspring, would fear on their account; so let them
be careful of (their duty to) Allah, and let them speak right
words*.[[3]](#_ftn787)

"And due to the statement of Abū Ja'far, peace be on him: 'Surely Allah,
the Great and Almighty, has promised two punishments regarding
swallowing the property of the orphan: one punishment is in the world
and the other is in the next. So through making the property of the
orphan prohibited, the orphan subsists, depends on himself, the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F785) Ibid., 3, 129.  
 [[2]](#_F786) Ibid., 2, 278-279.  
 [[3]](#_F787) Ibid., 4, 9.  
  

  

  

offspring are saved from what has befallen him, because of the
punishment Allah has promised regarding it (swallowing the property of
the orphan), and, in addition, the orphan will avenge himself when he
becomes a grown-up; enmity and hatred occur to the extent that they
annihilate each other.'"

Islam has strongly prohibited swallowing the property of the orphan and
ordered men to maintain his property until he becomes an adult. Allah,
the Most High, has said: "And test the orphans until they attain
puberty; then if you find in them maturity of intellect, make over to
them their property.[[1]](#_ftn788)"

The Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned the reasons for prohibiting
swallowing the property of the orphan.

### 8. Theft

He, peace be on him, said: "Theft is prohibited. If it was permissible,
then it would lead to the corruption of funds, killing, disputes, envy,
abandoning trades and industries, and acquiring properties without any
right."

As for theft, it is among the ugliest prohibited things, for it means
swallowing the funds of people without any right. The thief takes the
funds of those who have sacrificed their own souls for gathering them,
makes them lead a life of neediness, while he leads a happy life through
the funds he has taken. Theft is among the worst kinds of injustice, for
this reason Allah, the Most High, has said: "And (as for) the man who
steals and the woman who steals, cut off their hands as a punishment for
what they have earned.[[2]](#_ftn789)"

The jurists have mentioned numerous conditions regarding cutting the
hand off. If these conditions are available, the thief's hand is cut
off.

#### Amputating the right hand of the Thief

He, peace be on him, said: "And the reason for amputating the right hand
of the thief is because he undertakes the things with his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F788) Ibid., 4, 6.  
 [[2]](#_F789) Ibid., 5, 38.  
  

  

  

own right hand, which is the best of his limbs and most useful of them
to him. So amputating the right hand has been decided as a punishment
and lesson to the creatures lest they should seek taking funds without
any right; and because he (the thief) most times undertakes theft with
his own right hand.

"Usurping and taking funds without right has been prohibited, for it
results in kinds of corruption; corruption is prohibited because it
leads to total ruin, and other aspects of corruption."

For these firm reasons which the Imām, peace be on him, has mentioned,
Islam has ordered the right hand of the thief to be cut off, and not his
left hand.

### 9. Wine

He, peace be on him, said: "Allah has prohibited wine because it leads
to corruption, changes the intellects of those who drink it, makes them
deny Allah, the Great and Almighty, and fabricate lies against Him and
his apostles, and makes them do other things such as corruption, murder,
slander, and adultery; therefore they do not refrain from the unlawful.
For this reason we have decided that all intoxicating drinks are
unlawful for they result in that which results from wine; therefore, he
who believes in Allah and the Last Day should turn aside from it, show
love for us, for their is no safeguard between us and those who drink it
(wine)."

As wine does man and society abundant harm, Islam has decisively
prohibited it. In this connection Allah, the Most High, has said: "O you
who believe, intoxicants and games of chance and (sacrificing) stones
set up and (dividing by) arrows are only an uncleanness, the Shaitan's
work; shun it therefor that you may be successful.[[1]](#_ftn790)"

Surely wine brings about all vices and leads to committing all the
prohibited such as fornication and theft, and, in addition, it  
 destroys man's health, for it gives rise to enteritis, high blood  
 pressure, and the like. Moreover, the drunk's blood is full of alcohol
to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F790) Ibid., 5, 90.  
  

  

  

the extent that it burns just as alcohol does. I (the author) have
mentioned the damages of wine in my book *Work and the Rights of the
Worker in Islam*.

### 10. Dead Animals

He, peace be on him, said: "As regarding dead animals, the prohibition
of eating their meat is due to the damage such meat will cause to the
body, and due to the fact that Allah has made lawful the meat of animals
slaughtered in His names so that that would be a distinction between
what is lawful and what is not."

As for eating the meat of dead animals, it gives rise to many diseases
and, perhaps, death.[[1]](#_ftn791) That is because dead animals are
still accompanied by germs which sometimes do not die even through
roasting their meat, as it has been mentioned by modern medicine.

### 11. The Blood

He, peace be on him, said: "And Allah, the Great and Almighty, has
prohibited the blood just as He has made unlawful dead animals, for it
(the blood) gives rise to the corruption of the bodies, the yellow
water, bad breath, bad smell, bad manners, the cruelty of the heart, the
paucity of graciousness and mercy, to the extent (that the one who
drinks it) kills his father and his friend."

Islam has prohibited drinking the blood, for it conveys deadly
secretions and poisons. If one drinks the blood of a sick animal, surely
his blood will have the germs of such an animal. Physicians have
unanimously agreed on that the blood is never a food.

### 12. The Spleen

He, peace be on him, said: "The spleen has been prohibited because of
the blood it contains; the cause of its prohibition is similar to that
of the blood and dead animals; it is equally bad in its consequences."

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F791) Dr. 'Abd al-'Aziz Ismā'il, al-Islām wa al-Tibb al-Hadith,
p. 17.  
  

  

  

Islam has prohibited the spleen and regarded it as the blood and dead
animals, for eating it causes damages and corruption to man's body, just
as the Imām, peace be on him, has stated.

### 13. Pigs and Apes

He, peace be on him, said: "And pigs are prohibited; their creation was
distorted by Allah in order to provide a moral lesson to the creation,
and in order to remind them to fear Allah, and as evidence of Allah's
might to distort what He creates at will, and because the food they eat
is the filthiest of filth, in addition to many other reasons.

"And likewise, pigs are prohibited; (Allah) distorted their creation as
He distorted that of pigs  in order to provide a moral lesson to the
creation, and as evidence of Allah's might to distort what He creates at
will; and He has placed in them (qualities) similar to that of man in
order to indicate that they (apes) belong to the creation upon whom
(His) wrath was brought down."

Islam has prohibited the meat of pigs, and, through that, it has saved
the Muslims from great evil. Bity Wdikson says: "Surely the infection by
the worms of the pig's meat is about general in special regions from
France, Germany, Italy, and Briton, but it is rare in the eastern
country, for the religion of its people has prohibited eating pig's
meat; pig's meat also conveys Tarnjina to man."

The following are some realities on pig's meat and the extent of its
danger:

A. The specialist physician cannot decide that one pig is not infected
by these worms; rather all pigs are infected by them.

B. Each female of these worms lays 1500 ova in the mucous membrane of
the sick person's bowels. So the blood distributes and spreads the
million ova laid by all the female worms all over the body, and the
fetuses come together in muscles, so the give rise to severe aches, and
very painful muscular inflammations, and after that one is inflected by
malignant tumors.

C. There is no medicine for this disease and, in addition, pig's meat
coveys to man some germs and paratyphoid, and they cause to  

  

  

him an acute poisoning accompanied by severe inflammations in the
digestive system, and they may give rise to death within some
hours.[[1]](#_ftn792)

### 14. Rabbits

He, peace be on him, said: "The rabbits are prohibited because they are
with the same rank to cats: their claws are like those of cats and like
wild animals, so their behavior is equally wild, in addition to their
own inner dirtiness and due to their bleeding which is similar to the
bleeding of women during their menstrual period; and because they are
miscreants."

As for eating the meat of rabbits, it is prohibited according to the
reasons given by the Imām, peace be on him. However, some Islamic
schools do not regard rabbit as dirty, and they have regarded eating the
meat of rabbits as permissible.

### 15. Beasts and Birds of Prey

He, peace be on him, said: "Beasts and birds of prey are prohibited
because they eat carcasses, the flesh of men, feces, and the like. So
Allah, the Great and Almighty, has placed signs in the lawful and the
unlawful animals and birds. And just as my father has said: 'Beasts with
canine teeth and birds with claws are prohibited; birds with gizzards
are lawful.'

"Yet another reason for distinguishing lawful birds from unlawful ones
is these words of him, peace be on him: 'Eat birds which flap their
wings and do not eat those birds which glide their wings.'"

Islam has prohibited birds of prey such as falcon and Egyptian vulture;
likewise, the birds which have neither crop nor gizzard nor spurs on
their feet; it is sufficient when one spur is on the feet of the lawful
birds.[[2]](#_ftn793)

The Imām, peace be on him, has stated that such birds and animals are
prohibited because they eat carcasses, the flesh of men,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F792) Rūh al-Din al-Islāmi (3rd edition), p. 405.  
 [[2]](#_F793) Minhājj al-Sālihi\`n, vol. 2, p. 274.  
  

  

  

feces, and their meat is affected by that, so their meat is not
appropriate for man's stomach.

#### 16. That over which any other (Name) than that of Allah has been invoked

He, peace be on him, said: "It is prohibited (to eat) that over which
any other (name) than that of Allah has been invoked, for Allah, the
Great and Almighty, has made it incumbent on His creation to profess Him
and to invoke His name over the lawful sacrifices; lest that through
which they seek nearness to Him and that which has been made as act of
worship to Satan and idols should be equal, because invoking the name of
Allah, the Great and Almighty, (over sacrifices) means professing His
Lordship and His Oneness. As for that over which any other (name) than
that of Allah has been invoked, it has nothing except associating others
with Him and seeking nearness through it to other than Him, that
mentioning and invoking the name of Allah over sacrifice may be a
difference between what Allah has made lawful and what He has made
unlawful."

 It is prohibited to eat the meat of the sacrifices over which any other
name than that of Allah is invoked, for they are slaughtered to seek
nearness to other than Allah such as idols, and this was the custom of
those people who lived before Islam, and who had neither awareness nor
thought; rather they were like beasts. When Islam came, it prohibited
their sacrifices. It regarded their thoughts and works as dirty, their
sacrifices as unclean and inedible.

### 17. Eating the Meat of Mules is Reprehensible

He, peace be on him, said: "It is reprehensible to eat the meat of
domestic mules because the people are in need of their backs and
employing them; and for fear that they may be few; not because of the
dirtiness of their creation nor because of the dirtiness of their food."

Islam has made it reprehensible to eat the meat of domestic donkeys and
mules, for they were the most important means for transportation during
those times. If they had been slaughtered, the  

  

  

means of transportation would have been few. As for their meat, it is
eatable and has nothing to damage general health.

### 18. Man may marry up to four Women

He, peace be on him, said: "Why may a man marry up to four women, while
a woman is prohibited from marrying more than one man? Because when a
man marries four women, his children will all be related to him; had a
woman married two husbands or more simultaneously, nobody would know for
sure who fathered the sons she gave birth to, since they all were in
cohabiting with her, and this causes a complete disorder for relating
one to his father, and who should inherit who, and who is the kin of
who."

The Imām, peace be on him, has explained the reason why a man may marry
four women, while a woman may not marry two husbands or more
simultaneously. Had it was permissible for her to marry more than a
husband at the same time, then who would father the son she gave birth
to? Surely such a kind of marriage loses lineage and corrupts
inheritances.

### 19. Repeating the Divorce Statement thrice

He, peace be on him, said: "The reason for repeating the divorce
statement thrice is due to the time interval between each, and due to a
possible desire for reconciliation or the calming of anger, if any, and
to teach women to respect their husbands and deter them from disobeying
them."

The revocable divorce *(talāq al-'idda)* is that the husband divorces
his wife when the pre-conditions are available; then he has the right to
return to her during the *'idda* and to remarry her. Then he divorces
her during another purity, so it is prohibited for him to remarry her
until she marries another husband; the reasons for such a kind of
divorce has been mentioned by the Imām, peace be on him.

### 20. The Woman divorced nine times

He, peace be on him, said: "The reason why a husband can never remarry
his wife whom he divorced nine times is that it is his right  

  

  

penalty so that men do not take divorce lightly or take advantage of
women and think of them as weak, and so that the man would be
considering his affairs, remaining awake and aware, so that he would
lose all hope of a reunion after the ninth pronouncement of the divorce
statement."

If a woman is divorced in the manner mentioned in the previous question,
and someone else marries her, then he divorces her, and her first
husband marries her and divorces her three times in the previous manner,
then it is prohibited for him to marry her until she marries someone
else. If someone else marries her and divorces her, then her first
husbands marries her and divorces her thrice in the previous manner,
then he can never marry her again. As for the reasons for such a kind of
divorce, they have been mentioned by the Imām, peace be on him. If the
divorce is not revocable, the divorced woman can never be prohibited,
even if the divorce is more than nine times.

### 21. The Inheritance of Woman

As for the inheritance of a woman, it is that she inherits half what men
get of inheritance. The Imām, peace be on him, has given two reasons for
that:

Regarding the first reason, he, peace be on him, said: "The reason for
giving women half what men get of inheritance is that when the woman
marries, she receives, while the man gives; therefore, Allah decided to
assist the males to be able to give."

Regarding the second reason, he, peace be on him, said: "Yet another
reason for giving the male twice as much as the female is that the
female is considered dependent on the male when she needs, and he has to
take care of her living expenses and to spend on her, while the woman is
not required to take care of the expenses of the man, nor can she be
required to pay his expenses if he was in need; therefore, Allah decreed
to give the man more according to these words of Him, the Great and
Almighty: *Men are the protectors and maintainers of women because Allah
has given the one more than the other, and because they support them
from their means*.[[1]](#_ftn794)"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F794) Qur'ān, 4, 34.  
  

  

  

As the man is responsible for paying the expenses of the woman such as
those of house, food, clothes, and others mentioned by the jurists, the
woman is given half what the man gets of inheritance, just as the Imām,
peace be on him, has stated. With this question we will end our talk
about the reasons for some precepts which have been reported from Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him.

The Conditions of the Prophets and Bygone Communities
-----------------------------------------------------

The Imām, peace be on him, was asked about the reasons for the
conditions of some prophets and bygone communities, and he answered. The
following are some of them:

### The Drowning of Pharaoh

Ibrāhim b. Mohammed al-Hamadāni narrated, saying: "I asked Abū al-Hasan
'Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on him: 'What is the reason for which
Allah, the Great and Almighty, drowned Pharaoh even after Pharaoh had
believed in Him and admitted His unity?'"

He, peace be on him, answered: "Because he believed only when he saw
Allah's retribution, and belief to avoid danger is not accepted. This is
Allah's judgment regarding past and future generations. Allah, the Great
and Almighty, has said: *When they saw Our punishment, they said: We
believe in Allah, the One, and we reject the partners we used to
associate with Him. But their professing the faith when they (actually)
saw Our punishment was not going to benefit them*.[[1]](#_ftn795) And
He, the Great and Almighty, has said: *The day that certain signs of
your Lord do come, no good will it do to a soul to believe in them then,
if it did not believe before nor did it earn righteousness through its
faith*.[[2]](#_ftn796)

"So when Pharaoh was about to be drowned, he said: *I believe that there
is no god except the One in Whom the children of Israel believe, and I
am of those who submit (to Allah in Islam)*. (It was said  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F795) Ibid., 40, 84-85.  
 [[2]](#_F796) Ibid., 6, 158.  
  

  

  

to him): *Ah now! But a little before were you in rebellion! And you did
mischief (and violence)! This day shall We save you in your body, so
that you may be a Sign to those who come after
you!*[***[1]***](#_ftn797)

"Pharaoh was dressed in iron from head to foot; he had worn it on his
body. When he drowned, Allah placed him in his body on an upland, that
he might be a Sign to those who came after him, so they would see him on
a lofty ground though he was heavy in iron; heavy things go down and do
not go up; and that was a sign and mark.

"And for another reason Allah, the Great and Almighty, drowned Pharaoh;
and it is that when he was about to be drowned, he sought the help of
Mūsā and did not seek the help of Allah, so Allah, the Great and
Almighty, revealed to Mūsā: *O Mūsā, why do you help Pharaoh? Because
you did not create him. If he asked Me for help, I would help him*."

### The Drowning of the World during the Days of Nūh

'Abd al-Salām b. Sālih al-Harawi narrated, saying: "I asked al-Ridā,
peace be on him: 'O son of Allah's Messenger, what is the reason for
which Allah, the Great and Almighty, drowned all the world in the time
of Nūh, while there were among them children and those who had no sins?'

"He, peace be on him, answered: 'There were no children among them
because Allah, the Great and Almighty, sterilized the loins of the
people of Nūh and the wombs of their wives for forty days, so their
progeny ceased. They were drowned and there was no child among them; and
Allah, the Great and Almighty, does not destroy with His punishment him
who has no sin. As for the rest of the people of Nūh, they were drowned
due to the lying of the liars; and he who is absent from an affair and
is satisfied with it is like him who witnesses and does it."

### The Miracle of Mūsā

Ibn al-Sikkit asked Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him: "Why did Allah, the
Great and Almighty, send Mūsā (Moses) b. 'Umrān with a  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F797) Ibid., 10, 90-92.  
  

  

  

miraculous cane and white hand and the tool of sorcery, 'Īsā (Jesus)
with miraculous medicine, and Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, with miraculous speech and oratory?"

He, peace be on him, replied: "When Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, sent
Mūsā, sorcery dominated the minds of the people of his time, so he
brought them from Allah, the Great and Almighty, something which they
never had, nor could they bring about anything like it, thus rendering
their sorcery void and proving his argument against them. When Allah,
the Blessed and Exalted, sent 'Īsā during a period of time when chronic
diseases were widespread and people were in dire need of cure, 'Īsā
brought them from Allah, the Great and Almighty, something they never
had, bringing the dead back to life, curing those born blind and the
lepers by the will of Allah, proving his argument against them. And when
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, sent Mohammed, may Allah bless him and
his family, during the time when speeches and oratory dominated the
minds of the people of his time, he brought them the Book of Allah, the
Great and Almighty, and with the wisdom and counsel, thereby voiding
their arguments."

Ibn al-Sikkit admired this answer of the Imām and said: "By Allah, I
have never seen anyone like you! What is the argument against people
these days, then?"

"Reason," answered the Imām, "through it can you come to know who tells
the truth about Allah, so you believe in him, and who tells lies about
Allah, so you disbelieve in him."

"This, by Allah, is the right answer," retorted Ibn al-Sikkit.

### Ulū al-'Azm

The Imām, peace be on him, said: "Ulū al-'Azm have been called Ulū
al-'Azm because they were the possessors of the laws and resolutions,
and that is every prophet after Nūh, and every prophet during the days
of Ibrāhim and after him adopted his law and his method and followed his
Book, to the time of our Prophet Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family. So these five (prophets) are Ulū al-'Azm (the Possessors of
Constancy); they are the most excellent of the prophets and the
messengers; the shari'a (law) of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, is not abrogated until the Day of Resurrection, nor is there a
prophet after him until the  

  

  

Day of Resurrection. So if one claims prophecy after him or brings a
book after the Qur'ān, then his blood is permitted for all those who
hear that from him." 

### Al-Hawariyūn (the Disciples)

'Ali b. al-Hasan b. 'Ali b. Faddāl narrated on the authority of his
father, who said: "I asked Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him: 'Why
have the Hawariyūn been called the Hawariyūn?'"

He, peace be on him, answered: "In the opinion of the people is that
they have been called the Hawariyūn because they shortened (their
clothes) purified their clothes of dirt through washing; and it is a
name derived from *al-khubz al-hawār* [***[1]***](#_ftn798). In my
opinion the Hawariyūn have been called the Hawariyūn because they
purified their own souls and purified those other them of the dirtiness
of sins through preaching (to them) and reminding (them of Allah)"

He ('Ali's father) said: "I asked him (al-Ridā): 'Why have they been
call al-Nasārā.'"

"Because they were from a village called Nāsira in Syria *(bilād
al-Shām)* inhabited by Maryam (Mary) and 'Īsā after their return from
Egypt," he answered.

### Ibrāhim, the Bosom Friend of Allah

Al-Husayn b. Khālid narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, who said: [I heard my father relate on the authority of
his father, peace be on him, who said:] "Allah, the Great and Almighty,
took Ibrāhim for friend because he did not come to anyone and never
asked anyone except Allah, the Great and Almighty."

### Ismā'il, the Truthful in his Promise

Sulaymān al-Ja'fari narrated on the authority of Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, who said: "Did you know why Ismā'il was called the
Truthful in his promise?"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F798) *Al-khubz al-hawār* it is that which is sifted several
time; and in al-Qāmūs, it is the white flour.  
  

  

  

"No, I did not know," replied Ismā'il.

"He promised a man and sat down for a year waiting for him," retorted
the Imām.

With this matter we will end our talk about the reasons which the Imām,
peace be on him, has given for the conditions of some prophets and
bygone communities.

The Reasons for some Islamic Affairs
------------------------------------

A group of traditions regarding the reasons for some Islamic affairs has
been reported from the Imām, peace be on him, as follows:

### The Qur'ān is always new

Ibrāhim b. al-'Abbās narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him, that he narrated on the authority of his father that a man asked
Imām al-Sādiq, peace be on him, saying: "Why does the Qur'ān not
increase during spreading and studying but newness?"

He, peace be on him, replied: "Because Allah did not send it down to a
time apart from a time nor to a people apart from a people, so it is new
every time and is fresh with every people until the Day of
Resurrection."

Surely the Qur'ān is the great miracle of Islam, and that is because
therein are moral lessons appropriate for all times and developments;
therein is nothing deviates from the laws of the cosmos or opposes
innate; moreover, it is wonderful in eloquence and great in style, so it
is fresh and new throughout times.

### 'Ali is the Divider of Paradise and of Hell

Al-Ma'mūn asked Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him: "O Abū al-Hasan, tell me
about your grandfather the Commander of the faithful: Why is he called
the divider of Paradise and of Hell, and how that attribute came to be
applied to him?"

He, peace be on him, in turn asked him: "O commander of the faithful,
have you not narrated from your father from his forefathers quoting 'Abd
Allah b. 'Abbās saying that he had heard the Messenger  

  

  

of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, saying: 'Loving 'Ali is
belief and hating him is unbelief?'"

"Yes," replied al-Ma'mūn.

"If the distribution of Paradise and of Hell is done according to loving
and hating him, then he is the distributor of Paradise and of Hell,"
explained al-Ridā, peace be on him.

So al-Ma'mūn said: "May Allah never permit me to live after your demise,
O Abū al-Hasan! I witness that you are the heir of the knowledge of the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family."

Abū al-Salt al-Harawi said: "After al-Ridā had gone back home, I came to
visit him, and I said to him: 'O son of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah
bless him and his family, what an excellent answer you have given the
Commander of the faithful! He said: 'O Abū al-Salt, I spoke to him in
the way he understood best, and I have heard my father telling a
tradition from his forefathers, on the authority of  'Ali, who said:
'Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, said: 'O 'Ali,
you are the distributor of Paradise and of Hell on the Day of Judgment;
you say to Hell: 'This is mine, and that is yours.'"

Imām 'Ali the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, stands for
every noble deed in Islam. Without doubt he is the distributor of
Paradise and of Hell. In this respect many authentic traditions have
been reported from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family.[[1]](#_ftn799) Al-Ma'mūn admired this firm justification of Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him.

### 'Ali does not restore Fadak

'Ali b. al-Hasan b. 'Ali b. Faddāl narrated on the authority of his
father, who said: "I asked al-Ridā, peace be on him, about the Commander
of the faithful (Imām 'Ali), peace be on him, as to why he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F799) Al-Sawā'iq al-Muhriqa, p. 75. In Kanz al-'Ummāl, vol. 6,
p. 402, it has been mentioned: "'Ali said: 'I am the distributor of
Hell.'" And in Kunūz al-Haqā'iq by al-Manāwi, p. 92: "Allah's Messenger,
may Allah bless him and his family, said: ''Ali is the divider of
Hell.'"  
  

  

  

did not restore Fadak (to its rightful owners) when he undertook the
affairs of men? He, peace be on him, replied: 'We are members of a
family who, upon becoming rulers, do not take their rights from those
who confiscated them. Should we become in charge of the Muslims, we
shall rule them and restore their confiscated rights to them, but we do
not do so for our own selves.'"

Abū Bakr confiscated Fadak and took it from the hand of Fātima, the
mistress of the women of the world. As for the reason for that, it is
that he desired to undermine the rank of the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him. He intended to wage an economic warfare against the
enemy forces to paralyze them. Fadak remained in the hands of the
governors and the rulers. However, the 'Alawide Sayyids restored it
during the days of 'Umar b. 'Abd al-'Aziz and of al-Ma'mūn. The talk
about it has many branches, and the judge is Allah, the Exalted, Who
will decide among His servants on the day when neither property nor sons
will avail.

### The Companions of the Prophet

Mohammed b. Mūsā b. Nasr al-Rāzi narrated, saying: [My father related to
me, saying: al-Ridā, peace be on him, was asked about the tradition of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family: 'My companions are like
the stars: If you follow any of them, you shall receive guidance.' And
about his tradition: 'Leave my companions to me.' So he, peace be on
him, replied:]

"Yes, he did say this tradition, meaning thereby the companions who did
not make any alteration after him or any change (to the Islamic creed)."

The Imām was asked: "How can you tell that they altered and changed?"

He answered: "This is due to what is reported about him (the Prophet),
may Allah bless him and his family, that he said: 'Certain individuals
among my companions will be pushed away by force from my Pool (of
Kawther) on the Day of Resurrection just as strange camels are pushed
away from the watering place, and I shall say: 'O Lord! My companions!
My companions!' And it shall be said to me:  

  

  

'You do not know what innovations they invented after you.' So they will
be pushed away towards the left side (where Hell is), and I shall say:
'Away with them; ruined they shall be.' Such will be the penalty of
those who alter and change (the Prophet's traditions and
practices).[[1]](#_ftn800)"

As for companionship, it did not protect the Prophet's companions from
making mistakes, for some of his companions were Samra b. Jundub, 'Amru
b. al-'Ās, al-Mughira b. Shu'ba, and the like from among the heads of
hypocrisy and mischief.

### The People desert 'Ali

'Ali b. al-Hasan b. 'Ali b. Faddāl narrated on the authority of his
father, who said: [I asked Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, about the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, as to why the people
deserted him after knowing his distinction, his past feats, and his rank
to Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family. He, peace be
on him, answered:]

"They deserted him and preferred others over him after having come to
know his merits simply because he had killed a great number of their
fathers, grandfathers, brothers, uncles, and other relatives who defied
Allah and His Apostle; therefore, they kept their grudge against him
inside their hearts and they did not like him when he became their
ruler. They did not have grudge against anyone else as much as they had
against him, for nobody else was so forceful in making *jihād* in the
defense of Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, as
much as he was; so, they deserted him for someone else."

Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F800) Al-Bukhāri (vol. 6, p. 119, al-Amiriya edition) has
narrated on the authority of  'Abd Allah b. Mas'ūd, on the authority of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who said: "I shall be
the first to reach the Pool, then the souls of some men from among you
will be resurrected and they shall be prohibited from coming near me,
and I shall say: 'O Lord! These are my companions!' And it shall be said
to me: 'You do not know what they did after you.'" Narrations similar to
this are numerous.  
  

  

  

killed those far and close for the sake of Allah, the Most High, and
struck off the heads of those polytheists with his own sword through
which he established Islam, so they harbored malice against him and
deserted him for someone else.

### Imām 'Ali does not take his own Right

Al-Haythem b. 'Abd Allah al-Rummāni narrated, saying: [I asked 'Ali b.
Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on him, saying: 'O son of Allah's Messenger, tell
me about 'Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him: Why did he not fight his
enemies during the twenty-five years after the demise of Allah's
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, as he did during the days
of his caliphate?' He, peace be on him, answered:]

"It is due to his following the example of Allah's Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, who did not fight the polytheists of Mecca
during the thirteen years after his Prophethood, or the ones in Medina
during the nineteen months period of his stay there; it is due to the
numbers of his supporters being too small. Likewise, 'Ali did not engage
himself in fighting his enemies because his owner supporters were too
few. Since the Prophethood of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, was not nullified by the fact that he did not make
*jihād* during the period of thirteen years (in Mecca) and nineteen
months (in Medina), the Imāmate of 'Ali was not nullified because he did
not perform *jihād* for twenty-five years, for the deterring factor in
both examples was one and the same."

Surely Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, left
his own right and did not make *jihad* against his enemies, for his own
supporters were too few. In this connection, he has said: "Then I began
to think whether I should assault or endure calmly the blinding darkness
of tribulations wherein the grown up are feeble and the young grow old
and the true believer acts under strain till he meets Allah (on his
death). I found that endurance thereon was wiser. So I adopted patience
although there was pricking in the eye and suffocation (of
mortification) in the throats."

Surely Imām 'Ali had no group of people to support him, though  

  

  

he had many enemies and opponents, so he, peace be on him, was patient
and left his own right preferring over it the general interest and
keeping the word of the Muslims.

With this matter we will end our speech about the reasons which the
Imām, peace be on him, has given for some Islamic affairs.   

