Chapter Xii
===========

  

  

HIS COMPANIONS AND NARRATORS OF HIS TRADITIONS
==============================================

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,  was, in his time, the giant of Islamic
thought and the most learned person on the face of the earth, as al-Mmūn
said. He supplied Islamic world with all  elements of progress and
renaissance. He employed the Prophetic Mosque, may Allah increase it in
honor, as an institute for his lessons and lectures. The religious
scholars, the narrators, and the students of jurisprudence surrounded
him, while he was twenty and some years old.[[1]](#_ftn877) They
recorded his verdicts, his marvelous wise sayings, and arts.

The religious scholars found in his traditions knowledge similar to that
of his grandfather, the Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family,
the first Inspirer of the ideological and scientific matters on earth;
they came to know that he was as brilliant as his forefathers, the pure
Imām, the pioneers of the cultural and scientific renaissance in the
world of Islam. The narrators said: There are no seven noble persons on
earth from whom the Shia *(khas)* and non-Shia *(ām)* wrote traditions
except Ali b. Mūsā (al-Ridā), peace be on him.[[2]](#_ftn878)

The religious scholars took great care of his traditions to the extent
that when he passed through Nisābūr (Iran), they gathered around him.
Their number was more than twenty thousand persons. They held ink pots
and asked him to relate to them the traditions of his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F877) Tahdhib al-Tahdhib.  
 [[2]](#_F878) Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p. 29.  
  

  

  

grandfather, Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family. He
narrated to them the tradition called *al-hadith al-dhahabi* (the Golden
Tradition), as we will mention it. As the tradition was of great
importance, one of the Sām\`ni Emirs ordered it to be written in gold
and to be buried with him.[[1]](#_ftn879) Some students of his
grandfather, Imām al-Sādiq, peace be on him, and of his father Imām
Mūsā, peace be on him, narrated (traditions) on his
authority.[[2]](#_ftn880) A group of the religious scholars who were
coincided with him also narrated from him. We will present the
biographies of his companions and the narrators of his traditions. That
is because, as we think, they will complete the research on the
personality of the Imām and shows a side of his scientific life. (They
are as follows:)

1. Ibrāhim Bin al-Abbās
-----------------------

b. Mohammed al-Sawli, the great, inspired poet. He was given the *kunya*
of Abū Ishāq. He was the most brilliant poet of his time and best of all
the poets in showing friendship and love toward the Imāms of the members
of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them. There were close ties
between him and Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. He showed deep, sincere
love toward Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. We will present some sides of
his life.

### His Paying a Visit to the Imām

Ibrāhim along with Dibil al-Khazāi, the poet of the members of the House
(*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, visited Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him. That was when al-Mamūn pledged allegiance to him and appointed him
as his successor. Dibil recited to him his everlasting poem, which is
regarded as one of the Arab excellent poems. We will mention it in his
biography. Then Ibrāhim recited to him his poem of which nothing is
known except this line:

The murders of the children of the Prophet, Mohammed,

have removed the comfort of the heart after endurance.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F879) Akhbār al-Diwal, p. 115.  
 [[2]](#_F880) Al-Barqi, Rijāl, p. 53.  
  

  

  

This poetry line shows the sufferings and sorrow of al-Sawli toward the
trials and tribulations which the enemy of Islam wreaked upon the
Household of the Prophet. I (i.e. the author) think that the whole poem
is good and firm and is regarding the lamentation for the members of the
House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them. When he had finished reciting
it, the Imām  gave them twenty thousand of the dirhams which held his
holy name. As for Dibil, he took his prize and went to (the holy city)
of Qum. There the people bought each dirham for ten dirhams, hence he
bought his portion for one hundred thousand dirhams. As for Ibrāhim b.
al-Abbās, he kept some of the dirhams until he died.[[1]](#_ftn881)

The following lines are some of his poetry on praising Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him:

Ones actions are a sufficient, just witness for his being the most
knowledgeable of his people.[[2]](#_ftn882)

I can see that they have a modern one, but the modern is

not similar to the old (in their good deeds).[[3]](#_ftn883)

He (al-Mamūn) bestows upon you through your own

properties, and you are given one percent.[[4]](#_ftn884)

May Allah not praise him who seeks the help of your

enemies and praises them.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F881) Al-Murtadā, al-Amāli, vol. 1, p. 485. In (the book) A'yān
al-Shi'a (vol. 6, p. 16), it has been mentioned: "The (poetry) lines
which have been composed by Ibrāhim were written on the backof a
notebook and there was a signature at the bottom of them *('matūq
khā'if)*, and that he used them metaphorically for his praising him.  
 [[2]](#_F882) Regarding his explaining this poetry line, al-Sayyid
al-Amin has said: "The deeds of the family of Abū Tālib are an enough
witness of their good origin."  
 [[3]](#_F883) Al-Sayyid al-Amin has commented on this poetry line,
saying: "He (the poet) has used it metaphorically for the children of
al-'Abbās that they had a modern one who undertook the caliphate, but he
was not similar to their religion in his good deeds."  
 [[4]](#_F884) Ibrāhim has not mentioned the names of the addressed
ones; surely he means the family of Abū Tālib and at their top is Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him, and that al-Ma'mūn bestowed upon them when he
gave them some gifts which were of their properties."  
  

  

  

You have preferred your partner, who is a close relative,

just as the parent prefers his own son.[[1]](#_ftn885)

These lines show his deep faith in the members of the House (*ahl
al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, and his friendship toward them. He
metaphorically used these lines for them, for he was afraid of the
tyrannical authority which punished due to doubt and accusation all
those who showed friendship toward the Family of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family.

### Examples of his Poetry

Al-Sawlis poems are regarded as part of wonderful Arab poetry. The
following lines are some of his chosen poems:

A visit has brought near men to each other in spite of their being far,
and the shrine of Laylā has become distant in spite of its being near.

And (the houses) standing at Munrajj al-Liwā are nearer (to me) than
(the shrine of) Laylā; and that is her house.[[2]](#_ftn886)

The following lines belong to him:

One maybe tired of a misfortune and the escape from it is

with Allah.

It (the misfortune) became more intense.

When its episodes intensified, it was driven away, while I

thought that it would not be driven away.[[3]](#_ftn887)

The following lines belong to him too:

You were the iris of my eyeball, so the eye wept for you.

Whoever desires to die after you, then let him die. For I

took care of you.[[4]](#_ftn888)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F885) The one addressed in his words 'you have preferred' is
al-Ridā the great Imām, peace be on him, and his partner is al-Ma'mūn.  
 [[2]](#_F886) Ibn Khullakān, Wafayāt al-A'yān, vol. 1, p. 25.  
 [[3]](#_F887) Ibid., p. 29.  
 [[4]](#_F888) Ibid.  
  

  

  

### His Burning the Divan of his Poetry

Ibrāhim was the friend of Ishāq b. Ibrāhim, so he wrote a copy of his
poetry concerning Imām Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on him, and gave it
to him. The copy remained with him until al-Mutawakkil, the tyrannical,
became a caliph.  Ibrāhim was in charge of expenditure for
al-Mutawakkil. Separation and hate took place between Ibrāhim and Ishāq,
hence Ibrāhim removed him from some expenditures which were at his hand,
asked him for some money, insisted on it, and demanded him in a bad
manner. Hence Ishāq summoned one of his trustworthy brothers and said to
him: Go to Ibrāhim b. al-Abbās and say to him: Your poetry concerning
Ali b. Mūsā in your own handwriting and other than your handwriting is
with Ishāq. By Allah, if you continue wronging him and do not refrain
from asking him (for money), he will hand over (your) poetry to
al-Mutawakkil. As a result the man went to Ibrāhim b. al-Abbās and told
him about that. Ibrāhim was so worried that he entrusted the affair to
the man. He released him (Ishāq) from all that which he asked from him,
took the poetry from him, and made him swear by Allah that he had no
poetry with him. When he received the poetry, he burnt it in his
presence.[[1]](#_ftn889)

### Examples of his Writings

Ibrāhim was an eloquent writer. The following is a piece of his writing
on behalf of an Abbāsid king who threatened the rebels:

Now, then, the Commander of the faithful has patience. If it is not
sufficient, a threat will follow it. If it is not sufficient, his
resolutions will be sufficient. Greetings.

Ibn Khullakān commented on this letter, saying: This statement, though
brief, is very marvelous.[[2]](#_ftn890)

### His Death

Ibrāhim died in Samarā in Shabān 15, in the year 243 A.
H.[[3]](#_ftn891)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F889) Al-Murtadā, Amāli, vol. 1, p. 485.  
 [[2]](#_F890) Ibn Khulakān, Wafayāt al-A'yān, vol. 1, p. 29.  
 [[3]](#_F891) Ibid.  
  

  

  

2. Ibrāhim Bin Abū al-Bilād
---------------------------

The real name of Abū al-Bilād is Yahyā b. Salim al-Ghatafāni. He
(Ibrāhim) was given the *kunya* of Abu Ismāil. In his book *al-Rijāl*,
Shaykh al-Tūsi number him as one of the companions of Imām al-Sādiq,
peace be on him. He said: He (Ibrāhim) was trustworthy, a jurist, and a
reciter (of the Qurān). He lived for a long time until Ali b. Mūsā
al-Ridā sent him a letter. His two sons (Yahyā and Mohammed), Sahl b.
al-Yasa, and others narrated (traditions) on his
authority.[[1]](#_ftn892)

Al-Najāshi said: Ibrāhim was trustworthy, a reciter (of the Qurān), and
an author. His father was blind and a narrator of poetry; al-Farazdaq
said to him: O sorrow of my soul at your eyes, O man!

Ibrāhim narrated (traditions) on the authority of Abū Abd Allah, Abū
al-Hasan Mūsā, and al-Ridā, peace be on them. Imām al-Ridā sent him a
letter and lauded him. He has a book. A group (of narrators) reported
the book on his authority.[[2]](#_ftn893)

3. Ibrāhim Bin Abū Mahmūd
-------------------------

al-Khurasāni. Al-Najāshi regarded him as reliable and said: He (Ibrāhim)
reported (traditions) on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.
He has a book. Ahmed b. Īsā narrated the book on his
authority.[[3]](#_ftn894)

Al-Kashi said: [Nasr b. al-Sabāh said:] Ibrāhim b. Abū Mahmūd was blind.
Ahmed b. Īsā narrated on his authority the questions of Mūsā, peace be
on him, which are about twenty-five pages. He lived after (the death of)
al-Ridā.

Hamdawayh narrated, saying: [Al-Hasan b. Mūsā al-Khashshāb informed us,
saying: Ibrāhim b. Abū Mahmūd informed us, saying:] I visited Abū Jafar
and there were books with me for him from his father. He began reading
them and putting a big book on his eyes. He  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F892) Al-Najāshi, Rijāl.  
 [[2]](#_F893) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F894) Ibid.  
  

  

  

wept until his tears flowed down his cheeks, so l said to him: May I be
your ransom, your father, perhaps, said to me in one session several
times: May Allah make you dwell the Garden. So he said: I also say to
you: May Allah make you dwell the Garden! Then I asked him: Do you
guarantee that your Lord will make me enter the Garden? Yes, he replied.
He (Ibrāhim b. Abū Mahmūd) said: I took his foot and kissed
it.[[1]](#_ftn895)

4. Ibrāhim Bin Ishāq al-Nahāwandi
---------------------------------

He narrated (traditions) on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him, and Sālih b. Mohammed al-Nahāwandi reported (the traditions) on his
authority.[[2]](#_ftn896)

5. Ibrāhim Bin Ismāil Bin Dāwud
-------------------------------

He narrated (traditions) on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him, and Mūsā b. Jafar al-Madāini reported (the traditions) on his
authority.[[3]](#_ftn897)

6. Ibrāhim Bin Bashir
---------------------

Al-Najāshi said: He narrated questions on the authority of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, Mohammed b. Abd al-Hamid narrated on his
authority.[[4]](#_ftn898)

7. Ibrāhim Bin Salāma al-Nishābūri
----------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, and added that he was an agent.[[5]](#_ftn899)
Al-Sayyid al-Khūi said: The men differed over his state. Some regarded
him as an argument; others did not regard him (as argument). Those who
regarded him (as argument) gave evidence through two premises:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F895) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F896) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 6, Chapter on the Excellence of the
Visitation of Abū al-Hasan, 'Ali b. Mūsā, peace be on him.  
 [[3]](#_F897) Ibid., vol. 4, Chapter on the Fasting of three Days in
every Month.  
 [[4]](#_F898) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[5]](#_F899) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
  

  

  

The first (premise) is that he was the agent of Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him. The second (premise) is that they (the Imāms) did not appoint
the sinner as an agent. The Sayyid discussed both
premises.[[1]](#_ftn900)

8. Ibrāhim Bin Shuayb al-Wāqifi
-------------------------------

He (i.e. Ibrāhim Bin Shuayb) said: I was sitting in the Mosque of Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and there was beside me a
man from the people of Iraq. I asked him: Who are you? The retainer of
Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, he replied. I said to him: I have
a need of you. What is it? he asked. I want you to hand over a letter
*(ruqa)* to him. Yes, he said, as you like. So I went out, took a sheet
of paper, and wrote in it: In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the
Merciful. Your fathers, who were before you, would tell us of something
therein were signs and proofs. I want you to tell me my name and my
fathers name.

He (i.e. Ibrāhim Bin Shuayb) said: Then I stamped the letter and gave it
to him. On the following morning, he (the retainer) brought me a sealed
letter. I opened the letter and read it. At the bottom of the letter (it
was written): In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful. Abū
Ibrāhim, among your fathers are Shuayb and Sālih; among your sons are
Mohammed, Ali, and so-and-so.[[2]](#_ftn901)

9. Ibrāhim Bin Shuayb al-Aqarqūfi[[3]](#_ftn902)
------------------------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him. Shaykh al-Māmaqāni said: His state is unknown to us,
and knowledge belongs to Allah.[[4]](#_ftn903)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F900) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 1, p. 91.  
 [[2]](#_F901) Al-Kashi.  
 [[3]](#_F902) He was from 'Aqrāqūf. It was said that it was a village
of the districts of al-Dujayl, and it was said that it was one of the
districts of the river of 'Īsā. There were four leagues between it and
Baghdad. Beside it there was a great, high hill which could be seen five
leagues away. This has been mentioned in *Marāsid al-Ittilā'*  
 [[4]](#_F903) Tanqih al-Maqāl.  
  

  

  

10. Ibrāhim Bin Sālih
---------------------

In his (book) al-Rijāl without mentioning any nick-name or description,
Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[1]](#_ftn904) Al-Najāshi said: Ibrāhim b. Sālih
al-Anmāti[[2]](#_ftn905) al-Asadi was trustworthy and narrated
(traditions) on the authority of Abū al-Hasan, peace be on him. He has a
book. A group (of narrators) reported the book.[[3]](#_ftn906)

11. Ibrāhim Bin Abd al-Hamid
----------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi said: He (Ibrāhim) was among the companions of Imām Abū
Abd Allah; he coincided with Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and did not
hear from him according to the statement of Sad b. Abd Allah. He was a
Wāqifi and has a book.[[4]](#_ftn907) He (Shaykh al-Tūsi) said in
al-Fihrast: Ibrāhim b. Abd al-Hamid is reliable. He has a book *(asl)*.
Abū Abd Allah Mohammed b. Mohammed b. al-Numān al-Mufid told us about
the book.[[5]](#_ftn908)

As Shaykh al-Tūsi has regarded him as trustworthy in *al-Fihrast,* then
he was not a Wāqifi. Perhaps he withdrew from the Wāqifiya and adopted
the True Religion (of the Shiites).

12. Ibrāhim Bin Ali
-------------------

b. Abd Allah b. Jafar b. Abū Tālib. Alis mother was the mistress of the
women, the heroine of Karbalā, the lady Zaynab, peace be on her. Shaykh
al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him.[[6]](#_ftn909)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F904) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[2]](#_F905) Al-Anmāti is ascribed to anmāt which is the plural of
namat meaning a woolen garment with soft velvet put on the howdah.  
 [[3]](#_F906) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[4]](#_F907) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[5]](#_F908) Al-Tūsi, al-Fihrast.  
 [[6]](#_F909) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
  

  

  

13. Ibrāhim Bin Mohammed
------------------------

al-Ashari, al-Qummi. Al-Najāshi said: He (Ibrāhim) is trustworthy and
narrated on the authority of Imām Mūsā and Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
them, and his brother al-Fadl. Their book is mutual. Al-Hasan b. Abū Ali
b. Faddāl narrated the book on their authority.[[1]](#_ftn910) In his
(book) al-Rijāl Ibn Dāwud regarded him as reliable, and so did al-Fādil
al-Majjlisi, and others.[[2]](#_ftn911)

14. Ibrāhim Bin Mohammed
------------------------

al-Khazzāz. He narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, and al-Hasan b. Said reported on his
authority.[[3]](#_ftn912)

15. Ibrāhim Bin Mohammed
------------------------

He was a retainer from Khurasān (Iran). Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as
one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[4]](#_ftn913)

16. Ibrāhim Bin Mohammed al-Hamadāni
------------------------------------

He was the agent of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[5]](#_ftn914) Shaykh
al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā, Imām
al-Jawād, and Imām al-Hādi peace be on them.[[6]](#_ftn915) Al-Kashi
said: He performed the hajj forty times.[[7]](#_ftn916)

17. Ibrāhim Bin Mūsā
--------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on
him, and Mohammed b. Hamza reported on his authority.[[8]](#_ftn917)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F910) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[2]](#_F911) Tanqih al-Maqāl.  
 [[3]](#_F912) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 1, p. 152.  
 [[4]](#_F913) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[5]](#_F914) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[6]](#_F915) Al-Barqi, Rijāl.  
 [[7]](#_F916) Al-Kashi.  
 [[8]](#_F917) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 1, p. 162.  
  

  

  

18. Ibrāhim Bin Hāshim
----------------------

Abū Ishāq al-Qummi. He was originally from Kūfa and then moved to (the
Holy City of) Qum. Shaykh al-Najāshi numbered him as one of the
companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and said: [Our companions
say:] He (Ibrāhim b. Hāshim) was the first to publish the traditions of
the Kufāns in Qum. He has books. Among them are the Book of al-Nawādir
and the Book of the Legal Decisions of Imām Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him.[[1]](#_ftn918)

19. Ibrāhim Bin Hāshim al-Abbāsi[[2]](#_ftn919)
-----------------------------------------------

 Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[3]](#_ftn920) Apparently, he was an unknown Imāmi
(traditionalist)[[4]](#_ftn921) Al-Sayyid al-Khūi said: The correct
(name) is Hāshim b. Ibrāhim, not Ibrāhim b. Hāshim as in (al-Rijāl by)
al-Najāshi.[[5]](#_ftn922)

20. Ahmed Bin Abū Nasr
----------------------

 He narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and
Ahmed b. Mohammed reported on his authority.[[6]](#_ftn923)

21. Ahmed Bin Ashyam
--------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[7]](#_ftn924) He narrated on the authority of Yunus,
and Ahmed b. Mohammed reported on his authority.[[8]](#_ftn925)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F918) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[2]](#_F919) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[3]](#_F920) Ibid.  
 [[4]](#_F921) Tanqih al-Maqāl, vol. 1, p. 39.  
 [[5]](#_F922) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 1, p. 152.  
 [[6]](#_F923) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 6, Chapter on Dowers and Wages.  
 [[7]](#_F924) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[8]](#_F925) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, Chapter on Dictating to those near to
Death.  
  

  

  

22. Ahmed Bin Āmir
------------------

b. Sulaymān b. Sālih b. Wahab who was martyred along with (Imām
al-Husayn), the sweet basil of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family. His son Abd Allah reported: My father was born in the year
157 A. H. He met Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,  in the year 174 A. H.
Al-Ridā died in Tūs, on Tuesday, Jamādi al-Ulā 18, in the year 202 A. H.
I saw Abū al-Hasan (al-Ridā) and Abū Mohammed, peace be on them. In this
manner he has been mentioned in al-Najāshis (book of al-Rijāl).

23. Ahmed Bin Umar al-Hallāl
----------------------------

He sold sesame oil. He narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace
be on him. He has questions on his authority.[[1]](#_ftn926)

24. Ahmed Bin al-Fayd
---------------------

 Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām Abū
al-Hasan (al-Ridā), peace be on him.[[2]](#_ftn927) He is an unknown
Imāmi (Shiite).

25. Ahmed Bin Mohammed
----------------------

b. Abū Nasr al-Bizanti. He was a trustworthy Kufān. He met Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, and had a great rank with him. He reported a book on
his authority. He has books such as the Comprehensive Book *(kitāb
al-Jāmi)*, and the Book of the Miscellaneous  Traditions *(kitāb
al-nawādir)*. In his book *al-Ghayba,* Shaykh al-Tūsi said: He (Ahmed b.
Mohammed) was a Wāqifi, then he withdrew when he saw the miracles at the
hand of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, which declared the correctness of
his Imāmate. Hence he clung to the argument, adopted his Imāmate and
that of his children after him.

Ahmed said: I was with Imām al-Ridā and spent the evening with him. He
(Ahmed) said: I said: Shall I leave? He, peace be on  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F926) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[2]](#_F927) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
  

  

  

him, said to me: Dont leave, for you have entered into evening. He
(Ahmed) said: I stayed with him, and he said to his slave-girl: Fetch my
mat and pillow and spread them for Ahmed in that room. He (Ahmed) said:
When I entered the room, I asked myself: Was anyone like me in the house
of Allahs friend[[1]](#_ftn928) and in his bed? So he called me: Ahmed,
the Commander of the faithful visited Sasaa b. Sohān and said to him:
Sasaa, dont regard my visit to you as pride over your people. Be humble
before Allah and He will raise you. (The Shiite traditionalists) have
unanimously agreed that he is meritorious, and that his narration is
correct when it is narrated in correct manner from him. He died in the
year 221 A. H.[[2]](#_ftn929)

26. Ahmed Bin Mohammed
----------------------

b. Hanbal b. Hilāl al-Shaybāni. Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of
the companions of Imām Abū (al-Ridā), peace be on him.[[3]](#_ftn930)
Ibn Hajar said: Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Hanbal b. Hilāl b. Asad
al-Shaybāni, al-Marwazi, who lived in Baghdad, Abu Abd Allah, one of the
Imāms, is trustworthy, a memorizer (of the Qurān), a jurist, and an
argument. He is the head of the tenth class. He died in the year 241 A.
H. and was 77 years old.[[4]](#_ftn931)

27. Ahmed Bin Mohammed
----------------------

b. Īsā al-Ashari, al-Qummi was the Shaykh of the Qummis, their eminent
figure, their jurist. He was the only head who met the Sultan. He met
Abū Jafar, the Second, and Abū al-Hasan al-Askari, peace be on them.

He has books. The following are some of them:

1. Kitāb Fadl al-Nabi (the Book of the Excellence of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family).

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F928) In another account: "So I said: Praise belongs to Allah,
the argument of Allah and inheritor of the knowledge of the prophets is
intimate with me...."  
 [[2]](#_F929) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, pp. 237-239.  
 [[3]](#_F930) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[4]](#_F931) Taqrib al-Tahdhib. Tarjama fi Tahdhib al-Tahdhib.  
  

  

  

2. Kitāb al-Mutta (the Book of Fixed-term Marriage).

3. Kitāb al-Nawādir (the Book of Miscellaneous Traditions). It was not
classified, and then it was classified by Dāwud b. Kawra.

4. Kitāb al-Nāsikh wa al-Mansūkh (the Book of the Abrogating and the
Abrogated Verses).

5. Kitāb al-Attima (the Book of Foods).

6. Kitāb al-Mansūkh (the Book of the Transformed).

7. Kitāb Fadāil al-Arab (the Book of the Excellences of the Arabs).

Ibn Nūh said: I have seen his book on the hajj with al-Dabili.

28. Ahmed Bin Yusuf
-------------------

He was the retainer of the Banū (children) of Taym Allah. He was from
Kūfa, but his house was in Basrah. Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of
the companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and added that he was
trustworthy.[[1]](#_ftn932)

29. Idris Bin Zayd
------------------

He was among the companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. Al-Sadūq
mentioned him firstly along with Ali b. Idris and numbered them as two
companions of al-Ridā, peace be on him. He (al-Sadūq) described him as
al-Qummi when he mentioned his way to him again.[[2]](#_ftn933)

30. Idris Bin Abd Allah
-----------------------

b. Sad al-Ashari. He is trustworthy and has a book. He narrated on the
authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[3]](#_ftn934)

31. Idris Bin Īsā
-----------------

al-Ashari, al-Qummi. Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F932) Al-Kashi.  
 [[2]](#_F933) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[3]](#_F934) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 3,  p. 9.  
  

  

  

the companions of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him. He is
reliable, and he narrated on tradition on His (the Imāms) 
authority.[[1]](#_ftn935)

32. Idris Bin Yaqtin
--------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām Abū
al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[2]](#_ftn936)

33. Ishāq Bin Ādam
------------------

al-Ashari, al-Qummi. He narrated a book on the authority of Imām Abū
al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, and a group (of traditionalists)
narrated the book on his authority.[[3]](#_ftn937)

34. Ishāq Bin Ibrāhim
---------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā and
Imām al-Jawād, peace be on them.[[4]](#_ftn938) Al-Kashi said: He
(Ishāq) reached serving Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, through al-Hasan
b. Said al-Ahwāzi.[[5]](#_ftn939)

35. Ishāq Bin Ibrāhim
---------------------

al-Hanzali, better known as Ibn Rāhawayh. Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as
one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[6]](#_ftn940)

36. Ishāq Bin Mohammed
----------------------

al-Hudayni. Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[7]](#_ftn941)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F935) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[2]](#_F936) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[3]](#_F937) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[4]](#_F938) Al-Barqi, Rijāl.  
 [[5]](#_F939) Al-Kashi.  
 [[6]](#_F940) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[7]](#_F941) Ibid.  
  

  

  

37. Ishāq Bin Imām Mūsā
-----------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him. He (Ishāq) narrated on the authority of his brother, on
the authority of his uncle, on the authority of Imām Abū Abd Allah,
peace be on him. Mohammed b. Muslim reported on his
authority.[[1]](#_ftn942)

38. Ismāil Bin Sad
------------------

al-Ahwas. He narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,
and Mohammed b. Khālid reported on his authority.[[2]](#_ftn943)

39. Ismāil Bin Abbād
--------------------

al-Qasri, from the Qasr of the children of Hubayra. Al-Barqi numbered
him as one of the companions of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on
him.[[3]](#_ftn944)

40. Ismāil Bin Īsā
------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan and Imām  al-Ridā,
peace be on them, and his son Sad reported on his
authority.[[4]](#_ftn945)

41. Ismāil Bin Qutayba
----------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, and added that he was unknown.[[5]](#_ftn946)

42. Ismāil Bin Mahrān
---------------------

b. Abū Nasr al-Sukūni. He was a Kufān retainer. He was given the *kunya*
of Abū Yaqūb. He is trustworthy and reliable. He was one of the
companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. He wrote a group of books.
The following are some of them:

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F942) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F943) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 3 p. 133.  
 [[3]](#_F944) Al-Barqi.  
 [[4]](#_F945) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 3,  p. 158.  
 [[5]](#_F946) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
  

  

  

1. Al-Malāhim (Bloody Fights).

2. Thawāb al-Qurān (the Reward of the Qurān).

3. Al-Ihlilijya (the Myrobalan).

4. Sifat al-Mumin wa al-Fājir (the Qualities of the Believer and the
Sinner).

5. Khutab al-Imām Amir al-Muminin, peace be on him (the Sermons of Imām
the Commander of the faithful).

6. Nawādir (Miscellaneous Traditions).

7. Al-Nawādir (the Miscellaneous Traditions).[[1]](#_ftn947)

Ibn al-Ghadāiri criticized his traditions, saying: His (Ismāils)
traditions are not pure. They sometimes become disordered and are
sometimes right. He narrated many (traditions) on the authority of the
very weak (traditionalists). It is permissible to regard him as a
witness. Our master al-Khūi regarded him as trustworthy because of the
testimony of Jafar b. Mohammed b. Qawlawayh, Ali b. Ibrāhim, Shaykh
al-Tūsi, al-Najāshi, and al-Ayyāshi. What Ibn al-Ghadāiri has mentioned
does not mean that he is not trustworthy; rather he negated purity of
his (Ismāils) traditions because he narrated on the authority of the
weak (traditionalists).[[2]](#_ftn948)

43. Ismāil Bin Hammām
---------------------

b. Abd al-Rahmān al-Basri, the retainer of Kinda. He narrated on the
authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. He, his father, and his
grandfather are trustworthy. He has a book, and a group (of
traditionalists) reported the book on his authority.[[3]](#_ftn949)

44. Asram Bin Matar
-------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[4]](#_ftn950)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F947)Al-Kashi.  
 [[2]](#_F948) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 3,  pp. 188-189.   
 [[3]](#_F949) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[4]](#_F950) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
  

  

  

45. Aflah Bin Zayd
------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[1]](#_ftn951)

46. Aflah Bin Zayd
------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, and added that he was unknown.[[2]](#_ftn952)

h2\>47. Al-Yās Bin Mrū

al-Sayrafi, al-Khazzāz. He was one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him. When death came to him, he said to those who were
around him: [Witness against me, and this is not the hour of lying. I
heard Abū Abd Allah, peace be on him, say:] By Allah, if the servant who
loves Allah and His Messenger and shows friendship toward the Imāms
dies, the Fire will not touch him.[[3]](#_ftn953)

48. Ayyūb Bin Nūh
-----------------

He was from Kūfa and was the retainer of al-Nakha. He is trustworthy.
Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[4]](#_ftn954) He was an agent. When he died, he left
behind him only one hundred and fifty dinars. The people thought that he
had a lot of money because he was the agent of the Imāms, peace be on
them.[[5]](#_ftn955)

49. Al-Bāis
-----------

He was the retainer of Hamza b. al-Yasa al-Ashari. He is trustworthy.
Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[6]](#_ftn956)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F951) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F952) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F953) Al-Kashi.  
 [[4]](#_F954) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[5]](#_F955) Al-Kashi.  
 [[6]](#_F956)Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
  

  

  

50. Bakr Bin Sālih
------------------

al-Rāzi. Shaykh al-Barqi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[1]](#_ftn957) The Shaykh said: He has a book
on the degrees of faith and kinds of unbelief, seeking forgiveness, and
jihād (struggle).[[2]](#_ftn958)

Ibn al-Ghadāiri said: He is very weak. He was unique in (mentioning) the
oddities.[[3]](#_ftn959)

51. Thaljj Bin Abū Thaljj
-------------------------

al-Yaqūbi. He was one of the sons of Dāwud b. Ali al-Yaqūbi. Shaykh
al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him.[[4]](#_ftn960)

52. Jafar Bin Bashir al-Bujayli
-------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[5]](#_ftn961) He was one of the ascetic, worshipful
Shiites. His mosque is still at Bujayla, in Kūfa. Al-Najāshi said: When
my companions and I went to Kūfa, we performed the prayer in the mosque.

Jafar, may Allah have mercy on him, died in al-Abwā, in the year 208 A.
H. He was given the nick-name of the Basket of Knowledge *(quffat
al-Ilm)*. His books are as follows:

1. Kitāb al-Mashyakha (the Book of the Shaykhs).

2. Kitāb al-Salāt (the Book of Prayer).

3. Kitāb al-Makāsib (the Book of Gains).

4. Kitāb al-Sayd (the Book of Hunting).

5. Kitāb al-Dhabāih (the Book of Slaughtering).[[6]](#_ftn962)

Shaykh al-Tūsi said: He has a book; the book is ascribed to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F957) Al-Barqi, Rijāl.  
 [[2]](#_F958) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith.  
 [[3]](#_F959) Ibid.  
 [[4]](#_F960) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[5]](#_F961) Ibid.  
 [[6]](#_F962) Al-Najāshi.  
  

  

  

Jafar b. Mohammed, peace be on him, and the narration of Imām Ali b.
Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[1]](#_ftn963)

53. Jafar Bin Ibrāhim al-Haddrami
---------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[2]](#_ftn964)

54. Jafar Bin Ibrāhim
---------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on
him, and Jafar b. Hāshim reported on his authority.[[3]](#_ftn965)

55. Jafar Bin Īsā
-----------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[4]](#_ftn966) He narrated on the authority of Imām
al-Kāzim and Imām al-Ridā, peace be on them, and his brother Mohammed b.
Īsā reported on his authority.[[5]](#_ftn967)

56. Jafar Bin al-Muthannā al-Khatib
-----------------------------------

He was the retainer of Thaqif and was a Wāqifi. Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered
him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him.[[6]](#_ftn968)

57. Jafar Bin Mohammed al-Qazwini
---------------------------------

In the Chapter on Kunā, Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the
companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[7]](#_ftn969)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F963) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[2]](#_F964) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F965) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 4,  p. 46.  
 [[4]](#_F966) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[5]](#_F967) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 4, p. 92.  
 [[6]](#_F968) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[7]](#_F969) Ibid.  
  

  

  

58. Al-Hasan Bin Ibrāhim al-Kūfi
--------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[1]](#_ftn970)

59. Al-Hasan Bin Asbāt al-Kindi
-------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[2]](#_ftn971)

60. Al-Hasan Bin Asad al-Basri
------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[3]](#_ftn972)

61. Al-Hasan Bin Bashir
-----------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, and added that he was unknown.[[4]](#_ftn973)

62. Al-Hasan Bin Bashshār al-Madāini
------------------------------------

He was one of the companions of Imām al-Kāzim and Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on them. He his trustworthy and correct. He was a Wāqifi, and then he
withdrew.[[5]](#_ftn974)

63. Al-Hasan Bin al-Jahm
------------------------

b. Bukayr b. Ayun, Abū Mohammed al-Shaybāni. He is trustworthy. He
narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him.
He has a book.[[6]](#_ftn975)

64. Al-Hasan Bin al-Jahm al-Rāzi
--------------------------------

He was one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him.[[7]](#_ftn976)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F970) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F971) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F972) Ibid.  
 [[4]](#_F973) Ibid.  
 [[5]](#_F974) Abū Dāwud, Rijāl.  
 [[6]](#_F975) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[7]](#_F976)Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 4, p. 304.   
  

  

  

65. Al-Hasan Bin al-Husayn al-Anbāri
------------------------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on
him, and Ali b. al-Hakam reported on his authority.[[1]](#_ftn977)

66. Al-Hasan Bin al-Husayn
--------------------------

b. Sālih. He narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, and Ali b. Abd al-Ghaffār reported on his
authority.[[2]](#_ftn978)

67. Al-Hasan Bin al-Husayn al-Alawi
-----------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him. Ahmed b. Mohammed reported on his authority.

68. Al-Hasan Bin Rāshid
-----------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him, without any description, as one of the
companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[3]](#_ftn979)

69. Al-Hasan Bin Ziyād
----------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, and added that he had a book.[[4]](#_ftn980)

70. Al-Hasan Bin Said al-Kūfi
-----------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[5]](#_ftn981)

71. Al-Hasan Bin Shādhān al-Wāsiti
----------------------------------

He (i.e. Al-Hasan b. Shādhān) said: [I wrote to Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā,
peace be on him, and complained to him of the alienation of the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F977) Ibid., p. 313.  
 [[2]](#_F978) Ibid., p. 315.  
 [[3]](#_F979) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[4]](#_F980) Ibid.  
 [[5]](#_F981) Ibid.  
  

  

  

people of (Wāsit) and their wrong against me. A group of the Uthmāniya
harmed me. Hence, he, peace be on him, wrote with his own hand:] Verily,
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, took a promise from His friends for
patience in the state of falsehood. Therefore, show forbearance toward
the decree of your Lord. If the Master of the creatures rose, they would
say: *O woe to us! Who has raised us from our sleeping-place? This is
what the Beneficent (Allah) promised and the apostles told the
truth*.[[1]](#_ftn982)

72. Al-Hasan Bin Shuayb al-Madāini
----------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[2]](#_ftn983)

73. Al-Hasan Bin Abbād
----------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[3]](#_ftn984)

74. Al-Hasan Bin al-Abbās al-Marūfi
-----------------------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and
Mohammed b. Ali reported on his authority.[[4]](#_ftn985)

75. Al-Hasan Bin Ali
--------------------

b. Faddāl. He was the retainer of Taym al-Rabāb. He is a trustworthy
Kufān.[[5]](#_ftn986) Al-Najāshi said: [Abū Amrū said: al-Fadl b. Shādān
said:] In the mosque of al-Rabi, in the estate of al-Rabi, while I was
reciting (the Qurān) under a reciter (of the Qurān) called Ismāil b.
Abbād, I saw some people exchange secrets. One of them said: On the
mountain there is a man called b. Faddāl. He is the most worshipful of
those whom we have seen or heard about. He goes out  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F982) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 4, p. 367.  
 [[2]](#_F983) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[3]](#_F984) Ibid.  
 [[4]](#_F985) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 4, p. 382.  
 [[5]](#_F986) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
  

  

  

to the desert and performs a long prostration to the extent that birds
come and sit on him, for they think that he is a garment or a rag. Wild
animals graze around him; they are not afraid of him, for they are
intimate with him. When the armed paupers come to attack the people or
fight against them, they flee in the world out of fear of his person.
Al-Fayd said: I thought that this man was in the first time. Shortly
after that, while I was sitting with my father, may Allah have mercy on
him, in the estate of al-Rabi, a handsome old man came wearing a
yellowish shirt and cloak and greenish sandals. He greeted my father and
he got up for him, greeted him, and magnified him. When he wanted to go
to Ibn Abū Umayr, I asked (my father): Who is this old man?. This is
al-Hasan b. Ali b. Faddāl, replied (my father). Is he the meritorious
worshipful? I asked. Yes, he is, answered (my father). Isnt he on the
mountain? I asked. Yes he is, answered (my father), what heedless your
reason is , boy! I told him about what I heard from the people
concerning him and he said: That is true. After that he came constantly
to my father. Then I went to him in Kūfa and heard from him the book of
Ibn Abū Bukayr and traditions other than it. He carried his book, came
to al-Hijjra, and recited it for me. When the son-in-law of Tāhir b.
al-Husayn performed the hajj, the people magnified him because of his
money and his important position with the Sultan (ruler). He (al-Husayn)
was described for him, but he did not go to him. He (the son-in-law of
Tāhir b. al-Husayn) sent for him asking his coming. He (al-Husayn) said:
I have no kinship; there is no work between them and me. After that I
knew that his coming to me was for his religion. As for his place of
praying, it was near the pillar called *al-Sābia* (the Seventh) or the
Pillar of Ibrāhim, peace be on him, in the mosque of Kūfa. He, Abū
Mohammed, and Ali b. Asbāt met. Al-Hajjāl claimed theology; he was the
best of the people in theology. Ibn Faddāl ascribed me to him concerning
theology and knowledge. He loved me very much. Al-Hasan was famous for
that throughout his lifetime until death came to him, and he died. He
believed in the True Religion, may Allah have mercy on him. 

He has the following books:

1. Kitāb al-Ziyārāt (the Book of Visitations).

  

  

  

2. Kitāb al-Thārāt (the Book of the Revenges).

3. Kitāb al-Nawādir (the Book of Miscellaneous

Traditions).

4. Kitāb al-Radd alā al-Ghāliya (the Book of the Answers to the
Extremists).

5. Kitāb al-Shawāhid min Kitāb Allah (the Book of the Examples from the
Book of Allah).

6. Kitāb al-Mutta (the Book of Fixed-Term Marriage).

7. Kitāb al-Nāsikh wa al-Mansūkh (the Book of the

Abrogating  and the Abrogated verses).

8. Kitāb al-Malāhim (the Book of the Bloody fights).

9. Kitāb al-Salāt (the Book of Prayer).

10. The book which his son Ali narrated on the authority

of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.

His death, may Allah have mercy on him, was in the year 224 A.
H.[[1]](#_ftn987)

  76. Al-Hasan Bin Ali
----------------------

b. Ziyād al-Washshā, al-Bujayli, al-Kūfi. He was among the companions of
Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and one of the eminent figures of this
sect (i.e. the Shiites). He narrated on the authority of his grandfather
al-Yās, who said when death came to him: [Witness against me, and this
is not the hour of lying. I heard Abū Abd Allah, peace be on him, say:]
By Allah, if the servants who love Allah and His Messenger and shows
friendship toward the Imāms dies, the Fire will not touch him. Then he
repeated the second and the third while I did not asked him (about
that).

Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Īsā reported: I went out to Kūfa to seek traditions
and found in it al-Hasan b. Ali al-Washshā and asked him to take out for
me the book of al-Alā b. Razin al-Qalā and of Abān b. Uthmān al-Ahmar.
He brought them for me and I said to him: I want you to permit me in
order to take them (the two books). He said to me: Hasan, may Allah have
mercy on you, way are you in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F987) Al-Najāshi.  
  

  

  

a hurry? Go and copy them. I said to him: I am not safe from mishaps. He
said: If I had known that this tradition would be sought in such a
manner, I would have written it many more, for I met in this mosque
(i.e. the mosque of Kūfa) nine hundred old men and they would say: Jafar
b. Mohammed related to us.

He has books of which are the following:

1. Kitāb Thawāb al-Hajj (the Book of the Reward of the

Hajj).

2. Kitāb al-Nawādir (the Book of Miscellaneous

Traditions).

3. Kitāb Masāil al-Ridā (the Book of the Questions of al-

Ridā).[[1]](#_ftn988)

   77. Al-Hasan Bin Ali
-----------------------

b. Yaqtin b. Mūsā, the retainer of the Hashimites. He was a jurist and
theologian. He narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Ridā, peace be
on him. He has the book: *Masāil Abū al-Hasan Mūsā* (the Questions of
Abū al-Hasan Mūsā), peace be on him.[[2]](#_ftn989)

78. Al-Hasan Bin Ali al-Daylami
-------------------------------

Al-Wahid has mentioned him in *al-Taliqa*  and said: He (al-Hasan b. Ali
al-Daylami) was the retainer of al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[3]](#_ftn990)

79. Al-Hasan Bin 'Ali
---------------------

He was the retainer of Taym Allah b. Tha'laba and was from Kūfā. Shaykh
al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him.[[4]](#_ftn991)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F988) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F989) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F990) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 5, p. 678.  
 [[4]](#_F991) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
  

  

  

80. Al-Hasan Bin Ali al-Washshā
-------------------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. He said:
When young, my father and I had supper with Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him.[[1]](#_ftn992)

81. Al-Hasan Bin Umar
---------------------

b. Yazid. Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[2]](#_ftn993)

82. Al-Hasan Bin Faddāl
-----------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on
him, and on the authority of a group (of traditionalists). His sons
Ahmed, Ali and Mohammed reported on his authority. Mūsā b. Umar narrated
on his authority.[[3]](#_ftn994)

83. Al-Hasan Bin Qārūn
----------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on
him, and Ibrāhim b. Hāshim reported on his authority.[[4]](#_ftn995)

84. Al-Hasan Bin al-Qāsim
-------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[5]](#_ftn996) Al-Kashi narrated on the authority of
al-Hasan b. al-Qāsim, who said: One of the sons of Jafar, peace be on
him,  was dying. Al-Ridā was late in coming to him. That grieved me, for
he was late in coming to his uncle Mohammed. Then he came. Shortly after
that he rose,  and I rose along with him and asked him: May I be your
ransom, why have you risen and left your uncle in the state in which he
is? My uncle will bury so-and-so (i.e. his brother), he, peace be on
him, replied. He (al-Hasan b. al-Qāsim) said:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F992) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 5, p. 75.  
 [[2]](#_F993) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[3]](#_F994) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 5, p. 88.  
 [[4]](#_F995) Ibid., p. 93.  
 [[5]](#_F996) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
  

  

  

Shortly after that, the sick person recovered and buried his brother,
who was sound with them. After that al-Hasan realized the True Religion
and believed in it.[[1]](#_ftn997)

85. Al-Hasan Bin Mahbūb al-Sarrād
---------------------------------

He is also called al-Zarrād. He was given the *kunya* of Abū Ali. He was
the retainer of Bujayla. He was a trustworthy Kufān. He narrated on the
authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, and reported on
the authority of sixty men from among the companions of Imām Abū Abd
Allah, peace be on him. He was of great position. He wrote a group of
books of which are the following:

1. Kitāb al-Mashyakha (the Book of the Shaykhs).

2. Kitāb al-Hudūd (the Book of Islamic Punishments).

3. Kitāb al-Diyāt (the Book of Blood Money).

4. Kitāb al-Farāid (the Book of Religious Obligations).

5. Kitāb al-Nikāh (the Book of Marriage).

6. Kitāb al-Talāq (the Book of Divorce).

7. Kitāb al-Nawādir (the Book of Miscellaneous

Traditions), about one thousand pages.

8. Kitāb al-Tafsir (the Book of Interpretation (of the

Qurān).

9. Kitāb al-Itqq (the Book of Emancipation of Slaves).

Shaykh al-Kashi numbered him as one of the jurists on whose authentic
traditions our companions unanimously agreed. That was when he (the
Shaykh) nominated the jurists from among the companions of Imām al-Kāzim
and Imām al-Ridā, peace be on them. He (al-Hasan b. Mahbūb) died at the
age of seventy-five, in the year 224 A. H.[[2]](#_ftn998)

86. Al-Hasan Bin Mohammed
-------------------------

b. Abū Tallha. Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of
Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[3]](#_ftn999)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F997) Al-Kashi, Rijāl.  
 [[2]](#_F998) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F999) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
  

  

  

87. Al-Hasan Bin Mohammed
-------------------------

b. Sahl al-Nawfali. Al-Najāshi regarded him as a weak (traditionalist)
and said: However, he has a good book with many interests. He called it
*Majālis al-Ridā maa Ahl al-Adyān* (the Sessions of al-Ridā with the
People of Religions).[[1]](#_ftn1000)

88. Al-Hasan Bin Mohammed al-Qummi
----------------------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and
al-Khabiri reported on his authority.[[2]](#_ftn1001)

89. Al-Hasan Bin Mohammed
-------------------------

al-Nawfali, al-Hāshimi. He narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[3]](#_ftn1002)

90. Al-Hasan Bin al-Nadr al-Armani
----------------------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and Ahmed
b. Mohammed b. Īsā reported on his authority.[[4]](#_ftn1003)

91. Al-Hasan Bin Yazid
----------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[5]](#_ftn1004)

92. Al-Hasan Bin Yunus
----------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[6]](#_ftn1005)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1000) Al-Najāshi.  
 [[2]](#_F1001) Al-Tahdhib, vol. 6, Chapter on the Excellence of the
Visitation of Abū al-Hasan Mūsā.  
 [[3]](#_F1002) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 5 p. 138.  
 [[4]](#_F1003) Ibid., p. 151.  
 [[5]](#_F1004) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[6]](#_F1005) Ibid.  
  

  

  

93. Al-Hasan al-Taflisi
-----------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[1]](#_ftn1006)

94. Al-Husayn Bin Ibrāhim
-------------------------

b. Imām Mūsā b. Jafar, peace be on him. Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as
one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.[[2]](#_ftn1007)

95. Al-Husayn Bin Abū Said
--------------------------

al-Makāri, Abū Abd Allah. He and his father were two eminent figures of
the Wāqifa. He went in to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and said to
him: You have opened your door for the people and sat to give them
religious opinions, while your father had never done that. He (the
Imām), peace be on him,  said to him: There is no harm on me from Hārūn
(al-Rashid). Then he said to him: May Allah put out the light of your
heart and make poverty enter your house. Woe unto you! Did you not know
that Allah revealed to Maryam that there was a prophet in her womb?
Accordingly, Maryam gave birth to Īsā, peace be on him, so Maryam
belonged to Īsā, and Īsā belonged to Maryam. As for me, I belong to my
father and my father belong to me. He (al-Husayn b. Abū Said) said (to
the Imām): I want to ask you a question. I do not think that you will
hear from me, explained the Imām, however, question (me). He said: A man
was near to death, and he said: Whomever I possessed in the past is
free, and whomever I possess at present is not free. Have you not
recited this verse: *For the moon we have appointed stages until it
becomes again like an old dry branch of palm tree (urjūn)?* Whomever the
man possessed before the six moths was old, and whomever he possessed
after the six months was not old. Then he left the Imām, peace be on
him. Shortly after that, poverty and affliction befell
him.[[3]](#_ftn1008)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1006) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F1007) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F1008) Al-Kashi.  
  

  

  

96. Al-Husayn Bin Bashshār al-Wāsiti
------------------------------------

He was Ziyāds retainer. He is a trustworthy and correct
(traditionalist). He narrated on the authority of Imām Abū al-Hasan Mūsā
(al-Kāzim), peace be on him, and reported on the authority of Imām Abū
al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him.

When Imām (Mūsā) al-Kāzim died, he (al-Husayn b. Bashshār) went out to
Imām al-Ridā. He did not think that Imām al-Kāzim would die nor did he
acknowledge the Imāmate of al-Ridā. He intended to ask him (Imām
al-Ridā). When he reached the Imām, who was at al-Sawi, he asked for
permission and went in. The Imām welcomed him, brought him near to him,
and then he said to him: Husayn, if you want Allah to look at you
without any veil and you look at Allah without any veil, then show
friendship toward the Household of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, and him who undertakes the affairs (of the Muslims) from among
them. Al-Husayn hurried to say: Will I look at Allah, the Great and
Almighty?

Yes, by Allah, he, peace be on him, replied.

After that al-Husayn was sure that Imām al-Kāzim died, and Imām al-Ridā
was the Imām after him.

The Imām, peace be on him, turned to him and said: I did not want to
permit you (to come in), for the affair is critical that is because of
the observation imposed on him by the Abbāsid authority. However, I have
known your affair (i.e. that you belong to the Wāqifiya).

The Imām added, saying: Did you know your affair well?

Yes, al-Husayn replied.[[1]](#_ftn1009)

97. Al-Husayn Bin Bashir
------------------------

He narrated on the authority of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and Ahmed
b. Mohammed reported on his authority.[[2]](#_ftn1010)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1009) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F1010) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 5, p. 208.  
  

  

  

98. AL-Husayn Bin al-Jahm
-------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[1]](#_ftn1011) Imām, professor al-Khūi said: It is
possible that his name has been changed, for his correct name is
al-Hasan. His biography has already been mentioned in al-Hasan Bin
al-Jahm al-Rāzi.[[2]](#_ftn1012)

99. Al-Husayn Bin Khālid al-Sayrafi
-----------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tūsi numbered him as one of the companions of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.[[3]](#_ftn1013) Al-Sadūq narrated on the authority of
Safwān b. Yahyā, who said: I was with al-Ridā, peace be on him, when
al-Husayn b. Khālid al-Sayrafi came in to him and said to him: May I be
your ransom, I want to go out to al-Awad. He (the Imām), peace be on
him, said: Cling to well-being wherever you find it. He (al-Husayn) was
not satisfied with that. He went out and headed for al-Awad. However, he
was attacked and all his money was robbed on a highway.[[4]](#_ftn1014)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1011) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[2]](#_F1012) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 5, p. 214.  
 [[3]](#_F1013) Al-Tūsi, Rijāl.  
 [[4]](#_F1014) Al-Kashi.  
  

