Chapter Xiii
============

  

  

THE TIME OF THE IMĀM
====================

The time of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, was called the Golden Time.
It was the most brilliant and wonderful of all the times in Islamic
history. That is because building prospered; agriculture developed; the
Islamic state dominated most regions of the world as well as Baghdad
became the capital of Islamic world; rather the capital of the world,
for it was the greatest city to which scholars and diplomats from
everywhere in the world came in order to obtain an office in the state
or to present the needs of their countries in the fields of 
administration, economy, and science.

We must mention the affairs of that time, for there is a close
relationship between them and the research on the life of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him.

The Scientific Life
-------------------

The scientific life in the time of Imām al-Ridā bloomed, and its
activities in all kinds of science grew. That was the most developed
kind of civilization progress which the Abbāsid state reached in all
periods of its reign. We will briefly present some aspects of this
scientific progress as follows:

### The Satellite of Ibn al-Muqanna

Among the most marvelous inventions of that time was the satellite which
was made by Atā al-Khurasāni, better known as Ibn al-Muqanna. That
satellite appeared and the people saw it from a two-month distance, and
then it disappeared from them, and concerning it Abū al-Alā al-Maarri
has said:

  

  

  

Be watchful! The satellite whose head is masked

is error and enticement just as the satellite of
al-Muqanna.[[1]](#_ftn1369)

The poet Abū al-Qāsim Hibat Allah b. Sanā al-Mulk has referred to it in
a poem, saying:

To you, the satellite of al-Muqanna when rising is not

more charming than that of the turbaned one.[[2]](#_ftn1370)

However our references have not mentioned how that satellite was made
and its apparatuses as well as they have not referred to the country
where the satellite was made. More likely, it was made in Baghdad, the
Capital of the Abbāsid government in that time, any how, the making of
that satellite is regarded as the greatest scientific achievement in
those times.

Yet another example of the scientific achievements in those times was
the usage of crystal in making ships. This has been mentioned by some
historians.

### The Institutes and Libraries

The Abbāsid government established institutes and libraries in Baghdad,
that Islamic and non-Islamic sciences might be studied therein. The
Government founded wherein thirty marvelous schools; the most famous of
them was al-Nizāmiya.[[3]](#_ftn1371) Moreover it established therein
public libraries the most important of which is:

#### The Depository of Wisdom

Hārūn al-Rashid brought to it his personal library and added to it the
books which were collected by his father al-Mahdi and his grandfather
al-Mansūr. Then al-Mamūn asked the Emir of Siqliya for some
philosophical and scientific books. He added these books to the
Depository of Wisdom *(Bayt al-Hikma)* after he had received them as
well as he brought to it may books form Khurasān. Wherever he heard of a
book, he brought the book to it.[[4]](#_ftn1372)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1369) Al-A'lām, vol. 5, p. 29.  
 [[2]](#_F1370) Ibn Khullakān, Wafayāt al-A'yān, vol. 2, p. 426.  
 [[3]](#_F1371) Rihlat Ibn Jubayr, p. 208.  
 [[4]](#_F1372) Hayāt al-Imām Mohammed al-Jawād, p. 197.  
  

  

  

Sahl b. Hārūn b. Rāhbūn was a scribe in the Depository of Wisdom, and
then he was appointed by al-Mamūn as a keeper of the philosophical books
which were brought from the Island of Cyprus. When al-Mamūn made peace
with the leader of the Island, he asked him to send him the books which
were collected by the Greeks in a house and which none came to know
except them. So the leader of the Island gathered his retinues and men
of opinion and counseled with them about carrying the books to al-Mamūn,
and they advised him not to carry them to him except one archbishop who
said to him: I think that you should be quick in sending the books to
him, for if these sciences enter a state, they will corrupt it and sow
division among its scholars; therefore, send them to al-Mamūn. Al-Mamūn
became delighted at them and appointed Sahl as a keeper over
them.[[1]](#_ftn1373) It is worth mentioning that Ghaylān al-Fārisi was
the general keeper of the library and was scribe of al-Rashid and
al-Mamūn.

This library continued supplying researchers and scholars with various
kinds of science. When Hulagu, the Mongol shedder of blood, occupied
Baghdad, he destroyed the library, and hence Islam world lost its most
important heritage.   

### The Translation of Books

Among the aspects of the development of the cultural and scientific life
in that time was translating books from foreign languages into Arabic
including medical, mathematical, astronomical books as well as
philosophical and political sciences. In his book al-Fihrast, Ibn
al-Nadim has mentioned many names of these books. Hanin b. Ishāq was the
head of the Translation Department. Ibn al-Nadim narrated: Al-Mamūn
exchanged letters with the Romanian King. He turned to him for help,
wrote to him, and asked permission to send him what he chose of the old
books stored in Rome. He (the Romanian King) responded to him after a
refusal. Accordingly, al-Mamūn delegated for that a group of persons
including al-Hajjājj b. Matar, Ibn al-Batriq, Salam (the keeper of the
House of Wisdom), and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1373) Tamhid Li Tārikh al-Falsafa, p. 47.  
  

  

  

others. They chose books from what they found. When they brought them to
al-Mamūn, he ordered them to carry the books to the Depository of
Wisdom.[[1]](#_ftn1374)

Of course, the books translated into Arabic developed Arab and Islamic
thought and, in addition, they contributed in improving sciences in
Islamic world, for may students worked in studying and understanding
them.

### The Maps and Observatories

Among the aspects of the scientific progress of that time is that
al-Mamūn ordered a world map to be drawn and it was called al-Mamūns Map
*(al-Sura al-Mamūniya)*, and it was the first world map to be drawn
during the Abbāsid time, as well as he ordered an observatory to be
established, and it was established at al-Shammāsiya, a district in
Baghdad.[[2]](#_ftn1375)

### The Dominating Sciences

As for the sciences which dominated that time, they were the sciences of
the Qurān, which are as follows:

#### 1. The Interpretation of the Qurān

This science means interpreting the verses of the Holy Qurān, clarifying
their meanings, distinguishing the abrogating verses from the abrogated,
the unlimited verses from the limited, the general from the specific,
and so on. The interpreters followed two ways in their interpretations:

A. Interpreting the Qurān according to transmitted traditions, by this
we mean interpreting the Holy Qurān according to the traditions
transmitted from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and
the good Imāms; this method was followed by most Shiite interpreters
such as the Interpretation of al-Qummi, al-Burhān, al-Askari, and
others. The argument of Shiites concerning this method  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1374) Ibn al-Nadim, al-Fihrast, p. 339.  
 [[2]](#_F1375) 'Asr al-Ma'mūn, vol. 1, p. 375.  
  

  

  

of interpreting is that it is the Imāms who were singled out for the
knowledge of the Qurān, and that it is they who were knowledgeable in
interpreting it. Imām Abū Jafar al-Bāqir, peace be on him, said: None
can claim that he has knowledge of the surface and deep meaning of the
Qurān except the testamentary trustees (i.e. the Imāms).[[1]](#_ftn1376)

Shaykh al-Tūsi, Shaykh of the Shiite Sect, said: It is not permissible
to interpret the Qurān except with the authentic traditions transmitted
from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and the Imāms
whose statement is an argument like that of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family.[[2]](#_ftn1377)

B. Interpreting the Qurān according to opinion, by this we mean
interpreting the Qurān according to the approved, rational
considerations. This method was followed by the interpreters from among
the Mutazilities and the Bātiniya who did not take care of the
traditions reported from the Imāms of guidance, peace be on him,
concerning the interpretation of the Holy Qurān, who interpreted the
Qurān according to their approved, rational considerations
only.[[3]](#_ftn1378) As for interpreting the Qurān according to the
surface meanings, it is not regarded as a method of interpretation, but
it is not objected.

It is worth mentioning that the first school to be established in Islam
for interpreting the Qurān according to the transmitted traditions was
at the time of Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
for he was the first interpreter of the Qurān, and under him studied Abd
Allah b. Abbās, the scholar of the community, and other prominent
companions (of the Prophet). Then, after him, the pure Imāms began,
through their lectures,  interpreting the Qurān, the causes of the
revelation of the Qurān, and the excellence of reciting its verses.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1376) Al-Tibyān, vol. 1, p. 4.  
 [[2]](#_F1377) Hayāt al-Imām al-Bāqir, vol. 1, p. 181.  
 [[3]](#_F1378) Ibid.  
  

  

  

#### 2. The Hadith (Tradition)

Among the sciences which dominated that time is the science of the
hadith, by this we mean the traditions transmitted from the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, or from one of his testamentary
trustees, the pure Imāms, namely their words, their actions, their
justifications, for they are part of the Sunna, and in the Sunna just as
in the Holy Qurān there is the general, the specific, the unlimited, the
limited, and the like.

The Shiites were the first to write down the traditions, for the Imāms
of guidance urged their companions to do that. In this connection, Abū
Basir narrated, saying: I went in to Imām Abū Abd Allah al-Sādiq, peace
be on him, and he said: What has prevented you from writing down (our
traditions)? You will not memorize (our traditions) unless you write
(them). A group of the Basrans asked me about something, wrote them
down, and departed.[[1]](#_ftn1379) A group of the companions of Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him, collected the authentic traditions in big,
comprehensive books which are the first comprehensive books of the Imāmi
Shiites and regarded as the foundation of writing down the four
comprehensive books by the three Muslim Shaykhs.[[2]](#_ftn1380)

#### 4. Science of Islamic Jurisprudence

Science of Islamic jurisprudence is the greatest of all Islamic sciences
and most distinguished of the them, so it was widespread in that time
and the rest of times. This honorable science is responsible for
rendering knowledge of required, religious duties imposed on the bounded
who are responsible before Allah for following and putting them into
practice.

The Imāms of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on him,
played an active role in establishing a jurisprudence school which
included the eminent jurists and scholars such as Zarāra,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1379) Hayāt al-Imām al-Mohammed al-Jawād, p. 194.  
 [[2]](#_F1380) Muqaddamat al-Muqni' wa al-Hidāya, p. 10.  
  

  

  

Mohammed b. Muslim, Jābir b. Yazid al-Jufi, Abū Hanifa, and the like.
These jurists and scholars recorded what they had heard from the pure
Imāms in their fundamentals which they are about four hundreds, and
which were rectified and gathered in the four books to which the Imāmi
jurists refer for concluding lawful precepts.

The Shiites are regarded as the first to record jurisprudence. In this
regard Mustafā Abd al-Razzāq said: The Shiites were the quickest of the
rest of the Muslims in inclining to writing down jurisprudence. It is
rational that the Shiites were the quickest in clinging to recording the
lawful rules because their belief in the infallibility or semi
infallibility of their Imāms urged them to write down their legal
decisions, their formal and legal opinions.[[1]](#_ftn1381)

#### 4. Science of Fundamentals

Among the sciences which were studied in those times and the like was
deriving religious decisions *(ijtihād)*; this science was founded by
the greatest Imām Abū Jafar Mohammed al-Bāqir, peace be on
him.[[2]](#_ftn1382)

#### 5. Grammar

Grammar was among the sciences which played an important role during the
Abbāsid time, for some of its matters and researches were the object of
heated argument at gatherings held in the palaces of the Caliphs;
disputes and heated arguments concerning some of its matters took place
among the leading grammarians in the presence of the Abbāsid Caliph. A
group of great figures specialized in this science; at their head were
al-Kisāi, al-Farrā, Sibawayh, and this science was established by Imām
Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, the pioneer of
wisdom and knowledge in Islam.

#### 6. Theology

As for theology, it was widespread in that time. The scholars and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1381) Tamhid Li Tārikh al-Falsafa al-Islāmiya, pp. 202-203.  
 [[2]](#_F1382) Hayāt al-Imām al-Mohammed al-Jawād, p. 195.  
  

  

  

the theologians discussed important researches on this science in order
to defend their beliefs. On the top of the theologians was Hishām b.
al-Hakam, the student of Imām Jafar al-Sādiq, peace be on him, who
disproved the beliefs of his opponents and established with his definite
proofs the creed of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be
on him, which Allah has chosen for His servants.

Some Sunni famous theologians were Wāsil b. Atā, Abū al-Hudhayl
al-Allāf, Abū al-Hasan al-Ashari, and Hujjat al-Islām al-Ghazāli.

#### 7. Medicine

Medicine was widespread during that time. Imām al-Ridā,  peace be on
him, was at the head of the scientists in this science, and his
dissertation in medicine is regarded as the most marvelous medical
research, hence it has been called the Golden Dissertation *(al-Risāla
al-Dhahabiya)*. The Abbāsid kings encouraged people to study this
science and spent a lot of money on the specialists in it such as
Gabriel b. Bakhtishū, the skillful doctor.

#### 8. Chemistry

Chemistry was among the most important sciences which attained great
care in that time. Jābir b. Hayyān, the pride of the Arab east, was
specialist in it; he received his researches from the greatest figure of
Islamic thought, Imām Jafar al-Sādiq, peace be on him, whom some western
scholars called the thinking brain of humanity, for it was he who
established this science.

#### 9. Architecture and Civil Engineering

Architecture and civil engineering reached zenith in that time, for the
architects were creative in their designing the palaces of the caliphs
whether in Baghdad or in Sāmrā. Those palaces were the largest building
throughout history. An example of the marvelous architectural designs is
the ponds which were made in Sāmrā, which the poets adored, and which
astonished the minds of the scholars, in addition to that there were
wonderful paintings and the Hanging  

  

  

Gardens the like of which has not been made even in this century when
architecture and technology have reached top.

#### 10. Astronomy

Astronomy was among the dominating sciences in that time. Al-Mamūn, the
Abbāsid, was one of those who were specialists in it. These are some
sciences which dominated that time, and which represented intellectual
freedom and technology in the time of the Imām, peace be on him.

### The Scientific Centers

#### 1. Baghdad

Baghdad was one of the cities of knowledge in Islamic world, for it was,
as we have mentioned before, the capital of the supreme authority and of
knowledge; various kinds of culture dominated it; in it spread
institutes, schools, the Depository of Wisdom, public and private
libraries.

#### 2. Yathrib

As for Yathrib (Medina), it was the most important scientific center in
Islamic world, for the school of the members of the House *(ahl
al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, was established wherein, and it included
the leading jurists and religious scholars who took care of recording
the traditions of the Imāms of guidance, peace be on them, especially as
it concerns their traditions on jurisprudence, which is the most perfect
system in Islam. The school of the next generation *(tābiin)* was also
established therein; it was the school which took great care of the
jurisprudence which was narrated on the authority of the companions (of
the Prophet).

#### 3. Kūfa

Kūfa was more important than Yathrib, for in it was the greatest mosque
*(al-jām al-Azam)* which was a public center for Islamic studies and, in
addition, there were seminars including hundreds of students who studied
under professors specialist in Islamic sciences  

  

  

such as jurisprudence, the interpretation of the Qurān, the hadith
(tradition), and Arabic. The school of Kūfa objectively took care of the
sciences of the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them.
Al-Hasan b. Ali al-Washshā reported, saying: I met nine hundred shaykhs
in this mosque (i.e. the mosque of Kūfa) and all of them said: Jafar b.
Mohammed related to me (traditions).[[1]](#_ftn1383)

Important families of knowledge graduated from the mosque of Kūfa. They
are as follows: the family of Hayyān al-Taghlubi, the family of Ayun,
the children of Atiya, the house of the children of Darrājj, and
others.[[2]](#_ftn1384)

A grammar school was established in Kūfa; one of its prominent teachers
was al-Kisāi, whom (Hārūn) al-Rashid entrusted with teaching his two
sons, al-Amin and al-Mamūn.[[3]](#_ftn1385)

#### 4. Basrah

As for Basrah, it was an important center of grammar. Abū al-Aswad
al-Duali, the student of Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, was the first to establish this school. This school competed
with the school of Kūfa (for Arabic Grammar). The Basran grammarians
were called the men of logic in order to distinguish them from the
Kūfans grammarians. Among the leading grammarians of this school was
Sibawayh, who compiled *Kitāb Sibawayh* (the Book of Sibawayh) in
grammar, which is the ripest of Arabic books and the best of them in
depth and originality. Daybūr said: If we look at the book of Sibawayh,
we will find it a ripe work and  great effort to the extent that the
later authors said: The book must be the fruit of cooperating efforts of
many scholars just like the Law *(qānūn)* of Ibn Sinā.[[4]](#_ftn1386)

Basrah was not only an important center of grammar but also was a school
of the science of interpreting the Holy Qurān. Among  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1383) Hayāt al-Imām Mūsā b. Ja'far, vol. 1, p. 82.  
 [[2]](#_F1384) Tārikh al-Islām, vol. 2, p. 338.  
 [[3]](#_F1385) Hayāt al-Imām Mohammed al-Jawād, p. 191.  
 [[4]](#_F1386) Tārikh al-Falsafa fi al-Islām, p. 39.  
  

  

  

the prominent scholars in this science was Abū Amrū b. al-Alā. Besides
Basrah was the school of prosody and linguistics. Among the specialists
in these two sciences was al-Khalil b. Ahmed, the author of the book
*al-Ayn*, which is the first linguistic dictionary written in
Arabic.[[1]](#_ftn1387)

These are some aspects of the cultural and scientific life of that time;
generally speaking, Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, was the first pioneer
of the scientific movement, for the scholars and the jurists gathered
around him in order to study his pure sciences, as well as sessions were
held in the Abbāsid palace including the great scholars whom al-Mamūn
summoned in order to test Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, but they went
out of the palace and announced the Imāms excellence and mentioned with
admiration his many scientific abilities.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1387) Hayāt al-Imām Mohammed al-Jawād, p. 192.  
  

