His Affecting Shiism
====================

  

  

His affecting Shiism
--------------------

Some historians and researchers believed that al-Ma'mūn adopted the
Shi'ite doctrine; they depended on the following:

### 1. Who taught him Shiism?

Before his retinues and companions, al-Ma'mūn declared that he embraced
the Shi'ite creed; this has been mentioned in the following tradition:
Sufyān b. Nazār narrated, saying: [On day I was with al-Ma'mūn and he
asked his companions:]

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1509) Subh al-A'shā, vol. 2, p. 420.  
 [[2]](#_F1510) Al-Tuhaf wa al-Hadāyā, p. 105.  
 [[3]](#_F1511) Ibid.  
  

  

  

"Did you know him who taught me Shiism?"

"No, by Allah, we did not know him," they all replied.

"Al-Rashid did," he retorted.

"How did that occur whilst al-Rashid killed the *ahl al-Bayt?"* they
asked.

"He killed them for the kingdom," he answered, "for the kingdom is
barren. One year I made a pilgrimage along with him. When he arrived in
Medina, he walked toward his visitors and said to them:

"'If those from Mecca, Medina, the *Muhājireen* (migrants), the *Ansār*
(supporters), the Hāshimites, and the rest of the tribes of Quraysh
visit me, they should mention their ancestry.' The chamberlains obeyed
that. When a man wanted to visit him, he introduced himself to the
chamberlains. When the man visited him (al-Rashid), he gave him as a
gift according to his rank and lineage; his gift ranging from two
hundred to five thousand dinars."

Al-Ma'mūn said: "While I was standing, al-Fadl b. al-Rabi' came in and
said: 'O Commander of the faithful, there is a man who claims that he is
Mūsā b. Ja'far b. Mohammed b. 'Ali b. al-Husayn b. 'Ali b. Abū Tālib.'

"So al-Rashid walked toward his sons and the rest of his commanders and
said to them: 'Keep your own souls.' Then he said to al-Fadl: 'Give him
permission to enter and do not (let him stop at any place) except at my
own carpet.'"

Al-Ma'mūn said: "Then an old man with a yellow face came; worship
exhausted him; he was like an old (water) skin; prostration wounded his
face and his nose. When al-Rashid saw him dismounting, he shouted: 'No,
by Allah, (he will not dismount) except on my own carpet.' So the
chamberlains prevented him from dismounting; and all the people looked
at him with honor, admiration, and magnification. The Imām arrived at
the carpet; he was surrounded by the chamberlains and the commanders. He
dismounted, and al-Rashid rose for him, received him, accompanied him to
the end of the carpet, kissed his face and his eyes, took him by the
hand, accompanied him to the beginning of the assembly, sat with him,
talked with him, asked  

  

  

him about his conditions, and then he asked him:

"'O Abū al-Hasan, what about your family? Are all of them boys?' 'No,
most of them are followers and retainers,' answered the Imām, 'As for my
children, they are more than thirty.'" Then he mentioned the number of
the males and of the females.

Then Hārūn (al-Rashid) turned to him and asked him: "Why do you not
marry your womenfolk to their cousins and their qualified ones?"

"The hand falls short of that," replied the Imām.

"What about your land?" asked Hārūn.

"It sometimes produces and sometimes does not produce," answer the Imām.

"Are you in debt?" asked Hārūn.

"Yes," replied the Imām.

"How much is it?" asked Hārūn.

"Ten thousand dinars," answered the Imām.

"O cousin," retorted Hārūn, "I will give you a sum of money in order to
marry the males to the females, pay your debt, and reform your lands."

The Imām thanked him for that and said to him: "You have tightened the
bonds of kin, O cousin, and Allah has thanked this beautiful intention;
the blood relationship is contiguous; kinship is close; the ancestry is
one; al-'Abbās is the uncle of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and full brother of his father, the uncle of 'Ali b. Abū Tālib,
peace be on him, and full brother of his father; may Allah not make you
far from doing that; for He has made you open-handed, made your element
honorable, and made your origin high."

"I will do that with pleasure," promised Hārūn.

Then the Imām advised him to show kindness to the poor in general,
saying: "O Commander of the faithful, surely Allah has made it incumbent
on the rulers to refresh the poor of the community, to pay (the debts )
on behalf of the debtors, to settle (the debts) on behalf of the over
burdened, to clothe the naked, and to treat the worried with kindness,
for you are appropriate for doing that."

  

  

  

"I will do that, Abū al-Hasan," promised Hārūn.

Then the Imām, peace be on him, rose and Hārūn al-Rashid rose for him,
kissed his eyes and his face, and then he turned to his sons and said to
them: " 'Abd Allah, Mohammed, and Ibrāhim, go before your uncle and
master; take hold of  the stirrup (of his mount); set right his garments
on him; and accompany him to his house."

The Imām departed; on the same road, he delighted al-Ma'mūn and gave him
good news of the succession, saying to him: "If you undertake this
authority, then treat my children with kindness."

The Imām went to his house escorted by Hārūn's sons. Then al-Ma'mūn
returned to his house. When the sitting-place became void of the people,
he turned to his father and asked him: "O Commander of the faithful, who
was the man whom you honored, magnified, for whom you rose from your
sitting-place and received, whom you sat in front of the sitting-place
and you sat beside, and whose stirrup you ordered us to set right?"

"This is the Imām of the people, the proof of Allah over His creatures,
and His vicegerent over His servants," replied Hārūn.

Al-Ma'mūn admired this statement, so he asked his father: "O Commander
of the faithful, are not all these qualities yours and fulfilled in your
person?"

"I am the Imām of the masses by force and through oppression," answered
Hārūn, "as for Mūsā b. Ja'far, he is the Imām in truth. By Allah, my
little son, his more worthy of being the successor of Allah's Messenger,
may Allah bless him and his family, as the caliph than I am and anyone
else among the people. By Allah, if you yourself attempt to take such
caliphate from me, I shall take it away from you even if that means
gouging your eyes, for  power is blind!"

When Hārūn al-Rashid intended to leave Medina for Baghdad, he ordered a
parcel of two hundred dinars (to be prepared), and then he said to
al-Fadl b. al-Rabi': "Take it and go to Mūsā b. Ja'far and say to him:
The Commander of the faithful say to you: 'We are in financial straits;
and our gifts will come to you in the near future.'"

Al-Ma'mūn stood up and said to his father: "You give five thousand
dinars or less than it to the children of the *Muhājireen*  

  

  

(migrants), of the *Ansār* (supporters), and those whose ancestry you do
not know; however you give two hundred dinars to Mūsā b. Ja'far, whom
you honored and magnified. This is the least gift you have given to any
of the people."

Hārūn scold al-Ma'mūn and said to him: "Keep silent! May you have no
mother! If I gave this (i.e. Mūsā b. Ja'far) what I had guaranteed, I
would not be safe from him, for he will tomorrow strike my face with one
hundred thousand swords from among his Shi'ites and followers; the
poverty of this (man) and his household is more useful to me and you
than lending a helping hand to them."

Hārūn expressed his fear of the Imām, peace be on him, so  he decided to
wage an economic warfare against him lest he should be able to revolt
against him. Makhāriq, the singer, was in the session. He felt pain, so
he opposed Hārūn and said to him: "O Commander of the faithful, when I
enter Medina, its inhabitants ask me for something. If I leave it and do
not divide anything among them, they do not realize the favor of the
Commander of the faithful toward me, and my rank with him."

So Hārūn order ten thousand dinars to be given to Makhāriq, but he said
to him: "O Commander of the faithful, this (sum of money) is for the
people of Medina. I am in debt, and I want to pay it."

So Hārūn ordered ten thousand dinars to be given to him. Then he said to
him: "I want to join my daughters in marriage." So he ordered ten
thousand dinars to be given to him. Then he said to him: "There is no
escape from giving me a land producing for me, my family, and my
daughters." So he gave him a productive land whose revenues amounted ten
thousand dinars a year, and he ordered it to be given to him quickly.
Then Makhāriq quickly went to the house of Imām (Mūsā) al-Kāzim, peace
be on him. When he arrived at it, he asked for permission to visit the
Imām. He was given permission, and he said to him: "I have understood
why this tyrannical (i.e. Hārūn al-Rashid) treated you in such a manner
and what he ordered to be given to you. I tricked him for you, and I
took from him three gifts amounting thirty thousand dinars, and a land
producing ten thousand dinars a year. By Allah, master, I am in no need
of any of that. I did  

  

  

not take it but for you; I bear witness that this productive land
belongs to you; and I have brought you the money."

The Imām, peace be on him, thanked Makhāriq for that and said to him:
"May Allah bless you concerning your property and reward you well. I
will never take even a dirham of it or a thing of the land. I have
accepted your gift and kindness, so depart on the right path and do not
consult me concerning that.[[1]](#_ftn1512)"

This narration gives an account of the following:

1. Hārūn al-Rashid honored Imām Mūsā al-Kāzim, peace be on him, whilst
he had never honored anyone before him, for he (Hārūn) dominated most
regions of the earth and his name spread in the east and the west.

2. He admitted that Imām al-Kāzim, peace be on him, was the proof of
Allah over His creatures, that he was the Imām of the community, leader
of its temporal and spiritual authority, and that Hārūn was the leader
of the community by force and through oppression, not through merit.

3. He gave an enormous amount of money to Makhāriq, the singer, whilst
he deprived the children of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, of their legal rights.

### Returning Fadak to the 'Alawides

Among the matters depended by those who believed that al-Ma'mūn was a
Shi'ite is returning to the 'Alawides Fadak, which the previous
government confiscated in order to spread poverty and deprivation among
them, and to impose an economic siege on them lest they should oppose
those rulers. As a result al-Ma'mūn returned Fadak to them and raised
the economic straits from them. Accordingly, Di'bil al-Khazā'i, the poet
of the *ahl al-Bayt*, praised him for this noble deed, which he offered
to the 'Alawides, saying:

The face of the time has become smiling when al-

Ma'mūn returned Fadak to the Hashimites.

Many researches have regarded this step as a proof of that al-Ma'mūn was
a Shi'ite.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1512) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 1, pp. 88-93.  
  

  

  

### His Praising Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful

Al-Ma'mūn lauded Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, the pioneer
of fairness and justice in Islam. He wrote to all regions that 'Ali b.
Abū Tālib, peace be on him, was the best of the creatures after Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family.[[1]](#_ftn1513) Al-Sawli
has reported his poetry lines concerning the excellence of Imām 'Ali,
the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. The following are some
of them:

Repentance is not accepted from a repenter but through

love for Ibn Abū Tālib,

The brother of Allah's Messenger, successor of the rightly

guided one; brother is superior to bosom friend and

companion.

If they someday gather together regarding excellence,

brother surpasses the desire of the desirous.

Advance the guide *(al-hādi)* in his excellence so that you

will be safe from blamer and captious criticizer.

Another example of his poetry lines through which he refuted those who
criticized him for his being close to the children of the Prophet is the
following:

Many a seducer bites (the tips of his fingers) in rage

against me when I bring near the children of the

testamentary trustee.

So I have said: Have you not given knowledge,

distinguished the misguided from the guided, come to

know of my argumentation through the seven oft-repeated

verses, intellectual concepts, and firm traditions?

Through which quality and meaning do you prefer

unbelievers to 'Ali?

'Ali is the greatest and best of the *thaqalayn* (men and

jinn) in right except the right of the Prophet.[[2]](#_ftn1514)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1513) Tadhkirat al-Khawās, p. 366.  
 [[2]](#_F1514) Al-Bayqahi, al-Mahāsin wa al-Masāwi', vol. 1, p. 105.  
  

  

  

The following lines are another example of his poetry which he composed
regarding the *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them:

If the opponent turns aside (from the Shi'ite), then I stand

by the Shi'ite.

I am among the family of the Prophet of guidance, the

best Prophet from among the children of Ghālib.

Love for them is an obligatory religious duty which we

should perform just as we perform an obligatory
pilgrimage.[[1]](#_ftn1515)

This poetry clearly shows that he was a follower of the *ahl al-Bayt*,
peace be on them, and that he preferred them to others.

Al-Sawli has narrated the following poetry lines al-Ma'mūn composed
concerning Imām 'Ali, peace be on him:

Mother shows love for the testamentary trustee Abū al-

Hasan, and that is with me among the wonders of this

time.

The successor of the best of men, and the first to help

Allah's Messenger secretly and openly.

Had it not been for him, the Hāshimites would not have

seized an authority, and they would in the course of time

have perished and been despised.

So he has appointed the 'Abbāsids as governors and has

not singled out other than them (for authority).

So 'Abd Allah made clear guidance in Basrah, and 'Ubayd

Allah bestowed lavishly on Yemen.

And he divided the works of the caliphate among them, so

he is still connected to this thankfulness and hostage to

(it).[[2]](#_ftn1516)

This poetry gives an account of that Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, rendered a service to the 'Abbāsid family
when he appointed 'Abd Allah b. al-'Abbās as a governor over Basrah, and
he was his minister and special adviser. Similarly he appointed 'Ubay
Allah b. al-'Abbās as a ruler over Yemen; however  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1515) Tadhkirat al-Khawās, p. 367.  
 [[2]](#_F1516) Ibid., 366.  
  

  

  

the 'Abbāsid family renounced this favor and treated the children of the
Imām  with murder and severe punishment and committed toward them crimes
which even the Umayyad family had not committed. In this book we have
given many examples of their persecuting the 'Alawides. It goes without
saying that the 'Abbāsids did not regard them as the children of the
Prophet and his trust among his family, on the contrary they killed them
everywhere.

The following two poetry lines has been ascribed to al-Ma'mūn:

If you want the Muraji'i to die before the time of his death,

then mention before him the name of 'Ali and call down

blessing upon the Prophet and his Household.

Ibrāhim b. al-Mahdi, better known as b. Shakkla, answered him, saying:

If the Shi'ite maunders regarding an statement and you

want him to reveal what is in himself, then call down

blessing upon the Prophet and his two companions, his

two helpers and his two neighbors by his grave.[[1]](#_ftn1517)

Al-Sawli has mentioned that it was written on one of the columns of the
mosque of Basrah: "May Allah have mercy on 'Ali; surely he was
pious*(taqiyā)*."

Hafs Abū 'Amr al-Khattābi, who was one-eyed, would sit beside that
column. He erased the writing, and one of the neighbors of the mosque
wrote to al-Ma'mūn and told him about al-Khattābi's erasing the writing,
so he was displeased with him and ordered him to be brought before him.
When al-Khattābi was brought before al-Ma'mūn, he asked him: "Why have
you removed the name of the Commander of the faithful from the column?"

"What was on it?" asked al-Khattābi.

"'May Allah have mercy on 'Ali; surely he was pious *(taqiyā)*,' was on
it." replied al-Ma'mūn.

"It was written on it," retorted al-Khattābi, "'May Allah have mercy on
'Ali; surely he was a prophet *(nabiyā)*'"

"You have told a lie," said al-Ma'mūn, "rather the *qāf* was  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1517) Al-Mas'ūdi, Murūjj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 329.  
  

  

  

sounder than your sound eye. Had it not been for that I increase your
hypocrisy before the general populace *('āmma)*, I would punish you."
Then he ordered him to be driven out.[[1]](#_ftn1518)

### His Disparaging Mu'āwiya

Those who thought that al-Ma'mūn was a Shi'ite indicated that he ordered
Mu'āwiya b. Hind to be cursed and disparaged all over Islamic world, for
he ordered the caller to call: "There shall be no pardon for anyone
guilty of praising Mu'āwiya or preferring him to any companion of
Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family.[[2]](#_ftn1519)"

This cannot be as a proof of that al-Mu'mūn was a Shi'ite, for Mu'āwiya
was discovered; his realty appeared; all circles have agreed on
dispraising him; he was the mortal enemy of Islam; he was the leader of
the events and committed grave sins.

### His Proving the Imāmate of Imām 'Ali

The most important thing which those who believed that al-Ma'mūn was a
Shi'ite gave as a proof of that he was a Shi'ite is that he held
scientific sessions and gave firm proofs of that 'Ali, the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him, was an Imām, that he was the first Muslim
leader after the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, that he
was more entitled to his rank and worthier of his office than the rest
of the people.

Among the most marvelous and important sessions which al-Ma'mūn held in
his palace is that which attended by the forty traditionalists and
theologians, whom Yahyā b. Akkthem had chosen from among the scholars of
Baghdad, who spared no effort to prove that the caliphs were better than
Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. However,
al-Ma'mūn refuted their proofs through his decisive indications, which
showed his skill and abundant knowledge of theological researches. We
will mention the full text of this marvelous debate because it is of
great importance; it is as follows:

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1518) Tadhkirat al-Khawās, p. 367.  
 [[2]](#_F1519) Al-Mas'ūdi, Murūjj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 361.  
  

  

  

#### Al-Ma'mūn

When the scholars appeared before al-Ma'mūn, he turned to them, greeted
them, and said to them: "On this day of mine I want to place an argument
between Allah and me, so he who suffers from retention of urine or wants
to relieve his nature, then let him go and relieve his nature; be
delighted; take off your sandals and your cloaks."

They carried out al-Ma'mūn's order, then he turned to them and said: "O
People, I have summoned you in order to advance you as an argument
before Allah, the Exalted, so fear Allah; consider your own souls and
your Imām (leader); let not my majesty and my place prevent you from
saying the truth wherever it be and returning falsehood to him who
brings it; fear for your own souls from the Fire; seek nearness to
Allah, the Most High, through His good pleasure and preferring obedience
to Him, for everyone who seeks nearness to a creature through an act of
disobedience to the Creator, Allah empowers him over him; therefore
debate with me with your all intellects.

"I claim that 'Ali b. Abū Tālib is the best of all creatures after
Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family. If I am right,
then regard me statement as right; if I am wrong, then answer me
quickly. If you want me to question you, I will question you; if you
want to question me, then question me."

In this speech there is no crookedness or deviation from logic, for its
owner seeks plain truth.

#### The Traditionalists

"Rather, it is we who will question you," retorted the traditionalists.

Al-Ma'mūn undertook the matter and guided them to the way to debates,
saying: "Give (me your proofs) and entrust one of you with your speech.
When he speaks and one of you has an addition, then let him add it to
his speech; if he brings a shortcoming, then show him rightness."

  

  

  

#### The First Proof

A traditionalist mentioned a proof of that Abū Bakr was the best of the
community after Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family,
saying: "We claim that Abū Bakr is the best of the people after Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, for a tradition, upon which
there is unanimous agreement, has been transmitted from Allah's
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, who said: 'Follow those
who will come after me: Abū Bakr and 'Umar.' As the Prophet of mercy
ordered (us) to follow them, we have come to know that he ordered us to
follow none except the best of men."

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer

He objectively discussed the traditions fabricated against the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, saying: "The traditions are
numerous; there is no escape from that either they are all right or they
are all false or some of them are right or some of them are false; if
they are all right, then they are all false, for they contradict each
other; if they are all false, then the religion is false and (Islamic)
law is dead. As these two possibilities are untrue, the third
(possibility) is true, namely some traditions are right and some are
false. If (the matter) is such, then there is no escape form (giving) a
proof of which of them is right, that we may believe in it and reject
the opposite of; therefore, if the evidence for a tradition is right in
itself, then it is necessary for one to belive in it and to put it into
effect.

"As for this tradition of yours, it is one of the traditions whose
proofs are false in themselves, for Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family, is the wisest of the wise, the most entitled of the
creatures to truthfulness, and the farthest of men from ordering the
impossible and making the people embrace the opposite, for this means
that these two men (i.e. Abū Bakr and 'Umar) are harmonious with each
other in all sides, (namely) they are one in number, quality, form, and
body;  it is impossible that two (persons) are equal in meaning in all
sides.

  

  

  

"If they are different, then how is it permissible to follow them? This
is an order (to perform) that which is unbearable, for if you follow one
(of them), you will oppose the other; the evidence for that they are
different is that Abū Bakr had ordered the apostates to be taken as
prisoners, while 'Umar regarded them as free; 'Umar ordered Khālid to be
removed (from the office) because he had killed Mālik b. Nuwayra,
whereas Abū Bakr prevented him from doing that; 'Umar prohibited the two
*mutt'as*, while Abū Bakr had adopted them; 'Umar established the Divan
of Gifts, whereas Abū Bakr had not adopted it; Abū Bakr had appointed
('Umar) as successor (after him), whilst 'Umar did not do that; there
are numerous examples of this (matter)."

Al-Ma'mūn's answer is very trustworthy, for he refuted the tradition and
established that it was one of the fabricated traditions.

#### The Second Proof

Through a tradition attributed to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, another traditionalist indicated that the two Shaykhs (i.e.
Abū Bakr and 'Umar) were better than Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, saying: "Surely, the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, said: 'If I had to take a bosom friend, I would have
taken Abū Bakr as a bosom friend."

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer

Al-Ma'mūn disproved this tradition, saying: "This is impossible, for
your traditions show that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, asked his companions to associate as brothers with each other,
and that he delayed 'Ali, peace be on him. When he ('Ali) asked him
about that, he replied: 'I have delayed you (for nothing) except for my
own soul.' Therefore, if one tradition is established, the other is null
and void."

Al-Ma'mūn's discussion about the tradition is objective; there is no
partiality therein; rather it was based on a decisive proof.

  

  

  

#### The Third Proof

Another traditionalist said: "Surely 'Ali, peace be on him,  said on the
pulpit: 'The best of this community after the Prophet are Abū Bakr and
'Umar.'"

Al-Ma'mūn discussed this tradition, saying: "This is impossible, for if
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, had come to know that
they were the best (of the community), he had not appointed 'Amrū b.
al-'Āss as a commander over them one time and Usāma b. Zayd another
time; among the things which refute this tradition is the statement of
'Ali when the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, passed way:
'I am more worthy for being near to the Prophet (than they are), but I
feared that the people would become apostates'; these words of him,
peace be on him: 'How are they better than me? I have worshipped Allah
before and after them.'" In this manner al-Ma'mūn disproved the
tradition and showed that it was fabricated.

#### The Fourth Proof

Another traditionalist said: "Surely Abū Bakr closed his door and said:
'Is there anyone to accept my resignation and I will render my
resignation to him?' So he ('Ali), peace be on him, said to him:
'Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, has advanced
you, then who can delay you?'"

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer to the Tradition

He disproved the tradition, saying: "This (tradition) is untrue, for
'Ali, peace be on him, did not pledge allegiance to Abū Bakr; you have
narrated that he did make homage until Fātima, peace be on her, died,
and that she asked ('Ali) to bury her at night lest they (Abū Bakr and
'Umar) should witness her coffin.

"Another proof is that if the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, appointed him (Abū Bakr) as a caliph, then why did he resign and
say to the Ansār: 'I have chosen for you these two men: Abū 'Ubayda and
'Umar'?"

  

  

  

#### The Fifth Proof

Another traditionalist said: "'Amrū b. al-'Āss asked: 'O Prophet of
Allah, which woman is the most lovable to you?' ''Āi'sha,' he replied.
'Amrū asked again: 'Which man is the most lovable to you?' 'Her father
(i.e. Abū Bakr),' he answered."

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer

He refuted this tradition, saying: "This (tradition) is false, for you
have narrated that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
placed before him a grilled bird and said: 'O Allah, bring me the most
lovable creature to you,' and it was 'Ali (who came to him). Then which
of your traditions do you accept?"

The Muslims have unanimously agreed that 'Ali was the most lovable of
the creatures to Allah and the nearest of them to Him.

#### The Sixth Proof

Another traditionalist said: "'Ali said: 'If one prefers me to Abū Bakr
and 'Umar, I will administer the punishment of the liar to him."

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer

He answered this tradition ascribed to Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, saying: "How is it permissible for 'Ali to
administer such a punishment to him against whom there is no punishment?
Therefore, he broke the punishments prescribed by Allah and opposed His
orders. He who prefers 'Ali to Abū Bakr and 'Umar is not a liar, for you
have narrated on the authority of  your Imām (Abū Bakr), who said: 'I
have become a caliph over you but I am not the best of you.' So which of
the two men is more truthful in your viewpoint Abū Bakr against himself
or 'Ali against Abū Bakr, though the tradition contradicts itself? There
is no escape from that he is either truthful or a liar. If he is
truthful, then how did he come to know that? Through a revelation
(whereas) the revelation has ceased? Or through conjecture (while) the
conjecturer is  

  

  

perplexed? Or through thinking (whereas) thinking *(nazar)* is a
research? And if he was untruthful, then it is impossible for a liar to
undertake the authority and precepts of the Muslims and to administer
the prescribed punishments to them."

#### The Seventh Proof

Another traditionalist said: "The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: 'Abū Bakr and 'Umar will be the masters of the old men of
the Garden.'"

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer

He said: "This tradition is impossible, for there will be no old men in
the Garden; it is narrated that Ashhamiya visited the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, and he said to her: 'No old woman will enter
the Garden.' She wept, so the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, said to her: [Allah, the Most High says:] '*Surely We have made
them to grow into a (new) growth. Then We have made them virgins,
loving, equals in age*.[[1]](#_ftn1520)' If you claim that Abū Bakr will
be a young man when he enters the Garden, then you have narrated that
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said concerning
al-Hasan and al-Husayn: 'Surely they are the masters of the youths of
the haven from among the first and the last; their father is better than
them.'"

Al-Ma'mūn's answer to the tradition is logical and not based on
doctrinal caprices and trends.

#### The Eighth Proof

Another traditionalist said: "The Prophet said: 'If I had not been
appointed (as a prophet) among you, then 'Umar would have been
appointed.'"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1520) Qur'ān, 56, 35-37.  
  

  

  

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer

Disproving this tradition, al-Ma'mūn said: "This (tradition) is
impossible, for Allah, the Exalted, says (to the Prophet): *Surely We
have revealed to you as We revealed to Nuh and the prophets after
him*.[[1]](#_ftn1521) And He, the Most High, said: *And when We made a
covenant with the prophets and with you, and with Nuh and Ibrahim and
Musa and Isa, son of Maryam*.[[2]](#_ftn1522) Therefore, is it
permissible for Allah to appoint as a prophet him with whom He had not
made a covenant and to delay him with whom He had made a covenant for
Prophethood?"

Al-Ma'mūn's answer to the tradition is based on intellect and logic, and
nothing therein deviates from them.

#### The Ninth Proof

Another traditionalist advanced an argument, saying: "The Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, looked at 'Umar on the Day of 'Arafa,
smiled (at him) and said: 'Surely Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, boasts
of His creatures in general and of 'Umar in particular.'"

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer

Disproving this tradition, al-Ma'mūn said: "This is impossible, for
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, does not boast of 'Umar and leaves His
Prophet; therefore, 'Umar is among the elite and the Prophet is among
the populace.

"This tradition is not more wonderful than your tradition which says
that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said: 'I entered
the Garden and suddenly I heard the beat of two sandals; (I came to know
that) Bilāl, Abū Bakr's retainer, had entered the Garden before me.' For
this reason you have said: 'Abū Bakr's retainer is better than the
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, for the early is better
than the late.'"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1521) Ibid., 4, 163.  
 [[2]](#_F1522) Ibid., 33, 7.  
  

  

  

#### The Tenth Proof

Another traditionalist said: "The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: 'If the punishment came down, none would be safe from it
except 'Umar b. al-Khattāb.'"

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer

He said: "This tradition also opposes the Book, for Allah, the Exalted,
says to His Prophet: *But Allah was not going to chastise them while you
were among them*.[[1]](#_ftn1523) So you have regarded 'Umar as an equal
to the Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family."

#### The Eleventh Proof

Another traditionalist said: "The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, bore witness that 'Umar would enter the Garden before ten of his
companions."

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer

He said: "If 'Umar was as you have said, he would not say to Hudhayfa:
'I adjure you before Allah, am I among the hypocrites?' If the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, had said to him: 'You are among the
inhabitants of the Garden,' and he did not believe him and Hudhayfa
confirmed him, then he believed Hudhayfa and did not believe the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and this is (something)
opposes Islam; if he had believed the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, then why did he ask Hudhayfa? These traditions contradict
each other."

#### The Twelfth Proof

Another traditionalist said: "The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: 'I was placed in the scale of a balance and my community
was placed in the other scale, and I outweighed it; then  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1523) Ibid., 8, 33.  
  

  

  

Abū Bakr was put in my place, and he outweighed it; then 'Umar (was put
in his place), and he outweighed it; then the balance was raised.'"

#### Al-Ma'mūn's Answer

He confuted this tradition, saying: "This (tradition) is impossible, for
either their bodies or their deeds were placed in the balance. If their
bodies (were placed in the balance), then every human being knows that
their bodies do not outweigh the bodies of the community; if their deeds
(were placed in the balance), then they have not been (weighed) yet.
Just imagine how much more is that which has not been (weighed) yet?"

Then al-Ma'mūn turned to the traditionalists and asked them: "Tell me:
Through which thing do the people claim that they are superior to each
other?"

"They claim that they are superior to one another through good deeds,"
replied a traditionalist.

Commenting on this statement, al-Ma'mūn said: "Tell me about him who was
more excellent than his companion during the time of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family: did the less excellent *(mafdūl)* do
after the death of the Messenger more than the most excellent
*(al-fādil)* did in the time of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family? Would he be equal to him? If you say 'yes', then I will make you
find in this time of ours him who is the best of them  in jihād, hajj,
fasting, prayer, and alms."

"You are right," they all replied, "the most excellent *(fādil)* in our
time is not equal to the most excellent in the time of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family."

So al-Ma'mūn said to them: "Carefully consider what your Imāms, from
whom you have taken your doctrines, have narrated concerning the
outstanding merits of 'Ali, peace be on him, and compare them with what
it has been mentioned concerning the ten (persons) for whom they have
borne witness that they will enter the Garden. If they ('Ali's
outstanding merits) were part of numerous  
 parts, then you are right; if they (your Imāms) have narrated  

  

  

concerning 'Ali's excellences more (than they have narrated concerning
the excellences of the ten persons), then take what your Imāms have
narrated and do not exceed (it)."

The traditionalists were perplexed, not knowing what to  answer, for
al-Ma'mūn had closed before them all avenues of argument. Then al-Ma'mūn
turned to them and asked: "Why have you kept silent?"

"We have fully searched out (the matter)," they replied. That is because
they had nothing to advance as an argument.

"I am going to question you," said al-Ma'mūn, "tell me: which work was
the best when Allah appointed His Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family?"

"Priority in belief in Islam," they all answered, "for Allah, the
Exalted, says: *And the foremost are the foremost, these are they who
are drawn nigh (to Allah)*.[[1]](#_ftn1524)"

"So did you know that there was anyone earlier than 'Ali (in belief) in
Islam?" asked al-Ma'mūn.

"He (Ali) was earlier but he was still young; there was no religious,
obligatory duty on him. As for Abū Bakr, he became a Muslim when he was
an old man, and there was a religious, obligatory duty on him, so there
is a difference between these two states," they answered.

Al-Ma'mūn answered, saying: "Tell me about the Islam of 'Ali: Was it
through an inspiration by Allah, the Exalted, or through the summons of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family? If you say that it was
through an inspiration, then you have preferred him to the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, for the Prophet had not been inspired;
rather Gabriel came to him from Allah; he summoned him to Him and
informed him of Him.

"If you say (that 'Ali became Muslim) through the summons of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, then did he summoned him
(to Islam) of his own accord or through the order of Allah, the Most
High? If you say (that he summoned him to it) of his own accord, then
this opposes the words through which Allah has  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1524) Ibid., 56, 10-11.  
  

  

  

described His Prophet, saying: *Say: I do not ask you for any reward for
it; nor am I of those who affect* [[1]](#_ftn1525), and through these
words of Him, the Exalted: *Nor does he speak out of desire. It is not
naught but revelation that is revealed*.[[2]](#_ftn1526) If he (summoned
him) on behalf of Allah, then Allah had ordered His Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, to summon 'Ali (to Islam) from among the boys
of the people and preferred him to them. Therefore, he (the Prophet)
summoned him ('Ali to Islam) because he was trustworthy and Allah, the
Exalted, supported him.

"Yet there is another quality. Tell me: Is it permissible for the Wise
(Allah) to impose upon His creatures unbearable religious duties? If you
say 'yes', then you are unbelievers; if you say 'no', then how is it
permissible for Him to order His Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, to summon him who does not accept what he is ordered (to
perform) because of his boyhood, minority, and his being weak to accept
(Islam).

"Still there is another reason. Did you know that the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, summoned any boy from among the boys of his
family or other than them, and he was equal to 'Ali? So, if you claim
that he had not summoned any other than him, then this is an excellence
for 'Ali over the boys of the people."

Then al-Ma'mūn turned to the traditionalists and asked them: "Which work
is after the precedence to faith?"

"Jihad in the path of Allah," they all answered.

As a result al-Ma'mūn continued establishing argument against them
concerning that Imām 'Ali was the most excellent one, saying: Do you
think that any of the ten (persons) had any act during jihad as 'Ali had
throughout the attitudes of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family? (For example, at the Battle of) Badr more than sixty polytheists
were killed; 'Ali killed more than twenty, and the rest of the people
killed forty."

"Abū Bakr was directing it (the battle) along with the Prophet,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1525) Ibid., 38, 86.  
 [[2]](#_F1526) Ibid., 53, 3-4.  
  

  

  

may Allah bless him and his family, in his canopy," a traditionalist
replied.

"You have brought a wonder through this," retorted al-Ma'mūn, "was he
(Abū Bakr) directing it with the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, or without him? Did he make him as a partner? Was the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, in need of Abū Bakr's opinion? Which
of these three (viewpoints) is the most lovable to you?"

"I seek refuge in Allah," replied the traditionalist, "I do not claim
that he (Abū Bakr) directed it without the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, or he (the Prophet) made him as a partner or the Prophet
was in need of him."

"Then what is the excellence (of his being) in the canopy?" asked
al-Ma'mūn, "if the excellence of Abū Bakr came through absenting himself
from the battle, then all those who absented themselves (from it) must
be more excellent than the mujāhideen, while Allah, the Great and
Almighty, says: *The holders back from among the believers, not having
any injury, and those who strive hard in Allah's way with their property
and their persons are not equal; Allah has made the strivers with their
property and their persons to excel the holders back a (high) degree,
and to each (class) Allah has promised good; and Allah shall grant to
the strivers above the holders back a mighty reward*.[[1]](#_ftn1527)"

Then al-Ma'mūn addressed Ishāq b. Hammād b. Zayd, a leading
traditionalist, saying: "Recite the Sura *Hal Atā*."

Ishāq recited the Sura. When he reached these words of Him, the Exalted:
*And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan and
the captive....*, al-Ma'mūn asked him: "Concerning whom these verses
have been revealed?"

"Concerning 'Ali," answered the traditionalist.

"Have you heard that 'Ali, peace be on him, had said: '*We only feed you
for Allah's sake; we desire from you neither reward nor thanks*,' when
he had given food to the poor, the orphan, and the captive?"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1527) Ibid., 4, 95.  
  

  

  

"No," replied the traditionalist, "surely Allah, the Most High, had
known 'Ali's inner self and intention, so He has manifested that in His
Book, that His creatures may recognize his ('Ali's) affairs."

"Did you come to know that Allah has described the Garden with a thing
other than the *(transparent) glasses made of siliver* *(qawārir)* as it
is in this verse?" asked al-Ma'mūn.

"No," came the answer.

"Therefore, this is another excellence," retorted al-Ma'mūn, "What did
Allah mean by the *(transparent) glass made of siliver (qawārir)*?"

"I do not know," was the answer.

"He meant that they were *made of siliver* because of their clearness,"
commented al-Ma'mūn, "what in them is seen just as what outside them is
seen; this is like these words of him (the Prophet), may Allah bless him
and his family: 'O Ishāq, your longing for the (transparent) glasses
made of siliver *(qawārir)*' (must be) gentle, by this he meant the
women who were as transparent as glasses made of siliver; (this is) like
these words of him, may Allah bless him and his family: 'I rode the
horse of Abū Tallha and found it a sea,' namely, it was like a sea
because of its abundant running; and like these words of Him, the
Exalted: *And death will come to him from every quarter, but he shall
not die; and there shall be vehement chastisement before him*
[[1]](#_ftn1528), which mean that as if death came to him (from every
quarter); and if it came to him from one quarter, he would die."

"O Ishāq, are you not among those who bear witness that the ten
(persons) are in the Garden?" asked al-Ma'mūn.

"Yes," came the answer.

"If one says: 'I do not know whether this tradition is right or wrong,'
do you regard him as an unbeliever?" asked al-Ma'mūn.

"No," was the answer.

"If one says: 'I do not know whether this sura (belongs) to the Qur'ān
or not,' do you regard him as an unbeliever?" asked al-Ma'mūn.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1528) Ibid., 14, 17.  
  

  

  

"Yes," came the answer.

"O Ishāq," said al-Ma'mūn, "tell me about the tradition of the grilled
bird: Is it authentic in your view?"

"Yes," was the answer.

"By Allah, your obstinacy has appeared," retorted al-Ma'mūn, "either
this (i.e. 'Ali) is as the Prophet summoned him or he is rejected, or
Allah had known the most excellent *(al-fādil)* of His creatures, but
the less excellent *(al-mafdūl)* was more lovable to Him, or you claim
that Allah does not distinguish the most excellent *(al-fādil)* from the
less excellent *(al-mafdūl);* therefore, which of these three (views) is
the most lovable to you?"

Ishāq became perplexed, did not find any answer, and remained thinking
until he found a way to defend his viewpoint, saying: "O Commander of
the faithful, surely Allah, the Exalted, says concerning Abū Bakr: "*He
is the second of the two, when they were both in the cave, when he said
to his companion: Grieve not, surely Allah is with us*.[[1]](#_ftn1529)
So Allah ascribed him to the companionship of His Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family."

"Glory belongs to Allah!" exclaimed al-Ma'mūn, "how little your
knowledge of the language and the Book is! The unbeliever may be the
companion of the believer. Therefore, which excellence is in this
(companionship)? Have you not heard these words of Him, the Most High:
*His companion said to him while disputing with him: Do you disbelieve
in Him Who created you from dust, then from a small life-germ, then He
made you a perfect man?* [[2]](#_ftn1530) He made him a companion for
him; and al-Hazali composed poetry, saying:

I left early in the morning and my wild companion

(which) was under the cloak was aware of the east.

"And al-Azdi has said:

I summoned the wild animal regarding it and my

companion has pure legs and body.

"Therefore, he regarded his own horse as his companion. As for  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1529) Ibid., 9, 40.  
 [[2]](#_F1530) Ibid., 18, 37.  
  

  

  

these words of Him: *surely Allah is with us*, Allah is with the pious
and the sinful. Have you not heard these words of Him, the Most High:
*Nowhere is there a secret counsel between three persons but He is the
fourth of them; nor (between) five but He is the sixth of them; nor less
than that nor more but He is with them wherever they
are*.[[1]](#_ftn1531) As regarding these words of Him: *Grieve not*,
tell me about the grief of Abū Bakr: Was it obedience or disobedience?
If you claim that it was obedience, then you have regarded the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, as one who prohibits obedience, and
this opposes the attribute of the Wise (Allah); and if you claim that it
was disobedience, then the disobedient have no excellence. Tell me about
these words of Him, the Exalted: *Allah send down His tranquillity upon
him.*  Upon whom (did He send tranquillity)?"

"He sent down tranquillity upon Abū Bakr," replied Ishāq, "for the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, was free from the quality
of tranquillity."

Then al-Ma'mūn demanded: "Tell me about these words of Him, the Exalted:
*Certainly Allah helped you in many battlefields and on the Battle of
Hunayn, when your great numbers made you vain, but they availed you
nothing and the earth became strait to you notwithstanding its
spaciousness, then you turned back retreating. Then Allah sent down His
tranquillity upon His Apostle and upon the believers*.[[2]](#_ftn1532)
Do you know the believers whom Allah has meant in this verse?"

"No," was the answer.

Then al-Ma'mūn explained the meaning of this sacred verse, saying:
"Surely the people turned their backs in flight at the Battle of Hunayn,
so none stayed with the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
except seven Hāshimites: 'Ali, peace be on him, was striking (the
polytheists) with his sword; al-'Abbās took hold of the bridle of the
mule of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1531) Ibid., 58, 7.  
 [[2]](#_F1532) Ibid., 9, 25-26.  
  

  

  

his family, and five persons were surrounding the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, lest he should be wounded by the weapon of the
unbelievers until Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, granted His Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, a victory. The believers whom Allah
meant in this verse were 'Ali and the Hāshimites who were present. So
who was more excellent he who was with the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, and the tranquillity was sent down upon the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, and upon him or he who was in the cave
with the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and was not
entitled to sending it upon him? O Ishāq, who is more excellent he who
was in the cave with the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, or
he who slept on his bed and protected him with his own soul until the
determined emigration went well with the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family?

"Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, ordered His Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, to order 'Ali to sleep on his bed and to protect him
with his own soul. So he ordered 'Ali to do that, and he said: 'Will you
be safe, O Allah's Prophet?' 'Yes,' he said. 'I listen and obey,' he
retorted. Then he ('Ali) wore the Prophet's garment, and slept on his
bed. As for the polytheists, they surrounded him; they were sure that it
was the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who was on bed.
They had unanimously agreed that each man from each Qurayshi tribe
should strike him one time, lest the Hāshimites should demand his blood.
As for 'Ali, peace be on him, he heard of the order of the people which
would destroy his own soul, but he was not as impatient as Abū Bakr was
in the cave while he was with the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. 'Ali was still alone with patience and fore-thought, so Allah
sent His angels to protect him from the polytheists of Quraysh. When he
entered upon morning, he got up. The people looked at him and asked:
'Where is Mohammed?' 'I do not know,' he answered. 'Then you have
deceived us,' they retorted. Then he followed the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. Therefore, 'Ali was still the most excellent
due to his (brave) attitudes; he increased himself nothing except good
until Allah, the Exalted, took him to Himself while he was praiseworthy
and forgiven."

  

  

  

"O Ishāq, do you not narrate the tradition of authority *(hadith
al-wilāya)*?" asked al-Ma'mūn.

"Yes," came the answer.

"Narrate it," ordered al-Ma'mūn.

He narrated it to al-Ma'mūn, and he asked him: "Do you not see that it
(the tradition) has made obligatory his right against Abū Bakr and 'Umar
whereas it has not made obligatory their rights against him?"

"The people say that the Prophet said this tradition concerning Zayd b.
Hāritha," answered Ishāq.

Denying this answer, al-Ma'mūn asked: "Where did the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, say it?"

"He said it at Ghadir Khum," replied Ishāq, "after he had finished the
Farewell Pilgrimage."

Al-Ma'mūn hastened to disprove that, asking: "When was Zayd b. Hāritha
killed? Was he not killed before Ghadir Khum?"

"Yes," was the answer.

"Tell me: If you came to know that your own son became fifteen years of
age and said: 'My master is the master of my cousin, O people accept
(him),' would you hate that?" asked al-Ma'mūn.

"Yes," came the answer.

Denying these words of Ishāq, al-Ma'mūn asked: "Do you deem your son far
above what you do not deem the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, far above?"

Then al-Ma'mūn turned to him in order to establish an argument against
him, saying: "Do you narrate the statement of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, to 'Ali: 'Your position with me is as Hārūn
had with Mūsā.'?"

"Yes," was the answer.

"Did you not know that Hārūn was the brother of Mūsā on side of his
father and mother?" asked al-Ma'mūn.

"Yes," came the answer.

"So did 'Ali have such a position?" asked al-Ma'mūn.

"No," was the answer.

"Hārūn was a prophet," retorted al-Ma'mūn, "but 'Ali was not a  

  

  

prophet, so the third position is nothing except the succession
*(khilāfa)*. The hypocrites said: 'He (the Prophet) was displeased with
him ('Ali); he appointed him as a successor in order to soothe him.'
This is just as Allah has given an account of Mūsā when he said to
Hārūn: *Take my place among my people, and act well and do not follow
the way of the mischief-makers*.[[1]](#_ftn1533)"

Commenting on these words of al-Ma'mūn, Ishāq said: "Surely Mūsā
appointed Hārūn as successor among his people while he was alive, and
then he went to the appointed place and time of his Lord; surely the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, appointed 'Ali when he went
out to make campaigns *(ghazawāt)*."

Al-Ma'mūn answered him, saying: "Tell me about Mūsā: Was there with him
any of his companions when he appointed Hārūn as successor and went to
the appointed place and time of his Lord, the Great and Almighty?"

"Yes," answered Ishāq.

"Did he not appoint him as a successor over them all?"

"Yes," came the answer.

"So such was 'Ali," explained al-Ma'mūn, "when the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, went out to make campaigns, he appointed him
as a successor over the weak, the women, and the boys, for most of his
people were along with him; he appointed him as a successor over them
all; the proof of that he appointed him as a successor over them all
during his lifetime, his absence,  and after his death is this statement
of him, may Allah bless him and his family:' 'Ali's position with me is
as Hārūn had with Mūsā, except that there will be no prophet after me.'
According to this statement, he was also the helper of the Prophet,may
Allah bless him and his family,for Mūsāsupplicated Allah,the Exalted,and
said in his supplication:  
 *And give to me an aider from my family, Hārūn,my  
 brother. Strengthen my back by him,and associate  
 him(with me) in my affair*.[[2]](#_ftn1534) Therefore, if 'Ali had a  
 position with the Prophet as Hārūn had with Mūsā, then  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1533) Ibid., 7, 142.  
 [[2]](#_F1534) Ibid., 20, 29-32.  
  

  

  

he was his aider just as Hārūn was the aider of Mūsā and was his
successor just as Hārūn was the successor of Mūsā."

Al-Ma'mūn debates with Theologians
----------------------------------

After al-Ma'mūn had debated with the traditionalists and overcome them
through discussing the traditions which they produced as evidence in
support of their beliefs, he turned to the theologians and asked them:

"Shall I question you or you question me?"

"Rather we shall question you," they replied.

A theologian turned to al-Ma'mūn and asked him: "Wasn't the Imāmate of
'Ali, peace be on him, (decided) by Allah, the Great and Almighty? Was
it reported from Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, by
him who reported the religious duties such as the four-*rak'a* noon
prayer, one dirham per five dirhams, and the hajj to Mecca?"

"Yes," replied al-Ma'mūn.

"Why have the people not differed over all religious duties and differed
over the Imāmate of 'Ali only?"

"Because they do not compete and desire for the religious duties as they
do for the succession *(khilāfa)*," answered al-Ma'mūn.

Another theologian asked: "Have you not denied that the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, ordered the people to elect a man from
among them in order to take his place as a signof mercy and gentleness
toward them, without that he himself did not appoint anyone as a
successor lest his successor should be disobeyed, so the punishment
would befall them?"

Al-Ma'mūn replied: "I have denied that, for Allah, the Exalted, is more
merciful to His creatures than the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and He already sent His Prophet to them and knew that there were
obedient and disobedient among them; still that did not prevent Him, the
Most High, from sending him.

"Yet there is another reason: If he (the Prophet) had ordered them to
elect a man from among them, then either he would have ordered them all
or some of them. If he had ordered them all, who  

  

  

would have been the elected one? And if he had ordered some of them,
then there would have been a sign for this meaning.If you say that (the
sign) is the jurists, then there is no escape from specifying the jurist
and his qualities."

Another theologian said: "It has been narrated that the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, said: 'If the Muslims regard something
as good, then Allah regards it as good; and if they regard something as
ugly, then Allah regards it as ugly."

Al-Ma'mūn disproved this corrupt statement which requires correction
*(taswib)* which is generally regarded as void, and which is that when
Allah decrees a certain event, some people rectify Him and others accuse
Him of mistake; and this is the answer of al-Ma'mūn: "There is no escape
from that this statement either concerns all the believers or some of
them. If it concerns all (the believers), then this is impossible, for
it is not possible for the whole (believers) to be in agreement; and if
it concerns some of them, then each (sect) narrates something good
concerning its leader *(sāhib)* just as the narration of the Shi'ites
concerning 'Ali and the narration of the Hashawiya concerning other than
him, so when do you establish what you want regarding the Imāmate?"

Another theologian asked: "So is it permissible for you to claim that
the companions of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, were
mistaken?"

Al-Ma'mūn answered him, saying: "How do we claim that they were mistaken
and were in agreement on error while they knew neither a religious duty
nor a tradition *(sunna)*, for you have claimed that the Imāmate is not
a religious duty from Allah nor a tradition from the Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family? So how is the Imāmate wrong while it is
neither a religious duty nor a tradition in your viewpoint?"

Another theologian said to al-Ma'mūn: "You claim that the Imāmate
belongs to 'Ali and not to other than him, then produce evidence in
support of what you claim."

"I do not claim that," explained al-Ma'mūn, "but I acknowledge that; the
claimer is he who claims that appointment, deposition, and  

  

  

choice belong to him. As for evidence, it is entrusted to his partners,
for they are opponents, or it must be produced by other than them, and
the others are not available, so how is evidence produced in support of
this (matter)?"

Another theologian asked: "What had 'Ali, peace be on him, to do after
the death of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family?"

"He had done it," replied al-Ma'mūn. (i.e. 'Ali had done what was
obligatory on him).

"Was it not obligatory on 'Ali to tell the people that he was an Imām?"
asked the theologian.

Al-Ma'mūn retorted: "Surely the Imāmate does not occur through an act
from him concerning himself; nor does it occur through an act from the
people concerning him such as choice or preference or the like; rather
it occurs through an act from Allah concerning him just as He said to
Ibrāhim: *Surely I will make you an Imām of men*.[[1]](#_ftn1535) And
just as He, the Most high, said to Dāwud: *O Dāwud We have made you a
ruler in the land*.[[2]](#_ftn1536) And just as He, the Great and
Almighty, said to the angels: *I am going to place in the earth a
vicegerent (khalifa)*.[[3]](#_ftn1537)

"Therefore the Imām becomes an Imām on the part of Allah, the Exalted,
and through His choosing him through good deed in beginning, nobility in
ancestry, purity in childhood, and infallibility in the future. If the
Imāmate occurs through an act from him concerning himself, then he who
performs such an act is worthy of it; if he performs an act opposite to
it and resigns, then he is a vicegerent *(khalifa)* on the part of his
deeds."

Another theologian asked al-Ma'mūn, saying: "Why have you regarded the
Imāmate as obligatory for 'Ali after the Messenger, may Allah bless him
and his family?"        

  Al-Ma'mūn answered: "Because he was faithful when a child just as the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family was; he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1535) Ibid., 2, 124.  
 [[2]](#_F1536) Ibid., 38, 26.  
 [[3]](#_F1537) Ibid., 2, 30.  
  

  

  

renounced the error of his people and refrained from polytheism just as
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, did, for polytheism is
oppression, and the oppressive cannot be an Imām; he ('Ali) was not
among those who worshipped the idols according to the unanimous
resolution (of the Muslims). He who becomes a polytheist takes the place
of the enemies of Allah, the Exalted, so the decision concerning him
('Ali) is the witness to him through that on which the community has
unanimously agreed until another unanimous resolution like it comes, and
for it is not permissible for one convicted even one time to be a ruler;
if the ruler is convicted one time, then there is no difference between
him and the convicted."

Another theologian asked al-Ma'mūn: "Why did 'Ali, peace be on him, not
war against Abū Bakr and 'Umar just as he did against Mu'āwiya?"

"The matter is impossible," replied al-Ma'mūn, "for the 'why' *(lima)*
is requirement, and 'did not do' is denying, and there is no cause for
denying; rather the cause is for positiveness; it is obligatory to think
about the authority of 'Ali, peace be on him, was it (decided) by Allah
or by other than Him? If it is correct that it (was decided) by Allah,
then doubt of His direction is unbelief because of these words of Him,
the Most High: *But no! by your Lord! they do not believe (in reality)
until they make you a judge of that which has become a matter of
disagreement among them, and then do not find any straitness in their
hearts as to what you have decided and submit with entire
submission*.[[1]](#_ftn1538) So the deeds of a doer are a link clinging
to him; therefore,  if his undertaking (the authority) was from Allah,
the Exalted, then his deeds from Him, and it is obligatory on the people
to be content and submissive. And Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless him
and his family, left a warring against the polytheists on the Day of
al-Hudaybiya, on the day when the polytheists prevented his animals for
immolation *(haddyahū)* from (going to) the House (i.e. the Ka'ba).
However, when he found helpers and became strong, he warred (against
them) just as Allah, the Most High, has said concerning the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1538) Ibid., 4, 65.  
  

  

  

first (attitude): *So turn away with kindly
forgiveness*.[[1]](#_ftn1539) Then He, the Great and Almighty, said:
*Then slay the polytheists wherever you find them, and take them
captives and besiege them and lie in wait for them in every
ambush*.[[2]](#_ftn1540)"

Another theologian asked him, saying: "If you claim that the Imāmate of
'Ali, peace be on him, (was decided) by Allah, the Exalted, and
obedience to him was obligatory, then why it was not permissible for the
prophets, peace be on them, to leave delivering (their messages) and
summoning (men to their Lord), while it was permissible for 'Ali to
leave what he was ordered to do such as summoning the people to obey
him?"

Al-Ma'mūn answered: "We do not claim that 'Ali, peace be on him, was
ordered to deliver (a message) in order to be a messenger, but he was
placed as an Emblem between Allah and His creatures, so he who followed
him was obedient, and he who opposed him was disobedient. If he ('Ali)
had found helpers through whom he would be strong, he would have waged
jihad (against those who deprived him of authority); if he had not found
helpers, then the people would have been blamed, not  him, for they had
been ordered to obey him in all circumstances; he had not been ordered
to wage jihad against them except through a force; he was of the same
rank with the House (i.e. the Ka'ba), to which it is obligatory on men
to make a pilgrimage; if they make a pilgrimage (to it), then they will
fulfill what is against them; and if they do not do, they will be
blamed, not the House."

Another theologian asked al-Ma'mūn: "If it is obligatory that there is
no escape from that there should be an Imām to whom obedience is due
through compulsion, then how is it obligatory through compulsion that he
was 'Ali apart from other than him?"

He disproved this vague error, saying: "Surely Allah, the Most High,
does not impose (something) unknown; the imposed (i.e. the Imāmate and
other religious duties) is not impossible, while the unknown is
impossible, for Allah, the Exalted does not impose  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1539) Ibid., 15, 85.  
 [[2]](#_F1540) Ibid., 9, 5.  
  

  

  

(something) unknown, and the imposed is not impossible; therefore, there
is no escape from that the Messenger, may Allah bless him and his
family, had to demonstrate divine command in order to put an end to the
excuse between Allah and His servants. For example, if Allah, the Most
High, imposed on the people fasting a month and they did not know which
month it was, and the month was not marked with a mark, and it was
obligatory on them to find that out through their intellects in order to
find what Allah, the Exalted, had willed, then they would be in no need
of the Messenger who would explain (it) to them, and of the Imām who
would convey to them the tradition of the Messenger."

Another theologian questioned al-Ma'mūn, saying: "Where did you make it
obligatory that 'Ali was adult when the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, summoned him (to faith)? The people claim that he was a boy
when he was summoned to (faith), that it was not permissible for him to
perform (the religious) precepts, and that he was not an adult."

He replied: "Surly it cannot be thought that in that time he was among
those for whom the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, sent in
order to summon (them to faith). If he was so, then it would possible
that he was responsible and strong enough to perform the religious
duties."

The Traditionalists and the Theologians keeps silent
----------------------------------------------------

The traditionalists and the theologians kept silent, for al-Ma'mūn
confuted them, established argument against them, and produced evidence
in support of the Imāmate of Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, and then he asked them the following questions:

"Has the community not narrated unanimously that the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, said: 'He who fabricates lies against me, then
let him occupy his place in the Fire.'?"

"Yes, O Commander of the faithful," they replied.

Then al-Ma'mūn presented another Prophetic tradition before  

  

  

them, saying: "Any they have narrated on his authority that he said: 'He
who disobeys Allah through an act of disobedience, whether small or
great, then he adopts it as religion and follows it with insistence is
immortal among the layers of the Hellfire.'"

The traditionalists and the theologians confirmed and admitted the
tradition, so al-Ma'mūn said to them: "Tell me about a man whom the
community chooses: Is it permissible to call him the successor
*(khalifa)* of Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family,
and (appointed) by Allah, the Great and Almighty, whereas the Messenger
had not appointed him as a successor? If you say 'yes', then you have
stubbornly contended. And if you say 'no', then it is obligatory that
so-and-so is not the successor of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family."

After a talk took place between him and the traditionalists and the
theologians concerning this matter, al-Ma'mūn began preaching to them,
saying: "Fear Allah; consider your own souls carefully; leave imitation;
avoid vague errors. By Allah, Allah does not accept (any deed) except
from a servant who does not do (anything) except through that which he
understands and does not enter (anything) except concerning that which
he regards as true. Suspicion is doubt, and clinging to doubt is
unbelief in Allah, the Most High, and its owner (i.e. the doubter) is in
the Fire."

After this rebuke, al-Ma'mūn turned to them and asked: "Tell me about
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family: Had he appointed
(anyone) as a successor before he died or not?"

"He had not appointed (anyone) as a successor," they all replied.

"Was his leaving that (i.e. the succession) guidance or error?" asked
al-Ma'mūn.

"Yes, it was guidance," they answered.

So al-Ma'mūn produced evidence in refuting their beliefs, saying: "Isn't
it incumbent on the people to follow guidance, to leave falsehood and to
avoid error?"

"They have done that (i.e. they have followed guidance)," they replied.

Then al-Ma'mūn established wonderful argument and proof  

  

  

against their false statement, saying: "Why did the people appoint (Abū
Bakr) as a successor after him (i.e. the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family) while he left it (i.e. the succession)? So leaving his
practice is error, and it is impossible that guidance is the opposite of
guidance. And if leaving succession is guidance, then why did Abū Bakr
appoint (someone) as a successor, while the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, did not do that? And why did 'Umar regard the authority
after him as a consultative council among the Muslims in contrast with
his companion (i.e. Abū Bakr)? That is because you have claimed that the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, did not appoint (anyone) as
a successor, whereas Abū Bakr appointed (someone) as a successor, and
'Umar did not leave appointing (someone) as a successor just as Abū Bakr
did, and he brought a third meaning, which is the consultative council
which he nominated in order to appoint the successor after him. So tell
me which of that do you regard as right? If you regard the practice of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, as right, they you have
regarded the practice of Abū Bakr as wrong, and such is (my) view
concerning the rest of the statements. Then tell me: Which is better
according to your claim leaving the succession which the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, did or the succession which a sect did?"

"Tell me: Is it permissible that leaving it (the succession) by the
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, is guidance and doing it
by other than him is guidance? Is there any guidance the opposite of
guidance? So where was then the error?

"Tell me: Has anyone become a ruler through being chosen by the
companions since the death of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, up to this day? If you say 'no', then you have made it
obligatory that all the people have made error after the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family.

"If you say 'yes', then you have accused the community of lying, and
your statement has disproved the existence which cannot be refuted. Then
tell me about these words of Him, the Great and Almighty: *Say: To whom
belongs what is in the heavens and the earth*?[[1]](#_ftn1541) Is this
true or false?"

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1541) Ibid., 6, 12.  
  

  

  

"Yes, it is true," they replied.

"Isn't that which apart from Allah belongs to Allah if He has created
and possessed it?"

"Yes," was the answer.

Accordingly, al-Ma'mūn became exited and said: "So this disproves your
obligatory choosing a successor, your making obedience to him
obligatory, and your calling him the successor of Allah's Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family. It is you who appoint him as a
successor, remove him (from office)  when you become angry with him and
he works in contrast with your love, and you murder him when he refuses
to resign."

After this speech, he spoke to the people with violence. Then he turned
to the *'qibbla* (the direction to Mecca), raised his hands, and said:
"O Allah I have guided them! O Allah I have explained to them everything
obligatory on me!

"O Allah, I believe in seeking nearness to You through preferring 'Ali,
peace be on him, to the creatures after Your Prophet Mohammed, may Allah
bless him and his family, just as Your Messenger, may Allah bless him
and his family, has ordered us (to do).[[1]](#_ftn1542)"

The people kept silent; they did not find any way to defend their
beliefs. Most al-Ma'mūn's indications concerning the Imāmate of Imām
'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, were based on
logic and proof. I (i.e. the author) think that the Imāmate of Imām
'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, is as clear as the
sun, for it has been made obligatory by his talent and geniuses, his
strong clinging to Allah, his asceticism, and his renouncing the world.
All these qualities made him worthier of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, than other than him. None of the companions or the
relatives of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,  
 had such creative qualities of knowledge, honesty, honor,  
 and the like from among the noble qualities and great tendencies; and  
 through this sense he was more entitled than the rest of the people
to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1542) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, pp. 184-199. Bihār
al-Anwār.  
  

  

  

the office and rank of the Prophet. As for his relationship to the
Prophet, it does not make him  preferable to the rest of the Muslims,
for it is incorrect to give relationship as proof of his right to
undertake the caliphate.

Any how, al-Ma'mūn gave all proofs of the Imāmate of Imām 'Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, in order to seek nearness to
Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and to find favor with him; this has been
demonstrated by Ishāq b. Hammād, who said: "Al-Ma'mūn preferred Imām
'Ali, peace be on him, to all companions (of the Prophet) in order to
seek nearness to Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, who himself
would say to his trustworthy companions: 'Do not be deceived by his
(al-Ma'mūn's) statement. By Allah, none will kill me except him, but it
is necessary for me to be patient until the moment of death
comes.'[[1]](#_ftn1543)"

His Entrusting the Imām with Regency
------------------------------------

Yet another proof depended by those who believed that al-Ma'mūn was a
Shi'ite is that he entrusted regency to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,
that he subjected to danger the caliphate the 'Abbāsids undertook and
hand it over to the 'Alawides.

These are the most important proofs given by those who say that
al-Ma'mūn was a Shi'ite and had 'Alawide thought and opinion.

His Shiism is false
-------------------

Through abundant consideration and research, I (i.e. the author) have
come to know that al-Ma'mūn was not a Shi'ite; nor did he show love for
the members of the House *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them. He took the
previous measures for political considerations, not for summoning the
people to adopt the Shi'ite doctrines, and this can be proved through
the following:

1. Al-Ma'mūn belonged to the 'Abbāsid family, who is famous for showing
detest and enmity toward the members of the House *ahl al-Bayt*, peace
be on them. This family begot none except tyrannical  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1543) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 185.  
  

  

  

persons who wreaked their wrath upon the family and the children of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. They killed them, made them
homeless, and punished them severely. They committed crimes toward them,
to the extent that even the Umayyad family did not commit them. Rather
the Umayyad family thought famous for violent enmity toward the children
of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family did not treat them as
the 'Abbāsid did; the Umayyads had excellences better than those of the
'Abbāsids. In this book we have explained that the 'Abbāsids persecuted
the 'Alawides.

Any how, it is very unlikely that al-Ma'mūn turned away from the line of
his fathers, that he changed their program and behavior overnight, that
he became an 'Alawide, that he showed love for the opponents of his
fathers and subjected his state to danger.

2. As for his disparaging Mu'āwiya and the rulers before him, and
preferring Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, to
them, it was not earnest; rather it was formal and for political
purposes, for al-Taghlubi, a contemporary of al-Ma'mūn, has narrated:
"Al-Ma'mūn said: 'And they have thought that it is not permissible to
prefer 'Ali except through disparaging the predecessors; I seek
sanctuary in Allah from disparaging (anyone) even al-Hajjājj b. Yusuf,
so just imagine how much more are the good
predecessors?[[1]](#_ftn1544)"

He refused to disparage al-Hajjājj b. Yusuf, the criminal terrorist, who
drowned Iraq in the blood of the innocent.

The following poetry lines which confirm that have been ascribed to him:

Love for 'Ali after the Prophet has become my religion in

which I believe and because of which I shall not make an

apology tomorrow.

I shall not curse (Abū Bakr) al-Sidiq nor 'Umar.

Then Ibn 'Affān, who was unjustly killed, is in the

Gardens along with the righteous.

Yet I shall curse neither al-Zubayr nor Talha when a sayer

treacherously says.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1544) Hayāt  al-Imām  al-Ridā, quoted from 'As al-Ma'mūn, vol.
1, p. 369.  
  

  

  

And I shall not curse 'Ā'isha, the mother; we shall disown

him who fabricates lies against her.[[1]](#_ftn1545)

Yet there are other examples and proofs which indicate that his Shiism
was false, and that he had not any relationship with the members of the
House *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them.

3. He assassinated Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, after he had achieved
his political aims; he was not satisfied with that, so he ordered his
governor over Egypt to wash the pulpits on which he delivered speeches
concerning the regency of Imām al-Ridā[[2]](#_ftn1546), peace be on him;
this procedure shows that he had harbored malice against the Imām.

The 'Alawide family fully understood that the friendship al-Ma'mūn
showed toward them was false, formal, and unreal. The narrators said
that al-Ma'mūn wrote to 'Abd Allah, Imām al-Ridā's brother, to grant him
security and to guarantee him regency after him just as he did toward
his brother Imām al-Ridā. It has been mentioned in his letter: "I do not
think that any of the family of Abū Tālib will fear me after what I had
done toward al-Ridā."

So 'Abd Allah answered him in a letter and disclosed therein al-Ma'mūn's
intentions as follows:

"I have received your letter and understood it. You want to deceive me
with regard to my own soul just as the hunter does, and you want to
trick me with the trick of the assassin intending to shed my blood.

"I have wondered at regency and my undertaking it after you. You think
that  I have not been informed of what you had done toward al-Ridā; how
have you come to know that I crave after kingdom? Do you think that (I
crave after) the kingdom whose bloom and sweetness have deceived you? By
Allah, if I was thrown into a flaming fire while I was alive, it would
be more lovable to me than undertaking an authority over the Muslims or
drinking unlawful drink during intense, deadly thirst.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1545) Al-Bidāya wa al-Nihāya, vol. 10, p. 277.  
 [[2]](#_F1546) Al-Kindi, al-Wilāt wa al-Qudāt.  
  

  

  

"Or (do you think that I crave after) the poisoned grapes through which
you had killed al-Ridā? Or do you think that hiding has tired me, and my
chess has become strait out of it? By Allah, for that reason I have
become tired of life and detested the world. If my religion permitted me
to put my hand in yours in order to take your purpose from me, I would
do that. However, Allah has made it prohibited for me to risk my blood.
Would that you were able, without sacrificing my soul for you, to kill
me, and I met Allah, the Great and Almighty, (stained) with my own
blood, and I met Him while killed and wronged, so I would get rid of
this world.

"Know that I am one who seeks salvation for his own soul;  I have done
my best concerning that which makes Allah pleased with me and concerning
a work through which I seek nearness to Him; I have found no opinion to
guide me to any of that, so I have returned to the Qur'ān in which is
guidance and cure;  I run over it sura by sura, and verse by verse, but
I have found nothing closer to one than martyrdom in seeking His good
pleasure.

"I ran over it again considering which kind of jihad was the best and
for which class (of people), so I have found Him, the Great and
Almighty, say: *Fight those of the unbelievers who are near to you and
let them find in you hardness*.[[1]](#_ftn1547) I asked myself: 'Which
kind of the unbelievers is more harmful to Islam and nearer to my place,
so I have found that none is more harmful to Islam than you, for the
unbelievers have shown their unbelief, and the people have understood
their affair, recognized them, and are careful of them. You have
deceived the Muslims through (showing) Islam and hiding unbelief; you
have killed (people) through doubt and punished them through accusation;
you have illegally taken the property of Allah, openly drunk unlawful
wine, spent the property of Allah on the amusers, given it to the
singers, and deprived the Muslims of it; therefore, you have cheated
(them) through (adopting) Islam; you have encompassed Islamic regions
just as the Muslims have done; you have decided for the polytheist
through Islam, disobeyed Allah and His Messenger just as the stubborn
opponent has done.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1547) Qur'ān, 9, 123.  
  

  

  

"As a result if the time makes me happy and Allah helps me against you
through the supporters of the truth, I will sacrifice my own soul for
struggling against you with a struggle which He accepts from me, but if
He gave you a respite and delayed you in order to punish you through
what you deserved in your return (to Him) or the days chose me before
that, then sufficient unto me would be my efforts and my intention which
Allah, the Great and Almighty, had known. Greetings!"

This letter displays al-Ma'mūn's falseness, deception, and unreal
friendship toward the members of the House *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on
them.

As for the last paragraphs of the letter, they have added al-Ma'mūn to
the caravan of the unbelievers against whom jihad is obligatory, and
whom should be toppled. They have also demonstrated that al-Ma'mūn used
a certain policy to kill the people out of doubt and punished them due
to accusation, and that he was sinful, for he drank wine and spent the
properties of the Muslims on amusement centers, singers, the
mischievous, and the dissolute.

This letter was a thunderous outcry in the face of al-Ma'mūn, the
criminal, and it is among the brilliant pages on resisting oppression
and tyranny.

It is worth mentioning that another part of this letter or of another
letter was sent to al-Ma'mūn by this great Sayyid. It is as follows:
"Let me avenge myself on you and your fathers, who regarded our blood as
lawful, took our right, openly declared concerning our affair, and of
whom we are cautious; you are the subtlest of them in stratagem toward
us through your satisfying us and concealing the ordeals we have
received (through you); you have deceived us one by one, but jihad is
lovable to me just as it is lovable to everyone you have wronged. I have
sharpened my own sword, installed my own spearhead, and chosen my own
horse.

"I do not know which enemy is the most harmful to Islam, but I have come
to know that Allah's Book contains all things; I have read it and found
in it: *O you who believe, fight those of the unbelievers who are near
to you and let them find in you hardness*."

  

  

  

Yet another paragraph of this letter is the following: "I had reflected
(on you) and suddenly (found) that you were the most harmful enemy to
Islam and the Muslims. For the unbelievers have turned aside from it and
opposed it, so the people have become cautious of them and warred
against them, but you have apparently entered it, so the people have
refrained (from fighting against you), and you have begun destroying its
handles one by one; therefore you are the most harmful enemy to
Islam.[[1]](#_ftn1548)"

These paragraphs give an account of some sides of the 'Abbāsid policy
which was based on wronging the 'Alawides and punishing them severely.
Similarly, they give an account of this great Sayyid, the son of Imām
Mūsā, peace be on him, who was eager for waging jihad against the
government of al-Ma'mūn, the mortal enemy of Islam, for he 'demolished
its handles one by one,' as it has been mentioned in the letter.

4. Having assassinated Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, al-Ma'mūn
destroyed the 'Alawides. He ordered his intelligence and his security
forces to pursue and uproot them, and they assassinated a group of the
children of Imām Mūsā, peace be on him. He used poison as a weapon in
order to put an end to the progeny of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family. For example, he assassinated with poison the great,
noble 'Alawide Ibrāhim, the son of Imām Mūsā, peace be on him. When
Ibrāhim died, Ibn al-Sammāk buried him and composed, saying:

Al-Imām al-Murtadā has died of poison, and the time has

concealed his excellence and knowledge.

He unjustly died at al-Zawrā' just as his forefather was

unjustly killed at Karbelā'.

So the yellow sun is mourning for him, and the sad moon

is striking his own face.[[2]](#_ftn1549)

Surely his assassinating the 'Alawides and pursuing them, to the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1548) Maqātil al-Tālibiyyin, pp. 630-631.  
 [[2]](#_F1549) Hayāt al-Imām Mūsā b. Ja'far, vol. 2, p. 48, quoted from
Mukhtasar Akhbār al-Khulafā'.  
  

  

  

extent that they escaped out of fear of him and hid themselves in the
countries and the cities, disproves his summons to Shiism and indicates
that he had no relationship with friendship to the members of the House
*ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them, namely, he was like his fathers, who
were the mortal enemy of the children of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family.

The Reasons for his Pretending Shiism
-------------------------------------

It is necessary for us to pause in order to discuss the reasons for
al-Ma'mūn's showing friendship toward the members of the House *ahl
al-Bayt*, peace be on them, and for his announcing his Shiism in the
official gatherings. I (i.e. the author) think that he pretended Shiism
for the following reasons:

A. He was in disagreement with his 'Abbāsid family, who inclined to his
brother al-Amin, whose mother was Mrs. Zubayda, who belonged to the
'Abbāsid family and spent generously on the 'Abbāsids. As for the mother
of al-Ma'mūn, she was Marājil, who was among the female-slaves in the
palace. The 'Abbāsids disdained al-Ma'mūn because of his mother, and he
intended to abase them through his showing friendship to the 'Alawides
and his designating Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, as a successor after
him.

B. Through his pretending Shiism, al-Ma'mūn intended to please the
commanders of his army, who showed tendencies and friendship to the
members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them.

C. Al-Ma'mūn intended to display sympathy with the 'Alawides and to
announce the outstanding merits of Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, that he might attract the feelings of the
pious people whose sentiments and hearts were full of love and
friendship toward the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on
them, so he was able to use them as a weapon during his war against his
brother, al-Amin.

D. He pretended Shiism and entrusted the office to Imām al-Ridā, peace
be on him, in order to suppress the violent, Shi'ite revolt headed by
the great Sayyids from among the children of Imām Mūsā  

  

  

b. Ja'far, peace be on him. It is worth mentioning that this revolt
extended to most regions of Islamic world and was about to put an end to
the 'Abbāsid government, but with unique slyness al-Ma'mūn was able to
suppress it; that was when he appointed Imām al-Ridā as a successor
after him, for the latter was the master and leader of the 'Alawides,
and large part of this community believed in his Imāmate.

As a result, al-Ma'mūn was able to suppress and uproot the revolt
through his artificial sympathy with the members of the House (*ahl
al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, his designating Imām al-Ridā as his
successor, and minting the currency in his name.

D. He pretended Shiism because he wanted to discover the Shi'ites and to
make the authorities know their names and places, for they were hidden
groups. It is worth mentioning that the previous 'Abbāsid governments
were unable to know of them, their secret activities, and their groups.
Accordingly, through his kindness to the 'Alawides, his disparaging the
caliphs, and his dispraising Mu'āwiya, and the like, al-Ma'mūn intended
to discover the Shi'ites, that his security forces and his police might
pursue them; this can be indicated by some official documents issued by
him. These are some reasons for al-Ma'mūn's showing love for the members
of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them.

His Policy
----------

During the days of his rule, al-Ma'mūn followed the policy of Mu'āwiya
b. Hind. The historians mentioned that he was asked to follow the policy
of Abū Bakr and 'Umar, but he refused to accept it. As a result he
insisted on following the policy of Mu'āwiya, the wicked pagan, who took
money and spent it according to his desires. Al-Ma'mūn said: "There is
no escape for me from (following) this (i.e. Mu'āwiya's
policy).[[1]](#_ftn1550)" Any how, he followed Mu'āwiya's example, so he
intended to kill the innocent through giving them poison to drink, and
in this manner he was able to put an end to them just as Mu'āwiya did
toward his opponents when he said: "Surely Allah has soldiers (made) of
honey." Cunning and deception were the most prominent of his qualities
just as they were of Mu'āwiya's.

**  
**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1550) Hayāt  al-Imām  al-Ridā, p. 181, quoted from al-Mahāsin
wa al-Masāwi' by al-Bayqahi,  p. 295.  
  

