Chapter Xv
==========

  

  

IMAM AL-RIDĀ AND REGENCY
========================

We are in front of an important historical event which busied the public
opinion and stunned all political circles. The event is that al-Mamūn
appointed Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, as a heir apparent after him;
it indicates that the succession would be taken from the Abbāsids and
handed over to their opponents, the Alawides; it astonished the people
and they asked each other: How has the Abbāsid policy changed into this
line opposing the political line which the Abbāsids have followed since
the beginning of their reign? They asked one another such a question
because the Abbāsids were famous for persecuting and uprooting the
Alawides; in other words, the Abbāsids destroyed the Alawides, buried
them while they were alive, threw their children into the Tigris, and
used against them all kinds of genocide.

The people and history have known that al-Mamūn belonged to this
(Abbāsid) family, who wronged the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*,
peace be on them; therefore, it was not possible for him to follow
behavior other than that of his fore-fathers or to deviate from their
anti-Alawides trend. Al-Mamūn was fed on showing detest and enmity
toward the Alawides, for his grandfather al-Mansūr and his father
al-Rashid followed all ways to put an end to them; they employed all
their economic and political organs to degrade their importance and
dignity and to remove them from the political arena in the world of
Arabs and Islam.

The Abbāsids were the opponents of the Alawides, but why did al-Mamūn
create such a sudden change (in his policy) and turn  

  

  

away from the plan and method of his fathers? Why did he appoint Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him, as a successor after him? Similarly, why did
Imām al-Ridā agree to undertake regency while he was fully aware of the
deviation of al-Mamūn and of his harboring malice against the members of
the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them? We will answer these
questions as follows:

Al-Mamūns Motives
-----------------

It is necessary for us to pause in order to consider the reasons and
motives which urged al-Mamūn to appoint Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,
as a successor after him:

1. Al-Mamūn had no strong position in Islamic state, for the Abbāsid
family disdained him because of his mother Marājil, who was among the
slave-wives in the palace, because of his strong relationship with
al-Fadl b. Sahl and his entrusting all his affairs to him, while he was
originally from Persia. Moreover, his brother al-Amin hated him,
intended to do evil deeds toward him, and schemed against him, for he
competed with him for the authority. Accordingly, al-Mamūn wanted to
reinforce his position, to strengthen his influence, and to overcome
those who harbored malice against him. As a result, he vested the office
in Imām Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on him, the greatest personality
in Islamic world and son of Imām al-Sādiq, who was the first to supply
Islamic world with thoughts and knowledge. Moreover large part of the
Muslims believed in his Imāmate and showed friendship to him. For this
reason al-Mamūn took the initiative and designated him as his successor
over this important office in Islamic world.

2. Al-Mamūn undertook the leadership of  Islamic state while he was
fully aware of that Islamic society harbored hate and detest against the
Abbāsid family, who oppressed the Muslims, appropriated their affairs,
wreaked all kinds of oppression and tyranny upon the Alawides, the
summoners to social justice. So the Muslims wished for the return of the
Umayyad reign though it was famous for cruelty and torture. In this
connection, the poet says:

Would that the tyranny of the Marwānis returned to us,

  

  

  

and would that the just of the Abbāsids was in the fire.

Another poet says:

I do not think that tyranny will come to an end while over

the community is an Abbāsid governor.

Al-Mamūn intended to open a new page for the citizens and to conceal the
policy of his fore-fathers, so he appointed Imām al-Ridā the hope of
Islamic community, peace be on him as a successor after him.

4. Most al-Mamūns Army, officers and soldiers, were from among the
Shiites who adopted the Imāmate of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, so he
wanted to win their affection and loyalty.

5. Surely the revolt against the Abbāsid government broke out and
extended to most Islamic regions, and the motto of the revolutionaries
was: The summons to al-Ridā from among the family of Mohammed, may Allah
bless him and his family. The revolutionists responded to this
allegiance al-Mamūn pledged to the Imām. In the meantime, he gave the
Imām the nickname of al-Ridā (i.e. the consent), that, through that, he
might attract the feelings of the revolutionaries, and they pledged
allegiance to him, and he got rid of the danger which encircled his
state and was about to wrap up its banner and fold up its principal
features. This was the plan of al-Mamūn, who was among the first-class
diplomatic corps, so he was able to overcome the events surrounding him
and to save his government from the deadliest danger encircling it.

5. Through his nominating Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, for succession,
al-Mamūn was able to give a religious quality to his government in order
to indicate that it was not oppressive like that of his fathers, that
mutiny against him was illegal, and that it was obligatory on the
Muslims to war against those who revolted against him.

6. Among the aims which al-Mamūn achieved through this pledge of
allegiance (to the Imām) is that he was able to know the Shiite elements
and to recognize their identities. It is worth mentioning that the
places of the Shiites were very secret, that the Shiites worked in
secret and in hiding-places. However,  after this  

  

  

pledge of allegiance (to the Imām), their affair appeared, and the
authorities were able to discover them.

7. Al-Mamūn pledged allegiance (to Imām al-Ridā) in order to indicate
that the Imām, peace be on him, was not among those who renounced the
world; rather he was among those who loved it through his accepting this
pledge of allegiance. However, the Imām was fully aware of al-Mamūns
objectives which he disproved when he stipulated that he would not
appoint nor remove nor take part in government.

These are some motives which urged al-Mamūn to appoint Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, as a successor after him.[[1]](#_ftn1551) Now, we will
return to talk about regency, the attitude of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him, toward it, and some matters concerning it; that is as follows:

### Al-Fadls Letter to the Imām

Al-Fadl b. Sahl sent a letter to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, in which
he asked him to come to Khurasān in order to receive the caliphate from
al-Mamūn; this is the text of the letter:

In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most

Merciful,

To Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, son of Allahs Apostle, the

chosen one, who has become rightly guided by his

guidance, followed his practice, kept the religion of

Allah, and stored the revelation of Allah.

From his friend, al-Fadl b. Sahl, who sacrificed

himself for returning his right to him, and connecting his

night to his day concerning it.

Peace, mercy and blessings of Allah be upon you, O

rightly guided one. Verily I praise on your behalf Allah,

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1551) Al-Sayyid Ja'far Murtadā has objectively and inclusively
mentioned the objectives which motivated al-Ma'mūn to appoint Imām
al-Ridā as successor after him. He has mentioned eleven objectives in
his book Hayāt al-Imām  al-Ridā (the Life of Imām al-Ridā).  
  

  

  

other than Whom there is no god, and ask Him to bless

Mohammed, His servant.

Now then, surely I hope that Allah has helped you and

permitted you to return your right from him who has

deemed you as weak, that He may magnify His favors

toward you, make you the inheriting Imām, make your

enemies and those who have turned away from you see

from you what they feared.

Verily, this letter of mine is out of a determination from

the Commander of the faithful, the servant of Allah, Imām

al-Mamūn and from me for returning your right to

you, confirming your right before you, handing it over

to you, for which I ask Allah who has become aware of it,

that you will inform me of that through which I will be the

happiest of all people, among the successful with

Allah, among those who accomplish the right of Allahs

Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, and his deeds, among
those who help you with it, that I may reach both good through showing
friendship to you and your state.

When my letter reaches you, my I be your ransom, and it

is possible for you not to place it off your hand, so that

you may come to the Commander of the faithful (i.e. al-

Mamūn), who regards you as a partner in his authority,

a mediator in his ancestry, and the most appropriate of the

people for that which is under his hand. I have done that

while I am surrounded by Allahs choice, protected by His

angels, safeguarded by Him, and Allah is a guarantor for

you through all that which gathers good benefit for you,

and set right the community through you. *Allah is*

*sufficient for* *us and most excellent is the Protector.*

Peace, Allahs mercy and blessings be upon you.[[1]](#_ftn1552)

This letter, sent by the highest ranking official in the Abbāsid
government, contains the following:

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1552)Hayāt  al-Imām  al-Ridā, pp. 442-443, quoted from the book
al-Taddwin by 'Abd al-Kareem al-Rāfi'i al-Shāfi'i.  
  

  

  

1. Giving noble nicknames and exalted qualities to the Imām, peace be on
him, as follows: (the one who) kept the religion of Allah, and (the one
who) stored the revelation of Allah. Of course, it is the Shiites who
have given these nicknames to their Imāms.

2. Informing the Imām, peace be on him, of that the caliphate would be
returned to him, that Allah, the Exalted, decreed to return this usurped
right to its people and leaders, the Household of the Prophet, whose
master was Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.

3. This letter was not written by al-Fadl only; rather it was written by
him and al-Mamūn, who had decided to abdicate the caliphate and to hand
it over to the Imām.

4. This letter shows that al-Fadl asked the Imām to leave Medina
(Yathrib) for Khurasān at once in order to undertake the leadership of
the rule.

### The Attitude of the Imām

Our sources have not shown the Imāms answer to this letter, but it is
certain that the Imām vigorously refused to responded to it, for he was
aware of al-Mamūns intentions and al-Fadls unreal letter to him. It is
worth mentioning that the political motives schemed behind the scenes
urged al-Fadl and al-Mamūn to write it.

### Al-Mamūn sends Messengers to the Imām

Al-Mamūn sent an official delegation in order to ask the Imām to leave
Medina (Yathrib) for Khurasān. As for the person who headed the
delegation, he was al-Rajā b. Abū al-Dahhāk; it is said that he was Īsā
b. Yazid, better known as al-Julūdi. Al-Sayyid al-Amin has regarded that
as unlikely, and he said: Surely al-Julūdi was among the (military)
commanders of al-Rashid and was an opponent of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him, so it was not wise for al-Mamūn to send him to the Imām in order to
ask him to leave (Medina for Khurasān).[[1]](#_ftn1553)

Al-Mamūn ordered the head of the delegation to bring the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1553) A'yān al-Shi'a 4/Q2/121.  
  

  

  

Imām, peace be on him, through the road leading to Basrah, al-Ahwāz, and
Fars, and not to bring him through the road leading to Kūfa and
Qum.[[1]](#_ftn1554) Also al-Mamūn wrote to Imām al-Ridā and asked him
not to come through the road leading to the mountain and Qum, and to
come through the road leading to Basrah, al-Ahwāz, and
Fars.[[2]](#_ftn1555)

The reason for al-Mamūns insistence and concern is very clear; it is
that he did not want the Imām to come through Kūfa and Qum, for both
cities were among the Shiite centers, and their inhabitants were from
among those who showed friendship to the Imām and believed in his
Imāmate. So if the Imām had passed through them, he would have been
magnified and honored; this would have reinforced his position and
subjected the Abbāsid state to danger. As for the Imāms passing through
Basrah, it did not benefit him, for its inhabitants inclined to Uthmān
and showed friendship to the Abbāsids. This step indicates the false
plan of al-Mamūn, who claimed that he would abdicate the caliphate and
hand it over to the Alawides.

### The Imām says Farewell to the Grave of the Prophet

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, did not find any escape from responding
to al-Mamūn, so he went to the grave of his grandfather, the Messenger,
may Allah bless him and his family, and said the final farewell to it,
for he came to know that he would not visit it again. Muhawwil
al-Sijistāni has narrated, saying: When the post regarding sending Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him, on a journey to Khurasān came, I was in
Medina. He entered the mosque in order to say farewell to the grave of
his grandfather, Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family.
He said farewell to it several times. He wept and wailed loudly, so I
walked towards him, greeted him, and he returned the greetings. Then I
congratulated him on that which he would reach, but he, peace be on him,
said: Leave me, for I am going to leave  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1554) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 149.  
 [[2]](#_F1555)A'yān al-Shi'a. Bihār al-Anwār.  
  

  

  

neighboring my grandfather, may Allah bless him and his family, so I
will die strange and buried beside Hārūn (al-Rashid).

Muhawwil al-Sijistāni said: So I went out following the road of the Imām
until he died at Tūs and buried beside Hārūn.[[1]](#_ftn1556)

### The Imām orders his family to weep over him

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, came to know that he would not return to
his family and homeland. So he gathered the members of his family,
divided twelve thousand dinars among them, made them know that he would
never return to them, ordered them to weep and wail for him while he
could hear that, and then he said the final farewell to
them.[[2]](#_ftn1557)

### The Imām appoints his Son al-Jawād

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, appointed his son al-Jawād as a successor
after him, while he was seven years old or more than that. He made him
enter the mosque of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and
place his hand on the edge of the holy grave; he made him cling to it,
ask his grandfather, the Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family,
to protect him; then he said to him: I have ordered all my agents and my
servants to listen to you and obey you. Then the Imām told his
companions that his son would be the successor after
him.[[3]](#_ftn1558)

### To the Sacred House of Allah

The Imām had gone to the Sacred House of Allah to say the final farewell
to it before he headed for Khurasān. Most his family accompanied him,
among them was his son Imām al-Jawād, peace be on him. When he arrived
the Sacred House, he greeted it,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1556) A'yān al-Shi'a 4/Q2/122.  
 [[2]](#_F1557)A'yān al-Shi'a 4/Q2/123. Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 3, p.
95.  
 [[3]](#_F1558) Al-Durr al-Nazim.  
  

  

  

circumambulated it, performed prayers in the Standing-place of Ibrāhim,
ran, and circumambulated it along with his son al-Jawād. When al-Jawād
arrived at the Stone of Ismāil, he sat by it for a long time. So
Muwaffaq al-Khādim asked him to stand up, but he refused and looked sad
and sorrowful. So Muwaffaq hurried towards the Imām and told him about
the state of his son. Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, hastened to his son
and asked him to stand up, and he wept, sighed, and said: O Father, how
can I stand while you are saying the final farewell to the House with a
farewell after which there will be no return?

Imām al-Jawād, peace be on him, saw sadness appear on the face of his
father, so he concluded that his father was in the last part of his
life. That happened, for Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, did not return
to the Holy Houses and died poisoned through the hand of al-Mamūn, the
Abbāsid.

### To Khurasān

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, left the Sacred House of Allah for
Khurasān, and he was extremely honored and magnified at every district
or in every city through which he passed, for the Muslims hurried to
receive him cordially, to get the blessing of kissing his hands, to ask
him to stop at them, and to serve him. They asked him about the precepts
of their religion, and he, peace be on him, answered them about that.

  

  

  

### In Nisābūr

The caravan of the Imām covered the desert, was earnest in waking, and
did not pay attention to anything until it arrived in
Nisābūr.[[1]](#_ftn1559) The Imām was received there with a unique
popular reception, for Nisābūr did not witness such a reception
throughout its history. At the head of those who received him were the
scholars, the virtuous, and the traditionalists who have narrated on his
authority al-Hadith al-Dhahabi which we will mention.

The Imām, peace be on him, stopped at the district of al-Gharbi or
al-Farawi, in the house of a person whom the people of Nisābūr called
Bisanda, a Persian word means satisfactory, for the Imām was satisfied
with him apart from the rest of the peopleand stopped at his house. Then
the Imām planted an almond in that house, and it grew and became a tree
and bore fruit in a year. When the people came to know of the tree, they
began curing themselves with its fruit. So he who was inflected by a
certain malady got the blessing through eating some of its fruit, and he
recovered through the bless of the great Imām. A person cut some of its
branches, and he became blind. Ibn Hamdān cut down that tree, and he
became blind.[[2]](#_ftn1560)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1559) Regarding Nisābūr, Yāqūt al-Hamawi (in his bookd Mu'jam
al-Buldān, vol. 5, pp. 331-332) has said: "Nisābūr is a great city with
important excellences. It is the origin of the virtuous and source of
the scholars. I have never seen the like of it in the country which I
have circled." Abū al-'Abbās al-Zawzani, better known as al-Ma'mūni has
praised it, saying:  
 There is no (land) like Nisābūr; (it is) a good land and a Forgiving
Lord!  
 Dispraising its inhabitants, al-Murādi has said:  
 Do not stop at Nisābūr while you are a stranger  
 Unless your robe is connected to an authority;  
 Otherwise neither courtesy avails; nor does ancestry benefits; nor is
man's sacredness respected.  
 Many learned scholars graduated from it; among them was al-Hāfiz Imām
Abū 'Ali al-Husayn b. 'Ali b. Zayd b. Dāwud b. Yazid al- Nisābūri,
al-Sā'igh.  
 [[2]](#_F1560) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 133.  
  

  

  

There was a public bath-house in Nisābūr. The Imām entered it, washed
himself, and performed a prayer on its top, so the inhabitants of
Nisābūr began getting the bless of that public bath-house. They washed
themselves wherein, drank from it seeking bless, prayed on its top, and
asked Allah, the Great and Almighty, to accomplish their needs, and they
were accomplished for them out of the bless of the great
Imām.[[1]](#_ftn1561)

### Al-Hadith al-Dhahabi

The scholars and the traditionalists surrounded the Imām, peace be on
him, who was on the (back) of a gray mule wearing his turban. At the
head of the scholars were Yahyā b. Yahyā, Ishāq b. Rāhawayh, Mohammed b.
Rāfi, Ahmed b. Harb, and others.[[2]](#_ftn1562) When the people saw
him, and he was in that appearance which gave an account of the
appearance of Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, they
said loudly, There is no god but Allah, and exclaimed, Allah is great!
They displayed sadness for the Imām and wept for him. That area became
noisy out of weeping, so the scholars and the Huffāz (memorizers of the
Qurān) called out: O people, listen, understand, and do not harm Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, regarding his family!

Then the Imām, peace be on him, delivered to the scholars this holy
tradition, saying: I heard my father Mūsā b. Jafar say: I heard my
father Jafar b. Mohammed say: I heard my father Mohammed b. Ali say: I
heard my father Ali b. al-Husayn say: I heard my father al-Husayn b. Ali
say: I hard my father the Commander of the faithful Ali b. Abū Tālib
say: I heard the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, say (on
behalf of Allah): There is no god but Allah is My stronghold, so he who
enters My stronghold is safe from My chastisement.

When the Imām passed, he called out to the people of Nisābūr,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1561) Ibid., p. 135.  
 [[2]](#_F1562) Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Muntazam, vol. 10, p. 67 (photographed
and available in al-Sayyid al-Hakim Library).  
  

  

  

saying: But according to its conditions, and I am among its
conditions.[[1]](#_ftn1563)

Surely the statement, there is no god but Allah, is one of the
strongholds of Allah, the Most High, but according to conditions among
which is professing the Imāmate of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, who is
one of the testamentary trustees of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family.

More than twenty thousand scholars and memorizers of the Qurān
*(huffāz)* has written this holy tradition.[[2]](#_ftn1564) As for the
chain of authorities of this tradition, it is the greatest and most
wonderful of all chains of authorities. Ahmed b. Hanbal says: If this
chain of authorities was recited before a mad person, he would recover
from his madness.[[3]](#_ftn1565) A Sāmāni ruler ordered this tradition
to be written in gold and to be buried along with him.[[4]](#_ftn1566)

### To Tūs

The caravan of the Imām, peace be on him, left Nisābūr and covered the
desert until it arrived at Sanābād where there was a mountain from which
cooking-pots were made. The Imām leaned on the mountain and said: O
Allah, benefit (the people) through it, bless that which is placed in
it, and that which is made from it. Then he ordered some cooking-pots
for him to be made from it. They were made for him, and he said: My food
will not be cooked (in anything) except in them.

The house of Hamid b. Quhtuba al-Tāi was at Sanābād, where the grave of
Hārūn al-Rashid is. The Imām went to it and reached the grave of Hārūn.
So he drew a line with his own hand and said to those around him: This
is my earth, and I will be buried in it. Allah will  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1563) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 135. The scholars have
taken great care of this tradition, so they have mentioned numerous
chain of authorities for it and regarded it as one of the authentic
traditions.  
 [[2]](#_F1564) Akhbār al-Diwal, p. 115.  
 [[3]](#_F1565) Al-Sawā'iq al-Muhriqa.  
 [[4]](#_F1566) Akhbār al-Diwal, p. 115.  
  

  

  

make my Shiites and those who love me visit me. If any of them visits me
and greets me, Allah will forgive him (his sins) and have mercy on him
through our intercession, the *ahl al-Bayt*. Then he turned to the
*qibbla*, performed some *rakas*, and supplicated with some
supplications. Having finished his prayers, he performed a long
prostration. I (i.e. Hamid al-Tāi) counted that he said, glory belongs
to Allah, five hundred times.[[1]](#_ftn1567) Then the Imām, peace be on
him, gave some of his clothes to Hamid, who, in turn, gave them to a
slave-wife of his. She took them, and then she quickly came back and
said: I have found a piece of cloth in the shirt of Abū al-Hasan
(al-Ridā). Then she handed it to Hamid, and he at once gave it to the
Imām, peace be on him, and asked him: What is in it, O son of Allahs
Messenger?

This is a supplication, the Imām, peace be on him, replied, he who
carries it in his own pocket, (all evil deeds) will be driven away from
him, and it will be an amulet against the accursed Satan and the ruler.

Hamid asked the Imām to dictate it to him, and he recited it to him. It
reads as follows: In the name of Allah, I seek protection in the
Merciful (Allah) from you if you are pious or not pious. I have clung to
Allah, the All-hearing, the All-seeing, against your ear and your eye.
You have no power over me; nor over my ear and my eye; nor over my hair;
nor over my skin and my flesh; nor over my blood; nor over my brain; nor
over my nerves; nor over my bones; nor over my family; nor over my
wealth; nor over what my Lord has provided me. I have been covered over
between me and you with the cover of Prophethood through which the
prophets of Allah covered themselves from the power of the Pharaohs.
Gabriel is on my right hand; Michael is on my left hand; Seraphiel is
behind me; Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, is before me;
Allah is aware of what withholds you and Satan from me.

O Allah, let not his ignorance overcome your slowness if he incites and
makes little of me! O Allah, I have sought refuge in You!  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1567) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 136-137.  
  

  

  

O Allah, I have sought refuge in You! O Allah, I have sought refuge in
You![[1]](#_ftn1568)

### Al-Mamūn receives the Imām

Al-Mamūn ordered the Imām to be received with an official reception, so
the armed forces and the rest of the people went out to receive him.
Al-Mamūn was at the head of those who received him. There were along
with him al-Fadl b. Sahl, the rest of his ministers and advisers.
Al-Mamūn shook hand with the Imām, welcomed him warmly, appointed for
him a splendid house supplied with servants and all the necessary
requirements, and took great care of him.

#### Al-Mamūn asks the Imām to undertake the Caliphate

Al-Mamūn officially abdicated the caliphate and asked the Imām, peace be
on him, to undertake it, saying: O son of Allahs Messenger, I have
realized your excellence, your knowledge, your asceticism, your piety,
and your acts of worship; therefore, I see that you are more appropriate
for the caliphate than me.

The Imām answered him: Through renouncing the world I hope for the
salvation from the evil of the world; through refraining from the
unlawful I wish for wining good final results; through humbleness in the
world I hope for exaltedness with Allah.

I have seen that I must remove myself from the caliphate and entrusted
it to you, retorted al-Mamūn.

However, the Imām was fully aware of the intentions of al-Mamūn, who
spared no effort to achieve his political objectives. How did al-Mamūn
abdicate the caliphate while for it he killed his brother al-Amin;
destroyed Baghdad; spread bereavement, sadness, and mourning among the
regions of  Islamic world? How did he hand it over to the Imām in spite
of all these evil deeds?

The Imām gave a decisive answer which enraged al-Mamūn, saying to him:
If this caliphate belongs to you, then it is not  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1568) Ibid., vol. 2, p. 138.  
  

  

  

permissible for you to take off the garment in which Allah has clothed
you and to give it to other than you. If the caliphate does not belong
to you, then it is not permissible for you to give me that which does
not belong to you.

The Imām silenced al-Mamūn and closed before him all avenues of
argument, so the latter threatened the former, saying: There is no
escape for you from accepting this matter.

I will never do that willingly, retorted the Imām.

Dhu al-Riyāsatayn[[2]](#_ftn1569) admired this attitude of them and
began saying: How fantastic, I have seen al-Mamūn, the Commander of the
faithful, entrusting the matter of the caliphate to al-Ridā, and I have
seen al-Rida saying to him: I have no ability or power for that. I have
never seen the caliphate more abandoned than that.

The Imām, peace be on him, was aware of this false purpose, for al-Mamūn
belonged to the Abbāsid family, who harbored malice against the members
of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, killed them during the
brightness of day and darkness of night, and spared no effort to
eliminate them from the face of earth. As for al-Mamūn, he was the
wickedest of them, for he killed the master of the Alawides, Imām
al-Ridā, and killed other than him from among the pure Alawides. So how
did the Imām trust him?

### Al-Mamūns claimed Justifications

As for al-Mamūns claimed justifications during his asking the Imām,
peace be on him, to undertake the caliphate, they are as follows:

1. He summoned al-Fadl b. Sahl and his brother al-Hasan b. Sahl. When
the were before him, he told them that he would entrust the caliphate to
the Imām. So al-Hasan exaggerated that before him and explained to him
its disadvantages. However, al-Mamūn said: I had promised Allah that if
I  overcame the deposed one (i.e. al-Amin), I would have handed over the
caliphate to the most meritorious *(afdal)*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1569]](#_F1569) Dhu al-Riyāsatayn means the man with two offices. This
nickname was given to al-Fadl b. Sahl, who was in charge of the military
and civil administration.  
  

  

  

of the family of Abū Tālib. I do not know anyone more meritorious than
this man on the face of the earth.[[1]](#_ftn1570)

This means that al-Mamūn had promised Allah that if he put an end to his
brother and overcame him he would have handed over the caliphate to the
most meritorious of the family of Abū Tālib, and the most meritorious of
them in his time was Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. But this did not
happen according to the events that followed.

2. Through his handing over the caliphate to the Alawides, he tried to
reward Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, for his
favors toward the Abbāsids, for the latter appointed Abd Allah b. Abbās
as a minister and entrusted him with the Emirate of Basrah. Similarly,
he entrusted Ubayd Allah b. al-Abbās with the Province of Yemen, and
other favors he did toward them. So al-Mamūn wanted, through what he
did, to reward the Imām regarding his children.[[2]](#_ftn1571)

3. He did that in order to seek obedience to Allah, His good pleasure,
good for the community, and the interests of the
Muslims.[[3]](#_ftn1572)

These are some justifications which al-Mamūn advanced as pretext for
handing over the caliphate to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.

#### His false Justifications

These justifications were unreal. If al-Mamūn had been truthful to them,
he would not have prevented the Imām from passing through Kūfa when he
came from Medina (Yathrib), for he feared that the people would receive
him in this city, which was among the centers of the Shiites in Islamic
world; likewise, he would not have prevented him from passing through
Qum, for the same reason. Moreover Abd Allah b. Abū Sahl al-Nobakhti, an
astrologer, told him that it was not good for him to pledge allegiance
to Imām al-Ridā when he appointed him as a successor after him; yet
al-Mamūn insisted on pledging  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1570) Maqātil al-Tālibiyyin, pp. 562-563.  
 [[2]](#_F1571) Al-Ādāb al-Sultāniya, p. 219.  
 [[3]](#_F1572) Al-Ma'mūn has declared than in the document of regency
which we will mention.  
  

  

  

allegiance to the Imām during that time.[[1]](#_ftn1573) This
demonstrates that he was a liar regarding this matter.

### Al-Mamūn asks the Imām to undertake Regency

Through all ways and means, al-Mamūn tried to convince the Imām, peace
be on him, to accept the caliphate or at least the regency after him,
but he refused him vigorously. He went on convincing the Imām for more
than two months, but all his attempts came to nothing, for the Imām
insisted on refusing him and refraining from undertaking any state
office.

### Al-Mamūn forces the Imām

All the diplomatic ways which al-Mamūn followed to convince the Imām,
peace be on him, to accept regency came to an end, so he thought that he
had to follow another way which was threatening the Imām. He sent for
the Imām. When he was in his presence, a conversation took place between
them, so the Imām said to him: By Allah, I have never told a lie since
my Lord, the Great and Almighty, has created me. I have not renounced
the world for the world, and I definitely know what you want.

What do I want? asked al-Mamūn.

The Imām asked him for security if he said the truth frankly, saying:
The Imām (i.e. the leader) must be truthful, mustnt he?

I have given you security, replied al-Mamūn.

The Imām explained the motives which urged al-Mamūn to vest regency in
him, saying: Through that you want the people to say: Surely Ali b. Mūsā
(al-Ridā) has not renounced the world; rather it is the world which has
renounced him. Do you not see that he has accepted regency and craved
for the caliphate?

Al-Mamūn became angry, so he shouted at the Imām, saying: You always
face me with what I hate! You have felt safe from my power! I swear by
Allah, you should accept regency or I will force you  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1573) Farajj al-Mahmūm, p. 142. Tārikh al-Hukamā', pp.
222-223.  
  

  

  

to (accept) it! You should do that; otherwise, I will strike off your
head![[1]](#_ftn1574)

The Imām, peace be on him, pleaded to Allah and supplicated Him, saying:
O Allah, You have prohibited me from throwing my own soul into
destruction; I have been forced; I am about to be killed by Abd Allah
al-Mamūn if I do not accept regency! I have been forced just as Yusuf
and Danyāl, peace be on them, had been forced by the tyrant of their
time to accept authority! O Allah, there is no covenant except Your
covenant; nor have I a friend except You! So give me success to
establish Your religion and to enliven the Sunna of Your Prophet,
Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family! Verily, You are the
Master, and You are the Helper! You are the best Master, and You are the
best Helper![[2]](#_ftn1575)

Any how, the Imām accepted regency while he was weeping and
sad.[[3]](#_ftn1576) Pain and worries dominated him.

### The Conditions of the Imām

The Imām mentioned before al-Mamūn some conditions which showed that he
was dissatisfied with regency and that he was forced to accept this
office. These conditions are as follows:

1. He would not appoint anyone as a governor.

2. He would not dismiss anyone.

3. He would not abolish any rite.

4. He would be a distant adviser in the affairs of the
state.[[4]](#_ftn1577)

Yet al-Mamūn accepted these conditions which clashed with his objectives
and exposed his intentions.

### The Textual Document of Regency

The regency between the Imām, peace be on him, and al-  
 Mamūn was not confined to speech; rather it was written on an  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1574) Al-Sadūq, Amāli, p. 43. 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p.
140.  
 [[2]](#_F1575) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 1, p. 19.  
 [[3]](#_F1576) Yanābi' al-Mawadda, p. 284.  
 [[4]](#_F1577) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 140.  
  

  

  

official document signed by the Imām and al-Mamūn, witnessed by
high-ranking statesmen, and transmitted by a group of historical
sources. Ibn al-Jawzi came to know of the document and said: My uncle
bought it (the document) for two hundred dinars and brought it to Sayf
al-Dawla Sadaqa b. Mansūr, and there were in it scripts of a group of
writers such as Abd Allah b. al-Abbās and the Moroccan Minister
*(al-Wazir al-Maghribi)*.[[1]](#_ftn1578) Similarly, Ali b. Īsā
al-Arbali came to know of it and has mentioned its text in his book
entitled *Kashf al-Ghumma*, and that was in the year 670 A.
H.[[2]](#_ftn1579) I (i.e. the author) will narrate its text as follows:

In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful,

This letter has been written by the servant of Allah (i.e. al-Mamūn) b.
Hārūn al-Rashid, the Commander of the faithful, to Ali b. Mūsā b. Jafar.

Now then: So surely, Allah, the Great and Almighty, has chosen Islam as
religion and chosen from among his servants messengers showing the way
to Him and guiding to Him, the first of them gives good news of the last
of them and the last of them testifies the first of them, until the
Prophethood of Allah reached Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, after a cessation of the (mission of the) apostles, extinction
of knowledge, a cessation of revelation, and approach to the Hour. So
Allah has ended the prophets through him, made him a witness to them,
and dominator over them, and He sent down to him His Holy Book
*falsehood shall not come to it from before it nor from behind it*, *a
revelation from the Wise, the Praised One* through which He has made
lawful and unlawful, promised and threatened, cautioned and warned;
through which He has ordered and prohibited, that the firm argument over
His creatures may be His*, that he who would be perish might perish by
clear proof, and he who would live might live by clear proof, and most
surely Allah is Hearing, Knowing*.

So he (the Prophet) delivered on behalf of Allah His message  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1578) Mir'āt al-Zamān, vol. 5, p. 148 (photographed).  
 [[2]](#_F1579) Kashf al-Ghumma.  
  

  

  

and summoned (men) to His path through what He had ordered him of
wisdom, good exhortation, reasoning in the best way, then through jihad
and hardness, until Allah took him to Himself and chose for him that
which is with Him. So when the Prophethood came to an end, and Allah
ended through Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, the
revelation and the message, He has made the religion continue and 
regulated the authority of the Muslims through the caliphate, its
completion and exaltedness, and undertaking it with respect to Allah
through obedience through which the duties and punishments imposed by
Allah, Islamic laws are carried out, and jihad is waged against His
enemy.

So it is obligatory on the vicegerents of Allah to obey Him concerning
what He has entrusted to them and attracted their attention regarding
His religion and His servants, and it is obligatory on the Muslims to
obey their caliphs and to help them in establishing the right and
justice of Allah, the security of the way, sparing blood, settling
hostility, and reuniting; otherwise, the cord of the Muslims disorders;
they become disordered; their beliefs become different; their religion
is defeated; their enemy becomes powerful; they are different in
opinion; and they lose this world and the next.

So it is incumbent upon him whom Allah has appointed as a vicegerent on
His earth and entrusted him with His creatures to do his best for Allah,
to prefer that in which there is the good pleasure of Allah and
obedience to him, to follow that for which Allah will make him stand and
about which He will question him, to rule with the truth and do with
justice in what Allah has placed him and vested him with, for Allah, the
Great and Almighty, says to His prophet Dāwud: *O Dāwud, surely We have
made you a ruler in the land;  so judge between men with justice and do
not follow desire, lest it should lead you astray from the path of
Allah; (as for) those who go astray from the path of Allah, they shall
surely have a severe punishment because they forget the day of
reckoning*. And (for) Allah, the Great and Almighty, said: *So by your
Lord, We shall ask them all about what they were doing*. And (for) we
have heard that Umar b. al-Khattāb said: If a goat got lost on the bank
of the Euphrates, I would fear that Allah would ask me about it.

  

  

  

By Allah, surely the one who will be asked about his own soul and
informed of his work regarding what is between him and Allah will be
brought before a great affair and tremendous danger; therefore, just
imagine how much more is (the situation) of him who is responsible for
taking care of a community? And reliance is on Allah; to Him is the
flight, desire for success and protection, directing and guiding to that
through which argument is established, good pleasure and mercy from
Allah are won.

And the best of the community in reflecting on his own soul and the
loyalist of them to Allah regarding His religion and His servants from
among His creatures on His earth is he who works according to obedience
to Allah, His Book, and the Sunna (practices) of His Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, during the period of his days and after it,
strains his own opinion regarding him to whom he has entrusted his
reign, whom he has chosen for the Imāmate over the Muslims and taking
care of them after him, and appoints for them him who is a great figure
and a place of flight in order to bring them into harmony,  to reunite
them, to  spare their blood, to give them security, with Allahs
permission, from their division, their being corrupt by enmity, and
their difference, and to raise the insinuation and trickery of Satan
from them. For Allah, the Great and Almighty, has regarded regency after
the caliphate as part of completing and perfecting Islam, exalting and
setting right its followers, and He has inspired succession in His
vicegerents through His emphasizing on him whom they choose for Him
after them, who through whom blessing is great and well-being is
inclusive, and Allah, through that, has invalidated the deception of men
of dissension, hostility, slander, difference, and any lying in wait for
discord.

He (al-Mamūn) has been the Commander of the faithful since the caliphate
reached him, so he has tried its ugly taste, its burdensome undertaking,
its hard provisions, clinging to obedience to Allah which is obligatory
on him who undertakes it (the caliphate), and fear of Him concerning
what He has burdened with it. So he has tired his body, kept his eye
awake, elaborated his thinking on that through which the religion is 
glorified, the polytheists are suppressed, the community is  

  

  

set right, justice is spread, the Book and the Sunna are established;
and he has deprived himself of ease, gentleness, and happy life. He is
aware of that about which Allah will ask him; he likes to meet Allah
while he is loyal to Him regarding His religion, His servants, choosing
for succession after him and taking care of the community the best one
(of men) in religion, piety, and knowledge, and the most hoped of them
for assuming the command and right of Allah, whispering (to Him) through
seeking refuge (in Him) concerning that, asking Him for inspiration in
which there is His good pleasure and obedience to Him by day and night,
reflecting on seeking and requesting him through the members of his
household from among the children of Abd Allah b. al-Abbās and Ali b.
Abū Tālib, confining himself to his knowledge of him whose condition and
doctrine he has come to know, sparing no effort and power to ask about
him whose affair is unknown to him, till he examined their affairs
through knowledge, tried their stories through seeing, regarded their
conditions as innocent through observing, and discovered that which is
with them through questioning.   

So his (al-Mamūns) choosing him (al-Ridā) was after  asking Allah for
the best and exerting himself in accomplishing His right toward His
servants and His earth concerning the two houses in general. That is
because he (al-Mamūn) has seen his (the Imāms) brilliant excellence, his
plain knowledge, his manifest piety, his pure asceticism, his renouncing
the world, and his being safe from the people. He has clearly come to
know that reports, tongues, and words have unanimously agreed upon him.
Besides, he still knows his excellence when young and adult, hence he
has appointed him as his successor after him, having confidence in
asking Allah for the best regarding that, for Allah has come to know
that his act is as preferring for him and the religion, taking care of
Islam and the Muslims, seeking safety, and establishing argument and
salvation on the day when men will stand for the Lord of the worlds.

The Commander of the faithful had summoned his sons, the members of his
house, his personal entourage *(khāssa)*, his commanders, and his
servants, and they with pleasure have pledged  

  

  

allegiance (to al-Ridā). They are aware of that the Commander of the
faithful has preferred the obedience to Allah to his own desire
regarding his children and other than them from among those who are more
interlaced than him in womb relationships and closer (than him) in
kinship.

He (al-Mamūn) has named him al-Ridā (consent), for the Commander of the
faithful is satisfied with him; therefore, O group of the household of
the Commander of the faithful and those who are in the guarded city from
among his commanders, his soldiers, and the Muslims in general,  pledge
allegiance to the Commander of the faithful and after him to al-Ridā,
Ali b. Mūsā in His name, His blessing, His good decree for His religion,
and His servants, with a pledge of allegiance for which you stretch out
your hands and at which you are delighted. You are aware of what the
Commander of the faithful has intended through it (the pledge of
allegiance), preferring through it the obedience to Allah, taking care
of himself and you, giving thanks to Allah for what He has inspired in
the Commander of the faithful through it regarding accomplishing His
right in taking care of you, his clinging to directing you and setting
you right, hoping for the advantage of that through reuniting you,
sparing your blood, bringing you together, closing your frontiers,
strengthening your religion, defeating your enemy, setting right your
affairs; and hasten to obedience to Allah and to the Commander of the
faithful, for it is security; if you hurry to him and praise Allah for
him, you will know that good luck is through him, Allah
willing.[[1]](#_ftn1580)

This document has ended and was dated on Monday on the eighth of the
month of Ramadān, in the year 201 A. H.

Al-Mamūn asked Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, to write the document of
regency with his own sacred hand, and he, peace be on him, wrote the
following:

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful, praise
belongs to Allah, the Doer of what He intends, there is no repeller of
His decision; nor is there any repeller of His decree, who  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1580) Subh al-A'shā, vol. 9, pp. 362-366.  
  

  

  

knows the stealthy looks and that which the breasts conceal, and His
blessings be upon His Prophet, the last of the prophets, and his family,
the good, the Pure.

I say, and I am Ali b. Mūsā b. Jafar, that the Commander of the
faithful, may Allah support him with rightness and give him success for
right guidance, has come to know of our right of which other than him
has failed to know, so he has tightened the womb links which have been
cut, made safe the souls which have become frightened; rather he has
enlivened them while they were already destroyed, made them rich while
they were poor, seeking the good pleasure of the Lord of the world,
wanting no reward from other than Him, and Allah will reward the
grateful and He does not waste the reward of the doers of good.

And that he has entrusted his regency and the great authority to me if I
remain (alive) after him, so he who unties the knot of the command of
Allah through tying it and breaks a handle whose fastening is more
lovable to Allah, then surely Allah will make lawful his sacredness if
he through that reproaches the Imām and violates the sacredness of
Islam, according to this the former (i.e. Imām Ali)  did, was patient
toward the random matters, and did not object the resolutions, for he
feared that the religion would be scattered, the cord of the Muslims
would be disordered, the affairs of the pre-Islamic paganism age was
close (to him), an opportunity might be seized, and calamity might
quickly be created.

And I have appointed Allah (as witness) over my own soul if He makes me
take care of the authority over the Muslims and vests me with His
vicegerency to work among them (men) in general and the children of
al-Abbās b. Abd al-Muttalib in particular, through obedience to Him and
to His Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, that I will not
shed forbidden blood; nor will I make lawful pudenda nor property except
that which is shed by the punishments prescribed by Allah and made
lawful by the religious duties issued from Him, and that I will do my
best and power to choose the most qualified persons, and through that I
have placed against my own soul a certain promise about which Allah will
ask me, for He, the Great and  

  

  

Almighty, says: *And fulfill the promise; surely (every) promise shall
be questioned about*.

And if I originated or changed or altered, I would be worthy of being
changed and liable to severe punishment, and I seek refuge in Allah from
His wrath, desire for success in obeying Him, coming between me and
disobeying Him, (giving) well-being to me and to the Muslims.

*Al-jāmia* [[1]](#_ftn1581) and *al-jafr* [[2]](#_ftn1582) indicate the
opposite of that, and I do not know what will be down toward me and you,
*surely the judgment is Allahs; He relates the truth and He is the best
of the deciders*, but I have obeyed the order of the Commander of the
faithful, preferred his good pleasure, and Allah protects me and him; I
have called Allah to bear witness to my own soul through that, *and
Allah is enough for a witness*.

I have written (the document of regency) in my own handwriting in the
presence of the Commander of the faithful, may Allah prolong his life,
al-Fadl b. Sahl, Sahl b. al-Fadl, Yahyā b. Akkthem, Bishr b. al-Mutamir,
and Hammād b. al-Numān, in the month of Ramadān, in the year 201 (A.
H.).

Al-Fadl b. Sahl, the minister of al-Mamūn, wrote the following: The
Commander of the faithful, may Allah prolong his life, has decreed
reading the meaning of this letter outwardly and inwardly in the Holy
Shrine of our master, Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, between the theological center *(rouda)* and the Pulpit in the
presence of the elite from among the Banū Hāshim, the rest of the
friends and the soldiers, and he asks Allah to make the Commander of the
faithful and all Muslims know through it the argument over all Muslims
and to invalidate the vague errors which have hindered the viewpoints of
the ignorant: *On no account will Allah leave the believers in the
condition which you are in*.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1581) (The document called) *al-jāmi'a* is a scroll seventy
yards long which the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, dictated from his own mouth and 'Ali b. Abū Tālib wrote in his
own hand writing.  
 [[2]](#_F1582) *Al-jafr* or the white case is a vessel in which are the
Torah of Mūsā, the Gospels of 'Īsā, the Psalms of Dāwud and the other
Books of Allah.  
  

  

  

Al-Fadl b. Sahl wrote (this document) in the appointed date.

Yahyā b. Akkthem has written the following: Yahyā b. Akkthem has
testified to the content of this page outwardly and inwardly, and he has
written in his own handwriting the (appointed) date.

Hammād b. al-Numān has written the following: Hammād b. al-Numān has
testified to the content (of this document) outwardly and inwardly.

Bishr b. al-Mutamir has written the following: Bishr b. al-Mutamir has
testified to the like of that and written in his own handwriting the
(appointed) date.[[1]](#_ftn1583)

 It is necessary for us to pause in order to consider the document of
al-Mamūn, what Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, has written, and what
al-Fadl b. Sahl has testified, and that is as follows:

### The Contents of the Document of Regency

The document of regency signed by al-Mamūn and Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him, contains the following:

Firstly, praising Islam and Allahs great Book, which is a perfect system
and an inclusive institution for making man happy and righteous.

Secondly, lauding the great Prophet, the greatest summoner to Allah,
hoister of torch of monotheism and intellectual renaissance on earth.

Thirdly, clarifying the succession after the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, for through it the religion is established, the
authority over the Muslims is regulated, and it is the shadow of Allah
on earth.

Fourth, it is obligatory on the Muslims to obey the caliphs, for
disobedience to them causes disadvantages to Islamic world.

Fifth, the caliphs undertake important responsibilities of which are
preferring obedience to Allah to all things, ruling over men with  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1583) Subh al-A'shā, vol. 9, pp. 392-393.  
  

  

  

fairness and justice, and other important responsibilities which the
document has inclusively shown.

Sixth, among the most important responsibilities of the caliphs is that
they designate successors after them, that the designation should be
based on perfect choice and exact test regarding him whom they appoint
after them, and that the choice should not be subject to partiality and
desires, for such an action leads the community to disadvantages.

Seventh, al-Mamūn did his best to choose the successor after him, so he
did not find in the Abbāsid and the Alawide families anyone more
meritorious than Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, because he had noble
qualities of which are the following:

A. Brilliant excellence,

B. Useful knowledge,

C. Pure asceticism in the world,

D. And refraining from all things made unlawful by Allah,

the Most High.

It is these noble qualities which urged al-Mamūn to elect the Imām and
to nominate him for regency after him.

### The Contents of what the Imām has written

As for the contents of what Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,  has written 
concerning regency, they are as follows:

Firstly, praising al-Mamūns relationships with the Alawides, for he
refreshed them through such relationships after they had faced tyranny
and oppression through the Abbāsid rulers, who spared no effort to
eliminate the Alawides from the face of earth; it is worth mentioning
that the Abbāsids buried the Alawides while they were alive, killed them
everywhere, threw their babies into the Tigris, and wreaked other
tragedies upon them.

Secondly, through these word of him, if he through that reproaches the
Imām, Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, referred to his grandfather, Imām
Ali, the Commander of the faithful, the gate of the city of the
knowledge of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his  

  

  

family, and the pioneer of his wisdom, whom the people removed from his
office which the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, entrusted
to him on the Day of Ghadir Khum, and accordingly the community suffered
from terrible kinds of tragedies and calamities, for the caliphate was
undertaken by some criminals such as Muāwiya, Yazid, al-Walid,
al-Mansūr, and other than them from among the Imāms of oppression and
tyranny who spared no effort to oppress the people and to force them to
yield to what they hated.

Similarly, through these words of him, and was patient toward the random
matters, he referred to the words of Umar b. al-Khattāb, who described
the pledge of allegiance to Abū Bakr as, a random matter *(falta)* from
whose evil Allah has protected the Muslims. So Imām Ali, the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him, was patient toward this random matter,
which he has mentioned in his saying: and there is pricking *(qadhā)* in
the eye * *and suffocation (of mortification) in the throat. That is
because he feared that the word of Islam would collapse, and the unity
of the Muslims would crack, for the Muslims were still close to the
pre-Islamic paganism age, and the enemy forces lied in wait for
attacking Islam if any division occurred in it; therefore, it is this
matter which prompted Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, to be patient toward those who took his legacy.

Thirdly, the Imām promised before Allah and the Muslims that he would
rule the Muslims with a policy based on pure justice, that he would
return to the people the practices of his grandfather the greatest
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and that he would choose
for the organ of government qualified and righteous persons who feared
Allah, the Exalted, and sought the next world. If the Imām had
undertaken the caliphate over the Muslims, he would have achieved all
these great goals.

Fourth, the Imām, peace be on him, predicted that he would not assume
the caliphate; nor would the community lead a life of ease and comfort
during his rule, for he had read *al-jāmia* and *al-jafr,* which were
among the deposits of the Prophethood, in which was the knowledge of
what was and what would be until the Day of  

  

  

Resurrection, which showed that he would not undertake the caliphate,
and that al-Mamūn would  deceive him through regency.

### The Contents of al-Fadls writing

As for what al-Fadl b. Sahl wrote in the document of regency, it refers
to that al-Mamūn ordered this document to be read in the mosque of the
Prophet between the theological center and the Pulpit, and in the
presence of the Hāshimite notables, the armed forces, and the rest of
the people, for reading the document in such a place would emphasize
regency and disprove the views of the ignorant and of the partial.

These are some contents of the document and its supplements. They are
plain; there is no confusion or ambiguity in them.

### The Pledge of Allegiance to the Imām

Al-Mamūn held a general popular festival attended by the ministers, the
high-ranking statesmen, the commanders of the armed forces, and the rest
of the people; at their head were the Alawides and the Abbāsids; the
festival was held on Tuesday, the second day of the blessed month of
Ramadān[[1]](#_ftn1584), in the year 201.[[2]](#_ftn1585)

Al-Mamūn was seated and he had had two great cushions placed for Imām
al-Ridā, so that he would have the same kind of seat and covers. He
seated al-Ridā, peace be on him, on them; he was dressed in green and
wearing a turban and a sword. Then al-Mamūn ordered his son, al-Abbās,
to be the first of the people to make the pledge of allegiance to
him[[3]](#_ftn1586), and then the people pledged allegiance to him.

### The Way of the Pledge of Allegiance

As for the way the people followed to pledge allegiance to the Imām,
peace be on him, it was unique, with which the Umayyad and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1584) 'Uyūn al-Tawārikh, vol. 3, p. 221.  
 [[2]](#_F1585) Sir al-Silsila al-'Alawiya, p. 38. Mir'āt al-Zamān, vol.
6, p. 40. Al-Qudā'i.  
 [[3]](#_F1586) Bihār al-Anwār.  
  

  

  

the Abbāsid kings were not familiar, for he, peace be on him, moved his
hand and hit his own face with the back of it and their faces with the
palm.

Stretch out your hand for the pledge of allegiance, al-Mamūn demanded.

The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, used to make
the pledge in this way when the people pledge allegiance to him,
retorted al-Rida, peace be on him.[[1]](#_ftn1587)

Perhaps the Imām depended on these words of Him, the Exalted: The hand
of Allah is above their hands. So it was not permissible for one who
made the pledge of allegiance to place his own hand above the hand of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, or above the hand of
the Imām, peace be on him.

#### The Imām predicts that this Matter will not be achieved

Imām al-Rida, peace be on him, was dressed in the robes of honor and
attended that meeting. Orators and poets rose and began to mention his
great merit and summoned the people to pledge allegiance to him. The
Imām, peace be on him, looked at one of his close associates, who was
feeling happy about what had happened. He signaled him to come closer.
He went closer to him, and he said so that no one else could hear: Do
not occupy your heart with this matter and do not be happy about it. It
is something which will not be achieved.[[2]](#_ftn1588)

The matter was as the Imām, peace be on him,  had said, for this pledge
of allegiance to him was not achieved, and al-Mamūn broke his promise
when he gave him poison to drink and assassinated him.

#### Al-Mamūn delivers a Speech

When the ceremonies of the pledge of allegiance to the Imām were over,
al-Mamūn rose, ascended the pulpit, and addressed the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1587) Maqātil al-Tālibiyyin.  
 [[2]](#_F1588)Al-Fusūl al-Muhimma, p. 238.  
  

  

  

people, saying: O people, you have come to know about the pledge of
allegiance to Ali b. Mūsā b. Jafar b. Mohammed b. Ali b. al-Husayn b.
Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him. By Allah, if I recited these names
before the deaf and the dumb, they would recover with the permission of
Allah, the Great and Almighty.[[1]](#_ftn1589)  

#### Imām al-Ridā delivers a Speech

After the pledge of allegiance to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, had
terminated, al-Mamūn asked him to ascend the pulpit and address the
people, so he went up on the pulpit. He praise and glorified Allah, and
then he said: O People, we have a right due to us from you through the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, and you also
have a right due to you from us through him. If you carry out your duty
to us, then it is necessary for us to carry out our duty to you.

The Imām did not mention anything other than these words[[2]](#_ftn1590)
in which he has expressed his right due to him from the people, for he
is the grandson of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who was faithful to their religion and their world, and took
them out of the life of error and estrangement, so if they had carried
out his right and installed him as a caliph, then it would have been
obligatory on him to establish in their regions justice in all its
senses and concepts.

#### Al-Abbās delivers a Speech

Al-Abbās, the orator, delivered an eloquent, wonderful speech and ended
it with this poetry line:

There is no escape for the people from having a sun and

a moon, so you are a sun, and this is that moon.[[3]](#_ftn1591)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1589) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 147.  
 [[2]](#_F1590) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F1591) Tadhkirat al-Khawās, p. 364.  
  

  

  

### Persons abstain from pledging Allegiance to the Imām

Some persons abstained from pledging allegiance to the Imām, for they
harbored malice against him, hated him, and were indignant with al-Mamūn
because of his appointing the Imām as a successor after him. They are as
follows:

1. Īsā al-Julūdi.

2. Ali Bin Umrān.

3. Abū Yunus.[[1]](#_ftn1592)

Al-Mamūn ordered them to be arrested and imprisoned.

#### Al-Mamūn orders them to be executed

He ordered these three persons to be taken out of the prison. When they
stood before him and saw Imām al-Ridā sitting beside him, they became so
angry that Ali b. Umrān addressed al-Mamūn, saying: I seek refuge for
you, O Commander of the faithful, with Allah from taking out this
authority, which Allah has vested in you and with which He has singled
you out, and placing it in the hands of your enemies and those whom your
forefathers had killed and made homeless in the land.

O Son of the adulteress, shouted al-Mamūn at him, why have you insisted
on that?

Then he ordered his head to be struck off. Then Abū Yunus was brought
before him. When he saw the Imām sitting beside al-Mamūn and enjoying
honor and magnification, he became displeased and addressed al-Mamūn,
saying: O Commander of the faithful, by Allah, this (one) who is sitting
beside you worships an idol apart from Allah.

As a result al-Mamūn ordered him to be executed, and he was executed.
Then Īsā al-Julūdi was brought into his presence. It is worth mentioning
that he was the mortal enemy of the members of the House (*ahl
al-Bayt)*, peace be on them. It was he whom Hārūn al-Rashid had  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1592) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā.  
  

  

  

sent to Medina (Yathrib) in order to loot and confiscate the garments
and jewels of the granddaughters of Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family. Accordingly, he went to the house of Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, intended to break into it and to loot the garments of
the Alawide ladies. The Imām refused that, but al-Julūdi paid no
attention to him. So the Imām began entreating him and promising him
that he would go in and bring him what he wanted. Al-Julūdi yield to the
words of the Imām, who went in, gathered the garments and jewels of the
Alawide ladies, and gave them to him. He took them and went away. As for
the Imām, he asked al-Mamūn to pardon al-Julūdi, but he refused him
vigorously, saying: O my master, it is this (person) who had looted (the
garments and jewels) of the granddaughters of Mohammed, may Allah bless
him and his family!

Al-Julūdi looked at the Imām when he was speaking to al-Mamūn and
entreating him in order to pardon him, but the stupid one (i.e.
al-Julūdi) thought that the Imām intended to avenge himself upon him
because of what he had done toward him, so he said to al-Mamūn: O
Commander of the faithful, I ask you through Allah and my service to
al-Rashid not to accept the statement of this (i.e. the Imām) concerning
me.

Al-Mamūn turned to Imām al-Ridā and said to him: O Abū al-Hasan, he has
asked me for pardon, and we regard his oath as true.

Then he addressed al-Julūdi, saying: No, by Allah, I will not accept his
statement concerning you.

Then he turned to the police men and said to them: Let him join his
friend! So he was advanced and his head was struck off.[[1]](#_ftn1593)

### Important Decrees

Al-Mamūn issued some important decrees on the occasion of appointing
Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, as a successor. They are as follows:

1. Giving salaries to the soldiers for one full year.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1593) Ibid., vol. 2, p. 161-162.  
  

  

  

2. Abandoning the black uniform of the Abbāsids[[1]](#_ftn1594), and
dressing in green. I (i.e. the author) think that the inhabitants of the
Garden will be dressed in green, for Allah, the Most High, says: And
they shall wear green robes of fine silk and thick silk.[[2]](#_ftn1595)

3. Striking dirhams and dinars with the name of Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him. Al-Sayyid Abd al-Qādir Ahmed al-Yusuf has mentioned some
examples of that currency as follows:

### (The Dinar)

It has been written in the center of its face: There is no god but
Allah, the One without associate with Him. It has been written in the
girth: In the name of Allah, this dinar was struck in Samarqand in the
year 202. And it has been written in the circle: Allahs is the command
before and after, and on that day the believers shall rejoice at Allahs
help.

It has been written in the center of the back: Allah, Mohammed is Allahs
Messenger, al-Mamūn is the vicegerent of Allah, of what the Emir
al-Ridā, the regent over the Muslims, Ali b. Mūsā b. Ali b. Abū Tālib
has commanded.

And it has been written in the circle of the center of the back:
Mohammed is the Messenger of Allah; He has sent him with guidance and
the religion of truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all
religions, though the polytheists may be averse.

### (The Dirham)

 Abd al-Qādir has moved the shape of the dirham from Berlin Museum
numbered 1295. The formula of the writing in the center of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1594) Ina tradition it has been mentioned that Gabriel came
down to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and was dressed
in black, so he asked him: "O Gabriel, what about this black uniform?"
"It is the uniform of children of your uncle al-'Abbāss," replied
Gabriel, "O Mohammed, your children will face destruction from the
children of your uncle al-'Abbāss." This has been mentioned in Wasā'il
al-Shi'a, vol. 3, p. 279.  
 [[2]](#_F1595) Qur'ān, 18, 31.  
  

  

  

the face is: There is no god but Allah, the One without an associate
with Him. in the year 203.

The writing in the circle is: Allahs is the command before and after,
and on that day the believers shall rejoice at Allahs help.

The writing in the back is: Allah, Mohammed is Allahs Messenger,
al-Mamūn is the vicegerent of Allah, of what al-Ridā has commanded.

The writing in the circle is: Mohammed is the Messenger of Allah; He has
sent him with guidance and the religion of truth, that He might cause it
to prevail over all religions, though the polytheists may be averse.

Another shape of the dirham available in the British Museum in London,
number 289 is as follows:

The writing in the center of the face is: There is no god but Allah, the
One without an associate with Him.

The writing in the girth is : the year 2

The writing in the circle is: Allahs is the command before and after.

The writhing in the center of the back is: It was commanded by the Emir
of the Muslims, Ali b. Mūsā...Ali b. Abū Tālib...Dhu al-Riyāsatayn.

The writing in the circle is: Mohammed is the Messenger of Allah.

These dots show that some letters have been erased, for they have copied
in this manner in the world catalogs. This writing has been erased
because the currency is very old and used very much. There are examples
of the dirhams which were struck in the year 704 A. H., the same as the
currency of the Imām, and it has been written in them what had been
written in the original currency.[[1]](#_ftn1596)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1596) Al-Imām 'Ali al-Ridā Wali 'Ahd al-Ma'mūn, pp. 62-65.  
  

  

  

### The Imām marries al-Mamūns Daughter

Al-Mamūn asked Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, to marry the Princess,
Mrs. Umm Habib[[1]](#_ftn1597); the Imām accepted that and married her.
Al-Mamūn intended to seek nearness to the Imām, that the relationships
between them might be strong. Some traditionalists think that al-Mamūn
married his daughter to the Imām in order to spy on his behavior and
activities. This step suits al-Mamūn, who is famous for deception and
trickery.

### The Pledge of Allegiance to the Imām in all Cities

Al-Mamūn ordered all his governors over all Islamic cities and regions
to take from all citizens the pledge of allegiance to Imām al-Ridā
regarding regency. The following are some cities where the pledge of
allegiance to him was taken:

#### 1. Medina (Yathrib)

All popular classes in Medina (Yathrib) happily received  the news of
regency of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. The governor of Medina, Abd
al-Jabbār al-Masāhiqi, hurried to the mosque of the Prophet in order to
take from the inhabitants of the city the pledge of allegiance (to the
Imām). That was after al-Mamūns command concerning that. He ascended the
pulpit and addressed the people, saying: O People, this is the matter
for which you have wished, the justice for which you have waited, and
the good for which you have hoped. This is Ali b. Mūsā b. Jafar b.
Mohammed b. Ali b. al-Husayn b. Ali b. Abū Tālib, the peace of Allah be
upon them.[[2]](#_ftn1598)

The pledge of allegiance to Imām al-Ridā was the most important and
valuable hope for which the Muslim community waited,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1597) Abū al-Farajj al-Asfahān has mentioned: "Imām al-Ridā
married Umm al-Fadl, al-Ma'mūn's daughter." This is incorrect; the
correct is that the Imām married Umm Habib.  
 [[2]](#_F1598) Al-'Aqqd al-Farid, vol. 5, p. 226.  
  

  

  

for it impatiently waited for the return of the rule to the Imām, that
he might establish pure justice among it, spread security and welfare
among its regions, and save it from the oppression and tyranny of the
Abbāsids.    

#### 2. Egypt

Al-Mamūn wrote to his governor over Egypt, al-Sari, and ordered him to
take from the Egyptians the pledge of allegiance to his successor Imām
al-Ridā. The letter came to al-Sari in the month of Muhrrah, in the year
202. So al-Sari started taking the pledge of allegiance to the Imām,
peace be on him. But Ibrāhim b. al-Mahdi, the leader of the singers in
Baghdad, spoiled this pledge of allegiance, for he wrote to the
prominent soldiers and their commanders in Egypt and ordered them to
depose al-Mamūn and his heir apparent and to revolt against al-Sari. So 
some of them responded to him, among them were al-Hārith b. Zara b.
Mahzam at al-Fistāt, Abd al-Aziz al-Wazir al-Jarawi at the bottom of the
land, Salāma b. Abd al-Malik al-Azdi al-Tahāwi at al-Said, Sulaymān b.
Ghālib b. Gabriel, and Abd al-Aziz b. Abd al-Rahmān b. Abd al-Jabbār
al-Azdi. As a result they revolted against al-Sari, summoned the people
to pledge allegiance to Ibrāhim, and appointed Abd al-Aziz al-Azdi as a
governor over Egypt. So al-Sari warred against them, captured Abd
al-Aziz and a group of his family. He killed some of them, sent some of
them along with Abd al-Azizs daughter to al-Mamūn, and he ordered them
to be killed. The rest went to al-Harawri in order to protect
them.[[1]](#_ftn1599) In this manner the revolt was suppressed, and the
people pledged allegiance to the Imām.

#### 3. Mecca

Al-Mamūn sent Īsā al-Julūdi to Mecca in order to take from its people
the pledge of allegiance to the Imām, and in Mecca was Ibrāhim, the
brother of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him. Īsā al-Julūdi summoned the
Meccans to pledge allegiance to the Imām, peace be on  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1599) Al-Wilāt wa Kittāb al-Qudāt, p. 168.  
  

  

  

him, and to dress in green. So they responded to him with happiness and
thankfulness, invoking (Allah) for al-Mamūn for accomplishing their wish
and hope through this pledge of allegiance.[[1]](#_ftn1600)

#### 4. Kūfa

The overwhelming majority in Kūfa received the news of the pledge of
allegiance to the Imām with happiness and delight. Al-Mamūn entrusted
al-Abbās, the son of Imām Mūsā, peace be on him, with taking from the
Kūfans the pledge of allegiance (to the Imām). Ibrāhim b. Abd al-Hamid
gave him one hundred thousand dirhams and said to him: Fight on behalf
of your brother, for the Kūfans respond to you for that, and I am along
with you. Al-Abbās undertook this task, so a large group of them
responded to him. A group of people said to him: If you summon (us) to
al-Mamūn and then after him to your brother, then we are in no need of
your summons; and if you summon (us) to your brother or to some of the
members of your household or to yourself, then we will respond to you.
So al-Abbās said to them: I summon (you) to al-Mamūn in the first place,
and then after him to my brother, al-Ridā.[[2]](#_ftn1601)

These people abstained from pledging allegiance to the Imām, condemned
those who pledged allegiance to him, and summoned them to break the
pledge of allegiance. When Ibrāhim b. al-Mahdi came to know about the
desertion of the Kūfans, he ordered his army residing at the Nile and
under the leadership of Said and Abū al-Bit to occupy Kūfa and suppress
the mutiny. The armies of Ibrāhim marched and arrived at al-Qantara near
Dir al-Awar. There they were hindered by a military force headed by the
Alawide, Ali b. Mohammed b. Jafar and Abū Abd Allah, the brother of the
great leader Abū al-Sarāyā, so it met them, and finally the armies of
Ibrāhim b. al-Mahdi won a victory (over it).

Then the armies of Ibrāhim advanced towards Kūfa;  they were dressed in
black; their motto was: O Mansūr there is no obedience to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1600) Al-Ya'qūbi, Tārikh, vol. 3, p. 277.  
 [[2]](#_F1601) Al-Tabari, Tārikh.  
  

  

  

al-Mamūn. The Kūfans cowered and were unable to war against them, so
they sent a delegation to the commander-in-chief of the army of Ibrāhim
in order to give security to al-Abbās and his group, and he responded to
them for that and made it a condition on them that al-Abbās and his
companions should leave Kūfa. Then the delegation came back to al-Abbās,
who had no knowledge of that, and said to him: Surely all your followers
are mobs; you will see that the people will face war, loot, and murder;
therefore, leave us; we are in no need of you.[[1]](#_ftn1602)

Accordingly, al-Abbās left Kūfa while he was sad and sorrowful. He came
to know that the Kūfans would not protect him; nor would they fulfill
their promise and covenant toward him. Then the armies of Ibrāhim
entered Kūfa, but no clashes took place between them and those who
pledged allegiance to the Imām as a heir apparent.

These are some of the regions where the pledge of allegiance to the Imām
was taken as a heir apparent.

### Persons criticize the Imām

Some Shiites criticized the Imām for his accepting the succession after
al-Mamūn, the Abbāsid. They are as follows:

#### 1. Mohammed Bin Arafa

Mohammed b. Arafa came to the Imām and asked him: O son of Allahs
Messenger, what has made you accept  regency?

That which made my grandfather the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, accept the consultative council, replied the
Imām.[[2]](#_ftn1603)

Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, was forced to
take part in the consultative committee which Umar b. al-Khattāb chose
in order to elect the caliph after him. The Imām announced his sadness
and sorrow because of his joining the members of the consultative
council, saying: But good heavens! What had I to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1602) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F1603) Wasā'il al-Shi'a, vol. 12, p. 148.  
  

  

  

do with this consultation? Where was any doubt about me with regard to
the first of them that I was now considered akin to these ones? Imām
al-Ridā was forced to accept regency just as his grandfather was forced
to accept the consultative committee.

#### 2. A Man

A man criticized him for his accepting regency, saying: May Allah set
you right, how have you become the successor of al-Mamūn?

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, denied his accepting the succession after
al-Mamūn. Then he asked the man: Who is better the Prophet or the
testamentary trustee?

No, the Prophet, replied the man.

Who is better the Muslim or the polytheist?

No, rather the Muslim, answered the man.

Then the Imām, peace be on him, stated a decisive argument, saying: The
Chief of Egypt was a polytheist, and Yusuf was a prophet. Al-Mamūn is a
Muslim, and I am a testamentary trustee. Yusuf asked the Chief to vest
him with an office, to the extent that he said to him: *Place me (in
authority) over the treasures of the land, surely I am a good keeper,
knowing well*. As for al-Mamūn, he has forced me to be his
successor.[[1]](#_ftn1604)

#### 3. Al-Rayyān Bin al-Salt

 Al-Rayyān Bin al-Salt visited Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and said
to him: O son of Allahs Apostle, surely the people say: Verily, you have
accepted regency though you show asceticism in the world.

So the Imām answered him: Allah was already aware of that I hated that.
So when I had to choose between that and murder, I preferred acceptance
to murder. Woe upon them! Surely Yusuf was a prophet and messenger, but
when necessity pushed him to undertake the treasures of al-Aziz (the
Chief of Egypt), he said to him: *Place me  
*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1604) Ibid., p. 146.  
  

  

  

(in authority) over the treasures of the land, surely I am a good
keeper, knowing well. Similarly, necessity pushed me to accept that
(i.e. regency), though I was forced and was about to be destroyed. I
have accepted this matter and will leave it. So I complain to Allah, and
it is He Whom we ask for help.[[1]](#_ftn1605)

The Imām vigorously expressed his hate and detest toward this office,
but he was forced to accept it.

#### 4. A Khārijite

A Khārijite angrily walked towards the Imām and asked him: Tell me about
your entering into (negotiations) with this tyrant (i.e. al-Mamūn) while
you regard them as unbelievers and you are the grandson of Allahs
Messenger, so what made you do that?

The Imām replied: Who are more unbelieving in your viewpoint they or the
Chief of Egypt and the inhabitants of his kingdom? Dont they, any how,
claim that they are monotheists and those were polytheists and did not
profess Allah? Wasnt Yusuf b. Yaqūb a prophet and son of a prophet; yet
he demanded the Chief, who was an unbeliever, and said to him: *Place me
(in authority) over the treasures of the land, surely I am a good
keeper, knowing well*, and took the place of the Pharaohs? As for me, I
am one of the children of Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his
family. He (al-Mamūn) forced me to accept this matter. What have I
denied and you have become indignant with me?

The Khārijite began saying: I witness that you are the son of Allahs
Apostle, and that you are truthful.[[2]](#_ftn1606)

Through his conversations with those who were indignant with him, the
Imām, peace be on him, has shown that he was forced to accept being a
heir apparent. That is because he had to chose between killing and
accepting regency, so he accepted  regency in order to save his own soul
from the destruction which would cause no advantage to Islam.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1605) Ibid., p. 147.  
 [[2]](#_F1606) Ibid., pp. 149-150.  
  

  

  

### The Indignant with al-Mamūn

The anti *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them, forces were indignant with
al-Mamūn because of his designating Imām al-Ridā as a heir apparent;
they regarded this procedure as taking the caliphate from the Abbāsid
family who enjoyed its shadow.

The Abbāsid family was the most indignant with al-Mamūn, for they
regarded that as a danger against their kingdom and the end of their
lives. They were so angry with him that they took the following
measures:

#### Deposing al-Mamūn

The Abbāsids refused al-Mamūns pledge of allegiance to the Imām,
regarded it as abolished, made public their mutiny against al-Mamūn
before the people, asked them to reject the pledge of allegiance to him
and to his heir apparent. So many people responded to them. Accordingly,
they stated that they were not responsible for the pledge of allegiance
to al-Mamūn.

#### The Pledge of Allegiance to Ibrāhim Bin Shakkla

The Abbāsids intended to pledge allegiance to their leader Ibrāhim b.
Shakkla[[1]](#_ftn1607), the Shaykh of the singers and the musicians in
Baghdad. They summoned the people to accept him as a caliph and called
him al-Murdi (the satisfactory one).[[2]](#_ftn1608) The aware and the
intellectual circles made fun of him and disdained him, for he was
reckless and free from all values and traditions; concerning him Dibil
al-Khazāi, a revolutionary and social poet, has composed:

Ibn Shakkla cried in Iraq and (among) its people, so those

blind and foolish hurried to him.

If Ibrāhim (Ibn Shakkla) undertakes it (the caliphate),

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1607) Shakkla was the mother of Ibrāhim and was a black
female-slave. As for Ibrāhim, he was so strong with a great body that he
was called al-Tinnin (the dragon), Wafayāt al-A'yān, vol. 1, p. 20.  
 [[2]](#_F1608) Al-Ya'qūbi, Tārikh.  
  

  

  

then, after him, Makhāriq and Zalzal will be appropriate

for it.

How do, and that does not occur, the dissolute inherit the

caliphate one by one?

Dibil al-Khazāi mocked the caliphate which was undertaken by this
dissolute person. He has shown that if the caliphate had been suitable
for him, then it would have been suitable for his equal singers such as
Zalzal, and Makhāriq. It is an act of mockery that Ibrāhim assumed the
caliphate and undertook the affairs of the Muslims. The historians have
said: Ibrāhim was the mortal enemy of the family of Ali, peace be on
him. When he had heard that regency was entrusted to Imām al-Ridā, peace
be on him, he became so angry that he composed these poetry lines:

So may the Abbāsids not be rewarded well, according to my claim, nor may
they be delighted with my kindness.

They quickly came to me; and the barren time has brought

them clear news.

It has untied the bands of the properties from them and

put them round the heads of the Alawides.

So they (the bands) have clamored when they have been

put round the heads which will demand the

Prophets legacy.[[1]](#_ftn1609)

In his time the central budget became bankrupt, and the soldiers
gathered around his court asking him for their salaries, so his
messenger came out for them and said to them: He has no money. A joker
demanded and said: In stead of money, let the Caliph comes out and sing
three songs for the people on this side and three songs for the people
on that side.[[2]](#_ftn1610)

Dibil has composed a poem regarding this funny view, saying:

O soldiers, do not be hopeless; take your salaries

and do not be displeased.

He will sing you a song the

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1609) Al-Wilāt wa Kittāb al-Qudāt, p. 168.  
 [[2]](#_F1610) Wafayāt al-A'yān, vol. 1, p. 21.  
  

  

  

beardless and the bearded enjoy.

Your leaders songs, neither enter the bag nor

tie it.

In this manner the caliph, who plays on the lute,

provides his soldiers with the means of subsistence.

He has stamped the record of your salaries and corrected

the determination; therefore do not be displeased.

The pledge of allegiance to Ibrāhim is an ill omen, during it the people
will be killed or subjected to famine.[[1]](#_ftn1611)

### Al-Mamūns Letter to the Abbāsids

Al-Mamūn and his Abbāsid relatives exchanged letters of cursing and
slandering. Al-Mamūn sent the Abbāsids a letter which
says[[2]](#_ftn1612):

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful,

 Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the worlds; Allah has blessed
Mohammed and the family of Mohammed, in spite of the unwilling, now
then:

Al-Mamūn has come to know of your letter, your scheming your affair, and
your churning your butter. He has towered over the hearts of your young
and your old. He is aware of you when you come to (him) and turn away
(from him) and of what your letter had reached before you wrote it
regarding coaxing falsehood, turning away the eminent figures of the
truth from their places, your abandoning the Book of Allah and the
traditions, and all that which has been brought by the truthful one
Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, to the extent that you
look like the bygone communities which had been destroyed (by Allah)
through causing (the land) to sink down, drowning, the winds, the
outcry, thunderbolts, and stoning.

       *Do they not then reflect on the Qurān or are there locks on
the  
*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1611) 'Asr al-Ma'mūn, vol. 3, pp. 255-256.  
 [[2]](#_F1612) It was in reply to their letters which they had sent to
al-Ma'mūn and asked him to answer it, so he has answered them through
this letter which has abstracted them from every noble quality.  
  

  

  

hearts? By Him who is closer to the jugular vein than al-Mamūn, were it
not for that someone said, al-Mamūn has left answer due to feebleness, I
would not answer you, because of your bad manners, your insignificant
importance, your weak intellects, and your silly viewpoints in which you
take refuge. So let a listener listen, and let those present tell those
absent.

This part of al-Mamūns letter contains the following:

1. Al-Mamūn started his letter with calling down blessing upon Mohammed
and his family, and then he said, in spite of the unwilling, by which he
meant the Abbāsids, who spared no effort to eliminate the name of the
family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and to remove
their intellectual and spiritual qualities from the world of Islam.

2. He was aware of the hidden things in the souls of the Abbāsids and
came to know of their intentions. He came to know of them when they came
to him and turned away from him. He was aware of them when they
supported falsehood, abandoned right, left the Book of Allah and what
was brought by the greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.

3. He answered their letter not as a result of taking care of them;
rather he feared that it would be said that he was unable to answer
them. Now, let us return to read the second part of al-Mamūns letter.

Now then, Allah, the Exalted, sent Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, after a cessation of the (mission of the) apostles, while
Quraysh were (taking care of) themselves and their properties; they did
not think that there was anyone to compete with them (for exaltedness)
or vie with them (for glory). So our Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, was trusted and among the middle of them in house and the
least of them in wealth. So Khadija, daughter of Khwaylid, was the first
to belive in him and to help him through her own wealth. Then the
Commander of the faithful Ali b. Abū Tālib believed in him while he was
seven years old, did not associate anything with Allah even a flicker of
an eye; nor did he worship an idol; nor did he swallow down usury; nor
was he similar to those ignorant in their ignorance. As for the uncles
of Allahs  

  

  

Messenger, they were either a mean Muslim or a stubborn unbeliever
except Hamza, for he did not refrain from Islam; nor did Islam refrain
from him until he passed away while he was fully aware of his Lord.

As for Abū Tālib, he looked after him (the Prophet), brought him up,
defended him, and protected him. When Allah took Abū Tālib to Himself,
the people hurried and agreed on murdering him (the Prophet), so he
immigrated to the people *who made their abode in the city and in the
faith, love those who have fled to them, and not find in their hearts a
need of what they are given, and prefer (them) to themselves though
poverty may afflict them, and whoever is preserved from the
niggardliness of his soul, these it is that are the successful ones*.

This part displays the mission of the greatest Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family; it shows that the Prophet was sent to an arrogant
group of people who thought that there was none to compete with him for
exaltedness and glory, and that, at the dawn of the brilliant mission,
none believed in him except Umm al-Muminin (the mother of the believers)
Mrs. Khadija, who appropriated all her wealth for his message, and after
her believed in him Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, the peace
of Allah be upon him, who was seven years old, did not prostrate for any
idol and did not worship it; rather he worshipped Allah, the Most High,
due to faith in Him and sincerity to Him.

As for the uncles of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
one of them was Abū Lahab, who was a spiteful, errant polytheist; among
them was the hero of Islam, lion of Allah, the martyr Hamza, throw whom
Allah exalted Islam, and who bravely defended Allahs Messenger until he
died as a martyr.

The best uncle of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, is
Abū Tālib, who believed in Islam, adopted its goals and doctrines, stood
beside the Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, protected him,
and drove away from him the scheming of the enemies. When this great
figure died, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, lost the
one who protected and defended him; in the mean time, Quraysh hurried to
kill him, so he immigrated to  

  

  

Medina (Yathrib), took it as a quarter for his summons and a capital for
his government, for therein he found the choice who were ready to
sacrifice their own souls for him. Now, let us return to another part of
this letter:

None of the *Muhājirin* (Emigrants) supported Allahs Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, as Ali did, for he helped him, protected
him through his own soul, and slept on his bed. Then he was still
clinging to the parts of the frontiers. He clashed with the heroes, did
not recoil from any equal, and did not turn the back in flight from any
army. He was calm. He ordered the whole (people), but none ordered him.
He was the most violent of all the people in pressure against the
polytheists, the greatest of them in waging jihād for Allah, the most
learned of them in the religion of Allah, the best of them in reading
the Book of Allah, the most knowledgeable of them in the lawful and the
unlawful.

It is he who is the leader of the authority *(wilāya)* in the hadith of
Ghadir Khum and concerned by these words of him (the Prophet), may Allah
bless him and his family: Your position with me is as Hārūn had with
Mūsā, except that there will be no prophet after me. He was leader of
the Day of al-Tāif, and the most lovable of all creatures to Allah, the
Exalted, and to Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family. It
was he who opened the gate (of Khaybar) and closed the gates of the
mosque. It was he who carried the standard on the Day of Khaybar, killed
Amrū b. Abdū Wūd, and was the brother of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, when he made the Muslims associate with each other
as brothers.

He was inaccessible and generous. It was he concerning whom the verse
(was revealed): *And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and
the orphan and the captive*.[[1]](#_ftn1613) He was the husband of
Fātima, the mistress of the women of the world and of the Garden, and
son-in-law of Khadija. He was the cousin of Allahs Messenger, may Allah
bless him and his family, who brought him up and maintained him. He was
the son of Abū Tālib (and similar to him) in his support  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1613) Qur'ān, 76, 8.  
  

  

  

and jihād, and he was the soul of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, on the Day of al-Mubāhala (the contest of prayer).

It was he whom Abū Bakr and Umar had consulted before they did any
affair. They carried out what he regarded as right and did not carry out
what he regarded as wrong. He was the only Hāshimite who took part in
the Consultative Council. By my life! If his companions had been able to
drive him away from him, just as al-Abbās (may Allah be pleased with
him) did, and they had found a way to that, they would have done.

As for your preferring al-Abbās to him (Ali), surely Allah, the Most
High, says: *What! do you make (one who undertakes) the giving of drink
to the pilgrims and the guarding of the Sacred Mosque like him who
believes in Allah and the latter day and strives hard in Allahs way?*
[[1]](#_ftn1614)

By Allah if a man of your men or other than him had a quality of the
Commanders of the faithfuls laudable qualities, excellences, and the
verses interpreted in the Qurān, then you would regard him as worthy of
the caliphate and preferred him to the companions of Allahs Messenger,
may Allah bless him and his family, through that quality. Then the
affairs would promote him until he undertook the affairs of the Muslims,
so he did not take care of any of the Hāshimites except Abd Allah b.
Abbās as a sign of magnifying his right and tightening the bonds of his
blood relatives and confidence in him, so it was one of his affairs
through which Allah will forgive him.

This part displays some excellences of Imām Abū al-Husayn, the pioneer
of wisdom and knowledge in the world of Islam, of which is that he
defended the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, supported him,
protected him with his own soul and blood, spent the night on his bed
when Quraysh decided to kill him, may Allah bless him and his family,
clashed with the heroes, struck off their heads as a sign of defense for
Islam; therefore, he was the most violent of all the people in pressure
against the polytheists and the unbelievers. So how great his advantages
for Islam are!

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1614) Ibid., 9, 19.  
  

  

  

Among his excellences is that he was the most learned and knowledgeable
of the people in the precepts of the religion and the law of the master
of the messengers, that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
entrusted the authority to him, appointed him as his successor after him
on the Day of Ghadir Khum, and said his famous statement regarding him:
Whoever I am the master *(mawlā)* of, this man, Ali is his master. O
Allah, befriend whoever befriends him, be hostile to whoever opposes
him, support whoever supports him and desert whoever deserts him. The
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, praised him again when he
said to him: Your position with me is as Hārūn had with Mūsā, except
that there will be no prophet after me.

Another example of his exalted position and his great importance with
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, is that he (the
Prophet) ordered all the doors facing his great mosque to be closed; he
did not exclude in any of them except that of Ali, for it remained open
and was not closed. Among his virtues is that he carried the standard on
the Day of Khaybar, for it was he who conquered the stronghold of
Khaybar and put an end to the Jews, and killed Amrū b. Abd wud, of whom
the Muslims were afraid and whom none of them fought against except the
hero and protector of Islam, Imām Ali, peace be on him.

Another example of the good traits of the Commander of the faithful is
that when the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, made the
Muslims associate with each other as brothers, Ali was alone, so the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, associated with him as his
brother and said to him: O Ali, you are my brother in this world and the
next.

Another example of his excellences is that this holy verse was revealed
concerning him, his two sons, and his wife, the mistress of the women of
the world: *And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the
orphan and the captive*.

Another example of his virtues is that the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, married him to the mistress of the women of the Muslims
and part of him, Fātima al-Zahrā, peace be on her, for there was no man
equal to her except Ali.

  

  

  

Yet another example of his great traits is that he was the soul of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, as it is indicated by the
Verse of al-Mubāhala, for he, the peace of Allah be upon him, through
his talents and genius, had a personality similar to that of the noble
Messenger, who filled the world with light.

As Imām Ali had an exalted character and a great rank, Abū Bakr and Umar
consulted him when they intended to carry out a certain affair; of
course, they consulted him regarding the precepts of the religion.

In this part of al-Mamūns letter is that if any of the Muslims had had
excellences like those of Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, then he would have been worthy of undertaking the caliphate
and authority over the Muslims. Now, let us listen to another part of
this letter, which says:

Then we (the Abbāsids) and they (the Umayyads) were like one hand just
as you claim until Allah, the Exalted, decided the authority for us, so
we terrified them (the Alawides), straitened them, and killed them more
than the killing of the Umayyads toward them. Woe unto you! Surely the
Umayyads killed anyone (from among the Alawides) who unsheathed a sword,
while we, the Abbāsids, have killed *en masse*; so, ask the great souls
of the Hāshimtes what sin they committed. Ask those who were thrown into
the Tigris and the Euphrates, and those who were buried in Baghdad and
Kūfa while they were alive. How far! *So he who has done an atoms weight
of good shall see it. And he who has done an atoms weight of evil shall
see it*.[[1]](#_ftn1615)

This part of the letter gives an account of the Abbāsid rulers who
committed tragedies toward the family of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, for they spared noeffort to wrong them and to
eliminate them. In this connection al-Mansūr al-Dawāniqi said to Imām
al-Sādiq, peace be on him: I will kill you and your family to the extent
that I will leave none of you.[[2]](#_ftn1616)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1615) Ibid., 99, 7-8.  
 [[2]](#_F1616) Al-Manāqib, vol. 3, p. 357. Al-Bihār, vol. 47, p. 178.  
  

  

  

And al-Mansūr said: I have killed more than one thousand (persons) from
among the progeny of Fātima, and I have left their master and protector,
Jafar b. Mohammed.[[1]](#_ftn1617)

And Ismāil al-Dibājj said when he escaped from al-Mansūr:

The tyrant is not satisfied with our blood which he sheds

every where, and he does not fall short of looking for (us).

Nothing will quench his thirst except that he will not see

on earth a son belongs to the daughter of the Prophet.[[2]](#_ftn1618)

Al-Mamūn has shown terrible kinds of tragedies which the Abbāsids
wreaked upon the Alawides, and of which are the following:

A. Destroying all the Alawides.

B. Throwing them into the Tigris and the Euphrates while they were still
alive to the extent that they died of drowning.

C. Burying them in Baghdad and Kūfa while they were still alive.

The children of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
suffered from other persecutions through the Abbāsids. Now, let us
listen to another part of this letter:

As for what you have mentioned regarding the deposed one (al-Amin) and
the confusion concerning him, by my life, none other than you had
confused him, for it was you who had made easy to him breaking (the
pledge of allegiance), adorned for him treason, and said to him: What
could your brother do? He is an exiled man. You have properties and men.
We will send for him, and he will be brought. So you had told lies and
schemed (against him), and you have forgotten these words of Him, the
Exalted: *And he who has been oppressed, Allah will most certainly aid
him.*[[3]](#_ftn1619)

In this part of his letter, al-Mamūn has mentioned that some events
happened between him and his brother al-Amin, and that the events were
created by the Abbāsids, for it was they who made al-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1617) Al-Adab fi Zil al-Tashayya', p. 68.  
 [[2]](#_F1618) Al-Maqqrizi, al-Nizā' wa al-Takhāsum, p. 51.  
 [[3]](#_F1619) Qur'ān, 22, 60.  
  

  

  

Amin love deposing al-Mamūn and subduing him. In other words the events
happened not as a result of al-Amins view and planning. This is another
part of this letter:

As for what you have mentioned regarding al-Mamūns reflection on the
pledge of allegiance to Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, al-Mamūn did not pledge
allegiance to him but he was discerning concerning his affair and was
aware that none on the face of the earth was clearer than him in
excellence, more manifest than him in chastity, more pious than him in
piety, more ascetic than him in asceticism in the world, freer than him
in soul, more satisfactory than him with the personal entourage
*(khāssa)* and the populace *(āmma)*, and stronger than him in Allahs
Selfness, and that the pledge of allegiance to him was surely agreeing
with the good pleasure of the Lord, the Great and Almighty. I did my
best for Allah and paid no attention to the blame of a blamer.

By my life! If the pledge of allegiance stems from partiality, then
al-Abbās, my son, and the rest of my children will be the most lovable
to my own heart and the most beautiful in my own eye, but I willed an
affair and Allah willed an affair, so my affair did not precede Allahs.

This part gives an account of that al-Mamūn pledged  allegiance to Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him, during regency, and that it was not because of
partiality, sentiments, and desires; rather it was on account of
diligence, scrutiny, and consideration about the affairs of the Muslims.
That is because the great Imām was endowed with exalted qualities of
which are the following:

A. Surely the Imām was the most meritorious of all people on the face of
the earth.

B. He was the most chaste person.

C. He refrained from the things made unlawful by Allah.

D. All the Muslims magnified him and preferred him to

other than him.

E. He, peace be on him, did not fear the censure of any

censurer regarding Allah.

It is these qualities which urged al-Mamūn to designate the  

  

  

Imām as his heir apparent. Now, let us listen to another part of this
letter:

As for what you have mentioned regarding the alienation which has
touched you during my rule, by my life, it has not occurred but from you
through your helping (al-Amin) against me and your inclination to him.
But when I killed him, you scattered like slaves, so you sometimes
followed Ibn Abū Khālid; sometimes you followed Arābi; and sometimes you
followed Ibn Shakkla. Then all of you drew a sword against me. Were it
not for that my trait was pardon and my nature was forgiveness, I would
not leave any of you on the face of earth, for all your blood is lawful.

Al-Mamūn has expressed the estrangement and deprivation which befell the
Abbāsids during his time, for they were the reason for that when they
helped and supported al-Amin. However, when he was killed, they joined
all those who mutinied against his government such as Ibrāhim b. Shakkla
and the like, so through that they filled al-Mamūns heart with malice
against them. Had it not been for that his quality was forgiveness, as
he said, then he would not have left any Abbāsid on the face of earth.
And this is another part of his letter, which says:

As for what you have asked about the pledge of allegiance to al-Abbās,
my son, *will you exchange that which is better for that which is
worse?* Woe unto you! Surely al-Abbās is still a young man; his reason
is not acquainted (with life affairs); he is not given time (to stay)
alone; experiences have not strengthened him; the women direct him; and
the slave-wives maintain him. Then he has not understood the religion
yet; he does not distinguish between the lawful and the unlawful; (he
has nothing) except knowledge which subjects do not put into effect and
through which no proof is established. If he was qualified; experiences
strengthened him; he understood the religion, attained the high degree
of the Emir of justice in asceticism in the world and turned away his
soul from it, he would have with me nothing except what a man from Akk
and Himyar had; therefore, do not mention this statement frequently, for
my tongue is still restrained from affairs and stories which I hate (to
mention), and for your souls  

  

  

will be broken when they are revealed. It is worth mentioning that Allah
will someday reach His order and manifest His decree.

If you refuse (all things) except removing the cover and revealing the
defects, then al-Rashid informed me on the authority of his forefathers
and of what he found in the book of the state and other than it that the
Abbāsids would come to an end after the seventh son of al-Abbās and the
blessing upon them would be confined to his own lifetime, so if it (the
blessing) said farewell (to you), then you would say farewell to it. And
if you lost my person, then seek a stronghold for your own souls. And
how far! You will have (nothing) except the sword. Al-Hasani, the
revolutionary, the wild or al-Sufyāni, the forced, will reap you with a
reap, and al-Qāim al-Mahdi will not spare your blood except through its
right.

This part of the letter shows the reasons which prevented al-Mamūn from
designating his son, al-Abbās, as a heir apparent as follows: Al-Abbās
did not have the qualifications which should be available in the heir
apparent such as knowledge, excellence, piety, and the like. He was
still a boy whom days did not educate and experience did not strengthen.
He had neither knowledge nor culture. Rather, he was a youth whose
affairs were directed by the women and the salve-wives, so how was it
right for al-Mamūn to nominate him for this important office?

After this al-Mamūn added that al-Rashid told him about what he found in
the book of the state; he told him that the Abbāsid state would come to
an end after the seventh Abbāsid king, and that the Abbāsids would not
rule after him.

As for al-Rashid, he made a mistake, for the Abbāsid state continued
after their seventh king and then it came to an end by Hulagu the
Tatarian, who struck off the heads of the Abbāsids, removed their
kingdom and authority. Now, let us listen to another part of this
letter, which says:

I pledged allegiance to Ali b. Mūsā because he himself was worthy of the
caliphate and because I chose him; I did that because I wanted to spare
your blood and to defend you through continuing love between us and
them; I have followed this way in order to honor the  

  

  

family of Abū Tālib and to aid them with a little of *al-fayyā* (war
booty gained without fighting).

Al-Mamūn has said that his pledge of allegiance to Imām al-Ridā, peace
be on him, was for the interest of the Abbāsids, for, through this
pledge of allegiance, he was able to spare their blood. Perhaps the
reason for that is that many revolts broke out in Islamic world and
summoned the people to pledge allegiance to al-Ridā from among the
family of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, that he might
establish political and social justice in the quarters of the homeland.
When he brought him and appointed him as his successor, those revolts
terminated. If they had continued, they would have destroyed the Abbāsid
rule and put an end to the Abbāsids.

Now, let us return to another part of this letter, in which al-Mamūn
says: And if you claim that I have intended to achieve a result and an
advantage for them (the Alawides), then surely I always reflect on you,
take care of you, your progeny, and your children after you, while you
are inattentive, heedless, straying, in a gulf (of ignorance) blindly
wandering on; you do not know what is wanted toward you, of the
indignation you have cast as a shadow over him, and the extortion of the
blessing. The concern of one of you is that he enters into evening while
he is mounted and enters upon morning while he is drunk. You boast of
acts of disobedience and rejoice at them. Your gods are the lutes. You
are womanish and stupid. None of you thinks of setting right 
livelihood, continuing blessing, doing a noble deed, *the day on which
property will not avail nor sons, except him who comes to Allah with a
heart free (from evil)*.

ss = t50\>You have neglected prayers, followed desires, and  busied
(yourselves) with pleasures, so you will meet perdition. By Allah,
perhaps, I think of your affairs, so I find none of the communities
deserved punishment until it befell them out of a defect, except that I
have found the defect itself in you along with many defects which, as I
think, Iblis has not discovered; nor has he ordered (men) to put them
into practice, while in His Holy Book, Allah has given an account of the
people of (the Prophet) Sālih that there *was among them nine persons
whom made mischief in the land*; yet you have followed them  

  

  

inwardly and outwardly as a sign of making little of the hereafter and
little certitude in the reckoning; therefore, which of you has an
opinion which may be followed or useful reflection? So may your faces be
distorted and your cheeks be covered with dust!

Al-Mamūn has described his own family with the ugliest qualities by
which none is distinguished except low men and the deviants of regions.
He has pictured them with a picture which is detested by the least of
people in feelings.

Now, let us listen to another part of this letter, in which he says: And
as for what you have mentioned about the fault regarding Abū al-Hasan
(al-Ridā), may Allah enlighten his face, so, by my life, it is in my
viewpoint for renaissance and independence through which I hope that I
will pass *al-Sirāt* [[1]](#_ftn1620), security and salvation from the
fear on the Day of the Greatest Fear, and I do not think that I have a
deed better than that except that I must return the like of it (the
caliphate) to the like of him (al-Ridā). How can I obtain that (deed)?
And how can you win that happiness?

Al-Mamūn has refuted the viewpoints of his own family, who criticized
him for his making an unforgivable mistake through appointing Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him, as a heir apparent. So he answered them that
he took such a step for the renaissance and independence of the
community, for he had nominated for the leadership of the community the
best man on the face of earth, that he might establish the truth, spread
justice, and return dignity to Islam.

This is another part of this letter, in which he says: As for your
statement that I have discredited the views of your forefathers and
insights of your ancestors, then this is the statement of the Qurayshi
polytheists, who have said: *We have found our fathers on a course, and
surely we are guided by their footsteps*.[[2]](#_ftn1621) Woe unto you!
Surely the religion is not taken (from anyone) except from the prophets;
therefore, understand (what I say to you), and I do not see that you
understand (it).

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1620) *Al-Sirāt* is a path or a road or a kind of bridge which
only the righteous can cross on the road to Paradise.  
 [[2]](#_F1621) Qur'ān, 43, 22.  
  

  

  

Through this statement, al-Mamūn has disproved the viewpoints of his own
family, who claimed that he had discredited the viewpoints of his
forefathers and spoiled the insights of his ancestors, and that was
through his showing kindness to the family of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. It is worth mentioning that this silly logic
was followed by the Qurayshi polytheists, who have said: *We have found
our fathers on a course, and surely we are guided by their footsteps*.

Now, let us listen to the last part of this letter, in which he says: As
for your reviling because of my following the policy of the Magians
toward you, then nothing has made you believe in that except haughtiness
even if apes and pigs govern over you. By my life, they had been
Magians, and they have become Muslim just as our fathers and mothers in
the past. So they are the Magians who have become Muslim, and you are
the Muslims who have become apostates. Therefore a Magian who becomes a
Muslim is better than a Muslim who becomes an apostate. For they prevent
each other from doing evil and enjoin (men) to do good; seek nearness to
good; refrain from evil; defend the sacredness of the Muslims; rejoice
at evil which befalls polytheism and polytheists; give good news to one
another of good which includes Islam and Muslims, *so of them is he who
accomplished his vow, and of them is he who yet awaits, and they have
not changed in the least*.[[1]](#_ftn1622)

You are either one who plays with his own soul or stupid or a singer or
one who plays on the tambourine or one who plays on the flute. By Allah,
if the Umayyads, whom you killed yesterday, were raised from the dead
and it was said to them, Do not disdain the defects through which you
disparage them, they would increase nothing to what you have adopted
inwardly and outwardly as a craft and manners.

You become impatient when evil touches you and deprive (others) of good
when it touches you. You do not disdain (offenses) and do not hope (for
good deeds) except out of fear. How do you  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1622) Ibid., 33, 23.  
  

  

  

disdain (offenses) while you spend the night mounted, enter upon morning
admiring your own sins as if you had earned a praiseworthy deed, your
goal is your stomach and your pudenda, pay no attention to murdering one
thousand sent prophets or angels brought nigh in order to attain your
own desires, love him who adorns act of disobedience for you or helps
you with ill-deed, are cleaned by the drunken woman,  are patted by the
unknown one, and your conditions are scattered? You must refrain from
(doing) evil deeds and atrocities or the sword will be raised above your
heads, and there is no strength save in Allah; my reliance is on Him,
and He is sufficient unto me.[[1]](#_ftn1623)

This letter has terminated, and in the last part of it, al-Mamūn has
mentioned the defects and atrocities of his own family. I (the author)
think that there is no Arab family has been stained with such
atrocities, which al-Mamūn has mentioned, and which led this family to
an endless level of meanness.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1623) Al-Bihār (modern edition), vol. 49, pp. 208-214. Hayāt
al-Imām al-Ridā, pp. 453-460, I (the author) have quoted the letter from
it.  
  

