Chapter Xvi
===========

  

  

THE AFFAIRS OF THE IMĀM
-----------------------

### IN KHURASĀN

It is necessary for us to pause in order to talk about some affairs of
Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, when he resided in Khurasān; his affairs
there are as follows:

Poets visit the Imām
--------------------

A group of the eminent Arab poets in that time visited Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, blessed him, and congratulated him on his undertaking
regency. Among them was the great poet, Dibil al-Khazāi, who revolted
against oppression and tyranny, expressed the sufferings of the
oppressed and the deprived. One of them was the inspired poet, Ibrāhim
b. al-Abbās al-Sawli, the unique poet and proser of the
time.[[1]](#_ftn1624) And among them was the great poet Razin b. Ali,
the brother of Dibil al-Khazāi.

Before they traveled to Khurasān, Dibil had said to Ibrāhim: I want to
accompany you to Khurasān.

How nice a companion and accompanied one your are! exclaimed Ibrāhim,
surely we have followed the precondition of Bashshār.

What is his precondition? asked Dibil.

He has said his statement:

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1624) We have mentioned his biography in the research on the
Companions of the Imām and the Narrators of his Traditions.  
  

  

  

The best brother whom I fraternize is he whose baggage I

carry, and who carries my baggage when I ask him to carry them.

When a time turns away from him, I have confidence in

him; and when the time turns away from me, he has

confidence in me.

His property belongs to me and I do not fear his

miserliness; my property belongs to him, and he does not

fear my miserliness throughout the time.[[1]](#_ftn1625)

During their journey, they were robbed, so they were forced to ride
donkeys carrying thorns, so Ibrāhim composed, saying:

They have been loaded thorns instead of pottery; they are

drunk not because of wine; rather because of intense

weakness.

He asked Razin to complete this (poetry line), and he said:

So if you, in spite of that, come to playing and amusement,

then your state concerning it is equal and will not persist

in decrease.

Then he said to Dibil: Complete this (poetry line), O Abū Ali. And he
said:

If that has passed, so be witty and hasten to play and

amuse (our selves), for surely I am going to sell my

sandals.[[2]](#_ftn1626)

Then the caravan of these eminent figures began covering the desert
paying no attention to anything until it arrived in Khurasān. Shortly
after their arrival there, they hurried to meet the Imām, peace be on
him, so Dibil recited to him his poem called al-Tāiya, which we will
mention, and Ibrāhim b. al-Abbās composed before him a poem of which the
historians have narrated nothing except this line:

The deaths of the children of the Prophet Mohammed

have removed the pains of the heart after endurance.

As for the Imām, he warmly received them, honored and magnified them.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1625) Ibn 'Asākir, Tārikh, vol. 5, p. 331.  
 [[2]](#_F1626) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, pp. 141-142.  
  

  

  

### The Imām awards a Prize to Dibil

The Imām gave to Dibil a parcel in which there was ten thousands of the
dirhams struck with his name.[[1]](#_ftn1627) It is worth mentioning
that the dirhams had not been placed in the hand of anyone before Dibil,
so Dibil refused to take them and said: No, by Allah, I have not wanted
this (money); nor have I gone out for it. I have come to have the honor
of him and to look at his face. Then he asked the servant of the Imām to
ask the Imām in order to give him one of his garments, so the Imām gave
him a silk garment[[2]](#_ftn1628) along with dirhams and said to him:
Take this parcel, for you will be in need of it.

 Dibil departed until he arrived at Qum and there a talk about the Imāms
garment was announced, so the Qummis hurried to Dibil and asked him to
sell them the garment for thirty thousand dirhams.[[3]](#_ftn1629) He
refused that and left the Qummis, but a group of them followed him and
said to him:

You must take the money or you better know.

By Allah, surely I will not give it to you on my on accord, retorted
Dibil, nor will it benefit you when you take it by force, for it is
wanted only for Allah, the Great and Almighty, and it is forbidden for
you to wear it.

Then he swore by Allah that he would not sell it to them unless they
gave him a piece of it, that it might be placed in his shroud. So they
gave him one sleeve, and it was placed in his shrouds.[[4]](#_ftn1630)
The  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1627) Al-Aghāni, vol. 18, p. 29. Mu'jam al-'Udabā', vol. 4, p.
194. In al-Kashi's Rijāl, p. 314, it has been mentioned: "He (al-Ridā)
gave him six hundred dinars." In al-Itthāf it has been mentioned: "He
have him one hundred dinars." The latter narration is unlikely, for the
Imām was famous for generosity and munificence.  
 [[2]](#_F1628) Muqaddamat Diwān Di'bil, p. 52.  
 [[3]](#_F1629) In al-Najāshi's Rijāl, p. 197, and in al-Bihār, vol. 12,
p. 71, it has been mentioned: "The Imām gave Di'bil a green shirt and a
ring whose stone was agate, and he said to him: 'Keep this shirt, for I
wore it and performed one thousand *rak'as* during one thousand nights
and completed the Qur'ān one thousand times.'"  
 [[4]](#_F1630) Abū al-Farajj al-Asfahāni, al-Aghāni, vol. 18, p. 29.
Mu'jam al-'Udabā', vol. 4, p. 194.  
  

  

  

narrators have mentioned: The most lovable slave-wife to Dibil became
ill. So he bandaged her with what he had of the garment of the Imām,
peace be on him, and she got well.[[1]](#_ftn1631) 

As for the dirhams, Dibil sold each one to the Qummis for ten dirhams,
so his share amounted one hundred thousand dirhams.[[2]](#_ftn1632)

### The Imām awards a Prize to Ibrāhim

The Imām, peace be on him, gave Ibrāhim al-Sawli ten thousands of the
dirhams struck with his holy name. Ibrāhim did not sell them; rather
they remained with him.[[3]](#_ftn1633) So he spent some of them, and
the rest remained with him until he died.

#### The Immortal Poem of Dibil

The poem which Dibil recited to the Imām, peace be on him, is regarded
as one of the masterpieces of Arab literature and among the sources of
Islamic legacy. It is the most famous of Dibils poems. It had a strong
impression on the Imām, so he wept and fainted three
times.[[4]](#_ftn1634) That is because Dibil has mentioned in it the
painful tragedies which befell the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*,
peace be on them. Dibil wore a garment and wrote the poem. He performed
the ritual consecration wearing the garment, and then he ordered it to
be placed in his own shrouds.[[5]](#_ftn1635)

Dibils poem widely spread in that time. Al-Mamūn heard of it, admired
it, asked Dibil to recite it to him, and said to him: It wont do you any
harm; I have given you security from all things. It had been narrated to
me, but I want to hear it from your own mouth. So he recited it, and
al-Mamūn wept to the extent that his beard became wet out of his
tears.[[6]](#_ftn1636)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1631) Al-Bihār, vol. 12, p. 71.  
 [[2]](#_F1632) Al-Murtadā, Amāli, vol. 1, p. 484.  
 [[3]](#_F1633) Ibid.  
 [[4]](#_F1634) Abū al-Farajj al-Asfahāni, al-Aghāni, vol. 18, p. 42.  
 [[5]](#_F1635) Mu'jam al-'Udabā', vol. 4, p. 194.  
 [[6]](#_F1636) Abū al-Farajj al-Asfahāni, al-Aghāni, vol. 18, p. 42.  
  

  

  

A joke has been narrated about this excellent poem; the joke is as
follows: When Dibil and his companions departed Marū, some highwaymen
attacked them and took all that which they had. It happened that a
highwayman robbed Dibil and recited a line of his poem which he had
recited to the Imām, and the line is as follows:

I see that their *fayya* [[1]](#_ftn1637) is divided among other than
them,

and their hands is void of their *fayya* .

So Dibil asked the highwayman: Whose poetry line is this?

It belongs to a man called Dibil from Khazāa, replied the highwayman.

I am Dibil! was the answer.

Then Dibil recited the poem, so the highwayman became astonished, called
to the rest of the highwaymen, and asked them to return what they had
taken from Dibil and his companions as a sign of honor for the poet of
the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, and they
returned it to them.[[2]](#_ftn1638)

As this poem is of great importance, some eminent figures have explained
it. They are as follows:

1. Al-Sayyid Nimat Allah al-Jazāiry.

2. Kamāl al-Din Mohammed b. Mohammed al-Shirāzi.

3. Al-Hajj Mirza Ali al-Tabrizi.[[3]](#_ftn1639)

#### The Text of the Poem

The late Abd al-Sāhib al-Dujayli has reported the text of the poem in
the Divan of Dibil from a group of handwritten and printed sources; we
have reported it from him; the text of the poem is as follows:

The doves whose utterance and speeches are not

understood answer each other through sounds and sighs.

They tell through breaths about the secret of souls captives

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1637)*Fayya'* is a war booty gained without fighting.  
 [[2]](#_F1638) Nūr al-Absār, p. 147. Al-Itthāf, vol. 163. Al-Bihār,
vol. 12, p. 71. Muqaddamat Diwān Di'bil, p. 53.  
 [[3]](#_F1639) Al-Dhari'a.  
  

  

  

to past love and another coming.

So they will make happy or help (the lovers) until the

kinds of darkness are dispersed and defeated by dawn.

Peace be on the courtyards void of wild cows; (I am) a sad

adorer yearning for the courtyards.

As far as I know that their familiar places were green

because of the perfumed, white (ones) and the ashamed

(ones).

Nights helped friendliness against abandonment, but after

me they approached one another out of estrangement.

Then they looked through their unveiled eyes and covered

their cheeks with their hands.

And then everyday I have, in my eye, drunkenness for

which my heart spends the night drunk.

How many a regret excited by my standing at Mahsar and

Arafāt[[1]](#_ftn1640) on the Day of Gathering.

Do you not see what the days have brought upon the

people through nullifying (the Imāmate), long separation,

the states of the reckless[[2]](#_ftn1641), and those who sought light

through them in the dark?

Just imagine how much more is he who has come to seek

nearness to Allah through fasting, prayers, showing love

for the children of the Prophet and his family, hating the

Banū of al-Zarqā  and al-Abalāt [[3]](#_ftn1642), Hind[[4]](#_ftn1643),
what Sumayya[[5]](#_ftn1644)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1640) Mahsar and 'Arafāt are two places in Mecca.  
 [[2]](#_F1641) The states of the reckless were those of the Umayyads
and the 'Abbāsis who made little of all the Islamic customs and
values.  
 [[3]](#_F1642) The Banū of al-Zarqā' were the children of Marwān whom
Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, dismissed. As for
al-Zarqā' she was Marwān's mother and was among those dissolute women
who lived before Islam. Al-'Abalāt was one of Quraysh tribes.  
 [[4]](#_F1643) Hind was the mother of Mu'āwiya, the claimed companion
of the Prophet, who created events and offenses in Islam.  
 [[5]](#_F1644) Sumayya was the mother of Ziyād, the criminal
terrorist.  
  

  

  

had done, her son who showed unbelief and dissoluteness

in Islam?

It was they who broke the covenant of the Book, religious

duties and clear verses therein through falsehood and

vague errors.[[1]](#_ftn1645)

And that is a mere trial which has exposed them through

a summons of error from among ugly things.

Legacy without nearness (to the Prophet), authority

without guidance, and government without consultative

council are among the rightly-guided ones.[[2]](#_ftn1646)

(These) misfortunes have made us see the greenness of the

horizon red and made sweet water tastes salt.

Nothing made easy those creeds among them except the

homage of the random errors.[[3]](#_ftn1647)

The Companions of the Shelter *(saqifa)* did not attain an

authority because of legacy; rather due to the affair of

(their) origin.[[4]](#_ftn1648)

If they had entrusted the reins of the caliphate to the

testamentary trustee[[5]](#_ftn1649), then they would have been
regulated by  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1645) Di'bil means the Umayyad government who broke the
covenant of Allah and made little of all the Islamic values.  
 [[2]](#_F1646) He means that Umayyad government did not depend on a
consultative committee nor on nearness to Allah's Messenger.  
 [[3]](#_F1647) He hints at the pledge of allegiance to Abū Bakr about
which 'Umar has said: "The pledge of allegiance to Abū Bakr was a random
error from whose evil Allah has protected the Muslims."  
 [[4]](#_F1648) The Shelter *(saqifa)* which Di'bil has meant was that
of the Banū of Sā'ida where they had plotted against the caliphate while
the Prophet was shrouded had not been buried yet. This meeting resulted
in removing Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, from the office of
the caliphate, and this matter has brought upon Muslims afflictions and
destruction.  
 [[5]](#_F1649) The testamentary trustee was Imām 'Ali, the Commander of
the faithful. He was the testamentary trustee of Allah's Messenger and
the gate of the city of his knowledge. If he had undertaken the
caliphate, he would have protected the Muslims from the stumbles.  
  

  

  

him who was protected from stumbles.

(He) was the brother of the last of the messengers[[1]](#_ftn1650), the
one

purified of uncleanness, and the one who killed the

heroes at the battles.

If they deny (that), then to him bear witness al-

Ghadir, Badr, and Uhd whose elevations are high[[2]](#_ftn1651),

Verses of the Qurān are recited concerning his

excellence, his giving food during famines[[3]](#_ftn1652),

and his outstanding qualities he attained out of his preceding laudable
deeds which none before him had

performed.

(These) laudable deeds were not attained by trickery; nor

were they obtained by anything except by the sharp edge

of the spear.

Gabriel, the trusted one, whispered to him while you

devoted yourselves (to serving) both al-Izzā and Manāt.[[4]](#_ftn1653)

At Arafāt I wept over the traces of the house, and I shed

the tears of my eyes (for them).

The traces of the deserted houses untied the handles of

patience and exited my longing.

Schools of verses (of the Qurān) are without recitation,

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1650) The brother of the last of the messengers is Imām 'Ali,
the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, for the Prophet said to
him: "O 'Ali, you are my brother in this world and the next."  
 [[2]](#_F1651) Al-Ghadir is the famous place where the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, made the pledge of allegiance to Imām
'Ali, the Commander of the faithful. The homage of al-Ghadir is part of
Islam. So he who denies it denies Islam, as some great figures of the
time say.   
 [[3]](#_F1652) The verses which have been revealed regarding Imām 'Ali
are numerous, of which are: Āyat al-Mubāhala, Āyat al-Mawadda, Āyat
al-Tathir, Āyat al-Tasaddiq bi al-Khātam, and others from among the
verses which have praised and lauded the hero of Islam.  
 [[4]](#_F1653) Al-'Izzā and Menāt were two idols belonged to Quraysh,
who served them apart from Allah.  
  

  

  

and the place of inspiration is (like) courtyards without

people.[[1]](#_ftn1654)

To the family of Allahs Messenger belong (the houses) at al-Khif part of
Minā, al-Rukn, al-Tarif, and al-Jamarāt [[2]](#_ftn1655)

The houses belong to Ali, al-Husayn, Jafar, Hamza, and al-Sajjād the one
with calluses *(Dhū al-Thafanāt)* [[3]](#_ftn1656);

The houses belong to Abd Allah and al-Fadl his full brother to whom
Allahs Messenger whispered in privacy;

The houses among which the inspiration of Allah came

down to Ahmed (Mohammed), who has been mentioned in

the verses, belong to the people through whose guidance (men) have
become rightly guided and felt secure from their slip of stumbles.

The houses were (confined to) prayer, reverential fear,

fasting, purity, and good deeds.

Gabriel, the trusted one, stopped at the houses carrying from Allah
greetings and mercy;

The houses (were the place) of inspiration of Allah, the place of His
knowledge, and the path of guidance through clear ways.

The houses have been effaced by the tyranny of

every opponent, not by days and years.

O inheritors of the knowledge of the Prophet, upon

you be peace with lasting perfumes.

Stop in order to ask the house whose inhabitants hastened:

When was your knowledge of fasting and prayers? Where

are those whom the loneliness of remoteness has wronged

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1654) He hints at the houses of the Sayyids from among the
children of the Prophet who were killed by the swords of the Umayyads,
to the extent that their house became void of those stars shone with the
light of faith and monotheism.  
 [[2]](#_F1655) The 'Alawi Sayyids lived in these places which Di'bil
has mentioned; wherein they spent the night through serving Allah and
reciting His Book.  
 [[3]](#_F1656) The one with calluses *(Dhū al-Thafanāt)*  was the
nickname of the master of worshippers, Imām Zayn al-'Ābidin, who had
calluses like those of a camel in the places of his prostration due to
his abundant prostration for Allah.  
  

  

  

(and made them like) branches separating in the horizons?

They are the people of the legacy of the Prophet when

they are ascribed; they are the best masters and protectors.

They are feeders during famine and every attitude; they

have become honorable through favor and blessings.[[1]](#_ftn1657)

As for people, they are either envier or liar or spiteful

harboring malice or one who is unable to avenge the blood

of his dead.

When they (the Qurayshi hypocrites and the people of the

Book) remember their dead at (the battles of) Badr,

Khaybar, and Hunayn, they shed tears. [[2]](#_ftn1658)

So how could they show love for the Prophet and his family while they
split open their bowels?[[3]](#_ftn1659)

They were gentle to him through their statements but they

had hearts containing spites.[[4]](#_ftn1660)

So if it (the caliphate) is not undertaken except through

nearness to Mohammed, then Hāshim is worthier (of it)

than those of bad lineage.

May Allah water the grave in Medina (with) His rain, for

therein has rested the Security through blessings.

The Prophet of guidance upon whom his King has called

down blessings and given to him as gift His repose.

Allah calls down blessings upon him as long as the sun

rises and the night stars appear.

O Fātima, if you imagined al-Husayn, who was thrown to

the ground and died thirsty by the Euphrates, then you, O

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1657) Di'bil hints at the generosity of the Household of the
Prophet and that they gave food to the poor and the deprived during
famines.  
 [[2]](#_F1658) He hints at those anti-*ahl al-Bayt* persons who were
killed by the sword of 'Ali, so when they remembered their dead they
shed bitter tears.  
 [[3]](#_F1659) How could the forces who deviated from the *ahl al-Bayt*
show love for the Prophet and his family?  
 [[4]](#_F1660) Di'bil means that the opponents of Islam were gentle to
the Prophet through their speech, but their hearts contained enmity
against him.  
  

  

  

Fātima, would strike your cheeks beside him and make

the tears of your eye flow on your cheeks.

O Fātima, arise, O daughter of the good, and mourn for

the stars of the heavens in a deserted land.

Graves are in Kufān (i.e. Kūfa); others are in Tiba; others

are in Fakh; blessings are called down upon them.[[1]](#_ftn1661)

Other (graves) are in the land of al-Jawzān; a lonely grave is at
Bākhamrā.[[2]](#_ftn1662)

And a grave is in Baghdad; (it) belongs to a pure soul

which the Merciful (Allah) has included in the Gardens.[[3]](#_ftn1663)

As for the painful misfortunes which have deeply hurt me

through the essence of qualities, (they are) the graves by the River
Euphrates in the land of Kerbalā, where they (al-Husayn  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1661) Di'bil hints at the Holy Shrines of the 'Alawi Sayyids;
the first of their Holy Shrines is that of Imām 'Ali, peace be on him,
at Najaf, which is at the outskirts of Kūfa, and the grave of the martyr
Muslim b. 'Aqil. In Tiba are the graves of al-Baqi' Imāms, peace be on
them. In Fakh are the grave of al-Husayn b. 'Ali b. al-Hasan and the
graves of other 'Alawis.   
 [[2]](#_F1662) At al-Jawzān is the grave of the great martyr Yahyā b.
Zayd, who died as a martyr during the days of al-Walid, the Umayyad
(caliph). Bākhamrā is a place (in Iraq) between Kūfa and Wāsit; wherein
died as a martyr Ibrāhim b. 'Abd Allah b. al-Hasan during the days of
the tyrannical (caliph), (al-Mansūr) al-Dawāniqi.  
 [[3]](#_F1663) As for the grave which is in Baghdad, it is the grave of
Gate to needs, Imām al-Kāzim and of his grandson Imām al-Jawād. Many
books have mentioned: "When Di'bil reached this poetry line, Imām
al-Ridā asked him: 'Shall I add two lines (to your ode) in this place?'
'Yes, O son of Allah's Messenger,' replied Di'bil. So he, peace be on
him, has said:  
 "'And a grave is at Tūs. What a misfortune is that which has pressed
the bowels through sighs!  
 "'To the Mustering (or) until Allah sends al-Qā'im who will remove
grief and distress from us.'  
 "So Di'bil asked him: 'Whose grave is at Tūs?' 'It is mine,' answered
the Imām, peace be on him." This (narration) has been mentioned in
al-Manāqib (vol. 3, p. 450) and others.  
  

  

  

and his companions) stopped at the late night.

They died thirsty by the Euphrates, so would that I died

for them before the time of my death.

During my remembering them, I complain to Allah of pain which waters me
with the cup of abasement and atrocities.

I fear that if I visit them, I will be exited by their death

(which took place) between the valley and the date-palms.

The events of time have divided them; just as you see that

they have a district with houses covered (with dust).

Except that in Medina is a group of them, throughout the

time, rawboned because of hardships.

None visits them except some visitors from among

hyenas, eagles, and vultures.

They are forever asleep in graves standing in various

districts of the earth.

In al-Hijāz and (among) its people were courageous ones from among them
chosen as leaders.

Hard droughts kept away from neighboring them[[1]](#_ftn1664),

and the pebble of the pebbles did not warm them.

(They were) hot, so comets did not visit them; and (their)

faces shone by the curtains in the dark.

If they (people) brought horses running very quickly (and

carrying) spears, they (the Prophets Household) were the pokers of the
embers of death and hardships.

If they prided themselves (upon their lineage), they brought Mohammed,
Gabriel, the Furqān (Qurān), and the Suras.

And they numbered Ali, possessor of laudable deeds and

exaltedness, Fātima al-Zahrā the best daughter, Hamza

possessor of guidance and piety, and Jafar, who flies in

the Gardens.

Those, not the product of Hind and her party Sumayya

from among the foolish and the dirty.

Taym and Adi will be asked about them and their

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1664) For they had renounced the world.  
  

  

  

homage which was the greatest sin.[[1]](#_ftn1665)

It was they who prevented the forefathers from taking

their own right, and it was they who left the children

hostage to separation.[[2]](#_ftn1666)

It was they who took it (the caliphate) from the

testamentary trustee of Mohammed, so their pledge of

allegiance was treacherous.[[3]](#_ftn1667)

Stop your blaming me for (my showing love for) the Household of the
Prophet; they are my lovers and I have confidence in them as long as
they live.

I have chosen them as a guide to my own affairs, for

they are, any how, the most excellent choice.

I have sincerely shown love for my masters and willingly

submitted my own soul to them.

Therefore, O my Lord, increase me in the insight of my

sureness and add, O my Lord, my love for them to my

good deeds.

I will weep over them as long as a rider makes a pilgrimage to (the
House of) Allah and as long as a dove coos in the trees.

I will sacrifice my own soul for you; (your) middle-aged and youths
release captives and collect blood-money (for the people).

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1665) By Taym, he meant Abū Bakr; and by 'Adi, he meant 'Umar
b. al-Khattāb. Di'bil think that they are responsible for the distresses
and tragedies which befell the *ahl al-Bayt*. It was they who removed
Imām 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, from the office of the
caliphate and brought upon the Prophet's family various kinds of bitter
misfortunes.  
 [[2]](#_F1666)Di'bil hints at the previous kings who prevented the
'Alawi Sayyids from taking their own right and left the Sayyids from
among their childrenhostage to separation.  
 [[3]](#_F1667)The testamentary trustee was Imām 'Ali the Commander of
the faithful; the testamentary trustee of Allah's Messenger and gate of
the city of his knowledge. As for Di'bil, he has condemned those who
swerved the caliphate from him and entrusted it to other than him.  
  

  

  

When death limits the steps of the horses, you release

them (and use) sharp spears and swords.

I love those far because of their love for you, and for you I abandon my
family and my daughters.[[1]](#_ftn1668)

I conceal my love toward you out of fear of him who is

hostile, stubborn to the men of the truth and disobedient

to (them).

O my eye, weep over them and shed abundant tears;

it is time for you to shed tears.

Certainly the days have surrounded me with their own evil, and surely I
hope for security after my death.[[2]](#_ftn1669)

Do you not see that I have gone and come for thirty years,

and I am always in sorrows?

I see that their *fayya* is divided among other than them,

and their hands are void of their *fayya*.[[3]](#_ftn1670)

So how can I be cured of an intense sorrow, and the

intense sorrow is the Umayyads, the men of dissoluteness

and (bad) results?

The family of Allahs Messenger are thin-bodied, while

the family of Ziyād are big-necked!

Ziyāds daughters are protected in the palaces whereas the

family of Allahs Messenger are in the deserts!

I will weep for them as long as the sun shines on earth and the caller
of good calls (men) to prayer;

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1668)Di'bil means that he loves and is sincere to him who loves
and is sincere to the Household (of the Prophet) even if they are far
from him in lineage; he shows enmity toward those who show enmity toward
them even if they are his family and his daughters.  
 [[2]](#_F1669)In a narration: "I am fearful in the world and the days
of its effort." In another narration: "When Di'bil recited this line,
the Imām, peace be on him, raised his hands in supplication and said:
'May Allah make you secure, O Khazā'i, on the Day of the Greatest
Fear!'"  
 [[3]](#_F1670)In a narration: "When Di'bil reached this line, Imām
al-Ridā began turning over his palm of the hand and said: 'Yes, by
Allah, they are contracted.'"  
  

  

  

(I will weep for them) as long as the sun shines and sets; and I will
weep for them at night and in the early morning.

The houses of Allahs Messenger have become a desert,

and the family of Ziyād live in palaces.

The throats of the family of Allahs Messenger are bled,

and the family of Ziyād are at ease.

The womenfolk of Allahs Messenger are taken as

captives, and Ziyāds womenfolk (are respected).

When one of them is killed, they stretch out for the killers

palms of the hand and prevent them from taking blood
money.[[1]](#_ftn1671)

Had it not for him whom I expect today or tomorrow, I

would be out of breath due to the sorrows for them.

Certainly an Imām will appear and rise in the name of

Allah and the blessings.[[2]](#_ftn1672)

He will distinguish among us everything right and wrong,

reward for favors and vengeance.

I will intensely withhold myself from arguing with them;

enough for me is what I find of the moral lessons.

So, O my soul, renounce (the world); then O my soul, be

delighted, for it is not far all that which will come;

Do not be impatient of the period of tyranny; surely I can

see that my strength shows signs of separating (from the

world).

So if the Most Gracious (Allah) brings near that period of

mine and delays my life span for prolonging my life, then

I will avenge (myself upon them), will not leave any

calamity for myself, make my sword and spear quench

their thirst with their blood.

For surely I hope for from the Most Gracious (Allah),

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1671)In a narration: "After Di'bil had finished reciting this
line, Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, began turning over his palm of the
hand and said: 'Yes, byAllah, they are contracted.'"  
 [[2]](#_F1672)When Di'bil had finished this line and the one after it,
the Imām said to him: 'O Khazā'i, the Holy Spirit has spoken through
your tongue.'"  
  

  

  

through showing love for them an uninterrupted life in

Paradise.

May Allah give shelter to this creature; surely He is

permanent in glances toward every people.

If I say something good, they deny it with something evil

and cover the realities with vague errors.

I try to remove the sun from its place and to make solid

stones hear.

So they are either a knower who does not make use of (my

statement) or a stubborn one who inclines to (his) caprices

and lusts.

I am negligent of them when I die of a pang

frequenting in my chest and in (my) epiglottis.

Although my own ribs are wide, they have become narrow because of the
intense sighs they have contained.[[1]](#_ftn1673)

This ode called al-Assmā has terminated. As for the Imām, he was
satisfied with it and supplicated for Dibil in order to be successful on
the Day of the Greatest Fear.

The Imām was strongly moved by the poetry lines in which Dibil lamented
for Imām al-Husayn, peace be on him. He wept bitter tears and fainted
more than one time, for the tragedy of Karbelā had melted his heart, and
he would say: Surely the affair of al-Husayn has made our eyes
sleepless, our tears flow, and abased our dear one. O land of grief and
tribulation *(karb wa balā)*, you have made us inherit grief and
tribulation until the Day of Resurrection! So the weepers should weep
for al-Husayn, for weeping for him erases great sins.[[2]](#_ftn1674)

The sadness of the Imām became intense and his sorrow doubled when the
month of Muharram came, and he said: None saw my father, the blessings
of Allah be upon him, smile when the month of Muharram came, and the
tragedy would overcome him until ten days of it passed. When the tenth
day came, then that day was the day of his calamity, his sadness, and
his weeping, and he would say: This is the day on which al-Husayn was
killed.[[3]](#_ftn1675)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1673)Di'bil, Divan.  
 [[2]](#_F1674)Al-Anwār al-Nu'māniya, vol. 3, p. 238.  
 [[3]](#_F1675)Ibid.  
  

  

  

And he, peace be on him, said: Surely the people who lived before Islam
prohibited fighting in the month of Muharram, while therein (shedding)
our blood was regarded as lawful, our sacredness was violated, our
progeny and our womenfolk were taken as captives, fires were set to our
tents, and our baggage were taken. They (the Umayyads) did not conform
to the sacredness of Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his
family, with respect to our affair.[[1]](#_ftn1676)

Al-Rayyān b. Shabib has narrated, saying: I visited al-Ridā on the first
day (of the month) of Muharram, and he said to me: O son of Shabib, are
you fasting? No, I replied.

Then the Imām began making him aware of the sacredness of that day,
saying: This is the day on which Zakariyā supplicated his Lord and said:
O Lord, give me from You a good progeny, surely You hear supplication!
So Allah responded to him. He ordered the angels, and they said to
Zakariyā while he was standing and praying in the mihrab: Surely Allah
has given good news to you of Yahyā. So he who fasts in this month and
supplicates Allah, the Great and Almighty, He responds to him just as He
had responded to Zakariyā.

O son of Shabib, surely the people who lived before Islam prohibited
wrongdoing and fighting in the month of Muharram because of its
sacredness, but this community has not come to know of the sacredness of
its month nor the sacredness of its Prophet. In this month they killed
his progeny, took his womenfolk as captives, and took his baggage, so
may Allah never forgive them that.

O son of Shabib, if you weep for a thing, then weep for al-Husayn b. Ali
b. Abū Tālib, for he was slaughtered just as a ram is slaughtered, and
along with him was killed eighteen men from among his Household, of whom
there is no like on earth; the seven havens and the earth wept for
murdering him; four thousand angels came down to earth in order to
support him but they found that he had been killed, so they (will
remain) by his grave while they are shaggy and covered with dust until
the Qāim, peace be on him, rises; they will be with him, among his
supporters and Shiites; their slogan will be: Let us avenge the blood of
al-Husayn![[2]](#_ftn1677)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1676)Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F1677)Ibid., p. 239.  
  

  

  

The Tragedy of Karbelā has immortalized sadness and sorrow for the
members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, for they and
their Shiites are in constant sadness; they do not forget the tragedies
which befell the grandson of the Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, on the day of Āshūrā when the sacredness of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, was violated. On that day, immortal in
the world of sadness, the army of b. Marjāna paid no attention to the
sacredness of Allah and of His Messenger through murdering the grandson
of Allahs Apostle in that terrible manner.

After this let us return to the affairs of the Imām in Khurasān:

### The Imām spends all what he has

The Imām spent all what he had on the poor and the miserable in
Khurasān, so al-Fadl b. Sahl censured him for that, saying: Surely this
is (a kind of) damage!

So the Imām answered him with a strong argument, saying: Rather it is a
profit; do not regard as damage that which results in reward and
generosity.[[1]](#_ftn1678)

It is not an act of damage when the Imām spent all what he had on the
poor and the deprived in order to save them from poverty and misery;
rather the damage was the enormous properties which the Abbāsid kings
spent on their desires and their red nights, while they spent nothing on
the poor from among the Muslims.

The Imāms Sermon on Allahs Oneness
----------------------------------

This sermon is regarded as one of the excellent sermons of the Imāms
from among the *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on him, and among the marvelous
sermons which have been transmitted from them regarding the matters of
Allahs Unity. If Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, had had no legacy except
this sermon, then it would have been a sufficient proof of his Imāmate
and his reaching an exalted rank of knowledge and excellence which none
has ever reached except the infallible Imāms, peace be on him. As this
sermon is of great importance, his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1678)Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p. 29.  
  

  

  

Eminence, the late Yahyā b. Mohammed Ali has explained it and mentioned
in the introduction to it: Surely the famous sermon which has been
mentioned regarding Allahs Oneness belongs to His Excellence, Holy
Presence, Purified Yard, the eighth of the Imāms of the religion, the
Imām of mankind, Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, the greeting and praise be on him.
That is because it is a deep see containing advantages and perceptions,
including the techniques of science and kinds of knowledge which nothing
can gather except it, and so on.[[1]](#_ftn1679)

As for composing this sermon is that when al-Mamūn desired to install
the Imām as his successor, the Hāshimites (the Abbāsids) envied the Imām
and said to al-Mamūn: Do you want to appoint an ignorant man who has no
insight to direct the caliphate? Therefore send for him. He will come to
us and you will decide how his ignorance decides you against him. So he
sent for him and he came. The Hāshimites said to him: O Abū al-Hasan,
ascend the pulpit and display for us a sigh whereby we may worship
Allah. So he ascended the pulpit and sat for a long time, his head bowed
in silence. Then he trembled a great trembling and stood up straight,
praised and lauded Allah, and asked His blessing for His Prophet and his
Household. Then he said: The first element in the worship of Allah is
knowledge of Him, the root of knowledge of Him is to profess His
Oneness, and the correct way to profess the Oneness of Allah is to
negate attributes from Him. For the powers of reason testify that every
attribute and everything possessing an attribute is created. Everything
possessing an attribute testifies that it has a Creator which is neither
attribute nor possesses an attribute. Every attribute and everything
possessing an attribute testify to connection (between the attribute and
that to which it is attributed). Connection testifies to temporality.
And temporality testifies that it accepts not the Beginningless, which
accepts not the temporal.

So it is not Allah whose Essence is known through comparison. It is not
His Oneness that is professed by someone who attempts to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1679)Sharh Khuttbat al-Imām al-Ridā fi al-Tawhid, a manuscript
available in Imām Amir al-Mu'minin's Library, no. 1728.  
  

  

  

fathom Him. It is not His reality that is attained by someone who
strikes a similitude for Him. It is not He who is confirmed by him who
professes an end for Him. It is not He to whom refers he who points to
Him. It is not He who is meant by him who compares Him (to something).
It is not to Him that he who divides Him into parts humbles himself. And
it is not He who is desired by him who conceives of Him in his
imagination.

Everything that can be known in itself is fashioned. All that stands
apart from Him is an effect. Allah is inferred from what He fashions,
the knowledge of Him is made fast by the powers of reason, and the
argument for Him is established by (mans) primordial nature.

Allahs creating of the creatures is a veil between Him and them. His
separation from them is that He is disengaged from their localization.
That He is their origin is proof for them that He has no origin, for
none that has an origin can originate others. That He has created them
possessing means (of accomplishing things) is proof that He has no
means, for means are witness to the poverty of those who use them.

So His names are an expression, His acts are (a way) to make (Him)
understand, and His Essence is reality. His inmost center separates Him
from creation, and His otherness limits what is other than He. Therefore
ignorant of Allah is he who asks for Him to be described! Transgressing
against Him is he who seeks to encompass Him. Mistaken is he who
imagines to have fathomed Him! Whoso says how? has compared Him (to
something). Whoso says why? has professed for Him a cause. Whoso says
when? has determined Him in time. Whoso says in what? has enclosed Him.
Whoso says to what? has professed for Him a limit. Whoso says until
what? has given Him an end. Whoso gives Him an end has associated an end
with Him. Whoso associates an end with Him has divided Him. Whoso
divides Him has described Him. Whoso describes Him has deviated from the
straight path concerning Him.

Allah does not change with the changes undergone by creation, just as He
does not become limited by delimiting that which is limited. He is One,
not according to the explanation offered by number;  

  

  

Outward, not according to the explanation of being immediate (to the
senses); Manifest, not through the appearance of a vision (of Him);
Inward, not through separation; Apart, not through distance; Near, not
through approach;  Subtle, not through corporealization; Existent, not
after non-existence; Active, not through coercion; Determining, not
through the activity of thought; Directing, not through movement;
Desiring, not through resolution; Willing, not through directing
attention; Grasping, not through touch; Hearing, not through means; and
Seeing, not through organs.

Times accompany Him not, places enclose Him not, slumber sizes Him not,
attributes delimit Him not, and instruments are of no use to Him. His
being precedes times, His existence non-existence and His
beginninglessness beginning.

By His giving sense to the sense organs it is known that He has no sense
organs. By His giving substance to substances it is known that He has no
substance. By His causing opposition among things it is known that He
has no opposite. By His causing affiliation among affairs it is known
that He has no affiliate. He opposed darkness to light, obscurity to
clarity, moisture to solidity, and heat to cold. He joins together those
things which are hostile to one another and separates those which are
near. They prove (the existence of ) their Separator by their separation
and their Joiner by their junction. That is (the meaning of) these words
of Him, the Great and Almighty: *And of everything created We two kinds;
haply you will remember*.[[1]](#_ftn1680)

So through them He separated before and after that it might be known
that He has no before and after. They testify with their temperaments
that He who gave them temperaments has no temperament. They prove by
their disparity that He who made them disparate has no disparity. They
announce through their subjection to time that He who subjected them to
time is not subject to it Himself.

He veiled some of them from others so that it might be known that there
is no veil between Him and them other than them. His is the meaning of
lordship when there was none over whom He was Lord,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1680)Qur'ān, 51, 49.  
  

  

  

the reality of godhood when there was nothing for whom He was God, the
meaning of Knower when there was nothing to be known, the meaning of
Creator when there was nothing created and the import of hearing when
there was nothing to be heard. It is not because He created that He
deserves the meaning (of the term) Creator and not because He brought
the creatures into being that the meaning of making is derived.

How (should it not be so)? For *mudh (ever since)* conceals Him not,
*qad* (already) brings Him not near, *laalla* (perhaps) veils Him not,
*matā* (when) limits Him not in time, *hin* (at the time of) contains
Him not, and *maa* (with) brings Him not into association. Instruments
limit only themselves and means allude only unto their own like. Their
activities are found only in things. *Mudh* withholds things from being
eternal, *qad* shields them from beginninglessness, and *law lā* (if
only) wards off perfection. Things become separate and prove (the
existence of) their Separator. They become distinguish and prove their
Distinguisher. Through them their Maker manifests Himself to the powers
of reason. Through (these powers) He becomes veiled to sight, to them
imaginations appeal for a decision, in them is substantiated (only)
other than Him, from them is suspended the proof and through them He
makes known to them the acknowledgment.

Confirmation of Allah is made fast by the powers of reason, and faith in
Him reaches perfection through acknowledgment. There is no religiosity
except after knowledge, no knowledge except through sincerity, and no
sincerity along with comparison. There is no negation of comparison if
there is affirmation of attributes.

So nothing in creation is found in its Creator. All that is possible in
it is impossible in its Maker. Movement and stillness do not affect Him.
How should that which He effects (in others) have effect upon Him, or
that which He has originated recur for Him? Then His Essence would be
disparate, His inmost center divided, His signification prevented from
eternity. How would the Creator have a meaning different from the
created?

If something from behind limited Him, then something in front would
limit Him. If perfection were seeking Him, imperfection would  

  

  

be upon Him. How should that which does not transcend temporality be
worthy of (the Name) Beginningless? How should that which does not
transcend being produced produce the things (of the world)? There then
would have arisen in Him a sign of having been made and He would become
a proof after having been the proven.

There is no argument in absurd opinions (such as the above), no answer
when it (absurdity) is asked about, no glorification of Him in its
meaning. Nor is there any ill in distinguishing Him from creation,
unless it be that the Eternal accepts not to be made two, nor the
Beginningless to have a beginning.

There is no god but Allah, the All-high, the Tremendous. They have cried
lies who ascribe equals to Allah! They have gone astray into far error
and suffered a manifest loss! And Allah bless Mohammed, the Prophet, and
his Household, the good, the pure.[[1]](#_ftn1681)

This great sermon contains vague philosophical and theological
researches; it shows the scientific abilities of Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him; it clearly indicates that the Abbāsids were mistaken when they
though that the Imām was incapable of discussing scientific researches.
It is certain that most of those who listened to the sermon of the Imām
did not understand these philosophical matters, which the Imām, peace be
on him, has presented, and which has dealt with the most important
matters of Allahs Oneness.

### The Sermon which the Imām has written to al-Mamūn

Al-Mamūn asked Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, to write him a sermon in
order to recite it to the people when he led them in prayer, so he,
peace be on him, wrote him the following great sermon:

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.

Praise belongs to Allah, Who from nothing was, nor from making a thing
He sought help, nor from a thing He created (the creatures), nor from it
He formed the things; rather He said to it, Be, and it is.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1681)Al-Tawhid, pp. 34-41.  
  

  

  

And I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, Who is unique and
without partners, far above resisting rivals, vying with opposites,
taking consorts and children. I also bear witness that Mohammed is His
chosen servant and his distinguished, trusted one. He sent him with the
detailed Qurān, His connected revelation, and His pure Distinguisher
*(Furqān)*, so he gave good news of His reward and warned against His
punishment, may Allah bless him and his family.

I recommend you, O servants of Allah, to fear Allah, Who knows your
secret and open (deeds), and knows what you hide, so surely Allah will
not leave you wandering without an aim; nor did He create you in vain;
nor will He enable you to guidance. Beware! Beware, servants of Allah!
For Allah has made you cautious of (retribution from) Himself, so do not
subject (yourselves) to regret, calling for wrath, and arriving at the
torture of the Hellfire, *surely the torture thereof is a lasting evil,
surely it is an evil abode and (evil) place to stay;* it does not go
out; eyes do not sleep; souls neither die nor live;  (they are) in
chains and shackles, (subjected to) punishments and exemplary
punishments, *so oft as their skins are thoroughly burned, We will
change them for other skins, that they may taste the chastisement;
surely Allah is Mighty, Wise; a fire, the smoke of which shall encompass
them about*, so their call shall not be heard, their supplication shall
not be responded, and there shall be no mercy upon their weeping. So
flee, O servants of Allah, to Allah through these perishing souls, in
the successive outcry, in the bygone days, before death befalls you,
usurps your souls from you, distresses you in your hearts and be between
you and the return. How far! So there will be no way to the return and
no arrival to the residence. May Allah protect you and me through what
He has protected His righteous friends, guide you and me to what He has
guided His good servants.[[1]](#_ftn1682)

This sermon summons men to do good, to refrain from the unlawful, and to
renounce the world; it warns them against Allahs punishment and
chastisement.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1682)Al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 215.  
  

  

  

Al-Mamūn asks the Imām for good Poetry
--------------------------------------

Al-Mamūn asked the Imām, peace be on him, to recite to him the best
poetry lines which he had narrated on clemency. So he, peace be on him,
said: These are the best lines which I have narrated:

If I am tried by the ignorance of those inferior to me,

then I prevent myself from returning in kind through ignorance.

If those like me are similar to me in intellect,

then I escape due to my clemency, that I may be far

above the like.

If I am inferior to him in excellence and intellect,

then I recognize his right of superiority and

excellence.

Al-Mamūn admired these poetry lines and asked: Who composed them?

One of our boys, replied the Imām.

Recite to me the best poetry you have narrated regarding silence toward
the ignorant, demanded al-Mamūn.

So he, peace be on him, recited these lines:

The friend may abandon me and turn aside (from me),

so I make him see that there are reasons for his

abandonment.

I see that if I admonish him, I will urge him, so I see

that leaving admonition is an admonition toward him.

If I am tried by an ignorant one showing clemency and

finding impossible things as correct, then I keep silent.

Perhaps silence is an answer to the answer.

Al-Mamūn was astonished and asked: How good this (poetry) is ! Who
composed it?

One of our youths, answered the Imām.

Then al-Mamūn said: Recite to me the best (poetry) you have narrated
concerning attracting enemy, that he may be a friend.

So the Imām recited to him these lines:

  

  

  

I make peace with the possessor of malice, so I

overcome and deafen him because of the favor of

endurance from me.

He who does not repel the evil deeds of his enemy

through his kindness (to him) does not take graciousness

from a lofty place.

I see that nothing destroys old malice

quicker than immediate friendliness.

So al-Mamūn said: How good this (poetry) is! Who composed it?

One of our young men, replied the Imām

Recite to me the best (poetry) you have narrated regarding keeping
things secret, demanded al-Mamūn.

So the Imām recited to him the following:

Surely I forget secret lest I should announce it. O he

who wants secret to be kept, I forget it lest it should

come to my mind and my heart reveals it to him who

has colic in his bowels.

So he who does not reveal secret and it comes to his

mind is about to be unable to keep it.

As a result al-Mamūn admired the marvelous poems which the Imām had
memorized.

The Imāms Letter to his Son al-Jawād
------------------------------------

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, sent from Khurasān a letter to his son
al-Jawād mentioning in it:

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.

May my soul be sacrificed for you, I have heard that when you ride, the
retainers make you go out of the small door of the garden; this is a
sign of miserliness in them lest anyone should attain good from you. So
I ask you though my right against you that you should go out and come in
through the big door, and if you ride, Allah willing, let gold and
siliver be with you. When someone asks you for something, you give him.
When one of your uncles asks you to give him, then do not give him less
than fifty dinars; as for more than this  

  

  

amount, that is up to you. When one of your aunts asks you to give her,
then do not give her less than fifty dinars; as for more than this
amount, that is up to you. And when one of Quraysh asks you (to give
him), then do not give him less than twenty-five dinars; as for more
than this amount, that is up to you. Surely I want Allah to give you
success, so fear Allah. Give and do not fear miserliness from the
Possessor of the Throne.[[1]](#_ftn1683)

Have you ever seen such an angelic soul clinging to kindness to men in
general? Generosity was one of the qualities of the Imām, so he urged
his son to tighten the bonds of kin and to show kindness to the
miserable.

This letter gives an account of a kind of exalted education practiced by
the members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, who brought
up their children to cleave to honor and virtue, planted in their own
souls high noble moral traits and good qualities, that they might be an
example of good and a good model of the community.

The letter of Praise and Condition
----------------------------------

This letter has been ascribed to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him; it flows
with praising al-Fadl b. Sahl and lauding his great efforts in
establishing the kingdom of al-Mamūn, defeating his opponents such as
his brother al-Amin, Abū al-Sarāyā, and others. He spared no effort to
suppress those violent revolts. So al-Mamūn rewarded him for that
through giving him great wealth and enormous properties; likewise, he
gave the like of that to his brother al-Husayn b. Sahl as a prize to
them for their loyalty to him. The letter says:

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.

Now then, praise belongs to Allah, the Originator, the Exalter, the
Powerful, the Dominator, the Watcher over His servants, the Feeder over
His creatures, toward whose dominion all things are humble, before whose
might all things are lowly, through whose power all things are
submissive, before whose force and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1683)Ibid., pp. 215-216.  
  

  

  

tremendousness all things are humble, whose knowledge encompasses all
things and counts their number, so no great thing makes Him tired, no
small thing is distant from Him; beholders eyes attain Him not;
describers description encompasses Him not; His are creation, command,
the loftiest attribute in the heavens and the earth; and He is the
Mighty, the Wise.

And praise belongs to Allah, Who has legislated Islam as religion,
preferred it, magnified it, honored it, ennobled it, made it the
valuable religion other than which is no (religion) accepted, the
straight path to which he who clings does not go astray, from which he
who turns away is not rightly guided, placed therein the light and the
proof, cure and explanation, sent with it him whom He chose from among
His angels to him whom He distinguished from among His messengers in the
bygone communities, and the past centuries until His message reached
Mohammed, the chosen one, may Allah bless him and his family, so He
sealed through Him the prophets, made him follow the tracks of the
messengers, sent him as mercy for people, bringer of good news to those
believers who believed (in his message) and warner to those unbelievers
who denied (it), *that His is the conclusive argument, and that he who
would perish might perish by clear proof; and most surely Allah is
Hearing, Knowing*.

And praise belongs to Allah, Who has made his Household inherit the
legacies of the prophethood, deposited in them knowledge and wisdom,
made them the source of the Imāmate and the caliphate, made their
authority (over Muslims) obligatory, and ennobled their rank, so He
ordered His Messenger to ask his community to show love for them, for He
says: *Say I demand not, of you any reward for it(the  
 toil of preaching) except the love of my relations*.[[1]](#_ftn1684)
And that through  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1684) Qur'ān, 42, 20. Al-'Allāma has said: [The consensus (of
scientists) in the two authentic books, Ahmed b. Hanbal in his Musnad,
al-Tha'labi in his Tafsir have narrated on the authority of Ibn 'Abbāss,
may Allah have mercy on him, who said:] "When *Say I demand not, of you
any reward for it ( the toil of preaching) except the love of my
relations* was revealed, they asked: 'O Apostle of Allah, who are your
relations whose love you have made obligatory on us?' 'They are 'Ali,Fā
tima, and their two sons, 'he replied."  
  

  

  

which He has described them such as keeping off from them every kind of
uncleanness and His purifying them in these words of Him: *Verily Allah
intends to keep off from you every kind of uncleanness and to purify
you, people of the House, with a thorough purification*.[[1]](#_ftn1685)

Then surely al-Mamūn has been kind to Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family, with respect to his family, and tightened the bonds
of his Household. So he has returned friendliness to them, brought them
together, reconciled them, put an end to the division among them; and
Allah through him has driven away enmities and spites from them. So
through his felicity, his protection, his blessing, his devotion, and
his gifts their hands have become one, their word is inclusive, and
their desires are harmonious. He has kept the rights for their owners,
put the legacies in their places, rewarded with the kindness of the good
doers, safeguarded those who have been stricken by tribulation, brought
near (those far) and sent far (those close) because of the religion.
Then he has singled out him whose efforts have given priority to him
(over others) with preference, giving precedence (over others), and
honoring. Such (a person) is Dhū al-Riyāsatayn al-Fadl b. Sahl, for he
(al-Mamūn) has seen that he (al-Fadl) supports him, undertakes his
right, speaks of his argument, heads his chiefs, leads his horses,
directs his wars, governs his subjects, summons (them) to him, rewards
him who responds to obedience to him, opposes him who opposes him, helps
him only, cures the malady of hearts and intentions. Neither paucity of
wealth nor lack of men prevents him from that; greediness does not make
him partial; and no fear turns him aside from his intention and his
insight.  
 Rather, when the terrified terrify (him), and when threateners,  
 menacers, many dissenters and opponents from among the *mujāhidin*  
 and the deceivers threaten him, he is the most resolute of them, the  
 most steadfast of them, the most powerful of them in scheming, the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[2]](#_F1685)Ibid., 33, 33. Al-'Allāma has said: "The interpreters (of
the Qur'ān) have unanimously agreed that this verse was revealed
regarding 'Ali, Fātima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, peace be on them.
Similarly, the consensus (of scientists) such Ahmed b. Hanbal, and the
like, has narrated that it was revealed concerning them."  
  

  

  

best of them in direction, the strongest (of them) in establishing the
right of al-Mamūn and in summoning (men) to him, to the extent that he
has broken the teeth of the errant, blunted the edge (of their sword),
clipped their finer-nails (lit. wings), reaped their thorn (i.e. killed
them), struck them down (just as he struck down) those unbelievers who
broke his covenant, flagged in his command, made little of his right,
felt safe from his influence and his courage; in addition to the (other)
works of Dhū al-Riyāsatayn toward all kinds of the communities from
among the polytheists; (for example) through him Allah has increased 
the boundaries of the country of the Muslims; you have heard of their
news, regarding which the letters have been read on your pulpits, which
the people have transmitted to you (and) to other than you. As Dhū
al-Riyāsatayn strove earnestly for the Commander of the faithful,
undertook his right, sacrificed for him his own soul and the soul of his
brother Abū Mohammed al-Hasan b. Sahl, whose nature is blessed and whose
policy is praiseworthy, he (the Commander of the faithful) thanked him
to the extent that he surpassed the first and triumphed over the
successful.

The Commander of the faithful has rewarded him to the extent that he has
attained properties, country estates and jewels, though this reward does
not equal one of his days and attitudes. Yet, he (al-Fadl) has left this
reward out of renouncing it, disdaining it, securing it for the Muslims,
casting away the world, making little of it, preferring the hereafter
(to it), and competing (with others) for it (the hereafter).

And he has asked the Commander of the faithful about abdicating and
renouncing (the office of ministry). So he and we have regarded that as
great because of our knowledge of what Allah, the Great and Almighty,
has put in his place in which he is of might for the religion and
authority, strength for setting the Muslims right,  
 waging jihād against the polytheists, and what Allah has shown  
 through him of his truthful intention, his blessed soul, his correct  
 direction, his strong view point, his successful request, his helping  
 (him) with the truth and guidance, kindness and reverential fear. So  
 when the Commander of the faithful has become confident of him, we  
 have (also) become confident of him according to the view of the  

  

  

religion and that in which is his righteousness; we have given him his
demand, which is equal to his rank; we have written to him a letter of
*habā and shart* (praise and condition), which has been copied at the
bottom of this letter of mine; we called to witness to it Allah, those
who were present with us from among our household, the (military)
commanders, the companions, the judges, the jurists, the personal
entourage, and the populace.

The Commander of the faithful has ordered the letter to be announced in
the regions, spread among their inhabitants, read on their pulpits,
established with their governors and their judges. So he has asked me to
write about that and to explain its meanings, which are in three parts:

The First Part: Explaining all his (al-Fadls) works through which Allah
has made his right incumbent upon us and the Muslims.

The Second Part: Explaining his rank in removing his reason concerning
all that which he has directed, in which he has entered, and there is no
objection against him concerning that which he has left and hated. That
is because the creatures should not pledge allegiance to anyone except
to him and his brother. Part of removing the reason (for his abdicating
the office) is hiding it from all those who have wronged them (al-Fadl
and his brother), strive through corruption against us, them, and our
friends, lest one should crave after a difference against them or after
an act of disobedience to them or after a trickery concerning an entry
between us and them.

The Third Part: Explaining our gifts to him if he has to choose between
abdicating and renouncing (the office), and the proof of accomplishing
(that) because of the reward of the hereafter regarding which he has
striven through that which (must) be established in the heart of him who
has doubt about him regarding that, and that which obligates us such as
dignity, might, the *habā* (praise) which we have given to him and his
brother regarding protecting them both from that from which we protect
ourselves. And that encompasses all that through which the cautious
takes precautions with respect to the affairs of religion and the world.

This statement has terminated; it lauds the great efforts which al-  

  

  

Fadl b. Sahl made for strengthening the government of al-Mamūn and
establishing his state. It also praises his honesty, his refusing to
accept many prizes and gifts, and his asking for abdicating the office
of ministry. Moreover it shows that this request of him was refused.
This statement is a preface to the letter of *al-Habā wa al-Shart* (the
Praise and Condition), which says:

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. This is a
letter on *al-Habā wa al-Shart* (the Praise and Condition) from the
servant of Allah al-Mamūn, the Commander of the faithful, and his heir
apparent Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā, to Dhū al-Riyāsatayn al-Fadl b. Sahl; (the
letter was written) on Monday, the seventh of the month of Ramadān, in
the year 201 A. H. This is the day on which Allah has completed the
state of the Commander of the faithful, appointed his heir apparent,
made the people wear green uniform, (made the Commander of the faithful)
achieve his hope of setting right his friend and overcoming his enemy.
We have summoned you to that in which is some of rewarding you, for you
have fulfilled the right of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, the right of
Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, the right of the
Commander of the faithful and of his heir apparent, Ali b. Mūsā, the
right of the Hāshimtes through whom (we) hope to set right the religion
and to settle the enmity among the Muslims, until he establishes his
favor upon us and upon the populace through that; and through that with
which has helped the Commander of the faithful such as establishing the
religion and the Sunna, manifesting the second summons (to the religion)
and preferring the first (summons to the religion to it), in addition to
suppressing the polytheists, breaking the idols and killing the tyrants;
in the cities are still standing the rest of his works in respect of the
deposed one (i.e. al-Amin) and Qābil, regarding the one called al-Asfar
(the yellow one) and the one nicknamed Abū al-Sarāyā, concerning the one
called al-Mahdi Mohammed b. Jafar al-  
 Tālibin and the Hawli Turks, regarding Tabristān and its kings to the  
 Port *(Bandar)* of Hurmuz b. Sharwin, in respect of Daylam and its  
 king Mahors, concerning Cabul and its king Harmos then its king  
 Asfahid, regarding Ibn al-Barm, the mountains of Bidār Benda,  

  

  

Arshistān, al-Ghour, and the like, in regard with Khurasān, and Bloun
the leader *(shāhib)* of the mountain of al-Tibtt, regarding Kaymān and
Tagharghar, concerning Armenia and al-Hijāz, the Leader of the Throne
*(sāhib al-Sarir)*, and the Leader of al-Khazar *(sāhib al-Khazar),*
regarding al-Maghrib (Morocco) and the wars wherein; the explanation of
that is in the Divan of Biography *(sira)*.

These (works of yours) have summoned us to aid you with one million
dirhams, a crop of ten million jewel dirhams, feudal estates had been
given to you by the Commander of the faithful before that; in our
viewpoint, you deserve more than one hundred million jewel dirhams. You
had left the like of that when it was given to you by the deposed one
(i.e. al-Amin). You have preferred Allah and His religion (to that). You
have thanked the Commander of the faithful and his heir apparent,
secured all of that to the Muslims, and you have generously given it to
them.

You have asked us to respond to  your request, for which you have
yearned, and which is abdicating and renouncing (the office of the
ministry), that you may set right him who has doubt about your striving
for the next world apart from this world and your renouncing the world.
(We) cannot manage without the like of you and cannot refuse the request
of the like of you. If your demand took us out of the bliss (conferred)
upon us, then how would we order? Through it you have raised provision
and made argument obligatory on him who claims that your summoning (the
people) to us is for the world, not for the hereafter. We have responded
to what you have asked from us and given it to you, confirmed by Allahs
promise and covenant which do not change; nor do they alter; we
entrusted the matter to you in that time. If you intend to keep to (your
office), then your are dear, the reason is removed from you, any kind of
work you hate to practice is driven way from you, and we protect you
from that from which we protect ourselves in all circumstances. If you
intend to abdicate (the office), then you are honorable, (and only your)
body is removed. Then the right of your body (against you) is that you
give rest to it and honor it. Then we will give you of that which you
take and of that which we have given to you in this letter, but you have
left it today.

  

  

  

And we have given to al-Hasan b. Sahl the like of that which we have
given to you, so the half of the gift we have given to him and his
household is for you, and for that he sacrificed his own life for waging
jihad against the tyrants, conquering Iraq twice, scattering the
gatherings of Satan, and entering the fires of war, so the religion has
become strong. Through his own soul, his household, those whom ruled
from among the friends of the truth, he protected us from the torture of
the simoom. We have called to witness Allah, His angels, His good
creatures, and all those who had given their pledge of allegiance to us
and the applause of their right hand regarding what is in this letter on
this day and after it. We have made Allah as surety over us for it, made
it incumbent upon us to fulfill the conditions without excluding
anything which decreases them secretly or openly. The promise is a
religious duty (about which weshall be) questioned; the best of the
people in fulfilling (promise) is he who asks the people to fulfill
(it). Allah, the Exalted, said: *And fulfill the covenant of Allah when
you have made a covenant, and do not break the oaths after making them
fast, and you have indeed made Allah a surety for you; surely Allah
knows what you do*.[[1]](#_ftn1686)

This document called *al-Habā wa al-Shart* has terminated, and it has
been signed by al-Mamūn and Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him.

### Al-Mamūns Signature

It has been mentioned in it: In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious,
the Most Merciful. The Commander of the faithful (i.e. al-Mamūn) has
made it incumbent on himself (to fulfill) all that which is in this
letter, to call Allah to witness and to make Him as a Summoner and
Surety for it. He wrote it in his own handwriting in (the month of)
Safar, (in the) year 202, (as a sign of) honoring *al-Habā* (praise) and
confirming *al-Shart* (the condition).

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1686)Qur'ān, 16, 91.  
  

  

  

### Imām al-Ridās Signature

It has been mentioned in the signature of the Imām, peace be on him: In
the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. Ali b. Mūsā
al-Ridā has made it incumbent on himself (to fulfill) all that which is
in this letter, to what he has confirmed wherein on his day and tomorrow
as long as he is alive and to make Allah, the Exalted, as a Summoner and
Surety for it; and enough for a witness is Allah. He wrote it in his own
handwriting in this month (of Safar), in this year (202). Praise belongs
to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, may Allah bless him and his family,
*Allah is sufficient for us and Most excellent is the
Protector*.[[1]](#_ftn1687)

This document has come to an end. It gives an account of the terrible
pictures of the political disturbance by which Islamic country was
afflicted, for popular revolts spread in it and discords became general
wherein. Some sources emphasize that the time of al-Mamūn was the time
of discords and disorders, that these revolts were suppressed and
uprooted by al-Fadl b. Sahl, who was expert in suppressing revolts,
while rivers of blood flowed, sadness and mourning spread in most
Islamic countries. Of course, those revolts resulted from the oppression
and tyranny which dominated that time at the hands of the Abbāsids, who
ruled Islamic world with a policy void of just and fairness. Any how,
both the parts of the document do not belong to the composition of Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him; rather they belong to the organ of government
and its helpers; and they have attributed them to Imām al-Ridā, that
they might be religious and unbroken; this can be supported by the
following:

Firstly, this document grants millions of properties to al-Fadl b. Sahl
and enormous wealth as a reward for the services he rendered to al-Mamūn
and his suppressing the revolts against him. Of course, these properties
belong to the central treasury of all Muslims. Without doubt it is not
permissible to misuse even the least property of the Muslims or to  give
it as a reward or the like to any person; rather it is  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1687)'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, p. 2, 154-159.  
  

  

  

obligatory to spend it on the interests of the Muslims, improving their
standard of living, refreshing them, and spreading welfare among them.
So how was it possible for the Imām to make that permissible and to
decide giving these properties to al-Fadl?

Secondly, this document contains signs of praise and laudation toward
al-Fadl b. Sahl, and, in the meantime, it defames the revolt of Abū
al-Sarāyā and of Jafar b. Mohammed, the two Tālibi ones. Such a praise
does not belong to the morals of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, for he
did not praise anyone unless he was worthy of praise and laudation; nor
did he dispraise anyone unless he was entitled to dispraise and slander;
this was his behavior and method in life. So how did he give this praise
to al-Mamūn? And how did he laud al-Fadl with this laudation? It is
worth mentioning that he harbored hatred and detest against them, for he
was aware that they had wicked and spiteful souls. Generally speaking,
al-Mmūn honored the Imām and appointed him as a heir apparent after him
for a political maneuver of which the Imām was fully aware.

Thirdly, this document contradicts what the Imām, peace be on him, made
as a condition on al-Mamūn when he agreed to assume the position of heir
apparent. In other words he agreed to assume the position of heir
apparent on the condition that he would not interfere in any of the
affairs of the state and would be far from all political events. So how
did he interfere in the affair of al-Fadl and reward him for his loyalty
to al-Mamūn?

These are some criticisms which face ascribing this document to Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him.        

With his Brother Zayd
---------------------

Zayd joined the revolt declared by Abū al-Sarāyā, the summoner to
Mohammed b. Ibrāhim al-Hasani. He was appointed by Abū al-Sarāyā as a
governor over the province of al-Ahwāz, so he went to it in order to
undertake the tasks of his job. When he passed through Basrah, which was
under the domination of the Abbāsid government, he burnt the houses of
the Abbāsids, so he was given the nickname of *Zayd al-Nār* (the Zayd of
fire). When the revolt of Abū al-Sarāyā was  

  

  

suppressed, Zayd disappeared. However, al-Hasan b. Sahl, looked for him,
found him, and imprisoned him. He was still in prison until Ibrāhim, the
Shaykh of the singers, better known as Ibn Shakkla, took the reins of
government. Then the inhabitants of Baghdad broke into the prison and
released Zayd. As a result he went to Medina (Yathrib), summoned the
people there to pledge allegiance to Mohammed b. Jafar. But al-Mamūn
sent an army and the army could suppress the revolt, captured Zayd, and
brought him to al-Mamūn, who said to him: O Zayd, you revolted (against
us) in Basrah and refused to start with the houses of our enemies from
among the Umayyads, Thaqif, Ghinā, Bāhila, and the family of Ziyād, and
you intended (to burn) the houses of the children of your uncle (i.e.
the Abbāsids).

So Zayd said to him with joy: O Commander of the faithful, I made a
mistake in all the situations; if I return to revolt, I will start with
our enemies.

Al-Mamūn smiled at him, sent him to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, and
said to him: I have entrusted you with his crime, so educate him in a
good manner.[[1]](#_ftn1688)

Zayd was brought before the Imām, and he said to him: Woe unto you Zayd!
You did toward the Muslims in Basrah what you did, while you claim that
you are the son of Fātima, daughter of Allah Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family. By Allah, Allah Messenger, may Allah bless him and
his family, will be the severest of all people toward you! O Zayd, he
who takes through Allahs Messenger should give through him.

When al-Mamūn heard of the Imāms statement, he wept and said: The
Household of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, must
follow this manner.[[2]](#_ftn1689)

With His Sister Fātima
----------------------

When Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, was in Khurasān, he wrote to the
pure lady Fātima, better known as lady Masūma; he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1688)Tanqih al-Maqāl, vol. 1, p. 471.  
 [[2]](#_F1689)Mir'āt al-Jinān, vol. 2, p. 13.  
  

  

  

asked her to come to him, for she was a favorite with him and dear to
him. When the letter came to her, she prepared herself and traveled to
him.[[1]](#_ftn1690) When she arrived at Sāwa, she fell ill. So she
asked about the distance between Sāwa and Qum, and it was said to her:
Ten  leagues. So she ordered the people to carry her to Qum, and they
carried her to it. She stopped at the house of Mūsā b. Khazzrajj while
she was holding the reins of her she-camel. He brought her to his house,
and she stayed in it for seventeen days. Then she died, and Mūsā
prepared her for burial. He buried her in his own land and built over
her holy grave a shelter of reed mats. (Such was her grave) until a dome
was built over it by lady Zaynab, daughter of Mohammed b. Ali
al-Jawād.[[2]](#_ftn1691) Her Holy Shrine have become one of the dearest
places of worship and one of the Holy Shrines in Islam; likewise, that
Sacred City has become one of the universities of knowledge and among
the cultural centers in Islam.

Al-Hasan b. Mohammed al-Qummi says: I was (sitting) with Imām al-Sādiq,
peace be on him, and he said: Surely Allah has a sacred city, and it is
Mecca; His Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, has a sacred
city, and it is Medina; the Commander of the faithful has a sacred city,
and it is Kūfa; we have a sacred city, and it is Qum wherein a woman
called Fātima from among my children will be buried; whoever visits her,
the Garden is obligatory for him.[[3]](#_ftn1692) Imām al-Sādiq had
announced that before she was born.

The Īd Prayer
-------------

Al-Mamūn asked Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, to say  the Īd prayer
before the people and to deliver a sermon after the prayer, that the
hearts of the populace might become assured through that and recognize
his excellence, but the Imām refused to respond to him and said to him:
You have come to know about the conditions made between us; I do not
interfere in this affair; therefore, exempt me from saying the prayer
before the people.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1690)Jawharat al-Kalām, p. 146.  
 [[2]](#_F1691)Hayāt al-Imām Mūsā b. Ja'far, vol. 2, p. 439.  
 [[3]](#_F1692)Tuhfat al-'Ālam, p. 36. Al-Bihār.  
  

  

  

I only intend by that that the peoples heart should be assured and that
they should know your great merit, replied al-Mamūn.

Al-Mamūn insisted on that, so the Imām was forced to respond to him, but
he made it a condition that he should go out just as Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, and his grandfather the Commander of the
faithful, Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on him, did.

Go out as you wish, replied al-Mamūn. Then he ordered the military
commanders and the rest of the people to receive Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him.

The people went out waiting for the Imām in the roads and on roof-tops.
As for the military commanders, they were ready and wore the best
uniform. When the sun rose, the Imām washed and put on a white turban.
One end of it he made hang on his holy breast and the other between his
shoulders. He took his staff in his hand and said to his retainers: Do
whatever I do. Then he went out in that humble state, raised his head
towards heaven, and exclaimed four times: Allah is great *(Allahū
akbar)*! Then he stood at the door and exclaimed four times: Allah is
great *(Allahū akbar)*! Then he said: Allah is great, for He has guided
us! Allah is great, for He has given to us of the cattle quadrupeds!
Praise belongs to Allah, for He has tried us!

The earth shook with saying Allah is great! The people walked like waves
and said at the top of their voices: Allah is great! The appearance of
the Imām, peace be on him, reminded them of that of his grandfather the
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, who developed the
intellectual life on earth. So they understood the deviation of those
kings who ruled them with oppression and tyranny.

The great Imām, the peace of Allah be on him, walked bare-foot, stopped
after each ten steps, and said four times: Allah is great! The people
imagined that the sky, the earth, and the walls were answering him. As
for Marū, it shook with weeping and clamor. Al-Mamūn heard of that and
he became frightened and terrified. So al-Fadl b. Sahl hurried to him
and said to him: O Commander of the faithful, if al-Ridā reaches the
place of prayer for the festival, the people will break out in
rebellion. So send instructions to him to go back.

  

  

  

Accordingly, al-Mamūn sent one of his policemen to the Imām to ask him
to go back, so he, peace be on him, called for his boots and put them
on. Then he went back without saying the prayer before the
people.[[1]](#_ftn1693) This action demonstrates the spirituality of the
Imām, his renouncing the world, his rejecting the pleasures of the
kingdom and authority. Al-Bahri has described the coming out of the
Imām, peace be on him, in this way, saying:

When you came out of the ranks, they mentioned the

Prophet, said, There is no god except Allah, and exclaimed: Allah is
Great, till you  reached the place of prayer wearing the light of
guidance appearing and manifesting on you.

You walked with the walking of one submissive and

humble before Allah, does not show pride nor haughtiness.

If a longing one affected other than what he could do, then

the pulpit would walk toward you.[[2]](#_ftn1694)

The narrators have said: Surely the going out of the Imām in this way
was one of the most important factors which motivated al-Mamūn to harbor
malice against the Imām and then to assassinate him.

The Imāms Supplication in Asking for Water
------------------------------------------

Rain was withheld from the people, so some of those who harbored malice
against the Imām, peace be on him, ascribed that to his assuming the
position of heir apparent. They began announcing and spreading that
among the popular circles in order to defame the personality of the
Imām, peace be on him. Al-Mamūn heard of that and became displeased with
it. Then he told the Imām about that, asked him to supplicate Allah for
sending down rain to the people. The Imām answered him, saying: Surely,
I will do that on Monday.

Why? asked al-Mamūn.

He, peace be on him, replied: Surely, Allahs Messenger, may  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1693)Usūl al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 189-190. 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā,
vol. 2, pp. 150-151. Al-Manāqib, vol. 4, pp. 371-372. Kashf al-Ghumma.  
 [[2]](#_F1694)Al-Manāqib, vol. 4, p. 372.  
  

  

  

Allah bless him and his family, came to me yesterday nigh, and there was
along with him the Commander of the faithful, Ali, peace be on him, and
he said to me: My son, wait until Monday (comes). Go to the desert and
ask for water, for surely Allah shall water them (with rain), and tell
them of what will Allah make you see of what they do not know of their
state, that they may be increased in knowledge of your excellence and
position with your Lord, the Great and Almighty.

So al-Mamūn and the rest of his personal entourage waited until Monday
came. Meanwhile he ordered all the popular classes to go to the desert
on Monday. When this day came, the people went in a hurry to the desert.
The Imām, who was in the appearance of the prophets, went to the desert.
When he arrived in the desert, a pulpit had been installed for him. The
people surrounded him and said at the top of their voices: There is no
god but Allah! Allah is great!

### The Imāms Supplication

The Imām ascended the pulpit, praised and lauded Allah, and then he
said: O Allah! O Lord! It is You who have magnified our right, the *Ahl
al-Bayt!* So they have sought access through us (to You) as You have
commanded, hoped for Your bounty and mercy, expected Your kindness and
favor. So give them water with a watering which is useful, general,
neither slow nor harmful! And let their rain start after their leaving
this view of them to their houses and their abodes!

The Imām added, saying: So by Him who sent Mohammed with the Truth as
prophet, the wind wove clouds in the air, and it thundered and
lightened.

When the people heard of the Imāms statement, they intended to go to
their houses, lest the rain should befall them. So he, peace be on him,
said: That cloud which has towered over you is not for you; rather it is
for another city. And he mentioned to them the name of the city.

Then ten successive clouds towered over the people, and the Imām told
them that each cloud would rain in a certain city, and he mentioned the
names of the cities. As a result the eleventh cloud  

  

  

towered over them, so he, peace be on him, said: O People, that is the
cloud which Allah, the Great and Almighty, has sent for you, so thank
Allah for His favor toward you; go to your abodes and houses, for it has
been sent for you. It has been prevented from raining on your heads
until your enter your abodes. Then some good suitable for the
munificence of Allah, the Great and Almighty, will come to you.

Then he descended the pulpit, and the people went in a hurry to their
houses. When they arrived at their houses, it began raining heavily. So
the valleys, the basins, the streams, and the deserts were filled with
water.

The people believed in the miracles of the members of the House (*ahl
al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, and their remarkable rank with Allah, the
Most High, and said: We congratulate the children of Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, on the miracles of Allah, the Great and
Almighty, toward them.

### The Imāms Sermon

In the wake of the miracle, the Imām, peace be on him, delivered a
sermon before a large crowd of people, saying: O men, fear Allah with
respect to the favors of Allah toward you, so repel them not from you
through disobeying Him; rather make them continue through obeying Him
and thanking Him for His blessings and favors. And know that you do not
thank Allah for a thing after faith in Him, and after professing the
rights of the friends of Allah from among the family of Mohammed, may
Allah bless him and his family more lovable to Him than helping your
believing brethren with their world, which is a bridge for them to the
Gardens of their Lords. So surely, he who does that is among the special
friends of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted; Allahs Messenger, may Allah
bless him and his family, already said concerning that a statement. The
believer should not turn away from Allahs bounty toward him in the
statement if he carefully considers it and put it into practice.

It was said: O Allahs Messenger, so-and-so has perished, for he has
committed sins so-and-so. So Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: Rather, he has saved himself (from  

  

  

Allahs punishment), and Allah will not end his work except with a good
final result; He will erase his evil deeds and change them into good
ones. Surely, one day he passed through a road and found a believers
pudenda  uncovered while the believer was not aware (of that). He
covered it on his behalf without telling him (of that) lest he (the
believer) should be ashamed. Then that believer recognized him in a
valley and said to him: May Allah reward you generously, honor your
return, and He may not discuss with you on the Day of Resurrection. So
Allah has responded to him concerning him; therefore, Allah will not end
(the work of) this servant except with a good final result because of
the supplication of that believer. This man heard of the statement of
Allahs Messenger, so he repented, turned to Allah in repentance, and
practiced the acts of obedience to Allah, the Great and Almighty. Only
seven days ago, Median was attacked, so Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, sent a group of people to war against them (the
attackers). This man was among them, so he died a martyr.

The Imāms sermon has ended; it flows with summons to fear of Allah, the
Most High, cooperation and friendship among the Muslims. The Imām has
regarded that as the best act of obedience and nearness to Allah, the
Exalted.

### Admonition and Warning

The clubs and the assemblies talked about the Imāms supplication in
asking for water and the heavy rain because of his supplication. The
Abbāsids and their hirelings were so displeased with this miracle which
showed the excellence of the Alawides and their great rank with Allah,
the Exalted, that a wicked one of them admonished al-Mamūn and warned
him against entrusting regency to the Imām and against the appearance of
this miracle, saying: O Commander of the faithful, I seek refuge for you
with Allah from that you will be the history of the
caliphs[[1]](#_ftn1695) through your taking this general  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1695)His statement 'that you will be the history of the
caliphs' is an allusion to the greatest event, namely entrusting regency
to Imām al-Ridā, and that it will be the point of history for the
people. Perhaps he wanted to say that you would be the last caliph.  
  

  

  

honor and great pride out of the house of the sons of al-Abbās (and
handing it over ) to the house of the sons of Ali.

You have helped (the Alawides) against your own soul and your own
family. You have brought this magician, the son of the magicians. He was
unknown, but you have made him known. He was weak, but you have exalted
him. He was forgotten, but you have reminded (men) of him. He was
hidden, but you have hinted at him. He has filled the world with sorcery
and longing through this rain which came down during his supplication.
So I fear that this man (i.e. Imām al-Ridā) will take this authority out
of the sons of al-Abbās (and hand it over) to the sons of Ali. I fear
that he will through his magic be able to remove your blessing and to
dominate your kingdom. Has anyone harmed himself and his kingdom as you
have done?

This statement gives an account of the foolish logic of those people who
lived before Islam and claimed that the greatest Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, was a magician because of the miracles and the
signs which happened through his hand. Accordingly, such a kind of
people claimed that the grandson of the Prophet was a magician. Now, let
us listen to al-Mamūns answer:

This man (i.e. Imām al-Ridā) was hidden from us and was summoning (the
people) to himself. So we have intended to make him our heir apparent,
that he may summon (men) to us, admit that the kingdom and the caliphate
belong to us, those who have admired him may believe that he has not
been truthful in what he has claimed, and that this authority belongs to
us apart from him. We feared that if we had left him in that state, we
would have faced unbearable difficulties. Now, if we have done toward
him what we did, made a mistake in his affair, and we are about to be
destroyed out of honoring (him), then it is not permissible to neglect
his affair. But we must disparage him gradually, that we may picture him
in the picture of him who is not worthy of this affair. Then we will
scheme against him to turn his tribulation away from us.[[2]](#_ftn1696)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1696)'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, pp. 169-170.  
  

  

  

Al-Mamūn has uncovered the motives which prompted him to appoint the
Imām as a heir apparent after him as follows:

1. The Imām secretly summoned the people to himself, so if al-Mamūn had
entrusted regency to him, he would have summoned the people to him,
recognized his kingdom and his caliphate.

2. Al-Mamūn intended to show the people that the Imām, peace be on him,
did not renounce authority; nor did he seek the next world.

Any how, he finally admitted that he made a mistake when he nominated
the Imām for this office and asked him to supplicate in asking for water
and the like which displayed his spirituality and his great rank with
Allah, the Most High. Accordingly, he decided to seek evil deeds and
scheme against him in order to put an end to him.

Al-Mamūn fears the Imām
-----------------------

Al-Mamūn feared the Imām, was terrified by the surrounding of the people
around him, and feared for his kingdom from disappearance, for the
people came to know that the Imām, peace be on him, was virtuous and
spiritual, that he would be able to establish political and social
justice in their regions, and that the Abbāsids were not entitled to the
leadership of the community and the authority over the Muslims.

### Important Decisions

Al-Mamūn reflected for a long time on (this affair) and summoned his
advisers in order to get rid of the Imām, so he took the following
decisions:

Firstly, he held scientific conferences which included the greatest
scholars of the world in order to test the Imām and to render him
incapable of answering their questions, that he might use that as means
to defame the personality of the Imām and disprove the creed of the
Shiites who maintained that the Imām should be the most learned of the
people of his time. Meanwhile, if the Imām had been unable to answer
their questions, al-Mamūn would have able to remove him from regency.

But this plan came to nothing, for the Imām answered all the  

  

  

questions of the scholars who afterwards admitted his huge scientific
abilities and his excellence over them.

Secondly, he surrounded him by dense forces of security in order to keep
an eye on him. This task was entrusted to Hishām b. Ibrāhim al-Rāshidi
al-Hamadāni. The narrators say: Ibrāhim was a scholar and an author. He
undertook all the affairs of al-Ridā, peace be on him, before he was
sent to Khurasān. He received all the properties which were sent to the
Imām. When the Imām was sent to Khurasān, Ibrāhim communicated with Dhū
al-Riyāsatayn. Dhū al-Riyāsatayn enticed Ibrāhim with an office and
money. So Ibrāhim followed his caprice, abandoned his religion, deviated
from the truth, and spied on the Imām. He transmitted all the stories
and affairs of the Imām to al-Fadl and al-Mamūn. He was appointed by
al-Mamūn as a chamberlain for al-Ridā. So he thoroughly straitened the
Imām, prevented all the people from reaching him except those whom he
loved, and reported all his words to al-Mamūn and his minister
al-Fadl.[[1]](#_ftn1697)

Thirdly, he prevented the Shiites from attending the assemblies of the
Imām and listening to his talks. He entrusted this task to his
chamberlain Mohammed b. Amrū al-Tūsi, and he prevented them from meeting
the Imām. He treated the Imām rudely, and he, peace be on him, became
angry with him. So the Imām rose, performed two *rakas*, and said in his
personal prayer *(qunūt)*: O Allah! O Possessor of inclusive power, wide
mercy, uninterrupted kindnesses, successive boons, beautiful benefits,
and overflow grants! O He who is not described by  description; nor is
compared to any like! O He who creates (men) and provides (them),
inspires (them) and makes (them) speak, originates and legislates, has
risen high and become lofty, ordains and does well, shapes and masters,
provides arguments and makes them conclusive, grants and bestows
lavishly upon (men)! O He who is exalted in might, so He escapes swift
eyes! O He who is close in subtlety, so He passes through thoughts! O He
who takes care of the kingdom by Himself, so there is no rival in the
kingdom of His  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1697)Ibid., p. 153.  
  

  

  

authority! (O He who) is One in magnificence, so there is no opposite in
the invincibility of His station! O He by whose magnificence of awe the
intricacies of the subtlest of imaginations are bewildered, before whose
tremendousness the swift eyes of mankind fail! O He who knows the
thoughts of the hearts of those knowers and sees the glances of
beholders eyes! Faces are humble in awe of Him; necks are lowly before
His majesty; hearts are afraid out of fear of Him; limbs shake with
fright of Him! O Originator! O Innovator! O Powerful! O Invincible! O
All-high! O Exalter! Bless him through whom prayer is honorable when
blessing is called down upon him (i.e. the Prophet)! Take vengeance upon
him who has wronged me, made little of me, and dismissed the Shiites
from my own door! Let him taste the bitterness of abasement and
disgrace; make him ousted among the dirty and homeless among the
unclean![[1]](#_ftn1698)       

Allah responded to the Imāms supplications, for the mobs revolted
against al-Mamūn and were about to put an end to him, and he faced
terror and disgrace which none can describe.

Al-Mamūn dismissed the Shiites again and tried to annoy the Imām. When
the Imām came to know of that, he washed, performed two *rakas*, and
said in his personal prayer *(qunūt)*: O Allah! You are Allah, the
Living, the Self-subsistent, the Creator, the Provider, the One who
gives life (to the dead), the One who makes (men) die, the Originator,
and the Innovator. To You belongs munificence; to You belongs praise; to
You belongs kindness; and to You belongs the command. You are One with
no associate with You. O One, O Unique, O Single, O Eternal Refuge! O He
who has not begotten; nor has been begotten, and equal to Him is not any
one! Bless Mohammed and the family of Mohammed!

Then he supplicated Allah to drive away that which concerned him, and He
removed from him al-Mamūns trickery and oppression.[[2]](#_ftn1699)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1698)Ibid., pp. 172-173.  
 [[2]](#_F1699)Hāmish al-Musbāh, p. 293.  
  

  

  

The Imām does not praise al-Mamūn
---------------------------------

The Imām, peace be on him, did not praise al-Mamūn; nor did he flatter
him. Rather he adopted toward him an attitude distinguished by
earnestness, frankness, and bitter criticism for some of his works. As
for al-Mamūn, he burst with anger and hid that in order to follow the
Imām, peace be on him. The following are some of the Imāms attitudes
toward al-Mamūn:

1. When al-Mamūn presented the caliphate to the Imām and said to him: I
want to rid myself of the caliphate, vest the office in you, and pledge
allegiance to you.

Now, reflect on this frankness of the Imām in his response to al-Mamūn.
He, peace be on him, said to him: If this caliphate belongs to you and
Allah has made you possess it, then it is no permissible for you to take
off the garment in which Allah has clothed you and to give it to other
than you. If the caliphate does not belong to you, then it is not
permissible for to give me that which does not belong to
you.[[1]](#_ftn1700)

Have you reflected on this profluent logic and undeniable argument which
flows with truth and truthfulness? So al-Mamūn lost his mind; he did not
know what to say, and then he sought refuge with silence.

2. When the Imām refused to accept the caliphate, al-Mamūn presented
regency to him, so he answered him with this decisive answer, saying:
Through that you want the people to say: Surely Ali b. Mūsā (al-Ridā)
has not renounced the world; rather it is the world which has renounced
him. Do you not see that he has accepted regency and craved for the
caliphate?

As a result al-Mamūn was indignant with the Imām and shouted at him,
saying: You always face me with what I hate! You have felt safe from my
penalty! I swear by Allah, you should accept regency or I will force you
to (accept) it! You should do that; otherwise, I will strike off your
head![[2]](#_ftn1701)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1700)'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 139.  
 [[2]](#_F1701)Ibid., p. 140.  
  

  

  

Through all his steps and works, the Imām, peace be on him, preferred
Allahs good pleasure (to the worldly pleasures); he did not praise
anyone; nor did he flatter any creature. If he had flattered al-Mamūn,
sought nearness to him, and satisfied his feelings, al-Mamūn would not
have assassinated him.

3. Yet another example of that the Imām, peace be on him,  was frank
with al-Mamūn and did not praise him is that al-Mamūn said to him: O Abū
al-Hasan I though a bout a thing and concluded correctness from it. I
thought about our ancestry and your ancestry, so I have found that they
have the same excellence and that our Shiites have differed over that
because of caprice and fanaticism.

So the Imām said to him: There is an answer to this statement. If you
like (it), I will mention it to you; if you dislike (it), I will keep
silent.

I did not say it except to know what you have regarding it, retorted
Al-Mamūn.

The Imām established an argument that the Alawides were more entitled to
the Prophet than the Abbāsids and nearer to him than them, saying: O
Commander of the faithful, I adjure you before Allah! If Allah, the
Exalted, resurrected His Prophet Mohammed, and he came out to us from
behind one of those hills and asked you for your daughters hand, would
you marry her to him?

Glory belongs to Allah! replied al-Mamūn, is there anyone who turns away
from Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family?

Do you think that it is permissible for him to ask me for my daughters
hand? asked al-Ridā.

Al-Mamūn kept silent and did not find any way to justify his closeness
to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. That is because the
Imām established an undeniable argument which is that he was among the
children of Fātima al-Zahrā, peace be on her. Accordingly, al-Mamūn
said: By Allah, you are closer to Allah Messenger (than
us).[[1]](#_ftn1702)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1702)Kanz al-Fawā'id, p. 166.  
  

  

  

The members of the House (*ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them, were
entitled to the caliphate not because of their nearness to Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, but because of their
abilities, their talents, and their knowledge of what the community
needed in administrative and economic fields. 

The Imām refuses to appoint Governors
-------------------------------------

Al-Mamūn asked Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, to choose and appoint some
governors over some Islamic regions, but he refused to respond to this
request, saying: Surely I have entered in what I entered on the
condition that I should not command, nor order, nor dismiss, nor counsel
until Allah advances me before you (in death). By Allah, the caliphate
is a thing about which I have not told myself. I was in Medina and
frequented through its streets riding my own mount. The people of Medina
and other than them asked me to accomplish their needs and I did. So
they were like uncles to me; my letters are valid in the cities. If you
increase me in favor, then my Lord has bestowed it upon
me.[[1]](#_ftn1703)

The Imām vigorously refused to interfere in any of the affairs of the
state in order to indicate that the state of al-Mamūn was illegal, and
that he was forced when he joined it.

### The Imām predicts that he will not enter Baghdad

Al-Mamūn told Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, that he would enter Baghdad
and told him about what he would do in it, so he asked him: Shall we
enter Baghdad?

You will enter Baghdad, the Imām, peace be on him, replied.

A Shiite heard this statement and became frightened, for he came to know
that the Imām would not enter Baghdad. He was alone with the Imām and
said to him: I have heard a thing which has saddened me. He mentioned
the statement, so the Imām, peace be on him, said to him: I will not go
to Baghdad. I will not see Baghdad; nor will it see me.[[2]](#_ftn1704)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1703)'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, pp. 166-167.  
 [[2]](#_F1704)Ibid., pp., 224-225.  
  

  

  

This is one of the proofs of his Imāmate, for he did not leave Khurasān
for Baghdad until al-Mamūn assassinated him.

The Imām and al-Fadl Bin Sahl
-----------------------------

As for al-Fadl b. Sahl[[1]](#_ftn1705), he was the most remarkable
personality in the state of al-Mamūn. He enjoyed wide-range powers, for
he dominated all the organs of the government. So his role in the state
of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1705)Al-Fadl b. Sahl al-Sarkhasi became a Muslim at the hand of
al-Ma'mūn in the year 190 A. H. He was the most knowledgeable of the
people in astrology. Al-Ma'mūn asked the mother of al-Fadl to send him
what her son had left behind him. She sent him a sealed box. When he
opened the box, he found in a silk piece of clothe in which al-Fadl had
written in his handwriting: "In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious,
the Most Merciful. This is what al-Fadl b. Sahl has decided against
himself. He has decided that he will live for forty years and will be
killed between Mā' and Nār." He lived for this period, then he was
killed by Ghālib, al-Ma'mūn's uncle, at Sarkhas. An example of the
marvelous poetry which Ibrāhim al-Sawli has composed regarding praising
him are the following:  
 Fadl b. Sahl has a hand of which the like fallshort.  
 So its giving is for riches; its power is for themoment of death;  
 Its inside is for generosity; and its outside isfor kissing.  
 Praising al-Fadl, Abū Mohammed 'Abd Allah b.Mohammed says:  
 By your life, though the noblemen in every cityare great, they are
(nothing) but creatures for al-Fadl.  
 You see the great men are lowly before al-Fadlwhen he appears, and
al-Fadl is lowly before Allah.  
 He has become humble when Allah has increased himin exaltedness, and
every great person with him is humble.  
 Al-Fadl lost a son called al-'Abbās and became very impatient for him.
So Ibrāhim, the son of Imām Mūsā b. Ja'far visited him, comforted him,
and composed before him:  
 Your reward after al-'Abbāss is better than him,  
 And Allah is better than you for al-'Abbāss.  
 "You are right," al-Ma'mūn said. This has been mentioned in Wafayāt
al-A'yān, vol. 3, pp. 209-211.   
  

  

  

al-Mamūn was like that of the Barāmika during the days of Hārūn
al-Rashid. He was very skillful with political affairs, so concerning
him,  Ibrāhim b. al-Abbās says:

And if the battles become hot, I will send for them an opinion through
which their phalanxes will be defeated.

When the swords become blunt, a resolution is carried out

by the opinion, so it quenches the thirst of their edges.

It (the opinion) will establish for a group (of people) its state and
install in another (state) its mourners.[[1]](#_ftn1706)

These poetry lines give an account of the skill of al-Fadl  at political
affairs; they show that he through his own opinion  could put an end to
a state and establish another in the place of it, just as he did when he
overthrew the state of al-Amin and established the state of al-Mamūn.

Any how, al-Fadl was one of those who negotiated with Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, about regency. He threatened the Imām when he
vigorously refused to accept it. We will mention some of the Imāms
affairs with him as follows:

### A false Suggestion for assassinating al- Mamūn

Al-Fadl b. Sahl and Hishām b. Ibrāhim tried to deceive Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, and to destroy him. They came to him and asked him to
ask the people to leave his assembly, that they might secretly negotiate
with him. The Imām asked the people to leave his sitting-place, then
al-Fadl took out an oath written in release and divorce and that for
which there was no religious expiation, saying: We have come to you to
say the truth. We have come to know that the authority belongs to you,
and the right is yours, O son of Allahs Messenger. Our consciences bear
(witness) to what we say through our tongues. What we possess will not
be released; our wives will be divorced; we will make thirty pilgrimages
(to Mecca) on foot, on the condition that we should kill al-Mamūn and
make the authority pure for you, that the right may return to you.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1706)Abū al-Farajj al-Asfahāni, al-Aghāni, vol. 9, pp. 31-32.  
  

  

  

The Imām was fully aware of their deception and their false statement.
If they had been honest in their statement, they would have carried that
out before their negotiations with the Imām, for they had come to know
that he refused to accept all those attempts which Islam did not adopt,
of which was assassination. Any how, he scolded them, saying: You are
ungrateful for the blessing; if I accept what you have said, then
neither you nor I will be safe (from al-Mamūns punishment).

Then they went to al-Mamūn and told him about the statement of the Imām,
and he rewarded them well. As for the Imām, he went in a hurry to
al-Mamūn and informed him of the matter. Accordingly, al-Mamūn came to
know that the Imām did not harbor evil against him.[[1]](#_ftn1707) It
is more likely that it was al-Mamūn who made this plan in order to know
the Imāms intentions toward him.    

### His informing against the Imām

The researchers who are aware of Islamic history say that al-Fadl was
not a Alawide in thought[[2]](#_ftn1708), for he took against Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him, terrible steps of which is that he informed
al-Mamūn of him, saying: Surely you have entrusted regency to Abū
al-Hasan (al-Ridā) and taken it out of the children of your father. The
populace, the scholars, the jurists, and the family of Abbās are not
satisfied with that, and their hearts have turned away from
you.[[3]](#_ftn1709) Have you seen how al-Fadl provoked al-Mamūn against
the Imām and informed him against him? Surely he made al-Mamūn harbor
malice and hatred against the Imām, peace be on him.

### His Opposing the Imām

Al-Fadl vigorously opposed the Imām. He opposed the Imām  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1707) 'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 167.  
 [[2]](#_F1708)Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F1709)Sayyid Ja'far Murtadā, in his book entitled *al-Imām
al-Ridā,* has mentioned that al-Fadl was not a Shi'ite,  while Ibn
Khulakān, in his book entitled *Wafayāt al-A'yān* (vol. 3, p. 209), and
the like have mentioned that he was a Shi'ite.  
  

  

  

when he suggested a certain idea and summoned al-Mamūn to cancel it. The
narrators have mentioned that al-Mamūn visited the Imām and recited to
him a letter regarding that some of his (military) forces had conquered
some villages in Cabul. So the Imām asked him: Are you pleased with
conquering one of the villages of the polytheists?

Isnt there any pleasure in that? retorted al-Mamūn.

The Imām turned to him and guided him to the place of the pleasure which
he had to follow, saying: O Commander of the faithful, fear Allah with
respect to the community of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, this authority which Allah has entrusted to you and singled you
out with it, for surely you have wasted the affairs of the Muslims and
vested them in other than you, while he has ruled them with something
other than the rule of Allah. You have resided in this country (i.e.
Khurasān), left the land of immigration and revelation. The Muhājirin
and the Ansār have been wronged besides you. The believers have badly
been treated. The wronged will someday overexert themselves, but they
will be unable (to earn) their expenses, to find someone to complain to
him of their conditions, and to reach him.

So, O Commander of the faithful, fear Allah regarding the affairs of the
Muslims, return to the house of the Prophet and the source of the
Muhājirin and the Ansār. Do you not know that the ruler of the Muslims
is like the pole in the middle of a tent, whoever wants it takes it?

These words give an account of the Imāms frankness and sincere advice;
in them there is neither praise nor complying with al-Mamūns feelings
and inclinations. Al-Mamūn turned to the Imām and asked him: O my
master, what do you think?

The Imām advised him to follow the truth whereby was his salvation,
saying: I think that you must leave this country for the place of your
fathers and grandfathers, take care of the affairs of the Muslims, and
do not entrust them to other than you, for Allah will question you about
your followers.

Al-Mamūn responded to the Imāms view and said to him: Excellent is your
saying, O my master! This is the viewpoint.

  

  

  

Then he ordered the armies to prepare themselves to leave (Khurasān) for
Medina (Yathrib). When al-Fadl heard of that, he became sad, went in a
hurry to al-Mamūn, and said to him: What is this view which you have
been ordered to follow?

Al-Mamūn told him about the Imāms view concerning taking Medina as a
capital for his government. As a result al-Fadl spared no effort to
disprove this view advising him to follow the opposite of what the Imām
had suggested, saying: O Commander of the faithful, this is not the
correct (view); yesterday you killed your brother and removed the
caliphate from him; the children of your father, all Iraqis, your
household, and the Arabs are your supporters. Then you have done this
second event; surely you have entrusted regency to Abū al-Hasan
(al-Ridā) and taken it out of the children of your father.  The
populace, the jurists, the scholars, and the family of al-Abbās are not
satisfied with that, and their hearts have turned away from you.

I think that you must reside in Khurasān, that the hearts of the people
may relay on this (situation) and forget what was regarding the affair
of your brother. In this country there is a group of shaykhs who have
praised (your father) al-Rashid and come to know of the affair;
therefore, consult them regarding that. If they advise (you to follow)
that, then you carry it out.

Who are they? asked al-Mamūn.

Such as Ali b. Abū Umrān, Abū Yunus, and al-Julūdi, answered al-Fadl.

It is worth mentioning that it was these persons who were indignant at
the pledge of allegiance to Abū al-Hasan (al-Ridā) and were not
satisfied with it.

At last al-Mamūn responded to al-Fadls viewpoint and turned away from
the Imāms in respect of taking Medina (Yathrib) as a capital for the
kingdom.[[1]](#_ftn1710)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1710)'Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 160.  
  

