Introduction
============

  

  

(1)
===

This is an inquiry into the life of Imām Ali b. Mūsā al-Rida, peace be
on him, the eighth Imām from the Household of the Prophet. He is Allahs
light, His gift, and His treasure. He and his fathers, the leaders of
Islamic Thought, are in no need of praisers praise and descripers
description, for Allah, the Exalted  praised them, took away uncleanness
from them, and purified them from deviation. Regarding them He, the
Exalted, has said: *Verily Allah intends to keep off from you every kind
of uncleanness  and to purify you people of the House with a thorough
purification*.[[1]](#_ftn1) He has also imposed love for them on all the
children of Islam. Moreover He, the Exalted, has said: *Say: I demand
not of you any reward for it (the toils of preaching) except the love of
my relations*.[[2]](#_ftn2)

Their grandfather the Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family,
associated them to the Qurān when he said: I am going to leave among you
the *thaqalayn*. If you cleave to them, you will never go astray after
me; one of them is greater than the other that is the Book of Allah
which is a cord stretching from the sky to the earth and my offspring
from my family. They will never scatter (from each other) until they
come to me at the Pool *(hawd)*. Hence, think! How will you treat them
after me?[[3]](#_ftn3) Also he, may Allah bless him and his family,
regarded them as the life-ships of this community. He has said:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F1) Qur'ān, 33, 22.  
 [[2]](#_F2) Ibid., 41, 23.  
 [[3]](#_F3) Al-Tirmidhi, Sahih, vol. 2, p. 308. Asad al-Ghāba, vol. 2,
p. 12.  
  

  

  

Verily  my Household among you are like Noahs Ark, which whoever
embarked was safe, and whoever missed drowned. Verily my Household among
you are like the gate of *Hitta* among the children of Isrāil, through
which whoever entered was forgiven.[[1]](#_ftn4)

Al-Mamūn asked Abd Allah b. Matar, who was an eminent thinker and poet
at his time: What is your opinion of the Household (of the Prophet)?
What shall I say about the clay which was plunged into the water of the
Message and planted in the water of the Inspiration? Nothing will spread
from it except the musk of guidance and ambergris of piety, replied Abd
Allah with these brilliant words.

These golden words controlled al-Mamūns heart, hence he, and in the
presence of Imām al-Rida, ordered the mouth of Abd Allah to be stuffed
with pearls.[[2]](#_ftn5)

All the exalted values and genuine principles of which man boasts were
in the Imāms of the Household (of the prophet), peace be on them, for
they were some of their elements and qualities.

(2)
===

As for the inclinations and qualities of Imām al-Ridā, they were like
those of his fathers, the great Imāms. He freed himself from the world,
renounced its beauties, and turned away from its embellishment,
dedicated himself to Allah, devoted himself to Him, and clung to
obedience to Him. He had knowledge of the precepts of the religion,
inclusively encompassed the law of the Lord of the messengers, helped
the weak, relieved the deprived, accomplished the needs of the needy,
and other qualities which placed him at the top of honor and glory in
the world of Arabs and Muslims.

Imām Ali al-Rida, peace be on him, possessed these original values in
all their forms and kinds, for he completely freed himself from the
world and divorced it three times, just as his grandfather  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F4) Majjma' al-Zawā'id, vol. 9, p. 68. Al-Hlya, vol. 4, p. 306.
Tārikh Baghdad, vol. 2, p. 19.  
 [[2]](#_F5) Al-Majjlisi, Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p. 71.  
  

  

  

Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, did. Hence, he
paid no attention to its vanities and embellishment. This clearly
appeared when he undertook the succession, which was the greatest office
in the Islamic State, hence he was the second character after al-Mamūn.
Nevertheless, he rejected all the seductions of government and
authority. He intensely hated the popular festivals and all kinds of
honoring and magnifying which the people would hold for their kings and
rulers. He announced this when he said: Mans waking behind a man is a
trial for the followed and abasement for the follower.[[1]](#_ftn6) The
narrators have said: Imām Ali b. Mūsā al-Rida would go to the
bath-house, but the owner of the bath-house did not recognize him. It
happened that there was a soldier in the bath-house and the soldier
asked the Imām to rub and clean him. The Imām responded to his request.
When the soldier came to know of the Imām, he became fearful and
terrified. However, the Imām calmed his fear and made him know that he
rendered him a human service.

Among his high moral traits is that he would eat with his boys and
retainers. He hated to distinguish himself from them. There are other
high moral traits which he inherited from his grandfather, the greatest
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family.

(3)
===

The Imāms of *ahl al-Bayt*, peace be on them, had their own brilliant
policy and method in the world of government and policy. They thought
that government should be a means for establishing pure justice and
truth, spreading love and friendship among men. They though that
government should be a means for refreshing peoples, achieving their
welfare, security, and prosperity. They thought that government was
worthless if it did not achieve these noble aims through which peoples
become happy. Listen to what the master of the Household (of the
Prophet), Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, when
he said to his helper and adviser, Abd  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F6) Al-Ya'qūbi, Tārikh.  
  

  

  

Allah b. Abbās to whom he held up his sandals made of fiber and asked
him:

Ibn Abbās, how much do you value these sandals?

They have no value, Ibn Abbās retorted.

By Allah, they are more lovable to me than these affairs of yours but
for the fact that I must establish (what is) true and ward off (what is)
false, explained the Imām.

The dictionary of policy has no words greater or more exalted than these
words said by  Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful and greatest
Muslim thinker, peace be on him. Authority has no value unless it
establishes fairness and justice, wards off falsehood and tyranny.

This is the path which Allah has chosen for His servants, that they may
be righteous, and that they may enjoy a government which stands on
neither deception nor misleading nor playing with the fates of the
community.

(4)
===

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, appeared on the arena of the political
life in Islam, and he was the most brilliant politician in Islamic
history. He was steadfast in his political attitudes, so he was not
deceived by the bright ways and false hopes of al-Mumūn, the Abbāsid
king, when he abdicated the throne and entrusted it to him. This 
abdication of the throne was not real; nor was it true at all; rather
al-Mamūn had decided that in order to achieve his  political goals;
probably the most important one of these goals is that he wanted to
suppress those burning revolts which were about to burn the Abbāsid
government and to fold its flag. Among those revolts was that  of Abū
al-Sarāyā. It is worth mentioning that Abū al-Sarāyā was an inspired
military commander like Abū Muslim al-Khurasāni, who had overthrown the
Umayyad government. Moreover al-Mamūn wanted to conciliate the Iranians
and all supporters of the Household (of the Prophet) whom the previous
Abbāsid governments had wronged, persecuted, and deprived of their
natural rights.

  

  

  

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, was fully aware of the political reasons
which urged al-Mamūn to abdicate the office of the caliphate and to hand
it over to him, peace be on him. He, peace be on him, vigorously refused
to undertake it. When al-Mamūn was despair of him, he threatened him
with death, so the Imām reluctantly responded to him according to the
following conditions:

A. He (Imām al-Ridā) would not command; nor would he prohibit.

B. He would not remove any person from his office.

C. He would not appoint any person in any of the state offices.

These conditions indicate that the Imām was the apparent successor of
al-Mamūn, and that the government of al-Mamūn was illegal, for if it had
been legal, he would not have mentioned these conditions.

Only few days ago and all the people came to know that the Imām had deep
faith and that al-Mamūn had nothing except cunning. They understood that
al-Mamūn wanted to  achieve his political aims. When al-Mamūn had
achieved his goals, he assassinated the Imām, for he was unable to
remove him from the office of regency. We will explain this matter in
the chapters that follow.

(5)
===

Among the aims of this book is to give proof of the Imāms abundant
knowledge of philosophy, theology, medicine, jurisprudence, and so on.
This can be indicated objectively through his debates with the great
philosophers and scholars from different countries and cities. It is
worth mentioning that al-Mamūn had asked them to come to Khurasān in
order to examine the Imām. He held a private and secret meeting with
them and promised to give them a lot of money if they could silence the
Imām with their arguments and render him incapable of answering them,
that he might use this incapability as a means for slandering and
defaming the Shiites who believed that the Imāms of the Household (of
the Prophet), peace be on them, were the most knowledgeable of the
community, and that  

  

  

Allah endowed them knowledge and excellencies just as He had endowed His
prophets and His testamentary trustees.

The scholars responded to al-Mamūns summons and asked the Imām about the
vaguest and most difficult matters. The historians have said: The
scholars asked Imām Ali b. Mūsā al-Rida more than twenty thousand
questions about various matters, and he skillfully answered them. Then
they admired his abundant knowledge and most of them believed in his
Imāmate. As a result al-Mamūn was forced to prevent the scholars and
others from meeting the Imām. Meanwhile he kept him under intense
observation lest the people should admired him.

It is worth mentioning that these debates were recorded by some of the
Imāms students, but we have not found them yet. Perhaps they are part of
the manuscripts which Arab and Islamic world has lost.

Any how, the Shiite historians have reported a small group of these
debates which are of great importance. For they , though few in number,
show the Imāms abundant and scientific wealth, and they indicate that he
was a unique thinker and scholar in the world of Islam.

(6)
===

Some books of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, have been reported and
mentioned in the books of some historians and biographers such as Ibn
al-Nadim, al-Tūsi, and others. They are as follows:

A. Tibb (Dissertation) of Imām al-Ridā
--------------------------------------

It is a great, medical account which the Imām wrote according to
al-Mamūns request and is called *al-Risāla al-Dhahabiya* (the Golden
Dissertation). It contains the Imāms health programs on foods which
improves mans body and protects it from maladies. It also contains his
general prescriptions such as refraining from eating too much food which
gives rise to high blood pressure, diabetes, arteriosclerosis, and other
dangerous diseases. It is certain that if one puts into practice the
Imāms prescriptions, he will need no medicine.

  

  

  

As this dissertation is of great importance, some meritorious people
have explained it according to modern medicine. Among them is Dr.
al-Sayyid Sāhib Zayni.

B. Imām al-Rid ās Musnad
------------------------

It contains some traditions which the Imām, peace be on him, has
reported from his grandfather, the greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family. It was printed in Cairo. Allāma Abd al-Wāsi b. Yahyā
al-Wāsimi printed and commented on it.

C. Jawām al-Shria
-----------------

It contains outstanding, religious precepts and mother,  juristic
problems. Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, dictated it to al-Fadal b.
Sahl, the prime minister of al-Mamūn. That was according to al-Mamūns
request. This dissertation has been mentioned in Tuhaf al-Uqūl and other
Shiite books. We have reported it from them and mentioned it in the
book. These books are part of the Imāms scientific wealth.

As for the jurisprudence of Imām al-Ridā, we have indicated that it is
not among his works; rather it belongs to other than him and is ascribed
to him.

Any how, the narrators have reported from the Imām a large group of
outstanding precepts and moral teachings. Islam wants its followers to
adopt such precepts and teachings, that they may develop their life. 

(7)
===

This book includes biographies of some great scholars and narrators who
studied under the Imām, peace be on him, narrated his traditions and his
wise sayings, and wrote books about them. It is certain that mentioning
such biographies will enhance the research about the Imāms  life, for it
shows that the scholars in that time took great care of taking knowledge
and sciences from the Imām. The narrators and historians have
unanimously agreed that the Imām was a unique Muslim thinker, and that
he derived his own knowledge from  

  

  

that of his pure fore-fathers, peace be on them, who were the guardians
of the knowledge of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and
inheritors of his wise sayings.

(8)
===

This book contains an inquiry into the time of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him, for such a time was full of economic, scientific, social,
political, and other events which had great effects on the life of the
people.

Mentioning such events is necessary for every researcher. It is worth
mentioning that psychology and sociology have established that events in
every time have direct effects on mans life and intellect.

The time of the Imām was full of important events of which is that Hārūn
al-Rashid created a conflict between his two sons al-Amin and al-Mamūn.
This conflict resulted in destroying Baghdad, the most beautiful capital
in the Middle East, and murdering a large group of people. Another
example of these events is the revolt of the inspired leader, Abū
al-Sarāyā, and other great revolts which were about to destroy the
Abbāsid government and to fold its standard.

Yet another example of the events in that time was the matter of
creating the Qurān. It was a hidden or neglected theological problem,
but it was al-Mamūn who moved it and it led to shedding blood without
any right, spreading disorders and discords among the Muslims.

However, through his political cleverness, al-Mamūn could overcame all
those events he faced. Then he forced Imām al-Ridā the hope of the
Muslim community, peace be on him to accept the succession after him and
made the people busy thinking of this great event. Accordingly, he was
able to suppress all those revolts against him .

(9)
===

We have deeply and inclusively probed into the characters of the Abbāsid
kings with whom Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, coincided.  

  

  

As a result we have concluded that their characters are similar to those
of the Umayyads, who spent the property of Allah on themselves and
enslaved His servants. After this serious research on their characters,
we have come to know that they did not perform any good deed; nor did
they pay attention to the interests of the Muslims. Rather, they were
absorbed in satisfying their pleasures and desires. They spent on their
red nights in Baghdad millions of the funds of the Muslims. They
enriched singers, abusers, and the dissolute;  meanwhile they subjected
the people to poverty and unhappiness.

Moreover, they ordered the innocent to be whipped, imprisoned, and
killed by sword; at the head of those innocent were the Alawide Sayyids
who demanded nothing except establishing social justice. They ordered
their tax collectors to show rudeness and brutality toward farmers,
craftsmen, and manufacturers. As a result the tax collectors destroyed
the peoples bodies by whip and went too far in wronging the people.

(10)
====

As for inquiring into Islamic history, it must be objective, honest, far
from doctrinal and traditional trends, for this history has many
subjects which have hidden the truth and concealed realities, so it is
incumbent on (us) to spend more efforts in order to distinguish the
right from the wrong and the true from the false. An example of these
subjects is that noble attributes and great titles were given to the
Umayyad and the Abbāsid kings; they were given the titles as Allahs
vicegerents on earth, while this noble title represents fairness,
justice, and law. I (the author) seek refuge in Allah from such titles
which were given to persons like Yazid, Marwān, al-Walid, and other
Abbāsid kings who turned the life of the people into an unbearable
inferno.

Some historians and authors think that the measure of ones highness and
great position is his sitting on the throne of government and his
seizing the reins of  general authority over a country. This is
incorrect; the measure of ones exaltedness in Islamic viewpoint is the  

  

  

services which he renders to his community in the fields of economy,
culture, security, and prosperity. If Muslim historians and authors
deprive kings of these titles and give them to those who render great
services to the community, then they will render great service to
Islamic history, for the orientalists and others who harbor malice
against Islam have criticized Islam because of  such kings who acted in
a manner different from Islamic justice and fairness. They think that
these kings represent Islam in their conducts and works. If those who
criticize Islam probe into Islamic precepts, they will find them noble,
creative, comply with justice and nature, have nothingpraise belongs to
Allahwhich complies with injustice. Rather they will find that Islamic
precepts  oppose injustice, and that the irregular behavior of some
Muslim kings does not represent Islam.

(11)
====

This is not the first book to be written about the life of Imām Ali b.
Mūsā al-Ridā, peace be on him. Rather many books have been written on
his life in Arabic and other than it, and the most important of them is
al-Sayyid Jafar Murtadās *the Life of Imām al-Ridā*, peace be on him,
for this book is rich in information.

It is worth mentioning that all the books written on the personality of
this great Imām have not encompassed its realities yet. This a
far-fetched hope, for the Imām , peace be on him, had boundless
intellectual wealth like that of the leading Imāms, peace be on them,
who were guardians of righteousness, and inheritors of the knowledge of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.

(12)
====

Before I end this introduction to the book, I would like to  thank His
Eminence, our great professor, the Hujjah of Islam and Muslims, Shaykh
Husayn al-Khalifa for his care, favor, and help with printing some of my
books; I would particularly like to thank His Eminence al-Hujjah, the
great Allāma, my brother, Hādi Sharif al-Qarashi for the creative
efforts he rendered to me, his valuable notes on the book, his  

  

  

checking some of the books I made use of, and his encouraging me to
serve the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on. I ask
Allah, the Exalted, to reward him just as He rewards the righteous from
among His servants. Verily He is the Supporter of purpose and success.

Holy Najaf,

Shawwāl 14th, 1411 A. H.

Bāqir Sharif al-Qarashi.

  

