Chapter I
=========

  

  

THE GREAT BABY
==============

  

  

  

Before we speak about the birth of the pure Imām Abū Mohammed, peace be
on him, and the affairs accompanied it, we will mention his brilliant,
exalted lineage, which is related to Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family, who is the source of flow, bestowal, good, and mercy
to mankind. So which lineage is more exalted and greater than that of
Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, who is one of the fruit of Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, and one of his brilliant
branches. The following is an outline about his noble origin.

His Father
----------

As for the father of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, he is Imām Mūsā
al-Kāzim b. Imām Jafar al-Sādiq b. Imām Mohammed al-Bāqir b. Imām Zayn
al-Ābidin b. Imām al-Husayn b. Imām Ali b. Abū Tālib, peace be on them.

In the world of lineage, there is no lineage more exalted or purer than
this lineage. It is certain that the pure Imāms are the successors of
Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, and his
testamentary trustees (of authority). In the chapters that follow, we
will mention an outline about his father Imām Mūsā, peace be on him.

His Mother
----------

As for the mother of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, she was endowed with
all qualities of honor and virtue, through which the Muslim woman
becomes exalted, such as chastity, purity, and great  

  

  

soul. She is among the glorious women in Islam. His mother was a
slave-wife, and this quality does not decrease her position, for Islam
has made piety and good deeds as a measure to differentiate men from
each other, and every thing other than this measure is not important.

The narrators have reported many narrations about how Imām al-Kāzim
married this glorious lady. The following are some of them:

1. She was among the noble non-Arabs and was the retainer of Mrs.
Hamida, the mother of Imām Mūsā, peace be on him. She was among the
meritorious women in her intellect, her religion, and her honoring her
mistress, Hamida. She did not sit before her in order to honor and
magnify her. So Hamida said to her son Imām Mūsā: My little son, surely
Takktum is a slave-girl. I have never seen a slave-girl better than her.
I have no doubt that Allah will manifest her children. I have granted
her to you and advise you to treat her kindly.[[1]](#_ftn7)

2. Hishām b. Ahmed has reported: Abū al-Hasan the First  
 (Mūsā al-Kāzim) said to me: Did you know that one of the people  
 from al-Maghrib has come? No, I replied. Indeed, he, peace be on  
 him, said, a man from the people of al-Maghrib has come to Medina.  
 So come with us. He rode off and I rode with him until we came to  
 the man. There he was, a man of al-Maghrib. He had with him slave-  
 girls. Show us your wares, I told him. He showed us nine good  
 slave-girls. However, all the time Abū al-Hasan was saying: I have  
 no need of those. Then he told him: Show us something else. I  
 have nothing except a sick slave-girl, he replied. what is (wrong)  
 with you (not) to offer her (for sale) he (Abū al-Hasan) said. The
man  
 refused and went away. On the next day he (Abū al-Hasan Mūsā),  
 peace be on him, sent for me and told me: Ask him how much is the  
 maximum he wants for her? Whatever he says, tell him that you will  
 take her. I went to the man and he said to me: I would not take less  
 than such-and-such a sum. I will take her, I said. She is yours, he  
 replied, but tell me about the man who was with you, yesterday. He  
 was a man from the Banū Hāshim, I told him. Which Banū  
 Hāshim? he asked. From among their chiefs, I answered, I do not  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F7) 'Iyūn Akhb ār al-Ridā, vol. 1, pp. 14-15.  
  

  

  

have more (information) than this. I want more than (this sum of money),
he demanded. I have nothing more than this, I explained. Then he said: I
will tell you that when I bought her from a remote area of al-Maghrib, a
woman from *ahl al-kitāb* (the people of the Book, i.e. Jews and
Christians) met me and asked me who this maidservant was whom I had with
me. I told her that I had bought her for myself but she said it was not
appropriate that she should be with the like of me. It is fitting that
this slave-girl should be with the best person on earth, for she will
soon give birth to a son such as has not been born in the east or the
west. I took her to Abū al-Hasan (Mūsā). It was not long afterwards that
she gave birth to Ali (al-Ridā).[[1]](#_ftn8)

3. It was reported that Imām al-Kāzim, peace be on him, said to his
companions: By Allah, I have bought this slave-girl according to Allahs
command and inspiration. He was asked about this statement and he
replied: While I was sleeping my grandfather and my father came to me,
and there was with them a piece of silk cloth. They spread the piece,
and suddenly there was a shirt in which was the picture of this
slave-girl. Then they said: Mūsā, from this slave-girl you will have the
best of the people of the earth after you. Then my father ordered me: If
a baby-boy is born for you, name him Ali. Then he said: Allah, the Great
and Almighty, will manifest justice and mercy through him. Blessed is he
who believes in him, and woe unto him who shows enmity toward him and
denies him![[2]](#_ftn9)

These are some of the narrations which have been reported about how Imām
Mūsā al-Kāzim, peace be on him, married this noble lady. He showed
sincere love for her, and she enjoyed admiration and respect in his
house.

### Her Name

As for the name of this pure lady, the narrators have differed over it.
They following are some of their opinions about it:

1. Takktum, many historians think that her name is Takktum.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F8) Ibid., pp. 17-18.  Usūl al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p.  487.  Kashf
al-Ghumma, vo l. 3, p. 102.  
 [[2]](#_F9) Yousif  b.  Hātam  al-Shāfi'i, al-Durr al-Nazim fi Manāqib
al-A'imma.  
  

  

  

Concerning this name the poet composed the following lines when he 
praised Imām (Ali al-Ridā), peace be on him:

Ali, the magnified, is the best of the men in soul, father, family, and
grandfathers.

Takktum has brought him to us for knowledge and clemency. He will be the
eighth Imām who will deliver the proof of Allah.[[1]](#_ftn10)

This is an Arabic name with which ladies from among the Arab women were
called, and concerning it the poet says:

The two imaginations circled and increased in malady

the imagination of Takknā and the imagination of

Takktum . [[2]](#_ftn11)

2. Al-Khayzarān.[[3]](#_ftn12) 

3. Arwā.[[4]](#_ftn13)

4. Najjma.[[5]](#_ftn14)

These are some of the views which have been mentioned about her name.
Confirming the most correct one of these names is not useful for
readers.

### Her Reverential Fear

This pure lady was among the worshipful women. She devoted herself to
the acts of obedience to Allah, for she followed the behavior of her
husband, Imām al-Kāzim, peace be on him, the Imām of the Allah-fearing
and those who turn to Allah, the Most High, in repentance. Among the
qualities of her worship is that when she gave birth to Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him, she said: Help me with (finding) a wet nurse. She was
asked: Has your milk decreased? I  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F10) 'Iyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 1, p. 15. In this book it has
been mentioned that some people have ascribed this poetry to the uncle
of Abū Ibrāhim b. al-'Abbās.    
 [[2]](#_F11) A'yān al-Shi'a, 4/Q2/80.  
 [[3]](#_F12) Tadhkirat al-Khawās, p. 361. Bhar al-Ansāb, p. 28.
Al-Majjlisi, Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p. 2.  
 [[4]](#_F13) Al-Shaykhāni al-Qādiri, al-Sirāt al-Sawi, p. 169
(photographed). Nūr al-Abbsār, p. 138.  
 [[5]](#_F14) Al-Mufid, al-Irshād, p. 342.  
  

  

  

do not want to tell a lie, she replied, the milk has not decreased, but
I want to perform a part of my prayers and glorification.[[1]](#_ftn15)
Have you seen how this angelic lady adored Allah and devoted herself to
Him. She asked (the people) to help her with finding a wet nurse for her
baby lest it should divert her from performing her prayers and
glorification.

The Great Baby
--------------

When Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, was born, the earth shined; waves of
delight and happiness spread through the Household of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his Household. As for Imām al-Kāzim, he received
with more delight the news of the birth of his blessed baby, so he
hurried to his wife and congratulated her on her baby, saying: I
congratulate you, Najjma. It is a mark of nobility for you from your
Lord!

Imām al-Kāzim took his blessed baby, folded it with a white piece of
cloth, and performed the religious rites for it. He said the *adhān* in
its right ear, said the *iqāma* in its left ear, called for sweet water
and rubbed its lower jaw with it, and then he returned it to its mother
and said to her: Take it, for it is the rest *(baqiyat)* of Allah on His
earth.[[2]](#_ftn16)

The first picture which the Prophets grandson (Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him) saw in the world of existence was that of his father, the Imām of
the Allah-fearing and leader of the monotheists; and the first voice
which he heard was:

Allah is Great!

There is no god but Allah!

These brilliant words are the secret of existence and song of the
Allah-fearing.

Imām al-Kāzim, peace be on him, named his blessed baby with the name of
his grandfather Imām Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him, that he might get blessing seek  good omen in this  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F15) 'Iyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 1. A'yān al-Shi'a, 4/Q2/80.  
 [[2]](#_F16) Kashf al-Ghumma , vol.  3,  p. 88. 'Iyūn Akhbār  al-Ridā,
vol. 1,  p.  18.  
  

  

  

name, which stood for the greatest personality created in the world of
Islam and had all good qualities of the world.

### His Nicknames

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, was given a group of noble nicknames.
Each nickname represented one of his noble qualities. The following are
some of them:

#### 1. Al-Ridā

The historians and narrators have differed over the person who gave this
exalted nick-name to the Imām, peace be on him, to the extent that it
has prevailed him and become a name through which  he is recognized. The
following are some of the statements:

##### A. Al-Mamūn

A group of the historians has maintained that it was al-Mamūn who gave
him this nick-name to him[[1]](#_ftn17), for he was satisfied with him
and appointed him as his successor.[[2]](#_ftn18) Imām al-Jawād, peace
be on him,  refuted this statement before a group of his companions,
saying: Verily Allah, the Blessed and Most High, named him al-Ridā, for
he was the pleasure of Allah, the Exalted, the Great, in His heaven, of
His Messenger, and of the Imāms, the blessings of Allah be upon them,
after him.

Al-Bizanti asked him: Werent all your past forefathers, peace be on
them, the pleasure of Allah (*ridā* al-Allah), the Exalted, the Great,
of His Messenger, and of the Imāms after him?

Yes, replied Imām al-Jawād.

Why has only your father been named al-Ridā? al-Bizanti asked.

Because both his opposing enemies and obedient supporters were pleased
with him, while this did not happen to any of his fathers, so only he
was called al-Ridā.[[3]](#_ftn19)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F17) Abū al-Fidā', Tārikh, vol. 2, p. 24. Ibn al-Athir, Tārikh,
vol. 5, p. 183.  
 [[2]](#_F18) Al-Majjlisi, Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p. 4.  
 [[3]](#_F19) 'Ilal al-Sharāi'. A'lām al-Wara. Al-Majjlisi, Bihār
al-Anwār, vol. 12, p. 2.  
  

  

  

##### B. Imām Mūsā

Some narrators believe that it was Imām Mūsā al-Kāzim, peace be on him,
who gave this nick-name to his son. Sulaymān b. Hafs reported: Imām Mūsā
b. Jafar named his son Ali al-Ridā. He would say: Summon to me my son
al-Ridā. I asked him: To my son belongs pleasure *(al-Ridā)*. He
answered: My son is al-Ridā. When he addressed him, he said: O Abū\`
al-Hasan.[[1]](#_ftn20) These are some statements about giving him this
noble nick-name. Ahmed al-Bizanti gave the reason for giving this
nick-name to him, saying: He was given the nick-name of al-Ridā because
he is the good pleasure of Allah, the Most Exalted, in His heaven, the
pleasure of His Messenger, and of the Imāms after him on His
earth.[[2]](#_ftn21)

#### 2. Al-Sābir [[3]](#_ftn22)

He was given the nick-name of *al-Sābir* (the patient) because he was
patient toward the troubles and misfortunes caused to him by his
opponents and enemies.

#### 3. Al-Zaki [[4]](#_ftn23)

Imām Ali b. Mūsā al-Rida, peace be on him, was pure, noble, and
honorable.

#### 4. Al-Wafi [[5]](#_ftn24)

As for loyalty, it was one of the Imāms qualities, for he was loyal to
his community and homeland.

#### 5. Sirājj Allah [[6]](#_ftn25)

The Imām was the *Sirājj* of Allah (the Lamp of Allah). He guided the
misled and the perplexed (to the right path).

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F20) Al-Majjlisi, Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p. 3.  
 [[2]](#_F21) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F22) Jawharat al-Kalām fi Madh al-Sāda al-A'lām, p. 143.  
 [[4]](#_F23) Al-Sirāt al-Sawi, p. 199.  
 [[5]](#_F24) Tadhkirat al-Khawās, p. 361. Al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 210.  
 [[6]](#_F25) Al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 210.  
  

  

  

#### 6. Qurrat Ayn al-Muminin [[1]](#_ftn26)

Among his noble nick-names is *Qurrat Ayn al-Muminin* (the delight of
the eye of the believers), for he was their ornament, their pride, their
cave, and their stronghold.

#### 7. Makkyadat al-Mulhidin [[2]](#_ftn27)

He was given the nick-name of *Makkyadat al-Mulhidin* (the stratagem of
the unbelievers), for nullified their vague errors and refuted their
imaginations. This was through his debates which were held in the
Abbāsid palace, and with which he established the originality of Islamic
principles and values.

#### 8. Al-Siddiq [[3]](#_ftn28)

He was given the nick-name of *Al-Siddiq* (the very truthful one), for
he was like Yūsuf (Joseph), who ruled Egypt. He led Islamic world and
had an absolute leadership over it.

#### 9. Al-Fādil [**[4]**](#_ftn29)

He was given the nick-name of *al-Fādil* or the most meritorious one,
for he was the most meritorious and perfect of all the people of his
time. These are some of the noble nick-names which were given to him;
they display his exalted character and great importance.

### His Kunya

The Imāms of the Household (of the Prophet), peace be on them, would
give *kunya* to their children when young, and this is an example of
Islamic education aiming at improving personality and making child feel
that he or she has position with his family. Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him, was given the following *kunyas*:

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F26) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F27) Al-Majjlisi, Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p. 4.  
 [[3]](#_F28) Ibid.  
 [[4]](#_F29) Ibid.  
  

  

  

#### 1. Abū al-Hasan

His father Imām Mūsā al-Kāzim, peace be on him, gave him this
*kunya*.[[1]](#_ftn30) He, peace be on him, said to Ali b. Yaqtin: O
Ali, this son of mineand he pointed to Imām al-Ridāis the master of my
children, and I have given him my *kunya*.[[2]](#_ftn31) Imām al-Ridā
was given the *kunya* of Abū al-Hasan. As this *kunya* was common
between them, Imām al-Kāzim was called: Abū al-Hasan the past, and Imām
al-Ridā was called Abū al-Hasan the second, that the people might
distinguish between the two *kunyas.*

#### 2. Abū Bakr

This *kunya* was rare. He was not known for it, but rarely. Abū al-Salt
al-Harawi narrated: One day al-Mamūn asked me a question, and I
answered: Concerning the question, Abū Bakr (i.e. al-Ridā) said
such-and-such. So al-Mamūn asked me: Which Abū Bakr our Abū Bakr or Abū
Bakr of the populace *(Āmma)*? Our Abū Bakr, I replied.

Īsā said: I asked Ibn al-Salt: Who is your Abū Bakr? Ali b. Mūsā, he
answered, he was given this *kunya*.[[3]](#_ftn32)

### The Year of his Birth

The historians have differed over the year in which Imām  al-Rida, peace
be on him, was born as well as they have differed over the month in
which he was born. The following are some of their statements in this
regard:

1. He was born in the year 147 A. H.[[4]](#_ftn33)

2. He was born in the year 148 A. H.[[5]](#_ftn34) This year is famous

 with the narrators.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F30) Ibid., p. 3.  
 [[2]](#_F31) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F32) Maqātil al-Tālibiyyin, p. 561.  
 [[4]](#_F33) Nūr al-Abbsār, p. 138.  
 [[5]](#_F34) Ghāiyat al-Ikhtisār, p. 148. Bahr al-Ansāb, p. 28. Usūl
al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 486. Al-Mufid, al-Irshād, p. 341. Al-Durr al-Maslūk
(photographed), p. 139. Akhbār al-Diwal, p. 114. Jawharat al-Kalām, p.
143. Al-Kaf'ami, Musbāh. Roudat al-Wā'izin. Mir'āt al-Jinān, vol. 2, p.
11.  
  

  

  

3. He was born in the year 150 A. H.[[1]](#_ftn35)

4. He was born in the year 151 A. H.[[2]](#_ftn36)

5. He was born in the year 153 A. H.[[3]](#_ftn37) It was the year in

which his grandfather al-Sādiq died.[[4]](#_ftn38)

These are some statements about the year of his birth. The historians
have also differed over the month in which he was born. The following
are some of their statements:

1. He was born on Thursday or the night of Thursday, the eleventh of
(the month of) Rabi al-Awwal.[[5]](#_ftn39)

2. He was born on Thursday[[6]](#_ftn40), the 11th of (the month of) Dhi
al-Qida.[[7]](#_ftn41)

3. He was born on the 7th of (the month of) Shawwāl. It was said (that
he was born on) the 8th of it, and it was said on the 6th of
it.[[8]](#_ftn42)

These are some of the statements which the historians and the narrators
have mentioned.

### His Characteristics

Many historians said that Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,

was brown or deep brown.[[9]](#_ftn43) It was said that he was white had
a medium height,[[10]](#_ftn44) and that he was like his grandfather
Allahs Apostle,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F35) Al-Mujaddidūn fi al-Islām, p. 87.  
 [[2]](#_F36) Sir al-Silsila al-'Alawiya, p. 38.  
 [[3]](#_F37) Al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 153. Kashf al-Ghumma. Dā'irat Ma'ārif
al-Qarn al-'Ishrin, vol. 6, p. 665.  
 [[4]](#_F38) A'yān al-Shi'a 4/Q2/77-78. (It has been mentioned) in
al-Irshād that he was born five years after the death of his grandfather
Imām al-Sādiq, peace be on him. An account similar to this has been
mentioned in al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 210.  
 [[5]](#_F39) Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 3, p. 87.  
 [[6]](#_F40) Al-Durr al-Maslūk, p. 139.  
 [[7]](#_F41) A'yān al-Shi'a 4/Q2/77.  
 [[8]](#_F42) Mir'āt al-Jinān, vol. 2, p. 12.  
 [[9]](#_F43) Akhbār al-Diwal.  
 [[10]](#_F44) Al-Shaykhāni al-Qādiri, al-Sirāt al-Sawi fi Manāqib Āl
al-Nabi, p. 199.  
  

  

  

may Allah bless him and his family.[[1]](#_ftn45) As he was like his
grandfather in his characteristics, he was similar to him in his noble
moral traits, which distinguished him from the other prophets.

### His Solemnity

As for the solemnity of Imām Abū Mohammed (al-Ridā); faces were humbled
in fear of it, for it was similar to that of the prophets and the
testamentary trustees (of authority) whom Allah clothed in His light.
All those who saw him respected him. An example of his solemnity was
that when he sat with the people or rode off with them, none was able to
raise his voice because of his great solemnity.[[2]](#_ftn46) The
reporters have said: When he (i.e. Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him) came
to al-Mamūn, the chamberlains and the servants hurried to raise the
curtain for him. When they heard that al-Mamūn wanted to pledge
allegiance to him, they said to each other that if he (the Imām) came,
they would not honor or magnify him as they would do. The Imām came as
usual, and his solemnity moved them, so they honored him as they would
do. Then they blamed one another and swore (by Allah) that if he
returned they would not honor him. When the Imām, peace be on him, came
on the following day, they stood for him and greeted him, but they did
not raise they curtain for him, so a wind came and raised it for him.
When he wanted to leave, the wind also raised the curtain for him.  As a
result they said to each other: Surely this man is of great importance,
and Allah takes care of him, so return to your serving
him.[[3]](#_ftn47)

The Imāms of the Household (of the Prophet), peace be on them, had
importance and standing with Allah, the Most High, for it was He who
supported and directed them to correctness, as He did toward His
prophets and His messengers.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F45) Al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 210.  
 [[2]](#_F46) Hayāt al-Imām al-Jawād.  
 [[3]](#_F47) Akhbār al-Diwal, p. 114. Jawhart al-Kalām, p. 145.
Al-Ithāf bi Hub al-Ashrāf, p. 58.  
  

  

  

### The Inscription of his Ring

As for the inscription and words engraved in ring, they  more likely
represent ones inclinations and desires. The following (words) were
engraved in the ring of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him:

*Wali Allah* (the Friend of Allah).[[1]](#_ftn48)

He had another ring in which it was engraved:

*Al-Izzah Lillāh* (Might belongs to Allah).[[2]](#_ftn49)

These inscriptions represent the Imāms great devotion to Allah, the Most
Exalted, and his clinging to Him.

### His Childhood

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, grew up in the greatest and most exalted
house in Islam. It was the house of the Imāmate and center of
revelation. *The house which Allah permitted to be exalted and in which
His name may be remembered.* Imām al-Ridā grew up in this noble house
dominated by high Islamic education. For wherein the young respected and
honored the old, and the old felt compassion for the young; noble moral
traits spread; nothing was heard except reciting the Book of Allah; and
nothing was done except good deeds and what brought man near to his
Lord.

Educationists have maintained that house is among the most important
factors which form person and build his character. If love, friendship,
exalted habits, good customs, and sweet words dominate house, child will
grow up soundly, be far from complexity and double personality. If house
is corrupt and is full of hatred and detest, child will be complex and
corrupt.

As for the house where Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, grew up, it was
the most exalted one in the world of Islam, for it was the center of
virtue and noble moral traits;  it brought up the best of mankind and
the Imāms of truth and justice in Islam. In addition to house,
environment plays an important role in bringing up person. As  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F48) Al-Durr al-Maslūk, p. 139. Al-Majjlisi, Bihār al-Anwār,
vol. 12, p. 4.  
 [[2]](#_F49) Al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 210.  
  

  

  

for the environment in which Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, grew up, it
included the best men and scholars who studied under his father Imām
Mūsā b. Jafar, peace be on him.

All intellectual factors and means of exalted education were available
for Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, so he grew up within this educational
frame just as his great fathers (the treasures of Islam) did.

### His Behavior

As for the behavior of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, it was a wonderful
example of his fathers, who dined their souls and freed them from every
inclination which had no relation with truth and reality.

The behavior of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, is distinguished by
showing steadfastness toward the truth and rejecting falsehood. He
ordered al-Mamūn, the Abbāsid Caliph, to fear Allah and blamed him for
his behavior which opposed the reality of religion. However, al-Mamūn
became displeased with the Imām and committed the most horrible crime
when he assassinated him, peace be on him. We will explain this matter
in the chapters that follow.

The Imāms behavior toward his household and his brothers is another
example of his showing steadfastness  toward the truth. The Imām turned
away from those who deviated from Allahs laws. He swore (by Allah) that
he would not speak with his brother Zayd until he met Allah, the Most
High. That was when Zayd committed something contrary to Allahs law. 

As for his behavior toward his children, it is distinguished by his
showing marvelous, educational manners toward them, especially toward
his son Imām al-Jawād, peace be on him. He did not call him with his
name; rather he addressed him with his *kunya*. He said: Abū Jafar
(al-Jawād) wrote to me, and I wrote to Abū Jafar.[[1]](#_ftn50) He
called him with his *kunya* because he wanted to honor and magnify
him.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F50) Mu'jam Rijāl al-Hadith, vol. 14, p. 283.  
  

