Chapter Ii
==========

  

HIS QUALITIES
=============

As for the qualities of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, they represent
all virtues. All noble qualities gathered in him. Allah endowed him with
all outstanding qualities just as He endowed his great fathers. He
endowed him with nobility and made him an eminent figure for the
community of his grandfather (the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family). So the Imām guided the perplexed and the straying (to the
truth), and he enlightened minds. They following are some of his noble
qualities:

As for the noble traits of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, they  
 were part of those of his grandfather, the greatest Prophet, may
Allah  
 bless him and his family, by which he was distinguished from the rest  
 of the prophets. Through his exalted manners, (the Prophet), may  
 Allah bless him and his family, was able to develop man and saved  
 him from the ill traits of those who lived in the pre-Islamic period.
As  
 for Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, he had the high noble qualities of  
 his grandfather. Concerning his noble traits, Ibrāhim b. al-Abbās has  
 said: I have never seen nor have I ever heard that there is a person  
 more meritorious than Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him. He  
 never turned away from anyone; nor did he interrupt anyone; nor did  
 he refuse to do someone a favor he was able to do; nor did he ever  
 stretch out his leg before an audience; nor did he ever lean upon  
 something while his companion did not; nor did he ever call any of  
 his servants or attendants a bad name ; nor did he ever spit or burst  
 into laughter; rather, his laughter was just a smile. When he was
ready  
 to eat, he seated with him all his attendants, including the doorman  

  

  

and the groom. He slept little at night. He spent most of his nights
from begging to end (in praying or reciting the Qurān). He did abundant
charity, most of which was at dark nights.[[1]](#_ftn51)

These words display the Imāms noble moral traits, which are as follows:

A. He did not turn away from any of the people, whether they were his
friends or his enemies; rather, he received them warmly  and smiled at
them.

B. He did not interrupt anyone while he was speaking; rather, he let him
talk until he finished his talking.

C. Among his exalted morals is that he did not stretch out his legs
before those who sat with him; rather, he sat politely.

D. He did not lean upon something while his associate did not.

E. He did not call any of his retainers or attendants a bad name even if
they mistreated him.

F. He did not show haughtiness toward them; rather, he seated them with
him when he was ready to eat.

G. He prayed abundantly and spent his nights in praying and reciting the
Book of Allah.

H. He did a lot of good for the poor; he gave alms to them at dark
nights lest none should recognize him.

These are some of the Imāms noble moral traits which Ibrāhim b. al-Abbās
had witnessed. Another example of his morals is that when he undertook
regency, the most exalted office in Islamic state, he did not order any
of his supporters and retainers to carry out his many affairs; rather,
he himself carried them out. The narrators have said: When he was in
need of taking a bath, he hated to order anyone to prepare the bath for
him. He went to the public bath-house in the city. The owner of the
bath-house never thought that the deputy (of al-Mamūn) would come to a
public bath-house and wash in it; rather, he thought that the kings
would take a bath  in their own houses. When the Imām entered the
bath-house, there was a soldier in it. The soldier removed the Imām from
his place and ordered him to pour water on  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F51) Hayāt al-Imām al-Jawād, p.37.  
  

  

  

his head, and the Imām did. Then a man who recognized the Imām entered
the bath-house, and he shouted at the soldier, saying: You have ruined
yourself! Why have you ordered the son of the daughter of Allahs
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, to give you a massage? So
the soldier felt extremely embarrassed; he kissed the Imāms foot and
apologized to him, saying: O Son of Allahs Messenger, why did you obey
me when I ordered you? However, the Imām smiled at him and said to him
gently. It is a reward. I did not want to disobey you in what I was
rewarded.[[1]](#_ftn52)

Another example of his exalted morals is that when he was ready to eat,
he seated with him his retainers even the doorman and the
groom.[[2]](#_ftn53) In this manner he taught them that there was no
color discrimination among men, and that they were equal. Ibrāhim b.
al-Abbās has said: I heard Ali b. Mūsā al-Ridā saying: I swear by
emancipation and when I swore by it, I would emancipate one of my slaves
till I emancipated each and everyone of them that I do not see myself as
better than that (and he pointed to a black slave of his who remained in
his service) on account of my kinship to the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and his family, except if I do a good deed which would
render me better.[[3]](#_ftn54)

A man said to him: By Allah, no person on the face of  earth is nobler
than you in father.

He, peace be on him, said: Reverential fear made them noble and
obedience to Allah preserved them.

 Another person said to him: By Allah, you are the most meritorious of
the people.

The Imām answered him, saying: Do not exaggerate; he who fears Allah and
obeys Him is better than me. By Allah this verse has not been abrogated:
*O men! Surely we have created you of a male and female, and made you
nations and tribes that you may know each other; surely the most
honorable of you with Allah is the most Allah-fearing of you; surely
Allah is Knowing, Aware*.[[4]](#_ftn55)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F52) Nūr al-Abbsār, p. 138.  
 [[2]](#_F53) 'Uyyūn al-Tawārikh (photographed), vol. 3, p. 227.  
 [[3]](#_F54) Al-Majjlisi, Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p.28.  
 [[4]](#_F55) Ibid.  
  

  

  

It has been narrated that the Imām  has composed poetry in this respect:

I have worn the garment of riches through chastity

and begun walking high-headed.

I do not associate with *al-nisnās*[[1]](#_ftn56)

but I associate with men.

If I see the rich show pride,

I show pride toward them through despair (of them).

I do not show pride toward the poor;

Nor do I show weakness toward bankruptcy.[[2]](#_ftn57)

This poetry is evidence for his noble moral traits, which all the world
lauds and all the Muslims admire.

His Renunciation the World
--------------------------

An example of the qualities of Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, is that he
renounced the world and turned away from its pleasures and
embellishments. Mohammed b. Abbād tells us about the Imāms ascetic
conduct, saying: Al-Ridā used to sit on a leaf mat during the summer and
on a straw sack during the winter; he used to put on coarse clothes, but
when he went out to meet the public, he put on his very
best.[[3]](#_ftn58)

The narrators have said: Imām (al-Ridā) used to wear a silk clothe.
Sufyān al-Thawri met him and blamed him for wearing such a clothe,
saying: I think that you had better wear a clothe cheaper than this one.
However, the Imām took his hand gently and put it into his sleeve;
suddenly, there was a coarse clothe under that silk one; and he, peace
be on him, said to him: Sufyān, the silk is for men and coarse clothes
are for the Truth (Allah)[[4]](#_ftn59)

Renouncing the world was the most prominent quality in Imām al-Ridā,
peace be on him. The narrators have unanimously agreed that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F56) Al-Nasnās is an imaginary man-like animal.  
 [[2]](#_F57) Al-Manāqib, vol. 4, p. 361.  
 [[3]](#_F58) 'Uyyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 178. Al-Manāqib, vol. 4,
p. 361.  
 [[4]](#_F59) Hayāt al-Imām al-Jawād, p. 39.  
  

  

  

when he became the heir apparent (of al-Mamūn), he paid no attention to
any of the aspects of the authority and of magnification which men
showed toward their kings.

His Munificence
---------------

There was nothing more lovable with the Imām than doing kindness to men,
and especially the poor. The historians have mentioned numerous examples
of his munificence. The following are some of them:

1. When the Imām was in Khurasān, he spent on the poor all what he had
on the Day of Arafa, so al-Fadl b. Sahl criticized him for this, saying:
Surely, this is a loss! Rather it is a profit, the Imām answered, you do
no damage when you spend something for reward and
generosity.[[1]](#_ftn60)

It is not an act of damage when something is spent on the poor and the
weak for Allahs good pleasure; rather, it is an act of loss when
something is spent on unlawful deeds like those of kings and ministers
who spend a lot of money on singers and the mischievous.

2. A man came to the Imām, greeted him, and said to him: I am one of
those who love you and your fathers. I have returned from the hajj. My
money has finished. I have nothing with me to reach a stage, so I ask
you to send me back to my homeland. When I arrive in it, I  
 will give what you have given to me as alms to the poor on your behalf.
The Imām said to the man: Sit down, may Allah have mercy on you. Then he
turned to the people and spoke to them until they scattered. None stayed
with him except Sulaymān al-Jafari and Herthama. The Imām asked them for
permission and entered the  
 house. Then he came out, closed the door, and said: Where is
al-Khurasāni? AL-Khurasāni stood for him. The Imām, peace be on  
 him, said to him: Take this two hundred dinars, spend it on your need,
and do not give it to the poor as alms on my behalf. The man went away
with happiness because the blessing of the Imām had included him. Then
Sulaymān al-Jafari turned to the Imām and asked  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F60) Ibid., p. 40.  
  

  

  

him: May I be your ransom, you gave to the man a lot of money and had
mercy on him, but why did you cover your face from him?

He, peace be on him, replied: I did that less I should see the abasement
of begging on his face because of my accomplishing his need. Have you
not heard the tradition of Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless him and his
family: He who secretly does a good deed is like him who performs the
hajj seventy times; and he who openly performs an evil deed is
abandoned. Have you not heard the statement of the poet: When I someday
come to him in order to seek my need, I return home without losing
face.[[1]](#_ftn61)

3. Yet another example of his munificence is that he ordered the most
delicious food to be put on a tray and to be given to the poor, and he
recited this verse: *But he would not attempt the uphill road*. Then he
said: Allah knows that not everyone is able to emancipate a slave, so He
has regarded munificence as a path leading to the Garden.

4. Another example of his munificence and generosity is that a poor man
said to him: Give me according to the extent of your kindness.

The Imām answered him: I cannot afford that.

The poor man paid attention to his own mistake, so he said again: Give
me according to mine.

The Imām smiled at him and said: Yes, I will do this.

Then he ordered two hundred dinars to be given to the poor
man.[[2]](#_ftn62) The Imāms acts of munificence cannot be counted. If
the Imām had given to the poor man all his money, he would have felt
that such a gift was not equal to his munificence and mercy, which was
an extension to that of his grandfather, the greatest Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family.

5. Another example of his exalted acts of munificence is what has been
narrated by Ahmed b. Ubayd Allāh on the authority of al-Ghaffāri, who
said: A man from the family of Abū Rāfi, the retainer of the Apostle of
Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, called so-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F61)Al-Majjlisi, Bihār al-Anwār , vol.  12,  p.  28.  
 [[2]](#_F62) Al-Manāqib, vol. 4, p. 361.  
  

  

  

and-so, had me in his debt. He demanded payment from me and insisted on
my paying him. When I realized that, I prayed the morning prayer in the
mosque of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, and
I set out to see al-Ridā, peace be on him. On that day, he was in the
valley of al-Arid. When I got near his door, he came out. He was wearing
a shirt and a clock *(ridā)*. When I looked at him, I felt ashamed
before him. When he reached me, he stood and looked at me. I greeted him
it was the month of Ramadān. I said: May I be your ransom, your retainer
so-and-so has me in his debt. By Allah, he has spread reports of me
around.

By Allah, I was thinking to myself, that he would tell him to leave me
alone. By Allah, I had not told him how much I owed nor had I given
specific details about anything. He told me to sit down until he came
back. I was still there at the time when I prayed the sunset prayer. I
had been fasting and I had become troubled and wanted to leave.
Suddenly, he came. There was (a crowd of) people.

Beggars were begging from him and he was giving them alms. Then he
retired from them and went into his house. He came out and called me. I
rose and went in with him. He sat down and I sat down with him. I began
to talk to him about the governor of Medina. When I had finished, he
said to me: I do not think that you have eaten yet? Yes, I replied.

He called for food for me and it was put in front of me. He told the
servant to eat with me. The servant and I had our fill of food. When we
had finished, he said: Raise the cushion and take what is under it.

I raised it and there was (many) dinars. I took them and put them in my
sleeve. He told some of his servants to accompany me to my house, and
they did. I went to my house and called for a lamp. I examined the
dinars and they were forty-eight dinars. I only owed the man
twenty-eighty dinars. On a dinar of them it was engraved: The debt to
the man is twenty-eighty dinars and the rest is yours.[[1]](#_ftn63)

These are some acts of his generosity, and they show his noble soul
which was created for kindness to people.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F63) Al-Majjlisi, Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12,  p. 28.  
  

  

  

 

His Entertaining Guests
-----------------------

The Imām, peace be on him, entertained guests, bestowed liberally upon
them, and he himself served them. One day a person stopped at him and he
spoke to him at night. When the lamp changed, the guest hurried to set
it right, but the Imām went ahead of him and he himself set it right and
said to his guest: We are the people who do not employ their
guests.[[1]](#_ftn64)

His Releasing Slaves
--------------------

The most lovable thing to Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, was releasing
slaves and freeing them from slavery. The narrators have said: He (Imām
al-Ridā, peace be on him) released one thousand slaves.[[2]](#_ftn65)

His Kindness to Slaves
----------------------

The Imām, peace be on him, did a lot of good and kindness for the
slaves. Abd Allah b. al-Salt reported on the authority of a man from the
people of Balakh, who said: I was with Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him,
during his journey to Khurasān. One day he called for food and gathered
his black and non-black retainers around it. Hence I asked him: May I be
you ransom, could you please isolate food for these (retainers)? As a
result, he blamed me for this and said: The Lord, the Blessed and
Exalted, is One, the mother is one, and reward will be according to
deeds.[[3]](#_ftn66)

Surely, the Imāms of the Household (of the Prophet), peace be on them,
behaved in such a manner in order to abolish color discrimination among
men and to show that they were in one mosque, and that nothing
discriminated one person from another except reverential fear and good
deeds.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F64) Ibid.,  p. 18.  
 [[2]](#_F65) Al-Ithāf bi Hub al-Ashrāf,  p.  58.  
 [[3]](#_F66) Al-Majjlisi,  Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p. 18.  
  

  

  

His Knowledge
-------------

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, thoroughly encompassed all sciences and
knowledge. The historians and the narrators have unanimously agreed that
he was the most knowledge of the people of his time, the most
meritorious of them, and the most learned of them in the precepts of
religion and other sciences such as philosophy and medicine. Talking
about the Imāms abundant knowledge, Abd al-Salām al-Harawi has said: I
have never seen a person more knowledgeable than Ali b. Mūsā al-Rida.
When a religious scholar sees him, he bears witness for him (as being
the most knowledgeable) as I do. Al-Mamūn gathered for him in assemblies
a number of the scholars of religions, the jurists of Islamic law, and
theologians. However, he overcame them to the extent that they
acknowledged his excellence (over them) and confessed their feebleness
before him. I heard him say: I used to take my place at the theological
center *(rouda)* and the number of the learned  scholars in Medina was
quite large. Yet when a question over-taxed the mind of one of those
scholars, he and the rest would point at me, and they would sent me
their queries, and I would answer them all.[[1]](#_ftn67)

The Imām was the most learned of the people of his time and was the
highest authority in Islamic world; religious scholars and jurists would
send to him their questions about Islamic precepts.

Ibrāhim b. al-Abbās has said: When al-Ridā was questioned about a
certain thing, he answered it. I have never seen that there is a person
more knowledgeable than him. Al-Mamūn examined him with questions about
all things, and he answered them.[[2]](#_ftn68)

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, was the most eminent Muslim thinker, so
he was able to develop the cultural and scientific life of the Muslims.

Al-Mamūn has said: I think that there is no person on the face of earth
more learned than this man (i.e. Imām al-Ridā).[[3]](#_ftn69)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F67) Kashf al-Ghumma, vol.  3, p.  107.  
 [[2]](#_F68) 'Uyyūn Akhbār al-Ridā,  vol. 2, p. 180. Imām  al-Jawād, p.
42. Al-Ithāf  bi Hub al-Ashrāf.  
 [[3]](#_F69) A'yān   al-Shi'a, 4/Q2.  
  

  

  

His (i.e. Imām al-Ridās) debates in Khurasān, Basrah, and Kūfa give
evidence for his being the most knowledgeable on the face of earth.
During those debates he was questioned about the most difficult problems
and he answered them, so all the religious scholars of his time yielded
to him and acknowledged his excellence over them.

His Knowledge of all Languages
------------------------------

Another example of his being the most knowledge person is that he could
speak all languages. Abū Ismāil al-Sindi has reported: When I was in
India, I heard that Allah had an Arab proof, so I went out to seek him.
I was guided to al-Ridā (peace be on him), and I went to him. I could
not speak Arabic. I greeted him in Sindi, and he greeted me in my own
language. I asked him in Sindi, and he answered me in it. I said to him:
I have heard that Allah has an Arab argument, and I have gone out to
seek him. He, peace be on him, said to me: It is I; ask (me) about
whatever you desire. I asked him about my questions, and he (peace be on
him) answered them in my own language.[[1]](#_ftn70)

Abū al-Salt al-Hurawi has said: Al-Ridā, peace be on him, spoke to
people in their own languages. I asked him about this (quality), and he
replied: O Abū\` al-Salt, I am Allahs proof over His creatures. Allah
does not appoint over a people a proof who does not speak their own
language. Have you not heard the words of the Commander of the faithful:
We have been given sound judgment. Is this not his knowledge of 
languages?[[2]](#_ftn71)

Yāsir al-Khādim (the retainer) has narrated: Abū al-Hasan (al-Ridā),
peace be on him, had in his house Byzantines and Slavs. He was close to
them. He heard them speak in Slavic and Romanian, saying: We are visited
in our homeland every year, but we are not visited here. In the
following morning he (al-Ridā) sent someone to visit them.[[3]](#_ftn72)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F70) Al-Majjlisi,  Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p. 15.  
 [[2]](#_F71) Al-Manāqib, vol. 4, p. 333.  
 [[3]](#_F72) Ibid.  
  

  

  

Shaykh Mohammed b. al-Hasan has composed a poem concerning this quality,
saying:

And his knowledge of all languages

is the clearest miracle and sign.[[1]](#_ftn73)

His Prophecies
--------------

Imām al-Ridā, peace be on him, had foretold many events before they
happened, and they happened just as he had predicted. These prophecies
clearly confirm the original faith of the Shia who say that Allah, the
Exalted, endowed the Imāms of the Household (of the Prophet) with
excellence and inner knowledge, just as He had endowed His messengers.
The following are some of the Imāms prophecies:

 1. Al-Hasan b. Bashshār  narrated on the authority of al-Ridā, who
said: Abd Allah (i.e. al-Mamūn) will kill Mohammed (i.e. al-Amin). I
(al-Hasan b. Bashshār) asked him: Will Abd Allah b. Hārūn kill Mohammed
b. Hārūn? Yes, he replied, Abd Allah who is in Khurasān will kill
Mohammed b. Zubayda who is in Baghdad. Then he recited this poetry line

Surely successive spites expose you

and bring out the hidden malady.[[2]](#_ftn74)

Some days ago and al-Mamūn killed his brother al-Amin. We will mention
this event in the chapters that follow.

2. Another example of the Imāms inner knowledge is that when Mohammed b.
Imām al-Sādiq rose in Mecca and summoned the people to himself and broke
the pledge of allegiance to al-Mamūn, Imām al-Ridā went to him and said
to him: O Uncle, do not accuse your father or your brother ( i.e. Imām
al-Kāzim, peace be on him) of lying, for this authority will not go well
with you. However, Mohammed b. Imām al-Sādiq paid no attention to the
Imāms advice,  and he announced his revolt against al-Mamūn. Shortly
after that, the troops of al-Mmūn headed by al-Jalūdi attacked Mohammed
and his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F73) Nazhat al-Jalis, vol. 2, p. 107.  
 [[2]](#_F74) Al-Manāqib, vol. 4, p. 335. Jawhart al-Kalām, p. 146.  
  

  

  

fighters and defeated them. Then Mohammed asked al-Jalūdi for security,
and he gave it to him. Then he went up on the pulpit and abdicated
authority, saying: This authority belongs to al-Mmūn and I have no right
in it.[[1]](#_ftn75)

3. Al-Husayn, the son of Imām  Mūsā, peace be on him, has said: We were
youths from the Banū Hāshim. While we were sitting around al-Ridā, peace
be on him,  Jafar b. Umar al-Alawi passed by us shabby. We looked at
each other and laughed at him, so al-Ridā said: In the near future he
(Jafar b. Umar al-Alawi) will have a lot of money and many followers. A
month ago, Jafar became the governor of Medina and enjoyed good
conditions.[[2]](#_ftn76)

4. Muhawil al-Sijistāni has narrated: When Imām  al-Ridā, peace be on
him,   was commanded to go to Khurasān, I was in Medina. Al-Ridā entered
the mosque in order to say farewell to Allahs Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family. He said farewell to him several times. Throughout
this (time) he went and came back to the grave. He wept and wailed
aloud, so I walked towards him and greeted him, and he greeted me. I
congratulated him, and he said to me: Leave me, for I am going to go out
of the neighborhood of my grandfather; I will die in exile, and be
buried beside Hārūn. I went out to follow him on the road until he
arrived in Khurasān. He stayed in it for a time, and then he was buried
by Hārūn.[[3]](#_ftn77)

The matter was just as the Imām had predicted. He went to Khurasān, and
did not return from it. He was assassinated by al-Mmūn, the Abbāsid
Caliph, and was buried beside Hārūn al-Rashid.

5. Safwān b. Yahyā has reported: When Abū Ibrāhim (i.e. Imām al-Kāzim)
passed away and Abū al-Hasan al-Ridā, peace be on him, spoke (i.e.
undertook the office of the Imāmate), we were afraid for him. He was
told: You have made public a great matter and on account of that, we
fear for you from this tyrant (i.e. Hārūn al-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F75) Al-Bihār, vol. 12, p. 13.  
 [[2]](#_F76) Al-Fusūl al-Muhimma, p. 229. Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 12, p.
13.  
 [[3]](#_F77) Al-Ithāf bi Hub al-Ashrāf, p. 59. Akhbār al-Diwal, p.
114.  
  

  

  

Rashid). Let him try as hard as he can, he answered, he will find no way
to harm me.[[1]](#_ftn78)

The matter happened as he had predicted. Hārūn al-Rashid did not
mistreat him. The Imām  underlined this meaning to his companions.
Mohammed b. Sinān has reported: I (i.e. Mohammed b. Sinān) said to Abū
al-Hasan al-Ridā during the days of Hārūn: Surely, you have made
yourself famous through this matter and your sitting in the assembly of
your father, while the sword of Hārūn is dripping blood (i.e. the blood
of the Household of the Prophet and their followers). He, peace be on
him,  said: Allahs Messenger (may Allah bless him and his family) has
encouraged me when he said: If Abū Jahl takes a hair from my head, then
bear witness that I am not a prophet. For this reason I say to you: If
Hārūn (al-Rashid) takes a hair from my head, then bear witness that I am
not an Imām.[[2]](#_ftn79)

Several times the Imām , peace be on him, announced that Hārūn would not
mistreat him, and that he would be buried beside him. Hamza b. Jafar
al-Lārijāni has narrated: Hārūn went out of the gate of the Sacred
Mosque, and Ali went out of the gate and said: How remote the abode is!
And how near the meeting is! Surely, Tūs will gather me and him
together![[3]](#_ftn80)

The Imām has stressed his burial beside Hārūn in many traditions. Mūsā
b. Hārūn has narrated: While Hārūn al-Rashid was delivering a speech in
the Mosque of Medina, I saw Ali (al-Ridā), and he said to me: You will
see that I and he (Hārūn al-Rashid) will be buried in one
house.[[4]](#_ftn81)

6. Another example of the Imāms inner knowledge is the calamity of the
Barāmika. Regarding their calamity, Musāfir has reported: I (i.e.
Musāfir) was with Abū al-Hasan Ali al-Ridā, Yahyā b. Khālid al-Barmaki
passed by and covered his face with a handkerchief (to escape) from  the
dust. He (Abū al-Hasan Ali al-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F78) A'yān al-Shi'a 4/Q2/97.  
 [[2]](#_F79) Ibid.  
 [[3]](#_F80) Al-Ithāf bi Hub al-Ashrāf, p. 59.  
 [[4]](#_F81) Ibid.  
  

  

  

Rida) said: Wretched ones who do not know what will happen to them
during this year.

Then the Imām added: The more surprising thing than this is that I and
Hārūn will be like these (two fingers of mine). Then he joined his
forefinger and middle finger together.

Musāfir reported: By Allah, I did not understand the meaning of al-Ridās
words concerning Hārūn until his death and burial beside
him.[[1]](#_ftn82)

7. Mohammed b. Īsā has reported on the authority of Habib al-Nabāji, who
said: I saw Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, in a
vision. He came to al-Nabāji[[2]](#_ftn83) and stopped at the mosque
where the pilgrims stopped every year. I went to him and greeted him.
There was before him a tray made of palm leaves, and there was Sayhāni
dates in the tray. He gave me a handful of these dates. I counted them
and they were eighteen. I asked (a person) to explain the vision, and he
told me that I would live for eighteen years. Twenty days ago, while I
was on my farm, a person came and told me about the coming of al-Ridā
from Medina and his stopping at that mosque. I saw the people going to
him, so I went to him. I saw him sitting in the place where Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, sat in the vision. There
was before him a tray made of palm leaves, and there was Sayhāni dates
in it. I greeted him, and he, peace be on him,  greeted me. He asked me
to come nearer to him and gave me a handful of these dates. I counted
them and they were equal to those which Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, had given to me. As a result I said: Increase me, O
Son of Allahs Apostle! He said: If Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family,  increased you, we would increase you.[[3]](#_ftn84)

8. Jafar b. Sālih has narrated: I came to al-Ridā and said to him: My
wife is pregnant, so supplicate Allah to make her give birth  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F82) Ibid.  
 [[2]](#_F83) The house of the pilgrims of Basrah  
 [[3]](#_F84) Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 3, p. 103. Jāmi' Karāmāt al-Awliyā',
vol. 2, p. 156. Nūr al-Abbsār.  
  

  

  

to a male. As a result he said: They are twin. I went away and said: I
will name one of them Mohammed and the other Ali. Then I came to him,
and he said to me: Name one of them Ali and the other Umm Amrū. When I
went to Kūfa, my wife had given birth to a male and a female, so I named
the male Ali and the female Umm Amrū.[[1]](#_ftn85)

The narrators have mentioned many prophecies indicating that Allah
endowed the Imām  with knowledge just as He had endowed His righteous
friends and servants.

His Acts of Worship and Reverential Fear
----------------------------------------

One of the most prominent qualities of Imām  al-Ridā, peace be on him,
is his devotion to Allah, the Exalted, and his clinging to Him. We can
clearly see this quality in his acts of worship which represent great
part of his spiritual life standing on light, Allah-fearingness, and
piety. One of his companions has said: When I saw him (al-Ridā), I
mentioned these words of Him, the Exalted: *They used to sleep but
little in the night*. Concerning his acts of worship, al-Shibrāwi has
said: Throughout the night he (al-Ridā) performed ablutions,  prayed,
and slept. In this manner he (continued) until the morning
came.[[2]](#_ftn86)

The Imām, peace be on him,  was the most Allah-fearing of the people of
his time and the most obedient of them to Allah, the Most High. Al-Mmūn
sent Rajā b. Abū al-Dahhāk to Medina in order to bring the Imām to
Khurasān. The latter went and accompanied him on the road from Medina to
Maru. He has reported the following about his acts of worship: By Allah,
I have never seen a man more (earnest) than him in seeking protection in
Allah (the Great and Almighty), mentioning Him in all his times, and
fearing Him. When he rose in the morning, he performed the morning
prayer. When he finished his prayer and said the *taslim*, he sat in his
place of prayer and (began) glorifying Allah, praising Him, saying:
Allah is Greater! There is no god but Allah! O Allah bless the Prophet
and his family, may Allah bless him and his family. He continued these
phrases until the sun  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F85)Jawharat al-Kalām, p. 146.  
 [[2]](#_F86) Al-Ithāf bi Hub al-Ashrāf, p. 59.  
  

  

  

rose. Then he prostrated himself in prayer for a long time. Then he went
to the people to speak to them and to preach to them until it was
forenoon. Then he renewed his ablution and returned to his place of
prayer. When the sun came near to descending (from its midday zenith),
he stood and prayed six *rakas*. In the first *raka* he recited the sura
*al-Hamd* and the sura *qul yā ayyuhā al-kāfirūn*. In the second *raka*
 he recited the sura *al-Hamd* and the sura *qul huwa Allah ahad*. In
every *raka* of the four-*raka* prayers he recited the sura *al-Hamd*
*lillāh* and the sura *qul huwa Allah ahad*, and then he recited the
taslim. Then he recited his personal prayer in the second *raka* before
the kneeling and after the recitation. Then he said the *adhān* (the
call to prayer). Then he prayed two *rakas*. Then he said the *iqāma*
(the declaration of standing for prayer) and performed the noon prayer.
When he recited the *taslim*, he glorified Allah, praised Him, and said:
Allah is Greater! There is no god but Allah! He continued these phrases
for a long time. Then he performed *Salāt al-Shukr* (the prayer for
giving thanks). In it he said:  Thanks be to Allah, for one hundred
times. When he raised his head, he stood and prayed six *rakas*. In each
*raka* he recited the sura *al-Hamd* *lillāh* and the sura *qul huwa
Allah ahad*. After each two *rakas* he recited the *taslim*. Then he
said his personal prayer in the second *raka* before the kneeling and
after the recitation. Then he said the *adhān* (the call to prayer).
Then he prayed two *rakas* and said his personal prayer in the second
*raka*. When he recited the *taslim*, he stood and performed the
afternoon prayer. When he recited the *taslim*, he sat in his place of
prayer, glorified Allah, praised Him, and said: Allah is Greater! There
is no god but Allah! Then he prostrated himself in prayer and said one
hundred times: Thanks be to Allah.

When the sun set, he performed the ritual ablution, said the *adhān* and
*iqāma*, and performed the three *rakas* of the evening prayer. Then he
said his personal prayer in the second *raka* before the kneeling and
after the recitation. When he recited the *taslim,* he sat in his place
of prayer, glorified Allah, praised Him, and said: Allah is Greater!
There is no god but Allah. He recited these phrases for a long time.
Then he performed *Salāt al-Shukr* (the prayer for giving  

  

  

thanks). Then he raised his head and did not say anything until he stood
and prayed four *rakas*, finishing each two *rakas* with the taslim.
Then he said his personal prayer in the second *raka* before kneeling
and after the recitation. In the first *raka* of these four *rakas,* he
recited the sura *al-hamd*  and the sura *qul yā ayyuhā al-kāfirūn.* In
the second *raka* he recited the sura *al-hamd * and the sura *qul huwa
Allah ahad.* Then he recited the *taslim*. Then he sat and recited
personal supplications until he entered into evening. Then he broke the
fast. Then he stayed until about third of the night passed. The he stood
and performed the night prayer in four *rakas*. Then he said his
personal prayer in the second *raka* before kneeling and after the
recitation. When he recited the *taslim*, he sat in his place of prayer
mentioning Allah, the Great and Almighty, glorifying and praising Him,
saying: Allah is Greater! There is no god but Allah! He said these
phrases for a long time. After saying his personal supplications, he
performed *Salāt al-Shukr*, and then he went to bed.

At the last third of night he got up glorifying and praising (Allah),
saying: Allah is greater! There is no god but Allah! And he asked Him
for forgiveness. Then he cleaned his teeth with the *miswāk* (cleaning
stick for teeth). Then he performed the ritual ablution. Then he stood
and performed the late night payer. He said eight *rakas*. After each
two *rakas*, he recited the *taslim*. In the first two *rakas* of them,
he recited the sura *al-hamd*  and the sura *qul huwa Allah ahad* thirty
times.

Then he performed the prayer of Jafar b. Abū Tālib, which is four
*rakas*. After each two *rakas,* he recited the *taslim*. After the
second *raka* of each two *rakas,* he said his personal prayer before
kneeling. He regarded it as (part) of the late night prayer. Then he
performed the other two *rakas*. In the first *raka* he recited the sura
*al-hamd* and the sura *al-mulk*. In the second *raka* he recited the
sura al-*hamd* and the sura *hal atā alā al-insān*. Then he stood and
performed the two *rakas* of *al-Shaf*a. In each *raka* he recited the
sura *al-hamd* one time and the sura *qul huwa Allah ahad* three times.
He said his personal prayer after the second *raka*. Then he stood and
performed (the prayer of *al-witr*), which is one *raka*. In it he
recited the sura *al-  
*

  

  

hamd, the sura *qul huwa Allah ahad* three times, the sura *qul aūdhu bi
Rab al-falaq* one time, and the sura *qul aūdhu bi Rab al-nās* one time.
Then he said his personal prayer before the kneeling and after the
recitation. He would say (the following) in his personal prayer:

O Allah, bless Mohammed and the Household of Mohammed. O Allah, guide us
through him whom You guided, make us well through him whom You made
well, attend to us through him to whom You attend, bless us in that
which You have given, protect us from the evil of what You decreed, for
You decree and none decrees against You. Verily he whom You befriend is
not lowly, and he toward whom You show enmity is not exalted, blessed
are You and high exalted!

Then he said seventy times: I ask Allahs forgiveness and seek repentance
from Him. When he recited the *taslim,* he sat and recited supplications
for a long time. When the dawn approached, he stood and prayed the two
*rakas* of the dawn. In the first *raka* he recited the sura *al-hamad*
and the sura *qul yā ayyuhā al-kāfirūn.* In the second *raka* he recited
the sura *al-hamad* and the sura *qul huwa Allah ahad*. When the dawn
broke, he said the *adhān* and the *iqāma* and performed the prayer of
the early morning in two *rakas*. When he recited the *taslim,* he sat
and recited supplications until the sun rose. The he performed *Salāt
al-Shukr* (the prayer for giving thanks).[[1]](#_ftn87)

This tradition in detail displays:  the obligatory prayer of Imām 
al-Ridā, peace be on him; his supererogatory prayers; the suras of the
Holy Qurān which he recited in them; and the supplications which he
recited after his prayers. This means that he was always busy
worshipping Allah, the Exalted.

The love for Allah dominated the Imāms heart, sentiments and feelings,
to the extent that it was one of his qualities.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F87) Al-Bihār, vol. 12, pp. 26-27. The tradition also includes
the explanation of some of his supplications, his acts of worship, and
his reciting some *suras* during his supererogatory prayers.  
  

  

  

His Supplication during his Personal Prayer *(qunūt)*
-----------------------------------------------------

The Imām, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication
during his personal prayer *(qunūt)*: The flight is toward You, O
Possessor of presence and desire. The desire is for You, O He through
whom is pride. You, O Allah, can see the whisperings of souls, observe
the movements of hearts, and know of hidden secrets without affectation
and tyranny; and You, O Allah, can see all things; but toward Your
clemency they have shown audacity, disobedience, arrogance, and
obstinacy; (and You can see) what Your friends suffer out of effacing
the tracks of the truth, obliterating its marks, the increase of
ill-deeds, the continuation of their people toward them, the appearance
of falsehood, the generality of  unjust and mutual consent on that
(regarding) dealings and sundries; it (unjust) has become familiar and
become as one of the obligatory and legislated things.

O Allah, hasten toward him whom you help is successful, and him whom You
support is not afraid of the blame of anyone, and severely punish the
unjust; be neither merciful nor affectionate to them.

O Allah, so rush toward them!

O Allah, be quick toward them!

O Allah, grant them not a respite!

O Allah, punish them early in the morning and at midday, in the early
dawn and by night, when sleeping, in the forenoon while playing; scheme
against them when scheming; and take them by surprise while safe!

O Allah, scatter them; disperse their helpers; decrease their aids;
defeat their soldiers; reduce their limits; uproot their glory; and
weaken their determinations!

O Allah, grant us their sides; make us possess their districts; change
their blessings; replace with peace our caution of them and their
aggression (against us); make use control them thoroughly! O Allah, so
do not withhold Your punishment, which if occur among people, *evil
shall then be the morning of the warned one!*[***[1]***](#_ftn88)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F88) Muhajj al-Da'awāt, p.73.  
  

  

  

This supplications gives an account of the vengeance of the Imām, peace
be on him, on the oppressive and tyrannical rulers of his time who
drowned Islamic world in hardships and tragedies and forced the Muslims
to performed what they hated. This is one of the political supplications
which narrate the conditions of that time.

His Supplication during the Prayer for giving Thanks (salāt al-Shukr)
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Sulaymān b. Jafar has narrated: We visited Imām al-Ridā, peace be on
him, while he was performing the prayer for giving thanks *(salāt
al-Shukr)*. He lengthened his prostration in prayer. Then he raised his
head and we asked him about his long prostration. He told us that he
prayed with the following supplication. He urged us to (supplicate) with
it. Then he ordered us to write it, and we wrote it. The supplication is
as follows:

O Allah, curse those who altered Your religion, changed Your favor,
accused Your Messenger (may Allah bless him and his Household), opposed
Your religion, turned away from Your way, were ungrateful for Your
boons, returned Your words to You, disdained Your Messenger, killed the
(grand) son of Your Prophet, distorted Your Book, denied Your signs, sat
in the assembly which was not appropriate for them, and which the people
carried on the shoulders of the Household of Mohammed!

O Allah, curse them with curses following each other, gather them and
their followers blue-eyed in the Hell-fire!

O Allah, we seek nearness to You through cursing them and renouncing
them in this world and the next!

O Allah, curse those who killed the Commander of the faithful and
al-Husayn b. Ali and Fātima, daughter of Allahs Messenger, may Allah
bless him and his Household.

O Allah, increase them in chastisement to chastisement, humiliation to
humiliation, abasement to abasement, and disgrace to disgrace!

O Allah, drive them away to the Fire with violence and return them to
Your painful chastisement with a return!

  

  

  

O Allah, gather them and their followers in the Hell-fire in group! O
Allah, divide their gathering; scatter their affair; make their words
disagree with each other; disperse their unity; curse their Imāms; kill
their leaders, their masters, and their eldest ones; curse their heads;
break their banars; spread terror among them; and leave not any dweller
of them!

O Allah, curse Abū Jahl and al-Walid with curses following one another!
O Allah curse them with a curse through which curse every angel brought
nigh, every prophet sent out, and every believer whose heart You examine
for faith! O Allah curse them with a curse from which the inhabitants of
the Fire seek refuge, and which does not come into anyones mind! O
Allah, curse them in Your hidden secret and Your manifest openness,
chastise them with a chastisement in the ordination, and let their
partners be their followers and their lovers! Verily You hear
supplication![[1]](#_ftn89)

This supplication shows that the Imām was indignant with some Caliphs
who controlled without any right the general authority of the country,
and hence they brought about woe and destruction to Islamic world
through preventing the pure Household of the Prophet from undertaking
authority while they were the most learned of others in the affairs and
precepts of Islām. This great supplication is one of the political
supplications.

The Imām uses Supplication as Weapon
------------------------------------

Yet another  quality of the Imāms spiritual life is that he practiced
supplication as a weapon through praying to Allah and referring to Him
in all his affairs, for he found in it (supplication) a spiritual
enjoyment which none of the enjoyments of life equaled it. We will
mention his statements concerning the importance of supplication before
we present some of his supplications.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F89) Muhajj al-Da'awāt, p.320.  
  

  

  

### Supplication is the Weapon of the Prophets

The Imām urged his companions to supplicate Allah and said to them:
Adhere to the weapon of the prophets!

What is the weapon of the prophets? he was asked.

Supplication, he replied.[[1]](#_ftn90)

### Concealing Supplication

The Imām advised his companions to conceal supplication, and that man
should supplicate his Lord secretly, that none may know of him. He,
peace be on him, has said:

A servants secret supplication equals seventy open
supplications.[[2]](#_ftn91)

### Slowness in Answering Supplication

The Imām spoke about the reasons for the slowness in responding to
supplication. Ahmed b. Mohammed b. Abū Nasr has narrated: [ I (i.e.
Ahmed) said to Abū al-Hasan (i.e. Imām al-Ridā): May I be your ransom, I
have asked a need from Allah since so-and-so year, and something have
entered my heart because of slowness (in answering it). He, peace be on
him, declared:] O Ahmed, beware of that Satan makes a way against you in
order to make you despair (of Allahs mercy). Abū Jafar (i.e. Imām
al-Bāqir), the blessings of Allah be upon him, said: The believer asks
his need from Allah, the Great and Almighty, but He delays responding to
him out of love for his voice and listening to his wailing.

 Then he said: By Allah, what Allah, the Great and Almighty, sets behind
the believers in this world is better than what He sets before them
therein. What a thing is the world? Abū Jafar would say: The believers
supplication during ease should be similar to that of his during
hardship. He should not flag (in supplicating) when he is given.
Therefore, be not tired of supplication, for it is of great position
with Allah, the Great and Almighty. Adhere to patience, seeking the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F90) Usūl al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 368.  
 [[2]](#_F91) Ibid., p. 476.  
  

  

  

lawful, and tightening your bonds of kin. Beware of showing open enmity
toward men, for we, the members of the House, tighten ties with him who
cut us and treat kindly him who mistreats us, hence we, by Allah, see
through that the good final result. If the possessor of a favor (strives
for gathering) sample funds, then he is not satisfied with anything.
When favors become abundant, the Muslim is in danger because of the
duties incumbent upon him and the trial through them.

Tell me, if I say some words to you, will you trust them? asked Imām
al-Ridā.

May I be your ransom, if I do not trust you, then whom shall I trust?
retorted Ahmed, You are the proof of Allah over His creatures.

Therefore, have more confidence in Allah, for you will meet him, replied
the Imām, dont Allah, the Great and Almighty, say: *And when My 
servants ask you concerning me, then surely I am very near; I answer the
prayer of the suppliant when he calls on me*[[1]](#_ftn92)*;*  dont He
say: *do not despair of the mercy of Allah*[[2]](#_ftn93)*;* and dont He
say: *and Allah promises you forgiveness from Him and
bounty*.[[3]](#_ftn94) Therefore, have confidence in Allah more than you
have in other than Him. Place nothing in your soul except good, and you
will be forgiven.[[4]](#_ftn95)

The Imām has mentioned the causes which hold back supplication and delay
response and, in addition, he has urged (Muslims) to follow the morals
of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt)*, peace be on them.

### His Amulet *(hirz)*

The Imām, peace be on him, would use this holy supplication as weapon:
In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. O He to whom
there is neither likeness nor similitude! You are Allah!  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F92) Qur'ān, 2, 186.  
 [[2]](#_F93) Ibid., 39, 53.  
 [[3]](#_F94) Ibid., 2, 268.  
 [[4]](#_F95) Usūl al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 489.  
  

  

  

There is no god but you; nor is there a creator except You! You perish
the creatures and You remain! You are clement toward him who disobeys
You! And Your good pleasure is in forgiveness![[1]](#_ftn96)

He also clung to this great supplication: I have submitted, O my
Protector, to you; I have submitted my own soul to You; I have entrusted
the whole affairs of mine to You! I am Your servant, son of Your
servant. So hide me in Your cover from the evil from among Your
creatures, protect me from every harm and evil through Your kindness,
and spare me the evil of every possessor of evil through Your power!

 O Allah, I seek protection in You from him who schemes against me or
desires ill for me! Close the eyes of the oppressive from me, for You
are my helper! There is no god but You, O Most Merciful of the merciful
and Lord of the worlds! I ask you to be sufficient against harm, (to
give me) well-being, recovery, help against the enemies, and success for
what You love and accept, O Our Lord! O Lord of the worlds! O
All-compeller of the heavens and earth! O Lord of Mohammed and his good,
pure Household! Your blessings be upon all of them![[2]](#_ftn97)

The Imām, peace be on him,  submitted himself and all his affairs to the
One, the Subducer who has power over all things. He clung to the
above-mentioned supplication, that Allah might turn away from him the
trickery of aggressors and oppression of wrongdoers.

Some of his Supplications
-------------------------

Some holy supplications have been reported from Imām al-Ridā, peace be
on him. They are as follows:

1. The following is his supplication in seeking security and faith: O He
who gives me evidence for Himself and humiliates my heart through
certainty in Him, I ask from You security and faith in this world and
the next![[3]](#_ftn98)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F96) Muhajj al-Da'awāt, p. 44.  
 [[2]](#_F97) Al-Musbāh, p. 217.  
 [[3]](#_F98) Usūl al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 579.  
  

  

  

This supplication, though short, contains a proof of the Oneness of
Allah; the proof is that Allah makes His creatures profess His existence
through the wonders of this universe.

2. He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this great supplication: O
Allah, give me guidance; make me steadfast toward it; muster me
according to it; make me safe with the safety of him upon whom there is
neither fear nor sorrow nor impatience; You are worthy of reverential
fear and worthy to forgive![[1]](#_ftn99)

3. He taught the following holy supplication to his companion and
student, Mūsā b. Bukayr. He said to him: Memorize what I write to you.
Supplicate with it during every hardship of which you are afraid. The
supplication is as follows: In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the
Most Merciful. O Allah, my many sins have made me lose face before You,
prevented me from being worthy of Your mercy, and kept me away from
deserving Your forgiveness! I have adhered to Your boons and  clung to
supplicating You, for You have promised those who are like me in acting
extravagantly (against their own souls), making errors, and despairing
of Your mercy through Your words:  *Say: O My servants who have acted
extravagantly against their own souls, do not despair of the mercy of
Allah; surly Allah forgives the faults altogether; surely He is the
Forgiving, the Merciful.*[[2]](#_ftn100) You have warned those who
despair of Your mercy and said: *And who despairs of the mercy of his
Lord but the erring ones.*[[3]](#_ftn101) Then You have summoned us
through Your mercy to supplicate You, thus You have said: *Call upon me,
I will answer you; surely those who are too proud for My mercy shall
soon enter hell abased*.[[4]](#_ftn102)

O my Lord, hopelessness has covered me, and despair of Your mercy has
wrapped me! O my Lord, You have promised to reward him who has good
opinion in You and to punish him who has bad opinion in You! O Allah, my
eye has been seized by good opinion of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F99) A'yān al-Shi'a, 4/Q2/197.  
 [[2]](#_F100) Qur'ān, 39, 53.  
 [[3]](#_F101) Ibid., 15, 56.  
 [[4]](#_F102) Ibid., 40, 60.  
  

  

  

You in releasing my neck from the Fire, covering my slips, releasing
(me) from my stumble! O Allah, Your words, which have neither alteration
nor change, are true: *(Remember) the day when We will call every people
with their Imām*.[[1]](#_ftn103) That is the Day of Resurrection when
the trumpet shall be blown and what is in the graves shall be raised. I
believe, witness, confess, do not deny, do not renege, conceal,
announce, manifest, and hide that You are Allah, there is no god but
You, One with no partner with You, that Mohammed is Your servant and
messenger, may Allah bless him and his Family, and that Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, master of the testamentary trustees,
inheritor of knowledge of the prophets, emblem of religion, destroyer of
the hypocrites, the fighter against the Renegades *(Māriqin)*, my Imām,
my proof, my handle, my path, my guide, and my argument. I do not trust
my deeds though pure; nor do I see that they will save me though
righteous but through (showing) friendship to him, following his
example, acknowledging his great virtues, accepting from those who
delivered them, and submitting to those who narrated them. I confess
that his testamentary trustees from among his grandsons are Imāms,
arguments, guides, lamps, guideposts, lighthouses, masters, and pious. I
believe in their secret, their openness, their outward, their inward,
their present, their absent, their living, and their dead. In that there
is neither doubt nor suspicion nor change when You turn away (from
that).

O Allah, summon me on the day of my mustering and my resurrecting
through their Imāmate, and save me, O My Protector, from the heat of the
Fires through them, and supply me with the repose of the Gardens!
Surely, if You release me from the Fire, I will be one of the achievers.
O Allah, I rose in the morning of this day of mine (while) I have
neither confidence nor hope nor asylum nor place of flight nor shelter
except those through whom I seek access to You, seeking nearness to Your
Messenger Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his Family, then Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, al-Zahrā, the mistress of the women of the
worlds, al-Hasan, al-Husayn,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F103) Ibid., 17, 71.  
  

  

  

and the one after them who will pave the way for the hidden proof from
among his children, hoped for the community after him.

O Allah, make them in this day and after it my fortress against detested
things and my stronghold against fears; save me through them from every
enemy, tyrant, oppressor, sinner, the evil of what I know, what I deny,
what has hidden from me, what I see, and the evil of every crawling
creature that You have taken by the forelock! *Surely You are on a
straight path*.

O Allah, through my seeking access through them to You, seeking nearness
to You through showing love for them, fortifying myself with their
Imāmate, open for me the doors to Your provision; spread upon me Your
mercy; make Your creatures love me; turn me aside from their detest and
their enmity! *Verily You are powerful over everything*.

O Allah, there is reward for everyone (who) seek access (through them to
You); there is right for all the possessors of intercession, hence by
him whom You have appointed as Your friend and placed ahead my request,
I ask You to make me recognize the blessing of this day of mine, this
month of mine, and this year of mine!

O Allah, they are my place of flight and my help during my hardship, my
ease, my well-being, my tribulation, my sleep, my wakefulness, my
departure, my residence, my difficulty, my facility, my openness, my
secret, my morning, my evening, my movement, my habitation, my secret,
and my publicity! O Allah, through them, disappoint me not of Your
favor; cut not my hope from Your mercy; disappoint me not of Your
repose; tempt me not with the closure of the doors to provisions and of
the ways to them; open for me an easy opening from You; appoint for me a
way out from every hardship and a road for every plenty! Surely, You are
the Most Merciful of the merciful. May Allah bless Mohammed and his pure
Household! Amen, Lord of the world![[1]](#_ftn104)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F104) Muhajj al-Da'awāt, pp. 315-317.  
  

  

  

This supplication gives an account of the firm clinging of the Imām to
Allah, the Exalted, and his absolute obedience to Him. Also it gives an
account of the outstanding merits of the members of the House *(ahl
al-Bayt)*, peace be on him, who are the emblems of religion and
gatekeepers of the wisdom of the Master of messengers.

4. The Imām, peace be on him, would recite this supplication for seeking
provision and plentiful livelihood. He would recite it after each
obligatory prayer. It is as follows: O He Who possesses the needs of the
askers and knows the minds of those who are silent! There is a present
hearing and ready response to every request from You. There is
encompassing, inner knowledge of all those silent before you. I ask You
by Your truthful promises, Your generous benefits, Your boundless mercy,
Your conquering authority, Your everlasting kingdom, Your perfect words,
O He whom the obedience of the obedient does not profit nor does the
disobedience of the disobedient harm, bless Mohammed and his Household;
provide me with some of Your bounty; and give me that through which You
provide me with well-being, through Your mercy, O Most Merciful of the
merciful![[1]](#_ftn105)

5. This is another example of his holy supplications: In the  
 name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. O Allah! O  
 Possessor of comprehensive power, boundless mercy, uninterrupted  
 kindnesses, successive boons, beautiful benefits, and great gifts! O
He  
 who created (men) and provided (them) with the means of subsistence,  
 inspired (them) and made (them) utter, originated (them) and made  
 laws (for them), is exalted and high, ordained and did well, formed and
did excellently, advanced an argument and delivered (it), bestowed
lavishly upon (men),  gave (them) generously, granted (them) and did a
favor for (them)! O He who is exalted in mightiness, so swift sight
escapes Him, and is close in gentleness, so misgiving  
 thoughts pass Him! O He who is unique in kingdom, so there is no  
 equal for Him in the kingdom of His authority and is One in  
 magnificence, so there is no rival in the invincibility of His station.
O  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F105) Al-Musbāh, p. 168.  
  

  

  

He by whose magnificence the subtlest of imaginations are bewildered,
and the swiftest of the eyes of mankind fall short of knowing His might!
O He who knows the thoughts of the hearts of men and sees the glances of
beholders eyes! Faces are humble in awe of Him; necks are submissive to
His mightiness and majesty; hearts are afraid out of fear of Him; and
limbs tremble in terror of Him! O All-apparent! O All-hearing! O
All-high! O Exalted! Bless him who makes prayer honorable through
calling down blessings upon him; take vengeance on him who has wronged
me, made light of me, dismissed the Shiites from my door; let him taste
the bitterness of abasement as he has made me taste it; make him outcast
among those who commit abominable acts and those who are impure! Praise
belongs to Allah! May Allah bless Mohammed and his good, pure
Household![[1]](#_ftn106)

This supplication is abound with praising and lauding Allah with the
most beautiful kind of laudation. Also it is filled, especially at the
end of it, with oppression, harm, and persecutions which were brought
about to the Imām by al-Mamūn, the Abbāsid Caliph, who dismissed the
Shiites of the Imām, and made light of him. That was when Islamic world
admired the position of the Imām and his great personality, and when it
came to know that al-Mamūn had an insignificant character void of morals
which were necessary for the office of the caliphate over the Muslims.
This supplication demonstrates that the Imām was so displeased with
al-Mamūn that he invoked Allah against him.

6. Yet another example of his holy supplications is following:  
 In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious,the Most Merciful. O Allah,  
 to You belongs praise for repelling afflictions which come down, the  
 misfortunes of adversity, calamities, and the continuous rush of the  
 lavishness of favors! To You belongs praise for Your wholesome  
 bestowal and Your praiseworthy trial! To You belongs praise for Your  
 great beneficence, Your dear good, Your easy imposing, and Your  
 repelling difficulties! To You belongs praise for Your making
fruitful  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F106) Ibid., p. 292. Al-Bihār, vol. 12, p. 24.  
  

  

  

little gratitude, Your giving abundant reward, Your lessening the weight
of heavy sins, Your accepting narrow excuse, Your lifting up burdensome
time, Your making easy difficult places, and Your preventing Your
decisive command! To You belongs praise for driving away tribulations,
abundant favor, repelling fearful things, and abasing the tyrannical! To
You belongs praise for little obligation, plentiful reduction,
strengthening the weak, and aiding the troubled! To You belongs praise
for your abundant disregard, Your lasting bounty, Your taking away the
barrenness of land, Your praiseworthy acts, and Your uninterrupted
gifts! To You belongs praise for delaying immediate punishment, leaving
sudden chastisement, making easy the paths of return (to You), and
sending down the rain of clouds! Verily, You are All-gracious,
All-Bestower![[1]](#_ftn107) This supplication contains a group of
phrases which laud and praise Allah, the Exalted, the Creator of the
universe and Giver of life.

These are some of the Imāms supplications which reveal part of his
spiritual life, namely he devoted himself to Allah, communicated with
Him, and held fast to His cord. With this supplication we will end our
speech about some qualities of the Imāms holy character.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_F107) Ibid., 415.  
  

