Important Point
===============

The writer goes so far as to say that the Shia belief or Shiasm took
its form gradually on the ladder of events. That it was product of
accidents and a manufacture of episodes is completely untrue. We
reiterate that the Shia belief or Shiasm is rooted in Islam. As the Book
said so it is; as the Prophet demonstrated so it is. A great scholar,
ABAN BIN TAQLAB, of the Sunni thought, was asked as to what a Shia and
Shiasm is. He replied:

"A Shia is he who follows Ali (AS). If for instance all the companions
or associates of the Prophet (SAW) happened to agree over an issue and
Ali happened to differ from it, or the whole Nation agreed over a thing
and Imam Jafer Sadiq's word differed with it, a Shia would obey the
Imam's word." The authority is the word of the Imam, although 'EJMA'
might have preceded it.

The Imam is immune from sin and the Shia depends on the Imam and act by
his guidance. The oldest Sunni sources have confirmed the truth of
Shiasm.

**55. RETURN OF MAFIDI:**

What was predicted did not produce a result, what was foretold was not
applicable; circumstances did not come under the fang of prediction;
hence, the appearance of the 12th Imam remained uncertain. The writer
says this. The time of appearance of the Imam was and still is unknown.
Therefore, there was no prediction in this respect. The Shia knew this.
There was no uncertainty about it nor is there today. If the writer says
the uncertainty lies in the belief he is wrong. The matter is clear.
Knowledge of time is known to no one except God.

That the Shias in hopes of the future, abstain from taking part in
politics is wrong. The political activity of Shias is undeniable.
Sometimes Shias have remained aloof and at a distance from politics
which again in itself is a policy. Religious prudency dictates at
interludes for policies to vary. Many only look at the periphery of the
events. The political stand that a Shia take is on the fundamental of a
campaign. He opposes a tyrant government and supports anything having to
do with belief. His position has always been strong solid in the
political field.

**56. THE RISE (QIAM) OF MAIWI:**

The writer has tried with obvious efforts to minimize the value of the
belief in Mahdi. He constantly repeats his allegations. He goes on
saying that the Ommiyads, as well as the Abbasids lost ground and power.
The Shia became hopeful and encouraged. This did not last long. Despair
and disappointment overtook him. The writer says next that a few
appeared in the role of Mahdi.

Shias again became hopeful. A new dimension was given to Mehdism. The
writer proceeds to say that several faces were given to the belief and
to the Redeemer. Also several HADITH (traditions) were told in this
respect. The writer says that sometimes various signs were pronounced as
to the appearance of the Imam in order to tranquilize the Shia and drown
him into intoxication. The defeat of the Bani Abbas rulers had no part
in the bloom of Shiasm. They were like HALAKO dictators. The Bani Abbas
rulers were more or less believers in Mahdi - the twelfth Imam. One of
their caliphs, Naser, considered himself as a deputy of the twelfth
Imam. The story of ISMAEEL HARQALI indicates that caliph MOSTAZEE had a
belief in Mahdi.

Secondly, the Shia never despaired. There was no reason for this nor
any cause. The writer's conclusion is unfounded. As we have said before,
the Shia has maintained his own belief. Since the early days of Islam
all Muslims inclusive of the Shia believed in the advent of a Redeemer.
The Holy Quran says that good doers will inherit the earth.

The believers in Mehdism are charged with vigor in waiting that day.
The science books of ancient times, like the ZABOOR and TORA also give
similar promises. Certain people have always tried with great effort to
create chaos and discolor this belief. It was by Divine consent that
this belief was revealed to the Prophets David, Moses and Mohammad
(SAW). It was revealed to Prophet Mohammad what the future would hold.

These hidings has circulated from mouth to mouth and traveled on the
wings of time, ages have fluttered, and centuries have flustered to
carry it to us to remind us of the advent of Mahdi. Whatever the
endeavor, whatever the effort, whatever the try; this tower can not be
pulled down by any distraction because REASON has stood as a foundation
to its erection.

**57. NEAR FIJTURE-THE RISE (QIAM) OF MAHDI:**

In this chapter one does not read the writer's mind but sees his
identity. With whatever weapon available to him, he assaults Shiasm with
a malicious intention. How sad it is to see one, such as him giving in
to worldly advantages. However flagitious the intention we shall not
despise him. An imperturbable soul gapes for understanding. We shall
endure the writer, to pity him in his attempt to plot against Shiasm.

In my good will I had considered him to be a Shia in the prelude of
this treatise, however now I may censured of predilection towards him.
He seems not to have any obligation or malevolent ends toward writing
the book. However he can not be vindicated in not having one. have met
him briefly, and to me, he posed as an ardent believer in the Shia faith
and a staunch adheres to the Shia school. I still think good of him and
still entertain goodwill towards him. I am willing to conjecture that
this man should have written the book in order to echo what the
adversaries have said, or make his book popular with those who are
researchers in Islam or in Middle Eastern studies so as to show himself
disguised as a Muslim bigot.

I have nothing better to say of him. God alone knows; He is All knowing
and He knows the secrets hidden in one's heart. Quite likely he wants to
please many groups at the cost of the anguish of Shiasm. We should
regretfully admit that a strange and unearthly notion is in vogue and
the vogue is effulging among new comers.

Of course, they hold themselves amenable to their conscience; and they
only display their own derailment. If they wish to barrow their own
faith it will be their own mistake in which they have chosen the smelly
stench over the fresh, sweet fragrance of flowers.

The time too is encouraging, and books are being written which could
propagate the vilification of a religion rather than a religion itself.
To mock faith is to gain a furor. To negate, nullify, and invalidate, is
the most befitting style that a writer may choose to follow.
Unfortunately writers without a zeal to keep the faith in whatever they
are born in or to maintain one at whichever they are, or to seek one
instead of posing as nullifidians.

Under a membrane of religion they enter and rob the belief leaving
behind traces of doubt. In such a hurricane stands firm the mansion of
Shiasm; the waves ever falling beat themselves upon the tower and return
scattered and split, feeble and flaccid having had squandered their
strength and lost their prowess.

Therefore, they like the books, which interrogate the essentiality or
reality of a religion and debate it on the ground of visible and
tangible matter rather than to prove its truth. They reward such a
writer and regard such a book. The proof whether that of hearing or that
of reason to them is not wholesome. They want DOUBT - to be said, to be
read, and to be believed in. We have no dispute with the writer himself
nor do we wish to quarrel him.

We leave it to him to mend his mistakes. We have indicated in the
proceeding discourses the way and method of analysis. We face here two
angles; One- the wrong conclusions, accusations and wrong allegations
are made by a particular man; Two- the way of research that amounts to
science or knowledge seems to us personal. So, we can not take a seat of
judgment nor do we like to pass one.

Now we draw the attention of our readers to his statements and
afterwards to our answers. Partly his statement runs thus:

1. Some narrations (i.e. 'HADITH') like that of Abi Hamza he refers to;
in which the appearance of the Imam was considered a relief and rescue.
However the Imam did not appear which imputed the change of God's mind.
At first God has made up His mind then later changed it. He says that it
was 'BADA'. 'BADA' means first occurrence of a thing, that is, an
'occurrence' without precedent or without pre-knowledge or a pre-plan.

2. He says: "In the principal beliefs of a Shia it is permissible to
think that God decides to do something but because of unforeseen
circumstances which impede an becomes a hinderance, he of Shia either
delays His plan or totally cancels it. The name of this theory is "BADA"
means 'OCCURRENCE' without a precedent. He continues that the doctrine
of "BADA" was introduced by the earlier leaders of Shia. They brought
forward this theory in order to justify or vindicate or extenuate their
own defeats or failures in establishing an Islamic just government,
which they had claimed to do. Their defeat again was justified to be for
their own good. So the writer says similar things.

3. According to the writer BADA goes a long way to establish that the
knowledge of the Imams was parochial and limited. He argues and in his
words he seems quite certain that Ismaeel was appointed Imam by his
father, Imam Sadiq (AS), but died in his father's lifetime. Hence, the
Imamate was switched to another son of Imam Sadiq (SA) by the name of
Kadum. This was, says the writer a "BADA" which the Imam could not have
been known earlier.

He appointed his son Ismaeel as Imam but he was not aware that the Imam
hood was to go to Kadum his other son. The Divine decisions too change
as the conditions do. The writer even questions the divine knowledge.
God is not omniscient, because at some times His calculations too go
wrong. 4. In the writer's opinion the Shia deans and speakers were
having in Divinity the same belief as that held by MOTAZELIS which
included the theory of 'ABAD' (occurrence).

But the 'Occurrence' (the BADA) was regarded by the Motazalees as being
true, because God does the best for his creatures. But Ash'aries have
repelled and exorcised this theory on the ground that it shows the
inability of God to foresee what is to happen. So, God is short of
foresight and short of full knowledge.

This contradicts the quality of God. But that the Shias adopts this
theory with a great mastery, so as to obviate the contrast of words and
adjust this thing without contradicting their own advocacies. The writer
here dwells on the theory of Sadooq in the interpretation of creation.
The writer has also quoted a narration (HADITH) from Imam Jafer Sadiq
(SA): "Whoever says that God does a new thing without pre knowledge; I
seek distance from him.

And he who says that God sometimes does not like His own performance;
he has denied God." The writer has mentioned several other HADITHS, and
narration quoted in the Quranic verses, which all prove that God's
knowledge is absolute and circles everything and circumferences all. The
Shias have always held this belief. It is a false accusation that the
Shias regard God as not being firm in His determinations.

We exorcise this allegation. The writer claims that the change of Imam
hood from Ismaeel to Kadum still remains an unsettled issue. IBN BABWAY
has narrated the uneasiness of Imam Sadiq (SA) with regards to the death
of his son Ismaed. He reports the Imam having had said: "Nothing has
indicated God's will more evidently than what has happened by the death
of my son." He adds: "perhaps he would have been the Imam after me had
he lived." This appears as a mistake in translation. His actual words
mean this: "Let people know that he is not the Imam after me. Actually
there is no any such word that confirms the Imam hood of Ismaeel. The
thing that is confirmed is his death and the Imamate of Mosa
al-Kadum."

5. Then the writer narrates the interpretation of 'BADA' from Shaik
Mofeed, which is most accurate and conspicuous. Then he writes the
statements of Shaik Tosi. But the pity is, instead of reaching to a
conclusion he remarks this; "All these things puts one into hesitation
with regards to all the traditions pertaining to the appearance of the
Imam." He paces the paths that of Mofeed, and that of Tosi, but did not
reach the destination because his fate was to wander.

He combines and says: "It seems that to appoint a day of the appearance
of the Imam for Shia scholars was less than to appoint a year for this
issue of dispute." He perhaps wants to say that they abstain from fixing
a month and a day in order to guard themselves against the results. But
he goes on further to which we draw our reader's careful attention.

1. Abi Hamza has narrated from Imam Baqer (AS) that, Ali Bin Abi Taleb
has said that after seventy there will be relief. Here the writer
comments: Because of the martyrdom of Imam Hussain it was delayed until
the year 140. Then when the Shias did not keep it a secret, it was once
more delayed. God did not keep the knowledge of its time with any of the
Imams.

This narration is discrepant. In the books of 'RIJAAL', that is the
biography of the narrators, Abi Hamza died in the year 150. Hasan Bin
Mahboob who has narrated on the authority of Abi Hamza died in the year
224 at the age of seventy-five. This shows that when Abi Hamza died
Hasan Bin Mahboob was only a child of one year. So, this narration is
invalid because a child of one can not possibly tell what the writer
wants to be told.

There should be someone else between him and Abi Hamza. Since it is
unknown as to who he was we can not credit this narration. As we said
before, the source of news must be accepted and supported by authority.
This news is quite vague because there is no support to it.

What appears to us is this; in spite of the innumerous sayings of the
prophet (SAW) and the Imams (HADITH) all of them from reliable sources,
and quite clear to us say that the appearance of the twelfth Imam will
be unknown and an indefinite length of time will have to elapse. In the
horizon near and close there would be no sign to see of his appearance.
There are lectures and speeches by Ali Bin Abi Taleb,

in which he has elucidly said that the Imam would appear at a time when
time will be at the threshold of the end. He has also foretold the
ordeals that the believers would have to undergo, and the sufferings
they would have to endure. The writer pays no regard to these sayings
but sticks to the utterance of one man!

2. The determination of God varies, differs and changes. If the
translation be correct; we take refuge in God alone from this nonsense.
Destiny is changeable but not the will of God. Does God make a decision
in ignorance, and then turn it down at the time of cognosance and
knowledge? Is God unknowing at some- times and knowing at others? May
God forbid. The writer believes such and such a belief suits the writer
himself. Shias never believe in such a 'Kufr' paganhood. This conjecture
is totally refuted, and rejected by the Shia. Shiasm is clear, cogent,
and candid; and a Shia is clean. God is almighty and far from being what
His enemies attribute Him to be.

The Shia knows Him that His qualities are perfect and they worship Him
accordingly. Qualities of perfection and those, which complete the
beauty, are His. What happened is in the cronical of His cognizance.
What occurs is in His knowledge and what will be is in His attention.
Time has no province on His Being. He governs time. Everything is
circumvented and circumfrenced by His Absolute awareness. He knows what
each womb hides. To say that He is partly ignorant and partly wise is
wrong. Ignorance is for humans.

Whatever we know; was known before by Him. Knowledge is His tribute
while to us it is an achievement; knowledge rests with Him whereas it is
sought by us. What is sought can amount to more or less, because it
depends upon the length of seeking. However God's knowledge is boundless
and unlimited. We need knowledge; we crawl from IGNORANCE towards
knowledge;

so we leave one to gain another. We are in constant migration from want
to need, from less to more, from short to perfection. But perfection is
a tribute of God. He never stands needy to seek that which supplies and
caters this is the outlook of the Shia towards his God.

3. Doctrine of "Occurrence without precedent" (BADA) is not a Shia
invention nor is it his fancy. This has long ago been waired off and
reputed by Shia scholars. If it is to be discussed; it is a factor that
of Quranic and Islamic values as well as that of the Unity of God. First
of all the Shia neither handled this element justify any defeat, or to
accommodates political end.

This theory of "BADA" is a column in the science of divinity. It is not
a tool so as to be tightened or loosened as needed. The Holy Quran says;
"If the people of the villages had believed and feared we would have
opened over them blessings from heaven and the earth. But they lied and
we punished them for what they were doing." Also: "Corruption has
appeared in the land and the sea by what the hands of the people have
earned." ,

"And told your Lord; 'Call me I answer to you.", "Repent to your Lord.
He is the Forgiver. He sends rains for you through the sky." , "And, We
promised thirty nights to Moses and completed them by ten.", "Its Faith
was its advantage had believed a village.

But the nation of Yunus when they believed we waived off the punishment
from that of shame in the world and left them for while.", "If you are
thankful, I, indeed, will increase it for you.", "And he who fears God,
He makes a way out to him and provides him that he calculates not.",
"That God never changes His boundaries which He favored upon a nation
unless they change what in themselves." And several other such verses.

The Shia believes in the absolute power and all comprising knowledge of
God. "Nothing is hidden from Him in the earth nor in the sky. He is the
knower of the conditions of this servants and His creatures - their
past, their present and their future are at parity to Him. Nothing hides
from Him and never poses a thing to Him from ignorance to knowledge."
These are what Shias believe of God. From the foregoing verses of the
Quran this secure is known.

Gratitude becomes reason for the increase of the bounties from God.
Piety paves a way to come out of the difficulties, and God sends to him
Provision from the quarters, which he can think of. He sends His rains.
He attends the needs at supplication.

Faith, repentance, and compunction. He wards off the punishment. His
advantage of His bounties causes one to miss His bounties. To support
this there are traditions from both Sunni and Shia sources which abound
much. Events too, there are in this respect. Religious programs,
instructions, supplication, and dependents on Him. Compunction, alms,
establishing link among family relations, gratitude, good hidings,
warrant, negative and positive teachings, relieving ones soft and
getting rid of self purity and purgency all can not be justified on the
ground of BADA as the writer has interpreted it.

"BADA" means the influence of the things on man's life and his good
ending and likewise his bad ending; and not in the sense of ignorance of
God. Sometimes there are causes that result in a thing or reasons that
cause a thing. Likewise the causes result in something not to happen, or
impede an occurrence. Or its effects further go ahead in advancing
negative influence or positive ones.

So, the outcome of it comes out strange neither a calculation could
anticipate nor could anticipation calculate. It is an odd cycle of
currency of events or the sudden anicut of impediments, obstacles,
hindrances - a flux and reflux, a wave and a bed of sea, a vacuum and a
tower of equrgitation, a total obviation and an apparent surprise; all
this is a well organized decree of Divine projected, planned, and
programmed for man and man has no say in it.

All these things, effects, reflections, action of the causes and their
stagnancy are recorded in the gist of the Book. These things have
bearing on the choice of man but occur by the will of God in accordance
with the destiny He has dictated. So there is no coersian nor is it a
delegated one, but it is in between the two. "Neither a compulsion nor
an assignment but something between the two things." God has decreed
that the fire burns;

every creature thrives in its own line. But the causes of annihilation
and establishment, that is, the essentialities of 'being' for many
incidents or many obstacles, which in some cases are materialistic
humans, are adhibited to them; these are not called 'BADA'.

The term of BADA implies to the occurrences unusual and uncommon, like
charity, supplication, links amidst relatives that influence or
happenings or hinder the happenings, and man regards them by judging the
visible material causes as a certainty, but occurs the opposite. Both
the cases are the same. In one a man notices the flow of affairs and
calculates thereon as to where they would end, and makes out the
consequences in anticipation.

In the second, the flow of affairs gives a man an impression on which
he makes up the result in advance; but occurs quite the opposite of what
was once a certainty. Human is not acquainted because it is from an
invisible atmosphere. Since man knows not, he tries to establish
arguments whereas from Him is everything. The synopsis of BADA in the
sense gives this verse of the Holy Quran; "And the Jews said that both
hands of God are tied. Tied are their hands; they are cursed for what
they said; for God's both hands are open."

Like the belief of the Jews that Gods hands are tied, can not do a
thing; this is to negate 'BADA', while its correct meaning is that,
God's hands are open; His Power is Absolute without stint and with
Absolute knowledge.

In order to make it clear we would like to repeat our explanation:

Supposingly, the correct meaning of 'BADA' is the sense in which God is
taken for granted as being ignorant; and whit does not contradict the
idea that God's power is limited, runs opposite to reason." He is
powerful over everything and aware of everything", seems the best
synopsis of 'BADA'. God has so designed things that they possess
particular reasons for the being, which is, the How of events, likewise
their effects. The hidden causes, which in thousands is the work of God
either immediately or otherwise have a bearing on God's decree.

Fire burns - cause and effect is deposited in it; but the efficacy of
it that is, the eventuality of it depends upon the will of God. In this
respect the invisible causes and absence of matter, also play a part,
their influence is effective and for stretching, such a dependency upon
God and supplication and so forth. Now the factors among those of
material and moral ones superceded the stranger.

For example a general corollary of maintaining family thinks among
relatives is longevity. 'BADA' does not depend on material causes. Moral
causes as for God's design are effective. Above all, what God intends -
overruns all. Where effect work, it gets ground; where obviation
eradicates the track of a thing, it is also due to reasons of its own.
The rule of cause and effect is superceded by God's decree.

Therefore, the unseen causes become a ground to be believed in. "Every
day He is in business"; proves this. "To Him is the Command, order and
creation. To God is the rule that of present and that the past"; and the
continuity of His government and all the qualities of action which
should be believed in. Without His consent, intention, sanction and
without His order nothing moves and nothing happens. Our inability to
understand Divine affairs and the links therein and therefrom does not
change anything. Human beings are unable to understand Divinity.

Many have belief in God but they do not have knowledge about Him. God
is a reality that remains remote from human. Understanding which gives
sanctuary and sanctity to the entity of God. Minds can not avail the
conception although reason provides the proof. It is very knowledge that
we are absolutes unable to conceive God. A delicate datum of mysticism
it is. 'BADA' could mean obliteration of effect. The interlinks are
corollary to God's plan. We see an incident that is saved from
happening, a danger that is warned off; is due to causes invisible from
us and from the unseen origin. We can say briefly that it should mean
that everything is under God's command. Certainties fail if not
concomitant with His Will. This conception is supported by "And with Him
is the gist of the Book."

Such interpretations are made by many scholars, which go to prove that
"BADA"s logic and reason does not attribute to God's inability to
conceive the haughtier. Shiasm deals with the fact that man should never
forget God, and should not depend on outer elements or visible causes.

Man should believe in this verse: "Say o, God you are the Possessor of
things, give the things to whomever you like and take back the things
from whomever you want and give respect and vility, in your Hand is the
food; You are powerful over everything." Without such a belief, which is
the true reflection of 'BADA', man can not cultivate wisdom nor can he
pace the path of knowledge. To him the ladder of ascendancy to higher
altitudes would not be available in which to attain the exalted anagogic
that could bring to his sight the divine regions to enjoy.

This belief is natal to him and innate with him. His conscience can not
deny that which his ignorance rejects. In times of dread one remembers
God and calls Him by His exalted nouns - PROVIDER (REZZAKH), CURER
(SHAFI), SUFFICER (KAFI), and PROTECTOR (HAFIZ) all these have a bearing
on "DADA" "Nothing worships God like AL-BADA"; shows the importance of
BADA.

The compendium of BADA comes out that it does not limit the power of
God, and does not contradict the absolute knowledge of God. The sense of
BADA is misrepresented. It is imputed to the limit of God's knowledge.
It is not so. It has been confused with the saying of the Jews. There
appear to be two confusions:

First: The compulsion; whatever occurs is with and in the knowledge of
God, however the knowledge comes to Him later. Of course, this is not
permissible for God's tributes. "Everyday occurrences happen that are in
His knowledge; He creates, provides, and create obstacles. All are His
performances. Nothing would nor will happen beyond the province of His
knowledge and nothing He could do is beyond the limit of His
knowledge.

This shows, where He has no knowledge, He is ignorant, and where He is
ignorant He can do nor create anything. But the qualities of God do not
accept such specifications. God is above all these things. His knowledge
can not be limited or His Power. This is quite a worthy logic that
negates the omnipotence of God, and as a result invalidates the very
Divinity. We are judging God on our own capacities, which are, of
course, limited in knowledge and in practice - this is a repelled
conjecture. The conscience of man knows whether he is bound or free. It
is just like when one doubts the heat even though he sees the fire.

Second is; God creates and God annihilates. There is no complesion on
the part of God. To obviate the effect or to create a cause is God's
will. Whether we agree or not will not be of any difference. Divine's
performance is not of His Mercy. God's knowledge is not an obstruction
to the flow of events. God knows, and His knowing has no negative effect
on the occurrences. Similarly God knows His creation. His knowledge does
not stop man from taking choice, or deprive him of the power to choose.
This sense is reflected in the following couplet, which is said in reply
to Khyam:

"Because Divine knowledge is disobedience; Reason rejects this
pordentors ignorance." 1

This question comes to mind even while the philosophy of 'DADA' exists
and that is; How was it that news and events of the future were related
to the prophets and our Prophet (SAW) as well?

'Dada' has no bearing. The unseen, foretold by the prophets or the
Imams is due to the knowledge vested in them by the Divine. It is an
accusation on the honesty of the prophets or Imams because what they
have foretold came true. Their knowledge of the unseen is the knowledge
of God given to them. They saw what they forecast to happen.

What God has informed or taught the prophets, and authorized them to
tell, 'DADA' has no province in it. The prophet (SAW) had informed Ammar
that he would be a killed at the hands of tyrants. The Prophet (SAW) had
also foretold of Ali Din Abi Taleb's assasination, the martyrdom of Imam
Hussain and the events that would ensue. The Prophet (SAW) had said in
advance that Fatimah, his daughter would be the first one to meet him
after his death. The Prophet (SAW) had given predictions of Mahdi and
his appearance.

Ali Bin Abi Taleb also predicted some future happenings. Sunni
authorities have all accepted these predictions given by the Prophet
(SAW) himself, as well as those given by Ali Bin Taleb. We can not say
that they said some thing and something else happened. There are reports
and all of them untrue just like one narrated by Abi Hamza. Such fake
and false reports abound in History. They can not be trusted because
they are told by one person only.

Had it been true others too would have reported it as they could not
have remained blind to an event or deaf to a word. For instance, there
was another claim reported by Omar Bin Homaq to this effect, that he had
visited Ali Bin Abi Taleb and that Ali (AS) had been wounded by Ibn
Muljim. He told him that he would soon leave him and that in the year
seventy there would be havoc and calamity. The narrator proceeds and
says that he asked Ali (AS) as to whether after the havoc there would be
ease and comfort, but Ali (AS) condition worsened and he did not
reply.

OmKulsoom cried. The Imam asked OmKulsom not to cry which was torture
to him, and that she did not see what he had been seeing then - Angels
that were in the skies, and behind them the prophets and apostles who
had come to receive him. And that, the Prophet had held his hands and
told him to come, for it was a better place. The narrator adds that
hence once more repeated his question which Ali (AS) replied that every
clamity is followed by comfort and that there is ease after every
havoc.

He said: "God eradicates what He desires and establishes what He wants
and with Him is the gist of the Book." As can be observed in this
narration the information is watery. Nothing is said directly. The Holy
Quran says; "Indeed, after every hardship there is ease." This report
has nothing to do with the appearance of Mahdi. To take this narration
for something else is an exaggeration. Here 'DADA' has no part. There
are many such narrations.

I would like to apologize from all dear reader in having dwelt over
this subject too long. If any one would like to learn more about 'DADA'
he can refer to my book 'SIR AL-BADA' (Secret of DADA), in which I have
gone into much detail - there are other books too useful in this field.
What my intention was from this discourse; was to bring to the attention
of the writer and the readers that the subject of DADA is not a simple
one.

Such a complicated matter can not so easily be understood, and when a
thing is not fully understood it is not wise to give or pass a judgment.
Likewise, without proper knowledge information and proofs it would be
far from justice to accuse and attack Shiasm, and it's school of
Imamate. My point was just to make the writer understand that he has
gone astray.

The material advantage or political end has tempted one to say what he
himself knows is untrue, to write what he himself well knows is false,
to reject where acknowledgement is due and to acknowledge where it
should be repelled,

to create doubts if not he himself doubts in the Divinity, in the
unseen causes and the invisible universe, in the purity of Imams and the
prefectness of their office, in the Absolute tributes of the Almighty
shows the shallowness which is in itself a proof that there is no fish
because there is no depth. The mysticism, Islamic issues and the Mehdism
all should be wairell off because there is delay in the appearance of
Mahdi. The writer should ponder a little and think as to where he stands
in relation to his own conscience.

A researcher can not believe the faith of a sect, or a religion of a
multitude or trifles and superfluous 'hear-says'. He should turn that
heavy rock which is kept as a door to hide the truth, instead of
sweeping the ground only to be blinded by the dust, and to say he sees
only dust. This is his own failure not the religion's shortage.

In the end the writer has dwelt on the 'RAJ'YAT' or 'the return' based
very much on the narration of Mufazzal Bin Omar. Here we only suffice on
three points and will not ad to the length of this article.

1. The belief in the Imamate of the twelfth Imam, Mahdi, and in his
reappearance is not concomitant with the belief in the return (RAJ'AT)
of all dead ones. May be one has belief in Mehdism and not in the
'RAJ'AT' (the return of the dead ones). On the other hand both these
beliefs have a Quranic ground and the Prophet's (SAW) words. The Imamate
of the twelve Imams and the salutary of Mehdism is a thing particular
and especial that constitutes a fundamental, and forms a pillar in the
principles of the religion.

The two matters - Mehdism, Imamate and the 'RAJ'AT' have no interwoven
course, nor does one depend on the other for support.

2. 'RAJ'AT' that is the return of the dead back to this world is not a
Shia belief or a Shia fundamental; but it is purely an Islamic issue -
common to Shias and Sunnis as well. The Quranic verses predict it and in
this, both sects, Shia and Sunni, equally share. "And the day we
resurrect from every nation groups from those who belied our signs while
they despise." "And we will resurrect them not letting one go." That the
details of 'THE RETURN' was not based on authentic narration are void.

3. The narration of Muffazzal, the base for the writer, is not trusted
by many scholars and researchers in the science of traditions 'HADITH',
that is, traditionists. Whatever the narrator has said by way of details
is unfounded. The book, which the writer is depending on is a book
scarcely known among Muslims. It is rarely read by any and seldom could
be of use except to only a few, and those few belong to a category,
which have no acquaintance with the Shia belief, ideology or Shia
logic.

If the writer had read the bottom of page 53 in the first volume of
'DIHAR', where this narration is mentioned, he would never have trusted
that narration and would never have made it the base now mentioned in
his book.

I pray to God the Almighty to bless the researchers and the writers in
the toil of their task, and to provide them with a correct outlook, so
that deliberation may not blind them nor bigotry persuade them. Indeed,
to err is human. But to avoid is also in human power. We should not
allow ourselves to impute others' mistakes, deliberations or to
attribute to any intention.

We must follow and trust reason and not go astray, we should believe in
the decency of reason and truth. too see myself very much in want in
this field, I take refuge in God, seeking His help and His guidance. I
should here like to offer my apologies, in case, I have been short of
politeness. I bank on the funds of their understanding and their
forgiveness.


