1. the Prophet - a Paragon of Perfection and High Above an Ordinary Man
=======================================================================

The Prophet is above an ordinary man.

He possesses qualities, which are not common among the ordinary people.
This thought and belief which reason attests to. The belief in his being
a chosen one in itself evidences his mission as his mission is the
evidence of his being a chosen one.

As we know one who is vested with the office of prophet hood should
have distinct distinction from among others through either those of
moral, knowledge, conduct and behavior - each at its zenith. If he too
stands at the same level in the same class with the same grade quite
equal with others, then what superiority goes to him or what prominence
and preference does he have over others?

In such a case why should others obey him and why should he give
orders? God does not impose not one upon others if he is not better than
them. Of course, the Prophet is not a super human nor is he a being
other than human. But, indeed, he is a man superior to other men, a
distinguished one, a perfect one and a man in its complete sense. This
factor remained open to all throughout his life - private and public.

His generous behavior, exalted moral, a charitable character and the
human virtue had already set him at a station higher than that in which
lurked everyone else. He was not yet a prophet. We are not going here to
compare his moral with that of others.

The writer too Mr. Abdul Azeer, whom we shall refer to hereafter as the
writer, holds the same opinion. The temrs used by him such as 'paragon
of the desired perfection', 'chosen one by Divine', 'a real leader';
reflect the same sense.

This statement: 'The consummate perfection which the Prophet left
behind gives reason to this thought that he should be above a common
man', brought forward this conjecture after his becoming a prophet and
before his death. Appointment to the office of prophethood is subject to
better decency and wider ability. All it shows was that the Prophet was
not a common man.

**2. One Universal Government Islamic Jusbice, and the Imamate of
Mahdi:**

That this Divine design in forming a new nation throughout the world
should be worldwide and as such, a total justice under the oneness of
God should stretch from end to end, was a salient factor in the
invitation to Islam. Besides; the Quranic Verses too have given
expression to this end in its several chapters.

Muslims also have often and always looked forward in anticipating the
realization of the goals in line with the promise committed by God and
His Prophet. Furthermore, there are hundreds of predictions foretold by
the prophet that Islam will be the absolute and universal religion and
that a total justice will rule providing security over the earth;

and this will be accomplished by Mehdi whose appearance is awaited as
it is promised. He is from the Prophet's progeny, son of Ali and
Fatimah, bearing a patronymic same as that of the Prophet.

One day Mahdi will appear; this belief has been introduced, that is,
the specifications too are told. This is a belief that runs in the veins
of Islam and is divulged in its preliminary texts. Besides, the
traditions those are constant - and are their constancy runs no doubt -
support the belief.

The Prophet has given the tidings and it is he who has kept his nation
in waiting for the day of the appearance of Mahdi. This belief, as other
ones, is a principal and cardinal one envigoured by its originality and
enlivened by its purity. The belief in the Prophet resigns to the belief
in Mahdi.

Extract from the traditions has not constituted this belief.
Prognostications that Islam will become worldwide and that the truth
will obliterate the wrong, do exist and do provide an umbrella, but this
belief stands by its own supported by the text. Symptoms are foretold
and the qualities specified which are to be taken for granted when they
occur as the indication of Mehdi's appearance.

These predictions might have had been efficacious in the growth of this
belief but the conditions and circumstances that came into being
immediately after the death of the Prophet have not part in this belief,
because this belief had already been divulged to the people far in
advance. The origin of this belief is the prophet hood and not the
time.

Likewise, attachment of the faithful ones with the Prophet stands apart
from the count to be regarded as one of the causes for Mahdism. Such a
conjecture, if there be or to form one, is doomed to be rejected and
refuted because it is bleak and barren; not an evidence nor a proof, nor
a document,

nor a logic is there to irrigate it so as to keep it alive. Therefore,
if this be said, which, indeed, has been, that a group of Muslims were
not happy in the rule of the caliphs whom had ruled after the Prophet's
death, some of the people among them were led to a belief which
persuaded them to wait,

anticipating the rise of one from the Prophet's progeny, to take up the
guidance of the people; is only an absurdity neither coherent nor
congruous with reality. Resurrection of man is Islam according to the
Quran does not indicate to the appearance of a redeemer in the person of
Mahdi at the end of time.

Therefore, those who were ardently faithful to the person of the
prophet, gratified themselves to look forward to what they had hoped to
witness in their own lifetime. The dispatch and constancy with which
they held the view became a belief with them to anticipate the
appearance of a man from the Prophet's progeny, guided by God for the
redemption of the people. Although such is their argument and thus their
reasoning but it is not true.

The appearance of Mahdi, the Redeemer, had been prognosticated long ago
and the predictions in this regard abound to the extent that no other
prediction in Islam, whatever its object, does not equal in number. It
is certitude. Here what astonishes is this: The writer appears to have
explored the subject thoroughly, and he says that the traditions, which
predict the appearance of Mahdi exceed to more than a thousand. Further,
the writer has quoted from the books written by others and he has taken
sufficient store from the books of "HADITH" and interpretation.

After having had set out on such a journey, long and tedious,
endangering himself of every possible hazard, and having had wandered
far and wide he comes back only to tell that he has seen nothing. To
believe him reasons rejects. His toil has gone futile and his fatigue
without compensation is his misfortune. This is a pity.

Great Sunni scholars have written books on this subject. Twelve
centuries have since passed and the books written then have withstood
the ransacking by the scholars and researchers of Islamic sciences. From
them they have narrated its material, and quoted its essence in their
own books availing nothing but to tell that the advent of Mahdi was had
never been foretold.

In the glare of light they have failed to see the object. They
attributed the fact to the personal attachment of a few with the
Prophet. Even this argument that the advent of Mahdi is not mentioned in
the Quran is lame because the Prophet had on many occasions informed the
nation that such a day exists in the womb of time and there is not
miscarriage of it.

His companions heard him; and form mouth to mouth circulated the
forecast. But, doubt still swells in the cradle of hesitation! Such is
the obduracy and so the stubbornness.

This is a mistake, though not deliberate. Likewise, there are several
other mistakes in the book, all because the writer has ignored
authorities and references which form a foundation of the belief among
all Muslims in the advent of the redeemer, Mahdi.

His means of reasoning and way of argument has steered him to blunders.
The issue of Mehdism has so disturbed him that he has disturbed all by
his wrong discussion, in which instead of explaining has confounded the
confusion... The religion of Islam and the belief in Shiaism confronts
him either to check or challenge him. He has gained nothing in his
exploration but has lost the track to return back.

Consequence? Reason alarms us. Such a way of analysis and conclusion in
the subject matter of Imamate if to be tolerated, will lead us to doubt
other matters, such as the prophet hood of the prophets. And a step
further, the issue of belief in God itself will be put to question. From
the start it is a slaught on belief because of its wrong approach.

For instance, the prophet hood of Moses could be put to question. It
could be argued that the Israelis were oppressed by the pharaoh, Moses
thought to rescue them. In fact, it was the atrocities of the pharaoh
who incited Moses to campaign under the title of prophet hood. In other
words, it was nationalism that caused Israelis to accept Moses'
invitation. Or, it could be said that, the Prophet too campaigned under
the title of prophet hood because of the heartening condition of the
poor people of Mecca and the atrocities of moneylenders and the wicked
deeds of the populace.

These and such analysis and justifications are close to fiction rather
than to reality, as they do not have the remotest bearing on the
actuality of causes and effects of things.

In spite of all this it should not be forgotten, as the writer has
pointed out, that the atrocities of the people who held the affairs in
their hands did not go without influence on the hearts. It made the
public more staunch in their belief in Mahdi and his Imamate and more
enthusiastic in anticipation of a redeemer because of the need for
relief that was the deservation of their hour.


The grounds, historical and social, have always aided in advancing the
call of the prophets, as was the case with our Prophet. This conclusion
is in agreement with the divine universal view. To link the prophet
hood, and Imamate to circumstances and the divine outlook of the
universe is not reasonable. The outlook of one who believes in God shall
refute it. It is feeble, flaccid, and fake.

**3. Shiasm and the meaning of Imam, the Redeemer:**

We will present explanations of some magnitude in order to obviate
mistakes since there are several. The taking shape and the Foundation of
Shiasm in the epoch of prophet hood:


A. Historical events and constant traditions indicate that during the
prophet hood itself, the Shia faith started taking shape and gaining
ground by its Salient feature that is the belief in Imamate fixed by the
text.

In the early years of his prophet hood when the Prophet commenced the
call, a foundation was laid and officially announced to the people with
much stress on the need for their adherence to it. This is quite obvious
in the much known tradition of THAQALAIN (two heavy things).

The Prophet did not suffice on that. He wanted to write it down in his
will which he said was important and that they would never go astray if
they adhered to it. He demanded a pen and paper for this purpose. As he
was sick in his deathbed no one obeyed his order.

Those who were present around him opposed him openly and said, "The man
is ulterring nonsense." They stopped him from writing down his will by
not giving him a pen and paper.

Those who accepted the Prophet's invitation and stuck to this faith was
and is a Shia. It is the contents of the Prophet's call and the essence
of his Mission. As for the leadership of the nation, on every occasion
and in every opportunity this issue has been made known to the people by
the Prophet (SAW).

Imamate is a comer stone in the proclamations of the Prophet (SAW). The
importance of it comes to light by this saying of the Prophet (SAW),
which he narrated on various occasions. "He who dies without knowing the
Imam of his time dies a death of ignorance." What we infer from this
tradition is that to ignore the Imam or not to recognize him is
tantamount to death a death prior to Islam. The station of Imam is
such.

The Prophet (SAW) has specified the qualities of the Imam as to who and
how he should be, also as from which class and which clan he should be.
Their number too which is twelve was told by the Prophet (SAW). He in
his lifetime had disclosed their names individually. Every Imam is a
perfect man of his time.

His conduct, moral, and knowledge is superior to all. He is the example
in every aspect to be followed. The Quranic verses as well support this.
Imamate is a Divine office like that of Prophet hood. As God chooses His
prophet, He chooses His successor too because the office is the same;
the prophet introduced a mission and the Imam was and is the guardian of
that mission.

One propagates while the other preserves. The writer says that in the
early years of Islam there was no sign of either Shiasm or Sunnism. If
he means by this that the Shia thought had no root in Islam in its early
years; he is mistaken. He says openly quite contrary to the fact. The
leadership of Ali (AS) or his succession to the Prophet (SAW) was the
most original thought expressed by the Prophet (SAW) himself. It is as
old as Islam itself.

In addition to the Prophet's sayings, there are several incidents and
occasions of no less importance which occurred and which pointed to the
issue of Imamate, that is the leadership after the Prophet.

During that time a division had not yet occurred. Opposition to the
Shia thought and Imamate took years to develop and identify itself by
the name of Sunni.

The individuals who channeled things to flow in quite the opposite
direction, which caused the division, were quite resigned to the
original Islam because that was the age of the Prophet, which to them
was the age of ambush. The Islam of that age, that is, the time of their
ambush, remained in its originality that later begot the name of Shiasm
because they had invented 'Sunnism' - a contrary school.

The life of the Prophet (SAW) rather shielded them. The death of the
Prophet (SAW) exposed them. There they were feeble. Later they were
cunning. What the Prophet had set up they upset. The upset one took the
name of Sunni. The original setup preserved its entity in Shia.

Zero hour was the death of the Prophet (SAW). The meeting place was
SAQIFA. They gathered; laid bare their intentions. The clamor died down
and a successor to the demised Prophet was suggested, nominated, and
appointed - all in no time.

Why was Ali not there? Ali (AS) was occupied in the funeral of the
Prophet (SAW). Actually the gathering at SAQIFA drew a line between
Islam dividing it into two.

Now, their allegation. The Holy Quran has not located a center nor
accommodated the scholars with a choice in interpretation of the issues
and of fashioning the affairs into a discipline.

This is not correct. The Quran says in the chapter 'Women': "If they
had referred it to the Messenger and to those in authority among them,
those of them whose task it was investigate would have known the
mailer." (4:85) Of course, its interpretation requires a separate
chapter. But at a cursory view we come to know that the term, 'those in
authority' purports to the Imams, immune of sins.

The Prophet had often said that the Quran was with them, and they with
the Quran unseperable from earth other. In this respect readers may
refer to the traditions 'THAQALAIN', 'SAFEENA', and 'Amam' and several
other ones. In another tradition the Prophet says:

"In every generation to come out of my nation, there are just people
alongside the members of my House, who cleanse the religion from
deviation of the arrogant and wrong of the wrong doers."


