19. Discrepancy in the Date of Birth of Mahdi
=============================================

The difference in the date of birth of the twelfth Imam is of very
little vaniance comparing to that of the other Imams. Some narration
says the date of Mehdi's birth is at parity with the number of letters
in the word NOOR that is light according to the 'ABJAD' calculations.
The more acceptable statement is that of MR. Fazl Bin Shazan, coeval
with Imam Hasan Askari, who indicates 255.

The 12th Imam birth was surrounded by conditions not usual or normal.
His absence was more than his appearance. His father, Imam Askari
allowed only a few chosen associates of his own to see his son and
become blest by his appearance. His short absence commenced as soon as
he became Imam. In his absence he appointed deputies who were his
agents. This was immediately after the death of his father Imam Hasan
Askari.

20. The Issue of absence or occultation is a reality and not a theory
or a fancy:

The writer has this to say. The atrocities of Bani Abbas towards the
progeny of Ali and the sons of Imam Jafer Sadiq had created unrest and
confusion as well as the problem of succession to Imam Hasan Askari
(260, 874 AD). At Samerra there rendered elements and factors, which as
a result brought on the theory of the Imam's occultation.

However it was not a theory but a reality, a fact, a truth. It was
written in books before Imam Hasan Askari had become Imam that the
twelfth Imam would take shelter in absenting himself and that he would
take refuge in his own disappearance and that for his safety he would
resort to his own occultation under God's command. Some took advantage
of the opportunity. Jafer claimed that he was the awaited one. People
did not believe him because of his reputation. The hers' claim further
strengthened the belief of the Shia in the Imamate of Mahdi. Their trust
nullified the false claims.

What we can understand from the writers tone, is that in a sense from
the time of Imam Sadiq and onward the term IMAMAT did not carry any
political meaning, that is, IMAMAT was bleak of political platform and
barren of political performance. The Imams and their followers remained
safe to a certain extent.

The writer should know that the Imams possessed the combined offices,
that of political leadership and that of the religious one. Both the
Imams and the Shias knew that the Imams held both offices. In addition,
the Shia views them as the sole heirs of the Prophet.

The rulers of Bani Abbas were no more than the robbers and confiscators
of their right and what belonged to them. The rulers too were alive to
this fact that they were transgressers and trespassers to that which was
not theirs. Time and again Mansoor, Haroon, Mamun, and other rulers had
acknowledged the fact that the religious position was not theirs to
hold, nor that of the political position. They were only occupants while
the right was that of the Imams.

**21. BELIEF IN A REDEEMER:**

In the view of the writer the belief in a redeemer is merely a Shia
belief which was rendered advantageous to Bani Abbas as well. As the
Sunni school of thought emerged, they held on to this belief which at
times was to their interest. This belief of a redeemer was that of all
Muslims. Who actually was and is this Redeemer? This stood the dispute
that divided the opinion among Muslims.

Bani Abbas tried to show that the Redeemer was one from them. They
could only try when there existed a general belief. Itself is a good
proof that the Muslims commonly were holding this belief without any
reservations. Mansoor tried to introduce his son Mohammad Bin Abdullah
as the Redeemer. For this purpose he gave him the title of MEHDI. The
efforts in this field regardless from where it came from did not
succeed, because the people did not approve of their reputation for such
a post.

**22. IMAMAT OF IMAM MOSA BIN JAFER:**

The writer writes that there was a dispute about who would succeed as
imam. He twists and turns the understanding of the reader and tries to
make the subject as much murky as possible. Dispute is a common thing to
occur when a matter happens to be of importance. The more important the
matter the more deeper the dispute. The outcome is important. The
Imamate of Kadum took its seat in the hearts. A general love surrounded
him and a certain respect was rooted in the hearts, which received him.
His succession became authentic and legitimate by his own life, which
was in the eyes of the people. His straightforwardness, simplicity,

truth, humbleness, worship, piety, generosity, and charity, all these
qualities gave the proof of his right to succession and his deseruation
to be the Imam-His death in the prison which was obtained by means of
poison, left far reaching effects on the regime of Haroon.

Shafeyee, the founder of the Shafeyee sect among Sunnis left Baghdad in
protest for Egypt. All have praised the personality of Imam Kadum.
Similarly the death of Imam Reza which too was by poison and likewise
the death of Imam Jawad which too was by poison. The martyrdom of these
Imams left a very bad reflection on the regime of the day. Another
blunder of the writer is that he consider Imam Hadi and Imam Hasan
Askari to have had witnessed the total downfall of the Bani Abbas
dynasty. The fact is that the collapse of the Bani Abbas dynasty took
place in theera of Mostasam,

as he was killed by Halako in the year 656 Hijra. So, in the time of
these two Imams the Bani Abbas dynasty was fast going down, and the
military officers were handling the installation of a caliph and again
dismissing or discarding him.

**23. The appearance of the Imam and his administration of Justice
worldwide.**

That the Imams through their own agents or elements acquired
information and knowledge current with the affairs of their time is not
to be debated.

However, the writer claims that they became aware of the fact the an
Alawi Imam by the name of Mahdi would come, and that he would not be
able to stop the flow of events due to the severe corruptness in
general. Therefore says the writer, they decided to postpone the
reappearance of the "Awaited One" indefinitely. Yes, the events had
become such, however the writer fails to understand that the
reappearance of the twelfth Imam was not postponed by Imam Hadi nor Imam
Askari, for they had no such power.

It was a Divine secret in which only Allah himself knew and planned.
According to various narrations, those of Shia and those of Sunni,
nobody knew nor does know the person who is to appear and when he will
appear. Even the Imams, except Mahdi himself, knew not the specified
man. It is a Divine responsibility. And, it is in Divine hand. Its
knowledge is with God.

It's delay or its urgency is the concern of God. The writer fails to
dig any deeper. For it is the insight that probes and opens the horizons
of a vast sight to see. What we know is that which the Prophet (SAW) and
the Holy Quran has taught us.

That is a redeemer will come to rescue the world from tyranny and to
spread therein justice is a promise committed by God to mankind; and it
has been foretold by the Prophet. But no one is competent to set its
timing. It is not a human programme. Hence, it is not for human to
decide. When one can not decide he can deny. Here denial is not
important, because to deny facts does not uproot them.


**24. The House of Ali and Motawakkel**

Alhamdolelah, the writer, sees and accepts the cruelty, and tyranny of
Motawakkil. He says without reservation; and this is, indeed,
appreciable. In the court, Motawakkil became upset, very much so that he
wept under the crushing strokes of his soul. The writer attributes his
inner disturbance to the recitation of Quranic Verses. He is wrong. Imam
Hadi spoke to him in poetry. Because part of the verse has been
translated from Arabic to English, some of the beauty has been lost;

"Over the peaks of mountains, guarded they lived; Never saved them the
peaks they were deceived."

**25. 'TAQIA' A strong command from the Divine in the Holy Quran:**

Again the writer goes astray. "Why do not you fear them a dread?" "Lo,
he who hates him and his heart is satisfied with belief." These are the
Verses of the Quran. It pertains to Ammar to conceal his faith. To
conceal one's faith or to hide one's religion if the conditions demand
so; is God's order. To avoid danger in any respect, either to life,
property, reputation, or to personal prestige one should conceal his
true belief.

Reason and logic says so. To do otherwise is wrong as it is to expose
one to danger. The writer says that the Shia invented TAQIA in order to
protect themselves against the Sunni who were a majority and also from
the rulers who were too Sunni. So under the pretext of TAQIA. The writer
is short o of knowledge in this subject. As we pointed out earlier it is
a clear commandment from God. To obey God is not wrong.

**26. THE FIRST WRITER WHO WROTE THE BOOK ABOUT THE OCCULTATION:**

The Imam's scholars have classified political and social grades. From
Qulaini to Tosi Nomani who are regarded as some of the first ones to
write about the absence of the Imam. Prior to them there was a group of
doctors who dealt with this subjects and wrote books. Fazl Bin Shozan
(died in 260) and still farther back there were Abrahim Bin Husham Abil
Fazl Al-Nasheri and others constitute a class of writers.

**Imamate Of Two Brothers**

Imam Hasan (AS) and Imam Hussain (AS) were two brothers and at the same
time Imams. In that period and age both were Imams one obeyed the other;
the younger brother obeyed his elder, as he became Imam. Imam Hasan (AS)
actually held the political authority as well as the religious one. He
administered social affairs and held the government over them.

Imam Hussain (AS) had no say as long as his brother Hasan was alive.
The writer now tries to establish a link on this precedent and suggests
that the Imamate was of Abdulla Ajta instead of Mosa al-Kadum or to the
both of them and similarly to Jafar brother of Imam Hasan Askari. The
office of Imamate is Divine. As such, the Imamate is not dependent on
our pleasure. It is not our right to suggest one for the Imamate or not
to approve the other's.

When Mosa al-Kadum became Imam, Abdullah goes out of question. Likewise
Jafar is not Imam because Hasan Askari is the Imam. The Imamate of Hasan
and Hussain can not be a base for any who happens to be a brother of the
Imam to become Imam. To avoid such a kind of mischief or this type of
interpretation the Prophet (SAW) in his life time had repeatedly
disclosed the names of the Imams individually. He had even specified the
characteristics of them. So, that no doubt nor suspicion would remain.

**27. Division of Groups**

Regarding the Imam after the martyrdom of Imam Hasan Askari a man by
the name of NOU BAKHATI had written a book under the title "HREQ
AL-SHIA" (sects of Shia). This man says strange things never heard
before nor will be heard anymore. A few examples of his findings: After
the martyrdom of Imam Hasan Askari the Shia divided into groups and
sects. They split into fourteen sects although it is not a fact he says.
His book "HREQ al-SHIA" gives a wide range of sections, groups, and
divisions. As one goes farther into this book he sees that the word
GROUP can not be applied at all since there was none. A SECT can not be
called a SECT since that SECT did not exist at all.

A DIVISION can not be named a DIVISION since there were not one or two
persons who differed or said anything different. But all such trifles
and superfluous conjectures have gone a great deal to give bulk to the
book. In what times they existed; he does not say. What were the names
of those DIVISIONS or SECTS or GROUPS; he himself knows not because he
does not say. How long did they remain in their difference? Why didn't
their GROUP or their DIVISION gain ground so as to attract followers?
Who was their leader a chief? All these and such questions remain
without answer.

There is nothing real in the hook. The great scholars Shaik Mofeed and
Shaik Akbar Tosi have rejected the existence of divisions. They replied
in "A story of NOU BAKHTI" it was "AL- FOSOOL AL-MUKHTARA" (The selected
chapters). In a book by Shaik Mofeed he says in its second volume,
"There is no sect, no group in existence. In our times till the year 372
there has been no sect other than the twelve Shia Imamia." This is an
introduction for our readers to form a background for themselves, for
their own judgment or opinion because the writer has brought forward NOU
BAKHTI's book in his argument.

There are books written about nations, creeds, and so on. But these
books were written under a prejudice of exaggeration and not on fact.
Whatever one sees in print does not mean it has authority behind it
therefore be accepted. History can not show any trace of any of those
sects. No date can be fixed as to when; no location can be pointed to as
to where; then the very debate on it is of no sense nor of any use
discussing. Probabilities do not become facts. A man might have existed
who deviated, divided, disgruntled, deprived, and depraved;

but surely he was not a SECT, GROUP nor DIVISION.

There is no evidence to show that Jafar had a following. There is a
likelihood that political and or animosity of some might have given a
wider range to Jafar. But he gained nor established a following. The
only sect that was there and that is still there in spite of the ups and
downs of the passage of time, regardless of the vicissitudes of
political events, and despite the changes that are common to man is the
sect which believes in the Imamate of the 12th Imam, son of Imam Hasan
Askari. The Shia Imamia which as said, did not surrender to temptation
but adhered to faith and preserved the belief, although however
difficult. Great scholars appeared in this sect. A great many books have
been written in this field.

Whatever differences might have happened concerning the person of
Mahdi, it was not so wide as is pretended and not so serious as is said.
There were no fourteen sects as is now claimed. The writer can not
gather a hundred men as the followers. To tell, one can also tell that
Omar caused a division or created a division among Muslims as, after the
Prophet's death he shouted and clamored that the Prophet had not died.

This divided the Muslims into two groups - one who believed in the
eternal life of the Prophet taking his death for his absence and the
other one who believed in his death. But a lunatic opinion, single and
alone, uttered with a calculated mischief aimed at a particular
deliberate purpose or intention can not be a criterion on which an
ideology can be rested. As soon as it is said, it is dismissed because
it reflects the mind of the sayer. The sect that acknowledges the
Imamate or the lmamhood of Mahdi, son of Imam Hasan Askari has existed
for centuries.

From the 3rd century the sects that are mentioned in the book have had
been without existence. They have vanished. They never existed. Leaving
aside the alleged sects, the truth is that the Authority of God can not
be absent from the earth. This authority is vested in the person of
Mahdi, the Imam of our time. The Shia can not ignore the Imam. Here ends
the circuit of fictious sects.

**28. Books about the Sects:**

"MILEL WA NAHAL" of Shahrastani "AL-FASAL" of Iban Hagam; these books
speak of divisions and describe the sects or groups with full mistakes
and deliberate errors. To rely on them is irresponsible because they
have been written without study. Every prejudice is gratified in it and
malice has taken a breath of relief as it speaks about Shia without
knowledge. No information, no knowledge seems to have been necessary to
write this book. Another book "AL- FARAKH BAIN ALFIREQ" and another book
"AL-TAISEER" carries a theme which ignorance could be proud of. Where
there is no literacy, there is fancy; where there is no information,
there is imagination; and the books are written. These books are deal,
thus should they be left.


