Traditions That Are Told About the Imamate of Thirteen Ones
===========================================================

In our article "JILA AL-BASAR LE MAN YATAWALLA AL-AIYEMME AL-ISNAESHAR"
(glisten of sight to one who yields to the twelve Imams) we have dealt
over this subject. The traditions that indicate that there are thirteen
Imams are not authentic ones. The narration should be constant, that is,
heard by many; hence, told by many or circulated mouth by mouth.

Such narration of any tradition is gestant with credibility. If it is
told by one person it does not stand credible. When the Prophet (SAW)
spoke, he spoke among his associates or in a gathering or amidst a few
people. So, his conversation was heard by more than one man; and
accordingly narrated by more than one. If a tradition is narrated by
only one source and there is no second to it; it is void of any
authenticity.

This is a standard or a law for gaining certainty about the issue
pertaining to belief and other religious matters. On the other hand, the
traditions that indicate the number of Imams as twelve are many and
related by several and told by various sources.

In the book MASNAD of Ahmad al-Hanbali there are above thirty sources
mentioned having had heard from the Prophet(SAW) the number of Imams to
be twelve. Muslim in his "SAHEER" quotes eight sources who have related
the traditions indicating the number twelve.

In the Shia books there are hundreds of sources who have mentioned the
Prophet's sayings the traditions, that fix the number of twelve.
Besides, the sources form the man of good reputation. There remains no
doubt in the authencity of the very subject. However the traditions or
tradition quoting the number of Imams to be thirteen has been invented.
Since it is a lie it is dismissed.

**29. SALEEM RELATES A NEWS:**

What is attributed to Saleem does not exist in his (SALEEM'S) book.
Saleem is reported to have narrated that the Prophet (SAW) had told Ah
Bin Abi Taleb that he and twelve ones from his progeny are the rightful
and legitimate Imams.

The very authentic copies of the book of SALEEM BIN QAIS mostly
possessed by scholars do not have what it is alleged to him. What the
book of Saleem Bin Qais carries is the various narration of several
sayings of the Prophet (SAW) all to the effect that the Imams are twelve
and their names starting from Ah Bin Abi Taleb down to Mahdi are
indicated.

This book came into being in the first century of Hijra and remains
till now well credited and well trusted. The names of the twelve Imams
were mentioned at a time when they were not yet born. So what is a false
accusation or an unfounded allegation merely attributed to Saleem Bin
Qais is only a matter of prejudice, to obfuscate the very subject and
infuscate the understanding.

It is common practice to fabricate a fiction and then set out in
conquest of a writer who may transact this counter note on his credit
because of the customers who bank in him their trust. Better than Saleem
Bin Qais they could not have found. As his notes are plenty, one counter
can easily be mixed therein.

If at all it is deducted, a general clamor would stout that it is
Saleem's; since Saleem's would obtain currency and circulate from hand
to hand. Such a fraud is also played with Abi SAHAL NOUBAKHTI. This
silly trick has persisted deliberately. Writer should have checked them.
Translators also proved negligent in this respect.

Anyway, we should pronounce here that such a stratum will not be of
benefit to any nor will it serve as a religious cause nor will it
advance any religion forward.

It would only create a mist on the understanding of readers. The root
of belief in a 'MEHDI' is also to be found in the Tora and that of the
Bible prior to Islam. Any literature that could be traced in the distant
past will say something of this kind. This is the pedestal of the Divine
Religion.

**30. TITLES OF THE TWELFTH IMAM:**

The writer sees everything from a material aspect. He has not yet
reached a destination. Everywhere he stops and wanders again and says
something in the pain of fatigue. Moslems believe generally in Mahdi; it
is a political belief. The Shia believes in Mahdi particularly; it is a
political effect. What is a belief? He has several titles such as MEHDI,
REDEEMER and etc.; they are invented by history. Let him at least for
once tell something of sense.

Any link with the world, the other one, is out of question to the
writer. He compares natural phenomenon with religion. The moon, earth,
sun and animals all appear and disappear in a cycle, come and go;
likewise religion too is to him. He wants to reach a religion after
having lost the religion.

The world that is next, the self that is in a man, the ulterior
influence of invisible on visible, the unseen on the seen, the spirit
and its environment, the soul and its surroundings; all these things
carry no sense to him. What holds a matter matters to him. So, he is
altogether on quite a different track, which never joins the straight
path of belief.

He displays a series of historical events as his discoveries. He has
assorted the events, adjusted the episodes, rejected and accepted some
while misplacing others in an order prove his point. When he offers his
cargo he misleads the customer. The titles such as MEHDI, GHAYEB, HUJJAT
which are rooted in the Quran and transplanted in the Prophet's sayings
are regarded by him as the names that came into being due to certain
incidents or events in history.

Had he cared for traditions he would have come to know that thetitles
'AL-QAYEM','HUJJATULLAH', 'KHALEEFATULLAH', 'AL-MENDI' belong to the
twelfth Imam. But the language of tradition is strange to him nor is he
familiar with the tone of the Prophet (SAW).

In some time or some era one title might have been widely spoken. Again
in certain conditions some other title might have given more consolation
or satisfaction to the people. For this reason some among the titles of
the twelfth Imam are more famous. We observe this in the names of God
also. AL-SHAFI, AL-SALAAM, AL-HAHZ, AL-RAHMAN, AL-REZZAGH are more
uttered.

The personal circumstance has a bearing on this as one resorts to a
particular tribute or quality moves them to the other. But this could
not mean that God was lacking those qualities in ancient times and got
them as time progressed. Such results are the natural outcome of the
analysis done on the basis of matter. Therefore, the very method of
analysis, that is, the material one, is wrong and will lead one astray.
The belief in God is the consequence of a centipede of things and a
train of suppositions. Before that, there was no belief in God.

Likewise, the qualities which are the names of God. This is the result
of a materialistic view of the things. Finally, one has to deny all God
and prophets. Such a result of such a wrong method of analysis can not
convince one nor could it be justified in rejecting God. It will not
succeed to shake the belief of a believer.

The moment Mahdi came into being the titles were fixed to him because
of the qualities he possessed. Mahdi the rescuer, fixed one, good doer,
master of the command, master of time, master of age, master of moment
is he.

Each of those titles reflects a particular dimension of his personality
and of his task. The possessor of those titles is the twelfth Imam.
Mahdi is the same twelfth Imam and the 12th Imam is the same Mahdi that
the scholars of Sunni have acknowledged. Abu Davood is one of them. He
in his book "AL-MEHDI" says that the twelfth Imam is the seal of the
Imams.

**31. THE TITLE "AL-QAYEM"**

Although the writer's uproar, this time he quotes page 282 from the
book "GHEEBAT" (absence) of Tosi that, "QAYEM means he will upraise
after meeting his death." About this sufficient explanation Tosi has
provided; "but to deal this subject we first should necessarily speak of
the Imamate." As the ramification is getting wider we shall speak about
the Imamate only briefly because its short summary suffices to take in
the details.

Imamate in Shiasm is based on the Holy Quran. There are numerous
traditions of the Prophet that support the establishment.

1. Imamate is a Divine obligation. Persons competent enough become the
choice of God. They are vested by God with this mission. God's choice of
the person to this office is pronounced to the people by the Prophet at
God's desire.

2. The prime and the supreme condition for an Imam that qualifies him
to be the Imam is his infallibility, that is, immunity from sin or wrong
doing, and his superiority in knowledge with the others so that all
could obey his instructions and follow his guidance. Khaleel Bin Ahmad
narrates a description of Imam by Ali Bin Abi Taleb: "All need him while
he needs no one. This is an indication that he is the Imam of all."

3. The earth can not be without an Imam or the Authority of God.
Everyone should know and recognize the Imam of his time. If he dies
without knowing his Imam, he has died as though in ignorance.

4. Imams are twelve as per the sayings of the Prophet.

5. All the Imams are from the Prophet's House. They do not exceed
twelve including Ali. According to the Prophet's words, repeatedly said,
they are at parity with the Quran and as heavy (important) as the Quran
itself. They never part with the Quran. They remain always associated
with it.

6. All Imams individually possess the worldly and the spiritual
leadership. The only thing that they do not share nor possess is the
prophet hood, which was terminated at the Prophet himself. NAHJUL
BALAGHA describes them as God's Authority over His creatures. They are
the boat of safety. They are the refuges for the nation. They are the
guards to protect the people from divisions and deviations. He who does
not recognize them and they do not recognize him shall not enter heaven.
He who denies them and they who denies him shall enter hell."

7. The Imams were introduced before hand by the Prophet (SAW) who
disclosed their names and specifications individually. Each Imam has
introduced the following one his successor indicating his name and his
person. These are the fundamentals of principle belief. There is no
likelihood, no pos- sibility for any mistake or confusion in the order
and the person of the Imam, because of the precautions already taken by
the Prophet (SAW) in his time in disclosing their names individually.

Also each Imam pointed out to the people his successor (the next Imam).
One should take these matters into consideration if he were to know
something of the Imamate. For a believer who acknowledges God and the
Next world the ground is reason on which the pillars of belief rest.
These fundamentals are irrefragable and incontrovertible because they
are supported by the Quran and the constant circuit of the Prophet's
traditions.

This subject that the IMAMAT is a Divine obligation has been
established by the Quran and the tradition that took the wing of
constancy. Dr. Allama Hilli in his book "TWO THOUSANDS" (ALFAIN) has
brought forward two thousand arguments and evidence to prove this
subject only. Basically this subject springs from TOWHEED (oneness of
God) and it is the oneness of God that gives origin to this subject.

Imamate is so basic and so fundamental that it is deep- rooted in
Towheed. Towheed is the essence of Islam. And, it is this Towheed that
establishes Imamate thereby making it obligatory upon all Muslims. The
importance of Imamat is reflected form this where we suffer: "To Him is
the Command and to Him is the order and He is the Sultan and He is the
Ruler and He is the Guardian and He is the cognizant of the interests of
the creatures. There is no order nor is there a dismissal to any one
without Him."

The matter of immunity from sin gives strength to this subject besides
the superiority of knowledge. The Quran here says: "He who guides to the
truth more deserves to be followed; he who does not guide should be
guided." The Imam should necessarily be infallible. Reason requires so.
Dr. Allama Huh has established this fact through two thousand arguments.
One many refer to book ALFAIN.

There should be God's Authority over the earth. "To each nation there
is a leader." "And we have reached the word to them." "A day (in which)
we call every people with their Imam." These Quarnic verses with due
consideration to their interpretation and the sayings of the Prophet
thereon prove that the earth can not be empty of an Imam. The books,
those of Sunnis, Shias, Zaidias, and those of Imamias all say
collectively the same.

There is uniformity of opinion at this point. TAZ-KARAT AL-HOFFAZ of
the Sunnis has acknowledged the necessity of the presence of an Imam on
earth. Whether the Imam is hidden or apparent, concealed or absent or
open he is there as should be. In the book SAWAYEQ and other books of
Sunni scholars a long statement of Imam Zainulabedeen is narrated. The
Imam in his long statement says that the earth can not remain without an
Imam from the House of the Prophet (SAW). If there happens to be any
word coming to this fundamental it is worthless and groundless.

Imam Zainulabedeen says in his supplication in his SAHEEFA SAJJADIA:
"O, God, you have supported your religion in all times by the Imam whom
you made a banner to your servants and a tower in your dominion after
making his rope to reach yours and you made him a medium to your
paradise. And obedience to him you made obligatory.

And you warned about disobedience to him. To carry on his orders, you
ordered; and to stop at what he stops the action, you commanded. No
advancer advances from him nor does a delayer lag behind him. He is the
Fortress of seekers and the cave of believers and the path of adheres
and the worth of the worlds."

In this supplication the Imam is well sketched. The states and the
station of the Imams is made clear. Shiasm can be observed in this
supplication. After all these discussions it is a wonderful thing to say
"The upraising of QAYIM after death was acknowledged earlier but later
on this thought was rejected by scholars."

Any thought in a Shia atmosphere if expressed by the Prophet (SAW) and
Ali Bin Abi Taleb and all other Imams are a fixed truth. Any other
thought contrary to it is of no credit and is void of truth. In an
analysis some seek to find out a trifle and enlarge it magnifying it in
order to avoid the truth or to reject the fact. Some non-Muslim Islamic
scholars have done this to serve their venom. It is not our point to
overlook the loophole. What we say is, do not overlook the important
ones. One should examine and compare both and see which one is
acceptable.

The Imam first dies and the upraises. This is contrary to the
fundamental. The earth in that case would remain without an Imam, which
is not possible. The age of the Imam is lengthy as his occultation too.
If we accept his death first and then his becoming a redeemer, we have
to reject what the Prophet (SAW) and Ali (AS) and the other Imams have
told us.

A narrator by the name of Mosa Bin Sadan Hannat (whom is not regarded
as a man of reputation) quotes another man by the name of Abdulla Bin
Qassim. Abdulla Bin Qassim was called 'the her'. Such a man can not be
trusted. This liar hero quotes his source as Abu Saeed Qurasani. Abu
Saeed Qurasani's whereabouts are not known. Besides this, there is not
other source to have had told the same thing or a similar one to it.

If we look at the word QAYIM we understand it to mean that an upraising
is ahead, and this Imam is to be the doer or possessor of that 'QIYAM'.
An upraising which is to be against the political conditions and
religious perversion and social depravations of that time. He will
uproot every root of tyranny and fill the world with justice. Generally
the word 'QIYAM' (upraisal) is contem- porary with surmise. All Imams
were QAYIM that is 'responsible'. But each of them was in accordance
with the conditions of his time.

The situation he was in was one concerned to him. But in a broader view
and a broader sense this title QAYIM is particular to Mahdi because the
QIYAM is going to be a wider, universal one not confined to a specified
time and place. His QIYAM (upraisal) will embrace the conditions of
individual, social, political, and economical ones. The application of
this title brings to mind that of only the 12th Imam and no other one.

Saddookh has narrated a tradition. His source is Kamaluddin. Kamaluddin
narrates that he (Kamaluddin) heard the 9th Imam, Mohammed al-Taqi
(A.S.) say: "The Imam after me is my son. His word is my word. His order
is my order. To obey him is to obey me. The Imamat will run to his son,
Hasan Askary. What he says is to be obeyed. His word is his father's
word. His order is the order of his father." Then he became quiet.
Kamaluddin asked; "Oh, son of the Prophet of God! Who is the Imam after
Hasan?" The Imam wept. Then he said; "Imam Hasan Askari's son, AL-QAIYM
AL MONTADER.

" Then Kamaluddin asked; "Oh, son of the Prophet of God, why is he
called AL- QAYIM?" The Imam answered; "Because he will bring an
upraising." Kamaluddin asked; "Why is he called the awaited one?" The
Imam replied: "Because there will be an absence that wilt be very long.
Faithful ones will await his appearance. Those who have doubt will
reject him. Those who believe in him will be redeemed."

In another source "MA'ANI AL-AKHBAR", the same is also mentioned. Some
have indicated other reasons too for his title 'QAYIM'. One is that he
will appear and raze a war against tyranny with his sword. Now, for his
other title, Mehdi, there are several interpretations. AL-MEHDI is as
independent a title as is AL-QAYIM. One whom God has guided is called
Mehdi.

According to predictions, the reforms and the deeds that Mehdi will
perform will suit the title AL-QAYIM. It is also known that these
titles, "AL-QAYIM" and "AL-MEHDI" were heard from the Prophet's mouth.
There is no sense in arguing that one title is superior to the other.
Both belong to one and both were given and pronounced by one.


**32. Mahdi Al-Anam The Twelfth Imam**

The writer in this chapter has written what reflects his prejudice or
ignorance. The Imam will appear; the Imam will rescue the world from
tyranny; all this imagination is the product of the last decades of Bani
Ommiya's rule. The tyranny of Bani Ommiy's government invigorated this
belief more deep. But in no way did it create this supposition or this
fancy as the writer says.

It is as old as Islam itself The Prophet (SAW) himself had disclosed
MEHDISM and told the people what we now know. It is a promise given by
the prophet (SAW) and as is known, the Prophet (SAW) did not utter out
of his own desire or lust. It is God's word and Divine Revelation from
which he speaks. So, it is a promise given to us by God through the
Prophet (SAW).

The writer says that the title of MEHDI was given to rescue the Shia
from dullness and hopelessness. To inject them with ray of hope or a
beam of anticipation towards a better future. As we have repeatedly said
it is a reality. The title has nothing to do with the disappointment of
a man or a group of men. The title does not add anything to the
personality of the Imam. His responsibility is already foretold by the
Prophet (SAW).

The Shia did not invent anything so far as religion is concerned. The
title MAHUI is also acknowledged by Sunni scholars. It was heard on the
tongue of most well known Sunni authorities. As such, it seems that it
is the writer who is trying to invent something at this stage.

**33. MIRACLOUS BIRTH AND THE DATE:**

It is not bad to give a summary about the event of Mehdi's birth. The
birth of Mahdi the son of Imam Hasan Askari is recorded by historians as
being a simple event. However the birth is surrounded by some strange
signs. The writer is not willing to see or accept the strange signs
because he says that no such events were recorded. Which records he uses
for his research, we do not know. An event of birth is not to be
elaborated - generally speaking. Sources that are close to the house of
Imam Hasan Askari (AS) should also be contacted to see what they know
and have to say. Historical science has gone too flaccid as its scholars
have shown prejudice in recording the events or the facts. However,
facts do remain unchanged although the attitude of a historian is
however changeable.

The birth of messengers is gestant with unusual events, extra ordinary.
Adam's birth for example was a strange thing. The birth of Abraham,
Is'haq, Moses, and Jesus were all strange, Jesus (AS) still in a cradle
spoke. All these events were super natural and extra ordinary. If these
events are not historical, then the birth of Mahdi too is not one. If
those events are regarded as being historical, the birth of 'Mahdi' too
is one.

The negligence of some historians do not spoil the event. As a figure
of speech, no matter how many veils are hung to hide or conceal
something, if a candle is placed beyond the veils even the slightest
light will still pass through those veils. Often is the case that an
unauthentic source says something ignorant and it becomes history; but
an occurrence of importance and magnitude which took place and is told
by persons of repute and renown, still is not considered history! What a
portentous display of prejudice and partiality it is!

The writer says that the biographies of the Imams of the Shia have been
so written that they are like the stories of the SOHS. The stories of
the SOFIS are far from sense and reason. The writer could have said that
the biographies of the Imams are like the stories of the births of
prophets like Abraham, Is'haq, Ismaeel, Moses, Jesus and Yehya. But,
taste is needed to install a similitude. Delicacy is the demand, wit is
the want and vigilance is the vitality,

needed to bring a similarity of the same sanctity. The stories of the
SOFIS are fabricated in order to attain the level of godly figures so as
to make them credible. They are fake, false, and feigned. But the facts
of the prophets or the Imams do not break apart by false statements as a
shadow can not eradicate a light. It is the evil that proves a virtue. A
dark night is the indication of a bright day, which dawns from within
its folds.

The very sense the word history imparts should be defined here. Some
events are perhaps narrated in the books of philosophy or medicine and
not in the book of history. Although irrelevant of its place it is still
history or an historical event. Whether it be the prophet of God or
kings what they do goes down as history. Therefore, history can not be
confined to a man or a particular group or a particular performance. As
a result there is no classification or category to which certain events
are regarded as historical or non historical. The writer is wrong. The
birth of the twelfth Imam was history in itself as well as a historical
event.

**34. THE CREATION OF THE PROPHETS AND THE IMAMS:**

About the creation of the Imams and the Prophets, that is, how they
were created or the nature of their creation. Shias are not different
with others in its conception or conviction. About the creation of the
Prophet (SAW), the Sunni sect has a great deal of narration and
traditions. The same Sunni sources have much to say with regards to the
creation of Ali Bin Abi Taleb, Imam Hasan, Imam Hussain, and Fatimah
daughter of Mohammed. As to the reason of the creation of the prophet
(SAW) and the Imams the Quran gives a root. "Indeed, God has chosen you
and purged you and selected you over the men of the worlds."

As for the prophet Moses the Quran says: "And, We revealed to the
mother of Moses to feed him with her milk and if she happened to fear
about him, throw him into the river and not fear nor grieve. We shall
return him back to her and make him among the messengers." From this we
infer that the mother of Moses was informed about the return of her
child back to her and that he would become a prophet of God.

In his book AL SIFWA Zaid Bin Ali Bin Hussain describes the issue of
AHLUL BAIT (members of the Prophet's (SAW) House) their being chosen
ones. He lists from the Quran to support his statement. From a viewpoint
of Islamic principle and belief, the extra ordinary type of creation of
the Imams can not be waired of taking into consideration the miracle in
the birth of Jesus Bin Maryem.

**35. MEHDISM AFTER THE MARTYRDOM OF IMAM HUSSAIN (AS)**

The writer concludes that because Mahdi will appear on the day of
ASHORA he will, therefore, make his headquarters either in Kofa or in
Kerbala. Also because Mehdi descends from the progeny of Ah his
upraising too will be in Kofa and Karbala. However let us stop here and
look a little closer into the matter.

First, it is an acknowledged fact that Mahdi hails from the Prophets
(SAW) House because he is the twelfth Imam. But what relation is there
with Kerbala and Kofa? We can not limit his range of activity for the
whole earth is in his range of activity. All predictions indicate such
as we have repeatedly pointed out, the traditions of the Prophet (SAW).
The writer has connected Mehdi's appearance to the martyrdom of
Hussain.

This he has done deliberately so as to limit the whole issue and to
prove it has a background of revenge. The writer knows very well that
the Imams were all from the House of the Prophet (SAW), that is, his
offspring. So, the twelfth Imam too, Mehdi. Nobody has limited Imamate
to the Household of the Prophet (SAW), it is God's design, His desire,

His deed, and His determination because Imamate is His office and an
Imam is His choice as to who to be and from where. Mahdi hails from the
progeny of the Prophet, it is a fulfillment of a condition among the
conditions concomitant with the office of Imamate. As such he should be
from AHLUL BAIT (from the Prophet's house). This ensures that all his
doings and deeds will all be in the line of the Prophet (SAW) himself.


