36. Absence of Mahdi
====================

Under this title or leading the following may be said; A. the
disappearance of the Imam was an event of most importance. Shias became
upset and much disappointed they were uncertain as to what would happen
politically, religiously and socially. It's far reaching effects in
every as peek at every field was alarming. Some remained dumbs founded,
perplexed and confused knowing not what to do.

A true Shia's concern was as to how to confront the adversary who was a
staunch appetent, a Sunni, and how to protect his own strategy in that
political hurricane; and to this added his worry as to how to guard an
ordinary Shia whose belief was their hunt in which it was a moving
object in the jungle that had engaged their arrows and could fell prey
to the beast of their propaganda.

The safety of a common Shia, and the danger of the security of a
learned Shia was the anxiety of the hour. Although they saw themselves
exposed to an ambush from behind a tree in that society, which to them
had turned into a forest ruled by wild and bestial animals, yet the most
learned scholars of Shia were safe in their hidings.

They were armed by the Prophet's (SAW) traditions and the verses of the
Holy Quran, which had established the truth of Imamate to rescue them
and to guard a common Shia against the danger.

As a result we now see that Shiasm has survived every risk of
eradication. It has preserved its originality rejecting any deviation.
Whose make up is her original face and whose ornaments are her natural
features.

Indeed, malice incited the ugly to abnubilate her beauty by any
fuliginous way or to fash its admirers. But her admirers stood a
grueling test and her own numinous beauty stood a palladium. However, no
matter their practice the Shiasm deranged its entity. The learned ones
gave refuge to the thought of the people. The NAWABS took the affairs of
the Shia in their hands.

While everything was in order, the belief in the twelfth Imam was never
shaken; NOUBAKHTI says that in the town of Qum, there existed a sect
that believed in thirteen Imams. We have heard nothing of that kind, and
know that all there believed and believe in twelve Imams. Everyone in
books of narration claim that there existed scholars during the past two
and half centuries to tell people about the Imamate of the twelve
Imams.

Yes, a deeper look will show that a few who had turned aside from the
original path in search of personal gains or to whom a deliberate
deviation had taken far away from the track, later regret persuaded them
and repentance returned them back to their right path and to which they
adhered in fealty and stuck in faith.

B. Earlier to Ibn Babway and Nomani others like Fazi Bin Shazan (died
260) have written books about both the periods of the absence of the
twelfth Imam. These books had appeared before the birth of Imam Hasan
Askari. Mashikha Hasan Bin Mahboob (died 224) has also written about
this subject. The writer too maintains that the two periods of the
absence of the Imam has brought forward changes in the views.

We should point out here that both periods were of importance and of a
new kind in the history of Shiaism but not in the sense that the theme
of Shiaism varied with that of the past. These two periods further
cemented the faith of those who were having a pre knowledge through the
sayings of the Prophet (SAW) and the Imams.

The way of installing a proof or housing evidence was at variance among
the lecturers. But at the same time they all depended on the traditions,
that is, the sayings of the Prophet (SAW). Side by side they used reason
as well.

This method of presenting or producing evidence of reason or logical
proofs became wider and wider during the space of time. From the time of
Shaikh Mofeed to the time of Allama Hilli and toward this method took an
entity to itself. The proof for divinity, the evidence for prophet hood
attained a wider range. Likewise, there is still a possibility that it
may still go beyond. But the evidence of narration, that is, the
narrative proofs remains what they had been because the words could be
invented to install in the prophet's (SAW) sayings.

C. The absence of the Imam is reflected in a way to give an impression
that to revolt against tyrant rulers is not an obligation on the people.
Therefore, the scholars, that is, the Shia clergymen and their
jurisprudents in association with the family of Boway did not oppose the
caliphate of the Bani Abbas dynasty. They propagated Shiasm. If the
Boway family (AALBOWAY) committed atrocities, Shias had no obligation to
oppose it. It was only the right of the Imams to revolt or upraise
against the tyrant rulers and their governments.

If the occultation of the twelfth Imam makes an upraising impossible
then no upraising should take place and the concern should be only
towards the protection of Shiasm. To bring down a government is the only
right of the twelfth Imam.

Such an impression is quite wrong and misleading. First: Shias were in
no circumstances and under no conditions obliged to bring down the
governments of the Bani Abbas dynasty. Shias were and are obliged to
obey the Imam. The Shia ponders, thinks and considers himself under the
yoke of twelve Imams, individually and collectively. Even to this day
the yoke of the Imamate of the twelfth Imam is around the neck of the
Shia. Bani Abbas knew this. They knew that to bring down their
government was not the responsibility of a Shia. It depended on the
stand and outlook of the Imam of that time. Obedience of the Shia to
their Imam, their love, affection, and faith in him was to Bani Abbas a
dread and a matter to take into calculations and something to bestow
consideration to.

On the other hand, the conduct, character, behavior, abundant
knowledge, truth, honesty, uprighteousness, straightforwardness,
endurance, tolerance, forbearance, and forgiveness of the Imam was in
itself an element and a factor that weakened the Bani Abbas politically,
socially and morally. This the Bani Abbas well knew that they very
presence of the Imam, whoever he be, was their own weak point because
his existence demonstrated what he possessed and what they were deprived
of.

Whatever qualities and abilities they had, the Bani Abbas caliphs were
short of. They lacked. The people too witnessed the same what the Bani
Abbas saw. The ability of the people to judge and compare could not be
taken away from them. As they compared, they hated one and liked one;
they hated one and honored one; they hated one and obeyed the other.
This being out of their power, the Bani Abbas remained always uneasy,
harassed, confused, and uncertain.

To secure their own rescue from this harassment the easiest thing to do
was to detain the very object of fear. This they did. They imprisoned
the Imams. They put them under home arrest. They implied secret agents,
police to keep a watch on them. They broke the link of the people with
them. Motawakkal brought the tenth Imam, Ali Al-Naqi, from Madina to
Samerra so that he may keep a direct watch on him and control his every
movement.

In any circumstance there was never the question that the Shia would
revolt. In the days of the tenth and eleventh Imams, Ali Al-Naqi and
Hasan Askari, there was no probability of any such thing. It was a
general belief that it was up to the Imam to decide what to do. But
there was a strong belief running among Shias that each Imam did what he
was under commission to do.

The Prophet (SAW) had a charted and the programme by the command of God
for every Imam, framing his responsibility. So, every Imam in his time
acted and behaved accordingly. This secret chart was transferred from
one Imam to the other. The other factor to be considered is this, that
in those days conditions had become so bad and the people were in such a
low mentality that there was no preparedness on their half to consume a
change. In such a probability of failure it was wise to avoid the
upraising. Its consequences would have been more futile and reverse
rather prolific and useful.

The Bowihian's stand did not totally discard the caliphates of the Bani
Abbas dynasty although they took the helm of affairs in their hands.
They installed a caliph and they even dismissed a caliph. But they did
not declare their disagreement with the machinery of the caliphate. Had
they done so they would have had to confront a huge front of opposition
of Sunnis. A total chaos would have entailed posing a general danger to
Shias. Any change in their stand would have reflected a religious basis
for that change. To avoid Bani Abbas and appoint an Alawi caliph was
tantamount to the continuation of the same trend. Some say that the
interests of AALBOWAY was in keeping the Bani Abbas dynasty in order to
retain their own power. Anyway, AALBOWAY was neither to do nor think of
any other way.

This should not be forgotten that in the time of the absence of the
twelfth Imam some of the Bani Abbas clan was not bad towards the Shia.
They even pretended to be Shia. Naseruddin Allah was a scholar among the
caliphs of Bani Abbas. He believed in the Imamat of the twelfth Imam and
in his absence. He even considered himself as the deputy of the 12th
Imam.

There runs a theory that no one has a right to revolt against tyrant
governments during the absence of the 12th Imam. This is absolutely
wrong. To upraise against tyranny in the event of possible conditions is
in jurisprudence an obligation. This obligation becomes a general one in
case the tyranny of a ruler happens to consume one's property, life, or
one's honor so that all people should go to the victim's help. To defend
against a tyrant needs no sanction of a religious jurisprudent.

Defense is a sacred liability. To defend a Muslim, or to defend a
Muslim society is obligatory no matter whether the enemy be an outsider
or one from inside. For example the ex-shah of Iran wanted to change the
Islamic identity of Iran. So to defend such a danger becomes a
liability. In jurisprudence these questions are discussed, the defense
or the effort to oppose the tyranny of a ruler who is not a jurisprudent
or a believer. These issues during the period when the Imam is absent
are decided by the Shiy of jurisprudence. In the span of the absence of
the twelfth Imam the tyrant governments in certain conditions become
compulsory to be brought down.

D. The motive of ALLBOWAY in their upraising obviously was political
with lust for power. But it can not be waived off that originally they
should have been motivated by religious matters or the atrocities
committed against the Shia might have incited them to revolt against the
tyrant rulers.

On the ground that their upraising was contrary to Shia religious
standards we can not condemn them. There are several considerations.
When their upraising had succeeded their behavior in general and that of
some of them in particular was far better than all their predecessors.
They even surpassed in their compe- tency and good conduct with others.
The rulers among them showed no enmity with the Shia. They were jealous
and very much enthusiastic towards propagating the Shia belief and at
the same time advertent enough to not encroach the Sunni sanctity. In
other words they had brought freedom for the Shia and obliterated those
conditions that necessitated the TAQIA (concealing one's belief).

In any case, their policy was not to invalidate the Sunnism or to crush
any other religion. They did quite the opposite to what their
predecessors had done. They provided liberty for Shias and also opened
avenues for them to enter any government service. AAL BABWAY nullified
the previous policy for restricting Shias in every aspect of social
life. So, they in fact protected Shiasm and helped it. What they gave to
others by way of freedom they gave to Shias as well. Because of the
equity, which they maintained with the Shia, they were accused of
religious bigotry. However, we are not here to defend the AAL BABWAY\>'s
policies. This can not be denied that they too were a dynasty, which
appeared on the political scene and became recorded in history.

They differed with their previous rulers who were Sunnis and did
everything against the Shias by way of harm. One of them was Motawakkel
who even tried to annihilate the Shia belief. But the BABWAY dynasty did
not act to take revenge nor did they adopt any negative attitude towards
the Suni. They opened opportunities of jobs and propaganda to them. They
were more human comparing to their predecessors like Motawakkel,
Salahuddin Ayubi and Taqhrool Saljokhi. The Babway dynasty was in fact
Shia.

They believed in IMAMAT and also the disappearance of the twelfth Imam.
But they did not intervene nor did they interfere in religious matters.
What they pondered they used to pronounce openly. The Shia clergymen
coordinated with the BABWAY's harass on the basis that, in the politics
people should not take part nor they should participate in revolts
against the governments. This is wrong. The Shia religion does not
dictate such a thing.

If we look from a political angle, the Babways were Shia. Therefore
they felt themselves secure from any Shia revolt against them. Since
they were good with the Sunnis if by any case the Shia were to make any
upraising it would have been crushed by the forces adversary to the Shia
thought.

All the political fronts of the Shias would have been lost. If Shia
clergy would have revolted the result would have been the same. On the
other hand, Babways had paved the way for the Shias to enter into jobs
and have well stations in society. So, the Shia thought it prudent to
support the BABWAY rules. In such circumstances the Shia clergy took to
serve the expansion of knowledge and the propaganda of the Shia ideology
and at the same time made it obligatory upon themselves to support the
BABWAYS.

As things took shape an understanding opened its umbrella shadowing the
Shias and the BABWAYS without these being a contract or an agreement.
Their understanding was the result of the security which the BABWAY
rulers felt at the hands of Shia, and the contemplation of the Shia
clergy that the harm of a revolt would be more than the gain. To not
make a movement was a religious conviction to one party while to the
other a good prudent policy to honor that conviction.

In any case let us pronounce that we can not repudiate the legitimacy
of their rule, at least, some of them.


**37. The absence from the view of narrators**

Difference in the date has opened avenues to the writer to tell what
his lust is and to say what is his wish and to write what is his
pleasure. Yes, there is a difference; So what? Does this difference
change anything? Does it bear on any dimension? The beginning of the
Imam hood (IMAMAT) of the 12th Imam is in the very year 260. To
penetrate deeper we see that the very pregnancy of his mother remained
unnoticed. Miraculously it was a concealed matter. Then, his birth; this
too was a secret known only to very few close ones.

In other words, this Imam ever since he began life either in the womb
of his mother or in the vast of this universe, either as a babe or as an
infant, a veil surrounded, concealing him or any sign of his or any
symptom that could indicate his whereabouts or his existence. He was
destined to remain under the veils of secrets.

It was for the absence to steal his presence into disappearance. He is
in reservation kept most cautiously by the Divine for the future.
Several curtains should hide him under the guard of wonder and the
vigilance of surprise. Several hands of doubt collectively could not
lift any of the curtains nor could a deliberation peep through it. The
mystery is beyond the ken of human, and the ambit of the calculation of
two and two is four, because God's job can not be circumferenced by our
understanding.

He is that treasure which should be kept secret till time is ripe, till
sight can tolerate the fire of its diamond. His absence was a calculated
affair. The Imamate of the Imams had its cycle and Imam Hasan Askari was
still peddling it. So, it is wrong to suppose that the era of the
Imamate had ended. When the eleventh Imam was still alive the era was
alive too. In the year 260 the martyrdom of Imam Hasan Askari put an end
to an era and opened a new one. The twelfth Imam took the office. Then
he went into hiding. Then he appeared. Then he went into hiding.

38. The view of Narrators about the issue of the Imam's disappearance:
The writer says that the first time the term GHEEBAT (absence or
disappearance) was introduced, it was in the book by the name of
KAMALUDDIN. he says that it is likely that Qulaini too might have
explained such a thing earlier.

First fact is regularly being ignored time and again, forgotten by the
writer, that the sense and the meaning of GHEEBAT was already a known
fact, as it was in the traditions and the narration that have hailed
immediately from the Prophet (SAW) and the Imams. So, the occurrence of
such an event GHEEBAT was an event not a surprise. The awareness of the
people towards this fact is older than the book KAMALLUDDIN of Sadoq and
the book KAH of Qulaini. They did not invent it but mentioned the
traditions about it.

If anyone were to give an explanation of the OHEEBAT it could have been
the same about Sadoq and Kafi have told in their books. Besides, those
who have survived both the periods of the GHEEBAT (absence or
occultation) have told the same thing and have narrated their
experience. What was foretold, is narrated; and what was foretold took
place.

39. The GHEEBAT of the 12th Imam - Two kinds:

Earlier to Nomani in the books of the Prophet's sayings and
conversations (TRADITIONS) both types of the Imam's disappearance (GREEB
AT) has been mentioned. There are some who have been written before the
end of the short GHEEBAT. The writer now tells us in a way to suggest
that when the GHEEBAT happened these books too appeared. Since he has no
belief in the invisible or unseen (GHAIB) he should say so. He can even
suggest that whatever is written is after the happenings although the
Prophet might have foretold then.

He wants to accuse the great scholars who were great authorities such
as Sadoq, Nomani and others of fraud and fabricating traditions. May God
guide him.

The GHEEBAT was split into two periods - one a short duration, the
other with an indefinite duration. The lengthy GHEEBAT was anticipated.
Ali Bin Mohammed al-Samri and others were having a mental preparedness.
Nomani and others consider the GHEEBAT as a sign attesting the Imam hood
of Mehdi. The writer says that both kinds have had a root in the recent
narration. The narration can not be new or recent. All of them are old
because they relate to the time of the Prophet (SAW). If the writer
knows let him specify which are the new ones and which are the old
narration?

We can make not such that the narration of Imam Ali Bin Abi Taleb (AS)
are older than those by Imam Hasan (AS) Imam Hussain (AS) or Imam
Zainulabedeen (AS). Likewise what Imam Baqer (AS) has told is older than
that which Imam Sadqq (AS) told. So this should be his sense, divided
among the Imams in accordance to their order and periods. But, actually
the fifth Imam, Baqer, is the first Imam who started a school in which
he told many things explaining the legislation and other issues. The
narration that hailed newly or recently relates to the period after the
period of Imam Baqer (AS).

This issue is useful in distinguishing the dates or locating the
duration of period with regards to narration and other religious
jurisprudence. This standard can not be maintained after the period of
Imam Askari. Usually the narration can be considered false if they come
after the duration of the period of Imam Askari. But such a supposition
can not be given to the narration that pertain to the GHEEBAT of the
twelfth Imam because they were told in every age right from the
Prophet's (SAW) time down to Imam Askari (AS). There was nothing to be
added thereon or to be deducted there from.

Whatever the new authors have written they have depended upon the old
authors. The interpretations and comments made thereon are all in
uniformity because of the pedestal being one. There can be a difference
in synonyms, such as short absence, little absence, long absence,
lengthy absence, continued absence and so on.

These terms GHEEBAT SUGHRA (short GHEEBAT) and GHEEBAT KUBRA (long
absence) were not invented in the era of Safavi. They have no bearing on
the reality. There had been two periods. The narration can not be
changed by the marginal diameters or spaces down by suppositions.
Furthermore, belief can not be shaken as well. Any other interpretation
would only show one's own mind and the extent of its listing to falsity
the fact.

To invalidate a narration one should search the ground of that
particular narration. If the narrators of that particular narration have
any credibility reputation or a reliability that could creep in a catena
of continuity up to the authority of Imam Sadiq (AS) reason would not
approve its repudiation. What Noubakhti has written of the Shia sects
should be something of prediction about the unseen future. To foretell
what will happen in the future no one would claim, unless he should have
prophecy, which no one has.

So, it is quite easy to tell what this imagination might bring to his
mind. In such an event he has rejected the established traditions and
acknowledged the realities of history. 40. The writer regarding the 2nd
Ambassador says that it was a period of chaos and tumult in the history
of the Shia. People were left adrift in an ocean of uncertainty knowing
not where the stand is for them and to which shore they should land. The
writer has magnified the things because he is looking through a
microscope of prejudice.

Any little thing would appear to him big. The things were not as he is
pretending to have been. A little commentary on his statements seems
necessary. Chaos and tumult; they are a natural corollary of
uncertainty. There were those who were faithful to their belief and
ardent in their faith. They knew who their Imam were and who the present
one was.

They also had pre-knowledge of the absence of the Imam as they had
heard or read the Prophet's (SAW) sayings. It is a common practice to
ask. They should have told as they should have been asked. Had there
really been a chaos where was it? In the center town of the Shias in Qum
we did not hear nor did we witness such chaos.

What the winter says come out to prove that the Shia belief of twelve
Imams hails from a strong origin. The scholars, the thinkers and other
personalities of the day were believers in the Imamate of the son of
Imam Askari (AS) and in his occultation (GREEBAT). He refers to the
ministerial families of BANI Furat and the relations of ABU SUHAIL
NOUBAKHTI. This is the strength of a religion. The curiosity of the
enemies should have tried to find out the fact. They could not establish
otherwise. During the GHEEBAT a link of deputies with the Imam take his
orders, it seems practicable as well as reasonable.

All the traditions about the GHEEBAT narrated by Shazan, Nomani,
Kamaluddin are attested by sources of authority and based on evidence
passed on from the Imams by the Prophet (SAW) himself. All these sayings
were predictions, that is, years behind the events and the events far
ahead the sayings. The Shias who were in various provinces and parts
would not have accepted to revert, refer or consult to the NAWABS
(deputies) of the Imam had there not been a cogent conviction for
them.

There had been links that establish the connection with the Imam. It
was a well-organised and systematic network of communication to the Imam
and from the Imam. Ali Bin Babway, a man of thought and knowledge,
writes a letter to the Imam through the NAWAB (Imam's deputy) and gets
an answer through the same channel. Had there not been a truth in it a
man of Ali Bin Babway's like would not have corresponded with the Imam.
This in itself is proof.

The writer says on the authority of Fathia that a group of Shia
believed in the Imamat of Jafer and many yielded to his authority. By
saying so the writer wants to say what he, of course, does not say but
means to say, however does not want to go that far. Well, we say that he
means that Mahdi was fake Imam because of Jafer. Why does he not ponder
the other way? Why wasn't Jafer a false Imam? The biography of Jafer was
known to one and all. His reputation, his conduct his behavior, his
temperament brought him no respect from the people. Therefore, he was
immediately ignored although he was supported by the government of the
day in order to create a rift and split. Those who gathered around him
were the paid agents of the government.

Another mistake. The writer sees the Imam as an infant. But the
consensus shows that the Imam had attained his boyhood.

The unity among Shias is of course due to a belief common among them.
In a stock all are shareholders; and all are united too. The belief in
the Imamate of the twelfth Imam has brought all Shias together. But the
writer says that the Imam's deputies (NAWABS) had brought all together.
Of course they were men of reliance and respect in all the Shia places.
For example, Abulafer Omravi was very much respected. They were symbols
of unity and honor of the Shia but not the reason for it. The Nawabs
were only agents of the Imam. The cardinal and supreme factor was the
very Imamate of Mehdi, which held the mosaic together. Today too this
belief in Imamate holds the jurisprudents in awe and reverence and the
deputies of the Imam.

**41. The Way the 3rd Ambassador selected:**

It might be felt that the appointment of one ambassador depends upon
the recommendation of his predecessor to the Imam or with a consensus of
the Shia scholars or clergy. As the previous one appoints the new one.
Such an air of conception hangs around the third ambassador Hussain Bin
Rooh. But, the reality is something else. It is the direct choice of the
Imam himself; an im- mediate selection by himself alone.

It was not a contract or agreement between the persons or parties.
Since the man was appointed by the person of Imam Mehdi himself, the
appointed one was highly respected and revered among the people -
commons and dignitaries. It was a commonly known fact that the
ambassador was the Imam's choice and in contact with him. Had it been
otherwise, such men of repute such as Abu Suhail Noubakhti, Ibn Mateel,
Hasan Bin Jana Nasibi would have disputed and never obeyed the
ambassador.

**42. THE FOURTH AMBASSADOR AND THE END OF THE PERIOD OF HIS
EMBASSY**

The long absence (GHEEBAT KUBRA) was an anticipated one during the
short one (GHEEBAT SUGHRA). In that period books too were written about
this subject. No ambassador was appointed after Ali Bin Mohammed Saruri.
The reason is not known. It could be that the Imam did not find a
trustworthy one. It could be this that the Nawabs of the period of short
GHEEBAT were to acquaint the people with the coming GHEEBAT that was
going to be indefinitely long.

**43. THE TOTAL GHEEBAT (OCCULTATION)**

The confirmation of Mehdism of the twelfth Imam starts from this period
as the last leader of the Moslems. Ever since the Shias came to know
that the Imam's appearance was not definite in the near future they took
him to be their Mahdi.

We should correct him. He was the twelfth Imam known to all and
acknowledged by all. It was not a condition that he should go into
hiding in order to become Imam. For an Imam, disappearance or hiding is
not a necessary condition. But that he was the Mahdi promised by the
Prophet (SAW) was a thing not certain. Of course, it is a common thing
to have an existence of doubt in the minds. Every issue in accordance
with its magnitude is shaded by doubt or there are some whose business
is to create doubts. Therefore, this should not be denied that the short
period of the Imam's absence and the beginning of the long period have
been covered by doubts. The scholars should pay heed in this respect to
furnish the facts so as to obviate he doubts and present the subject in
the minds in a clear picture.

**44. Rise of a Question:**

The writer raises a question as to when and how the representation of
the Imam (Mehdi) is vested to the jurisprudents indirectly and with full
distinctions. How has he comes to such an interpretation?

A simple thing becomes complicated because of the reasoning the writer
has resorted to. The link of the defeat of the Ullama (clergy) against
the governments of AAL BABWAY, SAFAVI, and KACHAR is connected here. The
issue of the jurisprudents being the oracles for the people in the times
of GHEEBAT, short or long comes into the light from two dimensions. The
vital importance goes to the establishment of a link with the Imam by
any means if not direct.

One: God's commands are to be understood so as to be acted upon. If in
the time of the Prophet (SAW) or any of the Imams a man could not reach
any of them he would then go to a clergy so as to ask his questions and
learn what he has sought out to learn. This is a reasonable solution.
Therefore it is only reasonable that during Imam Mahdi's occultation the
same would happen. The question that has been brought up as to what
period the jurisprudents actually became oracles for the people are not
a sensible one.

In the days of the Prophet (SAW) or the Imams or in the days of GHEEBAT
any one who had a high knowledge on religious issues stood as an
authority to be referred to. It was not limited to a certain time or
place Knowledge can not be limited to a time or space. One who has a
through knowledge of a subject stands as a guide whenever referred to
and by whosoever.

Two; An oracle is an administrator of a society or a leader of a
society, because he meddles in disputes, solves their problems, gives
opinion in their differences and judges their quarrels and attends their
various difficulties. In such a dimension, the jurisprudents before the
time of Imam Hasan Askari (AS) had an active part. It was obligatory for
the people to contact them. For a jurisprudent the government of the
Imam is valid. A jurisprudent is in his place a representative of the
Imam. This is an issue purely of jurisprudence.

The guardianship of a jurisprudent is a second grade authority which
descends from the absolute authority of the Imam. In this regard there
is no general agreement among the scholars. Some consider the
guardianship of the Ullama (clergy) not fixed because they do not think
that there is enough proof. Is'haq Bin Yakob says that the uncertainty
could run into events, as well as certain things which could not be
determined. The deputies of the Imam had a general responsibility. They
had no intention to collect money. The writer is accusing a group of
good people without feeling the least moral responsibility.

The guardianship of the jurisprudents is absolutely necessary. Whether
some believe it or not, their being representatives of the Imam they all
agree that on some matters no one other than a jurisprudent can have
guardianship. To command the people towards virtue, to restrict the
people from evil is the responsibility of a jurisprudent. But the
actions of a jurisprudent are regarded as final and to be honored. The
governments and their power or authority over the people is a thing
religiously illegal. Therefore, the governments are regarded as tyrants.
In this description all governments are alike whether BABWAYS, SAFAVIS,
KACHARS.

The writer thinks that the text of the tradition as told by Is'haq Bin
Yakob was deviated in later days. We tell him he is wrong.

The versions might differ in words but the text remains the same. One
thing which waives off the writer's wrong conception is; In the text,
there is a word in Arabic, "ALAIKUM" or "Upon them" which makes no sense
in the age of total occultation (GHEEBAT) of the Imam, because there is
no link, no NAWAB, nor deputy, and therefore no link with the Imam.

This pronoun 'ALAIKUM' better suits the days of short GHEEBAT. We
suggest that it should be translated as 'UPON YOU'. The writer has not
attended these little things because of his over happiness in having
gained something more important. Such examples abound. The translation
of BIHAR has rendered the word 'ROWAAT' into jurisprudents, while such
does not exist in the writings of Majusi.

This is in the days of Kachar. The word "ROWAAT" is not in the Arabic
text of BIHAR because it was not necessary. The writer now takes this
and uses it as a weapon in which to accuse the Shia writes in
interpreting the traditions as time fits. Our readers can judge for
themselves whether to come to such a conclusion is just or unjust.


