45. in Spite of the Congruity Conditions
========================================

what is the philosophy in Imam Mahdi still remaining absent? In view of
the writer, conditions were favorable for the appearance of the Imam in
the days of the AALBOWAY government and there existed also militarily
possibilities. But on what ground was the Imam to make his appearance?

The answer to such a question lies in what Sadogh has said, and that is
the conditions were not secure enough as to ensure his appearance. There
was no assurance as to how many people and whom he could actually trust.
Was there any security in finding 313 people as associates or
companions. I have said before that a number of 313 men absolutely
perfect in belief, completely humble to the orders, totally resigned to
the will of God, and whole heartedly ready for any sacrifice or ordeal
can not be expected among us. In words all stand but in practice who
stands? To give a test all will fail. Who knows how many agents there
were in their guise.

So on what tested ground is it said that conditions were favorable? It
is only a pretext. It is a pretension. The time is only known to God
alone. He knows and He decides the hour, because He is aware of even
what is concealed hearts. We have nothing but to resign to Him who is
the Master mind of religion.

**Hesitation Among The Followers Of The School**

The matters written or told by IBN BABWAY shows the scale of hesitation
and the extent of surmise and the amount of doubt among the followers of
the Shia school. This statement of the writer is not true. Why? He says
or imagines that a majority of Shia was dubious not quite certain, that
is, certitude missed them and doubt gained them. Where there is a
question, there is an answer. This does not mean that the question is
the consequence of doubt.

If a thing is answered by way of explanation, it is not that the
society is drowned in doubts or it is overpowered by uncertainty, there
is question and a question is espoused with reply. What IBN BABWAY
points out is a thing plain and common. He says that the enemies,
opponents and adversaries were creating doubts and pushing them by way
of propaganda. They aimed at misguiding people who were poorly educated
or had little knowledge and less information.

It was such doubts that were used to be answered. In every society, in
every religion it is a common thing. Anyone either a Shia or a Sunni can
ask as to why the Imam is absent or as to when he will appear. This is a
good symptom in a society. It indicates a mental awareness or a
religious awakening or an upraising of spirit.

He wants to base his belief on the foundation of knowledge and the
pedestal of cogency rather than on a track, which was paced by his
forefathers. He asks, interrogates, inquires, and investigates but still
does not change his course. This shows his staunch belief in the
correctness of his path, which ascertains him of the destination he is
heading to. To most questions the answer of the Prophet (SAW) applies:
"This is God's command and a secret among the Divine secrets"

**46. IMMUNITY FROM SIN IS IT A NEW THING?**

The writer says this is a thing newly thought upon and newly
introduced. If he means that this issue is being newly argued; it is
something else. In every environment a different tone is spoken. In
every time a different vogue rules the taste. Therefore, we should speak
what suits the language of the writer and at the same time avoid
misleading our readers.

His claim that "ESMAT" (immunity from any wrongdoing or infallibility)
is a newly made up thing, is completely out of tine. By so saying he has
gone a great deal in repudiating or rejecting the prophet hood of the
apostles and the Imamate of the Imams. The 'ESMAT', the infallibility of
them is supported by REASON and attested by the Book of God - The Holy
QURAN. The ALLAMA Hilli, has spoken of one thousand proofs. Nomani has
narrated the tributes, which were narrated earlier to him by the
eleventh Imam Hasan Askari (AS). It is well understood and well
acknowledged. But what to do with ignorance? It is man's arrogance to
reject; his reason is his taste.

**47. PROOFS OF TOTAL ABSENCE:**

Under this subject he too has gone astray. By 'ROWAAT' (narrators) he
means jurisprudents. The motive to him appears being the difference
between the jurisprudents and the kings or rulers. His evidence is the
saying of SAHEB JAWAHAR about the difference of opinion in the Friday
prayers. What he says or what he has gathered by way of information is
exaggeration. The writer is aiming at, a new forty volume jurisprudence
series of books. It is not so easy to reject others opinion.

'Rowaat' applies to those who know the science of HADITH (tradition) -
they should be experts in them to understand or make out sense. This has
no relation to recent times. He can not link this word NARRATORS or
'ROWAAT' to jurisprudents. Those who are the scholars in this science of
tradition are called 'ROWAAT' (NARRATORS).

Of course, the issue of the 'urisprudents' guardianship during the
absence of the Imam is mostly in dispute, or discussion, because it is a
matter of public concern. Since it is a question of jurisprudence and a
subordinery one, difference of opinion is common. In every certitude the
dispute runs in the essentiality of there being a ruler, and a sanction
from a jurisprudent. His proceeds, exercise of power and obligation of
obedience to him or the government should be authorized by a
jurisprudent. These are the issues totally of a different rank and
category mentioned in jurisprudence.

**48. PRIMARY SOURCES AND THE EXTENT OF THE GHEEBAT (ABSENCE)**

The writer is again wrong in assuming that the twelfth Imam, according
to the primitive and primary sources, was supposed to appear in the near
future. The sources, which he is titling as primary or primitive have
already said that the period of the absence (GHEEBAT) would be long and
indefinite and that it would be gestant with ordeals. Jaber Ansari
narrates the Prophet's (SAW) words: "He is that who remains hidden from
Shias and his friends.

His 'Imamate' (Imam hood) would be difficult for words to confirm
unless God tests the hearts against the belief." Jaber says that the
Prophet (SAW) spoke this when he first introduced the name and the
pedigree of Imam Mahdi. Ali Bin Abi Taleb in NAHJUL BALAGHA says: "There
is no ordeal longer than this and so hope remoter than this." There are
several narration in this regard. But none is there to indicate a hope
of his appearance in the near future.

There are a few sayings which do not have a ground and which are before
the Imam hood of the eight Imam, Imam Reza (AS), that the appearance of
the Imam was procrastinated due to the deeds of the Shia. The reason for
the delay is a deed. This is groundless.

**49. EVIDENCE OF REASON:**

The writer says that the resort to reason is due to the lack of
tradition or a fraud in tradition. Well, then what is the way to reach
the truth if reason is rejected? What is heard might be wrong; what is
said might be commentitious; what is told could be deceptive; well, then
to what alternative should one resort to as a dernier one? In every
dispute, reason has often stood powerful and strong. But on what reason
the writer is not willing to entertain a reason is astonishing enough.

In any case, supposing there is any deviation in a tradition this would
not amount to say that every tradition is invalid. What is false would
not be so impetus as to nullify the fact. If in a bundle one thing
happens to be short, it would not mean that the whole bundle is missing.
Likewise, if an argument lames it can not be said that reason can not
pace. In a human life hearing or oral evidences have a great
influence?

It is from this hearing that one garners knowledge, collects
acquaintance with sciences, treasures information and holds it as a rod
for aid. It is an irrefragable fact that in every age the market of
false and fraud has had been flourishing, very much profitable, very
much prolific. Still no one has denied the value of oral communications.
A general consensus has approved oral evidences and oral proofs. This
too can not be denied that every thing does not undergo the load of
reason as, it is only accustomed to the yoke of proof that should be
audible.

Besides, things pertaining belief or a faith like the prophet hood of
the prophets, and the Imamate of the Imams, or the Day of Judgment, or
the Next world one should create certitude in them. Else any proof, any
evidence, any testimony would not help because it is not in their range
to create a belief. If a narrator has narrated and the source of his
story is only one it should be attested by the standard of that only
source and should be an argumentally established one. Else, such
narration can not be trusted.

After this prelude we go back again to the issue of OHEEBAT (absence)
of the Imam and his Imam hood. To trust we need the source of the
stories or the narration that surround this subject to be trustworthy
and reliable. Who can be more so than the very person of the Prophet
himself? If what we hear does not convince us we revert to reason. What
is wrong in it?

If he says all the news and the hidings and the narration are
fabricated ones, deprived of reality and brefet of truth, from the side
of Bani Ommiya and Bani Abbas, that is, by their courts and courtiers,
to obnubilate the real status of the Imams and to solidate their own
stations, that is, to propagate after than realities and spread a mist
so that the mentalities could not visualize farther it could serve a
fortress to them necessary for their safety. No one denies this. Yes, it
was so; and, indeed, such they worked. But to what end? All such
fabricated stories, false narration, fake sayings, flame words, and
feigned traditions are distinguished. Therefore, they are sifted from
the real and authentic ones, as grains from dust. Besides, the narrators
too who were hired for this mission are pretty much discredited into
their biographies and they are no more credible in the science of HADITH
(tradition).

They are discarded. When distinction is drawn between the truth and the
false it is not a problem to ascertain the correct one from the wrong.
The credibility of the traditions that pertain the Imamat established.
This subject is a vast one, which opens wider avenues of discussion
before us. The enemy of the Shia has in every age taken stand against
them. The writer says that the narration and traditions are all false
and fabricated ones. If so, why the enemy at every time and in every era
of a caliph whether he be from BANI OMM'YA or he be from BANI ABBAS?

Why were the people restricted from telling and hearing the traditions
(that is the Prophet's words) that mirrored the real station of the
Imams and reflected their tributes? They are lies. Why care? Why be
afraid of lies? A lie lives shorter than truth. A lie is always lame. A
lie can not form a dread. The BANI OMM'YAS and BANI ABBAS even
imprisoned those who only narrated what they had heard from the Prophet
(SAW) about any of the twelve Imams.

They confiscated the belongings of those persons. We just ask WHY? The
writer is claiming that the traditions were a fraud. Volumes are written
about the atrocities of the caliphs because of the traditions which the
scholars spoken or wrote and the poets sang all in the praise of the
Prophet's Household - the Imams. Even the Sunni authorities, like
BUKHARI has written in his book SAHEEH about Imam Sadiq (AS), he first
curses them who had restricted the narration of such traditions. He
says: "God curse them for turning down the truth." Abu Hanifa, a student
of Imam Sadiq (AS) too admits the greatness of the truth surrounding the
Prophet's Household, the AHLUL BAIT. But all this is a lie to the
writer. We leave him to BUKHARI.

**50. REALITY OF REASON OR AUDIENCE:**

Reality of reason, as the writer says, is it preferable over the
reality of hearing? This is a question well drawn and it can be well
answered. The subject of IMAMAT is like that of prophet hood and the
conditions surrounding a prophet. To prove a general Imam hood, that is,
the need for an Imam and the conditions of Imam; reason is enough to
prove it. Had the issue of IMAMAT been one of those that remained out of
the premises conception and reason, not independent enough to have say
in it, the hearing of the proof would suffice like that of the Prophet's
(SAW) teachings.

What the Prophet (SAW) has advocated or instructed is in itself a
ground for the reason to be taken in account. The condition that an Imam
should have immunity from any wrong doings, that is, ESMAT, and for his
appointment people have no part; it is reasonable. On the other hand,
what is heard form the Prophet (SAW) in this regard is also a proof- a
ground to establish the truth. What the Prophet (SAW) said and what we
heard from him is alike with reason sufficient to establish the truth.

Reason can not accept what one accepts by hearing. For some items only
hearing of the proof is essential. For example, the existence of an
Imam, the benefits, the blessings that ensue there from can not be
proved by reason; they can be established only by audible evidence. This
is also applied to the prophet hood.

With regards to a particular Imam, the previous one introduces the
coming one, that is his successor - exactly the same as the prophets
did. Jesus (AS) foretold the prophet hood of Mohammed (SAW). The
predecessor informs the people as to whom his successor is. The
testament of one prophet or imam to the prophet-hood or the Imam hood of
the coming one is a proof to establish the truth of that prophet or the
Imam. To explain here we should say that a miracle is a proof for the
prophet. Almost all the prophets were blest with this power to perform
miracles by the Greatness of God.

The first Prophet can not establish the truth unless he should show or
comply with the demands to show a miracle. God has sent His Prophet with
the power to perform miracles because a miracle can not be denied, and
it establishes the truth of his being a prophet. A miracle is a proof
that of reason and that of hearing. The miracle can be seen by those who
are there and can not be witnessed by those who are somewhere else. Here
to them only the narration, the hearing is proof authentic enough to
establish the truth.

The Quran is the only miracle, which does not demand any hearing proof
because of its eternality. It is the perfection of Islam and its rules
and its morals. The Imamat of the first Imam. A text that of Divine
establishes its truth. It is the Prophet (SAW) who should establish the
Imamate of the Imam he is appointing. The Prophet's word here is
authority because h is God's command through the Prophet's word.

Imam too performs miracle. The proof of Imamate is his miracle or the
Prophet's appointment or word. Since the Imam is appointed by the
Prophet (SAW) by the command of God is the proof of his truth.

In other words it is upon the Prophet (SAW) to establish the Imamate
whom he has introduced under God's order. Supposingly the proofs, which
are forwarded by the Prophet, were not available to us or they become
doubtful or various interpretations had made it dubious, then the one
man to turn to would have been Ali Bin Abi Taleb. As there being no one
other than him referred to or mentioned by the Prophet. Since the man in
guardian is one, the benefit of doubt can not be availed by any one
else. It was one man, as told by the Prophet (SAW), instructed and
specified by him. Here the truth goes to the favor of Ali Bin Abi Taleb
because there was no one second to him.

An Imam appointed by God through His Prophet is infallible and immune
from sin. He should act as a leader, guide, and guardian of the people
in all their religious, social, political and social spheres. Ali Bin
Abi Taleb was a Divine Imam immune from sin, infallible and impeccable.
There was other than himself that such a claim was made.

As for the twelfth Imam, the earth should have God's representative,
'HUJJAT', that is, the Authority, the witness. In no age can the earth
remain without one. The claim of Imamate is made to him alone. So he
stands as the Imam whether present or absent. The others who made the
claim proved themselves liars. In the denial of Imamate we deny justice
to God. It is the demand of justice, as reason dictates that God should
keep His Authority in the world. If evil grows and is not checked then
it could be attributed to God and that is absolutely unreasonable.

**50. STANDARD OF MERCY "LOTF"**

The writer has discussed in length this subject. The main theme is the
dispute which has argued both Asha'ira and Motazila, what it goes to
good and evil and which rejects one (Asha'ira) and confirms the other
who is Motizala.

We have repeatedly said that Shiasm is an independent school, its
originality is that of Islam, it is not influenced by any extraneous
thoughts or any exotic ideas, it is strictly in line coherent,
congruous, and concurring with the teachings of the Impeccable and
Infallible Imams. In logical issues, arguments have included the
standard of LOTF (MERCY OR GRACE). The Shia has followed and benefited
from the Holy Quran. The gist of belief, the theme of faith, the kernel
of trust lies with the holy persons of the Imams in the Shia school of
thought. This is very close to reason that the ITEZAL sect might have
extracted many things from Shiasm, and depended on Shia thought. Their
leaders could have been the pupils of our Imams.

'LOTF', or GRACE with the GHEEBAT (absence) of the twelfth Imam is
mostly rejected by the Sunnis. The writer has reiterated the reply from
the Shia sources. We suffice on that.

The occultation of the twelfth Imam is a thing in itself an independent
subject, already foretold by the Holy Prophet (SAW) himself. Ah Bin Abi
Taleb too has referred to it. Shia and Sunni traditionists have both
mentioned it. Jaber too has said that the absence of the twelfth Imam is
a grace (LOTF). The Prophet (SAW) said: "By him who has sent me with the
Message, they will be illuminated by his light, and they will benefit
from his guardianship, as people benefit from the sun from behind the
clouds."

To deny every 'LOTF' (Grace or mercy) of the existence of the absent
Imam, and to deny its influence, that is, the graceful or merciful one,
in the era of his absence (GHEEBAT) does not fall in line with reason.
The grace, mercy or the 'LOYF' exists, as it is contemporary with the
existence of the Imam whether he be present or absent from touch or
sight. If not so, then for humans what is the usefulness of him - a
Divine choice - obliged by Divine will to remain in hiding. God does not
do a thing, which is vain and void of sense, or short of benefit, or
lame in advantage. Whatever proceeds from the wish or will of God bears
fruit to mankind. Fecundity is His intention;

prolific to His design; grace and mercy his degree; and LOTF His Imam
the hidden Imam is an absolute personification of His mercy. It is
through 'LOTF' that the Imam should be appointed by God and designated
through the Prophet (SAW). Imam is in GHEEBAT, that is, he is absent;
but the mercy is current - the snows of the Himalayas are far from
sight, but the Ganges flows down to the Bay of Bengal. In Bengal, the
Himalaya peaks are not visible nor are they in other regions;

but the Ganges flows, irrigating vast patches of land throughout the
Northern Belt to the East. Since we do not see the snows of the
Himalayas should we deny the existence of the Ganges river as well? If
it is not a mercy, then Mahdi is not an Imam. It is his Imamate that
makes him graceful to man. It is the scent of a flower that gives it
worth. Flowers made of paper could be more elegant; but they have no
grace of odor and no LOTF of fragrance. Tosi says: "The Imam's existence
is LOTF, his action LOTF." Ali Bin Abi Taleb says: "Else,

the proofs of God will be void and vain will be His signs." An Imam
whether present or absent is a 'grace', a 'mercy', a 'LOTF' of God
because he is His sign, guardian of His religion, holds His office and
was chosen by Rim. The Imam who can carry out or execute the office of
Imam hood also imparts the GRACE of God. To deny him the GRACE is to
deny him the Imamate. It is not possible that, a Prophet can not guide
or influence the people. The mercy of his prophet hood can not be
denied, because of its essentiality with prophet hood, and its being in
consistence with the office of prophet hood. To appoint an Imam is God's
mercy, and mercy from God is His obligation towards His servants and
creatures.

God has appointed the son of Imam Hasan Askari as the Imam. If we deny
it, it tantamount to say that God has abstained from bestowing mercy
upon us in the period of GHEEBAT. To say so is to deny God. It is by His
Mercy that we have an Imam. His GHEEBAT (absence) does not reject the
reality whatever hails from God - is LOTF; the 12th Imam is LOTF and his
GHEEBAT is LOTF because it is God's order.

**51. ISMAT (INFALLIBILITY) of 12TH IMAM:**

The writer has claimed that due to his research, he has come to the
following conclusions; that the theory of "Esmat" or immunity from sin
has come about and even grown deeper as time has passed, because of the
distance between the people and the Imams. He uses IBN BABWAY and Mofeed
as his witnesses. A belief remains stable throughout the passage of
time. Everything else along with time diminishes changes and even
vanishes. A true religion does not undergo this element. A true religion
remains original. The present day belief of the Shia is consistent with
the past. The flow of ages has not decreased nor increased it.

That the Shia in the earlier ages did not believe in the 'ESMAT'; is a
statement groundless and unfounded. As they grew distant from the Imams
they believed in their 'ESMAT'. In the words, the factor of this belief
is the distance. This way of thinking is utterly ignorant. The Shias
have always held the same belief. He has preserved what the school of
Imamate or in particular, the school of Imam Jafer Sadiq (AS) has given
to him.

His belongings are of a known origin and of a trustworthy brand.
Likewise the belief of Shaikh Mofeed was not a new one. The narration,
traditions, and interpretations of the Quranic verses have been used as
his base. What SADOOQ says in 'AYUN', is not of his invention. What a
Moslem knows generally, he has collected in 'AYUN' We do not see a thing
of non-existence changing its guise to something of existence. What
Shiasm has said is only the echo of what the Prophet (SAW) had uttered
or the Imams had told. The issue of ESMAT.

The immunity from sin, is no exception to this rule. Sadooq has
repudiated the idea. But from his tongue a great many lies are being
born. The Prophet's sayings of THAQALAIN (two heavy things), and his
words "ALI is WITH TRUTH AND TRUTH WITH ALI", "ALI is WITH THE QURAN AND
THE QURAN WITH ALI" all these and several other ones have elucidly
expound and enlarged the comprehension and the very gist of ESMAT. The
writer asks as to why the Shia paid or pay heed to these words of the
Prophet (SAW). Or why they draw a meaning out of the sayings of the
prophet or recite the Quran and try to understand it? Why isn't the
writer prepared to conceive that without ESMAT, there can be no Imam or
prophet? ESMAT is fundamental and it is the condition that qualities the
imam for Imam hood. No one has this except those chosen ones. Then, no
one is a prophet or imam except the chosen ones.

**53. A COLLECTIVE REJECTION TO THE CALIPHATE OF ABUBAKR:**

As for 'IJMA', or 'agreement', the writer says at the end of ESMAT. The
Shia Imamia regard this method as being void and null because of the
pressure of an Imam amidst the people. The writer adds that the Shia
have chosen to disregard the consensus (IJMA) of Sunnis who did the same
to give a legitimacy to the caliphate of Abubakr.

Let us explain here that it had no bearing on the caliphate of Abubakr
at all. An Imam should enter into consensus (IJMA); else, he has no
validity. To give value or credit or authenticity to an 'IJMA' in which
the Imam might not have participated is wrong and not valid. Next,
Abubakr did not carry any consensus. He became caliph on the strength of
terror, and tyranny. People were forced td acknowledge his authority. Is
it a consensus? So; why wasn't that consensus present with Ali Bin Abi
Taleb? Why didn't the men of importance among the Bani Hashem, not
surrender to his authority? But the writer still calls it a consensus
'IJMA'. If IJMA (consensus) was the way or a salutary ground that gives
validity to the caliphates; why didn't Omar go through it? No 'IJMA'
(consensus) took place; however Omar became caliph. The criterion can
not be conceived? They advocate and they act differently.

Othman as well came to power through a committee of six men appointed
by Omar. Where had the 'IJMA' gone? They act as though public opinion
means something to them. However what is obvious, is that they did not
care at all about the 'IJMA' or consensus, that is the public opinion.
The obvious and apparent evidence points out that three men came to
power in three different ways. One, with a so called 'IJMA' (consensus),
another, no consensus at all- just by force, the third, by a pre
appointed six men committee. Mawiya too openly made his resurgence to
the caliph of his time, Ali. He was a dictator - he cared for neither
law nor rule, no power limited him. Where was the 'IJMA' consensus
now?

The writer ignores that the 'IJMA' was scalped, and changed to meet
their demands. The writer knows well that those rulers and caliphs had
no popular backing nor a publish support. The 'IJMA' then was a slogan,
a protect, and no more. If a real 'IJMA', or in our acquainted term, a
referendum were to be launched they would see who would succeed and who
would lose. Caliphs such as Abu Bakr,

Othman and Mawiya were put into power by a few people who were
motivated by their own interests. They met and agreed; they designed,
decided and acted - there always hung a veil and they named this secrecy
as a referendum 'IJMA'. Tyranny stood at hand to come to their aid.

**54. ABOUT "IJMA" AGAIN MISTAKES:**

The writer says that in order to invalidate the authority of Abu Bakr
the Shia subjected the 'IJMA' to the participation of an infallible
Imam. It was a reality that any 'IJMA' or referendum could lose
authencity if the Imam did not participate in it. If 'IJMA' is their
ground why was Ah absent in that 'IJMA'? There were many besides Ali who
did not know of such an 'IJMA' at all. The Imam was not referred to; he
was not asked at all; his opinion was never sought;

in fact, it was kept an arcanum from him. Then what referendum or
"IJMA" was it !?! This is a trick, misleading the public under the name
of 'EJMA'. The result is always deceiving because the IJMA is deceiving.
In truth, in reality, in fact, can the writer tell us that Abu Bakr
reached power on the strength of public opinion - EJMA? If so, why was
it that in the EJMA many were not present? Ali's opinion was not
important? Was he not one among Muslims; was it not important what he
said? His opinion was never sought. So, this was not an 'EJMA'. Let them
seek for some other name. This 'EJMA' with a design preplanned and a
malefic motive worked out into long concealed implacability.

Acrimony was from its very foundation, and from the very beginning it
was invalid, vague, void, and null nothing beyond a show. But the name
still stood 'EJMA'. The Prophet's (SAW) corpse was still fresh in the
ground. It was only Ali (AS) busy and occupied in his funeral, and they
in their plan and feigned 'EJMA'. It originated, as we said earlier, in
order to save face. The Prophet (SAW) died. They left his side and
hurried to SAQIFA.

ABUBAKR was declared there as caliph. None knew except some who held
contradicting motives adversary intentions and inimical designs. To this
the writer has given the name of 'EJMA'. The course of Islam was changed
while the body of the Prophet (SAW) still on the ground was not yet
buried. People were astonished. Force was used and terror was applied in
order to silence them and obtain their acceptance.


They conceived of plan in order to give them legitimacy. They decided
to brand it with the mark of 'EJMA'. A saying from the Prophet (SAW) too
imputed; "My nation does not gather over wrong nor go astray." If this
was the ground of legitimacy, then what was the legitimacy for Omar,
Othman, Mawiya and several others becoming caliphs? Why was the EJMA not
practicable there or why did they not resort to it? No answer.


