A Supplication from Imam `Ali ibn al‑Husayn Zain al‑ `Abidin
============================================================

*Supplication from Imam \`Ali ibn al‑Husayn Zain al‑ \`Abidin peace be
upon him, from al‑Sahifatul Sajjadiyah*

The following Dua' has been taught to us by the 4th Imam, al‑Sajjad,
peace be upon him, as he is commonly known. The Arabic and English Dua'
are as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللَّهمُمَّ إنِّي أَسْتَخِيرُكَ بِعِلْمِكَ فَصَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّد
وآلِهِ وَاقْضِ لِيْ بالْخِيْرَة وَأَلْهِمْنَا مَعْرِفَةَ الاخَتْيارِ،
وَاجْعَل ذَلِكَ ذَرِيعَةً إلى الرِّضا بِما قَضَيْتَ لَنَا
وَالتِّسْلِيْمِ لِمَا حَكَمْت. فَأَزح عَنَّا رَيْبَ الارتِياب،
وَأَيدْنا بِيَقِين الْمخْلصِينَ، وَلاتَسُمْنا عَجْزَ الْمَعْرِفةِ
عَمَّا تَخَيَّرْت، فَنَغْمِط قَدْركَ، وَنَكْزَه مَوضِعَ رِضاك،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ونجْنَحَ إلَى الَّتِي هَي أَبْعَدُ مِنْ حُسْنِ العاقِبة وَأَقْرَبُ إلى
ضِدِّالْعافيَةِ، حَبِّبْ إليْنا مانَكرَهُ مِنْ قَضائِك وَ سَهَّل
عَلَيْنَا مَا نَسْتَصْعِبُ مِنْ حُكْمِكَ، وَأَلهمنا الانْقِياد لِمَا
أَوْرَدْتَ عَلَيْنا منْ مَشِيَّتِكَ حَتَّى لا نُحِبَّ تَأخِيرَ ما
عَجَّلْتَ، ولاتَعْجيْلَ ماأَخَّرْتَ، وَلانَكْرَهَ مَا أَحْبَبْتَ،
ولاَنَتَخَيَّرَ ما كَرِهْت، وَاخْتِمْ لَنَا بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْمَدُ
عاقِبةً وَأكْرَمُ مَصِيراً إنَّكَ تُفِيدُ الْكَرِمَةَ وَتُعْطِي
الْجَسِيمَةَ، وَتَفْعَل ماتُرِيدُ وَأَنْتَ عَلَى كُلٌ شَيءٍ قَدِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O' God, I ask from Thee the best in Thy knowledge, so bless Muhammad and
his Household and decree for me the best!

Inspire us with knowledge to chose the best and make that a means to
being pleased with what Thou hast decreed for us and submitting to what
Thou hast decided! Banish from us the doubt of misgiving and confirm us
with the certainty of the sincere!

Visit us not with incapacity to know what Thou hast chosen, lest we
despise Thy measuring out, dislike the place of Thy good pleasure, and
incline toward that which is further from good outcome and nearer to the
opposite of well‑being!

Make us love what we dislike in Thy decree and make easy for us what we
find difficult in Thy decision!

Inspire us to yield to that which Thou bringest upon us by Thy will,
lest we love the delay of what Thou hast hastened and the hastening of
what Thou hast delayed, dislike what Thou lovest, and choose what Thou
dislikest!

Seal us with that which is most praised in outcome and most generous in
issue! Surely Thou givest generous gain, bestowest the immense, dost
what Thou wilt, *and Thou art powerful over everything!*


