Section 1: The Necessity of Performing an Istikhara for all Affairs
===================================================================

1) Istikhara: Success for a Muslim
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ و آله:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ سَعادَةِ أبْنِ آدَمَ أسْتِخارَتُهُ اللهَ وَرِضاهُ بِما قَضَى
اللهُ وَ مِنْ شَقْوَةِ أبْنِ آدَمَ تَرْكُهُ أسْتِخارَةَ اللهَ وَ
سَخَطُهُ بِما قَضَى اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Prophet of Allah said: \`Among the felicities of the children of
Adam is that he asks the best from Allah and His pleasure in that which
Allah has decreed for him. And among the misfortunes of the children of
Adam is abandoning the asking of what is best from Allah and not being
pleased with what Allah has decreed.* " [^1]5

The actual meaning of the word *Istikhara* is to seek the best from
Allah in one's affairs, which is not only commendable, but is also
highly recommended *(mustahab)* in Islam. This type of *Istikhara* which
has been continuously mentioned in the ahadith is in actuality, one form
or type of supplication (Dua) which Allah Himself has given great
importance to in the Holy Book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(قُلْ مَا يَعْبَؤُ بِكُمْ رَبِّي لَوْ لاَ دُعَائِكُمْ...)
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Say: My Lord would not care for you were it not for your prayer
(supplication)... "*** **(al‑Qur'an 25-77)**

In this, the first hadith, before starting any job or action, a
supplication, which is a form of *Istikhara* has been recommended to be
performed. We have been told that this is one of the roads that lead to
a person's happiness.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر گنج سعادت كه خداً داًد به حافظ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اًز يُمن دُعای شب و ورد سحری بود
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whatever treasures of happiness that God gave to Hafiz*

*Was from the way of the night supplication and prayers in the morning.*
(Hafiz)

2) Istikhara: A Recommendation from the Ahl al‑Bait
---------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلإِمَامُ عَلَيٌّ{ عَليهِ السَّلامْ } فِي وَصِيَّتِهِ إِلى إِبْنِهِ {
عَليهِ السَّلامْ } :
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَ أَكْثَرِ الإِسْتِخارَةَ، إِذا أَمْضَيْتَ فَاسْتَخِرْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*al‑Imam 'Ali (‘as)* *in the will to his son recommended that,* "...
*(In all your actions) continuously ask (Allah) for the best.* "[^2]

*He also said, \`Any time you have decided to perform an act, then ask
(Allah) for what is best.* " [^3]7

The method of asking for what is best that has been most often mentioned
in the ahadith, including the hadith mentioned above and has been
emphasized, is that one in which one asks for the best from Allah in the
form of a Dua' *(supplication).*

This type of seeking what is best is not associated with the instance in
which a person has a doubt or can not make a decision. Rather, from the
traditions of the *Ahl* *al‑Bait* (‘as), it is clear that before we
carry out any action ‑ no matter how small or insignificant it may be ‑
we are recommended and encouraged to seek help, and constantly remember
Allah in all of our affairs. [^4]8

3) Istikhara: As Taught by the Ahl al‑Bait
------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلإمَامُ الْباقِرُ{ عَليهِ السَّلامْ }:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنَّا نَتَعَلَّمُ الإسْتِخَارَةَ كَمَا نَتَعَاَّمُ السُّورَةَ مِنْ
اللهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*al‑Imam al‑Baqir (‘as), said: "We (the Ahl al‑Bait) teach the method of
Istikhara (asking Allah for what is best) just as we teach the Surahs of
the Book of Allah, the Glorious and the High.* " [^5]9

In reality, the *Istikhara* or asking the best from Allah is a type of
spiritual link or connection and request of one's needs from the humble
servant to the Needless and Self‑Existing Creator.

The supplications and requesting what is best ‑ both before and during
all acts, establishes a deep and continuous relationship between the
servant of Allah ‑ who is always in need of help, and his needless
Master.

This is the type of *Istikhara* that has been emphasized by the
*A'immah* of the Ahl al‑Bait , and was part of their natural disposition
*(fitrah).*

The *Istikhara* with the Tasbih beads and the Qur'an is the final step
after one still entertains doubts and uncertainty in his mind and should
only be done **after** seeking the best from Allah , thinking*,*
weighing out the pros and cons, and requesting advice from others.

[^1]: Bihar al‑Anwar, Volume 77, Page 159, Hadith 153

[^2]: Nahj al‑Balaagha, Saying 31

[^3]: Ghurur al‑Hikm, Saying 3988

[^4]: The various types of Istikhara by Dua' have been mentioned in
Ahadith 16 to 22, which will follow.

[^5]: Wasa'il ash‑Shia, Volume 7, Page 66, Hadith 10101


