Section 3: Penalty for Not Performing an Istikhara
==================================================

8) Failure in One's Actions
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإِمَامُ الصَّادِقُ عَليهِ السَلامْ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقُولُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ ((مِنْ شِقَاءِ عَبْدِي أنْ يَعْمَلَ
الأَعْمَالَ وَ لاَ يَسْتَخِيرُ بِي.))
  </p>
</blockquote>

*al‑Imam al‑Sadiq (‘as)* *said that Allah, the Glorious and High has
said: "Of the reasons for the misfortune of My servant is that he
performs an action but does not seek the best from Me.* " [^1]14

The meaning of seeking the best which has been recommended to be done
before all tasks as has been mentioned in the above Hadith, which if not
performed will lead one to misfortune, is simply asking for the best
from Allah.

It is the simple task of saying, \`O' *Allah guide us to whatever you
deem is best and whatever your pleasure lies in'* that one can achieve
this mental state. This can grant us prosperity in our works.

9) Ruin and Destruction
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإمَامُ عَلِيُّ عَليهِ السلامْ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِسْتَخِرْ وَ لاَ تَتَخَيَّرْ فَكَمْ مَنْ تَخَيَّرَ أمْراً كَانَ
هَلاَكُهُ فِيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*al‑Imam 'Ali (‘as)*, *said: "Seek the best from Allah and do not decide
on your own (when you intend to do anything). How many people have
decided on their own in performing a task and their destruction was in
that.* "[^2]

The meaning of the above Hadith and Ahadith number 8 and 10 do not mean
that before one weighs the pros and cons, uses his own intelligence and
consults with others, he should immediately open the Qur'an or take hold
of his Tasbih beads and seek what is good for himself and let his future
be decided by one of these methods. One who acts in this way has
definitely not understood the true meaning of the *Istikhara*.

Rather, these ahadith ‑ in addition to providing us with valuable
supplications, also help us to establish a spiritual link between us and
our Creator.

10) Deprivation of Blessings from Allah
---------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإِمَامُ الصَّادِقُ عَليهِ السلامْ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ دَخَلَ فِي أَمْرٍ بِغَيْرِ اسْتِخَارَةٍ ثُمَّ ابْتَلىَ لَم
يُؤْجَرْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*al‑Imam al‑Sadiq 'said: "Whosoever enters into an action without asking
Allah for what is the best and then falls into a difficulty will not
receive the reward (as one who had gone thru trials and
tribulations).”*[^3]

There are some people who without the least amount of contemplation,
investigation and seeking advice from others, resort to "the well‑known
types of *Istikhara*" to decide everything in their lives.

Before they proceed to do anything, without thought and getting
recommendations from others, they seek help and resort to the Qur'an or
the Tasbih beads to help them decide the path to choose.

It must be pointed out that this view about the *Istikhara* is
completely wrong and is diametrically opposed to the clear verses of the
Qur'an and the ahadith which clearly mention the need for one to use his
own God­given intellect and thinking before proceeding to perform any
action.

These kind of people who consider the value of thought and seeking
advice from others to be something baseless are actually suffering from
a lack of intelligence and in most instances in their daily lives, will
be bound to blunder.

[^1]: Bihar al‑Anwar, Volume 91, Page 222, Hadith 126

[^2]: Ghurur al‑Hikm, Saying 2346

[^3]: al‑Mahasin, Volume 2, Page 432, Hadith 2498  / Bihar al‑Anwar
Volume 91, Page 223, Hadith 2


