Section 5: Danger of not Being Satisfied with the Outcome of an Istikhara
=========================================================================

14) Leveling Accusations against Allah
--------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإِمَامُ الصَّادِقُ عَليهِ السَلامْ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنِ اسْتَخَارَ اللهَ فِي أَمْرِهِ فَعُمِلَ أَحَدُ الأَمْرَينِ
فَعُرِضَ فِي قَلْبِهِ شَيْءٌ إتَّهَمَ اللهَ فِي قَضَائِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*al‑Imam al‑Sadiq (as) said: "Whosoever seeks the best from Allah in his
affair, and acts upon one of the options (either performs or does not
perform an action) but has something enter into his heart (unhappiness
or doubt regarding to how he acted), has leveled an (unfounded)
accusation against Allah.*" [^1]22

It is possible that not being truly happy with the outcome of the
*Istikhara* has it roots in one of the following:

1. Doubt whether Allah (swt) truly wants the best (for His servants),
which in reality is laying an unsupported accusation that Allah is
greedy and does not want good for His servants.

2. Doubt in the knowledge of Allah concerning what is truly good, which
in reality is laying the charge that Allah is ignorant and is imperfect.

3. Doubt in the power of Allah in deciding what is truly the best. This
action charges Allah with being weak and powerless.

4. Doubt that Allah (swt) does not pay attention to His servants and
their asking for the best from Him. This action insinuates that there is
some defect in the mercy of Allah .

One must have complete certainty in whatever Allah has decided, and be
pleased that He would do only what is good for His servants. This is
because without a doubt, Allah will guide His servants to that which is
good and that in which lies his betterment, however many sins the
servant of Allah has on his record.

15) Being Distanced from the Mercy of Allah
-------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُئِلَ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ الله عَليهِ السَلامْ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَبْغَضَ الْخَلْقِ إِلىَ الله؟ قَالَ عَليهِ السَلامْ: مَنْ
يَتَّهِمُ إلَيْهِ. قِيلَ وَ أحَدٌ مَنْ يَتَّهِمُ اللهَ؟ قَالَ عَليهِ
السَّلام نَعَمْ. مَنِ اسْتَخَارَ اللهَ فَجَائَتْهُ الْخِيَرَةُ بِمَا
يُكْرِهُ فَسَخَطَ. فَذَاِلِكَ يَتَّهِمُ اللهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*al‑Imam al‑Sadiq (as) was once asked: "Who is the worst creation in the
eyes of Allah?" The Imam (as) ,replied, "The one who levels an
accusation against Him (Allah). " The person retorted, "Is it possible
for a person to level an accusation against Allah?" The Imam (as)
,replied, "Yes. The one who asks Allah for the best and it (the best) is
given to him but in the way of something that he does not like, and he
becomes upset. Thus, this is the one who has leveled an accusation
against Allah.* ‘’ [^2]23

[^1]: Bihar al‑Anwar, Volume 91, Page 225

[^2]: Makarim al‑Akhlaq / Mahasin Barqi, Page 598, Hadith 5 / Bihar
al‑Anwar, Volume 91, Page 223, Hadith 2


