The Author
==========

Shaykh Saduq ibn Babawayhi is universally regarded among the Ithna
'Ashari Shi'a as one of their foremost doctors and traditionists.

Professor E.G. Browne, in discussing the founders of the Shi'a theology,
says “The most important of these earlier divines are 'the three
Muhammads', al-Kulayni (Muhammad bin Ya'qub, died 329/941), Ibn
Babawayhi (Muhammad bin 'Ali bin Musa, died 381/991-2) and the already
mentioned Tusi (Muhammad bin Hasan, died 460/1067).

Of these, the first composed the *Kafi,* the second *Man la
Yahduruhu'l-faqih* (a title which approximates in sense to our familiar
'Every man his own Lawyer'), and the third, the *Istibsar* and the
*Tahdhibu'1-Ahkam,* which are known collectively amongst the Shi'a as
'The Four Books' *(al-Kutubu'1-arba 'a)* and of which the full
particulars will be found in the above-mentioned *Kashfu'1-Hujub”.*[^1]

Considering the high repute in which he is held, the early times in
which he lived, the great influence he had on later theologians and
traditionists, and the numerous works which are attributed to him, it is
very unfortunate that the earliest works which give an account of his
life are extremely brief and give us no indication whatever of his
character, his studies, his travels and his life.

Thus, at the end of our enquiry, we are faced with the problem of
writing the account of a man, the whole of whose life is summarized by
Tusi in about four lines (Tusi, *List,* 204) and by Najashi in three
lines at the beginning and two lines at the end *(Rijal.* 276,279). Thus
Browne is fully justified in observing that “The older 'Books of the
Men' *(Kutubu'r-Rijal),* such as the works of at-Tusi and an-Najashi,
are generally very jejune, and suited for reference rather than
reading”.[^2]

The two earliest sources for the life of Ibn Babawayhi are
*Shaykhu't-Ta'ifa* Muhammad bin Hasan bin 'Ali at-Tusi, born 385/995,
died 460/1067.[^3] His *Fihrist* was published by A. Sprenger in the
*Bibliotheca Indica,* Calcutta, in 1853 - 1855*,* under the title of
Tusi's *List of Shi'ah Books and Alam al-Hoda's Notes on Shi'ah
Biography.* It has always been considered an early and reliable
authority.[^4]

The second source is Ahmad bin 'Ali an-Najashi, born 372/982, died
450/1063.[^5] His *Kitabu'r-Rijal* (Bombay, 1317/1899-1900) is a very
useful book of reference, and is particularly exhaustive as it regards
lists of works written by each author. On a comparison of these two,
Najashi will be found to be the better and more detailed work, as has
been pointed out by Sprenger.[^6] Najashi gives a very comprehensive
list of the Shaykh's works.

The later works of reference, like *Qisasu'1-'Uluma', Amalu'1-Amil,
Muntaha'1-Maqal* and others repeat with certain additions the
information given in the earlier works. It is therefore safe to treat
Tusi and Najashi as the basic authorities.

Of later works, I have made the fullest use of *Rawdatu'l-Jannat* by
Muhammad Baqir bin Hajji Zaynu'l-Abidin al-Musawi al-Khwansari
(lithographed Tehran, 1306/1888). This is the most scholarly and
comprehensive of modem authorities, and as far as can be ascertained
from the Imami scholars themselves, they place great reliance on it. The
account of Shaykh Saduq, although it extends to four pages (557-560),
consists mainly of a discussion of his views, opinions on his greatness
as a doctor of theology, his soundness (being *thiqa)* as a
traditionist, and various other matters, without giving us details of
his life or glimpses of his character.[^7]

With regard to his writings, according to Professor E.G. Browne, the
Q*isasu'1-'Ulama'* attributes 189 (iv. 377,405) and Najashi 193 works to
the Shaykh Saduq (EL, ji, 366*).* Tusi however mentions 43, and
*Rawdatu'1-Jannat* 17 only. In addition to these authorities, such
manuscript catalogues as were available in Bombay have been consulted by
me, and after dealing with his biography, the results carefully stated.

Abu Ja'far Muhammad bin 'Ali bin al-Husayn bin Musa Ibn Babawayhi[^8]
al-Qummi is generally known as *ash-Shaykh as-Saduq.* His place of birth
is not mentioned either by Tusi or by Najashi, but Donaldson says that
he was born in Khorasan.[^9] In 355/966 he went to Baghdad, apparently
from Khorasan, and died in Rayy in 381/991.[^10] Ahlwardt in the *Berlin
Catalogue* says that the date of death is 39l/l00l,[^11] and this is
followed by some authors. There is however no sufficient authority for
this date.

Of his life and character we know nothing; but of his birth a most
entertaining legend is preserved. According to Tusi and Najashi,[^12]
when in Iraq, his father 'Ali bin al-Husayn Ibn Babawayhi al-Qummi (died
329/940-941) met Abu'l-Qasim Husayn bin Ruh, who was the third of the
four agents of the Hidden Imam during the period of 73 years, 256-339
A.H[^13]., and asked him several questions. Thereafter 'Ali wrote a
letter to him through 'Ali bin Ja'far bin al-Aswad[^14] in order that
the letter be delivered to the Hidden Imam.

In the letter 'Ali asked for a son, to which he received a reply from
Husayn bin Ruh saying “We have prayed to Allah for it on your behalf and
you will be rewarded with two goodly sons”. Afterwards two sons were
born of a slave girl *(min umm walad),* Abu Ja'far Muhammad (the
celebrated Shaykh Saduq) and Abu Abdullah Husayn. It is reported from
his younger brother Husayn that Muhammad used to pride himself on the
circumstances of his birth. **أنا ولدت بدعوة** **صاحب الأمر و يفتخر
بذلك.**

The same story is reported in *Rawdatu'l-Jannat* with certain variations
in two different versions: (1) Abu Ja'far Muhammad bin 'Ali al-Aswad
*(not '*Ali b. Ja'far al-Aswad, as said by Tusi and Najashi) was asked
to request Ruh to ask the Imam, and no letter was written. (2) Abu
Ja'far asked Ruh and was informed after three days that he had prayed
for 'Ali and the prayer was accepted. 'Ali had three sons, Muhammad
(Shaykh Saduq), Hasan and Husayn.

'Ali was a theologian and divine and taught Shaykh Saduq.[^15] Muhammad,
the eldest son was the most famous of all. The second brother Hasan was
devoted to piety and did not generally mix with the people.[^16] The
third and youngest brother was Husayn, also a well-known jurist and
theologian.

Shaykh Saduq apparently taught at Baghdad and being a contemporary of
the Buwayhid Ruknu'd-Dawla, entered into controversies at his behest. He
was well known for his knowledge, memory, justice, intelligence and
reliability; and he is universally regarded as a pillar of religion. Ibn
Tawus and Shaykh Sulayman accepted his authority among others.

Muhammad Baqir Majlisi (who according to E.G. Browne was “one of the
greatest, most powerful and most fanatical *mujtahids* of the Safawi
period”, the well-known author of *Biharu'1-Anwar,* an encyclopedic work
in 25 volumes, died 1111/ 1699-1700; see *Pers. Lit.,* iv. 403, 409-410)
says that his traditions were declared as reliable by a decision of a
number of *'Ulama'.*[^17]

His Works
---------

With regard to the works of Shaykh Saduq, it has already been pointed
out that Najashi mentions 193, the *Qisasu'l-'Ulama'* 189, Tusi 43 and
*Rawdatu'l-Jannat* 17 works. The last-named work says that he is the
author of 300 books[^18]; this clearly follows the tradition of earlier
authorities. This wide divergence in number, although it cannot be fully
explained, may be due to the fact that the titles mentioned by Najashi
may, in a large number of cases, be called the chapters of a book,
rather than books themselves. It is also possible that in some instances
the same book may have been known by two different names. The lists
below first consist of the books which are known and extant.

The two earliest authorities are Tusi and Najashi, and they give the
following authorities for their statements:

**Tusi:** After mentioning 43 works, he says that there also exist
smaller works, the names of which are not known to him (p.305). His
sources are a number of people, chief among whom are (1) Shaykh Abu
'Abdullah Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Nu'man, (2) al-Husayn bin
'Ubaydu'l-lah, (3) Abu'l-Hasan Ja'far bin al-Hasan bin Khaska al-Qummi,
and (4) Abu Zakariya' Muhammad bin Sulayman al-Hamrani, all of whom were
personally in touch with the author.

**Najashi**: He says that some of the books were actually read by his
father 'Ali bin Ahmad bin al-'Abbas an-Najashi - with the author, and
the rest were specifically mentioned by him (the father) when he heard
of them at Baghdad. The father was given an *ijaza* (permission) by
Shaykh Saduq to teach all the books.

It is very interesting to observe that Khwansari in *Rawdatu'l-Jannat,*
after mentioning seventeen works, observes that “the rest of the works
have not come down to us”*.*

It will be observed that a full reference to all manuscript catalogues
has not been possible in Bombay. Hence only a selection from the most
important catalogues has been made. Nevertheless, it is hoped that a
clear idea of the extant works of the Shaykh can be obtained from List
A, and List B may be used for reference as Najashi is not always
available and an alphabetical arrangement may facilitate reference.

The manuscript catalogues used are indicated by abbreviations, which can
easily be identified with the help of Brockelmann's *Geschichte der Arab
ischen Litteratur* and the recent *Supplement,* where full references
are to be found. The only exceptions are Sipahsalar, Browne and one or
two others, which are included in the list of abbreviations.

> Works known and preserved

1. **كتاب (رسالة) الاعتقادات** Risalatu'l-I'tiqadat. Not mentioned by
Tusi or Najashi. *Kashf,* 239; *RJ,* no.14.  
**Text**. *GAL,* i. 187; *GAL,* Sup. i. 322 (7) numerous references.
According to Brockelmann “Eng. Trans. By A. A. A. Fyzee, 1932” (!);
Browne, p.16;Brit.Mus.,851; Cod. Br. Mus., add. 19,623; Rieu, 385; Pet:
Am., 61; lv. ASB. Ar., 828, 829, 830;Berlin, 1944.  
**Lith**. Najaf 1343/1924-25 (together with three other *risalas),*
pp.234 = N; Delhi (with Urdu trans. by Md. I'jaz Husayn), Ithna'Ashari
Press, 1347 (1st ed. 1332), sub nom. **هدية جعفري ترجمة** **عقائد شيخ
صدوق** (sic) **عليه الرحمة**. Tehran (together with four other
*risalas),* 1274 = T.  
**Persian Translation.** Iv. Cur., 386. Sipahsalar, vol. ii, is not
available to me, but in vol.i, p.534, no.1839 is mentioned in the
footnote.  
**Commentary**. Arabic, **تصحيح الاعتقادات** *Tashihu'l-I'tiqadat* by
Sh. Mufid, see *GAL,* Sup. i. 323. Printed in the Arabic periodical
*al-Murshid,* Baghdad, 1344 sqq., vols. I, II and III were available to
me by the kindness of the Rampur State Library. The rest, not available.
A MS. copy exists in the Asafiya (Hyderabad, Deccan). Mufid differs on
many points from Saduq, but according to *RJ* the truth is with both of
them, 563.Tehran, 621/8 (ii. 379) mentions a Persian *sharh* by Abu'1
Fath Husayni.

**2. إكمال (كمال) الدين و إتمام تمام النعمة في إثبات الغيبة و كشف
الحيرة-**  
***Ikmalu'din wa Itmamu'n Ni'ma fi Ithbatu'l-ghayba wa
Kashfu'l-hayra.*** Kashf, 271, add **في غيبة مولانا** **صاحب** **العصر و
الزمان** not mentioned by Najashi or Tusi. *RJ* doubts authorship.  
**Text**. Ed. F. Moller, Heidelberg, 1901; Sarkis, M*u'jam,* 44; *GAL,*
Sup. i. 322, many references. Berlin, 2721/2; Paris, 1231; Manchester,
807; Heidelberg. ZS, x. 74; Blochet, *Nouv*. *Acq.,* 6666; Sipahsalar,
vol. I, nos. 97,271, 272 (pp.204-207), gives good account of Saduq and
Ruknu'd-Dawla.

3. **كتاب الأمالي (أو المجالس)** ***Kitabu'l-Amali*** *(Al-majalis)*
Kashf 278; *RJ;* but not mentioned either by Najashi or Tusi under this
name. The *majalis* of early authorities is probably the *Amali* of
later ones. See also no.12 below. GAL, i. 187; Sup.i,321,322; Berlin,
1269;Tehran, ii. 24-25 (p.11) **(اين كتاب باسم المجالس هم موسرم است-**
Meshed, iv. 3, 5, 8;W. Ivanow in J*RAS* for 1920,543. Lith. Tehran, 1300
AH.; Brit. Mus., *Cat. of Print. Books,* 163. The *Amali* is a closely
printed book (10 by 6 inches) of 402 pp., consisting of 97 *babs,* and
containing many interesting things on a variety of subjects.

4. **كتاب التوحيد-** ***Kitabu'l-Tawhid.*** Tusi (29); Najashi; *RJ;
Kashf* 2391. GAL, Sup. i. 322; Meshed, *JRAS* for 1920, 543 (3 copies);
Sipahsalar, 106, 295, 296 (pp.229-230).  
**Lith**. Tabriz or Tehran (?); no date or place, pp. 383, 7 by 41/2
inches, containing 64 *babs.*

5**.** **كتاب ثواب الاعمال-** ***Kitab Thawabu'1-A'mal***. Najashi; Tusi
(34);RJ (10); Kashf, 733. GAL, Sup. i. 322; Browne, 10; Manchester, 94.

6. **كتاب الخصال-** ***Kitabu'l-Khisal.*** Najashi; *RJ; Kashf,* 1050.
GAL, Sup. i. 322; Meshed, W. Ivanow in *JRAS* for 1920,545 (**حصال**?)  
 Lith. Tehran, 1302; Sarkis, *Mu'jam,* 44.

7. **كتاب السهو-** ***Kitabu's-Sahw***. Najashi**.** Berlin, 1370;
apparently only one known copy. Sh. Mufid wrote a refutation of this,
*RJ,* 564.

8. **كتاب عقاب الاعمال-** ***Kitab 'Iqabu'l-A'mal***. Najashi; Tusi
(35); *Kashf,* 2120; *GAL,* Sup. i. 322.

9. **كتاب علل الشرائع و الأحكام-** ***Kitab 'Ilali'sh-Shara'i'
wa'l-Ahkam***. Najashi; Tusi (20); *RJ; Kashf* 2129. GAL, i. 187; Sup.i.
321; Berlin, 8326, 8327;Br. Mus., 1196, add. 23, 261 *(p.542);* Iv. ASB.
Ar., 1038; Sipahsalar, 132 (pp.278-279)

10. **كتاب العلل غير مبوَّب-** ***Kitabu'l-'Ilal ghayr mubawwab***.
Najashi; Tusi (25). Cf. *GAL,* i. 187 *(al- 'ilal);* not known whether a
separate work. Cf. Berlin, 8326, 8327.

11. **عيون أخبار الرضا**- ***'Uyun Akhbar 'r-Rida***. Not mentioned by
Najashi or Tusi; *RJ; Kashf,* 2149. GAL, i. 187; Sup. i. 321; Berlin,
9663; Munich, 188. *456;* Paris, 2018; Br. Mus., 1619; and or. 130
(p.730); India Office, 146; Meshed, W. Ivanow, *JRAS* for 1920; 543 (3
copies); Tehran, 550; Sipahsalar, 135, 360, 361, *362,* 364
(PP.282-283).  
 Lith. Tehran, 1275 A. H. Persian Translation. **تحفة ملكى** Bankipore,
507 **(vi.** 150) Sipahsalar, 103 (p.225). Persian Paraphrase. Iv. ASB.
Per., 1108, 1109.

12. **ذكر مجلس الذي جرى له بين يدي ركن الدولة-** ***Dhikr majlis
al-ladhi jara lahu bayna yaday Ruknu'd-Dawla.*** Najashi GAL, i. 187,
**بابويه** (sic) **(مناظرة الملك ركن الدولة مع الصدوق ال** Sup i. 322;
Br Mus., add. 16,832 (31), p.403; Strothmann *Isl.* XXI, 307. *Kashf,*
3120 gives another title:  
**مناظرة ركن الدولة مع محمد بن علي بن الحسين بن بابويه القمّي و قد جمعها
الشيخ ركن الدين الدروبستي**  
 Najashi mentions **ذكر مجلس الذي جرى بين ركن الدوله** and goes on (2)
**ذكر مجلس آخر** (3) **ذكر مجلس ثالث** (4) **ذكر مجلس رابع** and (5)
**ذكر مجلس خامس**. It is probable that all of these are now collected in
the lithographed text of the *Amali* (no.3 above) which consists of 97
*majlis.*

13. **معاني الأخبار** ***Ma'ani'l-Akhbar.*** Najashi; Tusi (36); *RJ;
Kashf,* 2992. GAL, i. 187; Sup. i. 321; India Office, 145. Persian
Translation. Tehran, 25(ii. 16).

14. **كتاب المقنع في الفقه\_*****- Kitabu'l-Muqni' fi'l-fiqh***.
Najashi; Tusi; Kashf, 3079. GAL, Sup. i. 322 (13).Lith Persia, 1860 A.
H.; Sarkis, Mu'jam, 44; Br. Mus., *Cat. Arab Print. Books,* 164.

15. **من لا يحضره الفقيه-** ***Man la yahdhuru-hu'l-Faqhih***. Not
mentioned by Najashi; Tusi (28); *RJ; Kashf* 3170. GAL, **i.** 187; Sup.
i. 321 (numerous references); Berlin, 4782/3; Pet., 250; Br. Mus.,
*905;* Sup., 330, add. 19,358; Ind. Of., 289; Paris, 1108; Blochet,
*Nouv.* *Acq.,* 6615, 6616, 5559, 6662; Bodl. ii. 84-86; Buhar, 50;
Bankipore, 263, 264, 479; Sipahsalar, 154 (and 10 other copies), gives
full and very valuable account of its composition. See below. Lith.
Lucknow, A.H. 1306-7, 4 vols.; *Sarkis, Mu'jam,* 44; Br. Mus., *Cat.
Arab. Print. Books,* 164. Persian Commentary. Iv. Cur., 381; Bankipore,
1258, 1259, 1260.

With regard to its composition, the author writes in the introduction
that when he was at Ilaq, near Balkh, he met Sharafu'd-din Abu
'Abdullah, known as Ni'matu'llah, Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ishaq bin
Husayn bin Ishaq bin Musa bin Ja'far as-Sadiq and greatly profited by
his learned company and discourse.

They discussed the book *Man la yahduru-hu't-Tabib* of Muhammad bin
Zakariya ar-Razi, and Ni'matu'l-lah asked him to compose a book
regarding what is lawful and unlawful and the sharia and its rulings.
Shaykh Saduq agreed to the suggestion and composed the book (Sipahsalar,
i. 325). The title is reminiscent of **كتاب دعائم الإسلام في ذكر الحلال
و الحرام و القضايا و الأحكام** *Ismaili Law of Wills,* p.1.

It is difficult to give an explanation to why Najashi does not mention
this - the most important of the Shaykh's works, one of the “four books”
of the Shi'a; it may however be suggested that instead of mentioning the
whole book, he gave the title of each of the chapters.

That is the only explanation which accords with the additional fact that
there is a wide disparity between the list given by him and his
contemporary Tusi, who is also one of the most respected of Shi'ite
doctors. Mus. iii. 547-719 deals with the authorities cited in this
work.

16. **النصوص على الأئمة الإثني عشر-** ***An-Nusus
'ala'l-a'immati'I-Ithna'ashar**.* Not mentioned by Najashi or Tusi. GAL,
i. 187; Paris, 20182 *Kashf,* 3268, says that it is ascribed to the
Shaykh. The authenticity is therefore very doubtful.

17. **كتاب النكاح-** ***Kitdbu'n-Nikah***. Najashi. Is this a chapter
from some work or a separate work? Iv. ASB. Ar., 614 (?). It is doubtful
whether this is the work of Saduq or of Qadi Nu'man.

18. **كتاب الهداية في الأصول و الفروع-** ***Kitabu'l-Hidaya***. Najashi,
*Kashf,* 3392; cf. *Kashf,* 3396 **هداية** **الطّالبين** *RJ* says this
is not mentioned by the author of *Amalu'1-Amil* (558).  
 GAL, Sup. i. 322; Ind. Of., 4632 (A. J. Arberry in *JRAS* for
1939,395-6); Berlin, Brock., *Sup.,* p.952.  
 Lith. Persia, 1276/1860; Sarkis, *Mu'jam,* 44; Br. Mus., *Cat. Arab.
Print. Books,* 163.

[^1]: Persian Literature in Modern Times, iv. 358-359. He adds that more
modern times have also produced their "three Muhammads", namely, Md. b.
Hasan b. 'Ali . . . al-Hurr al-\`Amili (author of Amalu'l-Amil), d.
1033/1623-24; Md. Ibnu'l-Murtadi, commonly known as Mulla Muhsin-i-Fayd,
d. 1090/1679; and Md. Baqir-i-Majlisi, d. 1111/1699 - 1700. The first
wrote the Wasa'il, the second the Wafi and the thud the Biharu 'l-Anwar,
which constitute the "three books" of the later times. These seven works
are the most important works on Shl'a theology, jurisprudence and
tradition.

[^2]: ibid., 358.

[^3]: EI, iv. 982; Browne, Lit. His., iv. 405.

[^4]: See Sprenger's Preface and Browne's valuable discussion of
biographical authorities, Lit. His., iv. 355-358.

[^5]: Browne, loc. cit.

[^6]: Preface to Tusy's List, pp. 1 and 2.

[^7]: Of modern accounts of his life, the two following may be consulted
with advantage, by Hidayat Husain in EI, ii. 265, and by D.M. Donaldson,
The Shi \`ite Religion, London, 1933, pp.285 286. See also Buhar
Catalogue, ii. 51, and R. Strothmann in EI, iv. 354.

[^8]: The Shaykh is known generally by the title of Shaykh Saduq or by
his name, Ibn Babawayhi. This is an interesting compound, made up of the
word baab and the termination -awayhi, which originally was -uya and
earlier -oe. Wright, Arab. Gram., i. 244d, gives several examples of
names such as: نِفطَوْيهِ, عَمْرَوَيْهِ, بُوَيْهِ, سَيْبَوَيْهِ the last
of which is dealt with as Seboe by Justi IranischesNamenbuch, 293, the
newer form being Sibuyeh. Babooe, Babuya, and thence the current
arabicized Babawayhi is discussed by Justi, ibid., 55, as being both
Iranian and Semitic. The termination -oe, -uya, arabicized
into -a-way-hi the last (\_َ وَيْه \_ُوَيْه) is probably a double
diminutive, as my friend Mr. W. Ivanow explains. According to him -uya =
u +a (k); and such cases are to be found in Persian: mardakak, marddkd,
zanakak, etc., also kuchuluk, kuchulu. Further philological discussion
will be found in P. Horn, Neupersische Schriftsprache in Grund. Iran.
Phil., vol. i, Pt. 2, pp. 184 -186 and No1deke, Persische Studien, i. 4
sqq. The word bab is apparently of Semitic origin and may mean "gate".
The compound "a small gate" is however not intelligible. It may be
suggested that it has reference to the well-known hadith: أنا مدينة
العلم و عليٌ بابها so that Saduq is the "small", while his father \`Ali
is the "great" gate. This however does not accord with the fact that
\`Ali, his father, also bore the name of Ibn Babawayhi. The real reason
of the appellation, as is so often the case, is lost in obscurity and no
useful purpose would be served in making ingenious guesses. Similar
compounds are Hamduya, Sadruya, Hasanuya, Dhikruya, etc. Also خالويه
(RJ, 236), قولويه (Kashfu 'l-Hujub, no. 2312) and ماجيلويه (Kashf, p.33;
Najashi, 184).

[^9]: The Shi \`ite Religion, 286. Date of birth not mentioned,
Bankipore Cat., v. Pt. I, p.183.

[^10]: Tusi, Fihrist, 304; Najashi, Rijal, 276, 279. For mistakes
regarding date of death, see Bankipore Catalogue, v. Pt. I, p.183.

[^11]: Ahlwardt, nos. 1269, 2721, etc.

[^12]: Tusi, 218; Najishi, 184-185.

[^13]: Donaldson, 285.

[^14]: According to Rawdatu 'l-Jannat, the correct name is Abu Ja'far
Md. b. 'Ali al-Aswad, 378, 379.

[^15]: RJ, 37222.

[^16]: RJ, 5591o-11 – مشتغل بالعبادة و الزهد و لا يختلط بالنّاس

[^17]: RJ, 557 sqq. According to Tusi (304): كان جليلاً حافظاً للأحاديث
بصيراً بالرجال ناقداً للأخبار لم يُر في القميين مثله في حفظه و كثرة
علمه، له نحو ثلثمائة مصنف This tradition is repeated by all later
authorities like RJ, Lu'lu'atu 'l-Bahrayn, etc.

[^18]: RJ, 55824-25.


