Belief In The Capacity Of Human Beings (al-istita'a)
====================================================

The shaykh Abu Ja'far, may Allah have mercy on him, said: Our belief
regarding this (question) is what Imam Musa bin Ja'far al-Kazim, on both
of whom be peace, said, when he was asked, “Has a human being capacity?”
He said: Yes, provided he possesses four characteristics - (he should
be) free in respect of action[^1]; in good health; complete in the
possession of limbs, and in the possession of capacity given him by
Allah. Now when all these qualities coexist, then the man is said to be
capable *(mustati).*

He was asked, “For instance?” and the Imam said: (Suppose) there is a
man who is free to act, in good health, possessing normal limbs. It is
not possible for him to fornicate unless he sees a woman. Now when he
meets the woman,[^2] it may either be that he is chaste, and prevents
himself (from sin) as did Joseph, on whom be peace; or that he may act
freely with her and fornicate and then he is a fornicator. He cannot be
said to have obeyed Allah under compulsion (in the first case); nor can
he be said to have disobeyed Him by being overpowered (in the second
case).[^3]

And Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq was asked concerning the saying of Allah the
Mighty and Glorious:

***“And they had been summoned to prostrate themselves while they were
yet unhurt” (Qur'an 68:43)***.

He said: (That is) they were capable of acting as they were commanded
and of abstaining from that which was prohibited, and for this reason
they were tested.[^4] And Imam Abu Ja'far (Muhammad al-Baqir) on whom be
peace, said: In the Torah it is written “O Moses (says Allah), verily I
have created thee and chosen thee and guided thee and given thee
strength and commanded thee to obey Me, and prohibited thee from
disobeying Me.

Now if thou wilt obey Me, I shall help thee towards My obedience; but if
thou wilt disobey Me, I shall not aid thee in thy disobedience to Me. It
is for me to show kindness to thee in respect of thy obedience; and it
is for Me to charge thee for thy disobedience to me”.[^5]

[^1]: mukhalla as-sarb is employed for animals let loose for roaming
freely in pasture land.

[^2]: Reading أمرأة with D, not امرأته as in N.

[^3]: Tawhid, 279-280.

[^4]: Tawhid, 280.

[^5]: The question of istita'a is intimately connected with free will
and predestination. The views of al-Qummi go further than most
authorities. Analysing Wensick's discussion, there may really be three
positions: (1) Man's activity is not real but only metaphorical
(Jabrites); (2) Man's capacity differs in respect of good and evil
actions (Ash'arites; see also MC, 266, art. 19; and (3) Complete
capacity (Mu\`tazilites, Shi\`ites) -and apparently al-Qummi takes the
last position. MC, art. 128 (art. 15). 157, 266; BHA, nos. 115 -122,
particularly 119. Tawhid, 277 - 284.


