Concerning The Tablet (lawh) And The Pen (qalam)
================================================

Says the Shaykh: Our belief concerning the Tablet (*lawh*) and the Pen
(*qalam*) is that they are two angels.[^1]

[^1]: The Urdu translator protests against this extraordinary
proposition, and says as follows (D, 31): "Shaykh Muf1d says that to
think that the lawh (tablet) and the qalam (pen) are two angels is
contrary to the true belief, because it is clear from several traditions
that the lawh is a book in which God has, in His power, written down all
events that are to happen till the Day of Resurrection. Also in the
Qur'in we have: \`And verily We have written in the Psalms (zabur),
after the Reminder: My righteous slaves shall inherit the earth' (cp.
Psalms, xxxvii. 29) [21, 105] . That is to say, \`We have written after
the reminder, on account of Our Power, that My righteous slaves shall
inherit the earth'. In this verse by dhikr is meant the lawh. And qalam
is the name of that thing by the instrumentality of which the events of
the time and the happenings of the world are inscribed. When God
intended to acquaint the angels with some secret of His, or to send
revelations to one of the prophets, the angels were commanded to read
the lawh. Shaykh Saduq himself, while describing the manner in which
revelation was sent down, writes that there was a lawh in front of the
two eyes of Israfil. When Allah desired to send a revelation, the lawh
would be brought in contact with his forehead. Thus it is apparent that
lawh is not the name of an angel, nor do we find in any dictionary that
lawh and qalam are two angels". This is a very interesting refutation of
the Shaykh's doctrine by his disciple, Shaykh Mufid (for whom see
Rawdatu 'l-Jannat, 563). Unfortunately the original text of the Tashih
on the point is not available to me. MB also mentions that such is the
belief of Shaykh Saduq. In Sunnite theology the meaning of lawh is quite
different. It is of vast dimensions, of white pearl, and contains a
record of everything from beginning to end (MC, 148). The Pen however
was created before and has priority (ibid., 162). Two ideas emerge: (a)
the Tablet as the original copy of the Revelation, and (b) as the record
of the decisions of the Divine Will (El, iii. 19-20). According to
Western Isma'ilis, qalam is the primal souce of the universe (FC, 21),
and lawh is the most guarded Tablet (ibid., 86). The Isma'ilf influence
can be seen in Ibnu'l-\`Arabi. He uses qalam, lawh and \`arsh for the
Neo-Platonic First Intellect, Universal Soul and Universal Body,
respectively (Affifi, 63, n. l; 67).


