Introduction
============

While it cannot be denied that within recent years there has been a
considerable increase in our general knowledge regarding Islam, it must
also be admitted that not any appreciable advance has been made in our
knowledge of Shi’ite history, philosophy and law.

Curiously enough researches of considerable significance have been made
regarding Ismailism (a small fraction of the Shia) and the works of L.
Massignon, W. Ivanow and P. Kraus, in particular, have opened up new
vistas and indicated new lines of advance. But with regard to the most
important and numerous group of the Shia, the Ithna Ashariya, the
position has remained more or less stationary.

Isr. Friedlaender[^1], writing in 1907, complains of the paucity of our
knowledge in this respect, and he says that Shi'ism is known to us in
the roughest outline[^2], and the religious tendencies are not known at
all. One of the difficulties according to him is its heterogeneous
character; for it is not easy to analyze its peculiar component parts,
drawn as they are from such widely divergent sources as Babylonian,
Persian, Jewish and Muslim.[^3] Professor E. G. Browne, writing in 1924,
deplores the lack of our knowledge, particularly in regard to the
Shi’ite creed, and he advocates a comparative study.[^4]

Later, discussing the *Haqqu1-Yaqin* of Muhammad Baqir Majlisi, a very
important theological work, composed in 1109/1698 and printed in Tehran
in 1241/1825, he regrets the lack of leisure which prevented him from
completing its French rendering begun by the late M. A. de Biberstein
Kazimirslci; and he further adds that the importance of it would be
great “since we still possess no comprehensive and authoritative
statement of Shi'a doctrine in any European language”.[^5]

Still later, in 1934, R. Strothmann, writing in the *Encyclopedia of
Islam,* while giving a brief account of the Shi'a[^6], laconically
remarks that “there is no thorough account of the Shi'a”. The position
during the last seven years has not improved, despite the appearance of
works which throw light on certain aspects of Shi'ism.[^7]

The publication of the late Professor A. J. Wensinck's *The Muslim
Creed* (Cambridge, 1932) marked an epoch, and after its appearance it
was generally felt that having performed the task in a masterly fashion,
he had clearly indicated a new approach to the problem, and indeed
pointed the way to another aspect of study -the examination of the
Shi'ite creed.

Professor Wensinck had restricted himself to the early Sunnite
authorities, and while studying his lucid and methodical presentation of
the subject, we see that the picture is incomplete and can only be
completed by editing and translating a number of Shi'ite creeds, thus
paving the way for a historical and systematic study of the subject.

The creed of Islam cannot be understood by the study of the “Sunnite”
element only; to this must also be added the inquiry into the Shi'ite
counterpart. The uses of such a study are many, but three different
aspects may here be stressed: such a study would clarify many historical
questions; it would give us an insight into theological controversies -
as these are not always barren, fanatical and personal, but indicative
of general trends of thought; and finally, it would tend to the solution
of the problem of legal distinctions that puzzle some of the foremost
jurists.[^8]

Our knowledge regarding the Shi'ite faith is generally derived from
three well-known heresiologists whose published work is easily
accessible. These in chronological order are: Baghdadi (died
429/1038),[^9] Ibn Hazm (died 456/1054)[^10] and Shahrastani (died
548/1153**)**[^11]**.** Of these, Shahrastani is the best known, for it
was published early; later, Ibn Hazm in the rendering of Friedlaender,
came also to be fairly well known; the earliest authority, Baghdadi, is
for various reasons the least known. All of these are devout Sunnis,
convinced of the pernicious errors of the *rawafid,* the Shi'a.

With such an attitude, it is impossible for them to be just or fair to
the Shi'ite point of view. One may as well expect a sober account of the
Church of England from a Catholic priest. The result is that the earlier
orientalists believed that Shi'ism was a pernicious corruption of Islam,
concocted mainly, if not solely, for political reasons[^12]; also that
the Sunni faith is the “orthodox” faith and the Shi'ite, the “heterodox”
one.

Whether Shi'ism was a deliberate corruption of Islam or whether it was
one of its early forms is now hardly a debatable question. All the
evidence which has come to light in recent years goes against the
corruption theory; it is a form of Islam of interest from various points
of view and it should be studied in its historical setting principally
through Shiite sources, in comparison with all the other material
available. Sunnite scholars of the olden days had neither the knowledge
nor the will to give a purely objective account of the Shi'a faith, this
is a factor which must impel one to go to the Shiite originals
themselves.

As to “orthodoxy”, a minority, however small, may well have retained a
very close touch with the original tradition; the majority, however
preponderant, may conceivably have lost it in the stress of political
conflicts. While it is not at all easy to determine how much weight is
to be given to the plausible doctrine of the Shi'a that 'Ali, by virtue
of his relationship and affinity to the Prophet, had a better insight
into religion than others.

It is also not possible to dismiss contemptuously the possibility of the
personal religious tradition of the Prophet, at least in some important
matters, being carefully handed down to the Imams of the House of the
Prophet, the people who undoubtedly had the best opportunity of knowing
the true interpretation of many a principle of Islam,[^13] Hence a
historical, objective, critical and comparative study of the Shi’ite
sources is greatly to be desired.

In order to obtain an insight into the Shi'ite religion in general, we
must first of all look at their creed. For this purpose we must go to
their own authorities and find that we have only two sources available
to us. The first is *al-Babu'l-Hadi 'Ashar* by Hasan bin Yusuf bin 'Ali
bin al-Mutahhar al-Hilli, known as 'Allama Hilli (died 726/1326). The
original text, together with its commentary *an-Nafi' Yawmi'l-Hashr* by
Miqdad-i-Fadil al-Hilli (eighth century A.H.) was translated by W. M.
Miller, and published by the Royal Asiatic Society, London, in 1928.

This little treatise is a very popular creed and has practically
superseded every other in modern times. The second creed, of which a
brief summary is before us, is the *Aqa'idu 'sh Shi'a* by 'Ali Asghar
bin 'Ali Akbar, composed in the middle of the 19th century A.D. This is
a book of 438 pages and Professor F. G. Browne gives an admirable
summary in his *Persian Literature in Modern Times* (381 - 402).

He says: “Such an outline is the Shi'a creed of contemporary Persia in
its crudest and most popular form. It would be interesting to trace the
evolution of that creed from the earliest times of Islam, to compare (so
far as the available material allow) the historical with the legendary
Imams, and to contrast in detail the beliefs, both doctrinal and
eschatological, of the Shi'a and the Sunnis” (p. 402).

These appear to be the only Shiite creeds studied in their entirety, but
much valuable material may also be found in works like Nawbakhti's
*Firaqu 'sh-Shi'a* and *The Shi'ite Religion* by D.M. Donaldson (London,
1933). In chapters xxix, xxx and xxxi he has given interesting
quotations from Majlisi's *Hayatu'1-Qulub.* Thus it will be apparent
that a systematic rendering of Ibn Babawayhi's creed constitutes a great
advance on our present knowledge.

He was one of the greatest Shaykhs of the Shi'a - the author of one of
the FOUR BOOKS - and having died in 381/991, he preceded by about 350
years 'Allama-I-Hilli whose *al-Babu'l-Hadi 'Ashar* is now a recognized
classic. It is one of the earliest Ithna 'Ashari creeds and therefore of
great value for the study of the historical evolution of the Shi'ite
creed.

For the purposes of my translation I have used two printed editions, the
Najaf and the Delhi editions, and consulted the Tehran edition. The
Najaf edition is on the whole the most correct, although the Delhi
edition gives many interesting additions and corrections in the later
part. The Delhi edition is accompanied by an Urdu rendering, which
despite some errors, is fairly useful; but the most admirable feature is
the translator's notes. He has apparently made good use of the
*Tashihu'l-I'tiqadat* of Shaykh Mufid, which was printed in the
periodical *al-Murshid,* Baghdad, and a MS. copy whereof exists in the
Asafiya Library, Hyderabad.

I regret I have not been able to study this work in its entirety,
although the authorities of the Rampur State Library were kind enough to
allow me the loan of those parts of *al-Murshid* which are preserved in
their library, but which unhappily contain a part only of the text of
*Tashih.*

It was my intention originally to add a systematic introduction to this
translation, giving a comparative and historical account of the Shi'ite
creed. A deeper study of the subject, however, has made me realize my
own limitations and instilled diffidence. It appears to me that there
are numerous works, at present not available to me, which must be
carefully studied and analyzed before such a task can profitably be
undertaken.

The only thing I have been able to do is to add a certain number of
notes for facilitating a comparative study. *The Muslim Creed* was quite
adequate for the Sunni doctrine; but for Shi'ite dogmas, apart from
*al-Babu'l-Hadi Ashar,* no other creed was available.

Between the alternatives of giving no references at all, or of drawing
attention to some of the salient points from such doctrinal works of
Isma'ilism as *Kaidmi Pir* and *The Fatimid Creed* both by W. Ivanow, I
have chosen the latter course, in the hope that it may help the
comparative study of Shi'ite dogma. References to Ibnu'l-'Arabi's
doctrine have been added as they form the basis of many Sufi and
mystical works.

[^1]: "The Heterodoxies of the Shiites in the presentation of Ibn Hazm,"
JAOS, vol. 28, pp. 1-80; and a commentary, vol. 29, pp. 1 -183.

[^2]: JAOS, 28, 3.

[^3]: ibid., 4.

[^4]: Pers. Lit., iv. 402.

[^5]: ibid., 418.

[^6]: EI, iv. 350 at 357.

[^7]: For example, Die Zwolfer Schi\`a by R. Strothmann, Leipzig, 1926;
al-Babu 'l-Hadi Ashar, tr. W.M. Miller, R.A.S.,London, 1928; Hasan b.
Musa an-Nawbakhti,Firaqu'sh-Shi'a, ed. H. Ritter, Istanbul, 1931; The
Shiite Religion by D.M. Donaldson, London, 1933, to mention some of
them. The best general accounts of the Shiite faith are to be found in
E.G. Browne, Pers. Lit., iv. 354 sqq. and R. Strothmann, Enc. of Islam,
iv. 350-358, s.v. Shi'a.

[^8]: In this connection an eminent authority on Muslim Law in India, F.
B. Tyabji, has made the interesting suggestion that the difference
between the Shiite and Sunnite law of inheritance can only be explained
on the hypothesis that the Shiite interpretation came from the Prophet
himself through \`Ali, and was not, as is too often assumed, the
creation of later minds (Aryan Path for Feb. 1940, pp. 69-70).

[^9]: Baghdadi, al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, ed. Md. Badr, Cairo, 1910; trans.
in Moslem Schisms and Sects, Pt. I, by K.C. Seelye, Columbia University
Press, 1920; Pt. II, by A.S.Halkin, Tel-Aviv, 1935; a Mukhtasar by \`Abd
ar-Raziq ar-Ras'ani was ed. by P. Hitti, Cairo, 1924.

[^10]: Israel Friedlaender, op. cit. The second volume contains a
commentary and very valuable materials for the study of Shi'ism.

[^11]: Shahrastani, al-Milal wa'n-Nihal, ed. Cureton, London,
1846;reprint, Leipzig, 1923.

[^12]: Isr. Friedlaender, JAOS, 28, 2.

[^13]: W. Ivanow has made some pertinent observations on the question of
orthodoxy and heterodoxy in JBBRAS for 1940, 52.


