Concerning The Questioning In The Grave
=======================================

Says the Shaykh, may the mercy of Allah be upon him: Our belief
concerning the questioning in the grave is that it is true and that
there is no escape from it. He who answers in the proper manner will
obtain rest and perfume in his grave, and the Garden of delight in the
life to come.

And he who does not answer in the proper manner, for him (there will be)
the

***“feast of boiling water” (Qur'an 56:93***[^1]***)***

In his grave, and the roasting in hellfire in the next world. Most of
the torment of the grave takes place on account of backbiting and
rudeness and making light of (the impurity of) urine.

The severest form of torment that is inflicted in the grave on the
rightful believer is like the (involuntary) trepidation of the eyelid or
scarification.[^2] These torments are in expiation of sins for which his
anxieties and grief and diseases and the excess of pain at the moment of
death did not atone.

Verily the Messenger of Allah, on whom be His blessings and peace,
shrouded Fatima bint Asad, mother of the Prince of believers ('Ali bin
Abi Talib), in his own shirt after the women had finished bathing her
and carried her bier on his own shoulders.[^3]

He continued to carry the bier until it was brought to her grave. The
Prophet then lay himself down in it, and rising, he took her in his arms
and laid her in the grave. Thereafter he stooped over her whispering for
a long time and saying to her: Thy son thy son. He then came out (of the
grave) and leveled the earth over her.

Then he stooped over her grave and people heard him say: There is no
deity other than Allah. O God, verily I commend her to thee. Then he
returned and the believers said: O Messenger of Allah, verily we saw you
doing something which you have never done before. He said: Today I have
lost the grace of Abu Talib.

For, in respect of aught that she possessed Fatima used to prefer me
both to herself and her children. One day I spoke to her of the Day of
Resurrection, and how the people will rise naked, and she said: Woe to
my (naked) body!

And I assured her that Allah would resurrect her fully clothed. And I
spoke to her of the straitness of the grave and she said: Woe to my
distress![^4] And I assured her that Allah the Exalted would protect her
from it. Wherefore did I shroud her in my own shirt and reclined in her
grave, and stooped over her and instructed her regarding the matters
about which she would be questioned.

She was asked about her Lord, and she said: My Lord is Allah. And she
was asked about her Prophet and she replied: Muhammad. And she was asked
about her Imam and *wali* (guardian), and she faltered and paused.

And I said to her: Thy son, thy son. So she said: My Imam is my son.
Thereupon they (the two angels) departed from her, and said: We have no
power over you. Sleep, even as a bride sleeps in her inner apartment.
Then she died a second death and the verification of this is in the Book
of Allah:

***“They say: Our Lord! Twice hast thou made us die, and twice hast thou
made us live. Now we confess our sins. Is there any way to go out?”
(Qur'an 40:11)***.[^5]

[^1]: N, D, and T have نزولٌ من حميم meaning "desent". But نُزُلٌ as in
Qur. 56, 93 is the correct reading.

[^2]: Refers to the practice of making slight incisions for drawing
blood which are not very painful.

[^3]: For a similar tradition in Qadi Nu'man's Da'a 'imu'l-Islam,see
Fyzee, Ismaili Law of Wills, no. 29.

[^4]: N وا ضغطاه; D وا ضعفاه.

[^5]: The translator explains that the belief in two deaths, one in this
world, and another in the grave, is well established. See also MB, S.V.
موت. The questioning in the grave by the two angels Munkar and Nakir is
well established in Sunnite creeds: MC, 129, art. 18 and 19; 163 -167;
195, art. 23; 268; art. 27. For the philosophical Isma'ili explanation,
see FC, nos. 93,94.


