Concerning Intersession (ash-shafa'a)
=====================================

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja'far, the mercy of Allah on him: We believe that
*shafa'a*[^1] *(here,* the state of being forgiven) belongs to him whose
religion is approved (by Allah), whether he be of those who have
committed great sins or small sins *(kaba'ir, sagha'ir)*[^2]*.* As for
those persons who have repented of their evil deeds, they are not in
need of intercession. Says the Prophet: May Allah not grant my
intercession to him who does not believe in my (power of) intercession.
And he (the Prophet) said: No mediator (*shafi'*) is more successful
than repentance *(tawba)*[^3]*.*

(The right of) intercession belongs to prophets *(anbiya')* and
*awsiya'*[^4]*.* And among believers *(mu'minln)* also there are some
who can intercede on behalf of people equal in number to the tribes of
Rabi'a and Mudar.[^5] Even the least of believers will be liable to
intercede on behalf of 30,000.[^6]

There can be no forgiveness for skeptics *(ahlu'sh-shakk)* and
polytheists *(ahlu'sh-shirk);* nor for unbelievers *(ahlu'l-kufr)* and
those who are persistent in their denial *(ahlu'l-juhud).* But the
sinful amongst those who believe in the unity of Allah
*(ahlu't-tawhid*[^7]*)* may be forgiven.

[^1]: الشفاعة is not merely "intercession" but also "passing over
without punishment", or forgiving sins, etc. (Lane). MB makes no
distinction between شفاعة and غفران. Wensinck discusses intercession
very fully, MC, 61. Rejected by the Mu'tazilites, it was generally
accepted by the canonical tradition. Intercession appears to be against
the doctrine of justice and retribution, and even the Qur'an in some
passages is not favourable to the idea, ibid., 181, 183. Compare also
Fiqh Akbar II, art. 20, MC, 194. The Wahhabis do not reject intercession
altogether; they merely limit its operation, MC, 183. According to
Ibnu'l-\`Arabi there is no real shafi'a; the term implies merely a
relation between two Divine Names, the Merciful and the Avenger, Affifi,
165. BHA, nos. 234, 235. FC, no. 29. Among Isma'ili intercession cannot
be had except through the walaya of the Imam, KP, trans. 30, Fayzee,
Ismaili Law of Wills, 70,71,72.

[^2]: On these two terms see BHA, no. 226 and note on p.100.

[^3]: MB, 398; MC, 194 (art. 20), 169 and 180sqq.; BHA, nos.237-238.

[^4]: In Sunnite traditions the privilege of intercession belongs also
to angels, martyrs and saints, MC, 182. Ithna \`Asharites generally
restrict it to prophets and Imams, BHA, nos. 234, 235.

[^5]: These were big tribes and are selected to indicate the large
number of persons on whose behalf effective intercession will take place
by the instrumentality of a single individual.

[^6]: In the Sunnite tradition, 70,000, Wensinck, Handbook, 112.

[^7]: In the Wasiyat Abi Hanifa, art. 25, even mortal sins may be
forgiven, MC, 130, 182, 268.


