Revelation Of The Qur'an In The Night Of Power
==============================================

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja’far: Our belief concerning this is that the
Qur’an was sent down in one lot, in the month of Ramadan, on the Night
of Power *(laylatu’l-qadr)* [^1] (first) to *al-Baytu’l-Ma’mur.*[^2] And
then it was revealed in the space of twenty[^3] years from the
*Baytu’l-Maqmur* (to the Prophet).[^4]

And verily Allah the Glorious and Mighty bestowed knowledge in its
totality on His Prophet, on whom be the blessings of Allah and His
peace, and then said to him: ***“…And hasten not (O Muhammad) with the
Qur’an ere its revelation hath been perfected unto thee, and***
***say:*** ***My Lord! Increase me in knowledge” (Qur’an 20:114).***

And He said:

***“Stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it. Lo! Upon Us (resteth) the
putting together thereof and the reading thereof. So when We read it,
follow thou it’s reading. Then lo! Upon Us (resteth) the explanation
thereof.” (Qur’an 75:16-19).***

[^1]: Macdonald, 335 (al-Fudali) ; Wensinck, Handbook, s.v. Night of the
Decree, 176. Fully discussed, MB, 309 and reasons given why so called.

[^2]: This is the edifice in Heaven (in the third, or the fourth, or the
fifth, or the seventh Heaven) which 70,000 angels visit every day. It is
exactly above the Ka'ba (Lane). It is related from \`Ali b. lbrahim that
this edifice was erected by Allah for the purpose of repentance for the
inhabitants of the heavens, just as the Ka'ba is for the inhabitants of
this world, MB, 309. Cp. Baytu'l-\`Izza, Macdonald, 335.

[^3]: MB, 23 years.

[^4]: The Urdu translator says that Shaykh Mufid does not accept this
belief as correct. It is based on a single tradition, of an uncertain
character. And as certain verses of the Qur'an refer to events which
were recent at the time, it is clear that the whole of the Qur'an could
not have been revealed at one time at the Baytu'1-Ma'mur. In reality, it
was revealed piecemeal as necessity arose. The Urdu translator, sitting
in judgement between the two views, says: Everything contained in the
Qur'in was known to God from the beginning (that is, He possessed
detailed knowledge of coming events). And then on the happening of
particular events, the appropriate verses of the Qur'an, already in
existence, were revealed from time to time.


