Concerning the Extent of The Qur’an
===================================

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja'far: Our belief is that the Qur'an, which Allah
revealed to His Prophet Muhammad, is (the same as) the one between the
two boards *(daffattyn)*[^1]*.* And it is that which is in the hands of
the people, and is not greater in extent than that.

The number of s*uras* as generally accepted is one hundred and fourteen.
And according to us, *ad-Duha* (The Morning, *Sura* 93) and *al-Inshira*
(The Consolation, *Sura* 94) together form one s*ura;* and *al-Fil* (The
Elephant, *Sura* 105) and *Quraish* (*Sura* 106) together form one
*sura.*

And he who asserts that we say that it is greater in extent than this
(the present text) is a liar.

And that which is related (in tradition) concerning the reward for
reciting every *sura* of the Qur'an, and the reward of him who completes
the whole of the Qur'an, and the permissibility of reciting two *suras*
in a *rak'a* (unit of prayer),[^2] and the prohibition of reciting the
Qur'an between the two *suras* in a *rak'a* of the *fard* prayer[^3] is
the verification of what we said concerning the Qur'an and that the
extent of the Qur'an is (no more than) what is in the hands of the
people.

And similarly what is related concerning the prohibition of reading the
whole of the Qur'an in a single night, and that it is not permissible to
complete the recitation of the Qur'an in less than three days is (also)
a verification of what we have said.

On the contrary we say that so much of revelation has come down, which
is not part of the Qur'an, that were it to be collected, its extent
would undoubtedly be 17,000 verses. And this, for example, is like the
saying of Gabriel to the Prophet: Allah says to thee, O Muhammad, act
gently with My creatures, in the same manner as I do.

Or his (Gabriel's) saying: Be careful of the bitter hatred of the people
and their enmity. Or his (Gabriel's) saying: Live as you desire, for
verily you shall die. Love what you will, for verily you shall be
separated. Act how you will, for verily you shall be faced with it.

The nobility of man is his prayer by night; his honor is refraining from
injury to human beings. Or like the saying of the Prophet: Gabriel never
ceased enjoining me (to use) the toothbrush *(siwak)* until I feared it
would chafe (my gums) or make me toothless.[^4]

And he (Gabriel) never ceased enjoining me (to be good) to the neighbor
until I thought he would make him my heir; and he never ceased enjoining
me about the wife, to the extent that I thought it would be improper to
divorce her; and he never ceased enjoining me about the slave, until I
thought that he would fix a period within which he should be freed.

Or like the saying of Gabriel, when the battle of the Ditch (*Khandaq*)
was over: O Muhammad, verily Allah, Exalted and Blessed is He above all,
commands you not to say the *'asr* (afternoon) prayer, except with the
Banu Qurayza.[^5] Or like his saying (the Prophet's): My Lord commanded
me to deal gently with the people, in the same manner as he asked me to
perform the obligatory acts.

Or like his saying: Verily we prophets were ordered not to speak to
people except in accordance with their intelligence. Or like his saying:
Verily Gabriel brought a command to me from my Lord, which cooled my
eyes and brought joy to my breast. He (Gabriel) said: Verily Allah the
Mighty and Glorious says that 'Ali is the Prince of Believers, and the
leader of those having a whiteness on the forehead, wrists and ankles
(from the effects of ablution and prayer).[^6]

Or like his saying: Gabriel came to me and said: O Muhammad, verily
Allah the Blessed and Exalted, has given Fatima in marriage to 'Ali in
front of His Throne *('arsh),* and made select angels bear witness to
the marriage. So marry her to him in this world and make the select
amongst your people bear witness to it.

There are many such (traditions), all of which are revelations, but do
not form part of the Qur'an; if they did, they would surely have been
included and not excluded from it. The Prince of Believers ('Ali), when
he collected the Qur'an and brought it, said to them: This is the book
of Allah, your Lord, as it was revealed to your Prophet; not a single
word has been added to it or omitted from it. They said: we have no need
of it; we have with us what you possess. So he ('Ali) returned saying:

***“But they flung it behind their backs and bought therewith a little
gain. Verily evil is that which they have gained thereby” (Qur'an
3:187)***.

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq has said: The Qur'an is one; it was revealed by One
to one single Prophet. And the difference (in readings) is due only on
account of different transmitters *(rawi,* plural *ruwat).*

Wherever there occurs in the Qur'an the like of the saying of Him Who is
Exalted above all:

***“If thou ascribe a partner to Allah thy work will fail and thou
indeed will be among the losers!” (Qur'an 39:65)***.

Or the like of His saying: ***“That Allah may forgive thee (O Muhammad)
of thy sin that which is past and that which is to come” (Qur'an
48:2)***.[^7]

Or like His saying:

***“And if We had not made thee wholly firm thou mightest almost have
inclined unto them a little. Then had We made thee taste a double
(punishment) of living and a double (punishment) of dying.....” (Qur'an
17:74-75).***

And verses resembling these - our belief concerning them is that they
were revealed within the meaning of (the well-known proverb) - “Thee do
I mean (O beloved), but hear, O (thou) neighboring lady”.[^8]

And wherever there occurs in the Qur'an the particle *aw*, that is,
“or”, the person to whom the ordinance refers has an option. And
wherever there occurs in the Qur'an the expression *ya*
*ayyuha'1-ladhina amanu “*O you who believe”, this is in lieu of the
expression in the Torah, *ya* *ayyuha'l-masakin, “*O you miserable
ones”.

Every verse of the Qur'an, which begins with the expression ya
*ayyuha'l-ladhina amanu* (“O you who believe”), refers necessarily to
'Ali bin Abi Talib as their leader *(qa'id)* and prince *(amir)* and the
most noble and the first among them.

And every verse which directs the way to Paradise applies to the Prophet
or the Imams, the blessings of Allah upon them all and their partisans
and followers. And every verse which points the way to Hell refers to
their enemies and opponents.

If the verses deal with the account of those mentioned earlier (i.e.
Prophets and Imams) then whatever of good there is in them will be
applicable to the righteous; and whatever of evil, to the evildoers.
Among the prophets none is better than the Prophet Muhammad, the
blessings of Allah upon him, and among the *awsiya'* (plenipotentiaries)
none is better than his (the Prophet's) plenipotentiaries[^9], and among
the communities none in reality is more excellent than this community -
the partisans *(Shi'a)* of the People of his (Prophet's) House, and none
else. And among the wicked, none is more wicked than those who are their
enemies and opponents.[^10]

[^1]: This expression implies that the text of the Qur'an, as is to be
found in the textus receptus and which is in the hands of every one in
the shape of a book, is the one accepted wholly by al-Qummi. Some of the
Shi'a assert that a portion of the Qur'an is not included in the textus
receptus and is with the Hidden Imam, cf. Browne's Literary History of
Persia, iv. 388 - 389, citing Aqa 'idu 'sh-Shi\`a of \`Ali Asghar b.
\`Ali Akbar; Sell, Studies in Islam (Madras, 1928), 246, citing Dr.
Mirza Kazembeg in Journal Asiatique, December 1843, pp. 373 -430, and
suggesting that the Sura of an- Nurayn (The Two Lights, that is,
Muhammad and \`Ali) is omitted. This view is however erroneous, as is
shown here and fully discussed by Muhammad Ali, The Holy Qur'an, text
and translation (Woking, England, 1917), Preface pp.xc-xcii, citing
Mulla Muhsini Fayd in his famous tafsir, as-Safi. See the Tehran ed.,
1274 A.H, pp. 10 -15 (6th mugaddima), and also F. Buhl, EI, ii. 1063 -
1076, esp. 1071.

[^2]: The translator adds that this is the case in the sunna prayer.

[^3]: This refers to the prohibition of reciting two suras of the Qur'an
after al-Hamd in the fard prayer.

[^4]: N err. جبرئيل يوصيني بالسؤال حتى خفت أن أحفى أو أدرد D correctly
بالسواك and احفى أو أدرد.

[^5]: N إلّا بيني فريضة D إلّا ببني قريظة

[^6]: So Lane, s.v. حجل. The expression الغرّ المُحَجَّلُونَ is taken
from the description of noble horses, and later applied to the most
pious among human beings. The Urdu translator renders it loosely: that
is ". . . the leader of (all) commanders".

[^7]: The Urdu translator says: Mufaddal b. \`Umar said that some one
asked the meaning of this verse of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq. The Imam said:
I swear by God, the Prophet never committed any sin. The real meaning is
that on account of his intercession, the sins both past and future, of
the partisans of 'Ali will be forgiven. ( Majma \`u 'l -Bayan). The
translator gives a graphic illustration of the "vicarious liability" for
the sins of others, and how it can be got over. A king appoints a friend
of his as the governor of a province, and tells him "You are responsible
for the good behaviour of these people". Some of these subjects break
the law, and are brought forward for punishment. The governor intercedes
and the king says: "Their wrongdoing would not have been forgiven but
for your intercession. And this can only be done on the assumption that
these wrongs were committed by you personally". Similarly there are many
verses of the Qur'an addressed to the Prophet, but intended in reality
for the community. The translator further states that according to one
authority (probably MB), di'f in this context means punishment, torment
(\`adhab). All these fanciful explanations are of great interest from
the dogmatic point of view.

[^8]: Freytag, Arab. Prov. i. 72-75 (No. 187); MB, s.v. جار. The proverb
إيّاكِ أَعْنِي وَ اْسْمَعِي ياَ جارَه is explained by the translator as
follows: This is a proverb among the Arabs. Sahl b. Malik al-Fazari is
the originator. He fell in love with a beautiful young girl and,
desiring to marry her, wrote some verses addressed to another lady, two
of which were: يَا أُخْتَ خَيْر البَدْوِ وَ الحَضارَة كَيْفَ تَريْنَ فِي
فتى فَزارَة أَصْبَحَ يَهْوِي حُرَّةً مِعْطارَةَ إيّاكِ أَعْنِي وَ
اْسْمَعِي ياَ جارَه (1) "O sister of one who is best among the dwellers
of the desert and the town. What do you think (about marrying) a young
man of the tribe of Fazara. (2) He is greatly desirous of a free woman
well-perfumed; Thee (O beloved) do I mean, but hear, O thou neighbouring
lady! " This proverb is employed when a certain person is addressed and
another is intended.

[^9]: The twelve Imams of the Shi\`a.

[^10]: Although it begins with the Qur'an, this section contains a
number of well-known Shi'itic beliefs.


