The Number of Prophets And Vicegerents
======================================

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja'far: Our belief concerning their number is that
in all there have been one hundred and twenty-four thousand prophets[^1]
and a like number of *awsiya*'[^2]. Each *nabi* (prophet) had a *wasi*
to whom he gave instructions by the command of Allah. And concerning
them we believe that they brought the truth from Allah, that their word
is the word of Allah, that their command is the command of Allah, that
obedience to them is obedience to Allah and that disobedience to them is
disobedience to Allah.

They spoke not except on behalf of Allah, and on being inspired by Him.
And verily the leaders of the prophets are five in number round whom the
heaven revolve[^3], and they are the masters of the religious path *(as
habu 'sh-shara'i'),* namely Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad, on
all of whom be peace:

***“messengers of inflexible purpose” (Qur'an 46:35)***

. Muhammad verily is their leader and the most excellent of them.[^4] He
brought the truth and confirmed (the message of) the apostles.

Those who declared him to be a liar will suffer a painful agony. And
those who believed in him and honored and helped him[^5], and followed
the light[^6] which descended with him they are the successful and the
victorious ones.

It is necessary to believe that Allah the Mighty and Glorious did not
create any created thing more excellent than Muhammad and the Imams,
peace on them, that they are the most loved of creatures in the eyes of
Allah, and the most noble and the foremost among them, on account of
their acceptance of Him (as their Lord). When Allah took the pledge
*(mithaq)* of the prophets and

***“required them to bear witness of themselves (saying): Am I not your
Lord? and they said: Yes, verily” (Qur'an 7:172)***.

And verily Allah sent His Prophet Muhammad (with a message) to the other
prophets in the world of atoms *(adh-dharr)*[^7] *.* And verily Allah
the Mighty and Glorious gave to each prophet (i.e. knowledge, power,
etc.) according to the extent of his cognition *(ma'rifa*)[^8], while
the cognition of our Prophet Muhammad was greater and more sublime[^9],
for it took precedence in accepting Allah (as the Supreme Being).

We believe that Allah, Blessed and Exalted is He above all, created the
whole of creation for him (the Prophet) and for the People of his House,
and that but for them, Allah, Glory be to Him, would not have created
the heavens or the earth, Paradise or Hell, Adam or Eve, the angels or
(any) created thing *(shay* ') - the Blessings of Allah upon them all.

And our belief is that after His Prophet, the Blessings of Allah upon
him, the proofs[^10] of Allah for the people are the Twelve Imams,[^11]
the first of them being the Prince of Believers 'Ali bin Abi Talib, then
al-Hasan, then al-Husayn, then 'Ali bin al-Husayn, then Muhammad bin
'Ali, then Ja'far bin Muhammad, then Musa bin Ja'far, then 'Ali bin Musa
ar-Rida, then Muhammad bin 'Ali, then 'Ali bin Muhammad, then al-Hasan
bin 'Ali, then Muhammad bin al-Hasan the Proof *(al-hujja),* who upholds
the command of Allah *(al-qa'im bi-amri'l-lah),* the Master of Time
*(sahibu'z-zaman),* the Vicegerent of the Beneficent One
*(khalifatu'r-Rahman)* in His earth, the one who is present in the
earth[^12] but invisible *(gha'ib)* to the eyes - the Blessings of Allah
on all of them.[^13]

Our belief regarding them is that they are in authority *(ulu'l-amr).*
It is to them that Allah has ordained obedience,[^14] they are the
witnesses for the people and they are the gates of Allah *(abwab)* and
the road *(sabil)* to Him and the guides *(dalil,* plural *adilla)*
thereto, and the repositories[^15] of His knowledge and the interpreters
of His revelations and the pillars of His unity *(tawhid).* They are
immune from sins *(khata')* and errors *(zalal);* they are those from
whom

***“Allah has removed all impurity and made them absolutely pure”
(Qur'an 33:33)***.

They are possessed of (the power of) miracles *(mu'jizat)* and of
(irrefutable) arguments *(dala'il*); and they are for the protection of
the people of this earth just as the stars are for the inhabitants of
the heavens. They may be likened, in this community, to the Ark of Noah;
he who boards it obtains salvation or reaches the Gate of Repentance
(*hitta*).[^16]

They are the most noble slaves of Allah, who

***“speak not until He hath spoken; they act by His command” (Qur'an
21:27)***.

And we believe that love for them is true belief *(iman)* and hatred for
them is unbelief *(kufr);* that their command is the command of Allah,
their prohibition is the prohibition of Allah; obedience to them is
obedience to Allah, and disobedience to them is disobedience to Allah;
their friend *(wali*[^17]*)* is the friend of Allah, and their enemy the
enemy of Allah.

We believe that the earth cannot be without the Proof *(hujja)* of Allah
to His creatures - a leader either manifest *(zahir)* and well known
*(mashhur)*[^18]*,* or hidden *(khafi*[^19]*)* and obscure *(maghmur).*

We believe that the Proof of Allah in His earth and His vicegerent
*(khalifa)* among His slaves in this age of ours is the Upholder
*(al-Qa'im)* (of the law of Allah), the Expected One *(al-Muntazar),*
Muhammad bin al-Hasan bin 'Ali bin Muhammad bin 'Ali bin Musa bin Ja'far
bin Muhammad bin 'Ali bin al-Husayn bin 'Ali bin Abi Talib, on them be
peace.

He it is concerning whose name and descent the Prophet was informed by
Allah the Mighty and Glorious, and he it is who will fill the earth with
justice and equity, just as now it is full of oppression and wrong.[^20]
And he it is through whom Allah will make His faith manifest

***“in order to supersede all religion, though the polytheists may
dislike (it)” (Qur'an 9:33, 48:28, 61:9).***

He it is whom Allah will make victorious over the whole world until from
every place the call to prayer will be heard, and all religion[^21] will
belong entirely to Allah, Exalted is He above all. He it is, who is the
Rightly Guided *(mahdi),* about whom the Prophet gave information that
when he appears, Jesus,[^22] son of Mary, will descend upon the earth
and pray behind him, and he who prays behind him is like one who prays
behind the Prophet of Allah, because he is his vicegerent *(khalifa).*

And we believe that there can be no *Qa'im* other than him; he may live
in the state of occultation (as long as he likes); and were he to live
in the state of occultation for the space of the existence of this
world, there would nevertheless be no *Qa'im* other than him. For, the
Prophet and the Imams have indicated him by his name and descent; him
they appointed as their successor, and of him they gave glad tidings -
the Blessings of Allah on all of them.[^23]

[^1]: Browne, Persian Literature, iv. 387-388; Donaldson, 320. In Sunni
dogmatics the numbers differ from 315 apostles (Ibn Sa'd) to 224,000;
but Nasafi is non-committal MC, 204; Macdonald, 312. It is also to be
observed that here no difference is made between apostle (rasul) and
prophet (nabi). The distinction according to Sunnite doctrine appears to
be that the former were sent each with a law and a book, while the
latter, only to preach and to warn,MC, loc. cit. For distinction between
risala and nubuwwa, see Affifi, 95 and generally, KP, ch. iv. pp. 52
sqq.

[^2]: The word wasi is untranslatable in English, except in a legal
context, where executor is an exact rendering. "Plenipotentiary" or
"vicegerent" may also be used in certain cases. It has in Shi'itic works
the following chief attributes: (1) wasi is a person who is, by command
of Allah, specially instructed and authorized by the nabi to perform
certain acts. These are considered to be the commands of the nabi and
the duties of the wasi. (2) During the lifetime of the nabi, the wasi
holds a position next after him as vicegerent, FC, no. 31 ; and for
particular religious and political functions, he acts as his
plenipotentiary. (3) After the death of the nabi the wasi is his khalifa
(successor), his executor and the leader of the community, being the
most excellent of men after the Prophet, FC, no. 31. The distinction
between him and the Imam is that the latter has not had the advantage of
personal intimacy and direct instruction from the nabi, KP, 20; although
in the absence of the nabi, the wasi and the imam have similar powers.
Thus wasi is superior to imam, \`Ali being superior to all Imams, FC,
nos.35, 36. It is for these reasons that the word wasi has throughout
been retained in the translation. The terms wasi has very special
association in Isma'ili's thought, FC, nos. 31,35. Wisayat and nubuwwat
are temporary institutions, but imamat is permanent and everlasting, no.
35. The substance of the nabi is closely connected with that of the wasi
and the wasi isthe truest interpreter of the religion of the nabi, no.
31 \_ The Kalami Pir is full of the doctrine of wisayat (or wasayat?)
out of which a few points are worthy of mention. The nabi is the natiq,
teacher of the revealed religion (tanzil) and he always prepares برباى
كند a wasi, who is the teacher of the inner meaning (ta'wil), pp. 18,
56,57; every natiq has a wasi, 57; the wasi gives to every one tanzal
(zahir) or ta'wil (batin) according to his ability, 56. On the meanings
of the word وصية see Fyzee, Ismaili Law of Wills, 8.

[^3]: Reading دارت عليهم الرحى as in D: not الرحى as in N.Cf. MB, s.v.
رحا p.37. The expression in ordinary English means "on whom everything
depends".

[^4]: Cf. MC, 113 - 115, where it is shown that at first no distinction
was made; but later Muhammad's superiority was clearly accepted,
Macdonald, 305 (Ghazili), 312 (Nasafi), 345 (Fudali) ; BHA, no. 170; FC,
no. 29. In KP there are expressions showing the identity of the
substance of 'Ali and Muhammad, 79 sqq., and it is not at all clear
whether 'Ali is not superior to the Prophet, cf. especially 74, where we
have: "'Ali was the greatest among all the prophets and saints, pious
and holy". According to Ibnu'l-\`Arabi, the reality of Muhammad is
identified with the logos, Affifi, 70; Muhammad is therefore the centre
of the Sufi hierarchy - the Qutb, 71 et seq. The question of Prophecy
from the Western Isma'ili's point of view is dealt with in Abu Hatim
ar-Razi's A'lamu 'n-Nubuwwa (W. Ivanow, Guide to Ism. Lit., no, 19) and
other works.

[^5]: Reading \`azzaruhu.

[^6]: Browne, Lit. His., iv. 388; KP, Intr. xxxviii, 85. Ibnu'l-\`Arabi
holds that saintship can only be derived from this "light", and in this
he is under the influence of Hallaj, Affifi, 74, 92, 189.

[^7]: Before the atoms were put together by Allah and the mass shaped
into different forms. This shows how early the excellence of Muhammad
was recognized. This is a reference to the interesting legend regarding
the covenant of Adam and his descendants referred to in the Qur'an, 7,
171 -173. ذَر is obviously used for its affinity with ذرِّيَتهم and may
mean either "atoms" or "ants". The descendants of Adam, prior to the
creation of this physical world, were made to appear to him in the shape
of ants: Baydawi, ed. Fleischer, i. 35215-17 (com. to the Qur'an 7,172);
MB, s. v. وثق. - أخذ الله ميثاق شيعتنا بالولاية و هم ذّر يوم أخذ الميثاق
على الذّر- توضيحه: أن الأرواح تعلّقت ذالك اليوم بجسد صغير مثل النّمل
دعاهم إلى الإقرار فأقَرَّ بعضهم و أنكر بعضهم The Thus God took the
twofold covenant from mankind: (a) the Unity of Allah, and (b) the
priority in excellence of the Prophet Muhammad. In this manner not only
mankind, but all the prophets testified to these two dogmas, tawhid and
khatamiya. MB goes further and mentions also the wilaya as part of the
covenant. Cf. also Wensinck, Handbook, s. v. Adam, 11 b. It is necessary
to emphasize, as is done in the explanations, that all this happened in
a spiritual sense and in a spiritual world, not actually and in a
physical sense; and this world is the عالم الذّر (the world of atoms or
ants), and في الذّر stands for في عالم الذّر whereas على الذّر refers to
the covenant itself. The rendering "world of atoms" appears to be more
in consonance with the real significance in English than the expression
"world of ants". From the traditions it would appear that the
descendants of Adam appeared to him as a huge cluster of ants; it may
also be suggested - and the metaphor is even more beautiful - that they
appeared to him as innumberable particles floating in a beam of light.
The idea of the excellence of the Prophet appears to be of gradual
growth; originally no distinction was made between the various apostles,
MC, 115,191 ( Figh Akbar 11, art. 6), 215. The mithaq was originally
between God and man; then it was made to include the Prophet's
excellence over all the other prophets, and finally the Shi'a engrafted
upon it the doctrine of walaya as well.

[^8]: FC, no. 28. This is clearly in anticipation of the Sufi doctrine,
Afifi, 74, 92, 189.

[^9]: Reading as in D كانت أكبر و أعظم و سبقت إلخ.

[^10]: FC, no. 38.

[^11]: On the Imamate generally see Browne, iv. 391-395; BHA, nos.
174 -218, esp no. 210; Donaldson, D. M., The Shiite Religion (London,
1933), 305 -338; FC, nos. 30 -42; KP, xxxviii, and idex.

[^12]: Lit. "present in the cities (amsar)."

[^13]: Browne, iv. 394; Donaldson, The Shiite Religion, 277 sqq.; BHA,
nos. 210, 211, 217.

[^14]: Ref to Qur'an 4, 62. BHA, no. 211.

[^15]: N عَيْبَة; D مهبط. 'ayba is a leather bag; metaphorically, it is
also used for a person who is a repository of one's secret (Lane).

[^16]: Qur'an 2, 58; 7, 161. So Pickthall. The word means "remission
laying down the burden of sins" (Palmer); or "forgiveness" ( Rodwell).

[^17]: tiyj with the kasr of the waw is "authority", "power",
"sovereignty "; and with the fatha, is "love", "devotion" – و بالفتح
المَحَبَّة, MB, s.v. yj,97. This is the general meaning; the theological
concept is on p.99; الوَلاية بالفتح محبة أهل البيت و اتِّباعِهِم في
الدين و امتثال أوامرهم و نواهيهم و التأسّي بهم في الأعمال و الأخلاق. و
أمّا معرفة حقَّهم و اعتقاد الإمامة فيهم فذلك من أصول الدين لا من فروع
العلمية. It therefore involves: ( 1) love and devotion to the People of
the House (ahlu 'l-bayt) of the Prophet, namely, the Imams; (2)
following them in religion; (3) obedience to their commands and
absention from their prohibitions; (4) imitation of their actions and
conduct; and finally, (5) recognition of their rights and belief in
their Imamate, - this being a basic principle of religion, not a mere
scholastic deduction. SUNNIS. - There is a hadith that there can be no
faith without love of Muhammad's family, Wensinck, Handbook, 169 (citing
Tirmidhi 46, 28, etc.). ITHNA \`ASHARIYA. - Walaya is a basic principle,
Browne, iv. 394 - 395; Donaldson, 344--345 (citing Hayatu 'l-Qulub of
Majlisi), 247, 346. In BHA, the whole section on Imamate, nos. 179 sqq.,
necessarily involves this belief and shows the importance given to it.
ISMA\`ILIS, - The Western (Musta'lian) Isma'ilis regard wwalaya as the
first and the most important of the seven pillars (da\`a 'im ) of
religion. In the Da'a'imu 'l-Islam, vol. I, beg., it is related on the
authority of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq: بُني الإسلام على سبع دعائم، الولاية و
هي أولها و أفضلها، و بها و بالولي يوصل إلى معرفتها. Cf. also Fyzee,
Ismaili Law of Wills, p. 1, n. 1 and JRAS for 1934, p.22; FC, p.9 and
no. 69. The basis of the doctrine appears to be the wasiya of 'Ali in
the Da'a'imu 'l-Islam, vol. II (see Fyzee, Ismaili Law of Wills, no.9).
'Ali first asks for devotion, citing Qur'in 42, 23) (ibid., 70); then
before laying down the principles of religion, that is, tahara, salat,
etc., he again mentions walaya (p.71); intercession will not be
available to those who do not recognize 'Ali's right and the rights of
the ahlu 'l-bayt (p.72); "I enjoin you to be devoted to us the People of
the House, for God has coupled obedience to us with obedience to Him and
His Messenger" (p.74). The wasiya of 'Ali is cited widely in Isma'ili's
works both ancient, like the \`Uyunu 'l-Akhbar of Sayyidna \`Imadu'd-
Din Idris b. Hasan, and modern like Siraju'l-Huda'l-Munir by Sardar
Sayyidna Tahir Sayfu'd-Din, the present daa\`i of the Da'udi Bohoras,
1352 A.H., pp.85 -95. Among the Eastern (Nizarian) Isma'ilis, the
doctrine of walaya is extended still further. Walaya is an essential
part of belief, KP, 36, 89; he who dies without recognizing the Imam of
the time dies a kafir, 27, 48, 61, 69; calumny of 'Ali means exclusion
from grace, 37; closeness of \`Ali and the Prophet, 74; and finally
wilaya (not walaya) as a rank, is superior to nubuwwa, for the light of
nubuwwa, is inferior to the light of wilaya, xxxviii, 74, 86.

[^18]: N omits مشهوراً.

[^19]: N خائفاً err. for خافياً Tajul-Aqa'id, FC, no. 37, does not
accept the ghayba of the Imam.

[^20]: This phrase is very common in Shi'itic literature and forms part
of the mahdi tradition in general, cf. Isr. Friedlaender in JAOS, vol.
xxix, 30 - 31 ; Shahrastani, 177, 1331, etc. ; BHA, no. 211 (pen). See
p.111.

[^21]: Reading with D و يكون الدين كله لله.

[^22]: Reading with D و أنه الذي إذا خرج نزل عيسى إلخ; N و انه إذا نزل
عيسى

[^23]: The Twelfth Imam is in some respects similar to the Mahdi of the
Sunnis, MC, 243, 244. The descent of Jesus is also generally accepted,
Wensinck, Handbook, 113, where it is stated that he will descend in
Syria, kill the anti-Christ, appear as Imam, destroy the cross, kill the
swine, and restore Islam to its pristine purity; he resides miraculously
in the Heavens. Cf. also mahdi, Wensinck, Handbook, 139. For a full
discussion of mahdi, as distinguished from Imam, see EI, iii. 111- 115,
s. v. Mahdi. Among the Shi'a the traditions and books about the 12th
Imam are legion; the following are a few general references, Browne, iv.
394; Donaldson, 226 -241; R. Strothmann in EI, ii. 642, s. v. al- Qa'im
(many references); BHA, nos. 210, 211, 217; in no. 211 the 12th Imam is
declared as the greatest (afdal) of all the Imams, an-Nafi' yawmi
'l-Hashr, Bombay ed. 587 , Najaf ed. 788.


