Concerning Infallibility ('isma)
================================

**Concerning Infallibility ('isma)**[^1]

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja'far: Our belief concerning the prophets
*(anbia')*[^2], apostles *(rusul),* Imams and angels is that they are
infallible (*ma'sum);* purified from all defilement *(danas),* and that
they do not commit any sin, whether it be minor *(saghira)* or major
*(kabira).* They do not disobey Allah in what He has commanded them;
they act in accordance with His behests. He who denies infallibility to
them in any matter appertaining to their status is ignorant of them, and
such a one is a *kafir* (unbeliever).[^3]

[^1]: The word \`isma, translated by Wensinck in MC as impeccability,by
Miller in BHA as "immunity to sin" and by W. Ivanow as "infallibility",
needs further explanation in view of its doctrinal importance in
Shi\`itic literature. The root \`asama, ya'simu, \`asman, means
according to Lane, prevented, hindered, protected, defended, preserved,
withheld, etc. And \`isma is prevention, hindrance, defence, protection;
its primary significance being trying or binding. عصمة الأنبياء is
explained in Taju '1-Arus as God's preservation of the prophets, first,
by peculiar endowment of them with essential purity of constitution;
then by the conferring of large and highly-esteemed excellences; then by
aid against opponents, and rendering their feet firm, then by sending
down upon them tranquility (as-Sakina, Qur'an 9, 26, etc.) and the
preservation of their hearts or minds, and adaptation to that which is
right. Whence we have "a defence from the state of perdition" and
finally, "a faculty of avoiding acts of disobedience, with possession of
power to commit them". This is the positive quality which is believed by
the Shi'a to be the peculiar possession of the Imams\_ It is a state of
sinlessness and infallibility or immunity to sin, resulting from a
characteristic of their nature, which is a miraculous gift of Allah. It
is also fully explained in MB, s.v.عصم also E1, ii. 543 (Ign. Goldziher)
and BHA, notes to para.174 at p.98.

[^2]: The \`isma of the prophets is accepted by Sunnis to a limited
extent; Fakhru'd-din Razi being a great supporter of the dogma,
Goldziher, op. cit.; Donaldson, 337;MC, 217--218; but the Sunnite
tradition contains nothing of \`isma, while the Shi'a lay great emphasis
on it. It is the Fiqh Akbar II which, under Shiite influence, developed
the dogma of Muhammad's infallibility, MC, 218. It was claimed by Ibn
Tumart, Macdonald, 247, 292, 347 (al-Fudali); BHA, nos- 164 - 173 (see
Miller's note to no. 164 at p.97).

[^3]: Browne, iv. 394 - 395; Donaldson, 320 - 338 gives a very valuable
account of \`isma, the nine proofs whereof will be found on p.321; BHA,
nos.179-185; FC, nos.37, 41, 56; KP, xliii (Imam), xIv.94 (hujja).


