The Denial Of Excess And Delegation
===================================

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja'far: Our belief concerning those who exceed the
bounds of belief *(ghal,* plural *ghulat)* and those who believe in
delegation *(al-mufawwida*[^1]*)* is that they are deniers *(kuffar)* of
Allah, Glory be to His name. They are more wicked than the Jews, the
Christians, the Fire-Worshippers, the Qadarites[^2] or the Kharijites
*(Haruriya)*[^3], or any of the heretics *(ahlu'1-bid'a)* or those who
hold views which lead astray *(al ahwa'u 'l-madilla).* None have
belittled Allah more, Glory be to Him; as Allah says:

***“It is not possible for any human being unto whom Allah has given the
scripture and wisdom and the prophethood that he should afterwards have
said unto mankind: Be slaves of me instead of Allah; but (what he said
was): Be ye faithful servants of the Lord by virtue of your constant
teaching of the Scripture and of your constant study thereof” (Qur'an
3:79)***. ***“And he commanded you not that ye should take the angels
and the prophets for lords. Would he command you to disbelieve after ye
had become Muslims?” (Qur'an 3:80)***.

And He said, Mighty and Glorious is He:

***“Do not be excessive in your belief” (Qur'an 4:171, 5:77)***.

Our belief concerning the Prophet is that he was poisoned during the
expedition of Khaybar. The poison continued to be noxious to him until
it cut his aorta and then he died from its effects.[^4]

And the Prince of Believers, on whom be peace, was murdered by
'Abdu'r-Rahman bin Muljam al-Murad[^5], may Allah curse him, and he was
buried in Ghari[^6]. (1st Imam)

And Hasan bin 'Ali, on both of whom be peace, he was poisoned by his
wife Ja'da bint Ash'ath of Kinda, may Allah curse them both, and he died
on account of that. (2nd Imam)[^7]

And Husayn bi 'Ali was slain at Karbala. His murderer was Sinan bin Anas
an-Nakha'i, the curse of Allah on them both. (3rd Imam).[^8]

And 'Ali bin Husayn, the Sayyid Zaynu'1-'Abidin, was poisoned by
al-Walid bin 'Abdu'l-Malik, may Allah curse him. (4th Imam)[^9]

And Muhammad al-Baqir bin 'Ali was poisoned by Ibrahim bin al-Walid, may
Allah curse him. (5th Imam)[^10]

And Ja'far as-Sadiq was poisoned by Abu Ja'far al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi,
may Allah curse him. (6th Imam)[^11]

And Musa al-Kazim bin Ja'far was poisoned by Harun ar-Rashid, may Allah
curse him. (7th Imam) [^12]

And 'Ali *ar-Rida* b. Musa was poisoned by Ma'mun, may Allah curse him.
(8th Imam)[^13]

And Abu Ja'far Muhammad at-Taqi bin 'Ali was poisoned by al-Mu'tasim,
may Allah curse him. (9th Imam)[^14]

And 'Ali an-Naqi bin Muhammad was poisoned by al'Mutawakkil, may Allah
curse him. (10th Imam)[^15]

And Hasan al-'Askari bin 'Ali was poisoned by al-Mu'tamid, may Allah
curse him. (11th Imam)[^16]

And our belief is that these events actually occurred, and that there
was no doubt in the minds of the people regarding the Imams' affairs, as
some of those who exceed the bounds (of belief) allege.[^17] On the
contrary the people witnessed their murder really and truly, and not by
conjecture *(hisban)* or fancy *(khaylula)* or doubt *(shakk)* or false
allegation *(tuhma).* He who asserts that some person or persons were
substituted for one of the Imams, or some of them, is not of our
religion and we have nothing in common with him.

And verily the Prophet and Imams, on whom be peace, had informed
(people) that they would all be murdered. He who says that they were not
murdered has verily given them the lie. And he who declares them to be
false has imputed falsehood to Allah, the Mighty and Glorious, and
denied Him and goes out of Islam.

***“And whoso seeketh religion other than al-Islam, it shall not be
accepted from him, and he will be a loser in the Hereafter.” (Qur'an
3:85)***

And Imam 'Ali ar-Rida, on whom be peace, used to say in his prayer:

O God, I seek absolution from Thee in respect of Thy Strength and
Power.[^18] There is neither strength nor power save in Thee. O God, I
declare myself before Thee as having nothing to do with those who assert
in respect of us things which we ourselves do not know. O God, to Thee
belongs creation and Thou possessest the power of command;

***“Thee (alone) do we worship and from Thee do we seek help” (Qur'an
1:5)***.

O God, Thou art our Creator, and the Creator of our ancestors, near and
remote. O God, none deserves lordship save Thee; and divinity befits
none except to Thee. So do Thou curse the Christians who belittled Thy
greatness, and do Thou curse those who declare Thee to resemble Thy
Creature. O God, verily we are Thy slaves and the sons of Thy slaves. We
have no power over ourselves in respect of profit, loss, death, life or
resurrection *(nushur).*

O God, he who asserts that we (the Imams) have the power of creation and
providing (for mankind) - we (Imams) seek absolution from Thee in
respect of him, an absolution similar to that of Jesus, son of Mary, in
respect of the Christians. O God, we have never called upon them to
assert what they do assert; so do not punish us for what they say and
forgive us for what they allege.

***“My Lord! leave not one of the disbelievers in the land” (Qur'an
71:26)***.

***“If Thou shouldst leave them, they will mislead Thy slaves and will
beget none save lewd ingrates”(Qur'an 71:27).***

And it is related from Zurara that he said: I said to Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq that a man from among the descendants of 'Abdu'l-lah bin Saba'
is a believer in (the doctrine of) delegation *(tafwid).* And he said:
And what is *tafwid?* I (Zurara) said: According to him Allah, the
Mighty and Glorious, (in the first instance) created Muhammad and 'Ali,
and then delegated the matter (of creation) to them, and these two
created and gave sustenance, and caused life and death.

The Imam said: He, the enemy of Allah, has lied. When you return to him
recite to him the verse of the Chapter of The Thunder:

***“Or assign they unto Allah partners who created the like of His
creation so that the creation (which they made and His creation) seemed
alike to them? Say: Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the
One, the Al-mighty” (Qur'an 13:16)***.

Then I went to the man and informed him of what Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq had
said, and he became as if I had forced him to swallow stones or as
though he were struck dumb.

Now (undoubtedly) Allah has delegated matters concerning religion to His
Prophet and He, the Mighty and Glorious, says:

***“And whatsoever the Messenger giveth you, take it. And whatsoever he
forbiddeth, abstain (from it)” (Qur'an 59:7)***.

And this (that is, religious authority) has also been delegated to the
Imams.

The sign of the Delegators (al-mufawwida) and the Extremists (al-ghulat)
and their likes is the belief that their Shaykhs[^19] and ulema have
attributed less than their due (to the Imams). And the sign of the
Hallajites among the Extremists is the claim of Manifestation (tajalli
)[^20] in their devotion, in spite of their doctrinal belief in the
abandonment of prayer and all the obligatory acts (fard- 'idh),[^21] and
(also) their claim of knowing the Most High Names of Allah'[^22] and
their claim of the incarnation (intiba\`) of the Divine Being in bodily
shape for them[^23]. I For according to them the saint (wali), when he
is purified and knows their religion, becomes more excellent than the
Prophets. Their distinguishing characteristic is the claim that they
know alchemy. They know nothing of it, except the counterfeiting and
silvering of brass[^24] arid lead (for deceiving) Muslims. O God, do not
include us among them and curse them.

[^1]: W. Ivanow translates ghuluww as extremism in Shi'itic belief.
These terms are explained by the Urdu translator. He says: The ghulat
are those who believe 'Ali to be God or prophet, a claim which he
himself would not make. This explanation is clearly taken from MB:الغالي
من يقول في أهل البيت ما لا يقولون في أنفسهم كمن يدَّعي فيهم النبوة و
الإلهيَّة MB, s. v. غلى, 675. The mufawwida are those who beliebe that
God created the Prophet and 'Ali and then ceased to function. Thereafter
it was these two who arranged everything in the world. They create and
sustain and destroy; Allah has nothing to do with these things, MB, 372.
On the ghulat see also Browne, iv. 395. The MS. copy of the I'tiqadat in
the Asafiyah Library, Hyderabad, no. 7909 (hadith, 333), vocalizes it
mufawwada.

[^2]: This is a peculiar use of the word qadarya, because as Wensinck
has shown, they did not believe in evil coming from God and were nearer
to the Mu'tazila and the Shi'a, MC, 52, 53. It is really their other
beliefs, for instance, rejection of the popular eschatology, ibid., 119,
and of Heaven and Hell, 166, and other doctrines that made them hated.

[^3]: The Qadarites and Kharijites are omitted in D, but the translator
inserts them in the Urdu rendering.

[^4]: The usually accepted view is that the Prophet died of fever at
Medina, Fr. Buhl in EI, iii. 656; Tor Andreae, Mohammed (Eng. Tr. 1936),
242.

[^5]: So in D. 'Ali died on 21 Ram. 40/27 Jan. 661, El, i. 284.

[^6]: MB, s.v. غرا, 66 explains that ghari (الغَرِى كغَنِىّ) is a
magnificent building, and the "two gharis" in Kufa (presently Najaf) is
the place where 'Ali b. Abi Talib was buried. Cf. also
Maqata1u't-Ta1ibiyin, (Najaf, 1263), p.28; and for a modern description,
Donaldson, 54 sqq.

[^7]: Donaldson, 66 sqq. Died A.H. 49, EI, ii. 274.

[^8]: ibid., 79 sqq. Died 10 Muh. 61/10 Oct. 680, El, ii. 339.

[^9]: ibid., 101 sqq. D adds فقتل و دفن بالبقيع, Died 92/710- 711 or 94/
712-713.

[^10]: ibid., 112 sqq. Died A.H. 114, 117 or 118, EI, iii. 670.

[^11]: ibid., 129 sqq. Died 148/765, El, i. 993.

[^12]: ibid., 152 sqq. Died 183/799, EI, iii. 741.

[^13]: ibid., 161 sqq. Died 203/818, EI, i. 296.

[^14]: ibid., 188 sqq. Died 220/835, Browne, iv. 394.

[^15]: ibid., 209 sqq. Died 245/868, Browne, loc. cit.

[^16]: ibid., 217 sqq. Died 260/873. On Imims generally, Browne,
iv.391-395.

[^17]: Some apparently believed that the Imams were miraculously
translated to Heaven. The expression ما شَبَّه للنّاس is reminiscent of
Qur'an 4, 157 regarding the death of Jesus.

[^18]: This apparently means: I declared that I have nothing to do with
the belief that in strength or power any one can be Thy equal.

[^19]: Reading with N مشائخهم D مشائخ قم.

[^20]: To III means the manifestation of the Deity to human beings as a
vision. Compare FC, 12 and the visio beatifica of the Catholics, MC, 65.
Tajalli, according to Ibnu'l-\`Arabi, is "the eternal and everlasting
self-manifestation", Affifi, 61 ; this is different from the Emanations
of the neo-Platonists, 62; the mystic gains perfect knowledge by
tajalli, 109; Ibnu'1-\`Arabi complete pantheism, 141; the greatest
happiness is the realization of the inseparable Unity with God, 168. KP,
p.68, tr., n. l \_ Apparently however, as Dr. Affifi explains, tajalli
(manifestation) is different from inbi'ath (emanation), op. cit., 62\_
But see tajalliyi awwal, KP, 72, and -shuhud, ibid., 82. It would seem
that inbi \`ath is connected with the process of creation, while tajalli
takes place after creation and depends to some extent upon the gnosis of
the saint.

[^21]: Among the Nazirian Isma'llis, people with proper knowledge of the
secrets of religion are exempt from the outward prescriptions of the
law, K P, 95.

[^22]: Knowledge of اسم الله الأكبر "the most great name of Allah" has a
great significance among Sufis. See generally the works cited by L.
Massignon in the article on tasawwuf in El, iv\_ 681.

[^23]: Incarnation (hulul) and metempsychosis (tanasukh) are rejected
both by Musta'lian and Nizirian Ismai'ilis, KP, xlix, n. 2 and see
above, note 163, p. 134.

[^24]: Reading with N تقضيض الشَّبَه; D تنفيق الشبه is also possible,
meaning "they pass off brass and lead as current coin among the
Muslims".


