Concerning Dissimulation (Taqiyya)
==================================

Says the Shaykh, may the mercy of Allah be on him: Our belief concerning
*taqiya*[^1] (permissible dissimulation) is that it is obligatory, and
he who forsakes it is in the same position as he who forsakes
prayer.[^2] Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq was told: O son of the Messenger of
Allah, verily we see in the mosque one who openly abuses your enemies,
calling out their names. And he said: May Allah curse him! Why does he
refer to us? He, Who is Exalted above all, says:

***“Revile not those who invoke (deities) other than Allah, lest
wrongfully they revile Allah through ignorance” (Qur'an 6:108).***

And Imam Ja'far in explaining this verse has said: So do not revile
them, lest they revile your 'Ali. And he also said: He who reviles the
friend (wali) of Allah (i.e. Ali) has reviled Allah. And the Prophet
said: He who reviles thee, O 'Ali, has verily reviled me; and he, who
reviles me, has verily reviled Allah.

Now until the Imam al-Qa'im appears, *taqiya* is obligatory and it is
not permissible to dispense with it. He, who abandons it before the
appearance of the Qa'im, has verily gone out of the religion of Allah,
Exalted is He, and the religion of the Imams, and disobeys Allah and His
Messenger and the Imams. Imam Ja'far was asked concerning the Word of
Allah, Mighty and Glorious is He:

***“Verily the noblest among you, in the sight of Allah, is the most
pious” (Qur'an 49:13)***.

He said: (It means) he who adheres most scrupulously to the practice of
*taqiya.*

And Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has described the showing of
friendship to unbelievers as being (possible only) in the state of
*taqiya.* And He the Mighty and Glorious says:

***“Let not believers take disbelievers for their friends in preference
to believers. Whoso doeth that hath no connection with Allah unless (it
be) that ye but guard yourselves against them, for fear of being
killed”*** ***(Qur'an 3:28)***.[^3]

And Allah the Mighty and Glorious says:

***“Allah doth not forbid you to deal with kindness and fairness toward
those who have not made war upon you on account of your religion, or
driven you forth from your homes: for Allah loveth those who act with
fairness (Qur'an 60:8).”***

***“Only Allah doth forbid you to make friends of those who, on account
of your religion, have warred against you, and have driven you forth
from your homes, and have aided those who drove you forth: and whoever
maketh friends of them are wrong-doers” (Qur'an 60:9)***

And Imam Ja'far said: Verily, I hear a man abusing me in the mosque; and
I hide myself behind a pillar so that he may not see me. And he (Imam
Ja'far) said: Mix with the people (enemies) outwardly, but oppose them
inwardly, so long as the Amirate *(imratun)* is a matter of opinion.[^4]
And he also said: Verily diplomacy *(arri'a')* with a true believer is a
form of *shirk* (polytheism); but with a hypocrite *(munafiq)* in his
own house, it is worship.

And he also said: He who prays with them (hypocrites) standing in the
first row, it is as though he prayed with the Prophet in the first row.
And he also said: Visit their sick and attend their funerals and pray in
their mosques. And he also said: (You should) become an ornament for us,
and not a disgrace. And he said: May Allah have mercy on a person who
inculcates friendship towards us among men, and does not provoke ill
will among them.

The storytellers *(qassasun)* were mentioned before Imam Ja'far, and he
said: May Allah curse them, for they speak ill of us. And he was asked
concerning the storytellers, whether it is permissible to hear what they
say, and he said: No. And Imam Ja'far said: He, who gives ear to a
speaker, has verily rendered himself submissive to him; if the speaker
(discourses) concerning Allah, then the listener has verily worshipped
Allah, and if he speaks of the devil, then the listener has worshipped
the devil.

And Imam Ja'far was asked concerning the Word of Allah, Exalted is He
above all:

***“As for the poets, the erring follow them” (Qur'an 26:224)***.

He said: These are the storytellers.

[^1]: In the Delhi edition ch. 39 deals with "the ancestors of the
Prophet" and ch.40, with taqiya. For a general account see R. Strothmann
on taqiya in EI, iv. 628, where it is rendered "disguise" and in its
technical sense "dispensation from the requirements of religion under
compulsion or threat of injury". Professor Browne renders it "prudential
concealment", Per. Lit., iv. 17. Numerous instances of taqiya are
mentioned by Donaldson (see Index). MC, 107. The tradition books are
full of taqiya in the chapters of al-amr bi'1-ma'ruf wa'n-nahy
\`anil-munkar, Wasa'il, ii. 467; Mustadrak, ii. 357 sqq. It is also
recognized among Isma'ilis, KP, 67; at p.96 fasting is explained
allegorically as keeping the tenets of true religion secret from others.
EC, no.49. In the Da'a'im and Mukhtasaru l-Athar of Qadi Nu\`- man, vol.
ii, Kitabu'l-ashriba, we have on the authority of Imam Ja'far التقيَّة
ديني و دين آبائي في كل شيْ إلّا في تحريم المسكر، إلخ.

[^2]: The Urdu translator explains that the real meaning of taqiya is
the protection of the true religion from enemies by hiding it, in
circumstances where there is fear of being killed or captured or
insulted. But an essential condition is that on account of taqiya the
true religion should not be destroyed, otherwise, it is not permissible.
Similarly, the killing of a true believer (mu'min) is not taqiya,

[^3]: So explained in MB. This phrase has been variously rendered:
Palmer - "unless, indeed, ye fear from some danger from them"; Rodwell -
"unless, indeed, ye fear a fear from them"; Pickthall- "taking (as it
were) security".

[^4]: That is, until the rule of the rightful Imam is finally
established. The Urdu rendering: - "So long as the matter remains in the
hearts of men" is erroneous.


