The Ancestors Of The Prophet
============================

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja'far: Our belief concerning them is that they were
believers *(muslimun)* from Adam down to Abdu'l-lah, his (Prophet's)
father, peace be on him, and that Abu Talib and the Prophet's mother
Amina bint Wahb were Muslims.[^1]

And the Prophet, on whom be blessings and peace said: I am derived from
(the bonds of) matrimony and not from any unlawful union *(sifah),* from
Adam downwards.

And it is related that 'Abdu'l-Muttalib, peace be on him, was a *hujjat*
and Abu Talib was his *wasi.*

[^1]: The Urdu translator adds a note that among the ancestors of the
Prophet were seven prophets, namely: Adam, Seth, Noah, Elias, Abraham,
Ishmael and al-Yasa\` (Esau?); and he cites Qur'an 6, 83-86 as
supporting his own argument. He also cites a verse attributed to Abu
Talib proving that he was a Muslim: "(O people of Quraysh) do you not
know that we have found it written down in the earliest book (Torah)
that Muhammad was a prophet". The translator is surprised that despite
such clear proof people should hold other views. Wensinck shows that in
the Fiqh Akbar II, art. 27 sometimes began with the statement: The
parents of the Apostle of Allah died as infidels, and so did Abu Talib,
his uncle, MC, 197, n. 1. In the hadith the Prophet is reported to have
visited Abu Talib on his death-bed and admonished him to accept Islam.
Later, however, perhaps on account of Shi'itic influence, this attitude
was abandoned, MC, 239-240; KP, 31,84. For Abu Talib, see Donaldson, 5,
n.2.


