Concerning Two Divergent Traditions
===================================

Says the Shaykh, the mercy of Allah be upon him: Our belief concerning
the authentic reports *(akhbar)* related from the Imams is that they
accord with the Book of Allah, being in agreement with its meaning and
not divergent from it, because they are the result of inspiration from
Allah, Glory be to Him. If they were derived from (someone) other than
Allah, they would surely have been divergent.

The outward form of the reports differ only on account of certain
reasons. For instance, (in one report) the expiation for *zihar* is laid
down as the manumission of a slave; in another report we have the
performance of fasts for two consecutive months; and in a third report
we have the feeding of sixty destitute persons. Now all these are
correct.

Fasting is prescribed for him who has no slave to free; and feeding (the
poor) is prescribed for him who is unable to fast. It has also been
reported that he should give *sadaqa* (charity) to the extent that he
can, and this applies to him who has not the means to feed (sixty
persons).

And among (such traditions) are those in which one takes the place of
the other. For instance, what has been related regarding the expiation
of an oath:

***“. . . the feeding of ten of the needy ones with the average of that
wherewith ye feed your own folk, or the clothing of them, or the
liberation of a slave, and he who findeth not (the wherewithal to do
so), he must fast for three days.” (Qur'an 5:89)***.

Now when three traditions are reported concerning the expiation of an
oath - firstly, feeding; secondly, clothing; and thirdly, the
manumission of a slave - they are regarded by the ignorant as differing
from one another. In fact they are not divergent, but each one of these
is alternative to the other.

And among the reports handed down are some which are due to *taqiya.*

It is related on the authority of Sulaym bin Qays al-Hilali that he said
to the Prince of Believers, peace be on him: Verily I have heard from
Salman, Miqdad and Abu Dharr some explanations of the Qur'an and the
traditions of the Prophet different from what are generally known to the
people.[^1] And I have heard from you a corroboration of what I heard
from them.

And I know that there are many things current among the people regarding
the explanation of the Qur'an and the traditions of the Prophet, to
which you (the Imams) are opposed, and you assert that all that is
false. Is it possible that the people attribute a lie[^2] to the Prophet
of Allah deliberately, and give explanations according to their own
opinions?

(The reporter) says: And 'Ali, on whom be peace, said: You have asked (a
question), so now hearken to its reply. Verily the people at large
possess the truth and the falsehood; the abrogating *(nasikh)* and the
abrogated *(mansukh)* verses; the special and the general; the definite
*(muhkam)* and the ambiguous *(mutashabih);* the well remembered
*(hifz)* and the doubtful *(wahm).*

Even in the lifetime of the Prophet, on whom be peace, people attributed
to the Prophet things which were not true, until (matters reached such a
stage that) he rose to address the people and said: O people, the number
of perjurers against me has increased; now he who speaks a falsehood
against me intentionally, let him prepare[^3] for himself a place in
Hell. Thereafter falsehoods were told against him after his death.

All traditions have come to you from one of four sources, and there is
not a fifth. First, the hypocrite *(munafiq)* professing the faith,
simulating Islam,[^4] who does not regard it as a sin, and does not care
if he speaks an untruth against the Prophet intentionally. Now if people
knew that he was a mendacious hypocrite, they would neither have
accepted anything from him, nor would they have considered him truthful.

But they said: Here is a man who associated with the Messenger of
Allah[^5] and who saw and heard him. Therefore they accepted
(traditions) from him, not knowing his real attitude. And Allah has
given tidings regarding the hypocrites and described them with clarity.
For He says, Great is He as a Speaker:

***“And when thou seest them, their figures please thee; and if they
speak thou givest ear unto their speech. (They are) as though they were
blocks of wood in striped cloaks” (Qur'an 63:4)***.[^6]

They (the hypocrites) then split up in factions after the Prophet, and
found favor[^7] with the leaders of destruction and inviters towards the
Fire, by means of deception and falsehood and calumny. They assigned
them offices,[^8] enjoyed the wealth of the world through them and bore
them (hypocrites) upon the necks of people. For people, generally - save
those whom Allah has protected[^9] -follow the kings and the worldly
path. This is the first of the four types.

(The second is) the man who hears something from the Prophet but does
not remember it precisely. He then falls into an error concerning it,
without intentionally telling a lie. Now this (tradition) is with him;
he professes it, acts according to it, and relates it to others and
says: I heard it from the Messenger of Allah. If people knew that this
was a mistake, they would not accept it, and if he himself knew that it
was an error, he would certainly have cast it off.

The third is the man who hears the Prophet commanding a certain act,
which, unknown to him, was later forbidden. Or (he hears the Prophet)
forbidding an act, which was later, unknown to him, permitted. Hence he
remembers the abrogated, but not the abrogating (command). Now if he
knew that it was abrogated, he would surely have rejected it; and
similarly if the people knew that what was heard from the relator was an
abrogated command, they too would surely have rejected it.

The fourth is the man who does not give the lie to Allah and His
Prophet, because he hates falsehood and fears Allah the Mighty and
Glorious, and honors the Messenger of Allah. He does not forget it, but
commits to memory precisely what he hears. So he brings forward what he
has heard, without any increase or decrease. If he knew the abrogating
and the abrogated (command), he would act in accordance with the
abrogating and would reject the abrogated (injunction).

Now the commands of the Prophet, like those of the Qur'an, are
abrogating *(nasikh) a*nd abrogated *(mansukh),* special *(khass)* and
general (*'am),* definite *(muhkam)* and ambiguous *(mutashabih).* And
there may be words related from the Prophet bearing two meanings, a
general and a particular one, exactly as in the case of the Qur'an.
Allah the Mighty and Glorious says in His Book:

***“And whatsoever the Messenger giveth you, take it. And whatsoever he
forbiddeth, abstain (from it)” (Qur'an 59:7)***.

Now what Allah and His Messenger mean[^10]t remained ambiguous to those
who did not know. Not all the Companions of the Prophet questioned or
tried to understand him, for among them were those who neither
questioned, nor understood him**;**[^11] for Allah forbade them from
questioning when He said:

***“O ye who believe! Ask not of things which, if they were made known
to you, would trouble you; but if ye ask of them when the Qur'an is
being revealed, they will be made known unto you. Allah pardoneth this,
for Allah is Forgiving, Clement. A folk before you asked (for such
disclosures) and they disbelieved therein” (Qur'an 5:101-102)***.

So they were forbidden from questioning to such an extent that they were
glad if a desert Arab would come and ask, and they would listen.

I ('Ali) used to visit the Messenger of Allah, habitually,[^12] every
night and every day in strict privacy, when he used to answer me
concerning what I asked, and I used to go about him wherever he went.
The companions of the Messenger of Allah knew (full well) that he did
not act in this manner with anyone else. And this (private conversation)
would often take place in my house.

And whenever I would visit him at some of his resting-places, he would
arrange for being alone with me and ask his wives to leave, so that no
one would remain except he and I. And when he would come to me in
private, he would ask everyone to withdraw except Fatima or one of my
two sons, and when questioned he would answer me. And when I would
remain silent and my questions would be exhausted, he would begin
himself.

So that nothing was revealed to the Prophet of the verses of the Qur'an,
or taught to him by Allah, Exalted is He, concerning what was lawful and
what was forbidden, command or prohibition, obedience or sin, things
past or future but he would teach it to me and make me read it, or
dictate it to me and I would write it down in my own hand. He would
explain to me its true meaning (*ta'wil),* and its apparent and hidden
significance *(zahir, batin),* and I would commit it to memory and would
not forget even a letter of it.

Whenever the Messenger of Allah used to instruct me, he would place his
hand on my chest and say: O Lord! Fill his mind *(qalb)* with knowledge,
understanding, light, forbearance and belief *(iman);* teach him and do
not let him remain ignorant; cause him to remember and not to forget. I
said to him one day: May my father and mother be sacrificed for you, O
Messenger of Allah!

Do you fear forgetfulness (on my part)? And he said: O my brother! I
fear neither forgetfulness nor ignorance on your part. Allah the Mighty
and Glorious has informed me that he has accepted (my prayers)
concerning you ('Ali) and your associates, who will come after you.

And I said: O Messenger of Allah, who are my associates? And he said:
Those, obedience to whom has been coupled by Allah, with obedience to
Himself and obedience to me (Prophet). And I said: Who are they, O
Messenger of Allah? And he said: They concerning whom' Allah has said:

***“O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those of you
who are in authority” (Qur'an 4:59)***.

And I said: O Messenger of Allah, who are they? He said: They are the
*awsia'* (executors) who will be executors after me. They will not
separate until they come to me at my Pond *(hawd),* rightly-guiding and
rightly-guided. The deceit of those that deceive will not injure them,
nor the desertion of those that desert them.[^13]

They (the Imams) are with the Qur'an, and the Qur'an is with them; they
will not forsake it (the Qur'an) and it will not forsake them. By them
(Imams) will my community *(umma)* be guided, and by them will they be
benefited,[^14] and by them will calamity be averted, and through them
will their prayers be heard.

And I ('Ali) said: O Messenger of Allah, name them to me He said: “You,
O 'Ali, then this, my son” - and he put his hand on the head of Hasan.
“And then this, my son” - and he put his hand on the head of Husayn.
“Then your namesake, O brother, he is the leader of the devotees; then
his son, named Muhammad, the Opener *(baqir)* of my knowledge, and the
treasurer of the inspiration of Allah. O brother, 'Ali (Zaynu'l-Abidin)
will be born in your lifetime, so give my greetings to him. And Muhammad
(al-Baqir) will be born in your lifetime, O Husayn, so give my greetings
to him.

And then Ja'far (as-Sadiq), then Musa (al-Kazim) bin Ja'far, then 'Ali
(ar-Rida) bin Musa, then Muhammad (at-Taqi) bin 'Ali, then 'Ali
(an-Naqi) bin Muhammad, then Hasan az-Zaki (al-'Askari) bin 'Ali, then
he, whose name is my name and whose color is my color - the upholder of
the Command of Allah *(al-qa'im bi-amri'l-lah)* in the final era, the
Righteous Guide, **who will fill the earth with justice and equity, just
as now it is full of oppression and wrong**.[^15]

I swear by Allah, O Sulaym,[^16] that people will swear allegiance to
him between the Pillar *(Rukn)* and the Place *(Maqam),*[^17] and I know
the names of the people who will support him and I know their
tribes.[^18]

Sulaym bin Qays said: Later on I met Hasan and Husayn at Medina after
Mu'awiya began to reign, and I related them this story from their
father. Both of them said: You speak the truth. The Prince of Believers
had related this story to you, while we were sitting, and we remembered
this from the Messenger of Allah as you relate it, and not a word has
been added or subtracted.[^19]

And Sulaym bin Qays said: I then met 'Ali bin al-Husayn
(Zaynu'l-'Abidin), on whom be peace, and his son Muhammad al-Baqir was
with him, and I related to him what I had heard from his father, and he
('Ali) said[^20]: I heard it from the Prince of Believers, who in turn
had it from the Messenger of Allah, while he was ill and I was a boy.
Then Abu Ja'far (Muhammad al-Baqir) said: And when my grandfather gave
me the Prophet's greetings I was a boy.

Aban bin Abi 'Ayyash said: I related the whole of this story, as related
by Sulaym bin al-Qays al-Hilali, to Imam 'Ali bin al-Husayn, and he
said: He (Sulaym) spoke the truth. Jabir bin 'Abdullah al-Ansari
happened to meet my son, Muhammad al-Baqir, while he was attending
school, and he kissed him and gave him the greeting of the Messenger of
Allah.

Abin bin Abi 'Ayyash said: I went to the Hajj after the death of Imam
'Ali bin al-Husayn (Zaynu'l-'Abidin), and I met Imam Muhammad al-Baqir,
and I related to him the whole of this story, as related by Sulaym bin
Qays, and his eyes filled with tears[^21] and he said: Sulaym, may the
mercy of Allah be upon him, spoke the truth.

Sulaym had come to my father after my grandfather al-Husayn was slain,
and I was present when he related this story exactly in the same manner
and my father said to him: By Allah, you have spoken the truth, O
Sulaym. My father had related to me this story from the Prince of
Believers.

(Says the Shaykh Abu Ja'far:) In the Book of Allah, the Mighty and
Glorious, there are verses which the ignorant will find inconsistent
with, and contrary to, one another. But in fact they are not so. For
instance, His saying, Exalted is He:

***“So this day We have forgotten them even as they forgot the meeting
of this (their) day” (Qur'an 7:51)*** and His saying: ***“They forgot
Allah, so He hath forgotten them” (Qur'an 9:67)***.

Thereafter He says: ***“And thy Lord is not forgetful” (Qur'an
19:64)***.[^22]

And similarly His saying:

***“On the day when the Spirit and the angels will stand arrayed, they
speak not, saving him whom the Beneficent alloweth and who speaketh
right “ (Qur'an 78:38).***[^23]

And the like of His saying:

***“Then on the Day of Resurrection ye will deny each other and curse
each other” (Qur'an 29:25)***, and His saying:

***“Lo! that is the very truth; the wrangling of the dwellers in the
Fire” (Qur'an 38:64)***.

And then He will say:

***“Contend not in My presence, when I had already proffered unto you
the warning” (Qur'an 50:28)***.

And His saying, Exalted is He:

***“This day We seal up their mouths, and their hands shall speak out
and their feet shall bear witness as to what they (their possessors)
used to earn” (Qur'an 36:65)***.

And the like of His saying:

***“That day will faces be resplendent, looking forward toward their
Lord” (Qur'an 75:22-23)***.

Then says the Glorious and Mighty:

***“The eyes see Him not, but He seeth the eyes***[^24]***.*** ***He is
the Subtle, the Aware” (Qur'an 6:103)***.

And His saying:

***“And it is not (vouchsafed) to any mortal that Allah should speak to
him unless (it be) by revelation or from behind a veil” (Qur'an
42:51)***.

And then He says:

***“And Allah spoke directly unto Moses” (Qur'an 4:164)***.

And He says:

***“And their Lord called them, (saying): Did I not forbid you from that
tree . . .” (Qur'an 7:22)***.

And the like of His saying, Exalted is He:

***“And not an atom's weight in the earth or in the sky escapeth your
Lord, nor what is less than that or greater than that, but it is
(written) in a clear book” (Qur'an 10:61)***.

And then He says***:***

***“(And Allah) will not look upon them on the Day of Resurrection, nor
will He assoil***[^25] ***them “ (Qur'an 3:77).***

And then He says:

***“Nay, but surely on that day they will be precluded***[^26] ***from
(the mercy of) their Lord” (Qur'an 83:15)***.

And the like of His saying:

***“Have ye taken security from Him Who is in the Heaven that He will
not cause the earth to swallow you when lo! it is convulsed” (Qur'an
67:16)***.

And His saying:

***“The Beneficent One, Who is established on the Throne” (Qur'an
20:5)***.

Then He says:

***“He is Allah in the heavens and the earth. He knoweth both your
secret and your utterance, and He knoweth what ye earn” (Qur'an 6:3)***.

And He says:

***“There is no secret conference of three but He is their fourth, nor
of five but He is their sixth, nor of less than that or more, but He is
with them wheresoever they may be” (Qur'an 58:7)***.

And He says, Exalted is He:

***“We are nearer to him than his jugular vein” (Qur'an 50:16)***.

And Allah says:

***“Wait they, indeed, for nothing less than that the angels should come
to them, or thy Lord should come, or that there should come one of the
portents from thy Lord!” (Qur'an 6:158)***.

And the like of His saying:

***“Say: the angel of death, who hath charge concerning you, will gather
you” (Qur'an 32:11)***.

And then He says:

***“Our messengers (i.e. angels) receive him and they neglect
not”***[^27] ***(Qur'an 6:61)***.

And He says:

***“Those whom the angels cause to die. (Qur'an 16:28,32);*** and says
Allah, Exalted is He: ***“Allah receiveth (men's) souls at the time of
their death” (Qur'an 39:42)***.

And the likes of these verses abound in the Qur'an, concerning which one
of the *zindiqs*[^28] asked the Prince of Believers, on whom be peace
and blessings, and he explained the consistency of their significations
and elucidated to him their real meaning *(ta'wil).*

I have extracted the tradition *(khabar)* concerning this, supporting it
by a commentary, in the *Kitabu't-Tawhid,*[^29] and I shall write a book
specially concerning it by His Will and Help, Exalted is He.

[^1]: Lit. "which are not in the hands of the people".

[^2]: Reading with D افترى الناس يكذبون الخ; and not as N أفترى يكذبون
الخ.

[^3]: Reading with N فليَتَبَوَّء; D err. فينبوَه.

[^4]: Reading with N متصنّع not as in D متضع.

[^5]: Reading with D هذا من صحب رسول الله ص.

[^6]: خُشُبٌ مُسَنَّدَة is an expression which has been variously
explained. Pickthall adds a variant to the above: "propped up blocks of
wood", which is more literal. Rodwell has "Like timbers are they leaning
against a wall". This verse was revealed in reference to \`Abdu'1-lah
and other hypocrites, who had fine strong bodies and eloquent tongues
and sat reclining in the company of the Prophet.

[^7]: Reading with D فَتَقَرَّبوا.

[^8]: Reading with D العمَّال and not as in N الاعمال.

[^9]: 326. N من عَصَمَةُ الله; D err. من عصمة الله.

[^10]: N ما عنى الله; D ما نهى الله.

[^11]: Reading with D لأن فيهم قوماً ما كانوا يسئلونه الخ N has لأن فيهم
قوما كانوا يسئلونه.

[^12]: Read دُخْلَةً; not as in D دخلَة.

[^13]: Reading with N خذلان من خذلهم.

[^14]: Lit. "will receive rain".

[^15]: N كما ملئت قبله ظلماً و جوراً الخ. BHA, no. 211, p.79. compare
Fyzee, Ismaili Law of Wills, 67 - 68. See p. 86 above.

[^16]: Kashf, Rijal (Bombay ed\_), 68 - 69.

[^17]: By rukn is meant the Black Stone and magam means the Maqam
Ibrahim.

[^18]: Here ends \`Ali's long speech, beg. at p. 106.

[^19]: D omits و لم ينقص منه حرفاً.

[^20]: Reading with D فقال سمعت عن أمير المؤمنين عن رسول الله و هو مريض
الخ; N و ما سمعت عن أمير المؤمنين. There is some confusion in N; the
dropping of the word فقال does not make the sense regular.

[^21]: Reading fa ighrawragat, إفعوعل (xii) of غرق.

[^22]: The Urdu translator explains that in the first two verses 7, 49
and 9, 68; the meaning of the word نسيان is جزاىء نسيان that is "the
punishment of forgetfulness" whereas in the last verse 19, 65; the word
means "forgetfulness" - thus there is no inconsistency.

[^23]: The Urdu translator adds a footnote: In this verse the words لا
يتكلمون ,etc. (78, 38) means this, that no one will intercede except
those who are permitted by Allah; and the words ثم يوم القيامة etc. (29,
24) mean that some will describe others as unbelievers and curse them.
Therefore the inconsistency appears to be chat in one verse there is
prohibition of speaking, whilst in the other, permission to do so is
patent. Now in reality this is not so. From the first verse it is clear
that generally every one is not allowed to intercede; and from the
second it appears that people who are consigned to Hell will speak ill
of one another. Hence there is no inconsistency in the two verses.

[^24]: So Lane, which I have adopted; and not Pickthall who has: Vision
comprehendeth Him not, but He comprehendeth (all) vision.

[^25]: So Rodwell. Pickthall has: Make them grow.

[^26]: Lit. "covered from" (Pickthall) or "shut out as by a veil" (
Rodwell), which is even more literal.

[^27]: This means that the angels, ordered to take the life of a man,
carry out their instructions without fail.

[^28]: Zindiq is a very interesting word; it may generally be rendered
as a "dangerous heretic". Its derivation from Aram. Sadiq, "friend", as
proposed by Prof. A. A. Bevan (Browne, Lit His Per i. 159 - 160;
Nicholson, Lit. His. Arabia, 375, n. 2) is apparently not accepted by
modern scholars like Prof. L. Massignon, s.v. Zindiq, EI, iv. 1228.

[^29]: See Tawhid, p.114 sqq.


