Belief Concerning Taklif (Responsibility)
=========================================

**Belief Concerning Taklif (Responsibility)** [^1]

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja'far: Our belief concerning the obligation to obey
the law (*taklif*) is that Allah imposes upon His slaves (mankind) only
such legal obligations as are within their power (to obey), for He says:

***“Allah tasketh not a soul beyond its capacity” (Qur'an 2:286)***.

Now (in the Arabic idiom) *wus'* (capacity, scope) indicates a lesser
degree of potentiality than *taqa* (strength). And (Imam Ja'far)
as-Sadiq has said: I swear by Allah, Allah has not burdened His slaves,
save to a lesser extent than their capacity.

For He has only imposed upon them five prayers during the course of a
day and night; and only thirty days of fast during the year; and only
five out of every two hundred dirhams (as *zakat*); and only one
pilgrimage during the course of a lifetime, although the full extent of
their capacity is greater.[^2]

[^1]: The word taklif in the sense used by the theologians is difficult
to render. It is rendered "the imposition of a task" by Miller, BHA, no.
10, p.5. For a fuller expl. see nos. 131-143. Wensinck, MC, 43,
translates it "the obligation of the law"; p.216; "the bondage of the
law ", etc. The "sanction" of the law may also be suggested, the word
sanction being used in the modern juristic sense. But this can only be
used with reference to God. Ivanow translates it "religious duties", FC,
no. 55; this is not very satisfactory. Probably the best is
"obligation", "responsibility", Affifi, 155. Taklif is so used that God
is mukallif (one who applies or enforces taklif), while man is mukallaf
(one to whom taklif is applied or upon whom it is enforced). In English
we would say: God enforces the rule of law; man is obliged to obey.

[^2]: MC, 261, 265; FC, no. 55.


