The Belief In Respect Of Human Actions
======================================

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja'far: Our belief concerning human actions is that
they are created *(makhluqa),* in the sense that Allah possesses
foreknowledge (*khalq taqdir*), and not in the sense that Allah compels
mankind to act in a particular manner by creating a certain disposition
(*khalq takwin*). And the meaning of all this is that Allah has never
ceased to be aware of the potentialities (*maqadir*) of human
beings.[^1]

[^1]: This explanation is necessary in order to repel the inference that
if God is the creator of all actions, then the responsibility for sin
cannot be but His - which is of course an impossible doctrine having
regard to the belief in taklif. The Urdu translator explains khalq
taqdir by saying that God has created human beings with the power to do
good as well as evil, but He possesses foreknowledge of what they are
going to do. Khalq takwin would imply that God has created the actions
as well, so that their actions are really His actions. This is not the
Ithni \`Ashari view D, notes to p.17. See also Wensinck, MC, 49 sqq.
(qadar = the eternal decree of God, p.53); especially, 55. Far more
radical is BHA, nos. 118-122 in which is advocated complete free will.
FC, nos. 95,96; Affifi, 152 -156. "God does not will in the sense that
He chooses, but in the sense that He decrees what He knows will take
place", Affifi, 156. In MB, 3118-9 it is clearly stated that the
Ash'arites take the view of complete predestination, and the
Mu'tazilites, of complete free will, while the truth is midway between
the two extremes. Khalq taqdir and takwin are explained by Sh. Mufid in
Tas. (Mur. ii. 98 -100) , who holds that the actions of men are not by
any means created by Allah (افعال العباد غير مخلوقة لله) for him 'ilm
and akhlaq are two different things in Arabic. Some further explanation
will also be found later at Mur. ii. 140.


