The Belief Concerning (Allah's) Intention (Irada) And Will (Mashi'a)
====================================================================

**The Belief Concerning (Allah's) Intention (Irada) And Will
(Mashi'a**[^1]**)**

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja'far: Our belief concerning this is (based upon)
the saying of (Imam Ja'far) as-Sadiq: Allah wills *(sha'a)* and intends
*(arada);* or He does not like (*lam* *yuhibba)* and He does not approve
*(lam yarda).*[^2]

Now by *sha'a* (He wills) is meant that nothing takes place without His
knowledge and *arada* is synonymous with it; and He does not like (*lam*
*yuhibba)* it to be said that He is “the third of the three (cf. 5, 77);
and He does not approve of disbelief on the part of His slaves. Says
Allah the Mighty and Glorious:

***“Verily thou (O Muhammad) guidest not whom thou lovest, but Allah
guideth whom He will” (Qur'an 28:56).***

And He says, Exalted is He:

***“And ye will not, unless (it be that) Allah willeth” (Qur'an 76:30;
81:29).***

And He says, the Glorious and Mighty:

***“And if thy Lord willed, all who are in the earth would have believed
together. Wouldst thou (O Muhammad) compel men until they are
believers”***[^3] ***(Qur'an 10:99)***.

And He says, Glorious and Mighty is He:

***“And it is not for any soul to believe save by the permission of
Allah” (Qur'an 10:100)***.

And as He, the Glorious and Mighty, says:

***“No soul can ever die except by Allah's leave and at a term appointed
“(Qur'an 3:145).***

And as He, the Glorious and Mighty, says:

***“And they say, had we any chance in the affair we should not have
been slain here. Say (O Muhammad): Even if ye had been in your houses
those appointed to be slain would surely have gone forth to the places
where they were to lie”***[^4] ***(Qur'an 3:154)***.

And as He says:

***“If thy Lord willed, they would not do it; so leave them alone with
their devising “(Qur'an 6:112).***

And He, the most Exalted, says:

***“Had Allah willed, they would not have been polytheists” (Qur'an
6:107)***.

And he says:

***“And if We had willed, We could have given every soul its guidance”
(Qur'an 32:13)***.

And He says***:***

***"And whomsoever Allah wishes to guide, that man's breast will He open
to Islam; but whom He wishes to mislead, strait and narrow will He make
his breast, as though he were mounting up to the very
Heavens!"***[^5]***(Qur'an 6: 125).***

And He says:

***“It is Allah's desire to assign no portion in the Hereafter” (Qur'an
3:176)***.

And He says:

***“Allah desires to make the burden light for you” (Qur'an 4:28)***.

And He says:

***“Allah desireth for you ease; He desireth not hardship for you”
(Qur'an 2:185)***.

And He says:

***“And Allah wishes to turn to you in mercy; but those who follow their
lusts desire that ye should go greatly astray” (Qur'an 4:27)***.

And He says:

***“And Allah desireth no injustice for (His) slaves “(Qur'an 40:31).***

This is our belief concerning (Allah's) Intention and (His) Will. Our
opponents denounce us for this, and say that according to our belief,
Allah intends (that man should commit) crimes and that He desired the
murder of Husayn bin 'A1i, on whom both be peace.[^6]

This is not what we believe. But we say that Allah desired that the sin
of the sinners should be contradistinguished from the obedience of those
that obey, that He desired that sins, viewed as actions, should not be
ascribed to Him, but that the knowledge of these sins may be ascribed to
Him, even before the commission thereof.[^7]

And we hold that Allah's wish was that the murder of Husayn should be a
sin against Him and the opposite of obedience. And we say that Allah
intended that his (Husayn's) murder should be prohibited, and something
which was not commanded.

And we say that his murder was something that was disliked and not
approved;[^8] and we say that his murder was the cause of Allah's
displeasure and it was not the cause of His approval, and that Allah the
Mighty and Glorious did not desire to prevent his murder by means of
(His) compulsion or power, but merely by prohibition and word. And if He
had prohibited it by (His) compulsion and power, even as he prevented it
by prohibition and word, surely he would have escaped being murdered,
just as Abraham was saved from the fire, when Allah, the most Exalted,
said[^9] to the fire in which he (Abraham) was thrown:

***“O fire, be coolness and peace for Abraham” (Qur'an 21:69)***.

And we say that Allah always knew that Husayn would be killed by force,
and by such death, attain everlasting merit, and his murderer,
everlasting wretchedness. We hold that what Allah wills; happens; and
what He willeth not, will not happen.[^10] This is our belief regarding
Allah's intention and will, and not that which is ascribed to us by our
opponents and for which we are reviled by those who hold heretical
views.

[^1]: Cp. Affifi, 160. According to Ibnu'l-\`Arabi, mashi 'a is the
divine commonsense, and is an emanation from God, something like
Plotinus' First Intellect; whereas irada is the creative will. The
distinction between irada and mashi 'a is, according to Affifi, derived
by him from Hallaj.

[^2]: The Imam takes these four expressions and explains and illustrates
them one by one.

[^3]: Qur'an 10, 99 is expl. in Tas. (Mur. iii. 22-23)

[^4]: كتاباً مؤجلاً may also be rendered "a fixed ordinance".

[^5]: Expl. in Tas. (Mur. iii. 21 - 22).

[^6]: Referring to the believers in extreme predestination. MC, 81,82,
discusses the Mu'tazilite view, which is the same as that held here. See
further MC, 143, where the Ash'arite view is fully discussed. The
doctrine of al-Qummi does not differ in the main from the neo-Ash'arite.

[^7]: MC, 143,144; BHA, nos. 118 sqq.; FC, nos. 96-89, 95.

[^8]: The clause مستقبحاً غير مستحسناً omitted in D.

[^9]: N قال الله تعالى للنّار التي القى فيها: يا نار كوني .. الخ; D قال
الله تعالى للنّار: كوني.. الخ

[^10]: This is again difficult to reconcile. The extreme Sunnite view
appears to be that everything was caused and willed by God, either
directly or by means of His knowledge. The Mu'tazilites however denied
ascription of evil to Allah. And the Ithna \`Asharis are close upon this
view, BHA, nos. 125, 126. The Isma'ilis do not attribute evil to God,
FC, p.72 (top). For a philosophical view, see Affifi, 156 sqq. Fuller
discussion, Tawhid, 272 -277.


