Ishtighal
=========

82. What is *ishtighal*?  
*Ishtighal* is a noun that comes before the verb that is affected by a
pronoun which refers to the first noun. For example: **الکتاب قرأتُهُ**
(The book, I read it.)

83. What is the noun that comes first called?  
 The noun that comes first is called the noun of *ishtighal*.

84. When is it obligatory to put the noun of *ishtighal* in the
accusative case?  
 It is obligatory to put the noun of *ishtighal* in the accusative case
if it comes after:  
 • a conditional word, for example; **إنِ العِلمَ خَدَمتَهُ فأحسِن
إلیه** (Verily, I put myself in the service of knowledge and it did good
to me.)

• after **ألا** , for example: **ألا التلمیذَ المجتهد تکافِئُونَهُ**
(Why don't you be like the striving student?)

• after **هلا** , for example: **هلا خَیرَ نفسِکَ تریدُهُ** (The best
for yourself, don't you want it?)

• after **هل** , for example: **هَل سلیماً أهَنتَهُ** (Did you
disrespect Salīm?)

85. What function does the noun of *ishtighal* have if it is in the
accusative case?  
 If the noun of *ishtighal* is in the accusative case it is an objective
compliment of an implied verb which is explained by the mentioned verb.
For example: **هل الثَّمرَ أکلتَهُ؟** (The date, did you eat it?) was
really: **هل أکلتَ الثمر أکلته؟**

86. When is it obligatory to put the noun of *ishtighal* in the
nominative case?  
 It is obligatory to put the noun of *ishtighal* in the nominative case
if it comes:  
 • after **إذا** , for example: **دَخَلتُ البَیتَ فإذا الولدُ
یُوَبِّخُهُ أبوه** (I entered the house, and all of a sudden there was a
father who was scolding his son.)

• after a *hāl* accusative *hlasjwāw*, for example: **سافَرتُ و الشعبُ
ینهاه** **الخطیبُ عنِ الحربِ** (I traveled while the youth, the speaker
was forbidding him from war.)

• before conditional words, interrogative words, **ألا** , **هلا** , the
inchoative *lām*, the negative *mā*, the informative *kam*, the annular
prepositions, and conjuncts.

87. What function does the noun of *ishtighal* have if it is in the
nominative case?  
 If the noun of *ishtighal* is in the nominative case it is an
inchoative and the verbal sentence after it is the predicate in the
nominative case.

88. When is it permissible to put the noun of *ishtighal* in the
accusative or nominative cases?  
 It is permissible to put the noun of *ishtighal* in the accusative or
nominative cases in any other case that was not mentioned. For example:
**التُّفاحةُ أکلتُها** (The apple, I ate it.)


