Adverbal Qualification of Time and Place
========================================

94. What is an adverbial qualification of time and place?  
 An adverbial qualification of time and place is a noun mentioned to
describe the time or place of the action. For example: **حَضَرتُ صَباحاً
أمامَ المعلّمِ** (I was present in the morning in front of the teacher.)

95. How many kinds of adverbial qualifications of time and place are
there?  
 There are two kinds of adverbial qualifications: time or place.

96. Are all of the adverbial nouns indeclinable?  
 No, there are some adverbial nouns of time and place that can be used
as an adverb and as other than an adverb. Examples of these are: **یوم و
مکان** . These adverbs are declinable. Then there are some adverbs which
can only be used as adverbial nouns, for example: **قَبلَ ، عندَ ، بَعدَ
، لَدُن** . These adverbs are indeclinable.

97. Does an adverbial noun of time or place need to refer to
something?  
 An adverbial noun of time or place must always refer to either a verb
or a noun that is similar to a verb (infinitive, active participle form,
passive participle form, adjectives that are similar to verbs, and
superlative/comparative forms). For example: **جِئتُ صباحاً** (I came in
the morning.) In this sentence 'morning' refers to the verb 'came.'

98. What are the adverbial nouns of time that are able to be put into
the accusative state?  
 The adverbial nouns of time that can be put in the accusative case are
the adverbial nouns of time that can be used as adverbs and other than
adverbs. There are two conditions of this, one that the noun refer to a
verb or a noun that is like a verb and two that the meaning of 'in' is
implied. For example: **سافرتُ شهراً** (I traveled for a month.)

99. What are the adverbial nouns of place that are able to be put into
the accusative state?  
 The adverbial nouns of place that can be put in the accusative case are
the adverbial nouns of place that can be used as adverbs and other than
adverbs. There are two conditions of this, one that the noun refer to a
verb or a noun that is like a verb and two that the meaning of 'in' is
implied. For example: **قف یمینک** (Stop [in the direction of ] your
right side.)

100. Mention some adverbial nouns of place that are able to be put into
the accusative state.  
 Some of the adverbial nouns of place that can be put in the accusative
case are:  
 • The six directions: **أمام** (front), **وراء** (behind), **یمین**
(right), **یسار** (left), **فوق** (above), **تحت** (below)

• Distance and weight: **میل** (mile), **کیلو** (kilo)

101. What represents an adverbial noun of time or place?  
 The following words represent an adverbial noun of time or place:  
 • Infinitives: **جئتُ طلوعَ الشَّمسِ** (I came at sunrise.)

• Adjectives: **نُمتُ طویلاً** (I slept for a long time.)

• Numbers: **سرتُ خمسةَ أیَّام** (I traveled for five days.)

• Demonstrative pronouns: **وَقفتُ تلکَ النَّاحیةَ** (I stayed in that
area.)

• Quantity words such as **کل** or **بعض: مَشَیتُ کل النَّهار** (I
walked the whole day.)


