Exceptive
=========

104. What is an exceptive?  
 An exceptive is a noun mentioned after **إلا** or its sisters and is in
opposition to what was mentioned before it. For example: **خَرَجَ
التلامذةُ من المدرسةِ إلا خالداً** (The students left the school, except
Khālid.)

105. What are the sisters of **إلا**  
 There are five sisters of **إلا: غَیر، سوی، عَدا، خَلا، و حاشا**

106. When is it obligatory to put the exceptive of **إلا** in the
accusative case?  
 It is obligatory to put the exceptive of **إلا** in the accusative case
when the sentence before **إلا** is a complete positive sentence. For
example: **یعیشُ النَّاسُ براحةٍ إلا الکسلانَ** (The people live in
comfort except lazy people.)

107. When is it permissible to put the exceptive of **إلا** in the
accusative case?  
 It is permissible to put the exceptive of **إلا** in the accusative
state or to have it follow the word it is an exceptive of if the
sentence before the **إلا** is complete and negative. For example:  
**ما نَجَحَ الطلابُ إلا إبراهیمَ أو إبراهیمُ** (The students did not
succeed except Abraham.)

108. When is the state of the exceptive of **إلا** determined by what
comes before it?  
 The state of the exceptive of **إلا** is determined by what comes
before it when the sentence before the **إلا** is an incomplete
sentence. For example: **ما جاءَ إلا سلیمٌ** (Nobody came except Salīm.)

109. What is the ruling of an exceptive of **غیر** or **سوی** ?  
 The ruling regarding the exceptives of **غیر** and **سوی** is that it
is always in the genitive state being a compliment of a prefixed noun.
But the words **غیر** and **سوی** have the same rules as the exceptive
of **إلا**. For example: **نجح الطلاب غیرَ الکسلانِ** (The students
succeed except lazy ones.), or **ما نجح عیرُ المجتهدِ** (Nobody succeeds
except the striver.)

110. What is the ruling of an exceptive of **خلا , عدا** , or **حاشا**  
**خلا** **,** **عدا** **,** and **حاشا** are:  
 • prepositions and whatever comes after them is in the genitive state,
for example:

**نجح الطلابُ عدا الکسلان**  
 • verbs and whatever comes after them is in the accusative state being
the objective compliment, for example: **نجح الطلابُ ما عدا الکسلانَ** .
they are always verbs if preceded by a infinitive *mā*.


