Nominative Cases of a Noun: Subject of a Predication
====================================================

33. What is a subject of the predication?  
 A subject of the predication is an objective compliment that comes
after a passive verb and takes the place of the actor that has been
erased. For example: **قُتِلَ** **اللّصُّ** (The thief was killed.)

34. What should be done if the verb is transitive and takes on more than
one objective compliment?  
 If the verb is transitive and takes on more than one objective
compliment, the first objective compliment is put into the nominative
case as the subject of the predication and the second objective
compliment remains in the accusative case. For example: **رُزِقَ**
**الفقیرُ** **مالاٌ** (The poor man was given money.)

35. Does the verb remain in the same form if the subject of the
predication is feminine?  
 If the subject of the predication is feminine the verb is made
feminine:  
 • in the preterite tense by adding a vowel-less *tā'* to the end of the
verb, for example:

**سُرِقَت** **ساعةٌ** (A watch was stolen.)  
 • in the aorist tense by adding a feminine letter to the beginning of
the verb, for example:

**تُغرَسُ** **الشَّجرةُ** (The tree was planted.)

36. Does the verb change if the subject of the predication is a noun in
the dual form?  
 The dual letters are not added to the verb if the subject of the
predicate is a clear noun in the dual form, rather it remains single.
For example: **ضُرِبَ** **اللّصانِ** (The two thieves were hit.)

37. Does the verb change if the subject of the predication is a noun in
the plural form?  
 The plural letters are not added to the verb if the subject of the
predicate is a clear noun in the plural form, rather it remains single.
For example: **سُمِعَ** **الشَّهودُ** (The witnesses were heard.)

38. What is a sentence comprised of a verb and a subject of the
predication called?  
 A sentence that is comprised of a verb and a subject of the predicate
is called a verbal sentence. For example: **زُرِعَ** **الحبُّ** (The
grains were planted.)


