Ahl Al-Bayt From The Viewpoint Of Mystics
=========================================

Merits And Virtues Of Ahl Al-Bayt In Mystics’ Narrations
--------------------------------------------------------

I know that whoever believes in Muhammad but does not believe in his
offspring is not true. (Attar Nayshaburi)

We will not attend any assembly where the names of Muhammad’s Household
are not mentioned. (Abu-Said Abul-Khayr)

Sadi! If you wish to enjoy the pleasure of love and evergreen blossom of
life, it is enough to absorb the love of Muhammad and his Household.
(Sadi of Shiraz)

### Note

There are few philosophers, theologians and narrator of traditions,
historians, jurisprudents and men of letters who have not said or
written something about Ahl al-Bayt, their dignity and their
personality. Yet, mystics seem to have spoken and written more than the
others, for they have probed more into various dimensions of human
beings and into the features, virtues and station of Ahl al-Bayt. Hence,
a separate chapter is devoted to their speech, viewpoints and
description.

Most of the material used in this chapter belongs to Sunni mystics for
two reasons: Firstly, to become clear that the station of Ahl al-Bayt
and their sublime morality are not only adhered to by their followers
but the followers of other sects also attracted are to them. Secondly,
there are truths in their writings, which indicate that what is
attributed to Ahl al-Bayt is not false or imaginative. Rather, these are
indisputable historic facts. What is mentioned here is only an abstract
of what the mystics have said about Ahl al-Bayt.

Abul - Fadhl Meybody And Khajeh Abdullah Ansari
-----------------------------------------------

Abu-Bakr al-Naqqash has reported Imam Ali as saying:

One day, a Jew came to me saying, “In your book, there is a verse the
meaning of which is difficult to understand. If you clarify it for me, I
will become Muslim.” “Which verse is that?” I asked. The Jew said, “The
verse is: keep us on the right path. If you are already on the right
path, why are you asking for it?” I said, “A group of prophets and God’s
friends have already entered Paradise and attained an eternal
prosperity. We are asking Allah to keep us on that path which led them
to Paradise.” The Jew was convinced and he converted to Islam.[^1]

One day, Imam Ali (a.s) came home to find Hasan and Husayn crying. He
asked for the reason. Lady Fatimah (a.s.) said, “They have not eaten for
a whole day.” A pot was boiling on fire at the same time. Imam Ali (a.s)
asked, “What is in the pot?” Lady Fatimah (a.s) answered, “There is
plain water only.” Imam Ali (a.s) became so distressed that he took his
cloak to the market and sold it for six Dirhams. He had no sooner bought
something for eating than he met a beggar shouting, “Whoever offers to
Allah a good gift, he will have a better one for himself. Imam Ali (a.s)
offered to him whatever he had and, when he came back home, he told the
story to Lady Fatimah (a.s). She said, “Allah bless you, O Abul-Hasan!
You are always benevolent!”

Imam Ali (a.s) was set to go to the mosque to offer prayer when he saw a
nomadic selling a camel. He said, “O Abul-Hasan, I am selling this
camel. Would you like to buy it?” Imam Ali (a.s) said, “I do not have
money.” The nomadic said, “I sell it to you until booty comes or you get
something from the public fund.” Imam Ali (a.s) bought that camel for
sixty Dirhams and went his way. Another nomadic came to him, “O Ali!
Will you sell this camel to me?” Imam Ali (a.s) said, “Yes, I will.”
“How much do you sell it for?” asked the man. Imam Ali (a.s) said,
“Whatever price you say.” He said, “A hundred and twenty Dirhams.” Imam
Ali (a.s) said, “I do.” He then returned home. Telling the story to Lady
Fatimah (a.s) he said, “I will give sixty Dirhams to the nomadic and
take the other sixty for ourselves.”

So he went out to look for the man. On his way, he met the Holy Prophet
who asked, “Where are you going?” Imam Ali (a.s.) told him the story.
The Holy Prophet rejoiced, greeted and gave him good news, “O Ali! That
man was not an Arab. The first man who sold you the camel was Archangel
Gabriel and the second man who bought it was Archangel Michael. The
camel too was one of the camels of Paradise. This is the good gift you
offered to Allah by helping that beggar. Allah, may He be honored and
glorified, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يُقْرِضُ اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Who is it that will offer to Allah a goodly gift (2:245)***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُنْفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُمْ بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ سِرًّا
وَعَلَانِيَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***As for those who spend their property by night and by day, secretly
and openly… (2:274)***

This verse was revealed on the occasion that Imam Ali (a.s.) had four
Dirhams and in his house there was no one but him. He gave away all four
Dirhams to beggars, one by night, one by day, one secretly and one
openly.

The members of the *Mubahalah* (mutual curse) were five: the Holy
Prophet, Lady Fatimah, Imam Ali, Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn. The Holy
Prophet put his mantle upon them saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألَّهُمَّ هَؤُلأءِ أهْلُ بَيْتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah, these are my Household.”

At this moment, Archangel Gabriel came and said, “O Muhammad! am I from
your Household?” The Holy Prophet said, “You are from us.” Taking pride
in this, Archangel Gabriel said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ مِثْلي؟ وَأنَا فِي السَّمَاءِ طَاوُسُ الْمَلأئِةِ، وَفِي الأرْضِ
مِن أهْلِ بَيتِ مُحَمَّدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Who can be like me while I am the chief of angels in heavens and a
member of Muhammad’s Household?”[^3]

Ali al-Murtadha (the well-pleased) - cousin of Muhammad al-Mustafa (the
well-chosen Prophet) and spouse of the Lady of the Judgment Day, Fatimah
al-Zahra (the luminous lady) who was the guard of caliphate and the head
of Allah's favorites - was the peer of *ismah* and Prophethood, the
source of knowledge and wisdom. Devotion, truthfulness, certainty, trust
in Allah, piety and abstinence were his motto and garment. He was the
impetuous lion, the holder of Dhul-Fiqar (the lethal sword), and the
master of the *Muhajirun and Ansar*.

### Conquest of Khaybar

A day before the Conquest of Khaybar, the Holy Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لأعْطِيَّنَّ الْرَّايَةَ غَداً رَجُلاً يَفْتَحُ اللَّهُ عَلَى يَدَيهِ،
يُحِبُّ اللَّه وَ رَسُولَهُ، وَيُحِبٌّهُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tomorrow, I will give this standard to a man who loves Allah and His
Messenger and Allah and His Messenger love him.

All night, all the companions were thinking about the truthful man to
whom the standard of Islam and the banner of victory ‘*there is no god
but Allah*’ would be given. The next day, the Holy Prophet asked, “Where
is Ali ibn Abi-Talib?” They answered, “O Allah's Messenger! He has sore
eye.” He said, “Bring him here.” As he was brought, the Holy Prophet put
forth his tongue on his eyes. He was healed and a new light was found in
his sight; so, the standard of Islam was given to him.[^4]

### Imam Husayn and a Beggar

It is narrated that Imam Husayn (a.s) saw a beggar and asked him about
his lineage. The man said that he was son of so-and-so. The Imam said,
“May Allah bless you; I was looking for you. Your father had claim of a
few Dirhams over my father. Now it is time for me to pay my father's
debt to you.” With this pretext, he gave him the dirhams and thanked
Allah.[^5]

### The Marriage of Imam Ali and Lady Fatimah

One day, the Holy Prophet came to the Mosque holding a branch of basil
in his hand. He said to Salman, “Summon Ali.” Salman went to Ali saying,
“O Ali! Go and see Allah’s Messenger!” Ali said, “O Salman! How did you
find Allah's Messenger at this hour?” Salman said, “He was very happy
like a shining moon.”

Ali came to the Holy Prophet who gave him that branch of basil. It had a
very sweet-smell. Ali asked, “How sweet-smelling this is! What is it?”
The Holy Prophet said, “It is a gift from the paradisiacal women for the
marriage of my daughter, Fatimah.” Ali said, “To whom will she be
married, O Allah’s Messenger?” He replied, “She will be married to you,
Ali! I was sitting in the mosque when an angel came in a way I had never
seen before, saying: My name is Mahmud and my station in heaven is
Nedia. A third of night had passed when I heard a call from the layers
of heaven saying: O archangels, heavenly creatures and cherubim! Get
together in the fourth heaven. All got together. The inhabitants of
Paradise were present too. A decree said: O Archangels and Favorites of
the King! Recite the Quranic chapter: The Man (*Insan* or *al-Dahr*).

Then, Tuba Tree was ordered to offer the marriage of Ali and Fatimah
Zahra to heavens! At this time, Tuba started shaking whereby Jewels,
pearls and ornaments showered down. Then, there came a decree to put a
pulpit of a white pearl under Tuba Tree. An angel went up the pulpit
praising Allah and greeting all the prophets. Then Allah called: O
Gabriel! O Michael! You are two witnesses of Fatimah, and I, the Lord,
am Fatimah’s Guardian! O Cherubim and heavenly creatures! I take you as
witnesses that I gave Fatimah in marriage to Ali. Give the good news to
My beloved that we made this marriage in heaven, you do the same on the
earth.

So, the Holy Prophet invited the *Muhajirun* and *Ansar* on the same
occasion. Turning his face to Ali, the Holy Prophet said, “O Ali! This
was decreed in heaven. Now I give Fatimah to you in marriage against
four hundred Dirhams as marriage portion. Do you accept it?” Ali said,
“O Allah’s Messenger! I accepted her marriage to me.” Allah’s Messenger
said, “Allah bless you.”[^6]

### Imam Ali’ s Knowledge

Ibn Abbas is reported as saying: One night, Ali said to me, after you
have accomplished your night prayer, come to me so that I can give you a
gift. It was a night shining with moonlight. Ali said, “What is the
meaning of (the letter) *alif* in *Surah al-Hamd* (No. 1)?” I said, “O
Ali! You know it.” So, he started speaking and spoke for an hour on the
*alif* and another hour on (the letter) *lam*. He did the same with the
other letters and when he finished, the sun was rising. I found that my
knowledge as compared to Ali’s was like a small pond is before a
sea.[^7]

### In praise of Ibn Muhammad, Jafar al-Sadiq

(He is) the king of the nation of the Chosen Prophet, proof of
prophethood, truthful agent, scholar of research, fruit of the hearts of
Allah’s Favorites, a dear child of the prophets, explicator of Ali,
inheritor of prophet, mystic lover, Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s). We have
already said that we need a separate book to give the full account of
prophets, companions and Ahl al-Bayt. Since Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s) is one
of Ahl al-Bayt, a wayfarer and is reported on more occasions, we will
say a few words about him.

Those who follow Imam al-Sadiq are the Twelvers; that is Shiite Muslims
who believe in the Imamate of Twelve Imams. If we wish to use just one
epithet to describe his character, the truthful (unaffected) would be
the best. He was trustworthy and a perfect leader. He was the guide of
spiritual followers, the Imam of Muslims, a man of letters, mentor of
Divine lovers, prayer leader, the most noble of the pious, a man of
truth, and a peerless interpreter of the Holy Quran. He has quoted Imam
al- Baqir on many occasions. It is strange that the Twelvers have this
impression that Sunni Muslims have nothing to do with Ahl al-Bayt. This
is a wrong impression. I know that whoever believes in Muhammad but does
not believe in his offspring does not truly believe in Muhammad (S). A
Shafiite love for Ahl al-Bayt was to the extent that he was accused of
being heretic hence put in jail. He too composed a line of poem saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَفْضاً حُبُّ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ فَلْيَشْهَدِ الْثَقَلأنِ أنِّ رَافِضِي
لَوْ كانَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

If love for Muhammad's Family is heresy, let all jinn and men testify to
my heresy.

It has been reported that once Dawud al-Tai came to Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.)
saying, “O son of Allah’s Messenger! Give me a piece of advice, for my
heart has turned black. You have an excellence over all creatures hence
you have a right to give us pieces of advice.” The Imam said, “Abu-
Sulayman! I fear that on the Judgment Day my great grandfather will
reproach me as to why I have not observed the right of adherence. Only
Allah is the most deserving of all treatments and dealings.” Dawud burst
into tears and said, “O Allah! You – the one whose entire being is from
the Holy Prophet, whose constitution is based on proof and reason, whose
grandfather is Allah’s Messenger and whose mother is the all-chaste Lady
is this much humble, then how can Dawud be proud of his deed!

It is reported that they saw al-Sadiq wearing a precious fur coat. They
said, “O Son of Allah”s Messenger! This is not becoming for Ahl
al-Bayt!” The Imam took the hand of the person into his sleeve. He had
worn coarse woolen clothes stinging the arm. Al-Sadiq (a.s) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذَا لِلْحَقَّ وَهَذَا لِلْخَلَقِ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

“This is for Allah, and that is for people.”

### In praise of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s)

(He is) the proof for the people who have dealings with Allah, reason
for the people of vision, Imam who is the offspring of the prophet,
chosen of the followers of Ali, companion of the manifest and hidden,
Abu-Jafar Muhammad Baqir whose other name was Abu-Abdullah and he was
called al-Baqir.

He was known as well versed in all sciences, knowledge, and fine points.
He was renowned for argumentation and demonstrative proof. Commenting on
this holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... فَمَنْ يَكْفُرْ بِالطَّاغُوتِ وَيُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever disbelieves in Shaitan and believes in Allah…)2:256)***

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) says: What deters you from Allah is the Satan.
Behold, the veil, which has kept you from Him. Try to remove that veil,
for one who has a veil before his eyes cannot claim nearness to
Allah.[^8]

Abul – Qasim Al-Qushayri
------------------------

Maruf ibn Fayruz al-Karkhi was one of the spiritual guides whose prayer
was answered. He was one of the devotees of Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha and
became Muslim at the hands of the Imam. Maruf reports: I was bound to
Kufah when I met a man called Ibn al-Sammak. He would give pieces of
advice to people saying, "Whoever turns his back on Allah, Allah will
turn His back on him too. And whoever turns to Allah, Allah will have
mercy on him and all people will be with him." His words appealed to me;
so, I turned to Allah and abandoned everything save serving Ali ibn Musa
al- Ridha. I said this to the Imam who said: If you take the advice, it
is sufficient."[^9]

Husayn ibn Ali was walking home when he met several children. They had
some pieces of bread. So, they invited him to have some. After having a
piece of bread, Husayn took them home giving them food and clothes and
saying: They were better hosts, for they had nothing more than what they
had but I have more than what I gave away.[^10]

It is reported that Shaqiq al-Balkhi asked the meaning of magnanimity
from Jafar ibn Muhammad (al-Sadiq). The Imam asked, “What is your
opinion?” Shaqiq said, “If we are given, we will thank and if it is
withheld, we will wait.” Imam al-Sadiq said, “Dogs in Medina will do the
same.” Shaqiq said, “O son of Allah’s Messenger! What is magnanimity
then?” The Imam replied, “If we are given, we will give away and if we
are not given, we will wait.”[^11]

A man who had come from Mecca fell asleep in Medina. When he woke up, he
thought his purse had been stolen. Seeing Imam Jafar, he seized him by
the collar, saying, “You have taken my purse!” The Imam said, “How much
money was in it?” He said, “A thousand Dinars.” Jafar took him home and
gave him a thousand Dinars. When the man went to his place, his purse
was there! He apologetically came back to the Imam bringing back the
money. However, the Imam did not accept it saying, “We will not take
back what we have given.” The man said, “Who is this person?” They said,
“He is Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s).”[^12]

It is reported that Paradise longs for three persons: Ali, Ammar and
Salman - may Allah be pleased with them all.[^13]

It is reported that Amir al-Muminin Ali (a.s.) - May Allah exalt his
esteem - called out at a slave but he did not take heed. The Imam called
him again, yet the slave took no heed. The Imam called him again but he
took no notice. Rising up from his place, Ali saw him lying down. So he
asked, “Did you not hear me?” He said, “I heard you.” The Imam asked,
“Then why didn’t you come?’ The slave said, “Such a noble man as you
are, I knew I was free from punishment, so I was lazy.” The Imam said,
“I set you free for the sake of Allah, the Honored and Glorified.”[^14]

Muhammad Al-Ghazzali
--------------------

Abul-Hasan Madaini reports: Hasan, Husayn and Abdullah ibn Jafar - may
Allah be pleased with them all - were on a pilgrimage to Mecca. Leaving
their camel load in a place, they went to an Arab old woman when they
were hungry and thirsty. They asked her, “Do you have anything for
drink?”

She said, “Yes, I do.” She milked her sheep and gave them milk. Again
they asked, “Do you have anything to eat?” The old woman said, “I have
no food but you can slaughter the sheep and eat it.” So, they
slaughtered the sheep and ate of it, saying, “We are from the tribe of
Quraysh. When we go back from pilgrimage, come to us. We will treat you
nicely.” Then they left.

When the old woman’s husband came home, he became angry saying, “You
have given the sheep to people you do not know.” After a while, the old
woman and her husband came to Medina out of poverty. They had to pick up
droppings of camels and sell them to make their ends meet.

One day when the old woman was passing through the alley, Hasan who was
sitting at the door noticed her and said, “Do you know me?” She said,
“No, I do not.” Hasan said, “I am the one whom you hosted.” He then
ordered a thousand sheep and a thousand Dinars to be given to her and
then he sent her along with his servant to Husayn.

“What did my brother give to you?” Husayn asked. She replied, “A
thousand sheep and a thousand Dinars.” Husayn gave her the same.[^15]

Addressing Lady Fatimah, the Holy Prophet once said, “I give you the
good news that you are the doyenne of the women in Paradise.” Fatimah
said, “What are Asiyah and Mary then?” Allah’s Messenger said, “Each of
them was the doyenne of the women of her time; but you are the doyenne
of all women in entire world of all times. All of you are in houses,
adorned with precious stones with no suffering or preoccupation.” Then,
Allah’s Messenger said, “I have given you in marriage to my cousin who
is a master in this world and the master of my ummah in the
Hereafter.”[^16]

Whenever Ali ibn Husayn performed ablution for prayer, he would look
pale in face. When he was asked about it, he would say, “Do you not know
before whom we are standing?”[^17]

One day when Ali ibn Husayn was on his way to mosque, a man swore at
him. The servants made an attempt to do something but the Imam said,
“Stop it! What is hidden to you from us is more! Are you in need of
anything?” The man was ashamed. So Ali ibn Husayn gave him a thousand
Dirhams and a garment. The man was going away saying, “I bear witness
that he is but the son of Prophets.”[^18]

Abu – Said Abul - Khayr
-----------------------

Baba Hasan was prayer leader of our spiritual guide (Sheikh), Abu-Said.
Under the Sheikh, Sufis followed his leadership. One day when he was
performing the Morning Prayer, he came to *qunut* (Communion) saying,
“Blessed and Exalted is our Lord, greetings be upon Muhammad.” He went
into prostration. When he completed his prayer, our Sheikh asked him,
“Why did you not send greeting upon the Household of Muhammad, and why
did you not say: O Allah send greetings upon Muhammad and upon the
Household of Muhammad?” Baba said, “The companions have divided opinion
as to whether or not to say ‘The Household of Muhammad’ in the first
*tashahhud* and *qunut* and so to be on the safe side, I did not say
it.” Our Sheikh said, “We will not attend any assembly where the names
of Muhammad’s Household are no mentioned.”[^19]

Our Sheikh has reported: A Jew came to Amir al-Muminin Ali (a.s),
asking, “Who is Allah the glorified?” At this question, the Imam’s face
turned pale saying, “Allah existed without the attribute of ‘existence’
and without the quality as He exists forever. Nothing precedes Him, for
He is before everything. He is infinite. He exceeds all extremes. Did
you understand, Jew?” The Jew said, “I bear witness that whoever says
anything but this is false. I bear witness that there is no god but
Allah.”[^20]

Our Sheikh, Abu-Said, said: I saw in dream that whoever sends greetings
upon Allah’s Messenger a thousand times every Friday night will see him
in his dream. We repeatedly did so and saw the Holy Prophet in our dream
with Fatimah sitting near him. He was rubbing his hand on the head of
Fatimah saying, “This is the doyenne of the women of the worlds.”[^21]

Mustamli Bukhari
----------------

Ali ibn Abu-Talib is the master of the mystics. The ummah unanimously
agree that he has the authority of all prophets, because he has said
that which no one has ever said and no one will ever say.

Hasan ibn Ali was given poison six times. On five occasions, the poison
was not effective but on the sixth time, it was when Husayn ibn Ali came
to his bed saying, “O brother! Tell me who has given you poison, so that
I will take complete vengeance on him!” Hasan said, “O my brother!
Neither my father Ali nor my mother Fatimah nor my grandfather Muhammad
nor my grandmother Khadijah nor any of our Household was talebearer. If
Allah forgives me on the Judgment Day, I will not enter Paradise unless
I forgive one who gave me poison."

One day, Hasan was eating a piece of bread. At this moment, a man came
to him saying, “I have a debt of ten thousand dirhams.” Hasan said,
“Give him ten thousand dirhams to pay his debt.” They gave the money to
the man and he went away.

To say something about the morality of Husayn, one day when he was
having his food, a slave girl was standing over his head with a bowl in
her hand. Suddenly, the bowl fell off her hand. Husayn had a look at
her. The slave girl quoted a section of the holy verse, “*Those who
restrain the anger*.” Husayn said, “I forgive you.” The slave girl
added, “*And Allah loves the benefactors.*” Husayn said, “You are free
for the sake of Allah.”

What can we say about the virtues and excellent qualities of those who
are parts of the Holy Prophet?

Abul Hasan Hajwiri Ghaznawi
---------------------------

### A few words in praise of Ahl al-Bayt

Ahl al-Bayt enjoy a high rank for having been purified. Each of them has
an excellence in spirituality and they are all models among their own
tribe. Allah willing I wish to mention some of their virtues here.

The dear one of the Holy Prophet, the sweet basil of the well-pleased
Imam, the apple of the eye of the Luminous Lady, Abu-Muhammad al-Hasan
ibn Ali - May Allah honor his dignity - was well-versed in the spiritual
path and interested in its fine points. When determinists took over and
people of seclusion were dispersed across the world, Hasan al- Basri
wrote a letter to Hasan ibn Ali (a.s) saying:

Peace of Allah be to you, son of Allah’s Messenger and apple of his eye.
Mercy and blessing of Allah be to you. You - members of Banu-Hashim -
are like ships afloat on seas and you are like shining stars and
guidance. Whoever follows you will be rescued, like those who were
aboard Noah’s Ark. O son of Allah’s Messenger, we are at a loss and we
would like to know what you think on this issue, for you are from the
issue of the Prophet and your link will never be cut off. Your knowledge
comes from that of Allah Who is your protector.

Receiving the letter, Hasan (a.s.) wrote back:

Whoever does not believe in destined good and evil on the part of Allah
is an unbeliever; and whoever attributes his sins to Allah is wicked;
that is to say, denying the fate. What we have accepted in our religion
is fate. Attributing sins to Allah is determinism. Therefore, a servant
is free in acquisition to the extent of his capability given by Allah.
Thus religion lies in between determinism and fate.

It is reported that a Bedouin was passing by while Hasan (a.s.) was
sitting at the threshold of the house. A Bedouin started swearing at him
and his parents. Hasan rose up, saying, “O Bedouin! If you are in need
of food, I will give you food and if you are thirsty, I will give you
water. What is the matter with you?” The Bedouin kept on abusing Hasan
and his parents. Hasan told his servant to bring a purse of golden coins
and said, “O Bedouin! I beg your pardon, this is all we have at home and
I offer it to you.”

Hearing this, the Bedouin said, “I bear witness that you are the son of
Allah's Messenger and I have come here to test your forbearance. This is
the virtue of the great ones for whom praise or blame is equal and they
never change because of unkind words.”

The candle of the Muhammad’s Household and the master of his time – Abu
Abdullah al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s.) - may Allah be pleased
with them, was Allah’s favorite, the center of the people of
tribulation, and the one slain on the plains of Karbala. Those who have
heard this story unanimously agree that as long as the truth was
manifest, he was a follower of truth but when truth was missing, he drew
out his sword and did not find comfort until he had sacrificed his dear
life for the sake of Allah. His virtues are too well known to be
mentioned here.

The inheritor of Prophethood, the torch of the ummah, the wronged
master, the deprived Imam, the ornament of the servants of Allah,
Abul-Hasan Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu-Talib (a.s.) was the most
honorable worshipper of his time. He is known for his intuition of
delicate points. A story tells us that when Husayn along with his
children were killed in the plain of Karbala and there was no one to
look after the women, he was ill and Husayn called him Ali the junior
(Ali Asghar).

When they were brought on bare camels to Syria before Yazid ibn
Muawiyah - may Allah abase him - a person said, “How is your day, O Ali
from the Household of Mercy?” He said, “Because of unkindness of our
people, our morning was like that of the people of (Prophet) Musa
because of the plight of the people of Pharaoh who killed their children
and unveiled their women in a way we do not know the day from the
night.”

Husham ibn Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan, the story goes, was circumambulating
the Holy Kabah. He wished to kiss the Black Stone but failed to find his
way to it due to the huge crowd. So he went up the pulpit and delivered
a sermon. After some time, Zayn al-Abidin Ali ibn Husayn entered the
Mosque for circumambulation with a face as bright as moon and a garment
with sweet scent. When he came near the Black stone, the pilgrims made
room for him to kiss it out of respect for him. Observing such a scene,
a man from Syria said to Husham, “The pilgrims did not make room for you
who are a governor. Who is that good looking young man for whom the
pilgrims made way near the Black stone?”

Husham said, “I do not know him.” He had the intention that the people
of Syria do not recognize or follow him nor show interest in his
Imamate. Farazdaq, the poet who was standing there, said, “I know him.”
They said, “Who is he?” Farazdaq said, “He is the one whom the land of
revelation and even the Sacred House know very well…” He also composed
some lines in praise of Imam and Ahl al-Bayt. Hearing this, Husham
became angry and had him jailed in a prison between Mecca and Medina.

When the Imam heard the story, he sent him twelve thousand Dirhams with
a message saying that we did not have more than this. Farazdaq sent back
the silver coins saying, “O son of Allah’s Messenger! I have composed
many poems for silver with false eulogy; however, what I have composed
is for the sake of Allah and love for His Messenger and his offspring.”
When the message reached Zayn al-Abidin, he said, “Send these silver
coins back and say: O Abu- Firas! If you love us, do not ask me to take
back what I have given away from our property.” It was then that
Farazdaq was convinced to take the silver coins.[^22]

The virtues of Zayn al-Abidin are too numerous to be mentioned here.

Sa’di Of Shiraz
---------------

*Sa’di do not suppose that the way of Chastity*  
*Is anywhere but following Mustafa -*  
*Who is honorable in character,*  
*Beautiful in qualities*  
*The Prophet of people, and mediator of followers,*  
*The Imam of all Prophets, the leader of the way,*  
*The trustee of Allah, the descending place of Gabriel,*  
*The intercessor of men, the Lord of Resurrection Day,*  
*The guiding leader, high judge of the court of Accounts,*  
*The inter-locator whose Mount Sinai is the whole universe,*  
*and all rays are the reflection of His light,*  
*the orphan who had not compiled the Qur'an,*  
*and washed away the holy books of several nations.*  
*One night he rode, and rose to high heaven*  
*And in worth and rank was elevated above angels.*  
*He rode so swiftly in the land of proximity to Allah,*  
*That Gabriel was left behind at Sadreh*  
*What admirable eulogy can I offer you?*  
*O people's prophet, peace be upon You!*  
*The salutation of angels be upon your soul,*  
*On your descendants and followers.*  
*O Allah; I beg you by the children of Fatimah*  
*To end my life with devotion to the Prophet's lineage.*  
*Whether you grant my wish or not*  
*I shall make my entreaty to the family of the Prophet.*[^23]

Sayyid Haydar Amuli And Sheikh Muhyo Al-Din Ibn Arabi
-----------------------------------------------------

Sayyid Haydar Amuli in his mystical-theological exegesis of the Holy
Quran entitled *al-MuHit al-Adham wal-Bahr al-Khidhimm*, has pointed out
the following:

Be it known to you that the truths and secrets in the Holy Quran are
Divine truths and secrets descended on purified souls from a sacred
realm. Allah Himself has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَقُرْآنٌ كَرِيمٌ فِي كِتَابٍ مَكْنُونٍ لَا يَمَسُّهُ إِلَّا
الْمُطَهَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most surely it is an honored Quran, in a book that is protected; none
shall touch it save the purified ones. (56:77-79)***

Therefore, the Holy Quran is not revealed to anyone but those who have
attained perfection and are free from sins and disobedience called
uncleanness. Again Allah says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْخَبِيثَاتُ لِلْخَبِيثِينَ وَالْخَبِيثُونَ لِلْخَبِيثَاتِ ۖ
وَالطَّيِّبَاتُ لِلطَّيِّبِينَ وَالطَّيِّبُونَ لِلطَّيِّبَاتِ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Unclean things are for unclean ones and unclean ones are for unclean
things and the good things are for good ones and the good ones are for
good things. (24:26)***

These purified souls are none but the Prophets, the Messengers and the
Imams who truthfully followed them. It is for this reason that we claim
that ‘those who are firmly rooted in knowledge’ are the Prophets,
Messengers, Imams, Allah’s favorites and then the inheritors of
monotheism. Therefore, no one else can be included in their group as it
has been pointed out by the elder Sheikhs. In this connection Allah
says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House, and to purify you a thorough purifying. (33:33)***

In this verse, Allah alludes to the purification of Ahl al-Bayt and
their being free from sins and disobedience. Uncleanness can mean
atheism and paganism or sin and debauchery. In the first meaning, Ahl
al-Bayt are necessarily free from these sins. In the second meaning, the
word ‘purify’ cannot be applied to them unless Ahl al-Bayt are also not
far from it. The sins and debauchery are the worst uncleanness and here
Allah Himself has testified to their purification.

The great Sheikh Muhyi al-Din Ibn Arabi refers to the same meaning in
getting to know the secret of Salman and his joining Ahl al-Bayt, which
has a moral long story.[^24] Supporting what we have said so far, let us
quote the following as a proof for those who deny it:

Know this! May Allah support you! Jafar ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq in a
Hadith has reported Allah’s Messenger as saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَوْلَى الْقَومِ مِنْهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The servant of each nation is a person from among them.

Allah’s Messenger has also said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أهْلُ الْقُرَانِ هُمْ أهْلُاللَّهِ وَ خَاصَّتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The people of the Holy Quran are men of Allah and His favorites."

Allah too says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ ۚ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely as for My servants, you (Satan) have no authority over them.
(17:65)***

Therefore, the submission of every servant of Almighty Allah on whom the
right of another servant will be decreased to the extent of that right
and that person will have an authority on him. For this reason, he will
not become a devoted servant. This has caused the devoted servants to be
detached from people in order to resort to mountain and deserts and
escape from people. They are keen to rid themselves of everything. I
have met many of them during my trips.

### Purification - A Heavenly Food For Devoted servants

Since the Holy Prophet was a devoted servant, Allah purified him and his
Household thoroughly and removed uncleanness from them, which is what is
considered as indecency and defect. None can be included in Ahl al- Bayt
saved the purified. The Holy Prophet by saying, “Salman is from us - Ahl
al-Bayt”, testifies that Salman has been purified.

### Ahl al-Bayt, A Paragon of Purification

Allah Almighty has testified to the purification of Ahl al-Bayt and
removal of uncleanness from them. None but a purified one can be
included with them. As soon as one is included with them, they will
receive Allah’s favor. So what do you think of Ahl al-Bayt themselves?

They are actually the paragon of purification. The following Quranic
verse indicates that Allah has made Ahl al-Bayt share His forgiveness
with His Messenger:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah may forgive your community their past faults and those to
follow (48:2)***

Based on this verse, Allah has purified His Messenger through His
forgiveness. For this reason, whatever is considered sin for us is a sin
only in appearance if committed by Allah’s Messenger because no blame
follows him either from Allah or from us. Therefore, all the offsprings
of Fatimah and those included with Ahl al-Bayt such as Salman will be
subject to the above mentioned verse until the Day of Judgment. They
have been purified by the honor of Muhammad and Allah’s favor and they
will be raised to life with forgiveness.

### Love for Ahl al-Bayt; Desire of the Messenger

The Holy Prophet has not asked any reward other than love for his near
relatives. In this lies the secret of strengthening the ties of
relationship with him. How can anyone who does not respond positively to
the Holy Prophet’s demand hope for his intercession? One who has the
love for something will be always with it. Hence, the one who adheres to
the love for Ahl al-Bayt, through the right of having claim, will not
take to them to ask for what comes to him from them. A true lover of Ahl
al-Bayt has said: Whatever the beloved does is good.

### Love for Ahl al-Bayt Is Love for Allah

If your love for Allah and the Holy Prophet is true, you will naturally
love Ahl al-Bayt and whatever comes to you from them, even if
disagreeable is a favor from Allah for their love.

### The Secret of Ahl al-Bayt and Some of Their Features

Now that we have spoken of the spiritual poles of this station and the
fact that the Ahl al-Bayt are chosen by Allah, we should know that no
one knows anything about their secret except the sacred ones. Al-Khidhr,
may Allah be pleased with him, is one of the greatest ones among such
personalities. In this regard, Allah has testified that He bestowed His
mercy on him and gave him from His own knowledge that Prophet Moses had
to learn from.

One secret of getting to know the station of Ahl al-Bayt and what Allah
has given attention to is their high rank in knowledge. One of the other
secrets is their knowledge of Allah’s plan for their enemies who claim
to love Allah’s Messenger. The Holy Prophet himself has recommended the
love for his Ahl al-Bayt and he himself is one of them. However, most
people have not done what Allah’s Messenger asked them to do on the
order of Allah. They did not obey Allah and His Messenger, nor did they
take his relatives as friends except those who did something for them.
These people love their desires and they are in love with themselves.
What has been said so far, has been said by the great Sheikh (Ibn
Arabi). It is aimed at getting to know how to love and make friends with
them, the dignity and virtues of Ahl al-Bayt and about purification,
*ismah*, the secrets of the Holy Quran by adhering to them and knowing
such personalities as Salman…[^25]

After quoting this chapter from *al-Futuhat al-Makkiyyah*, Sayyid Haydar
Amuli, may his soul rest in peace, in his commentary further elaborates
on Ahl al-Bayt. Yet to be brief, we have even summarized Ibn Arabi’s
statements. What Sayyid Haydar Amuli writes on the opinion of Ibn Arabi
is his own opinion too. Hence, we have not devoted a separate chapter to
Sayyid Haydar.

We bring this chapter to conclusion with a poem by Ibn Arabi as quoted
by Sulayman ibn Ibrahim Qunduzi (1220-1294) in *Yanabi
al-Mawaddah*.[^26]

Find no peer for Ahlal-Bayt  
 For they are people of witness  
 Enmity with them is a big loss.  
 Love for them is a great prayer.

[^1]: Kashf al-Asrar: 18/1

[^2]: Kashf al-Asrar, 662/1

[^3]: Kashf al-Asrar: 151/2

[^4]: Kashf al-Asrar: 151/3,150

[^5]: Kashf al-Asrar: 106/5

[^6]: Kashf al-Asrar: 49/7

[^7]: Kashf al-Asrar: 686/10

[^8]: Tadhkirat al-Awliya: 20,125

[^9]: Al-Risalah al-Qushayriyyah: 28

[^10]: Al-Risalah al-Qushayriyyah: 223

[^11]: Al-Risalah al-Qushayriyyah: 363

[^12]: Al-Risalah al-Qushayriyyah: 363

[^13]: Al-Risalah al-Qushayriyyah: 582

[^14]: Al-Risalah al-Qushayriyyah: 394

[^15]: Kimyaye Saadat: 167/2

[^16]: Kimyaye Saadat; 186

[^17]: Kimyaye Saadat: 414/2

[^18]: Kimyaye Saadat: 421

[^19]: Asrar al-Tawhid: 204/1

[^20]: Asrar al-Tawhid: 248/1

[^21]: Asrar al-Tawhid: 268/1

[^22]: Kashf al-Mahjub: 85-95

[^23]: Boostan of Sa’adi translated into English by Aladdin Pasargadi,
Rahnama Publication, 2000

[^24]: Al-Futuhat al-Makkiyyah; Vol. 1, Ch. 29

[^25]: Tafsir al-Muhit al-Azam: 447/1

[^26]: Yanabi al-Mawaddah: 174/3, Chapter: 65


