The Culture Of Ahl Al-Bayt
==========================

Morality Of Ahl Al-Bayt
-----------------------

Morality of Ahl al-Bayt is a collection of their godly and human virtues
towards their fellow human beings. On many occasions, the infidels,
atheists, and pagans were attracted to Islam because they had been
influenced by the morality of Islam represented by Ahl al-Bayt. Free
from errors and vices, Ahl al-Bayt are the paragon of virtues for all
human beings until the Day of Judgment.

### Morality of the Holy Prophet

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) reports:

Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s.) was tasked by the Holy Prophet to go to the
market and purchase a shirt. He went to the market and purchased a shirt
for twelve dirhams. The Holy Prophet asked, “How much did you pay for
it?”

“Twelve dirhams”, said Imam Ali (a.s.).

“I do not like it so much! I would like to have a less expensive one. Is
the seller ready to take it back, if so, please return it?, ” Holy
Prophet (S) said to him

“I do not know, Allah’s Messenger,” replied Imam Ali (a.s.).

“Go and see whether he agrees to take it back or not,” asked the Holy
Prophet (S)

Ali took the shirt alongwith him and returned to the market to ask the
seller, “The Holy Prophet wants a shirt which is less expensive in price
than this. Are you ready to pay back our money and take back the shirt?”

The seller accepted it; Ali took the money and returned to the Holy
Prophet. Then they both went towards the market. On the way, the Holy
Prophet saw a slave-girl crying.

“Why are you crying?” he asked.

“My master gave me four dirhams and sent me to the market for shopping.
I do not know how I lost the money. At present, I am scared to go back
home.”

The Holy Prophet gave her four dirhams from those twelve dirhams and
said, “Buy what you want and go back home!” Then, he went to the market,
purchased a shirt for four dirhams and put it on.

On his return, he saw a naked man; he immediately took off his shirt and
gave it to him. He returned to the market and purchased another shirt
for four dirhams. He put it on and took to the way towards his house. On
the way, he saw the same slave-girl sitting, puzzled, embarrassed and
perplexed.

“Why didn’t you go back home?” he asked.

“O Allah’s Messenger, it is too late. I am afraid they might beat me,
for I have been slightly delayed.”

“Let us go together. Show me the way to your house! I will intercede for
you with them so that they may not bother you.”

The Holy Prophet accompanied the slave-girl. As they reached the house,
the girl said, “This is the house.”

The Holy Prophet said in a high voice from behind the door, “O people of
the house, peace be upon you.” He did not get any reply. Thus he said
again, yet there was no reply. For the third time, he saluted, and they
replied, “O Allah’s Messenger, peace and Allah’s mercy and blessings be
upon you.”

“Why did you not reply for the first time, didn't you hear my voice?”

“Of course, yes! We heard your voice the first time and came to know
that it was you!”

“Then what was the reason for your delay?”

“O Allah’s Messenger! We love to hear your voice again and again. Your
salaam is peace, blessing and grace for our house.”

“This slave-girl of yours was delayed. I came here to ask you not to
pester her.”

“O Allah’s Messenger! Because of your gracious visit, this slave-girl is
free from now on.”

The Holy Prophet said, “Thanks to Allah, how blessed these twelve
Dirhams were; which became the dress of two naked persons and a
slave-girl got her freedom.”[^1]

### Five Moral Habits of the Holy Prophet

Allah’s Messenger has been reported by Imam al-Baqir (a.s) to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَمْسٌ لَسْتُ بِتَارِكِهِنَّ حَتَّى الْمَمَاتٍ: لِبَاسِي الصُّوفَ،
وَرَكُوبِي الْحِمَارَ مُؤكِفَاً، وَأكْلِي مَعَ الْعَبِيدِ، وَخَصْفِي
الْنَّعْلَ بالْيَدِ، وَتَسْلِيمِي عَلَى الصِّبْيَانِ سُنَّةَ مِنْ
بَعْدِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I will not quit five habits until the moment of my death: wearing coarse
clothes, riding a mule without packsaddle, eating with the slaves,
weaving footwear with my own hands, and saluting children so that it
will become a tradition after me.

### A Jew Becomes Muslim By the Holy Prophet

Imam Musa (a.s) quoted Imam Ali (a.s) as saying, “Allah’s Messenger owed
a few dinars to a Jew, so he asked for it. The Holy Prophet said, “I
can't pay it now.” The Jew said, “I will not leave you until you have
paid my money.” The Holy Prophet said, “Then I will sit beside you.” He
sat beside that Jew for a long time during which he performed all his
prayers.

The Holy Prophet’s companions made an attempt to intimidate him. Looking
at them, the Holy Prophet asked, “What are you going to do with him?”
They said, “O Allah's Messenger! A Jew is taking you a hostage like
that!” The Holy Prophet said, “Allah has not commissioned me to do any
injustice to non-Muslims.”

When the day came to an end, the Jew said, “I bear witness that there is
no god but Allah and I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and His
Messenger. I give away a portion of my wealth for the sake of Allah, O
Messenger! I swear by Allah what I did to you was to see whether you are
the same person described in the Torah. I have read your description in
the Torah that Muhammad, son of Abdullah, will be born in Mecca; he will
migrate to Medina. He is neither rough nor furious. He is neither
foul-mouthed nor does he use indecent words. I testify to the oneness of
Allah and your Prophethood. This is my wealth at your disposal. Spend it
as Allah has commanded.”[^2]

### Interest-Free Loan For The Needy

Reporting his father, Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) says, “A needy came to the
Holy Prophet asking for help. The Holy Prophet (S) asked, “Is there
anyone here to give an interest-free loan?” A man from the Ansar rose up
saying, “I have such a loan.” The Holy Prophet said, “Give four vessels
of date to this man.” The man did so.

After sometime the man came to the Holy Prophet and asked for the
repayment of his loan. The Holy Prophet (S) said, “We will pay it in the
coming days.” The man came another time, hearing the same words. But
when he came for the third time, the Holy Prophet smiled and said, “Is
there anyone here to give an interest-free loan?” A man rose up saying,
“O Allah's Messenger! I have it.” The Holy Prophet asked, “How much is
that?” The man said, “As much as you wish!” The Holy Prophet said, “Give
eight vessels of date to this man.” The man said, “You owe me only four
vessels.” The Holy Prophet said, “The other four vessels are for you
too.”[^3]

### Eating with the Poor

Reporting his father, Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) says, “During the time of the
Holy Prophet, the needy had to spend nights in the mosque because they
had no home. One evening, the Holy Prophet broke his fast with the needy
in the mosque in a stone vessel. Since the food had been blessed by the
Holy Prophet, thirty people ate from it and then took the rest of the
food for their wives.”[^4]

### Piety and Contentment

Quoting his forefathers, Imam al-Ridha reports: Allah’s Messenger said:
An angel came to me saying, “O Muhammad! Your Lord has sent greetings to
you saying - I will fill Mecca with gold if you wish so.” But the Holy
Prophet raised his head toward the sky and said, “O Lord! I will eat my
fill one day to praise You and remain hungry to beg you.”[^5]

### Amazing Humbleness

Ibn Abbas reports that the Holy Prophet would always sit on the earth;
he would eat sitting on the earth; he would milk the sheep; and he would
accept the slaves’ invitation to share barley bread on their tablecloth.
[^6]

### Sympathy with People

Among the homeless poor people who used to live in the mosque, there was
a believer who was poor and indigent. He would follow Allah’s Messenger
in praying and never lost congregational prayer. The Holy Prophet (S)
had sympathy for him and closely watched his needs. The Holy Prophet (S)
kept on saying, “O Sa’d, I will make you needless if I gain something.”
A long time passed but the Holy Prophet did not gain anything. Hence,
his sympathy for the man increased. Allah Almighty Who was watching
this, sent Archangel Gabriel to him with two dirhams saying, “Allah is
aware of your sorrow about Sa’d. Would you like to make him needless?”
The Holy Prophet (S) said, “Yes.” “Give these two dirhams to him to
start a business.”

Taking the two dirhams, the Holy Prophet (S) left home for the mosque to
perform his Noon Prayer where Sa’d waiting for him. He said, “Do you
like business?” Sa’d said, “Yes, I do. But I do not have money.” The
Holy Prophet gave the two dirhams to him and said, “Start a business
with this and seek the Divine food.” After completing his prayer, the
Holy Prophet said, “Go after business from now on, for I was very sorry
for you”. Sa’d did so in a way that he bought goods for one dirham
selling them for two dirhams or bought goods for two dirhams selling
them for four dirhams.

In this way, he made a fortune and his business became brisk. He went so
far as to find premises near the mosque and set up his business there.
He became so engaged in his business that he no longer took heed of
Bilal’s call for prayer and would not come to the mosque. One day, the
Holy Prophet said to him, “O Sa’d! You are so much preoccupied with the
world that you have failed to perform prayer with the Prophet! What has
happened to your previous spirituality?” Sa’d said, “Shall I waste my
property? I have no option! I have to sell my goods to people and
receive the price and to purchase goods from people and pay for them!”

The Holy Prophet (S) thus became sadder for Sad than before when he was
poor and indigent. At this time, Gabriel came to the Holy Prophet
saying, “O Muhammad! Allah is aware of your sorrow for Sad. Which one do
you like best, the former or the present condition?” The Holy Prophet
(S) said, “The former conditions, for he is in a situation now that this
world has ruined his hereafter.” Gabriel said, “Tell Sa’d to return the
two dirhams you gave him. When he does so, he will be back to his former
conditions.”

So the Holy Prophet (S) went to Sa’’d and told him affectionately, “O
Sa’d! Don’t you want to return our two dirhams?” Sad said, “Yes, I will,
along with two hundred dirhams!” The Holy Prophet (S) said, “Only those
two dirhams!” Sa’d gave the two dirhams back to the Holy Prophet and
soon he lost what he had gained. Thus, he returned to the former
situation.[^7]

### Kindness against Ingratitude

Quoting Imam Ali, Imam Musa reports:

The Holy Prophet was always benevolent and benefactor yet he was never
appreciated by people. He was kind to Quraysh, Arabs and non-Arabs. We
Ahl al-Bayt are the benefactors but our benefaction is not appreciated.
The chosen believers too are like us.[^8]

### Devotion

Reporting Imam al-Sadiq, Abu-Basir narrates:

Allah’s Messenger would always eat like a servant; sit on the earth like
a servant and act upon the fact that he was a servant of Allah.[^9]

### A Permanent Cure

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) has said: A Bedouin woman was passing by the Holy
Prophet who was eating while sitting on the earth. She said, “O
Muhammad! I swear by Allah that you eat and sit on the earth like a
servant of Allah.” The Holy Prophet said, “Woe to you! Who is more
deserving than me to be a servant of Allah?” The woman said, “Give a
morsel of your food to me!” The Holy Prophet gave her a morsel. The
woman said, “No, give me the morsel from your mouth!” The Holy Prophet
brought out the morsel from his mouth and gave it to her. The woman
never experienced any pain in life until she died.[^10]

### Honoring A Nobleman

Hatam al-Ta’i was a noble, generous, and kind Arab. He would make food
of a camel’s flesh every day to feed people. He was doing this
whole-heartedly and with devotion. Nevertheless, he died before the
advent of Islam. After Hatam, his son Adi succeeded him; he was as
generous as his father. It is said that one day a man asked him for one
hundred Dirhams. Adi said, “By Allah, this is nothing, ask for more!”
When a poet eulogized him, Adi said, “Wait for me to give you a reward
before you read the eulogy.”

In the 9th A.H., the Holy Prophet sent a group headed by Imam Ali to
Ta’i tribe to invite them to Islam but they fought them and were
defeated. Most of the Ta’i people were taken captives along with a
considerable booty. Adi, a Christian by faith, escaped to Syria, leaving
his sister Safanah among the captives. She stood up before the Holy
Prophet and said, “O Allah’s Messenger! My father has passed away, my
guardian who is my brother has escaped to Syria, so be gracious to me.”
The Holy Prophet ordered to give here new clothes and send here
respectfully to Syria.

Seeing this, Adi was surprised. When his sister told him about the Holy
Prophet’s gracious behavior, Adi asked for an advisable act. The sister
said, “You would better go to him, for it would be a source of pride for
you to believe in him, should he be a prophet and it would be an honor
for you should he be a king.” Adi moved quickly. He went to the mosque
and introduced himself to the Holy Prophet who invited him to his house.

On the way home, an old woman came to the Holy Prophet and held him
standing for a long time speaking of her needs. The Holy Prophet too was
patiently listening to her! Adi said to himself, “This is not the
attitude of the kings to speak with the needy in this manner.” When they
reached home, the Holy Prophet made Adi sit on the mattress while he
himself sat on the earth facing him. Adi said, “It is not good for me to
sit on this mattress when you sit upon the ground.” The Holy Prophet
said, “You are our guest!”

Then the Holy Prophet said, “Perhaps you look at the actual poverty and
indigence of Muslims and our numerous enemies that you do not accept
Islam. But this situation will not last long.” Hearing this, Adi
willingly embraced Islam, defended Ahl al-Bayt after Allah’s Messenger
and remained steadfast until the end of his life. He fought along with
Imam Ali in the battles of Camel, Siffin and Nahrawan for the sake of
Allah. In the Battle of Jamal (Camel), he lost one eye and three of his
sons were martyred in the front of justice against injustice.[^11]

### Great Forbearance

Anas ibn Malik says: A Bedouin came to the Holy Prophet, took his cloak
by hand and drew it in a way that its edge left an abrasion on the Holy
Prophet’s neck. Then he said, “Order to bestow on me of Allah’s property
which is with you!” The Holy Prophet smiled and ordered to give to him
what he needed.”[^12]

### Courtesy towards the community

Whenever the Holy Prophet noticed the absence of a brother-in-faith for
three days, he would inquire about him. He would pray for his people if
they were not near by and would rush to visit them if they were
ill.[^13]

### Honoring a Guest

One day the Holy Prophet had a lot of guests at home. Jarir Ibn Abdullah
entered the house but could not find a place to sit. So, he had to sit
outside. Seeing this, the Holy Prophet spread his shirt for him to sit
on. Jarir picked up the shirt, put it on his face and kissed it.

Salman says: I went to see the Holy Prophet who was leaning on a
cushion. When he saw me, he offered his cushion to me saying: O Salman!
Allah will have his mercy on a Muslim who offers a cushion for his
brother-in-faith when he comes to visit him.[^14]

### Respect for Kindness

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) said: When a foster sister came to see the Holy
Prophet, he spread his cloak for her to sit on. He also started to speak
to her with a smile on his lips. When she left, her brother came to the
Holy Prophet but his behavior was quite different. When asked why they
were not treated equally, the Holy Prophet said: I respected the sister
more because she was more kind to her parents.[^15]

### Forgiving the Enemies

When the Holy Prophet conquered Mecca with his strong army of twelve
thousand soldiers, he treated people so kindly that they were all
surprised. No one could believe that a victor could treat the defeated
party in this way.

People of Mecca had gathered in the Sacred Mosque to see the leader of
Muslims and Islam come out of Kabah and judge those who committed all
kinds of persecution against him for thirteen years. However, after
breaking the idols, the Holy Prophet came out of Kabah to address the
people of Mecca as such, “O people! You were bad kinsmen and neighbors
for me. You expelled me from my hometown and fought against me in an
unmanly way. You did not spare any attempt to persecute my friends, my
companions or me. You killed my uncle, Hamzah. You fought against
Allah’s Messenger so I have the right to avenge myself on you. Based on
this right, your men must be killed, your wives and children must be
taken captive, your property must be seized by the conquerors, and your
houses must be demolished. Yet I leave the judgment to you. What do you
think?”

Suhayl ibn Amr, representing his people, said, “We speak good and think
good. You are an honorable brother and an honorable nephew who has power
over us.” These words impressed the tender-hearted Prophet in such a way
that his eyes were filled with tears. People of Mecca started weeping.
Then the Holy Prophet said, “I do the same thing as my brother Joseph
did. There is no sin upon you today. May Allah forgive you; He is the
Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful.”[^16]

### A Graceful Generosity

Sahl ibn Sa’d al-Saidi says: I made a cloak of black and white wool for
the Holy Prophet and he liked it. While touching it, he asked, “What a
good cloak this is!” A nomadic Arab who was present there said, “Give me
this cloak!” The Holy Prophet immediately took it off and gave it to
him.” [^17]

### Helping a brother-in-faith

Abu-Sa’id Khargushi in his book, *Sharaf al-Nabi* writes: A needy
companion of the Holy Prophet got married and asked him something. The
Holy Prophet went to Aishah’s house saying, “Do we have anything to help
this companion?” A’ishah said, “We have a bag with flour in it.” The
Holy Prophet gave it to the companion while they had nothing for
themselves.[^18]

### Forgiving a Foulmouthed Man

Ka’b ibn Zuhayr was an idolater who was steadfast in his idolatry until
the conquest of Mecca. One of his indecent works was poem of reproach
and satire about Allah’s Messenger. He and some other atheists who were
extremely biased in their paganism and in committing horrible crimes
against Islam were so detested that the Holy Prophet made Muslims
dutybound to shed their blood upon the conquest of Mecca.

Hearing this, Ka’b ibn Zuhayr, with his poetic talent, composed an ode
eulogizing the Holy Prophet and set out for Medina where he introduced
himself to Abu-Bakr and beseechingly asked to take him to the Holy
Prophet so that he might forgive him.

Abu-Bakr accepted his request and took to the Holy Prophet. He covered
his face with his turban so that nobody would recognize him, said, “O
Allah’s Messenger! This Arab man wishes to embrace Islam.” The Holy
Prophet stretched out his hand and Ka’b pledged his allegiance, saying,
“My father and mother are at your disposal, O Allah’s Messenger! This is
the station of one who seeks refuge with you. I am Ka’b ibn Zuhayr.” He
immediately recited the ode eulogizing the Holy Prophet. When he
finished, the Holy Prophet rewarded him with his stripped cloth from
Yemen, accepted his Islam and forgave him.

### Behavior towards the Chief of Hypocrites

Abdullah ibn Ubay who was the chief of hypocrites in Medina and his
friends did not spare any attempt to persecute the Holy Prophet and
Muslims. They were spying in favor of the enemies of Islam and insisted
on hypocrisies so much so that Quranic verses were revealed on their
being deprived of Allah’s mercy and their punishment on the Judgment
Day. Nevertheless, they did not stop their hypocrisy nor did they
repent. When the Holy Prophet returned from Tabuk, Abdullah ibn Ubay
fell sick and was close to death.

Based on the Quranic verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يُخْرِجُ الْحَيَّ مِنَ الْمَيِّتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He brings forth the living from the dead*** ***(6:95) -***

his son, a true and pure-hearted youth, was favored by the Holy Prophet
and Muslims. Based on the Quranic verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ إِحْسَانًا ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And you shall do good to your parents*** ***(2:83) -***

he would visit his father everyday as a religious duty. This good son of
Ubay asked the Holy Prophet to visit his father to save the dignity of
the family. Hence, the Holy Prophet too visited his father to preserve
the dignity of a man who was a true believer.

Out of sympathy, the Holy Prophet said to Abdullah ibn Ubay, “I forbade
you to make friends with the Jews but you did not accept it. Now is it
not time to do away with the love of the enemies of Allah and depart for
the hereafter?” In response, Abdullah said, “Asad ibn Hurarah was the
enemy of Jews but this enmity was of no avail when he was on the verge
of death. This is not the time to reproach me. I am on the verge of
death. I would like you to perform prayer for my dead body and give me
your shirt so that I will be buried with it.” The Holy Prophet gave his
outer shirt to him generously.

But Abdullah said, “I want the shirt which has touched your holy body.”
The Holy Prophet complied with his request and gave his under shirt to
him. After Abdullah's death, the Holy Prophet condoled his son, attended
the funeral service, prayed for him and in response to people’s protest
said, “My shirt, prayer and pardon will not be of avail for him.”
Following this manly and generous act, a thousand persons of the Khazraj
embraced Islam."[^19]

### Behavior towards the Companions

The Holy Prophet would visit his companions and inquire about their
health in the same way that they would visit him and inquire about his
health. He would bid them a fond farewell as they would bid him a fond
farewell. He would hug them as they would hug him. He would kiss them  
 as they would kiss him saying, “My father and mother are at your
disposal.”

If the Holy Prophet was invited to a party even at midnight, he would
accept it. When he was riding, he would not allow anyone to be on foot
at his service. If it were possible, he would make him ride with him; if
not, he would say, “You go to the appointed place, I will come after
you.” When he passed by children, he would salute them.[^20]

### Helping a Mother!

It is reported that certain slaves from Bahrain came to the Holy Prophet
making a line before him. There was a woman among them, who was crying.
The Holy Prophet asked, “Why are you crying?” The woman answered, “I had
a son sold to Banu-Abs”. The Holy Prophet asked, “Who sold him?” The
woman said, “Abu-Usayd al-Ansari did.”

Furious, the Holy Prophet said to Abu-Usayd Ansari, “Get on the horse
and return her son as you have sold him.” The man got on the horse and
after some time returned him.[^21]

The Holy Prophet said, “Whoever separates a mother and her children,
Allah Almighty will separate him from his friends.” [^22] The Holy
Prophet has also said, “Never go to the nest of birds at night nor
scaring them from their nests, for night is a time of rest for them.”

### Sublime Morality

Ibn Abbas reports: One day, the Holy Prophet was sitting in the mosque
along with his companions when a Bedouin entered carrying a sword and a
lizard in his lap and shouting, “O Muhammad! You are a sorcerer as well
as a liar!” The companions wanted to kill him but the Holy Prophet
stopped them.

Turning to the Bedouin, he said, “O Arab brother! Who are you looking
for?” The man said, "I am after Muhammad, the sorcerer and liar.” The
Holy Prophet said, "I am Muhammad but I am neither sorcerer nor liar.
Rather I am Allah’s Messenger.” The Bedouin said, “I swear by idols that
were it not for your dignity I would have killed you with this sword. I
swear by Lat that I will not believe you unless this lizard believes
you.” The Holy Prophet said, “O lizard! Who am I?” The lizard said, “You
are Allah’s Messenger.” With this, the heart of the Bedouin was
illuminated with the light of faith so he truthfully testified to the
oneness of Allah and the Prophethood of Muhammad. He further said, “O
Allah's Messenger! When I entered this mosque there was no man more
hostile than me to you and now there is no one loves you more than I
do.”[^23]

### Tolerating Hardships

It is reported that one day the Holy Prophet along with one of his
companions went to the desert of Medina. He saw an old woman at a well
intending to draw water but she could not. The Holy Prophet went near
her saying, “O Old Lady! Would you permit me to draw water for you?” She
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ أَحْسَنْتُمْ أَحْسَنْتُمْ لِأَنْفُسِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you do good, you will do good for your own souls*** ***(17:7)”***

The Holy Prophet went to the well, drew up the bucket, filled her
water-skin, put it on his shoulder and said to the woman, “Go ahead and
show me the way to your tent.” The companion insisted that he should
carry the water-skin but the Holy Prophet said, “I am more deserving
than anyone else to carry the load of my nation.”

The old woman led the way and the Holy Prophet was followed her until
they reached her tent. The Holy Prophet put down the water-skin and set
out for Medina.

The old woman entered the tent saying to her children, “Get up and bring
the water-skin in.” They asked, “O mother! How did you carry this heavy
water-skin up to here?” She said, “A sweet-speaking young man carried it
for me.” They asked, “Where did he go?” She said, “He went that way.”
The children of the old woman went after the Holy Prophet. When they
recognized him, they said, “Mother! This is the man you believe in and
are eager to see.”

The old woman and her children ran after the Holy Prophet until they
reached him and started kissing his hands. The old woman who was weeping
said, “O Allah’s Messenger! I did not recognize you. Forgive me for
being insolent to you. How can I apologize?” The Holy Prophet consoled
her, prayed for her children and retuned them kindly.[^24]

### Never Annoy People

It is reported that one day, the Holy Prophet had fever and that day was
the turn of being in Hafsah’s house. On that day, Aishah cooked barley
soup for the Holy Prophet and a slave-girl took the pot to Hafsah’s
house.

At the door, Hafsah said, “What is this?” The slave-girl said, “This is
barley soup that Aishah has cooked for Allah’s Messenger.” Hafsah was
very disturbed to hear this, saying, “Aishah has infringed my right.
Can’t I cook barley soup? Is my love for the Holy Prophet any less than
hers?” Then she took the pot from the slave-girl and threw it down so
the pot broke and the barley soup spilled on the earth.

The Holy Prophet took a piece of the pot in which there was a little
soup and ate it saying to the slave-girl, “If Aishah asks you whether
the Prophet ate from it, say yes and do not tell her what you have seen
or heard here so that there will be no cause of annoyance between them.”

It was after this event that the following verse was revealed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلَىٰ خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And most surely you conform yourself to sublime morality. (68:4)***

### Nobility

It is reported that when Mecca was conquered, Ikrimah, son of Abu-Jahl,
escaped to Yemen. When he was informed that Allah’s Messenger would not
blame anyone for his past faults and would not take him to task, he
returned to Mecca and to the Sacred Mosque. Seeing him, the Holy Prophet
rose up, spread his cloak for him and kissed him between the eyes.
Ikrimah said, “I loved the Holy Prophet more than myself, my father, and
my son.” Ikrimah became Muslim. He truly believed in Islam and was
martyred in one of the battles.[^25]

### Asking For Fair Price

A Bedouin came to the Holy Prophet saying, “I have several camels for
sale but I have no idea of their price in the market of Medina. I am
afraid of being deceived by buyers. Would you come to the market with me
giving your knowledge in this field?” The Holy Prophet said, “Bring the
camels to me and present them one by one.” He did so and the Holy
Prophet priced them each.

The Bedouin went to the market and sold the camels for the price the
Holy Prophet had said. Coming back, he said, “You guided me and I made a
huge profit. Now accept something from me and take of this money
whatever you wish.” The Holy Prophet said, “I expect nothing.” The
Bedouin said, “Accept a gift from me.” The Holy Prophet said, “I am not
in need of anything.” The Bedouin insisted. The Holy Prophet said, “Now
that you insist, bring me a female camel which gives milk provided that
you have not separated it from her young.”[^26]

### Gathering Wood For Making Fire

The Holy Prophet and his companions were on a journey. When they
alighted in a place, the Holy Prophet ordered them to slaughter a sheep.
One of them said, “I will slaughter it.” The second said, “I will skin
it.” The third said, “I will cook it.” The Holy Prophet said, “I will
gather wood for making fire.” The companions said, “O Allah’s Messenger!
Take no pains! We will gather wood for fire.” The Holy Prophet said, “I
know you would; but Allah hates to see His servant enjoy a state of
privilege among his friends and companions and distinguish between
himself and the others.”[^27]

### A Gracious Generosity

It is reported that the Holy Prophet and Jabir ibn Abdullah were riding
a camel belonging to the latter. Allah’s Messenger asked him to sell him
the camel. Jabir said, “My father and mother are at your disposal! It is
yours.” The Holy Prophet told Bilal to give the money to Jabir. Jabir
said, “O Allah’s Messenger! To whom should I entrust the camel?” The
Holy Prophet said, “May you enjoy the camel and its price and may Allah
bless this transaction.”[^28]

Examples Of Imam Ali’s Moral Virtues
------------------------------------

### Imam Ali (a.s) Intervenes

Imam Ali (a.s.) was once passing by date sellers when he saw a
slave-girl crying. He asked the reason, and she said, “My master sent me
with one dirham to buy dates. I bought the dates from this man and took
them home. But my master did not like them. I have returned them but
this man refuses to take them back.” Addressing the date seller, Imam
Ali said, “O servant of Allah! This is a slave-girl having no authority
of herself. Give back her one dirham and take back the dates.”

The date seller rose up and showed him a fist. People said, “What have
you done? This is Amir al-Muminin.” The man turned pale and started to
gasp out of fear. He took back the dates and returned the one dirham to
her. He then said, “O Amir al- Muminin! Be pleased with me.” The Imam
said, “The fact that you have amended your conduct has satisfied me. I
am pleased only to see that you have given people their due right."[^29]

### A Beautiful Pardon

Amir al-Muminin had sent an agent to arrest Labid ibn Utarad al-Tamimi
for having uttered certain words. The agent passed by the alley of Banu-
Asad where Nuaym ibn Dajajah al-Asadi captured Labid. When he was
arrested, the Imam ordered a physical punishment. Nuaym said, “By Allah,
to be with you is humiliation and separation from you is atheism!” The
Imam said, “I pardon you. Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْفَعْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ السَّيِّئَةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****Repel evil by what is best*** **(23:96)”.**

As for your saying, ‘*to be with you is humiliation*’ it is something
bad you have acquired; and as for ‘*separation from you is atheism*’ it
is something good you have acquired. So tit for tat.”[^30]

### Another Example of Pardon

Amir al-Muminin (a.s.) once entered Mecca for some affairs. He saw a
Bedouin clutching the curtain of Kabah and saying, “O Lord of the House!
The House is Yours and the guest is Yours. Every host prepares certain
means to receive his guest. Tonight, bless me by receiving me.”
Addressing his friends, Imam Ali said, “Are you not listening to this
Bedouin?” They said, “Yes, we are.” The Imam said, “Allah is too Great
to return His guest empty-handed!”

On the second night, Imam Ali found the same man clutching the same
pillar of Kabah saying, “O Almighty! There is no one mightier than You!
By Your Honor! Honor me in a way no one knows how! I resort to you by
the honor of Muhammad and the Family of Muhammad! Grant me something no
one but You can grant and avert from me what none but You can avert!”

Amir al-Muminin said to his friends, “By Allah! These words are the
chief name of Allah in Syriac. My beloved, Allah’s Messenger, has
informed me that tonight this Arab has asked for Paradise from Allah and
his prayer was granted and asked for the aversion of Hellfire, which was
granted too!”

On the third night, Imam Ali (a.s) again saw him in the same place
saying, “O Allah Who is not contained in a space and no space is devoid
of Him! Give this Arab four thousand Dirhams as sustenance!” Imam Ali
went forth saying, “O Arab! You asked Allah to host you, and He did; you
wished Paradise; and it was granted to you; you asked for aversion of
fire; and your prayer was granted; tonight, you are asking for four
thousand dirhams?” The Arab said, "Who are you?” The Imam said, “I am
Ali ibn Abu-Talib.” The Arab said, “By Allah! You are the one I desire
and you can meet my need!” The Imam said, “O Bedouin! Ask for it.” The
man said, "A thousand dirhams for dowry; a thousand for paying my debt;
a thousand for purchasing a house; and a thousand for running the
affairs of my life!” The Imam said, “You have been fair in asking for
your needs. Whenever you left Mecca for Medina, ask for my house.”

The Arab stayed in Mecca for a week and then came to Medina looking for
Amir al- Muminin, shouting, “Who will lead me to the house of the Leader
of the believers?” Husayn ibn Ali who was then a child said, “I will
lead you to his house. I am his son.” The Arab asked, “Who is your
father?” Husayn said, “Amir al-Muminin, Ali ibn Abi-Talib is my father.”
He asked, “Who is your mother?” Husayn said, “Fatimah al-Zahra, the
doyenne of the women of the world is my mother.” He asked, “Who is your
grandfather?” Husayn said, “Allah’s Messenger, Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn
Abd al-Muttalib is my grandfather.” He asked, “Who is your grandmother?”
Husayn said: “Khadijah daughter of Khuwaylid is my grandmother.” He
asked, “Who is your brother?” Husayn said, “Abu- Muhammad, Hasan ibn
Ali, is my brother.” the Bedouin said, “You have got the whole world! Go
to Amir al-Mu'minin and tell him that the Bedouin whose needs you had
guaranteed to meet in Mecca is beside your house.”

Husayn entered the house saying, “O father! The Bedouin whose needs you
have guaranteed to meet is at the door.” Addressing Fatimah, Imam Ali
said, “Is there any food at home for this Bedouin?” Fatimah said, “No.”
Hearing this, Imam Ali put on his clothes and went outside home saying,
“Call Abu-Abdullah, Salman the Persian.” When Salman came, the Imam
said, “O Abu-Abdullah! Put to sale the orchard whose trees the Holy
Prophet planted!” Salman too sold the orchard for twelve thousand
Dirhams. Imam Ali took the money and called for the Bedouin. Four
thousand dirhams were given to him to meet his needs and forty dirhams
for his expenses.

The news spread among the needy in Medina. They too came to Imam Ali. A
man from the Ansar went to Fatimah’s house and informed her of the
event. Fatimah said, “May Allah reward you for this news.” Ali was
sitting there giving away handfuls of Dirhams to the needy so much so
that there was nothing left for him."[^31]

### Pardoning Talhah

After the Battle of the Camel, Musa ibn Talhah was brought to Imam Ali
who said, “Say three times: I seek forgiveness of Allah and I repent to
Him.” Then he was set free. Addressing him, Imam Ali said, “Go wherever
you wish and take for yourself whatever you find of horses and weapons
in the camp. But fear Allah in your future life and stay at home.”[^32]

### Helping the Orphans

Although Amir al-Muminin was aware of the situation in the realm of
Muslims and paid special attention to the situation of the orphans,
widows and the needy, he would sometimes act like an ordinary person to
give lesson to rulers and to the community**.**

One day, he saw a woman carrying a water-skin on her back. He took the
water-skin from her and placed it on his back. When he inquired about
her situation, she said, “Ali ibn Abu-Talib sent my husband to the
battle where he was killed. Now I am alone with my children and I have
to work for others to make the ends meet.” Imam Ali returned home but
had no peace of mind during the whole night. In the morning, he took a
basket, put some meat, flour and dates in it and set out for the woman's
house. Some friends suggested carrying the basket but the Imam said,
“Who will carry the heavy load for me on the Judgment Day?” Reaching the
woman's house, he knocked at the door.

“Who are you?”

“I am the man who brought the water-skin for you. Now I have brought
some food for the children.”

“May Allah bless you and judge between us and Ali.”

She opened the door. Entering the house, he said, “I wish to do some
good acts. Allow me either to knead the flour and bake it or to look
after the children.” The woman said, “I will knead the flour.”

Imam Ali too cooked the meat and fed the children with his own hand
saying to each child while putting morsel in his mouth, “My son, forgive
Ali if he has failed in his duty towards you.” When the bread was ready,
the woman said, “O servant of Allah! Put fire in the oven.” He did. When
flames rose up, he brought his face near the fire and said, “Taste the
heat of fire. It is the punishment for those who fail in their duty
towards orphans and widows.”

By chance, a woman from the neighboring house came in. Recognizing him,
she cried at the woman, “Woe to you, don't you recognize the man who is
helping you? He is Amir al-Muminin!” The widow came forward and
shamefacedly cried, “Curse and shame to me. I beg your pardon.” The Imam
said, “No, I beg your pardon, for I failed in my duty towards you.”[^33]

### Carrying a Heavy Load

Imam Ali bought dates from the mart of Kufah putting them in a corner of
his cloak. People rushed to him to carry the dates, but he refused,
saying, “One who has a wife and children is more deserving of carrying
them.”[^34]

### Bare-Food on Five Occasions

Zayd ibn Ali reports: Ali would walk bare-footed holding his sandals in
his left hand on five occasions: Feast of fast-breaking (Eid al-Fitr),
Feast of Sacrifices (Eid al-Adha), Fridays, on visiting the sick, and
during funeral service. He would say, “These five occasions are the
places of Allah and I would like to be bare-footed therein.”[^35]

### Moral Behavior In The Market

Amir al-Muminin would always walk by himself in the market, showing the
way to those who had lost their way, helping those who were incapable,
reciting the following Quranic verse to the shop-keepers while passing
by them,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الدَّارُ الْآخِرَةُ نَجْعَلُهَا لِلَّذِينَ لَا يُرِيدُونَ
عُلُوًّا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا فَسَادًا ۚ وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***As for that future abode, We assign it to those who have no desire to
exalt themselves in the earth nor to make mischief and the good end is
for those who guard against evil. (28:83)***

### Those On Foot Not To Follow Riders

Imam al-Sadiq has reported: Amir al-Muminin, once, was riding when his
companions started following him on foot out of respect. At this moment,
he turned to them saying, “Are you in need of something?” They said, “We
would like to accompany you.” The Imam said, “Go back, for walking or
running on foot along with a rider will be a cause of corruption for the
rider and a cause of humiliation for those on foot.”[^36]

### A Jew Becomes Muslim

During Imam Ali’s caliphate, Shurayh was the judge. The Imam came to the
court with a Jew so that Shurayh will judge between them. The Imam said,
“The cuirass which is in your hand is mine, for I have neither sold it
nor have I given it as a present.” The Jew said, "The cuirass is mine
and now it is in my hands." Shurayh asked the Imam to present a witness.
Imam Ali said, “Qanbar (his servant) and Husayn testify that the cuirass
is mine.” Shurayh said that the ‘sons’ testimonies for their fathers are
not valid nor are those of servants, for they will witness in their
favor. Imam Ali said, “Woe to you, Shurayh! You have certainly made
several mistakes. Firstly, I am your leader and you obey Allah because
you obey me and you know that what I say is not false. Secondly, you
claimed that Qanbar and Husayn have witnessed in my favor. The
punishment for this is to judge among the Jew for three days.”

The Imam sent the judge to a Jewish neighborhood to judge among them and
then to come back to his place of work. When the Jew heard that although
Ali had two witnesses but did not misuse his authority and the judge too
passed a judgment against him, said, “This is truly the Leader of the
believers.” Hence he became Muslim; he confessed that the cuirass
belonged to Imam Ali, it had fallen off the Imam’s black and white camel
during the Battle of Siffin and he had taken it for himself.[^37]

### Justice in The Court

Once, a complaint was lodged by a plaintiff before Umar ibn al-Khattab -
the Caliph in those days. Both parties of litigation had to appear
before the court and lay their complaints. The one against whom the
complaint was lodged was Imam Ali (a.s). Convoking both parties, Umar
went and sat down on the seat of judgment.

According to the Islamic law, both parties ought to station next to each
other and the principle of equality before the Tribunal should be
respected. Accordingly, the Caliph called out the plaintiff by name and
beckoned him to stand up in a peculiar place before the judge. Then he
turned to Ali and said, “O Abul-Hasan! Place yourself next to your
plaintiff.” On hearing these words, Ali became apparently angry.

The caliph said, “O Ali, do you not want to stand next to your
adversary?” Ali said, “No, that is not the reason for my anger; the
reason is that you have not entirely respected the norms of justice, for
you called me respectfully by my nickname *Abul-Hasan* but you called
the other person by his ordinary name.” Umar hugged the Imam and kissed
him between the eyes saying, “May my father be your ransom! Allah guided
us with your mediation and brought us out of darkness into light through
you.”[^38]

### Contentment

After the Battle of the Camel, when Amir al-Muminin was about to leave
Basrah for Kufah, he said, “O people of Basrah! Why are you displeased
with me?” Referring to his shirt and cloak, the Imam said, “By Allah, I
paid the price of this shirt and cloak through spinning. So why are you
trying to find fault with me?” Referring to the purse, which he held in
his hand, the Imam said, “By Allah! The money in this purse is from
selling what I have produced in Medina. If there is anything with me
more than this, I will be a traitor.”[^39]

### Generosity

Being a child, some children of my age and I went to Rahbah one day. We
saw Ali (a.s.) standing beside a pile of gold and silver coins, pushing
the people backward from falling onto it. He, then, distributed the
coins among them and took nothing home!

When I returned home, I said to my father, “Today I have seen the wisest
and the most unwise person in my life.” My father asked, “Who is he?” I
said, “He is Amir al-Muminin…” As I told him the whole story, my father
said, “O son! You have seen the best man.”[^40]

### No Desire For Wealth

Qanbar, Imam Ali’s servant, asked his master to go to a room where he
had hidden bags full of gold and silver vessels. The Imam asked, “What
are these?” Qanbar said, “You always divide every thing among the people
but I have reserved all these for you.” Imam Ali (a.s.) asked, “Would
you like me to bring fire into my house?” He was angry, drew his sword
and broke those vessels into pieces ordering him to divide them among
the people. He further said, “O Gold and silver! Deceive anyone but
me.”[^41]

### Justice

Fudhayl ibn al-Ja’d reports: The main reason that the Arabs did not
support Imam Ali was the wealth. He never preferred an Arab to a
non-Arab or an aristocrat to an ordinary man. He never made compromises
with the chiefs of tribes or with the kings. This is why people
abandoned Ali and joined Muawiyah.

Ali (a.s.) complained to Malik Ashtar about his companions, failure to
support him and the fleeing of some of them to Muawiyah. Malik Ashtar
too would say, “O Amir al-Muminin! Some people cannot tolerate your
justice, for they are the people of the world! May Allah pave the way
for your justice, oppress your enemies, disperse them, foil their plan
and break their unity against you: Surely He is aware of what they do.”

In response, Ali (a.s.) said, “As for our just acts, Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَلِنَفْسِهِ ۖ وَمَنْ أَسَاءَ فَعَلَيْهَا ۗ وَمَا
رَبُّكَ بِظَلَّامٍ لِلْعَبِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever does good, it is for his own soul, and whoever does evil, it
is against it; and your Lord is not in the least unjust to the servants.
(41: 46)***

As for your opinion that justice is hard for them hence they abandoned
us, Allah knows that they did not leave us for any injustice. They left
us for worldly riches, which they will leave anyway and on the Judgment
Day. They will be questioned whether they fought for the world or Allah!
As for saying that we do not give to them from the public fund, we
cannot give them more than what they deserve. Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمْ مِنْ فِئَةٍ قَلِيلَةٍ غَلَبَتْ فِئَةً كَثِيرَةً بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ
ۗ وَاللَّهُ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***How often has a small party vanquished numerous hosts by Allah’s
permission, and Allah is with the patient. (2:249).***

Allah had commissioned Muhammad as a prophet with a small number of
people around him but they increased in number and He honored them while
they had been humiliated. If Allah wills, He will support us to remove
our problems and sorrows. I approve of your union, which pleases Allah.
You are the most benevolent and trustworthy of them with me, Allah
willing.”[^42]

### Public Fund

One night Imam Ali (a.s.) entered the house of public fund for
apportioning the funds. At this time, Talhah and Zubayr came to him. The
Imam put out the torch before him and ordered to bring another torch
from his house. They asked the reason. The Imam said, “The oil in that
torch belonged to the public fund and it was not right to speak to you
under its light.”[^43]

### Old Garment

Harun ibn Antarah reports while quoting his father: I went to the
presence of Ali at Khawarnaq. He was wearing a coarse old garment
shivering from cold. I said, “O Amir al-Muminin! You and Ahl al-Bayt,
like others, have a share in the public fund. So why aren’t you using
your share?” The Imam said, “By Allah, I do not take anything from the
public fund. The garment I am wearing is the same I brought from Medina
and I have no garment other than this.”[^44]

### No Love Of Wealth

Aqil ibn Abd al-Rahman reports: My aunt, wife of Aqil ibn Abi-Talib,
came to see Ali in Kufah while he was sitting on a packsaddle. At this
time, a wife of Ali, from Banu-Tamim, entered. I said, “Woe to you! Your
house is full of goods and here Amir al-Muminin is sitting on a
packsaddle!” She said, “Do not blame me! By Allah! He put everything
which is unfamiliar to him in the public fund.”[^45]

### Giving Clothes To The Naked

One day when Imam Ali (a.s.) was in the presence of the Holy Prophet, he
was found wearing a worn-out garment. So Allah’s Messenger said, “What
happened to the good garment I gave you?” Ali (a.s.) said, “O Allah’s
Messenger! I saw one of your companions complaining about his own
bareness and that of his wife. So I gave it away knowing that Allah will
give me a better one.”[^46]

### Charity

Imam Ali (a.s) had four dirhams with him once. He divided them into
four. He gave away one dirham for the sake of Allah by night and one
dirham by day. He gave away the third dirham secretly and the fourth
openly. The following holy verse was revealed on the same occasion,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُنْفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُمْ بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ سِرًّا
وَعَلَانِيَةً فَلَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ وَلَا خَوْفٌ
عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***As for those who spend their property by night and by day, secretly
and openly, they shall have their reward from their Lord and they shall
have no fear, nor shall they grieve (2:74)***

### Charity Changes People

Ibn Abbas has commented on the above-mentioned story, saying about the
following holy verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِجَالٌ لَا تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلَا بَيْعٌ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
وَإِقَامِ الصَّلَاةِ وَإِيتَاءِ الزَّكَاةِ ۙ يَخَافُونَ يَوْمًا
تَتَقَلَّبُ فِيهِ الْقُلُوبُ وَالْأَبْصَارُ لِيَجْزِيَهُمُ اللَّهُ
أَحْسَنَ مَا عَمِلُوا وَيَزِيدَهُمْ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ ۗ وَاللَّهُ يَرْزُقُ
مَنْ يَشَاءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Men whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the remembrance
of Allah and the keeping up of prayer and the giving of poor-rate; they
fear a day in which the hearts and eyes shall turn about; That Allah may
give them the best reward of what they have done, and give*** ***them
more out of His grace; and Allah gives sustenance to whom He pleases
without measure*** ***(24:37-38).***

He says: The occasion of the revelation was that one day the Holy
Prophet gave Ali three hundred dinars, which they had given to him as
gift. Ali (a.s.) said: I took the money and said to myself by Allah, I
will give such a charity with these dinars that Allah will accept. When
I completed the night prayer with Allah’s Messenger, I took a hundred
dinars and left the mosque. On my way, I came across a woman to whom I
gave one hundred dinars. The following day, people said, “Ali has given
charity to a corrupt woman!” It was a grant sorrow for me.

The night of that day, I performed the night prayer, took a hundred
dinars in my hand, left the mosque and said to myself, “By Allah! I will
give a charity, which will be accepted by my Lord. I saw a man and gave
away the one hundred dinars to him.” The following day, the people of
Medina said, “Ali has given away a hundred dinars to a thief.” Again a
great sorrow came to me but said to myself, “By Allah! I will give a
charity tonight that Allah will accept from me.”

So, I performed my night prayer with Allah’s Messenger and then left the
mosque having a hundred dinars with me. I saw a man to whom I gave the
money. The next day, the people Medina said, “Last night, Ali gave a
hundred dinars to a rich man.” Again, a great sorrow came to me.

I went to Allah’s Messenger and told him the story. The Holy Prophet (S)
said: O Ali! Gabriel says to you: Allah has accepted your charity and
purified your acts: The one hundred Dinars you gave as charity was put
at the disposal of a corrupt woman who repented to Allah and used the
money as earnings for her living. She also intends to get married with
this money.

The charity of the second night went to a thief who repented thereafter
and used the money for running a business. The charity of the third
night went to a rich man who had not paid alms for years. He went home
and blamed himself saying, “How miser I am! This is Ali ibn Abu-Talib
who gave away a hundred Dinars to me while he has nothing whereas I am a
rich man who has not paid his obligatory alms!” So, he reckoned his alms
and put it aside. It was for this reason that Allah revealed the
above-mentioned verses.[^47]

### Altruism

Both Shiite and Sunni scholars report: One day Ali was extremely hungry
so he asked for food from Fatimah who said, “There is no food except the
one I preferred to give to you than to myself as well as Hasan and
Husayn two days ago.” Ali asked, “Why didn't you tell me to prepare a
food for you?” Fatimah said, “O Abul-Hasan! I was ashamed to charge you
with what is not in your power!”

Ali left the house, went to the Holy Prophet (S) and borrowed a dinar to
buy food. On his way, he met al-Miqdad who said, “Whatever Allah wills
(will come to pass)!” Ali gave his one dinar to him, went to mosque, lay
down and went to sleep! Allah’s Messenger went to the mosque and found
Ali in that position. Awakening him, the Holy Prophet asked, “What did
you do?” Ali told him the story and then prayed with the Holy Prophet
(S). When Allah’s Messenger completed his prayer, he asked, “O Abul
Hasan! Do you have any food to share with you?” Ali kept quiet and gave
no answer out of shame.

Allah revealed to the Holy Prophet (S) to have the dinner with Ali that
night. So they both set out for Ali’s house. When they entered the
house, Fatimah was engaged in prayer and behind her was a big bowl
steaming. Fatimah brought that big bowl which was replete with food and
placed it before her father and her husband. Ali asked. Where has this
food come from? She said: From Allah’s Favor and Benevolence,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَرْزُقُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely, Allah gives to whom He pleases without measure (3:37)***

The Holy Prophet (S) put his hand between the two shoulders of Ali
saying, “O Ali! This is in lieu of your dinar.” Then he was choked with
tears saying, “Thanks Allah that I have not died to see in my daughter
what (Prophet) Zachariah saw in (Saint) Mary.”[^48]

### An Extraordinary Example of Altruism

#### The Battle Of Camel

Imam Ali (a.s.) made his utmost effort not to enter battle so that no
one would be killed. When he was informed in Medina that the leaders of
the Camel Army have left Mecca for Basrah, he quickly left Medina to
hold talks with them. He sent them a letter through Sasa’ah, a great man
of Basrah.

In that letter, he gave them advice with the utmost degree of kindness
and magnanimity. Once again, he sent Ibn Abbas to al-Zubayr to talk to
him saying, “Do not go or speak to Talhah, for it will be useless. Speak
to al-Zubayr who is softer. Tell him, your cousin says: In Hijaz you
were my friend. How come you have become my enemy in Iraq?”

Then, he sent a letter to Talhah and al-Zubayr through Imran al-Khuza’i
that read, “Though people may deny, but I did not go to people rather
they came to me to pledge allegiance with me. Their allegiance with me
was not out of fear, force or allurement. If your allegiance has not
been out of fear, repent quickly and turn to Allah. You claim that I
have killed Uthman! I leave the judgment to unbiased people. Anyone who
is condemned should be punished. You two elderly men of Quraish! Stop
behaving like this before this disgrace will be accompanied with
Hellfire.”

When Imam Ali arrived in the land of Zaviah on his way to Basrah, he
performed a four-Rakah prayer saying, “O Lord of heavens and what cast
shadow on them! O Lord of the earths and what they have on shoulders! O
Lord of the Great Throne! This is Basrah! I ask You to put the good of
this people in my hand and I seek refuge in You from their evil. O Lord!
These people have disobeyed me, rebelled against me and have broken
allegiance with me. O Lord! Preserve the blood of Muslims and let not
any blood be shed!”

When Ali was placed against the army of Basrah, he called, “O people! Do
not make haste!” Then the Imam called Ibn Abbas ordering him to go to
Talhah, al-Zubayr and Aishah and call them to Allah. Then Ammar ibn
Yasir, the great companion and elderly man of truth, stood between the
two armies, addressing the army of Basrah as such he said, “O people! It
is not fair that you have kept your wives behind curtains while you have
brought the Holy Prophet’s wife to be faced with arrows and swords.”
Then he went to Aishah, asking, “What do you want?” Aishah said, “I am
here to seek the revenge of Uthman!” Ammar said, “May Allah on this day
kill the oppressor, perish the rebel and destroy falsehood.”

Then, addressing the army of Basrah he cried out, “O people! Do you know
which of the two parties has had a hand in killing Uthman?” The arrows
were coming towards Ammar. The answer was arrows! Ammar came to Ali
saying, “O Amir al-Muminin: What are you waiting for? They have no goal
but killing with arrows showered on the army of Ali. There has been no
permission for battle yet!” Imam Ali (a.s) addressed his army as such,
“Who is here to take this Quran to the people and call them to it?
Whoever does this will be killed but I will guarantee his going to
Paradise.” A young man by the name of Muslim rose up, saying, “O Amir
al-Muminin: I will take the Quran to them and do what you said.” He took
the Quran, went to the enemy and called them to the Quran. They pierced
his body with spear. He fell on the ground and was martyred. Was killing
with spear an answer to logic?

Ali told his army to be prepared for battle but not start it. Ibn Badil,
a brave soldier, brought the dead body of his brother saying: O Amir al-
Muminin! Until when should we wait? Should they kill us and we look on?”
The dead body of another soldier was brought to Ali but he still did not
give the permission to fight. He just said, “O Lord! You are the
Witness.” Then, he turned to his army saying, “Have mercy on the
people!” Then, he took off his armor, rode on the mule of the Holy
Prophet, went to the battlefield and cried out, “O Zubayr! Come to me.”
Al-Zubayr came to the field with full arms. Seeing that Ali called al-
Zubayr to the field, Aishah said to herself, “Woe to me, my sister
Asma - al Zubayr's wife - will became a widow!” When Aishah was told
that Ali has come to the battlefield without arms, she calmed down.

In the battle field, Ali hugged al-Zubayr, saying, “Why have you
rebelled against me?” Al-Zubayr said, “I have come to take the revenge
of Uthman!” Ali said, “May God kill either of us who has had a hand in
the killing of Uthman.” Then he spoke softly to him reminding him of
Allah’s Messenger, who had said, “You will fight Ali and you will be the
wrong party.” Al-Zubayr said, “I seek Allah's forgiveness. If I had not
forgotten this word, I would not have rebelled.” The Imam said, “Zubayr!
Now, go back.” Al-Zubayr said, “How can I go back? My going back would
be considered as fear, a disgrace which cannot be washed away.”

The Imam said, “Go back before disgrace is accompanied with Hellfire.”
Al-Zubayr went back and as soon as he intended to go out of the Army of
the Camel, his son Abdullah cried out, “Where are you going?” Al-Zubayr
said, “My Son! Ali reminded me of something I had forgotten.” The son
said, “This is no the case, you are afraid of the swords of the
Hashimites!” The father said, “No, I remembered what the time had made
me forget. Are you blaming me for fear?” He took the spear and attacked
the right wing of Ali’s army.

Then addressing his soldiers, Ali (a.s.) said, “Let no one fight him.
Open the way for him. They have provoked him!” Al-Zubayr so attacked
both sides of the army. No one fought him or resisted against him.
Returning to his army he said to his son, “Does a timid man act like
that?” Then he took his way and left.

Ali’s kindness towards the enemy made a hero of him in the battlefield.
Did the Army of the Camel realize that what the Holy Prophet had
foreseen was not particular to al-Zubayr alone but everyone who fought
Ali would be a wrongdoer?

Again Ali came to the battlefield and called Talhah saying, “Why did you
rebel against me?” Talhah claimed that he wanted to take the revenge of
Uthman. Ali said, “May Allah kill either of us who has had a hand in
killing Uthman. Haven’t you heard the words of the Holy Prophet saying:
(O God) Befriend one who befriends Ali and bear enmity to one who bears
enmity to Ali. Were you not the first man who swore allegiance with me
and breached your allegiance? Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ نَكَثَ فَإِنَّمَا يَنْكُثُ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever breaks his faith, he breaks it only to the injury of his own
soul (48:10)***

Expressing his regret, Talhah said, “I seek Allah’s forgiveness.” He
went back. Sensing that Talhah intends to leave the battlefield, Marwan
ibn Hakam threw an arrow towards him. Talhah died immediately without
having a chance to inform the people of Basrah of their treacherous and
unjust act which he and al-Zubayr had planned.

Addressing his army, Ali (a.s.) said, “When you defeat the Army of the
Camel, do not kill the wounded and the captives, nor follow the
deserters, nor expose people’s private parts, nor cut anyone’s ears or
noses, nor loot anyone’s property except what they leave in the
battlefield.”

The enemy’s defeat was certain. Yet, no order of attack was issued. The
Army of the Camel attacked the right wing of Ali’s army, pushing them
back. It was at this moment that the order of attack was issued and the
Army of the Camel suffered a disgraceful defeat, this is Ali’s kindness
towards the enemy and his mercy on people in the battlefield. Does
history remember a ruler to have behaved like this towards the rebels?

#### The Battle of Siffin

Siffin was a region by the river Euphrates. When the army of Ali (a.s.)
reached it, he was told to block the army of Muawiyah from having access
to the river, but Ali did not accept the idea. Muawiyah took advantage
of this situation, seized all the ways leading to the river and blocked
the army of Ali from having access to the river.

By his command, the army opened ways to the river. To retaliate, Imam
Ali’s companions decided to block Muawiyah’s army from access to river,
but again Ali did not permit. The Battle of Siffin lasted for eighteen
months. The offensive by Ali’s army was started hoping that the Syrians
would give up and less blood would be shed!

#### The Battle Of Nahrawan

The best definition we can use in describing the Kharijites is that they
were people afflicted with the disease of enmity with Ali (a.s.) and
they did not stop this enmity until they had killed him. If we use the
word *disease* here it is because enmity with anyone needs a reason. A
person bears enmity to someone for personal reasons, for being jealous
of that person’s position, for having been hurt or harmed by that
person, for having experienced a tyranny, a family feud or religious
differences. None of those reasons existed for those who were hostile to
Ali. They simply could not see Ali alive and victorious.

These people were in the army of Ali (a.s.) in the Battle of Siffin but
when he overcame the enemy, they drew their swords against him and
deprived him of victory. They did not accept the intelligent arbiter
Imam Ali (a.s.) had chosen and selected the arbiter who was Ali’s enemy!
They were the enemies of Muawiyah too but unknowingly assisted him and
compelled Ali to accept the mediation of the arbiters.

When the treachery of mediation became clear, they started to disagree
with Ali (a.s.) so much so that they disrespected him in his presence
and absence. Ali too had left them to themselves showing no reaction to
what they said and did.

Ali’s friends who could not tolerate hearing their sarcastic and
insulting remarks would often ask Ali to suppress and imprison them or
check their activities. However, Ali would not agree, saying, “As long
as they do not do anything against us, we will not harm them nor will we
cut their stipend from the public fund. We will allow them to come to
the mosque but if they kill anyone, we will retaliate.”

The inner disease of Kharijites was being intensified. Hence, they could
not stay in Kufah, for they saw Ali there. So, they left it for
Nahrawan. Still Ali let them act freely and had nothing to do with them.
When he set out to suppress Muawiyah, he wrote a letter as such, “We are
going to suppress your enemies, a common enemy; come long with us.” The
Kharijites did not accept the offer and declared war against him! Still
Ali (a.s.) did not go to them and set off for Syria. Ali was asked to
put an end to the enmity of Kharijites first and then set out for Syria.
It was not accepted and the order to move to Syria was issued.

Ali’s army was or the way to Syria when news reached that the Kharijites
have become active, forcing people to curse Ali and anyone who does not
comply with it, is killed. Ali headed for Nahrawan, the Kharijites base.
He still refused to enter battle against them. So, he started to
admonish and guide them. He managed to dissuade many of them from
fighting though they refused to assist Ali in suppressing Muawiyah.
Those Kharijites who were dissuaded to fight Ali (a.s.) returned to
Kufah but remained Ali’s enemies.

Same people sowed the seeds of Kharijites in the history of Islam and
the rest did not accept any option but fighting and preferred death to
living with Ali. So they attacked Ali’s army with the motto of ‘*we are
going to Paradise*’. Still no order of counterattack was issued until
one of Al’s soldiers was killed. It was then that Imam Ali said, “It is
now the right time to fight them."Ali’s army started its attack, which
put the Kharijites to flight.[^49]

### A Light Diet

Suwayd ibn Ghaflah reports: I went to see Imam Ali (a.s.) while he was
in governor’s seat. A bowl of sour yoghurt was set before the Imam, the
smell of which I could feel. A loaf of bread of barley the husk of which
I could see was in his hand. The Imam was breaking the dry bread either
with his hand or with his knee!

At this time, I said to Fidhah, his slave-girl who was standing by him,
“Don’t you fear Allah for treating this old man as such? Don’t you sieve
the barley flour?” Fidhdhah said, “He has asked me not to sieve the
flour.”

Ali asked, “What are you talking about?” I told him the story. At this
time, Ali (a.s.) said, “May my parents be ransom for the one for whom
the flour was not sieved, nor did he ate fill bread of wheat for three
straight days until he passed away.”[^50]

### One Of The Days

Abu-Matar, one of the inhabitants of Basrah, reports: I was coming out
of Kufah Mosque when suddenly a man called from behind, “Hold up your
garment which makes it last longer and cut your hair short, if you are a
Muslim.”

I followed him while he had covered himself with a cloak and held a lash
in his hand, like a Bedouin, “Who is this man?” He said, “I find you a
stranger in this city!” I said, “Yes, I am a man from Basrah.” He said,
“This is Ali, the Leader of the believers.”

I followed him until he reached the neighborhood of Banu-Mohit, which
was the market-place of camels. There, he said, “Sell but do not take
oath, for it will destroy goods and blessing.” Then, he went to date
sellers. There, he found a slave-girl crying. He asked the reason. She
said, “This man sold me date for one dirham but my master did not like
it and he does not take it back.” The Imam said, “Take back your date
and give her back the one dirham, for she is a slave and has no
authority.” He pushed the Imam back! I said, “Do you know this man?” He
said, “No.” I said, “He is Ali ibn Abi-Talib, the Leader of the
believers.”

The man took back the date and gave back her money. Then, the man said,
“I hope you are pleased with me.” He said, “Now that you have given
people’s right, I am pleased with you.” Then while passing through the
date sellers, he said, “Give of these dates to the needy so that Allah
will bless your business.”

Then he went to fishmongers telling them to be careful not to sell the
fish, which has died in water! Then, he went to the market of canvas
sellers and visited an old man selling canvas and said, “I want a shirt
for three dirhams.” As soon as the man recognized him, he refused to
sell anything to him. He went to another seller but since he too
recognized the Imam, he did not buy from him until he came to a young
man. He bought a shirt for three dirhams; he put it on while praying as
such to Allah,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألْحَمْدُ للَّهِ رَزَقِنِي مِنَ الرِّ يَاشِ مَا أتَجَمَّلُ بِهِ فِي
الْنَّاسِ وَ أوَارِي بِهِ عَوْرَتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Praise be to Allah who provided me with a good garment to adorn
myself and to cover my private parts with.***

He was asked whether these were his words or he had heard it from
Allah’s Messenger. He said, “I heard from the Holy Prophet saying it
while he was wearing a garment.”

Amidst this, the father of the young man arrived. He was told that his
son had sold a shirt for three dirhams to Amir al-Muminin. Turning to
his son, he asked, “Why did you charge more than two dirhams?” The
father took the one dirham and came to Amir al-Muminin who was now
sitting with Muslims at the gate of Rahbah, saying, “O Amir al-Muminin!
Take this one dirham!” The Imam asked about the story of this dirham.
The man said, “The price of the shirt was two Dirhams.” The Imam said,
“He sold it with consent and I bought it with consent.”[^51]

### Recompense

In the eighth year after Hijrah, Allah’s Messenger conquered Mecca. The
House of Allah was purified from the filth of idols with Ali’s
idol-breaking act. Allah’s Messenger sent groups to propagate Islam and
to invite people to monotheism. He did not declare war. One of these
persons was Khalid ibn Walid who was dispatched not as fighter but as
propagator. On his way Khalid came to a tribe one of whom had killed his
uncle in the pre-Islamic era and had looted whatever belonged to him.

When Khalid was alight near the water sources of Banu-Judhaymah, they
took arms. Khalid said, “Put aside your arms, for people have become
Muslims.” He had their hands tied and killed whomever he wished. When
the news came to Allah’s Messenger, he raised his hands saying, “O Lord!
I seek immunity from what Khalid has done!” Then, the Holy Prophet sent
Ali with money to look into their affairs.

Ali gave them back whatever Khalid had taken from them. He paid the
blood money for all and the extra money, which Ali had with him, was
paid to them by the command of the Holy Prophet. When Ali came back, the
Holy Prophet said that what he had done was good and right. In the words
of Yaqubi, the Holy Prophet said, “What you have done is better than the
red camels.” It was at this time of addressing Ali (a.s.) that the
Messenger of Allah said, “May my father and mother be your ransom.”[^52]

### The Blazing Iron Bar

Muawiyah asked Aqil to tell him the story of the blazing iron bar. Aqil
said: Life had become extremely hard for me. I pleaded with my brother
Ali but he took no heed of it. One day, I took my children in whose
appearance poverty and indigence could be seen to visit Ali (a.s.). He
said, “Come at night so that I will give you something.”

At night, when one of my sons was holding my hand led me to Ali, I said
to my son, “Go and sit at a distance.” Having the expectation that Ali
(a.s.) would be giving me a purse of money, I stretched out my hand. But
what I touched was a blazing iron bar. I withdrew my hand with a loud
cry. At this moment Ali said, “This is the iron bar blazed by the fire
of the world. How will be our situation on the Judgment Day when we are
fastened with the chains of Hell?” Then he recited this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذِ الْأَغْلَالُ فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ وَالسَّلَاسِلُ يُسْحَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When the fetters and the chains shall be on their necks; they shall
be dragged (40:71)***

Imam Ali (a.s.), commented, “You have no right on me except what Allah
has made obligatory for you. Go back home!”

Muawiyah was extremely amazed and said, “Alas, alas! Women are barren to
give birth to his peer.”[^53]

### An Extraordinary Example of Piety

Imam al-Sadiq has been reported by Muawiyah Ibn Ammar to say: If there
were two options for Ali to do something for the sake of Allah, he would
choose the harder. O people of Kufah, you all know that when he was
ruling in this city, he used his income in Medina for living. He would
put the roasted flour he ate in a bag and seal it not be mixed with
anything else. Who was more pious than Ali in the world![^54]

### Dry Bread And Sour Yoghurt

Nadhr ibn Mansur has reported, as said by Aqabah ibn Alqamah: I went to
Ali’s house in Kufah, finding before him a bowl of sour yoghurt which
harmed me as well as several pieces of dry bread. I said, “O Amir al-
Muminin! Are you eating such a food?” He said, “Allah’s Messenger ate
from bread drier than this.” Referring to his garment, Ali (a.s.) said,
“Allah’s Messenger would wear a garment with a more rough texture. If I
do not follow his example, I fear not to join him.”[^55]

### Self-Sacrifice and Generosity

In the Battle of the Camel, the soldiers who fought along with Imam Ali
(a.s.) were twelve thousand in number. When the fighting came to an end
with the defeat of the enemies, Amir al-Muminin had the public fund
divided with each person having five hundred Dirhams as a share. Ali
took the same amount of dirham for himself. Addressing the public fund,
he said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غُرِّي غَيْرِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Deceive anyone but me.

After the division of the public funds, a man came about saying, “O Amir
al Muminin! My heart was with you although I could no take part in the
battle. Do me a favor by giving something to me.” The Imam gave his
share to him, going back home empty-handed.”[^56]

### Pardon

One day, Amir al-Muminin was in a gathering of his companions. While a
biased man of Kharijites was present, the Imam was admonishing his
friends. His heavenly words were so charming which impressed that blind-
hearted man but because of his inner enmity to Ali, he impudently said,
“May Allah kill him for his unbelief. How knowledgeable he is!”

Hearing such insolence, the companions of the Imam made an attempt to
kill him but Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “Grant a respite; calm down; either
curse against curse or pardon against sin.”[^57]

### A Model Of Generosity

An indigent man came to Imam Ali (a.s.) saying, “I am suffering from
three diseases: body, poverty, and ignorance.” The Imam said, “O Arab
brother! You should see a physician for your physical disease, a wise
man for ignorance and a generous person for poverty.”

The Arab said, “You are a physician, a wise man, and a generous man at
the same time.” Amir al-Muminin ordered three thousand dirhams to be
given to him from the public fund and said, “Spend one thousand dirhams
on your physical disease, one thousand dirhams on your poverty and one
thousand dirhams on your ignorance”.[^58]

### Favoring A Servant

When Amir al-Muminin ruled over the vast Islamic territories, he along
with Qanbar (his servant) went to a draper, asking, “Do you have two
shirts for five dirhams?” The young draper said, “Yes, but one is better
than the other; one costs three dirhams and the other costs two
dirhams.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “Bring both of them.”

When the young man brought the two shirts, the Imam said to Qanbar,
“Take the shirt which costs three dirhams.” Qanbar said, “O Amir
al-Muminin! You go up the pulpit and deliver sermons for people. You
take the better one.” The Imam said, “Qanbar! You are young and have the
desires of a young man. I am ashamed before Allah to count myself
superior to you! I heard Allah’s Messenger saying: Whatever you wear,
let your servant wear too and whatever you eat let your servants eat
too.” Then, the Imam put on the shirt, which cost two dirhams realizing
that the sleeves were too long so he said to the draper, “Cut the sleeve
short a little bit.” He did so and said, “Let me fold it, old man!” The
Imam said, “Let it be as it is. There is no time for such a thing.”[^59]

### Guidelines to rulers

Abd al-Rahman ibn Sulayman says reporting from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s): Amir
al-Muminin sent a man to the desert of Kufah to collect alms, saying:

O servant of Allah! Fear Allah and do not prefer the world to the
hereafter. Be careful about what I have entrusted you with. Guard
Allah’s right until you reach such and such tribe. Place yourself in
their region with out residing near their houses.

Then proceed towards them solemnly so as to be among them. Greet them
and say: O servants of Allah! The friend of Allah has sent men to you to
receive what is due to Allah from you. Is there anything due to Allah in
your property to pay to the friend of Allah? If anyone them of answers
negatively, say no more. If a rich man answers affirmatively, go with
him, without intimidating him. Do not promise (of anything) but good to
him until you reach his camels and cattle.

Do not go among them unless you are given permission, for most of them
belong to him. Say to him: O servant of Allah! Will you permit me to go
among them? If he says yes, do not go among the camels and the cattle
like a rough man who has an upper hand. Divide them into two halves.
Then let him choose the one he likes. Do not protest him for his choice.
Divide the remaining into two. Keep on this division until what is due
to Allah will remain and then collect it. If he asks you to cancel the
division, accept it. Mix them altogether and so the same as you have
done before until you collect of the camels and cattle what is due to
God.

Then take for yourself an agent who is benevolent, Muslim, sympathetic,
trustworthy and a safe keeper who does not treat them roughly. Therefore
send to me immediately whatever you collect of each of the tribes to be
put in a place Allah has commanded. If your emissary brings them here,
advise him not to hide the young camel from its mother, nor milk it
fully so as to harm the young camel, nor tire it by riding but to ride
them equally, to take them to a place to drink water, not to push them
from pasture to the plain road when they are having rest and at times it
is hard for them, to make use of them softly so that Allah willing, they
will come to us fat and fleshy, not tired out or exhausted so that they
will be divided according to the Book of Allah and the tradition of
Allah's Messenger.

This attitude will make your reward greater and is closer to your
interest. Allah will look at them, you, your endeavor and sympathy with
the one who has sent you and the ones who need the alms. Allah's
Messenger has said: Allah favors an agent who does his best to obey his
leader with sympathy.[^60]

### Fighting Oppression

Imam al-Baqir has reported: One Day when Amir al-Muminin was returning
home, found a woman waiting. Seeing him, she came near and said, “I am
in trouble. My husband oppresses me. He has turned me out form the house
and has threatened to beat me. If I go to him, he will beat me. I
request you to do justice between us.” Amir al-Muminin said, “O Servant
of Allah! It is too hot now. Wait until it cools down in the afternoon.
Then I shall come with you and redress your grievances.” The woman said,
“If I stay out too long, I am afraid it may increase his anger.”  
 For a moment he bowed his head and then raised it up saying to himself:

By Allah, one should not delay getting justice to the oppressed. The
right of the oppressed should certainly be taken from the oppressor; and
every fear should be taken out from her heart so that she maystand
boldly before the oppressor and demand her right.

The Imam further asked where her house was and she told him. He
accompanied her to her house, stood at the door and called out loudly,
“O master of the house! Peace be upon you.” A young man came out. He was
her husband. He did not recognize the Imam; he found that an old man of
about sixty years had accompanied her and assumed that she had brought
him for support and mediation, but he kept silent. At this moment Ali
said, "This lady has a complaint against you. She says that you have
done injustice to her and turned her out of the house. Besides you have
threatened to beat her. I have come here to tell you to fear Allah and
be kind to your wife.”

The man said, “In what way does it concern you if I have not treated my
wife well? Yes, I had threatened to beat her, but now, since she has
brought you to plead for her, I shall throw her into fire and burn her
alive.”

Ali was disturbed by the impudence of the man. Drawing out his sword, he
said, “I am admonishing you from bad deeds but you are replying me in
such manner clearly saying to burn this woman in fire! Do you think
there is no authority in this world?” His loud voice drew the attention
of the passers by and a huge crowd gathered. Whoever came saluted him
respectfully saying, “Peace be on you Amir al-Muminin.” When the rude
young man realized as to whom he was talking, he trembled and
supplicated, “O Amir al-Muminin! Forgive me. I confess my faults and
promise that henceforth I shall obey my wife.” Ali turned to the woman
and told her to go to the house and cautioned her not to behave in such
a manner that her husband had to be angry again.[^61]

Moral Virtues Of Lady Fatimah
-----------------------------

***Note***: Some people die leaving no traces. Others leave an impact
during their lifetime and are put into oblivion after their death.
Others are influential throughout the time. Some people have a physical
presence in history and they continue to live through their descendants,
grandchildren, mausoleums, and such art works as those of Michaelangelo,
which are immortal in the west. Others are immortal by their behavior.
In religious literature, we call this immortal behavior *tradition*.

Still further, there are people who leave behind a heritage of
spirituality and knowledge. Jesus Christ (a.s) and Aristotle are two
examples respectively. To sum it up, some personalities have such an
aptitude as to survive in history in any one of the three dimensions we
have just discussed. Nevertheless, Lady Fatimah, the daughter of the
Holy Prophet, had all the three dimensions of life assimilated in her.

Physically, Lady Fatimah (a.s.) has fifty million descendants. The Imams
and the righteous men are her offspring. There is no woman who has had
such a tangible presence in history.

In terms of mausoleums, it is something strange with Fatimah (a.s.).
While famous personalities such as Sa’di, Hafidh, Avicenna, Shah Jahan
and Nur Jahan in Taj Mahal keep a physical presence in the world though
the mausoleums associated with them, Lady Fatimah (a.s.) though lacking
a shrine, continues to exist physically in the world even after her
death. This is really a paradox.

Fatimah’s physical presence is highlighted knowing that the Fatimid
Dynasty founded a ruling system in Africa in her name. The immortal epic
of Nasir Khosrow Alawi, ‘*I am a Fatimid*’ reflects the same physical
presence. The Fatimid rulers in commemoration of Lady Fatimah al-Zahra
founded the al-Azhar University, the most famous scientific-religious
center of Sunni Muslims in Egypt.

In terms of knowledge, Lady Fatimah (a.s.) has had a dynamic presence
too. Sulayman Kittani, a Lebanese Christian writer, Louis Massigngon, a
French Orientalist, and Professor Henry Corbin are some of the famous
personalities who have written books on the heritage of knowledge which
Lady Fatimah has left behind.

As for model of behavior in history, we can say that this young woman
who did not live more than eighteen years left behind such tradition of
behavior about which Imam al-Mahdi has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ فِي إبْنَةِ رَسُول اللَّه ِ لِي أسْوَةٌ حَسَنَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is a model for me in the daughter of Allah’s Messenger. [^62]

Sociologists believe that the reason behind crisis of the young
generation in the third world is absence of a model for behavior. In
this relation, Lady Fatimah serves as a model for all the youths, for
she has a genuine personality with a halo of sanctity around her. What
follows is a perspective of moral virtues and behavior of Lady Fatimah
followed by the viewpoints of famous people.

### Enduring Hardships

Imam al-Sadiq has reported: One day, the Holy Prophet entered Fatimah’s
house and found her wearing a coarse dress, grinding flour with her own
hands, and breastfeeding her son. Seeing this situation, his eyes were
full of tears. Turning to her, he said, “O my honorable daughter! Endure
the hardships of this world so as to attain the sweetness of the
Hereafter.” Fatimah answered, “I praise Allah for His blessings and
thank Him for His favor.”[^63] At this time, the following verse was
revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَسَوْفَ يُعْطِيكَ رَبُّكَ فَتَرْضَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And soon will your Lord give you so that you shall be well pleased.
(93:5)***

### Charity

One day, Salman the Persian went to the door of Lady Fatimah’s house to
carry out the Holy Prophet’s order of preparing food for a newly
converted Muslim Arab. Hearing Salman’s request, Fatimah said, “I swear
by Allah that Hasan and Husayn went to sleep with empty stomach.
Nevertheless, I would not reject a good deed especially that it has
turned to my house. Salman, take this dress of mine to Simon the Jew and
buy for it three kilos of dates and three kilos of barley!”

Salman took the dress to Simon and told him the story. Simon’s eyes
became tearful, saying, “This piety in this world is what (Prophet)
Moses had foreseen in the Torah. Therefore, I bear witness that there is
no god but Allah and Muhammad is His Messenger.”

After converting to Islam, he gave three kilos of dates and barley to
Salman who took it to Fatimah. She ground the barley with her own hands,
baked it and gave it to Salman. He said, “O daughter of Allah’s
Messenger! Take some of this for Hasan and Husayn.” Fatimah answered, “I
will not take anything from what I have given away in the way of
Allah.”[^64]

### Ask More Questions

A woman went to the presence of Lady Fatimah saying, “I am an old and
weak mother who makes a lot of mistakes in my prayer. I have been sent
to you to know how to perform my prayer.” Lady Fatimah said, “Ask any
questions you wish.” The woman asked ten questions all of which were
answered by Lady Fatimah with a good mien.

However, the woman was ashamed of her many questions. She said, “I will
not bother you any more!” Lady Fatimah said, “Ask any more questions.”
In order to boost her morale, she said, “If a person is asked to carry a
heavy load to a high place and he is given a hundred thousand dinars as
reward, will he feel tired in view of that reward?” The woman said,
“No.” Lady Fatimah (a.s) said, “I am rewarded by Allah more than that
for every question which I answer. Hence, I never get tired. I heard
Allah’s Messenger saying: On the Judgment Day, scholars will be in the
presence of Allah and they will be rewarded to the extent of their
knowledge and the efforts they have made for propagating Islam and
guiding people."[^65]

### Neighbor First!

Lady Fatimah (a.s.) used to pray Almighty Allah at night and weep out of
His fear so heavily that it would awaken his children. Imam Hasan says:
One Friday night, I saw my mother standing in the altar while she was in
bowing and prostration positions until the dawn, praying for everybody
except herself! I said: “Mother! Why aren't you praying for yourself?”
She said: “My dear son! Neighbor first!”

Lady Fatimah (a.s.) constantly reminded her children of Allah’s
Messenger who considered children as bouquets of flowers. She would also
send her children to him.[^66]

### Intimacy With The Holy Quran

The honorable daughter of the Holy Prophet had a strong intimacy with
the Holy Quran. Salman reports: The Holy Prophet sent me to Fatimah’s
house for doing something. I waited a little at the door until she
saluted me. I heard her reciting the Holy Quran and grinding something
without having someone to serve her.[^67]

### The Blessed Necklace

Jabir Ansari has reported: After performing the afternoon Prayer, the
Holy Prophet sat in the altar of the mosque, speaking to people. At this
time, an old Arab wearing threadbare clothes and unable to stand on his
feet entered the mosque. Seeing him, the Holy Prophet consoled him and
asked after his health. The old man said, “O Allah’s Messenger! I am
hungry; I need food. I am naked; clothe me; I am indigent; give me
something.”

The Holy Prophet said, “I have nothing to give you. But the one who
shows you to a benefactor is like one who has done the good. Go to the
house of one who loves Allah and the Prophet and Allah and Prophet love
her too; one who prefers Allah to herself. Go to Fatimah’s house, which
is in the neighborhood. O Bilal! Guide this man to there.” The old man
went with Bilal. The old man stood near the door and in a loud voice and
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أسْلأمُ عَلَيْكُم عَلَيْكُم يَا أهْلَ بَيتِ النُّبُوَّةِ، وَ
مُخْتَلَفِ الْمَلأئِكَةِ، وَ مَهْبِطِ جِبْرَءِيلَ الرُّوحِ اللأمِينِ
بِاتَّنْزِيلِ مِنْ عِنْدِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you O Household of the Prophet! You are the seal of the
Divine mission; unto you the angels turn from the presence of the Lord
of the world.

Lady Fatimah answered from within the house, “Blessings and peace of
Allah be upon you. May I know who you are and what you need?” The old
man softly and gently said, “I am an old Arab. I am hungry and I do not
have clothes and I am helpless. I went to your beloved father, Allah’s
Messenger, and he sent me here.”

It had been three days she and her family had anything to eat. It was
three days since hunger had struck her home. It was three days since
water was the only food for them but for Fatimah it was not a matter of
hesitation or doubt.

She had nothing but a small sheepskin which she used as a carpet and
bedding for her beloved sons. She gathered it up and with an apology
presented it to the old man, saying, “I hope Allah will give you better
than this.” But the old man did not take it saying, “O daughter of the
Prophet! What can I do with this? I am hungry!” Fatimah, looking
astonished, glanced around the small house so that she could find
something else. Suddenly she remembered the necklace that her cousin
(Hamzah’s daughter) had given her. She quickly unfastened it and gave it
to the old man; saying, “Sell it and I hope Allah will solve your
Problem!” The old man took the necklace, blessed her and returned to the
Prophet. The Prophet, upon hearing from the old man what had happened,
said with tears in his eyes, “By all means your problems will be solved
because the doyenne of the world women has blessed you with it.”

Ammar ibn Yasir, who had been watching, moved closer to the Prophet,
saying, “O Allah’s Messenger! Will you give me permission to buy this
necklace?” The Prophet said, “Ammar, whoever buys this necklace will be
saved from Hellfire.” Ammar turned to the old man and asked, “How much
will you sell this necklace for?” The old man replied, “I need money to
buy clothes and food, and money for my journey so that I can go to my
city. I will sell it for that much money.”

Ammar who had sold his share of booty from the Battle of Khaybar and had
a little money said, “I will give you 20 dinars and 200 dirhams for this
necklace.” The old man’s eyes shone with happiness. He said, “You are a
generous man.” Ammar gave to him what he had promised.

The old man came to the Holy Prophet who asked him, “Are you satisfied
now?” The man said, “Yes, may my parents be your ransom!” The Holy
Prophet said, “So give a reward to Fatimah for what she has done for
you.” The old man raised his hand in prayer saying, “O Allah! Bless
Fatimah with what no one has so far seen or heard about!” Allah’s
Messenger said Amen to the old man’s prayer, turned to his companions
and said, “Allah has granted this to Fatimah in this world: I am her
father and no one in the world is like me. Ali is her husband and had he
not been there, there would be no suitable spouse for her. Hasan and
Husayn are her sons who are the leaders of the youths of Paradise.”

The Holy Prophet, who was sitting with Miqdad, Ammar and Salman, said,
“Should I say more about Fatimah?” They said, “Yes, Allah’s Messenger!”
So he said, “Gabriel came to me saying: ‘When the soul of Fatimah is
grasped and she is buried in her grave, two angels will ask her: Who is
your Lord? She will say: Allah is my Lord. When she is asked who is your
friend she will say: The one who is near my grave, Ali ibn Abu-Talib.’
Be aware that Allah has assigned a group of angels to protect her from
above as well as from the right and left sides. They are with her in her
lifetime and her grave, constantly saluting her, her father, her
husband, and her children. So whoever visits my grave after my death has
indeed visited me in my lifetime; whoever visits Fatimah has indeed
visited me; whoever visits Ali ibn Abu-Talib has indeed visited Fatimah;
whoever visits Hasan and Husayn has indeed visited Ali; and whoever
visits the offspring of Hasan and Husayn has indeed visited the two
Imams.”

Hearing this, Ammar took the necklace, perfumed it with scent, put it in
an expensive cloth, called his slave and said, “Take this to the Prophet
and after this you will belong to him.” The slave took the necklace to
the Prophet and told him what Ammar had said. The Holy Prophet said,
“Give my regards to Fatimah, give her the necklace and tell her that you
are now in her custody.” Fatimah took the necklace in surprise and told
the slave, “You are free in the way of Allah.” The slave started
laughing and said, “I am surprised at the blessings of this necklace. It
has satisfied a hungry person, clothed a naked person, fulfilled the
needs of another, freed a slave and in the end returned to its
owner.”[^68]

### Fatimah’s Bequest

Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin reports: Lady Fatimah had seven orchards, which
she had been endowed from Banu-Hashim and Banul-Muttalib. She had
appointed Ali (a.s.) and after him Hasan and Husayn as its custodians.

### Said about Lady Fatimah

Quoting from *Sharh al-Masabih,* Zayn al-Arab says:

Fatimah was called Batul, which means “broken off”. There was no one was
like her in virtue.

Quoting from *al-Manaqib*, al-Harawi says:

Fatimah was called Batul meaning “interrupted” because she was
matchless.

Kamal al-Din Muhammad ibn Talhah al-Shafii has said:

Fatimah was endowed with virtues, which were particular to her. She
enjoyed characters for which other honorable souls competed.

Shams al-Din Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Dhahabi has said:

There are many reasons that Fatimah could be proud of. She was tolerant,
benefactor, contented, and grateful.

The Lebanese Christian writer, Sulayman Kittani says:

Fatimah was chaste. She was the paragon of the Holy Prophet’s virtues,
which had borne the fruit of a genius for morality and creativity. Her
weak body was the vessel of her crystal soul so as to be effaced in the
Source from which her father dawned.

Aishah has said:

I found no one superior to Fatimah except her father.

The Egyptian scholar, Bint al-Shati says:

Fatimah was the most beloved among the Holy Prophet’s daughters and the
most similar to him in terms of temperament and constitution. Allah
willed that only she would be subject to purification and the mother of
all the Imams from the progeny of the Holy Prophet.

In his book, *Nafahat min Sirat al-Sayyidah Zaynab* (Fragrances from
Lady Zaynab's Conducts), professor Ahmad Shams Basi points out:

Fatimah was the best among the world women and the doyenne of the women
in the hereafter.

Dr. Ali Ibrahim Hasan has said:

Fatimah’s life is a unique page among the pages of history. We see here
all the grandeur and magnitude. We stand before a personality that came
into existence with a halo of wisdom and splendor around her; a wisdom
the source of which cannot be found in philosophers’ books but the
outcome of spiritual experiences and a splendor not coming from kings or
wealth but coming from the very depth of her soul. Perhaps it was
Fatimah’s unique grandeur that compelled Aishah to say: I found no one
superior to Fatimah except her father.[^69]

Morality Of Imam Hasan
----------------------

Quoting his grandfather, Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) has reported: Hasan ibn Ali
ibn Abu-Talib was the most pious, the most devoted and the best of the
people of his time. When he was on Hajj, he would often walk on foot and
on many occasions bare-footed to the Holy Mosque. He would cry or be
fainted whenever he remembered death, grave, resurrection on the
Judgment Day and crossing the *Sirat*. He would be writhing like a
snake-bitten whenever he was reminded of heaven and hell. He would ask
Allah for heaven and sought refuge in Allah from hell.[^70]

### Generosity

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has reported: A man passed by Uthman ibn Affan who
was sitting in the mosque asking for money. Uthman ordered five dirhams
to be given to him. The man said to Uthman, “Guide me to one who can
relieve my pain.”

Uthman asked him to go to those generous youths, indicating with his
hand a place in mosque where Imam Hasan, Imam Husayn and Abdullah ibn
Jafar were sitting. The man saluted them and asked for money. “Begging
is not permissible save for three cases, blood money with compassion,
debt with a broken heart and poverty which is intolerable. Which is your
case?” The man said, “I am afflicted with one of them.” Imam Hasan
ordered fifty dinars to be given to him. Imam Husayn too ordered
forty-nine dinars to be given to him, and Abdullah ibn Jafar too ordered
forty-eight dinars to be given to him.

After having received these Dinars, the man passed by Uthman once again.
Uthman asked, “What did you do?” The man said, “I passed by you asking
for money. You helped me only with five dinars and did not ask me any
question either; but that generous young man having thick hair asked me
something while giving me fifty dinars. The second one gave me forty
nine Dinars and the third forty eight Dinars.” Uthman said, “Who can
relieve your pain like these generous young men? They have appropriated
knowledge and insight for themselves and have gathered wisdom and
benevolence in them.”[^71]

### Humbleness

Imam Hasan’s humility was such that one day he was passing by some needy
people sitting on the earth and eating pieces of bread. Seeing Imam
Hasan, they said, “O son of Allah’s Messenger! Come and share the food
with us!” Imam Hasan dismounted and said, “Allah does not like the
arrogant.” He was engaged in eating with them. He invited them to his
house a few day later, giving them food and clothes.[^72]

### Write Down Your Needs

A man came to the presence of Imam Hasan asking him to fulfill his
needs. The Imam said, “Write down you needs and give it to us.” When he
read his letter, he gave him twice the amount he had asked for. One of
those present said, “How blessed this letter was!” The Imam said:

It was more blessed for us, for it placed us among the benefactors.
Don’t you know that a good deed is one which is done without anyone ask
for it? But what is given when it has been asked for is a low price
against the honor of the needy person. Perhaps a needy person who has
spent the night between fear and hope and has no idea of whether his
needs will be accepted or rejected will receive little money against his
being dishonored should you give him only to the extent of his
need.[^73]

### Extraordinary Example of Generosity

A needy man once came to the presence of Imam Hasan who gave fifty
thousand dirhams and five hundred dinars saying, “Bring someone to carry
it for you.” When he brought a porter, the Imam gave his cloak to him
saying, “This is the wage of one who carries it.”[^74]

### Giving Away All Savings

An Arab came to the presence of Imam Hasan, “Give him whatever savings
we have.” They gave him twenty thousand dirhams. The Arab said, “My
master! You did not give me permission to tell you my needs and recite a
eulogy in praise of you.” The Imam composed a poem saying, “The fear of
disgracing one who has needs urges us to give away before he expresses
his needs.”[^75]

### Feeding A Hungry Dog

One day, Imam Hasan saw a black slave having a loaf of bread in front of
him. The slave would eat a morsel of bread and give a morsel to a dog
near him. Imam Hasan asked, “What compels you to do so.” The slave said,
“I am ashamed of eating myself and not giving the dog anything.” The
Imam said, “Do not move from this place until I come back.” The Imam
went to the master of the slave and purchased him together with the
orchard he was working in. He set the slave free and gave him the
orchard.[^76]

Morality Of Imam Husayn
-----------------------

Imam Husayn (a.s) is reported as saying:

I am sure that Allah’s Messenger believed that the best deed after
prayer was to make a believer happy provided there is no sin involved.

### The Most Generous Man!

A Bedouin arrived in Medina asking for the most generous man living
there. They guided him to Imam Husayn. The Bedouin entered the mosque
and found Imam Husayn praying. He stood in front of the Imam, reciting a
poem with the following content, “Whoever knocks at the door of your
house will not be desperate. You are the paragon of generosity. You are
a haven. Your father put the unbelieving rebels to death. Were it not
for your sake, our life would be a hell.”

Imam Husayn saluted the Bedouin, then said to Qanbar, “Is there any of
Hijaz holdings left?” He said, “Yes, about four thousand Dinars.” The
Imam said, “Bring it here, for he is more deserving of it than us.”
Then, he took his cloak off his shoulders, wrapped the money in it and
gave it to him, reciting a poem with the following content, “Take this
holding from me and accept my apology. Know that I would like to be kind
to you. If the reins of the rule were in our hands you would be showered
with generosity; but the vicissitudes displace the affairs and presently
we can give away only a little.”

The Arab took the holding from the Imam while his eyes were full of
tears. The Imam said, “What I have given to you is a little.” The Arab
answered, “The reason I am crying is that I wonder how the earth will
eat this giving hand.”[^77]

### What A Sorrow!

Imam Husayn (a.s.) went to visit Usamah ibn Zayd who had fallen sick.
Usamah kept on saying, “What a sorrow!” The Imam asked, “Dear brother!
What is sorrow for?” He said, “I owe sixty thousand dirhams.” The Imam
said, “I promise to pay it.” He said, “I am afraid that I will die
before my debt is paid.” Imam Husayn said, “I will pay it before your
death.” He did so.[^78]

### Helping The Needy

In the events of Karbala, they found a scar on the shoulder of Imam
Husayn. When Imam Zayn al-Abidin was asked about it, he said, “This is a
mark left by the heavy leather bag replete with what the widows, orphans
and the poor needed, which my father carried on his shoulders."[^79]

### Honoring A Teacher

Abd al-Rahman al-Salami taught *Surah al-Fatihah* to one of Imam
Husayn’s sons. When the child recited before the Imam, he gave the
teacher a thousand dinars as well as gifts. They objected to the Imam’s
act, but he said, “What I have given to him cannot make up for what he
has done.”[^80]

### Seek My Pleasure

There was an argument between Imam Husayn and his brother, Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah. In a letter to Imam Husayn, Muhammad wrote, “Dear
brother! Ali is my and your father. In this relation neither I am
superior to you nor are you superior to me. Your mother is the daughter
of the Holy Prophet. Should my mother possess all the gold of the world,
she cannot be equal to your mother in terms of virtues. When you read
the letter, come to me and seek my pleasure, for you are more deserving
of good deeds than me. May peace and blessing of Allah be upon you.”
After reading the letter, Imam Husayn went to his brother and there was
no argument between them any more.[^81]

### Liberality

On the day of Ashura (the tenth Muharram), Imam Husayn was told to
submit to the rule of Yazid and pledge allegiance to him. The Imam
replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهِ لأأعْطِيِكُم بِيَدِي إعْطَاءَ الذَّلِيلِ وَلا أفِرُ فَرَارَ
الْبَعَبِيدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

By Allah! I will not put my hand in your hand like the abased people nor
will I escape from the battlefield like slaves.

Raising his voice, the Imam added:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِبَادَ اللَّهِ، إنِّي عُدْتُ بِرَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمْ مِنْ كُلِّ
مُتَكَبِّرٍ لأ يُؤمِنُ بِيَوْمِ الْحسَابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O servants of Allah! I seek refuge to my Lord and Your Lord from every
arrogant person who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning.[^82]

### Better Greeting

Anas reports: I was in the presence of Imam Husayn when his slave-girl
entered the room presenting a bunch of basil as greeting. The Imam said,
“You are free in the way of Allah!” I said to the Imam, “She presented
an inexpensive bunch of basil to you and you set her free!” The Imam
said, “Allah has taught us courtesy as such when He has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا حُيِّيتُمْ بِتَحِيَّةٍ فَحَيُّوا بِأَحْسَنَ مِنْهَا أَوْ
رُدُّوهَاۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when you are greeted with a greeting, greet with a better
greeting than it or return it, surely Allah takes account of all things.
(4:86)***

Therefore, in this case, a better greeting was to set her free.

### Man’s Value

An Arab came to the presence of Imam Husayn saying, “O son of Allah’s
Messenger! I have undertaken to pay blood money but I cannot afford it.
I said to myself that I will ask it from the most generous man and I
don’t find anyone more generous than Ahl al-Bayt.” The Imam said, “O
Arab brother! I will ask you three questions. Should you answer one of
them, I will give you a third of what you need. If you answer the second
question, I will give you two-thirds of it and finally if you answer all
the three questions, I will give to you all you need.”

The Arab said, "Will you – a man of knowledge and honor - ask questions
from such a person as me?” The Imam said, “Yes, I heard my grandfather
saying that everyone’s value is to the extent of his knowledge.” The
Arab said, “All right, ask me your questions. I will answer if I can.
Even if I can’t answer your questions, I will learn them from you.” The
Imam asked, “What is the best deed?” The Arab said, “Belief in Allah.”
The Imam asked, “What is salvation?” The Arab said, “Trust in Allah.”
The Imam asked, “What is an ornament for men?” The Arab said, “Knowledge
accompanied with forbearance.” The Imam said, “What if there were no
forbearance?” The Arab said, “A wealth accompanied by generosity.” The
Imam said, “What if there was no generosity?” The Arab said, “Indigence
accompanied by patience.” The Imam said, “What if there was no
patience?” The Arab said, “A thunderbolt coming down from heaven to burn
such a person who deserves it.” The Imam smiled, gave him a purse of one
thousand dinars as well as his ring with a gem worth two hundred dirhams
saying, “O Arab! Give the one thousand dinars to your creditors and
leave the ring for living expenditures.” The Arab took them reading the
holy verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah best knows where He places His message. (6:124)***[^83]

Morality Of Imam Zayn Al-Abidin
-------------------------------

A relative of Imam Zayn al-Abidin who was standing beside him, raised
his voice and started to abuse him. The Imam did not answer him until he
went back to his house. At this moment, the Imam said to his companions,
“Did you hear what this man said? I would like you to come with me to
hear my response.” The Imam put on his shoes and set out with his
companions saying to himself,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْكَاظِمِينَ الْغَيْظَ وَالْعَافِينَ عَنِ النَّاسِ ۗ وَاللَّهُ
يُحِبُّ الْمُحْسِنِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and those who restrain their anger and pardon men; and Allah loves
the doers of the good. (3:134)***

When they reached the house of that man, the Imam introduced himself to
the servant who conveyed it to his master. The man who seemed to be
looking for trouble came out. He was sure that the Imam had come for
retaliation; rather, the Imam said, “My brother! A few minutes ago, you
were standing beside me and said such and such words against me. If I am
the one whom you described, I will ask for Allah’s forgiveness; but if
what you said about me is not true, may Allah forgive you.” The man
kissed the Imam’s forehead, saying, “What I said about you is not true
and it is more deserving of me.”[^84]

### The Lepers

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) has reported: One day, Imam Zayn al-Abidin was
passing by the lepers while he was riding. The lepers who were eating
invited the Imam to share food with them. The Imam said, “I am fasting;
otherwise, I would sit with you.” When the Imam reached home, he had
some food prepared, invited the lepers and ate with them.[^85]

### Forgiving A Neighbor

Husham ibn Ismail was appointed as ruler of Medina by Abd al-Malik ibn
Marwan. One of the grandsons of Imam Ali (a.s) reports: Husham ibn
Ismail was a bad neighbor who persecuted Imam Zayn al-Abidin greatly.
When he was dismissed, he was brought to public with his hands tied, on
the order of Walid ibn Abd al-Malik for retaliation. While he was under
arrest near Marwan’s house, Imam Zayn al-Abidin passed by and greeted
him. The Imam had already advised his companions not to offend
Husham.[^86]

### A Hidden Charity

There were families in Medina whose needs were fulfilled without knowing
wherefrom. When Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn passed away, they found out that
it was the Imam who had secretly helped them.

It is also reported: Imam Zayn al-Abidin would come out of house at
nights with a purse full of dirhams and dinars. He would go from one
door to another leaving some dirhams and dinars at the door of each
house. Only when he had passed away, they found out that the benefactor
had been Imam Zayn al-Abidin.[^87]

### Prayer And Charity

Abu-Hamzah Thamali has reported: I saw Imam Zayn al-Abidin in prayer
while his cloak was falling off his shoulders but he did not make any
attempt to hold it until he completed his prayer. I asked about it. The
Imam said, “Woe to you! Do you know before Whom was I standing? Prayer
is not accepted save with full concentration and presence of heart.”

### A Quranic Pardon

One of the slave-girls of Imam Zayn al-Abidin was pouring water on his
hands while performing ablution when all of a sudden the ewer hit and
hurt the Imam's face. The Imam raised his head towards her. The slave-
girl said: Allah says, “*Those who restrain their anger.*” The Imam
said, “I restrained my anger.” The slave-girl said, “*…and pardon men.*”
The Imam said, “I pardoned you.” The slave-girl said, "*…and Allah loves
the doers of good.*” The Imam said, “You are free in the way of
Allah.”[^88]

### Day of Loss

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) reported: There was a clown in Medina who would make
people laugh. One day he said to himself, “This man (Imam Zayn
al-Abidin) has made me helpless to make him laugh!” So, when the Imam
was followed by two of his servants, he passed by the clown. Seeing the
Imam, the clown walked behind him, drew his cloak and ran away. The Imam
did not pay any attention to the clown but people went after him and
took back the cloak. Addressing people, the Imam said, “Who is this
man?” They said, “He is a making people of Medina laugh.” The Imam said,
“Tell him there is a day for Allah in which idle people will suffer
losses.”[^89]

### Unknown Among Travelers Kindness To A Camel

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) has reported: When he was passing away, Ali ibn al-
Husayn said to his son, Imam al-Baqir, “I have gone on Hajj on this
camel for twenty times and I have not given it a lash. Bury it when it
dies so that it will not be eaten by wild animals, for Allah’s Messenger
has said: Any camel which goes to Arafah for seven times, Allah will
make it one of the blessings of Paradise and place blessing in its
offspring.” When the camel of the Imam died, they buried it.[^90]

### Giving Away His Food

When Ali ibn al-Husayn was fasting, he would have a sheep slaughtered,
its meat cut into pieces and cooked. At sunset while he had not broken
his fast, he would order to bring the bowls, fill them and take them to
such and such houses until there was no more food in the pot. Then, they
brought bread and date for the Imam to break his fast with.[^91]

### Helping The Needy

When dark overwhelmed Medina and people were at rest, Imam Zayn
al-Abidin would come out of house to go to the needy people and divide
among them the food which he carried in a bag on his shoulder while
covering his face so that none would know him. On many occasions, he
would stand waiting at the doors so that they would come and take their
shares. When they saw him face to face, they would say: “He is the
possessor of bag!”[^92]

### The Story of Grapes

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) has reported: Imam Zayn al-Abidin was very fond of
grapes. One day, they had brought fresh grapes to Medina. His wife
bought some of them for him to break his fast with. When they brought
them before him and he stretched out his hand to take some, a needy
person knocked the door and asked for something. The Imam told his wife
to take the grapes for the needy person. She said, “Some of it was
enough for the needy person.” The Imam said, “No, By Allah; take all of
it for him.” The next day, again they bought grapes for him but an
indigent person came to the door and the Imam gave him all of the
grapes. The third night, no needy came. So the Imam ate the grapes
saying, “We did not lose anything in it, thanks to Allah.”[^93]

### Nobility in Childhood

Abdullah ibn Mubarak reports: When I was on Hajj to Mecca, I caught
sight of a seven or eight year old child walking alongside a caravan of
pilgrims with no provision with him. I went forward, saluted him and
asked, “With whom did you cover the desert?” He said, “With the
Beneficent Allah.” He looked great to me. I asked, “Where is your
provision, my son?” He said, “My piety is my provision and my Lord is my
goal.” He looked magnanimous. I asked, “Which lineage do you come from?”
He said, “Abd al-Muttalib.”

“Which family?” I asked.

“Hashim”, he said.

“Which branch”, I asked.

“Ali – Fatimah”, he said.

“O my master! Have you composed a poem?” I asked.

“Yes, I have”, he said.

“Recite part of your poem,” I asked.

The Imam recited a poem with the following words:

We are those sent to the pond of Kawthar. We give water to some and
repel others. None can attain salvation but through our mediation. One
who loves us will not suffer losses and one who makes us happy will
receive happiness from us and whoever harms us will be of low birth. One
who usurps our right will be punished on the Judgment Day!

Then I lost sight of him until I came to Mecca. After I had completed my
Hajj rituals and returned to al-Abtah, I saw a circle of people round
someone. It was the same child with whom I spoke. I asked who he was.
They said that he was Zayn al-Abidin.[^94]

### Asking For Forgiveness

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) has reported: My father sent his slave on mission
but he delayed in fulfilling it. He lashed him with one stroke. The
slave said, “O Ali ibn al-Husayn. You send me on a mission and hit me!”
My father cried, saying, “My son! Go to the grave of the Holy Prophet,
perform a two-unit prayer and say: O Lord: Forgive Ali ibn al-Husayn on
the Judgment Day.” Then he said to the slave, “You are free in the way
of Allah.”

Abu-Basir says: I said to the Imam, "May I be your ransom. It seems that
setting a slave free is the atonement of hitting him!" But the Imam kept
silent.[^95]

### Retaliation

Imam al-Ridha reports: Ali ibn al-Husayn hit his slave on one occasion.
Being sorry, he entered home, took off his shirt and while giving a lash
to his slave said, “Hit Ali ibn al-Husayn!” The slave refused to do and
the Imam gave him fifty dinars.[^96]

### Mother’s Right

Imam Zayn al-Abidin has said, “You are the most benevolent man but you
don’t eat from the same plate with your mother while she likes to.” The
Imam said, “I don’t like to stretch my hand to reach a morsel which my
mother has an eye on it hence being disowned by her.”

From that time on, he would put a cover on the plate of food when eating
with his mother so he would put his hand under it and ate the food.[^97]

### Security Against Loan

Isa ibn Abdullah reports: Abdullah was on the verge of death. The
creditors had gathered in his house claiming their dues. He said, “I
don't have anything to pay you. Refer to either of my cousins, Ali ibn
al-Husayn or Abdullah ibn Jafar to pay my debt to you.” The creditors
said,  
 “Abdullah ibn Jafar is a man of long-term promise. He is negligent too.
Ali ibn al-Husayn, though not wealthy, is truthful. Hence, he is a
better option for us.” The news reached Imam Zayn al-Abidin. He said
that he would undertake to pay the debt at harvest time, while he had no
grain at all. When it was harvest time, Allah destined for him a certain
amount of money with which he paid all the creditors’ claim.[^98]

### An Extraordinary Example of Forbearance

A man insulted Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.). His slaves made an attempt to
attack him. The Imam said, “Let him go. What is hidden of us is more
than what he is saying about me.” Addressing the same man, the Imam
said, “Do you need anything?” The man was ashamed. The Imam gave his
garment to him together with a thousand dirhams. The man said loudly, “I
bear witness that you are the son of Allah’s Messenger.”[^99]

### Reaction To Backbiting

Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.) reached a group of people who were talking
behind his back. He stood near them saying, “If you are true about what
you say, may Allah forgive me; and if you are lying, may Allah forgive
you.”[^100]

### Forgiving The Child’s Killer

Imam Zayn al-Abidin had a few guests; he asked his servant to be quick
in preparing the food. The servant hastily brought the iron grid on
which the meat had been grilled but it fell off his hand on the head of
the Imam's child who was on the ground and killed him. Addressing the
servant who was shocked and trembling from fear, the Imam said, “You did
not do it intentionally. Therefore, you are free in the way of Allah.”
He then took part in the funeral service of his child.[^101]

### Devotion

Imam Zayn al-Abidin had a needy cousin and the Imam would go to the door
of his house as an unknown man giving him a few dinars. But the cousin
would say, “Ali ibn al-Husayn does not observe ties of relationship
towards me. May Allah not give him a good reward!”

The Imam heard what he was saying but forbore it and did not wish to
reveal his identity.

When Imam Zayn al-Abidin passed away, his cousin, whose nightly
assistance had been cut off, realized that it was Imam Zayn al-Abidin
who fulfilled his needs. For this reason, he rushed to the Imam’s grave
and wept bitterly.[^102]

Morality Of Imam Muhammad Baqir
-------------------------------

Muhammad ibn Munkadir reports: I never thought Ali ibn al-Husayn to
leave an excellent successor after him until I saw his son, Muhammad. I
wanted to give him a lesson, but he gave me one:

On a hot day, I went to Medina where I saw Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) leaning
to work with his large frame with support of his two slaves. I said to
my self, “A great man of Quraish working at this hour of day in search
of the material world! I will certainly give him an advice.” I
approached and saluted him. While he was gasping, he greeted me back.
Sweat was pouring from his head and face because of hot weather. I said,
“May Allah improve your affairs. A great man of Quraish seeking the
world at this time of the day! What will happen if death overtakes you
in this situation?”

Taking his hands off the shoulders of the two slaves and leaning against
the wall, he said, "By Allah, if death overtakes me and I am in this
situation, I will be in a state of obedience to Allah by which I can
preserve my value from you and people. I am afraid of death only when I
am committing a sin!” I said, “May Allah bless you! I intended to give
you advice but you gave me advice.”[^103]

### Charity

Hasan ibn Kuthayr reports: I was complaining about indigence and
unkindness of brothers-in-faith to Imam al-Baqir (a.s) who said, “A
brother who is fond of you when you are rich, but cuts off his relations
with you when you are in need, is a bad brother!” Then the Imam ordered
his slave to give me a purse of seven hundred Dirhams, saying, “Spend
this for the moment and inform me when it comes to and end.”[^104]

### Benevolence

The companions of Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) report: the Imam allowed us to
give away between five hundred and six hundred thousand dirhams and he
was never tired of giving gifts to brethren, emissaries and those who
had set their hope on him.[^105]

### Forbearance With A Christian

Imam Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn had the title of *Baqir*, that is to
say ‘One who analyzes’. He was called *Baqir al-Ulum* meaning one who
analyzes the knowledge. A Christian, in a mockery and ironic way playing
on words of *Baqir*, misinterpreted to *Baqara* called him, “You are
*Baqara* (cow)!” Without expressing any annoyance or anger, the Imam
replied calmly, “No, I am not *baqara* but I am Baqir.” The Christian
said, “You are the son of a lady-cook.” The Imam said in reply, “It was
her job, which is not considered an insult or disgrace to her
personality.” The Christian said, “Your mother was black, immodest and
had an abusive tongue.” The Imam said, “If whatever you attribute to my
mother is true, I pray Allah to forgive her and absolve her sins, and if
it is a lie, may Allah forgive you for your lies and slander.”

Observing such a clemency from a person who had the authority to submit
a non-Muslim to different persecutions was sufficient to provoke a
revolution in the soul of the Christian and invite him towards Islam.
Later on, he embraced Islam. [^106]

### Hospitality

Salma, a slave-girl of Imam al-Baqir (a.s.), reports: the Imam’s
brothers-in-faith would always come to visit him and the Imam too,
received them with the best food, gave them a good garment and dinars. I
said to the Imam, “You will become needy as a result of this
generosity!” The Imam would say, “O Salma! Good deeds are but giving
gifts to brothers-in-faith and praiseworthy deeds.” Imam al-Baqir would
allow between five and six hundred thousand dirhams to be given away to
brothers-in-faith. He would never get tired of associating with his
brethren, saying, “Recognize the actuality of the friendship of your
brothers-in-faith from the feelings you have in your hearth towards
him.” He was never heard calling anybody with disgraceful names; he
would rather call them with their best names.[^107]

### Wife’s Rights

Hasan Zayyat of Basrah reports: My friend and I went to the presence of
Imam al-Baqir while he was sitting in a well-decorated room with a
purple mantle on his shoulder. He had trimmed his beard and blackened
his eyes with kohl. I was full of questions. Realizing this, the Imam
said, “Hasan! You and your friend may come to me tomorrow.” I said,
“Very well, may I be your ransom!” The next day, we went to see him. He
was sitting on a mat and wearing coarse clothes. He turned to my friend
and said, “O brother of Basrah! When you came to me yesterday, I was in
my wife's room. It was her turn. The room was hers as well as all the
articles. She had made up herself for me and I had to make up myself for
her. Don't give way to gloomy thought about me.” My friend said, “May I
be your ransom. By Allah, something passed in my mind but Allah removed
it now and I know that truth lies in what you said.”[^108]

### Praying Together

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) has reported: Any time an event saddened my father,
he would gather women and children and then raise his hands in prayer
and they would say Amen.[^109]

### Surrender To Allah

A group of people went to the presence of Imam al-Baqir (a.s). This
visit coincided with the illness of one of his children. They found him
sad and restless. They said, “By Allah, if anything happens to him, we
might see from him what we do not approve of.” It was not long time when
they heard the Imam wailing. He came back to his friends with open face.
They said to him, “May we be your ransom! We were afraid that if
something happened we would see you more sorrowful.” The Imam said, "We
would like to see one whom we love safe and sound but there is Allah’s
decree, we will surrender to what He loves."[^110]

### Prayer At Night

Quoting Imam al-Sadiq (a.s), Ishaq ibn Ammar has reported: I was
spreading my father’s bed and waiting for him to come. When he would go
to his bed and sleep, then I would go to mine. One night, he was late. I
went to the mosque to look for him. While all people had gone home, I
found him alone in the mosque in prostration. I heard his lamentation,
saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَكَ أللَّهُمَّ رَبِّ حَقاً حَقاً. سَجَدْتُ لَكَ يا رَبِّ
تَعَبُّداً وَرِقاً. ألْلَّهُمَّ إنَّ عَمَلِي ضَعِيفٌ فِضَاعِفهُ لِي.
أللَّهُمَ قِنِي عَذَابَكَ يَوْمَ تَبْعَثُ عِبَادَكَ، وَتُبْ عَلَيَّ
إنَّكَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Glory be to You, O my Lord, with true glory! I am prostrating myself
before You, O my God, worshipping and serving You! O Allah! My deed is
weak; (please) double its reward. O Lord! Preserve me from Your
punishment when You resurrect Your servants. Accept my repentance for
You are the best Accepter of repentance and the most Merciful.[^111]

Morality Of Imam Jafar Al-Sadiq
-------------------------------

Muawiyah ibn Wahab has reported: I was with Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) in
Medina intending to go to the market. Suddenly, he fell into
prostration. When he rose is head, I asked for the reason. He said, “I
just remembered Allah’s blessings on me.” I said, “Near the market where
people are going and coming?” The Imam said, “None saw me.”[^112]

### Helping Non-Shiites

Mualla ibn Khunays has reported: At a drizzling night, Imam al-Sadiq
(a.s) left home to the shelter of Banu-Saidah. I followed him, but
suddenly something dropped from his hand. He said, “In the name of
Allah”. He then asked me to search for it with my hand and give it to
him if I find it. I suddenly touched pieces of bread spreading on the
earth. I gave to the Imam whatever I had found. Then I saw a bag full of
bread in the Imam’s hand. I said, “Would you kindly permit me to carry
them for you?” The Imam said, “No, it is I who must carry it.
Nevertheless come along with me.” We reached the shelter of Banu-Saidah
and came across a group of people who were asleep. The Imam hid one or
two loaves under their clothes. When he helped the last person, we
returned to our place. I said, “May I be your ransom! Do they know the
truth?” The Imam said, “I would help them with salt if they knew
it.”[^113]

### Helping The Relatives

Abu Jafar Khathami has reported: Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) gave me a purse of
gold coins and asked me to take it to such and such man of the
Hashimites without telling him who had sent them. I gave the purse of
gold coins to that man who said, “May Allah give a good reward to one
who has sent it to me. He does it every year and I can live with it
until next year, whereas Jafar al-Sadiq with all his wealth does no give
me anything!”[^114]

### Generosity

A traveler from among pilgrims who was in Medina fell into sleep. When
he woke up, he thought his purse had been stolen. He searched for the
purse and found Imam al-Sadiq, whom he did not know, praying. He caught
the Imam accusing him of stealing his purse! The Imam asked, “What was
in it?” He answered, “One thousand dinars.” Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) took him
home and gave him a thousand dinars. When the man returned to his place,
he found his purse. So he went back to the Imam’s house apologizing. But
the Imam refused to accept the money, saying, “What I have lost will not
return to me.” The man asked, “Who is this generous man.” They said, “He
is Jafar al-Sadiq.” The man said, “This generosity is particular to
him.”[^115]

### Say Your Request

Ashja Salami came to the presence of Imam al-Sadiq finding him ill. He
sat besides him asking about the cause of illness. The Imam said, "Quit
asking about the cause of illness. What is your request?" Ashja composed
a poem praying to Allah for the health of the Imam. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s)
asked to his servant, “Do you have anything on you?” He said, “Four
hundred Dinars.” The man said, “Give it to Ashja.”

### An Extraordinary Example of Kindness

Sufyan al-Thawri came to the presence of Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) while the
Imam was pale. He asked for the reason. The Imam said, “I always warned
my household not to go on the rooftop. I entered home finding one of my
slave-girls climbing the ladder while holding one of my children in her
arms. As soon as she saw me, she started trembling out of fear and my
child fell from her arms and died immediately. My paleness is not for
the child but because of the fear that overwhelmed the slave-girl. I
twice told her that she was not to blame. I then set her free in the way
of Allah.”[^116]

### Do Not Disclose Your Poverty

Al-Mufadhdhal ibn Qays reports: I went to the presence of Imam al-Sadiq,
complaining to him about my situation and asking for prayer for me. The
Imam asked his slave-girl to bring the purse, which came from Abu-Jafar.
When she did, he said, “This purse has four hundred Dinars. Spend it on
your needs.” I said, “May I be your ransom! By Allah, I did not intend
to receive money. I had just come here to ask you to pray for me.” The
Imam said, “I will pray for you; but from now on, do not disclose your
poverty to people, for you will be abased.”[^117]

### Honoring A Guest

Abdullah ibn Yafur reports: I found a guest with Imam al-Sadiq (a.s).
The guest rose up to do something in his house. The Imam prohibited him
from doing anything and he himself did what was supposed to be done. The
Imam further said, “Allah’s Messenger has prohibited hosts from asking
the guest to do anything.”[^118]

### Attitude Towards Two Needy Persons

Musmi ibn Abd al-Malik has reported: we were at Mina in the presence of
Imam al-Sadiq and a group of Shiites. There were grapes before us and we
were eating from them. A beggar appeared and demanded for help. The Imam
picked up some grapes and wanted to give to him. The beggar refused it
and said, “Give me money!” The Imam said, “Excuse me, I do not have
money.” The beggar became disappointed and went away. After taking a few
steps, the beggar regretted in making his decision and asked for the
grapes to be given to him. The Imam did not give him the grapes.

A short time afterwards another beggar came asking for help. The Imam
took a cluster of grapes and offered it to him. The beggar accepted it
and said, “Praise belongs to the Lord of the worlds Who granted me my
sustenance.” The Imam, hearing these words, ordered him to wait and gave
him two handfuls of grapes. The beggar praised Allah for the second
time. The Imam again told him to wait and not to leave. Then he turned
towards one of his companions and asked, "How much money do you have
with you?"

The man searched his pockets and found about twenty dirhams. He gave it
to the beggar on the order of the Imam. For the third time, the beggar
thanked Allah and said, “Praise only is due to Allah. O Allah, You are
the Bestower of bounties and there is no associate for You.” Hearing
these words, the Imam took off his garment and gave it to the beggar.
Now the beggar changed his words and uttered some thankful words to the
Imam and went away. We presumed that if the beggar had continued
thanking and praising Allah in the same way as before, the Imam would
have assisted him more.[^119]

### Praying To Allah

Abdullah ibn Yafur has reported: I heard Imam al-Sadiq, while raising
his hands towards the sky, saying, “O Lord! Do not leave me even a
moment to myself.” His eyes being tearful, the Imam turned to me and
said, “O son of Yafur! Allah left (Prophet) Yunus, son of Matti
(Matthew) less than a moment by himself and a calamity came about.” I
said, “Did he go as far as being ungrateful to Allah?” The Imam said,
“No, but dying in that situation would be perdition.”[^120]

### Patience In Hard Conditions

Qutaybah al-A’sha has reported: I went to the presence of Imam al-Sadiq
to visit his ill son. I found the Imam sad and worried at the door. I
asked, “May I be your ransom! How is the child?” Then Imam said, “By
Allah! He is badly afflicted!” The Imam entered the house, stayed there
for an hour and returned to us with shining face. It looked as though
the sorrow had left Imam. I said hopefully to myself that may be the
child had probably improved. So I said, “May I be your ransom! How is
the child?” The Imam said, “He died!” I said, “May I be your ransom.
When he was alive you were sad but now that he has died you are no
sadder. How is it that?” The Imam said, “We, Ahl al-Bayt, are anxious
before the calamity; but when Allah’s decree is passed, we are content
with it and we are in a state of submission to Him.”[^121]

### Paradise, A Reward For Prayer

Abu-Basir has quoted Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.): I was circumambulating the
Kabah when my father passed by me. Observing that I was sweating and
endeavoring in performing my prayer, he said to me, “My son Jafar! When
Allah loves a servant, He rewards him with Paradise and accepts little
acts from him.”[^122]

### Kindness To Servants

Hafs ibn Aishah has reported: Imam al-Sadiq sent a slave on a mission.
The slave was delayed for sometime. So the Imam went after him and found
him sleeping. He sat near him and started to fan him. When the slave
woke up, the Imam said, “You had no right to sleep at this hour. You
should sleep at night and work for us during day.”[^123]

### Working Hard For Living

Abu-Amr al-Shaybani has reported: I saw Imam al-Sadiq in coarse garment,
with a spade in his hands working and sweating in his orchard. I said,
“May I be your ransom! Give the spade to me to do it.” The Imam said, “I
like to work hard for living under the sun.”[^124]

### Worker's Wage

Hannan ibn Shuayb has reported: We hired a group of people to work in
the orchard of Imam al-Sadiq. When the work was finished, the Imam said
to Mutib, “Pay the wage of workers before their sweat dry up.”[^125]

### Lawful Profit

Abu-Jafar Fazari has reported: Imam al-Sadiq called his servant, gave
him a thousand dinars and said, “Be prepared for making a journey to
Egypt for doing business, for our dependents have increased.” The
servant prepared certain goods and set out for Egypt with the caravan of
merchants. When they were near Egypt, they met a caravan leaving. They
asked about the goods needed by people in Egypt, they said, “What you
have is rare in Egypt.” So, they agreed to sell their goods with a good
profit!

Having sold their goods, they returned to Medina and went to see Imam
al-Sadiq. Having two purses of a thousand dinars each, the servant said,
“May I be your ransom! One purse is the principal and the other is the
profit”. Imam al-Sadiq said, “This is a huge profit! How did you sell
the good?” The servant told the Imam the whole story. The Imam said,
“Glory be to Allah! Did you collude to sell the goods with a high profit
to Muslims?” Then he took one of the purses and said, “This is the
principal money and I am not in need of its profit. Striking with a
sword in a battlefield is easier than seeking what is lawful.”[^126]

Morality Of Musa Al-Kadhim
--------------------------

### Worshiping Allah and Serving The People

Imam Musa ibn Jafar al-Kadhim was the most pious, the most versed in
jurisprudence and the most generous of the people of his time. It has
been reported that he performed supererogatory prayers linking them to
the Morning Prayer and then he was engaged in benedictions until dawn.
He would fall in prostration without raising his head until noon. The
Imam prayed a lot and repeated the following invocation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أللهُمَّ إنِّي أسْألُكَ الرَّاحَة عِنْدَ الْمَوْتِ والْعَفْوَعِنْدَ
الْحِسَابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Lord! I ask you ease at deathbed and forgiveness on the Day of
Reckoning. The sin of Your servant is great but forgiveness is with You.

The Imam always cried out of fear of Allah so much so that his face
became wet with tears. He would look into the affairs of his family and
relatives more than anyone else and would appease the needy in Medina at
night. He would always carry a basket of flour and dates as well as a
purse of dirhams and dinars to give to them but no one knew where this
favor came from.[^127]

### Contentment and Generosity

Muhammad ibn Abdullah Bakri has reported: I went to Medina to take a
loan but no one offered me any. So I said to myself, “I better go to
Imam Musa and tell him about my grievances.” Hence, I went to his
plantation, which stood on the heights of the city. The Imam came to me
along with his servant. He had a basket in his hand with pieces of meat,
which I shared with him and then he asked me about my needs. I told him
the story and we set out for his house. He went inside and after a few
seconds, he came out giving me a purse of three hundred dinars. Being
satisfied, I mounted the mule and left Medina.[^128]

### An Extraordinary Example of Generosity

Mansur Dawaniqi (the Abbasid ruler) asked Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) to
attend the Festival of Nowruz (New Day) to receive the gifts from all
walks of life. The Imam answered, “The Nowruz Festival is a tradition
for the Persians.” Mansur said, “I observe this festival as a policy for
strengthening ties with the army. I ask you by God to attend this
festival.” The commanders of the army came to the Imam, congratulated
him on the occasion and presented him with gifts.

The servant of Mansur who was standing next to the Imam, counted the
gifts one by one. At the end of the festival, an aged man came to the
Imam saying, “O Son of daughter of Allah’s Messenger! I am a needy man
who cannot present you with a gift. Instead, I have three lines of poem,
which my grandfather has composed for your grandfather, Husayn ibn Ali.
He thus recited the poem. Imam Musa said, “I accepted your gift. Please
sit beside me. May Allah bless you.” Raising his hand towards the
servant of Mansur, Imam Musa said, “Go to the Emir, inform him of the
gifts and ask what he is going to do with all these gifts.” The servant
did the mission, came back and said, “Mansur says: All the gifts belong
to you. Do as you wish.” Imam Musa said to the old man, “Take all these
gifts which is my grant to you.”[^129]

Morality Of Imam Ali Ibn Musa Al Rida
-------------------------------------

Ibrahim ibn Abbas has reported: I never saw Imam al-Ridha say any unkind
words to anyone or interrupt anyone. The Imam would never reject anyone
whose needs he could fulfill nor would he ever stretch his legs before
his companions. He never insulted his servant nor would he ever spit on
the ground. He never laughed but smiled.

When he was sitting in a private place, he would have the tablecloth
spread before him, making the slaves, housekeeper and servants sit with
him to share the food. He slept few hours and kept vigil most of the
time. He would fast the first day, midmonth and the last day of the
month, saying, “Should you fast in this way, it is as if you are keeping
fasting all the days.” He would give money as charity and did benevolent
acts secretly. He would do most of his good deeds at night. None has
seen his like in terms of virtues.[^130]

### Feeding The Needy

Muammar ibn Khala has reported: When Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) wanted to eat,
a big tray was brought before him and he would pick up from the best
food which was on the table, put it on the big tray and sent it for the
needy people. Then he recited the following verses,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا اقْتَحَمَ الْعَقَبَةَ وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الْعَقَبَةُ  فَكُّ
رَقَبَةٍ أَوْ إِطْعَامٌ فِي يَوْمٍ ذِي مَسْغَبَةٍ يَتِيمًا ذَا
مَقْرَبَةٍ أَوْ مِسْكِينًا ذَا مَتْرَبَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But he would not attempt the uphill road. And what will make you
comprehend what the uphill road is. (It is) the setting free of a slave;
Or the giving of food in a day of hunger; to an orphan, having
relationship; Or to the poor man lying in the dust. (90:11-16)***

Then the Imam would say, “Allah knows that it is not easy for all human
beings to set slaves free; hence, He has made feeding the needy a way
for His servants to enter Paradise."[^131]

### Honoring All Human Beings

A man from Balkh has reported: I was accompanying Imam al-Ridha in his
journey to Khorasan. One day he asked for food and made all the black
and white servants sit to share it with him. I said to him, “May I be
your ransom! It would be better if there were a separate table for
them.” The Imam said, “Say nothing. Allah is One, our father is one, our
mother is one and the reward is for our deeds.”[^132]

### Helping A Needy Traveler

Al-Yasa ibn Hamzah has reported: I was in the presence of Imam al-Ridha
(a.s) where a group of people asked him questions about what was lawful
and unlawful. A tall man joined the gathering and said, "Peace be to
you, O son of Allah’s Messenger! I am a devotee of yours and of your
ancestors. I am returning from Hajj. I have lost my money and my
provision. I have nothing on me to travel furthermore. Should you help
me to reach my hometown, Allah has blessed me. When I reach my hometown,
I will give as charity what you have given me; for I am not entitled to
charity.”

Imam al-Ridha said, “May Allah bless you. Take a seat here." Then the
Imam released the people and there were only the Imam, Sulayman Jafari,
Khaythamah, the needy traveler and I. Then the Imam said, “Will you give
me permission to enter the chamber?” He then turned to Sulayman Jafari
and said, “Allah has improved your affair.” The Imam entered the room,
closed the door and stretched his hand out of an opening saying, “Where
is the man from Khorasan?” The man said, “I am here.” The Imam said,
“Take this purse of two hundred dinars, spend it for your living costs,
seek blessing of Allah, don’t give any charity and leave this house so
that we will not see each other!”

When the traveler left, Sulayman said to the Imam, “May I be you ransom,
you were both kind and generous. Why did you cover your face then?” The
Imam said, “In order not to see humiliation and abasement in his face
for having fulfilled his needs. Have you not heard this *Hadith* from
Allah’s Messenger: ‘One who hides his good deed is like one who makes
pilgrimage to Mecca for seventy times. One who reveals vices will be
degraded and one who hides evil will be forgiven.’ Have you not heard
the old saying: ‘When I go to him to fulfill my needs, I will return
home while I have saved my face.’”[^133]

### A Worker's Wage

Sulayman ibn Jafar has reported: I was with Imam al-Ridha for doing a
task. I had the intention to go back home but the Imam asked me to stay
with him that night. We set off for the Imam’s house but we arrived at
sunset. On entering the house, Imam al-Ridha had a glance at his slaves
who were busy building a stable with mud. He suddenly saw a black worker
who was not his slave. When he asked about him, they said, “He is
helping us and we will give him some money at the end.” The Imam asked,
“Did you talk about his wage?” They said, “He is satisfied with what we
will give him.”

Imam al-Ridha was upset on hearing this. I said, “May I be your ransom!
Why are you so upset?” The Imam said, “Had I not prohibited you from
employing people without first coming to agreement about their wage?
Know that if a person works for you without his wage being fixed, if you
give three times his wage, he will think that you have not paid his due
wage, but if you fix his wage first and then pay it, he will appreciate
your promise and even if you pay a little extra money to him he will
become grateful."[^134]

### Devotion

Abul-Salt al-Hawawi has reported: when Imam al-Ridha arrived in
Nayshabur on a black and white mule, I was accompanying him and the
scholars of Nayshabur had come to say welcome to the Imam. When he left
to the neighborhood of Marbaeh, they took the rein of his mule saying,
“O son of Allah’s Messenger! We ask you through the mediation of your
purified forefathers, tell us a *Hadith*.” Imam al-Ridha who had a cloak
of fur on, put his head out of the mule litter saying:

Quoting Allah’s Messenger, my father reported: Gabriel informed me of
Allah saying. I am verily Allah; there are no god but Me. O My servants!
Worship only Me and know that anyone of you who meets Me by bearing
witness that there is no god but Allah wholeheartedly and with devotion
has entered My fortress; and whoever enters My fortress will be immune
from My chastisement.

They asked, “O son of Allah’s Messenger! What is devotion in the Oneness
of Allah?” The Imam answered, “Obeying Allah, obeying Allah’s Messenger
and obeying the Imamate of Ahl al-Bayt.”[^135]

### A Letter to His Son

Bazanti has reported: I read a letter written by Imam al-Ridha to his
son, Imam al-Jawad with the following content:

O Abu-Jafar! I was informed that they will take you out through the
small gate which indicates their envy lest you might help people. I ask
you through the right I have on you, to go and come through the big
gate. When you mount, make sure to have dirhams and dinars with you.
Give away whenever someone asks you for help. Do not give away less than
fifty dinars. Should your aunts ask you for something, do not give away
less than twenty-five Dinars. I wish that Allah will exalt you.
Therefore, give away and be not afraid of indigence.[^136]

### Giving Away His Shirts

Rayyan ibn Salt has reported: I was at the door of Imam al-Ridha’s house
in Khorasan. I said to Muammar, “Do you dare to ask my master to give me
one of his shirts and the dirhams which have been minted in his name?”

Muammar reported: I immediately went to the presence of Imam al-Ridha
but before saying anything the Imam said, “O Muammar! Wouldn’t Rayyan
like me to give him one of my shirts and some of the dirhams I have?” I
said, “Glory be to Allah! This is exactly what he said at the door!” The
Imam smiled and said, “Successful indeed is the believer. Tell him to
come to me.” So we went to the presence of the Imam. I saluted him and
he answered my salutation, asked for two of his shirts and gave them to
me. When I rose up to leave, he put thirty Dirhams in my hand.[^137]

### Paying off a Heavy Loan

Abu-Muhammad Ghaffari has reported: I had a heavy debt; so, I said to
myself, “I have no option for paying off my debt except that of seeking
help from my master Abu’l-Hasan Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha.”

So, I set off for the Imam’s house in the morning. When I reached there,
I asked for permission to see the Imam, and when I entered the room, the
Imam said, “Abu-Muhammad! I am aware of your need. We will pay off your
debt.” When evening came, I was served the dinner and the Imam then
said, “Will you stay with us or leave?” I said, “Master, should you
fulfill my need, I prefer to leave.” Then the Imam gave me a handful of
dinars. I bid him farewell and went to a place I could see the dinars.
He said, “O Abu- Muhammad! They are fifty dinars; twenty-six are for
paying off the dept, and twenty-four for the living expenditures.” The
next morning when I looked at the Dinars precisely, I did not see that
Dinar, yet it was not less than fifty Dinars either![^138]

Morality Of Imam Al-Jawad
-------------------------

Imam al-Jawad was unique in terms of knowledge, forbearance, eloquence,
devotion and other moral virtues despite his being underage. He had a
wonderful aptitude for answering scientific questions on the spot. Like
his purified ancestors, Imam al-Jawad paid much attention to physical
appearance and cleanliness.

### A Blessed Letter

A man of the tribe of Banu-Hanifah from the region of Bost and Sistan
has reported: I came to know Imam al-Jawad when I was on my Hajj to
Mecca. It was the beginning of the reign of al-Mutasim, the Abbasid
ruler. We were sitting round a tablecloth and while some of the friends
of the Abbasid ruler were also present, I said to the Imam, “May I be
your ransom! Our governor has love for Ahl al-Bayt and I am charged to
pay tax to him. Should you consider it advisable, kindly write to him to
do me a favor by canceling the tax. To observe dissimulation aimed at
preserving the life of the ruler of Sistan, Imam al-Jawad said, “I do
not know him!”

I said, “May I be your ransom; as I have already said he is a devotee of
Ahl al-Bayt and your writing to him will be useful for me.” Imam
al-Jawad picked up a piece of paper and wrote, “In the name of Allah,
the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful. The holder of letter speaks
well of you. What is left of your deeds is the good ones. So be kind to
your brethren and know that you will be taken to task by Allah for an
atom’s weight of your deeds.”

The letter holder reports: The news of the letter had reached the
governor of the region, Husayn ibn Abdullah Naysaburi, before my
arrival. So before I reached Sistan, he had come to the gate of city to
welcome me. I gave him the letter. He kissed and put it on his eyes,
saying, “What do you need?” I said, “I have been levied a tax which I
cannot afford to pay.” He ordered the tax to be written off, saying, “As
long as I am the governor of this region, don't pay tax.” He then asked
about my dependents. I gave him the number of my dependents. So he
ordered a regular pension to be given to me. After this event, I did not
pay tax as long as I lived nor did he stop sending me gifts until he
passed away.[^139]

### Protecting the Oppressed

Ali ibn Jarir has reported: I was in the presence of Imam al-Jawad when
a sheep of the house was missing. At this time, one of the neighbors was
brought to the Imam on charge of theft. The Imam said, “Woe to you! Let
him go. He has not stolen the sheep. The sheep is in such and such man’s
house. Go and find it there.”

They went to the same house finding the sheep there. They arrested the
owner of the house, tore his clothes into pieces and beat him up, but he
took an oath that he had not stolen the sheep. They brought him to the
Imam who asked, “Why have you oppressed him? The sheep had entered his
house and this man was not aware of it.” Then the Imam appeased him and
gave him an amount of money to make up for his clothes and
beating.[^140]

### Dignity of Imam al-Jawad

After the martyrdom of Imam al-Ridha (a.s), people kept on blaming
Mamun, the Abbasid ruler. Wishing to acquit himself of the crime, he
left Khorasan for Baghdad and wrote a letter to Imam al-Jawad (a.s)
inviting him to Baghdad with much honor.

The Imam set off for Baghdad, but before seeing the Imam, Mamun went
hunting. On his way, he came across a group of children who were
standing on the way. Imam al-Jawad too was standing there. Observing the
pomp of Mamun, the children dispersed off. However, the Imam did not
move from his place! He was standing in his place with the utmost degree
of calm and dignity until Mamun came near to him. He was amazed to see
the child. Drawing the reins of the horse, Mamun asked, “Why did not you
clear the way like other children?” The Imam replied, “O Caliph! The
road was not narrow nor had I committed anything wrong to escape from
you! I don’t think you will punish anyone without having committed
anything wrong.” Mamun was even more surprised when he heard these
words.

The boy’s beauty had attracted him so he asked, “What is your name,
boy?” The Imam said, “My name is Muhammad.” He asked, “Who is your
father?” The Imam said, “Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha.” When Mamun heard of the
child’s descent, he was no more surprised and was ashamed of hearing the
name of the Imam whom he had martyred! He sent greeting to the pure soul
of the Imam and went away.

When he went back to wilderness, he caught sight of a francolin and let
a falcon go after it. The falcon disappeared for sometime but when it
returned, it had a small fish still living in its beak. Mamun was
surprised to see it; he took the fish in his hand and returned to the
same place where he had seen Imam al-Jawad. Again the children ran away
but the Imam did not move from his place. Mamun said, “Muhammad: What is
it in my hand?” Through inspiration, the Imam said, “Allah has created
seas; clouds rise up from seas; small fish come up with clouds; kings
falcons hunt them; the kings take them in their hands and test the
Household of the Prophet!” Mamun was surprised more to hear this,
saying, “You are truly the son of al-Ridha! Such wonderful acts are
possible only by the son of that honorable man.”[^141]

### Mamun’s Trickery

Mamun played every trick to make Imam al-Jawad as worldly and sensual as
himself. However he failed in his plot until he gave her daughter in
marriage to the Imam. On the wedding night, he ordered a hundred
slave-girls who were the most beautiful to hold a chalice each in their
hands to welcome the Imam in the bridal chamber with much pomp and
glory. The slave-girls did as they had been ordered but Imam al-Jawad
paid not attention to them.

Mamun had to call *Mukhariq*, a music performer who had a sweet voice
and played violin. *Mukhariq* said to Mamun, “O Leader of the Faithful!
If you wish al-Jawad to have a desire of the world, my voice will
suffice it.” *Mukhariq* sat face to face with the Imam and started
singing. He sang in a way that all the people of the house gathered
round him. Then, he started playing violin. He did so for one hour but
Imam al-Jawad looked neither at right side not left side. Finally the
Imam raised his head saying, “Fear Allah, O you long-bearded man!” At
this moment the violin fell from the hands of the music performer and he
enjoyed it no more until he died.[^142]

### A Shafiite’s Opinion about The Imam

Kamal al-Din Shafii, a great Sunni scholar, about Imam al-Jawad writes:
This (Imam Muhammad al-Jawad) Abu-Jafar is the second Muhammad. The
first is Muhammad al-Baqir. He has a high-ranking position. He is
renowned everywhere. His broad-mindedness and sweetness os speech have
attracted everyone. He was destined to die young. He lived a short life
but he was a source of benefits for all. Everyone who saw him bowed to
him and benefited from his knowledge. He was a source of light, which
illuminated everything. Both intellect and mind benefited from his
knowledge.[^143]

Morality Of Imam Al-Hadi
------------------------

Abu-Hashim Jafari has reported: I was afflicted with a bad poverty; so,
I went to Abul-Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad. When I sat in his presence, he
asked, “Abu-Hashim! Which of the bounties of your Lord will you thank?”
I could not speak nor did I know what answer to give to the Imam. He
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَزَقَكَ الإيمَانَ فَحَرَّمَ بَدَنَكَ عَلَى النَّارِ. وَ رَزَقَكَ
الْعَافِيَةَ فأعَانَكَ عَلَى الطَّاعَةِ. وَ رَزَقَكَ الْقُنُوعَ
فَصَانَكَ عَنِ التَّبَدُّلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah has given you faith as sustenance hence made your body immune
from hellfire. He has also given you good health hence helped you to
obey Him. And He has given you contentment as sustenance hence made you
immune from unrestrained way of living.

O Abu-Hashim! I have started speaking to you with these words, for I had
the impression that you were going to complain to me of One Who has
given you all these blessings. Meanwhile I have ordered one hundred
dinars to be given to you.”[^144]

### Sanitation and Climate

Fahham Mansuri reports while quoting his uncle,: One day Imam al-Hadi
(a.s) said, “I was brought reluctantly to the city of Samarra (literally
meaning one who sees it becomes happy). Now if they make me leave this
city, I will do it reluctantly.” I said, “Why is that, my master?” The
Imam said, “For its good climate, its sanitation and its little
diseases.”[^145]

### Special Favor Towards Shiites

A group of people from Isfahan including Abul-Abbas Ahmad ibn Nazar and
Abu-Jafar Muhammad ibn Alawiah report: In Isfahan, there was a man of
Shiite faith named Abd al-Rahman. He was asked, “Why in our time you
have made belief in the Imamate of Ali al-Naqi (a.s) incumbent upon
yourself?” He answered: I have seen something which made the Imam’s
leadership obligatory to me: I dare to say I was a needy man and one
year, the people of Isfahan sent me along with other persons to the
court of al-Mutawakkil, the Abbasid ruler, to plead for justice.

We were in Mutawakkil’s court when the order to summon Ali ibn Muhammad
ibn Ridha was issued. I asked some of the persons present in the court
who was this man. It was said that he was an Alawi and the heretics
believe in his Imamate. Mutawakkil might have summoned to kill him. I
decided not to leave this place to see what he looks like.

Finally, when the Imam came on a horse while people were standing on the
two sides of the road, I was watching him. As soon as I saw him, I began
to love him and said: May Allah relieve him from the evil of Mutawakkil.
He was looking only at the mane of his horse without paying attention to
his right or left side. I was also praying for him. When he was passing
by me, he turned his holy face towards me and said, “Allah has answered
your prayer, prolonged your life, and made your wealth and children
abundant.” Hearing this, I trembled and fell down among my friends, they
asked, “What happened?” I said, “Just a blessing and said no more.”

I then returned to Isfahan. Allah gave me such a fortune that in
addition to what I have outside my house, I have assets worth several
thousands of dirham at home. I am also blessed with ten children. I am
now seventy and odd years, believing in the Imamate of that honorable
Imam who knew what was in my mind and whose prayer Allah answered in
relation to me.[^146]

### Healing a Leper

Abu Hashim Jafari has reported: A man from Samarra was afflicted with
leprosy hence life had become hard for him. One day, he was complaining
to Abu-Ali Fahri of his plight. Abu-Ali said, “Should you ask Abul-Hasan
Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Ridha to pray for you, your disease will be
healed.”

One day when the Imam was returning from Mutawakkil’s house, the leper
who was sitting on the way rose up to get close to the Imam to ask him
to pray for the healing of his disease. Before he could ask, the Imam
said three times, “Go aside; Allah will restore your good health”, while
pointing to him with his holy hand. Abu-Ali Fahri later saw the leper
who had told him about his meeting with the Imam. Abu-Ali said, “The
Imam had prayed for you before you asked him to do so. Be sure you will
have your good health restored soon.” The leper went home. The night
passed; and when it dawned there was no sign of leprosy on his
body.[^147]

### Kindness To Relatives

Dawud ibn Qasim Jafari reports: I had gone to say farewell to the Imam
in Samarra before going on Hajj. He came out with me and when he came to
the end of the retaining wall, he descended and I descended too. The
Imam drew a circle on the ground saying, “O uncle! Take what is inside
this circle for spending during your Hajj.” I pounded on the earth with
my fist and found a bar of gold containing two hundred *misqals* of
gold.[^148]

### Generosity

Muhammad ibn Talhah has reported: One day, Imam al-Hadi left Samarra for
a village for an important case, which had come about. An Arab came to
meet him. So, the man was told that the Imam had gone to such and such
place. The Arab too went to that village to see him. The Imam asked,
“What do you need?” He answered, “I am an Arab from Kufah who believes
in the Imamate of your great grandfather, Ali ibn Abu-Talib. I have a
heavy debt, which is hard to pay. I find no one but you to pay my debt.”
The Imam said, “Be happy.”

The Imam received him as a guest, and in the morning said, “I will ask
you something that you should not oppose!” The Arab said, “I will not
oppose to what you do.” The Imam wrote a note in his own handwriting
admitting that he owed the Arab a certain amount of money, which was
more than the Arab’s debt. Then the Imam said, “Take this note and bring
it to me in Samarra. There will be a group of people beside me. Show
this note, speak harshly and demand your money.” The Arab agreed and
left the Imam.

When the Imam reached Samarra, a group of the companions of the ruler
were with him when the Arab arrived, showed the handwriting, demanded
the money and spoke as the Imam had advised him. Imam al-Hadi spoke
softly to him and promised to pay his debt. The story of Imam al-Hadi
and the Arab reached Mutawakkil. He ordered to take thirty thousand
Dirhams for Imam al-Hadi. When The Imam received the money, he did not
touch it until the Arab came. Then the Imam said, “Take this money, pay
your debt, spend the rest for your living expenditures and accept our
apology.” The Arab said, “O son of Allah’s Messenger! By Allah! I
expected only one third of this money but Allah knows where to place His
message He took the money and left for home.”[^149]

### Choosing A Name For A Child

Ayyub ibn Nuh has reported: I wrote a letter to Imam al-Hadi saying, “My
wife is pregnant. Pray to Allah to give me a son.” Imam al-Hadi wrote
back, “When your son is born, name him Muhammad.” My wife gave birth to
a son whom I named Muhammad.[^150]

Morality Of Imam Hasan Al-Askari
--------------------------------

From among the letters sent by Imam Askari to Ali ibn Husayn ibn
Babawayh of Qum, there is a letter in part of which special attention
has been paid to him and to all Shiites, indicating that a true Shiite
enjoys a high value for the infallible Imam. Parts of the letter read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكَ بِالصَّبْرِ وَانْتِظَارِ الْفَرَجِ. قَالَ النَّبِيُّ: أفْضَلُ
الأعْمَالِ إنْتِظَارُ الْفَرَجِ. وَلأ يَزَالُ شِيعَتُنَا فِي حُزْنِ
حَتَّى يَظْهَرَ وَلَدِي اَلَّذِي بَشَّرَ بِهِ الَّبِيُّ يَمْلأُ
الأرْضَ قِسْطاً وَعَدْلاً كَمَا مُلِئَتْ جَوْراً وَ ظُلْماً. فَاصْبِرْ
يَا شَيخِي يَا أبَا الْحَسَنِ عَلِيُّ، وَأمُرْ جَمِيعَ شِيعَتِي
بِالصَّبْرِ، فَإنَّ الأرْضَ لِلَّهِ يُورثُهَا مَنْ يَشَاءُ مِنْ
عِبَادِهِ، وَالْعَاقِبَةٌ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ، وَالسَّللأمُ عَلَيْكَ وَ
عَلَى جَمِيع شِيعَتِنَا وَ رحْمَةٌ اللَّهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ، وَصَلَى
اللَّه عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You have the duty to be patient and await the reappearance of Imam
al-Mahdi, for Allah’s Messenger has said: The best deed of my ummah is
to await the reappearance of Imam al-Mahdi. Our followers are eagerly
waiting for the reappearance of my son the news of whose coming the Holy
Prophet has given in order to fill the world, which has been replete
with injustice, with justice. O Dear Sheikh Abul-Hasan Ali, be patient
and invite all Shiites to patience. Beyond doubt the earth belongs to
Allah and He will give it as legacy to anyone of His servants that He
wishes to and the good end belongs to those who guard against evil.
Peace, mercy and blessings of Allah be on you and on all Shiites and
peace of Allah be on Muhammad and his progeny.[^151]

### Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil

Hasan ibn Muhammad of Qum has reported: The great persons of Qum told me
that Husayn ibn Hasan ibn Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Ismail ibn Jafar
al-Sadiq openly drank wine in the city of Qum. One day I went to the
door of Ahmad ibn Ishaq Ashari who was the head of charitable bequests
in Qum, for a need. But he did not give him entry permission. So Husayn
ibn Hasan sorrowfully returned home!

A few days later, Ahmad ibn Hasan set off for Mecca on Hajj. When he
reached Samarra, he was denied permission to see Imam Hasan Askari! He
cried for a long time until the Imam gave him permission to see him.
After being received by the Imam, Ahmad said, “O son of Allah's
Messenger! Why did you deny me permission to see you; while I am Shiite
and your follower?” The Imam said, “Because you sent away our cousin
from your house!” Ahmad started crying and took an oath that he had done
so in order to forbid him from drinking wine. The Imam said, “You are
right but you should have honored them because of his relation to us.”

When Ahmad returned from Mecca, the dignitaries of Qum came to see him
and Husayn too was with them. When Ahmad saw Husayn, he rose up,
welcomed and honored him and made him sit in a high place. Husayn ibn
Hasan was surprised by this behavior; so, he asked Ahmad the reason for
it. Ahmad ibn Ishaq told him what had happened between Imam Hasan Askari
and him. Hearing this, Husayn ibn Hasan repented his evil deed, returned
home, broke all the bottles of wine, became a pious man, and retired to
mosque until death took his life and he was buried near the shrine of
Fatimah Masumah.[^152]

### Charity

Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Ibrahim has reported: Earning a livelihood had
become hard for us and indigence had overwhelmed us. My father told me
to take him to the presence of Imam Hasan Askari for he had been
described as a generous man. I said to my father, “Do you know him
personally?” He said, “I do not know him nor have I seen him.”

On the way, my father said, “How good it will be if he orders five
hundred dirhams to be given to us, two hundred for clothes, two hundred
for flour and one hundred for living expenditures.” I said to myself, “I
wish he would give me three hundred dirhams so that I would buy a horse
for one hundred dirhams, I would spend one hundred for living costs and
I would buy clothes for one hundred and then I would go to the region of
Jabal.” When we reached the door of the house of Imam, his slave came
towards us saying, “Ali ibn Ibrahim and his son Muhammad may enter.”
When we entered the room and saluted him, the Imam said to my father,
“What kept you from coming to visit us?” My father said, “My master! I
was ashamed of seeing you in this position.”

When we came out of the house, the Imam’s servant gave him a purse
saying, “This is five hundred dirhams, two hundred dirhams for clothes,
two hundred dirhams for flour and one hundred dirhams for living
expenditures.” He gave me a purse to me too, saying, “This is three
hundred Dirhams, one hundred Dirhams for buying a horse, one hundred
Dirhams for clothes, and one hundred for living costs. Don't go to Jabal
rather go to Surrah in Iraq.”[^153]

Morality And Character Of Imam Al-Mahdi
---------------------------------------

The Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s), due to restrictions imposed on them from
every side, had no chance to fully reveal their capacities. The Imam of
the Time, may Allah expedite his reappearance, will have a chance to
reveal his multi-dimensional capacity as foreseen by the Holy Prophet
and the Imam’s of Ahl al-Bayt. Therefore, his behavior, conduct and
temperament have a dimension wider than those of the other Imams.

In most narrations, we read that the time of Imam al-Mahdi will be
replete with bloodshed and killing. In certain narrations, it has even
been pointed out that Allah will remove love for the enemies from the
heart of Imam al-Mahdi so much so that people will say,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...لَيْسَ هَذَا مِنْ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ، لَو كَانَ مِنْ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ
لِرَحِمَ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

This is not from the Household of Muhammad. Were he from the Household
of Muhammad, he would have some mercy.[^154]

However, one must note that when Imam al-Mahdi reappears, the world will
be in the enemies’ hand and they will strongly resist him. In this
connection, Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ قَائِمَنَا إذَا قَامَ اسْتَقَبَلَ مِنْ جَهَلَةِ النَّاسِ أشَدَّ
مِمَّا اسْتَقْبَلَهُ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ مِنْ جُهَّالِ الجَاهِلِيَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When our Imam rises up, he will find people more ignorant than that of
the time before Allah’s Messenger.

In this case, Imam al-Mahdi will have no option other than resorting to
war and a revolutionary decisiveness. When the resistance of the sworn
enemy is broken, justice, welfare, peace and security will prevail
everywhere. What follows are narrations showing the morality and
corrective character of Imam al-Mahdi in relation to the world and man
at large:

### Resemblance To The Holy Prophet

Looking at Husayn, Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ ابْنِي هَذَا سَيِّدٌ كَمَا سَمَّاهُ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ سِّداً.
وَسَيُخْرِجُ اللَّهُ مِنْ صُلْبِهِ رَجُلاً بِاسْمِ نَبِيِّكُم،
يُشبْبِهُهُ فِي الْخَلْقِ وَالْخُلْقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This son of mine is a master as the Holy Prophet has called him a master
and from his issue will come a man who has the same name as the
Messenger of Allah and resembling to him in creation and
character.[^155]

Abdullah ibn Ata reports: I asked Imam al-Sadiq about the character of
Imam al-Mahdi, and the Imam said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَصْنَعَ مَا صَنَعَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

He will do what the Holy Prophet did.[^156]

Quoting Allah’s Messenger, Ibn Abbas has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّاسِعُ مِنْهُمْ، قَائِمُ أهْلِ بَيْتتِي وَ مَهْدِيُّ أمَّتِي،
أشْبِهُ النًّاسِ بِي فِي شَمَائِلِهِ وَ أقْوَالِهِ وَأفْعَالهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The ninth of them, the support of my Household and al-Mahdi of my ummah
is the most similar to me in appearance, speech and deed.[^157]

Abu-Muhammad Hasan ibn Ali Askari (a.s) was quoted by Ahmad ibn Ishaq
ibn Sa’d as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألْحَمْدُ لِلًّهِ الَّذِي لَمْ يُخْرِ جْنِي مِنَ الدُّنْيَا حَتَّى
أرَانِي اْلْخَلَفَ مِنْ بَعدي، أشْبَهَ النَّاسِ بِرَسُولِ اللَّهِ
خَلْقاً وَ خُلْقا.ً
  </p>
</blockquote>

I praise Allah that before I die He has shown me my successor who is the
most similar to Allah’s Messenger in appearance, speech and deed.[^158]

Quoting Qatadah, Kab al-Ahbar has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألْمَهْدِيُّ خَيْرُ النَّاسِ...مَحْجُوبُ الْخَلأئِقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Mahdi is the best of the people… the most beloved of people.[^159]

### Dispensing Justice

Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (a.s) was asked, “O son of Allah’s Messenger! Who
is the support of you Ahl al-Bayt?” The Imam said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّابِعُ مِنْ وُلْدي ...يُطَهِّرُ اللَّهُ بِهِ الأرْضَ مِنْ كُلِّ
جَوْرٍ... فَإذَا خَرَجَ أشْرَقَتِ الأرْضُ بِنُورِهِ، وَوُضِع مِيزَانُ
الْعَدْلِ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ فَلأ يَظْلِمُ أحَدٌ أحَداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is the fourth of my sons. Through him, Allah will remove injustice
from the Earth. When he reappears, the earth will be illuminated with
his heavenly light. He will dispense justice among people so much so
that no one will do any injustice to others.[^160]

Quoting his father, Ali ibn Aqabah has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا قَامَ الْقَائِم،ُ حَكَمَ بِالْعَدْلِ وَارْتَفَعَ فِي أيَّامِهِ
الْجُورْ...وَرَدَّ كُلَّ حَقٍّ إلَى أهْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When Al-Mahdi rises up, he will rule with justice; there will be no
injustice in his time and he will restore justice to its owner.[^161]

Quoting Allah’s Messenger, Imam Ali has expressly said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آخِرُهُمْ إسْمُهُ عَلَى اسْمِي. يَخْرُجُ فَيَمْلأُ الأرْضَ عَدْلاً
كَمَ مُلِئَتْ جَوْراً وَظُلْما
  </p>
</blockquote>

The last of them (i.e. the Imams) has my names. He will reappear and
fill the earth with justice when it is replete with injustice.[^162]

Quoting Allah’s Messenger, Imam Ali has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَمُنَادٍ يُنَادِي:هَذا الْمَهْدِيُّ خَلِيفَةٌ اللَّهِ
فَاتَّبِعُوهُ. يَمْلأُ الأرْضَ قِسْطاً وَعَدْلاً كَمَا مُلِئَتْ جَوراً
وَ ظُلْماً. وَذَلِكَ عِنْدَمَا يَصِيرُ الدُّنْيَا هَرَجاً وَ مَرَجاً،
وَ يَغَارُ بَعْضُهُم عَلَى بَعْضِ؛ فَلأ الْكَبِيرُ يَرْحَمُ الصَّغِيرَ
وَلأ القَوِيُ يَرْحَمُ الَّعِيفَ، فَحِينَئِذٍ يَأذَنُ اللَّهُ لَهُ
بِالْخُرُوجِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The herald will call: This is al-Mahdi, Allah’s caliph. Follow him. He
will make the earth replete with justice when it is filled with
injustice. Allah will permit him to reappear at a time when chaos will
overwhelm the world - some will attack the others by night, the
grown-ups will have no mercy on the small ones, nor will the powerful be
kind to the weak. [^163]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أوَّلُ مَا يُظْهِرُ الْقَائِمُ مِنَ الْعَدْلِ أنْ يُنَادِي مُنَادِيَهُ
أنْ يُسَلِّمَ صَاحِبِ الْفَرِيضَةٍ الْحَجَرَ الأسْوَدَ وَ الطَّوَافَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The first sign of al-Mahdi's justice is that a herald on his behalf will
call: One who is performing minor Hajj should give his place to one on
whom major Hajj is incumbent.[^164]

There are a hundred and twenty narrations on how al-Mahdi will make the
earth replete with justice.

### Peace and Security

Imam Ali (a.s.) has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ قَدْ قَامَ قَائِمُنَا...لَذَهَبَتِ الشَّحْنَاءُ مِنْ قُلُوبِ
الْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

When our support rises up, enmity will leave the people’s hearts.[^165]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s) has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَبْعَثُ الثَّهلاثَمِائَةٍ وَالبِضْعَةَ رَجُلاً إلَى الآفَاقِ
كُلِّهَا...حَتَّى تَخْرُجَ الْعَجُوزُ مِنْ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبَ
فَلا يَنْهَاهَا أحَدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When three hundred and odd companions of the Imam rule across the world,
a feeble old woman in the east will set off for the west in peace and
security.[^166]

Quoting his father, Ali ibn Aqabah has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا قَامَ الْقَائِمُ ... أُمِّنَتْ بِهِ السُّبُلُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Should the Rising Imam rise up, all roads will become safe.[^167]

### Public Welfare

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أدْرَكَ قَائِمِ أهْلِ بِيتِي مِنْ ذِي عَاهَةٍ بَرَأ وَمِنْ ذِي
عَاهَةٍ وَمِنْ ذِي عَاهَةٍ بَرَأ وَمِنْ ذِي ضَعَفٍ قَوِيَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Should those who have been hurt see the support of the Ahl al- Bayt,
they will be relieved; and the feeble ones who see him will become
powerful.[^168]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنْ قَامَ قَائِمُنَا ...يَطْلُبُ الرَّجُلُ مِنْكُمْ مَنْ يَصِلُهُ
بِمَالِهِ وَيَأخُذُ مِنْ زَكَاتِهِ فَلأ يُجَدُ أحَدٌ يَقبَلُ مِنْهُ
ذَالِكَ. إسْتَغْنَى النَّاسُ بِمَا رَزَقَهُمُ اللَّهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Should our support (al-Mahdi) rise up, a man from among you will look
for a needy person to help him and to take alms from what is incumbent
to him; but he will not be able to find such a person to accept it from
him; and people will become independent due to what Allah has given them
out of His grace.[^169]

Quoting the Holy Prophet, Imam Ali has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَاتِيهِ الرَّجُلُ وَالْمَالُ كُدْسٌ فَيَقُولُ؛ خُدْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Everyone will go to him with wealth accumulated beside him and will ask
al-Mahdi, “Grant something to me.” And he will say, “Take whatever you
wish.”[^170]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) has reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا ظَهَرَ الْقَائِمُ...يُعْطِي النَّاسَ عَطَايَا مَرَّتَينِ فِي
السَّنَةِ وَ يَرْزُقُهُمْ فِي الشَّهْرِ رِزْقُهُمْ فِي السَّنَةِ
وَيَرِّزُقُهُمْ فِي الشَّهَرِ رِزْقَيْنِ وَيُسَوِّي بِيْنَ النَّاسِ
حَتَى لأتَرى مُحْتَاجاً إلَى الزَّكَاةِ. وَ يَجِيءُ أصْحَابُ
الزَّكَاةِ بِزَكَاتِهِم ْ إلَى الْمَحَاوِيجِ مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ فَلأ
يَقْبَلُونَهَا . فَيُصِرُّونَهَا وَيَدُورُونَ فِي دُورِهِمْ
فَيَخْرُجُونَ إلَيْهِمْ فَيَقُولُونَ: لأحَاجَةَ فِي دَرَاهِكُم!
  </p>
</blockquote>

When the Rising Imam reappears, he will give away to people twice a year
and he will provide people with sustenance twice a month equally so that
you will not find anyone in need of alms. The alms-payer will come to
the needy followers of al-Mahdi but the needy will not accept his alms.
The alms-money will be put in a purse to be taken to the houses of the
Shiites, who will come out of their houses, addressing them: We are not
in need of your money!

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) has further reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَجْتَمِعُ إلَيْهِ أمْوَالُ أهْلُ الدُّنْيَا كُلِّهَا مِنْ بَطَنِ
الأرضِ وَظَهْرِهَا، فَيُقَالُ لِلنَّاسِ: تَعَالَو إلَي مَا قَطَعْتُمْ
فِيهِ الأرْحَامَ فِيهِ الدَّمَ الْحَرَامَ وَ رَكَبْتُمْ فِيهِ
المَحَارِمِ، فَيُعْطِهِ أحَدٌ قَبْلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

All the people’s wealth, both inside and outside the earth will be
accumulated for al-Mahdi and then they will be said: Come to what for
which you became merciless and shed the blood unlawfully and for which
committed sins. Here, Imam al-Mahdi will award to people such a grant
that no one has ever awarded.

The Holy Prophet has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَكُونُ فِي آخِرِ الزَّمَانِ خَلِفَةٌ يُعْطي الْمَالَ وَلا يَعِدُّه
عَدّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the end of the world, there will be a caliph who will divide the
wealth without counting them.[^171]

Allah’s Messenger (S) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يَمْلأُ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَ أُمَّةِ مُحَمَّدٍ غَنِىً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the time of al-Mahdi, Allah will make the hearts of the community of
Muhammad free from want.[^172]

### Removing Harms From Shiites

Imam Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(ألْمَهْدِيُّ) يَكُونُ رَحْمَةً لِلمؤْمِنِينَ وَعَذَاباً عَلَى
الْكَافِفرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Mahdi is a source of mercy for believers and punishment for the
unbelievers.[^173]

Imam Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا قَامَ قَائِمُنَا أذْهَبَ اللَّهُ عَنْ شِيعَتِنَا الْعَهَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When the Rising Imam rises up, Allah will remove all harms from the
Shiites.[^174]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(نْ قَامَ قَائِمُونَا) يُوسَعُ اللَّهُ عَلَى شِيعَتِنَا، وَلَو لأ مَا
يُدْرِكُهُمْ مِنَ السَعَادَةِ لَبَغَوْا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the time of al-Mahdi, Allah will improve the situation of the
Shiites, for if they are not happy, they will rebel.[^175]

Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا قَامَ الْقَائِمُ أذْهَبَ اللَّهُ عَنْ كُلِّ مُؤْمِنٍ الْعَاهَةَ
وَ رَدَّ إلَيهِ قُوَّتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When our support rises up, he will remove harms from believers and
restore them their power.[^176]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا قَامَ الْقَائِمُ جَاءَتِ الْمُزَامَلْةٌ؛ وَ يَأتِي الرَّجُلُ إلَى
كِيسِ أخِيهِ فَيَأخُذُ حَاجَتَهُ لأيَمْنَعُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When our support rises up, the era of concord will come about and every
person takes what he needs from the purse of his brother without being
prevented.[^177]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا أسْرِي بِي أوْحَى إلَيِ رَبِّي...وَ بِهِ (الْمَهْدِيِّ)
أنْتَقِمُ مِنْ أعْدَائِ وَهُوَ رَاحَةٌ لأِوْلِيَائ، وَهُوَ الَّذِي
يَشْفِي قُلُوبَ شِيعَتِك مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ وَالْجَاحِدِينَ
وَالكَافِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

During the Night of Ascension, Allah said to Holy Prophet (S) about
al-Mahdi: I will take revenge from enemies through him. He is the source
of tranquility for My friends and it is he who will calm the Shiites
from experiencing of revenge of oppressors and unbelievers.[^178]

### Promoting Intellect, knowledge and Morality

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا قَامَ قَائِمُنَ وَضَعَ يَدَهُ عَلَي رُؤوسِ الْعِبَادِ، فَجَمَعَ
بِهِ عُقُولَهُمْ، وَأكْمَلَ بِهِ أخْلأقَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When our support rises up, he puts his hand on the heads of the servants
whereby he promotes their wisdom and morality.[^179]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا قَائِمَنَا إذَا قَامَ مَدَّ اللَّهُ لِشِيعَتِنَا فِي أسْمَاعِهِمْ
وَأبْصَارِهِمْ حَتَّي لأيَكُونَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَينَ الْقَائِمِ بَرِيدٌ؛
يُكَلِّمُهُمْ فَيَسْمَعُونَ وَ يَنْظُرُونَ إلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When our support rises up, Allah will strengthen the Shiites’ vision and
hearing where by there is no need for a link between them and the
standing Imam. He will speak to them while they listen to and look at
him.[^180]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألْعِلْمُ سَبْعَةَ وَ عِشْرُونَ حَرْفاً. فَجَمِيعُ مَا جأءَتْ بِهِ
الرُّسُلُ حَرْفَانِ. فَلَمْ يَعْرِفِرالنَّاسُ حَتَى الْيَوْمَ غَيْرَ
الْحَرْفَينِ فَإذَارقَامَ قَائِمُنَا أخْرَجَ الْخَمَسَةَ
وَالْعِشْرِينَ حَرْفاً فَبَثَهَا فِي النَّاسِ وَ ضَمَّ إلَيهَا
الْحَرْفَيْنِ حَتَّى يَبُثَّهَا سَبْعَةَ وَ عِشْرِينَ حَرْفاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Knowledge has twenty-seven parts. What the prophets have brought are two
parts and people do not know more than these two parts to date. When our
support rises up, he will bring with him the other twenty-five parts and
spread the m among people so that they will become twenty-seven parts
all together.[^181]

### Final Rule

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ دَوْلَتَنَا آخِرُ الدَّولِ. وَلَمْ يَبْقَ أهْلُ بَيتٍ لَهُم
دَوْلَةٌ لأ مَلَكوا إلأ مَلَكُوا قَبْلَنَا، لِئَلأ يَقُولُوا إذَا
رَأوا وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِين سِيرَتَنَا: إذَا مَلَكْنَا
سِرْنَالابِمِثْلِ سِيرَةِ هَئُلأءِ! وَهُوَا قَوْلُ اللَّهِ تَعَالَى:
  </p>
</blockquote>

Our rule is the last one. No dynasty will come after our rule lest they
will say if the rule were ours we would act like them. This is the
meaning of Allah’s saying:

***The good end is for those who guard against evil.***[^182]

### How to Salute Imam al-Mahdi?

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

Should you survive as to see him, when you look at him, say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أسَّلأمُ عَلَيْكُمْ أهْلَ بَيْتِ الرَّحْمَةِ وَنُّبُوَّةِ وَمَعْدِنَ
الْعِلْمِ وَمَوضِعِ الِّسَالَةِ السَّلأمُ عَلَيكَ يَا بَقِّيَّةَ
اللَّهِ فِي أرْضِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O people of the House of the Prophet and of Mercy,
source of knowledge, and seat of Divine Mission. Peace be upon you, O
Allah’s Reminder on the earth.

Ahl Al-Bayt And Altruism
------------------------

Self-sacrifice and preferring others interests above their own is an
inherent feature of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.). It can be seen in the life of
each of them so much so that they helped both those who were and those
who were not entitled to it. The Holy Prophet has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّا لَنُعطِي َيْرَ الْمُسْتَحِقِّ حَذَراً مِنْ رَدٍرالْمُسْتَحِقِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We give away to all out of fear of rejecting a needy person.[^183]

Abu Tamzah Thamali says: I heard Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.) saying to
his slave-girl, “Feed any needy person who passes by my house.” At this
time, I said to the Imam, “But everyone who wants something and
stretches out his hand is not needy.” The Imam said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخَافُ أنْ يَكُونَ بَعْضُ مَنْ يَسْألُنَا مُحِقاً فَلا نُطْعِمُهُ،
وَنَرُدُّهُ، فَيَنْزِلُ بِنَا أهْلَ البَيْتِ مَا نَزَلَ بِيَعْقُوبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I fear to reject the one who asks for help as a needy and we fail to
feed him. Then it may happen to us Ahl al-Bayt, what had happened to
Prophet Jacob.”[^184]

Ahl al-Bayt’s self-sacrifice was such that they sometimes gave away
whatever they had in the way of Allah.

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الْحَسَنَ بْنَ عَلِيٍّ قَاسَمَ رَبَّهُ ثلأثَ مَرَّاتٍ حَتَّى
نَعْلاً وَنَعْلاً وَثَوْباً وَ ثَوباً وَدِينَاراً وَدِينَاراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Hasan ibn Ali gave away his shoes, garments and dinars in the way of
Allah.”[^185]

### An Extraordinary Example of Altruism

Hasan Basri says: One day, Imam Husayn (a.s.) approached his orchard to
find his slave sitting and eating some bread. He sat under a palm-tree
closely observing him. The slave threw a piece of bread for a dog nearby
for every piece of bread, which he ate himself. At the end, he thanked
Allah saying, “O Allah, bless me and my master as You blessed his
parents. You are the best of the Merciful.”

At this time, Imam Husayn rose up and called him by name. The slave who
was frightened rose up and said, “My master! O master of all believers!
I did not notice you. Forgive me.” The Imam said, “You should forgive
me, for I entered the orchard without permission!” The slave said, “Are
you saying this because of your excellence, magnanimity and generosity?”
The Imam said, “I saw you feeding the dog while you were eating
yourself. Why?” The slave said, “My master, while I was eating, the dog
was looking at me and I was ashamed of its look. Besides, it is the dog,
which guards your orchard and I am your slave. We both live on what you
give us.”

Imam Husayn started crying and said, “You are free in the way of Allah
and I give away one thousand dinars to you!” The slave said, “Even if
you set me free, I would like to work in your orchard.” The Imam said,
“One must practice what one preaches. I entered the orchard without your
permission and I am now giving it away to you with whatever in it.” The
slave said, “If you have given away this orchard to me, I too will give
it to your followers.”[^186]

### Generosity under the hardest conditions

It is noteworthy that Ahl al-Bayt did not cease to give away even under
the hardest conditions. In this connection, they have related: When a
needy person heard that a community had gathered in the desert of Ninawa
on the Day of Ashura, he set off for that place. Seeing him, Imam Husayn
asked about his situation. The man said, “I am a needy man and I have
heard that a large group of people have gathered here. I said to my self
perhaps they might give me something.” The Imam said, “Stand here and do
not go away.” The Imam went to his camp and wrapped in a cloth what the
man needed and gave it to him. The man became happy and went away!

### Forgiving The Guilty

Ubaydullah ibn al-Hurr al-Jufi was a moody person who was for justice at
one moment and for injustice at another. Sometimes, he was neutral too!
Although he was from Iraq, he rushed to help Muawiyah in the Battle of
Siffin. He was at the service of Ahl al-Bayt’s archenemy that is
Muawiyah throughout the battle and fought against Imam Ali (a.s.).
Thinking that he could not live in Iraq any longer, Ubaydullah went to
Syria along with Muawiyah after the end of the battle.

There was a rumor in Iraq that Ubaydullah ibn al-Turr had been killed in
the battle. Hence, his wife married Ikrimah ibn al-Khabis. Hearing this
news, Ubaydullah who was very fond of his wife decided to return to the
city of Kufah to make his wife divorce her new husband. Muawiyah warned
him against going to Kufah, saying, “If you go there, you will be killed
by Ali’s sword!” Yet, he answered, “I have no fear of going there, for I
am going towards justice. Ali’s morality is different from yours. He is
heavenly and will dispense justice.”

So, Ubaydullah came to Kufah. First, he went to see the new husband of
his wife but the man refused to divorce her. Ubaydullah, who could not
resist him, went to Kufah Mosque to see Ali (a.s.). He found a large
group of people surrounding Imam Ali and lodged his complaint. Imam Ali
(a.s.) said, “Aren't you the same person who helped Muawiyah against me
in the Battle of Siffin and drew sword against believers?” He answered
“I have not come here to be questioned rather I have come here to find a
solution. Return my wife to me.”

Imam Ali ordered to his servant to bring the husband of the woman. He
called on him to divorce his wife so that she will marry her first
husband. The man said, “My wife is pregnant.” Imam Ali ordered a house
to be hired and the woman was transferred there. A nurse too was hired
at the cost of Amir al-Muminin to take care of her until the time of
delivery so that she will later marry her first husband after observing
all the legal procedures.[^187]

Forgiving offences and ignoring unkindness of others was an act of
manliness for the Ahl al-Bayt. Allah’s Messenger has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُرُوءَتُنَا أهلَ الْبَيتِ الْعَفْوُ عَمَّنْ ظَلَمَنَا وَإعْطَاءُ مَنْ
حَرَمَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The manliness of us, Ahl al-Bayt, means to forgive one who has done
injustice to us and to give to one who has withheld from us.

Ahl al-Bayt did not utter this truth just verbally. They always
practiced it. Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) has reported: A Jew woman poisoned a
piece of meat and brought it to the Holy Prophet (S) so as to kill him.
When her plot was divulged, the Holy Prophet interrogated her, “What
made you to do this?” She said, “I said to myself that this meat will
not harm him if he is Allah’s Messenger and will rid people of his rule
if he is a king.” Hearing this, the Holy Prophet pardoned her.[^188]

Ibn Abil-Hadid, in *Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah*, describing Imam Ali, has
said: He was the most tolerant in forgiving the offenders and the most
forgiving towards the guilty ones. The truth of this claim is proved in
the Battle of the Camel when he defeated Marwan ibn Hakam, the most
hostile enemy, but forgave him.[^189]

### Forgive Me for the Sake of Hasan and Husayn

Allah’s Messenger ordered an offender to be arrested to punish him. The
fugitive offender tried to hide himself in one house then another to
escape punishment. He kept himself from being seen by the people for
sometime but it was hard to continue with this act. One day, he was
looking through a small window when he saw Hasan and Husayn (a.s.)
passing by. He opened the door, came out, put them on his shoulder and
set out for the Prophet’s Mosque. When he entered the mosque, the Holy
Prophet was on the pulpit. So he loudly said, “O Allah’s Messenger! I
ask you by these two honorable persons to forgive me.” The Holy Prophet
forgave him with kindness and tolerance.[^190]

### Forgiving the corrupt on the Earth and Anti-Islam Fighters

A person who was in the presence of Imam Ali in Basrah asked him, “What
is the punishment of a person who enters battle against Allah?” The Imam
said, “Banishment, amputation of hand or foot, or execution, based on
the Quranic order.” He asked, “If this person is Harithah ibn Zayd, what
will be the order?” The Imam said, “He is subject to the same order.” He
said, “O Amir al-Muminin! Harithah had come to ask you for forgiveness!”
The Imam said, “Let him come here.” When Harithah entered, he fell to
Imam Ali’s feet, but the Imam took his arms and said, “Rise up! Allah
has forgiven you.”[^191]

Ahl Al-Bayt And Humbleness
--------------------------

Humbleness is an outstanding feature in the lives of Ahl al-Bayt.

Ibn Masud reports: A person came to the presence of Allah’s Messenger
and when he started to speak, he was trembling. The Holy Prophet (S)
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَوِّنْ عَلَيْكَ! فَلَسْتُ بِمَلِكٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Calm down; I am not a king.”[^192]

Another person reports: A group of people and I went to the presence of
the Holy Prophet (S) and said, “You are our master.” The Holy Prophet
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّيِّدُ اللَّهُ تَبَارَكَ وَ تَعَالى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is the Master.”[^193]

Abu-Basir reports: Imam al-Sadiq went to the public bath whose owner
said, “Let me evacuate the public bath for you!” Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.)
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لأ حَاجَةَ لِي فِي ذَالِكَ. ألْمُؤمِنُ أخَفُّ مِنْ ذَالِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“No, it is not necessary. The pious believer does not bother for those
things.”[^194]

It is also reported that Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) went to a public bath. A
person who had not recognized him said, “O gentleman! Rub me with this
flannel!” Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) did so. At this time people who were in
the bath introduced Imam al-Ridha to him, the man became ashamed; he
made an apology and an attempted to draw himself aside. However the Imam
calmed him with his words and kept on rubbing him with the
flannel![^195]

Humility is like a seed, which when sown in the earth will bear abundant
fruits. With their humility, the Ahl al-Bayt made the realm of obedience
come to fuition. Some of these fruits are knowledge, awareness and
vision. They have been chosen as leaders of guidance until the Judgment
Day because of their in-depth insight into the truth of universe. Hence,
all should be aware that to take lead ahead of them will cause perdition
and to ignore them will cause bewilderment. The Holy Prophet has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلأ تَسْبِقُوهُمْ فَتَهْلِكُو، وَلأ تُعَلَّمُوهُمْ فَهُمْ أعْلَمُ
مِنْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not take lead ahead of my Ahl al-Bayt, for you will come to perdition
nor do your teach them, for they are more knowledgeable than you.[^196]

He has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإنَّهُمْ أحْلَمُكُمْ صِغَاراً وَ أعْلَمَكُمْ كِبَاراً.
لأيُدْخِلُونَكُمْ فِي ضَلألَةٍ وَلأ يُخْرِجُونَكُمْ مِنْ هُدىً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Be aware that Ahl al-Bayt are the wisest in childhood and the most
knowledgeable in their maturity. They will never misguide you nor will
they take you out of true guidance.[^197]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said to Salamah ibn Kuhayl and Hakam ibn Utaybah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَرِّقَا وَ غَرِّبَا، فَلأ تَجِدَانِ عِلْماً صَحِيحاً إلأ شَيْئاً
خَرَجَ مِنْ عِنْدِنَا أهْلَ الْبَيْتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You will never attain sound knowledge neither in the east nor in the
west but with us, Ahl al-Bayt. [^198]

The Imam has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحُنْ خزَّانُ عِلْمِ اللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We, the Ahl al-Bayt, are treasures of Divine knowledge.[^199]

Imam Husayn has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا نَدْرِي مَا يَنْقِمُ النَّاسُ مِنَّا! إنَّا لَبَيْتُ الرَّحْمَةِ
وَ شَجَرَةُ النُّبُوَّةِ وَ مَعْدِنُ الْعِلْمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We do not know why people harbor enmity against us while we are from the
House of mercy, the tree of Prophethood and the source of
knowledge.[^200]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) reports: When it was noontime, Ali ibn Husayn
performed his prayer and then was engaged in invocations and greeted the
Holy Prophet (S) and Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ:
شَجَرَةِ النُبُوَّةِ وَ مَوْضِعِ الرِّسَالَةِ وَمُخْتَلَفِ
الْمَلأئِكَةِ وَ مَعْدِنِ الْعِلْمِ وَأهْلِ بَيْتِ الْوَحْيِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah; Send greetings on Muhammad and on the descendents of Muhammad,
the evergreen tree of Prophethood, the destination of the Divine
messages, the academy where angels came to learn and know, the
depository of wisdom, and the household of Divine Revelation.

Culture Of Ahl Al-Bayt: Excerpts
--------------------------------

Ahl al-Bayt’s culture is the most perfect moral, ideological, socio-
political, educational and scientific culture, a large section of which
has been compiled by the believing Shiite narrators. Such books as
al-Kafi, Man-La-Yahdhuruhu-l-Faqih, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, al-Istibsar,
Basair al- Darajat, al-Mahasin by al-Barqi, al-Amali by Shaykh al-Mufid,
al-Amali by Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Khisal, Jami al-Akhbar, Ilal al-Sharai,
al-Wafi, al-Shafi, Nur al-Thaqalayn, Bihar al-Anwar, Wasail al-Shiah,
Mustadrak al-Wasail, al-Awalim, al-Mahajjah al-Baydha…. etc. contain
narratives on the culture of Ahl al-Bayt, the practice of which will
ensure good life in this world and the hereafter, as well as Allahss
pleasure and the eternal Paradise. The Holy Prophet has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا خُلِقْتُمَ لِلْفَنَاءِ، بَلْ خُلِقْتُمْ لِلْبَقَاءِ. وَإنَّمَا
تُنْقَلُونَ مِنْ دَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You were not born for extinction, rather for survival. With death, you
are only displaced; that is you are transferred from one house to
another house.[^201]

He has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ أخْوَفَ مَا أخَافُ عَلَى أمَّتِي الْهَوَى وَطُولُ الأمَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I fear two things for my ummah: carnal and far-away desires.[^202]

He has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِزُّ الْمُؤْمِنِ اسْتِغْنَاؤُهُ عَنِ النَّاسِ، وَفِي الْقِنَاعَةِ
الْحُرِّيَةٌ وَالْعِزُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A believer’s honor lies in his independence from people and his freedom
and honor lie in contentment.[^203]

Imam Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَرْءُ يُوزَنُ بِقَولِهِ وَيُقَوَّمُ بِفِعْلِهِ؛فَقُلْ مَا تَرْجَحُ
زِنَتُهُ، وَافْعَلْ مَا تَجِلُّ قِيمَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Man is evaluated by his words and assessed by his deeds. Therefore, say
what makes your words weighty and act in such away that makes your
behavior valuable.[^204]

He has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَحَلَّوا بالأخْذِ بالْفَضْلِ وَالْكَفِّ عَنِ الْبَغْيِ وَالعَمَلِ
بالْحَقِّ وَالإنْصَافِ مِنَ النَّفْسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Adorn yourself with moral virtues and avoid tyranny. Behave justly and
be fair to all.

He further says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْبَغِي لِلْعَاقِلِ أنْ يَحْتَرِسَ مِنْ سُكْرِ المَالِ وَسُكْرِ
الْقُدْرَةِ وَسُكْرِ الْعِلْمِ وَسُكْرِ المَدْحِ وَسُكْرِ الشَّبَابِ؛
فَإنَّ لِكُلِّ ذَلِكَ رِيَاحاً خَبِيثَةَ تَسْلُبُ الْعَقْلَ وَ
تَسْتَخِفُّ الوَقَارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Man should preserve himself from being intoxicated with wealth, power,
knowledge, praise, flattery and youth, for each of these intoxications
are poisoned winds which obliterates wisdom and reduces a man’s
dignity.[^205]

Lady Fatimah (a.s) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي أحِبُّ مِنْ دُنْيَاكُمْ ثَلأثاً: الإنْفَاقَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ،
وَتِلأوَةَ كِتَابِ اللَّهِ، وَالنَّظَرَ إلَى وَجْهِ أبِي رَسُولِ
اللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I love three things of your world: giving away in the way of Allah,
reciting the Book of Allah, and looking at the face of my father -
Allah’s Messenger.[^206]

Imam Hasan (a.s.) was asked the meaning of magnanimity; he replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شُحُّ الرَّجُلِ عَلَى دِينِهِ، وَ إصْلأحُهُ، وَقِيَامُهُ بالْحُقُوقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zeal for faith, rectification of wealth, observation of Allah's and
people's rights, as well as manliness and fairness.[^207]

Addressing Imam Husayn (a.s.), a man said, “I am a sinner. I cannot
refrain from committing sin. Give me an advice.” The Imam said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إفْعَلْ خَمْسَة أشْيَاءَ وَأذْنِبْ مَا شِءتَ. فأوَّلُ ذَلِكَ: لأ
تَأكُلْ رِذْقِ اللَّهِ وَأذنِبْ مَا شِئْتَ. وَالثَانِي: أخْرُجْ مِنْ
وِلأيَةِ اللَّهِ وأذْنِبْ مَا شِئْتَ. وَالثَلِثُ: أطْلُبْ مَوْضِعاً
لأيَرَاكَ اللهُ وَأذْنِبْ مَا شِئتَ. وَالرَّابِعُ: إذَا جَاءَ مَلَكُ
لِيَقْبِضَ رُوحَكَ فَادْفَعْهُ عَنْ نَفْسِكَ وَأذْنِبْ مَا شِئْتَ.
وَالْخَامِسُ: إذَامَالِكٌ فِي النَّارِ فَلأ تَدْخُلْ فِي النَّارِ
وَأذْنِبْ مَا شِئْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do five things and then commit any sin you wish: Firstly, do not eat
sustenance given by Allah and then commit any sin you wish. Secondly,
come out of the guardianship of Allah and then commit any sin you wish.
Thirdly, go to a place where Allah cannot see you and then commit any
sin you wish. Fourthly, when the Angel of Death comes to take your life,
escape from him and commit any sin you wish. Fifthly, when the
gatekeeper of the Hell intends to throw you into it, do not enter and
then commit any sin you wish.[^208]

Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمَّا حَقُّ وَلَدِكَ فَتَعْلَمَ أنَّهُ مِنْكَ وَمُضَافٌ إلَيكَ فِي
عَاجِلِ الدُنْيَا بِخَيرِهِ وَشَرِّهِ، وَأنَّكَ مَسْئولٌ عَمَّا
ولِّيِتَهُ مِنْ حُسْنِ الأدَب وَالدِّلالَةِ عَلَى رَبِه وَالْمَعُونَةِ
لَهُ عَلَى طَاعَتِهِ فِي نَفْسِهِ، فَمُثابٌ عَلى ذَلِكَ وَ مُعَاقَبٌ،
فَاعْمَلْ فِي أمْرِهِ عَمَلَ الْمُتَزَيِّنِ بِحُسْنِ أثرِهِ عَلَيهِ
فِي عَاجِلِ الدُّنْيَا، الْمُعْذِرِ إلَى رَبهِ فِيمَا بَيْنَكَ
وَبَيْنَهُ بِحُسْنِ الْقِيَامِ عَلَيهِ وَالأخْذُ لَهُ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The right of your child is that you should know that he is from you and
will be ascribed to you, through both his good and his evil, in the
immediate affairs of this world. You are responsible for what has been
entrusted to you, such as educating him in good conduct, pointing him in
the direction of his Lord, and helping him to obey Him. So, act towards
him with the action of one who knows that he will be rewarded for good
doing toward him and punished for evildoing.[^209]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللَّهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لِلشَّرِّ أقْفَلاً، وَجَعَلَ مَفَاتِيحَ
تَلْكَ الأقْفَالِ الشَّرَابَ. وَالْكَذِبُ شَرٌّ مِنَ الشَّرَابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah has set locks for evil things so as to protect men from their
harms. Wine, this intoxicating liquid, is the key to all evil things.
Telling lie is worse than drinking wine.[^210]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ مُدْمِنَ الْخَمْرِ كَعَابِدِ وَثَنٍ؛ وَتُورِثُهُ الإرْتِعَاشَ
وَتَهْدِمُ مُرُوئَتَهُ وَ تَحْمِلُهُ عَلَى التَّجَسُّرِ عَلَى
الْمَحَارِمِ مِنْ سَفْكِ الدِّمَاءِ وَرُكُوبِ الزِّنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A habitual drunkard is as an idolater. One who always drinks wine will
be afflicted with palsy and his morality will diminish. Drinking wine
makes man so bold in committing sin that he will not refuse to shed
blood nor engage in adultery.[^211]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إحْذَرْ مِنَ النَّاسِ ثَلأثَةً: الْخَائِنَ وَالظَّلُومَ وَالَّمَّامَ؛
لأنَّ مَنْ خَانَ خَانَكَ، وَمَنْ ظَلَمَ لَكَ سَيَظْلِمُكَ، وَمَنْ
نَمَّ إلَيْكَ سَيَنِمُّ عَلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Avoid three groups of people when associating with and making friends:
traitor, oppressor, and talebearer. One who commits treason in your
interest one day will commit treason against you another day. One who
oppresses another for your sake will oppress you soon. One who tells
tales to you about others will tell tales to others about you
soon.[^212]

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s) passed by a dark-colored man. He saluted him,
sat beside him, spoke to him for a while and expressed his readiness to
meet his needs. Some people who were watching this scene, said, “O son
of Allah’s Messenger! Do you associate with this person and ask about
his needs?” The Imam said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَبْدٌ مِنْ عَبِيدِ اللَّهِ وَأخٌ فِي كِتَاب اللَّهِ وَ جَارٌ فِي
بِلأدِ اللَّهِ. خَيْرُ الآبَاءِ آدَمُ وَأفْضَلُ الأدْيَانِ الإسْلأمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He is one of the servants of Allah and based on the Holy Quran, he is
our brother-in-faith and our neighbor in the cities of Allah. Adam who
is the best father and Islam, which is the best religion, have linked us
to him.[^213]

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلْيَكُنْ نَفَقَتُكَ عَلَى نَفْسِكَ وَعِيَالِكَ قَصْداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Be moderate in your expenditures on yourself and your family.[^214]

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أطَاعَ هَوَاهُ أعْطَى عَدُوَّهُ مُنَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who obeys his carnal desires has realized the desires of his
enemy.[^215]

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا كَانَ زَمَانٌ الْعَدْلُ فِيهِ أغْلَبُ مِنَ الْجَورِ، فَحَرَامٌ
أنْ يُظَنَّ بِأحَدٍ سُوءاً حَتَّى يُعْلَمَ ذَلِكَ مِنْهُ. وَإذَا كَانَ
زَمَانٌ الْجَوْرِ، أغْلَبُ مِنَ الِّعَدْلِ، فَلَيْسَ لأِحَدٍ أنْ
يَظُنَّ بِأحَدٍ خَيْراً مَا لَمْ يَعْلَمْ ذَلِكَ مِنهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When justice prevails in a society rather than injustice, it is unlawful
to be suspicious of any person unless he commits an evil act. But when
injustice prevails in society, it is not good to be optimistic about
anyone unless his good act is witnessed.[^216]

The Holy Prophet has said:

Parents will be rewarded greatly by Allah. They say, “Our Lord! What is
all this favor for? Our good deeds are not worthy of such a reward.”
They will be replied, “All this reward is for teaching the Holy Quran to
your children and for making them aware of Islamic culture.”[^217]

Ahl Al-Bayt And The Holy Quran
------------------------------

Beyond doubt, understanding the Holy Quran does not depend solely on
knowing the meaning of the Arabic words or on being familiar with the
Arabic literature. Were it so, Allah would not have introduced in His
Book the people of the Reminder, who are Ahl al-Bayt according to the
narrations related by both Shiite and Sunni Muslims, as the teachers of
the Holy Quran.

Considering that Allah has introduced teacher for the Holy Quran,
understanding the main parts of this Book which according to Imam Ali
contain “Its permission and prohibitions, its obligations and
discretion, its repealing injunctions and the repealed ones, its
permissible matters and compulsory ones, its permissible and the general
ones, its clear and obscure ones” is not a layman’s job.[^218]

People from all walks of life, whether academicians or theologians,
intellectuals or non-intellectuals, scholars or laymen, mystics or
philosophers need to refer to valid narrations and reports by Allah’s
Messenger and Ahl al-Bayt so as to enter the profound sea of the Holy
Quran. They have to board the ship of their knowledge in order to find
the truth.

Should they choose a path other than this, they will have to impose
their own findings on the Quranic verses as the meaning of this Divine
Book; hence they will inflict irreparable damage on themselves and on
Muslims by doing so.

Commenting on the Holy Quran, Allah’s Messenger has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ظَاهِرُهُ أنِيقُ وَبَاطِنُهُ عَمِيقٌ. لأتُحْصَى عَجَائِبُهُ
وَلأتَبْلَى غَرَائِبُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has a well-arranged and well-decorated appearance and it has a
profound inward aspect. Its marvels cannot be counted and its wonders
will never get old.[^219]

How can we possibly understand the Holy Quran when Allah’s Messenger
describes it as such? Only those should speak of the interpretation of
the Holy Quran who are firmly rooted in knowledge as described by the
Divine Book itself. According to valid and genuine narrations, those
firmly rooted in knowledge are no one but the Holy Prophet and his
purified Ahl al-Bayt. Should the implicit verses of the Holy Quran be
interpreted and the interpretation accepted without seeking help from
Ahl al-Bayt, it would certainly lead man to atheism and perdition. These
verses must be interpreted by those firmly rooted in knowledge and
literal meaning must be avoided.

As for the interpretation of abrogating and abrogated, dependent and
independents as well as general and particular verses, it should be done
by Ahl al-Bayt. Any personal interpretation of the Quranic verses will
make man afflicted with an irreparable loss. As an example, we read the
following in the Holy Quran,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَدُ اللَّهِ فَوْقَ أَيْدِيهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The hand of Allah is above their hands. (48:10)***

Hand does not mean a physical hand rather it means ‘Power’. Should we
take hand as the real hand, we have thought of Allah as having a body,
which is an evident blasphemy. Therefore, the interpretation of the
above-mentioned verse is: the power of Allah is above all powers.

Another example is 17:72 of the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ كَانَ فِي هَٰذِهِ أَعْمَىٰ فَهُوَ فِي الْآخِرَةِ أَعْمَىٰ
وَأَضَلُّ سَبِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever is blind in this world, he shall also be blind in the
hereafter; and more erring from the way.(17:72)***

If we take the literal meaning of ‘blind’, we have to believe that those
believers who stood at a high rank in terms of faith and good deeds and
were favored by the Prophets and the Imams are deprived of seeing the
scenes in Paradise - a belief that does not conform with 43:71 of the
Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِيهِ الْأَنْفُسُ وَتَلَذُّ الْأَعْيُنُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Therein shall be what their souls yearn after and wherein eyes shall
delight (43:71)***

Therefore, we should give in to the Ahl al-Bayt’s interpretation of the
word, which is ‘blind-hearted’ not ‘physically blind’.

Thus, we realize that the implicit verses need an interpretation not
based on the appearance and the literal meaning of the word but it must
be interpreted in another way. This is exactly what Allah has entrusted
to those firmly rooted in knowledge:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَعْلَمُ تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلَّا اللَّهُ ۗ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي
الْعِلْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***None knows its interpretation except Allah and those who are firmly
rooted in knowledge. (3:7)***

Those who are firmly rooted in knowledge are those who enjoy a firm and
true knowledge in which there is no change. It is knowledge that Allah
has caused to shine in the hearts of His servants; namely, the Prophets
and the Imams. In this relation, Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ الرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ وَ نَحْنُ نَعْلَمُ تَاوِيلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We are firmly rooted in knowledge and we know how to interpret the Holy
Quran.[^220]

Truly the only knowledge, which is not subject to change and is
different from the knowledge of all scientists and scholars, is the
knowledge of the Prophets and the Imams, which is fixed until the
Resurrection Day. This is so because their knowledge is Divine and based
on intuition; that is to see the truth with the eyes of the heart.
Beyond doubt such hearts never make an error in realizing the truths and
in finding the manifest and hidden secrets of the universe.

Ahl Al-Bayt, The World And The Hereafter
----------------------------------------

Ahl al-Bayt were extremely active in all aspects of life for the good of
this world and the Hereafter and did not give up the struggle. Imam
al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لأتَكْسَلُوا فِي طَلَبِ مَعَايشِكُمْ، فَإنَّ آبَاءَنَا كَانُوا
يَرْكُضُونَ فِيهَا وَ يَطْلُبُونَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not be lazy in earning a living, for our forefathers were running
after it while seeking it.

Amir al-Muminin, Imam Ali has reported: Once in Medina, I became very
hungry and to find a job, I went to the vicinity of Medina when I saw a
woman gathering a lump of clay to be mixed with water. I went to her and
agreed that for each bucket of water, she would give me a date. Hence, I
filled sixteen buckets with water in a way my hands were blistered. I
washed my hands and went to the woman and said: “See the blisters in the
palms of my hands!” The woman gave me sixteen dates and I went to see
the Holy Prophet to whom I told the story and he shared the dates with
me.[^221]

Abdullah ibn Hasan says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهِ، أعْتَقَ عَلِيٌّ ألْفَ أهْلِ بَيْتٍ بِمَا مَجَلَتْ يَدَاهُ
وَ عَرَقَ جَبِينُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

By Allah (I swear), Ali set free one thousand slaves in the way of Allah
with the wage he had earned with blisters in the palms of his hand and
the sweat of forehead.[^222]

Abd al-Ala says:  
 On a hot day of summer, I met Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) who was working
hard. I said, “May I be your ransom! You have a high rank before Allah;
why are you giving yourself so much trouble?” The Imam said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَبْدَا الأعَلَى! خَرَجْتُ فِي طَلَبِ الرِّزْقِ لأسْتَغْنِيَ عَن
مِثْلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Abd al-Ala! I have come out seeking my daily bread so as to be
independent of your like.”[^223]

Ali ibn Hamzah says: I saw Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) working on a
farmland. While his two feet were soaked with sweat, I said, “May I be
your ransom! Where are your men?” He said, “One who was better than my
father and me worked with his hands on this farmland.” I asked who he
was. The Imam replied, “Allah’s Messenger, Amir al-Muminin and my
forefathers who worked with their hands. This is the duty of the
Prophets, Messengers, their successors and the righteous ones.”[^224]

Ahl al-Bayt, in addition to working hard for earning a living, were
working hard for the Hereafter so much so that no one could be their
equal in terms of praying and spirituality. They encouraged their
followers to pray and act piously; they considered salvation in the
Hereafter contingent on submission to Allah and prayer and bewared them
of desiring for salvation without having piety and fear of Allah.

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) has been quoted by Jabir al-Jufi to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا جَابِرُ، أيكْتَفِي مَنِ أتَّخَذَ التّشَيُّعِ أنْ يَقُولَ
بِحُبِّنَا أهْلَ الْبَيْتِ؟ فَوَ اللَّهِ مَا شِيعَتُنَا إلأمَنِ إتَّى
اللَّهَ وَ أطَاعَهُ. وَمَا كَانُو يُعَرَفُونَ إلأ بِالتَّوَاضُعِ
وَالتَّخَشُّعِ وَأداءِ الأمَانَةِ وَكَثَرَةِ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ،
وَالصَّوْمُ وَالصَّلأةِ، وَالْبِرِّ بِالْوَالِدَيْنِ، وَتَّعَهُّدِ
لِلْجِيرَانِ مِنَ الفُقَرَاءِ وَأهْلِ الْمَسْكَنَةِ وَالْغَارِ مِينَ
وَالأيْتَامِ، وَصِدْقِ الْحَدِيثِ، وَتِلأوَةِ الْقُرْآنِ، وَكَفِّ
الألْسُنِ عَنِ النَّاسِ إلأ مِنْ خَيْرٍ، وَ كَانُوا أمَنَاءَ
عَشَائِرِهِمْ فِي الأشْيَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Jabir, do you think that it is sufficient for those who claim being
Shia to say that they cherish us; the Prophet’s Household? By Allah I
swear, our Shia are only those who fear and obey Allah. Their signs are
modesty, submission, fulfillment of the trusts, very much reference to
Allah, fasting, offering prayers, piety to (their) parents, aiding the
neighbors especially the poor, the destitute, the indebted, and the
orphans, truth, reciting the Quran, and avoiding mentioning people
except for praising. In addition, they are the most trustful of the
people of their tribes.

I said, “O son of Allah’s Messenger! Today, we do not know anyone who is
having all these features.” The Imam said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا جَابِرُ، لأتَدْهَبَنَّ بِكَ الْمَذَاهِبُ! حَسَبُ الرَّجُلُ أنْ
يَقُولَ أُحِبُّ عَلِيَّاً صَلَوَاتُ اللَّهِ عَلَيْهِ وَأتَولأه؟ فَلَوْ
قَالَ إنِّي أُحِبُّ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ،
وَرَسُولُ اللَّهِ خَيرٌ مِنْ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلأمُ ثُمَّ
لأيَتَّبِعُ سِيرَتَهُ وَلأ يَعْمَلُ بِسُنَّتِهِ مَا نَفَعَهُ حُبُّهُ
إيَّاهُ شَيْئاً، فَاتَّقُواللَّهَ وَاعْمَلُو الِمَا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ.
لَيْسَ بَيْنَ وَبَينَ أحَدٍ قَرَابَةٌ. أحَبُّ الْعِبَادِ إلَى اللَّهِ
عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ وَ أكْرَمُهُمْ عَلَيْهِ أثْقَاهُمْ لَهُ وَأعْمَلُهُم
لَهُ وَأعمَلُهُمْ بِطَاعَتِهِ. يَاجَابِرُ، مَا يَتَقَرَّبُ الْعَبْدُ
إلَى اللَّهِ تَبَارَكَ وَ تَعَالَى إلأ بِالطَّاعَةِ. مَا مَعَنَا
بَرَاءَةٌ مِنَ النَّارِ، وَلأ عَلَى اللَّهِ لأِحَدٍ مِنْكُمْ حُجَّةٌّ.
مَنْ كَانَ للَّه مُطِيعاً فَهُوَ لَنَا وَلِيٌ، وَمَنْ كَانَ للَّهِ
عَاصِياً فَهُوَ لَنَا عَدُوٌّ، وَلأتُنَالُ وِئلأيَتُنَا إلأ
بِالْعَمَلِ وَالْوَرَعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

No, Jabir. Do not misunderstand the matter. Is it enough for a man to
claim that he loves and follows Ali? If he claims that he loves the
Prophet (S), who is preferable to Ali (a.s.), but he does not follow his
traditions and does not act upon his instructions, his claim will be
definitely useless. Hence, you should fear Allah and work for the cause
of obtaining that which He has in possession. There is no relation
between Allah and anybody. The most favorable and honorable servants of
Allah are the most fearing and pious.

O Jabir, the only means through which a servant seeks to gain Allah’s
favor is obedience to Him. We - the Prophet's Household - do not carry a
patent for saving from Hell. Likewise, none of you has a claim against
Allah. He who obeys Allah is only our disciple and whoever disobeys Him
is our enemy. The loyalty to us cannot be gained except by means of
diligent work and piety.[^225]

Addressing Fudhayl, Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلِّغْ مَنْ لَقِيتَ مِنْ مَوَالِينَا عَنَّا السَّلأمَ وَ قُلْ لَهُمْ:
إنِّي لأ أغْنِي عَنْكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئاً إلأبِوَرَعٍ. فَاخْفَظُوا
ألْسِنَتَكُمْ وَكُفُّوا أيْدِيَكُمْ. وَعَلَيْكُمْ. وَ عَلَيْكُمْ
بِاصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلأةِ، إنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Send greetings to our friends and say: We cannot remove Allah’s
chastisement unless you adopt piety. Therefore, hold your tongues, cease
to commit any sin, be patient and perform prayer, for Allah is with the
patient.[^226]

Imam al-Sadiq has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَعَاشِرِ الشِّيعَةِ! كُونُو الَنَا زَيْناً وَلأ تَكُونُوا عَليْنَا
شَيئاً. قُولُو الِلنَّاسِ حُسْناً، وَاحْفَظُوا ألْسِنَتَكُمْ
وَكُفُّوهَا عَنِ الْفُضُولِ وَ قَبِيحِ الْقَولِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Shiite community! Be an ornament for us! Do not do anything indecent!
Speak to men good words! Hold your tongues! Avoid being talkative and
using a foul language.[^227]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) further says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَابْنَ جُنْدَبٍ! بَلِّغْ شِيعَتَنَا وَ قُلْ لَهُم: لأتَدْهَبَنَّ
بِكُم ااْمَذَاهِبُ!فَوَ اللَّهِ لأ تُنَالُ وَ لأيَتُنَا إلأبِالْوَرَعِ
وَالإجْتِهَادِ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَ مُوَاسَاةِ الإخْوَانِ فِي اللَّهِ
وَاَيسَ مِنْ شِيعَتَنَا مَنْ يَظْلِمُ النَّاسَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O son of Jundab! Convey our message to our followers and say to them:
Let not other trends mislead you, for, by Allah, our friendship cannot
be attained save by piety and hard work in the world as well as sympathy
with brothers-in-faith. One who oppresses people is not our
follower.[^228]

Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) say: Committing sins and indecent acts are features of
our enemies. Our followers avoid such things. The Shiites are neither
usurers nor usurpers; they are neither adulterers nor thieves; they are
neither traitors nor breakers of promise; they are neither oppressors
nor deniers of people's rights; they are neither tormentors of their
wives nor tormentors of their children, they neither break anyone's
heart nor slander people.

What Ahl al-Bayt taught people specially their followers who believed in
Allah, giving people their due rights, practicing according to the Holy
Quran, following the Holy Prophet, obeying his rightful successors and
keeping away from all sins. Addressing Abd al-Adhim al-Tasani, Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبْلِغْ عَنِّي أوْلِيَائِي السَّلأمَ وَقُلْ لَهُمْ أنْ لأ يَجْعَلُوا
للشَّيْطَانِ عَلَى أنْفُسِهِمْ سَبِيلاً. وَ مُرُهُم بِاصِّدْقِ فِي
الحَدِيثِ وَأدَاءِ الأمَانَةٍ. وَالْمُرْهُمْ بِالسُّكُوتِ وَ تَرَكِ
الْجِدَالِ فِيمَا لأيُعْنِيهِم وَإقْبَالِ بَعْضِهِمْ عَلَى بَعْضِ
وَالْمُزَاوَرَةِ، فَإنَّ ذَلِكَ قُرْبَةٌ، وَلأ يَشْغَلُوا أنْفُسَهُم
بِتَمْزِيقِ بَعْضِهِم بَعْضاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Convey my greetings to my friends and say to them: Expel Satan from
yourselves. Be honest and truthful. Avoid idle talks and keep silent.
Visit each other most often. By this, you can attain nearness to me.
Avoid dispersion and don't vex others.[^229]

Ahl al-Bayt have always warned their followers against committing sin
and oppression, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإيَّاكُمْ وَمَعَاصِيَ اللَّهِ أنْ تَرَكَبوهَا، فَإنَّهُ مَنِ
إنْتَهَكَ مَاصِيَ اللَّهِ فَرَكِبَهَا فَقَدْ أبْلَغَ فِي السأءَةِ إلَى
نَفْسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Beware of sins, for whoever commits sin will be unjust to himself.

The only way to avoid loss and perdition is to follow Ahl al-Bayt, which
entails Allah’s pleasure, Ahl al-Bayt’s intercession as well as
happiness in this world and the hereafter.

In a letter to the Shiite community, Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has given
important guidelines on ideological, moral and social issues as well as
family life, peaceful coexistence in this world and issues related to
the hereafter the excerpts of which are as follow:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُوا أنّهُ لَيْسَ يُغْنِي عَنَّكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ أحَدٌ مِنْ
خَلْقِهِ شَيْئاً؛ لأ مَلَكٌ مُقَرَّبٌ وَلأ نَبِيٌّ مُرْسَلٌ وَلإ مَنْ
دُونَ ذَلِكَ. فَمَنْ سَرَّهُ أنْ تَنْفَعَهُ شَفَاعَةٌ الشَّافِعِينَ
عِنْدَ اللَّهِ فَلْيَطْلُبْ إلَى اللَّهِ أنْ يَرْضَى عَنْهُ.
وَاعْلَمُوا أنَّ أحَداً مِنْ خَلْقِ اللَّهِ لَمْ يُىصِبْ رِضَا اللَّهِ
إلأ بِطَاعَتِهِ وَ طَا عَةِ رَسُولِهِ وَ طَاعَةِ اللَّهِ، وُلأةِ
أمْرِهِ مِنْ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ، صَلْوَاتُ اللَّهِ عَلَيْهِمْ.
وَمَعْصِيَتُهُم مِنْ مَعْصِيَةِ اللَّهِ، وَ لَمْ يُنْكِرْ فَضْلاً
عَظَمَ أو صَغُرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Know that none of the Allah’s creatures including Archangels and
Prophets can remove an iota of Allah’s punishment from you. Therefore,
anyone who wishes to benefit from the Intercessors’ mediation should ask
Allah to be pleased with him. Be it known to you that none of Allah’s
creatures won His pleasure save by obedience to Him, His Messenger and
the Imams from the Household of Prophet Muhammad. Disobedience to them
is as disobedience to Allah; hence, their virtues should not be
denied.[^230]

[^1]: Al-Khisal: 271/1, H. 13

[^2]: Al-Amali by Shaykh al-Saduq: 465, H. 6

[^3]: Qurb al-Isnad: 44

[^4]: Qurb al-Isnad: 69

[^5]: Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha: 30/2, H. 36

[^6]: Al-Amali by Shaykh al-Tusi: 393, H. 866

[^7]: Al-Kafi: 312/5, H. 38

[^8]: Ilal al-Shara'u: 187.

[^9]: Al-Mahasin: 456/2, H. 386

[^10]: Al-Mahasin: 457/2, H. 388

[^11]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa’d; 4

[^12]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 17

[^13]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 19

[^14]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 21

[^15]: Kitab Al-Zuhd: 34, H. 88

[^16]: Al-Kafi: 225/4, H. 3

[^17]: Nasikh al-Tawarikh: 584/2

[^18]: Sharaf al-Nabi: 69

[^19]: Nasikh al-Tawarikh: 234/3

[^20]: Sharaf al-Nabi: 67

[^21]: Daa’im al-Islam: 60/2, H. 162

[^22]: Awali al-La'ali: 249/2, H. 20

[^23]: Manhaj al-Sadiqin: 370/9

[^24]: Manhaj al-Sadiqin: 370/9

[^25]: Manhaj al-Sadiqin: 371/9

[^26]: Sharaf al-Nabi: 75

[^27]: Sharaf al-Nabi: 79

[^28]: Sharaf al-Nabi: 68

[^29]: Al-Manaqib: 1112/2

[^30]: Al-Kafi: 268/7, H. 40

[^31]: Al-Amali: 467, H. 10

[^32]: Al-Manaqib: 114/2

[^33]: Al-Manaqib: 115/2

[^34]: Bihar al-Anwar, 54/41, H. 1

[^35]: Al-Manaqib: 104/2

[^36]: Al-Mahasin: 629/2, 12, H. 104

[^37]: Hilyat al-Awliya: 139/4

[^38]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah: 65/17

[^39]: Al-Manaqib: 98/2

[^40]: Al-Gharat: 35/1

[^41]: Al-Gharat: 36/1

[^42]: Al-Gharat: 46/1

[^43]: Ihqaq al-Haqq; 539/8

[^44]: Kashf al-Ghummah: 173/1

[^45]: Al-Manaqib: 97/2

[^46]: The Path of Ali: 42

[^47]: Al-Manaqib: 74/2

[^48]: Al-Manaqib: 76/2

[^49]: The path of Ali: 53

[^50]: Kashf al-Yaqin: 86

[^51]: Kashf al-Ghummah: 163/1

[^52]: Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah: 430/2

[^53]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah: 253/11

[^54]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah: 201/2

[^55]: Al-Gharat: 55/1

[^56]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah: 249/1

[^57]: Nahj al-Balaghah: 880, Maxim, 412

[^58]: Jami al-Akhbar: 138

[^59]: Al-Gharat: 65/1

[^60]: Al-Gharat: 75/1

[^61]: Al-Manaqib: 106/2

[^62]: Bihar al-Anwar: 178/53, Chapter: 314, T 9

[^63]: Al-Manaqib: 342/3.

[^64]: Rayahin al-Shariah: 130/1

[^65]: Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda: 30/1

[^66]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal: 236/1

[^67]: Bihar al-Anwar: 46/43

[^68]: Bisharat al-Mustafa: 137

[^69]: Quoted from Alam al-Nisa by Ali Muhammad Ali Dakhil

[^70]: Al-Amali by Shaykh al-Saduq: 178, H. 8

[^71]: al-Khisal: 135/1, H. 149

[^72]: Al-Manaqib: 23/4

[^73]: Sulh al-Hasan 42-43

[^74]: Al-Manaqib: 16/4

[^75]: Al-Manaqib: 16/4

[^76]: Bihar al-Anwar: 352/43, Chapter: 16, H. 29

[^77]: Al-Manaqib: 66/4

[^78]: Al-Manaqib: 65/4

[^79]: Al-Manaqib: 66/4

[^80]: Al-Manaqib: 66/4

[^81]: Al-Manaqib: 66/4

[^82]: Al-Manaqib: 66/4

[^83]: Jami al-Akhbar: 137, Chapter: 96

[^84]: Kitab al-Irshad by Shaykh al-Mufid 145/2

[^85]: Al-Kafi, 132/2, H. 8

[^86]: Kitab al-Irshad by Shaykh al-Mufid: 147/2

[^87]: Ilal al-Shara’i: 231/1, H. 8

[^88]: Al-Amali by Shaykh al-Saduq: 201, H. 12

[^89]: Al-Amali by Shaykh al-Saduq: 220, H. 6

[^90]: Thawab al-Amal wa-Iqab al-Amal: 50

[^91]: Al-Kafi: 68/4; H. 3

[^92]: Al-Manaqib: 163/4

[^93]: Al-Manaqib: 154/4

[^94]: Al-Manaqib: 155/4

[^95]: Bihar al-Anwar: 92/46, Chapter: 5, H. 79

[^96]: Kitab Al-Zuhd: 45, Chapter: 7, H. 119

[^97]: Al-Manaqib: 162/4

[^98]: Al-Kafi: 97/5, T 7

[^99]: Al-Manaqib: 157/2

[^100]: al-Khisal: 517/2, H. 4

[^101]: Kashf al-Ghummah: 80/2

[^102]: Kashf al-Ghummah: 106/2

[^103]: Al-Kafi: 73/5, T 1

[^104]: Al-Irshad by al-Mufid: 166/2

[^105]: Al-Irshad by al-Mufid: 167/2

[^106]: Al-Manaqib: 207/4

[^107]: Kashf al-Ghummah: 118/2

[^108]: Al-Kafi: 448/6, H. 13

[^109]: Al-Kafi: 487/2, H. 3

[^110]: Al-Kafi: 226/3, H. 14

[^111]: Al-Kafi: 323/3, H. 9

[^112]: Basa’ir al-Darajat: 495, H. 2

[^113]: Al-Kafi: 8/4, H. 3

[^114]: Al-Manaqib: 273/4

[^115]: Al-Manaqib: 274/4

[^116]: Al-udad al-Qawiyyah: 155

[^117]: Rijal al-Kashshi: 184

[^118]: Al-Kafi: 283, H. 1

[^119]: Al-Kafi, 49/4, H. 12

[^120]: Al-Kafi: 581/2, H. 15

[^121]: Al-Kafi: 225/3, H. 11

[^122]: Al-Kafi: 86/2, H. 4

[^123]: Al-Kafi: 87/8, H. 50

[^124]: Al-Kafi: 76/5, H. 13

[^125]: Al-Kafi: 289/5, H. 3

[^126]: Al-Kafi: 161/5, H. 1

[^127]: Al-Kharaij wa’l-Jaraih, 896/2

[^128]: Kitab al-Irshad: 232/2

[^129]: Al-Manaqib: 319/4

[^130]: Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha: 184/2, Chapter: 44

[^131]: Al-Kafi: 52/4, H. 12

[^132]: Al-Kafi: 230/8, H. 296

[^133]: Al-Kafi: 23/4, H. 3

[^134]: Al-Kafi: 288/5, H. 1

[^135]: Al-Amali by Shaykh al-Tusi, 588, H. 1220

[^136]: Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha: 812, Chapter: 30, H. 20

[^137]: Qurb al-Isnad: 148

[^138]: Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha, 218/2

[^139]: Al-Kafi: 5/111, H. 6

[^140]: Bihar al-Anwar, 47/50, H. 22

[^141]: Bihar al-Anwar: 91/5, Chapter: 5, H. 6

[^142]: Bihar al-Anwar: 61/50, Chapter: 26, H. 37

[^143]: Matalib al-Saul fi Manaqib Al al-Rasul: 140

[^144]: Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 401/4, H. 5863

[^145]: Al-Amali by Shaykh al-Tusi: 281, H. 545

[^146]: Al-Kharaij wal-Jaraih: 392/1, 11

[^147]: Al-Kharaij wal-Jaraih: 399/1, 11

[^148]: Al-Manaqib: 409/4

[^149]: Kashf al-Ghummah: 374/2

[^150]: Kashf al-Ghummah: 385/2

[^151]: Al-Manaqib: 425/4

[^152]: Bihar al-Anwar, 323/50, Chapter: 4, H. 17

[^153]: Al-Kafi: 506/1, H. 3

[^154]: Bihar al-Anwar: 354/52, H. 13

[^155]: Bihar al-Anwar: 39/51, H. 20

[^156]: Bihar al-Anwar: 352/52, H. 108

[^157]: Bihar al-Anwar: 379/52, H. 187

[^158]: Kamal al-Din: 118/2.

[^159]: Aqd al-Durar fi Akhbar al-Muntadhar: 152

[^160]: Kamal al-Din: 371/2, Chapter: 35, H. 5

[^161]: Al-Irshad by al-Mufid: 384/2

[^162]: Bihar al-Anwar: 379/52, Chapter: 27, H. 186

[^163]: Bihar al-Anwar: 380/52, H. 182

[^164]: Al-Kafi: 427/4, H. 1

[^165]: Al-Khisal: 626/2, H. 10

[^166]: Bihar al-Anwar: 341/5, H. 91

[^167]: Al-Irshad by al-Mufid: 384/2

[^168]: Bihar al-Anwar: 335/52, H. 68

[^169]: Al-Irshad by al-Mufid: 386/2

[^170]: Bihar al-Anwar: 379/52, H. 186

[^171]: Aqd al-Durar fi Akhbar al-Muntadhar: 161

[^172]: Ibid

[^173]: Kamal al-Din: 376/2, H. 7

[^174]: Bihar al-Anwar: 317/52, Chapter: 22, H. 12

[^175]: Bihar al-Anwar: 341/52, Chapter: 27, H. 91

[^176]: Bihar al-Anwar: 364/52, Chapter: 27, H. 138

[^177]: Al-Ikhtisas: 26

[^178]: Kamal al-Din: 251/1, H. 2

[^179]: Bihar al-Anwar: 336/52, chapter: 27, H. 71

[^180]: Bihar al-Anwar: 336/52, Chapter: 27, H. 72

[^181]: Bihar al-Anwar: 336/52, Chapter: 27, H. 73

[^182]: Al-Irshad by al-Mufid: 384/2

[^183]: Uddat al-Dai: 101

[^184]: Ilal al-Sharau: 45/1, Chapter: 41, H. 1

[^185]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam: 11/5, H. 29

[^186]: Maqtal al-Husayn: 153/1

[^187]: Al-Kamil: 287/4

[^188]: Tuhaf al-Uqul: 38

[^189]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah: 22/1

[^190]: Bihar al-Anwar: 318/43, Chapter: 13, H. 2

[^191]: Fiqh al-Quran: 368/1

[^192]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 16

[^193]: Sunan Abi-Dawud, 254/4

[^194]: Al-Kafi: 503/6, H. 37

[^195]: Al-Manaqib: 362/4

[^196]: Al-Kafi: 294/1, H. 3

[^197]: Bihar al-Anwar 23:144

[^198]: Al-Kafi: 399/1, H. 3

[^199]: Al-Kafi: 192/1, H. 3

[^200]: Nuzhat al-Nadhir: 85

[^201]: Bihar al-Anwar: 78/58

[^202]: Al-Khisal: 51/1, H. 62

[^203]: Waram Collection: 169/1

[^204]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 317

[^205]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 66

[^206]: Musnad Fatimah al-Zahra

[^207]: Tuhaf al-Uqul: 235

[^208]: Jami al-Akhbar: 130

[^209]: Man-La-Yahdhuruhul-Faqih: 621/2, H. 3214

[^210]: Al-Kafi: 338/2, H. 3

[^211]: Al-Amali, H. 1

[^212]: Tuhaf al-Uqul: 315

[^213]: Tuhaf al-Uqul: 413

[^214]: Fiqh al-Ridha: 254, 37

[^215]: Alam al-Din: 309

[^216]: Alam al-Din: 312

[^217]: Tafsir al-Imam al-Askari: 449, H. 297

[^218]: Nahj al-Balaghah: 52, First Sermon

[^219]: Al-Kafi: 298/2, H. 2

[^220]: Al-Kafi: 213/1, H. 1

[^221]: Man-La-Yahdhuruhul-Faqih: 157/3, H. 3575

[^222]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal: 286/1

[^223]: Al-Gharat: 91/1

[^224]: Al-Kafi: 75/5, H. 10

[^225]: Al-Kafi: 74/2, H. 3

[^226]: Daa’im al-Islam: 133/1

[^227]: Al-Amali: 400, H. 17

[^228]: Tuhaf al-Uqul: 303

[^229]: Al-Ikhtisas: 247

[^230]: Al-Kafi: 11/8, H. 1


