Third Method : Intelectual Intuition Or Mystical Unveiling
==========================================================

**Man and Gnostic Comprehension**

Even though most men are occupied with gaining a livelihood and
providing for their daily needs and show no concern for spiritual
matters, there lies within the nature of man an innate urge to seek the
ultimately Real. In certain individuals this force which is dormant and
potential becomes awakened and manifests itself openly, thus leading to
a series of spiritual perceptions.

Every man believes in a permanent Reality despite the claim of sophists
and skeptics, who call every truth and reality illusion and
superstition. Occasionally when man views with a clear mind and a pure
soul the permanent Reality pervading the universe and the created order,
and at the same time sees the impermanence and transient character of
the diverse parts and elements of the world, he is able to contemplate
the world and its phenomena as mirrors which reflect the beauty of a
permanent reality. The joy of comprehending this Reality obliterates
every other joy in the eye of the viewer and makes everything else
appear as insignificant and unimportant.

This vision is that same gnostic "divine attraction" (jadhbah) which
draws the attention of the God-centered man toward the transcendent
world and awakens the love of God in his heart. Through this attraction
he forgets all else. All his manifold desires and wishes are obliterated
from his mind. This attraction guides man to the worship and praise of
the Invisible Deity who is in reality more evident and manifest than all
that is visible and audible.

In truth it is this same inner attraction that has brought into being
the different religions within the world, religions which are based on
the worship of God. The gnostic ('arif) is the one who worships God
through knowledge and because of love for Him, not in hope of reward or
fear of punishment.

From this exposition it becomes clear that we must not consider gnosis
as a religion among others, but as the heart of all religions. Gnosis is
one of the paths of worship, a path based on knowledge combined with
love, rather than fear. It is the path for realizing the inner truth of
religion rather than remaining satisfied only with its external form and
rational thought. Every revealed religion and even those that appear in
the form of idol-worship have certain followers who march upon the path
of gnosis. The polytheistic religions and Judaism, Christianity,
Zoroastrianism, and Islam all have believers who are gnostics.

**Appearance of Gnosis (Sufism) in Islam**

Among the companions of the Prophet, Ali is known particularly for his
eloquent exposition of gnostic truths and the stages of the spiritual
life. His words in this domain comprise an inexhaustible treasury of
wisdom. Among the works of the other companions which have survived
there is not a great deal of material that concerns this type of
question. Among the associates of Ali, such as Salman Farsi, Uways
Qarani, Kumayl ibn Ziyad, Roshaid Hajari, Maytham Tammar, Rabi'ibn
Khaytham.

However, there are figures who have been considered by the majority of
the Sufis, Sunni and Shi'ite alike, as the heads of their spiritual
chain (silsilah) after Ali.

After this group there appeared others, such as Tawus Yamani, Shayban
Ra'i, Malik ibn Dinar, Ibrahim Adham, and Shaqiq Balkhi, who were
considered by the people to be saints and men of God. These men, without
publicly talking about gnosis and Sufism, appeared externally as
ascetics and did not hide the fact that they had been initiated by the
earlier group and had undergone spiritual training under them.

After them there appeared at the end of the 2nd/8th century and the
beginning of the 3rd/9th century men such as Bayazid Bastami, Ma'ruf
Karkhi, Junayd Baghdadi and others like them, who followed the Sufi path
and openly declared their connection with Sufism and gnosis. They
divulged certain esoteric sayings based on spiritual vision which,
because of their repellent external form, brought upon them the
condemnation of some of the jurists and theologians. Some of them were
imprisoned, flogged, and even occasionally killed.

Even so, this group persisted and continued its activities despite its
opponents. In this manner gnosis and the "Way" (Tariqah, or Sufism)
continued to grow until in the 7th/13th and 8th/14th centuries it
reached the height of its expansion and power. Since then, sometimes
stronger and at other times less so, it has continued its existence to
this very day within the Islamic world.

Gnosis or Sufism as we observe it today first appeared in the Sunni
world and later among the Shi'ites. The first men who openly declared
themselves to be Sufis and gnostics, and were recognized as spiritual
masters of Sufi orders, apparently followed Sunnism in the branches
(furu') of Islamic law. Many of the masters who followed them and who
expanded the Sufi orders were also Sunnis in their following of the
law.

Even so, these masters traced their spiritual chain, which in the
spiritual life is like the genealogical chain of a person, through their
previous masters to Ali. Also the results of their visions and
intuitions as transmitted to us convey mostly truths concerning divine
unity and the stations of the spiritual life which are found in the
sayings of Ali and other Shi'ite Imams.

This can be seen provided we are not affected by some of the striking
and even sometimes shocking expressions used by these Sufi masters and
consider the total content of their teachings with deliberation and
patience. Sanctity resulting from initiation into the spiritual path,
which Sufis consider as the perfection of man, is a state which
according to Shi'ite belief is possessed in its fullness by the Imam and
through the radiance of his being can be attained by his true
followers.

And the Spiritual Pole (qutb), whose existence at all times is
considered necessary by all the Sufis - as well as the attributes
associated with him - correlates with the Shi'ite conception of the
Imam. According to the saying of the Household of the Prophet, the Imam
is, to use the Sufi expression, Universal Man, the manifestation of the
Divine Names and the spiritual guide of the lives and actions of men.

Therefore, one could say, considering the Shi'ite concept of walayat,
that Sufi masters are "Shi'ite" from the point of view of the spiritual
life and in connection with the source of walayat although, from the
point of view of the external form of religion they follow the Sunni
schools of law.

It is necessary to mention that even in classical Sunni treatises it
has sometimes been said that the spiritual method of the "Path," or the
"techniques" whereby one comes to know and realize himself, cannot be
explained through the external forms and teachings of the Shari'ah.
Rather these sources claim that individual Muslims themselves have
discovered many of these methods and practices, which then have become
accepted by God, such as is the case with monasticism in Christianity.

Therefore each master has devised certain actions and practices which
he has deemed necessary in the spiritual method, such as the particular
type of ceremony of being accepted by the master the details of the way
in which the invocation is given to the new adept along with a robe, and
the use of music, chanting and other methods of inducing ecstasy during
the invocation of the Divine Name.

In some cases the practices of the Tariqah have outwardly become
separated from those of the Shari'ah and it may seem difficult for an
outsider to see the intimate and inward relation between them. But by
taking into consideration the theoretical principles of Shi'ism and then
studying in depth the basic sources of Islam, namely the Quran and the
Sunnah, he will soon realize that it is impossible to say that this
spiritual guidance has not been provided by Islam itself or that Islam
has remained negligent in clarifying the nature of the spiritual program
to be followed.

**Guidance Provided by the Quran and Sunnah for Gnostic Knowledge**

God - exalted be His Name - has commanded man in several places in the
Quran to deliberate upon the Holy Book and be persistent in this effort
and not be satisfied with a merely superficial and elementary
understanding of it. In many verses the world of creation and all that
is in it without exception are called portents (ayat), signs and symbols
of the Divine. A degree of deliberation upon the meaning of portents and
signs and penetration into their real significance will reveal the fact
that things are called by these names because they manifest and make
known not so much themselves but a reality other than themselves.

For example, a red light placed as a sign of danger, once seen, reminds
one completely of the idea of danger so that one no longer pays
attention to the red light itself. If one begins to think about the form
or quiddity of the light or its color, there will be in his mind only
the form of the lamp or its glass or color rather than the conception of
danger. In the same manner, if the world and its phenomena are all and
in every aspect signs and portents of God, the Creator of the Universe,
they have no ontological independence of their own. No matter how we
view them they display nothing but God.

He who through guidance of the Holy Quran is able to view the world and
the people of the world with such an eye will apprehend nothing but God.
Instead of seeing only this borrowed beauty which others see in the
attractive appearance of the world, he will see an Infinite Beauty, a
Beloved who manifests Himself through the narrow confines of this
world.

Of course, as in the example of the red light, what is contemplated and
seen in "signs" and "portents" is God the Creator of the world and not
the world itself. The relation of God to the world is from a certain
point of view like (1 + 0) not (1 + 1) nor (1 x 1) (that is, the world
is nothing before God and adds nothing to him). It is at the moment of
realization of this truth that the harvest of man's separative existence
is plundered and in one stroke man entrusts his heart to the hands of
Divine love.

This realization obviously does not take place through the instrument
of the eye or the ear or the other outward senses, nor through the power
of imagination or reason, for all these instruments are themselves signs
and portents and of little significance to the spiritual guidance sought
here.

He who has attained the vision of God and who has no intention but to
remember God and forget all else, when he hears that in another place in
the Quran God says, "O ye who believe! Ye have charge of your own
souls.

He who erreth cannot injure you if you are rightly guided" (Quran, V,
105), then he understands that the sole royal path which will guide him
fully and completely is the path of "self realization." His true guide
who is God Himself obliges him to know himself, to leave behind all
other ways and to seek the path of self-knowledge, to see God through
the window of his soul, gaining in this way the real object of his
search. That is why the Prophet has said, "He who knows himself verily
knows the Lord." And also he has said, "Those among you know God better
who know themselves better."

As for the method of following the path, there are many verses of the
Quran which command man to remember God, as for example where He says,
"Therefore remember Me, I will remember you" (Quran, II, 152) and
similar sayings. Man is also commanded to perform right actions which
are described fully in the Quran and hadith. At the end of this
discussion of right actions God says, "Verily in the Messenger of Allah
ye have a good example" (Quran, XXXIII, 21).

How can anyone imagine that Islam could discover that a particular path
is the path which leads to God without recommending this path to all the
people? Or how could it make such a path known and yet neglect to
explain the method of following it? For God says in the Quran, "And We
reveal the Scripture unto thee as an exposition of all things" (Quran,
XVI, 89).


