Chapter V : On the Knowledge of the Prophet
===========================================

**Toward the Goal : General Guidance**

A grain of wheat that is placed within the bosom of the earth under
appropriate conditions begins to grow and enters upon a path of
development in which at every moment it takes on a new form and state.
Following a particular order and sequence it treads this path until it
becomes a grown plant with spikes of wheat ; if once again one of the
seeds were to fall upon the ground it would begin the previous cycle all
over again until it reached the final goal.

Likewise if the seed is that of a fruit placed within the bosom of the
soil it begins its transformation, breaking its shell, from which a
green stem shoots out. It follows an orderly and distinct path of
transformation until finally it becomes a fully grown tree, green and
full of fruit. Or if it is the sperm of an animal it begins to develop
within the egg or in the womb of the mother, following the line of
development peculiar to that animal until it becomes a perfected
individual of that animal species.

This distinct path and orderly development is to be development is to
be observed in each species of creatures in this world and is determined
by the inner nature of that species. The green wheat plant which has
sprung up from the grain will never bear oats or become a sheep, a goat,
or an elephant, and an animal that has become pregnant from its male
will never bear spikes of wheat or a plane tree.

Even if an imperfection were to occur in the organs or the natural
functions of the newly born, or if a lamp were to be born without an
eye, or a wheat plant develop without spikes of wheat, we would have no
doubt that such an occurrence was due to some pest or to unnatural
causes. Continuous order and regularity in the development and
generation of things, and the belonging of each species of creatures in
its generation and development to a particular order and rule, is an
undeniable fact.

From this evident thesis two conclusions can be drawn. (1) Between the
various stages that each species of creatures traverses from the
beginning to the end of its existence there is continuity and
interconnection, as if that species in each stage of its development
were pushed from behind and attracted by what is to come. (2) Due to the
above-mentioned continuity and interconnection, the last stage in the
development of each species is from the beginning of its generation the
goal and point of "existential attention" of that species.

For example, the "attention" of the walnut that sends out a green shoot
from below the earth is centered from that very moment on a fully grown
walnut tree. And a sperm in the egg or the womb is from the moment of
its generation moving toward the state of the perfected animal.

The Holy Quran, which teaches that the creation and the preservation of
things belong absolutely to God, considers this movement and attraction,
which each species in creation possesses in trading its path of
development, to be derived from Divine guidance. As He says, "Our Lord
is He Who gave unto everything its nature, then guided it aright"
(Quran, XX, 50). And also, "Who createth, then disposeth ; who measureth
then guideth" (Quran, LXXXVII, 2-3).

And He refers to the result of these sayings in these words: "And each
one hath a goal toward which he turneth" (Quran, II, 148). And also:
"And We created not the heavens and the earth, and all that is between
them in play. We created them not save with truth, but most of them know
not" (Quran, XLIV, 38-39).

**Special Guidance**

Obviously the human species is not an exception to this general rule.
The same guidance which rules over all species of creature governs man
as well. In the same way that each species through its particular nature
follows its path of perfection and is guided to it, so must man with the
help of this guidance be guided toward that which is his real
perfection.

Although man shares many elements with other species of animals and
with plants, the one special characteristic which distinguishes him is
intellect. It is with the help of his intellect and reason that man is
able to think and to make use of every means possible for his own
benefit, to fly into the endless spaces of the sky or swim in the depth
of the sea, or to bring under his service and command all kinds of
created things, whether they be minerals, plants or animals on the
surface of the earth, and to benefit even from members of his own
species to the greatest extent possible.

Owing to his primordial nature, man sees his happiness and perfection
in gaining complete freedom. Yet, he must of necessity sacrifice some of
his freedom because he is created as a social being and has endless
demands which by himself he can never satisfy, and also because he is in
cooperation and social intercourse with other members of his species who
themselves have the same instinct of self-centeredness and love of
freedom that he has. For the sake of the benefit he gains from others he
must in turn be of benefit to them. Equivalent to what he reaps from the
toil of others he must give of his own work. Or, in summary, he must of
necessity accept a society based upon mutual cooperation.

This point is clear in the case of newborn babies and children. At the
beginning, when desiring anything, they make use of no other means but
force and crying and refuse to accept any constraint or discipline. But
gradually, as a result of mental development, they realize that one
cannot succeed in the problems of life only through rebellion and force
; therefore, slowly they approach the condition of social beings.
Finally they reach the age when they become social individuals with
developed mental powers and are ready to obey the social regulations of
their environment.

When man comes to accept the necessity for mutual cooperation among
members of society he also recognizes the necessity for laws which rule
over society, clarifying the duty of each individual and specifying the
punishment for each offender. He accepts laws through whose application
each individual can realize real happiness and find felicity in
proportion to the social value of his efforts.

These laws are the same universal and applicable laws which man, from
the first day of his existence until today, has been continuously
seeking and to which he has always been attracted as the foremost among
all his desires. If the attainment of such a thing were not possible and
were not written upon the tablet of human destiny, it would not have
been the perennial yearning of man.

God, the Exalted, has referred to this reality of human society,
saying, "We have apportioned among their livelihood in the life of the
world, and raised some of them above others in rank that some of them
may take labor from others" (Quran, LXIII, 32). Concerning man's
selfishness and desire to monopolize things to himself He says, "Lo! man
was created anxious, fretful when evil befalleth him, and, when good
befalleth him, grudging" (Quran, LXX, 19-21).

**Reason and Law**

If we delve into the matter carefully we will discover that man seeks
continuously those laws which can bring happiness in the world ; that
people as individuals and in groups recognize, in accordance with their
God-given nature, the necessity for laws which provide felicity for them
without discrimination or exception, laws which establish a general norm
of perfection among mankind. Obviously, up to now, during the different
periods of human history, there have not come into being any such laws
which are devised by human reason.

If the laws of existence had placed the burden of creating such human
laws upon the shoulders of human reason, then during the long period of
history such laws would have been established. In that case, each
individual who possesses the power of reasoning would comprehend this
human law in detail in the same way that everyone realizes the necessity
for such laws in society.

In other words, if it had been in the very nature of things that it be
the duty of human reason to create a perfect common law which must
provide happiness for human society, and that man should be guided to
that perfect law through the process of creation and the generation of
the world itself, then such laws would have been apprehended by each
human being through his reason in the same way that man knows what is of
benefit or detriment to him throughout the determined course of daily
life.

There is, however, as yet no sign of the presence of such laws. Laws
which have come about by themselves, or have been devised by a single
ruler, or individuals, or nations, and have become prevalent in
different societies are considered by some as certain, and by others as
doubtful. Some are aware of these laws and others are ignorant of them.
Never has it come to pass that all people, who in their basic structure
are the same in that they are endowed by God with reason, should have a
common awareness of the details of the laws which can bring about
happiness in the world of man.

**That Mysterious Wisdom and Consciousness Called Revelation**

Thus, in the light of the discussion above, it becomes clear that the
laws which can guarantee the happiness of human society cannot be
perceived by reason. Since according to the thesis of general guidance
running throughout creation the existence of an awareness of these laws
in the human species is necessary, there must be another power of
apprehension within the human species which enables man to understand
the real duties of life and which places this knowledge within the reach
of everyone. This consciousness and power of perception, which is other
than reason and sense, is called the prophetic consciousness, or the
consciousness of revelation.

Of course the presence of such a power in mankind does not mean that it
should necessarily appear in all individuals, in the same way that
although the power of procreation has been placed in all human beings,
the awareness of the enjoyment of marriage and being prepared for this
enjoyment is possible only for those who have reached the age of
puberty. In the same way that the consciousness of revelation is a
mysterious and unknown form of consciousness for those who do not
possess it, the apprehension of the joy of sexual union is a mysterious
and unknown feeling for those who have not reached the age of puberty.

God, the Exalted, makes reference in His Word to the revelation of His
Divine Law (Shari'ah) and the inability of human reason to comprehend
this matter in the verses: "Lo! We inspire thee as We inspired Noah and
the prophets after him, as We inspired Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and
Jacob and the tribes, and Jesus and Job and Jonah and Aaron and Solomon,
and We imparted unto David the Psalms; and messengers We have mentioned
unto thee before and messengers We have not mentioned unto thee ; and
Allah spoke directly unto Moses ; Messengers of good cheer and of
warning, in order that mankind might have no argument against Allah
after the messengers" (Quran, IV, 163-165).

**The Prophets - Inerrancy of Prophecy**

The appearance of prophets affirms that conception of revelation
outlined above. The prophets of God were men who propagated the call of
revelation and prophecy and brought definitive proofs for their call.
They propagated among people the elements of the religion of God (which
is the same divine law that guarantees happiness) and made it available
to all men.

Since in all periods of history the number of people endowed with the
power of prophecy and revelation has been limited to a few individuals,
God - the Most Exalted - has completed and perfected the guidance of the
rest of mankind by placing the mission of the propagation of religion
upon the shoulders of His prophets. That is why a prophet of God must
possess the quality of inerrancy ('ismah).

In receiving the revelation from God, in guarding it and in making
possible its reaching the people, he must be free from error. He must
not commit sin (ma'siyah). The reception of revelation, its preservation
and its propagation are three principles of ontological guidance ; and
error in existence itself is meaningless.

Furthermore, sin and opposition to the claims of the religious call and
its propagation are impossible in a prophet for they would be a call
against the original religious mission ; they would destroy the
confidence of the people, their reliance upon the truth and the validity
of the call. As a result they would destroy the purpose of the religious
call itself.

God, the Exalted, refers in His word to the inerrancy of the prophets,
saying, "And We chose them and guided them unto a straight path" (Quran,
VI, 88). And also, "(He is) the Knower of the Unseen, and He revealeth
unto none His secret, save unto every messenger whom He hath chosen, and
then He maketh a guard to go before him and a guard behind him, that He
may know that they have indeed conveyed the messages of their Lord"
(Quran, LXXII, 26-28).

**The Prophets and Revealed Religion**

What the prophets of God receive through revelation and as a message
from God and conveyed to mankind was religion (din), that is, a way of
life and human duties which guarantee the real happiness of man.

Revealed religion in general consists of two parts : doctrine and
practice or method. The doctrinal part of revealed religion consists of
a series of fundamental principles and views concerning the real nature
of things upon which man must establish the foundations of his life. It
is comprised of the three universal principles of unity (tawhid),
prophecy (nubuwwat), and eschatology (ma'ad). If there is any confusion
or disorder in one of these principles the religion will not be able to
gain any following.

The practical part of revealed religion consists of a series of moral
and practical injunctions covering the duties man has before God and
human society. That is why the secondary duties which have been ordered
for man in different Divine laws are of two kinds : morals (akhlaq), and
actions (a'mal).

The morals and actions related to the Divine are of two kinds, such as:
first, the quality of faith, sincerity, surrender to God, contentment
and humility ; and second, the daily prayers, fasting, and sacrifice
(called acts of worship and symbolizing the humility and servitude of
man before the Divine Throne). The morals and actions related to human
society are also of two kinds, such as: first, the quality of love for
other men, wishing well for others, justice and generosity ; and second,
the duty to carry out social intercourse, trade and exchange, etc.
(called transactions).

Another point that must be considered is that since the human species
is directed toward the gradual attainment of perfection, and human
society through the passage of time becomes more complete, the
appearance of a parallel development must also be seen in revealed
laws.
The Holy Quran affirms this gradual development, which reason has also
discovered. It can be concluded from its verses that each Divine Law
(Shari'ah) is in reality more complete than the Shari'ah before ; for
instance, in this verse where He says, "And unto thee have We revealed
the Scripture with the truth, confirming whatever Scripture was before
it, and a watcher over it." (Quran, V, 48)

Of course, as scientific knowledge also confirms and the Quran states,
the life of human society in this world is not eternal and the
development of man is not endless. As a result, the general principles
governing the duties of man from the point of view of doctrine and
practice must of necessity stop at a particular stage.

Therefore, prophecy and the Shari'ah will also one day come to an end
when in the perfection of doctrine and expansion of practical
regulations they have reached the final stage of their development. That
is why the Holy Quran, in order to make clear that Islam (the religion
of Muhammad) is the last and most complete of the revealed religions,
introduces itself as a sacred book that cannot be abrogated (naskh),
calls the Prophet the "Seal of the Prophets" (khatam al-anbiya'), and
sees the Islamic religion as embracing all religious duties.

As He says, "And lo! it is an unassailable Scripture. Falsehood cannot
come at it from before it or behind it" (Quran, XLI, 41-42). And also,
"Muhammad is not the father of any man among you but he is the messenger
of Allah and the Seal of the prophets" (Quran, XXXIII, 40). And, "We
reveal the scripture unto thee as an exposition of all things" (Quran,
XVI, 89).


