Chapter Vi : Eschatoology
=========================

**Man is Composed of Spirit and Body**

Those who are acquainted to a certain extent with the Islamic sciences
know that within the teachings of the Holy Book and the traditions of
the Prophet there are many references to spirit and corpus, or soul and
body. Although it is relatively easy to conceive of the body and what is
corporeal, or that which can be known through the senses, to conceive of
spirit and soul is difficult and complicated.

People given to intellectual discussions, such as the theologians and
philosophers, Shi'ite and Sunni alike, have presented different views
concerning the reality of the spirit (ruh). Yet, what is to some extent
certain is that Islam considers spirit and body to be two realities
opposed to each other.

The body through death loses the characteristics of life and gradually
disintegrates, but it is not so with the spirit. When the spirit is
joined to the body, the body also derives life from it, and when the
spirit separates from the body and cuts its bond to the body - the event
that is called death - the body ceases to function while the spirit
continues to live.

From what can be learned through deliberation upon the verses of the
Holy Quran and the sayings of the Imams of the Household of the Prophet,
the spirit of man is something immaterial which has some kind of
relation and connection with the material body. God the Almighty in His
Book says, "Verily We created man from a product of wet earth ; Then
placed him as a drop (of seed) in a safe lodging ; Then fashioned We the
drop a clot, then fashioned We the clot a little lump,

then fashioned We the little lump bones, Then clothed the bones with
flesh, and then produced it as another creation" (Quran, XXIII, 12-14).
From the order of these verses it is clear that at the beginning the
gradual creation of matter is described and then, when reference is made
to the appearance of the spirit, consciousness, and will, another kind
of creation is mentioned which is different from the previous form of
creation.

In another place it is said, in answer to skeptics who ask how it is
possible for the body of man, which after death becomes disintegrated
and whose elements become dispersed and lost, to have a new creation and
become the original man, "Say : The angel of death, who hath charge
concerning you, will gather you, and afterwards unto your Lord ye will
be returned" (Quran, XXXII, 11). This means that your bodies
disintegrate after death and are lost amidst the particles of the earth,
but you yourselves, namely your spirits, have been taken from your
bodies by the angel of death and remain protected with Us.

Besides such verses the Holy Quran in a comprehensive explanation
expresses the immateriality of the spirit in itself when it asserts,
"They will ask thee concerning the Spirit. Say : The Spirit is by
command of my Lord" (Quran, XVII, 85).

In another place in explaining His command (amr) He says, "But His
command, when He intendeth a thing, is only that He saith unto it : Be!
and it is. Therefore glory be to Him in Whose hand is the dominion over
all things!" (Quran, XXXVI, 81-82). The meaning of these verses is that
the command of God in the creation of things is not gradual nor is it
bound to the conditions of time and space. Therefore, the spirit which
has no reality other than the command of God is not material and in its
being does not have material characteristics ; that is, it does not have
the characteristics of divisibility, change, and situation in time and
space.

**A Discussion of Spirit from Another Perspective**

Intellectual investigation confirms the view of the Holy Quran about
the spirit. Each of us is aware of a reality within himself which he
interprets as "I" and this awareness exists continuously within man.
Sometimes man even forgets his head, hands, feet and other members or
the whole body. But as long as his self exists, the consciousness of "I"
does not leave his awareness.

This perception cannot be divided or analyzed. Although the body of man
is continuously undergoing change and transformation and chooses
different locations in space for itself and passes through different
moments of time, the reality of "I" remains fixed. It does not undergo
any change or transformation. It is clear that if the "I" were material
it would accept the characteristics of matter which are divisibility,
change, and situation in time and space.

The body accepts all the characteristics of matter and, because of the
relation of the spirit and the body, these characteristics are also
considered to belong to the spirit. But if we pay the least attention,
it becomes evident to man that this moment in time and the next, this
point in space or another, this shape or another shape, this direction
of motion or any other, are all characteristics of the body. The spirit
is free from them; rather each of these determinations reaches the
spirit through the body.

This same reasoning can be applied in reverse to the power of
consciousness and apprehension or knowledge which is one of the
characteristics of the spirit. Obviously if knowledge were a material
quality, according to the conditions of matter it would accept
divisibility and analysis, and be determined by time and space.

Needless to say, this intellectual discussion could go on at length and
there are many questions and answers related to it which cannot be
considered in the present context. The brief discussion presented here
is only an indication of the Islamic belief concerning body and spirit.
A complete discussion will be found in works of Islamic philosophy.

**Death from the Islamic Point of View**

Although a superficial view would regard death as the annihilation of
man and see human life as consisting of only the few days that stand
between birth and death, Islam interprets death as the transfer of man
from one stage of life to another. According to Islam man possesses
eternal life which knows no end. Death, which is the separation of the
spirit from the body, introduces man to another stage of life in which
felicity or disappointment depends upon good or evil deeds in the stage
of life before death. The Holy Prophet has said: "You have been created
for subsistence, not annihilation. What happens is that you will be
transferred from one house to another."

**Purgatory**

From what can be deduced from the Holy Book and prophetic traditions,
it can be concluded that between death and general resurrection man
possesses a limited and temporary life which is the intermediate stage
(barzakh) and link between the life of this world and eternal life.
After death man is interrogated concerning the beliefs he has held and
the good and evil deeds he has performed in this life.

After a summary account and judgment he is subjected to either a
pleasant and felicitous life, or an unpleasant and wretched one,
depending on the results of the account and judgment. With this newly
acquired life he continues in expectation until the day of general
resurrection. The condition of man in the life of the intermediate state
(purgatory) is very similar to the condition of a person who has been
called before a judicial organization in order to have the acts he has
committed investigated. He is questioned and investigated until his file
is completed. Then he awaits trial.

The soul of man in the intermediate state possesses the same form as in
his life in this world. If he be a man of virtue, he lives in happiness
and bounty in the proximity of those who are pure and close to the
Divine Presence. If he be a man of evil, he lives in affliction and pain
and in the company of daemonic forces and "leaders of those who have
gone astray."

God, the Most Exalted, has said concerning the condition of a group of
those in the state of felicity, "Think not of those who are slain in the
way of Allah, as dead. Nay, they are living. With their Lord they have
provision. Jubilant (are they) because of that which Allah hath bestowed
upon them of His bounty, rejoicing for the sake of those who have not
joined them but are left behind: that there shall no fear come upon them
neither shall they grieve.

They rejoice because of favor from Allah and kindness, and that Allah
wasteth not the wage of the believers" (Quran, III, 169-171). And in
describing the condition of another group who in the life of this world
do not make legitimate use of their wealth and possessions, He says,
"Until, when death cometh unto one of the, he saith : My Lord! Send me
back, that I may do right in that which I have left behind! But nay! It
is but a word that he speaketh ; and behind them is a barrier [barzakh]
until the day when they are raised" (Quran, XXIII, 99-100).

**The Day of Judgment - Resurrection**

Among sacred texts the Quran is the only one to have spoken in detail
about the Day of Judgment. Although the Torah has not mentioned this Day
and the Gospels have only alluded to it, the Quran has mentioned the Day
of Judgment in hundreds of places, using different names. It has
described the fate awaiting mankind on this Day sometimes briefly and on
other occasions in detail. It has reminded mankind many times that faith
in the Day of Recompense (Day of Judgment) is on the same scale in its
importance as faith in God and is one of the three principles of
Islam.

It has mentioned that he who lacks this faith, that is, who denies
resurrection, is outside the pale of Islam and has no destiny other than
eternal perdition. And this is the truth of the matter because if there
were to be no reckoning in God's actions and no reward or punishment,
the religious message, which consists of an assemblage of God's decrees
and what He has commanded and forbidden, would not have the least
effect. Thus the existence or nonexistence of prophecy and the religious
mission would be the same. In fact, its nonexistence would be preferable
to its existence, for to accept a religion and follow the regulations of
a Divine Law is not possible without the acceptance of restrictions and
loss of what appears as "freedom."

If to submit to it were to have no effect, people would never accept it
and would not give up their natural freedom of action for it. From this
argument it becomes clear that the importance of mentioning and
recalling the Day of Judgment is equivalent to that of the principle of
the religious call itself.

From this conclusion it also becomes evident that faith in the Day of
Recompense is the most effective factor which induces man to accept the
necessity of virtue and abstention from unbecoming qualities and great
sins, in the same way that to forget or lack faith in the Day of
Judgment is the essential root of every evil act and sin.

God the Almighty has said in His Book, "Lo! those who wander from the
way of Allah have an awful doom, for as much as they forgot the Day of
Reckoning" (Quran, XXXVIII, 27). As can be seen in this sacred verse,
the forgetting of the Day of Judgment is considered to be the root of
every deviation. Meditation on the purpose of the creation of man and
the Universe, or on the purpose and end of Divine Laws, makes it evident
that there will be a Day of Judgment.

When we meditate on creation, we see that there is no action (which of
necessity is also a kind of motion) without an immutable end and
purpose. Never is the action, considered independently and in itself,
the end. Rather, action is always the prelude to an end and exists by
virtue of that end. Even in actions which superficially appear to be
without purpose such as instinctive actions or will discover purposes in
conformity with the kind of action in question. In instinctive actions,
which are usually a form of motion, the end toward which the motion
takes place is the purpose and aim of the action. And in the play of
children there is an imaginary end, the attainment of which is the
purpose of playing.

The creation of man and the world is the action of God and God is above
the possibility of performing a senseless and purposeless act such as
creating, nourishing, taking away life and then again creating,
nourishing, and taking away life, that is, of making and destroying,
without there being an immutable end and a permanent purpose which He
pursues in these acts.

There must of necessity be a permanent aim and purpose in the creation
of the world and of man. Of course, its benefit does not accrue to God,
who is above every need, but rather to the creatures themselves. Thus it
must be said that the world and man are directed toward a permanent
reality and a more perfect state of being which knows no annihilation
and corruption.

Also, when we study with care the condition of men from the point of
view of religious education and training, we see that as a result of
Divine guidance and religious training people become divided into the
two categories of the virtuous and the evil. Yet in this life there is
no distinction made between them. Rather, on the contrary, success
usually belongs to those who are evil and unjust. To do good is combined
with difficulty and hardship and every kind of privation and endurance
of oppression. Since this is so, Divine Justice requires the existence
of another world in which each individual receives the just reward ho
actions deserve, and lives a life in conformity with his merits.

Thus it is seen that careful consideration of the purpose of creation
and of the Divine Laws leads to the conclusion that the Day of Judgment
will come for every person. God, the Exalted, makes this clear in His
Book, saying, "And We created not the heavens and the earth, and all
that is between them, in play. We created them not save with truth ; but
most of them in vain.

That is the opinion of those who disbelieve. And woe unto those who
disbelieve, from the fire! Shall We treat those who believe and do good
works as those who spread corruption in the earth ; or shall We treat
the pious as the wicked?" (Quran, XXXVIII, 28-29). In another place He
says, "Or do those who commit ill-deeds suppose that We shall make them
as those who believe and do good works, the same in life and death? Bad
is their judgment! And Allah hath created the heavens and the earth with
truth, and that every soul may be repaid what it hath earned. And they
will not be wronged" (Quran, XLV, 21-22).

**Another Explanation**

In discussing the outward and inward meaning of the Quran we pointed
out that the Islamic sciences are explained in the Quran through
different means and that these are in general divided into the two
dimensions of the exoteric and the esoteric. The exoteric explanation is
the one that conforms to the level of the simple thought patterns and
understanding of the majority, in contrast to the esoteric, which
belongs to the elite alone which can be comprehended only with the aid
of the vision which comes through the practices of the spiritual life.

The explanation from the exoteric view presents God as the absolute
ruler of the world of creation, all of which is His dominion. God has
created many angels, whose number is legion, to carry out and execute
the commands He issues for every aspect of creation. Each part of
creation and its order is connected to a special group of angels who are
the protectors of that domain.

The human species is His creation and human beings are His servants who
must obey His commands and prohibitions ; and the prophets are the
bearers of His messages, the conveyors of the laws and regulations which
He has sent to mankind and has demanded that mankind obey. God has
promised reward and recompense for faith and obedience, and punishment
and painful retribution for infidelity and sin, and will not break His
promise.

Also since He is just, His justice demands that in another state of
being the two groups of virtuous and evil men, who in this world do not
have a mode of life in accordance with their good and evil nature,
becomes separated, the virtuous to possess a good and happy life and the
evil a bad and wretched existence.

Thus God, according to His Justice and the promises He has made, will
resurrect all men who live in this world after their death, without
exception, and will investigate in detail their beliefs and works. He
will judge them according to the truth and give everyone who has a right
his due. He will carry out justice on behalf of all who have been
oppressed. He will render to each person the reward for his own actions.
One group will be assigned to eternal heaven and the other group to
eternal hell.

This is the exoteric explanation of the Holy Quran. Of course it is
true and correct. But its language is composed of terms and images born
of man's social life and thought in order that its benefit might be more
general and the radius of its action more widespread.

Those who have penetrated into the spiritual meaning of things and are
to a certain extent familiar with the esoteric language of the Holy
Quran, however, understand from these sayings meanings which lie above
the level of simple and popular comprehension. The Holy Quran, amidst
its simple and uncomplicated expositions, occasionally alludes to the
esoteric aim and purpose of its message. Through many allusions the Holy
Quran affirms that the world of creation with all its parts, of which
man is one, is moving in its "existential becoming" which is always in
the direction of perfection toward God. A day will come when this
movement will come to an end and will lose completely its separate and
independent existence before the Divine Majesty and Grandeur.

Man, who is a part of the world and whose special perfection is through
consciousness and knowledge, is also moving with haste toward God. When
he reaches the end of this becoming, he will observe plainly the Truth
and Oneness of the Unique God. He will see that power, dominion and
every other quality of perfection belong exclusively to the sacred
Divine Essence ; the reality of each thing as it is will be revealed to
him. This is the first stage in the world of eternity.

If, through his faith and good works in this world, man is able to have
communication, relation, familiarity, and friendship with God and the
beings of his proximity, then with a felicity and joy that can never be
described in human language he will live near God and in the company of
the pure beings of the world above.

But if, because of desire and attachment to the life of this world and
its transient and baseless pleasures, he is cut off from the world above
and has no familiarity with or love for God and the pure beings of His
Presence, then he becomes afflicted with painful torment and eternal
adversity. It is true that a man's good and evil acts in this world are
transient and disappear, but the forms of these good and evil acts
become established in the soul of man and accompany him everywhere. They
are the capital of his future life, be it sweet or bitter.

These affirmations can be drawn from the following verses: God says,
"Lo! unto thy Lord is the (absolute) return" (Quran, XCVI, 8). And He
says, "Beware all things reach Allah at last?" (Quran XLII, 53); and
"The (absolute) command on that day is Allah's" (Quran, LXXXII, 19).
Also in the account of the address made to certain members of the human
race on the Day of Judgment He says, "(And unto the evildoer it is
said): Thou wast in heedlessness of this. Now We have removed from thee
thy covering, and piercing is thy sight this day" (Quran, L, 22).

Concerning the hermeneutic interpretation (ta'wil) of the Holy Quran
(the truth from which the Holy Quran originates) God says, "Await they
aught save the fulfillment [ta'wil] thereof? On the day when the
fulfillment thereof cometh, those who were before forgetful thereof will
say: The messengers of our Lord did bring the Truth! Have we any
intercessors, that they may intercede for wise than we used to act? They
have lost their souls, and that which they devised hath failed them"
(Quran, VII, 53).

He says, "On that day Allah will pay them their due, and they will know
that Allah, He is the Manifest Truth" (Quran, XXIV, 25). And, "Thou
verily, O man, art working toward thy Lord a work which thou wilt meet
(in His presence)" (Quran, LXXXIV, 6). Also, "Whoso looketh forward to
the meeting with Allah (let him know that) Allah's reckoning is surely
nigh..."

(Quran, XXIX, 5). And, "And whoever hopeth for the meeting with his
Lord, let him do righteous work, and make none sharer of the worship due
unto his Lord" (Quran, XVIII, 111). And, "But ah! thou soul at peace!
Return unto thy Lord, content in His good pleasure! Enter thou among My
bondmen! Enter thou My Garden!" (Quran, LXXXIX, 27-30).

Also He says, "But when the great disaster cometh, The Day when man
will call to mind his (whole) endeavor, And hell will stand forth
visible to him who seeth, Then, as for him who rebelled, And chose the
life of the world, Lo! hell will be his home. But as for him who feared
to stand before his Lord and restrained his soul from lust, Lo! the
Garden will be his home" (Quran, LXXIX, 34-41). Concerning the identity
of the reward of actions God says, "(Then it will be said): O ye who
disbelieve! Make no excuses for yourselves this day. Ye are only being
paid for what ye used to do" (Quran, LXVI, 7).

**The Continuity and Succession of Creation**

This world of creation which we observe does not possess an endless and
perpetual life. A day will come when the life of this world and its
inhabitants will come to an end as confirmed by the Holy Quran. God
says, "We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between
them save with truth, and for a term appointed." (Quran, XLVI, 3)

One could ask if before the creation of this world and present race of
humanity there had been another world and another human race; or, if
after the life of this world and its inhabitants terminates, as the Holy
Quran declares that it will, another world and humanity will be created.
The direct response to these questions cannot be found in the Holy
Quran.

There, one can only discover allusions to the continuity and succession
of creation. But in the traditions (rewayat) of the Imams of the
Household of the Prophet transmitted to us it is asserted that creation
is not limited to this visible world. Many worlds have existed in the
past and will exist in the future. The sixth Imam has said, "Perhaps you
think God has not created humanity other than you. No! I swear to God
that He has created thousands upon thousands of mankinds and you are the
last among the."

And the fifth Imam has said, "God, the Exalted, since creating the
world has created seven kinds none of whom were of the race of Adam. He
created them from the surface of the earth and set each being one after
another with its kind upon the earth. Then He created Adam, the father
of mankind, and brought his children into being from him."

And also the sixth Imam has said, "Do not think that after passing away
of the affair of this world and the Day of Judgment and the placing of
the virtuous in heaven and the evil in hell there will no longer be
anyone to worship God. No, never! Rather, again God will create servants
without the marriage of the male and the female to know His Oneness and
to worship Him."


