Part I: the Historical Bckground of Shi'ism
===========================================

The Termination of the Caliphate of 'Ali Amir al-mu'minin and His
Method of Rule The caliphate of Ali began toward the end of the year
35/656 and lasted about four years and nine months. During his period as
caliph Ali followed the ways of the Holy Prophet and brought conditions
back to their original state. He forced the resignation of all the
incompetent political elements who had a hand in directing affairs and
began in reality a major transformation of a "revolutionary" nature
which caused him innumerable difficulties.

On his first day as caliph, in an address to the people, Ali said, "O
People, be aware that the difficulties which you faced during the
apostolic period of the Prophet of God have come upon you once again and
seized you. Your ranks must be turned completely around so that the
people of virtue who have fallen behind should come forward and those
who had come to the fore without being worthy should fall behind. There
is both truth (haqq) and falsehood (batil).

Each has its followers; but a person should follow the truth. If
falsehood be prevalent it is not something new, and if the truth is rare
and hard to come by, sometimes even that which is rare wins the day so
that there is hope of advance. Of course it does not occur often that
something which has turned away from man should return to him."

Ali continued his radically different type of government based more on
righteousness than political efficacy but, as is necessary in the case
of every movement of this kind, elements of the opposition whose
interests were endangered began to display their displeasure and
resisted his rule.

Basing their actions on the claim that they wanted to revenge the death
of Uthman, they instigated bloody wars which continued throughout almost
all the time that Ali was caliph. From the Shi'ite point of view those
who caused these civil wars had no end in mind other than their own
personal interest. The wish to revenge the blood of the third caliph was
no more than an excuse to fool the crowd. There was no question of a
misunderstanding.

After the death of the Holy Prophet, a small minority, following Ali,
refused to pay allegiance. At the head of the minority there were
Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad, and Ammar. At the beginning of the caliphate
of Ali also a sizable minority in disagreement refused to pay
allegiance. Among the most persistent opponents were Sa'id ibn 'Ass,
Walid ibn 'Uqbah, Marwan ibn Hakam, 'Amr ibn 'Ass, Busr ibn Artat,
Samurah ibn Jundab, and Mughirah ibn Shu'bah.

The study of the biography of these two groups, and meditation upon the
acts they have performed and stories recounted of them in history books,
reveal fully their religious personality and aim. The first group were
among the elite of the companions of the Holy Prophet and among the
ascetics, devout worshipers and selfless devotees of Islam who struggled
on the path of Islamic freedom. They were especially loved by the
Prophet. The Prophet said, "God has informed me that He loves four men
and that I should love them also."

They asked about their names. He mentioned Ali and then the names of
Abu Dharr, Salman and Miqdad. (Sunan of Ibn Majah, Cairo, 1372, vol. I,
p. 66.) 'A'ishah has recounted that the Prophet of God said, "If two
alternatives are placed before Ammar, he will definitely choose that
which is more true and right." (Ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 66.)

The Prophet said, "There is no one between heaven and earth more
truthful than Abu Dharr." (Ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 68.) There is no record
of a single forbidden act committed by these men during their lifetime.
They never spilled any blood unjustly, did not commit aggression against
anyone, did not steal anyone's property, never sought to corrupt and
misguide people.

History is, however, full of accounts of unworthy acts committed by
some of the second group. The various acts committed by some of these
men in opposition to explicit Islamic teachings are beyond reckoning.
These acts cannot be excused in any manner except the way that is
followed by certain groups among the Sunnis who say that God was
satisfied with them and therefore they were free to perform whatever act
they wished, and that they would not be punished for violating the
injunctions and regulations existing in the Holy Book and the Sunnah.

The first war in the caliphate of Ali, which is called the "Battle of
the Camel," was caused by the unfortunate class differences created
during the period of rule of the second caliph as a result of the new
socioeconomic forces which caused an uneven distribution of the public
treasury among members of the community. When chosen to the caliphate,
Ali divided the treasury evenly as had been the method of the Holy
Prophet, but this manner of dividing the wealth upset Talhah and Zubayr
greatly.

They began to show signs of disobedience and left Medina for Mecca with
the alleged aim of making the pilgrimage. They persuaded "the mother of
the Faithful" (umm al-mu'minin), A'ishah, who was not friendly with Ali,
to join them and in the name of wanting to revenge the death of the
third caliph they began the bloody Battle of the Camel. This was done
despite the fact that this same Talhah and Zubayr were in Medina when
the third caliph was besieged and killed but did nothing to defend
him.

Furthermore, after his death they were the first to pay allegiance to
Ali on behalf of the immigrants (muhajirun) as well as on their own.
Also, the "mother of the Faithful," A'ishah, did not show any opposition
to those who had killed the third caliph at the moment when she received
the news of his death. It must be remembered that the main investigators
of the disturbances that led to the death of the third caliph were those
companions who wrote letters from Medina to people near and far inviting
them to rebel against the caliph, a fact which is repeated in many early
Muslim histories.

As for the second war, called the Battle of Siffin, which lasted for a
year and a half, its cause was the covetousness of Mu'awiyah for the
caliphate which for him was a worldly political instrument rather than a
religious institution. But as an excuse he made the revenge of the blood
of the third caliph the main issue and began a war in which more than a
hundred thousand people perished without reason. Naturally, in these
wars Mu'awiyah was the aggressor rather than the defender, for the
protest to revenge someone's blood can never occur in the form of
defense.

The pretext of this war was blood revenge. During the last days of his
life, the third caliph, in order to quell the uprising against him,
asked Mu'awiyah for help, but the army of Mu'awiyah which set out from
Damascus to Medina purposely waited on the road until the caliph was
killed. Then he returned to Damascus to begin an uprising to revenge the
caliph's death. After the death of Ali and his gaining the caliphate
himself, Mu'awiyah forgot the question of revenging the blood of the
third caliph and did not pursue the matter further.

After Siffin there occurred the battle of Nahrawan in which a number
people, among whom there could be found some of the companions, rebelled
against Ali, possibly at the instigation of Mu'awiyah. These people were
causing rebellion throughout the lands of Islam, killing the Muslims and
especially the followers of Ali. They even attacked pregnant women and
killed their babies. Ali put down this uprising as well, but a short
while later was himself killed in the mosque of Kufa by one of the
members of this group who came to be known as the Khawarij.

The opponents of Ali claim that he was a courageous man but did not
possess political acumen. They claim that at the beginning of his
caliphate he could have temporarily made peace with his opponents. He
could have approached them through peace and friendship, thus courting
their satisfaction and approval. In this way he could have strengthened
his caliphate and only then turned to their extirpation and destruction.
What people who hold this view forgot is that the movement of Ali was
not based on political opportunism. It was a radical and revolutionary
religious movement (in the true sense of revolution as a spiritual
movement to reestablish the real order of things and not in its current
political and social sense);

therefore it could not have been accomplished through compromise or
flattery and forgery. A similar situation can be seen during the
apostleship of the Holy Prophet. The infidels and polytheists proposed
peace to him many times and swore that if he were to abstain from
protesting against their gods they would not interfere with his
religious mission. But the Prophet did not accept such a proposal,
although he could in those days of difficulty have made peace and used
flattery to fortify his own position, and then have risen against his
enemies. In fact, the Islamic message never allows a right and just
cause, nor a falsehood to be rejected and disproven through another
falsehood. There are many Quranic verses concerning this matter.

**The Benefit which the Shi'ah Derived from the Caliphate of Ali**

During the four years and nine months of his caliphate, Ali was not
able to eliminate the disturbed conditions which were prevailing
throughout the Islamic world, but he was successful in three fundamental
ways:

1. As a result of his just and upright manner of living he revealed
once again the beauty and attractiveness of the way of life of the Holy
Prophet, especially to the younger generation. In contrast to the
imperial grandeur of Mu'awiyah, he lived in simplicity and poverty like
the poorest of people. He never favored his friends or relatives and
family above others, nor did he ever prefer wealth to poverty or brute
force to weakness.

2. Despite the cumbersome and strenuous difficulties which absorbed his
time, he left behind among the Islamic community a valuable treasury of
the truly divine sciences and Islamic intellectual disciplines. Nearly
eleven thousand of his proverbs and short sayings on different
intellectual, religious and social subjects have been recorded. In his
talks and speeches he expounded the most sublime Islamic sciences in a
most elegant and flowing manner. He established Arabic grammar and laid
the basis for Arabic literature.

He was the first in Islam to delve directly into the questions of
metaphysics (falsafah-i ilahi) in a manner combining intellectual rigor
and logical demonstration. He discussed problems which had never
appeared before in the same way among the metaphysicians of the world.
Moreover, he was so devoted to metaphysics and gnosis that even in the
heat of battle he would carry out intellectual discourse and discuss
metaphysical questions.

3. He trained a large number of religious scholars and Islamic savants,
among whom are found a number of ascetics and gnostics who were the
forefathers of the Sufis, such men as Uways al-Qarani, Kumayl
al-Nakha'i, Maytham al-Tammar and Roshaid al-Hajari. These men have been
recognized by the later Sufis as the founders of gnosis in Islam. Others
among his disciples became the first teachers of jurisprudence,
theology, Quranic commentary and recitation.

**The Transfer of the Caliphate to Mu'awiyah and Its Transformation
into a Hereditary Monarchy**

After the death of Ali, his son, Hasan ibn Ali, who is recognized by
the Shi'ah as their second Imam, became caliph. This designation
occurred in accordance with Ali's last will and testament and also by
the allegiance of the community to Hasan. But Mu'awiyah did not remain
quiet before this event. He marched with his army toward Iraq, which was
then the capital of the caliphate , and began to wage war against
Hasan.

Through different intrigues and the payment of great sums of money,
Mu'awiyah was able gradually to corrupt the aides and generals of Hasan.
Finally he was able to force Hasan to hand the caliphate over to him so
as to avoid bloodshed and to make peace. Hasan handed the caliphate to
Mu'awiyah on the condition that the caliphate would be returned to him
after the death of Mu'awiyah and that no harm would come to his
partisans.

In the year 40/661 Mu'awiyah finally gained control of the caliphate.
He then set out immediately for Iraq and in a speech to the people of
that land said: "I did not fight against you for the sake of the prayers
or of fasting. These acts you can perform yourself. What I wanted to
accomplish was to rule over you and this end I have achieved." He also
said, "The agreement I made with Hasan is null and void. It lies
trampled under my feet." With this declaration Mu'awiyah made known to
the people the real character of his government and revealed the nature
of the program he had in mind.

He indicated in his declaration that he would separate religion from
politics and would not give any guarantees concerning religious duties
and regulations. He would spend all his force to preserve and to keep
alive his own power, whatever might be the cost. Obviously a government
of such a nature is more of a sultanate and a monarchy than a caliphate
and vicegerency of the Prophet of God in its traditional Islamic sense.
That is why some who were admitted to his court addressed him as "king."
He himself in some private gatherings interpreted his government as a
monarchy, while in public he always introduced himself as the caliph.

Naturally any monarchy that is based on force carries with it
inherently the principle of inheritance. Mu'awiyah, too, finally
realized this fact, and chose his son, Yazid, who was a heedless young
man without the least religious personality, as the "crown prince" and
his successor. This act was to be the cause of many regrettable events
in the future. Mu'awiyah had previously indicated that he would refuse
to permit Hasan ibn Ali to succeed him as caliph and that he had other
thoughts in mind. Therefore he had caused Hasan to be killed by
poisoning, thus preparing the way for his son, Yazid.

In breaking his agreement with Hasan, Mu'awiyah made it clear that he
would never permit the Shi'ah of the Household of the Prophet to live in
a peaceful and secure environment and continue their activity as before,
and he carried into action this very intention. It has been said that he
went so far as to declare that whoever would transmit a hadith in praise
of the virtues of the Household of the Prophet would have no immunity or
protection concerning his life, merchandise and property.

At the same time he ordered that whoever could recite a hadith in
praise of the other companions or caliphs would be given sufficient
reward. As a result a noticeable number of hadiths were recorded at this
time praising the companions, some of which are of doubtful
authenticity. He ordered pejorative comments to be made about Ali from
the pulpits of mosques throughout the lands of Islam, while he himself
sought to revile Ali. This command continued to be more or less in
effect until the caliphate of Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, when it was
discontinued.

With the help of his agents and lieutenants, Mu'awiyah caused elite and
the most outstanding among the partisans of Ali to be put to death and
the heads of some of them to be carried on lances throughout different
cities. The majority of Shi'ites were forced to disown and even curse
Ali and to express their disdain for him. If they refused, they were put
to death.


