Shi'ism in the 4th/10th Century
===============================

In the 4th/10th century certain conditions again prevailed which aided
greatly the spread and strengthening of Shi'ism. Among them were the
weaknesses that appeared in the central Abbasid government and
administration and the appearance of the Buyid rulers. The Buyids, who
were Shi'ite had the greatest influence not only in the provinces of
Persia but also in the capital of the caliphate in Baghdad, and even
upon the caliph himself.

This new strength of considerable proportions enabled the Shi'ites to
stand up before their opponents who previously had tried to crush them
by relying upon the power of the caliphate. It also made it possible for
the Shi'ites to propagate their religious views openly.

As recorded by historians, during this century most of the Arabian
peninsula was Shi'ite with the exception of some of the big cities. Even
some of the major cities like Hajar, Uman, and Sa'dah were Shi'ite. In
Basra, which had always been a Sunni city and competed with Kufa which
was considered a Shi'ite center, there appeared a notable group of
Shi'ites. Also in Tripoli, Nablus, Tiberias, Aleppo, Nayshapur, and
Herat there were many Shi'ites, while Ahwaz and the coast of the Persian
Gulf on the Persian side were also Shi'ite.

At the beginning of this century Nasir Utrush, after many years of
propagation of his religious mission in northern Persia, gained power in
Tabaristan and established a kingdom which continued for several
generations after him. Before Utrush, Hasan ibn Zayd al-'Alawi had
reigned from many years in Tabaristan. Also in this period the Fatimids,
who were Isma'ili, conquered Egypt and organized a caliphate which
lasted for over two centuries (296/908-567/1171). Often disputation and
fighting occurred in major cities like Baghdad, Cairo and Nayshapur
between Shi'ites and Sunnis, in some of which the Shi'ites would gain
the upper hand and come out victorious.


**Shi'ism from the 5th/11th to the 9th/15th Centuries**

From the 5th/11th to the 9th/15th centuries Shi'ism continued to expand
as it had done in the 4th/10th century. Many kings and rulers who were
Shi'ite appeared in different parts of the Islamic world and propagated
Shi'ism. Toward the end of the 5th/11th century the missionary activity
of Isma'ilism took root in the fort of Alamut and for nearly a century
and a half the Isma'ilis lived in complete independence in the central
regions of Persia. Also the Sadat-i Mar'ashi, who were descendants of
the Holy Prophet, ruled for many years in Mazandaran (Tabaristan).

Shah Muhammad Khudabandah, one of the well-known Mongol rulers, became
Shi'ite and his descendants ruled for many years in Persia and were
instrumental in spreading Shi'ism. Mention must also be made of the
kings of the Aq Qoyunlu and Qara Qoyunlu dynasties who ruled in Tabriz
and whose domain extended to Fars and Kerman, as well as of the Fatimid
government which was ruling in Egypt.

Of course religious freedom and the possibility of exerting religious
power by the populace differed under different rulers. For example, with
the termination of Fatimid rule and coming to power of the Ayyubids the
scene changed completely and the Shi'ite population of Egypt and Syria
lost its religious independence.

Many of the Shi'ites of Syria were killed during this period merely on
the accusation of following Shi'ism. One of these was Shahid-i awwal
(the First Martyr) Muhammad ibn Makki, one of the great figures in
Shi'ite jurisprudence, who was killed in Damascus in 786/1384. Also
Shaykh al-ishraq Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi was killed in Aleppo on the
accusation that he was cultivating Batini teachings and philosophy.

Altogether during this period Shi'ism was growing from the point of
view of numbers, even though its religious power and freedom depended
upon local conditions and the rulers of the time. During this period,
however, Shi'ism never became the official religion of any Muslim
state.


**Shi'ism in the 10th/16th and 11th/17th Centuries**

In the 10th/16th century Isma'il, who was of the household of Shaykh
Safi al-Din Ardibili (d. 735/1334), a Sufi master and also a Shi'ite,
began a revolt in Ardibil, with three hundred Sufis who were disciples
of his forefathers, with the aim of establishing an independent and
powerful Shi'ite country. In this way he began the conquest of Persia
and overcame the local feudal princes. After a series of bloody wars
with local rulers and also the Ottomans who held the title of caliph, he
succeeded in forming Persia piece by piece into a country and in making
Shi'ism the official religion in his kingdom.

After the death of Shah Isma'il other Safavid kings reigned in Persia
until the 12th/18th century and each continued to recognize Shi'ism as
the official religion of the country and further to strengthen its hold
upon this land. At the height of their power, during the reign of Shah
'Abbas, the Safavids were able to increase the territorial expansion and
the population of Persia to twice its present size. As for other Muslim
lands, the Shi'ite population continued the same as before and increased
only through the natural growth of population.


**Shi'ism from the 12th/18th to the 14th/20th Centuries**

During the past three centuries Shi'ism has followed its natural rate
of growth as before. At the present moment, during the latter part of
the 14th/20th century, Shi'ism is recognized as the official religion in
Iran, and in the Yemen and Iraq the majority population is Shi'ite. In
nearly all lands where there are Muslims one can find a certain number
of Shi'ites. It has been said that altogether in the world today there
are about eighty to ninety million Shi'ites.


