Part Ii: Shi'ite Religiuos Thought
==================================

**CHAPTER III THREE METHODS OF RELIGIOUS THOUGHT**

By "religious thought" we mean that form of thought which is concerned
with any of the problems of a religious nature within a particular
religion, in the same sense that mathematical thought is the form of
thought which deals with mathematical questions and solves mathematical
problems.

Needless to say religious thought, like other forms of thought, must
have reliable sources from which the raw material of its thought
originates and upon which it depends. Similarly, the process of
reasoning necessary for the solution of mathematical problems must have
a series of established mathematical facts and principles.

The single source upon which the divinely revealed religion of Islam
depends and upon which it is based, inasmuch as it is based on a
revelation of celestial origin, is none other than the Holy Quran. It is
the Quran which is the definitive testament of the universal and
ever-living prophethood of the Prophet and it is the content of the
Quran that bears the substance of the Islamic call. Of course the fact
that the Quran is alone the source of Islamic religious thought does not
eliminate other sources and origins of correct thinking, as will be
explained later.

There are three methods of religious thought in Islam. The Holy Quran
in its teachings points to three paths for Muslims to follow in order to
comprehend the purposes of religion and the Islamic sciences: (1) the
path of the external and formal aspect of religion (the Shari'ah); (2)
the path of intellectual understanding; and (3) the path of spiritual
comprehension achieved through sincerity (ikhlas) in obeying God.

It can be seen that the Holy Quran in its formal aspect addresses all
people without providing any demonstration or proof. Rather, depending
on the unique sovereignty of God, it commands people to accept the
principles of faith such as divine unity, prophethood, eschatology; it
gives them practical injunctions such as the daily prayers, fasting,
etc.; and at the same time it prohibits them from committing certain
other actions. Yet if the Quran had not provided authority for these
commands it would never have expected man to accept and obey them.

It must, therefore, be said that such simple utterances of the Quran
are a path toward the understanding of ultimate religious ends and the
comprehension of the Islamic sciences. We call such verbal expressions
as "Believe in God and His Prophet" and "Perform the prayers," the
external or formal aspect of religion.

In addition to guidance in the external aspect of religion, we see that
the Holy Quran in many verses guides man toward intellectual
understanding. It invites man to meditate, contemplate and deliberate
upon the signs of God in the macrocosm and the microcosm. It explains
many verities through unfettered intellectual reasoning.

It must be said in truth that no sacred book praises and recommends
science and intellectual knowledge for man as much as does the Quran. In
many of its words and utterances the Quran attests to the validity of
intellectual proof and rational demonstration, that is, it does not
claim that man should first accept the validity of the Islamic sciences
and then through intellectual proofs justify these sciences.

Rather, with complete confidence in the truth of its own position it
proclaims that man should use his intellect to discover the truth of the
Islamic sciences, and only then accept this truth. He should seek the
affirmation of the words contained in the Islamic message in the world
of creation which is itself a truthful witness. And finally man should
find the affirmation of his faith in the results of rational
demonstration ; he should not have to gain faith first and the, in
obedience to it, seek proofs. Thus philosophical thought is also a way
whose validity and efficacy is confirmed by the Holy Quran.

Also, in addition to guidance in the external and intellectual aspects
of religion, we see that the Holy Quran in subtle terms explains that
all true religious science originates and comes from Divine Unity
(tawhid) and the knowledge of god and His Attributes . The perfection of
the knowledge of God belongs to those whom He has drawn from all places
and elevated solely to Himself. It is these men who have forgotten
themselves and all things and as a result of sincerity in obedience to
God have been able to concentrate all their powers and energies upon the
transcendent world. Their eyes have become illuminated through the
vision of the light of the Pure Creator.

With the eye of discernment they have seen the reality of things in the
kingdom of heaven and earth, for through sincerity of obedience they
have reached the station of certainty (yaqin). As a result of this
certainty the kingdoms of heaven and earth and the immortal life of the
eternal world have become revealed to them.

Deliberation upon the following holy verses illuminates fully this
claim: "And We sent no messenger before thee but We inspired him
(saying): There is no God save Me (Allah), so worship Me" (Quran, XXI,
25); and, "Glorified be Allah from that which they attribute (unto Him),
Save single-minded slaves of Allah" (Quran, XXXVII, 159-160); and, "Say,
I am only a mortal like you.

My Lord inspireth in me that your God is only One God. And whoever
hopeth for the meeting with his Lord, let him do righteous work, and
make none sharer of the worship due unto his Lord" (Quran, XVIII, 111);
and, "And serve the Lord till the inevitable [al-yaqin] cometh unto
thee" (Quran, XV, 99); and God says, "Thus did We show Abraham the
Kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those
possessing certainty" (Quran, VI, 76); and "Nay, but the record of the
righteous is in 'Iliyin - Ah! what will convey unto thee what 'Iliyin
is! - A written record, attested by those who are brought near (unto
their Lord)" (Quran, LXXXIII, 18-21); and, "Nay, would that ye knew
(now) with a sure knowledge ['ilm al-yaqin]! Ye will behold hellfire"
(Quran, XII, 5-6).

Thus it may be said that one of the paths for the comprehension of
religious verities and sciences is the purification of the carnal soul
and sincerity in obedience to God.

From what has been said it becomes clear that the Holy Quran proposes
three methods for the comprehension of religious truths: the external,
or formal aspects of religion; intellectual reasoning; and sincerity in
obedience leading to the intellectual intuition which results in the
unveiling of the truth and its inward vision.

Yet it must be understood that these three methods differ from each
other in several ways. For instance, since the external forms of
religion are verbal expressions in the simplest language, they are in
the hands of all people, and everyone benefits from them according to
his own capacity. On the other hand, the other two paths, which are
appropriate to a particular group (the elite - khawass), are not common
to all.

The path of the external forms of religion leads to the understanding
of the principles and the obligations of Islam and results in knowledge
of the substance of the beliefs and practices of Islam, and of the
principles of the Islamic sciences, ethics, and jurisprudence. This is
in contrast to the other two paths. The intellectual path can discover
the problems connected with faith, ethics, and the general principles
governing practical questions, but the intellectual method cannot
discover the specific religious injunctions given in the Quran and the
Sunnah.

The path of purification of the carnal soul, since it leads to the
discovery of God-given spiritual truths, can have no limits nor measure
of its results or of the truths revealed through this divine gift. Men
who have reached this knowledge have cut themselves off from everything
and forgotten everything but God and are under the direct guidance and
dominion of God Himself - May His Name be Glorified. Whatever He wants
and not what they want is revealed to them. We will now take up in
detail the three methods of religious thought in Islam.


**First Method : The Formal Aspect of Religion**

**The Different Facets of the Formal Aspect of Religion**

It has become clear from what has been said thus far that the Holy
Quran, which is the principal source of religious thought in Islam, has
given full authority to the external meanings of its words for those who
give ear to its message. The same external meaning of the Quranic verses
has made the sayings of the Prophet complementary to the words of the
Quran and has declared them to be authoritative like the Quran. For as
the Quran says: "And We have revealed unto thee the Remembrance that
thou mayst explain to mankind that which hath been revealed for them"
(Quran, XVI, 44).

And, "He it is who hath sent among the unlettered ones a messenger of
their own, to recite unto them His revelations and to make them grow,
and to teach them the scripture and Wisdom" (Quran, LXII, 2). And, "And
whatsoever the messenger giveth you, take it. And whatsoever he
forbiddeth, abstain (from it)" (Quran, LIX, 7). And, "Verily in the
messenger of Allah ye have a good example" (Quran, XXXIII, 21).

It is quite evident that such verses would not have any real meaning if
the words and deeds of the Prophet and even his silence and approval
were not authority for us just as the Quran itself is. Thus the words of
the Prophet are authoritative and must be accepted by those who have
heard them orally or received them through reliable transmission.
Moreover, through such a completely authentic chain of transmission it
is known that the Holy Prophet said, "I leave two things of value amidst
you in trust which if you hold on to you will never go astray: the Quran
and the members of my household. These will never be separated until the
Day of Judgment."

According to this and other definitely established hadiths the words of
the Family of the Household of the Prophet form a corpus that is
complementary to the Prophetic religious sciences and are inerrant in
the explanation of the teachings and injunctions of Islam. Their
sayings, received orally or through reliable transmission, are reliable
and authoritative.

Therefore, it is clear that the traditional source from which the
formal and external aspect of religion is derived, which is an
authoritative document and which is also the basic source for the
religious thought of Islam, consists of two parts: The Book (the Quran)
and the Sunnah. By the Book is meant the external aspect of the verses
of the Holy Quran; and by the Sunnah, hadith received from the Prophet
and his revered Household.

**Traditions of the Companions**

In Shi'ism hadiths transmitted through the companions are dealt with
according to this principle: if they deal with the words and actions of
the Prophet and do not contradict the hadiths of the Household of the
Prophet, they are acceptable. If they contain only the views or opinions
of the companions themselves and not those of the Prophet, they are not
authoritative as sources for religious injunctions. In this respect the
ruling of the companions is like the ruling of any other Muslim. In the
same way, the companions themselves dealt with other companions in
questions of Islamic law as they would with any Muslim, not as someone
special.

**The Book and Tradition**

The Book of God, the Holy Quran, is the principal source of every form
of Islamic thought. It is the Quran which gives religious validity and
authority to every other religious source in Islam. Therefore, it must
be comprehensible to all. Moreover, the Quran describes itself as the
light which illuminates all things. Also it challenges men and requests
them to ponder over its verses and observe that there are no disparities
or contradictions in them. It invites them to compose similar work, if
they can, to replace it. It is clear that if the Holy Quran were not
comprehensible to all there would be no place for such assertions.

To say that the Quran is in itself comprehensible to all is not in any
way contradictory to the previous assertion that the Prophet and his
Household are religious authorities in the Islamic sciences, which
sciences in reality are only elaborations of the content of the Quran.
For instance, in the part of the Islamic sciences which comprises the
injunctions and laws of the Shari'ah, the Quran contains only the
general principles.

The clarification and elaboration of their details, such as the manner
of accomplishing the daily prayers, fasting, exchanging merchandise, and
in fact all acts of worship ('ibadat) and transactions (mu'amalat), can
be achieved only by referring to the traditions of the Holy Prophet and
his Household.

As for the other part of the Islamic sciences dealing with doctrines
and ethical methods and practices, although their content and details
can be comprehended by all, the understanding of their full meaning
depends on accepting the method of the Household of the Prophet. Also
each verse of the Quran must be explained and interpreted by means of
other Quranic verses, not by views which have become acceptable and
familiar to us only through habit and custom.

Ali has said: "Some parts of the Quran speak with other parts of it
revealing to us their meaning and some parts attest to the meaning of
others." And the Prophet has said, "Parts of the Quran verify other
parts." And also: "Whosoever interprets the Quran according to his own
opinion has made a place for himself in the fire."

As a simple example of the Quran through the Quran may be cited the
story of the torture of the people of Lot about whom in one place God
says, "And we rained on them a rain," and in another place He has
changed this phrase to, "Lo! We sent a storm of stones upon them (all)."
By relating the second verse to the first it becomes clear that by
"rain" is meant "stones" from heaven. Whoever has studied with care the
hadiths of the Household of the Prophet, and the outstanding companions
who were the followers of the Prophet, will have no doubt that the
commentary of the Quran through the Quran is the sole method of Quranic
commentary taught by the Household of the Prophet.

**The Outward and Inward Aspects of the Quran**

It has been explained that the Holy Quran elucidates religious aims
through its own words and gives commands to mankind in matter of
doctrine and action. But the meaning of the Quran is not limited to this
level. Rather, behind these same expressions and within these same
meanings there are deeper and wider levels of meaning which only the
spiritual elite who possess pure hearts can comprehend.

The Prophet, who is the divinely appointed teacher of the Quran, says:
"The Quran has a beautiful exterior and a profound interior." He has
also said, "The Quran has an inner dimension, and that inner dimension
has an inner dimension up to seven numerous references to the inner
aspect of the Quran.

The main support of these assertions is a symbol which God has
mentioned in Chapter XIII, verse 17, of the Quran. In this verse divine
gifts are symbolized by rain that falls from heaven and upon which
depends the life of the earth and its inhabitants. With the coming of
the rain, floods begin to flow and each river bed accepts a certain
amount of the flood, depending on its capacity. As it flows, the flood
is covered with foam, but beneath the foam there is that same water
which is life-giving and beneficial to mankind.

As is indicated by this symbolic story, the capacity for comprehension
of divine sciences, which are the source of man's inner life, differs
among people. There are those for whom there is no reality beyond
physical existence and the material life of this world which lasts but a
few days. Such people are attached to material appetites and physical
desires alone and fear nothing but the loss of material benefits and
sensory enjoyment.

Such people, taking into consideration the differences of degree among
them, can at best accept the divine sciences on the level of believing
in a summary fashion in the doctrines and performing the practical
commands of Islam in purely outward manner without any comprehension.
They worship God with the hope of recompense or fear of punishment in
the next world.

There are also those who, because of the purity of their nature, do not
consider their well-being to lie in attachment to the transient
pleasures of the fleeting life of this world. The losses and gains and
bitter and sweet experiences of this world are for them no more than an
attractive illusion.

Memory of those who passed before them in the caravan of existence, who
were pleasure-seekers yesterday and no more than subjects of stories
today, is a warning that is continuously present before their eyes. Such
men who possess pure hearts are naturally attracted to the world of
eternity. They view the different phenomena of this passing world as
symbols and portents of the higher world, not as persisting and
independent realities.

It is at this point that through earthly and heavenly signs, signs upon
the horizons and within the souls of men, they "observe" in a spiritual
vision the Infinite Light of the Majesty and Glory of God. Their hearts
become completely enamored with the longing to reach an understanding of
the secret symbols of creation. Instead of being imprisoned in the dark
and narrow well of personal gain and selfishness they begin to fly in
the unlimited space of the world of eternity and advance ever onwards
toward the zenith of the spiritual world.

When they hear that God has forbidden the worship of idols, which
outwardly means bowing down before an idol, they understand this command
to mean that they should not obey other than God, for to obey means to
bow down before someone and to serve him. Beyond that meaning they
understand that they should not have hope of fear of other than God;
beyond that, they should not surrender to the demands of their selfish
appetites; and beyond that, they should not concentrate on anything
except God, May His Name be Glorified.

Likewise when they hear from the Quran that they should pray, the
external meaning of which is to perform the particular rites of prayers,
through its inner meaning they comprehend that they must worship and
obey God with all their hearts and souls. Beyond that they comprehend
that before God they must consider themselves as nothing, must forget
themselves and remember only God.

It can be seen that the inner meaning present in these two examples is
not due to the outward expression of the command and prohibition in
question. Yet the comprehension of this meaning is unavoidable for
anyone who has begun to meditate upon a more universal order and has
preferred to gain a vision of the universe of reality rather than his
own ego, who has preferred objectivity to an egocentric subjectivism.

From this discussion the meaning of the outward and inward aspects of
the Quran has become clear. It has also become evident that the inner
meaning of the Quran does no eradicate or invalidate its outward
meaning. Rather, it is like the soul which gives life to the body.
Islam, which is a universal and eternal religion and places the greatest
emphasis upon the "reformation" of mankind, can never dispense with its
external laws which are for the benefit of society, nor with its simple
doctrines which are the guardians and preservers of these laws.

How can a society, on the pretense that religion is only a matter of
the heart, that man's heart should be pure and that there is no value to
actions, live in disorder and yet attain happiness? How can impure deeds
and words cause the cultivation of a pure heart? Or how can impure words
emanate from a pure heart? God says in His Book, "Vile women are for
vile men, and vile men for vile women. Good women are for good men, and
good men for good women." (Quran, XXIV, 26)

He also says, "As for the good land, its vegetation cometh forth by
permission of its Lord; while as for that which is bad, only evil cometh
forth (from it)." (Quran, VII, 58) Thus it becomes evident that the Holy
Quran has an outward and an inward aspect and the inward aspect itself
has different levels of meaning. The hadith literature, which explains
the content of the Quran, also contains these various aspects.


