The Principles of Interpretation of the Quran
=============================================

At the beginning of Islam it was commonly believed by some Sunnis that
if there was sufficient reason one could ignore the outward meaning of
Quranic verses and ascribe to them a contrary meaning. Usually the
meaning which opposed the outward, literal meaning was called ta'wil,
and what is called "ta'wil of the Quran" in Sunni Islam is usually
understood in this sense.

In the religious works of Sunni scholars, as well as in the
controversies that have been recorded as taking place between different
schools, one often observes that if a particular point of doctrine (that
has been established through the consensus of the ulama of a school or
through some other means) is opposed to the outward meaning of a verse
of the Quran, that verse is interpreted by ta'wil to have a meaning
contrary to its apparent meaning.

Sometimes two contending sides support two opposing views and present
Quranic verses in proof of their contentions. Each side interprets the
verses presented by the other side through ta'wil. This method has also
penetrated more or less into Shi'ism and can be seen in some Shi'ite
theological works.

Yet, sufficient deliberation upon Quranic verses and the hadith of the
Household of the Prophet demonstrates clearly that the Holy Quran with
its attractive language and eloquent and lucid expression never uses
enigmatic or puzzling methods of exposition and always expounds any
subject in a language suitable for that subject.

What has been rightly called ta'wil, or hermeneutic interpretation, of
the Holy Quran is not concerned simply with the denotation of words.
Rather, it is concerned with certain truths and realities that transcend
the comprehension of the common run of men ; yet it is from these truths
and realities that the principles of doctrine and the practical
injunctions of the Quran issue forth.

The whole of the Quran possesses the sense of ta'wil, of esoteric
meaning, which cannot be comprehended directly through human thought
alone. Only the prophets and the pure among the saints of God who are
free from the dross of human imperfection can contemplate these meanings
while living on the present plane of existence. On the Day of
Resurrection the ta'wil of the Quran will be revealed to everyone.

This assertion can be explained by pointing to the fact that what
forces man to use speech, create words and make use of expressions is
nothing other than his social and material needs. In his social life man
is forced to try to make his fellow-men understand his thoughts and
intentions and the feelings which exist within his soul. To accomplish
this end he makes use of sounds and hearing. Occasionally also he uses
to a degree his eyes and gestures. That is why between the mute and the
blind there can never be any mutual comprehension, for whatever the
blind man says the deaf cannot hear, and whatever the mute makes
understood through gestures the blind man cannot see.

The creation of words and the naming of objects have been accomplished
with a material end in view. Expressions have been created for those
objects, states, and conditions which are material and available to the
senses or near to the sensible world. As can be seen in those cases
where the person addressed lacks one of the physical senses, if we wish
to speak of matters which can be comprehended through the missing sense
we employ a kind of allegory and similitude.

For example, if we wish to describe light or color to one who is born
blind, or the pleasures of sex to a child that has not reached the age
of adolescence, we seek to achieve our purpose through comparison and
allegory and through providing examples.

Therefore, if we accept the hypothesis that in the scale of Universal
Existence there are immense levels of reality which are independent of
the world of matter (and this is in reality the case), and that in each
generation there are among mankind but a handful who have the capability
of comprehending and having a vision of these realities, then questions
pertaining to these higher worlds cannot be understood through common
verbal expressions and modes of thought. They cannot be referred to
except by allusion and through symbolism. Since religious realities are
of this kind, the expression of the Quran in such matters must of
necessity be symbolic.

God says in his book, "Lo! We have appointed it a Lecture in Arabic
that haply ye may understand. And Lo! in the Source of Decrees, which We
possess, it is indeed sublime, decisive." (Common comprehension cannot
understand it or penetrate into it.) (Quran, XLIII, 3-4) He also says,
"That (this) is indeed a noble Quran, In a book kept hidden, Which none
toucheth save the purified" (Quran, LVI, 77-79). Concerning the Prophet
and his Household he says, "Allah's wish is but to remove uncleanness
far from you, O Folk of the Household, and cleanse you with a thorough
cleansing" (Quran, XXXIII, 33).

As proved by these verses, the Holy Quran emanates from sources beyond
the comprehension of common man. No one can have a full comprehension of
the Quran save those servants of God whom He has chosen to purify. And
the Household of the Prophet are among those pure beings.

In another place God says, "Nay, but they denied that (the Quran), the
knowledge whereof they could not compass, and whereof the interpretation
(in events) [ta'wil] hath not yet come into them" (Quran, X, 40)
(meaning the day of Resurrection when the truth of things will become
known). And again he says, "On the day (the Day of Resurrection) when
the fulfillment [ta'wil] thereof (of the whole Quran) cometh, those who
were before forgetful thereof will say: The messengers of our Lord did
bring the Truth!" (Quran, VII, 53)

**Hadith**

The principle that the hadith possesses validity, as attested by the
Quran, is not at all disputed among Shi'ites or in fact among all
Muslims. But because of the failure of some of the early rulers of Islam
in preserving and guarding the hadith, and the excesses of a group among
the companions and followers of the Prophet in propagating hadith
literature, the corpus of hadith came to face a certain number of
difficulties.

On the one hand the caliphs of the time prevented the writing down and
recording of the hadith and ordered any pages containing texts of hadith
to be burned. Sometimes also any increase in activity in the
transmission and study of hadith was forbidden. In this way a certain
number of hadiths were forgotten or lost and a few were even transmitted
with a different or distorted meaning. On the other hand another
tendency also prevailed among another group of the companions of the
Holy Prophet who had had the honor of seeing his presence and actually
hearing his words.

This group, which was respected by the caliphs and the Muslim
community, began an intense effort to propagate the hadith. This was
carried to such an extent that sometimes hadith overruled the Quran and
the injunction of a Quranic verse was even considered abrogated by some
people through a hadith. Often the transmitters of hadith would travel
many miles and bear all the difficulties of traveling in order to hear a
single saying.

A group of outsiders who had worn the dress of Islam and also some of
the enemies within ranks of Islam began to change and distort some of
the hadith and thus diminished the reliability and validity of the
hadith that was then heard and known. For this very reason Islamic
scholars began to think of a solution. They created the sciences
concerned with the biography of learned men and chains of transmission
of hadith in order to be able to discriminate between true and false
hadith.


**The Method of Shi'ism in Authenticating the Hadith**

Shi'ism, in addition to seeking to authenticate the chain transmission
of hadith, considers the correlation of the text of the hadith with the
Quran as a necessary condition for its validity. In Shi'ite sources
there are many hadiths of the Prophet and the Imams with authentic
chains of transmission which themselves assert that a hadith contrary to
the Quran has no value. Only that hadith can be considered valid which
is in agreement with the Quran.

Basing itself on these hadiths, Shi'ism does not act upon those hadiths
which are contrary to the text of the Quran. As for the hadiths whose
agreement or disagreement cannot be established, according to
instructions received from Imams they are passed by in silence without
being accepted or rejected. Needless to say there are also within
Shi'ism those who, like a group among the Sunnis, act on any hadith
whatsoever which they happen to find in different traditional sources.

**The Method of Shi'ism in Following the Hadith**

A hadith heard directly from the mouth of the Prophet or one of the
Imams is accepted as is the Quran. As for hadiths received through
intermediaries, the majority of Shi'ites act upon them if their chain of
transmission is established at every step or if there exists definite
proof concerning their truth, and, if they are concerned with principles
of doctrine which require knowledge and certainty, according to the text
of the Quran. Other than these two kinds of hadith, no other hadith has
any validity concerning principles of doctrine, the invalid hadith being
called "tradition with a single transmitter" (khabar wahid).

However, in establishing the injunctions of the Shari'ah, because of
reasons that have been given, Shi'ites act also on a tradition which is
generally accepted as reliable. Therefore it can be said that for
Shi'ism a certain and definitely established hadith is absolutely
binding and must be followed, while a hadith which is not absolutely
established but which is generally considered as reliable is utilized
only in the elaboration of the injunctions of the Shari'ah.

**Learning and Teaching in Islam**

To acquire knowledge is a religious duty in Islam. The Prophet has
said, "To seek knowledge is incumbent upon every Muslim." According to
fully established hadiths which elucidate the meaning of this saying,
knowledge here means the three principles of Islam : unity or tawhid ;
prophecy or nubuwwat; and eschatology or ma'ad. In addition to these
principles, Muslims are expected to acquire knowledge of the subsidiary
branches and the details of the injunctions and laws of Islam according
to their individual circumstances and needs.

It is clear that acquiring knowledge of the principles of religion,
even if it be in summary fashion, is possible to a certain extent for
everyone. But acquiring detailed knowledge of the injunctions and laws
of religion through use of the basic documents of the Book and the
Sunnah and technical reasoning based upon them (or what is called
demonstrative jurisprudence, fiqh-i istidlali ) is not possible for
every Muslim. Only a few persons have the capacity for demonstrative
jurisprudence, nor is such acquiring of detailed knowledge required of
everyone, for there are no injunctions in Islam requiring one to do what
lies beyond his abilities.

Therefore, the study of Islamic injunctions and laws through reasoning
has been limited through the principle of "sufficient necessity"
(wajib-i kifa'i) to those individuals who have the necessary capability
and are worthy of such study. The duty of the rest of the people,
according to the general principle of the necessity for the ignorant to
depend on the one who knows, is to seek guidance from capable and worthy
men of learning, who are called mujtahids and faqihs.

This act of following mujtahids is called imitation or taqlid. Of
course this imitation differs from imitation in the principles of
religious knowledge which is forbidden according to the very text of the
Quran, "(O man), follow not that whereof thou hast no knowledge."
(Quran, XVII, 36).

It must be known that Shi'ism does not permit imitation of a dead
mujtahid. That is to say, a person who does not know the answer to a
problem through ijtihad and through religious duty must imitate a living
mujtahid and cannot depend on the view of a mujtahid who is not living,
unless he had received that guidance while the mujtahid was alive. This
practice is one of the factors which have kept Islamic Shi'ite
jurisprudence alive and fresh throughout the ages. There are individuals
who continuously follow the path of independent judgment, ijtihad, and
delve into the problems of jurisprudence from one generation to
another.

In Sunnism, as a result of consensus of opinion (ijma') that occurred
in the 4th/10th century, it was decided that submission to one of the
four schools (of Abu Hanifah, Ibn Malik, al-Shafi'i, and Ahmad ibn
Hanbal) was necessary. Free ijtihad or imitation of a school other than
these four (or one or two smaller schools that died out later) was not
considered permissible. As a result, their jurisprudence has remained in
the same condition as it was about 1100 years ago. In recent times
certain individuals in the Sunni world have turned away from this
consensus and have begun to exercise free ijtihad.

**Shi'ism and the Transmitted Sciences**

The Islamic sciences, which owe their existence to the ulama of Islam
who organized and formulated them, are divided into the two categories
of intellectual ('alqi) and transmitted (naqli). The intellectual
sciences include such sciences as philosophy and mathematics. The
transmitted sciences are those which depend upon transmission from some
source, such as the sciences of language, hadith, or history. Without
doubt the major cause for the appearance of the transmitted sciences in
Islam is the Holy Quran.

With the exception of a few disciplines such as history, genealogy, and
prosody, the other transmitted sciences have all come into being under
the influence of the Holy Book. Guided by religious discussions and
research, Muslims began to cultivate these sciences, of which the most
important are Arabic literature (grammar, rhetoric, and the science of
metaphors) and the sciences pertaining to the external form of religion
(recitation of the Quran, Quranic commentary (tafsir), hadith, biography
of learned men, the chain of transmission of hadith, and the principles
of jurisprudence).

Shi'ites played an essential role in the foundation and establishment
of these sciences. In fact, the founders and creators of many of these
sciences were Shi'ites. Arabic grammar was put into a systematic form by
Abu'l-Aswad al-Du'ali, one of the companions of the Holy Prophet, and by
Ali.

Ali dictated an outline for the organization of the science of Arabic
grammar. One of the founders of the science of eloquence (rhetoric and
the science of metaphors) was Sahib ibn 'Abbad, a Shi'ite, who was a
vizier of the Buyids. The first Arabic dictionary is the Kitab al-'ayn
composed by the famous scholar, Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Basri, the Shi'ite
who founded the science of prosody. He was also the teacher of the great
master of grammar, Sibuwayh.

The Quranic recitation of 'Asim goes back to Ali through one
intermediary, and 'Abdallah ibn 'Abbas, who in hadith was the foremost
among the companions, was a student of Ali. The contributions of the
Household of the Prophet and their associates in hadith and
jurisprudence are well known. The founders of the four Sunni schools of
law are known to have associated with the fifth and sixth Shi'ite Imams.
In the principles of jurisprudence the remarkable advances accomplished
by the Shi'ite scholar Wahid Binbahani and followed by Shaykh Murtada
Ansari have never been matched in Sunni jurisprudence according to
existing evidence.


