Second Method : the Way of Intelection and Intelectual Reasoning
================================================================

**Philosophical and Theological Thought in Shi'ism**

It has been mentioned before that Islam has legitimized and approved
rational thought, which it considers a part of religious thought.
Rational thought in its Islamic sense, after confirming the prophecy of
the Prophet, provides intellectual demonstrations of the validity of the
external aspect of the Quran, which is a divine revelation, as well as
of the definitely established sayings of the Prophet and his noble
Household.

Intellectual proofs, which aid man in finding solutions for these
problems through his God-given nature, are of two kinds : demonstration
(burhan) and dialectic (jadal). Demonstration is a proof whose premises
are true (accord with reality) even if they be not observable or
evident. In other words, it is a proposition which man comprehends and
confirms by necessity through his God-given intelligence,

as for example when he knows that "the number three is less than four."
This type of thought is called rational thought; and in case it concerns
universal problems of existence, such as the origin and end of the world
and of man, it becomes known as philosophical thought.

Dialectic is a proof all or some of whose premises are based on
observable and certain data, as for example the case of believers in a
religion for whom the common practice is to prove their religious views
within that religion by appealing to its certain and evident
principles.

The Holy Quran has employed both these methods and there are many
verses in the Holy Book attesting to each type of proof. First of all,
the Quran commands free investigation and meditation upon the universal
principles of the world of existence and the general principles of
cosmic order, as well as upon more particular orders such as that of the
heavens, the stars, day and night, the earth, the plants, animals, men,
etc. It praises in the most eloquent language intellectual investigation
of these matters.

Secondly, the Quran has commanded man to apply dialectical thought,
which is usually called theological (kalami) discussion, provided it is
accomplished in the best manner possible, that is, with the aim of
manifesting the truth without contention and by men who possess the
necessary moral virtues. It is said in the Quran, "Call unto the way of
thy Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and reason ["jadil," from
jadal] with them in the better way" (Quran, XVI, 125).

**Shi'ite Initiative in Islamic Philosophy and Kalam**

As for theology, kalam, it is clear that from the beginning when the
Shi'ites separated from the Sunni majority they began to debate with
their opponents concerning their own particular point of view. It is
true that a debate has two sides and that both the opponents share in
it. However, the Shi'ites were continuously on the offensive, taking the
initiative, while the other side played the defensive role.

In the gradual growth of kalam, which reached its height in 2nd/8th and
3rd/9th centuries with the spread of the Mu'tazilite school, Shi'ite
scholars and learned men, who were students of the school of the
Household of the Prophet, became among the foremost masters of kalam.
Furthermore, the chain of theologians of the Sunni world, whether it be
the Ash'arites, Mu'tazilites or others, goes back to the first Imam of
the Shi'ites, Ali.

As for philosophy, those who are acquainted with sayings and works of
the companions of the Prophet (of which the names of 12,000 have been
recorded and 120,000 are known to exist) know that there is little in
them containing an appreciable discussion of philosophical questions. It
is only Ali whose compelling metaphysical utterances contain the deepest
philosophical thought.

The companions and the scholars who followed them, and in fact the
Arabs of that day in general, were not acquainted with free intellectual
discussion. There is no example of philosophical thought in the works of
the scholars of the first two centuries. Only the profound sayings of
the Shi'ite Imams, particularly the first and eighth, contain an
inexhaustible treasury of philosophical meditations in their Islamic
context. It is they who acquainted some of their students with this form
of thought.

The Arabs were not familiar with philosophical thought until they saw
examples of it during the 2nd/8th century in the translation of certain
philosophical works into Arabic. Later, during the 3rd/9th century,
numerous philosophical writings were translated into Arabic from Greek,
Syriac, and other languages and through them the method of philosophical
thought became known to the general public. Nevertheless, most jurists
and theologians did not look upon philosophy and other intellectual
sciences, which were newly arrived guests, with favor.

At the beginning, because of the support of the governmental
authorities for these sciences, their opposition did not have much
effect. But conditions soon changed through strict orders many
philosophical works were destroyed. The Epistles of the Brethren of
Purity, which is the work of a group of unknown authors, is a reminder
of those days and attests to the unfavorable conditions of that epoch.

After this period of difficulty, philosophy was revived at the
beginning of the 4th/10th century by the famous philosopher Abu Nasr
al-Farabi. In the 5th/11th century, as a result of the works of the
celebrated philosopher Ibn Sina (Avicenna), Peripatetic philosophy
reached its full development. In the 6th/12th century Shaykh al-Ishraq
Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi systematized the philosophy of illumination
(ishraq) and because of this was executed by the order of Salah al-Din
Ayyubi.

Thereafter, philosophy ceased to exist among the Muslim majority in the
Sunni world. There was no further outstanding philosopher in that part
of the Muslim world except in Andalusia at the edge of the Islamic world
where at the end of the 6th/12th century Ibn Rushd (Averroes) sought to
revive the study of philosophy.

**Shi'ite Contributions to Philosophy and the Intellectual Sciences**

In the same way that from the beginning Shi'ism played an effective
role in the formation of Islamic philosophical thought, it was also a
principal factor in the further development and propagation of
philosophy and the Islamic sciences. Although after Ibn Rushd philosophy
disappeared in the Sunni world, it continued to live in Shi'ism. After
Ibn Rushd there appeared such celebrated philosophers as Khwajah Nasir
al-Din Tusi, Mir Damad, and Sadr al-Din Shirazi, who studied, developed
and expounded philosophical thought one after another. In the same
manner, in the other intellectual sciences, there appeared many
outstanding figures such as Nasir al-Din Tusi (who was both philosopher
and mathematician) and Birjandi, who was also an outstanding
mathematician.

All the sciences, particularly metaphysics or theosophy (falsafah-i
ilahi or hikmat-i ilahi), made major advances thanks to the
indefatigable endeavor of Shi'ite scholars. This fact can be seen if one
compares the works of Nasir al-Din Tusi, Shams al-Din Turkah, Mir Damad,
and Sadr al-Din Shirazi with the writings of those who came before
them.

It is known that the element that was instrumental in the appearance of
philosophical and metaphysical thought in Shi'ism and through Shi'ism in
other Islamic circles was the treasury of knowledge left behind by the
Imams. The persistence and continuity of this type of thought in Shi'ism
is due to the existence of this same treasury of knowledge, which
Shi'ism has continued to regard with a sense of reverence and respect.

In order to clarify this situation it is enough to compare the treasury
of knowledge left by the Household of the Prophet with the philosophical
works written over the course of the centuries. In this comparison one
can see clearly how each day Islamic philosophy approached this source
of knowledge ever more closely, until in the 11th/17th century Islamic
philosophy and this inspired treasury of wisdom converged more or less
completely. They were separated only by certain differences of
interpretation of some of the principles of philosophy.

**Outstanding Intellectual Figures of Shi'ism**

Thiqat al-islam Muhammad ibn Ya'qub Kulayni (d. 329/940) is the first
person in Shi'ism to have separated the Shi'ite hadiths from the books
called Principles (usul) and to have arranged and organized them
according the headings of jurisprudence and articles of faith. (Each one
of the Shi'ite scholars of hadith had assembled sayings he had collected
from the Imams in a book called Asl, or Principles.) The book of Kulayni
known as Kafi is divided into three parts: Principles, Branches, and
Miscellaneous Articles, and contains 16,199 hadiths. It is the most
trustworthy and celebrated work of hadith known in the Shi'ite world.

Three other works which complement the Kafi are the book of the jurist
Shaykh-i Saduq Muhammad ibn Babuyah Qumi(d. 381/991), and Kitab
al-tahdhib and Kitab al-istibsar, both by Shaykh Muhammad Tusi (d.
460/1068).

Abu'l-Qasim Ja'far ibn Hasan ibn Yahya Hilli (d. 676/1277), known as
Muhaqqiq, was an outstanding genius in the science of jurisprudence and
is considered to be the foremost Shi'ite jurist. Among his masterpieces
are Kitab-i mukhtasar-i nafi' and Kitab-i sharayi', which have been
passed from hand to hand for seven hundred years among Shi'ite jurists
and have always been regarded with a sense of awe and wonder.

Following Muhaqqiq, we must cite Shahid-i Awwal (the First Martyr)
Shams al-Din Muhammad ibn Makki, who was killed in Damascus in 786/1384
on the accusation of being Shi'ite. Among his juridical masterpieces is
his Lum'ah-i dimashqiyah which he wrote in prison in a period of seven
days. Also we must cite Shaykh Ja'far Kashif al-Ghita' Najafi (d.
1327/1909) among whose outstanding juridical works is Kitab kashf
al-ghita'.

Khwajah Nasir al-Din Tusi (d. 672/1274) is the first to have made kalam
a thorough and complete science. Among his masterpieces in this domain
is his Tajrid al-iteqed which has preserved its authority among masters
of this discipline for more than seven centuries. Numerous commentaries
have been written on it by Shi'ites and Sunnis alike. Over and above his
genius in the science of kalam, he was one of the outstanding figures of
his day in philosophy and mathematics as witnessed by the valuable
contributions he made to the intellectual sciences. Moreover, the
Maraghah observatory owed its existence to him.

Sadr al-Din Shirazi (d. 1050/1640), known as Mulla Sadra and Sadr
al-Muta'allihin, was the philosopher who, after centuries of
philosophical development in Islam, brought complete order and harmony
into the discussion of philosophical problems for the first time. He
organized and systematized them like mathematical problems and at the
same time wed philosophy and gnosis, thereby bringing about several
important developments.

He gave to philosophy new ways to discuss and solve hundreds of
problems that could not be solved through Peripatetic philosophy. He
made possible the analysis and solution of a series of mystical
questions which to that day had been considered as belonging to a domain
above that of reason and beyond comprehension through rational
thought.

He clarified and elucidated the meaning of many treasuries of wisdom,
contained in the exoteric sources of religion in the profound
metaphysical utterances of the Imams of the Household of the Prophet,
that for centuries had been considered as insoluble riddles and usually
believed to be of an allegorical or even unclear nature. In this way
gnosis, philosophy and the exoteric aspect of religion were completely
harmonized and began to follow a single course.

By following the methods he had developed, Mulla Sadra succeeded in
proving "transubstantial motion" (harakat-i jawhariyah), and in
discovering the intimate relation of time to the three spatial
dimensions in a manner that is similar to the meaning given in modern
physics to the "fourth dimension" and which resembles the general
principles of the theory of relativity (relativity of course in the
corporeal world outside the mind, not in the mind), and many other
noteworthy principles. He wrote nearly fifty books and treatises. Among
his greatest masterpieces is the four-volume Asfar.

It should be noted here that before Mulla Sadra certain sages like
Suhrawardi, the 6th/12th century philosopher and author of Hikmat
al-ishraq, and Shams al-Din Turkah, a philosopher of the 8th/14th
century, had taken steps toward harmonizing gnosis, philosophy and
exoteric religion, but credit for complete success in this undertaking
belongs to Mulla Sadra.

Shaykh Murtada Ansari Shustari (d. 1281/1864) reorganized the science
of the principles of jurisprudence upon a new foundation and formulated
the practical principles of this science. For over a century his school
has been followed diligently by Shi'ite scholars.


