Islam and Other Religions: The Shi'ite View
===========================================

***In the Name of God, Most Merciful and Compassionate***

Islam is based on two realities: the blessed personality of the Prophet
Muhammad, who was chosen exactly fourteen lunar centuries ago to deliver
God's message and to be the leader of mankind; and the Qurâ€™an, the Book
from God which is the Prophet's enduring miracle and which contains
God's words in the form of intellectual and practical teachings of a
universal nature.

These two realities must be considered as one of the most important
factors in the development and perfection of human life, or rather, they
are the most important factor to have manifested itself over the course
of fourteen centuries in the faith and practice of hundreds of millions
of men, extending its influence deep into every aspect of their society.

It is true that of the world's religions Islam is the youngest and that
its followers are fewer in number than the sum of the adherents other
faiths, yet Islam is possessed of certain distinguishing characteristics
which sets it apart from other religious ways. For example, if we refer
to the sacred books of Hinduism, and in particular the Veda, we see that
the religious teachings presented there are almost exclusively of an
ascetic nature and at the same time that they are directed towards a
minority of the religion's followers. Thus, the majority of Hindus are
excluded from deriving direct spiritual benefit from these sacred books.

Buddhism and also Christianity display with Hinduism the same
exclusively ascetic outlook in their teachings. In the case of
Christianity this is obvious from the four Gospels and the other basic
religious texts. There are no practical injunctions or social laws and
moreover philosophy and rational thought are looked upon with disfavor.

The Divine Sacrifice and the remission of the sins of mankind are
doctrines which reduce the relevance of injunctions concerned with this
world.

Other religions have either ceased to draw men to themselves, such as
Sabeanism and Manicheanism, or else are limited to a particular race of
people, such as Judaism.

Thus it is only Islam which gives first importance to rationally
demonstrable beliefs and positive individual and social injunctions, as,
it is hoped, the present paper will make clear.


