The Effect of the World View of the Individual upon his Activity
================================================================

The form and characteristics of this orderly system which man follows in
his life is dependent upon his conception of the nature of the Universe
and of himself, who is an inseparable part of that Universe. Thus we see
that a group of men do not admit the existence of a creator for the
world and imagine that the world came into being accidentally and that
man is only this material form which comes into existence at birth and
ceases to exist at death.

These men organize their way of life and rules for living with a view to
the material needs of their ephemeral earthly existence, and this alone
. They follow a path which can lead to no more than a limited material
happiness and well-being.

On the other hand those who accept a creator for the universe and
believe that the regulation of the affairs of men and of the world is in
the hands of "the gods" do not consider man's life to be just this
material existence; they organize their way of living in such a way as
to attract the favor of the gods and keep away their anger, and in this
manner to achieve happiness in life and remain safe from unpleasant
occurrences resulting from gods' wrath.

Again, those who accept the Unity of God and believe that the Universe
and all that is in it is governed by One God who is All-Wise and
All-Powerful, and that man does not cease to exist at death but lives an
eternal life, will organize their lives accordingly, that is, with an
eye to assuring felicity in both worlds.

It is thus clear that "religion" is the organization of life, and that
life lived according to a program is religion. Those who try to separate
religion and life and claim that the first of these is only empty
formalism are sadly mistaken. It is in view of this that Islam calls the
path one follows in life "religion", while it calls the true way the
"Straight Path" and the false way the "Deviated" or "Crooked Path". God
says:

***"The curse of Allah is on evil-doers, who debar (men) from the path
of Allah and would have it crooked, and who are disbelievers in the Last
Day."*** ***(Qur’an 7: 44-45.)***[^1]

[^1]: This and all subsequent quotations from the Qur’an are from the
translation by Mohammed Marmaduke Pickthall, The Meaning of the Glorious
Koran, New York, 1953.


