The Islamic World View
======================

The concept upon which the Prophet of Islam founded his religion is that
all of existence has been created by the One God, and that every one of
the parts of existence is directed by God towards the perfection and
happiness peculiar to that part. Man also, who possesses eternal life,
is directed towards the happiness and welfare peculiar to his nature;
and this he gains by following the path shown to him by God.

The Holy Prophet addressed his message to natural man, that is, man
endowed with human nature and God-given intelligence and will who is not
tainted by superstition and blind belief. Such an individual with his
God-given primordial nature has the innate capacity and ability to
apprehend the above- described world view.

With the slightest reminder he naturally understands that the world in
its vastness and grandeur and its perfect arrangement and order is the
creation of a transcendent Creator whose infinite Being is the source of
every beauty and perfection and who is above all ugliness and evil. Such
an individual understands that the creation of the world and its
inhabitants was not without meaning and purpose; that the life of this
world will be followed by another life, and that the good and bad
actions of this world will not go unanswered for.

And as a result he understands that there must be a way of life
peculiarly suited to the needs of man which will enable him to live
according to his own real nature.

Islam's choice of natural and primordial man as the object of the
religious message has several basic results:

1. The Principle of Equality
----------------------------

The Islamic teachings apply to all. There is no distinction between
black and white, man and woman, noble and humble, rich and poor, king
and beggar, strong and weak, eastern and western, learned and ignorant,
old and young, or between those who are present and those who will come
in the future, for all of these share human nature and that which it
implies in common.

Equality of this sort is limited to Islam; other ways, each in its own
measure, have certain discriminatory principles. For example, Hinduism
distinguishes fundamentally between Brahmins and non- Brahmins and
between man and woman; in Judaism a distinction is made between the
children of Israel and the Gentiles, and in Christianity between man and
woman.

As for secular social systems, in these there is a distinction between
subjects of a country and foreigners. It is only Islam which considers
humanity as one and has uprooted completely the principle of distinction
and discrimination.

***"O mankind! Lo! We have created you male and female, and have made
you nations and tribes that ye may know one another. Lo! the noblest of
you, in the sight of Allah, is the best in conduct." (Qur’an 49: 13)***

***"Lo! I suffer not the work of any worker, male or female, to be lost.
Ye proceed one from another." (Qur’an 3:195)***

That is, male or female, you are all of the same human status.

2. The Principle of Realism
---------------------------

In view of the fact that man is provided with the instinct of seeking
reality and of discerning between the real and the unreal, the laws and
injunctions laid down by Islam are based upon a correspondingly
realistic view of things.

This can be explained as follows: Although man in his natural activity
is stimulated towards his vital goals by feelings and emotions, he in
fact sets out after real goals, not illusion and fantasy. The newly born
baby who cries in his hunger and reaches for his mother's breast in
search of milk desires that which is milk in reality, not the illusion
of milk; he cries from real hunger, not from fantasy and imagination.

Every individual who strives in the way of achieving his own interests
seeks his own real interests, not their mental concept. In the same
manner when feelings and emotions present certain desires to man, and
without being able to take into account his true best-interest stimulate
him toward certain goals, it is the faculty of discrimination or reason
which harnesses and modifies these emotions and shows to man that which
is in reality the good and the evil and the rightness and the wrongness
of his action.

It is reason, moreover, which forbids the sick person from eating
harmful foods although he wishes to eat them; it is reason which
prevents man from entering upon dangerous activities, hence depriving
him of a large part of his freedom of action; it is reason which is
man's single superiority over other animals, and his most important
faculty for distinguishing the real from the illusory.

The laws and injunctions brought by the Prophet of Islam are based upon
a realistic view of things, not upon the whims and fancies of men. That
is to say that man must perform that action which is really and truly in
his best interest even if it is against his fancy; and he must avoid
that action which he feels like performing but which is not in
conformity with his real interests.

The case of the religious community is the same: it must accomplish what
is truly in its best interest and what is in conformity with its
felicity, even though this act may be contrary to its wishes; it must
not perform that action which is the wish of the majority of its members
but which is contrary to its true interest.

In the language of the Holy Qur’an that which is in conformity with
reality or with man's true best interest is called "The Truth"
(*al-Haqq*). It is the single goal towards which man must direct his
endeavor and after which he must strive.

***"After the Truth what is there saving error?" (Qur’an 10: 33)***

***"And if the Truth had followed their desires, verily the heavens and
the earth and whosoever is therein had been corrupted" (Qur’an 23:
71).***

An almond nut which is placed in the ground under the necessary
conditions will after a few days break its skin, and a green shoot will
come forth from its kernel as well as a number of roots which are put
forth in various directions; by way of the roots the shoot will take
continuous nourishment from the ground and will constantly grow and
develop until ultimately it becomes a fully grown almond tree with
trunk, branches, leaves blossoms and fruit.

The sperm of an animal placed in the womb of the female of the species
under particular circumstances will assume the form and shape peculiar
to itself and by means of the activity peculiar to its species will day
by day become larger and more complete until it reaches the limit of its
perfection.

If we investigate in the same manner all of the creatures of the world
one by one it will become perfectly obvious that for each of them there
is a way peculiar to itself through which it reaches the limit of its
own perfection, and that from the first day of its coming into being it
is attracted towards its end.

In its development it never goes astray nor does it change its
direction, as if, for example, an almond shoot could develop into a
horse or a horse could go to sleep one night and wake up the next
morning an almond tree. Rather every creature is guided toward its final
goal by means of creation itself, and in traversing this path of
development it never falls into error.

The path which has been laid out for each creature leading to its final
goal is one which is in conformity with the means and potentialities
with which it was provided by its own nature. These means allow it to
attract what is of benefit and repel what is harmful and threatens its
existence. Chickens eat grain, sheep and cattle feed upon forage, and
wolves, leopards and hawks hunt for game, for each is equipped with
particular digestive systems which are proper only for particular
nutritive substances.

In the same way, birds defend themselves with their beaks, sheep and
cattle with their horns, scorpions and bees with their stings, lions and
leopards with their teeth and claws, and deer by flight, for the
defensive equipment of each of them is just this. In summary, each of
these creatures moves in its life towards a particular goal and end. It
performs actions in which the equipment provided by its very existence
guides it, and the nature of which this equipment determines.

This guidance and determination is the same general guidance and
determination which the Qur’an has referred to and attributed to the
Creator:

***"Our Lord is He who gave unto everything its nature, then guided it
aright." (Qur’an 20: 50)***

***"Who createth, then disposeth; who measureth [i.e., determineth],
then guideth." (Qur’an 87: 2-3).***

Obviously, man also, who is one of the species of creation, is not an
exception to this general rule. His natural disposition and character
show to him the path which he should take in life, and point out and
distinguish the duties and responsibilities which he must fulfill.

***"From what thing does he create him (man)? From a drop of seed. He
createth him and proportioneth him, then maketh the way easy for him."
(Qur’an 80: 18-20).***

Meditation upon this and upon our previous discussion will show that the
result of both of these discussions is the same, that is, that correct
actions and deeds (those which are in conformity with man's true best
interest)- which man must choose by means of his instinct of discerning
between the real and the illusory-are the very same actions towards
which the nature of man guides him, endowed as it is with its own
peculiar equipment.

It is thus that the way towards which the Holy Qur’an invites man, which
it has named "the Religion of the Truth", which it also refers to as the
natural and primordial religion, and attributes it to creation itself.

***"So set they purpose (O Muhammad) for religion as a man by nature
upright-the nature (framed) of Allah, in which He hath created man.
There is no altering (the laws of) Allah's creation. That is the right
religion." (Qur’an 30: 30).***

***"By a soul and Him who perfected it, and inspired it (with conscience
of) what is wrong for it and (what is) right for it. He is indeed
successful who causeth it to grow, and he is indeed a failure who
stunteth it." (Qur’an 91: 7-10).***

From another point of view, since creation is the work of God and since
every sort of beauty and appropriateness which is observable in it is
the result of His Mercy, that which is appropriate to human nature
inasmuch as it determines the actions which man must perform is called
"the Will of God".

(This is of course the Will of God in as much as it ordains laws, guides
men in his actions, and holds him responsible for these actions; it is
not the same as the Will of God inasmuch as it creates-which can never
be disobeyed or violated.)

Likewise the duties and rules which result from that which is
appropriate to man's nature are called the commands and prohibitions of
God.

***"The Lord bringeth to pass what He willeth and chooseth. They (men)
have never any choice.” (Qur’an 28: 68).***

Since the religion of Islam consists of duties and commands from God,
the Creator, and since the person who follows its doctrinal and
practical injunctions has submitted himself to the Will of God, in the
language of the Holy Qur’an this religion is called "Islam"
("submission" or "surrender").

***"Lo! religion with Allah (is) the Surrender. (Qur’an 3: 19).***

***"And whoso seeketh as religion other than the Surrender (to Allah) it
will not be accepted from him." (Qur’an 3: 85).***

3. The Principle of Equilibrium between the Material and the Spiritual
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The third result of Islam's message being directed at natural man, a
result which is indeed one of the great achievements of this religion,
is that a middle way is taken between materiality and spirituality.

This is in contrast to Judaism, which, as can be observed in its Holy
Book, the Torah, is not concerned with spiritual matters, and with
Christianity, which on the contrary-according to the explicit sayings of
Jesus-is not concerned with the material life of this world.

Other religions such as Hinduism and Buddhism and even Zoroastrianism,
Manicheanism and Sabeanism, which to one degree or another are concerned
with spiritual things, have separated the spiritual way from material
life, to the extent that the connection between the two has been totally
severed.

It is only Islam which chooses the middle way and bases itself upon the
foundation of primordial human nature. towards his God, and include
expressions of servitude in the face of His Lordship, poverty and need
in the face of His Wealth and Independence, lowliness in the face of His
Grandeur, insignificance in the face of His Majesty and Glory, ignorance
in the face of His Knowledge, incapacity in the face of His Power, and
submission in the face of His Will.

Moreover, to the extent possible these expressions have been given a
social character, such as in the case of the groups which gather for the
daily congregational prayers, the larger groups which meet for Friday
prayers, and the still larger gathering which takes place at the time of
the pilgrimage to Mecca.

A second portion of these injunctions concern duties which man has in
social surroundings and in relation with his fellow man. Of course in
these duties, which are the Islamic laws, the sense of responsibility
towards God has been taken into account, for man must surrender only to
His Will (that is, the requirements of His creation). In other words,
all actions must be performed in the shadow of the three basic
principles of Islam: Divine Unity, Prophecy, and the Last Day.

***"Say: O People of the Scripture [Jews and Christians]! Come to an
agreement between us and you: that we shall worship none but Allah, and
that we shall ascribe no partners unto Him, and that none of us shall
take others for lords beside Allah. And if they turn away, then say:
Bear witness that we are they who have surrendered (unto Him)." (Qur’an
3: 64).***

From the previous discussion it has become clear that in the religion of
Islam the path to be followed in life has been ordered and arranged in
such a way that man's social and material life resembles a cradle in
which the spiritual life is nurtured.

The inner spiritual light of the practicing Muslim is such that all of
his individual and social actions contribute to purifying his soul and
strengthening its radiance. Although outwardly he is with people,
inwardly he is with God, and although he is in the midst of a crowd, he
dwells in the spiritual retreat of the divine secret.

At the same time that he is running here and there in pursuit of
material goals, and is undergoing a series of events both bitter and
sweet, pleasant and unpleasant, beautiful and ugly, and in general is
involved in the events of the tumultuous external world, his heart is
free and exists in a world of tranquility in which he sees the Face of
God wherever he looks.

***“And whither so ever ye turn, there is Allah's countenance”. (Qur’an
2: 115).***

A pious Muslim extends his spiritual life into every aspect of his
material life. Wherever he is and whatever he is doing he is in contact
with God. Everything with which he occupies himself in the material
world is a mirror in which he sees God reflected.

On the other hand, non-Muslims who turn towards the spiritual life
imagine that their natural and every-day life is a veil between
themselves and the Truth they are seeking. As a result they are forced
to abandon normal life and to assume an unaccustomed manner of living in
their quest after spiritual perfection.

Whatever the advantages of such a way, from the point of view of a
person who lives a normal life it is a difficult road to follow and one
in which to persevere requires an extreme degree of will power. However,
the person who follows the spiritual life according to the directives of
Islam knows full well that such a way is easier than that of Islam, for
such people, by abandoning every-day life, have taken the easy way out
and have fled from the difficulty of continual vigil and effort.

They have set a barrier in the road towards perfection which creation
itself and the means it has put at man's disposal have prepared. Such
men have set out on a path of their own fancy, and it is questionable
whether they will ever reach the goal which creation has determined for
them.

In addition, given that the world and all it contains are the creation
of God and that the phenomena of the world, each according to the
measure of its own existence, are signs of the Truth and mirrors
displaying God, and given that man along with the various conditions
which mark his primordial nature is one of these signs, then it is
necessary that in the spiritual life (the way of knowledge of self and
of God) God be recognized in every situation.

All of these mirrors must be utilized in the acquisition of divine
knowledge and in the contemplation of God's Beauty, for if this is not
the case man will gain nothing more from his labors than an imperfect
knowledge or a perfect ignorance.

4. Knowledge and Wisdom from the Point of view of Islam
-------------------------------------------------------

The person who has made a cursory study of the religions and creeds of
the world will have no doubt that the dignity and honor which Islam has
accorded to knowledge and wisdom and the extent to which it has
encouraged their acquisition is unparalleled in any other religion or
ideology, whether revealed or non-revealed. It is the Holy Qur’an which
asks,

***"Are those who know equal to those who do not?" (Qur’an 39: 9),***

and which praises the exalted station of knowledge in the most eloquent
manner. And it is the Holy Prophet who has said:

• "*The pursuit of knowledge is incumbent upon every Muslim*,

• “*Seek knowledge from the cradle to the grave*"

• "*Seek knowledge, even unto China*."

Again, it is the Holy Qur’an which commands its followers never to stray
from the way of knowledge nor to follow what is only supposed or
assumed, and never to accept without deliberation what passes before
their sight or crosses their minds, for they will be responsible for
their beliefs.

***"(O man), follow not that where of thou hast no knowledge. Lo! the
hearing and the sight and the heart-of each of these it will be asked."
(Qur’an 17: 36).***

As has become clear Islam encourages its followers to acquire knowledge
with all the powers at their disposal, and in this respect it has
designated knowledge of religious jurisprudence or doctrinal sciences,
and the injunctions of the religious law (Shari'ah) as mandatory.

***“And the believers should not all go out to fight [in the holy war].
Of every troop of them, a party should go forth, that they (who are left
behind) may gain sound knowledge in religion.” (Qur’an 9: 122).***

A point which must be kept in mind is that the capacity of individuals
for the comprehension of scientific and intellectual truth varies. There
are people who have no talent for logical thought and who, with their
simple minds, live in a surrounding of physical labor and on a level of
purely material life, where there are others whose thought is logical
and who by their very nature take a special joy in comprehending
profound concepts and scientific theories.

Still others have cut their attention from both thought and physical
labor and, having a special aversion for the dark world of matter and
its deceiving beauty and fleeting pleasures, find in themselves a
particular attraction towards the transcendent world and a peculiar
fascination for its lasting and infinite beauty, of which the beauty of
this world is only the reflected image. Such men easily comprehend the
verities and mysteries of the transcendent world by means of inner
illumination.

It is with a view to this diversity, which is clearly visible among men,
that Islam instructs each of these three groups in its own terms and
language. One group it has taught by means of the external and formal
aspect of religion and a second group by way of intellectual
demonstration, while the third group it has instructed to struggle
against the carnal soul and to purify the heart. In the same way, in the
Qur’an God has struck a similitude about His Own utterances and
expressions:

***"He sendeth down water from the sky, so that valleys flow according
to their measure." (Qur’an 13: 17).***

The Holy Prophet has said:

"*We prophets have been commanded to speak to men according to the
measure of their understandings*."

Those among its followers who have not the taste for rational
demonstration and who would face the danger of error and deviation if
they were to attempt to traverse this path, Islam has charged with no
more than the measure of their ability, and beyond the three principles
of religion (Divine Unity, Prophecy and the Last Judgement) it only
instills them with simple practical injunctions such as command to do
good and prohibitions from committing evil; this type of formulation is
found in a great number of Qur’anic verses and in saying of the Prophet
and the Shi'ite Imams.

Of course in the case of the three principles of religion man in his
primordial nature can engage in a simple form of rational demonstration,
and hence he will have accepted nothing but definitely proven knowledge.
And in fact this method provides him with rational proof of the
remaining teachings and injunctions which he has accepted without
rational demonstration, for the truth of the principle of prophecy
proves in a definitive manner the validity of all of the saying which
have reached us from the Prophet.

The way of rational demonstration-Islam teaches those people who are
endowed with sound minds and who have the capacity to comprehend
scientific theories and intellectual and logical arguments through
logical and rational demonstration. In other words, it guides them
towards that which their uncorrupted and reality-seeking primordial
nature immediately perceives. It does not first impose upon them its
doctrines and beliefs and then defend these by reasoning and proofs.

The Book and the Tradition, that is, the verses of the Holy Qur’an and
the sayings of the Prophet and of the Shi'ite Imams-which make clear the
meaning and purpose of the Qur’anic verses-are full of this type of
rational demonstration. In them the Islamic beliefs and doctrines are
explained in detail by means of the simplest forms of expression and the
most convincing proofs, and likewise, mention is made in them of the
general and universal benefits and advantages of the Islamic laws and
injunctions.

Obviously, we must not overlook the fact that the meaning of discussion
and demonstration of the benefits and advantages of the Islamic laws and
injunctions is not that if an individual Muslim or Islamic society in
general does not understand a particular injunction, that injunction
should be rejected. For as we have already mentioned, these laws were
promulgated by means of prophecy, and the proof of the validity of
prophecy is a summary proof of the validity of these laws, even if we do
not possess the detailed reason for this.

The way of purification of the soul-The third group of men are those who
are ready and eager to sever all material attachments and to turn their
attention away from the deceiving adornments and illusory desires of
this world. Such men are prepared to forget all that is other than God
and to close their eyes to every beauty and ugliness and every sweet and
bitter experience of this transient and illusory existence.

Opening the eye of discernment towards the eternal world, they are
prepared to contemplate without the veil of materiality the radiance of
the Majesty and Grandeur of God, to traverse the stages of human
perfection which must be crossed upon leaving this fleeting life, and to
enter into the Proximity of the Divine. With such men Islam converses
secretly of the divine mysteries in a language which they alone
understand, and thus it guides them from the depths of ignorance to the
pinnacle of knowledge and wisdom.


