A Possible Criticism and its Answer
===================================

A number of orientalists have said that Islamic mystical and
metaphysical doctrines have been borrowed from those of India, for Islam
in itself is no more than a series of extremely concrete and simple
beliefs and sterile forms of worship. The succinct reply to these claims
is provided nicely by the words of the poet: "O Sweetheart, the
difficulty is that you're no judge of words."

We, of course, in our answer to this criticism, do not wish to defend
Islam from the point of view of its mystics and engage in proving the
validity and originality in the face of Indian mysticism of the various
ways which they have traversed on the spiritual path. In the same way,
in our discussion of rational demonstration we were not concerned with
analyzing and proving the validity of all the books on philosophy
written by Muslims, and in our discussion of the way of the formal
aspects of religion we did not declare as correct the way of the
generality of Muslims whatever it might be.

Rather, our goal in this article is limited to a general survey of the
original and genuine Islamic sources, that is, the Book and the
Tradition, without concerning ourselves with agreeing or disagreeing
with the activities and conduct of any particular one of the foregoing
classes of men.

The claim of the above-mentioned orientalists is based upon the
principle of evolution, according to which the development and
perfection of a natural phenomena is explained in a scientific manner.
This principle has been generalized to include every sort of happening
in whatever sphere, even habits, customs and phenomena of a spiritual
nature. Thus the root cause of every event is sought in preceding
events. According to the same principle it has been said that Islamic
laws were borrowed from those of the Romans and Islamic doctrines from
the philosophical ideas of the Greeks.

These orientalists have been mistaken in their judgement in two
respects. First, they have considered what is called "mystical
intuition" to be of the same order as normal thought and hence they have
imagined that the knowledge gained by purification of the soul is a
system of poetical thoughts, much as if a poet with his overflowing and
creative imagination and his eloquent means of expression could voice
such concepts better than a mystic knower of the divine secrets.

A similar mistake is made in the case of revelation, which is the
celestial perception of prophets and the means of receiving divine
sciences and laws. As a result, the basic source of Islamic doctrine and
injunctions is represented as being Greek thought and Roman law.

This mistake is perfectly obvious in the discussions carried on about
prophecy and the "mode of thought" of prophets. Moreover, the words and
utterances which have reached us from the prophets-whether their claim
to prophecy be true or not-openly contradict such opinions.

The second mistake is that, even if we accept the theory of evolution as
proven and definitely established, this theory must not be taken as
providing the reason for the manifestation of an instinctive drive. For,
an instinct placed within a species' primordial nature at its creation
will be manifested within each individual of that species (provided
there be no external impediment), whether or not there is a precedent.

As a case in point it can be said that diversity in foodstuffs and the
preparation of sophisticated cuisine was learned by the Arabs from the
Persians, but it cannot be said that the Arabs learned how to eat from
the Persians. Likewise, it can be said that democratic government with
its manifold administrative organizations spread to the East from the
West, but this cannot be said about the very art of forming a society
and establishing a government.

In our previous discussion it became clear that the way of purification
of the soul, that is, the spiritual life and mystical intuition, is
innate within the nature of man; once awakened through the necessary
groundwork and the removal of obstacles, it will direct man to enter
upon the path of spiritual illumination.

Hence, religion, which by its very nature is concerned to one degree or
another with the transcendent and eternal world, cannot but cause the
appearance of certain among its followers, who, this hidden urge having
been awakened within them, will sever all attachments with this fleeting
world full of pain and hardship, and with the hope of absolute bliss and
serenity will concern themselves with the eternal abode. And in practice
also we see that in every one of the world's religions there exists a
group enamored of the spiritual life and mystical way.

By comparing the presentation of spiritual matters in the basic texts of
the world's religions it can be clearly observed that the texts of Islam
have concerned themselves with the description of everlasting felicity
and the external world more than the texts of other religions.

Therefore, the appearance of the way of the purification of the soul
within Islam is perfectly natural, without there being the need for any
relationship as to its origins with India or with any other place.
Furthermore, as history is there to prove, a large number of the
companions of â€˜Ali (the cousin and son-in-law of the Prophet and the
first Shi'ite Imam) such as Salman, Kumayl, Rashid, Maytham and Uways
were under his direct spiritual guidance and instruction at a time when
Islam had not yet reached India and when there could be no question of
contact with Indian thought.

The fact that the chains of spiritual initiation (*silsilah*) of
practically all of the Sufi orders in Islam reach back to Ali further
corroborates this point.


