The Difference in Means of Expression between Islamic and other Mysticisms
==========================================================================

The delicate and refined expressions of Islamic mystical doctrine in
contrast to the formulation of other mysticisms, and especially to that
of the Indians, has the advantage of elucidating mystical verities
within the wrapping of formulations of a more general nature. Hence,
everyone is able to profit from them, each in the measure of his
understanding. Other mystical ways do not possess this distinction.

It is for this same reason that Islam has been saved from the harmful
results, which have affected other religions, by presenting mystical
truths openly and unambiguously. For example, in the case of Indian
mysticism, if we study the Upanishads carefully, we will see that the
doctrine presented there is a precise and extremely profound expression
of the Unity of God, but at the same time that it is so bold and
explicit that any one who refers to it who is not completely versed in
mystical and metaphysical doctrine will consider its marvelously
complete formulations as nothing but superstitious prattle, or at the
very least he will interpret passages which express the Unity of God in
the most sublime manner as being nothing but incarnationism, pantheism
and idol worship.

This claim, moreover, is proved by the opinions which many orientalists
who have specialized in Sanskrit have voiced concerning Indian
mysticism; for after the tremendous amount of research which they have
undertaken in the original Hindu and Buddhist texts they still consider
Indian mystical doctrines as nothing but superstition, produced by the
minds of men deprived of the advantages of life. And the basic reason
for all such opinions on the part of orientalists is the explicitness
and the shocking nature of the bold formulations of these texts.


