A Brief Consideration of the Spiritual Path
===========================================

It may possibly be imagined that the claim that Islam has expounded the
mystical way by means of intimations and symbols is unfounded and
amounts to chasing false ghosts. However, sufficient meditation upon
Islamic teachings and formulations, and a weighing of these against the
agitated and ecstatic states of the Islamic mystics, will prove the
opposite and will show that hidden within themselves and by allusion
these teachings elucidate all of the stages of perfection which are
traversed on the mystical way, although a true and detailed
comprehension of these states is only possible through mystical
intuition.

The travellers on the spiritual path, who as a result of their natural
and primordial readiness have surrendered their hearts to the infinite
Beauty and Perfection of the Truth, worship God only out of love, not
out of hope for reward or fear of punishment, for to worship Him in
order to gain Paradise or to avoid hell is in fact to worship that very
reward and punishment in place of God.

As a result of the divine attraction which has engulfed their hearts,
and more particularly as a result of having seen that God has revealed
the verse

***"Therefore remember Me, I will remember you" (Qur’an 2: 152)***

and hundreds of other Qur’anic verses where the remembrance of God is
spoken of, wherever and in whatever state they happen to be the mystic
travelers are occupied with His remembrance: “

***“Such as remember Allah, standing, sitting and reclining.” (Qur’an 3:
191).***

And when they hear the messages of the Beloved,

***"Lo! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers" (Qur’an
45: 3),***

***"And there is not a thing by hymneth His praise" (Qur’an 17: 44),***

And

***"And whither so ever ye turn, there is Allah's countenance" (Qur’an
2: 115),***

they understand that all existent things are mirrors, each displaying
the unique Beauty of the Truth in accordance with the possibilities of
its own being. Other than their quality of being mirrors they have no
existence in themselves.

Hence such men look to every phenomenon with love and eagerness and have
no object other than to contemplate the Beauty of God. And when they
hear God's messages

***"O ye who believe! Ye have charge of your own souls. He who erreth
cannot injure you if you are rightly guided (Qur’an 5:105)***

and

***"Thou, verily, O man, art working towards thy Lord a work which thou
wilt meet (in His presence)" (Qur’an 84: 6),***

they understand that by the nature of creation itself they are bound
within the framework of their own souls, and other than the way of their
souls there is no road open to them to reach God.

Whatever they see or find in the expansiveness of the world they see and
find in themselves. It is here that man understands that in fact he is
cut off from all places and things and other than he himself and his God
there is no one else.

Even if such a person is in the midst of a hundred thousand people he is
alone, and if others see him in the midst of a crowd, he sees himself in
a spiritual retreat far away from everyone else, no one being with him
but God. It is then that he looks at himself and sees all things within
himself, and he understands that he himself is also only a mirror in
which the unique Beauty of God is manifested, and that he has nothing
but God.

When he has remembered God in this fashion and has cleansed his heart
and emptied it of vanity and frivolity, the remembrance of God becomes
firmly fixed within his soul and he enters among the ranks of the people
of certainty (*al-yaqin*) and God's promise.

***"And serve thy Lord till the inevitable (al-yaqin) cometh unto thee"
(Qur’an 15: 99)***

is fulfilled. The doors of the kingdom of the heavens and the earth open
to him and he sees that all things are possessed absolutely by God.

***"Thus did We show Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth
that he might be of those possessing certainty." (Qur’an 6: 75).***

The person endowed with such a vision will behold the three stages of
Divine Unity. First the Unity of God in His Acts will be revealed to
him. He will see with certainty that it is God who directs the Universe
and all that it contains, and that the innumerable causes and agents
which are at work in the world, whether theirs be the activity of free
will or of necessity, are all painted upon the canvass of creation by
His all-powerful Hand. Cause and effect and the relationship between the
two-each is brought into being and executed by the One.

***"And unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the
earth." (Qur’an 45: 27).***

Secondly the Unity of God's Names and Qualities will be disclosed to him
and he will see without intermediary that every quality of perfection
which appears in the world, and likewise every quality of beauty and of
majesty, whether life, knowledge, power, might, grandeur or whatever, is
a glimmer from the infinite Source of Light which is the Truth, and that
these qualities shine forth through the variegated windows which are the
existences of things with the distinctions they possess.

***"Allah's are the fairest names. (Qur’an, 7:180).***

Finally in the third stage of Divine Unity he will behold that all of
these varied qualities are the manifestations of an infinite Essence,
and that in reality each of them is identical with every other and all
are identical with the Essence Itself.

***"Say: Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the
Almighty." (Qur’an 13:16).***


