The Epistle
===========

**( 7 )**

In the Name of God, the All-merciful, the Ever-merciful

Be it known to you, O, Maalik that I am sending you as Governor to a
country, which in the past  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) According to Nahj al-Balghah (Al-Sharf al-Rai's compilation of Imm
Ali's words, letters, and sermons), the epistle begins with the
following statements: Document of instruction written by Imm Ali for
Mlik al-Ashtar al-Nakhi when he appointed him as the governor of Egypt
and the surrounding areas after the position of Muammad ibn Abi Bakr,
had become precarious: This is the longest document and contains the
greatest number of beautiful sayings. In the Name of Allah, the
Compassionate, the Merciful This is what Allh's servant Ali, Amr
al-Muminn, has ordered Mlik ibn al-rith al-Ashtar in his instrument (of
appointment) for him when he made him Governor of Egypt for the
collection of its revenues, fighting against its enemies, seeking the
good of its people and making its cities prosperous. He has ordered him
to fear Allh, to prefer obedience to Him, and to follow what He has
commanded in His Book (the Holy Qur'n) out of His obligatory and
elective commands, without following which one cannot achieve virtue,
nor (can one) be evil save by opposing and ignoring them, and to help
Allh the Glorified, with his heart, hand and tongue, because Allh whose
name is Sublime takes the responsibility of helping him who helps Him,
and protecting him who gives Him support.

**( 8 )**

experienced both just and unjust rule. Men will scrutinize your action
with searching eye, even as you used to scrutinize the actions of those
before you, and speak of you even as you did speak of them.

The fact is that the public speak well of only those who do good. It is
they who furnish the proof of your actions. Hence the richest treasure
that you may covet should be the treasure of good deeds.

Keep your desires under control and deny yourself that which you have
been prohibited from, for, by such abstinence alone, you will be able to
distinguish between what is good to them and what is not.

Develop in your heart the feeling of love for your people and let it be
the source of kindliness and blessing to them. Do not behave with them
like a barbarian, and do not appropriate to yourself that which belongs
to them.

Remember that the citizens of the state are of two categories. They are
either your brethren in religion or your brothren in kind. They are
subject to infirmities and liable to commit mistakes. Some indeed do
commit mistakes. But forgive them even as you would like God to forgive
you. Bear in mind that you are placed over them even as I am placed over
you. And then there is God even above him who has given you the position
of a Governor in order  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

He also orders him to break his heart off from passions, and to restrain
it at the time of their increase, because the heart leads towards evil
unless Allh has mercy. ( 1 ) According to Nahj al-Balghah, this
statement is as follows: "Surely, the virtuous are known by the
reputation that Allah circulates for them through the tongues of His
creatures."

**( 9 )**

that you may look after those under you and to be sufficient unto them.
And you will be judged by what you do for them.

Do not set yourself against God, for neither do you possess the strength
to shield yourself against His displeasure, nor can you place yourself
outside the pale of His mercy and forgiveness. Do not feel sorry over
any act of forgiveness, nor rejoice over any punishment that you may
mete out to any one. Do not rouse yourself to anger, for no good will
come out of it.

Do not say, I am your overlord and dictator, and that you should,
therefore, bow to my commands, as that will corrupt your heart, weaken
your faith in religion and create disorder in the state. Should you be
elated by power, ever feel in your mind the slightest symptoms of pride
and arrogance, then look at the power and majesty of the Divine
governance of the Universe over which you have absolutely no control. It
will restore the sense of balance to your wavered intelligence and give
you the sense of calmness and affability.

Beware! Never put yourself against the majesty and grandeur of God and
never imitate His omnipotence; for God has brought low every rebel of
God and every tyrant of man.

Let your mind respect through your actions the rights of God and the
rights of man, and likewise, persuade your companions and relations to
do likewise. For, otherwise, you will be doing injustice to yourself and
injustice to humanity. Thus both man and God will turn unto your
enemies; there is no hearing anywhere for one who makes an enemy of God
himself. He will be regarded as one at war with God until he feels
contrition and seeks forgiveness.  

**( 10 )**

Nothing deprives man of divine blessings or excites divine wrath against
him more easily than cruelty. Hence it is, that God listens to the voice
of the oppressed and waylays the oppressor.

The Common Man
--------------

Maintain justice in administration and impose it on your own self and
seek the consent of the people, for, the discontent of the masses
sterilizes the contentment of the privileged few and the discontent of
the few looses itself in the contentment of the many. Remember, the
privileged few will not rally round you in moments of difficulty: they
will try to sidetrack justice, they will ask for more than what they
deserve and will show no gratitude for favors done to them. They will
feel restive in the face of trials and will offer no regret for their
shortcomings. It is the common man who is the strength of the State and
of Religion. It is he who fights the enemy. So live in close contact
with the masses and be mindful of their welfare.

Keep at a distance him who peers into the weaknesses of others. After
all, the masses are not free from weaknesses. It is the duty of the
ruler to shield them. Do not bring to light that which is hidden, but
try to remove those weaknesses, which have been brought to light. God is
watchful of everything that is hidden from you, and He alone will deal
with it. To the best of your ability cover the weaknesses of the public,
and God will cover the weaknesses in you, which you are anxious to keep
away from their eyes.

  

**( 11 )**

Unloose the tangle of mutual hatred between the public and the
administration and remove all those causes, which may give rise to
strained relations between them. Protect yourself from every such act as
may not be quite correct for you. Do not make haste in seeking
confirmation of taletelling, for the taleteller is a deceitful person
appearing in the garb of a friend.

The Counselors
--------------

Never take counsel of a miser, for, he will vitiate your magnanimity and
frighten you of poverty. Do not take counsel of a coward also, for, he
will cheat you of your resolves. Do not take counsel of the greedy too,
for he will instill greed in you and turn you into a tyrant.
Miserliness, cowardice, and greed deprive man of the trust in God.

The worst of counselors is he who has served as a counselor to unjust
rulers and shared their crimes. So, never let men who have been
companions of tyrants or shared their crimes he your counselors. You can
get better men than these, men gifted with intelligence and foresight,
but unpolluted by sin, men who have never aided a tyrant in his tyranny
or a criminal in his crime. Such men will never be a burden on you. On
the other hand, they will be a source of help and strength to you at all
times. They will be friends to you and strangers to your enemies. Choose
such men alone for companionship both in privacy and in the public.

Even among these, show preference to them who have a habitual regard for
truth however trying to you at times their truth may prove to be, and
who,

**( 12 )**

offer you no encouragement in the display of tendencies which God does
not like his friends to develop.

Keep close to you the upright and the God-fearing, and make clear to
them that they are never to flatter you and never to give you credit for
any good that you may not have done, for, the tolerance of flattery and
unhealthy praise stimulates pride in man and makes him arrogant.

Do not treat good and the bad alike. That will deter the good from doing
good, and encourage the bad in their bad pursuits. Recompense every one
according to one's deserts. Remember that mutual trust and good will
between the ruler and the ruled are bred only through benevolence,
justice, and service.

So, cultivate goodwill amongst the people, for, their goodwill alone
will save you from troubles. Your benevolence to them will be repaid by
their trust in you and your ill-treatment by their illwill. Do not
disregard the noble traditions set by our forbearers, which have
promoted harmony and progress among the people; and do not initiate
anything which might minimize their usefulness. The men who had
established those noble traditions have had their reward; but
responsibility will be yours if they are disturbed.

Try always to learn something from the experience of the learned and the
wise, and frequently consult them in state matters so that you might
maintain the peace and goodwill, which your predecessors had established
in the land.

**( 13 )**

The Different Classes of People
-------------------------------

Remember that the people are composed of different classes. The progress
of one is dependent on the progress of every other; and none can afford
to be independent of the other. We have the Army formed of the soldiers
of God; we have our civil officers and their establishments, our
judiciary, our revenue collectors and our public relation officers. The
general public itself consists of Muslims and Zimmis and among them of
merchants and craftsmen, the unemployed and the indigent.

God has prescribed for them their several rights, duties, and
obligations. They are all defined and preserved in the Book of God and
in the traditions of his Prophet.

The Army, by the grace of God, is like a fortress to the people and
lends dignity to the state. It upholds the prestige of the Faith and
maintains the peace of the country. Without it, the state cannot stand.
In its turn, it cannot stand without the support of the state. Our
soldiers have proved strong before the enemy because of the privilege
God has given them to fight for Him; but they have their material needs
to fulfill and have therefore to depend upon the income provided for
them from the state revenue.

The military and the civil population who pay revenue, both need the
cooperation of others the judiciary, civil officers, and their
establishment. The Qazi administers civil and criminal law; the civil
officers collect revenue and attend to civil administration with the
assistance of their establishment. And then, there are the tradesmen  

**( 14 )**

and the merchants who add to the revenue of the state. It is they who
run the market and are in a better position than others to discharge
social obligations. And then, there is the class of the poor and the
needy, whose maintenance is an obligation on the other classes. God has
given appropriate opportunity of service to one and all; and then there
are the rights of all these classes over the administration which the
administrator has to meet with an eye on the good of the entire
population, a duty which he cannot fulfill properly unless he takes
personal interest in its execution and seeks help from God. Indeed, it
is obligatory on him to impose this duty on himself; and to bear with
patience the inconvenience and difficulties incidental to the task.

The Army
--------

Be particularly mindful of the welfare of those in the army who in your
opinion, are staunchly faithful to their God and Prophet and loyal to
their chief, and who in the hour of passion can restrain themselves and
listen coolly to sensible remonstrance, and who can succor the weak and
smite the strong, whom violent provocation will not throw into violent
temper and who will not falter at any stage.

Keep yourself in close contact with families of established reputation
and integrity with a glorious past, and draw to yourself men brave and
upright in character, generous and benevolent in disposition, for such
are the salt of society.

Care for them with the tenderness with which you care for your children,
and do not talk before them of any good that you might have done to
them,  

**( 15 )**

nor disregard any expression of affection which they show in return,
for, such conduct inspires loyalty, devotion and goodwill. Attend to
every little of their wants not resting content with what general help
that you might have given to them, for sometimes, timely attention to a
little want of theirs brings them immense relief. Surely these people
will not forget you in your own hour of need.

It behooves you to select for you Commanderinchief one who imposes on
himself, as a duty, the task of rendering help to his men. And who can
excel in kindness every other officer who has to attend to the needs of
the men under him, and look after their families when they are away from
their homes; so much so, that the entire army should feel united in
their joys and in their sorrows. This unity of purpose will give them
added strength against the enemy. Continue to maintain a kindly attitude
towards them so that they might feel ever attached to you. The fact is
that, the real happiness of the administrators and their most pleasant
comfort lies in establishing justice in the state and maintaining
affectionate relations with the people. Their sincerity of feeling is
expressed in the love and regard they show to you, on which alone
depends the safety of the administrators. Your advices to the army will
be of no avail, unless and until you show affection to both men and
officers, in order that they might not regard the Government as an
oppressive burden or contribute to its downfall.

Continue to satisfy their needs and praise them over and over again for
what services they have rendered. Such an attitude, God willing, will
inspire the brave to braver actions and induce the timid to deeds of
bravery.

**( 16 )**

Try to enter into the feelings of others, do not foist the mistake of
one over another, and do not grudge dispensing appropriate rewards. See
to it you do not show favors to one who has done nothing but merely
counts on his family position. And do not withhold proper rewards from
one who has done great deeds simply because he holds a low position in
life.

The Real Guidance
-----------------

Turn to God and to His Prophet for guidance whenever you feel uncertain
as to what you have to do. There is the commandment of God delivered to
those people whom He wishes to guide aright:

O people of the Faith! Obey God and obey His prophet and those from
among you who hold authority over you. And refer to God and His prophet
whenever there is difference of opinion among you.

To turn to God is in reality to consult the Book of God; and to turn to
the prophet is to follow his universally accepted traditions.

Chief Judge
-----------

Select for your chief judge one from the people who is by far the best
among them one who is not obsessed with domestic worries, one who cannot
be intimidated, one who does not err too often, one who does not turn
back from a right path once he finds it, one who is not self-centered or
veracious, on who  

**( 17 )**

will not decide before knowing full facts, one who will weigh with care
every attendant doubt and pronounce a clear verdict after taking
everything into full consideration, one who will not grow restive over
the arguments of advocates and who will examine with patience every new
disclosure of fact and who will be strictly impartial in his decision,
one whom flattery cannot mislead or one who does not exult over his
position. But it is not easy to find such men.

Once you have selected the right man for the office, pay him handsomely
enough to let him live in comfort and in keeping with his position,
enough to keep him above temptations. Give him a position in your court
so high that none can even dream of coveting it and so high that neither
backbiting nor intrigue can touch him.

Subordinate Judiciary
---------------------

Beware! The utmost carefulness is to be exercised in this selection for
it is this high office, which adventurous selfseekers aspire to secure
and exploit in their selfish interests. After the selection of your
chief judge, give careful consideration to the selection of other
officers. Confirm them in their appointments after approved
apprenticeship and probation. Never select men for responsible posts
either out of any regard for personal connections or under any
influence, for, that might lead to injustice and corruption. Of these,
select for higher posts men of experience, men firm in faith and
belonging to good families. Such men will not fall an easy prey to  

**( 18 )**

temptations and will discharge their duties with an eye on the abiding
good of others.

Increase their salaries to give them a contented life. A contented
living is a help to self-purification. They will not feel the urge to
tax the earnings of their subordinates for their own upkeep. They will
then have no excuse either to go against your instructions or
misappropriate state funds.

Keep watching over them without their knowledge, loyal and upright men.
Perchance they may develop true honesty and true concern for the public
welfare. But whenever any of them is accused of dishonesty, and the
guilt is confirmed by the report of your secret service, then regard
this as sufficient to convict him. Let the punishment be corporal and
let that be dealt in the public at an appointed place of degradation.

Revenue Administration
----------------------

Great care is to the exercised in revenue administration, to ensure the
prosperity of those who pay the revenue to the state; for it is on their
prosperity depends the prosperity of others; particularly the prosperity
of the masses. Indeed, the state exists on its revenue. You should
regard the proper upkeep of the land in cultivation as of greater
importance than the collection of revenue, for revenue cannot be derived
except by making the land productive. He, who demands revenue without
helping the cultivator to improve his land, inflicts unmerited hardship
on the cultivator and ruins the State. The rule of such a person does
not last long.

**( 19 )**

If the cultivators ask for reduction of their land ceases for having
suffered from epidemics or drought or excess of rains or the barrenness
of the soil or floods damaging to their crops, then, reduce the process
accordingly, so that their condition might improve. Do not mind the loss
of revenue on that account for that will return to you one day manifold
in the hour of greater prosperity of the land and enable you to improve
the condition of your towns and to raise the prestige of your state. You
will be the object of universal praise. The people will believe in your
sense of justice. The confidence, which they will place in you, in
consequence will prove your strength, as they will be found ready to
share your burdens. You may settle down on the land any number of
people, but discontent will overtake them if the land is not improved.
The cause of the cultivator's ruin is the rulers who are bent feverishly
on accumulating wealth at all costs, out of the fear that their rule
might not last long. Such are the people who do not learn from examples
or precedents.

Clerical Establishment
----------------------

Keep an eye on your establishment and your scribes; and select the best
among them for your confidential correspondence such among these as
posses as high character and deserve your full confidence, men who may
not exploit their privileged position to go against you and who in the
drafting of treaties may not succumb to external temptation and harm
your interests, or fail to render you proper assistance and to save you
from trouble, and who in carrying out their duties can realize their  

**( 20 )**

serious responsibilities, for he who does not realize his own
responsibilities can hardly appraise the responsibilities of others. Do
not select men for such work merely on the strength of your first
impressions of your affection or good faith; for as a matter of fact,
the pretensions of a good many who are really devoid of honesty and good
breeding may cheat even the intelligence of rulers.

Selection should be made after due probation probation which should be
the test of righteousness. In making direct appointments from people,
see to it that those selected possess influence with the people and who
enjoy the reputation of being honest; for such selection is agreeable
both to God and the Ruler.

For every department of administration, let there be a head, whom no
trying task might cause worry and no pressure of work annoy. And
remember that every weakness of any one among your establishment and
scribe which you may overlook will be written down against you in your
scroll of deeds.

Trade and Industry
------------------

Adopt useful schemes placed before for those engaged in trade and
industry and help them with wise counsels. Some of them live in towns
and some move from place to place with their ware and tools and earn
their living by manual labor. Trade and Industry are sources of profit
to the State. While the general public is not inclined to bear the
strain, those engaged in these professions take the trouble to collect
commodities from far and near, from land  

**( 21 )**

and from across the sea, and from mountains and forests and naturally
derive benefits. It is this class of peaceloving people from whom no
disturbance need be feared. They love peace and order; indeed they are
incapable of creating disorder.

Visit every part of the country and establish personal contact with this
class, and inquire into their conditions. But bear in mind that a good
many of them are intensely greedy and are inured to bad dealings. They
hoard grain and try to sell it at a high price; and this is most harmful
to the public. It is a blot on the name of the ruler not to fight this
evil.

Prevent them from hoarding; for the Prophet of God Peace he on him had
prohibited it. And see to it that trade is carried on with the utmost
ease, that the scales are evenly held and that prices are so fixed that
neither the seller nor the buyer is put to a loss. And if in spite of
your warning, should any one go against your commands and commit the
crime of hoarding, then deal him appropriately with severe punishment.

The Poor
--------

Beware! Fear God when dealing with problem of the poor who have none to
patronize, who are forlorn, indigent, and helpless and are greatly torn
in mind victims to the vicissitudes of Time.  
 Among them, there are some who do not question  
 their lot in life and who notwithstanding their  
 misery, do not go about begging. For God's  
 sake, safeguard their rights; for on you rests the  
 responsibility of protection. Assign for their uplift a  
 portion of the state exchequer (Baitulmal),  

**( 22 )**

wherever they may be, whether close at band or far away from you. The
rights of the two should be equal in your eye.

Do not let any preoccupations slip them from your mind; for no excuse
whatsoever for the disregard of their rights will be acceptable to God.
Do not treat their interests as of less importance than your own, and
never keep them outside the purview of your important considerations,
and mark the persons who look down upon them and of whose condition they
keep you in ignorance. Select from among your officers such men as are
meek and God-fearing who can beep you properly informed of the condition
of the poor.

Make such provision for these poor people as shall not oblige you to
offer an excuse before God on the day of judgement; for, it is this
section of the people more than any other which deserves benevolent
treatment. Seek your reward from God by giving to each of them what is
due to him. And enjoin on yourself as a sacred duty the task of meeting
the needs of such aged among them as have no independent means of
likelihood and are averse to seek alms. And it is the discharge of this
duty that usually proves very trying to rulers, but is very welcome to
societies which are gifted with foresight. It is only such societies or
nations who truly carry out with equanimity their covenant with God to
discharge their duty to the poor.

Open Conferences
----------------

Meet the oppressed and the lowly periodically in an open conference and
conscious of the divine  

**( 23 )**

presence there, have a heart-to-heart talk with them, and let none from
your guard or civil officers or members of the police or the
Intelligence Department be by your side, so that the representative of
the poor might state their grievances fearlessly and without reserve,
for I have heard the Prophet of God saying that no nation or society
will occupy a high position in which the strong do not discharge their
duty to the weak.

Bear with composure any strong language which they may use, and do not
get annoyed if they cannot state their case lucidly, even so, God will
open for you his door of blessings and rewards. Whatever you can give to
them, give it ungrudgingly, and whatever you cannot afford to give, make
that clear to them, in utmost sincerity.

There are certain things which call for prompt action. Accept the
recommendations made by your officers for the redress of the grievances
of the clerical staff. See to it that petitions or applications
submitted for your consideration are brought to your notice the very day
they are submitted, however much your officers might try to intercede
for them. Dispose off the day's work that very day, for the coming day
will bring with it its own tasks.

Communion with God
------------------

And then do not forget to set apart the best of your time for communion
with God, although every moment of yours is for Him only, provided it is
spent sincerely in the service of your people. The special time that you
give to prayer in the strict religions sense is to be devoted to the
performance of the  

**( 24 )**

prescribed daily prayers. Keep yourself engaged in these prayers both in
the day and in the might, and to gain perfect communion, do not, as far
as possible, make your prayers grow tiresome.

And when you lead in congregational prayer, do not let your prayer be so
lengthy as to cause discomfort to the congregation or raise in them the
feeling of dislike for it or liquidate its effect: for in the
congregation there may be invalids and also those who have to attend to
pressing affairs of their own.

When I had asked of the Prophet of God on receiving an order to proceed
to Yemen, how I should lead the people over there in prayer, he said:
perform your prayers even as the weakest among you would do; and act an
example of considerateness to the faithful.

Aloofness Not Desirable
-----------------------

Alongside of the observance of all that I have said above, bear one
thing in mind. Never for any length of time keep yourself aloof from the
people, for to do so is to keep oneself ignorant of their affairs. It
develops in the ruler a wrong perspective and render him unable to
distinguish between what is important and what is not, between right and
wrong, and between truth and falsehood. The ruler is after all human;
and he cannot form a correct view of anything which is out of sight.

There is no distinctive sign attached to truth which may enable one to
distinguish between the different varieties of truth and falsehood. The
fact is  

**( 25 )**

that you must be one of two things: Either you are just or unjust. If
you are just, then you will not keep yourself away from the people, but
will listen to them and meet their requirements. On the other hand, if
you are unjust, the people themselves will keep away from you. What
virtue is there in your keeping aloof At all events aloofness is not
desirable specially when it is your duty to attend to the needs of the
people. Complaints of oppression by your officers or petitions for
justice should not prove irksome to you.

Make this clear to yourself that those immediately about and around you
will like to exploit their position to covet what belongs to others and
commit acts of injustice. Suppress such a tendency in them.

Make a rule of your conduct never to give even a small piece of land to
any of your relations. That will prevent them from causing harm to the
interests of others and save you from courting the disapprobation of
both God and man. Deal justice squarely regardless of the fact whether
one is a relation or not. If any of your relations or companions
violates the law, mete out the punishment prescribed by law however
painful it might be to you personally, for it will be all to the good of
the State.

If at any time people suspect that you have been unjust to them in any
respect disclose your mind to them and remove their suspicions. In this
way, your mind will get attuned to the sense of justice and people begin
to love you. It will also fulfill your wish that you should enjoy their
confidence.

**( 26 )**

Peace and Treaties
------------------

Bear in mind that you do not throw away the offer of peace which your
enemy may himself make. Accept it, for, that will please God. Peace is a
source of comfort to the army; it reduces your worries and promotes
order in the State. But Beware! Be on your guard when the peace is
signed; for, certain types of enemies propose terms of peace just to
lull you into a sense of security only to attack you again when you are
off your guard. So you should exercise the utmost vigilance on your
part, and place no undue faith in their protestations. But, if under the
peace treaty you have accepted any obligations, discharge those
obligations scrupulously. It is a trust and must be faithfully upheld
and whenever you have promised any thing, keep it with all the strength
that you command, for whatever differences of opinion might exit on
other matters, there is nothing so noble as the fulfillment of a
promise. This is recognized even among the nonMuslims, for they know the
dire consequences which follow from the breaking of covenants. So never
make excuses in discharging your responsibilities and never break a
promise; nor cheat your enemy. For breach of promise is an act against
God, and none except the positively wicked acts against God. Indeed
divine promises are a blessing spread over all mankind. The promise of
God is a refuge sought after even by the most powerful on earth; for
there is no risk of being cheated. So, do not make any promise from
which you may afterwards offer excuses to retract; nor do you go back
upon what you have confirmed to abide by; nor do you break it, however,
galling it may at first prove to be. For, it is far better to wait in  

**( 27 )**

patience for wholesome results to follow than to break it out of any
apprehensions.

Beware! Abstain from shedding blood without a valid cause. There in
nothing more harmful than this which brings about one's ruin. The blood
that is willfully shed shortens the life of a state. On the day of
judgement, it is the crime for which one will have to answer first. So,
beware! Do not wish to build the strength of your state on blood; for,
it is this blood which ultimately weakens the state and passes it on to
other hands. Before me and my God, no excuse for willful killing can be
entertained. Murder is a crime which is punishable by death. If on any
account the corporal punishment dealt by the state for any lesser crime
results in the death of the guilty, let not the prestige of the state
stand in any way of the deceased's relations claiming blood money.(1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) In Nahj al-Balghah, the following statements come next: "You should
avoid self-admiration, having reliance in what appears good in yourself
and love of exaggerated praise, because this is one of the most reliable
opportunities for Shaytan to obliterate the good deeds of the virtuous.
Avoid showing (the existence of) obligation on your subjects for having
done good to them or praising your own actions or making promises and
then breaking them, because showing (the existence of) obligation
destroys good, self-praise takes away the light of truth, and breaking
promises earns the hatred of Allah and of the people. Allah the
Glorified, says: Most hateful is it unto Allah that you say what you
(yourselves) do (it) nor. (They Holy Qur'n 61:3)."
