Chapter 9 : the Merits of Imam ‘ali- (‘a) According To Ibn ‘abbas
=================================================================

Ahmad bin Hanbal says:

Yahya- bin Hamma-d has related to us from Abi- ‘Awwa-nah from Abi- Balj
from ‘Amr bin Maymunah who narrated the hadith, saying:

“I was sitting with (‘Abdulla-h) bin ‘Abba-s when nine parties
approached him and said:

Either get up and come with us or leave this place for us.

Ibn ‘Abba-s who at that time had not yet lost his eyesight, answered:

I will come with you.

They conferred with him in slow tones and we did not understand what
they spoke about. Ibn ‘Abba-s then returned to his place and while
shaking his clothes said:

Alas, alas! They are trying to fault with a man who has ten privileges
(which he recounted as follows):

A.the Prophet (on the day of the conquest of Khaybar) said: “I will
send the one whom God will never turn back distressed; he loves Allah
and His Prophet.” Then he enquired: “Where is ‘Ali-?” They answered that
he was at home writhing in pain. He said: “May none of you be afflicted
with pain.” Then ‘Ali- came with his sore eyes in a state that he was
almost unable to see a thing or the way. The Prophet blew his breath
into his eyes and after shaking the standard thrice, handed it to ‘Ali-,
who returned victorious from this mission and brought with him (for the
Prophet) Safiyyah bint Ibn Akhtab.[^42]

B.the Prophet had sent someone (Abu- Bakr) for conveying Surah
al-Bara-’ah (to the people of Mecca). Then he sent (Imam) ‘Ali- (‘a)
after him to take charge of the Surah and said: “This Surah should not
be conveyed except by him who is from me and I am from him.”

C.He told his near of kin (children of ‘Abdul-Muttalib): “Who among you
is ready to accept my wila-yah in this world and the hereafter?” They
did not reply to him. ‘Ali- (‘a) who was sitting near him said: “I am
your friend in this world and the hereafter.” The Prophet said: “You are
(indeed) my friend in this world and the hereafter.” The Prophet again
turned to the gathering and asked: “Who among you will choose my
friendship in the world and the hereafter?” They did not reply but ‘Ali-
said: “O Messenger of Allah! I choose your friendship in this world and
hereafter.” He said: “You are certainly my friend in this world and the
hereafter.”

D.He is the first one after Khadi-jah to practice the Muslim faith.

E.The Prophet raised his cloak and covering ‘Ali-, Fa-timah, Hasan and
Husayn with it, said: “Indeed, Allah desires to remove uncleanness from
you O Ahl al-Bayt and keep you pure as pure can be.” (Holy Qur’a-n
33:33)

F.(Imam) ‘Ali- sold (risked) his life, put on the Prophet’s clothes and
slept in his place when the infidels (of Mecca) intended to make the
Prophet the target of their malevolence. ‘Ali- [(‘a)] was sleeping when
Abu- Bakr approached him thinking him to be the Prophet. (Imam) ‘Ali-
[(‘a)] told him: “The Prophet has gone towards the well of Maymun, go
and join him.” Abu- Bakr left and entered the Cave of Thaur with him.
The infidels started pelting (Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)] with stones (mistaking
him to be the Prophet). He flexed himself, writhed in pain but did not
remove the cloth covering his head. Only with the break of dawn did he
remove aside the cloth covering his head.

G.When the Prophet was leaving Medina with the people for the Tabuk
expedition, (Imam) ‘Ali- (‘a) asked him: “Am I not accompanying you?”
The Prophet replied in the negative. (Imam) ‘Ali- (‘a) sighed and the
Prophet told him: “Are you not pleased that your position to me is
similar to that of Aaron to Moses, except that you are not a Prophet? Is
it not proper for me to leave and you should stay as my vicegerent?”

H.The Prophet told him: “After me you are the Master and Leader of all
faithful people.”

I. The Prophet said: “Close all doors (of houses) leading into the
Mosque (of Medina) except that of the house of ‘Ali-.” As a result he
could enter the mosque in any state, since except for this passage there
was no other entrance to his house.
J. The Prophet said: “For whomsoever I am Master, ‘Ali- is his
Master.”[^43]

**Notes:**

[^42] The conquest of Khaybar by Imam ‘Ali- (‘a) is among the widely
related hadith. Ibn Hanbal has recorded this several times in his
Musnad, e.g. refer to vol. 3, p. 116 and vol. 4, p. 52, al-Maymuniyyah
print.
[^43] We have mentioned this hadith in brief because of its length. For
the full text refer to Musnad, hadith 3062 (Ahmad Sha-kir), and also
hadith no. 3063 recorded through different isna-d. Ahmad Sha-kir
considers the isna-d of both the hadith as sahi-h.

