Chapter 10 : the Canonical Meaning of Ahl Al-bayt (‘a)
======================================================

Ibn Hanbal says:

A. Ahmad has related from Muhammad bin Mas‘ab from Awza-‘i- from
Shadda-d Abi- ‘Amma-r who narrates:

I approached Wa-thilah bin Asqa‘ while a group of people was with him
and were speaking about (Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)]. When they got up and left,
Wa-thilah said:

Do you want me to inform you what I had seen of the Messenger of Allah
(S).

I replied in the affirmative. Wathilah said:

I went to Fa-timah [(‘a)] to enquire about (Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)] and she
said that he had gone to the Messenger of Allah (S). I waited for him to
come and saw the Messenger of Allah (S) approaching with ‘Ali-, Hasan
and Husayn. The Prophet entered with Hasan and Husayn holding either of
his hands, and he went near to ‘Ali- and Fa-timah and made them sit on
their knees in front of him and Hasan and Husayn. Then he covered them
with his cloak and recited this ayah:

“Indeed, Allah desires to remove uncleanness from you O Ahl al-Bayt and
keep you pure as pure can be.” (Holy Qur’a-n 33:33)

Then he said:

“Alla-humma ha-ula-’i Ahlu Bayti wa Ahlu Bayti ahaqq (O Allah these the
people of my house and the people of my house are [certainly] most
meritorious).”[^44]

B. Aswad bin ‘Amir has related to us from Hamma-d bin Salamah from
‘Ali- bin Zayd from Anas bin Ma-lik who narrates that for six months
every morning when the Prophet came out (of his house), he would pass by
the doorstop of Fa-timah’s house and say:

“To prayer O Ahl al-Bayt, Indeed, Allah desires to remove uncleanness
from you O Ahl al-Bayt and keep you pure as pure can be.”[^45]

The above description reveals that the word Ahl al-Bayt in the context
of this ayah is a canonical term established by the Holy Qur’a-n and
elucidated by the Prophet who determined the identity of this group. The
Prophet by gathering his daughter Fa-timah (‘a), her husband Imam ‘Ali-
(‘a) and the couple’s two sons Imam Hasan (‘a) and Imam Husayn (‘a)
under his cloak and reciting this ayah which was revealed in praise of
this group, made it clear that who actually are the Ahl al-Bayt and who
are not included in the concept of this ayah.[^46]

An interesting point to note here is that although Ibn Hanbal’s
narrations of the above aha-di-th have made clear the concept of the Ahl
al-Bayt in Ayah al-Tathi-r (Verse of Purity), he has recorded under the
section Musnad Ahl al-Bayt several hadith not only from Imam Hasan and
Imam Husayn (‘a) but from their uncles ‘Aqi-l bin Abi- Ta-lib and Ja‘far
bin Abi- Ta-lib as well as from their cousin ‘Abdulla-h bin Ja‘far.[^47]
It is worth noting that the last three persons, despite being the
meritorious scions of the Prophet’s clan, the Bani- Hashim, are not
members of the Ahl al-Bayt in view of the canonical term of the
Qur’a-nic ayah. This slip on the part of Ibn Hanbal can be explained by
the aha-di-th concerning Imam ‘Ali- (‘a) which he has included in the
so-called group ‘Asharah al-Mubashshirah and also mixed up aha-di-th on
the merits of Hazrat Fa-timah al-Zahra-’ (‘a) in the section titled
Musnad al-Nisa-’.[^48]

**Notes:**

[^44] Musnad, vol. 4, p. 107 (Musnad Wa-thilah bin Asqa‘), Matba‘ah
al-Maymaniyyah; also refer to vol. 6, pp. 292, 298, 304, 323 (Musnad
Umm-i Salamah).
[^45] Ibid, vol. 3, p. 259 (Musnad Anas bin Ma-lik); also refer to vol.
3, p. 286.
[^46] On the identity of the Ahl al-Bayt.
[^47] Al-Musnad, vol. 3, pp. 167, 199 (Ahmad Sha-kir)
[^48] For hadith on Hazrat Fa-timah al-Zahra-’ (‘a) refer to al-Musnad,
vol. 6, p. 282, Matba‘ah al-Maymaniyyah.

