Chapter 11 : Friendship With the Ahl Al-bayt (‘a)
=================================================

Ibn Hanbal says:

A. Ahmad has related from Ibn Numayr from A‘mash from ‘Adiyy bin
Tha-bit from Zirr bin Husbaish from (Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)] who narrates:

By Allah! One of the covenants which the Messenger of Allah (S) bound
me with is this:

“None will bear enmity towards me but the hypocrite and none will love
me but the faithful believer.”[^49]

Ahmad Sha-kir regards the isna-d of this hadith as sahi-h and says
about ‘Adiyy bin Tha-bit al-Ansa-ri- al-Kufi-:

He was one of the trustworthy persons of the first generation of
Muslims after the Prophet and his being a Shi-‘ah does not affect his
narrations since he was trustworthy and truthful.

B. ‘Abdulla-h bin Ahmad has recorded: Nasr bin ‘Ali- Azdi- narrates
from ‘Ali- bin Ja‘far from his brother (Imam) Musa- bin Ja‘far [(‘a)]
from his father (Imam) Ja‘far bin Muhammad (al-Sadiq) from his father
(Muhammad bin ‘Ali- al-Ba-qir), and he from (his father Imam) ‘Ali- bin
al-Husayn [(‘a)], who from his father (Imam Husayn), and grandfather
(Imam ‘Ali-), who narrates the hadith that the Messenger of Allah (S)
holding the hands of Hasan and Husayn said:

“Man ahabbani- wa ahabba hadhayn wa aba-huma- wa ummahuma- ka-na ma‘i-
fi- darajati- yawm al-qiya-mah” (Anyone who loves me and these two and
their father and mother will be with me and on my station on the Day of
Resurrection).[^50]

Ahmad Sha-kir considers the isna-d of this hadith as sahi-h. It is also
worth noting that when Nasr bin ‘Ali- Azdi- narrated this hadith he was
subjected to 1000 whiplashes on the orders of the ‘Abba-sid caliph
al-Mutawakkil.[^51]

C. Abu Ahmad (Muhammad bin ‘Abdulla-h bin Zubayr Asadi-) has related to
us from Sufya-n (Thawri-) from Abi- Jiha-f from Abi Ha-zim from Abi-
Hurayrah who quotes a hadith from the Messenger of Allah (S), saying:

“Man ahabbahuma- faqad ahabbani- wa man abghazahuma- faqad abghazani-,
ya‘ni- Hasanan wa Husaynan” (Anyone who loves them, I mean Hasan and
Husayn, indeed loves me, and anyone who hates them, surely hates
me).[^52]

Ahmad Sha-kir considers the isna-d of this hadith as sahi-h.

**Notes:**

[^49] Al-Musnad, hadith no. 642 (Ahmad Sha-kir). This hadith has been
recorded through a slightly different chain of authority (isna-d) on
pages 102 & 236 of the same book.
[^50] Ibid, hadith no. 576. This hadith has been added by Ibn Hanbal’s
son ‘Abdulla-h.
[^51] Ibn Hajar ‘Asqala-ni-, Tahdhi-b al-Tahdhi-b, vol. 1, p. 430,
printed by Da-’irat al-Ma‘a-rif al-‘Uthma-niyyah, Haiderabad Deccan
(India).
[^52] Al-Musnad, hadith no. 7863 (Ahmad Sha-kir); also refer to hadith
nos. 6406 & 7392 of the same edition.

