Introduction
============

The Musnad of Ibn Hanbal is probably the first of the six books of
hadi-th considered authentic by Sunni Muslims, since its author died 15
years before the death of the senior-most of the six hadi-th compilers,
Muhammad bin Isma-‘i-l al-Bukha-ri- (d. 256 AH), and 62 years before the
last of them, Ahmad bin Shu‘ayb al-Nasa-’i-, passed away (303 AH).
Throughout history, Sunni scholars have attached great importance to Ibn
Hanbal’s Musnad and eulogized it. Ha-fiz Abu Musa- Madyani- (581 AH),
writes:

This book is a great source and a reliable reference work for
researchers of hadi-th. The author has selected from the bulky hadi-th
literature, a large number of narrations to serve as guidelines and
support for the people so that when differences arise they take refuge
in them and cite them as authentic. [^3]

Shams al-Di-n Muhammad bin Ahmad al-Dhahabi- (748 AH) writes:

This book focuses on the hadi-th of the Prophet. There are very few
hadi-th not included (in this collection) whose authenticity has been
confirmed...One of the fortunate things about the Musnad is that we find
very few hadi-th which are considered inauthentic. [^4]

Ibn al-Jazari- (833 AH) is even more ecstatic about Ibn Hanbal’s
Musnad, and says:

On the face of the earth no better book of hadi-th has been compiled.
[^5]

Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqala-ni- writes in Tajri-d Zawa-’id al-Musnad
al-Bazza-z:

If a hadi-th is mentioned in Musnad Ibn Hanbal, other Masa-ni-d are not
cited for its sources.

Jala-l al-Di-n al-Suyuti- (849-911 AH) [^6] says:

Even the weak hadi-th found in it are near to hasan (fair). [^7]

Although these expressions are a clear exaggeration, they nonetheless
confirm the importance of this book for the Sunnis. In the light of
historical accounts, it was a habit among the Sunnis of the past to
recite this book in the presence of scholars of hadi-th, and at times
such a recitation would be held in a sacred place. For instance, during
the first half of the 9th century AH, Ibn Hanbal’s Musnad was recited in
the presence of Shams al-Di-n Muhammad bin Muhammad al-Jazari- in the
Masjid al-Hara-m of Mecca with the last session ending in the month of
Rabi-‘ al-Awwal 828 AH.[^8] It is also reported that during the 12th
century AH (18th century CE), a group of pious Sunnis gathered in the
Prophet’s Mosque in Medina to recite Ibn Hanbal’s Musnad in 56
sessions.[^9]

However, the most outstanding characteristic of the Musnad is that it
contains several eyecatching hadi-th on the merits of the Prophet’s Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a), whereas most of the compilers of the other masa-ni-d,
siha-h and sunan, have either ignored these aha-di-th or related only a
few of them. Ibn Hanbal got into trouble with the authorities for having
related these aha-di-th on the merits of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and his
house was searched on the orders of the ‘Abba-sid caliph Mutawakkil on
suspicion of supporting the Alawid cause.[^10]

It is a well known fact that Ahmad bin Shu‘ayb al-Nasa-’i-, the last of
the six Sunni compilers of the siha-h al-sittah, relied on Ahmad bin
Hanbal’s narrations for writing his excellent work titled Khasa-’is
Ami-r al-Mu’mini-n ‘Ali- bin Abi- Ta-lib (‘a).[^11] In short, the Musnad
contains narrations, many of which are considered authentic from the
Shi‘ite point of view. These are so pronounced when compared to the
other Sunni collections of hadi-th that orientalists and researchers
have attempted to investigate the cause, and after drawing a comparison
between Ahmad bin Hanbal and his contemporary compilers of the siha-h
al-sittah, have come to the conclusion that Muhammad bin Isma-‘i-l
al-Bukha-ri- and Muslim bin Hajja-j al-Qushayri-, for fear of the
‘Abba-sids, left out these aha-di-th but since Ahmad was courageous he
showed no fear in relating the aha-di-th on the merits of Imam ‘Ali-
(‘a) and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).[^12]

Ibn Hanbal did not confine the merits of the Prophet’s Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
to his book, but whenever necessary he opened his mouth to speak about
these virtues. Despite the fact that he held all the companions of the
Prophet in great esteem and considered those who cursed them to be
outside the pale of Islam,[[^13]] he strongly defended the superiority of
the Prophet’s immediate family against their enemies, especially against
Mutawakkil who left no stone unturned in his enmity to the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a). His son ‘Abdulla-h bin Ahmad relates:

Once, when I was sitting with my father, a group of the people of Karkh
(a locality of Baghdad) came and started a discussion on the caliphate
of Abu- Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthma-n and (Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)]. My father raised
his head and facing them said:

O people, you have said enough concerning (Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)] and the
caliphate. Be informed that the caliphate did not embellish (Imam) ‘Ali-
[(‘a)] but it was (Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)] who embellished the caliphate.

Ibn Abi- al-Hadi-d Mu‘tazili- (d. 655 AH), commenting on the above
remarks of Ahmad bin Hanbal says:

The meaning of this statement is that the other caliphs adorned
themselves with the caliphate and the caliphate covered their flaws, but
there was no shortcoming or deficiency in (Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)] to be made
up by the caliphate.[^15]

‘Abdulla-h bin Ahmad bin Hanbal also quotes his father as saying:

No narration with genuine isna-d (chain of authority) has been related
on the merits of anyone else (of the companions), as in the case of
(Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)].[^16]

He further states:

I asked my father what credence he had concerning the preferential
merits of the companions? He replied:

In the matter of caliphate, Abu- Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthma-n are superior
to all others.

I asked him what about (Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)]? He answered:

O my son! (Imam) ‘Ali- bin Abi- Ta-lib [(‘a)] is from a family
concerning whom (whose merits) no one can deliberate.[^17]

One of the students of Ibn Hanbal narrates:

We were in the presence of Ahmad bin Hanbal when a person asked:

O Aba- ‘Abdilla-h! What is your opinion about the hadi-th which says
that (Imam) ‘Ali- (‘a) stated:

“I am the distributor of hell?”

Ibn Hanbal replied:

From what aspect do you doubt its credence? Has it not been related
that the Prophet told (Imam) ‘Ali- (‘a):

“None will love you but the faithful believer and none will hate you
but the hypocrite?”

We said:

Yes.

He asked:

Where is the place of the faithful believer?

“In paradise”,

we answered.

He asked:

Where is the place of the hypocrite?

“In hell”,

we replied.

He said:

Ali is thus the distributor of hell.[^18]

Ibn Hanbal’s belief thus bears close resemblance to that of his
teacher, Sha-fi‘i-, who also recorded the merits and virtues of Imam
‘Ali- (‘a) and his descendants and considered himself their devotee.
When Ibn Hanbal was asked about the battle between Imam ‘Ali- (‘a) and
Mu‘a-wiyah bin Abi- Sufya-n, he said regarding them he knew nothing but
good,[^19] but added that in the field of jurisprudential studies he
found Imam ‘Ali- (‘a) to be linked to the truth. For instance, when in
his presence Sha-fi‘i- was accused of tashayyu for listing Imam ‘Ali-’s
(‘a) battles with Mu‘a-wiyah and the Khawa-rij under the rules of
transgressors, he replied that among the companions of the Prophet, Imam
‘Ali- (‘a) was the first leader who had to deal with the sedition and
revolt of opponents.

This reply makes it clear that Sha-fi‘i-’s categorizing of the battles
between Imam ‘Ali- (‘a) and Mu‘a-wiyah under rules for transgressors,
does not expose him to the fault-finding of his critics. In fact, for
any fair observor, the verdict between Sha-fi‘i- and his critics is that
Mu‘a-wiyah was a transgressor, as could be further confirmed by the
famous saying of the Prophet to his companion ‘Amma-r bin Ya-sir:
“taqtuluka al-fi’ah al-ba-ghiyah” (you will be killed by a party of
transgressors).[^20] No one can deny that ‘Amma-r, while fighting on the
side of Imam ‘Ali- (‘a), was killed by the forces of Mu‘a-wiyah during
one of the battles of the Siffi-n War, and thus in the light of this
hadi-th, beyond an iota of doubt, Mu‘a-wiyah is a transgressor.[^21]

Ibn Hanbal was a contemporary of four of the infallible Imams of the
Prophet’s Household – Imam Musa- al-Ka-zim (‘a), Imam ‘Ali- bin Musa-
al-Riza- (‘a), Imam Muhammad al-Jawa-d (‘a) and Imam ‘Ali- al-Ha-di-
(‘a). The author of Rawza-t al-Janna-t relates on the authority of
Daylami-’s Irsha-d al-Qulub that Ahmad bin Hanbal was a student of Imam
al-Ka-zim (‘a).[^22] Shaykh al-Ta-’ifah Tusi- considers him among the
students of Imam al-Riza- (‘a).[^23] A contemporary researcher pointing
out Ibn Hanbal’s links with Ima-mi- scholars, writes that he studied
under many of those known to be followers of the school of Imam Ja‘far
al-Sa-diq (‘a), and for this reason he has often been criticised by the
enemies of the Shi‘ites.[^24]

In view of the above facts it could be said that since Ahmad bin Hanbal
was under the influence of the Infallible Imams (‘a) or their disciples
or that he had a spirit of courage and fair-mindedness, he did not
hesitate to include in his Musnad many of the hadi-th on the virtues and
merits of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). These hadi-th are so eye-catching that
one of the contemporary scholars has collected them in an exclusive work
titled Musnad al-Mana-qib.[^25]

In this article the writer has selected some hadi-th from the Musnad
and highlighted them with brief explanations.

**Notes:**

[^3] Abu Musa- al-Madyani-, Khasa-’is al-Musnad (This treatise has been
published at the beginning of Ibn Hanbal’s Musnad by Ahmad Muhammad
Sha-kir), p. 21.

[^4] Al-Jazari-, Muhammad bin Muhammad, al-Mus‘ad al-Ahmad fi- Khatm-i
Musnad al-Imam Ahmad, p. 39. This treatise has also been included by
Sha-kir in his introduction to the Musnad.

[^5] Ibid, p. 28.

[^6] Al-Suyuti-, Jala-l al-Di-n, Ja-mi‘ al-Aha-di-th, compiled and
arranged by ‘Abba-s Ahmad Saqar and Ahmad ‘Abd al-Jawa-d, pulished in 21
volumes by Da-r al-Fikr, Beirut, 1994.

[^7] Hasan or fair, according to Sunni traditionists is the term used to
classify a hadith which is traced to the Prophet or his companions or
the second generation of Muslims, on the authority (sanad) of a person
of short memory but considered reliable. This type of hadith is also
free of sha-dh, which means a tradition of reliable isna-d but contrary
to another similarly attested tradition.

[^8] Ibn al-Jazari-, al-Mus‘ad al-Ahmad fi- khatm Musnad al-Imam Ahmad,
pp. 53-55.

[^9] Al-Mura-di-, Silk al-Durar, vol. 4, p. 160

[^10] On Ibn Hanbal’s accusation of support for the Alawids refer to Abu
al-Faraj ‘Abd al-Rahma-n bin ‘Ali- bin al-Jawzi-’s Mana-qib al-Imam
Ahmad bin Hanbal with a foreword by ‘Adil Nuwayhiz, Da-r al-Afa-q
al-Jadi-dah Publishers, Beirut, pp. 359-362, 1973.

[^11] This work brought about the death of al-Nasa-’i-. It is said that
when on a trip to Damascus he found the people of Syria ignorant of the
lofty personality of Imam ‘Ali- (‘a), he decided to write a book on the
merits of the Commander of the Faithful. When al-Nasa-’i- started
reading his work from the pulpit of the Mosque of Damascus, the enemies
of the Prophet’s Household pulled him down and beat him so severely that
he succumbed to his injuries in Palestine.

[^12] Ahmad Ami-n, Zuha- al-Isla-m, 6th edition, vol, 2, pp. 122-123,
published by Maktabah al-Nihzat al-Misriyyah, 1961.

[^13] Ibn al-Jawzi-, Mana-qib al-Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, p. 165.

[^14] Ibid.

[^15] Ibn Abi- al-Hadi-d, Sharh Nahj al-Bala-ghah, vol. 1, p. 17.

[^16] Ibn al-Jawzi-, Mana-qib al-Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, p. 163.

[^17] Ibid.

[^18] Abu al-Husayn Muhammad bin Abi- Ya‘la-, Tabaqat al-Hana-bilah,
vol. 1, p. 320, edited by Muhammad Ha-mid al-Faqi-, Cairo, 1952. It is
interesting to note that Ibn Hanbal’s reply bears close resemblance to
the answer given by Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (‘a) to Mufazzal bin ‘Umar
concerning this same hadith. Imam ‘Ali- bin Musa- al-Riza- (‘a) also
gave a similar reply to Ma’mun; refer to ‘Alla-mah Majlisi-: Biha-r
al-Anwa-r, vol. 39, pp. 193-194, Da-r al-Ihya-’ al-Tura-th al-‘Arabi-,
Beirut. It is essential to know that according to many narrations, Imam
‘Ali- (‘a) has stated: I am the distributor of heaven and hell”, Biha-r
al-Anwa-r, vol. 39, p. 199.

[^19] Ibn al-Jawzi-, Mana-qib al-Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, p. 164.

[^20] Ba-ghi- is used to describe a person who on the basis of a wrong
cause rebels against and fights the just leader. In the view of Imami
scholars, such a ba-ghi- is a ka-fir. Refer to al-Miqda-d bin ‘Abdulla-h
al-Suyuri-’s Kanz al-‘Irfa-n fi- fiqh al-Qur’a-n, edited by Muhammad
Ba-qir Behbudi-, al-Maktabah al-Murtazawiyyah, vol. 1, p. 386, Tehran
1384 AH.

[^21] For more details refer to Shaykh Muhammad Abu Zuhrah’s book Ibn
Hanbal: Haya-tuhu wa ‘Asruhu, Ara-’uhu wa Fiqhuh, pp. 148-149.

[^22] Muhammad Ba-qir al-Musawi- al-Khwansa-ri-, Rawza-t al-Janna-t,
vol. 1, p. 187, Maktabah Isma-‘i-liya-n, Tehran, 1390 AH.

[^23] Al-Tusi-, Muhammad bin al-Hasan, al-Rija-l, p. 367, edited by
Muhammad Sa-diq Al-i Bahr al-‘Ulum, 1st edition, Najaf, 1381/1961. Also
refer to Sayyid Abu al-Qa-sim al-Khu’i-: Mu‘jam Rija-l al-Hadith, vol.
2, p. 260, 3rd edition, Da-r al-Zahra-’, Beirut, 1403/1983.

[^24] Asad Haydar, al-Imam al-Sa-diq wa al-Madha-hib al-Arba‘ah, vol. 2,
pp. 503-506, 2nd edition, Da-r al-Kita-b al-‘Arabi-, Beirut, 1392/1971.
The author has listed the names of Ibn Hanbal’s teachers, who according
to him had Shi‘ite tendencies, but a review of Shi‘ite narrators in
Sayyid al-Khu’i-’s Mu‘jam Rija-l al-Hadith shows that no hadith has been
related from Ahmad bin Hanbal in authoritative Shi‘ite books of
hadith.

[^25] Usta-di-, Riza-, Musnad al-Riza- (‘a) in 40 articles, p. 154, 1st
edition, published by Kita-b-Kha-neh Ayatulla-h Mar‘ashi- Najafi, Qum,
1413/1371.

