Chapter 8 : Three Merits of Imam ‘ali- (‘a) in One Hadith
=========================================================

Ahmad bin Hanbal says:

Qutaybah bin Sa‘i-d has related to us from Ha-tam bin Isma-‘i-l from
Bukayr bin Misma-r from ‘Amir bin Sa‘d from his father (Sa‘d bin Abi-
Waqqa-s) who narrated the hadith that when the Prophet on leaving for a
campaign asked (Imam) ‘Ali- (‘a) to stay (behind in the city) in his
place, the latter said:

“Are you leaving me with the women and children?”

I heard the Prophet reply to him:

“Ya- ‘Ali- ama- tarza- ‘an takuna minni- bi manzilati Ha-run min Musa-
illa- annahu la- nabiyya ba‘di- (O ‘Ali-! Are you not pleased that your
position to me is similar to that of Aaron to Moses, except that
prophethood will cease after me?).”

(Sa‘d bin Abi- Waqqa-s says) I also heard (the Prophet say) on the Day
of Khaybar:

“La-u‘tiyanna al-ra-yah rajulan yuhibbu Allaha wa Rasulahu wa yuhibbuhu
Allahu wa Rasuluh” (I will give the standard to the man who loves Allah
and His Prophet and who is loved (in turn) by Allah and His Prophet).”

All of us raised our necks (to see). He said:

“Call ‘Ali- to me.”

On hearing this instruction (Imam) ‘Ali- [(‘a)] was brought to the
Prophet with sore eyes. The Prophet rubbed his eyes with his saliva and
gave him the standard and through his hands Allah conquered Khaybar for
the Muslims. And when the ayah “Call our sons and your sons, and our
women and your women and ourselves and yourselves” (3:61) was revealed,
the Messenger of Allah called ‘Ali- (‘a), Fa-timah (‘a), Hasan (‘a) and
Husayn (‘a) and said:

“Allahumma ha-ula-’i ahli- (O Allah these [persons] are my
family).”[^40]

The annotator of the Musnad considers the isna-d of this hadith as
sahi-h (authoritative) and writes:

This hadith has also been recorded through Qutabyah on the same chain
of authority by Muslim and Tirmidhi in their books. At the beginning of
this hadith, it is mentioned in the two books (Sahi-h Muslim and Sahi-h
Tirmidhi) that Mu‘a-wiyah (bin Abi- Sufya-n) ordered Sa'd (bin Abi
Waqqas) to curse (Imam) ‘Ali- (‘a), saying:

What prevents you from cursing Abu Turab?
Sa'd replied:

“I remember three things which the Messenger of Allah said to (Imam)
‘Ali- (‘a) and accordingly I will never curse him. If only one of these
virtues was for me I would have considered it better than possessing
red-haired camels.”

Then he related the three virtues (of Imam ‘Ali-) for Mu‘a-wiyah as
said before.[^41]

**Notes:**

[^40] Al-Musnad, hadith no. 1608 (Ahmad Sha-kir).
[^41] Muslim bin Hajja-j, al-Ja-mi‘ al-Sahi-h, vol. 2, pp. 236-237,
Bulaq Press, Cairo, 1290 AH; Muhammad bin ‘Isa- Tirmidhi-: al-Sunan
(al-Ja-mi‘ al-Sahi-h), vol. 4, pp. 329-330, printed in India, 1328.

