Right n. 4: The Right of Hearing
================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق السمع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا حَقُّ السَّمْعِ فَتَنْزِيهُهُ عَنْ أَنْ تَجْعَلَهُ طَرِيقًا
إلَى قَلْبكَ إلا لِفُوهَةٍ كَرِيمَةٍ تُحْدِثُ فِي قَلبكَ خَيْرًا أَو
تَكْسِبُ خُلُقًا كَرِيمًا فَإنَّهُ بَابُ الْكَلامِ إلَى الْقَلْب
يُؤَدِّي إلَيْهِ ضُرُوبُ الْمَعَانِي عَلَى مَا فِيهَا مِن خَيْرٍ أَو
شَرِّ. وَلا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of hearing is to keep it pure by not making it the
direct pathway to your heart, except for noble words that establish some
good in your heart or grant you a noble trait. Indeed hearing is the
gateway through which various concepts reach the heart —whether good or
evil. And there is no power but in God*****.***[^1]

The Almighty God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ الَّذِي أَنشَأَكُمْ وَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ وَالْأَبْصَارَ
وَالْأَفْئِدَةَ قَلِيلاً مَّا تَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: It is He who has created you (and made you grow), and made for
you the faculties of hearing, seeing, feeding and understanding. Little
thanks it is ye give.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Mulk 67:23]***

The Role of Hearing in Development
----------------------------------

When man is born, he is not familiar with the creatures in this world,
but he slowly gets acquainted with them. One of the means of acquiring
such recognition is the faculty of hearing. We hear things and they are
recorded in our minds. Imam Ali said to someone seeking advice:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيها السائل! إِسْتَمِعْ ثُمّ اسْتَفْهِم ثُمَّ اسْتَيْقِنْ ثُمَّ
اسْتَعْمِلْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O questioner! Listen first, and then understand. Then believe and put
what you have learned into practice.”*[^2]

Thus, we realize that the key to understanding, believing and putting
things into practice is our hearing. Therefore, hearing can be
considered our social sense, and in this sense, it can be considered
more important than seeing.

What is sound?
--------------

Sound is produced from vibration. Human voice is the product of the
vibration of our vocal cords. It has been proven that sound will not be
transmitted in a vacuum. However, we should not think that air is the
only media for the transmission of sound. Sound can be propagated in
liquids, gases and solids. It propagates in liquids faster than in
gases. Solids propagate sound even faster than liquids do. There are
three parts to the ear: the external ear, middle ear and inner ear.

The external ear consists of the pinna[^3] and the ear canal. The pinna
is made of cartilage and is so formed as to act as a receiving antenna
in charge of guiding the incoming sound waves towards the ear canal. The
ear canal is nearly three centimeters long, and produces wax to prevent
the entry of dirt and insects into the ear. The middle ear is separated
from the ear canal by the eardrum. The middle ear normally contains air
and is connected to the back of the pharynx by the Eustachian tube.
There are delicate bones in the middle ear.

When sound waves enter the ear and touch the eardrum, these delicate
bones vibrate and transfer these signals to a liquid inside the ear. The
hearing cells that are there sense these changes and transmit the
information to the brain. In simple terms, that is how we hear. Our
hearing ability depends on the position of the source of sound, our
physical state, the way we eat, and our age.

Anatomy and Physiology of the Ear
---------------------------------

### What is the ear?

The ear is the organ of hearing. The parts of the ear include:

External Ear or Outer Ear, consisting of:

1) Pinna or auricle - the outside part of the ear.

2) External auditory canal or tube - the tube that connects the outer
ear to the inside or middle ear.

3) Tympanic membrane - also called the eardrum. The tympanic membrane
divides the external ear from the middle ear.

4) Middle ear (tympanic cavity), consisting of:

A) Ossicles - three small bones that are connected and transmit the
sound waves to the inner ear. The bones are called: malleus,[^4]
incus,[^5] stapes.[^6]

B) Eustachian tube - a canal that links the middle ear with the throat
area. The Eustachian tube helps to equalize the pressure between the
outer ear and the middle ear. Having the same pressure allows for the
proper transfer of sound waves. The Eustachian tube is lined with
mucous, just like the inside of the nose and throat.

5) Inner ear, consisting of:

A) Cochlea (contains the nerves for hearing)

B) Vestibule (contains receptors for balance)

C) Semicircular canals (contain receptors for balance)

### How do we hear?

Hearing starts with the outer ear. When a sound is made outside the
outer ear, the sound waves, or vibrations, travel down the external
auditory canal and strike the eardrum (tympanic membrane). The eardrum
vibrates. The vibrations are then passed to three tiny bones in the
middle ear called the ossicles. The ossicles amplify the sound. They
send the sound waves to the inner ear and into the fluid- filled hearing
organ (cochlea).

Once the sound waves reach the inner ear, they are converted into
electrical impulses that the auditory nerve sends to the brain. The
brain then translates these electrical impulses into sound.

The Ear Relative to the Eyes and the Heart
------------------------------------------

Now let us address the question of why the ear is usually mentioned
before the eyes and the heart in the Holy Qur’an. Let us look at a few
verses in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَن يَرْزُقُكُم مِّنَ السَّمَاء وَالأَرْضِ أَمَّن يَمْلِكُ
السَّمْعَ والأَبْصَارَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Who is that sustains you (in life) from the sky and from the
earth? Or who is it that has power over hearing and sight?” [The Holy
Qur’an, Yunus 10:31]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُولـئِكَ كَانَ عَنْهُ
مَسْؤُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely the hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these, shall
be questioned about that.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Israa 17:36]***

Also in Naĥl 16:78, Baqarah 2:7, Ha-Mim 41:20 and many other verses
hearing and the ears have been mentioned before seeing and the eyes.
Scientists have mentioned several reasons for the superiority of the ear
over the eye. At first we should realize that the range of frequencies
we could detect via our hearing is wide. The ratio of the highest
frequencies we can hear to the lowest is nearly one thousand. However,
our sight is much more limited.

We can only sense a small fraction of the wavelengths. We cannot see the
infrared or the ultraviolet. The eyes are also very vulnerable and might
easily be damaged if we look at the sun or an eclipse, or ultraviolet
light emitted while welding is in progress. However, the ears are much
stronger. In addition, our viewing angle is very limited, while we can
hear sounds coming to us from all directions. These seem to be the
physical reasons for the superiority of hearing to sight, but it seems
that hearing is more powerful than sight in self-reconstruction and
spiritual enlightenment.[^7]

The Jurisprudents’ View on the Value of the Ear
-----------------------------------------------

In addition to the rights of the hearing that we discussed, the ear has
certain worth expressed in Islamic jurisprudence. Al-Muĥaqqiq al-Hilli
said: “The compensation to be paid for both ears is full compensation:
Each ear’s compensation is one half of the full compensation. The
compensation for the earlobe is one-third of the full compensation
whether it be torn or punctured.[^8]

In addition, in the Farsi editions of the Treatise of the Muslim
Jurisprudents we read: “If you cut both ears off, or make them deaf you
must pay the full compensation. If you only cut or damage one ear, you
must pay half compensation. If one cuts someone else’s earlobe he should
do his best to please him.”[^9]

[^1]: In the other version it is followed by: ”The right of your hearing
is to keep it pure from listening to backbiting and listening to that to
which it is unlawful to listen.”

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi, v.2, p.456.

[^3]: The largely cartilaginous projecting portion of the external ear.

[^4]: The outermost of a chain of three small bones of the mammalian
middle ear.

[^5]: The middle bone of a chain of three small bones in the ear of a
mammal.

[^6]: The innermost ossicle of the ear of mammals.

[^7]: Avvalin Daneshgah va Akharin Payambar, v.15, pp.101-106.

[^8]: Mukhtasar al-Manafi’, p.300, and Mabani Taklimat al-Minhaj, v.2,
p.282.

[^9]: The Treatise of al-Khu’i, p.503.


