Right n. 9: The Right of the Private Part
=========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الفرج
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا حَقُّ فَرْجِكَ فَحِفْظُهُ مِمَّا لا يَحِلُّ لَكَ
وَالاستِعَانَةُ عَلَيْهِ بغَضِّ الْبَصَرِ - فَإنَّهُ مِنْ أَعْوَنِ
الأَعْوَانِ- وَكَثْرَةُ ذِكْرِ الْمَوتِ وَالتَّهَدُّدِ لِنَفْسِكَ
باللهِ وَالتَّخوِيفِ لَهَا بهِ، وَباللهِ الْعِصْمَةُ وَالتَّأْيِيدُ
وَلا حَوْلَ وَلا قُوَّةَ إلا بهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of your private part is that you should protect it from
everything that is unlawful for you and help it by lowering your eyes -
this is certainly the best way to help it. And you should also remember
death often, and threaten yourself with God and try to make yourself
fear God.**[^1] **Preservation from sin and receiving help in so doing
are possible by God’s help. There is no strength or power but in Him.**

What Imam Sajjad means by “protecting your private parts” is covering it
from other people’s eyes. Consider the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُل لِّلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَغْضُضْنَ مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِنَّ وَيَحْفَظْنَ
فُرُوجَهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And say to the believing women that they should lower their gaze and
guard their modesty.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Nur 24:31]***

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ آيَةٍ في القُرآنِ في ذِكْرِ الفُروجِ فَهِي مِن الزّنا إلاّ هَذه
الآيَةَ فإنهَّا مِن النَّظَر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Every verse in the Qur’an in which the private parts are mentioned is
with regard to protecting it from fornication, except for this (above)
verse in which it means to protect the private parts from being
seen.”*[^2]

Sexual Instincts
----------------

Sexual instincts are among the major forces in man to derive pleasure in
life. These strong instincts attract men and women towards each other.
The love they have for each other makes them work hard to unite with one
another. That is why sex and marriage have always been a hot topic of
discussion in all religious or scientific gatherings. There have been
many theories related to this issue. Some of these theories are
extremist while others are normal.

Extremist Theory
----------------

Those who believe in sexual freedom including the followers of Freud
have adopted an extremist theory. Freud whose ideas are based on sex has
extended out of the domain of influence of sexual instincts to affect
many other natural instincts that are in reality very independent of
sex. He considers this instinct to be the main foundation of human
culture and civilization. Freud thinks that seeking sexual pleasure and
fulfillment is not limited to adulthood and exists throughout our
lifetime. He considers a baby’s sucking of the mother’s breast to be
sexually motivated and pleasing.

Freud bases his psychological theories on sexual failures. He thinks
that when sexual desires are not fulfilled due to social restrictions,
they are forced into the subconscious where they lend themselves to
severe stress and psychological illnesses. Freud believes that all the
various forms of psychological problems are rooted in the sexual
instinct.

Thus, a psychoanalyst must become very aware of the person’s experiences
in order to treat him. Freud’s opponents disagree with his idea that
sexual instincts are the root of all psychological illnesses. Freud’s
mistake lies in his considering unusual sexual emotions to be the source
of nervous or psychological illnesses. He fails to consider the person’s
social, economical or material environment. For example, when a simple
worker has psychological problems due to lack of income, poverty and
hunger, his illness is not rooted in sex. To treat him we must provide
him with better work opportunities, not satiate him sexually![^3]

The Church and the Other Extreme
--------------------------------

The followers of the Church, some religions, some philosophers and some
teachers of ethics have considered sex to be an animal act and have
called it filthy. By going to the other extreme, they have totally
abandoned sex. Saint Jerome always used to say: “Let us chop off the
tree of marriage by celibacy.” In the Church, we see great scholars like
Paules who was one of the heads of the Church. He never married and
advised all men and women not to marry.

In his first treatise addressed to Qarantian we read: “About what you
wrote to me, it is better for men not to touch women. However, in order
to avoid fornication, each man should have his own wife, and each woman
should have her own husband. The husband must fulfill his wife’s rights.
The wife should fulfill the husband’s rights. I wish all men were like
me, but each person has a divinely given gift. Some are this way. Others
are that way. Thus, I tell those who are single and the widowed women,
that it is best for them to remain like me. But if they cannot restrain
themselves, it is better for them to marry since it is better to marry
than burn in the Fire of Hell.”[^4]

Islam Takes the Balanced View
-----------------------------

Islam condemns both extremist views. The Commander of the Faithful has
considered going to either extreme to be out of ignorance. He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يُرَى الجَاهِلُ إلاّ مُفْرِطاً أو مُفَرِّطاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The ignorant one will only be seen either exceeding the bounds or
falling short.”*

Taking a moderate stance regarding sexual instincts is liked by God and
is according to the nature of our creation. In the moderate method,
sexual instincts are neither let loose, nor are they totally abandoned.
The law and social ethics support the fulfillment of this natural
instinct in a moderate degree, and the means for its proper fulfillment
are provided. In the method that is supported by God’s Prophets, people
are instructed that God has encouraged the people to get married. On the
other hand, any form of sexual deviation or being loose is seriously
fought with, and human societies are advised against these things.

Islam and Marriage
------------------

The Almighty God has expressed one of the main characteristics of
believing men or women in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِفُرُوجِهِمْ حَافِظُونَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ أَزْوَاجِهِمْ
أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ غَيْرُ مَلُومِينَ فَمَنِ
ابْتَغَىٰ وَرَاءَ ذَٰلِكَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْعَادُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who abstain from sex, except with those joined to them in the
marriage bond, or (the captives) whom their right hands possess, - for
(in their case) they are free from blame: But those whose desires exceed
those limits are transgressors.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Muminun 23:5-7]***

Islam has ordered its followers to get married since sexual instincts
are the most difficult to control. Islam has ordered us to make love
with our legal wives or our slaves. This implies both permanent and
temporary wives. There is also a mention of the misconception by the
Christians who considered any sexual contact to be wrong, and went so
far that the Catholic priests and the nuns did not marry all their life
long and considered marriage to be contrary to their spiritual position.
The Noble Prophet of Islam has paid attention to sexual instincts in his
teachings and has instructed his followers not to follow celibacy. God’s
Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن أَحَبَّ فِطرَتي فَلْيَسْتَنَّ بِسُنَّتي، وَمِن سُنَّتي النِّكاحُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever likes my nature should follow my traditions. One of my
traditions is marriage.”*[^5]

Marriage and Immunity from Sin
------------------------------

God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا مَعْشَر الشَّبابِ! مَن استَطَاعَ مِنْكُم الباهُ فَلْيَتَزَوَّجْ،
فَإنَّه أغَضُّ لِلبَصَرِ وَأحْسَنُ لِلفَرْجِ، وَمَنْ لمَ يَسْتَطِع
مِنكُم فَلْيُدْمِنِ الصَّوْمَ فإنَّ له وَجَاءً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O young people! Any of you who have the means to marry should do so
since this is the best way to protect your eyes from corrupt and
treacherous looks, and to guard the private parts* *from sin and
immodesty. Whoever does not have the means to marry should fast
continually since fasting can reduce lust.”*[^6]

Marriage as the Firm Foundation of Life
---------------------------------------

Islam encourages its followers to establish a family and considers the
family to be the most beautiful thing in the sight of God. The Noble
Prophet of God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما بُنِيَ في الإسْلامِ بِناءٌ أَحَبُّ إلى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
وَأَعَزَُ مِن التَّزْويجِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no establishment in Islam dearer to God the Almighty than
marriage.”*[^7]

Therefore, we must speed up the establishment of marriage. Imam Sadiq
narrated that once the Prophet climbed up on the pulpit and after
praising God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيُّها النّاسُ! إنَّ جِبرَئِيلَ أتَاني عَن اللَّطِيفِ الخَبِيرِ
فَقالَ: إنَّ الأبْكارَ بِمَنْزِلَةِ الثَّمَرِ على الشَّجَرِ: إذا
أَدْرَكَ ثَمَرَهُ فَلَم يُجْتَنَى أَفْسَدَتْهُ الشَّمْسُ وَنَثَرَتْهُ
الرِّياحُ، وَكَذلِكَ الأبْكارُ: إذا أدْرَكْنَ ما يُدْرِكُ النِّساءُ
فَلَيْسَ لَهُنَّ دَواءٌ إلاّ البُعُولَةَ وإلاّ لمَ يُؤْمَنْ عَلَيهِنَّ
الفَسادُ، فإنَّهُنَّ بَشَرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O people! Gabriel came to me from the threshold of God and said:
Virgin girls are like the fruits on a tree. When they ripen, they should
be plucked. Else, they will be spoiled due to exposure to the rays of
the sun, and they will be scattered about due to the blowing of the
wind. When girls mature and feel sexual inclinations, there is no remedy
for them but a husband. If they do not get married, they are not secure
from corruption since they are human (and are not immune from making
mistakes).”*

Marriage Provides a Garment
---------------------------

The Holy Qur’an has considered the chastity of men and women and has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُنَّ لِبَاسٌ لَّكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ لِبَاسٌ لَّهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They are your garments and ye are their garments.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Baqarah 2:187]***

Our garments cover up our sex organs and protect us against many bad
conditions such as heat, cold and bad weather. Marriage will help us
stay clean and pure. The Noble Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن أَحَبَّ أنْ يَلْقى اللهَ طاهِراً وَمُطَهَّراً فَليَتَعَفَّفْ
بِزَوجَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever likes to meet God in a pure and purified state should protect
his chastity by means of marriage.”*[^8]

The Prophet Disapproved of Abandoning Marriage
----------------------------------------------

Those who have the means to get married and establish a family in order
to save the Muslims from committing sins should do so. Islam blames
those who do not do so for various reasons. Consider the following case
for example. A man called Akkaf went to see God’s Prophet . The Prophet
asked: “Are you married?” He said: “O’ Prophet of God! No.” Then the
Prophet asked: “Are you healthy and wealthy?” He said: “Yes.” Then the
Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيْحَكَ يا عَكّافُ! تَزَوَّجْ تَزَوَّجْ فإنَّكَ مِن الخَاطِئينَ،
تَزَوَّجْ وإلاّ فأنْتَ مِن المُذنِبِينَ، تَزَوَّجْ وإلاّ فأنْتَ مِن
رُهْبانِ النَّصارَى، تَزَوَّجْ وإلاّ فأنْتَ مِن إخْوانِ الشَّياطِينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Woe be to you, Akkaf! Marry, marry, for now you are of the wrongdoers!
Marry, else you will be among the sinners! Marry, else you will be of
the Christian monks! Marry, else you will be among the brothers of
Satan!”*[^9]

In another tradition, we read that Imam Ridha narrated that a woman told
Imam Baqir : “I am a Mutabattil.” Imam Baqir asked: “What do you mean by
that?” She said: “I intend to never get married.” Imam Baqir asked:
“Why?” She said: “In order to attain nobility.” Then Imam Baqir said:
“Forget it. If there was any nobility in not getting married, the
Blessed Fatima Zahra was more suitable to have recognized this nobility,
and there is no one who can supercede her in nobility.”[^10] From these
traditions, we realize that the leaders in Islam have advised men and
women against celibacy so that they remain chaste.

Islam and Avoiding Women
------------------------

A few of the companions of the Noble Prophet of God decided to avoid
having sexual intercourse with their wives, eating breakfast and
sleeping at night. Um Salmah realized this and told this to the Prophet
. The Prophet went to them and asked:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتَرْغَبونَ عَن النِّساءِ؟ إني آتِي النِّساءَ وآكُلُ بِالنَّهارِ
وأَنامُ بِاللَّيلِ، فَمَنْ رَغَبَ عنْ سُنَّتي فَلَيْسَ مِنّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do you abstain from (going to) your wives? I go to my wives, eat in
the daytime and sleep at night. Whoever forsakes my tradition is not
from me.”*[^11]

Adultery is a Major Sin
-----------------------

Those who do not establish a family may commit adultery and fall into
disaster. The Holy Qur’an considers adultery to be an evil deed and
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَقْرَبُواْ الزِّنَى إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَاحِشَةً وَسَاء سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nor come nigh to adultery: for it is a shameful (deed) and an evil,
opening the road (to other evils).” [The Holy Qur’an, Bani Israil
17:32]***

This short verse stresses three important points:

1) The verse does not state: “Do not commit adultery.” Rather it says do
not even approach this wicked deed. This verse shows that although
adultery is a very bad deed, there are some other deeds that might
ultimately lead to it. Acts like flirting, looking, nudity, not wearing
the veil, reading dirty books, viewing pornography, and going to centers
of corruption or being in a private place with another person of the
opposite sex are all preparatory actions which might lead to adultery.

2) This verse clearly expresses the extreme degree of wickedness of
adultery.

3) This verse states that adultery will also pave the way for other
forms of corruption in the society.

The Philosophy behind Forbidding Adultery
-----------------------------------------

1) The first problem with adultery is that it will lead to social
disorder. The relationship of the father and children will become
unclear. This clear father-child relationship will provide life-long
support for the children. Adultery will eliminate this order. Let us
think for one moment that adultery is permitted in the whole world and
marriage is abolished. In such a world, none of the children born will
be supported. There is also no love for these children - the love that
is so critical in the raising of people who will not be criminals later.
Then the whole world will turn into a big zoo where all forms of
violence prevail.

2) Adultery is also a cause of the personal and social struggles between
those who run the centers of corruption. The detailed account of what
goes on in massage parlors and sex homes shows that many other crimes
are committed where adultery is practiced.

3) It has been proven by theory and in practice that adultery leads to
many contagious sexually transmitted diseases (STD’s) many of which are
life-threatening.[^12]

4) Adultery is usually followed by abortion since the women who commit
adultery never like to keep the baby. They even think it will be an
obstacle to their future practice of adultery.

5) We should not forget that the purpose behind marriage is not
satiating our sexual instincts. Rather cooperating in the establishment
of a joint life, the achievement of peace of mind, having a companion,
raising children and cooperation in many social affairs are also major
goals in marriage. These are not possible unless men and women are
dedicated to each other through marriage and adultery is forbidden.

Moving Statistics
-----------------

First, let us look at the statistics related to sexually transmitted
diseases (STD) in the United States.

### STD Statistics

One in five people in the United States has an STD[^13]. Two-thirds of
all STDs occur in people 25 years of age or younger. One in four new STD
infections occur in teenagers. Cervical cancer in women is linked to
HPV.[^14] Hepatitis is 100 times more infectious than HIV.[^15]
Two-thirds of Hepatitis B (HBV[^16]) infections are transmitted
sexually. HBV is linked to chronic liver disease, including cirrhosis
and liver cancer. STDs, other than HIV, cost about $8 billion each year
to diagnose and treat.

One in five Americans have genital herpes, yet at least 80 percent of
those with herpes are unaware they have it. At least one in four
Americans will contract an STD at some point in their lives. HPV is the
most common STD in the United States. More than 5 million people are
infected with HPV each year. Less than half of adults aged 18 to 44 have
ever been tested for an STD other than HIV/AIDS. At least 15 percent of
all infertile American women are infertile because of tubal damage
caused by pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), which is the result of an
untreated STD. Next let us look at the world statistics on abortion.

### World-Wide Abortion Statistics

Currently 54 countries allow abortion, which is about 61 percent of the
world’s population[^17]. According to the pro-abortion Center for
Reproductive Law and Policy in New York, 97 countries that constitute
about 39 percent of the population, have abortion laws that make it
illegal. The Alan Guttmacher Institute reports approximately **22**
million legal abortions were reported in 1987. It is estimated that
between four and nine million were not reported, totaling **26-31**
million legal abortions in 1987 alone. There were a total of
**10**-**22** million "clandestine" abortions, bringing the total
worldwide figure to **36** and **53** million abortions.

The Effects of Adultery in This World and the Hereafter
-------------------------------------------------------

So far, we discussed the philosophy behind forbidden adultery and its
wicked effects and a brief account of the relevant statistics in the
West. Now we shall point out some of the traditions regarding the
punishment of adultery in this world and the Hereafter. Imam Ali
narrated that he heard God’s Prophet say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
في الزِّنا سِتُّ خِصالٍ؛ ثَلاثٌ في الدُّنْيا وَثَلاثٌ في الآخِرَةِ.
فأمّا اللّواتي في الدُّنيا فَيَذْهَبُ بِنُورِ الوَجْهِ وَيَقْطَعُ
الرِّزْقَ وَيُسَرِّعُ الفَناءَ. أمّا اللّواتي في الآخِرَةِ فَغَضَبُ
الرَّبِّ وَسُوءُ الحِسابِ وَالدُّخُولِ (أو الخُلود) في النّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There are six bad effects of adultery. Three of them are in this world
and the other three are in the Hereafter. The effects of adultery in
this world are as follows:*  
*1 - Adultery takes away one’s sincerity and divine illumination.*  
*2 - Adultery stops the arrival of one’s share of daily bread.*  
*3 - Adultery speeds up man’s destruction.*

*The three effects of adultery in the Hereafter are as follows:*

*1 - Adultery will raise the anger of the Lord.*  
*2 - Adultery will make the Reckoning difficult,*  
*3 - Adultery will result in entry (or remaining forever) in the Fire of
Hell.”*

Adultery Brings Poverty and Destruction
---------------------------------------

God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزِّنا يُورِثُ الفَقْرَ وَيَدَعُ الدِّيارَ بَلاقِعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Adultery causes poverty and turns habitations into wasteland.”*[^18]

These are the evil results of adultery. Adultery will also cause sudden
death. Imam Baqir narrated that it is written in Imam Ali’s book that
God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا كَثُرَ الزِّنا مِن بَعْدي كَثُرَ مَوْتُ الفُجأَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When adultery becomes widespread after me, there will be frequent
occurrences of sudden deaths.”*[^19]

The Final Punishment for Adultery
---------------------------------

Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Al-Husayn quoted on the authority of Dho’aib ibn
Waqid on the authority of Husayn ibn Zayd that Imam Sadiq quoted on the
authority of his forefathers on the authority of the Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا وَمَنْ زَنى بِامْرَأةٍ مُسْلِمَةٍ أَو يَهُودِيَّةٍ أو
نَصْرانِيَّةٍ أو مجُوسِيَّةٍ، حُرَّةٍ أو أَمَةٍ، ثُمَّ لم يَتُبْ مِنهُ
وَماتَ مُصِرّاً عَلَيهِ فَتَحَ اللهُ تَعالى لَهُ في قَبْرِهِ
ثَلاثَمِائَةِ بَابٍ يَخْرُجُ مِنْها حَيّاتٌ وَعَقَارِبُ وَثُعْبانٌ
مِنَ النّارِ، فَهُوَ يَحْتَرِقُ إلى يَومِ القِيامَةِ. فإذا بُعِثَ مِن
قَبْرِه تَأذّى النّاسُ مِن نَتْنِ ريحِهِ فَيُعْرَفُ بِذلِكَ وَبِما
كانَ يَعْمَلُ في دارِ الدُّنيَا حَتىّ يُؤمَرُ بِه إلى النّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Beware! If a man commits adultery with a Muslim, Jewish, Christian or
Magian woman- be it a free woman or a slave - and reaches the time of
death without repenting, and persists on doing this wicked deed, God
will open up three hundred gates into his grave from which snakes,*
*scorpions and large serpents enter into it from the Fire. He will burn
until the Resurrection Day. When he is raised from his grave, people
will be tormented by his stench. He will be known by that and by his
evil deeds in this world, until he will be taken into the Fire.”*[^20]

Yes, this is the punishment for the people who commit adultery. They
will be thrown into the Fire of Hell.

Staying Chaste by Remembering Death
-----------------------------------

Imam Sajjad has expressed ways to remain chaste. The first thing to do
is not view forbidden scenes. The second way is to remember death a lot.
Now let us look at the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَاءتْ سَكْرَةُ الْمَوْتِ بِالْحَقِّ ذَلِكَ مَا كُنتَ مِنْهُ تَحِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the stupor of death will bring Truth (before his eyes): This was
the thing which thou wast trying to escape!” [The Holy Qur’an, Qaf
50:19]***

Death is like a state of being drunk. One will get so anxious when he
realizes that he is going to be transferred from this world into the
other world. He might even lose his mind realizing that he has to cut
off all ties with this world with which he is used to, and he will enter
a new world. Then he will be covered with fear, and experience a feeling
similar to being drunk.

What is Death
-------------

There is a tradition from Imam Sajjad which states that he was asked:
“What is death?” He replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
)المَوتُ) لِلمُؤْمِنِ كَنَزْعِ ثِيابٍ وَسخَةٍ قَمْلَةٍ وَفَكِّ قُيودٍ
وَأغْلالٍ ثَقيلَةٍ وَالاسْتِبْدالِ بِأفْخَرِ الثِّيابِ وأطْيَبِها
وأوْطى المَراكِبِ وَآنَسِ المَنَازِلِ. وَلِلكافِرِ كَخَلْعِ ثِيابٍ
فاخِرَةٍ وَالنَّقْلِ عَن مَنازِلَ أَنيسَةٍ وَالاسْتِبْدالِ بِأوسَخِ
الثّيابِ وأخْشَنِها وأوْحَشِ المَنَازِلِ وأعْظَمِ العَذابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“For a believer, death is like removing dirty, lice-infested clothes
and unfastening heavy chains and locks, in exchange for the most
beautiful and best garments, the most comfortable mounts and the most
delightful dwellings. However, for an unbeliever, death is like taking
off the most magnificent clothes and moving out of loved houses, in
exchange for the filthiest and coarsest clothes, the most desolate of
dwellings and the greatest punishment.”*[^21]

Imam Husayn’s Interpretation of Death
-------------------------------------

Imam Husayn also presented a beautiful interpretation of death for his
companions as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَبراً بَني الكِرامِ! فمَا المَوتُ إلاّ قَنْطَرَةٌ تَعْبرُ بِكُم عنِ
البُؤسِ وَالضَّرّاءِ إلى الجِنانِ الواسِعَةِ وَالنَّعيمِ الدّائِمَةِ،
فَأيُّكُم يَكْرَهُ أنْ يَنْتَقِلَ مِن سِجْنٍ إلى قَصْرٍ؟ ومَا هُوَ
لأعْدائِكُم إلاّ كَمَنْ يَنْتَقِلَ مِن قَصْرٍ إلى سِجْنٍ وَعَذابٍ.
إنَّ أبي حَدَثَني عَن رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلّى اللهُ عَلَيهِ وَآلِهِ أنَّ
الدُّنْيا سِجْنُ المُؤمِنِ وَجَنَّةُ الكَافِرِ، وَالمَوتُ جِسْرُ
هؤلاءِ إلى جِنانِهِم وَجِسْرُ هؤلاءِ إلى جَحِيمِهِم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O children of noble men! Persevere! Death is nothing but a bridge
transferring you from hardship and suffering to the vast gardens of
Heaven and lasting blessings. Which of you dislikes moving from a prison
into a palace? However, death for your enemies is only as one
transferred from a palace into a prison and punishment. My father quoted
on the authority of God’s Prophet that this world is like a prison for
believers and Heaven for unbelievers. Death is a bridge for these
(believers) to their Gardens and a bridge for those (unbelievers) to
their Fire.”*[^22]

Imam Sadiq’s Interpretation of Death
------------------------------------

Imam Sadiq was asked to describe death. He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ لِلمُؤمِنِ كَأطْيَبِ رِيحٍ يَشَمُّهُ فَيَنْعَسُ لِطِيبِهِ
فَيَنْقَطِعُ التَّعَبُ وَالألَمُ كُلُّهُ عَنْهُ، وَلِلكَافِر كَلَسْعِ
الأفاعِي وَلَدْغِ العَقارِبِ وَأَشَدَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Death for the believer is like breathing in a most pleasant breeze,
the fragrance of which makes him slumber and all tiredness and pain
comes to an end, but for the unbeliever it is like the biting of snakes
and the sting of scorpions and even more severe.”*

Imam Ali said the following about the time of death when the curtains to
the Unseen are drawn aside and the angels enter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّكُم لَو قَد عَايَنْتُم مَا قَد عَايَنَ مَن مَاتَ مِنْكُم
لجَزَعْتُم وَوَهَلْتُم وَسَمِعْتُم وَأطَعْتُم وَلكِنْ مَحْجوبٌ عَنْكُم
ما قَد عَايَنوا وَقَرِيبٌ ما يُطْرَحُ الحِجابُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If you could see what the dead see, you would be distressed and
terrified and (as a result) you would hear and obey (God’s words).
However, what they see is veiled from you, and soon the veil will be
drawn aside for you (and you too will see)!”*[^23]

The Reality of Death
--------------------

It is often thought that death implies an ending and total destruction
while this is in contradiction with what is said in the Holy Qur’an and
intellectual reasoning. From the view of the Qur’an death is an existing
affair. It is just a form of transferring from one world to another.
That is why death has been interpreted to be a return of our soul to the
angels in the Qur’an.

Three days in a person’s life are said to be awesome for man in many
Islamic traditions. They are the day on which he is born, the day he
dies and sees the world beyond death, and the day on which he enters the
Reckoning Ordeal and sees decrees that did not exist in this
world.”[^24] God said the following about John the son of Zachariah
regarding these three days:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَلَامٌ عَلَيْهِ يَوْمَ وُلِدَ وَيَوْمَ يَمُوتُ وَيَوْمَ يُبْعَثُ
حَيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So Peace on him the day he was born, the day that he dies, and the
day that he will be raised up to life (again)!” [The Holy Qur’an, Maryam
19:15]***

It is also said in the Qur’an that Jesus said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّلَامُ عَلَيَّ يَوْمَ وُلِدتُّ وَيَوْمَ أَمُوتُ وَيَوْمَ
أُبْعَثُ حَيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So peace is on me the day I was born, the day that I die, and the
day that I shall be raised up to life (again)"! [The Holy Qur’an, Maryam
19:33]***

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذِكْرُ المَوْتِ يُمِيتُ الشَّهَواتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The remembrance of death kills desires.”*[^25]

God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذْكُرُوا هادِمَ اللَّذّاتِ… الموتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Remember the destroyer of pleasures.”*

He was asked: “O Prophet of God! What is the destroyer of pleasures?”  
 He said: “Death.”

Imam Sajjad said that remembering death would destroy lust. Man should
remind himself of divine chastisement since this will also help destroy
lust. It is also important to seek God’s help as the Imam said. If young
people remember God and consider Him to be watching over all that they
do, they will succeed and be saved. Joseph said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أُبَرِّئُ نَفْسِي إِنَّ النَّفْسَ لأَمَّارَةٌ بِالسُّوءِ إِلاَّ
مَا رَحِمَ رَبِّيَ إِنَّ رَبِّي غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nor do I absolve my own self (of blame): the (human) soul is
certainly prone to evil, unless my Lord do bestow His Mercy: but surely
my Lord is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.” [The Holy Qur’an, Yusuf
12:53]***

He entrusted himself to God and he was saved.

The Jurisprudents’ Views on the Punishment for Fornication
----------------------------------------------------------

Islam has established rules and limitations to fight such a socially
disastrous act that destroys the foundations of family life. If these
rules and limitations are adhered to, then the Muslim society will be
pure and there will be security for the family members. This issue has
been addressed in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّانِيَةُ وَالزَّانِي فَاجْلِدُوا كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ مِّنْهُمَا مِئَةَ
جَلْدَةٍ وَلَا تَأْخُذْكُم بِهِمَا رَأْفَةٌ فِي دِينِ اللَّهِ إِن
كُنتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ وَلْيَشْهَدْ
عَذَابَهُمَا طَائِفَةٌ مِّنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The woman and the man guilty of adultery or fornication, - flog each
of them with a hundred stripes: Let not compassion move you in their
case, in a matter prescribed by God, if ye believe in God and the Last
Day: and let a party of the Believers witness their punishment.” [The
Holy Qur’an, al-Nur 24:2]***

There are three important instructions in this verse:

1 - The punishment for adultery or fornication for both men and women is
prescribed.

2 - The Qur’an stresses that in interpreting this verse, we should rely
on our faith in God and the Hereafter, not on our own feelings and
emotions. The punishment should be carried out as stated. There is a
tradition from God’s Prophet in this regard. According to this
tradition, some rulers who have reduced this punishment by one lash will
be brought to trial in the Hereafter and asked for the reason they did
so. They will say that they did so to have mercy on the people. Then God
will tell them: “Were you kinder to them than I am?” Others who have hit
an extra lash will be brought to trial in the Hereafter and asked for
the reason they did so. They will say that they wanted to force the
people to abandon committing sins. Then God will say: “Where you wiser
and more knowledgeable than I am?” Then He will order that both of them
be thrown into the Fire of Hell.

3 - The verse stresses that other believers should be present at the
scene of the punishment since the aim of this punishing is not just for
those who commit fornication to learn a lesson, rather it is meant to be
a lesson for other people, too. This is because moral corruption might
spread from the individuals involved to others in the society. As the
case has been brought to court, there is no need to protect the honor of
those who have committed fornication. They should be introduced to the
people and punished in public so that others realize that they should
respect the law.

The punishment for fornication has been prescribed to be one hundred
lashes for men and women in this verse. This is a general decree. There
are exceptions for this rule that we will point out. Certain conditions
have been stated to be necessary for the punishment.

1 - The first condition is maturity. Thus, this does not apply to
children who are not mature.

2 - The second condition is freedom of will. This applies if fornication
is done with free will. Thus, someone who is raped will not be punished.

3 - The third condition is sanity. If the man or woman who commits
fornication is insane, this punishment will not apply.[^26]

4 - Imam Khomeini added: “It should also be added that the person who
commits fornication should be aware of the punishment for fornication.
Else this punishment will not apply.”[^27]

The exception to the above rule is for adultery that is when a married
man who can make love with his wife or a married woman who can make love
with her husband commits fornication. Another exception to this rule is
committing incest. The third exception is committing rape. The
punishment for these crimes is death.

Conditions
----------

1 - To prove that fornication has been committed four just men, three
just men plus two just women, or two just men plus four just women must
witness that they have seen it take place.

2 - The place of committing fornication where they witness to have seen
fornication take place should be the same for all witnesses.

3 - The time of committing fornication that they witness to should be
the same.

4 - All the witnesses should witness in one court meeting.

5 - It is not acceptable if the four witnesses witness to have seen four
different people commit fornication.

6 - It is not acceptable if the four witnesses who witness to have seen
fornication take place cannot recognize the woman involved.

4 - Whenever three of the witnesses unite in their witnessing but the
fourth person does not witness or disagrees with them, then the
punishment of ‘Qazf’- malicious accusation means that someone associates
fornication or sodomy with a certain person[^28] will be decreed for the
three who witnessed.[^29]

[^1]: In the other version it is followed by:” The right of your private
part is that you protect it from fornication and guard it against being
looked upon.”

[^2]: Nur al-Thaqalayn, v.3, p.588.

[^3]: Bozorgsal wa Jawan (Guftar-i-Falsafi), v.1, p.205, quoted from
Andishehaye Freud, p.35, p.70.

[^4]: Ibid., v.1, p.195, quoted from Zanashoyee wa Akhlaq-i-Islami,
pp.46-52.

[^5]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.196.

[^6]: Ibid. p.197.

[^7]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, v.2, p.531.

[^8]: Ibid. v.2, p.530.

[^9]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, v.2, p.530.

[^10]: Bozorgsal wa Jawan, v.1, p.194.

[^11]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.14, p.8.

[^12]: The widespread disease called AIDS is just one example. A report
published in the USA Today on May29, 2001 states that although AIDS was
initially discovered in 1981, the death toll from it has exceeded 21.8
million people in 2000. The following is according to the Joint United
Nations Programme HIV/AIDS UNAIDS “AIDS epidemic update” of December
2001. Twenty years after the first clinical evidence of acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome was reported, AIDS has become the most
devastating disease humankind ever faced. Since the epidemic began, more
than 60 million people have been infected with the virus. HIV/AIDS is
now the leading cause of death in sub-Saharan Africa. Worldwide, it is
the fourth biggest killer. At the end of 2001, an estimated 40 million
people globally were living with HIV. In many parts of the developing
world, the majority of new infections occur in young adults, with young
women especially vulnerable. About one-third of those currently living
with HIV/AIDS are aged 15-24. Most of them do not know they carry the
virus. Many millions more know nothing or too little about HIV to
protect themselves against it. Eastern Europe – especially the Russian
Federation – continues to experience the fastest growing epidemic in the
world with the number of new HIV infections rising steeply. In 2001,
there were an estimated 250,000 new infections in this region, bringing
to 1 million the number of people living with HIV. Given the high levels
of other sexually transmitted infections, and the high rates of
injection drug abuse among young people, the epidemic looks set to grow
considerably. In Asia and the Pacific, an estimated 7.1 million people
are now living with HIV/AIDS. The epidemic claimed the lives of 435,000
people in the region in 2001. The apparently low national prevalence
rates in many countries in this region are dangerously deceptive. They
hide localized epidemics in different areas, including some of the
world’s most populous countries. There is a serious thread of major,
generalized epidemics. But, as Cambodia and Thailand have shown, prompt,
large-scale prevention programmes can hold the epidemic at bay. In
Cambodia, concerted efforts, driven by strong political leadership and
public commitment, lowered HIV prevalence among pregnant women to 2.3%
at the end of 2000 – down by almost a third from 1997. AIDS killed 2.3
million Africans in 2001. The estimated 3.4 million new HIV infections
in sub-Saharan Africa in the past year mean that 28.1 million Africans
now live with the virus. Without adequate treatment and care, most of
them will not survive the next decade. Recent antenatal clinic data show
that several parts of southern Africa have now joined Botswana with
prevalence rates among pregnant woment exceeding 30%. In West Africa, at
least five countries are experiencing serious epidemics, with adult HIV
prevalence exceeding 5%. However, HIV prevalence among young adults
continues to fall in Uganda, while there is evidence that prevalence
among young people (especially women) is dropping in some parts of the
continent. In the Middle East and North Africa, the number of people
living with HIV now totals 440,000. The epidemic’s advance is most
marked in countries (such as Djibouti, Somalia and the Sudan) that are
already experiencing complex emergencies. While HIV prevalence continues
to be low in most countries in the region, increasing numbers of HIV
infections are being detected in several countries, including the
Islamic Republic of Iran, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Pakistan. A
larger epidemic also threatens to develop in the high-income countries,
where over 75,000 people acquired HIV in 2001, bringing to 1.5 million
the total number of people living with HIV/AIDS. Recent advances in
treatment and care in these countries are not being consistently matched
with enough progress on the prevention front. New evidence of rising HIV
infection rates in North America, parts of Europe and Australia is
emerging. Unsafe sex, reflected in outbreaks of sexually transmitted
infections, and widespread injection drug use are propelling these
epidemics, which at the same time are shifting more towards deprived
communities. An extimated 1.8 million adults and children are living
with HIV in Latin American and the Caribbean – a region that is
experiencing diverse epidemics. With an average adult HIV prevalence of
approximately 2%, the Caribbean is the second-most affected region in
the world. But relatively low national HIV prevalence rates in most
South and Central American countries mask the fact that the epidemic is
already firmly lodged among specific population groups. These countries
can avert more extensive epidemics by stepping up their responses now.

[^13]: American Social Health Association.

[^14]: Human papilloma virus.

[^15]: Human Immunodeficiency virus.

[^16]: Hepatitis B virus.

[^17]: International Family Planning Perspectives, 16:59, June 1990; USA
Today, 8/8/96.

[^18]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, Kitab al-Nikah, Abwab Nikah Mahram, Bab 3,
Tradition no. 11, v.14, p.233.

[^19]: Ibid. p.231.

[^20]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, Kitab al-Nikah, v.14, p.233.

[^21]: Kifayat al-Muwahhidin, v.3, p.203.

[^22]: Ma’ani al-Akhbar, v.2, p.196.

[^23]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Fayz al-Islam, Sermon no.20.

[^24]: Nur al-Thaqalayn, v.3, p.327.

[^25]: Majmu’ah Waram, p.268.

[^26]: Mabani’ Takmilat al-Minhaj, p.169.

[^27]: Tahrir al-Wasilah, v.2, p.456.

[^28]: The punishment for ‘Qazf’ is 80 lashes for a man or a woman.

[^29]: Mabani’ Takmilat al-Minhaj, Tahrir al-Wasilah wa Sharh-i-Lum’ah,
Section on Fornication.


