Right n. 10: The Right of the Prayer
====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الصلاة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا حَقُّ الصَّلاةِ فَأَنْ تَعْلَمَ أنّهَا وِفَادَةٌ إلَى اللهِ
وَأَنَّكَ قَائِمٌ بهَا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللهِ، فَإذَا عَلِمْتَ ذَلِكَ
كُنْتَ خَلِيقًا أَنْ تَقُومَ فِيهَا مَقَامَ الذَّلِيلِ الرَّاغِب
الرَّاهِب الْخَائِفِ الرَّاجِي الْمِسْكِينِ الْمُتَضَرِّعِ
الْمُعَظِّمِ مَنْ قَامَ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ بالسُّكُونِ وَالإطْرَاقِ
وَخُشُوعِ الأَطْرَافِ وَلِينِ الْجَنَاحَ وَحُسْنِ الْمُنَاجَاةِ لَهُ
فِي نَفْسِهِ وَالطَّلَب إلَيْهِ فِي فَكَاكِ رَقَبَتِكَ الَّتِي
أَحَاطَتْ بهِ خَطِيئَتُكَ وَاسْتَهلَكَتْهَا ذُنُوبُكَ. وَلا قُوَّةَ
إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Then the right of your ritual prayer is that you should know that it
is an arrival at the threshold of God and that through it you are
standing before God. And when you realize that, then you will stand in
the station of him who is lowly, vile, beseeching, trembling, hopeful,
fearful, and abased.**

**And you will magnify Him Who is before you through stillness, and
bowing of the head,**[^1] **and humbleness of the limbs, and yielding of
the wing,**[^2] **and by saying the best supplications to Him in
yourself and beseeching Him to release (from punishment) your neck that
is encompassed by your offenses and destroyed by your sins. And there is
no power but in God.**

Imam Sajjad first stresses the importance of prayer since it is the
means by which we can appear at the threshold of God. It is the means
with which we can migrate from the material world, put all that
entertains us behind, attend to the divine grandeur, leave the darkness
of this world and enter the world of brightness. This migration should
be according to the requirements stated by the Imam .

Praying is the Greatest Form of Worship
---------------------------------------

Islam has established the prayer as the most important form of worship,
and has made especial recommendations to Muslims regarding it. Islam has
made it incumbent upon boys and girls to pray five times each day from
the time they reach adolescence. They are supposed to make up any
prayers that they may skip for any excuse. Especial times are also
specified for saying the prayers.

Times of the Prayer
-------------------

There are verses in the Holy Qur’an that specify the times of the
prayer. Consider the following verse in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِمِ الصَّلاَةَ طَرَفَيِ النَّهَارِ وَزُلَفًا مِّنَ اللَّيْلِ
إِنَّ الْحَسَنَاتِ يُذْهِبْنَ السَّـيِّئَاتِ ذَلِكَ ذِكْرَى
لِلذَّاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And establish regular prayers at the two ends of the day and at the
approaches of the night: For those things, that are good remove those
that are evil: Be that the word of remembrance to those who remember
(their Lord).” [The Holy Qur’an, Hud 11:114]***

This verse refers to the morning, evening and night prayers. Also,
consider the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَقِمِ الصَّلاَةَ لِدُلُوكِ الشَّمْسِ إِلَى غَسَقِ اللَّيْلِ وَقُرْآنَ
الْفَجْرِ إِنَّ قُرْآنَ الْفَجْرِ كَانَ مَشْهُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Establish regular prayers - at the sun's decline till the darkness
of the night, and the morning prayer and reading: for the prayer and
reading in the morning carry their testimony.” [The Holy Qur’an, Bani
Israil 17:78]***

This verse refers to all the five daily prayers. Also, consider the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَافِظُواْ عَلَى الصَّلَوَاتِ والصَّلاَةِ الْوُسْطَى وَقُومُواْ لِلّهِ
قَانِتِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Guard strictly your (habit of) prayers, especially the Middle
Prayer; and stand before God in a devout (frame of mind).” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:238]***

This verse refers to the noon and afternoon prayers.

The Most Hopeful Verse in the Qur’an
------------------------------------

There is a tradition in Majma Ul-Bayan which says: “One day Imam Ali
looked at the people and asked: Do you know which verse of the Holy
Qur’an is the most hopeful one? Some people said it was the following
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَغْفِرُ أَن يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ
ذَلِكَ لِمَن يَشَاء وَمَن يُشْرِكْ بِاللّهِ فَقَدِ افْتَرَى إِثْمًا
عَظِيما
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God forgiveth not that partners should be set up with Him; but He
forgiveth anything else, to whom He pleaseth; to set up partners with
God is to devise a sin most heinous indeed.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Nisaa
4:48]***

The Imam said no. Others said it was the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يَعْمَلْ سُوءًا أَوْ يَظْلِمْ نَفْسَهُ ثُمَّ يَسْتَغْفِرِ اللّهَ
يَجِدِ اللّهَ غَفُورًا رَّحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If anyone does evil or wrongs his own soul but afterwards seeks
God's forgiveness, he will find God Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.” [The
Holy Qur’an, al-Nisaa 4:110]***

Again, Imam Ali said: No, that is not what I mean. Others said it was
the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا عِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسْرَفُوا عَلَى أَنفُسِهِمْ لَا
تَقْنَطُوا مِن رَّحْمَةِ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ
جَمِيعًا إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: "O my Servants who have transgressed against their souls!
Despair not of the Mercy of God: for God forgives all sins: for He is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Zumar 39:53]***

Again, Imam Ali said no. Then the people asked him which verse it was.
Imam Ali said: I heard God’s Prophet say that the most hopeful verse
is:[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِمِ الصَّلاَةَ طَرَفَيِ النَّهَارِ وَزُلَفًا مِّنَ اللَّيْلِ
إِنَّ الْحَسَنَاتِ يُذْهِبْنَ السَّـيِّئَاتِ ذَلِكَ ذِكْرَى
لِلذَّاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And establish regular prayers at the two ends of the day and at the
approaches of the night: For those things that are good remove those
that are evil: Be that the word of remembrance to those who remember
(their Lord).” [The Holy Qur’an, Hud 11:114]***

Moses was Appointed to Establish Prayers
----------------------------------------

Now consider the following verse which shows that Moses was appointed to
establish regular prayers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَا اخْتَرْتُكَ فَاسْتَمِعْ لِمَا يُوحَى إِنَّنِي أَنَا اللَّهُ
لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا أَنَا فَاعْبُدْنِي وَأَقِمِ الصَّلَاةَ لِذِكْرِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I have chosen thee: listen, then, to the inspiration (sent to thee).
Verily, I am God: There is no god but I: So serve thou Me (only), and
establish regular prayer for celebrating My praise.” [The Holy Qur’an,
Ta-Ha 20:13-14]***

The first point mentioned in this verse is the principle of the Unity of
God that is the most important part of the call of the Prophets. The
next point mentioned is God’s worshipping. Then the instruction to
establish regular prayers that is the most important link between the
creatures and their Creator is stressed. Praying is the most effective
way not to forget God. There is no doubt that there are many factors in
man’s life that distract him from God.

This verse clarifies that the appointment of Moses started with a
mission to establish regular prayers. Praying several times a day is an
effective means to fight this negligence. When man wakes up from his
sleep that makes him forget everything in this world, and wants to start
his daily activities, God has made it incumbent upon him to start his
day with praying. This is done so that he can cleanse his heart and soul
with God’s remembrance.

Once man is delved into his daily activities and works all morning long,
he hears the call to the prayer at noon that invites him to hurry up to
the prayer. He stands at the threshold of the Lord. By saying prayers
and supplications, he eliminates any filth that may have covered up his
soul in the morning. He does the same thing again in the evening and at
night, and remembers God in his soul. God has stressed that the purpose
for the prayer is to remember Him. In another verse, He has stated that
His remembrance is the only means of the purification of our hearts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَتَطْمَئِنُّ قُلُوبُهُم بِذِكْرِ اللّهِ أَلاَ
بِذِكْرِ اللّهِ تَطْمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who believe, and whose hearts find satisfaction in the
remembrance of God: for without doubt in the remembrance of God do
hearts find satisfaction.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Ra’d 13:28]***

Remember God in All Circumstances
---------------------------------

The importance of remembering God in all circumstances is expressed in
the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا قَضَيْتُمُ الصَّلاَةَ فَاذْكُرُواْ اللّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا
وَعَلَى جُنُوبِكُمْ فَإِذَا اطْمَأْنَنتُمْ فَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلاَةَ
إِنَّ الصَّلاَةَ كَانَتْ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ كِتَابًا مَّوْقُوتًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When ye pass (congregational) prayers, celebrate God's praises,
standing, sitting down, or lying down on your sides; but when ye are
free from danger, set up regular prayers: for such prayers are enjoined
on believers at stated times.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Nisaa 4:103]***

The statement “celebrate God’s praises, standing, sitting down, or lying
down on your sides” may refer to the various positions in a battle. This
is an important Islamic instruction not to neglect God under any
circumstances. The above verse has been interpreted in many traditions
to refer to the conditions of praying for the ill.” [^4]

The Sayings of Imam Muhammad Ghazali
------------------------------------

The main spirit of the prayer is humbleness and the presence of our
heart during the prayer since the main goal of the prayer is to be
sincere with God, and to remember the Almighty God with ultimate
submission. God the Almighty said: “Establish the prayer in order to
remember Me.” God’s Prophet said: “Pray as if you are saying farewell.”

This implies that one must say farewell to his own selfish desires, and
everything other than God through praying. One must dedicate his full
attention to his prayer.[^5] Thus, we realize the importance placed on
praying by the Qur’an and the philosophy behind it.

True Prayer
-----------

The late Fayz wrote in Al-Haqa’iq: “The true spirit of prayer is due to
the following:

1) Sincere presence of the mind.  
 2) True understanding.  
 3) Humbleness.  
 4) Fear of the Majesty of God.  
 5) Hope in the Forgiveness of God.  
 6) Being shy of God.”

Sincere Presence of Mind
------------------------

Determination is a very important factor in prayer. It can result in
sincere presence of the mind during the prayer. When we are more
determined to do something, our mind will be better directed at that
affair. We must believe that the life of the Hereafter is preferable to
that of this world since it is eternal and free from trouble as we read
in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هَذِهِ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا إِلَّا لَهْوٌ وَلَعِبٌ وَإِنَّ
الدَّارَ الْآخِرَةَ لَهِيَ الْحَيَوَانُ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What is the life of this world but amusement and play? But verily
the Home in the Hereafter, - that is life indeed, if they but knew.”
[The Holy Qur’an, al-Ankabut 29:64]***

We read in another place in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But the Hereafter is better and more enduring.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-A’la 87:17]***

We cannot attain the life of the Hereafter except through praying.
Praying is the means of approaching God. When this is combined with the
belief that this world is really nothing, then we can find a sincere
presence of the mind.

True Understanding
------------------

The next important factor after sincere presence of the mind is true
understanding of what is being said. If one pays attention to the
meaning of what he says, then he will ignore the affairs of this world,
and all bothering thoughts during the prayer will leave him alone.

We can compare the situation of one who is praying and is bombarded with
bothering thoughts with someone who is trying to rest and think under
the shade of a tree, but is disturbed by the sounds of various birds. He
picks up a stick and tries to drive them away, but the birds come back
again.

Humbleness
----------

Humbleness is a spiritual state that leads to recognition of the
Grandeur and Majesty of God. This recognition is the foundation of
faith. It also leads to the recognition of one’s smallness and his being
subject to divine plans. The recognition of the above leads to a state
of humbleness in which bowing to God, our Creator, is more meaningful.

Fear of the Majesty of God
--------------------------

Fear of the Majesty of God is a state of mind for man that is derived
from the recognition of God’s endless power and His Will’s influence on
everything in the universe. The more we recognize God’s power and
influence, the more we fear His Majesty. The late scholar Naraghi has
also included sincerity and said: “Sincerity, intention to get closer to
God and not being hypocritical are also important in this issue.”[^6]

Hope in the Forgiveness of God
------------------------------

This hope is derived from the recognition of the source of Mercy of God.
Once you notice God’s endless nobility and kindness, and really believe
in God’s promise to reward us with Heaven for praying, then you will
become hopeful of the Forgiveness of God.

Being Shy of God
----------------

Once one realizes that he is unable to fulfill God’s rights that are
incumbent upon him, has faults and weaknesses which constantly pull him
towards the luxuries of this life, and realizes that God is Majestic and
knows everything that goes on within him, then he becomes shy of
God.[^7] We quoted the true aspects of prayer as mentioned by Fayz
Kashani so far. Now let us quote what Hajj Mirza Javad Malaki Tabrizi
said in this regard.

He refers to the writings of Shahide Awwal[^8] and says: “The Shahid
compiled the one thousand obligatory points about the prayer in one
book, and complied the three thousand recommended points about prayer in
another book.” Then he points out an important philosophy behind the
prayer that is expressed in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتْلُ مَا أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ وَأَقِمِ الصَّلَاةَ إِنَّ
الصَّلَاةَ تَنْهَى عَنِ الْفَحْشَاء وَالْمُنكَرِ وَلَذِكْرُ اللَّهِ
أَكْبَرُ وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تَصْنَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Recite what is sent of the Book by inspiration to thee, and
establish regular Prayer: for Prayer restrains from shameful and unjust
deeds; and remembrance of God is the greatest (thing in life) without
doubt. And God knows the (deeds) that ye do.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Ankabut 29:45]***

The Qur’an has clearly stated that prayer restrains us from engaging in
shameful and unjust deeds. If our praying does not serve this purpose,
we can conclude that we are praying out of hypocrisy. Even the slightest
bit of sincere attention to the true spirit of the prayer will restrain
man from shameful and unjust deeds.[^9]

As expressed by this late scholar, there is no other issue in Islam
about which there are as many points as there are about praying. The
issue of prayer always takes up the biggest chapters in books on
traditions and jurisprudence. The description of Imam Sajjad’s
illuminating words about the prayer presented here are but a few drops
of the sea! Praying also has some personal, moral and social effects,
which we shall briefly discuss here.

The Personal Effects of Praying
-------------------------------

One of the personal effects of praying five times each day and appearing
at the threshold of God is the strengthening of our spiritual powers and
determination. Thus, we can stand up against the difficulties that we
encounter just like a mountain. Another personal effect of praying is
the cleansing of our heart from the filthiness of this material world
since we separate ourselves from this material world and travel into the
divine world each time we pray. Thus, we can attain peace of mind. It
has been recorded that whenever the Prophet got troubled with the events
that happened, he sought refuge in praying a lot.

Since praying is a state of meeting the Lord, he would forget his sorrow
once he rushed to visit God. He said: “Once one of you stands up to pray
and says supplications to his Lord, he knows that there is no distance
between him and his Lord. God hears his prayers, responds to his call
and fulfills his prayer.”[^10] Another personal effect of praying is
that it will help us get rid of the selfishness and haughtiness we might
experience due to our misunderstandings when we get wealth or position.
This is a point of human perfection for which we strive. The late Imam
Khomeini said the following about the secrets behind standing, bowing
down and prostrating in prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّلاةُ قُربَانُ كُلِّ تَقِيٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Prayer is a pious believer’s means of approach (to God).”*

It is dependant on two acts - one of which is the basis of the other.
The first prerequisite is to abandon selfishness - that is true piety.
The second prerequisite is to seek the truth and to seek God. This is
true ascension and approach to God. That is why we read in the
traditions that “praying is the means of approaching God for every pious
man.” These prerequisite states are gradually achieved in the three
positions of standing up, bowing down and prostrating in prayer.

While standing up, we realize God the Absolute exists and is
everlasting. Then we forget our selfishness. While bowing down and
seeing the positions of the Names and Characteristics of God, we forget
our own selfishness. When prostrating we totally abandon our
selfishness, and absolutely submit to and seek God. All the positions
and ranks of those who trot in His way are derived from the ranks of
these three positions.”[^11] Another personal effect of praying is that
one who prays gets encouraged to improve himself and attain the highest
degree of noble characteristics. He tries to eliminate all his moral
wickedness. That is why the Holy Qur’an praises the believers for the
good characteristics that they attain as we read in the following
verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَفْلَحَ الْمُؤْمِنُون الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي صَلَاتِهِمْ خَاشِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The believers must (eventually) win through - those who humble
themselves in their prayers.” [The Holy Qur’an,*** ***al-Muminun
23:1-2]***

This winning has been interpreted to imply both worldly gains and
winning in the Hereafter. Worldly gains imply survival, richness and
honor. Winning in the Hereafter implies the following four:

1) Lasting without ever being destroyed[^12]  
 2) Richness without any poverty  
 3) Honor without any humiliation  
 4) Knowledge without any ignorance

Believers are recognized by being humble in these verses. This implies
that their praying is not just a series of meaningless words and
actions; rather it is accompanied by full attention to God – such an
attention with which they cut off themselves from others than Him.

Factors Which Yield Humbleness
------------------------------

The first factor that yields humbleness is recognition of the Majesty of
God and the minuteness of the world. Imam Ali has indicated in *Nahjul
Balaghah* that one of the signs of the pious people is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَظُمَ الخَالِقُ في أنْفُسِهِم فَصَغُرَ ما دُونَهُ في أعْيُنِهِم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Once the Creator was recognized to be Majestic by them, everything
else seemed small to them.”*[^13]

The second important factor that will result in humbleness is to direct
one’s attention to his prayer and not pay any attention to various other
issues. The third important factor is the place where one prays. We
should choose a place to pray that is lacking luxury items. That is why
it is not recommended to pray in front of pictures, sculptures, open
doors or where people cross. Another important factor for becoming
humble is to avoid committing sins. It is also important to be well
familiar with the meaning of what we say in prayer and understand the
philosophy behind the movements. It helps to perform the initial or
post-prayer recommendable acts. One must practice praying just like any
other thing in order to become apt at it and be careful not to forget to
pray.[^14]

The Social Effects of Praying
-----------------------------

Since praying fosters a sense of social responsibility, it has important
social effects. There is no doubt that man is created to be a sociable
creature. The tendency to live in a group is inherent in man. Living
alone bothers us. The worst form of punishment for man is to imprison
him in an individual cell. Man has two kinds of responsibilities - that
is individual and social responsibility. The Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ رَهِينَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Every soul will be (held) in pledge for its deeds.” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Muddath’thir 74:38]***

We also read the following verse in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ حَسَنَةٍ فَمِنَ اللّهِ وَمَا أَصَابَكَ مِن
سَيِّئَةٍ فَمِن نَّفْسِكَ وَأَرْسَلْنَاكَ لِلنَّاسِ رَسُولاً وَكَفَى
بِاللّهِ شَهِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whatever good, (O man!) happens to thee is from God; but whatever
evil happens to thee, is from thy (own) soul. And We have sent thee as
an Apostle to (instruct) mankind. And enough is God for a witness.” [The
Holy Qur’an, al-Nisaa 4:79]***

When we consider social responsibility, it is not the individual that is
important. The society is important, and we must consider what social
responsibility individuals have. The Noble Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّكُمْ رَاعٍ وَكُلُّكُمْ مَسْؤُولٌ عَنْ رَعِيَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Each one of you is a ruler, and each one of you is responsible for his
subjects.”*

One of the most important effects of praying is that it will foster the
sense of social responsibility. That is why there is a distinction made
in Islam between praying individually and attending congregational
prayers. The reward for these two is different. Attending congregational
prayers is highly recommended in Islam. Islam has decreed a
socio-religious Friday prayer that is held each week, where all the
Muslims stand to pray side by side.

The prayer leader delivers his sermons and expresses the social problems
of the day for all the people to know. Then they can think of solutions.
When all the Muslims stand side by side, their majesty is demonstrated.
This will prevent their enemies from plotting against them. Then the
Muslims can form an independent nation, rely on themselves and benefit
from their power and honor. It is recommendable for the lines of the
people attending the congregational prayers to be densely formed and
orderly.

It is even more important to note that everyone stands there side by
side regardless of his position, wealth, race or nationality, and shakes
hands with those around him after the prayers. Thus, the true spirit of
social equality is fostered, and class differences that always hinder
freedom-loving people are eliminated.

Love and sincerity are substituted for hate and animosity. Attending the
congregational prayers also helps the people become aware of each
other’s conditions. Should one not attend the prayers one week, others
will miss him, and ask what has happened to him. They will then do their
best to help resolve his problems. Generally, the prayer unites the
whole nation of Islam and establishes an independent society.

The Moral Effects of Praying
----------------------------

Man cannot approach God unless he eliminates his wicked traits and
characteristics and prepares himself for the development of noble
characteristics. The Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَن تَزَكَّى وَذَكَرَ اسْمَ رَبِّهِ فَصَلَّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But those will prosper who purify themselves and glorify the name of
their Guardian-Lord, and (lift their hearts) in prayer.” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-A’la 87:14-15]***

Praying is the means of morally purifying oneself. Continued praying
will help educate us in a good moral way, and restrains us from shameful
deeds. We read in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الصَّلَاةَ تَنْهَى عَنِ الْفَحْشَاء وَالْمُنكَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…For Prayer restrains from shameful and unjust deeds…” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Ankabut 29:45]***

Praying will uproot wickedness from man, and plant nobilities instead.
The following verses stress this very point:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْإِنسَانَ خُلِقَ هَلُوعًا إذا مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ جَزُوعاً و إذا
مَسَّهُ الخَيْرِ مَنُوعاً الّامُصَلِين الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَلَى
صَلَاتِهِمْ دَائِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Truly man was created very impatient - fretful when evil touches
him, and niggardly when good reaches him. Not so those devoted to
Prayer - those who remain steadfast to their prayer.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Ma’arij 70:19-23]***

These verses clearly demonstrate the effect of praying in the
elimination of impatience, fretfulness and niggardliness from our souls.
Those who are devoted to praying can rid themselves of these negative
traits. It is narrated in Jami’ as-Sadat by Naraghi that Imam Ali was
questioned about the meaning of prostrations in the prayer.

He replied: “The first prostration means: O’ God! You created us from
the dirt. When we raise our head it means: And You brought us out of the
dirt. The second prostration means: You will return us to the dirt. And
when we again raise our heads it means: And You will bring us out of the
dirt again.”[^15] It is obvious that if one really considers these
points, he would try to improve himself.

Praying and the Obstacles to Perfection
---------------------------------------

Sheikh Mahmood Shabastari has beautifully expressed the obstacles to the
acceptance of our prayers by God in a poetic fashion. To make it short,
he states the following four conditions:

1) Cleansing one’s self from physical filth.

2) Purification of one’s self from sins.

3) Freeing one’s self from wicked characteristics.

4) Total elimination of other than God in our inner thoughts.

Once one attains these four conditions, he can hope for his prayers to
be accepted.  
 Now that we have briefly expressed the importance of praying, its
philosophy, and its personal, social and moral effects, let us consider
how Imam Sajjad practically taught his followers about the importance of
praying. There were even times when his close relatives felt sorry for
him due to his extended prayers.

It is recorded in Bihar ul-Anwar by Allameh Majlesi that once Fatima,
the daughter of Imam Husayn went to see Jabir ibn Abdullah and said: “O
Companion of God’s Prophet! We have rights incumbent upon you. One of
these rights is that if you see one of us endangering his life due to
worshipping too much you must remind him and ask him to guard himself. O
Jabir! Ali ibn Al-Husayn[^16] has prayed so much that his forehead’s
skin has hardened, his feet have swollen and his body has lost all the
flesh on it. Please ask him to save himself.”

Jabir went to see the Imam and asked permission to enter. When he
entered, he saw that the Imam was sitting in his praying niche. The Imam
stood up and had Jabir sit next to himself, and asked Jabir about his
health. Jabir said: “Is it not true that God has created Heaven for you
and Hell for your enemies? Then why do you pray so much?”

The Imam replied: “O Companion of God’s Prophet! Do you know that God
forgave all of the past and future sins of the Prophet, but he still did
not stop worshipping? He worshipped so much that his blessed feet became
swollen. When told that his past and future sins were forgiven he
replied: Should I not be grateful for that?”

Then Jabir realized that his question did not have any effect on the
state of affairs. He said: “You are from among the people through whom
God fends off the calamities and protects the heavens and the Earth.”
Then Imam Sajjad said: “I will follow in my father’s and my
grandfather’s footsteps until I meet them.” Jabir said: “I have not seen
anyone like Ali ibn al-Husayn among the descendants of the Prophets.”
[^17]

Tavoos Faqih said: “I saw Imam Sajjad circumambulating the House of God
and worshipping God from after the night prayer until dawn. When he
looked around and saw that there were few people left who were
circumambulating, he looked up to the heavens and said: “O Lord! The
stars remaining are few, and are about to set. The eyes have been closed
to sleep. However, the gates of your Mercy to those who ask are still
open. O Lord! I have come to the door of your House to encompass me with
your Mercy, to forgive me, and to show me the face of my grandfather
Muhammad in the Hereafter.”

Then the Imam cried and said: “I swear by your Majesty and Honor! I do
not intend to oppose you by sinning. I am not ignorant of You and your
chastisement when sinning. I do not want to expose myself to your
chastisement. However, my Self wants to fool me, and your veil of Mercy
helps it. O Lord! Who will save me from your chastisement? O Lord! What
shall I hold on to if you cut off your rope of saving from me?

Woe to me! I will be brought to your threshold in the Hereafter. Those
whose load is light shall be told to go. Moreover, those whose load is
heavy shall be told to stay. I do not know whether I will be from among
those whose load is light and are told to go. Or will my heavy load
force me to stay there? O Lord! The older I get, the more my mistakes
become. Now it is time for me to repent. O My Ultimate desire! Will you
burn me in the Fire? Where then is my hope? What will then happen to my
friendship? I have come to You with my wicked deeds. There is no one
else with crimes like those of mine.”

Then he cried and prostrated on the ground. He felt good. I went to him
and cried. My tears dropped on his face. Then he suddenly said: “Who has
prevented me from the remembrance of my Lord?” Then I replied: “O
Grandson of the Prophet! That is I. I am Tavoos. Why are you doing this?
Why do you cry and moan so much? We feel obliged to follow you. O Sir!
Your father was such a noble man. Your mother was the Blessed Fatima .
Your grandfather was God’s Prophet .” Then Imam Sajjad said: “O Tavoos!
Forget about the father, the mother or the grandfather. God has created
the Heaven for those who obey Him whether they are a servant or a
Tunisian slave. God has created Hell for those who commit sins - even if
they are masters from the Quraysh tribe. Have you not heard God say?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَلَا أَنسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلَا
يَتَسَاءلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then when the Trumpet is blown, there will be no more relationships
between them that Day, nor will one ask after another!” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Mu’minun 23:101]***[^18]

Praying and the Forgiveness of Sins
-----------------------------------

At the end Imam Sajjad said: “…and by saying the best supplications to
Him by yourself and beseeching Him to save you from the responsibilities
which rest on your shoulders - surrounded by your faults and exhausted
by your sins.” You should ask God to save you and forgive your sins that
have overtaken you and will finally destroy you. We said earlier that
praying is effective in restraining us from committing sins and wicked
deeds. Now let us see how the Prophet of God represents praying as a
means of forgiveness of our sins. Abi Basir quoted on the authority of
Imam Baqir , on the authority of God’s Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَو كَانَ عَلى بَابِ دَارِ أَحَدِكُم نَهَرٌ وَاغْتَسَلَ في كُلِّ
يَوْمٍ مِنهُ خَمْسَ مَرَّاتٍ أكانَ يَبْقى في جَسَدِه مِن الدَّرَنِ
شَيءٌ؟ (قلت: لا. قال) فإنَّ مَثَلَ الصَّلاةِ كَمَثَلِ النَّهَرِ
الجارِي؛ كُلَّما صَلّى صَلاةً كَفَّرَتْ ما بَيْنَهُما مِن الذُّنُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If there was a flowing river right beside your house in which you
washed yourself five times each day, would any dirt remain on your
bodies?” He was told: “No.” Then he added: “Praying* *is similar to this
river. Whenever you pray the sins you committed between the last time
you prayed and this time will all be washed off.”*[^19]

If the person who prays fulfills all the required conditions, he will
then surely be forgiven and saved from punishment as the Prophet said.
The Commander of the Faithful also said the following that is recorded
in *Nahjul Balaghah*:  
 He advised his companions as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعَاهَدوا أَمْرَ الصَّلاةِ وَحَافِظوا عَلَيْها وَاسْتَكْثِروا مِنْها
وَتَقَرَّبوا بِها فَإنَّها كَانَتْ عَلى المُؤمِنِينَ كِتاباً
مَوقُوتاً. ألا تَسْمَعُونَ إلى جَوابِ أهْلِ النَّارِ حِينَ سُئِلوا:
مَا سَلَكَكُمْ في سَقَرٍ؟ قَالُوا لَمْ نَكُ مِنَ المُصَلِّينَ.
وَإنهَّا لَتَحُطُّ الذُّنُوبَ حَطَّ الوَرَقِ وَتُطْلِقُهَا إطْلاقَ
الرَّبْقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Adhere to praying and guard it. Pray a lot and seek nearness to God
through it, for prayer* ***“..is indeed a timed prescription for the
believers”(4:103).*** *Have you not heard the answer of the residents of
Hell when they are asked:* ***“’What drew you into Hell’? They will
answer, ‘We*** ***were not of those who prayed’”(74:42-43).*** *Indeed,
prayer sheds sins just as trees shed their leaves, and it sets loose (a
person’s) sins just as bonds are let loose.”*

[^1]: And fix your eyes looking down to the ground. In the other version
it is followed by: “You will approach the praye with humbleness, deep
from your heart and you will perform it according to its bounds and its
rights”. Then it continues.

[^2]: Being humble.

[^3]: Majma’ al-Bayan, v.5, p.201.

[^4]: Tafsir Namuneh, v.4, pp.104-105.

[^5]: Kimiyaye Sa’adat, v.1, pp.165-166.

[^6]: Ilm-i-Akhlaq-i-Islami, v.3, p.403.

[^7]: Al-Haqa’iq, p.223.

[^8]: Al-Shahid al-Awwal, Faqih al-Sarbidaran.

[^9]: Translation and Commentary on Risalat al-Huquq, Sepihri, p.92,
quoted from Asrar al-Salat, pp.176-177.

[^10]: Sharh Risalat al-Huquq, Ghopanchi, v.1, p.292.

[^11]: Adab-i-Namaz, p.350.

[^12]: Being eternal.

[^13]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Fayz al-Islam, Sermon no.104.

[^14]: Tafsir-i-Namunah, v.14, pp.204-205.

[^15]: Ilm-i-Akhlaq-i-Islami, v.3, p.442.

[^16]: Imam Sajjad .

[^17]: Sharh-i-Risalat al-Huquq, Ghopanchi, v.1, p.305.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, v.46, pp.81-82.

[^19]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.3, p.7, Tradition no.3.


