Right n. 11: The Right of Fasting
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الصوم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا حَقُّ الصَّوْمِ فَأَنْ تَعْلَمَ أَنَّهُ حِجابٌ ضَرَبَهُ اللهُ
عَلَى لِسَانِكَ وَسمْعِكَ وبَصَرِكَ وَفَرْجِكَ وبَطْنِكَ لِيَسْتر'َكَ
بهِ مِن النَّارِ وَهَكَذَا جَاءَ فِي الْحَديثِ «الصَّوْمُ جُنَّةٌ مِنَ
النّارِ» فإنْ سكَنَتْ أَطْرَافُكَ فِي حَجَبَتِهَا رَجَوْتَ أَنْ
تَكُونَ مَحْجُوبًا. وَإنْ أَنْتَ تَرَكْتَهَا تَضْطَرِبُ فِي حِجَابهَا
وتَرْفَعُ جَنَبَاتِ الْحِجَاب فَتُطّلِعُ إلَى مَا لَيْسَ لَهَا
بالنَّظْرَةِ الدَّاعِيةِ لِلشَّهْوَةِ وَالقُوَّةِ الْخَارِجَةِ عَنْ
حَدِّ التَّقِيَّةِ للهِ لَمْ تَأمَنْ أَنْ تَخرِقَ الْحِجَابَ وَتَخرُجَ
مِنْهُ. وَلا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of fasting is that you should know it is a veil, which
God has set up over your tongue, your hearing and your sight, your
private parts and your stomach, to protect you from the Fire. This
meaning is asserted in the tradition: “Fasting is a shield against the
Fire.” Thus if your parts become tranquil within the veil of fasting,
you have hopes of being protected.**[^1] **But if you leave them
agitated behind the veil and let them lift the sides of the veil, so
they look at things that are not lawful for them to look at that incite
lust and powers that are beyond the limits of being God-fearing, you
will not be safe from tearing through the veil and coming out of it. And
there is no power but in God.**

The Philosophy behind Fasting
-----------------------------

Since sins are usually committed via the tongue, the eyes, the ears, the
stomach or the unleashing of sexual desires, Imam Sajjad considers the
philosophy behind fasting to be restraining oneself from committing
sins. The Imam considers fasting to provide a veil over our body parts
that will prevent them from engaging in sin. The Qur’an expresses the
same philosophy behind fasting in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الصِّيَامُ كَمَا
كُتِبَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O’ ye who believe! Fasting is prescribed to you as it was prescribed
to those before you, that ye may (learn) self-restraint.” [The Holy
Qur’an, al--Baqarah 2:183]***

We see that self-restraint has been stated to be the main reason behind
fasting. Fasting implies self-restraint. It has also been used for
abstaining from talking as we read in the following verse in which the
Blessed Mary has been ordered not to talk in the form of a fast:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُلِي وَاشْرَبِي وَقَرِّي عَيْنًا فَإِمَّا تَرَيِنَّ مِنَ الْبَشَرِ
أَحَدًا فَقُولِي إِنِّي نَذَرْتُ لِلرَّحْمَنِ صَوْمًا فَلَنْ أُكَلِّمَ
الْيَوْمَ إِنسِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"So eat and drink and cool (thine) eye. And if thou dost see any man,
say, 'I have vowed a fast to (God) Most Gracious, and this day will I
enter into no talk with any human being'" [The Holy Qur’an, Maryam
19:26]***

Fasting before Islam
--------------------

From the verse Baqarah 2:183 that was cited above we can also conclude
that fasting is not limited to Muslims and it has been prescribed for
those before us. It is most probable that the similarity is only in its
prescription for the religions that came before Islam, not in its number
of days or time of fasting.

Fasting in the Old Testament
----------------------------

We read the following in the Old Testament regarding fasting:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَانَ هُنَاكَ عِنْدَ الر َّبِّ أَرْبَعِينَ نَهَاراً وَأَرْبَعِينَ
لَيْلَةً لَمْ يَأْكُلْ خُبْزاً وَلَمْ يَشْرَبْ مَاءً. فَكَتَبَ عَلَى
اللَّوْحَيْنِ كَلِمَاتِ الْعَهْدِ الْكَلِمَاتِ الْعَشَرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights; he did
neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tablets the
words of the covenant, the Ten Commandments.”[^2] [The Old Testament,
Exodus 34:28]

Fasting in the New Testament
----------------------------

We read the following in the New Testament regarding fasting:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أُصْعِدَ يَسُوعُ إِلَى الْبَرِّيَّةِ مِنَ الرُّوحِ لِيُجَرَّبَ
مِنْ إِبْلِيسَ. فَبَعْدَ مَا صَامَ أَرْبَعِينَ نَهَاراً وَأَرْبَعِينَ
لَيْلَةً جَاعَ أَخِيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the desert to be tempted by the
devil. After fasting forty days and forty nights, he was hungry.” [The
New Testament, Matthew 4:1-2]

Fasting of the Disciples
------------------------

We read the following in the New Testament regarding fasting by the
disciples:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لَهُ: «لِمَاذَا يَصُومُ تَلاَمِيذُ يُوحَنَّا كَثِيراً
وَيُقَدِّمُونَ طِلْبَاتٍ وَكَذَلِكَ تَلاَمِيذُ الْفَرِّيسِيِّينَ
أَيْضاً وَأَمَّا تَلاَمِيذُكَ فَيَأْكُلُونَ وَيَشْرَبُونَ؟» فَقَالَ
لَهُمْ: «أَتَقْدِرُونَ أَنْ تَجْعَلُوا بَنِي الْعُرْسِ يَصُومُونَ مَا
دَامَ الْعَرِيسُ مَعَهُمْ؟ وَلَكِنْ سَتَأْتِي أَيَّامٌ حِينَ يُرْفَعُ
الْعَرِيسُ عَنْهُمْ فَحِينَئِذٍ يَصُومُونَ فِي تِلْكَ الأَيَّامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast often, and
make prayers, and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees; but thine eat
and drink? And he said unto them, Can ye make the children of the
bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? But the days will
come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall
they fast in those days.” [^3] [Luke, 5:33-35]

From the above we can conclude that they fasted too. The number forty is
also expressed, but it is not clear how they fasted.[^4]

The Period of Fasting in the Qur’an
-----------------------------------

Consider the following verse of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيَّامًا مَّعْدُودَاتٍ فَمَن كَانَ مِنكُم مَّرِيضًا أَوْ عَلَى سَفَرٍ
فَعِدَّةٌ مِّنْ أَيَّامٍ أُخَرَ وَعَلَى الَّذِينَ يُطِيقُونَهُ
فِدْيَةٌ طَعَامُ مِسْكِينٍ فَمَن تَطَوَّعَ خَيْرًا فَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّهُ
وَأَن تَصُومُواْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(Fasting) for a fixed number of days; but if any of you is ill, or
on a journey, the prescribed number (should be made up) from days later.
For those who can do it (with hardship), is a ransom, the feeding of one
that is indigent. But he that will give more, of his own free will, - it
is better for him. And it is better for you that ye fast, if ye only
knew.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:184]***

There are two opinions regarding the meaning of “a fixed number of
days.” Some consider it to mean three days from each month. Ibn \`Abbas
adds the fasting on the day of Ashura[^5] to it. Some consider this
fasting to be recommended. Others consider it to be obligatory.

Other commentators have interpreted this to refer to the month of
Ramadan.[^6] The majority of the interpreters of the Holy Qur’an accept
this view. They say that God briefly expresses fasting to be for one or
two days, and then says it is for a fixed number of days, that is the
month of Ramadan. We can also understand from this verse that fasting is
obligatory for those who are not ill or on a journey. When ill or on a
journey, one should not fast. However, one should compensate by feeding
the poor. Abdul Rahman quoted on the authority of God’s Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصّائِمُ في السَّفَرِ كَالمُفْطِرِ في الحَضَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One who fasts while on a journey is like one who breaks his fast while
he is at home.”*[^7]

It has been narrated on the authority of Imam Sadiq :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصّائِمُ في شَهْرِ رَمَضانَ في السَّفَرِ كَالمُفْطِرِ فِيهِ في
الحَضَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One who fasts during the month of Ramadan while he is on a journey is
like one who is at home and breaks his fast.”*[^8]

In the interpretation of the above verse, we read in Majma’ al-Bayan:
Ayashi quoted Muhammad ibn Muslim on the authority of Imam Sadiq that
the Prophet never fasted while on a journey. Then this verse was
revealed one day at noon when they were in a place called Kara
ul-Ghameem. The Prophet asked for a bowl of water, drank some, and
ordered the people to drink too. Some of the people said: “It is near
the end of the day. It is better to complete our fast.” Then the Prophet
called them sinners. They were called sinners until the time of the
death of the Prophet .

The Meaning of the Word ‘Ramadan’
---------------------------------

The root of the word ‘Ramadan’ in Arabic is ‘ramaz’ that implies strong
shining of the rays of the Sun on pebbles. The Arabs named the various
months according to the conditions at the time in which they occurred.
The month of fasting was coincident with the peak of the heat. Another
account states that Ramadan is one of the Names of God. That is why we
are instructed not to refer to the month of fasting as ‘Ramadan’ but
‘the month of Ramadan.” In yet a third account, the month of fasting is
called Ramadan because it burns away the sins.

Fasting and Patience
--------------------

The Qur’an has interpreted fasting as patience. There is a tradition in
which Imam Sadiq has been quoted to have said the following in the
interpretation of the Almighty God’s statement “Seek help from patience
and prayer”: What is meant by patience is fasting. When something really
hard descends upon man, he should fast since God the Almighty says “seek
help from patience” - that is fasting.”[^9] The late Majlisi has said
the following in Mir’atul Uqool: The main part of fasting is
imprisonment. Fasting is called patience because it imprisons one and
restrains him from eating, drinking and love-making.” [^10]

Traditions on the Nobility of Fasting and Its Effects
-----------------------------------------------------

We can get a better understanding of the nobility of fasting and its
importance by reviewing some of the relevant traditions. Zurarah quoted
on the authority of Imam Baqir :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بُنِيَ الإسْلامُ عَلى خَمْسَةِ أشْياءٍ: عَلى الصَّلاةِ وَالزَّكَاةِ
وَالحَجِّ وَالصَّوْمِ والوِلايَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There are five pillars for Islam: praying, paying the alms-tax, the
holy pilgrimage, fasting and the friendship (of the Commander of the
Faithful and the leaders that came after him).”*[^11]

Majlisi said: These may be contemporary things since Islam is shaky
without them. Believing in these is a part of Islam. It is also probable
that what is meant by friendship is love of the Imams in addition to a
belief in them. Isma’il ibn Abi Ziyad quoted on the authority of Imam
Sadiq on the authority of his grandfathers that the Prophet told his
companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا أُخْبرُكُم بِشَيءٍ إنْ أنتُمْ فَعَلْتُمُوه تَباعَدَ الشَّيْطانُ
عَنكُم كَما تَباعَدَ المَشْرِقُ مِن المَغْرِبِ؟ قالوا: بَلى. قالَ:
الصَّوْمُ يُسَوِّدُ وَجْهَهُ وَالصَّدَقَةُ تَكْسِرُ ظَهْرَهُ وَالحُبُّ
في اللهِ وَالمُؤازَرَةُ عَلى العَمَلِ الصَّالِحِ تَقْطَعُ دَابِرَهُ
وَالاسْتِغْفارُ يَقْطَعُ وَتِينَهُ، وَلِكُلِّ شَيءٍ زَكاةٌ وَزَكاةُ
الأبْدانِ الصِّيَامُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do you want me to tell you what you can do that will cause Satan to go
as far away from you as the East is from the West?” They said: “O
Prophet of God! Yes.” He said: “Fasting blackens Satan’s face. Giving
charity breaks his back, love for the sake of God and helping in doing
good deeds roots him out, and repentance cuts off his aorta. There is an
alms tax for everything, and the alms of the body is fasting.”*[^12]

The late Majlisi considers this a reliable tradition. Ibn Abi Amir
quoted on the authority of some of the companions, on the authority of
Imam Sadiq : Almighty God revealed to Moses : What has prevented you
from supplicating to Me? He said: The bad smell of my mouth since I am
fasting. God the Almighty revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا مُوسَى! لخَلُوفُ فَمِ الصَّائِمِ أطْيَبُ عِنْدي مِن ريحِ المِسْكِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Moses! The odour of the mouth of one who is fasting is more agreeable
to Me than the fragrance of musk.”*[^13]

In another tradition, we read that the Prophet of God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّوْمُ جُنَّةٌ مِن النّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Fasting is a shield against the Fire.”*[^14]

Fasting and the Forgiveness of Sins
-----------------------------------

Imam Baqir said: God’s Prophet told Jabir ibn Abdullah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا جَابِرُ! هَذا شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ؛ مَن صَامَ نَهارَهُ وَقَامَ وِرْداً
مِن لَيْلِه وَعَفَّ بَطْنَهُ وَفَرْجَهُ وَكَفَّ لِسانَهُ خَرَجَ مِن
ذُنُوبِه كَخُروجِهِ مِن الشَّهْرِ. فَقالَ جابِرُ: يا رَسُولَ الله! مَا
أحْسَنَ هَذا الحَدِيثَ. فَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلّى اللهُ علَيه وآلِه:
يا جَابِرُ! ومَا أَشَدَّ هَذِه الشُّرُوطَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Jabir! This is the month of Ramadan. Whoever fasts during its days,
stands in prayer in its nights, keeps his stomach and his private parts
away from what is unlawful, and restrains his tongue shall leave all his
sins behind as he leaves this month.” Jabir said: “O Prophet of God! How
beautiful are these words.” The Prophet said: “O Jabir! And how
difficult are these conditions.”*[^15]

Imam Sajjad also mentioned these. In another tradition from the Prophet
the condition for fasting to be considered as worship is stated to be
not gossiping.”[^16]

Fasting and the Equality between the Rich and the Poor
------------------------------------------------------

It is quoted upon the authority of Imam Sadiq :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّما فَرَضَ اللهُ الصِّيامَ لِيَسْتَوِيَ بهِ الغَنِيُّ وَالفَقِيرُ،
وذَلِكَ أنَّ الغَنيَّ لم يَكُن لِيَجِدَ مَسَّ الجُوعِ فَيَرحَمُ
الفَقِيرَ لأنَّ الغَنيَّ كُلَّما أرادَ شَيئاً قَدَرَ عَلَيهِ، فأرَادَ
اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أنْ يُسَوِّيَ بَينَ خَلْقِهِ وَأنْ يُذِيقَ
الغَنيَّ نَيْلَ الجُوعِ والألَمِ لِيَرِقَّ عَلى الضَّعيفِ وَيَرْحَمَ
الجائِعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God made fasting obligatory so that the rich and the poor are made
equal. If there were no fasting, the rich would never experience the
feeling of hunger that would make them have mercy on the poor, for
whenever the rich desire something they are able to acquire it. Thus God
desired to place His servants on the same level, and that the rich
experience hunger and pain so that they have compassion for the weak and
have mercy on the hungry.”* [^17]

We see in this tradition that one of the philosophies behind fasting in
the month of Ramadan is to reduce the gap between the rich and the poor
people. Wealth has always divided human societies into two classes - the
rich and the poor. The rich who possess means of comfort and convenience
can never realize the hardships and pains suffered by the poor and
experience what they go through. When one fasts, he gets hungry and
thirsty. His human emotions get aroused and he starts to think of ways
to help those who are hungry. It is interesting to note that according
to Islamic jurisprudence no rich man can pay a poor man to fast instead
of him. This clearly shows the purpose behind fasting.

Fasting as Viewed by Imam Ali
-----------------------------

There are several views about fasting expressed by Imam Ali that are
recorded in *Nahjul Balaghah*. For example, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَزَكاةُ البَدَنِ الصّيامُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The alms tax of the body is fasting.”*[^18]

We know that taxing implies growth, development and purification. Here
the Imam has referred to the health-related aspect of fasting. In
another place he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَصَومُ شَهْرِ رَمَضانَ فإنَّهُ جُنَّةٌ مِن العِقابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Fasting in the month of Ramadan is a shield against the
chastisement.”*[^19]

In another place he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُمصُ البُطونِ مِن الصِّيامِ ذُبْلُ الشِّفاهِ مِن الدُّعاءِ صُفْرُ
الألْوانِ مِن السَّهَرِ عَلى وُجوهِهِم غَبَرَةُ الخاشِعين، أولئِكَ
إخْوانيَ الذّاهِبونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“They were those whose stomachs were slim due to fasting, their lips
were dry from (continuous) supplications, their faces were pale from
staying up at night, and their faces were covered with the dust of
humbleness. They were my brothers who are gone now.”*[^20]

In another of Imam Ali’s wise sayings we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصِّيامُ ابْتِلاءٌ لإخْلاصِ الخَلقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Fasting is a trial of people’s sincerity.”*[^21]

In another of Imam Ali’s wise sayings we read that on the day of
celebration, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّما هوَ عِيدٌ لمَنْ قَبِلَ اللهُ صِيامَهُ وَشَكَرَ قِيامَهُ، وكُلُّ
يَومٍ لا يُعصَى اللهُ فيهِ فَهوَ عِيدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is only a day of celebration (Eid) for those whose fasting God
accepts and whose standing up in prayer (at night) He rewards. Every day
in which one does not disobey God is a day of celebration.”*[^22]

In some of his advice he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أوصيكم وجميع ولدي... وصلاح ذات البين
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I advise you and my children…. to improve your social affairs, since
its reward is more than that of praying and fasting.”*[^23]

Fasting Without Any Gains
-------------------------

Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَم مِن صَائِمٍ ليسَ لهُ مِن صِيامِهِ إلاّ الجُوعُ وَالظَّمَأ، وَكَم
مِن قائِمٍ لَيسَ له إلاّ السَّهَرُ وَالعَناءُ. حَبَّذا نَومُ الأكْياسِ
وإفْطارُهُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There are many who fast and gain nothing from their fasting other than
suffering from thirst and hunger. Many stay up at night in prayer and
gain nothing but sleeplessness and fatigue. How beautiful is the
sleeping of the wise, and the breaking of their fasts!”*[^24]

In the well-known sermon called Qasi’ah, Imam Ali discussed the bad
ending of being entrapped by Satan’s plots, and pointed out factors that
can save man.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و عن ذلكَ ما حَرَسَ اللهُ عِبادَهُ المؤمِنين بِالصَّلاةِ و الزَّكَواتِ
و مُجاهَدَةِ الصِّيامِ في الأيَّامِ المَفْروضَاتِ تَسْكيناً
لأطْرافِهِم وَتَخْشِيعاً لأبْصارِهِم وَتَذليلاً لِنُفوسِهِم
وَتَخْفِيضاً لِقُلوبِهِم وإذْهاباً لِلخُيَلاءِ عَنهُم وَلِما في ذلِكَ
مِن تَعفِير عِتاقِ الوُجوهِ تَواضُعاً وَالتِصاقِ كَرائِمِ الجَوارِحِ
بالأرْضِ تَصاغُراً وَلحُوقِ البُطونِ بِالمُتونِ مِن الصِّيامِ
تَذَلُّلاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God protects his believing servants from that* *(Satan’s plots)
through* *praying, paying the alms-tax, striving to fast during the days
that fasting is prescribed since these acts will give tranquility to
their limbs and hinder them from engaging in sin. They will cause
humbleness of the eyes and control of the wild self. They will cause
humbleness of the heart and eliminate undue pride and haughtiness. That
will be due to tender cheeks being rubbed in the dust out of humility,
the most precious limbs cleaving to the earth in abjectness and stomachs
adhering to their backs because of fasting in abasement (before
God).”*[^25]

It is said that once an Arab who was riding a camel in the desert ran
into a man who was praying. His praying fooled the Arab. He got off his
camel, sat down next to him and said: “How well do you pray!” The man
said: “You do not know. I am also fasting.” The man’s praying and
fasting fooled the Arab, and he entrusted his camel to him. When he
returned he saw neither the man nor his camel. He felt sorry and
realized that he should not have been fooled by the man’s praying and
fasting, and should not have entrusted his camel to him.[^26]

Now that we have studied the various effects of fasting as expressed by
Imam Ali let us see what the master of the jurisprudents, Sheikh
Muhammad Hasan who is the author of Jawahir ul-Kalam, has said about the
positive effects of fasting in the chapter on fasting. He said: “It has
been narrated that God the Almighty said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّومُ لي وأنَا أُجازِي بِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Fasting is for Me, and I will reward it (even though I Myself am the
reward for fasting).*

He added: “The reason it is said that fasting is for God is that it is a
private issue which only God knows about. This is opposed to praying
that is visible by the people. It is also because through fasting, our
physical strength reduces while our intellect and the various faculties
are strengthened. Thus we can attain the more precise divine points,
heavenly knowledge and the desirable perfections.”[^27]

The Effects of Fasting as Viewed by Ghazali
-------------------------------------------

Abu Hamed said: “Fasting is for the sake of God and has an especial
nobility. Although all forms of worship are this way, there are two
points specific about fasting. They are as follows:

1 Fasting is a form of abstaining that is private. It is a secret that
others do not see unlike other forms of worship that are seen in public.
No one but God knows about fasting, since it is a personal action done
with patience.

2 Fasting is a form of self-restraint that is the greatest blow to God’s
enemy. This is because lust is the tool of Satan. Eating and drinking
strengthen lust. That is why God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الشَّيطانَ لَيَجرِي مِن ابْنِ آدَمَ مَجرَى الدَّمِ فَضَيِّقُوا
مَجارِيهِ بِالجُوعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Satan flows through man’s body just like blood. Block off the roaming
grounds of Satan via hunger.”*[^28]

Hunger derived through fasting breaks down Satan and acts as a
stronghold against him. Whoever defeats Satan has assisted God. This
assistance is related to granting success by God since God has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِن تَنصُرُوا اللَّهَ يَنصُرْكُمْ
وَيُثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O ye who believe! If ye will aid (the cause of) God, He will aid
you, and plant your feet firmly.” [The Holy Qur’an, Muhammad 47:7]***  
 God also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا فِينَا لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا وَإِنَّ
اللَّهَ لَمَعَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who strive in Our (cause), We will certainly guide them to
our Paths: For verily God is with those who do right.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Ankabut 29:69]***

In another verse God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يُغَيِّرُ مَا بِقَوْمٍ حَتَّى يُغَيِّرُواْ مَا
بِأَنْفُسِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily never will God change the condition of a people until they
change it themselves (with their own souls).” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Ra’d
13:11]***

The change mentioned in this verse is the elimination of lusts, since
lusts are the means by which Satan influences man. We cannot discover
the Grandeur of God as long as Satan influences us through our lusts.
God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَو لا أنَّ الشَّياطِينَ يَحومونَ عَلى قُلوبِ بَني آدَمَ لَنَظَروا إلى
مَلَكُوتِ السَّماءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If Satans were not hovering around the hearts of the descendants of
Adam, men could look at the kingdom of the heavens.”*[^29]

Fasting and Health
------------------

One of the philosophies behind fasting is health. Before considering the
positive effects of fasting on our health, let us see through what ways
illnesses affect our health. God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَعِدَةُ بَيتُ كُلِّ داءٍ وَالحِمْيَةُ رَأسَ كُلِّ دَواءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The stomach is the home of every illness, and abstinence (from food)
is the chief of all medicine.”*[^30]

Imam Kazim said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحِمْيَةُ رَأسُ كُلِّ دَواءٍ والمَعِدَةُ بَيتُ الأدْواء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“**Abstinence is the chief of every remedy and the stomach is the
home of illnesses.”*[^31]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيسَ مِن دَواءٍ إلاّ وَيُهَيِّجُ داءً وَليَس َفي البَدَنِ أنْفَعُ مِن
إمْساكِ اليَد الا عَمّا يَحتاجُ إلَيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no medicine that does not stir up an illness, and nothing is
more beneficial for the body than withholding from it all except what it
requires.”*[^32]

God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صُوموا تَصِحُّوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Fast, and you will be healthy"**.”***[^33]

We read in these traditions from the Prophet of God and the seventh Imam
who have divine knowledge that the stomach is the home of all illnesses
and we can get healthy by abstaining from eating. Al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah
narrated that he heard the Commander of the Faithful advise his son Imam
Hasan as follows: “O’ my son! Do you want me to teach you a practice
that will make you needless of doctors?” Imam Hasan said: “Yes.” The
Commander of the Faithful said that the Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَجلِسْ عَلى الطَّعامِ إلاّ وأنْتَ جائِعٌ، وَلا تَقُمْ عَن الطّعامِ
إلاّ وَأنْتَ تَشْتَهِيهِ، وَجَوّدِ المَضْغَ، وإذا نِمْتَ فَأعْرِضْ
نَفسَكَ عَلى الخَلاءِ، فإذا اسْتَعْمَلْتَ هذا اسْتَغْنَيْتَ عَن
الطِّبِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not sit down to eat unless you are hungry. Cease eating while you
still have some appetite to eat. Chew your food thoroughly. Go to the
toilet before you sleep. If you adhere to these you will not need
medical treatment.”* [^34]

This tradition also shows that overeating is the root of all illnesses.

Unorderly Food Intake and Orderly Excretions
--------------------------------------------

The skin, the liver, the kidneys and the lungs are all orderly body
parts. Our kidneys even know that we should not be awakened at night in
order to urinate. The kidneys reduce their secretions to lower the
production of urine depending on the stage of our sleep and the darkness
of the room. The skin, the lungs and the liver are similar.

However, our intake is so unorderly that even sometimes instead of
taking in good and useful things we let in smoke, dust and alcohol. This
will pressurize our metabolism beyond its ultimate strength and finally
make us ill. The body is like a reservoir of what we eat and drink. Many
organs are constantly at work trying to excrete the poisonous material
in our body. They need a chance to catch up with our unorderly intake.
Fasting is the perfect means to give our body a chance to get rid of the
poisons within it.[^35]

The Glands
----------

Consider the following points regarding the glands:

1) The functions of the glands are interrelated. If one reduces to
secrete some hormone, then the functioning of the other glands will be
messed up.

2) The hypothalamus is one of the most important glands whose
functioning is highly related to the functioning of the suprarenal
glands.[^36]

3) The hormones produced by the adrenal (suprarenal) glands[^37] are
very important. They can affect all the cells of our body. Any
overeating or eating bad things can have bad effects on the functioning
of the hypothalamus.

4) It has been proven that the pancreas[^38] and the adrenal glands have
an important role on longevity.

5) A close relationship between the functioning of the pancreas gland
and the adrenal glands has been proven.

6) It has been proven that as we age there is a reduction in the
production of the hormones secreted by the pancreas,[^39] but aging does
not affect the hormones secreted by the adrenal glands.

7) Vladimir Nikitin who is a professor of biochemistry experimented on
rats for many years. He proved that by keeping them hungry through
especial means he could extend their life expectancy from 2.5 years to
4.5 years. He believes that when the adrenal glands are kept hungry,
they themselves eat up their excess hormones that cause an imbalance.
Thus fasting can re-establish our hormonal balance for a while if for
some reason our hormones are out of balance.[^40]

Studies on Metabolism
---------------------

It is thought that whatever we eat is burnt to produce energy for our
body and the excess is let out. This is not a correct image of the way
our body works. Our body is not like a pond in which food enters from
one side, and leaves from the other side. What enters our body must be
fresh, but what leaves it is old. The oxygen that enters our body now
will leave our body six months later. The same holds true for calcium.
If radioactive nitrogen is added to our food, it will appear in the
urine several weeks later.

Therefore, we should not expect an instant replacement of the old food
in the body with fresh food that we eat. We must wait many days to
achieve this. Dr. John Feromozan said: The stored amount of glycogen
stored in the kidneys and protein in the blood and fat stored in the
body is 30% for men and 20% for women. This amount is sufficient for one
month.

Dr. Alexis Carrel in his book Man the Unknown Creature said the
following about fasting: “When you fast, the sugar in the blood pours
into the kidneys, the fat stored under the skin, the proteins stored in
the muscles, the glands and the kidney cells are released and used up.”
When we consider both of these statements we conclude that our body is
totally repaired after thirty days of fasting and it gets totally rid
itself of poisons and old materials.[^41]

Fasting and Ulcers
------------------

It is a common misunderstanding that fasting causes ulcers. If it was
so, then we should ask why the statistics show more cases of ulcers
among the non-Muslim nations who do not fast compared to the Muslim
nations. If ulcers were only common among Muslims, then we could suspect
a relationship between fasting and ulcers existed. However, this is not
the case and there is a growing trend of ulcers in the West. If fasting
was a cause of ulcers and given the more than fourteen centuries of
fasting by Muslims, ulcers should have become a hereditary disease among
the Muslims. However, this is not the case.[^42]

Causes of Ulcers
----------------

The causes of ulcers were investigated in an international conference on
diseases of the stomach in September 1966 in Tokyo. Those who attended
presented their country’s medical results as to the causes of ulcers.
Among these reports, the following were the most common causes of
ulcers:

1) Smoking.

2) Eating many hot foods.

3) Drinking too much water.

4) Usual use of coffee and spices.

5) Excessive use of salty or sour foods.

6) Drinking alcoholic beverages.

The representative from Turkey who attended this conference reported
that after the end of the month of fasting it has been found that
fasting accelerates this disease. This implies that fasting does not
cause ulcers, but if the person is prone to get an ulcer fasting will
speed it up. That is why Islam has instructed those who are ill or know
that they will get ill if they fast should not fast. Their fasting is
postponed to a later time.

Alexi Soforin’s Medical Fasting
-------------------------------

When we eat various foods, some of it passes through the digestive
system but is not used up by the cells. It gets stored up under the
skin, around the heart and around important body organs. These will
cause infections after some time and result in various ailments. The
more the excess food, the worse the infection will be. The illnesses
have different names, but are all rooted in microbes or viruses that
live where there exists excess food. Before any treatment, we must get
rid of the trash.

This is only feasible if we do not give our body any food and only drink
water. The body will then automatically extract the stored food and get
rid of it. Then the disease will be uprooted and show signs of
treatment. This method will naturally cleanse the body. If we use other
methods and take drugs, the drugs will also affect the healthy cells in
our body, and our body will react to the drugs. However, fasting does
not have any side effects. Also, note that this is a single treatment
for all illnesses.[^43]

So far, we have discussed the views of doctors about ways to treat
illnesses. We saw that abstaining and fasting is an important part of
this treatment, even the last one. Therefore, God who created us made
fasting obligatory so that we derive both spiritual and physical
benefits from it. We mentioned earlier that Imam Sajjad stressed the
importance of controlling our various organs and directing them in a
good way while fasting.

The Secrets of Fasting
----------------------

The scholars have mentioned three ranks for fasting. The first rank for
fasting is just restraining the stomach from eating and drinking, and
restraining our sexual desires. The second rank for fasting implies the
additional restraining of our ears, eyes, hands, feet and other organs.
Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا صُمْتَ فَلْيَصُمْ سَمعُكَ وَبَصَرُكَ وَشَعرُكَ وجِلدُكَ و…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When you fast your hearing, your sight, your hair, your skin and other
organs should also fast.”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يَكُنْ يَومُ صَومِكَ كَيَومِ فِطْرِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The day of your fasting should not be like the day that you do not
fast.”*

In another tradition he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدَعِ المِراءَ وَأذْيَ الخَادِمِ وَلْيَكُن عَلَيْكَ وَقارُ الصّيامِ
فإنَّ رَسولَ اللهِ صَلّى اللهُ عَليهِ وآلِهِ سَمِعَ امْرَأةً تَسُبُّ
جارِيَتَها وَهِي صَائِمَةٌ فَدَعى بِطَعامٍ فَقالَ لهَا: كُلِي.
فقَالَتْ: إنّي صَائِمَةٌ. قَالَ: كَيفَ تَكُونِينَ صَائِمةً وَقَدْ
سَبَبْتِ جَارِيَتَكِ؟ إنَّ الصَّومَ لَيسَ مِن الطَّعامِ وَالشَّرابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Abandon quarrelling and troubling your servant. Let the dignity of
those who fast be on you. Once the Prophet heard a woman who was fasting
reviling her maid. The Prophet brought her some food and asked her to
eat it. She said that she was fasting. The Prophet said: “How could you
be fasting when you have reviled your maid? Fasting is not just
abstaining from food and drink.”*[^44]

The next rank of fasting implies whole-hearted fasting. In this state,
we abandon all worldly thoughts that distract us from God. This form of
fasting is broken when we start to think about worldly affairs. It is
said that it is breaking this form of fast even if you think about what
to prepare to break the fast with, since you do not have a strong belief
that God will give you the promised daily bread. This rank is
specifically for the Prophets and the honest ones who are close to God.
God told the Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللّهُ ثُمَّ ذَرْهُمْ فِي خَوْضِهِمْ يَلْعَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***..Say: "God (sent it down)": Then leave them to plunge in vain
discourse and trifling. [The Holy Qur’an, al-An’am 6:91]***

Imam Sadiq narrated that God’s Prophet had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّوْم جُنَّةٌ: أيْ سِترٌ مِن آفاتِ الدُّنيا وَحِجابٌ مِن عَذابِ
الآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Fasting is a shield: that is, it is a covering against the calamities
of this world and a protective barrier against the punishment of the
Hereafter.”*[^45]

[^1]: From the Fire of Hell.

[^2]: King James version.

[^3]: King James version.

[^4]: There are also many other places in the Bible where fasting is
discussed. Consider the following two cases for example. Daniel fasted
for three weeks before receiving his vision: “In those days I, Daniel,
was mourning three full weeks. I ate no pleasant bread, neither came
flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all, till
three whole weeks were fulfilled. And in the four and twentieth day of
the first month, as I was by the side of the great river, which is
Hiddekel; then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a certain
man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz:
His body also was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of
lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like
in colour to polished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice
of a multitude. And I, Daniel, alone saw the vision: for the men that
were with me saw not the vision; but a great quaking fell upon them, so
that they fled to hide themselves. Therefore I was left alone, and saw
this great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my
comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength.
Yet heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the voice of his
words, then was I in a deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the
ground. And, behold, a hand touched me, which set me upon my knees and
upon the palms of my hands. And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man greatly
beloved, understand the words that I speak unto thee, and stand upright:
for unto thee am I now sent. And when he had spoken this word unto me, I
stood trembling. Then he said unto me: Fear not, Daniel: for from the
first day that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to chasten
thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy
words.” (The Bible, Daniel 10:2-12) Elijah fasted forty days before
speaking with God: “Now Ahab told Jezebel everything Elijah had done and
how he had killed all the Prophets with the sword. So Jezebel sent a
messenger to Elijah to say, “May the gods deal with me, be it ever so
severely, if by this time tomorrow I do not make your life like that of
one of them.” Elijah was afraid and ran for his life. When he came to
Beersheba in Judah, he left his servant there, while he himself went a
day’s journey into the desert. He came to a broom tree, sat down under
it and prayed that he might die. “I have had enough, Lord,” he said.
“Take my life; I am no better than my ancestors.” Then he lay down under
the tree and fell asleep. All at once an angel touched him and said,
“Get up and eat.” He looked around, and there by his head was a cake of
bread baked over hot coals, and a jar of water. He ate and drank and
then lay down again. The angel of the Lord came back a second time and
touched him and said, “Get up and eat, for the journey is too much for
you.” So he got up and ate and drank. Strengthened by that food, he
travelled forty days and forty nights until he reached Horeb, the
mountain of God. There he went into a cave and spent the night. And the
word of the Lord came to him: “What are you doing here, Elijah?” (The
Bible, Kings 19:1-9).

[^5]: The tenth day of the month of Muharram.

[^6]: The ninth month of the Islamic year observed as sacred with
fasting practiced daily from dawn to sunset.

[^7]: Majma’ al-Bayan, v.2, p.274.

[^8]: This implies that both acts are wrong.

[^9]: Mir’at al-‘Uqul, v.16, p.201.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Ibid, p.197.

[^12]: Mir’at al-‘Uqul, v.16, p.198.

[^13]: Ibid. p.203.

[^14]: Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda, v.2, p.123.

[^15]: Bihar al-Anwar, v.96, p.371.

[^16]: Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda, v.2, p.123.

[^17]: Mahajjah al-Bayda, v.2, p.124.

[^18]: Nahjul Balaghah, Subhi Salih, Hikmah no.136.

[^19]: Ibid., Sermon no. 110.

[^20]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 120, Fayz al-Islam.

[^21]: Ibid., Wise saying no.252, Sobhi Salih.

[^22]: Ibid., Wise saying no.428.

[^23]: Ibid., Advice no.47.

[^24]: Ibid., Wise saying, no.137, Fayz al-Islam.

[^25]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon no.192, Subhi Salih.

[^26]: Sarmayeh-e- Sokhan, v.1, p.14.

[^27]: Jawahir al-Kalam, v.16, p.182.

[^28]: Kimiya’ye Sa’adat, v.1, p.208.

[^29]: Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda, v.2, p.125.

[^30]: Safinah al-Bihar, v.2, p.78.

[^31]: Ibid. p.79.

[^32]: Ibid. p.78.

[^33]: Ibid. pp.79-80.

[^34]: Ibid. pp. 79-80.

[^35]: Awallin Daneshgah wa Akharin Payambar, v.3, pp.37-38.

[^36]: Located on both sides on the upper kidney poles.

[^37]: Cortisone, Aldosterone.

[^38]: The pancreas is a very important gland in the body. It digests
your food and produces insulin, the main chemical for balancing the
sugar level in the blood. The pancreas is a solid gland about 10 inches
(25 cm) long. It is attached to the back of the abdominal cavity behind
the stomach and is shaped like a tadpole.

[^39]: Aldosterone secretion decreases with age, which can contribute to
light-headedness and drop in blood pressure with sudden position changes
(orthostatic hypotension). Cortisol secretion decreases but the level
stays about the same.

[^40]: Awallin Daneshgah wa Akharin Payambar, v.3, pp.40-41.

[^41]: Ibid. v.3, pp.31-35.

[^42]: Ahamiyate Ruzeh az Nazar-i- Ilm-i-Ruz, p.224.

[^43]: Fasting as a New Method to Treat Illnesses, translated into Farsi
by Imami, p.12.

[^44]: Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda, v.2, p.131.

[^45]: Ibid.


