Translators´ Foreword
=====================

We thank God the Almighty for the opportunity granted to us to undertake
the preparation of A Divine Perspective On Rights after the successful
completion of The Complete Edition Of The Treatise On Rights by the
fourth religious leader in the line of the Prophet of God , Ali ibn
al-Husayn known as Imam Sajjad for his extended prostrations to God. A
Divine Perspective On Rights that is authored by Mr. Ghodratullah
Mashyekhi is a commentary on Imam Sajjad’s “The Treatise On Rights.”

We translated this commentary into English for the interested readers.
Regarding the references to verses of the Holy Qur’an, we have exactly
cited for coherency using an available translation of the Qur’an into
English by Mr. Abdullah Yusuf Ali (May God Reward Him). The Translation
of the Holy Qur’an that we used is the following:

1 The Holy Qur’an

2 Text, Translation, Commentary and Notes Large Size (1 Volume)

3 Abdullah Yusuf Ali (English & Arabic).

We have rewritten parts of the book to make it up-to-date. To include
the state of the art knowledge we have added many footnotes, references
to and verses from the Bible where appropriate.

We are partly indebted to our son Mehdi Peiravi for his assistance in
the typing and layout of the book, our daughter Maryam Peiravi for her
assistance in the translation of **The Treatise on Rights** from Arabic,
and her sister Talat June Peiravi for her poetic contribution to this
book. We are also indebted to the Ansarian Publications for supporting
this work and completing the typesetting of the book, their staff and
their respectable translators who have spent time to read the initial
manuscript and made many useful suggestions to enrich the work.

May God grant them their reward. We warmly welcome any suggestions made
by the readers that might help us learn about our mistakes and
shortcomings, and help us improve our future works.

Dr. Ali Peiravi  
 Ms. Lisa Zaynab Morgan  
<peiravi@netscape.net>


