Right n. 14: The Right of the Offering
======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الهدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمَّا حَقُّ الهَدْيِ فَأَنْ تُخلِصَ بهَا الإرَادَةَ إلَى رَبكَ
وَالتَّعَرُّضَ لِرَحْمَتِهِ وَقَبُولِهِ ولا تُرِيدَ عُيُونَ
النَّاظِرِينَ دُونهُ، فإذَا كُنْتَ كَذَلِكَ لَمْ تَكُنْ مُتَكَلِّفًا
ولا مُتَصَنِّعًا وَكُنْتَ إنَّمَا تَقْصِدُ إلَى الله. وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ
الله يُرَادُ بالْيَسيرِ وَلا يُرَادُ بالْعسِيرِ كَمَا أَرَادَ
بخَلْقِهِ التَّيْسِيرَ وَلَمْ يُرِدْ بهِمُ التَّعْسِيرَ، وَكَذَلِكَ
التَّذَلُّلَ أَوْلَى بكَ مِن التَّدَهْقُنِ لأَنَّ الْكُلْفَةَ
وَالْمَئونَةَ فِي الْمُتَدَهْقِنِينَ. فَأمَّا التَّذَلُّلُ
وَالتَّمَسْكُنُ فَلا كُلْفَةَ فِيهِمَا وَلا مَئونةَ عَلَيْهِمَا
لأَنَّهُمَا الْخِلْقَةَ وهُمَا مَوجُودَانِ فِي الطَّبيعَةِ. وَلا
قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of the offering**[^1] **is that through it**[^2] **you
purify your will toward your Lord, and expose yourself to His Mercy, and
His approval and not the eyes of the observers lower than Him. If this
is so, you will neither be hypocritical nor extravagant. You will only
intend the offering for God’s sake, and know that God wishes your ease,
and does not wish your hardship.**

**He also wishes His creatures to take it easy, and does not wish them
to suffer hardships. Likewise, modesty is better than arrogance, for
there lies extravagance and falsehood in the arrogant, while there are
no formalities or falsehoods in the humble and the servile, since they
are creatures and they exist in nature. There is no power but in God.**

The Arabic word ‘*hada*’ meaning offering is used to refer to the
sacrifice made for the holy pilgrimage to the Ka’ba.[^3] We read the
following verse in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَحْلِقُواْ رُؤُوسَكُمْ حَتَّى يَبْلُغَ الْهَدْيُ مَحِلَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not shave your heads until the offering reaches the place of
sacrifice...” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:196]***

This is called an offering since it is like a gift some give to others
after they sacrifice it. This is similar to the present that the queen
of Sheba sent for Solomon as we read in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنِّي مُرْسِلَةٌ إِلَيْهِم بِهَدِيَّةٍ فَنَاظِرَةٌ بِمَ يَرْجِعُ
الْمُرْسَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"But I am going to send him a present, and (wait) to see with what
(answer) return (my) ambassadors."[The Holy Qur’an, al-Naml 27:35]***

This word has been used seven times in the Holy Qur’an. In all
instances, it is used to refer to the sacrifice made for the pilgrimage.

The Sacrifice
-------------

The second obligatory act in Mina for those who go on the pilgrimage is
to send an offering for sacrifice. This offering is intended to be an
act to get closer to God. We read the following in Majma’ al-Bahrain:
“Offering refers to any good deed done with the intention of getting
closer to God.” If we want to better understand what Imam Sajjad said
about the offering, we should review the Qur’anic verses on this issue.
Consider the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَتِمُّواْ الْحَجَّ وَالْعُمْرَةَ لِلّهِ فَإِنْ أُحْصِرْتُمْ فَمَا
اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ وَلاَ تَحْلِقُواْ رُؤُوسَكُمْ حَتَّى
يَبْلُغَ الْهَدْيُ مَحِلَّهُ فَمَن كَانَ مِنكُم مَّرِيضاً أَوْ بِهِ
أَذًى مِّن رَّأْسِهِ فَفِدْيَةٌ مِّن صِيَامٍ أَوْ صَدَقَةٍ أَوْ نُسُكٍ
فَإِذَا أَمِنتُمْ فَمَن تَمَتَّعَ بِالْعُمْرَةِ إِلَى الْحَجِّ فَمَا
اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And complete the Hajj or 'Umrah in the service of God. But if ye are
prevented (from completing it), send an offering for sacrifice, such as
ye may find, and do not shave your heads until the offering reaches the
place of sacrifice. And if any of you is ill, or has an ailment in his
scalp, (necessitating shaving), (he should) in compensation either fast,
or feed the poor, or offer sacrifice; and when ye are in peaceful
conditions (again), if anyone wishes to continue the 'Umrah on to the
Hajj, he must make an offering, such as he can afford…” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:196]***

In this verse God has spoken of the offering three times.

The first occasion is concerned with the situation where you are in the
service of God, but you are prevented from completing it because of
getting ill. In this case, you must send an offering for sacrifice.

The second occasion is on the day of celebration before shaving the head
and after the ritual stoning of devil. It is not allowed to shave until
the offering is sacrificed.

The third case is when you are in peaceful conditions again. Sending an
offering for sacrifice in Mina is the certain duty of any pilgrim who
wants to participate in the pilgrimage ceremonies.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أيُّها الَّذين أمَنُوا لا تُحِلُّوا شَعائِرِ اللهِ و لا الشَّهْرَ
الحَرامَ و لا الهَدْىَ و لا القَلائِدَ و لا أمِّينَ البَيْتَ الحَرامَ
يَبْتَغُونَ فَضْلاً مِنَ اللهِ و رِضْواناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O ye who believe! Violate not the sanctity of the symbols of God,
nor of the Sacred Month, nor of the animals brought for sacrifice, nor
the garlands that mark out such animals, nor the*** ***people resorting
to the Sacred House, seeking of the bounty and good pleasure of their
Lord.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Maida 5:3]***

There are eight decrees in this verse. One is related to animals brought
for sacrifice - marked or unmarked. The same issue is pointed out in the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَعَلَ اللّهُ الْكَعْبَةَ الْبَيْتَ الْحَرَامَ قِيَامًا لِّلنَّاسِ
وَالشَّهْرَ الْحَرَامَ وَالْهَدْيَ وَالْقَلاَئِدَ ذَلِكَ لِتَعْلَمُواْ
أَنَّ اللّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ وَأَنَّ
اللّهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God made the Ka'ba, the Sacred House, an asylum of security for men,
as also the Sacred Months, the animals for offerings, and the garlands
that mark them…” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Maida 5:97]***

In another verse we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَقْتُلُواْ الصَّيْدَ وَأَنتُمْ
حُرُمٌ وَمَن قَتَلَهُ مِنكُم مُّتَعَمِّدًا فَجَزَاء مِّثْلُ مَا قَتَلَ
مِنَ النَّعَمِ يَحْكُمُ بِهِ ذَوَا عَدْلٍ مِّنكُمْ هَدْيًا بَالِغَ
الْكَعْبَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O ye who believe! Kill not game while in the sacred precincts or in
pilgrim garb. If any of you doth so intentionally, the compensation is
an offering, brought to the Ka'ba*** ***of a domestic animal equivalent
to the one he killed, as adjudged by two just men among you...” [The
Holy Qur’an, al-Maida 5:95]***

The compensation must be donated to the Ka’ba. Jurisprudents agree that
the expiation related to hunting while in Umrah should be sacrificed in
Mecca and that related to hunting while in Hajj should be sacrificed in
Mina. They also agree on the place of sacrifice. The issue of the
sacrificial animals is again referred to in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَصَدُّوكُمْ عَنِ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ
وَالْهَدْيَ مَعْكُوفًا أَن يَبْلُغَ مَحِلَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They are the ones who denied Revelation and hindered you from the
Sacred Mosque and the sacrificial animals, detained from reaching their
place of sacrifice…” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Fath 48:25]***

These were the seven instances where the offering to sacrifice is
mentioned in the Qur’an. We understand the importance of the offering
and realize that this is done in order to obey God and to approach Him,
and that it is to be taken to Ka’ba or the place of sacrifice.

The History of Offering for Sacrifice
-------------------------------------

Everyone is instructed to know when the practice of sending an offering
for sacrifice started. Historical records show various forms of offering
for sacrifice existed in different nations. The Qur’an has stated the
origin of this practice to be at the time of the two sons of Adam as we
read in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ ابْنَيْ آدَمَ بِالْحَقِّ إِذْ قَرَّبَا
قُرْبَانًا فَتُقُبِّلَ مِن أَحَدِهِمَا وَلَمْ يُتَقَبَّلْ مِنَ الآخَرِ
قَالَ لَأَقْتُلَنَّكَ قَالَ إِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللّهُ مِنَ
الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Recite to them the truth of the story of the two sons of Adam.
Behold! They each presented a sacrifice (to God): It was accepted from
one, but not from the other. Said the latter: "Be sure I will slay
thee." "Surely," said the former, "God doth accept of the sacrifice of
those who are righteous.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Maida 5:27]***

We can see that presenting a sacrifice to God is one of the means of
approaching God. Since the present of one of them was accepted, the
other one threatened to kill him. The two sons of Adam used this
practice to test their closeness to God. Abraham also tested his
closeness to God through presenting a sacrifice.

As understood from the Old Testament, God ordered him to sacrifice an
animal.[^4] The children of Abraham expressed their closeness to God
through offering sacrificial animals. The offerings at the time of Moses
were of two types. They used to sacrifice one group and free the second
group for the sake of God. The group that was sacrificed was also of the
following three kinds:

1) They used to burn one group and only leave its skin for the rabbi.

2) They used to burn half of the second group and leave the second half
for the rabbi.

3) The third group were those whose meat was for everyone.

The Romans used to offer sacrifice for their gods. The Priests used to
spread water, honey and rose water at the time of the offering. It is
recorded in history that they did not restrict themselves to the
sacrifice of animals. At times, they sacrificed people too. The
Phoenicians, Canaanites, Persians, Romans and Egyptians practiced this
until an order to ban this practice was issued in the year 657 A.D. by
the Romanian Parliament.

It is said that each year the Egyptians used to drown a fully made up
virgin girl in the river. They did this with the intention of getting
closer to their gods. This wicked practice continued in Egypt until Amr
ibn A’as banned it upon the permission of Umar ibn Khattab. This has
been quoted on the authority of Ustad Ahmad Jorjani who was one of the
scholars in Al-Azhar University.[^5]

Islam forbade all forms of offering for sacrifice for idols and men.
Islam taught the proper practice of sending an offering to its
followers. The verses related to this issue were cited above. Since
human nature is inclined towards the belief in God, man likes to offer a
sacrifice to Him. Islam taught man the proper way to offer a sacrifice,
and the proper thing to offer. We should not think that the blood or the
meat of the sacrificed animal would reach God. No. This is just a
practice to help man approach God. Therefore, it should be done with the
soul intention of approaching Him. That is why God’s name should be
invoked when we offer a sacrifice to Him.

Offering as a Religious and Intellectual Act
--------------------------------------------

It can be concluded from the above discussion that offering animals for
sacrifice is a religious and intellectual act that is done to purify the
soul, and improve the economy. The meat of the sacrificed animal should
be distributed among the poor people for the sake of God. This we
understand from the following traditions.

Imam Sadiq quoted on the authority of God’s Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنمَّا جَعلَ اللهُ هذا الأضْحى لِتَتَّسِعَ مَساكِينُكُم مِن اللّحُومِ
فَأَطْعِمُوهُم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God has established this sacrifice in order that your poor may have
ample meat to eat. Therefore, give them meat to eat!”*[^6]

Abi Basir narrated that he told Imam Sadiq : “What is the reason for
offering for sacrifice?” The Imam said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّهُ يُغفَرُ لِصاحِبِها عِندَ أوَّلِ قَطْرَةٍ تَقْطُرُ مِن دَمِها
عَلى الأرْضِ وَليَِعْلَمَ اللهُ مَن يَتَّقِيهِ بِالغَيْبِ. قالَ اللهُ
تَعالى: لَنْ يَنَالَ اللَّهَ لُحُومُهَا وَلَا دِمَاؤُهَا وَلَٰكِنْ
يَنَالُهُ التَّقْوَىٰ مِنْكُمْ ۚ أنْظُر كَيفَ قَبِلَ اللهُ قُربانَ
هابِيلَ وَرَدَّ قُربانَ قابِيلَ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘The sins of the one who is offering will be forgiven when the first
drop of blood of the sacrificed animal falls on the ground. It is also a
means by which God gets to know those who fear Him in the Unseen. God
the Almighty said:* ***“It is neither their meat nor their blood that
reaches God: it is your piety that reaches Him…” [Hajj, 22:37].*** *See
how God accepted the offering of Abel, but turned down that of
Cain.’*[^7] [^8]

The reward for the one offering the sacrifice and his being forgiven are
stressed in this tradition. In addition, the fact that his purity of
intentions is recognized is also outlined. Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَو عَلِمَ النّاسُ ما في الأُضْحِيّةِ لاسْتَدانوا وَضَحّوا؛ إنّه
لَيُغْفَرُ لِصاحِبِ الأضْحِيَّةِ عِندَ أوَّلِ قَطْرَةٍ تَقْطُرُ مِن
دَمِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If the people only knew the reward for offering animals for sacrifice,
they would borrow money to make an offering. Indeed, the sins of the one
who is offering a sacrificial animal are forgiven once the first drop of
its blood falls on the ground.”*[^9]

It has been recorded in Wasa\`il al-Shī\`ah that the Prophet of God told
his daughter, the Blessed Fatima :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إشْهَدي ذَبْحَ ذَبِيحَتِكِ فإنَّ أوَّلَ قَطْرَةٍ مِنها يَغْفِرُ اللهُ
بِها كُلَّ ذَنبٍ عَلَيكِ… وهَذا لِلمُسلِمينَ عَامَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Be present beside the animal you offer for sacrifice since your sins
will be forgiven the moment the first drop of its blood falls down on
the ground.” He then added: “This issue applies to all Muslims.”*[^10]

Imam Kazim quoted on the authority of God’s Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسْتَفْرِهوا ضَحاياكُم فإنهّا مَطاياكُم علَى الصِّراطِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Seek for sacrificial animals that are brisk and agile since they will
be your mounts to cross the (Bridge of) Sirat.”*[^11]

[^1]: The animal sacrificed during the holy pilgrimage.

[^2]: In the other version it continues: “You desire God and you do not
desire His creation; through it you desire only the exposure of your
soul to God’s mercy and the deliverance of your spirit on the day you
encounter Him.”

[^3]: The House of God.

[^4]: Sharh-i-Risalat al-Huquq, Ghopanchi, v.1, p.365.

[^5]: Ibid. pp.366-367.

[^6]: ‘Ilal al-Shara’i, p.437.

[^7]: The sons of Adam.

[^8]: Ilal al-Shara’i, p.438.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Sharh-i-Risalat al-Huquq, Ghopanchi, v.1, p.369.

[^11]: ‘Ilal al-Shara’i, p.438, section 179.


