Right n. 18: The Right of Subjects through Authority
====================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الرعية بالسلطان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأَمَّا حُقُوقُ رَعِيَّتِكَ بالسُّلْطَانِ فَأَنْ تَعْلَمَ أَنَّكَ
إنَّمَا اسْتَرْعَيْتَهُمْ بفَضْلِ قُوَّتِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ فَإنَّهُ
إنَّمَا أَحَلَّهُمْ مَحَلَّ الرَّعِيَّةِ لَكَ ضَعْفُهُمْ وَذُلُّهُمْ،
فَمَا أَوْلَى مَنْ كَفَاكَهُ ضَعْفُهُ وَذُلُّهُ حَتَّى صَيَّرَهُ لَكَ
رَعِيَّةً وَصَيَّرَ حُكْمَكَ عَلَيْهِ نَافِذاً، لا يَمْتَنِعُ مِنْكَ
بعِزَّةٍ وَلا قُوَّةٍ وَلا يَسْتَنْصِرُ فِيمَا تَعَاظَمَهُ مِنْكَ إلا
[باللهِ] بالرَّحْمَةِ وَالْحِيَاطَةِ وَالأَناةِ، وَمَا أَولاكَ إذَا
عَرَفْتَ مَا أَعْطَاكَ الله مِنْ فَضْلِ هذِهِ الْعِزَّةِ وَالقُوَّةِ
الَّتِي قَهَرْتَ بهَا أَنْ تَكُونَ لِلّهِ شَاكِراً، وَمَنْ شَكَرَ الله
أَعْطَاهُ فِيمَا أَنعَمَ عَلَيْهِ. ولا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Then the right of your subjects through authority is that**[^1] **you
should know that you have authority over them due to your power over
them, and that they have been made your subjects through their weakness
and humility. What do they deserve whose weakness and humility have made
them your subjects, and made your authority over them effective? They do
not disobey you by their own might and power.**[^2]

**They cannot find a supporter against your power except by God, by His
Mercy and Protection, and patience. How proper it is for you to
recognize that God has granted you this increased might and power with
which you have subdued others. You should be thankful to God. And God
will increase His Graces to those who thank Him. And there is no power
but in God.**

Regarding the rights of the ruler, Imam Sajjad said that the people
should obey him and avoid fighting him. Here he stresses the right of
the people and states that the ruler should be fair to the people due to
the power that he has. The Imam points out several important issues
here. At first, the ruler should be just. Secondly, the Imam says that
the ruler should act similar to a kind father. Thirdly, since the people
might make mistakes during their life, the ruler should be forgiving. At
last, the Imam says that the ruler should be thankful to God for the
power that He has granted him.

Justice in Leadership
---------------------

People consider a person who is not wishing bad for others, does not
violate their rights, does not treat the people with prejudice, and
treats everyone under his rule equally, to be a just ruler. On the other
hand, they consider a person who violates their rights; practices
prejudice, sides with the oppressors, and oppose the weak, to be an
oppressive ruler. Thus, we can say that human justice implies respecting
human rights, and honoring everybody's rights. This is what is meant by
justice based upon rights. God has invited all men to justice in the
Holy Qur’an as we read in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God commands justice, the doing of good...” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Naĥl 16:90]***

The Prophet Muhammad said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَبْقى المُلكُ بِالعَدْلِ مَع الكُفْرِ، وَلا يَبْقى بِالجَورِ مَع
الإيمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Rule can be sustained with unbelief, but it can never last with
oppression.”*[^3]  
 He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَدْلُ سَاعَةٍ خَيرٌ مِن عِبادَةِ سِتِّينَ سَنَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“An hour of justice is better than sixty years of worship.”*

The Difference between Generosity and Justice
---------------------------------------------

Imam Ali beautifully expressed the difference between generosity and
justice. When asked about this, he replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العَدْلُ يَضَعُ الأمُورَ مَواضِعَها وَالجُودُ يُخرِجُها مِن جِهَتِها
وَالعَدْلُ سائِسٌ عامٌّ فَالجُودُ عارِضٌ خاصٌّ فالعَدلُ أشْرَفُهُما
وَأفْضَلُهُما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Justice puts everything in its right place, but generosity takes them
out of their places. Justice is a universal caretaker, but generosity
will only benefit the one with whom you are generous. Therefore justice
is nobler and and more excellent.”*[^4]

The Prophets and Their Call to Justice
--------------------------------------

All the divinely appointed Prophets to invite the people to God have
declared man's prosperity and development subject to the development of
ethics and the practice of justice. Let us look at the following verse
in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كُونُوا قَوَّامِينَ لِلَّهِ شُهَدَاءَ
بِالْقِسْطِ ۖ وَلَا يَجْرِمَنَّكُمْ شَنَآنُ قَوْمٍ عَلَىٰ أَلَّا
تَعْدِلُوا ۚ اعْدِلُوا هُوَ أَقْرَبُ لِلتَّقْوَىٰ ۖ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ
ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O ye who believe! Stand out firmly for God, as witnesses to fair
dealing, and let not the hatred of others to make you swerve to wrong
and depart from justice. Be just. That is next to*** ***piety: and fear
God. For God is well acquainted with all that ye do.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Ma’ida 5:8]***

No issue in Islam is as important as the issue of justice. Justice is
similar to the issue of the unity of God. Both issues highly affect all
the major and minor principles of Islam. Likewise, none of the practical
or ideological, personal or social, and moral or legal issues are
separable from the subject of the unity of God. We shall not find any of
the above issues void of the concept of justice.

Therefore, it is not surprising to realize that justice has been
recognized as one of the major principles of our religion, and as one of
the firm ideological foundations of the Muslims. An important issue
pointed out in the above verse is that grudges, tribal animosities, and
personal quarrels can all hinder the practice of justice, and might lead
to the violation of other people’s rights. Therefore, such practices
that will lead to deviation from true justice should be abandoned since
justice is more important than all of them. Therefore, practice justice
since it is the most fundamental basis for piety and abstinence.

Justice in Speaking
-------------------

Consider the following verse of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَقْرَبُواْ مَالَ الْيَتِيمِ إِلاَّ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ
حَتَّى يَبْلُغَ أَشُدَّهُ وَأَوْفُواْ الْكَيْلَ وَالْمِيزَانَ
بِالْقِسْطِ لاَ نُكَلِّفُ نَفْسًا إِلاَّ وُسْعَهَا وَإِذَا قُلْتُمْ
فَاعْدِلُواْ وَلَوْ كَانَ ذَا قُرْبَى وَبِعَهْدِ اللّهِ أَوْفُواْ
ذَلِكُمْ وَصَّاكُم بِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And come not nigh to the orphan’s property, except to improve it,
until he attains the age of full strength; give measure and weigh with
(full) justice. No burden do We place on any soul, but that which it can
bear. Whenever ye speak, speak justly, even if a near relative is
concerned, and fulfill the Covenant of God. Thus doth He command you,
that ye may remember.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-An’am 6:152]***

In this verse, God invites the guardians of the orphans, salespersons
and those who weigh goods that they sell to adhere to justice, and even
more important than this is justice in speaking. This verse recommends
justice in speaking, justice in transactions, and justice when dealing
with those members of the society who do not have parents.

When talking about the orphan’s property, God uses the phrase “come not
nigh to the orphan’s property” which means do not approach it. This
concept has also been used regarding some other tempting sinful acts
such as prostitution, fornication, and stealing the properties of
orphans who have no supporters. God admonishes the people not to
approach these deeds so as to be safe from their strong and hard to
resist temptations.

Justice in Judgment
-------------------

Consider the following verse of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ يَأْمُرُكُمْ أَن تُؤدُّواْ الأَمَانَاتِ إِلَى أَهْلِهَا
وَإِذَا حَكَمْتُم بَيْنَ النَّاسِ أَن تَحْكُمُواْ بِالْعَدْلِ إِنَّ
اللّهَ نِعِمَّا يَعِظُكُم بِهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ سَمِيعًا بَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God doth command you to render back your trusts to those to whom
they are due. And when you judge between man and man that ye judge with
justice. Verily how excellent is the teaching which He giveth you! For
God is He Who heareth and seeth all things.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Nisaa’
4:58]***

In this verse, God advises us to return what we are entrusted with to
its owner. Then God stresses the importance of justice when we make a
judgment between people. This advice to adhere to justice has been
described to be an excellent teaching, and the judge has been warned
that God hears and sees everything, so he should be careful not to
misjudge.  
 In addition, God has established justice and doing good deeds as equal
to one another as expressed in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالإِحْسَانِ وَإِيتَاء ذِي
الْقُرْبَى وَيَنْهَى عَنِ الْفَحْشَاء وَالْمُنكَرِ وَالْبَغْيِ
يَعِظُكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God commands justice, the doing of good, and liberality to kith and
kin, and He forbids all shameful deeds, and injustice and rebellion. He
instructs you that ye may receive admonition.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Naĥl
16:90]***

Also, consider the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا دَاوُودُ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاكَ خَلِيفَةً فِي الْأَرْضِ فَاحْكُم
بَيْنَ النَّاسِ بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا تَتَّبِعِ الْهَوَى فَيُضِلَّكَ عَن
سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَضِلُّونَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ لَهُمْ
عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ بِمَا نَسُوا يَوْمَ الْحِسَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O David! We did indeed make thee a vicegerent on earth. So, judge
thou between men in truth (and justice). Nor follow thou the lusts (of
thy heart), for they will mislead thee from the Path of God. For those
who wonder astray from the Path of God is a Penalty Grievous, for that
they forget the Day of Account.” [The Holy Qur’an, Sad 38:26]***

In this verse, God first stresses vicegerency on the Earth. Next God
admonishes the Prophet David to adhere to justice in his judgments. At
last, God admonishes against following lust that will mislead us to
deviate from justice and forget the Resurrection Day and the Reckoning
that is sure to come. We presented the above verses of the Holy Qur’an
as a sample here in order to express the degree of importance of
justice, and to stress that a ruler must be fair with all the people in
the society. Next, we will look at several traditions regarding the
issue of justice.

Abu Ali al-Ashari quoted on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Koofi
on the authority of Ubays ibn Hisham on the authority of Abdulkarim
Halabi on the authority of Abi Abdullah : “Justice is more delicious
than water is for a thirsty person. How extensive is justice when it is
put in effect, even if it is done a little.”[^5]

Hasan ibn Ali quoted on the authority of Ibn Mahbooh on the authority of
Mu\`awiyah ibn Wahab on the authority of Imam Sadiq :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العَدْلُ أحْلى مِن الشَّهْدِ وَألْيَنُ مِن الزَّبَدِ وَأطْيَبُ رِيحاً
مِن المِسْكِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Justice is sweeter than honey, softer than butter, and more fragrant
than musk.”*[^6]

It has been narrated that Ibn Abi Ya’fur asked Imam Sadiq : “How is
one’s justice recognized among Muslims so that his witnessing for or
against someone can be accepted?” The Imam replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنْ تَعرِفوهُ بِالسَّتْرِ وَالعَفافِ وَكَفِّ البَطْنِ وَالفَرْجِ
واليَدِ وَاللِّسانِ، ويُعرَفُ باجْتِنابِ الكَبائِرِ الَّتي أوعَدَ الله
عَلَيها النّارَ مِن شُربِ الخَمْرِ والزِّنا وَالرِّبا وَعُقوقِ
الوالِدَينِ والفَرارِ مِن الزَّحْفِ وَغَيرِ ذلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“You will recognize it through his modesty and chastity, and his
restraining his stomach, private parts, hand and tongue. It will be
known by his avoidance of major sins for which God has* *threatened (the
punishment of) the Fire such as drinking wine, fornication, usury,
undutiful behaviour towards parents, fleeing from a holy war, etc.”*[^7]

Mutual Rights of the People and the Ruler
-----------------------------------------

Imam Ali expresses the mutual rights of the people and the ruler in
*Nahjul Balaghah* as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيُّها النّاسُ! إنَّ لي عَلَيكمُ حَقّاً وَلَكم عَلَيَّ حَقٌّ. فأمّا
حقُّكُم عَليَّ فالنَّصِيحَةُ وَتَوفِيرُ فَيئِكُم عَليكُم وَتَعلِيمُكُم
كَيلا تَجْهَلوا وتَأدِيبُكُم كَيما تَعَلَّمُوا. وأمّا حَقِّي عَلَيكُم
فَالوَفاءُ بِالبَيعَةِ وَالنَّصِيحَةُ في المَشْهَدِ وَالمَغِيبِ
والإجَابَةُ حِينَ أدْعوكُم وَالطَّاعَةُ حِين آمُرُكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O people! I have rights incumbent upon you, and you have rights
incumbent upon me. Your rights incumbent upon me include my advising
you, paying your dues fully, educating you so that you do not remain
ignorant, and training you until you learn. And my rights incumbent upon
you include your remaining loyal to your pledge of allegiance to me,
sincerely advising both in public and private, responding when I call
you, and obedience when I command you.”*[^8]

Imam Ali mentions the rights of the people incumbent upon the ruler as
giving them advice, counseling them on social and economical issues, and
providing them with equal educational opportunities. The ruler should
attend to the economic and educational needs of the society. The right
of the ruler is that the people should remain loyal to their pledge of
allegiance, and give him counsel sincerely both in private and public.
The people should also stand ready to respond to the call of the ruler
and obey his orders. Imam Ali also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعْظَمُ ما افْتَرَضَ سُبْحانَهُ مِن تِلكَ الحُقوقِ حَقُّ الوَالي
عَلى الرَّعِيَّةِ. وَحَقُّ الرَّعِيَّةِ عَلى الوالي فَريضَةٌ فَرَضَها
اللهُ سُبحانَهُ لِكُلٍّ عَلى كُلٍّ فَجَعَلَها نِظاماً لأُلْفَتِهِم
وَعِزّاً لِدِينِهِم فَلَيْسَتْ تَصْلُحُ الرَّعِيَّةُ إلاّ بِصَلاحِ
الوُلاةِ وَلا تَصْلُحُ الوُلاةُ إلاّ بِاسْتِقامَةِ الرَّعِيَّةِ. فإذا
أدَّتِ الرَّعِيَّةُ إلى الوالي حَقَّهُ وأدّى الوالي إلَيها حَقَّها
عَزَّ الحَقُّ بَيْنَهُم وَقَامَت مَناهِجُ الدِّينِ وَاعْتَدَلَتْ
مَعالِمُ العَدْلِ وَجَرَتْ على أَذْلالِها السُّنَنُ فَصَلُحَ بِذلِكَ
الزَّمانُ وَطُمِعَ في بَقاءِ الدَّولَةِ وَبَئِسَتْ مَطامِعُ الأعْداء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The most important of these rights which God the Almighty has made
incumbent are the rights of the ruler incumbent upon the people, and the
rights of the people incumbent upon the ruler. God has made these mutual
rights incumbent upon each one of them. He has established these rights
as measures to safeguard order, friendliness, and honor in their
religion.*

*The affairs of the people shall not improve unless the rulers are good
people. Rulers will not be good people unless the people are
hard-working and steadfast. If the two respect each other’s* *rights,
then their religion will be honored, and its practice will survive. Then
the signs of justice will be established firmly, and divine traditions
will take their natural course. If these principles are recognized and
these rights are respected, then there will be an era of improvement and
progress. The rule of government will last, and the enemies will be
disappointed.”*[^9]

Imam Ali continues:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإذا غَلَبَتِ الرَّعِيَّةُ وَاليَها أوْ أَجْحَفَ الوالي بِرَعِيَّتِهِ
اخْتَلَفَتْ هُنالِكَ الكَلِمَةُ وَظَهَرَتْ مَعالِمُ الجَورِ وَكَثُرَ
الإدْغالُ في الدِّينِ وَتُرِكَتْ مَحَاجُّ السُّنَنِ فَعُمِلَ بِالهَوَى
وَعُطِّلَتِ الأحْكامُ وَكَثُرَت عِلَلُ النُّفُوسِ فلا يُسْتَوحَشُ
لِعَظِيمِ حَقٍّ عُطِّلَ وَلا لِعَظِيمِ باطِلٍ فُعِلَ فَهُنالِكَ
تُذَّلُ الأبْرارُ وَتَعِزُّ الأشْرارُ وَتَعْظُمُ تَبِعاتُ اللهِ عِنْدَ
العِبادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“But if on the other hand, the people do not pay any attention to their
ruler, or the ruler oppresses the people, then there will be discord and
an increase in oppression. Then things that corrupt the religion will be
mingled with religion. Divine traditions will be forced off their right
course, and people will follow their desires and laws will be neglected.
Diseases of the soul will increase and there will be no feeling of
desolation for the great rights that have been neglected or the the
major crimes committted. Then the good-doers will be humiliated and the
wrongdoers will be honored. Under these circumstances, the consequences
of the people’s sins will be much more severe before God.”*[^10]

In this sermon, Imam Ali has stressed on the causes of the stability of
a government, and the means of existence of peace between the people and
the ruler, and its consequence as national prosperity. He also outlines
the roots of lack of social peace and security, and the causes of the
collapse of a government.

He expresses the conditions that lead to humiliation of good people, and
their exclusion from assuming social responsibilities, and the coming
into power of wicked people. Then all religious affairs will be called
off, corruption and deviations will become widespread and the society
will be on the verge of collapse.

Imam Ali expressed the following in a letter he wrote to the border
patrol:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أمَّا بَعْدُ فإنَّ حَقّاً عَلى الوالي أنْ لا يُغَيِّرَهُ عَلى
رَعِيَّتِهِ فَضْلٌ نَالَهُ ولا طَوْلٌ خُصَّ بِهِ وإنْ يَزِيدَهُ ما
قَسَّمَ اللهُ لهُ مِن نِعْمَةٍ دُنُوّاً مِن عِبادِهِ وَعَطْفاً عَلى
إخْوانِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Moreover, the right that is incumbent upon the ruler is not to
withdraw his donations to the people from the blessings that he obtains.
He should not change his ways. He should grant to the people of the
special grants he receives. He should give some of what God has given
him as his* *share to the people as to be closer to them. He should
treat his brothers with kindness and benefit from their affection”*[^11]

Imam Ali himself acted accordingly, and his rule was truly a just rule.
He was like a kind and sympathetic father for the society and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأقْنَعُ أنْ يُقالَ أمِيرُ المُؤمِنِينَ ولا أُشارِكُهُم مَكارِهَ
الدَّهْرِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Should I be content with being called the Commander of the Faithful,
and not share their hardships in this world?”*[^12]

No, it will never be so.  
 Imam Sajjad said:

“A ruler should be like a kind father and consider the members of the
society as his children, and treat them equally.”

This was put into practice during the rule of Imam Ali and the Imam made
the following recommendations to Malik al-Ashtar in his well-known
letter to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَشْعِرْ قَلْبَكَ الرَّحْمَةَ لِلرَّعِيَّةِ، وَالْمَحَبَّةَ لَهُمْ،
وَاللُّطْفَ بِهِمْ، وَلا تَكُونَنَّ عَلَيْهِمْ سَبُعاً ضارِياً
تَغْتَنِمُ أَكْلَهُمْ، فَإنَّهُمْ صِنْفانِ: إمّا أَخٌ لَكَ فِي
الدِّينِ، وَإمّا نَظِيرٌ لَكَ فِي الْخَلْق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Let your heart harbor feelings of mercy for your subjects, and love
and kindness for them. Do not be like a rapacious beast of prey against
them, seizing them in order to devour them, for people are in two
groups: either they are your brothers in religion or they are equal to
you in creation.”*

Imam Sajjad said:

“The people have faults which the ruler should forgive and forget.”

Imam Ali said the following in his letter to Malik al-Ashtar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّ فِي النّاسِ عُيُوباً إلْوالِي أَحَقُّ مَنْ سَتَرَها، فَلا
تَكْشِفَنَّ عَمّا غابَ عَنْكَ مِنْها، فَإنَّما عَلَيْكَ تَطْهِيرُ ما
ظَهَرَ لَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Indeed people have faults, and the ruler is the one who is most
suitable to cover up their faults. Therefore do not reveal those faults
that are hidden from you, for your duty is only to remove what is
apparent to you.”*

An important point has been considered here, that is to ignore or act as
if you do not know the faults of the people. Any ruler or government
should be this way. The last subject related to the rights of the people
that Imam Sajjad presents is that the ruler should be grateful to God
for the blessing of ruling over the people.

He should realize that he does not possess any power on his own and it
is in fact God who has granted him this power. He should realize that he
himself is only a weak person. Imam Ali instructs Malik al-Ashtar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإذا أَحْدَثَ لَكَ ما أَنْتَ فِيهِ مِنْ سُلْطانِكَ أُبَّهَةً أَوْ
مَخِيلَةً فَانْظُرْ إلى عِظَمِ مُلْكِ اللهِ فَوْقَكَ وَقُدْرَتِهِ
مِنْكَ عَلى ما لا تَقْدِرُ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ نَفْسِكَ، فَإنَّ ذٰلِكَ
يُطامِنُ إلَيْكَ مِنْ طِماحِكَ، وَيَكُفُّ عَنْكَ مِنْ غَرْبِكَ،
وَيَفِيُ إلَيْكَ بِما عَزَبَ عَنكَ مِنْ عَقْلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Should you ever feel proud and haughty due to your rule, consider the
Majesty of God’s dominion above you and His power over you in what you
yourself have no control. This will hinder you from your disobedience,
prevent your harshness and return to you what has departed from you of
your intellect (which has become subject to your haughtiness).”*

Then it is best for a ruler to be grateful for this divine blessing.

[^1]: In the other version it continues: ”they have been made subjects
through their weakness and your strength. Hence it is incumbent on you
to act with justice toward them and to be like a compassionate father
toward them. You should forgive them their ignorance and not hurry them
to punishment and you should thank God for the power over them which He
has given to you.”

[^2]: That they do not have.

[^3]: Sharh-i-Risalat al-Huquq, Ghopanchi, v.1, p.385.

[^4]: Nahjul Balaghah, Fayz al-Islam, wise saying no.429.

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, v.2, p.146.

[^6]: Ibid. p.147.

[^7]: Al-Mizan, v.6, p.221.

[^8]: Nahjul Balaghah, Fayz al-Islam, sermon no.34.

[^9]: Nahjul Balaghah, Fayz al-Islam, sermon no .207.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Nahjul Balaghah, Fayz al-Islam, sermon no. 50.

[^12]: Nahjul Balaghah, Subhi Salih, no.45.


