Right n. 19: The Right of Subjects through Knowledge
====================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الرعية بالعلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأمَّا حَقُّ رَعِيَّتِكَ بالعِلْمِ فَأَنْ تَعْلَمَ أَنَّ اللهَ قَدْ
جَعَلَكَ لَهُمْ فِيمَا آتاكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ وَولاّكَ مِنْ خَزَانةِ
الْحِكْمَةِ، فَإنْ أَحْسَنْتَ فِيمَا ولاّكَ اللهُ مِنْ ذلِكَ وَقُمْتَ
بهِ لَهُمْ مَقَامَ الخَازِنِ الشَّفِيقِ النَّاصِحِ لِمَولاهُ فِي
عَبيدِهِ، الصَّابرِ الْمُحْتَسِب الَّذِي إذَا رأَى ذا حَاجَةٍ أَخرَجَ
لَهُ مِنَ الأَمْوَالِ الَّتِي فِي يَدَيهِ كُنْتَ رَاشِدًا، وَكُنْتَ
لِذَلِكَ آمِلاً مُعْتَقِدًا وَإلاّ كُنْتَ لَهُ خَائِنًا وَلِخَلقِهِ
ظَالِمًا وَلِسَلْبهِ وَعِزِّهِ مُتَعَرِّضًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of your subjects through knowledge is that you should
know that God established you over them through what He has granted you
of knowledge, and the authority He has assigned you over His treasures
of wisdom.**

**If you do well in what God has given you authority over and serve as a
compassionate caretaker for them, sincere to his master in the affairs
of his slaves, the steadfast one seeking reward through his good deeds,
who, when he sees a needy person, takes out for him from the wealth
under his control - then you will be rightly guided and will be hopeful
and faithful.**

**Otherwise, you will be regarded as betraying Him, unjust to His
creatures, and exposing yourself to God's seizing His Graces and Power
from you.**

And in the other version we read: “And the right of your subjects
through knowledge is that you should know that God established you over
them through what He has granted you of knowledge and what He has
granted authority over His treasures of wisdom.

If you do well in teaching the people, not treating them roughly or
annoying them, then God will increase His bounty toward you. But if you
withhold your knowledge from people or treat them roughly when they seek
knowledge from you, then it will be God’s right to deprive you of the
knowledge and its splendor and make you fall from your place in the
people’s heart.”  
 Imam Sajjad has pointed out the following:

1 - What one has learned of knowledge, and whatever he has gained of
wisdom are all blessings of God. One does not have any of this on his
own. Therefore, after considering these points one should not become
haughty.

2 - What one has control over of knowledge and wisdom is only a portion
of God’s treasure. He is only considered to be a trustee and a
gatekeeper. He should warmly welcome others, and kindly grant them from
the treasures with which he is entrusted.

3 - Imam Sajjad considers knowledgeable wise men as gatekeepers of the
treasures of knowledge and wisdom. He does not deem it proper to be
stingy about knowledge or wisdom, as it is not proper to be stingy with
wealth.

4 - If the one who possesses knowledge acts upon his duties, he is like
a sympathetic counselor who has seriously safeguarded what he is
entrusted with. Otherwise, he is like one who has betrayed his master.
By not respecting the rights of his subjects through knowledge, he has
oppressed them, and has deprived them of their rights to be honored.

Therefore, one who possesses knowledge should seek ways to teach his
students that would encourage them to learn. Any form of bad-temper, ill
conduct or anger with the students will make the students lose their
interest. It might even force them to quit their studies. In fact, this
implies that the one who possesses knowledge has hoarded up his
knowledge, and is being stingy with his knowledge by showing this kind
of behavior.

A Good Teacher’s Characteristics
--------------------------------

A good teacher is one who possesses the following desirable
characteristics in teaching and encountering his students:

1 - A good teacher is one who does not assume the responsibility of
teaching until he attains all the desirable qualities and capabilities
of a teacher. This is to be recognized by good people.

2 - A good teacher is one who does not entrust his knowledge to bad
people to be abused and debased.

3 - A good teacher should put his knowledge to practice, and the society
should be given the chance to benefit from the fruits of this act. If
not, he is like those admonished in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَأْمُرُونَ النَّاسَ بِالْبِرِّ وَتَنسَوْنَ أَنفُسَكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ
تَتْلُونَ الْكِتَابَ أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do ye enjoin right conduct on the people, and forget (to practice
it) yourselves.”[The Holy Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:44]***

Regarding the following verse of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَخْشَى اللَّهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاء إِنَّ اللَّهَ
عَزِيزٌ غَفُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those truly fear God, among His servants, who have knowledge.” [The
Holy Qur’an, al-Fatir 35:28]***

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العَالِمُ مَن صَدَّقَ فِعْلُهُ قَولَهُ وَمَنْ لَمْ يُصَدِّقْ قَولُهُ
فِعْلَهُ فَلَيسَ بِعالِمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A knowledgeable person is one whose deeds confirm his words. One whose
deeds do not confirm his words is not a knowledgeable person.”*[^1]

4- A good teacher should be good-tempered and humble. He should train
his students with patience and kindness. The Prophet of God said the
following regarding scholars:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عُلَماءُ أُمَّتِي كَأنْبِياءِ بَني إسْرائِيلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“My nation’s scholars are like the Prophet of the Israelites.”*[^2]

This implies that the same patience and good-temper that is necessary
for the Prophets to succeed in their inviting the people to follow God,
is also necessary for teachers to be successful in teaching their
students.

5 - A good teacher should not use the student’s lack of sincerity and
intent to learn as an excuse not to teach him. Rather he should admit
him, and slowly develop this sincerity and intention to acquire
knowledge in the student in the process of teaching. This is because
knowledge without sincerity is similar to jewelry hanging around a pig’s
neck as Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تُعَلِّقُوا الجَواهِرَ في أعْناقِ الخَنازِيرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not hang jewels around a pig’s neck.”*[^3]

6 - A good teacher should not hesitate to teach whenever he finds a
student ready to learn. Jabir Jo’afi quoted on the authority of Imam
Baqir:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَكاةُ العِلمِ تَعلِيمُهُ عِبادَ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The alms due to be paid on your knowledge is teaching it to God’s
servants.”*[^4]

7 - A good teacher is one whose deeds do not negate his words. An
example of this might be his declaring something to be illegitimate, but
doing it himself.

8 - A good teacher should be determined to express what is right as much
as is in his power to do so. The Prophet of God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا ظَهَرَتِ البِدَعُ في أُمَّتِي فَلْيُظْهِرِ العالِمُ عِلْمَهُ
فَمَنْ لَمْ يَفْعَل فَعَلَيْهِ لَعنَةُ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When innovations (in religion) appear in my nation, then let the
person of knowledge confront it. Whoever does not do so, upon him be the
curse of God.”*[^5]

A Good Teacher’s Duties to His Students and Class
-------------------------------------------------

The following are the duties of a good teacher to his students and
class:

1 - A good teacher should foster good manners, proper ethics and
religious knowledge in his students step by step. He should develop
their sense of abstaining from this world.

2 - A good teacher should explain the value and the nobility of
knowledge to his students. He should help them understand that the men
of knowledge stand in the ranks of the Prophets.

3 - A good teacher should like for his students what he likes for
himself, and should dislike for them what he dislikes for himself.

4 - A good teacher should advise his students not to follow bad examples
and not to commit the forbidden acts or what might harm them.

5 - A good teacher should not be haughty with his students. Rather he
should be humble with them since the Prophet of God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِينُوا لِمَنْ تُعَلِّمونَ وَلِمَنْ تَتَعَلَّمونَ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Be gentle with those you teach and those you learn from.”*

6 - A good teacher should always be sympathetic with his students.
Whenever one of them is absent, he should ask the reason. He should
check on them every now and then either in person or through someone
else. He should visit them if they get ill. He should try to help
fulfill their needs when they become needy if he is able to assist them.

7 - A good teacher should get to know the names and characteristics of
his students.

8 - A good teacher should seek the easiest way to teach. In the
beginning, he should teach whatever must be taught first in order to
make them understand what he is teaching. He should present the material
to his students at a level that is understandable by them.

9 - A good teacher should be enthusiastic about going to class, and
should avoid presenting material beyond the mental ability of his
students to comprehend.

10 - A good teacher should treat all of his students the same. If they
are all of the same rank, he should not prefer some to others. In
addition, if there is an age-related difference in their rank, he should
show more respect for the students with a higher rank to encourage the
rest to work hard to attain a higher rank.

What a Teacher Should Practice
------------------------------

1 - A teacher should be clean, wear clean clothes, walk calmly towards
his class, and enter the class with utmost dignity.[^6]

2 - A teacher should remember God, and say supplications transmitted to
us through the Prophet of God and the Immaculate Imams stressing the
highest spiritual meanings. He should pray God to help guide him, and
help him understand well, and then start to teach.

3 - A teacher should greet his students upon entering the class. If he
is teaching in a mosque, he should at first say two units of prayers,
ask God to save him from making any mistakes, and help him succeed.

4 - When he wants to sit down in class, he should be calm. He should sit
down with dignity and having previously prepared his lecture, he should
start to teach.

5 - He should sit down facing the Qiblah[^7] whenever possible and avoid
vain talk.

6 - He should be sincere in his intentions to teach when he sets out to
go to class. He should establish the propagation of knowledge and divine
decrees as his main goal.

7 - He should avoid undue jokes while teaching. However, he should use
jokes mildly and at proper times to break the ice and eliminate the
highly formal atmosphere of the classroom.

8 - He should sit where every student can see him. He should look at him
and reply.

9 - He should be happy and pleasant when he is teaching, and avoid
frowning, or being bad-tempered.

10 - He should bless his class by starting his lecture with some verses
from the Holy Qur’an.

11 - It is very important for a good teacher to confess that he does not
know the answer to a question asked for which he does not know the
answer. He should do so bravely since Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا سُئِلْتُم عَمّا لا تَعْلَمونَ فَاهْرُبوا… تَقولونَ: اللهُ
أعْلَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If you are asked about what you know not, then flee.” He was asked
how. He replied: “Flee by saying God knows best.”*

One should realize that acknowledging that you do not know the answer to
that question does not reduce your status. Rather it will strengthen
your status in the hearts of the people since then they realize that you
are pious.

The Worth of Knowledge-Seekers in the Eyes of the Prophet
---------------------------------------------------------

The late Al-Shahid al-Thani[^8] expresses more characteristics of a good
teacher in the book Muniat al-Mureed. However, we will suffice with the
above and direct our attention to the worth of the knowledge-seekers,
and the reward that God has established for them.

1 - God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ طَلَبَ عِلْماً فَأدْرَكَهُ كَتَبَ اللهُ لهُ كِفْلَينِ مِن
الأجْرِ، وَمَن طَلبَ عِلماً فَلَم يُدْرِكْهُ كَتَبَ اللهُ له كِفلاً
مِن الأجْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God will grant two rewards to whoever seeks knowledge and acquires it.
And God will grant one reward to those who seek knowledge, but do not
acquire it.”*

2 - God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحَبَّ أنْ يَنْظُرَ إلى عُتَقاءِ اللهِ مِن النّارِ فَلْيَنْظُرْ
إلى المُتَعَلّمِينَ: فَوالّذي نَفْسي بِيَدِهِ ما مِنْ مُتَعَلِّمٍ
يَخْتَلِفُ إلى بابِ العَالِمِ إلاّ كَتَبَ اللهُ له بِكُلِّ قَدَمٍ
عِبادَةَ سَنَةٍ وَبَنى اللهُ لهُ بِكُلِّ قَدَمٍ مَدينَةً في الجَنَّةِ
وَيَمْشِي عَلى الأرْضِ وَهِيَ تَسْتَغْفِرُ له وَيْمْسِي وَيُصْبِحُ
مَغْفوراً لهُ وَشَهِدَتِ المَلائِكَةُ أنَّهُم عُتَقاءُ اللهِ مِن
النّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever likes to see those saved by God from the Fire (of Hell) should
take a look at those who seek knowledge. I swear by the One who
possesses full control over my life that God grants the reward of one
year of worshipping Him for each step that the knowledge-seekers take
while going to and returning from the house of the knowledgeable ones.
For each step they take, God builds them a city in Heaven. The Earth
prays for them and seeks their forgiveness as they walk* *on it. Their
mornings and evenings are accompanied by God’s forgiveness and the
angels witness that they have been freed by God from the Fire.”*[^9]

3- God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن طَلَبَ العِلْمَ فَهُو كالصّائِمِ نَهارَهُ وَالقَائِمِ لَيْلَهُ
وإنَّ باباً مِن العِلْمِ يَتَعَلَّمُهُ الرَّجُلُ خَيرٌ لهُ مِن أنْ
يَكونَ أبو قُبَيسٍ ذَهَباً فأنْفَقَهُ في سَبيلِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever seeks knowledge is like one who fasts in the daytime and stays
up at night to worship God. For him each chapter that he learns is
better than giving as much gold in charity as Mount Abu Qubays for the
sake of God.”*[^10]

4- God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن جَاءَهُ المَوتُ وهُوَ يَطْلُبُ العِلمَ لِيُحيِيَ بهِ الإسْلامَ
كانَ بَينَهُ وَبَيْنَ الأنْبِياءِ دَرَجَةٌ واحِدَةٌ في الجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever dies while seeking knowledge with the intention of reviving
Islam, then there is one rank in Heaven between him and the
Prophets.”*[^11]

This was a brief summary of the values of students that the Noble
Prophet expressed.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi, v.1, p.36.

[^2]: Munyah al-Murid, p.182.

[^3]: Ibid. p.184.

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi, v.1, p.41.

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, v.1, p.54.

[^6]: Munyah al-Murid, pp. 204-210.

[^7]: The direction towards the Holy House of God in Makkah to which
Muslims turn when they pray.

[^8]: Zayn al-Din al-Juba’i al-‘Amili.

[^9]: Zayn al-Din al-‘Amili.

[^10]: Zayn al-Din al-Juba’i al-‘Amili.

[^11]: Ibid.


