Right n. 20: The Right of the Wife
==================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الزوجة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمَّا حَقُّ رَعِيَّتِكَ بمِلْكِ النّكَاحِ فَأَنْ تَعْلَمَ أَنَّ
اللَّهَ جَعَلَهَا سَكَنًا وَمُسْتَرَاحًا وَأُنْسًا وَوَاقِيةً،
وَكَذَلِكَ كُلُّ وَاحِدٍ مِنْكُمَا يَجِبُ أَنْ يَحْمَدَ اللَّهَ عَلَى
صَاحِبهِ، ويَعْلَمَ أَنَّ ذَلِكَ نِعْمَةٌ مِنْهُ عَلَيْهِ. وَوَجَبَ
أَنْ يُحْسِنَ صُحْبَةَ نِعْمَةِ اللَّهِ وَيُكْرِمَهَا ويَرْفَقَ بهَا
وَإنْ كَانَ حَقُّكَ عَلَيْهَا أَغْلَظَ وَطَاعَتُكَ بهَا أَلْزَمَ
فِيمَا أَحْببْتَ وَكَرِهْتَ مَا لَمْ تَكنْ مَعْصِيةً، فإنَّ لَهَا
حَقُّ الرَّحمَةِ وَالْمُؤَانَسَةِ، وَمَوْضِعُ السُّكُونِ إلَيهَا
قَضَاءَ اللَّذَّةِ الَّتِي لا بُدَّ مِنْ قَضَائِهَا وَذَلِكَ عَظِيمٌ.
وَلا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of your subject through matrimonial contract**[^1] **is
that you should know that God has made her a repose, a comfort and a
companion, and a protector for you. It is incumbent upon each of you to
thank God for the other and realize that the other one is God's blessing
for you. It is obligatory to be a good companion for God's blessing, and
to honor her and treat her gently.**

**Yet, your right over her is more incumbent**[^2] **and she must obey
you in every matter that you like or detest - except in acts of
disobedience to God. She should enjoy the rights of mercy and intimacy,
as she is an object of tranquility. You should care for her through**
**consummation of the lust that must be consummated. And that is surely
great. And there is no power but in God.**

“The right of your wife (*zawja*) is that you know that God has made her
a repose and a comfort for you; you should know that she is God's favor
toward you, so you should honor her and treat her gently. Though her
right toward you is more incumbent, you must treat her with compassion,
since she is your prisoner (*asir*) whom you feed and clothe. If she is
ignorant, you should pardon her.”[^3]

This statement can be read in Makarim ul-Akhlaq: “She also has the right
to have mercy on her, since she is subject to you. You must feed and
clothe her. Whenever she makes a mistake out of ignorance, you should
forgive her.”

We already discussed the issue of marriage and establishment of a family
in chapter 9 in detail. In that chapter which was about sex, we
explained that the best way to prevent adultery and the corruption of
the society is through marriage and the establishment of family. We
described the physical, spiritual and psychological harms of sexual
corruption and fornication. Now in this chapter we will briefly discuss
the duties of a spouse as viewed in the Qur’an and the traditions - as
expressed by Imam Sajjad .

We already mentioned that marriage is a blessed foundation of a family.
The husband and wife make a promise to each other that this relationship
will last to the end of their life. This structure is not built using
bricks, steel rods and cement. It is a home built upon love, comfort and
delight in which the couple shall live together their whole life, and
raise boys and girls to continue the human society. We shall remind you
that this structure is only firm if the husband and wife know about what
Islam has set forth as rightful decrees. Otherwise, this structure will
be shaken up by the erupting quakes of disharmony and bad temper.

Love and Mercy
--------------

The first characteristics mentioned by Imam Sajjad are tranquility and
dwelling in love. God has considered the creation of man and woman, and
their dwelling together as signs in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
لِتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُمْ مَوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً ۚ
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And among His signs is this, that He created for you mates from
among yourselves, that ye may dwell in tranquility with them. And he has
put love and mercy between your (hearts): Verily in that are Signs for
those who reflect.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Rum 3:21]***

This issue of dwelling together in love is also stated in the following
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُم مِّن نَّفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ وَجَعَلَ مِنْهَا
زَوْجَهَا لِيَسْكُنَ إِلَيْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He Who created you from a single person, and made his mate in
order that he might dwell with her (in love).” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-A'raf 7:189]***

The two concepts of tranquility and dwelling together, which are major
God-given blessings, are presented in these verses. This includes
physical and spiritual as well as individual and social aspects of
tranquility and mutual life. No one can deny the physical ailments due
to not marrying. Everyone is familiar with the spiritual problems and
psychological disturbances that unmarried people have to deal with.

Unmarried people feel less social responsibility. This is why more cases
of suicidal attempts are seen among unmarried people. They also commit
more crimes. A person who gets married is no longer single. He discovers
a new character within himself, and feels a lot more responsible.

In these verses, love and mercy have been expressed after tranquility
and living together in peace which is the best form of life. Everyone is
seeking a peaceful life. In fact, love and mercy constitute the glue and
cement for the structure of the human society. There are some
differences between love and mercy.

1 - Love is the initial motivation for establishing a relationship.
However, at the end of life one or the other one gets weak, and mercy is
needed.

2 - Love exists between the adults who can serve each other. However,
children need mercy to grow up.  
 3 - Love is usually a mutual feeling, while mercy is unilateral and
mixed with self-sacrifice.[^4]

When the life of a couple is filled with tranquility, is based on love,
and is accompanied by mercy, it is firmly established. On the other
hand, a life without these is a shaky life, ready to break apart.
Marriage is like the first level of social life. Through marriage, one
can study and learn about the rights.

There are two kinds of rights established between a couple: legal rights
and moral rights. The legal rights include the right that the husband
must feed and clothe his wife and provide for her shelter. They also
include the right that the woman should obey her husband. These rights
are the fundamentals of mutual life, and are needed in order to provide
for life - just like the foundation and the structure of a building.

However, moral rights are those which both the husband and the wife are
morally bound to adhere to. Should they not adhere to these rights,
there is no legal obligation for them to do so. However, the beauty and
pleasure of life is dependent upon performing these duties. Acts like
compliance, friendship and love fall in this group. One can consider
these rights as the decorations of life such as painting and fine
plaster work.

“The law of creation has made men and women in need of each other in
order to better unite men and women together, and strengthen the family
which is the main basis for human prosperity. If men have been
established as the ones for the women to financially rely on, women have
been created for men to spiritually rely on. These different needs
attract them to each other, and finally unite them.”[^5]

Head of the Household in the Family Structure
---------------------------------------------

Consider the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرِّجَالُ قَوَّامُونَ عَلَى النِّسَاء بِمَا فَضَّلَ اللّهُ بَعْضَهُمْ
عَلَى بَعْضٍ وَبِمَا أَنفَقُواْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ فَالصَّالِحَاتُ
قَانِتَاتٌ حَافِظَاتٌ لِّلْغَيْبِ بِمَا حَفِظَ اللّهُ وَاللاَّتِي
تَخَافُونَ نُشُوزَهُنَّ فَعِظُوهُنَّ وَاهْجُرُوهُنَّ فِي الْمَضَاجِعِ
وَاضْرِبُوهُنَّ فَإِنْ أَطَعْنَكُمْ فَلاَ تَبْغُواْ عَلَيْهِنَّ
سَبِيلاً إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلِيًّا كَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Men are the protectors and maintainers of women, because God has
given the one more (strength) than the other, and because they support
them from their means. Therefore, the righteous women are devoutly
obedient, and guard in (the husband's) absence what God would have them
guard. As to those women on whose part ye fear disloyalty and
ill-conduct, admonish them (first), (next) refuse to share their beds,
(and last) beat them (lightly): But if they return to obedience, seek
not against them means (of annoyance). For God is Most High, Great
(above you all).” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Nisaa 4:34]***

We must realize that the family is a small society, and it needs a head
and a leader. The man is the head of the household. The woman is his
assistant and is under his supervision. We must know that this position
is granted to him due to the characteristics that exist in men. Such
characteristics are his ability to let his mind rule over his feelings -
as opposed to women, and his possession of more power and physical
strength.

Men can use the first to plan for their life, and use the second to
safeguard their family. The phrase “because God has given the one more
(strength) than the other” in the above verse refers to this point.
However, it is clear that entrusting men with this duty neither is
considered to be a reason for their possessing a higher human character,
nor is it to be a privilege for them. It is clear that in general, the
human character of an assistant may be loftier than that of his boss in
some aspects. However, the boss is usually more suitable than his
assistant, for the performance of the duty he is made responsible for.

In this verse, women are classified into two groups. The women in the
first group are righteous ones. They are humble. They respect the family
structure. They are highly responsible, and perform their duties and
responsibilities well. Regarding the rights that God has established and
are expressed in the above verse as “what God would have them guard.”
they perform their responsibilities well.

This they do regarding financial issues, and guarding their honor. The
women in the second group are the disobedient ones who are seen to have
signs of possible disloyalty and ill-conduct. Men are supposed to honor
and respect the first group of women, and admonish, or refuse to sleep
with the second group. Should these measures not work, men are supposed
to punish them as decreed by Islam.[^6]

We presented the above verse to show that according to the Holy Qur’an,
men are responsible for protecting and maintaining women. Imam Sajjad
stressed their right to be fed and clothed by men. All the major
jurisprudents have also decreed they have the right to be fed and
clothed: “It is obligatory for men to pay for the living expenses of
their permanent wives.

These expenses include food, clothes, shelter, and living necessities
such as rugs, blankets, cleaning apparatus, and things that women
usually need during their life. This is required if she lives in his
house and is obedient to him. Therefore, if she leaves the house without
a religiously acceptable excuse, and leaves him then she does not
deserve to be maintained. It is well-known that this responsibility of
maintaining his wife is only up until the time when the wife is
complaisant, and is lifted if she becomes disobedient.”[^7]

It was said that women have two types of rights. One is her legal right
to maintenance. Should the man not pay for her maintenance, she has the
right to legally claim and receive it. However, rights of the second
type are moral, humane rights. Respecting these rights will cause
tranquility, peace, and will strengthen life and aid its continuation.

Now we will attend to these rights. The Noble Prophet has made several
recommendations regarding women on various occasions. We will present
only a few here. The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَيْرُكُمْ خَيْرُكُمْ لأَهْلِهِ وَأنَا خَيْرُكُمْ لأهْلِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The best of you are the ones who treat their family the best. And I am
the best of you towards my family.”*[^8]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِيالُ الرَّجُلِ أسَراؤهُ، وأحَبُّ العِبادِ إلى اللّه تعَالى
أحْسَنُهُم صَنيعاً إلى أُسَرائِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A man's dependants are his prisoners. And the servants most loved by
God are the ones who best treat their prisoners.”*[^9]

Imam Baqir quoted on the authority of God's Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أوْصَاني جِبْرَئِيلُ بِالمَرْأةِ حَتىّ ظَنَنْتُ أنَّهُ لا يَنْبَغِي
طَلاقُها إلاّ مِن فاحِشَةٍ بَيِّنَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Gabriel advised me about women so much that I thought she could not be
divorced unless she clearly commits adultery.”*[^10]

In another tradition, The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن احْتَمَلَ مِن امْرَأتِهِ وَلَو كَلِمَةً وَاحِدَةً أعْتَقَ اللهُ
رَقَبَتَهُ مِن النّارِ وأوْجَبَ لَهُ الجَنَّةَ وَكَتَبَ له مِائَتَيْ
ألْفِ حَسَنَةٍ وَمَحا عَنهُ مِائَتَيْ ألْفِ سَيِّئَةٍ وَرَفَعَ لهُ
مِائَتَيْ ألْفِ دَرَجَةٍ وَكَتَبَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِكُلِّ شَعْرَةٍ
عَلى بَدَنِهِ عِبادَةَ سَنَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God will save whoever bears his wife - even if it is just one (bad)
word - from the Fire. God will assure him of Heaven and record two
thousand good deeds for him. God will wipe out two hundred thousand of
his wrong-doings and raise his rank two hundred thousand levels, and
establish as many years of worshipping for him as there are hairs on his
body.”*[^11]

These words of the Noble Prophet are the best advice we have received
regarding women. A man is supposed to be kind and polite to his wife. He
is supposed to ignore her mistakes. He is supposed to be patient with
her bad temper to be granted the divine rewards that the Noble Prophet
promised.

There is no doubt that there are problems in every house. At times
incompatibilities may cause quarrels that might cool their relationship.
This will place a gap between them, and will drive them more apart from
each other. If not prevented, this might lead to separation and divorce.
A young inexperienced husband and wife who still follow their lust may
get angry quickly, and attempt to take revenge on each other. In order
to prevent this, Islam has advised men and women to forgive each other,
and ignore one another's faults.

Ishaq ibn Ammar asked Imam Sadiq regarding the rights of a woman upon
her husband. Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُشْبِعُ بَطْنَها ويَكْسُو جُثَّتَها وإنْ جَهِلَتْ غَفَر لهَا. إنَّ
إبْراهِيمَ خَليلَ الرَّحْمنِ شَكا إلى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ خُلُقَ
سارَةَ فَأوْحَى اللهُ إليَهِ أنَّ مَثَلَ المَرأةِ مَثَلُ الضِّلْعِ إنْ
أقَمْتَهُ انْكَسَرَ وإنْ تَركْتَهُ اسْتَمْتَعْتَ بهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“He should fill her stomach, and cover her body. If she makes a
mistake, he should forgive her. Abraham - the friend of the Merciful -
complained to the Almighty God about Sara's bad temper. God revealed to
him: The similitude of a woman is like that of a dry bent stick. It will
crack if you try to straighten it, but you will benefit from it if you
leave it as it is.”*[^12]

Therefore, there is no use in being harsh with your wife. Nothing can be
gained but misery and bitterness. The most important issue that a man
should realize in life is that his wife is his life-partner. She is
neither his slave, nor his housemaid. Therefore, from the viewpoint of
religious jurisprudence, a man does not have the right to force his wife
to work, or to take the results of her efforts in his own possession.
More importantly, he should realize that he must help his spouse. Our
Immaculate Leaders have outlined many rewards for men who help their
wives. We will mention a few here.

The Rewards of Helping the Wives
--------------------------------

God's Prophet told Ali :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسمَعْ مِنّي يا أبا الحَسَنِ! ومَا أقولُ إلاّ مِن أمْرِ رَبّي: ما مِنْ
رَجُلٍ يُعينُ امْرأتَهُ في بَيْتِها إلاّ كانَ لهُ بِكُلِّ شَعْرَةٍ
علَى بَدَنِهِ عِبادَةُ سَنَةٍ صِيامُ نَهارِها وقِيامُ لَيلِها وأعْطاهُ
اللهُ مِن الثَّوابِ مِثْلَ ما أعْطى الصّابِرينَ وَداوُدَ وَيَعقوبَ
وَعِيسى عَلَيهمُ السّلامُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O father of Hasan! Listen to me. I will not tell you anything but what
my Lord commands. God will establish the reward of as many years of
fasting in the daytime and staying up at night to pray, as there are
hairs on one’s body for helping his wife with the housework. The reward
will be similar to what He has granted to the patient ones and the
Prophet David , Jacob and Jesus .”* [^13]

Surely, this reward will encourage believing men to help their wives,
and abstain from being forceful and bossy.

God's Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عَليُّ! مَن كانَ في خِدمَةِ العِيالِ في البَيتِ وَلَمْ يأنَفْ
كَتَبَ اللهُ اسْمَهُ في دِيوانِ الشُّهَداءِ وَكَتَبَ لهُ بِكُلِّ يَومٍ
وَلَيلَةٍ ثَوابَ ألفِ شَهيدٍ وَكَتَبَ لهُ بِكُلِّ قَدَمٍ ثَوابَ
حِجَّةٍ وَعُمْرَةٍ وَأعْطاه ُاللهُ بِكُلِّ عِرْقٍ في جَسَدِه مَدِينَةً
في الجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Ali! God will record in the book of the martyrs the name of whoever
serves his family at home, and does not disdain it. God will establish
the reward of one thousand martyrs for each day and night, and will
grant him the reward of the pilgrimage to the Holy House of God for
every step he takes in this regard. God will reward him with a city in
Heaven for every vein in his body.”*[^14]  
 God's Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عَلِيُّ! خِدمَةُ العِيالِ كَفّارَةٌ لِلكَبائِرِ وَتُطْفِيءُ غَضَبَ
الرَّبِّ وَمُهورُ الحُورِ العِينِ وَتَزيدُ في الحَسَناتِ والدَّرَجاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Ali! Serving the family is considered to be expiation for major
sins. It will quench the Lord's wrath, and be considered as the nuptial
gift for the ‘Houris’. It will be a cause of raised ranks, and
increased, recorded good-deeds.”*[^15]

Admonishing Strict Men
----------------------

God's Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن ضَرَبَ امْرَأةً بِغَيرِ حَقٍّ فأنا خَصْمُهُ يَومَ القِيامَةِ. لا
تَضْرِبوا نِسائَكُم، فَمَنْ ضَرَبَها بِغَيرِ حَقٍّ فَقَد عَصى اللهَ
وَرَسُولَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“On the Resurrection Day I am the enemy of any man who unduly beats his
wife. Do not beat your wives. Thus whoever unduly beats his wife has
surely disobeyed God and His Prophet.”*[^16]

God's Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيسَ مِنّا مَن وُسِعَ عَلَيهِ ثُمَّ قَتَرَ عَلى عِيالِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever is affluent but is stingy with his wife does not belong to our
nation.”*[^17]

Improving the Spouse's Living Conditions
----------------------------------------

It has been narrated that Imam Sajjad said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أرْضاكُم عِندَ اللهِ أوْسَعُكُم عَلى عِيالِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever provides most amply for his family will be the most pleasing
one near God.”*[^18]

Imam Ridha said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْبَغي لِلرَّجُلِ أنْ يُوسِعَ عَلى عِيالِهِ لِئَلاّ يَتَمَنَّوا
مَوتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A man should provide abundant provision for his family so that they do
not wish for his death.”*[^19]

So far we discussed how men should be kind to their wives, not bother or
hurt them; not be strict with them, but help them. Now let us see what
Islam instructs women to do to counter men's services, and what role
women should play in life.

The Rights of Men Incumbent Upon Women
--------------------------------------

Al-Hasan ibn Mahboob quoted on the authority of Malik ibn Atiyeh on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim on the authority of Imam Baqir that
once a woman went to the Prophet of God and asked: “O' Prophet of God!
What is the right of a man incumbent upon the woman?” The Prophet
replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنْ تُطِيعَهُ وَلا تَعْصِيَهُ، وَلا تَصَدَّقَ مِن بَيْتِهِ إلّا
بإذْنِه، وَلا تَصُومَ طَوعاً إلّا بإذْنِه، ولا تَمْنَعَهُ نَفْسَها
وإنْ كانَتْ عَلى ظَهْرِ قَتَبٍ، وَلا تَخْرُجَ مِن بَيْتِها إلاّ
بِإذْنِه، وإِنْ خَرَجَتْ بِغَيرِ إذْنِه لَعَنَتْها مَلائِكَةُ
السَّماءِ وَمَلائِكَةُ الأرْضِ وَمَلائِكَةُ الغَضَبِ وَمَلائِكَةُ
الرَّحمَةِ حَتىّ تَرْجِعَ إلى بيتِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقَالَت: يا رَسُولَ اللهِ مَن أعْظَمُ النّاسِ حَقّاً عَلى الرَّجُلِ؟
قال: والِداهُ. قالَت: فَمَنْ أعْظَمُ النّاسِ حَقّاً عَلى المَرْأةِ؟
قالَ: زَوْجُها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَت: فَما لي عَلَيهِ مِن الحَقِّ مِثْلُ مَا لهُ عَلَيَّ؟ قال: وَلا
مِن كُلِّ مِائَةٍ واحِدَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَت: وَالَّذِي بَعَثَكَ بِالحَقِّ لا يَمْلِكُ رَقَبَتي رَجُلٌ
أبَداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“She should obey him, and not rebel against him. She should not give
away anything from his house as charity unless by his permission. She
should not fast when not required to do so unless by his permission. She
should not withdraw herself from him even if they are riding a camel.
She should not leave the house without his permission. Should she ever
leave the house without his permission, she will be cursed by the angels
in the heavens and on the Earth, and the angels of wrath and mercy until
she returns home.”*

*The woman asked: “O' Prophet of God! Who has the most rights over a
man?” He said: “His parents.” She asked: “Who has the most rights over a
woman?” He said: “Her husband.” She asked: “Do I have the same rights
over him that he has over me?” The Prophet said: “No. Not even one
one-hundredth.” Then she said: “I swear by the One who rightfully
appointed you to Prophethood that no man will ever own me.”*[^20]

The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَقُّ الرَّجُلِ عَلى المَرأةِ إنارَةُ السِّراجِ وَإصْلاحُ الطَّعامِ
وأنْ تَسْتَقْبِلَهُ عِندَ بابِ بَيْتِها فَتُرَحِّبَ بِهِ وأنْ
تُقَدِّمَ إلَيهِ الطَّشْتَ وَالمِنْدِيلَ وأنْ تُوَضِّئَهُ وأنْ لا
تَمْنَعَهُ نَفْسَها إلاّ مِن عِلَّةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The right of the man over his wife is that she should turn on the
light, prepare the food, and rush to warmly welcome him when he comes
home. She should take him some water and a towel, wash his hands and not
withdraw herself from him unless she has an excuse.”*[^21]

The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تُؤَدّي المَرْأةُ حَقَّ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ حَتىّ تُؤَدِّيَ حَقَّ
زَوجِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A woman has not fulfilled God's rights unless she properly fulfills
her husband’s rights.”*[^22]

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيُّما امْرَأةٍ بَاتَتْ وَزَوْجُها عَلَيها ساخِطٌ في حَقٍّ لَمْ
تُقْبَلْ مِنْها صَلاةٌ حَتىّ يَرضَى عَنهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The prayers of a woman who passes a night while her husband is unhappy
with her regarding his rights, will not be accepted until he is pleased
with her.”*[^23]

The Women’s Holy War
--------------------

Imam Baqir has been narrated to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ كَتَبَ عَلى الرِّجالِ الجِهادَ وَعَلى
النِّساءِ الجِهادَ؛ فَجِهادُ الرَّجُلِ أنْ يَبْذُلَ مَالَهُ وَدَمَهُ
حَتىّ يُقْتَلَ في سَبِيلِ اللهِ، وَجِهادُ المَرأةِ أنْ تَصْبِرَ عَلى
ما تَرى مِن أذَى زَوجِها وَغَيْرَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God, the Almighty has decreed holy war for both men and women. The
holy war for men is to expend their property and their blood until they
attain martyrdom in the way of God. A woman's holy war is to be patient
with troubles she experiences from her husband and his jealousy.”*[^24]

Imam Baqir has considered the house to be the front in this tradition.
The soldiers who fight in this front are the women. The most important
weapon they use in this war is their patience. The swords and the spears
are the troubles she experiences from her husband. The woman should not
escape from this front. She should withstand all this with patience and
perseverance until her life terminates with a good ending.

Many of the women who have not been properly educated in this respect,
and are inexperienced may lose the war, abandon their house, and deprive
their dear children of maternal love. Thus, they choose eternal
bitterness for themselves, their husband and their children. On the
other hand, there are some patient women who diligently guide the vessel
of life through the stormy waves of their husbands’ wrath, zeal and
bothering until they settle down, and attain victory and prosperity for
themselves and their children.

Imam Sadiq has admonished women not to make up for men other than their
husband. He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيُّما امْرَأةٍ تَطَيَّبَتْ لِغَيْرِ زَوجِها لَمْ يُقْبَلْ مِنها
صَلاةٌ حَتىّ تَغْتَسِلَ مِن طِيبِها كَغَسْلِها مِن جَنابَتِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God will not accept the prayers of any woman who puts on perfume for a
man other than her husband until she bathes from her (having applied)
perfume just as she bathes after intercourse.”*[^25]

Regarding the woman's gratefulness for her husband's efforts, Imam Sadiq
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيُّما امْرَأةٍ قَالتْ لِزَوْجِها: ما رَأيْتُ مِنكَ خَيراً قَطُّ،
فَقَدْ حَبِطَ عَمَلُها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The good deeds of any woman who tells her husband that she has never
seen any good from him during her life will be cancelled, and wiped off
from her record of deeds.”*[^26]

We briefly discussed the rights of men and women. If the men and women
abide by these rules in the Islamic society, they shall have a sweet and
prosperous life. There is a delicate point in a verse in the Holy
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُحِلَّ لَكُمْ لَيْلَةَ الصِّيَامِ الرَّفَثُ إِلَى نِسَآئِكُمْ هُنَّ
لِبَاسٌ لَّكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ لِبَاسٌ لَّهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Permitted to you, on the night of the fast is the approach to your
wives. They are your garments, and ye are their garments.” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:187]***

This is a beautiful point. The husband and wife are like garments for
each other. Garments are used for coverage, tranquility, and the
protection and beauty of the body. Couples cover up each other's faults,
and are a means of each other's comfort and tranquility, too. This
coverage encompasses all aspects of their life.

They are supposed to cover up each other's faults. They are not supposed
to talk about each other's bad temper with other people. They should not
divulge their private secrets. They should respect each other. As we
said before while discussing the previous traditions, they should not
accuse each other, since then they will both be subject to destruction.

They should be patient and withstand each other's bad temper, so that
God grants them the great promised rewards. The husband and wife are
great blessings for each other as Imam Sajjad said. They should share
the sweet moments of life as well as its hardships. They should possess
a high spirit and ambition so that their children grow up to be eminent
people. Imam Sadiq quoted on the authority of the Noble Prophet of God :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَولُ الرَّجُلِ لِلمَرْأةِ إنِّي أُحِبُّكِ لا يَذْهَبُ مِن قَلْبِكَ
أبَداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The words of a man who tells his wife ‘I love you’ will never leave
her heart and mind.”*[^27]  
 This will cause the wife to love her husband and be his support during
times of hardship.

[^1]: Your wife.

[^2]: In the other version it is followed by: “you must treat her with
compassion, since she is your prisoner whom you feed and clothe. If she
is ignorant, you should pardon her.”

[^3]: As translated by William Chittick.

[^4]: Tafsir-i-Namunah, v.16, p.393.

[^5]: Nizame Huquq Zan Dar Islam, p.242.

[^6]: Tafsir-i-Namunah, v.3, p.372.

[^7]: Minhaj al-Salihin, v.2, p.279.

[^8]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.216.

[^9]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.14, p.122.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.216.

[^12]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.216.

[^13]: Jami’ al-Sa’adat, v.2, p.142.

[^14]: Jami’ al-Sa’adat,

[^15]: Ibid. p.143.

[^16]: Irshad al-Qulub, v.1, p.175.

[^17]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, v.2, p.643.

[^18]: Ibid.

[^19]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.15, p.249.

[^20]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.214.

[^21]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.214.

[^22]: Ibid. p.215.

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: Ibid.

[^25]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.215.

[^26]: Ibid.

[^27]: Furu’ al-Kafi, v.5, p.569.


