Right n. 21: The Right of your Slave
====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الرعية بملك اليمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمَّا حَقُّ رَعِيَّتِكَ بمِلْكِ اليَمِينِ فَأَنْ تَعْلَمَ أنَهُ
خَلْقُ رَبكَ، وَلَحْمُكَ وَدَمُكَ وَأَنَّكَ تَمْلِكُهُ لا أنْتَ
صَنَعْتَهُ دُونَ اللَّهِ وَلا خَلَقْتَ لَهُ سَمْعًا وَلا بَصَرًا وَلا
أَجْرَيتَ لَهُ رِزْقًا وَلَكِنَّ اللَّهَ كَفَاكَ ذَلِكَ، ثُمَّ
سَخَّرَهُ لَكَ وَائْتَمَنَكَ عَلَيْهِ وَاسْتَوْدَعَكَ إيَّاهُ
لِتَحْفَظَهُ فِيهِ وتَسِيرَ فِيهِ بسِيرَتِهِ فَتُطْعِمَهُ مِمَّا
تَأْكُلُ وَتُلْبسَهُ مِمَّا تَلْبَسُ وَلا تُكَلِّفَهُ مَا لا يُطِيقُ،
فَإنْ كَرِهْتَ[هُ] خَرَجْتَ إلَى اللَّهِ مِنْهُ وَاسْتَبْدَلْتَ بهِ
وَلَمْ تُعَذِّبْ خَلْقَ اللَّهِ وَلا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of your subject through being your slave is that you
should know that he is a creature of your Lord and is made of the same
flesh and blood as you. And you only own him, but you have not created
him apart from God. And you have not created his hearing and sight, nor
do you provide his daily sustenance; rather it is God who gives you
sufficiency for that.**

**Then He subjugated him to you, entrusted him to you, and provisionally
consigned him to you so that you may protect him there,**[^1] **and
treat him as well as He has treated you. So** **feed him with what you
eat yourself, and clothe him with what you clothe yourself. And do not
burden him with what he cannot withstand. And if you dislike him, you
ought to let** **him go and replace him, but do not torment God’s
creature. And there is no power but in God*****.***

We discussed what Imam Sajjad presented about the right of the trainer
through ownership earlier in Chapter 17. In this chapter, we shall
discuss the right of the slaves. There we stated that at the beginning
Islam accepted the issue of slavery and did not issue a decree as to the
slaves’ freedom all at once since it was not economically feasible.
However, since the issue of slavery was unavoidable at first, Islam
established certain rights for slaves, and advised the Muslims to
wholeheartedly honor their rights.

Islam and the Worth of the Slaves
---------------------------------

1 - Islam eliminated the distinctions between the master and the slave,
and it declared all equal. The Noble Prophet Muhammad said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إخْوانُكُم جَعَلَهُمُ اللهُ فِتْنَةً تَحتَ أيْديكُم فَمَن كانَ أخُوهُ
تَحتَ يَدِهِ فَلْيُطْعِمْهُ مِن طَعامِهِ وَلْيُلْبِسْهُ مِن لِباسِهِ
وَلا يُكَلِّفْهُ مَا يَغْلِبُهُ فإنْ كَلَّفَهُ ما يَغْلِبُهُ
فَلْيُعِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Your slaves are your brothers. God has set them as a trial under your
authority. Therefore whoever has mastery over one of his brothers should
feed him from what he eats himself, and should clothe him with what he
wears himself, and should not burden him with tasks beyond his strength,
and should assist him in doing whatever hard work he asks him to
do.”*[^2]

2 - The Prophet of Islam has honored slaves so much that he has not even
allowed anyone to call them a slave or a maid:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يَقُلْ أَحَدُكُمْ: هَذا عَبْدي وَهَذِهِ أَمَتي. وَلْيَقُلْ: فَتايَ
وَفَتاتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“No one is allowed to say this is my slave or that is my maid. You
should say this is my young man, and that is my young lady.”*[^3]

3 So much was done to improve the conditions of slaves in Islam, and
they were so honored so much that no one dared beat his slave lest he
would be recognized as the worst person in the world. This was done so
that no one can beat someone else just because he is a slave, so that no
one can hurt one of the servants of God nor oppress them. Imam Sadiq
quoted on the authority of God’s Prophet : “Do you want me to tell you
who the worst people are?” The companions said: “Yes. O Prophet of God!”
Then the Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ سَافَرَ وَحْدَهُ وَمَنَعَ رِفْدَهُ وَضَرَبَ عَبْدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Those who travel alone, do not admit guests, and beat their
slaves.”*[^4]

You can see from this tradition that the Prophet has introduced those
who beat or hurt their slaves as the worst of the people.

Imam Ali and his Generosity with His Slave
------------------------------------------

Once Imam Ali went to the bazaar and purchased two garments. He bought
one for two Dirhams and the other one for three Dirhams. He donated the
one he had bought for three Dirhams to his slave Qanbar and took the
other one for himself. His slave said: “You are the Commander of the
Faithful. You climb up the pulpit and deliver sermons to the people. You
deserve more to wear the more expensive garment.” Imam Ali replied: “I
am ashamed to seek superiority over you in this respect. I heard God’s
Prophet say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألْبِسُوهُم ِممّا تَلْبَسُونَ وَأطْعِمُوهُم ممّا تأكُلونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Clothe them with what you wear yourselves, and feed them with what you
eat.”*[^5]

The Prophet of Islam said:  
 “Your slaves are your brothers. Treat them with kindness. Seek their
help in performing your hard tasks, and help them in the performance of
difficult tasks.” [^6]  
 He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أوْصانِي حَبِيبي جِبْرَئيلُ بِالرِّفْقِ بِالرَّقيقِ حَتىّ ظَنَنْتُ
أنَّهُ سَيَضرِبُ لهُ أجَلاً يَخْرُجُ فِيهِ حُرّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“My friend Gabriel advised me about treating my slaves with gentleness
so much that I thought he would soon establish a deadline for freeing
them.”*[^7]

Abu-Dharr and Donating a Garment
--------------------------------

Abu-Dharr al-Ghifari owned two long expensive togas with which he
covered himself. After a while, he used one of them to make himself a
garment. He used to wear a cloak on top of that. He donated the other
one to his slave. When the people found out, they blamed him and said:
“You would have looked more handsome if you used both togas to make an
attire for yourself.”

Abu-Dharr replied: “But I heard the Prophet of Islam say: “Clothe your
slaves with what you wear yourselves, and feed them with the same with
which you feed yourselves.[^8] Once the Prophet of Islam noticed a man
was riding while his slave was walking behind him. The Prophet said:
“Let your slave ride with you since he is your brother. His spirit is
similar to your spirit.”[^9]

Imam Ridha and Slaves
---------------------

Yaser and Nader were both slaves of Imam Ridha . They said that Imam
Ridha told them: “Whenever you see me while you are sitting down and
eating, do not move until you finish your meal.”[^10]

Imam Sadiq and Slaves
---------------------

Once Imam Sadiq asked one of his slaves to go and do something. He went,
and did not return on time. The Imam went after him, and found him
asleep. He sat there and waited until he woke up. Then Imam Sadiq faced
him and said: “O man! Why do you sleep both at night and during the
daytime? The night is for you to rest, and the day is for you to
struggle to fulfill your needs.”[^11] The few examples above are only
cited to illustrate how the Immaculate Imams treated their slaves and
how much they honored them and respected them.

Pledges for the Slaves
----------------------

The Prophet of Islam did a lot to raise the status of the slaves. As an
example, he made a pledge of brotherhood for slaves such as Bilal
al-Habashi (the Abyssinian), Zayd ibn Harithe and Kharizat ibn Zayd with
free Muslims such as Khalid ibn Rowayhe Khasami, Hamza ibn Abi Talib and
Abu Bakr ibn Abi Quhafah. He also married off many of the women from
noble families to the slaves. He first married off his own aunt’s first
daughter named Zaynab, the daughter of Jahsh to the slave named Zayd ibn
Harithe.

Then he married off the daughter of the head of the Bani Bayazeh tribe -
the daughter of Zeyad ibn Lobayd to Jowbayr. In addition to this, he
appointed Usama ibn Zayd (the son of a slave) to be the head of the
Islamic armed forces and go to Syria to fight with the Roman enemies.
This he did even though there were many brave free men such as Umar, Abu
Bakr, and others from among the immigrants[^12] and the helpers[^13]
available to fill that position.

The Rewards for Freeing Slaves
------------------------------

So far, we have expressed the importance of the rights of the slaves as
expressed by the Noble Prophet of Islam and the Immaculate Imams . Now
we shall discuss the rewards for freeing slaves. We have already
discussed the rights of the trainer through ownership, and the issue
related to free slaves. There is a section in Wasa\`il al-Shī\`ah by
Sheikh Toosi called “Kitab ul-‘Itq”. In the first chapter of this
section called “Bab ul-Estehbabeh” there are many traditions regarding
the rewards for freeing slaves. We will mention a few of them here.

In the first tradition in this chapter we read: “Muhammad ibn al-Husayn
quoted on the authority of al-Husayn ibn al-Sa’ed on the authority of
Abi Abdullah Ja’far ibn Muhammad :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعتِقُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِكُلِّ عُضْوٍ مِنهُ عُضْواً مِن النّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God the Exalted the High will save whoever frees his slave from the
Fire. For every organ that he frees, God will save one of his organs
from the Fire.”*[^14]

In the fourth tradition in this chapter we read: “Husayn ibn Muhammad
quoted on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali on the authority of his
grandfathers on the authority of Bashir an-Nab’bal that he heard Imam
Sadiq say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أعْتَقَ نَسَمَةً صالِحَةً لِوجْهِ اللهِ كَفَّرَ اللهُ عَنهُ
مَكانَ كُلِّ عُضْوٍ مِنهُ عُضْواً مِن النّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God will forgive whoever frees a good servant of God for God’s sake.
God will save his organs from the Fire (of Hell) - an organ will be
saved for each organ freed.”*[^15]

The Evening of the Day of ‘Arafah498 and Freeing Slaves
-------------------------------------------------------

In the sixth tradition of this chapter, Imam Sadiq has been quoted as
saying: “The Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali freed one thousand
slaves using money he earned with his own hard work.” In the second
chapter of this section, it has been stated that it is recommended to
free slaves on the evening of the day of ‘Arafah. Two traditions from
Imam Sadiq have been narrated to support this. The first one is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسْتَحَبُّ لِلرَّجُلِ أنْ يَتَقَرَّبَ إلى اللهِ عَشِيَّةَ عَرَفَةَ
وَيَوْمَ عَرَفَةَ بِالعِتْقِ والصَّدَقَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is recommended for man to seek proximity to God on the day and
evening of ‘Arafah by freeing slaves and giving charity.”*[^16]

Thus from what we have described one can better comprehend the depth of
the meaningful words of Imam Sajjad regarding slaves. Therefore, we
should treat them as the Noble Prophet and the Immaculate Imams did.

[^1]: In you r shelter.

[^2]: Islam and Human Rights, p.204, quoted from Nahjul Fasahat, p.120.

[^3]: Ibid. from Shubhat al-Islam, p.34.

[^4]: Islam and Human Rights, p. 204, quoted from Bihar al-Anwar, v.16,
p.40.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Ibid. p.206.

[^7]: Ibid. quoted from “The History of Slavery” (Persian text), p.74.

[^8]: Islam and Human Rights, quoted from Bihar al-Anwar, v.16, p.40.

[^9]: Ibid. quoted from The History of Slavery (Persian text), p.74.

[^10]: Ibid. quoted from Bihar al-Anwar, v.15, p.41.

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: Those who emigrated from Makkah to Madina.

[^13]: Those who lived in Madina and helped the Prophet and the other
emigrants who accompanied him.

[^14]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.16, pp. 2-4.

[^15]: Ibid.

[^16]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.16, pp.2-4


