Right n. 24: The Right of the Child
===================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الولد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمَّا حَقُّ وَلَدِكَ فَتَعْلَمَ أنَّهُ مِنْكَ وَمُضَافٌ إلَيكَ فِي
عَاجِلِ الدُنْيَا بخَيْرِهِ وَشَرِّهِ، وَأَنَّكَ مَسْئولٌ عَمَّا
ولِّيتَهُ مِنْ حُسْنِ الأَدَب وَالدّلالَةِ عَلَى رَبهِ وَالْمَعُونةِ
لَهُ عَلَى طَاعَتِهِ فِيكَ وَفِي نفْسِهِ، فَمُثابٌ عَلَى ذلِكَ
وَمُعَاقَبٌ، فاعْمَلْ فِي أَمْرِهِ عَمَلَ الْمُتَزَيِّنِ بحُسْنِ
أَثرِهِ عَلَيْهِ فِي عَاجِلِ الدُّنْيَا، الْمُعْذِرِ إلَى رَبهِ فِيمَا
بَيْنَكَ وبَيْنَهُ بحُسْنِ الْقِيَامِ عَلَيْهِ وَالأَخذُ لَهُ مِنْهُ.
وَلا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of your child is that you should know that he is from
you and he will be ascribed to you in this world due to both his good
deeds and his evil deeds. And you are responsible for what has been
entrusted to you in teaching him good conduct, and guiding him toward
his Lord and helping him to obey Him on your behalf and for himself.
Then you will be rewarded for so doing, and you will be punished.**[^1]

**Then regarding his affairs, act like one who will be proud of bringing
him up in this world, and one who is excused by his Lord for what is
between you and him for taking good care of him, and the good results
you achieved. And there is no power but in God.**

Imam Sajjad mentions the following points regarding the rights of
children:  
 1 A father should not forget that the child is his and that the child’s
good or bad deeds will be ascribed to him.

2 A father is responsible for guiding the child to obey God, and to
teach and educate him.

3 A father should not be indifferent to the result of the deeds of his
child. There will be rewards for the child’s good deeds, and punishment
for the child’s bad deeds for the father, too.

4 A father should do his best to raise the child so that his excuse is
acceptable both to his child and God.

The rights of parents were presented in previous chapters. In this
chapter, Imam Sajjad presents the rights of children incumbent upon
parents. There is no doubt that the very foundation of each child starts
when a couple gets married and realizes that the fruit of their love and
mutual life will be the children that they have and raise. Some of the
traits of the children are genetically inherited from their parents.
Children are thus a reflection of their parents’ characteristics.

The issue of genetic inheritance of traits also holds true in plants and
animals, and is not to be discussed here further. Once by God’s will the
child is born into this material world, Islam considers the parents
highly responsible towards him. They should first realize the importance
of this issue, and seek God’s help in fulfilling their heavy duties. We
will briefly discuss these duties here.

To successfully raise children, parents should consider the following
two important points. First, they should revive the child’s potential
talents, and secondly they should work to eliminate the child’s wrong or
harmful inclinations. A good teacher is one who studies and discovers
the child’s talents and uses practical and scientific methods to develop
them to the point of their perfection and application. He also destroys
the potentially bad hereditary inclinations left over in the child from
his parents or grandparents. Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَجِبُ لِلوَلَدِ عَلى والِدِهِ ثَلاثُ خِصالٍ: اخْتِيارُهُ
لِوالِدَتِهِ وَتَحْسِينُ اسْمِهِ وَالمُبالَغَةُ في تَأدِيبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Three rights for the child are incumbent upon his father: selecting a
(good) mother for him, giving him a good name, and exerting the utmost
effort in raising him well.”*[^2]

Thus Imam Sadiq has considered that parents must exert all efforts to
raise their children.  
 Imam Sajjad said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعِنِّي عَلى تَربِيَتِهِم وَتَأدِيبِهِم وَبَرِّهِم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O God! Please help me in raising and educating my children and making
them good people.”*[^3]

Thus, we realize that raising children is a hard task and everyone
should seek God’s help in this important affair.

The Rights of Children
----------------------

Children have certain rights over their parents from the time that they
are born. The first right relates to naming them. This right has been
mentioned in many traditions. The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ حَقِّ الوَلَدِ عَلى الوالِدِ ِ أنْ يُحْسِنَ اسْمَهُ ويُحَسِّنَ
أدَبَه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Among the rights of child over the father are that he chooses a good
name for him, and raises him well.”*[^4]

The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَمُّوا أوْلادَكُم أسْماءَ الأنْبِياءِ وَأَحْسَنُ الأسمَاءِ
عَبْدُاللهِ وَعَبْدُالرَّحْمنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Give your children the names of the Prophets. The best names are
Abdullah and Abd al-Rahman.”* [^5]

The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِن حَقِّ الوَلَدِ عَلى والِدِهِ ثَلاثَة: يُحْسِنُ اسمَهُ ويُعَلِّمُهُ
الكِتابَةَ ويُزَوِّجُهُ إذا بَلَغَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Children have three rights over their father: that he give them a good
name, teach them how to read and write, and marry them off when they
mature.”*[^6]

Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَقُّ الوَلَدِ عَلى الوالِدِ أنْ يُحْسِنَ اسمَهُ ويُحَسِّنَ أدَبَهُ
ويُعَلِّمَهُ القْرآنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The right of a child incumbent upon his father is that the father
should choose a good name for him and teach him good etiquette and the
Qur’an.”*[^7]

Changing bad Names by the Prophet
---------------------------------

The Prophet Muhammad changed bad names of people and places to good ones
and freed the people from bad feelings and humiliation due to having a
bad name. Imam Sadiq quoted on the authority of his father that the
Prophet changed the ugly names of people and towns.[^8]

Umar had a daughter whom he had named Asiyah meaning sinner. The Prophet
changed her name to Jamileh meaning beautiful.[^9] In another tradition
we read: “ Abi Rafe’ narrated that the daughter of Umm-Salma’ was named
Barrah meaning good-doer. The Prophet of God changed her name to
Zaynab.”[^10]

The Prophet did this since that name connotated selfishness and some
people said that she wants to claim to be pure. The Prophet changed her
name to Zaynab to end the people’s humiliating her. Ahmad ibn Haytham
asked Imam Ridha : “Why did the Arabs put the names of animals such as
dogs, wild cats, tigers, etc. on their children?” Imam Ridha replied:
“The Arabs were fighters. They named their children this way so as to
frighten their enemies when they called their children during
fighting.”[^11]

Bad Names: A Cause of Humiliation
---------------------------------

The head of an Arab tribe was named Jareyah that means a kind of boa. He
was frank and strong. His relatives and him were displeased with
Mu\`awiyah’s oppressive rule and Mu\`awiyah had sensed this. Mu\`awiyah
decided to humiliate him. Once when Mu\`awiyah faced him,

Mu\`awiyah said: “How lowly were you in your tribe that they named you a
boa.” Jareyah immediately replied: “And how lowly you were in your tribe
that they named you Mu\`awiyah meaning a female dog.” Mu\`awiyah got
angry and said: “Shut up. You have no mother!” Jareyah replied: “I do
have a mother. By God we have hearts which beat in your hatred.” Then
Mu\`awiyah who was defeated said: “May God not increase the people like
you.”[^12]

Another example is related to a man who lived at the time of Mu\`awiyah.
He was the head of his tribe and his name was Sharik ibn Aoor. The word
“Sharik” means partner in Arabic, and it is not a good name. His
father’s name was Aoor that means “one with a defective eye” in Arabic.

Once when he went to see Mu\`awiyah, Mu\`awiyah said: “Your name means
“partner” but there are no partners for God. You are the son of the man
with a defective eye. However, a healthy man is better than one with a
defective eye. You are ugly, and beauty is better than ugliness. What is
the reason that the people of your tribe have chosen you as their
chief?”

Sharik replied: “By God your name is Mu\`awiyah which means a dog! You
barked and they called you Mu\`awiyah[^13]. You are the grandson of Harb
that means fighting, but peace is better than fighting. You are the son
of Sakhr that means rocks, but dirt is always better than rocks. How can
you be the Commander of the Faithful?” This really hurt Mu\`awiyah and
he ordered him to depart.[^14]

Ugliness or physical defects cause a sense of humiliation. Ugly names do
the same. It is for this reason that we are instructed in Islam to
choose proper names for our children. Choosing proper names will be very
influential on their personality, and will make them immune to
psychological complexes.

So far, we have discussed the duties of parents to choose good names for
their children. Next, we will discuss the next duty of parents in
educating their children and acquainting them with God. Let us see what
is said in this regard in the traditions.

How Loving Affects Child Development
------------------------------------

There is no doubt that children need both food and love to grow. They
receive their food from the milk they get when they are breast-fed by
their mother. This is the perfect food that God has prepared for their
physical growth. The food for their spirit consists of the training and
care they receive from their parents. Children need both food and love.
The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحِبُّوا الصِّبْيانَ وَارْحَمُوهُم فإذَا وَعَدْتُمُوهُم فَفُوا لَهُم
فإنَّهُم لا يَرَوْنَ إلاّ أنَّكُم رازِقُوهُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Love your children, and be kind and merciful to them. Fulfill your
promises made to them since children consider their father to be the one
who provides for their sustenance.”*[^15]

Loving the children and fulfilling promises made to them are stressed
here so that they do not learn to break their promises. There are many
ways to express your love. One way is to kiss and hug them when they are
small. The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبّلوا أولادَكُم فإنَّ لكُم بِكُلِّ قُبْلَةٍ دَرَجَةً في الجَنَّةِ ما
بَيْنَ كُلّ دَرَجَتَينِ خَمْسَمِائَةِ عامٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Kiss your children. There is an elevation in your rank in Paradise as
a reward for each kiss. Each raise in rank is as much as five hundred
years.”*[^16]

Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُبلَةُ الوَلَدِ رَحمَةٌ وقُبلَةُ المَرأةِ شَهوَةٌ وقُبلَةُ
الوالِدَينِ عِبادَةٌ وقُبلَةُ الرَّجُلِ أخاهُ دِينٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Kissing the child is mercy. Kissing the woman is desire. Kissing
parents is worship, and kissing one’s believing brethren is
religion.”*[^17]

Kissing is restricted for others. Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا بَلَغَتِ الجارِيَةُ سِتَّ سِنينَ فلا تُقَبِّلْها، والغُلامُ لا
تُقَبِّلُهُ المَرأةُ إذا جَاوَزَ سَبْعَ سِنينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Men should not kiss girls who are older than six and women should not
kiss boys who are older than seven.”*[^18]

The Prophet loved his grandsons and kissed them often. Once a man named
Aqra ibn Habes was present there when the Prophet kissed them. The man
said: “I have ten sons, but I have never kissed any of them.” The
Prophet said: “So why has God taken love out of your heart?” Therefore
we realize that the Prophet considered that man’s act of not kissing his
children to be a form of lack of love.”[^19]

Excessive Love
--------------

Although Islam advises us to love our children, it admonishes us against
excessive love, and its possible side effects. Imam Baqir said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَرُّ الآبَاءِ مَن دَعاهُ بِرُّهُ إلى الإفْراطِ وَشَرُّ الأبْناءِ مَن
دَعاهُ التَّقْصيرُ إلى العُقوقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The worst of fathers is one whose kindness (to his children) drives
him to excess. The worst of children is one whose negligence leads him
to undutifulness (towards parents).”* [^20]

Excessive love for the children might spoil them and make them haughty
and selfish. Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَرُّ الأمُورِ الرِّضا عَنِ النَّفْسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The worst of affairs is to be pleased with oneself.”*[^21]

Daughters are the Best Children
-------------------------------

Parents should thank God for the children that God grants them. They
should realize that children are God’s trust in them. They should
realize their heavy responsibility and exert all efforts to educate and
raise them. The Immaculate Imams expressed that girls should be treated
more kindly than boys are. This is really stressed in the sayings of the
Prophet and the Immaculate Imams . Consider the following tradition in
this regard.  
 Hazieh Yamani quoted on the authority of God’s Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَيرُ أوْلادِكُم البَناتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Your daughters are your best children.”*[^22]

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
البَناتُ حَسَناتٌ وَالبَنونَ نِعْمَةٌ؛ فَالحَسَناتُ يُثابُ عَلَيها
وَالنِّعْمَةُ يُسألُ عَنْها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Daughters are good deeds, and sons are blessings. Good deeds will be
rewarded and blessings will be questioned about.”*[^23]

The Prophet was given the glad tidings that God had granted him a
daughter. His companions were so upset about the news that one could
notice it from their faces. The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا لَكُم؟ رَيْحانَةٌ أَشَمُّها وَرِزْقُها عَلى اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Why are you so upset? A daughter is like a flower that I will smell.
God will give her daily bread.”* [^24]

God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نِعْمَ الوِلْدُ البَناتُ المُخَدَّراتُ. مَن كَانَتْ عِندَهُ وَاحِدَةٌ
جَعَلَها اللهُ سِتراً لهُ مِن النّارِ، وَمَن كانَتْ عِندَهُ اثْنَتانِ
أدْخَلَهُ اللهُ بِهِما الجَنَّةَ، وإنْ كُنَّ ثَلاثَةً أوْ مِثْلَهُنَّ
مِن الأخَواتِ وُضِعَ عنهُ الجِهادُ وَالصَّدَقَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The best children are daughters behind veils. Whoever has one
daughter, God will make her a protection for him against the Fire of
Hell. Whoever has two daughters, God will make him enter Heaven with
them. If one has three daughters or sisters, the duty of participation
in a holy war and payment of charity are removed from him.”*[^25]

Ibn Abbas quoted on the authority of God’s Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ دَخَلَ السّوقَ فاشْتَرى تُحفَةً فَحَمَلَها إلى عِيالِهِ كانَ
كَحامِلِ صَدَقَةٍ إلى قَومٍ مَحاوِيجَ، وَليَبْدَؤوا بالإناثِ قَبلَ
الذّكُورِ فإنَّهُ مَن فَرَّحَ ابْنَةً فَكأنَّما أعْتَقَ رَقَبَةً مِن
وُلدِ اسمَاعِيلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One who goes to the bazaar to buy a present for his family is like one
who has given some charity to needy people. One must put a higher
priority on giving gifts to his daughters over his sons, since making
one’s daughter happy is like freeing a slave from the children of
Ishmael.”*[^26]

Raise Children to Raise Your Honor
----------------------------------

Imam Sajjad asked us to attend to our children’s affairs in such a way
as to cause their social growth and increased honor. We should raise
them in such a way that they can live with honor and be a source of
honor for us. It was mentioned that excessive love for the child might
spoil him and make him selfish. He will also be raised in such a way
that he cannot rely on himself and become independent. Fathers should
foster a sense of self-confidence in their children from their early
childhood so that they can be strong in the face of hardships. Imam
Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ لُقمانُ: يا بُنَيَّ إنْ تَأدَّبْتَ صَغِيراً انْتَفَعْتَ بهِ
كَبِيراً، وَمَنْ عَنى بالأدَبِ اهْتَمَّ بهِ وَمَن اهْتَمَّ بِهِ
تَكَلَّفَ عِلْمَهُ وَمَنْ تَكَلَّفَ عِلْمَهُ اشْتَدَّ طَلَبُهُ وَمَنِ
اشْتَدَّ طَلَبُهُ أدْرَكَ بهِ مَنْفَعَتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Luqman said: O my son! You can benefit from politeness later if you
learn to be polite when you are young. One who wants to learn to be
polite makes an effort to learn. He will make all efforts to acquire
educational sciences. Once he learns it, he can benefit from it. O my
son! Always oblige yourself to perform your personal duties, and force
yourself to withstand the hardships imposed on you by others. Do not be
greedy with others if you hope to attain nobility in this world. Do not
place any hopes in other people. The Prophets and the Saints have all
been able to attain their higher ranks by cutting hopes off the
people.”*[^27]

We see that Luqman advises his son not to place any hopes in what others
have; thus, he helps him develop to be independent. Parents should use
these recommendations in raising their children.

[^1]: If you fail.

[^2]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.238.

[^3]: Sahifah al-Sajjadiyah.

[^4]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, v.2, p.618.

[^5]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.220.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Nahjul Balaghah, Hikmah no.399.

[^8]: Koodak (Guftar-i-Falsafi), v.2, p.228, quoted from Gharb al-Asnad,
p.45.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Ibid. quoted from Sahih Muslim, v.6, p.173.

[^11]: Koodak (Guftar-i-Falsafi), quoted from Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.5,
p.115.

[^12]: Koodak (Guftar-i-Falsafi), v.2, p.228, quoted from Gharb
al-Asnad, p.45.

[^13]: The son of Abu Sufyan Sakhr b. Harb b. Umayyah.

[^14]: Koodak (Guftar-i-Falsafi), quoted from Samarat al-Uraq, p.59.

[^15]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.219.

[^16]: Ibid. p.220.

[^17]: Ibid. p.220.

[^18]: Ibid. p.223.

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: Tarikh Ya’qubi, v.2, p.320.

[^21]: Sharh-i-Ghurar wa Durar, v.4, p.173.

[^22]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, pp.219-220.

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: Ibid.

[^25]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, pp.219-220.

[^26]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, v.2, p.615.

[^27]: Koodak (Guftar-i-Falsafi), v.2, pp.293-294.


