About The Author
================

Although this book is written by Ghodratullah Mashayekhi and is a
commentary on The Treatise on Rights, it is actually considered to be
authored by the fourth Imam - Ali ibn al-Husayn - since he is the author
of The Treatise On Rights. The commentator has just given more details
about what the Immaculate Imam has said. Imam Sajjad is the son of Imam
Husayn and Shah Banu.

According to some narrations, he was born on Sha’ban 5, 660 A.D. and
became martyred on Muharram 12, 717 A.D. by Walid Ibn-e Abdol Malik.
When he was born, his grandfather Imam Ali was controlling the affairs
of the government. He experienced three years of the Alavi Caliphate and
a short period of Imam Hassan’s government, which lasted for only
several months.

He witnessed the saga of Karbala that took place in 683 A.D. and
survived the day of Ashura. In accordance with the Divine decree, Imam
Husayn appointed him as the people's next leader after Imam Husayn’s
martyrdom at Karbala. Imam Sajjad who was also present there was ill and
unable to join the fight against the forces of Yazid. Thus, he was not
martyred. During his journey from Karbala, he delivered speeches in the
towns of Kufa and Damascus, and he informed the people of his father's
holy intentions. In this way, he disgraced Yazid.

Imam Sajjad liked the orphans, the poor, and the handicapped to come to
his house and be his guests. He used to give food and clothing to many
families who were poor and needy. Imam Sajjad was so earnest in
worshipping God that he was called ‘Zayn al-Abidin’, which means ‘the
adornment of the worshippers’, while his title ‘al-Sajjad’ means ‘one
who prostrates long and often.’ He lived for fifty-seven years, and
devoted most of his efforts to reviving the spiritual aspects of the
society. Hence, Imam Sajjad's life and statements were entirely devoted
to asceticism and religious teachings.

His religious teachings are in the form of invocations and
supplications. Having witnessed the unpleasant social situation of that
era during which religious values were deviated and changed, Imam Sajjad
attempted to establish a divine relationship between the people and God.
Consequently, he was able to touch the hearts of the people and the
people were deeply influenced by his words and his life style. His
famous supplications are well-known as “al-Ŝaĥīfah al-Sajjadiyyah.”

About three decades of the Imam's life were devoted to the revival of
spiritualism in the society. This book is one of his most outstanding
teachings. It is a master document on Islamic human rights, which not
only covers human rights, but also includes the rights of God, our body
parts, and our deeds. To any intelligent reader who ponders deeply about
the contents of this valuable document on rights, it immediately becomes
clear that Islam has already established the first document on rights
nearly fourteen centuries ago. However, unfortunately in our modern
world, there are those who claim to respect human rights, but they do so
only superficially


