Right n. 29: The Right of the Caller to Prayer
==============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق المؤذن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا حَقُّ الْمُؤَذِّنِ فَأَنْ تَعْلَمَ أنّهُ مُذَكِّرُكَ برَبكَ
وَدَاعِيكَ إلَى حَظِّكَ وَأَفْضَلُ أَعْوَانِكَ عَلَى قَضَاءِ
الْفَرِيضَةِ الَّتِي افتَرَضَهَا اللهُ عَلَيْكَ فَتَشْكُرَهُ عَلَى
ذَلِكَ شُكْرَكَ لِلْمُحْسِنِ إلَيكَ. وَإنْ كُنْتَ فِي بَيْتِكَ
مُهْتَمًّا لِذَلِكَ لَمْ تَكُنْ للهِ فِي أَمْرِهِ مُتَّهِماً
وَعَلِمْتَ أنَّهُ نِعْمَةٌ مِن اللَّهِ عَلَيْكَ، لا شَكَّ فِيهَا،
فَأَحْسِنْ صُحْبَةَ نِعْمَةِ اللَّهِ بحَمْدِ اللَّهِ عَلَيْهَا عَلَى
كُلِّ حَالٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of your caller to prayer is that you should know that he
is**[^1] **the one** **reminding you of your Lord, and is calling you to
your good fortune, and is your greatest helper in fulfilling an
obligation that God has made incumbent upon you. Therefore, thank him
for that just as you thank one who does some good to you.**

**And if you are upset with him at home due to this, you should not
accuse him for this since his act is for God. And you should know that
he is one of the blessings of God for you. There is no doubt about it.
Then you should kindly treat God’s blessing, by praising God for him
under all circumstances. And there is no power but in God.**

In short, we must remember that the one who calls us to prayer has the
following rights incumbent upon us based on the following reasons:

1) He is the one who reminds us of our Lord.

2) He is the one who unites us to get the benefits that we can derive
from praying.

3) He is our best assistant in fulfilling an obligatory duty.

Thus, we must thank him in such a way that we thank one who does good to
us. If we are upset with him, we should not accuse him since his act is
for the sake of God. We should know that he is one of God’s Blessings.
We should treat him with kindness and be grateful to him. Materialistic
forces draw us away from God. It is the one who calls us to prayer who
reminds us of the Lord. He helps save us from indulging in material
pleasures. He assists us towards performing the prayer that helps us
prosper. A high value has been recorded for the one who calls us to
prayer in the traditions and books on Islamic jurisprudence. Few have
been promised the rewards that those who call the people to pray have
been promised.

The Meaning of ‘Azan’
---------------------

‘Azan’ in Arabic means announcement. Consider the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَذَانٌ مِّنَ اللّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And an announcement from God and His Apostle.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Tawbah 9:3]***

The caller to prayer loudly announces that it is time to pray. We read
in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَذَّنَ مُؤَذِّنٌ بَيْنَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…But a crier shall proclaim between them…” [The Holy Qur’an, al-A’raf
7:44]***

The Decree to Call for Prayer
-----------------------------

The decree to call for prayers was revealed in the first year of the
immigration of the Noble Prophet to Medina. Other dates are also
recorded. The need for it became apparent when the number of Muslims
became so many that it was hard for them all to know when to pray. They
talked to each other and decided to establish a sign indicating that it
is time to pray.

Some suggested to ring a bell but the Prophet did not agree since this
was a Christian practice. Some suggested the use of a horn but the
Prophet did not agree since this was a Jewish practice. Some suggested
playing on the tambourine but the Prophet said that this was a Roman
practice. Others suggested using fire but the Prophet said that this was
a practice of the Magians.[^2]

Some suggested raising a flag, but the Prophet did not say anything.
Therefore, they did not settle on anything specific. Gabriel descended
when the Prophet was in Ali’s house and revealed the decree for the call
to prayer. Sadooq narrated in Man La Yahzuruhu al-Faqih: “Mansoor ibn
Hazim quoted on the authority of Imam Sadiq : Gabriel descended to the
Prophet of God when he was sleeping in Ali’s house. Gabriel recited the
‘Azan’ and the ‘Iqamah.’ Then the Prophet said: O’ Ali! Did you hear
that? He said: “O’ Prophet of God! Yes.” Then the Prophet said: “Did you
memorize it?” Imam Ali said: “Yes.” Then the Prophet said: “Then teach
it to Bilal.” Then Ali taught it to Bilal.[^3]

The Jurisprudents’ Rule on the Call to Prayer
---------------------------------------------

It is recommended for men and women to say the ‘Azan’ and ‘Iqamah’
before they pray. It has been quoted on the authority of Al-Mashoor, as
quoted by many others that it is recommended to say the ‘Azan’ and
‘Iqamah’. It is quoted in the books Al-Jomal and its commentary,
Al-Moqna’eh, Al-Nahayat, Al-Mabsoot, Al-Waseeleh, Al-Mohaz’zab, and
Mofid’s Akham Al-Nisaa that it is obligatory for men to say the ‘Azan’
and ‘Iqamah’ in congregational prayers. The jurisprudents have specified
the following cases in which there is no need to say the ‘Azan’:

1) For the afternoon Friday prayer once it is said right either after
the noon prayer or after the Friday prayer.

2) For the afternoon prayer on the day of Arafeh if it is said right
after the noon prayer.

3) For the night prayer on the day of celebration of sacrifice[^4] for
one who is in Mash’ar al-Haram if it is said right after the evening
prayer.

4) The afternoon or the night prayer of a ‘Mustahazeh’ woman who must
say them right after the noon or evening prayers.

5) The afternoon or the night prayer of one who cannot control his
urination or bowel movement.

In either of the above cases, there is no need to say the ‘Azan’ if the
prayers are said right one after the other or shortly thereafter.[^5]
Certain conditions have been stated by the jurisprudents for ‘Azan’ and
‘Iqamah’. First, one must have the intention to say the ‘Azan’ and
‘Iqamah’ from the start to the end. Therefore, if one says them without
intending to approach God, it is not accepted of him.

Secondly, the one who says the ‘Azan’ and ‘Iqamah’ must have faith.
However, it is not required for the one who says the call to prayer to
be mature, especially when it is used as an announcement. However, all
the jurisprudents require that the one who says the call to prayer as an
announcement should be a man. It is also required that the one who says
the call to prayer for men should be a man.

Thirdly, ‘Azan’ and ‘Iqamah’ must be said in order. Fourthly, there must
be proper continuity of expression in between the parts of the ‘Azan’.
Finally, the call to prayer should be said using correct Arabic.

There are certain conditions other than the prayer in which the
jurisprudents have deemed it good to say the ‘Azan’ and ‘Iqamah’ as
follows:

1) When a child is born, it is good to say the ‘Azan’ in his right ear
and the ‘Iqamah’ in his left ear.

2) When someone gets afraid of ogres or jinns in awesome deserts.

3) It is recommended to say the ‘Azan’ in the ear of one who has not had
any meat for forty days.[^6]

Now that it was said that according to the Shiites, the ‘Azan’ and
‘Iqamah’ are stressed and recommendable, and said that some
jurisprudents consider them to be obligatory for men in congregation
prayers, let us see what the Sunni jurisprudents say about this issue.
Malik and Abu Hanifeh agree with the Shiites and say that ‘Azan’ and
‘Iqamah’ are good in all prayers whether at home or on a trip, whether
said in person or in a congregation. They consider that there are no
cases in which it is obligatory to say the ‘Azan’ or ‘Iqamah’. However,
Ahmad ibn Hanbal as well as the Shafi\`iyah and Malikiyah have said that
‘Azan and Iqamah’ are obligatory as much as necessary.

The Difference in ‘Azan’ Between the Sects
------------------------------------------

The Shiites believe that there are two “Hayya Ala Khayril Amal” after
“Hayya Alal Falah” but the Sunnis believe that “As Salat Khayron Min
al-Nawm,” should follow in the morning prayer. Shiite scholars believe
that “Haya Ala Kharil Amal” had been used during the lifetime of the
Prophet , and his family and the Imams continued saying it. Imam Ali
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلّى اللهُ عَليهِ وآلِهِ يَقُولُ: ”إنَّ خَيرَ
أعْمالِكُمُ الصَّلاةُ.“ وَأمَرَ بِلالاً أنْ يُؤذِّنَ: حَيَّ عَلى خَيرِ
العَمَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I heard the Prophet of God say: ‘The best of your deeds is the prayer.
He ordered Bilal to say “Hayya Ala Khayr’il Amal” in the ‘Azan’**.***
[^7]

The Sunnis accept this to be the case at the time of the Prophet , but
say that Umar ibn Khattab ordered it to be removed, and to be replaced
with “As Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm” in the morning prayer. Sa’d ed-Din
Taftazani quoted on the authority of Umar in Hashiye Bar Sharhul Uzad:
Umar said: There were three things at the time of the Prophet which I
forbade. One was Hajj Tamattu\`, the second was temporary marriage, and
the third one was “Hayya Ala Khayr’il Amal.” [^8] In Sharh al-Tajrid by
Qushji, the above is narrated, but it ends with “I will punish whoever
performs any of these.” It is not clear who had authorized Umar to do
that. The responsibility for this only rests upon those who follow him.

The Parts of ‘Azan’
-------------------

According to many traditions in Wasa\`il al-Shī\`ah, there are four
“Allahu Akbar”, two “Ashado An La Illaha Illal’lah”, two “Ashado An’na
Muhammadan Rasoulul’lah”, and two “Hayya Alas- Salat”, two “Hayya Ala
al-Falah” and two “Hayya Ala Khayril Amal”, two “Allahu Akbar”, and two
“La Illaha Illal’lah” in the ‘Azan’. “Ashado An’na Ali’an Hojatul’lah”
is not a part of the ‘Azan’, but it is recommended to say it.

The Philosophy behind ‘Azan’ as Expressed by Imam Ridha
-------------------------------------------------------

The late Sadooq quoted on the authority of Imam Ridha : In fact, the
people were ordered to say the call to prayer for many reasons, among
which we can mention to remind those who might have forgotten to pray;
to awaken the ignorant ones; to recognize those who are ignorant when it
is time to pray. The one who calls to prayer invites the people to
worship God through his call to prayer. He makes the people more
inclined to pray and confess to the unity of God. He publicizes his own
faith and submission and reminds those who have forgotten.

The one who calls to prayer starts by glorifying God and ends by
testifying to His unity. Each part is repeated twice in order to affect
the person who hears it. If he does not notice it the first time, he
will recognize it the second time it is recited. Since the testifying to
the unity of God and the Prophethood of Muhammad are the foundations of
our faith, they are repeated twice. Thus, when one testifies twice to
the unity of God and the Prophethood of Muhammad , he has
whole-heartedly testified to all the pillars of faith. The next part of
the ‘Azan’ is the invitation to pray, as this is its main purpose. Thus,
this is the call to prosperity and good deeds, and the ‘Azan’ ends in
the name of God, as it started with it.[^9]

The Reward for Saying the Call To Prayer
----------------------------------------

Mu\`awiyah ibn Wahab quoted on the authority of Imam Sadiq on the
authority of God’s Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن أذَّنَ في مِصْرٍ مِن أمصَارِ المُسلِمِينَ سَنَةً وَجَبتْ لهُ
الجَنَّةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever performs the call to prayer in one of the Muslim towns for one
year, Heaven is incumbent on him.”*[^10]

Suleiman ibn Ja’far quoted on the authority of his father that once when
a man from Sham went to see Imam Sadiq , the Imam told him that Bilal is
the first person to go to Heaven. The man asked the reason. The Imam
said: “Because he was the first one to say the call to prayer.”[^11] In
another tradition Jabir Ja’far quoted on the authority of Imam Baqir
that God’s Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُؤَذِّنُ المُحْتَسِبُ كالشّاهِرِ سَيفَهُ في سَبيلِ اللهِ القاتِلِ
بَينَ الصَّفَّينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The one who calls to prayer, seeking a reward from God, is like one
who has drawn his sword in the way of God and is fighting in between the
rows.”*[^12]

Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يحُشَرُ المُؤذّنونَ يَومَ القيامَةِ طِوالَ الأعْناقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Those who say the call to prayer will be raised as chiefs on the Day
of Resurrection.”*[^13]

The late Sadooq quoted in the Manafi tradition on the authority of
Ja’far ibn Muhammad on the authority of his father on the authority of
God’s Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أذَّنَ مُحتَسِباً يُريدُ بِذلِكَ وَجْهَ اللهِ تَعالى أعْطاهُ
اللهُ ثَوابَ أربَعِينَ ألفَ شَهِيدٍ وَأرْبَعِينَ ألفَ صِدّيقٍ
وَيَدخُلُ في شَفاعَتِهِ أربَعُونَ ألفَ مُسِيءٍ مِن أُمَّتي إلى
الجَنَّةِ. إلا وإنَّ المُؤذِّنَ إذا قالَ: أشْهَدُ أنْ لا إلَهَ إلاّ
اللهُ، صَلّى عَليهِ سَبعونَ ألفَ مَلَكٍ وَاستَغْفَرُوا لهُ وَكانَ
يَومَ القِيامَةِ في ظِلِّ العَرشِ حَتىّ يَفْرُغَ اللهُ مِن حِسابِ
الخَلائِقِ وَيَكْتُبُ ثَوابَ قولِهِ: أشْهَدُ أنَّ محَمَّداً رَسُولُ
اللهِ أربَعُونَ ألفَ مَلَكٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God the High will grant the reward of forty-thousand martyrs and
forty-thousand veracious ones to whoever says the call for prayer for
the sake of God. Due to such a person, forty-thousand sinners from my
nation shall be allowed into Heaven. Indeed, when the one who says the
call to prayer testifies to the unity of God, seventy thousand angels
will send greetings to him and seek God’s forgiveness for him. They will
be in the shade of the Lord’s Throne on the Resurrection Day until God
finishes the reckoning of all people. Forty-thousand angels will record
the reward of his testifying to the Prophethood of Muhammad .”*[^14]

[^1]: In the other version it continues: ”reminding you of your Lord,
calling you to your good fortune, and helping you to accomplish what God
has made obligatory for you. So thank him for that just as you thank one
who does good to you.”

[^2]: Magians were priests of religious settlements from Mesopotamia and
its surroundings, and existed up to the Christian epoch. They believed
in the old nature religion of Iran, which preceded Zorastrianism.

[^3]: Sharh-i-Risalat al-Huquq, Ghopanchi, v.2, p.89.

[^4]: Known as Eid al-Qurban or Eid al-Azha.

[^5]: ‘Urwah al-Wuthqa, chapter on Azan and Iqamah.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Sharh-i-Risalat al-Huquq, Ghopanchi, v.2, p.90.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.4, p.646.

[^10]: Ibid. pp.613-616.

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.4, pp.613-616.


