Right n. 34: The Right of the Partner
=====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الشريك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا حَقُّ الشَّرِيكِ، فَإنْ غَابَ كَفَيْتَهُ، وَإنْ حَضَرَ
سَاويْتَهُ، ولا تَعْزِمْ عَلَى حُكْمِكَ دُونَ حُكْمِهِ، وَلا تَعمَلْ
برَأْيكَ دُونَ مُناظَرَتهِ، وتَحْفَظُ عَلَيْهِ مَالَهُ وَتنْفِي عَنْهُ
خِيَانتَهُ فِيمَا عَزَّ أَو هَانَ فَإنَّهُ بَلَغَنَا أَنَّ «يَدَ اللهِ
عَلَى الشَّرِيكَيْنِ مَا لَمْ يَتَخاوَنا». ولا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of the partner is that you should take care of his
affairs in his absence. And you should treat him equally when he is
present. And you should not make any decisions on your own without
considering his opinion. And you should not act according to your own
opinion before discussing it with him. You should safeguard his
property, and refuse to betray him in what is of great or little
importance, since it has been transmitted to us: “God’s hand is above
(the hands of) the two partners as long as they do not betray each
other.” And there is no power but in God.**

The concept of partnership has been mentioned in the Holy Qur’an when
referring to Moses and his brother Aaron. Here Aaron is to become a
partner with Moses to help him invite Pharaoh to obey God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اشْدُدْ بِهِ أَزْرِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَشْرِكْهُ فِي أَمْرِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Add to my strength through him. And make him share my task.”***
***[The Holy Qur’an, Ta-Ha 20:31-32]***

A partner is one who has a share in something or some work. We read in
the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَكُن لَّهُ شَرِيكٌ فِي الْمُلْكِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Nor has He a partner in His dominion...” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Furqan 25:2]***

This refers to God having no partners. Of course, God has created many
angels and forces to act as intermediate means to run the affairs of the
universe. This also refers to ascribing partners to God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ لَهُمْ شِرْكٌ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Or have they a share in the heavens?” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Fatir
35:40]***

An infidel is one who associates partners with God.[^1]

Partnership as Viewed in Jurisprudence
--------------------------------------

A partnership is not established unless it is regarding two things that
are totally alike in all respects, and are mingled into each other. Then
each partner allows the other one to use it.[^2] Some jurisprudents have
also required that partnership should be verbally expressed in Arabic or
another language. Partners should be adults, and they should be
sound-minded. They should fully opt to engage in partnership and have
the right to use their property. In Qawa\`id al-Ahkam Allameh Hilli
said: “There are four types of partnership:

1 - Partnership of property (Shirkah al-Amwal)  
 2 - Partnership by contributing effort and skill (Shirkah al-Abdan)  
 3 - Partnership based on negotiation (Shirkah al-Mufavezah)  
 4 - Partnership based on credit and reliability (Shirkah al-Wujuh)

However, no forms except the first type are right.”[^3] Therefore,
partnership is only correct in regards to property when done subject to
the conditions expressed by the jurisprudents.

Business Etiquette
------------------

For business to be right and for any earned profits to be legitimate,
there is certain trade etiquette in Islam. There is a whole chapter on
“business etiquette” in Wasa\`il al-Shī\`ah. As partnership is part of
trade, it is subject to that etiquette. Imam Sadiq quoted on the
authority of the Noble Prophet :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن باعَ وَاشْتَرى فَليَحْفَظْ خَمْسَ خِصالٍ وإلاّ فلا يَشْتَرِيَنَّ
وَلا يَبِيعَنَّ: الرّبا وَالحَلْفَ وَكِتْمانَ العَيبِ وَالحَمْدَ إذا
باعَ والذَّمَّ إذا اشْتَرى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever buys or sells should adhere to the following or not engage in
trade:*

*1 - Avoid usury.*  
*2 – Do not swear in trade.*  
*3 – Do not cover up the flaws in his goods.*  
*4 – Do not praise what he wants to sell.*  
*5 – Do not put down what he wants to buy.”*[^4]

In another tradition in Istikharat we read that Ibn Tavoos quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Yahya: “A friend of mine decided to go on a
business trip, but postponed it until he could go to visit Imam Sadiq
and seek his advice. When he went to see Imam Sadiq and asked for
advice, the Imam said: I advise you to be honest. Do not cover up the
flaws of what you want to sell.

Do not cheat or fool the one who buys goods from you since it is
illegitimate to do so. You should like for others what you like for
yourself. Do not swear since false swearing will cause you to go to
Hell. A businessman is at a loss unless what he gives and takes is
right. Therefore, pray when you decide to start your trip and ask God
for good. My father said that the Prophet of God recommended asking God
for good when you want to go on a trip just as he taught the
Qur’an.”[^5]

Partnership as Viewed in Traditions
-----------------------------------

The Noble Prophet said that God the Almighty said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنَا ثالِثُ الشَّريكَينِ ما لَمْ يَخُنْ أحَدُهُما صَاحِبَهُ، فإذا
خَانَهُ خَرَجْتُ مِن بَينِهِما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I am the third party in any partnership as long as one of the partners
does not cheat the other. If he cheats him, I leave the
partnership.”*[^6]

Husayn ibn Mukhtar asked Imam Sadiq : “If one who has a partner finds
out that his partner has cheated him, does he have the right to take the
same amount of money from what they share?” Imam Sadiq replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شُوِّه! إنمَّا اشتَرَكا بأمَانَةِ اللهِ، وإنّي لأُحِبُّ لهُ إنْ رَآى
شَيئاً مِن ذلِكَ أنْ يَسْتُرَ عَلَيهِ ومَا أُحِبُّ أنْ يَأخُذَ مِنهُ
شَيئاً بِغَيرِ عِلْمِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“How unseemly! They only entered into partnership in the security of
God. I wish him to cover up his partner’s mistake, and do not like him
to take anything without the knowledge of his partner.”*[^7]

Thus, we realize that partners should not cheat each other. They should
not take things from their joint property in each other’s absence since
this act would violate the rights of the other partner.

[^1]: Qamus-i-Qur’an, v.4, p.20.

[^2]: Al-Khalaf, Shaykh Tusi, v.2, p.138.

[^3]: Qawa’id al-Ahkam, v.1, p.242.

[^4]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.2, p.284.

[^5]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.2, p.285.

[^6]: Nahjul Fasaha, Kalameh 767.

[^7]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.13, p.187.


