Right n. 35: The Right of Property
==================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق المال
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا حَقُّ المَالِ، فَأَنْ لا تَأْخُذَهُ إلاّ مِنْ حِلِّهِ، ولا
تُنْفِقَهُ إلاّ فِي حِلِّهِ، وَلا تُحَرِّفْهُ عَنْ مَوَاضِعِهِ، ولا
تَصْرِفَهُ عَنْ حَقَائِقِهِ، ولا تَجْعَلْهُ إذا كَانَ مِنَ اللَّهِ
إلاّ إلَيهِ وَسَبَباً إلَى اللَّهِ. ولا تُؤثِرَ بهِ عَلَى نفْسِكَ مَنْ
لَعَلَّهُ لا يَحْمَدُكَ، وَبالْحَرِيِّ أَنْ لا يُحْسنَ خِلافَتَهُ فِي
تَرِكَتِكَ ولا يَعْمَلُ فِيهِ بطَاعَةِ ربكَ فَتَكُونَ مُعِينًا لَهُ
عَلَى ذلِكَ أَو بمَا أَحْدَثَ فِي مَالِكَ أَحْسَنَ نَظَرًا لِنَفْسِهِ،
فَيَعْمَلَ بطَاعَةِ رَبهِ فَيَذْهَبَ بالْغَنِيمَةِ وتَبُوءَ بالإثمِ
وَالْحَسْرَةِ وَالنَّدَامَةِ مَعَ التَّبعَةِ. وَلا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of your property is that you should not attain it except
by legitimate means and you should only spend it for legitimate causes.
You should not spend it improperly, you** **should not use it
wrongfully, and you should only use what is from God in His way and as a
means to approach Him.**

**In it (your property) you should not prefer above yourself one who
does not show gratitude to you, and in fact will neither use your legacy
well nor use it in obedience to your Lord. In that case you will be an
aid to him in that. Or you may bequeath your property to one who spends
it in the way of obedience to God in ways better than you do. Then he
will gain the benefits, and you will be left with the sins, the regret
and the remorse together with the ill consequences. And there is no
power but in God.**

We can summarize this as follows:

1 Proper ways to obtain wealth, and give charity.

2 The proper direction of use of property and its due right.

3 The source of wealth is God. Therefore, wealth must be spent in His
way.

4 Wealth should be used wisely. Otherwise, it will be left as
inheritance. The inheritors might use it properly and gain the related
benefits of this world and the Hereafter. The loss might be left for the
one who earned it in the first place.

Wealth is not stable. It might belong to us one day and belong to others
later. We read the following in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَالُ وَالْبَنُونَ زِينَةُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Wealth and sons are allurements of the life of this world.” [The
Holy Qur’an, al-Kahf 18:46]***

Forms of Ownership
------------------

There are two forms of ownership: true ownership and virtual ownership.
True ownership is the form of ownership in which the owner has absolute
control over things he owns. Examples include the ownership of the cause
over the effect or the mind over imagination. God is the true owner of
all things as we can see in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَللّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ وَكَانَ اللّهُ
بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ مُّحِيطًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But to God belong all things in the heavens and on earth. And He it
is that encompasseth all things.”[The Holy Qur’an, al-Nisaa 4:126]***

True ownership cannot be transferred from the owner. However, virtual
ownership is the form of ownership in which the owner can use the
property and prevent other people from using it. This is like the
ownership of man over his wealth. This form of ownership has been
developed through the social association of people with one another.
That is why it is called virtual. There is no true developmental
relationship between the owner and the property. This form of ownership
is transferable.

Man is the Center of Creation
-----------------------------

As viewed by Islam, man is the center of God’s creation. Everything else
is created to be subject to him. The Holy Qur’an counts the blessings
and considers them to be for man’s use as we can read in the following
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ لَكُم مَّا فِي الأَرْضِ جَمِيعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He Who hath created for you all things that are on earth.”
[The Holy Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:29]***

Also, consider the following verse in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ سَخَّرَ لَكُم مَّا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do ye not see that God has subjected to your (use) all things in the
heavens and on earth?” [The Holy Qur’an, Luqman 31:20]***

And the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ أَنشَأَكُم مِّنَ الأَرْضِ وَاسْتَعْمَرَكُمْ فِيهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He Who hath produced you from the earth and settled you
therein." [The Holy Qur’an, Hud 11:61]***

And the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآتُوهُم مِّن مَّالِ اللَّهِ الَّذِي آتَاكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Give them something yourselves out of the means which God has given
to you.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Nur 24:33]***

Thus, we see that God has given man a central role in creation, and
everything is created for man.

God has created everything including wealth for man’s benefit. The
economic system is an important part of the overall Islamic system. It
has been set up to meet man’s basic needs such as food, clothing,
housing, defense, recreation, health and hygiene, as well as his
psychological needs such as man’s desire for beauty.

The World as Viewed by Islam
----------------------------

We can group the verses of the Holy Qur’an and the traditions of the
Prophet and the Immaculate Imams regarding the life of this world into
three distinct groups. First, let us look at the Qur’anic verses in this
regard:

1 - There are some verses that blame the life of this world to be play
and amusement as we read in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا لَعِبٌ وَلَهْوٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The life of this world is but play and amusement.” [The Holy Qur’an,
Muhammad 47:36]***

Also, consider the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا إِلاَّ لَعِبٌ وَلَهْوٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What is the life of this world but play and amusement?” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-An’am 6:32]***

And the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هَذِهِ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا إِلَّا لَهْوٌ وَلَعِبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What is the life of this world but amusement and play?” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Ankabut 29:64]***

And the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا لَعِبٌ وَلَهْوٌ وَزِينَةٌ
وَتَفَاخُرٌ بَيْنَكُمْ وَتَكَاثُرٌ فِي الْأَمْوَالِ وَالْأَوْلَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Know ye (all) that the life of this world is but play and amusement,
pomp and mutual boasting and multiplying, (in rivalry) among yourselves,
riches and children” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Hadid 57:20]***

2 – In the second group of verses the life of this world and its
associated things are considered to be good and desirable as we read in
the following verses using the Arabic word “Fadlihi”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ عَيْلَةً فَسَوْفَ يُغْنِيكُمُ اللّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ إِن
شَاء إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if ye fear poverty soon will God enrich you, if He wills, out of
His bounty. For God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Tawbah 9:28]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَى الْفُلْكَ مَوَاخِرَ فِيهِ وَلِتَبْتَغُواْ مِن فَضْلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And thou seest the ships therein that plough the waves, that ye may
seek (thus) of the bounty of God.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Naĥl 16:14]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَبْخَلُونَ وَيَأْمُرُونَ النَّاسَ بِالْبُخْلِ وَيَكْتُمُونَ
مَا آتَاهُمُ اللّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(Nor) those who are niggardly or enjoin niggardliness on others, or
hide the bounties which God hath bestowed on them.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Nisaa 4:37]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْلَا فَضْلُ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا
وَالْآخِرَةِ لَمَسَّكُمْ فِي مَا أَفَضْتُمْ فِيهِ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Were it not for the grace and mercy of God on you, in this world and
the Hereafter, a grievous penalty would have seized you in that ye
rushed glibly into this affair.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Nur 24:14]***

And using the Arabic word ‘Khayr’ in the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذَا حَضَرَ أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ إِن تَرَكَ خَيْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is prescribed when death approaches any of you if he leave any
goods.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:180]***

*  
*

و

**  
**
َمَا تُنفِقُواْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَلأنفُسِكُمْ وَمَا تُنفِقُونَ إِلاَّ
ابْتِغَاء وَجْهِ اللّهِ وَمَا تُنفِقُواْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ يُوَفَّ إِلَيْكُمْ
وَأَنتُمْ لاَ تُظْلَمُونَ

***“Whatever of good ye give benefits your own souls, and ye shall only
do so seeking the "Face" of God. Whatever good ye give, shall be
rendered back to you, and ye shall not be dealt with unjustly.”[The Holy
Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:272]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ لِحُبِّ الْخَيْرِ لَشَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And violent is he in his love of wealth.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-‘Adiyat 100:8]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا مَسَّهُ الْخَيْرُ مَنُوعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And niggardly when good reaches him.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Ma’arij
70:21]***

And using the Arabic word ‘Rahmat’ in the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَا الإِنْسَانَ مِنَّا رَحْمَةً ثُمَّ نَزَعْنَاهَا
مِنْهُ إِنَّهُ لَيَئُوسٌ كَفُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If We give man a taste of Mercy from Ourselves, and then withdraw it
from him, behold! He is in despair and (falls in) blasphemy.” [The Holy
Qur’an, Hud 11:9]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لَّوْ أَنتُمْ تَمْلِكُونَ خَزَآئِنَ رَحْمَةِ رَبِّي إِذًا
لَّأَمْسَكْتُمْ خَشْيَةَ الإِنفَاقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: If ye had control of the Treasures of the Mercy of my Lord,
behold, ye would keep them back, for fear of spending them!” [The Holy
Qur’an, Bani Israel 17:100]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَرَادَ رَبُّكَ أَنْ يَبْلُغَا أَشُدَّهُمَا وَيَسْتَخْرِجَا
كَنزَهُمَا رَحْمَةً مِّن رَّبِّكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So thy Lord desired that they should attain their age of full
strength and get out their treasure - a mercy (and favor) from thy
Lord.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Kahf 18:82]***

And using the Arabic word ‘Hasana’ in the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا جَاءتْهُمُ الْحَسَنَةُ قَالُواْ لَنَا هَـذِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But when good (times) came, they said: This is due to us!” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-A\`raaf 7:131]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن تُصِبْكَ حَسَنَةٌ تَسُؤْهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If good befalls thee, it grieves them.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Tawbah
9:50]***

There are also some verses in which worldly deprivation under some
circumstances is considered a form of divine chastisement.

3 - The third group of verses describe the above two groups and attempt
to clarify the seemingly contradictory nature of the above
classifications of the life of this world. In these verses, we are told
that the life of this world is good when it is directed towards the life
of the Hereafter as a preparatory stage for it. However, if the life of
this world on its own is stressed upon, then it is blameworthy. Consider
the following verse in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إَنَّ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَرْجُونَ لِقَاءنَا وَرَضُواْ بِالْحَياةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَاطْمَأَنُّواْ بِهَا وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ آيَاتِنَا
غَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَـئِكَ مَأْوَاهُمُ النُّارُ بِمَا كَانُواْ يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who rest not their hope on their meeting with Us, but are
pleased and satisfied with the life of the present, and those who heed
not Our Signs - their abode is the Fire because of the (evil) they
earned.” [The Holy Qur’an, Yunus 10:7-8]***

The World as Viewed by the Traditions
-------------------------------------

Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنْيا مَتْجَرُ أوْلِياءِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The world is a trade center for God’s friends.”*[^1]

The Noble Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنْيا مَزْرَعَةُ الآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The world is a farm for the Hereafter.”*[^2]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نِعْمَ العَونُ الدُّنْيا عَلى الآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The world is the best aid for the Hereafter.”*[^3]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نِعْمَ المَالُ الصّالِحُ لِلعَبْدِ الصّالِحِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“How good is wealth for a good servant!”*[^4]

Thus, we can conclude that this world is an intermediate step and a
means to reach the Hereafter. The phrases “trade center”, “farm”, and
“helper” used in these traditions to refer to this world imply that one
cannot attain prosperity in the Hereafter without using the life of this
world. However, if we forget the role of this world and consider it the
ultimate goal for man, then we will become negligent and seek our
absolute welfare in this world. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ بَسَطَ اللَّهُ الرِّزْقَ لِعِبَادِهِ لَبَغَوْا فِي الْأَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If God were to enlarge the provisions for His servants, they would
indeed transgress beyond all bounds through the earth…” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Shura 42:47]***  
 It also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّ الْإِنسَانَ لَيَطْغَى أَن رَّآهُ اسْتَغْنَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay, but man doth transgress all bounds, in that he looks upon
himself as self-sufficient.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-‘Alaq 96:6-7]***

In addition, in another verse we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا أَنْعَمْنَا عَلَى الإِنسَانِ أَعْرَضَ وَنَأَى بِجَانِبِهِ
وَإِذَا مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ كَانَ يَؤُوسًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Yet when We bestow our favors on man, he turns away and becomes
remote on his side…” [The Holy Qur’an, Bani Israil 17:83]***

That is why divinely guided leaders have always stressed the concept of
sufficiency in this world. In a tradition from the Prophet of God we
read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ ارْزُقْ محَمَّداً وَآلَ محَمَّدٍ وَمَن أحَبَّ محَمَّداً وَآلَ
محَمَّدٍ العَفافَ وَالكِفافَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O God! Grant Muhammad and the family of Muhammad and those who love
Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, chastity and sufficiency.”*[^5]

It is also written in Nahjul Balaghah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَسألوا فِيها فَوقَ الكِفافِ وَلا تطْلُبوا مِنها أكْثَرَ مِن
البَلاغِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not ask herein for more than what is enough and do not demand from
it more than sufficiency.”*

Through these verses and traditions it became clear that wealth and its
role in economy is very important in life. We also realize that our life
should be accompanied by a strong belief. Now let us consider how Islam
views obtaining wealth and spending it.

Earning and Collecting Wealth
-----------------------------

All men like wealth. Is this love for wealth and motivation to own, a
part of man’s nature or is it an acquired form of behavior? Some people
believe this to be a part of man’s nature since even animals have an
instinct to own which can be observed from their behavior. Some
scientists consider this love for ownership not to be an independent
instinctive force.

Rather they think it is a means by which man can fulfill other
instinctive needs such as eating, clothing, housing, sex, and
child-rearing. Animals exert their ownership over objects that they need
for specific purposes. The various forms of this ownership can be seen
regarding their food, companions, and nest or a place to live. The
tendency to own is stronger in animals regarding their stronger
inclinations such as hunger, sex and child-rearing.

William James considered ownership to be a form of social expression of
personality or a form of psychological volumetric expansion. He said:
“The word me does not imply my psychological forces only. Rather it also
includes my clothes, my house, my automobile, my property, my bank
account, etc. All these things arouse the same senses in me.”[^6]

Even though the love for wealth is not instinctive, it has slowly become
a value in the society since wealth can help fulfill many of man’s
desires. The Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ لِحُبِّ الْخَيْرِ لَشَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And violent is he in his love of wealth.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-‘Adiyat 100:8]***

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا خَيرَ في مَن لا يحِبُّ جمْعَ المَالِ مِن حَلالٍ يَكُفُّ بهِ وَجْهَه
ويَقْضي بهِ دَينَه ويَصِلُ بهِ رَحمَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no good in one who does not like to legitimately earn wealth
to safeguard his honor, pay back his debts and establish the bonds of
kinship.”*[^7]

The Goal of Obtaining Wealth
----------------------------

Once when the Prophet of God was sitting with a few of his companions,
he saw a strong young man who was working hard and had been working
since dawn. The companions expressed their unhappiness about that man’s
acts and said: “We wish this young man used his strength and youth in
God’s way.” The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَقولوا هَذا! فإنَّهُ إنْ كانَ يَسْعى عَلى نَفْسِه لِيَكُفَّها عَن
المَسْألَةِ وَيُغنِيَها عَنِ النّاسِ فهُوَ في سَبِيل ِاللهِ، وإنْ كانَ
يَسْعى عَلى أبَوَيْنِ ضَعِيفَينِ أو ذُرِّيَّةٍ ضِعافٍ لِيُغْنِيَهُم
وَيَكُفَّهُم فهُوَ في سَبِيلِ اللهِ، وإنْ كانَ يَسْعى تَفاخُراً
وَتَكاثُراً فَهوَ في سَبِيلِ الشَّيطانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“No. Do not say this. If he is working so hard in order to prevent
himself from asking from people and to be free of need of them, then he
is working in God’s way. If he is working hard to fulfill the needs of
his weak parents or children, to make them free of need, then he is
working in God’s way. However, if he is working hard to collect a lot of
wealth and show off to others, then he is working in Satan’s way.”* [^8]

Thus we realize that whoever works hard to fulfill his needs and
safeguard his honor is serving God and such acts of earning wealth are
not only not blameworthy, but are considered to be a duty for every man
as well. The deeds and types of behavior of the Immaculate Imams are a
strong document to support this. Let us read what Muhammad ibn Monkadir
said about Imam Baqir . Imam Sadiq said that Muhammad ibn Monkadir once
said: “I did not think that Ali ibn Al-Husayn [^9] would appoint a
better leader after himself.

However, once I saw his son Muhammad ibn Ali [^10] and decided to advise
him. However, it turned out that he advised me instead. I was in the
outskirts of Medina on a very hot day when I saw him working on the
farm. I asked myself why such an old man from the Quraysh tribe is
working so hard seeking wealth on such a hot day. After greeting him, I
asked him why he was working so hard seeking worldly gains.

I said: May God improve your condition. Why is a noble man from the
Quraysh tribe seeking worldly gains at this time of day? What would
happen to you if the angel of death comes to take your life in this
condition? Then he greeted back and said: “If the angel of death arrives
while I am working so hard as I am doing now in order to earn a living
for myself and children so that I do not have to beg from you for my
needs, then I will be found in a state of servitude of God. I should be
worried to be caught by the angel of death in a sinful state.”

Then I said: “Yes, you are right. May God have Mercy on you! I wanted to
advise you, but you were the one who gave me advice.”[^11] Thus, we see
that our religious leaders made an effort to earn their living so that
they did not have to ask others for what they needed. They also taught
their followers to earn their own living and not beg.

Those who are working to earn a living for themselves, their wife and
children are considered to be in the ranks of those who participate in a
holy war in Islam. Imam Sadiq said: “Whoever strives to earn a living
for his wife is like one who is fighting in the way of God.”[^12] In
addition, one who abandons his wife and does not fulfill her needs is
deprived of God’s Mercy. The Noble Prophet of God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَلعُونٌ مَلعونٌ مَن يَضِيعُ مَن يَعولُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Cursed, cursed, is one who neglects his dependants.”*[^13]

Obtaining Wealth by Legitimate Means
------------------------------------

Imam Baqir quoted on the authority of the Noble Prophet during the
Farewell Pilgrimage:[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا إنَّ الرُّوحَ الأمِينَ نَفثَ في رَوعِي أنَّه لا تمُوتُ نَفسٌ حَتىّ
تَستَكْمِلَ رِزْقَها، فاتَّقوا اللهَ وَأجمِلوا في الطَّلَبِ وَلا
يحْمِلَنَّكُم اسْتِبطاءُ شَيءٍ مِن الرِّزْقِ أنْ تَطلُبُوهُ بمَعْصِيةِ
اللهِ، فإنَّ اللهَ تَبارَكَ وَتَعالى قَسَّمَ الأرْزاقَ بَينَ خَلقِهِ
حَلالاً وَلَم يُقَسِّمْها حَراماً، فَمَن اتَّقى اللهَ وَصَبرَ أتاهُ
اللهُ بِرزْقِه مِن حِلِّه، وَمَن هَتَكَ حِجابَ السِّتْرِ وَعَجَّلَ
فَأخَذَهُ مِن غَيرِ حِلِّهِ قُصَّ بهِ مِن رِزقِهِ الحَلال وحُوسِبَ
عَلَيهِ يَومَ القِيامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Indeed, Gabriel informed me that no one shall die before receiving his
full share of daily bread. Thus, fear God and be moderate in seeking
sustenance. Do not rush to earn your daily bread from illegitimate or
sinful ways if your daily bread is delayed a little. Indeed God the*
*Exalted the High has divided legitimate daily bread among his
creatures, and has not divided illegitimate daily bread among them.*

*Therefore, God shall grant whoever fears God and is patient and
perseveres, his share of legitimate daily bread. But whoever tears up
the covering veil (of innocence) and rushes to obtain wealth by
illegitimate means will lose a portion of his share of legitimate daily
bread. He will also be held accountable for his illegitimate earnings on
the Resurrection Day.”*[^15]

Therefore, we learn that patience and perseverance are important. If we
do not earn as much as we want, we should not try to illegitimately earn
wealth since by so doing we will not only lose a portion of our
legitimate daily bread, but we will also be held accountable at the just
threshold of God.

Convenient and Hard to Earn Income
----------------------------------

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرِّزقُ مَقسومٌ عَلى ضَربَينِ أحَدُهمَا واصِلٌ إلى صاحِبِهِ وإنْ لم
يَطْلُبْهُ وَالآخَرُ مُعَلَّقٌ بِطَلبِهِ. فالَّذي قُسِّمَ لِلعَبْدِ
عَلى كُلّ حالٍ آتيهِ وإنْ لم يَسْعَ لهُ، والَّذِي قُسِّمَ لهُ
بِالسَّعْيِ فَينبَغي أنْ يَلتَمِسَهُ مِن وُجوهِهِ وَهُوَ مَا أحَلَّهُ
اللهُ لهُ دونَ غَيرِهِ، فإنْ طلبَهُ مِن جِهَةِ الحَرامِ فوَجَدَهُ
حُسِبَ عَليهِ مِن رِزقِهِ وَحُوسِبَ بهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The daily bread is divided into two parts. One part of it will be
earned whether you ask for it or not. However, the second part is what
you must go out to work for and try to earn. You will obtain the first
part no matter what, even if you do not ask for it. However, it is best
for you to use legitimate means to earn the other portion that you must
seek to obtain. Should you obtain it through illegitimate means, it will
still be considered to be a portion of your share of daily bread, but
you will be held responsible for it.”*[^16]

What was said so far clarifies what Imam Sajjad said about wealth. He
also said that your wealth might be left as inheritance for one who
might use it right and get its reward in the Hereafter, too. The
Commander of the Faithful said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ أعظَمَ الحَسَراتِ يَومَ القِيامَةِ حَسْرَةُ رَجُلٍ كَسَبَ مالاً
في غَيرِ طاعَةِ اللهِ فَوَرَّثَهُ رَجُلاً فأنْفَقَهُ في طاعَةِ اللهِ
سُبحانَهُ فَدَخَلَ به الجَنَّةَ وَدَخَلَ الأوَّلُ بِه النّارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“On the Resurrection Day the greatest regret will be felt by the man
who earned wealth through sinful ways, and left it as inheritance for a
person who spent it in obeying God. The latter will be rewarded Paradise
on that account, while the former one will enter the Fire on account of
it.”*[^17]

This is a real cause for sorrow! To suffer the hardships of earning
wealth, and the chastisement of using illegitimate means to earn it!

[^1]: Nahjul Balaghah, Subhi Salih, Hikmah 131: “Certainly this world is
a house of truth for him who appreciates it; a place of safety for him
who understands it; a house of riches for him who collects provision
from it (for the next world); and a house of instruction for him who
draws instruction from it. It is the place of worship for the lovers of
God; the place of prayer for the angels of God; the place where the
revelation of God descends; and the marketing place for those devoted to
God. Herein they earn mercy and herein they acquire Paradise by way of
profit.”

[^2]: Daramadi Bar Iqtisad Islami, v.1. p.47.

[^3]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.12, p.17.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, v.72, p.59.

[^6]: Bozorgsal wa Jawan (Guftar-i-Falsafi), v.1, p.272, quoted from
Ravanshenasi Ijtima’i, v.1, p.104.

[^7]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.12, p.19.

[^8]: Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda, v.3, p.140.

[^9]: Imam al-Sajjad .

[^10]: Imam al-Baqir .

[^11]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.12, pp.9-10.

[^12]: Ibid. p.27.

[^13]: Ibid. p.27.

[^14]: The last performance of the pilgrimage of the Holy House of God
by the Prophet Muhammad .

[^15]: Ibid. p.27.

[^16]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.12, p.29.

[^17]: Nahjul Balaghah, Subhi Salih, Hikmat no. 429.


