Right n. 36: The Right of the Creditor
======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الغريم الطالب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا حَقُّ الغَرِيمِ الطَّالِب لَكَ، فَإنْ كُنْتَ مُوسِرًا
أَوفَيتَهُ وَكَفَيتَهُ وَأَغْنَيتَهُ وَلَمْ ترْدُدْهُ وتَمْطُلْهُ
فَإنَّ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ - قَالَ – «مَطَلُ
الغَنِيِّ ظُلْمٌ». وَإنْ كُنْتَ مُعْسِرًا أَرْضَيتَهُ بحُسْنِ القَوْلِ
وَطَلَبتَ إلَيهِ طَلَباً جَمِيلاً وَرَدَدتَهُ عَنْ نفْسِكَ ردًّا
لَطِيفًا، وَلَمْ تَجْمَعَ عَلَيْهِ ذهَابَ مَالِهِ وَسُوءَ
مُعَامَلَتِهِ فَإنَّ ذلِكَ لؤمٌ. ولا قُوَّةَ إلاّ باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of him to whom you owe**[^1] **is that you should pay
him back if you have the means to do so. You should meet his need, make
him rich, and avoid putting him off and procrastinating. The Prophet,
may God’s peace be upon him and his household, said: “The
procrastination of the rich is oppression.” But if you are in hardship,
you should satisfy him by using good words. You should gently ask him
and send him away with gentleness. You should not take his property and
mistreat him too. That is meanness. And there is no power but in God.**

In short, Imam Sajjad said: “One should pay back his debt if he can do
so. It is not right to postpone the repayment of a debt. One should talk
gently and be good-tempered when dealing with the creditor. Otherwise,
one is blameworthy since he has taken the money and is rude to the
creditor too.

Our life has many vicissitudes. It is not always the same. At times, we
are rich. At other times, we may be poor. We must try hard to maintain
our dignity under all conditions. When rich we should not become
rebellious and sinful. In addition, when we are poor we should not
debase ourselves. An important issue in Islam is helping others during
times when they need money by giving them a loan. We are also advised to
give more time to those who do not have money to pay back their loan to
us. There are many verses of the Holy Qur’an that outline the value and
importance of this issue.

Loaning to God
--------------

Charity is recommended in Islam. In addition, an important form of loan
in Islam is an interest-free loan. This is considered by the Qur’an to
be loaning to God as we read in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن تُقْرِضُوا اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا يُضَاعِفْهُ لَكُمْ وَيَغْفِرْ
لَكُمْ وَاللَّهُ شَكُورٌ حَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If ye loan to God, a beautiful loan, He will double it to your
(credit), and He will grant you Forgiveness: for God is most Ready to
appreciate (service), Most Forbearing.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Tagabun
64:17]***

This implies that loaning to God will be rewarded by Him and is a cause
of forgiveness and divine appreciation. In another verse we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن ذَا الَّذِي يُقْرِضُ اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا فَيُضَاعِفَهُ لَهُ
وَلَهُ أَجْرٌ كَرِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who is he that will loan to God a beautiful loan? For (God) will
increase it manifold to his credit, and he will have (besides) a liberal
Reward.”[The Holy Qur’an, al-Hadid 57:11]***

In another verse the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُصَّدِّقِينَ وَالْمُصَّدِّقَاتِ وَأَقْرَضُوا اللَّهَ قَرْضًا
حَسَنًا يُضَاعَفُ لَهُمْ وَلَهُمْ أَجْرٌ كَرِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For those who give in charity, men and women, and loan to God a
beautiful loan, it shall be increased manifold (to their credit), and
they shall have (besides) a liberal reward.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Hadid
57:18]***

Some consider loaning to God to be just charity while others also
include giving interest-free loans to believers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّن ذَا الَّذِي يُقْرِضُ اللّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا فَيُضَاعِفَهُ لَهُ
أَضْعَافًا كَثِيرَةً وَاللّهُ يَقْبِضُ وَيَبْسُطُ وَإِلَيْهِ
تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who is he that will loan to God a beautiful loan, which God will
double unto his credit and multiply many times? It is God that giveth
(you) want or plenty, and to Him shall be your return.” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:245]***

Usury as Viewed by the Qur’an
-----------------------------

Giving charity and interest-free loans were mentioned to be highly
valued acts in Islam. In these acts, one only considers the pleasure of
God and intends to help others. On the contrary, there is the question
of usury that has extremely detrimental social effects. We read in the
following verse of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ اتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَذَرُواْ مَا بَقِيَ
مِنَ الرِّبَا إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلُواْ فَأْذَنُواْ بِحَرْبٍ مِّنَ اللّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ
وَإِن تُبْتُمْ فَلَكُمْ رُؤُوسُ أَمْوَالِكُمْ لاَ تَظْلِمُونَ وَلاَ
تُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O ye who believe! Fear God, and give up what remains of your demand
for usury, if ye are indeed believers. If ye do it not, take notice of
war from God and His Apostle: But if ye turn back, ye shall have your
capital sums: Deal not unjustly, and ye shall not be dealt with
unjustly.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:278-279]***

Here we note that taking usury is against our beliefs, and is considered
to be like staging a war against God and the Prophet . If one repents
from doing this heinous act, then he can take back his money without
taking any interest. In another verse we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ الرِّبَا لاَ يَقُومُونَ إِلاَّ كَمَا يَقُومُ
الَّذِي يَتَخَبَّطُهُ الشَّيْطَانُ مِنَ الْمَسِّ ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ
قَالُواْ إِنَّمَا الْبَيْعُ مِثْلُ الرِّبَا وَأَحَلَّ اللّهُ الْبَيْعَ
وَحَرَّمَ الرِّبَا فَمَن جَاءهُ مَوْعِظَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِ فَانتَهَىَ
فَلَهُ مَا سَلَفَ وَأَمْرُهُ إِلَى اللّهِ وَمَنْ عَادَ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ
أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ يَمْحَقُ اللّهُ الْرِّبَا
وَيُرْبِي الصَّدَقَاتِ وَاللّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ كُلَّ كَفَّارٍ أَثِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who devour usury will not stand except as stand one whom the
Evil one by his touch hath driven to madness. That is because they say:
"Trade is like usury," but God hath permitted trade and forbidden usury.
Those who after receiving direction from their Lord, desist, shall be
pardoned for the past; their case is for God (to judge); but those who
repeat (the offence) are companions of the Fire: they will abide therein
(for ever). God will deprive usury of all blessing, but will give
increase for deeds of charity: For He loveth not creatures ungrateful
and wicked.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:275-276]***

Here we see usurers depicted like insane men. This may refer to their
social behavior since their deeds are similar to mad people. They do not
care for sympathy, love, cooperation and the like. It may also refer to
the way they will be resurrected in the Hereafter since our looks in the
Hereafter portray our deeds in this world. Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آكِلُ الرِّبا لا يخْرُجُ مِن الدُّنيا حَتىّ يَتَخَبَّطُهُ الشَّيطانُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A usurer shall not depart this world without Satan driving him
insane.”*[^2]

Some people question whether or not the roots of insanity are derived
from Satan. As we know, insanity is a form of psychological illness.
Some believe that it is a form of being touched by Satan. This belief
was very popular among the Arabs. As we know, following satanic thoughts
will cause one to think differently. Consequently, he will not be able
to distinguish right from wrong. In this verse, the state of usurers is
presented - both here and in the Hereafter.

The Justifications of Usurers
-----------------------------

Usurers claim that their deed is similar to engaging in trade. They
should be told that God has allowed trade, but He has forbidden usury.
This is because in trade both sides are equally prone to lose or gain,
while in usury the one who gives the loan never loses. Also note that in
normal trade both sides help develop production and consumption, while a
usurer helps neither.

In addition, our capital will be channeled into the wrong directions
causing the economy to suffer when usury is practiced, while trade
fosters the healthy flow of capital in the economy. Devouring usury will
also result in animosities and class disputes while engaging in trade
does not. Usury is discussed in the following verses of the Holy Qur’an
as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَأْكُلُواْ الرِّبَا أَضْعَافًا
مُّضَاعَفَةً وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O ye who believe! Devour not usury, doubled and multiplied; but fear
God; that ye may (really) prosper.” [The Holy Qur’an, Al-i-Imran
3:130]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَخْذِهِمُ الرِّبَا وَقَدْ نُهُواْ عَنْهُ وَأَكْلِهِمْ أَمْوَالَ
النَّاسِ بِالْبَاطِلِ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لِلْكَافِرِينَ مِنْهُمْ عَذَابًا
أَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…That they took usury, though they were forbidden; and that they
devoured men's substance wrongfully. We have prepared for those among
them who reject faith a grievous punishment.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Nisaa
4:160-161]***

Giving Time to the Debtor
-------------------------

Imam Sajjad has recommended paying back one’s debt if he can. However,
if he does not have enough money to pay it back, the Imam recommends us
to give him time to do so. We also read the following verse in the Holy
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كَانَ ذُو عُسْرَةٍ فَنَظِرَةٌ إِلَى مَيْسَرَةٍ وَأَن
تَصَدَّقُواْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If the debtor is in a difficulty, grant him time till it is easy for
him to repay. But if ye remit it by way of charity, that is best for you
if ye only knew.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:280]***

The verses on charity, interest-free loans, and forbidden usury were
presented earlier. Here we see that the repayment of a loan is a duty.
However, we are also told that we should give the debtor time to repay
if he is in difficulty. This is opposed to the common practice in the
Age of Ignorance when debtors in a difficulty were charged more interest
and put under more pressure to pay back. In Islamic law, it is clearly
stated that we cannot take back our loan by seizing the living
necessities of the debtor.

We can only seize what he might have that is extra. This is a clear form
of support for the weak classes of the society. Still a more important
issue is presented here. We are told that a loftier act would be to
remit the debt by way of charity if we can. This is a form of
self-sacrifice that is highly valued. We can see this side by side with
the advice to the debtor to talk gently with the creditor. The rights of
both sides are clearly described here. Now let us look at some related
material presented in volume 2 of Shafi by the late Fayz. In a tradition
the reward for giving more time is mentioned: Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن أرَادَ أنْ يُظِلَّهُ اللهُ يَومَ لا ظِلَّ إلاّ ظِلُّهُ…
فَليُنْظِرْ مُعْسِراً أوْ يَدَعْ لهُ مِن حَقِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Those who desire to be in the Shade of God on the Day on which there
is no other shade, should give time to debtors who are unable to pay
back their debt or remit it.”*[^3]

Imam Sadiq narrated that once the Prophet climbed the pulpit and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيُّها النّاسُ! لِيُبَلِّغِ الشّاهِدُ الغائِبَ مِنكم. ألا وَمَن
أنْظَرَ مُعْسِراً كانَ لهُ عَلى اللهِ في كُلّ يَومٍ ثَوابُ صَدَقَةٍ
بِمِثْلِ مَالِهِ حَتىّ يَستَوفِيَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O People! You who are present and can witness to what I say! Deliver
my words to those who are absent. Beware! God will reward the one who
gives time to a debtor who cannot pay back his debt with the reward of
charity on his loan for each day that the repayment of the loan is
postponed.”*

Then Imam Sadiq recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كَانَ ذُو عُسْرَةٍ فَنَظِرَةٌ إِلَى مَيْسَرَةٍ وَأَن
تَصَدَّقُواْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If the debtor is in a difficulty, grant him time till it is easy for
him to repay. But if ye remit it by way of charity, that is best for you
if ye only knew.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:280]***

Then he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُ مُعسِرٌ فَتَصَدَّقوا عَليهِ بما لَكُم عَلَيه فهوَ خَيرٌ لَكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“He is a poor person, so give charity to him from what he owes you, and
it will be better for you.”*[^4]  
 The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَما لا يَحِلُّ لِغرِيمِكَ أنْ يَمطُلَكَ وَهُوَ مُوسِرٌ فَكذلِكَ لا
يحِلُّ لكَ أنْ تُعسِرَهُ إذا عَلِمتَ أنَّه مُعْسِرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Just as it is not permissible for your creditor to postpone the
repayment of a loan if he is well to do, similarly it is not permissible
for you to demand your money back from him if you know that he is in
straitened circumstances.”*[^5]

Imam Sadiq was told that Abdul Rahman ibn Seyabeh who had passed away
had an unpaid debt to someone. They had asked the creditor to forgive
his debt, but he had not accepted to do so. The Imam said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيحَهُ! أمَا يَعلَمُ أنَّ لهُ بِكُلِّ دِرهَمٍ عَشَرةً إذا حَلَّلَهُ
وإنْ لم يحَلِّلْهُ فإنمَّا هوَ دِرهَمٌ بِدِرهَمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Woe to him! Does he not know that for each Dirham that he forgives he
shall be rewarded ten Dirhams? But if he does not forgive, he can only
receive one Dirham for each Dirham.”*

[^1]: In the other version it continues: “ a debt that, if you have the
means, you pay him back, and if you are in straitened circumstances, you
satisfy him with good words and you send him away with gentleness.”

[^2]: Tafsir-i-Namunah, v.2, p.272, quoted from Nur al-Thaqalayn, v.1,
p.291.

[^3]: Shafi, v.2, p.110.

[^4]: Shafi, v.2, p.110.

[^5]: Ibid.


