Right n. 38: The Right of the Adversary
=======================================

The Right of the Adversary who has a claim against you
------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الخصم المدعي عليك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا حَقُّ الخَصْمِ المُدَّعِي عَلَيْكَ، فَإنْ كَانَ مَا يَدَّعِي
عَلَيكَ حَقّاً لَمْ تنفَسِخ فِي حُجَّتِهِ وَلَمْ تَعمَلْ فِي إبطَالِ
دَعْوَتِهِ وَكُنْتَ خَصْمَ نفْسِكَ لَهُ والحَاكِمَ عَلَيْهَا
والشَّاهِدَ لَهُ بحَقِّهِ دُونَ شَهَادَةِ الشُّهُودِ، فَإنَّ ذلِكَ
حَقُّ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكَ، وَإنْ كَانَ مَا يَدَّعِيهِ بَاطِلاً رَفَقْتَ
بهِ وَرَوَّعْتَهُ وناشَدتهُ بدِينِه وَكَسَرْتَ حِدَّتهُ عَنكَ بذِكْرِ
اللهِ وَأَلْقَيْتَ حَشْوَ الْكَلامِ وَلَغَطَهُ الَّذِي لا يَرُدُّ
عَنْكَ عَاديَةَ عَدُوِّكَ بَلْ تبُوءُ بإثمِهِ وَبهِ يَشْحَذُ عَلَيْكَ
سَيفَ عَدَاوَتِهِ لأَنَّ لَفْظَةَ السُّوءِ تَبعَثُ الشَّرَّ.
وَالخَيْرُ مُقْمِعَةٌ لِلشَّرِّ. وَلا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of the adversary who has a claim against you is that if
his claim against you is true,**[^1] **you should not nullify his proof
or abolish his claim. And you should dispute against yourself on his
behalf and be a fair judge against yourself, and give witness to his
right against you without the witnessing of any witnesses. This is the
right of God that is made incumbent upon you. But if what he claims
against you is false, treat him with gentleness and remind him to fear
God, and implore him by his religion.**

**And by reminding him of God, you should help reduce his fury against
you. Avoid using indecent words and yelling at him since this will not
eliminate the animosity of your enemy, but it will result in your
suffering from the sin he commits against you. And it will also result
in his sharpening of the sword of animosity towards you, since indecent
words will cause evil, but good words will eradicate evil. And there is
no power but in God.**

The Right of the Adversary against whom you have a claim
--------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الخصم المدعى عليه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا حَقُّ الخَصْمِ الْمُدَّعَى عَلَيهِ فَإنْ كَانَ مَا تدَّعِيهِ
حَقًّا أَجْمَلْتَ فِي مُقَاوَلَتِهِ بمَخرَجِ الدَّعْوَى، فَإنّ
لِلدَّعْوَى غِلْظَةً فِي سَمْعِ الْمُدَّعَى عَلَيهِ. وَقَصَدْتَ قَصْدَ
حُجَّتِكَ بالرِّفْقِ وَأَمْهَلِ الْمُهْلَةِ وَأبْينِ الْبَيَانِ
وَألطَفِ اللُّطْفِ ولَمْ تَتشَاغَلْ عَنْ حُجَّتِكَ بمُنازَعَتِهِ
بالقِيلِ وَالقَالِ فَتَذهَبْ عَنْكَ حُجَّتُكَ ولا يَكُونَ لَكَ فِي
ذَلِكَ دَرْكٌ. ولا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of the adversary against whom you have a claim is that
if your claim against him is true,**[^2] **you should use pleasant words
while you are filing your claim, since hearing the claim is harsh for
the defendant. And you should provide your evidence with lenience, and
respite, and with the clearest statements, and with absolute gentleness.
And you should not dispute with him over gossip lest your proofs will be
voided and you will lose the opportunity to prove them. And there is no
power but in God.**

Sources of Quarrelling
----------------------

One of the fundamental desires of man in this short life is to have
peace and security. Man wishes to have a life filled with love and peace
and free of quarrelling. On the other hand, man is also subject to his
whims. He is greedy, selfish, lazy and haughty. These factors drive him
to not be pleased with what is rightly his, and violate other people’s
rights.

It is obvious that the more the crowd in one place, the more quarrelling
there will be among them. It is not possible for both sides of a quarrel
to be right. Usually one side is the one who is transgressing. Thus, we
need a judge in the society to handle these cases to resolve the
quarrels and establish justice between them. This is one of the major
reasons for the appointment of Prophets in the different eras in
history.

Islam Invites Man to Destroy the Roots of Quarrels
--------------------------------------------------

The illuminating teachings of Islam invite man to love and friendship,
and even forgiving and self-sacrifice. These instructions lead man to
eliminate the roots of problems in the society so that quarrels do not
even start. We read the following verse in the Holy Qur’an regarding the
followers of Islam after those who accepted Islam and migrated to
Medina, and those who already lived in Medina and helped the Prophet and
his followers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ جَاؤُوا مِن بَعْدِهِمْ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لَنَا
وَلِإِخْوَانِنَا الَّذِينَ سَبَقُونَا بِالْإِيمَانِ وَلَا تَجْعَلْ فِي
قُلُوبِنَا غِلًّا لِّلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ رَؤُوفٌ
رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who came after them say: "Our Lord! Forgive us, and our
brethren who came before us into the Faith, and leave not, in our
hearts, rancor (or sense of injury) against those who have believed. Our
Lord! Thou art indeed Full of Kindness, Most Merciful."[The Holy Qur’an,
al-Hashr 59:10]***

In this verse, we see the spirit of love in the Muslims that can
eliminate quarrels. The same holds true for the life of the Hereafter.
We read the following in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَزَعْنَا مَا فِي صُدُورِهِم مِّنْ غِلٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We shall remove from their hearts any lurking sense of injury.”
[The Holy Qur’an, al-A\`raaf 7:43]***

God has promised us the peaceful life we desire but cannot find in this
world in the Hereafter. Thus, Islam has instructed man to abandon
fighting in life. If there is quarrelling between people, Islam has
given certain instructions to eliminate the fight.

Resolving the Differences
-------------------------

There is a chapter in *Usul al-Kafi* on resolving the differences
between the people. Muslims are invited to help resolve the differences
between other Muslims. This is considered a form of worshipping. Habib
al-Ahwal narrated that he heard Imam Sadiq had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَدَقَةٌ يحِبُّها اللهُ إصْلاحٌ بَينَ النّاسِ إذا تَفاسَدوا وَتَقارُبٌ
بَينَهُم إذا تَباعَدوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The charity God likes is resolving the differences between the people
who have problems with each other; and helping them get closer to each
other when their discord has caused them to become separated.”*[^3]

In another tradition, we read that Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لأَنْ أُصْلِحَ بَينَ اثنَينِ أَحَبُّ إليَّ مِن أنْ أتصَدَّقَ
بِدينارَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Helping resolve the differences between two people is more desirable
to me than giving two Dinars in charity.”*[^4]

However, if the differences do not get resolved this way their case has
to be settled in court. Islam has the best judicial system in order to
give everybody his or her due rights. The judge must be a just person,
and consider the two sides of the agreement in the same manner. He
should also try to please God in his ruling on the case.

Islam’s Judicial Rules
----------------------

The most important steps implemented in European countries regarding
judges are as follows:

1 A judge must be independent and immune and be able to prosecute anyone
no matter what his rank or position of power is.

2 A judge must be paid a high enough salary to meet his financial needs
so that he does not give in to a rich man and rule unjustly. It is said
that the British government has dealt nicely with this issue.

3 All should be treated equally in court.

These issues, which are highly respected in European courts, are all
parts of the teachings of Islam.

The Power of the Judge
----------------------

The judge is granted so much power in Islam that even none of the
members of the Islamic government can surpass that power. Only the ruler
and his representative possess a higher degree of power. The Commander
of the Faithful wrote the following in his letter to Malik al-Ashtar
when he appointed him as his representative in Egypt:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ ﭐخْتَرْ لِلْحُكْمِ بَيْنَ النّاسِ أَفْضَلَ رَعِيَّتِكَ فِي
نَفْسِكَ… وَأَعْطِهِ مِنَ الْمَنْزِلَةِ لَدَيْكَ ما لا يَطْمَعُ فِيهِ
غَيْرُهُ مِنْ خاصَّتِكَ، لِيَأْمَنَ بِذٰلِكَ ﭐغْتِيالَ الرِّجالِ لَهُ
عِنْدَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Choose for the administration of justice among people one who is, in
your view, the best of your subjects…. Grant him the rank near you to
which none of your special companions may aspire, so that by it he may
be safe from people slandering him before you”*[^5]

Financial Independence of the Judge
-----------------------------------

Islam has granted the highest degree of financial independence to the
judge. Imam Ali ordered Malik to give the judge as much money as he
needs so that his financial needs do not affect the way he makes
judgments.

The Duties of the Judge in the Court
------------------------------------

The stress Islam has placed on equal treatment for both sides in the
court is so much that even the current practice in Europe does not meet
these high standards. It may even be that men cannot implement these
standards for many more centuries. The judge should treat both sides
equally in the court. Both parties should sit in the same place even if
one side of the case is the ruler and the other party is a simple
peasant. No privilege should be established for either party. Consider
the following case.

Haroon Choosing a Judge
-----------------------

It is recorded in history that when the Abbasid Caliph Haroon ul-Rashid
finished his pilgrimage he entered Medina. The people asked him to
appoint a just judge since the judge had passed away. They introduced
two men to him as candidates. In order to establish their degree of
suitability for this position, Haroon called one of them to enter. The
prime minister was standing in front of Haroon.

When the man entered, Haroon told him that there was some disagreement
related to an estate between him and the prime minister. In addition,
Haroon asked the man to resolve the case. The man thought for a while
after hearing the reasons for the disagreement and said that Haroon is
right. Haroon asked him to leave, and called in the other man. He
repeated the same fictitious story again and asked the man to judge
between them.

The man said: “I cannot judge between you since one side of the argument
is sitting in the highest position of power while the other side is
standing up in front of him. According to Islam you should both be in
the same position before I can judge between you.” Haroon ul-Rashid
enjoyed the man’s reply and appointed him as the judge immediately.

A judge is even supposed to treat the two sides equally in the way that
he looks or points at them. He should also talk to each of them for
about the same time. He should treat them both in the same way. Imam Ali
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاخْفِضْ لهُم جَناحَكَ وَألِنْ لهُم جانِبَكَ وابْسُطْ لهُم وَجْهَكَ
وآسِ بَينَهُم في اللَّحْظَةِ والنَّظْرَةِ حَتىّ لا يَطمَعَ العُظماءُ
في حَيفِكَ لهُم وَلا يَيأَسَ الضُعَفاءُ مِن عَدلِكَ عَليهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Humble yourself to them, be gentle with them and meet with them in a
friendly, cheerful manner. Treat them equally in your regard and
consideration of them, so that the strong do not hope for your acting
unjustly (in their favour), while the weak do not despair of your
justice to them.”*[^6]

The Words of Shahid al-Awwal About the Duties of the Judge
----------------------------------------------------------

In Al-Lum’ah Al-Dimishqiyah the words of Shahid al-Awwal about the
duties of the judge are recorded as follows: “It is incumbent upon the
judge to treat the two sides equally in talking, looking, greeting,
respecting, listening and being just. If one of the parties is a Muslim
and the other one is a pagan, the judge can let the Muslim man sit down
while the pagan one stands up.

The judge does not have to be whole-heartedly inclined to both sides in
this case. This is the jurisprudents’ view on the duties of the judge.
Regarding the way the judge should act in the court we read in Al-Lum’ah
al-Dimishqiyah: “If one side of the fight starts to talk, the judge
should listen to him. If both sides do so, the judge should listen to
the one on the right. If both remain silent the judge should say that
either one can present his claim, or they can both talk.”[^7]

The Plaintiff and the Defendant
-------------------------------

What is the difference between the plaintiff and the defendant? Shahid
al-Awwal said: “The plaintiff is the side whose abandoning of the claim
shall end the dispute. However, the defendant is the other side of the
dispute. He cannot end the dispute. There are three possible responses
by the defendant. He accepts the claim, rejects it or remains silent.
Each form of response is different as viewed by the judge.

Evidence and Oath
-----------------

We read in Wasa\`il al-Shī\`ah that the evidence is to be provided by
the plaintiff, and oath is for the defendant.[^8] This has been quoted
from Imam Sadiq on the authority of God’s Prophet . Abi Basir quoted on
the authority of Imam Sadiq :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ حَكمَ في دِمائِكُم بِغَيرِ ما حَكَم في أمْوالِكُم؛ حَكَمَ
في أمْوالِكُم أنَّ البَيِّنَةَ عَلى المُدَّعي وَاليَمينَ عَلى
المُدَّعَى عَلَيهِ، وَحَكَمَ في دِمائِكُم أنَّ البَيِّنَةَ عَلى مَنِ
أدُّعِيَ عَلَيهِ وَاليَمينَ عَلى مَن ادَّعَى لِئَلاّ يَبْطُلَ دَمُ
امرِئٍ مُسْلِمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God’s ruling regarding your blood (that has been shed) is different
from His ruling on your property. God has ruled that, regarding your
property, the evidence is incumbent on the plaintiff and the oath on
defendant, but regarding your blood (that has been shed) the evidence
is* *incumbent on the defendant and the oath on the plaintiff, so that
the blood of a Muslim may not be shed without compensation.”*[^9]

Imam Ridha provided the following in response to a question asked:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالعِلَّةُ في أنَّ البَيِّنَةَ في جمِيعِ الحُقوقِ على المُدَّعي
وَاليَمِينَ عَلى المُدَّعَى عَليهِ ما خَلا الدَّمِ لأنَّ المُدَّعَى
عَليهِ جاحِدٌ وَلا يمْكِنُهُ إقامَةُ البَيّنَةِ على الجُحودِ لأنَّهُ
مجْهُولٌ وَصَارتِ البَيّنَةُ في الدَّمِ عَلى المُدَّعَى عَليهِ
واليَمِينُ عَلى المُدَّعِي لأنَّهُ حَوطٌ يحْتاطُ بهِ المُسلِمونَ
لِئَلاّ يبْطُلَ دَمُ امرِئٍ مُسْلمٍ ولِيَكونَ ذلِكَ زاجِراً وَناهِياً
لِلقاتِلِ لِشِدَّةِ إقامَةِ البَيِّنَةِ عَلى الجُحودِ عَليهِ لأنَّ مَن
يَشهَدُ على أنَّهُ لم يَفعَلْ قِليلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The reason why evidence, in all cases other than that of bloodshed, is
incumbent on the plaintiff and the oath on the defendant is that the
defendant denies the claim and it is not possible to establish evidence
for denial.*

*However, in case of bloodshed, the evidence is due from the defendant
and the oath from the plaintiff. This is because it is a safeguard which
protects the Muslims, so that the blood of a Muslim may not go
uncompensated, and so that it may be a restraint and a deterrent for the
murderer, because of the difficulty of establishing the evidence for
denial, for there will be few who will testify that he has not done
it..”* [^10]

We learned from the above the jurisprudents’ view on the claiming side
and the claimant’s side. Imam Sajjad presented the moral aspects of this
issue. He reminded both sides of their moral duties. He invites both
sides to the truth and admonishes them against pursuing falsehood. Thus,
it is better for both sides of any dispute to remember the
recommendations of Imam Sajjad and take their case to a just judge - not
an oppressive one. Many traditions exist to support this.

[^1]: In the other version it continues: “you give witness to it against
yourself. You do not wrong him and you give him his full due. If what he
claims against you is false, you act with kindness toward him and you
show nothing in his affair other than kindness; you do not displease you
r Lord in his affair. And there is no strength save in God.”

[^2]: In the other version, it continues: ”you maintain polite
moderation in speaking to him and you do not deny him his right. If your
claim is false, you fear god, repent to Him and abandon your claim.”

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi, v.2, p.209.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Nahjul Balaghah,

[^6]: Nahjul Balaghah.

[^7]: Al-Lum’ah al-Dimishqiyah, Book of al-Qada.

[^8]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.18, pp.170-173.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.18, pp.170-173.


