Right n. 39: The Right of Him Who Seeks Your Advice
===================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق المستشير
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا حَقُّ المُسْتَشِيرِ، فَإنْ حَضَرَكَ لَهُ وَجْهُ رَأْىٍ جَهَدْتَ
لَهُ فِي النَّصِيحَةِ، وَأَشَرْتَ عَلَيهِ بمَا تَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ لَوْ
كُنْتَ مَكَانهُ عَمِلْتَ بهِ، وَذَلِكَ لِيَكُنْ مِنْكَ فِي رَحْمَةٍ
وَلِينٍ، فَإنَّ اللِّينَ يُؤْنِسُ الْوَحْشَةَ وَإنَّ الْغِلْظَ يُوحِشُ
مَوضِعَ الأنْسِ. وَإنْ لَمْ يَحْضُرْكَ لَهُ رَأيٌ وَعَرَفْتَ لَهُ مَنْ
تثِقُ برَأيِهِ وَترْضَى بهِ لِنَفْسِكَ دَلَلْتَهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَأَرْشَدتَهُ إلَيْهِ، فَكُنْتَ لَمْ تَألُهُ خَيرًا وَلَمْ تَدَّخِرْهُ
نُصْحاً. ولا حَوْلَ ولا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of him who seeks your advice is that you should exert
all efforts to advise him if you can provide him with a good opinion,
and suggest to him to choose what you would have chosen if you were in
his place. You should do so with mercy and with lenience since lenience
will eliminate fear while rudeness will eliminate friendliness.**

**But if you do not have any good advice for him, you should refer him
to someone else whom you know and trust his advice yourself. You should
spare no efforts to guide him towards the good and do your best to
advise him. And there is no power but in God.**

In short, Imam Sajjad says that once someone seeks advice, a right is
established for him. This right is clearly providing him with proper
advice if we can, or referring him to someone else whom we know and can
provide him with some good advice.

Consultation in Islam
---------------------

Consultation is one of the most important issues in Islam. It helps us
get our affairs done in a more reasonable fashion. If we do not consult
others regarding our affairs, then our affairs will not be done in a
perfect way, since by ourselves we cannot consider all aspects of an
issue no matter how intelligent we are. Once issues are presented for
consultation, and several experienced people use their intellect to
help, then the job will be done more perfectly.

Consultation is so important in Islam that even the Prophet , who
received divine revelations and was highly intelligent, consulted with
others and respected their views. This was done in order to establish
consultation as a practice among Muslims. His consultations were related
to public issues about the execution of divine rules, and not on
legislative issues.

Effects of Consultation
-----------------------

People who seek other people’s advice regarding their affairs seldom
fail. Others who consider themselves needless of other people’s advice
and do not do so, and just rely on their own minds, usually make
mistakes even though they may be very intelligent. Such an attitude
makes one unpopular and stops the flow of suggestions towards him.

Those who consult others regarding their affairs will not experience
other people’s jealousy if they succeed, since others will consider this
success as their own. Even if one fails, others will not blame him since
they will consider this failure to be their own fault. They will treat
him sympathetically.

One can also evaluate the degree of friendship of others when he seeks
their advice. This will pave the way for future success. This might have
been one of the reasons that the Prophet sought other people’s advice,
even though he was very intelligent.

Consultation as Viewed by the Holy Qur’an
-----------------------------------------

Consider the following verse from the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِمَا رَحْمَةٍ مِّنَ اللّهِ لِنتَ لَهُمْ وَلَوْ كُنتَ فَظًّا غَلِيظَ
الْقَلْبِ لاَنفَضُّواْ مِنْ حَوْلِكَ فَاعْفُ عَنْهُمْ وَاسْتَغْفِرْ
لَهُمْ وَشَاوِرْهُمْ فِي الأَمْرِ فَإِذَا عَزَمْتَ فَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى
اللّهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُتَوَكِّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is part of the Mercy of God that thou dost deal gently with them
Wert thou severe or harsh-hearted, they would have broken away from
about thee: so pass over (their faults), and ask for (God's) forgiveness
for them; and consult them in affairs (of moment). Then, when thou
hast*** ***taken a decision put thy trust in God. For God loves those
who put their trust (in Him).” [The Holy Qur’an, Al-i-Imran 3:159]***

It was revealed during the Battle of Uhud. It deals with an important
aspect of leadership. A good leader is one who forgives those who make
mistakes, but realize their mistake and repent. If a leader does not
forgive such people, and treats them with harshness, then the people
will soon leave him unsupported, he will fail to implement his plans,
and thus he fails to lead.

In this verse, the Prophet is instructed by God to consult the people
regarding his affairs. The Prophet obviously did not consult the people
regarding revelations. Rather he consulted them regarding the ways in
which he implemented divine decrees.

In other words, he never consulted the people on legislative issues:
Rather they were consulted on executive issues. For example, in the
Battle of Badr the Muslims set up their camps in a given location by the
order of the Prophet . One of the companions called Hobab ibn Monzar
asked: “Is camping in this location decreed by God, or is it your own
opinion?” The Prophet said: “No. There is no divine ruling on this
issue.” Then Hobab said: “This is not a good place to camp.” The Prophet
agreed with him.

We also read in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اسْتَجَابُوا لِرَبِّهِمْ وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
وَأَمْرُهُمْ شُورَى بَيْنَهُمْ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنفِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who hearken to their Lord, and establish regular Prayer; who
(conduct) their affairs by mutual Consultation; who spend out of what We
bestow on them for Sustenance.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Shura 42:38]***

As we can see the issue of consultation is stressed in this verse also
right after establishing regular prayers.

Consultation as Viewed in the Traditions
----------------------------------------

There are many traditions about consultation from the life of the
Prophet and the Immaculate Imams . The Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما شَقَى عَبدٌ قَطُّ بمَشُورَةٍ وَلا سَعِدَ بِاسْتِغْناءِ رأيٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“No one has ever been wretched after consultation, and no one has
become prosperous through being satisfied with his own opinion.”*[^1]

Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن اسْتَبَدَّ بِرأيِهِ هَلَكَ وَمَن شاوَرَ الرّجالَ شَارَكَهُم في
عُقولِهِم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One who only follows his own opinion will perish, but one who consults
people shares with them in their intellect.”*[^2]

The Noble Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا كانَ خِيارُكُم أُمَرائَكُم وأغْنِياؤكُم سُمَحائَكُم وأمْرُكُم
شُورى بَينَكُم فَظَهْرُ الأرْضِ خَيرٌ لَكُم مِن بَطْنِها، وإذا كَانَ
أُمَراؤكُم شِرارَكُم وأغْنِياؤكُم بُخَلائَكُم وَلم يَكُن أمْرُكُم
شورَى بَينَكُم فَبَطْنُ الأرضِ خَيرٌ لكُم مِن ظَهرِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If your good people are your rulers, your rich ones are generous, and
your affairs are carried out in consultation with each other, then the
surface of the earth is better for you than its depths. However, if your
rulers are your evil ones, your rich are miserly, and your affairs are
not carried out in consultation with each other, then being under the
earth is better for you than being on it.”*[^3]

Imam Kazim said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا هشامُ! مجَالَسَةُ أهْلِ الدّينِ شَرَفُ الدّنيا وَالآخِرَةِ
وَمُشَاوَرَةُ العاقِلِ النّاصِحِ يُمْنٌ وَبَرَكةٌ وَرُشْدٌ وَتوفِيقٌ
مِن اللهِ، فإذَا أشارَ عَلَيكَ العاقِلُ النّاصِحُ فإيّاكَ وَالخِلافَ،
فإنَّ في ذلِكَ العَطَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Hisham! Associating with people of religion is nobility in this
world and the Hereafter. Consulting with an intelligent, sincere advisor
is good fortune and a blessing and guidance. It is a form of divine
success. Therefore, beware of acting against the advice of an
intelligent, sincere advisor whose advice you seek, for in that lies
ruin.”*[^4]

Whom to Consult With
--------------------

Chapters 21 and 22 of Wasa\`il al-Shī\`ah deal specifically with whom to
consult with. We shall present a few traditions from these chapters
here.  
 Imam Sadiq quoted on the authority of his Noble father that the Prophet
of God was asked: “What does ‘Hazm’ mean?” He replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُشاوَرَةُ ذَوي الرّأيِ واتِّباعُهُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Consulting with those who are well-informed and following their
advice.”*[^5]

Imam Sadiq said that one of the recommendations of the Prophet to Imam
Ali was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا مُظاهَرَةَ أوْثَقُ مِن المُشاوَرَةِ ولا عقْلَ كالتَّدبِيرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no aid more reliable than consultation, and there is no
intellect like pondering over the affairs.”*[^6]

Imam Baqir said: “There are four lines in the Torah the first of which
is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن لا يَسْتَشِرْ يَنْدَمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One who does not seek advice regarding his affairs will regret
it.”*[^7]

Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا ظَهيرَ كَالمُشاوَرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no aid like consultation.”*[^8]

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إستَشِرْ في أمْرِكَ الّذينَ يخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In your affairs, only consult with those people who are fearful of
God.”* [^9]

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسْتَشِرِ العاقِلَ مِن الرّجالِ فإنَّه لا يأمُرُ إلا بِخَيرٍ، وإيّاكَ
والخِلافَ فإنَّ مُخالَفَةَ الوَرِعِ العاقِلِ مَفْسَدَةٌ في الدّينِ
والدّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Consult with men who are intelligent, since they will only advise you
to do good. Beware of opposing (their) advice, for opposing the
God-fearing intelligent man is a cause of ruin in religion and in this
world.”*[^10]

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ المَشورَةَ لا تَكونُ إلاّ بحُدودِها وإلاّ كانَت مَضَرَّتهُا عَلى
المُستَشِيرِ أكْثرَ مِن مَنفَعَتِها لهُ: فأوَّلهُا أنْ يَكونَ الّذي
تَشاوَرَ عاقِلاً، وَالثّانيةُ أنْ يَكونَ حُرّاً مُتَديّناً،
والثّالِثَةُ أنْ يكونَ صَديقاً مُؤاخِياً، والرّابِعةُ أنْ تُطلِعَهُ
عَلى سِرِّكَ فَيَكونُ عِلمُهُ بِه كَعِلمِكَ بِنفْسِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Consultation should be carried out within its limits, otherwise it
will be more harmful than beneficial to the one seeking advice. Firstly,
the one consulted should intelligent. Secondly, he should be a free,
religious man. Thirdly, he should be a sincere friend. Fourthly, when
he* *becomes acquainted with your inner thoughts, his knowledge of it
should be like your knowledge of yourself.”*[^11]

Whom Not to Consult With
------------------------

Undoubtedly we cannot consult with just anyone. We were advised to
consult with those who are intelligent, God-fearing, honest and
trustworthy and who wish us well. Consulting with some people might
cause us harm and deprivation. The Commander of the Faithful in his
letter to Malik al-Ashtar tells us whom not to consult with:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تُدخِلَنَّ في مَشورَتِكَ بخِيلاً يَعدِلُ بكَ عَن الفَضْلِ
وَيَعِدُكَ الفَقْرَ، ولا جَباناً يُضَعِّفُكَ عَن الأمورِ ولا حَريصاً
يُزَيِّن لكَ الشَّرَهَ بالجَورِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not include in your consultations a miser who turns you away from
generosity and threatens you with poverty, or a coward who renders you
weak in your affairs, or a greedy person who makes covetousness (for
wealth and power) accompanied by tyranny seem attractive to you .”*[^12]

As stated before consultation is a means of finding the proper way to do
things. It is meant to help us do the right thing. Therefore, we should
not consult with wicked, stingy, greedy or cowardly people. They will
not help us if we consult with them. Rather they will cause misery for
us. That is why Imam Sajjad has said: “But if you do not have any good
advice for him, you should refer him to someone else whom you know and
trust his advice yourself.”

[^1]: Tafsir-i-Namunah, v.3, p.145.

[^2]: Nahjul Balaghah, Subhi Salih, Hikmah 161.

[^3]: Tafsir-i-Namunah, v.3, p.145.

[^4]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.293.

[^5]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.8, pp.424-427.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.8. pp.424-427.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: Nahjul Balaghah, Fayz al-Islam, letter no.53.


