Right n. 44: The Right of the Younger One
=========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق الصغير
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا حَقُّ الصَّغِيرِ فَرَحْمتُهُ وتَثقِيفُهُ وتَعْلِيمُهُ
وَالعَفْوُ عَنْهُ وَالسِّترُ عَلَيهِ وَالرِّفْقُ بهِ وَالمَعُونَةُ لهُ
وَالسِّترُ عَلَى جَرَائِرِ حَدَاثتِهِ فَإنّهُ سَبَبٌ لِلتَّوبَةِ
وَالْمُدَارَاةُ لَهُ وتَرْكُ مُمَاحَكَتِهِ، فَإنَّ ذَلِكَ أَدنى
لِرُشْدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of him who is younger than you is that you have
compassion on him, train and educate him, pardon him, and cover up his
faults, be gentle with him and help him, cover up the guilts of his
juvenility because this will make him repent; treat him with patience,
and stop quarrelling with him. This will lead him to more sensible
conduct.**

Imam Sajjad recommends us to treat younger people with kindness, educate
them, pardon them and cover up their faults. We should be patient with
them and help them with their affairs. Undoubtedly being egocentric is
one of the foundations of the development of children’s personality. If
used properly and directed well, it can lead to their prosperity.

A proper way to respond to this egocentrism is to respect the children
and attend to their personality. Any child whose egocentrism is not
properly recognized in the family will feel humiliated. He will have a
feeling of having failed in life. He will be depressed. Such children
are prone to various deviations and faults. That is why Imam Sajjad
instructs us to overlook their mistakes.

The Noble Prophet has said the following regarding child-rearing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أكْرِموا أوْلادَكُم وَأحْسِنوا آدابَكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Respect your children and improve your behavior.”*[^1]

Imam Sajjad has stressed training and educating children as one of the
major duties of parents, and rights that children have incumbent upon
their parents. The practices and lives of the Immaculate Imams are good
examples of this.

Encouraging Children
--------------------

Imam Hasan gathered his children and his brother’s children once and
told them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّكُم صِغارٌ اليَومَ ويوشَكُ أنْ تَكونوا كِبارَ قَومٍ آخَرينَ،
فَتَعَلَّموا العِلمَ فَمَنْ لَمْ يَستَطِعْ مِنكُم أنْ يحْفَظَهُ
فَلْيَكْتُبْهُ وَليَضَعْهُ في بَيتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“You are all children today, but will soon be great men in the future,
so acquire knowledge. Whoever of you does not have a good memory, should
write down what his teachers say and keep the notes at home for later
review.”*[^2]

We see that Imam Hasan uses the children’s egotism to encourage them to
study to become great men in the future. He does not resort to
punishment or threatening, rather he shows them that their studies today
will pave the way for their progress tomorrow. What is done by Imam
Hasan is the best known method of educational guidance today. Thus if a
family succeeds in encouraging their children to study by raising hopes
for their future progress in them, that family can direct them to
eagerly pursue knowledge. There is no need to resort to threatening them
or using force and punishment.

Proper Way of Child-Rearing
---------------------------

One of the most fundamental conditions for the proper development of our
children is freedom. The same holds true for adults. There is no hope
for progress in an environment full of oppression. It is the calm
atmosphere of freedom that fosters the flourishing of talents. That is
why Muslim teachers do not resort to the use of force as much as
possible. The Prophet of Islam who was the teacher of humanity was very
kind.

Ibn Masoud narrated that once when a man went to see the Prophet , he
was afraid to talk. The Prophet said: “Do not be afraid. I am not a
king.”[^3] The Noble Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كانَ عِندَهُ صَبِيٌّ فَليَتَصَابَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever has a child should behave like a child with him.”*[^4]

Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كانَ عِندَهُ وَلَدٌ صَبا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever has a child should play with him.”*

The Noble Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحِمَ اللهُ عَبداً أعانَ وَلَدَهُ عَلى بِرِّهِ بالإحْسانِ إلَيهِ
وَالتّألُّفِ لهُ وَتَعليمِهِ وَتَأدِيبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“May God’s mercy be upon a servant (of God) who helps his child in
righteousness through goodness to him and friendliness towards him, and
through educating and training him.”*[^5]

Respecting Children
-------------------

Whenever the Noble Prophet of God returned from a journey, and met the
children on the way home, he stopped in respect for the children. He
then asked the smaller children to come forward. He picked them up and
hugged them. He put some of them on his shoulders. He instructed his
companions to hug children and let them ride on their shoulders. He said
children get really happy this way. The children never forget these
moments. Whenever they got together, they proudly talked about how the
Prophet of God hugged them, and gave them a ride on his back, or that he
ordered his companions to give them rides on their backs.

Overlooking Children’s Mistakes
-------------------------------

Imam Sajjad instructs us to pardon the faults of children, and overlook
their mistakes. Overlooking and pardoning some of the faults of children
is one of the major moral issues that should be used in the education of
children. It is sometimes more effective to overlook other people’s
mistakes and act as if you know nothing about them. Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلاحُ حالِ التّعايُشِ وَالتّعاشُرِ مِلءُ مِكيالٍ ثُلثاهُ فِطنَتُه
وثُلثُهُ تَغافُلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Goodness of companionship and living together is a full measure,
two-thirds of which is (possessing) understanding and one third of it is
overlooking (the shortcomings of others).”* [^6]

The Prophet of Islam has stressed the importance of overlooking other
people’s mistakes as we can read in the following tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُؤمِنُ نِصفُهُ تَغافُلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Half of (the nature of) the believer is overlooking mistakes.”*[^7]

Of course, there are two forms of overlooking. One form is recommendable
while the other form is not desirable. The form of overlooking of other
people’s mistakes that is recommended by the leaders of Islam is based
on the intellect and is meant to make improvements. It is done with good
intentions. Teachers can get good results from overlooking, if they do
it at the proper time and in the proper place.

As an example, stealing money from the parents is sometimes done by some
children all over the world. The instinctive desire to own develops in
children sooner or later. Then they start to consider everything their
own property. They may take other kids’ toys, or pick some money from
their father’s pocket. In these conditions it is best for the father to
say: “Some money has been taken from my wallet.” Then the mother should
say: “Is there anyone in this house who might do such a bad thing? No,
of course not.”

Then the father should apologize and say: “I am sorry. It must have
fallen out of my pocket, or maybe I did not get the right change back
when I was shopping.” Then the child will think over what he has done,
and say to himself how good it is that no one has found out about it.
Then he will decide not to do it again, since this will threaten his
honor. As stressed by Imam Sajjad , this is one of the situations in
which overlooking a child’s mistake is recommendable and will lead to an
improvement in his behavior.

[^1]: Qamus Qu’ran, v.4, p.129.

[^2]: Guftar-i-Falsafi (Koodak), v.1, p.464, quoted from Bihar al-Anwar,
v.1, p.110.

[^3]: Guftar-i-Falsafi (Koodak), v.1, p.479, quoted from Bihar al-Anwar,
v.1, p.110.

[^4]: Ibid. p.130, quoted from Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.5, p.126.

[^5]: Ibid. quoted from Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, v.2, p.262.

[^6]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.264.

[^7]: Guftar-i-Falsafi, v.1, p.405.


