Right n. 47: The Right of Him through whom God makes you Happy
==============================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق من سرك الله به وعلى يديه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا حَقُّ مَنْ سَرَّكَ اللهُ بهِ وَعلَى يَدَيهِ، فَإنْ كَانَ
تَعَمَّدَهَا لَكَ حَمِدْتَ اللهَ أَوّلاً ثُمَّ شَكَرْتَهُ عَلَى ذلِكَ
بقَدْرِهِ فِي مَوْضِعِ الجَزَاءِ وَكَافَأتَهُ عَلَى فَضْلِ
الابْتِدَاءِ وَأَرْصَدْتَ لَهُ الْمُكَافَأَةَ، وَإنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ
تَعَمَّدَهَا حَمِدْتَ اللهَ وَشَكَرتَهُ وعَلِمْتَ أنَّهُ مِنْهُ،
تَوَحَّدَكَ بهَا وأَحْبَبتَ هذا إذ كَانَ سَبَباً مِنْ أَسْبَاب نِعَمِ
اللهِ عَلَيْكَ وَترْجُو لَهُ بَعْدَ ذلِكَ خَيرًا، فإنَّ أَسْبَابَ
النِّعَمِ بَرَكَةٌ حَيثُ مَا كَانتْ وَإنْ كَانَ لَمْ يَتَعَمَّدَ. ولا
قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of him through whom God makes you happy is that**[^1]
**if he intentionally made you happy, you should first praise God and
then you should thank him accordingly, and reward him for initiating a
nobility and be determined to return his favor. But if he made you happy
unintentionally, you should praise God, thank Him, and realize that He
chose you exclusively for that, and you liked it. He has been one of the
means of God’s blessings descending upon you. You should only wish him
well since the means of descension of blessings are themselves blessings
wherever they be, even if unintentionally. And there is no power but in
God.**

There are many different situations in life. Sometimes life is filled
with failures and difficulties. At other times, it is filled with
success and happiness. The difficulties may seem like storms that
threaten a safe harboring. The successes may cause such an outbreak of
happiness that we lose all our control. Islam and the Qur’an direct us
towards prosperity, and invite us to act moderately in all situations.

We should not lose hope in God’s Mercy when we are faced with
difficulties. We should not think that there is no way out for us. We
should not become negligent during times of happiness and forget our
identity and God. We should remember God in all situations, and realize
that blessings and the attention that we receive are due to God’s will.
It is God who makes us happy. We should also realize that difficulties
are very instrumental in our progress and development. We should be
moderate whether we are happy or sad. The cause of happiness varies.
Sometimes we get a new position. At other times, we get rich. Sometimes
another person makes us happy.

The Reward for Making Believers Happy
-------------------------------------

There is a chapter on this subject in *Usul al-Kafi*. The importance of
happiness and making people happy has been outlined there. We will
review a few of them here.  
 Abi Hamzeh al-Thumali quoted on the authority of Imam Sadiq on the
authority of God’s Prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن سَرَّ مُؤمِناً فَقَدْ سَرَّني وَمَنْ سَرَّني فَقَدْ سَرَّ اللهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever makes a believer happy has indeed made me happy. Whoever makes
me happy has made God happy.”*[^2]

This tradition shows us that one way to please the Prophet and God is to
make the people happy. This can play a very important role in fostering
social unity, and in eliminating hard feelings and animosities. Jabir
narrated that Imam Baqir said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَسُّم المُؤمِنِ في وَجهِ المُؤمِنِ حَسَنةٌ وَصَرْفُ القَذى عَنهُ
حَسَنَةٌ وَما عُبِدَ اللهُ بِشَيءٍ أَحَبُّ إلَيهِ مِن إدخَالِ
السُّرورِ عَلى المُؤمِنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The smile of a believer at another believer is a good deed. Removing a
speck from your brother’s eye is a good deed. No form of worshipping God
is more loved by Him than making the believer happy.”*[^3]

Therefore, the best form of worshipping God is making others happy. Imam
Baqir said: “In the supplications of Moses - the son of Imran - we read
that God told Moses : “There are among My servants some for whom Heaven
is destined and they shall have the rule there.” Then Moses asked: “O
Lord! Who are those who have such a special place in Heaven?”

God said: “Those who make believers happy.” This tradition continues as
follows: “If a believer who lives in a land that is ruled by an
oppressive ruler migrates to a land in which pagans live, seeks asylum
there and gets influenced by them; when he dies he will be told, “O My
servant! I would have let you reside in Heaven if you had any place
there, but Heaven is forbidden for those who set up partners with me.”
The fire will be ordered to seize that man but not to torture him, and
he will be fed at proper times. Then Moses asked: “Where will he be fed
from?” God said: “He will be fed from wherever God wills.”[^4] We also
see a similar concept in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَغْفِرُ أَن يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ
ذَلِكَ لِمَن يَشَاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God forgiveth not that partners should be set up with Him; but He
forgiveth anything else, to whom He pleaseth …” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Nisaa 4:48]***

Therefore, we realize that those who make people happy go to Heaven and
have a special rank there. In the sixth tradition in the above-mentioned
chapter, we read that Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يَرى أَحَدُكُم إذا أدْخَلَ عَلى مُؤمِنٍ سُروراً أنَّهُ عَليهِ
أدخَلَهُ فَقَط، بَل واللهِ عَلَينا، بَل وَاللهِ عَلى رَسولِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When one of you makes a believer happy, you should not think that you
have only made him happy. No, I swear by God, you have also made us
happy. No, I swear by God, you have also made God’s Prophet happy.”*[^5]

Therefore the Prophet and the Immaculate Imams all get happy when they
see that their followers are being kind to each other and making each
other happy.

Making Others Happy Will Save You
---------------------------------

Sodayr Seyrafi quoted on the authority of Imam Sadiq : “When a believer
is resurrected on Judgment Day, he might see someone ahead of him who
tells him not to be afraid of what he sees, and gives him glad tidings
of happiness from the Lord. Then that person always accompanies him
until the Reckoning. His Reckoning will be an easy one, and he will be
told to go to Heaven.

That person who always walks ahead of him will still accompany him. Then
the believer will ask: “May God have Mercy upon you. You have been
walking ahead of me since I was resurrected, and have given me glad
tidings of God’s Mercy on me. Now please tell me who you are.” That
person will say: “I am the result of your deeds making other believers
happy in your life. God created me out of that happiness to give you
glad tidings.”[^6] In this tradition, we see that all our deeds will
somehow be manifested in the Hereafter.

Imam Sadiq’s Followers are Men of Action
----------------------------------------

Kulayni narrated that Mohammad ibn Jamhoor said: “Najashi was a farmer
who was appointed as the governor of the provinces of Ahwaz and Fars.
One of his agents went to see Imam Sadiq and said: I owe Najashi a lot
of taxes and know that he really likes you. Can you please write a
recommendation for me? Imam Sadiq wrote: “In the name of God, the
Beneficent, the Merciful. Make your brother happy in order to make God
happy.”

Then the man took the letter and gave it to Najashi. Najashi waited
until others left. Then he kissed the letter and asked him what he
wanted. The man told Najashi that he had been taxed 10,000 Dirhams.
Najashi ordered the tax not to be taken from him, and asked if he had
made him happy that way. The man said yes. Then he ordered that a horse,
a servant and a maid be given to him and asked if he had made him happy.

The man said yes. Then Najashi ordered the carpet he was sitting on to
be given to him, too. Later on, Mohammad ibn Jamhoor told the Imam what
had happened. The Imam became happy. He said: “O you became happy.” The
Imam said: “Yes. I swear by God that the Prophet became happy, too.”

Making Others Happy Will Always Accompany You
---------------------------------------------

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن أدْخَلَ عَلى مُؤمِنٍ سُروراً خَلَقَ اللّهُ مِن ذلِكَ السّرورِ
خَلقاً فَيلْقاهُ عِندَ مَوتِهِ فَيَقولُ لهُ: أبْشِرْ يا وَليَّ اللّهِ
بِكَرامَةٍ مِن اللّهِ وَرِضوانٍ، ثُمَّ لا يَزالُ مَعَهُ حَتىّ
يُدخِلَهُ قَبرَهُ، فَيَقولُ لهُ مِثلَ ذلِكَ فإذا بَعثَ يَلقاهُ
فَيَقولُ لهُ مِثلَ ذلِكَ، ثُمَّ لا يَزالُ مَعهُ عِندَ كُلِّ هَولٍ
يُبَشّرُهُ وَيَقولُ لهُ مِثلَ ذلِكَ، فَيَقولُ لهُ: مَن أنتَ رَحمَكَ
اللّهُ؟ فَيَقولُ لهُ: أنا السّرورُ الّذي أدخَلتَهُ عَلى فُلان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever makes a believer happy, God will create from that happiness a
creature who will meet him at the time of his death and say to him:
‘Rejoice, O friend of God, at the favour and pleasure of God’. He will
stay with him until he enters the grave and will repeat the same words
to him. When he is resurrected, he will meet him and say the same to him
again. Then he will continue to be with him at every (moment of) terror,
giving him glad tidings and repeating the same words. The man will say
to him: ‘Who are you, may God have mercy on you’? He will answer: ‘I am
the happiness you had brought to so and so in his lifetime’.”*[^7]

In the last tradition in that chapter, we read that Hisham ibn Hakam
quoted on the authority of Imam Sadiq :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِن أحَبِّ الأعْمالِ إلى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إدخالُ السُّرورِ عَلى
المُؤمِنِ: إشْباعُ جُوعَتِهِ أو تَنفِيسُ كُربَتِهِ أو قَضاءُ دَينِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One of the most beloved deeds for God is making a believer happy. That
includes feeding him if he is hungry, or helping fend off his
calamities, or paying off his debts.”*[^8]

Thus, we realize that Islam is for this world and the Hereafter. The
best society is one whose members treat each other with kindness and
love. The Immaculate Imams have constantly advised their followers to
help each other in order to direct them towards achieving Utopia.

[^1]: In the other version it continues: “you first praise God, then you
thank that person.”

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi, v.2, p.188, traditions 1-2.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi, v.2, p.188, tradition 3.

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, tradition 6.

[^6]: Ibid. pp.190-191.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, pp.191-192.

[^8]: Ibid.


