Right n. 50: The Right of Those Under the Protection of Islam
=============================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق أهل الذمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا حَقُّ أَهْلِ الذِّمَّةِ فَالحُكْمُ فِيهِمْ أَنْ تَقبَلَ
مِنْهُمْ مَا قَبِلَ اللهُ، وَتَفِي بمَا جَعَلَ اللهُ لَهُمْ مِنْ
ذِمَّتِهِ وَعَهْدِهِ وَتكِلُهُمْ إلَيهِ فِيمَا طَلبُوا مِنْ
أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَأُجْبرُِوا عَلَيْهِ وَتحْكُمَ فِيهِمْ بمَا حَكَمَ اللهُ
بهِ عَلَى نفْسِكَ فِيمَا جَرَى بَيْنَكَ [وَبيْنَهمْ] مِنْ مُعَامَلَةٍ
وَلْيَكُنْ بَينَكَ وَبيْنَ ظُلْمِهِمْ مِنْ رِعَايَةِ ذِمَّةِ اللَّهِ
وَالْوَفَاءِ بعَهْدِهِ وَعَهْدِ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ – صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ – حَائِلٌ فَإنَّهُ بَلَغَنَا أنَّهُ قَالَ «مَنْ
ظَلَمَ مُعَاهِدًا كُنْتُ خَصْمَهُ» فَاتَّقِ اللَّهَ. ولا حَوْلَ ولا
قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of those under the protection of Islam is that you
should accept from them what God has accepted from them, and fulfill
what God has established for them under His protection and covenant, and
entrust them to Him in what they are required to carry out, and are
obliged to do.**

**And you should judge among them with the judgments of God that He
commanded for you regarding the conditions of dealing with them, and do
not wrong them as long as they honor God's covenant and fulfill their
pledge. And the pledge of the Prophet, may God’s peace be upon him and
his household, is a barrier**[^1] **since it is reported that he said:
“I am the adversary of whoever oppresses one who has a treaty."
Therefore, fear God. And there is no power but in God.**

The Arabic word ‘Dhimma' means a pledge or a covenant. It has appeared
in the following verses, for example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَيْفَ وَإِن يَظْهَرُوا عَلَيْكُمْ لاَ يَرْقُبُواْ فِيكُمْ إِلاًّ
وَلاَ ذِمَّةً يُرْضُونَكُم بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَتَأْبَى قُلُوبُهُمْ
وَأَكْثَرُهُمْ فَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“How (can there be such a league), seeing that if they get an
advantage over you, they respect not in you the ties either of kinship
or of covenant? With (fair words from) their mouth they entice you, but
their hearts are averse from you; and most of them are rebellious and
wicked.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Tawbah 9:8]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَرْقُبُونَ فِي مُؤْمِنٍ إِلاًّ وَلاَ ذِمَّةً وَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُعْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In a believer they respect not the ties either of kinship or of
covenant! It is they who have transgressed all bounds. [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Tawbah 9:10]***

“Those under the protection of Islam” refers to the Jews and the
Christians who live under the rule of an Islamic government and have a
covenant with the Muslims. There are two references to this in the Holy
Qur’an.[^2] We read in *Nahjul Balaghah* the following regarding the
various social classes: “And there are people amongst them who pay taxes
and tribute.”[^3]

The people of the Book are the non-Muslims who adhere to one of the
Divine Books that are mentioned in the Qur’an. These people are
considered to be under the protection of Islam. They must pay taxes to
the state in order to benefit from the support of the government while
living in an Islamic country. Then the Islamic government protects their
lives and their property using this revenue.

According to Islamic jurisprudence, the people of the Book who live
under the protection of Islam can rely on their own religious
jurisprudents regarding their divine affairs, and can go to Muslim
judges regarding their personal or economic affairs. The Muslim judge
will judge between them according to Islamic principles. In such cases,
the people of the Book under the protection of Islam can rely on their
own religious authorities, too.[^4]

Our Duties towards the People of the Book
-----------------------------------------

It was stated that Jews and Christians who live in an Islamic country
are under the protection of Islam. Now let us see that based on the
Qur’an, what duties we have towards the people of the Book. Consider the
following verse in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَاتِلُواْ الَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللّهِ وَلاَ بِالْيَوْمِ
الآخِرِ وَلاَ يُحَرِّمُونَ مَا حَرَّمَ اللّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَلاَ
يَدِينُونَ دِينَ الْحَقِّ مِنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ الْكِتَابَ حَتَّى
يُعْطُواْ الْجِزْيَةَ عَن يَدٍ وَهُمْ صَاغِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Fight those who believe not in God nor the Last Day, nor hold that
forbidden which has been forbidden by God and His Apostle, nor
acknowledge the Religion of Truth, (even if they are)*** ***of the
people of the Book, until they pay the Jizya***[^5] ***with willing
submission, and feel themselves subdued.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Tawbah
9:29]***

We see that Islam has established an in-between law for them - something
between that for Muslims and Infidels. This is because the people of the
Book who follow the principles of a divine Holy Book are somewhat
similar to Muslims, but in some respects, they are close to the
infidels.

It is for this reason that we are not permitted to kill them. However,
we are only allowed to accommodate them in the Muslim society if they
agree to peacefully live with Muslims, respect the Muslims, and do not
rebel against the Muslims.

Poll-tax
--------

Poll-tax is a form of tax that is taken from non-Muslims who live under
the protection of Islam. They pay this tax so that the Islamic
government can protect their lives and their property.[^6] Some people
believe that the origin of the Arabic word used for poll-tax is derived
from ancient Persia.

At that time, a certain type of tax was levied to strengthen the army.
Others believe it to be a purely Arabic word that refers to tax taken to
provide security for religious minorities.[^7] In chapter seven we
referred to the text of the covenant between Khalid ibn Walid and
Salvaba, the elder of the Christians regarding the imposition of tax in
return for being under the protection of Islam.

Pre-Islamic Poll-Tax
--------------------

Some believe that the first instance of poll-tax is related to the
Sasanian king Anushiravan. It is certainly known that Anushiravan was
the first ruler to levy taxes on the nation. He charged taxes to all
non-governmental workers between the age of twenty and fifty. He charged
4, 6, 8 or 12 Dirhams per person. It is known that the philosophy behind
this tax was to collect money in order to defend the country and its
independence. To accomplish these objectives some personally participate
in the defense activities, while others support them through paying
annual taxes.

The age of tax payers being between twenty and fifty years implies that
it was levied only on those who could carry weapons and participate in
the defense activities, but did not do so because of their engagement in
a job. Muslims do not have to pay such taxes because all Muslims are
required to participate in a holy war when needed, but non-Muslims are
not obliged to participate in a holy war; but they must pay taxes. The
other reason supporting this idea is the exemption of the children,
women, old men and the blind men from religious minorities. Therefore we
realize that this form of tax is a form of financial assistance provided
by the people of the Book in return for the protection that the Muslims
offer them to safeguard their lives and property.[^8]

Therefore, those who consider this form of tax as payment to a conqueror
have not paid attention to the real meaning behind it. They should
realize that the people of the Book receive full protection under an
Islamic government by paying this tax. In addition, they become totally
exempt from having to participate in defense activities or engaging in
holy wars. In the verses cited above we read: “… until they pay the
Jizya with willing submission and feel themselves subdued.” This implies
that the payment of this tax is a sign of their submission to Islam and
the Holy Qur’an. In other words, it implies their readiness to
peacefully live as a religious minority among the ruling majority.[^9]

The Jurisprudence Ruling on Poll-Tax
------------------------------------

The first questions on the jurisprudence ruling on poll-tax is on who
should pay this tax. Then it deals with how much they should be charged
and the conditions for that. In Shara’i al-Islam by Muhaqqiq we read:
“Take it from those who confess to their religion being the Jews, the
Christians and those who are thought to follow the Holy Book being the
Magians.”[^10] The Commander of the Faithful said: “The Magians are
attached to the Jews and the Christians, and are treated the same
regarding the poll-tax and the blood compensation issues since they have
had a Divine Book in the past.”[^11]

There are traditions which state that the Prophet of the Magians was
named “Damast” and their book was called ‘Jamast’ which was recorded on
twelve thousand cow skins. These were all burnt.

The poll-tax cannot be taken from those other than the people of the
Book. The Qur’an says the following regarding the Pagans:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاقْتُلُواْ الْمُشْرِكِينَ حَيْثُ وَجَدتُّمُوهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then fight and slay the Pagans wherever ye find them.” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Tawbah 9:5]***

The case of the idol-worshippers is also clear. Therefore, the poll-tax
can only be taken from these three groups of religious people if they
adhere to the conditions of the covenant. There is no distinction
between the Persians or the Arabs in this regard. No taxes can be
charged to children or the mentally ill.

The Amount of Poll-Tax
----------------------

What is known from the companions[^12] is that there is no fixed amount
for this tax. The amount is based on the opinion of the leader, and the
financial ability of the tax-payers to pay it. What we understand from
Islamic history is that it is set to be a very small amount, sometimes
about one Dirham, or what the tax-payer can pay.

The Conditions of the Poll-Tax
------------------------------

There are six conditions for the poll-tax as follows:

1 - They should accept the payment of this tax.

2 - They should not do anything that violates the conditions of
submission and security such as deciding to engage in war with the
Muslims.

3 - They should not hurt the Muslims, financially harm them, or sexually
harass the Muslims. If any of them vilifies the Prophet , he would be
killed.

4 - They should not publicly engage in the Islamically forbidden acts
such as drinking wine, eating pork, or marrying those who are forbidden
to marry. The covenant is violated if any such deeds are done.

5 - They should not build any synagogues in Muslim lands, ring the
synagogue bell, or build their houses to be taller than the houses of
the Muslims.

6 - They should be subject to the decrees of Islam.

The jurisprudents have expressed these six conditions for the poll-tax.
These have been discussed in detail in books on Islamic jurisprudence.
We only made a few remarks to clarify the rights of the people under the
protection of Islam as expressed by Imam Sajjad . Now let us see the
moral and humane aspects of the rights of the people under the
protection of Islam.

The Responsibilities of the Muslims
-----------------------------------

In a sermon to the people of the Kufa, Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَد بَلغَني أنَّ الرَّجُلَ مِنهُم كانَ يَدخُلُ عَلى المَرأةِ
المُسْلِمَةِ وَالأُخرى المُعاهِدَةِ فَيَنْتَزِعُ حِجْلَها وَقُلَبَها
وَقَلائِدَها وَرُعائَها ما تَمْتَنِعُ مِنهُ إلاّ بالاسْتِرجاعِ
وَالاسْتِرحَامِ ثُمَّ انْصَرَفوا وافِرينَ ما نالَ رَجُلاً مِنهُم
كَلِمٌ ولا أُريقَ لهُم دَمٌ، فَلَو أنَّ امْرَءً مُسلِماً ماتَ مِن
بَعدِ هذا أسَفاً ما كانَ بهِ مَلوماً بَل كانَ بهِ عِندي جَديراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I have been informed that their men (soldiers from the army of
Mu\`awiyah) would enter the house of the Muslim woman, and the woman
under the protection of Islam, snatching their anklets, bracelets,
necklaces and earrings. She could not put up any resistance to them but
to recite the verse of:* ***‘We are from God and to Him shall we return’
(2:156)**, and to ask them for mercy. Then they would leave laden with
wealth, with not a man among them suffering a cut or their blood being
shed. If a Muslim would die in grief after this, he would not be
blameworthy; in fact, in my opinion, it would be worthy of him.”*[^13]

When we see how much the leader of the Muslims gets upset when a person
under the protection of Islam is oppressed, then we realize how
important it is to respect these rights. When Imam Ali saw an old
Christian man who was begging, he asked who he was. When they told him
that he was a Christian, he said: “You used him when he was young, but
have abandoned him in these conditions now that he is old and unable to
work?”[^14] Then Imam Ali issued an order for the state to support him
financially.

Respecting the Covenant
-----------------------

One of the main moral issues regarding the people under the protection
of Islam is respecting their covenant as expressed by Imam Sajjad . God
has said the following in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْفُواْ بِالْعَهْدِ إِنَّ الْعَهْدَ كَانَ مَسْؤُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And fulfill (every) engagement, for (every) engagement will be
enquired into (On the Day of Reckoning).” [The Holy Qur’an, Bani Israil
17:34]***

He has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِأَمَانَاتِهِمْ وَعَهْدِهِمْ رَاعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who faithfully observe their trusts and their covenants.” [The
Holy Qur’an, al-Mu’minun 23:8]***

Respecting the covenant is stressed in these two verses of the Holy
Qur’an. This is considered one of the salient characteristics of
believers. One will be held responsible for this and questioned about it
in the Hereafter. We can also recognize the importance of this issue
from traditions from the Noble Prophet and the Immaculate Imams .

Ali ibn Ibrahim narrated that he heard Imam Sadiq say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِدَةُ المُؤمِنِ أخاهُ نَذْرٌ لا كَفّارَةَ لهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The believer’s promise to his brother is a vow that has no
expiation.”*[^15]

One must honor a promise just as one honors a vow. The Noble Prophet
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كانَ يُؤمِنُ بِاللهِ وَاليَومِ الآخَرِ فَلْيَفِ بِوَعْدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever believes in God and the Resurrection Day should honor his
promise.”*[^16]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أقْرَبُكُم مِنّي غَداً في المَوقِفِ أصْدَقُكُم في الحَديثِ وأدّاكُم
للأمانَةِ وأوْفاكُم بِالعَهْدِ وَأحْسَنُكُم خُلُقاً وأقْرَبُكُم مِن
النّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The nearest of you to me tomorrow, at the station (in the Hereafter),
will be the most truthful of you in speech, the best of you in
delivering the deposits entrusted to you, the most faithful of you in
promise, the best of you in nature, and the nearest of you to
people.”*[^17]

Be it a Muslim or a Pagan
-------------------------

The Prophet of God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَلاثٌ لم يَجْعَلِ اللهُ تَعالى فِيهِنَّ رُخْصَةٌ: أدَاءُ الأمانَةِ
إلى البَرِّ وَالفاجِرِ، وَالوَفاءُ بِالعَهدِ لِلبَرِّ وَالفاجِرِ، وبرّ
الوالِدَينِ برّين كانا أو فاجِرَينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There are three things in which God, the Exalted, has not given any
concession:*  
*1* *–* *Delivering the deposit entrusted to you, whether to the
virtuous or the evildoer.*  
*2* *–* *Fulfilling the promise, whether to the virtuous or the
evildoer.*  
*3 – Goodness to parents, whether they are virtuous or evildoers.”*[^18]

What is understood from the verses and the traditions is the meaning of
Imam Sajjad’s recommendations regarding the rights of the people under
the protection of Islam. Therefore, anyone who honors these rights has
indeed honored the rights of God and His Prophet . Anyone who does not
honor these rights has oppressed the people who have a covenant with
him. The Prophet has said that he will be the adversary of such people
in the Hereafter. The Holy Qur’an instructs us not to mistreat those
opponents of Islam who do not mistreat us. Consider the following verse
of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَنْهَاكُمُ اللَّهُ عَنِ الَّذِينَ لَمْ يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ فِي
الدِّينِ وَلَمْ يُخْرِجُوكُم مِّن دِيَارِكُمْ أَن تَبَرُّوهُمْ
وَتُقْسِطُوا إِلَيْهِمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَنْهَاكُمُ اللَّهُ عَنِ الَّذِينَ قَاتَلُوكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ
وَأَخْرَجُوكُم مِّن دِيَارِكُمْ وَظَاهَرُوا عَلَى إِخْرَاجِكُمْ أَن
تَوَلَّوْهُمْ وَمَن يَتَوَلَّهُمْ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God forbids you not, with regard to those who fight you not for
(your) Faith nor drive you out of your homes, from dealing kindly and
justly with them: for God loveth those who are just. God only forbids
you with regard to those who fight you for (your) Faith, and drive you
out of your homes, and support (others) in driving you out, from turning
to them (for friendship and protection). It is such a turn to them (in
these circumstances), that do wrong.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Mumtahana
60:8-9]***

The Holy Qur’an invites the people of the Book to be in harmony with the
Muslims on ideological issues, and admonishes them against disunion as
we can read in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ تَعَالَوْاْ إِلَى كَلَمَةٍ سَوَاء بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَلاَّ نَعْبُدَ إِلاَّ اللّهَ وَلاَ نُشْرِكَ بِهِ شَيْئًا
وَلاَ يَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُنَا بَعْضاً أَرْبَابًا مِّن دُونِ اللّهِ فَإِن
تَوَلَّوْاْ فَقُولُواْ اشْهَدُواْ بِأَنَّا مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: “O’ People of the Book! Come to common terms as between us and
you that we worship none but God; that we associate no partners with
Him; that we erect not, from among ourselves, Lords and patrons other
than God.” If then they turn back, say ye: “Bear witness that we (at
least) are Muslims (bowing to God’s Will).” [The Holy Qur’an, Al-i-Imran
3:64]***

[^1]: Protecting them.

[^2]: Qamus al-Qur’an, v.3, p.24.

[^3]: Nahjul Balaghah, letter no.53.

[^4]: International Private Rights, p.108.

[^5]: Tribute, a poll-tax levied on those who did not accept Islam, but
were willing to live under the protection of Islam, and were thus
tacitly willing to submit to its ideals being enforced in the Muslim
state.

[^6]: Mufradat, Raghib, Article on Poll-tax.

[^7]: Tafsir-i-Namunah, v.7, p.356.

[^8]: Tafsir-i-Namunah, v.7, p.356.

[^9]: Ibid. p.355.

[^10]: Shara’i al-Islam, Muhaqqiq, Book on Jihad, Chapter on Poll-tax.

[^11]: Jawahir al-Kalim, v.21, p.229.

[^12]: Of the Prophet .

[^13]: Nahjul Balaghah, sermon no.27.

[^14]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.11, p.49.

[^15]: Usul al-Kafi, v.2, p.364.

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: Tarikh Ya’qubi, v.2, p.392.

[^18]: Ibid.


