Right n. 2: The Right of Your Self
==================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق النفس
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا حَقُّ نَفْسِكَ عَلَيْكَ فَأَنْ تَسْتَوْفِيَهَا فِي طَاعَةِ
اللهِ فَتُؤَدّي إلَى لِسَانِكَ حَقَّهُ وَإلَى سَمْعِك حَقَّهُ وَإلَى
بَصَرِكَ حَقّهُ وَإلَى يَدِكَ حَقَّهَا وَإلَى رِجْلِك حَقَّهَا وَإلَى
بَطْنِكَ حَقَّهُ وَإلَى فَرْجِكَ حَقَّهُ وَتَسْتَعِينَ باللهِ عَلَى
ذَلِك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And the right of yourself incumbent upon you is that you employ it in
obeying God; then you deliver to your tongue its right, to your hearing
its right, to your sight its right, to your hand its right, to your leg
its right, to your stomach its right, to your private part its right,
and you seek help from God in all that.**

Therefore, we must respect the rights of our body parts that God has
given us in order to honor ourselves. We should seek God’s help in doing
so.

The Meaning of One’s Self
-------------------------

Some researchers consider the self to imply our souls. We read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَخْرِجُواْ أَنفُسَكُمُ الْيَوْمَ تُجْزَوْنَ عَذَابَ الْهُونِ بِمَا
كُنتُمْ تَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللّهِ غَيْرَ الْحَقِّ وَكُنتُمْ عَنْ
آيَاتِهِ تَسْتَكْبِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Yield up your souls: this day shall ye receive your reward, - a
penalty of shame, for that ye used to tell lies against God, and
scornfully to reject of His signs!"” [The Holy Qur’an, al-An’am 6:93]***

Others consider it to mean our inner thoughts, or our hearts as in:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ فَاحْذَرُوهُ
وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ حَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And know that God Knoweth what is in your hearts, and take heed of
Him; and know that God is Oft-forgiving, Most Forbearing.” [The Holy
Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:235]***

We can also see this meaning in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعْلَمُ ما في نَفْسي وَ لا أعْلَمُ ما في نَفْسِكَ إنَّكَ أنْتَ
عَلّامُ الْغُيُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Thou knowest what is in my heart, though I know not what is in
Thine, for Thou knowest in full all that is hidden.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Maida 5:116]***

In other places self is used in its natural context as in the following
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللّهُ نَفْسَهُ وَإِلَى اللّهِ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…But God cautions you (to remember) Himself; for the final goal is
to God.” [The Holy Qur’an, Al-i-Imran 3:28]***

In other places, self is used to refer to our physical body, which needs
food, water and air to survive. Once these are cut off from the self, it
will perish. Sheikh Tabarsi has commented that there are three meanings
for the self: the spirit, one’s nature, and sometimes used to show that
we are placing a stress on something. An example of the use of self to
imply spirit is found in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُخَادِعُونَ اللّهَ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَمَا يَخْدَعُونَ إِلاَّ
أَنفُسَهُم وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Fain would they deceive God and those who believe, but they only
deceive themselves, and realize (it) not!” [The Holy Qur’an al-Baqarah
2:9]***

Self as Viewed by the Qur’an
----------------------------

As Sheikh Tabarsi said the Arabic word ‘*nafs’* meaning ‘self’ is used
to mean the spirit or the soul as we can read in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ يَتَوَفَّى الْأَنفُسَ حِينَ مَوْتِهَا وَالَّتِي لَمْ تَمُتْ
فِي مَنَامِهَا فَيُمْسِكُ الَّتِي قَضَى عَلَيْهَا الْمَوْتَ وَيُرْسِلُ
الْأُخْرَى إِلَى أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ
يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is God that takes the souls (of men) at death; and those that die
not (He takes) during their sleep: those on whom He has passed the
decree of death, He keeps back (from returning to life), but the rest He
sends (to their bodies) for a term appointed verily in this are Signs
for those who reflect.” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Zumar 39:42]***

Another example where self is used to mean the soul is found in the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُواْ يَوْماً لاَّ تَجْزِي نَفْسٌ عَن نَّفْسٍ شَيْئاً وَلاَ
يُقْبَلُ مِنْهَا شَفَاعَةٌ وَلاَ يُؤْخَذُ مِنْهَا عَدْلٌ وَلاَ هُمْ
يُنصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then guard yourselves against a day when one soul shall not avail
another nor shall intercession be accepted for her, nor shall
compensation be taken from her, nor shall anyone be helped (from
outside).” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Baqarah 2:48]***

In another place, it is used to imply our soul or heart as in the
following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُر رَّبَّكَ فِي نَفْسِكَ تَضَرُّعاً وَخِيفَةً وَدُونَ الْجَهْرِ
مِنَ الْقَوْلِ بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالآصَالِ وَلاَ تَكُن مِّنَ الْغَافِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do thou (O reader!) Bring thy Lord to remembrance in thy (very)
soul, with humility and in reverence, without loudness in words, in the
mornings and evenings; and be not thou of those who are unheedful.” [The
Holy Qur’an, al-A’raf 7:205]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُواْ إِن يَسْرِقْ فَقَدْ سَرَقَ أَخٌ لَّهُ مِن قَبْلُ فَأَسَرَّهَا
يُوسُفُ فِي نَفْسِهِ وَلَمْ يُبْدِهَا لَهُمْ قَالَ أَنتُمْ شَرٌّ
مَّكَانًا وَاللّهُ أَعْلَمْ بِمَا تَصِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They said: "If he steals, there was a brother of his who did steal
before (him)." But these things did Joseph keep locked in his heart,
revealing not the secrets to them. He (simply) said*** ***(to himself):
"Ye are the worse situated; and God knoweth best the truth of what ye
assert!" [The Holy Qur’an, Yusuf 12:77]***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبُّكُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا فِي نُفُوسِكُمْ إِن تَكُونُواْ صَالِحِينَ
فَإِنَّهُ كَانَ لِلأَوَّابِينَ غَفُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your Lord knoweth best what is in your hearts: If ye do deeds of
righteousness, verily He is Most Forgiving to those who turn to Him
again and again (in true penitence).” [The Holy Qur’an, Bani Israil
17:25]***

Self as Viewed by Scholars
--------------------------

Sadr ul-Muta’alliheen Shirazi quoted al-Sheikh ul-Raees Abu Ali Sina
from Shafa: “There are three divisions for the self. At first we have
the plant self, that is the first degree of perfection for an organic
natural being having the ability to feed and grow. The second division
is the animal self, that is the first perfection of an organic natural
being which only has the ability to feel and move combined with will.
The third is the human self which is the perfection of an organic
natural being with the ability to think, understand and draw
conclusions. Then the various properties and characteristics of these
divisions are presented.”[^1]

In the twenty-second chapter of Risalat Fosoos al-Hikam, Abu Nasr Farabi
known as “the second teacher” said the following regarding the self:
“Indeed the perfection of the self is in the recognition of God’s first
right incumbent upon oneself. This will result in a state of
self-confidence.”

Mr. Elahi Ghomsheyee made the following comments on this: “There are
many aspects of the speaking self. It is called the lascivious self
because it is highly inclined to animal lustful desires. As lust
overtakes it, the self considers obscene acts to be beautiful ones.
Thus, it is called the adorning self. As it uses trickery to do his
animalistic acts, and is deceitful: it is called the deceitful self. As
it returns to his own nature and blames himself whenever he commits a
wicked act, it is called the reproachful self.

As whenever it is freed from his eagerness for animalistic lustful
desires it benefits from mental pleasures it is called the confident
self. Whenever it totally submits to the will and pleasure of his true
lover being God and destroys his own will and pleasure, then it is
called the pleased self. For a confident self, the only form of pleasure
and perfection is derived from the recognition of God’s first right,
that is to purify the soul from the filthiness of the body.”[^2] We
shall discuss these aspects of the self as viewed in the Qur’an.

Various Aspects of the Self in the Qur’an
-----------------------------------------

### 1) The Lascivious Self

The lascivious self is that which orders us to fulfill its lustful
desires. This is man’s biggest enemy. The greatest religious men have
always sought God’s help to fight themselves. We read the following in
the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أُبَرِّئُ نَفْسِي إِنَّ النَّفْسَ لأَمَّارَةٌ بِالسُّوءِ إِلاَّ
مَا رَحِمَ رَبِّيَ إِنَّ رَبِّي غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Nor do I absolve my own self (of blame): the (human) soul is
certainly prone to evil, unless my Lord do bestow His Mercy: but surely
my Lord is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful." [The Holy Qur’an, Yusuf
12:53]***

In another verse of the Holy Qur’an we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ خَافَ مَقَامَ رَبِّهِ وَنَهَى النَّفْسَ عَنِ الْهَوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And for such as had entertained the fear of standing before their
Lord's (tribunal) and had restrained (their) soul from lower desires,
their abode will be the Garden” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Nazi\`at
79:40-41]***

What is meant in this verse is that man should restrain himself and
fight his carnal desires. The Commander of the Faithful said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّفْسُ مَجْبُولَةٌ بِسُوءِ الأَدَبِ وَالعَبْدُ مَأمُورٌ
بِمُلازَمَةِ حُسْنِ الأدَبِ وَالنَّفْسُ تجْرِي بِطَبْعِها في مَيدانِ
المُخَالَفَةِ وَالعَبْدُ يُجْهِدُها بِرَدِّها عَن سُوءِ المُطالَبَةِ،
فَمَتى أطْلَقَ عِنَانهَا فَهوَ شَرِيكٌ في فَسادِها، وَمَنْ أعَانَ
نَفْسَهُ في هَوى نَفْسِهِ فقَدْ أشْرَكَ نَفْسَهُ في قَتْلِ نَفْسِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The soul is inclined towards evil deeds, and a servant has the
responsibility of directing it towards good deeds. The soul tries to
resist, but the servant tries to control the bad desires of the soul.
Whenever a servant lets his soul free to do as it wishes, he is a
partner in the corruption and the crimes committed by the soul. Whoever
aids his own soul to fulfill his carnal desires has indeed taken part in
killing himself.”*[^3]

Imam Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَقْصِرْ نَفسَكَ عَمّا يضُرُّها مِن قبلِ أنْ تُفارِقَكَ وَاسْعَ في
فَكاكِها كَما تَسْعى في طَلبِ مَعيشَتِكَ فإنَّ نَفْسَكَ رِهينٌ
بِعَمَلكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Hinder your soul from bringing you harm and prevent losses before you
depart from it. Try to free it from its illegitimate desires as hard as
you try to earn a living, since the soul is subject to your deeds.”*[^4]

#### Fight the Instincts

Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفْضَلُ الجِهادِ مجَاهَدَةُ المَرْءِ نَفْسَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The most excellent holy war is one’s fighting against his own selfish
desires.”*[^5]

The Noble Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الشَّديدَ لَيسَ مَنْ غَلَبَ النّاسَ، وَلكنَّ الشَّديدَ مَن غَلبَ
عَلى نَفْسِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A strong man is not one who overcomes the people. Rather a strong man
is one who can overcome his self.”*[^6]

Imam Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خالِف نَفْسَكَ تَسْتَقِمْ وَخالِطِ العُلَماءَ تَعْلَمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Fight yourself to avoid any deviations and live an upright life.
Associate with the people who possess knowledge so that you can learn
and get freed from ignorance.”*[^7]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ قَوِيَ عَلى نَفْسِهِ تَناهَى في القُوَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever overcomes himself has attained the highest ranks of
power.”*[^8]

#### Stronger Than One Who Lifts Rocks

Once when the Prophet was passing by a group of people, he saw a man who
was lifting a heavy rock. The people were amazed at his strength and
admired him. When they told the Prophet about him, and his might, the
Prophet asked:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلا أُخْبِرُكُمْ بِمَا هُوَ أَشَدُّ مِنهُ؟ رَجُلٌ سَبَّهُ رَجُلٌ
فَحَلِمَ عَنهُ فَغَلَبَ نَفْسَهُ وَغَلَبَ شَيطَانَهُ وَشَيْطانَ
صَاحِبهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do you want me to tell you about someone who is stronger than him?
Whoever is insulted by others but restrains himself, controls his anger
and overcomes the devil within himself and the devil inside the one who
insulted him, is stronger than this man who is lifting heavy
rocks.”*[^9]

### 2) The Reproachful Self

So far, we have discussed the verses and traditions regarding the
lascivious self that continuously drives us towards doing evil deeds.
The other aspect of our soul that constantly blames us for our bad deeds
is called the reproachful self. The Holy Qur’an calls this aspect of our
soul as witness in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا أُقْسِمُ بِيَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالنَّفْسِ اللَّوَّامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I do call to witness the Resurrection Day; and I do call to witness
the self-reproaching spirit: (Eschew Evil).” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Qiyamah 75:1-2]***

The Imam has been quoted by Ali ibn Ibrahim to have said that what is
meant by the “self-reproaching spirit” is man’s self which disobeys and
then blames itself.

When someone commits a sin, he is blamed by himself and the call of
conscience tortures him. The psychologists have called this reproaching
force within us as our moral conscience, and the Qur’an has called it
the reproachful self. This implies that this reproaching force is our
human spirit that is a part of us, and has always existed in mankind.

#### Treating Loss of Hope

Once when Imam Sajjad was circumambulating the Holy House of God, he
noticed that some people had gathered somewhere in the mosque. He asked
what had happened, and he was told that a man called Muhammad ibn Shihab
al-Zuhri had suffered from a psychological illness and seemed to have
lost his mind. He did not speak at all, and his family had brought him
to Mecca hoping that he might talk to the people he saw there.

When Imam Sajjad finished performing the circumambulation ceremonies, he
went to see that man. The man recognized Imam Sajjad when he saw him.
When Imam Sajjad asked what was wrong with him, he said: “I have become
this way because I killed an innocent man when I was a governor. Such a
murder of an innocent man has devastated a governor, and the blaming of
his reproaching self has caused him psychological ailment; and the shame
of committing a sin has shut up his mouth. Now he is like an insane
man.”

Imam Sajjad who felt that he had really lost hope in being forgiven by
God said: “I am more worried about the sin of your losing hope in God’s
Mercy than that of killing an innocent man. Pay the full compensation
for his blood money to his family members.” The man said: “I tried, but
they did not accept it.” Then Imam Sajjad said: “Watch their house and
see when they leave it to attend the prayers. Then drop the bags full of
their blood money into their house.”[^10] By recognizing the influence
of the reproachful self or the moral conscience, Imam Sajjad treated
that man’s psychological problem.

### 3) The Adorning Self

One of the aspects of the human soul is that it attempts to present
wicked deeds as nice ones by somehow adorning them and making them look
good to us, thereby encouraging us to perform them. There are two cases
cited from the Holy Qur’an below.

#### Joseph and His Brothers

When Jacob’s children took their brother Joseph away from their father
and dropped him in a well and left him there, their self-adorned their
deeds and fooled them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَآؤُوا عَلَى قَمِيصِهِ بِدَمٍ كَذِبٍ قَالَ بَلْ سَوَّلَتْ لَكُمْ
أَنفُسُكُمْ أَمْرًا فَصَبْرٌ جَمِيلٌ وَاللّهُ الْمُسْتَعَانُ عَلَى مَا
تَصِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They stained his shirt with false blood. He said: "Nay, but your
minds have made up a tale (that may pass) with you, (for me) patience is
most fitting: Against that which ye assert, it is God (alone) Whose help
can be sought"...” [The Holy Qur’an, Yusuf 12:18]***

Their father recognized their evil deed. He warned them that it was
their minds that had made up a tale. This implies that when selfish
desires overwhelm and we let them overcome our mind and spirit, then
even the most horrible crimes such as killing or abandoning one’s
brother might be so adorned in our mind that we consider them holy and
obligatory deeds. This guides us towards the recognition of a
psychological principle.

Once excessive tendencies towards a certain issue are coupled with moral
wickedness, they will dull our senses and make things look different
than they really are in our mind. Therefore, proper recognition of facts
and realities, and correct judgment is impossible without
self-purification. In this verse, we see how the adorning self-caused
Joseph’s brothers to throw him into a well abandoning him there, and
fake a story to fool their father into believing their tale. On another
occasion, they returned from Egypt and brought their father the news of
their brother’s act of stealing. But their father did not believe them
and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ بَلْ سَوَّلَتْ لَكُمْ أَنفُسُكُمْ أَمْرًا فَصَبْرٌ جَمِيلٌ عَسَى
اللّهُ أَن يَأْتِيَنِي بِهِمْ جَمِيعًا إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْعَلِيمُ
الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Jacob said: "Nay, but ye have yourselves contrived a story (good
enough) for you. So patience is most fitting (for me). Maybe God will
bring them (back) all to me (in the end). For He is indeed full of
knowledge and wisdom." [The Holy Qur’an, Yusuf 12:83]***

#### Samiri

We read in the Holy Qur’an that when Moses was about to go to Mount Tur
(Mount Tabor) to receive the Ten Commandments, he told the people that
it would take him thirty days. However, his trip was extended to forty
days by God. Samiri fooled the children of Israel during the last ten
days and made them worship the calf. When Moses returned and encountered
that situation, at first he blamed his brother Aaron. However, once he
realized that Aaron was not at fault, and it was Samiri’s fault, he
blamed Samiri.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فَمَا خَطْبُكَ يَا سَامِرِيُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ بَصُرْتُ بِمَا لَمْ يَبْصُرُوا بِهِ فَقَبَضْتُ قَبْضَةً مِّنْ
أَثَرِ الرَّسُولِ فَنَبَذْتُهَا وَكَذَلِكَ سَوَّلَتْ لِي نَفْسِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(Moses) said: "What then is thy case, O’ Samiri?" He replied: "I saw
what they saw not: so I took a handful (of dust) from the footprint of
the Apostle, and threw it (into the calf): thus did my soul suggest to
me."” [The Holy Qur’an, Ta-Ha 20:95-96]***

Samiri was a corrupt selfish man. He was able to use his ingenuity,
courage and dexterity to deploy the weakness of the children of Israel
to make a great sedition. Thus, they ignored all of the previous
teachings of Moses and started to worship a calf. In this situation,
Samiri claimed that his evil deeds were rooted in his adorning soul by
saying: “Thus did my soul suggest to me.”

#### Hasan al-Basri: The Samiri of the Nation

There is a tradition in Ihtijaj by Tabarsi that states: “When the
Commander of the Faithful conquered Basra, the people gathered around
him. Among the people, Hasan al-Basri was writing down what Imam Ali had
said. Imam Ali asked him what he was doing. He said: “I am recording
your words to be saved for the future.” Then the Commander of the
Faithful said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَما إنَّ لِكُلِّ قَومٍ سامِرِيّاً وَهَذا سَامِرِيُّ هذِهِ الأُمَّةِ،
إنَّهُ لا يَقُولُ: لا مِساسَ، وَلكِنَّهُ يَقُولُ: لا قِتالَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O people! Beware that there is a Samiri for each nation. Know that
Hasan Bassri is the Samiri for this nation. The only difference is that
Samiri did not let anyone approach him, but this man tells the people
that we should not fight, even with the corrupt people.”*[^11]

The Imam was referring to Hasan al-Basri’s anti-war propaganda regarding
the Battle of Jamal.

### 4) The Confident Self

Confidence is one of the highest ranks for the self. We read in the
following verse of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ارْجِعِي إِلَى رَبِّكِ رَاضِيَةً مَّرْضِيَّةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَادْخُلِي فِي عِبَادِي وَادْخُلِي جَنَّتِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(To the righteous soul will be said:) "O (thou) soul, in (complete)
rest and come back thou to thy Lord, - well pleased (thyself), and
well-pleasing unto Him! Satisfaction! Enter thou, then, among My
devotees! Yea, enter thou My Heaven!” [The Holy Qur’an, al-Fajr
89:27-30]***

How wonderful is God’s invitation to the righteous whose faith has
helped them attain confidence, complete rest and satisfaction to return
to him: an invitation to a return combined with the pleasure of both
sides. Then he will be crowned with servitude; will be dressed in the
garment of servitude; will attain the position of especial ones, and
shall enter Heaven.

This refers to a form of peace and tranquility after turmoil and
attaining the utmost degree of certitude, recognition, and witnessing of
God. Kashefi interprets this as: “O’ the self that is confident by
remembering Me when granted blessings, and by patience and perseverance
during times of hardship. Thus now that you are pleased with the
blessings that I have granted you, return to what I have promised.”

#### The Confident Self at the Time of Death

The peace with which the confident self-departs from this material world
and joins eternity is the most beautiful demonstration of the nobility
of the confident self. Sudayr Seyrafi quoted the following on the
authority of Imam Sadiq regarding this state: “I asked Imam Sadiq : O’
grandson of the Prophet! May I be your ransom! Does a believer feel bad
about his spirit being taken out of his body at the time of death? Imam
Sadiq replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا وَاللهِ! إنَّهُ إذا جَاءَهُ مَلَكُ المَوتِ لِيَقْبِضَ رُوحَهُ جَزعَ
عِندَ ذلِكَ، فَيَقولُ ملَكُ المَوتِ: «لا تجْزَعْ! فَوالَّذي بَعَثَ
محَمَّداً لأنَا أَبَرُّ بِكَ وَأَشْفَقُ عَليكَ مِن والِدٍ رَحِيمٍ لَو
حَضَرَكَ، إفتَحْ عَينَيْكَ فانْظُر.» (قال) ويُمَثَّلُ له رَسُولُ اللهِ
صَلّى اللهُ عَلَيه وآلهِ وَأمِيرُ المُؤمِنينَ وفَاطِمَةُ والحَسَنُ
والحُسَينُ والأئِمَّةُ مِن ذُرِّيَّتِهِمْ عليهِمُ السلامُ فَيُقالُ
لهُ: «هذَا رَسُولُ اللهِ وأمِيرُ المُؤمِنِينَ وفَاطِمَةُ وَالحَسَنُ
والحُسَينُ والأئِمَّةُ عليهِمُ السّلامُ رُفَقَاؤكَ.» (قال) فيَفْتَحُ
عَينَيهِ فَيَنْظُرُ فَيُنادِي رُوحَهُ مُنادٍ مِن قِبَلِ رَبِّ
العِزَّةِ فَيَقولُ: «يَا أَيَّتُها النَّفْسُ المُطْمَئِنَّةُ إلى
محَمَّدٍ وأَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ ارْجِعِي إلى رَبِّكِ رَاضِيَةً بِالوِلايَةِ
مَرْضِيَّةً بِالثَّوابِ فَادْخُلِي في عِبادِي؛ يَعني محَمَّداً وَأهْلَ
بَيتِهِ، وَادخُلِي جَنَّتي.» فَما مِن شَيءٍ أحَبُّ إليَه مِنِ
اسْتِلالِ رُوحِهِ واللُّحُوقِ بِالمُنادي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘No. I swear by God! When the angel of death comes he becomes anxious
and distressed. However, the angel tells him: “Do not be distressed! I
swear by God who appointed the Prophet that I am even kinder to you than
a merciful father - if he was present here. Open your eyes and look.”
Then the Prophet , Imam Ali , the Blessed Fatima , al-Hasan, al-Husayn,*
*and the Imams are represented to him.*

*It is said to him: This is the Prophet and Imam Ali, the Blessed
Fatima, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and the Imams , your friends.’ He opens his
eyes and sees, and the caller calls out to his soul from the Glorious
Lord, saying: “O Confident self who has attained peace via Muhammad and
his* *household. Return to your Lord pleased with the friendship of Imam
Ali and the reward of your Lord. Join My servants Muhammad and his
household, and enter My Heaven.” Nothing will be more desirable for him
than the drawing out of his soul and joining the Caller!’*[^12]

Fighting Selfish Desires to Attain Perfection
---------------------------------------------

One must first recognize and abandon all his selfish desires before he
can attain human perfection. This has been quoted by Majashe on the
authority of the Noble Prophet of Islam who was the first perfect man
ever. It is recorded in Ghawali al-La\`ali that a man called Majashe
went to see the Prophet , asked him the following questions, and got the
following replies:

Question: “O’ Prophet of God! What is the way of recognition of God?”

Answer: “Recognition of the self.”

Question: “What is the way to agree with God?”

Answer: “To disagree with the self.”

Question: “What is the way to please God?”

Answer: “To raise the wrath of the self.”

Question: “What is the way to approach God?”

Answer: “To abandon the desires of the self.”

Question: “What is the way to obey God?”

Answer: “To disobey the wants of the self.”

Question: “What is the way to remember God?”

Answer: “To fight the self.”

Question: “What is the way to get closer to God?”

Answer: “To stay away from the self.”

Question: “What is the way to get accustomed to God?”

Answer: “To fear the self”

Question: “What is the way to attain all this?”

Answer: “Seeking God’s help against one’s self.”[^13]

If one practices what the Prophet has instructed us to do in this
tradition, then he can attain true mysticism. Man can only attain inner
peace and illumination if he abandons wicked traits and adorns himself
with perfection. He should first abandon all his wickedness, and then he
should adorn himself with perfections. Finally, man should polish the
beauties of his self, refine them, and make them transparent.

The Jurisprudents’ View on the Rights of the Self
-------------------------------------------------

Finally, we will discuss the jurisprudents’ view on the rights of the
self. One of the highly valuable aspects of the human self is his life.
Nothing can be equated with it. The Holy Qur’an says the following
regarding the value of man’s life:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ أجْلِ ذَلِكَ كَتَبْنا عَلى بَنِي إسْرَائيلَ أنَّهُ مَن قَتَلَ
نَفساً بِغَيرِ نَفْسٍ أوْ فَسادٍ في الأرْضِ فَكَأنَّما قَتَلَ النَّاسَ
جَمِيعاً وَ مَن أحْياها فَكَأنَّما أحْيا النَّاسَ جَمِيعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On that account: We ordained for the Children of Israel that if
anyone slew a person - unless it be for murder or for spreading mischief
in the land - it would be as if he slew the whole people: and if anyone
saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of the whole people….”
[The Holy Qur’an, al-Ma’ida 5:32]***

The Holy Qur’an determines a very bad punishment for killing a believer.
This is considered to be the worst crime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يَقْتُلْ مُؤْمِنًا مُّتَعَمِّدًا فَجَزَآؤُهُ جَهَنَّمُ خَالِدًا
فِيهَا وَغَضِبَ اللّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَلَعَنَهُ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُ عَذَابًا
عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If a man kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell, to
abide therein (for ever): And the wrath and the curse of God are upon
him, and a dreadful penalty is prepared for him.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Nisaa 4:93]***

The Holy Qur’an also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَقْتُلُواْ النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللّهُ إِلاَّ بِالحَقِّ
وَمَن قُتِلَ مَظْلُومًا فَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا لِوَلِيِّهِ سُلْطَانًا فَلاَ
يُسْرِف فِّي الْقَتْلِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ مَنْصُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nor take life - which God has made sacred - except for just cause.
And if anyone is slain wrongfully, we have given his heir authority (to
demand qisas***[^14] ***or to forgive): but let him not*** ***exceed
bounds in the matter of taking life; for he is helped (by the Law).”
[The Holy Qur’an, Bani Israil 17:33]***

The law of equality that is meant for punishing those who kill others is
presented by the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَكُمْ فِي الْقِصَاصِ حَيَاةٌ يَاْ أُولِيْ الأَلْبَابِ لَعَلَّكُمْ
تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In the Law of Equality there is (saving of) life to you, O ye men of
understanding; that ye may restrain yourselves.” [The Holy Qur’an,
al-Baqarah 2:179]***

We can classify killing into three groups: intentional,
pseudo-intentional, and unintentional. The remaining kin of the person
killed have the option to kill or accept the financial compensation[^15]
in case of intentional killing, or forgive altogether.

In a pseudo-intentional killing in which no weapon like a gun, or a
knife is used, and there has been no intention to kill, but to deliver a
blow to the other, the remaining kin of the murdered person can only
receive the financial compensation. In the case of unintentional
killing, there is only the possibility of financial compensation.[^16]

The Qur’an views the Law of Equality as a means of saving lives in the
society, while still leaving room for financial compensation or
forgiving. According to the jurisprudents’ views, the financial
compensation or the blood-money for the life of a free person is either
one of the following:

1 One hundred camels that have attained six years of age

2 Two hundred cows

3 One thousand sheep

4 Two hundred silk dresses

5 One thousand ‘Mithqal-e-Shar’i'[^17] of gold

6 Ten thousand Dirhams.[^18]

We should also note that the compensation for the blood money for women
is half of that for men.

[^1]: Afsar Arbaeh, v.8, p.53

[^2]: Hikmat-e-Ilahi Aam wa Khaas, p.31-32.

[^3]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, v.2, p.270.

[^4]: Ibid. p.310

[^5]: Sharh-e-Ghurar wa Durar, Aqa Jamal Khansari, v.2, p.462.

[^6]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, v.2, pg.270.

[^7]: Sharh-i-Ghurar wa Durar, v.3, p.462

[^8]: Ibid. v.5, p.254.

[^9]: Majmu’ah Waram, v.2, p.10.

[^10]: Majmu’ah Waram, v.2, p.4.

[^11]: Nur al-Thaqalayn, v.3, p.392.

[^12]: Nur al-Thaqalayn, v.5, p.577.

[^13]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, v.2, p.270.

[^14]: The option to kill or to accept financial compensation in case of
intentional killing.

[^15]: ‘Qisas’ in Arabic.

[^16]: Mukhtasar al-Manafi’, Kitab al-Diyat, p.294.

[^17]: Mithqal Shar’i is a unit of weight equal to 3.456 grams.

[^18]: Ibid.


