Abu Sufyan
==========

It was an age when the whole of the Hijaz (Arabia) was covered in
darkness and oppression and full of ignorance and corruption. It was a
country where debauchery, wrong action and evil deeds were considered to
be honorable.

It was a time when women were deprived of all privileges in life,
denied freedom and access to any spirituality. In those days, baby-
girls were buried alive and they were even denied the right to live. It
was to such a culture and way of behaving that the noble Prophet
Muhammad (s a w a) came; he appeared amongst the people, carrying a
life-giving message of peace and prosperity from his lord, Allah. His
message was this:

<p dir="rtl">
قولوا لا إله إلا الله تفلحوا
</p>

Say: (O people), there is no god but Allah, so that you may achieve
success.

The first action of the noble Prophet (s a w a) was to destroy and
remove the false and superstitious gods of the idol-worshippers which
then had made out of stone, he affirmed that there was no god only Allah
and that man must submit to Him only and to no other power. Thus, the
noble Prophet (s a w a) relying only on Allah for support, began calling
the people to the correct way of life; he feared nothing, neither person
nor political force.

In the same way, however, as darkness oposes itself to light and the
forces of evil to truth, so there existed in oppositionto this figure of
truth and spiritual reality the satanicfigures of darkness of that age;
namely, the men of the Quraysh tribe. To avoid conflict, he kept his
message hidden from these pharaonic-like people at the initial stages of
his mission. The first to accept the faith of Islam was Khadijah, the
noble wife of the Prophet (s a w a); then

Abu Talib, the uncle and guardian of Muhammad (s a w a) and Ali (a s),
his cousin and faithful supporter, both accepted.

These distinguished servents of Allah worshipped and prayed out of
sight of the mushrikin (the pl. of mushrik: polytheists) of Mecca,
especially the rich and powerful amongst the trive of the Quraysh. The
holy Prophet Muhammad (s a w a) used every opportunity to call the poor
servants and slaves of the Qurayshite nobles to worship Allah, the One,
the Unique, and to keep them from worshipping the idols of falsehood and
magic which had been erected by the chiefs of the Quraysh.

Gradually, however, from all quarters of Mecca murmurings of discontent
began; then the cry of anger and revolt of the pleasure-seeking nobles
was to be heard, loud and clear. The kafirun (the pl. of kafir; the
people who do not believe in God amongst the nobles of Mecca feared that
the slaves would be roused and incited by the call Muhammad (s a w a)

and as a result, they would be unable to keep them in slavery. Day be
day, the voice of criticism grew louder until the name of the Messenger
of Allah became known to every tribe in the Hijaz and in every corner of
every town, people could be heard talking about a certain man who had
brought a new din (a divine code for living and worshipping) and was
boldly challenging the existence of the accepted gods.

The chiefs and nobles of the Quraysh, qhose tyrannical leaders was of
Abu Sufyan, complained to Abu Talib the paternal uncle and guardian of
Muhammad (s a w a). They asked him to advise his nephew to stop
slandering and challenging their gods. Muhammad(s a w a) was not to be
deterred from hi mission. It was during this priod of psychological
warfare between the forces of truth and falsehood that Allah revealed to
the Prophet that he should begin to openly call the people to Islam, to
the worship of the One, Unique God and to prevent his family and
relatives from

worshipping the idols: وانذر عشيرتك الأقربين(and warn tribe and those
closest to you; Qur'an, 26: 214). Acting on this divine order, he told
Ali (a s) to organize a meeting and invite both his close family and the
rest of his kin. Ali (a s) sent out letters of invitation to his own
relatives and to those of Muhammad (s a w a) calling them to as evening
meal at his own house. One after the other, the important members of the
Quraysh, who were all related to the holy Prophet, arrived at the
meeting; Ali (a s) received and served on them.

When everyone had finished the meal, the noble Prophet (s a w a) began
to speak: ''Oh leaders of the Quraysh! Cease to worship idols! Put an
end to your evil actions, corruption, debauchery, tyranny, usury and
everything which is haram (forbidden according to the divine code), fear
God, for on the Day of Judgement each person will be rewarded according
to his actions...'' Silence fell on the meeting; the mushrikin were so
angry that they gnashed their teeth and would have torn the noble
Prophet Muhammad (s a w a) to pieces

had they been able; they feared Abu Talib, however, and so restrained
their evil desire. It was ta this moment that the Messenger of Allah
turned to face the sons of his paternal uncle Abdul- Muttalib and said;
''Listen, sons of Abdul Muttalib. In truth, I do not believe that any
other Arab had brought you must of this something better than I have
brought you.

You must realize that I desire nothing for you but the best of this
world and the next. Oh young men of Mecca! Do not listen to the words of
these ignorant old men who pass their miserable lives in idolworship,
magic, shirk (associating partners with Allah), tyranny and who strive
to keep th people from knowing the Truth''.

It was at this point in the speech of the noble Prophet that the men of
importance mongst the Quraysh, their pride deeply wounded by these
words, began to laugh and make fun of him, uproar then broke out in the
meeting and they got up from their places and left.

After this, the noble Messenger (s a w a),

carrying out the divine order, called the closest members of his tribe
to the worship of the One, Sublime God. He continued the task, sometimes
openly, sometimes secretly, amongst both the common and the elite,
taking advantage of every appropriate occasion until another more
definitive message came from Allah via Jibril (Gabriel): فاصدع بما تؤمر
وأعرض عن المشركين (So declare openly what you are bidden and turn aside
from the polytheists; Qur'an 15: 94).

After hearing this divine order, he went up the Sa fa mountain near
Mecca, gathering the nobles and leaders of the different tribes around
him and with words full of beauty and meaning and declaring the ayat
(the pl. ayah, verses of the Qur'an) which had been revealed to him by
Allah, he began to advise them: ''O people, O leaders of the Quraysh! I
demand nothing of you but that you say: لا إله الا الله -''there is no
god, but Allah''.

Nobody from amongst the distinguished assenble dared to speak except
for Abu Lahab, the uncle of the noble Prophet, who at the

instigation of Abu Sufyan cried out: "O Muhammad! Woe to you. Have you
invited us here to listen to those same words you were saying before? O
Muhammad , cease talking like this; don't ruin our lives. From the day
you came to us and began to call all the people to your god, a god which
is unfamiliar to us, our slaves and servants have been taken away from
us or they have deserted themselves.

O Muhammad , why don't you leave the people alone? Why don't you stop
talking like this? Abu Sufyan laughed at himself, satisfied at how well
his instigation of Abu Lahab had worked, and how Muhammad was powerless
to do anything. The holy Prophet remaining polite and patient, looked at
Abu Lahab with a pleasant smile; but he said nothing.

The ignorant people stole glances at each other, bent their heads
muttering and left the presence of the noble Messenger Muhammad (s.a.w)
.From among this crowded assembly, however, several persons, who
possessed a pure heart and spirit were attracted , as bees to the
nectar, towards

the noble Prophet, and accepted his message. These persons were Ammar
ibn Yasir and his mother and father, and Bilal, the Abyssinian .It was
from this moment on, that the leaders of the Quraysh , in particular the
most influential from amongst them, Abu Sufyan ,the deceitful plotter of
Mecca ,began to work together to from a counter- force to Muhammad
(s.a.w.a).


**The Changing Faces Of Abu Sufyan**

Before we begin to cosider the nature of Abu Sufyan's character, we
must go back a few years to a time before the birth of the Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.a) and become familair with the grand -parents of those
two men. Abd Manaf was one of the grand-parents of both the Prophet
(s.a.w.a) and Abu Sufyan. It was into Abu Manaf's home that the baby
twins were born, the toe of one f the twins was attached to the forehead
of the other.The two twins were taken to a soothsayer to see what he
thought of the matter. After seeing them, the

soothsayer said if the twins were seperated from each other, strife and
bloodshed would reign between their off -spring for as long as this
world existed.

As it was obvious that they would encounter enormous difficulties thus
joined to each other, it was decided that they should be seperated. One
of them was given the name Hashim and the other Abdush-Shams . It is
said that the toe of Hashim was attached to the forehead of
Abdush -Shams. Later, Abdush Shams who had no children of his own,
adopted a butcher's apprentice called Umayyah and gave him all rights of
inheritance.

It was at this point that the two forces of truth and falsehood were
set, the one opposed to the other: on the one side stood Hashim, who was
a peaceable man, fond of his friends and always entertaining guests and
on the other ,Umayyah who, because his true parents were not known, was
a spiteful , maliciuos and ill- mannered man. (We have already explained
that he was not the true son of

Abdush-Shams and that it is not known who his father or mother were; it
is said that he came originally from the west.)

At the time, Abd Manaf was responsible for guarding and talking care of
the Ka'bah of Mecca.After him, the responsibility was handed over to his
son Hashim whose devotion and hard-working nature made him more suitable
than anyone else. Umayyah, the adopted son Abdush-Shams, who thorough
his adoption was like a cousin to Hashim, became jealous.

The fire of jealouslyburned so fiercely in the heart of Umayyah that if
drove him crazy with anger, his jealousy wasno different from that of
Cain for Abel. Umayyah, this son of unknown parrntage , by trickery and
deciet used every opportunity to draw together a group of persons around
him in an attempt to destroy our undermine the social and political
influence of Hashim.Umayyah shemed and plotted, caused disorder and
chaos in people's hitherto peaceful lives.

Hashim, however ,a fine good-natured

man, from whose family the messenger (s.a.w.a) was to appear, cordially
invited Umayyah to come and exchange views with each other. Hashim
advised and requested the latter to give up his evil actions. These
gentle words of advise had no effect on the stony-hearted Umayyah and he
contiuned as before his interference into other's affairs. Hahims,
seeing that this selfish, black -hearted man would not cease his sevage
behaviour ,was obliged to buy his peace with money and goods; thus he
gave him several camels together with quantity of foodstuffs and
succeeded in relieving the people of his evil actions for a few days.

Umayyah, however ,began to cause trouble again; openly acted in a bad
manner and defiantly challenged Hashim. The confrontation between truth
and falsehood became so bitter that the difference between the two men
broke into open strife and battle and the courts of justice were obliged
to intervene.The two men appeared in court in order to settle their
differences; the judge

began the proceeding ; after a through investigation into the matter
and after talking counsel, he decided that Hashim was in the right.
Umayyah was ordered to return everything he had received from Hashim and
to be exiled to Sham (now Syria). Umayyah went to Sham but he did not
remain idle; even from his place of exile, he began interfering in
other's affairs , plotted and schemed , and instigated the
idol-worshippers against Hashim.

Unfortunately ,this good genrous man (Hashim) died at an early age
living behind him a son called Shaybah who was living with his mother in
another house. Hashim also had another brother whose name was Mauttalib:
this brother, like Hashim himself, was very well-mannered generous
man.

The respon -sibility for guarding the Ka'bah was entrusted to him.
Muttalib invited his nephew Shaybah from Medina and brought him up with
loving care; it is for this reason that he is called Abu Muttalib; that,
servant or slave of Muttalib.

But let us return to Umayyah. Umayyah

had many sons, who were all similar to Umayyah himself in their
intentions and behaviour .Moreover, all the bad qualities of Umayyah
were manifest to the utmost degree in the figure of one particular son
whose name was Harb. Thus, it was that the two forces, one satanic , the
other merciful ,were again opposed to each other.Harb at the instigation
of Abu Sufyan made plans to kill Abdul -Muttalib ; fortunately ,however
,he was unsuccesful in his attempt and had to flee.

The conflict between them continued in this way for a time until God
gave Abdul -Muttalib several fine and worthy sons; one of them was
Abdullah who was to have as a son the noble Prophet (s.a.w.a) .The two
opposed parties and the two forces of the truth and falsehood continued
thereby to confront each other: on the one side Abu Sufyan and on the
other side the noble Prophet Muhammad , the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a).

Abu Sufyan's deceit and hypocrisy ,his bad language and vile behaviour
was notorious amongst the people of the Hijaz. His evil

actions and had qualities were just like those of Hind, the
"liver-eater" (who ate the silver of Hamzah, the uncle of the holy
Prophet), who knew no bounds of modesty or decency; whether with here
own people or with strangers. His sister, Um Jamil played an important
role in hindering or tormenting Muhammad (s.a.w.a). She was the wife of
Abu Jahl and is mentioned by God in the Qur'an (surah 111, ayah 4) as
the bearer of fuel for the fire. In fact, all the family of Umayyah
(Hamamah, Rabi'ah, Hind , Abu Sufyan,Mu'awiyah and their grand-parents)
are mentioned by the name of 'the cursed tree' in the Qur'an (surah, 14
ayah 14).

From his early youth, Abu Sufyan shunned no means in order to achieve
his political and criminal aims; he took the infamous daughter of
Umayyah, Hind, as a wife to further his own designs and it was together
with this woman that he confronted Islam and the radiant figure of
Muhammad (s.a.w.a). Abu Sufyan believed that if his parents were
unable,as a result of their struggle, to vest control of the Kabah
from

the family of Hashim, then he himself should undertake this task. Abu
Sufyan saw himself as the guardian of the dictatorial regime of the
Quraysh and as the upholder of the traditional age of jahiliyyah
(pre -Islamic period of ignorance). To this end, he began his ungodly
action against the Messenger of Allah (s a w a), urging others to do the
same.

Furthermore, he persuaded them to make fun of the noble Master,
Muhammad (s a w a) and engage in open conflict with him. He even went os
far as to plot the death of Muhammad (s a w a). By studying the history
of that age, we will discover that abu Sufyan was the ring-leader,
responsible for all the battles undertaken against the Prophet; he even
swore never to sleep with his wives until he had killed Muhammad (s a w
a).

Finally, the situation became os had that the tribe of Hashim, under
the guidance of their own leader, Muhammad (s a w a), was forced to
leave Mecca and take residence in the valley of Shi'b Abi Tallib. The
nobles and important

men of Mecca from all the different fanilies drew together as a result
of this. They held many meetings, finally deciding on the following plan
of actions Muhammad and his followers:

1) To effect an economic blockade: no foodstuffs and other basic
necessities would be allowed to reach them.
2) All trade would be stopped and marrisge to any of them would not be
permitted.
3) Torture and harassment of them would be encouraged.

Other measures were also decided upon. Following these decisions, all
road leading to their encampments were closed and nyone caught dealing
with them, was subject to deprivation and torture. It was during this
perion that the holy Prophet began to equip and prepare his forces for
war (in the valley of Shi'b Abi Tallib and in other places). He trained
the strongest, most fiercest and most god-fearing amongst them in the
skills of war.

For three years, the noble Prophet and his faithful supporters remained
in these valleys, cut off socially and economically. Finally, however,
the powerful leaders of Mecca grew tired of ths situation and decided to
to lift the blockade. Deliverance of Hashim's trive and the Prophet
himself from this unfortunate situaion gave the supporters of Islam an
opportunity to consolidate their forces and allowed the god-fearing
slaves and servants of the usurewrs and powerful men of Mecca to come
out and join them.

As a result of the resistance of he holy Prophet against the forces of
Shaytan (satan), the Abu Sufyans and pharaonic men of Mecca were left
helpless; they gained nothing from their evil, inhuman policies. Their
trade and industry had been disrupted and the source of their riches was
in danger. In order to destroy the root of the problem of usury, the
Messenger of Allah (s a w a) ordered his followers, who were suffering
at the hands of the Meccans, to make hijrah (emigrate) from Mecca to
Medina. By

this mean, they were delivered of the evils of these blood -sucking
leeches.

The Quraysh had not remained idle; they held a series of meetings and
one of them, the kuffar (unbelievers) leaders made the following
proposals:

1) To set fire to the house of the Prophet.
2) To exile him to a far -off town and keep him under guard.
3)To imprison him without food and force hom to do haed labour.
4) To torture him.
5) To kill him by means of a hired -killer.

All of these proposals were rejected; it was then that one of the
evil-minded men present made the following strange suggestion: ''One man
should be chosen from each tribe and together, sword in hand, we should
strike the Prophet's head and cut him to pieces under the cover of
darkness. By taking this path of action, we would be free of his
troublesome action, would destroy all trace of him and no one

person in particular could be held responsible'' Shouts of approval
were to be heard from everyone and this devilish scheme was unanimously
accepted. Before carrying out this plan, however, they began to harass
and torture the faithful supporters of the holy Prophet. Among those who
especially suffered this campaign of harassment and torture at the hands
of these vicious men, we may cite the names of Bilal, the Abyssinian,
Ammar ibn Yasir and his mother and father.

They were stripped naked and thrown into the scorching sands of Arabia;
children and youths from among the ignorant kuffar were persuaded to use
every means to molest them.

The Father and mother of Ammar ibn yaser were martyred (shahid) under
the effects of the torture. Bilal, the Abyssinian Ammar and other
supporter of the Prophet fell ill after the torture and lay for a long
time in their houses, bed-ridden while recovering. Despite this torture
and harassment, neither the holy prophet Muhammad (s a w a) nor those
who

believed in his prophethood, gave up the task of calling the people to
Islam. The latter loved the Messenger of Allah and Islam so passionately
that iman (faith and trust in Allah) shone like a light in their hearts
and they did not feel the pain of the torture.

Gradually, the number of the Prophet's supporters increased and brave
Muslim revolutionaries appeared fron anongst the people, especially from
the class of slaves, servants and workers. The fire of their
determination ignited the hearts of both the town and the village tribes
and began to undermine and destroy the rule of the powerful, criminal
nobles of Mecca.


**The Hijrah Of The Messenger Of Allah From Mecca To Media**

Ten years have passed since the noble Prophet received the first
revelation from Allah, not once during these ten years had he

taken a moment's respite from his mission. Indeed, his supporter and
followers were not even left in peace at night by the idol- worshippers
and tyrants of Mecca. These idol- worshippers and enemies of the Master
Muhammad (s a w a) incited so much fear and uncertainty into the hearts
of the people that no one dared to openly approach the Prophet.

Abu Sufyan and Abu Lahab in particular, the leaders of these brutish,
evil criminals, one day caused so much trouble that the holy Prophet as
a result of this unfortunate situation, decided to leave for another
region where he would be able to continue calling the people to Islam
and to complete his mission.

The noble Messenger, after reflection, chose Ta'if (which was an
important town at the time), and alone he set off in its direction. On
arriving at Ta'if he made contact with the leaders of the different
tribes and explained his divine mission and the din of Islam to them.
The people of Ta'if into only refused to accept Islam, but they also
made every effort to torment and molest the prophet;

they even urged their own children to do the same. Men and women,
accompanied by their ignorant children followed the noble Prophet,
throwing stones at his body and legs until he fell, blood pouring from
his wounds, Muhammad (s. a .w .a) considered it likely that if he were
to return to Mecca, the idol- worshippers and enemies of God would take
him prisoner and kill him; if this were to happen, his mission would be
incomplete. He thus decided to spend a few days in a safe place called
Nakhlah. After several days, the noble prophet, accompanied by a group
of armed men to guard him, entered mecca and settled in the Masjidul -
Haram ( the Ka'bah and the mosque surrounding it).

Abu Sufyan and his liver - eating wife, Hind , had been lying in
ambush, awaiting the approach of the Prophet. They changed their mind
and decided into to attack, however, disturbed at the sight of the armed
men. Sometime passed after this incident, during which he

would go to the small towns and villages calling people to wake up to
the truth of his message, to the truth of Islam. One of the most
pleasant arreas we may mantion by name, was the small toown gy Yathrib,
which later came to be called as Madinatur - Rasul; ''the Town of the
Messenger '' The inhabitants of Yathrib who because of long years of
bitter fighting with the people of Mecca, were obliged to live in very
straightened circumstances; they joined the forces of islam and swore
that they would support the Master Muhammad (s a w a) to their last drop
of blood.

The noble Prophet took advantage of the situation and formed a military
encampment of his armed forces. The people of Mecca, especially its
leaders had slipped into a deep sleep, imagining that the holy Prophet's
mission and lost its impetus nd would soon fade into obscurity.
Suddenly, however, they received news of the past of the people of
Yathrib with the Messenger which caused the colour to drain from their
faces. The leaders and important nobles of the idol -

worshipping government of Mecca understood that the situation had
changed. They feared that if the Muslims had established an important
military encampment in the heart of the Arabian peninsula as a result
the very foundation of the central government of the idol - worshippers
in Mecca was in danger.

The supporters of Muhammad (s a w a), living in very difficult
circumstances because of he harassment and pressure on the part of the
mushrinkin of Mecca, requested permission of the holy Prophet of Allah
told them that the best place for them in the present situation was the
town of Yathrib. He added: '' You can make hijrah to this place, one by
one. Secretly and in perfect safety.'' After this order had been given,
the Muslims began to leave Mecca one a time using different excuses and
subterfuges to escape unnoticed, making their way to Yathrib.

The idol - worshippers of Mecca heard about this decision and prevented
them form leaving.

Despite this, a large number of the Muslims escaped to the surrounding
woody areas and joined the militant Muslims revol - utionaries. This
exodus comtinued until except for the Prophet and Ali (a s) and several
elderly of invalid persons, no one remained in Mecca. The noble Master
Muhammad (s a w a) received a further order from Allah to leave for
Medina and to join his supporters.

He realized, however, that because of the merciless officials of the
idol-worshipping government, it could be difficult to escape without
risking his life. As for Abu Sufyan, Abu Lahab and toher intoables
anongest the Quraysh, they ordeted that the prophet's house be
surrounded and that he himself should be killed.

Prophet Muhammad (s a w a) was warned of the evil plan of the idol -
worshippers and he realized that the sooner he left for Medina, the
better. The noble Messenger htus had Ali sleep on his bed and said to
him: '' Allah has instructed that your life

be sacrificed fir the sake of Islam.'' Ali (a s), the true and lawful
deputy and heir of the noble Messenger, lay down to sleep on the
latter's bed. Before the armed men of Abu Suyan had encircled the
prophet;s house, the Prophet escaped out of another door under the cover
of darkness. He made his way through the streets and alleyways and left
Mecca.

Forty men, armed with unsheathed swords, surrounded the house of the
Messenger of Allah. It was near daybreak when they burst into the room,
where the Prophet usually slept. They were just about to strike their
sword on the body of Muhammad (s a w a) when Ali (a s) raised his head
from the pillow and said: ''O What's going on?'' Abu Sufyan's armed men
were taken completely by surprise and recoiled in anger and hatred like
wounded snakes.

The kuffar, enemies of the holy Prophet, could hardly contain their
rage when they realized that their plit had completely failed. They
belidved, however that the Prophet must be hiding in some toher in Mecca
and so

they dispatched their guards to search every place the Prophet was
likely to have taken refuge in and ordered them to keep a watch on every
highway. They, poor fellows, did into know that the noble Prophet was
toside Mecca, sheltiering in a cave. After walking on foto for over a
week, he reached Madina and immediatelu began to think about forming a
poweful army to wipe out all trace of idol - worship, ignorance and
injuman behaviour from Arab society and to save the people from their
tyrannical oppressors.

On several occasions, accompanied by a number of devtoef men wo were
ready to die in the way of Allah, he attarcked the caravans of the
Quraysh and the nobles of Mecca. Teh latter, suported by the dictatorial
government had used force to plunder the goods of the Mulims who had
made hijrah to Medina. This action by Muhammad (s a w a) and his armu
caused fear in the hearts of the idol - worshipping community. Ome of
the most important battles against the kuffar and idol- worshippers of

Mecca to occur in the first years of the hijra of the holy Prophet, was
the battle of Badr. Those who fought beside the holy Prophet, were later
honoured above all the toher Muslims.

One day a caravan of the Quraysh, headed by Abu Sufyan, accompanied by
fifty arned guards was making its way towards Sham. They were bringing
eith them a thousand camels, the profit the idol- worshippers had made
through trading and also goods stolen from form the Muslims.

Teh noble Prophet found out about this important caravan and together
with three hundred and thirteen brave and faithful men set out to attack
it on its way back, The Muslim army gathered in a place called Badr,
Tehe were however differences of opinion as to whether the battle should
be fought or into.

The holy Prophet had to decide which was the best line of action; so he
took counsel with the commanders and officers of the Muslim army.
Although during the meeting and decision taking Umar and Abu Bakr de a
hypocritical show of support, others who were into truely

concerned with the advance of Islam were opposed to fighting' another
group of men announced their willingness to fight alongside the Prophet.
Shouting slogans of support for Islam, they were prepared to sacrifice
themselves in the way of Allah. The Prophet gave the order to attack and
the army of Islam surrounded the caravan .The courageous Muslim force
struck the army of the kuffar so fiercely that the latter turned in
flight leaving the camels and goods to the Muslims .It was total
dishonour for those who had been opposed to fighting.

Abu Sufyan managed to escape with his life, however, and returned like
a wounded animal to his house in Mecca.There he took counsel with his
wife Hind. The latter was one of the leaders of Banu Umayyah; she was
one of the rich pleasure -loving usurers of Mecca. She was the daughter
of Umayyah's brother and the evil-minded wife of Abu Sufyan .Hind was
the sister of Utaybah and Shaybah who were among the worst enemies of
the Prophet .The name of

her mother was Hammamah. Hind was at first the wife of Abu Umar and
Hafs Makhzumi; but when the latter realized how bad a woman she was,
they divorced her. Hind had several husbands and one of them, as we have
seen , was Abu Sufyan. Mu'awiyah ,the later commander of Banu Umayyah,
was the son of this very woman.

It was while the holy Prophet was travelling from Mecca to Medina that
Himd, Abu Sufyan and his brothers , accompanied by the rest of the
enemies of Islam tried every means to have him killed. It was these same
enemies who caused several wars. During the battle of Badr, Hind's
brother Shaybah was slain; Hind's heart began to consider how she would
be able to take advantage.

When the battle of Uhud occurred , Hind played a leading role in the
affairs. Inflamed by the recitations of epic poets, her thirst for
revenge increased; it was she who had the worthy uncle of the Prophet,
Hamzah , killed and later tore out the liver from his corpse. She

tried to eat it, but was unable to; she then cut off the limbs of this
fine man and hung them about her neck. It is because of this action that
she become known as the 'liver- eating ' Hind. Other Quraysh women did
the same thing to others. The holy Prophet became very angry at Hind's
action and ordered her to be killed .

Abu Sufyan , for his part ,thrust his spear into Hamzah's mouth and
pierced through his neck saying: "The battle, too, is under the
leadership of Abu Sufyan and any injury to the Prophet and his followers
, has been at my hand." Abu Sufyan made further plans to kill the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a) ,making pacts with the jews and the emperor
of Rome; none of them succeeded ,however ,and in desperation ,he gave a
large number of money to a hiredkiller, ordering him to slay Muhammad
(s.a.w.a) while he was praying.

The hired-killer , however ,was taken prisoner in the mosque before he
could carryout the attempt; he confessed in front of everyone that he
had been engaged on the part of Abu Sufyan .When this insidious man
saw

every way of action blocked and realized that he would into be able to
fulfil his aim, he resorted to other deceitful means: he decided to make
up with the Prophet and he gave the impression he had become a Muslim.
His action was just like all the present -day in anti -Islamic
politicians who accept the din only after realizing that they can into
achieve their aims by armed struggle.

When the Messenger of Allah marched from Medina with a large army to
capture Mecca and was about to enter the town (of Mecca) , Abu Sufyan
immediately approached Abbas the parternal uncle of the Prophet and
sought refuge.It was thus by compromise that he furthered his won
aims.

Umar ibn al-Khattab because of his hatred for Abu Sufyan ,believed that
he should into be given the opportunity to accept Islam; but rather
should be put to death .To this end ,he wanted to obtain the Prophet's
permission to decapitate him. However , Abbas ,the uncle of the Prophet
supported Abu Sufyan and did into allow Umar to carry out the plan,
saying that his life was under protection of

of Islam.

Umar wanted to kill Abu Sufyan as the latter used always to say: "I
swear by Allah, that if I remain alive, I will force this tribe to
relinquish its rule." From these words,it was clear why Umar was the
enemy of Abu Sufyan. He feared leadership of the Muslims would fall into
the hands of Abu Sufyan after the death of the Prophet; if this happened
,Umar's power would be curtailed.

Abu Sufyan was till waiting for a suitble occasion to strike Islam with
a heavy blow. Several times he swore: "As longs as I live, I will strike
to wrest political power from the hands of these people and accomplish
what my father failed to do." The noble Prophet realized that if Islam
still fell into the hands of these evil -minded prophet, it would be
corrupted and the age of jahiliyyah would return. As the Prophet was
fully aware of evil scheming on the part of the tribe of Banu Umayyah ,
he forsaw calamity and misfortune for the Muslims of the next
generation.He refered to this openly when he

said: "لكل شي ء افةُ و افةُ هذا الدين بنو أمَيةَ" Everything is
afflicted by some calamity ; and the calamity which will afflict the din
of Islam, is Banu Umayyah." He also said: "The worst of the tribes
amongst the Arabs is the Banu Umayyah."

Although Abu Sufyan is reckoned to be one of the holy Prophet 's
people, we know from his behaviours and evil intentions , how much harm
he did to the cause of Islam ; it was he who in the name of Islamic
Justice found his top positions of power amongst the ruling elite; it
was he, too, who tried to corrupt the purity of Islam. It is at first
surprising that the noble Prophet forgave such people and their actions
, even turning a blind eye to the 'liver-eating ' Hind , who had
perviously been sentenced to death; but we realize that it is not for
nothing that Allah called him (the Prophet):

"رَحمةً لٍلعَا لَمينَ" a mercy to the world !"

When the Messenger of Allah left this world and a dispute broke out
concerning who should be his rightful caliph and deputy, Abu

Sufyan went to visit Ali, hoping to incite him against Abu Bakr, Umar
and others who were unlawfully claiming the caliphate and thus to stir
up fresh stife within the Muslim community. Ali (a.s) raised by the
Prophet himself and aware of all the secrets of existence , whether past
or present, understood the real intention of the evil Abu Sufyan ;
striking his first on his chest , he declared: "O son of Umayyah ! I can
see what treacherous plot you have in mind. Your heart is into burning
our of love for Islam, but rather for your own selfish desires." When
Abu Sufyan realized that it was hopeless to try to deceive Ali (a.s) ,
he turned to Abu Bakr and Umar and began to compromise with them.

When Uthman became the third illegal caliph, Abu Sufyan found a way to
increase his activity against Islam. It was at his (Uthman's ) time that
through guile and deceit he appointed Mu'awiyah (son of Abu Sufyan) as
his commander.This was a preliminary step to gaining full control of the
government. One day in the house of Uthman, he went on the minbar

(a small raised platform) to speak; turning to the Umayyads , he began
: "O Umayyids! Seize hold of power as you would a ball in your hand and
do into let it slip from you fingers ." (Any thought of paradise and
hell was far from his mind: for him the Day of Reckoning did into exist
and only this world was any value to his eyes) This treacherous
politician ,

Abu sufyan , using cunning and deceit , persuaded the Umayyids to join
forces with the usurper -caliph, Dutchman saw that all the important
positions of power within the country were given to them and he himself
acted so inhumanly, so outrageously that mere words fail to describe the
true nature of his action .

Abu Sufyan even engaged a group of men to kill Uthman and to lay the
blame on Ali (a.s) who in his life had never caused wrong them, even to
an ant. It was Ali who said: "Even if the whole world were given to me ,
on condition that i take a straw from the mouth of an ant, I would into
do it." His words and actions tear away the veil of deceit and hypocrisy
: "The Umayyids have

into really accepted Islam .They have only covered their faces with the
mask of Islam." And on another occasion: "They have hidden their kufr
(disbelief) ,so that they can better fight against the very fundament of
Islam." Ammar ibn Yasir, the faithful friend of Imam Ali (a.s) and
unflinching fighter in the way of truth said: "When the Umayyids
appeared, all good departed and the evil of jahiliyyah returned."

Afte the death of the Prophet , the true Islamic rule became corrupted;
at the same time as the caliphate was being usurped , the Umayyids were
gradually revealing their own evil designs, ( we have seen what kind of
strife and conflict they caused to Islam and the Muslims) .It has thus
become clear to us who were the true enemies of the Prophet (s.a.w.a)
and Ali (a.s) and their families and what role they played in hindering
the spread of Islam.

\*\*\*\*


