Mu'awiyah
=========

Mu'awiyah was the first king to rule at the beginning of the Islamic
era. He was the founder of the reign of darkness and corruption. His
mother was Hind who fought against the Prophet (s.a.w.a) .It was Hind
who tore to eat it after sucking out the blood. Hamzah wast the cousin
of the holy Prophet who died fighting in the way of Allah (shahid) , in
the battle of Uhud.

As a result of her action, she has become known as the 'liver-eating '
Hind. Hind also cut off the ears and nose of Hamzah and hung them about
her neck. The rest of the women who were with her ,did the same to the
other men who had died fighting in the way of Allah.

Hind had four husbands, one of them being Abu Sufyan ,one of the
enemies of the Prophet form the beginning ,was probably the father of
Mu'awiyah. He sided with and incited those who were against Islam and
against the supporters of the Prophet .Abu Sufyan ordered his son
Mu'awiyah to arrange for the harassment of the Prophet's people and
cause the disbelievers (the kuffar, or those who cover up the truth ) to
take revenge on the Prophet himself for the death of their followers.

Thus to was that Mu'awiyah, who appeared to have accepted Islam,
continued the hostilities against the Prophet, Ali (a s), and his
progeny which his father had begun. Through the trickery and deceit of
his father, he was given a post as governor of the region of Syria
(Sham, which in those days was a country, without well defined borders,
but corresponding roughly to present -day Syria and parts of Lebanon and
Jordan) in the latter period of the illegal caliphate of Abu Bakr. He
remained governor during all three caliphates of Abu Bakr, Umar

and Uthman. When the usurper -caliph Uthman and members of worthy
Muslims were killed at the hands of the People, Ali (a s) who was
unhappy at the state of community, was persuaded to accept leadership of
the government. after a short time, however, to incite Imam Ali's
followers to turn against their master. Mu'awiyah who was an inefficient
governor, then seized control of the government and affairs of the
Muslims.

He was the first to oppose and change the purely Islamic nature of Imam
Ali's government and to establish in its place himself as the first in
the line of despotic dynastic rulers. He revived the royal customs,
holding court while seated on an imposing throne. He was responsible for
a reign of darkness and corruption; he drank wine, acted in a despicable
way and used force to keep government of the Muslims in his hands.

Mu'awiyah's mother was one of the women who openly carried out vile and
despicable acts against the Muslims. She used poisoned honey

to kill the Muslims fighting the way of truth and the faithful
supporters of Ali (a s ). Malik al-Ashtar, the commander of the Egyptian
army, appointed by Ali (a s), also died shahid (in the way of Allah)
after eating some honey poisoned by Mu'awiyah's mother. Mu'wiyah engaged
a number of thugs and ruffians to attack the houses of Ali's friends and
anyone who was fighting in the way of truth. Furthermore, he ordered
them to seize the Muslims' wealth and to rape and harass the
womenfolk.

In the name of Islam, he changed many divine commandments and many of
the directives given to the Muslim community by the Prophet. During his
government and imperial rule, corruption, debauchery drinking, gambling
and plundering of the Muslim's wealth became a way of life. The life and
property of a Muslims was into safe from Mu'awiyah and his behaviour; It
was he who played a part in the plot to kill Ali (a s), and later had
Imam Hasan killed.

During Mu'wiyah's rule, especially during

the caliphate of Uthman, the military commanders, ministers of state
and administrative officials plundered the baytul-mal (the public
treasury of the Muslims community) and used bribes and extortion to
achieve their ends. Mu'wiyah outstripped all his contemporaries in
matters of guile and treachery, deceit and trickery. His breast burned
with revenge and hate for the Muslims who were seeking the truth and
trying to establish justice.

He held secret meetings in which he ordered his military officers and
spies to make trouble for these most devoted to Allah and the cause of
Islam. It was thus decided the Ali(a s) and his sons be subject to the
greatest harassment.

Mu'wiyah in his usual treacherous way showed Uthman's robe and his wife
Na'ilah's two fingers ( which had been cut off during an attack on his
own followers) to an assembly of people who had gathered in the mosques.
By this action, he hoped to instigate them against Ali (a s ) and his
supporters. He ordered many of the village people and even

some of Ali's partisans who had entice away with bribes to shout
Islamic slogans and to act in every way as if they supported the cause
of Islam. He even commanded that the Qur'ans should be stuck on to the
ends of spears and that should be that: ''Judgement between ne and Ali
(a s) shall be made only on the basis of the Qur'an.''

It was Mu'awiyah's apparent acceptance of Islam which caused so much
hypocrisy and internal division amongst the Muslims community. It was
their deceiving facade which caused many of the divine commandments to
be changed to fit in with the political situation. By Means of his
officials and cooperation of his close friends, he gathered together a
great number of blood - thirsty, mercenary thugs from every corner of
the Hijaz.

He ordered them to attack all towns and villages which supported Ali (a
s), killing or raping the inhabitants and plundering their goods.
Mu'awiyah's aim was to ensure that anarchy and corruption spread to
every part of the country. He commanded that

the houses of the Shi'ahs, in particular, should be destroyed or set on
fire, and that these thugs should do everything possible to make life
difficult for the Muslims in general.

At Mu'awiyah's word, a great army on his infantry accompanied by
several mounted divisions were despatched to attack the Shi'ahs. Neither
caravans, markets, nor houses belonging to the Muslims were spared by
this attack. Mu'awiyah's mercenaries were trained to struck down and
kill their victims just like hunting dogs lusting after their quarry.

Mu'awiyah's friends and supporters were all corrupt and criminal, who
recognized neither morals or good behaviour; they stood opposite the
faithful upright supporters of Ali (a s) and his sons. the armies and
partisans of the tyrant Mu'awiyah were so bloodthirsty that they killed
babies, youths and even old men without mercy.

The aim of Mu'awiyah's vicious mercenaries was to prevent or discourage
the people from supporting Ali (a s) and the cause of Islam, so that
they might more easily plunder

the country's wealth and live a life of ease and luxury.

Mu'awiyah used such heinous stratagems that he managed to corrupt and
bribe almost all those who had made a pledge of support for Imam Hasan
(a s). He planted or infiltrated so many spies in the company and army
of the Imam that the latter was obliged , because of the smallness of
his army and the hypocrisy which grew around him, to make peace with
Mu'awiyah. As a result of this treaty, the way was open for Mu'awiyah
and his followers to increase their looting and plundering.

He was so cunning and malicious that he is looked to as an example by
all tyrants and oppressors the world over. He in notorious for the way
in which he succeeded in turning the Muslims themselves against Ali (a
s) and his son Imam Hasan (a s).

These ignorant Muslims, who gave the appearance of accepting Islam,
disobeyed the orders of the Imam when he prepared for war. It was these
same Muslims who, after the peace

treaty with Mu'awiyah, rose up in condemnation of the Imam, clamoring
for a reason why he had into gone to war. Such was he situation of
strife and disorder which the Imam had to deal with. Although Imam Hasan
(a s) -acting on the divine inspiration and with the shrewdness and
perspicacity concordant with his position of Imam -made peace with this
bloodthirsty man, the latter -whose only aim was power - did into leave
off his hostilities against Islam and the family of the Prophet. By
trick and stratagem, he had this noble man poison to death at the hand
of his wife.

He employed political compromise and a hypocritical appearance of Islam
to have Ali (a s) and his son, who were the true divinely -appointed
caliphs, confirmed to their houses. For forty years, he held sway over
the ignorant, unaware Muslims (who unfortunately are to be found in
every community and in every age). What, after all, was to be expected
from such a lying, dishonourable man who had seized control of the
government by such violent

means? What can one expect from a man who had seized power without a
thought for God and without the acceptance of the people? There was no
limit to the treachery of a man who eliminated rivals so that he might
enjoy a monopoly power.

What can one expect from a man who persuaded his mercenaries and
pillaging thugs to attack the life and honour of the Muslims, in
particular the Shi'ahs of Ali (a s)? Because of the existence of such a
bloodthirsty, evil man, the fear and terror on the hearts of those he
oppressed or imprisoned increased daily, and the tyranny and darkness,
corruption, killing and plundering became even more widespread.

Mu'awiyah's government was like all tyrannical governments. When it
triumphed over its enemy, it subjected them to dreadful torture, giving
full rein to their most evil desires and imagination.

What, one may ask, was the reason for such criminal behaviour? The
first, reason, was the sinister nature of his being and his bad

character. The second, his longing for power and desire of rule over
the Muslims who were unaware of the true meaning of Islam. The third,
his long -standing hatred for Muhammad (s a w a), Ali (a s) and their
followers. The fourth, the pleasure he derived from torturing and
molesting the followers of Ali (a s).

It was Mu'awiyah, the so- called 'Muslim ruler, who instructed a number
of his agents to kill babies in front of their mothers and to execute
men and women who supported Ali (a s). His bloodthirsty friends and
supporters, also, used to kill and seized the wealth of innocent,
defenceless Muslims. These thieves and professional murderers, because
of their blind obedience to their evil, treacherous master knew no
bounds to their criminal activity. When Mu'awiyah openly showed his
hatred and hostility for Ali (a s) and his family, the bloodshed,
killing, plundering and pillaging increased still further.

Mu'awiyah was a merciless tyrant who betrayed Islam and the Muslims;
from a raised

platform in the mosque (minbar), he would order that Ali (a s) should
be insulted and dishonoured. He told the assembled people that Ali (a s)
did not pray and that he was a thief and instigator of rebellious
activity. In Mu' awaiyah and his friends' eyes, Ali (a s)was a trouble -
maker, a thief and a man who did not offer his prayers and they
themselves were the protectors of the life and property of the Muslims
and servants of humanity.

In order to win over the younger generation and to inspire love for
himself and his wicked son Yazid, Mu'awiyah ordered that sheep and goats
be given away, and the boys and youths who received them be told they
were a resent from Mu'awiyah.

After several days when the boys had become attached to the animals, he
ordered hi men to gather the sheep and goats together again under the
cover of night and in the morning say that they had been stolen by Ali
(a s). By means of this stratagem, he was able to institute hatred for
Ali (a s) into their hearts. This is just a further example of the

trickery and treachery of Mu'awiyah.

Mu'awiyah, this despicable criminal tyrant, imagined that by inflicting
such difficulties and by subjecting them to such torture, he would be
able to turn Ali (a s) and his followers away from their divine goal. He
imagined that he would be able to keep hold of the political power for
ever, through deception and treachery of the people.

But the name of Ali (a s), his sons, his friends and followers will
live until the end of time, shining like stars in the book of history;
and the name of Mu'awiyah, his father and his son Yazid and all their
followers will always be remembered and cursed as bloodthirsty
tyrants.

Mu'awiyah had imprisoned many of the Shi'ah supporters of Ali (a s) who
were opposed to him and were fighting him against to tyranny and
corruption. He ordered his officials to torture them of to have them
buried alive in deep wells. Thus, many of those Muslims who had strong
faith (imam) and who refused to abandon true Islam, died; buried in dark
pits,

their hands, feet, ears and noses severed from their bodies. Whenever
the prisons became so full of prisoners that there was no more room for
their other victims, his officials knew ti was time to dispose of them
burying alive. Such was Mu'awiyah's animal - like behaviour towards the
supporters of Ali (a s). Such was the devoted care he lavished in his
agents that they carried out his orders for torture and execution with
the smallest attention to detail; as a reward, Mu'awiyah would increase
their rand or position and ordered them to receive payment from the
public treasury (baytul - mal) of the Muslims.

In this fashion, all the godless, ambitious men of the world were
attracted into his service. Whatever traces of conscience, humanity or
Islam they still possessed, they sold in the hope of worldly gain.
Mu'awiyah planted his spies amongst the people with the result that
nobody felt free to speak even in the safety of his own home and nobody
dared to mention the name of Ali (a s) or praise his action.

Fear and terror of Mu'awiyah filled the hearts of all the people,
except for those with particularly strong faith (iman) who were the
Shi'ahs of Ali (a.s) ; the latter in no way feared the violence and
torture of the agents of Mu'awiyah .They were willing to undergo the
most terrible kinds of torture, rather than relinquish Ali (a.s) or true
Islam. May Allah greet and bless them!

Mu'awiyah had decided to erase the name of Ali (a. s), his sons, his
partisans and all those who had adopted the Shi'ah path from the pages
of history by means of these mean, despicable acts.

He decided, moreover, to invite the people to love and respect the
wretched and cursed Banu Umayyah tribe; so that the way would be open
for his son to take up the reins of power. In order to achieve this
despicable aim, the killing, plundering, torture, tyranny, oppression
and injustice continued unabated. All these abominable actions had the
Banu Umayyah dynasty and its supporters

have become synonymous with oppression, corruption, treachery and the
plundering of the Muslims wealth. The name of Ali (a s), his sons and
supporters will live forever as the champions of divine guidance, of
Truth and as defenders of the oppressed. These two opposing forces
demonstrate the clear distinction between truth and falsehood.

Now it is up to you, reader, to choose one of these two ways.

\*\*\*\*


