Yazid
=====

Yazid was the wicked son of Mu'awiyah who inherited his father's rule.
He was the second of the dynastic rulers at the beginning of the Islamic
era. His father Mu'awiyah had obtained power over the Muslim community
through deceit and treachery. During the last days of his reign, he made
the people pledge their support the his son Yazid.

Thereupon, he installed his as his successor at an official ceremony.
Yazid's mother was Maysun, who like Hind (notorious for having eaten the
liver of Hamzah) was impure and unchaste woman. His mother had slept
with one of his father's slaves and the despicable, winedrinking
Mu'awiyah was really the offspring of that slave.

This has been confirmed by the noble Prophet, Salla - llahu alayhi wa
alihi wa sallam (s a w a - may Allah's peace and blessings be on him and
his progeny) who said: '' The murderer of my son Husayn alayhis - salam
(a s - peace be upon him), is a bastard''; which also applies to Shimr
Ibn Sa'd and Ibn Ziyad; since all of them were born out of wedlock.

Yazid had inherited all the qualities of his character and way of
behaving from his father, Mu'awiyah, except for one thing: whereas
Mu'awiyah governed by trickery and deceit, compromised with the demands
of Islam even to the point of building mosque, Yazid, however,
shamelessly committed the most criminal and despicable acts. Throughout
his life and especially during his period of rule, this tyrant, who
reigned over the unfortunate unaware Muslims in the name of Islam ,
became notorious for the following:

1) He owned monkeys which would dance for him dressed in gold -
embroidered multi - coloured

clothes.

2) His racing dogs were renowned the world over.
3) He was passionately fond of gambling.
4) His addition to wine set a clear example fir his successors.
5) He acted disrespectfully towards the Haram, Mosque of the Prophet (s
a w a) and towards other Mosque of the Muslims.
6) He killed the offspring of the Messenger of Allah (s a w a) and
committed numerous other crimes at the tragedy of Karbala'.
7) He forced the womenfolk to take off their veils (from both the
muhajirun, that is , those who left Mecca for Medina, and also from
amongst the ansar, that is those already living in Medina.
8) He killed countless people of Medina and he and his supporters were
responsible for the rape of numerous

women of Medina.

9) He arrested and made prisoners the supporters of Ali (a s)

10) He was responsible for damaging the house of Ka'bah and its
embroidered covering.

He committed many other despicable crimes which are at least as famous
as those we have listed.

Yazid was the first person who made debauchery, rape of women and
children corruption, wine - drinking, music and dancing commonplace
behaviour within the Muslims' lands. Yazid, in fact was a man who
devoted his life to wine, -drinking ,luxury ,indulgence ,racing dogs,
gambling and rape of women and young girls.

It was Yazid, the so-called caliph of the Muslims who killed the
offspring of the Messenger of Allah and their faithful supporters
.Immediately after killing Imam Husayn (a.s) it was this same man who
sat back to response in front of a feast of food and wine, surrounded by
musicians , singers and wine-

pourers,

Yazid, like his father had done before him, deliberately and openly
changed the divine laws to suit his own wishes .He committed such
despicable acts during his rule (which lasted only three years and nine
months) that he has been cursed by Allah and the people until the end of
time. The most abominable of these was the murdering of Imam Husayn
(a.s) , his family and a group of his supporters, during the first year
of his rule.

He set fire to their tents, tortured the women and baby children and
rode over the body of Imam Husayn (a.s) and others who had died fighting
in Allah's way ( shuhada') on horseback. Moreover , in the second year
of his rule, an event known as Harrah took place which was the scene of
further bloody atrocities on his part.

Like Mu'wiyah and his bloodthirsty agents, Yazid and his corrupt
followers did not shun any criminal act, however disgusting or
tyrannical .It was this event which clearly demonstrated to the Muslims
and to all men the world over the

extent of his corruption and violation of the most basic of human
rights.

A group of men from Medina (like other of that time who were forced at
spearpoint or bribed to make a pledge to Yazid) made their way to visit
this so-called 'Muslim' ruler at his place of government in Syria (or
more accurately Sham, a country which roughly corresponds to
present -day Syria and parts of Lebanon and Palestine).

They were able to see with their own eyes what kind of man was the man
who was ruling as a caliph of Islam, namely a man who love wine, racing
dogs, gambling and a life of ease and luxury and shamelessly violated
the honour of men, women and children alike. They returned to Medina in
a state of profound unease: when they had told the people of the
situation, a large group of men gathered and rose in a defiance of the
murderous regime.

They expelled the governor of Yazid and his wicked and blood -thirsty
agents from Medina.

From this moment onwards, the ranks of those rebellions to the
government of Yazid grew day by day; cries of 'death to Yazid and his
corruption ' rang out all around Medina. People spoke out for Islam from
the platform (minbar) of the mosques, from the streets and squares, and
whenever people would gather together,

the courageously declared their opposition to Yazid, saying, "anyone
who has killed the progeny of the Messenger of Allah, anyone who drink
wine, does not fast or pray , is addicted to gambling and racing dogs,
anyone who indulges in luxurious living, dancing and music, anyone who
rules corruptly , thinking only of his won interests and never of the
poor deprived people- such a man has no right to such position of power
and authority over the Muslims; such a man must step down from his
position and make away for another man.

We, Muslims of Medina, have pledged our allegiance to a man called
Abdullah ibn Handhalah who is often called Ghasil al-Mala'ikah; we
cannot bear to live under the

tyranny and corruption of the debauched drunkard Yazid and his
agents''. News of this rebellion of the Muslims of Medina reached
Yazid's ears. Yazid ordered his hated agents to go as soon as possible
to the scene to the demonstrations : they were to quell the
demonstrations and to stop the cry of those seeking truth and justice
from reaching the ears of the rest of the rest of the Muslims .

The bloodthirsty Yazid had a man called Muslim ibn Uqbah (also known as
Mushrif, the wanton spendthrift) brought before him, the latter had been
a faithful friend of Yazid's father Mu'awiyah .He despatched Muslim ibn
Uqbah at the head of a large army to crush the rebellious Muslim in
Medina. After Marching for sometime, they came to a halt in the rocky
area near Medina known as Harrah. The people of Medina set off towards
them in order to defend their lives and honour.

In this place, known as a heavy battle took place between the armies of
truth and falsehood, many of the Muslims from

Medina were killed .The rest were forced to retire, unable to withstand
the sheer size and weaponry of this murderous army of Yazid, they took
refuge in mosques (including the Holy Prophet's mosque) in order to save
their lives. it was the custom in those days to respect the sanctity of
Mosques, the Haram of the Prophet and large cemeteries; anyone taking
refuge , then would be safe from any haram.

The people of Medina ,under the impression that even the armies of the
usurper- caliph Yazid places. They did not realize that these were the
same godless people who had molested the Prophet, breaking his teeth,
throwing dirt on his face and committing countless other despicable
acts. They were the same people who while claiming to be Muslims ,placed
Ali (a.s) under house arrest, killed his sons and tortured his faithful
supporters.

It was these same ignorant people who in the name of the Qura'an and
claiming to defend the rights of every Muslim, disregarded the divine
commandments and

made corruption a commonplace in the society of the day.

Muslim Ibn Uqbah , the commander of this army of bloodthirsty men,
entered the mosques and the Haram sanctuary of the noble Prophet on
horseback in search of those who had sought refuge there, in total
violation of the ancient custom. They put everyone to the sword , the
mosque and the Haram of the noble Messenger (s.a.w.a) were drenched in
blood.

These godless mercenaries acted as they wished: desecrating and ruining
these sanctuaries of Islam , they then attacked Medina itself killing
countless inhabitations and violating the honour and property of others;
even women youths and young children were not spared the slaughter. The
murderous commander, acting as his master Yazid would have done, allowed
his army the total freedom of the city for three days; taking advantage
of his permission, Yazid's mercenaries gave free rein to their base
animal -like instincts. Thousand of women and unmarried girls were raped
even within the area

of the Prophet's mosque. These savage godless men acting in accordance
with the saying 'the way the common people live is dictated by the
behaviour of their kings' imitated the behaviour of Yazid; following the
example of their savage, debauched tyrant -king, they subjected those
who had fled to the mosque to unspeak-able atrocities.

After the army-commander and his vicious mercenaries had subdued the
rebellion of the Muslims by their slaughter and rape of the
inhabitations of Medina, they forced those who survived the attack to
make a pledge of allegiance to Yazid; after exacting this pledge under
the threat of death, they continued and increased their reign of
terror.

A group of the surviving Muslims, fearful for their lives and property,
swore an oath of allegiance to Yazid;others , however who resisted and
refused to accept dictatorial tyranny of Yazid, were killed by the
savage mercenaries .Such was the reality of what took place at Harrah,
just one atrocity among the thousands committed by Yazid in

the name of Islam and as a so-called 'Muslim' ruler .Another of the
despicable acts Yazid became notorious for, was his destruction and
setting fire to mosques.

Abdullah ibn Zubayr was one of the rebellious muslims, whose
independence and determination to secure a true Muslim government caused
Yazid considerable trouble ; the latter, in order to destroy Abdullah
ibn Zubayr and his supporters, sent an army commanded by Husayn ibn
Namir to Mecca.

The army marched towards Mecca , and came to a halt in the hills
overlooking the area of the Ka'bah; they then began to hurl great
boulders and fiery missiles from their huge catapults on to house of the
Ka'bah , destroying its walls completely and setting on fire the wooden
part of the structure and the embroidered drape-covering ; then the
barbaric mercenaries of the tyrant Yazid began to attack the town itself
with missiles , staffs, cudgels and swords killing, raping and
plundering the inhabitations of Mecca.

The people of Mecca were in desperate situation, there was no way open
to them but to entrust their face to Allah and raise their hands in
prayer to plead for the death of Yazid. They prayed that Allah may
deliver them of this corrupt dictator who was responsible for all the
killing and tyranny. It was not long before news reached Mecca of the
death of Yazid; the commander of the army of brutal mercenaries returned
to Sham and as a result , the defenceless people of Mecca were delivered
of the merciless attackers.

After three years, nine months and twenty-two days of dictatorial
government, Yazid left this world .He died of a kind pleurisy (a serious
illness with inflammation of the delicate membrane of the thorax and the
lungs, marked by pain in the chest or sides). His grave became a dirty
rubbish dump, a fitting end for such tyrant, a fitting end for a man who
violated the honour and property of the Muslims, a fitting end for
anyone who allows his satanic desires to take precedence over the laws
and

commandments of Islam and anyone who attempts to change the divine
code.

\*\*\*


**A Flower Flourish and Blooms In a Heap Of Dirt The Second
Mu'awiyah**

Before the bloodthirsty , wine -drinking traitor Yazid died, he
obtained for his son Mu'awiyah through menace and bribery a pledge of
allegiance from the Muslims . At a special ceremony , he declared his
son to be his successor after his death. Yazid's son ,from his earliest
childhood had been trained and educated by a good Muslim teacher, who
had faith in Allah.

His teacher had told him that his father and father's father had seized
power through deceit, treachery and the use of force against the family
of the Prophet; they had taken control of the affairs of the government
claiming to be the true caliphs of the Muslims. This conscientious
teacher showed Yazid's son the difference between truth and falsehood;
he

taught him that only someone who led a perfect life and whose concern
was for Islam and for benefit of the people had a right to the caliphate
and the government of the Muslims' affairs; "such person" he said " were
only to be found in the family of the Prophet , that is, Ali and his
son's progeny".

The teacher continued: "If you understand this, then refrain after the
death of your father, from taking the reins of government into your
hands: Oh son of Yazid, you are responsible in the eyes of Allah and on
the Day of Judgement, you will be questioned as to your actions in front
of all the people. You would be questioned why you accepted government
of the Muslims while there existed a man perfectly suited to the
position; ie, Zaynul Abidin , son of Imam Husayn (a.s). Do you not
realize that your father seized control of the affairs of the Muslims
through deceit ,treachery and by plotting and threatening ." These words
of the teacher had a profoundly good effect in the heart of this
receptive pupil and his love for Ali

(a.s) and hate for his grandfather Mu'awiyah grew increasingly stronger
during his period of learning and training .It was for this reason that
on the death of the despicable Yazid his son, Mu'awiyah the second
succeeded him but remained only forty days in power. Conflicting forces
were at work in the heart of Mu'awiyah the second; this inner commotion
continued until the day a truth triumphed and he stepped onto the minbar
of the mosque to make a speech, after cursing his father and gather's
father he began,

''Oh people, My grandfather, Mu'awiyah made war on the noble Prophet (a
s w a) and Ali (a s) and the latter were the most suited to the position
of governing the Muslims. Mu'awiyah, through deceit and treacherous
scheming usurped the caliphate of the Muslims, which was rightly due to
the family of the Prophet. He committed actions during his life which
you, better than I, are most familiar with. After Mu'awiyah, my father
Yazid seized control of the government, which as

before should have been given to the family of the Prophet (s a w a).
He killed the offspring of the Prophet (s a w a) and manipulated the
divine code of living which is Islam; he committed countless crimes and
barbaric atrocities which you are better aware of than I. The truth is
that I am ashamed even to speak about them.

He desecrated the sanctuary of the Haram and the mosque of the prophet
(s a w a) and destroyed or set fire to other mosques. He violated the
honour and the property of the Muslims. I confess I cannot bear to talk
about anymore of his horrible actions. Thus I am placing control of
affairs into your hands and you are free to choose your own ruler.''

After finishing his speech, he returned home and sat crying for a long
time. His mother came to him and said: ''Oh son, what a pity you did not
die in my womb and I did not hear these poisonous words of yours from
the very same minbar from which Mu'awiyah and your father used to
speak....'' Thus she continued until

Mu'awiyah the second replied to his mother: ''What a pity that I did
mot die and was not spared the indignity of having a wine - drinking
father and a shameless mother.''

Mu'awiyah lived only a few days longer, dying at the age of twenty -
two. After his death, Mu'awiyah's teacher who was responsible for
awakening the conscience of Yazid's son was buried alive. They realize
that it was he who influenced Mu'awiyah the second and had taught him
the truth about Islam. Although the influence if the teacher on
Mu'awiyah's spirit and intellect was considerable, it was not the
ultimate cause of his abandoning the position of caliphate.

There was another more important reason; one day while the son of Yazid
was sitting deeply in thought in his home, he heard the raised voices of
two slave - girls conversing with each other. One of them had turned to
the other who was the more beautiful and charming, saying: ''Your beauty
id the cause of the pride and arrogance of the Sultans." The

beautiful slave - girl replied: ''What better Sultanate exists than the
rule of beauty and charm? No king in his arrogance can refuse the
request of a beautiful woman; thus other I hold sway over all the kings
of the world'' The other slave - girl said: ''What i ask you, is the
good in being a power ruler:

every king who wishes to fulfil his duty and responsibility towards the
people, cannot expect to live a life of ease and comfort. If, however, a
king wants to spend his life in luxury, easy living indulgence hi
sensual pleasure and debauchery, then he has ruined his claim to
kingship and has failed to fulfil his duty towards the people. He will
be responsible before Allah and the people: his place will be in hell
and he will not be spared the punishment of Allah.

Thus, we can see that sultans and kings cannot enjoy both this world
and the next.'' The slave - girl's words affected the heart of Yazid's
son and consequently he abandoned the sultanate and delivered himself of
its heavy responsibilities and Allah's punishment in the next word.


**Abe Al-Malil**

After the downfall of the hated dynast of Abu Sufyan, it was the Marwan
family who came to power. The Marwan family seized control of the muslim
government which had been usurped previously by Abu Sufyan in the wars
against the family of the Prophet (s a w a). They then proceeded to
direct the affairs of the community in the name of Islam.

Marwan, whose son abd al-Malik was noted for his ignorance and
stupidity, was little suited for the responsibilities of ruling. He
began a conflict with a man called Zubayr and after a reign of terror,
killing and plundering, he extracted an oath of allegiance from him and
his followers under the threat of death. likewise, among the first
people to make a pact support

with him were the tribes of Jordan, but only (as they themselves
admitted) for fear of being killed if they did not accept.

Marwan was known by various other names such as: 'the monkey' 'the
lizard' and ' the crocodile'. This despicable evil man acquired these
names because of the thin sickly shape of his body reminded people of
these animals; moreover, he used to set out in search of the prophet (s
a w a) and when he found him, he stood and made ridiculous monkeys -
like gestures.

The Prophet of God would curse him and pray that God turn him into the
very creature he was apeing; thus it was that he became afflicted with
the shaking palsy; without waring, his whole body would suddenly begin
to tremble. There is a hadith (a saying) of the Prophet (s a w a) which
describes Marwan's bodily organ as resembling a lizard. The noble
Prophet s a w a) has declared that the lizard is a filthy animal and any
person killing one, should take a ghusl afterwards (ghusl is the washing
of the

whole body in a special way purify oneself spiritually and bodily). The
Prophet (s a w a) has also stated that whenever one of the Banu Umayyahs
family dies, he changes after death into the form of a lizard or
crocodile. It is for this reason that people are reminded of lizards at
the mention of any of the Banu Umayyah family.

\*\*\*\*


