Ubaydallah,son of Ziyad
=======================

Ziyad, the father of Ubaydullah is commonly attributed with various
fathers as his debauched mother was known to have committed adultery
with many men; therefore, he is known by various names such as:

-Ziyad, son of his father;
-Ziyad, son of his mother;
-Ziyad, son of Ubayd;
-Ziyad, son of Sumayyah.

His name has become linked to Mu'awiyah for the same reason; indeed he
is also known as the son of Abu Sufyan as it is believed his mother also
slept with the latter. We can see from these and other examples that all
the men who opposed the Prophet (s.a.w.a) and his Shi'ahs had immoral
parents or grand-parents .Four persons, in particular who became
notorious for their opposition to Ali (a.s) and his progeny ,were
illegitimate. The four ,noted for their treachery, cunning and evil were
Mu'awiyah, Amr ibn al-As, Ziyad and al-Mughirah ibn Shu'bah. It was
Ziyad who had the Shi'ahs of Ali (a.s) and other Muslim leaders captured
and put them to death. Before killing them , he would have his victims'
arms and legs cut off and would blind them by thrusting a hot iron into
their eyes. Ziyad, through hypocritical cunning, managed to worn his way
into the Shi'ah ranks and get to know the most important among them.
After this despicable treachery, he would order his men to take them
prisoners and subject them to torture.

Ziyad was the first to employ bitter aloes (a plant used in small
quantities for medicinal purposes) to poison the Shi'ahs of Ali (a.s)
and it was he who began the practice of burying his victims alive. It
was Ziyad, too, who encouraged the people to curse and slander Ali
(a.s).

Ubaydullah 's mother (Marjanah) was notorious for her immorality.

**THE WAR BETWEEN TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD**

During the early period of Abd al-Malik's rule, the Shi'ahs of kufah
rose up in revolt determinated to avenge the bloody death of Husayn ibn
Ali (a.s). They chose five of the bravest and most militant from among
them as leaders and started out towards Sham (Syria) to try and destroy
Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad who was of Abd al-Malik's rivals. Ubaydullah also
went out to meet them at the head of a thirty-thousand strong army of
his henchmen and torturers. A fierce battle ensured between the forces
of Truth and Falsehood and after terrible slaughter on both sides, the
Shi'ahs, unable to withstand the sheer size of the enemy army, were
defeated. It was Ubaydullah who planned the killing of Imam Husayn and
his supporters. It was not long, however, before Mukhtar ath -Thaqafi
rose up to avenge the death of Imam Husayn (a.s) .He defeated the armies
of Ubaydullah and killed large number of the enemy. Ubaydullah ,the
brutal tyrant, was put to death at the hands of Mukhtar at-Thaqafi
himself,the latter cut off the tyrant's head and brought it before Imam
As-Sajjad (a.s) (the fourth Shi'ite Imam), who expressed satisfaction at
the death of one of the bitterest enemies of Islam.


