Introduction
============

"We recite to the (0 Muhammad) from the account of Musa and Fir'aun
with truth for a people who believe." (28:3)

Moses is the most frequently mentioned of all the prophets spoken of in
the Qur'an and the details of his life are dwelt upon to a much greater
extent than those of any other prophet's life. Why was so much
importance given to his history is a point to consider.

In the earlier chapters revealed during the Prophet's stay at Mecca
there are only brief references to Moses and the incidents connected
with him. The Prophet had to deal here mostly with the idolatrous
Quraish of Mecca and, therefore, we find the principles of the faith of
Islam discussed in details in these revelations.

But when he migrated to Medina he had also to deal with the people of
the Book, the Jews and the Christians, living in and around Medina. As
far as the principles of religion were concerned, there was very little
difference between the teachings of the Qur'an and those of the original
Torah and the Evangel.

But the people of the Book in general and the Jews in particular were
most callous in the observance of these teachings and had tampered with
the books. To make them realise their error it was necessary to call to
their mind the most important features of their history and to show how
far they have strayed away from the path of truth which their scriptures
had laid down for them.

These were the people receiving the guidance of God ever since the time
of Jacob (Israel) through several prophets bringing the guidance of God
and prophesying the advent of the last messenger of God and yet these
were the very people who greatly misused their privileges and were the
most forward of all to reject the last Prophet in spite of a clear
prophecy of Moses which says:

"The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of
thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall harken. I will
raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and
will put my words in his mouth." (Deut. 18: 15-18).

It is to be noted that they are told twice that the promised prophets
who shall be like Moses shall appear from among their brethren and we
have already pointed out in the story of Abraham that the Arabs are the
descendants of Ishmael the one of Abraham and, therefore, they are the
brethren of the Israelites.

No Israelite prophet ever claimed to be the like of Moses and even
Jesus, the last among the prophets of Israel did never say that he was
the like of Moses. Even after the supposed crucifixion of Jesus his
disciples awaited the fulfillment of that prophecy. See Acts 3: 22
wherein it is stated:

"For Moses truly said unto the fathers. A Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me."

The Qur'an, in one of its earliest revelations, points out the
fulfillment of this prophecy in these words:

"We have sent to you a Messenger, a bearer of witness to you, as We
sent a messenger to Fir'aun." (73:15)

This claim is made plainer still in a later revelation:

"Say what think ye? If it is from Allah and you disbelieve in it, and a
witness from among the children of Israel has borne witness of one like
him." (46:10)

In unfolding the history of Moses and his followers, the Jews, the aim
of the Qur'an is not only to reclaim the Jews to Islam but at the same
time to teach the followers of Muhammad (may peace and blessings of God
be on him) that they should avoid all those pitfalls into which the
followers of Moses had fallen and also to assure them that after being
guided if they behave in the manner of the Jews, eventually their fate
will be no better than that of the Jews.

With this object in view the Qur'an has quoted the irrefutable
incidents of the life of Moses as evidence of the truth of the claim of
the last Prophet, preparing for them a straight path to reach the goal
of godliness set for them.

In this context it should be noted that some of the commentators of the
Qur'an have included in their commentaries much of the folklore that was
prevalent among the Jews, but as these accounts are not based on any
authentic Source, they cannot be relied Upon. We have tried in this
chapter to present to our readers a continuous account of the history of
Moses which is widely scattered in the pages of the Qur'an.


