Chapter 1: the Tyranny of Pharaoh Over the Israelites
=====================================================

Surely Fir'aun0 exalted himself in the land and divided its people into
parties, oppressing one party from among them by killing their sons and
sparing their women. Surely he was one of the mischief-makers. And We
desired to bestow a favour upon those who were Oppressed in the land and
to make them leaders and the heirs and to grant them power in the land
to make Fir'aun and Haman1 and their hosts see from them what they
feared. (28: 4-6)

The two parties were the Israelites and the Egyptians, the latter being
the task-masters of the former corresponding to the parties at Mecca,
the idolatrous Quraish who were the Oppressors and the followers of the
Prophet who were the oppressed. Pharaoh and his Counsellors, fearing
that the Israelites, who were aliens in the land of Egypt, might one day
become powerful and supreme in the land, oppressed and persecuted them
in various ways.


**Chapter 2: The Childhood of Moses**

"And We revealed to Musa's mother saying: Give him suck, then when thou
fearest for him, cast him into the river and do not fear nor grieve;
surely We will restore him to thee and make him one of the apostles."
(28:7)

In another place the same incident is expressed in these Words:

"Call to mind the Occasion when Vie revealed to thy mother: Put him
into a chest, then, cast it down into the river, then the river shall
throw him on the shore, then shall take him up one who is an enemy to Me
and enemy to him and I cast down upon thee love from Me and that thou
mightest be brought up before My eyes." (20:38-39).

Moses was born at a time when Pharaoh had commanded all male children
born to the Israelites to be thrown into the Nile: Moses's mother kept
him concealed for three months and at last unable to hide him any longer
threw him into the river in an ark of bulrushes whence he was picked up
by Pharaoh's Wife.

"And Fir'aun's followers took rum up that he might be an enemy and a
grief for them, Surely Fir'aun and Haman and their hosts were
wrong-doers. And Fir'aun's wife said: Joy of the eye to me and to thee:
do not slay him; maybe he will be useful to us or we may take him for a
son. But they knew not what they did. And the heart of Musa mother was
free from anxiety;

she would have almost disclosed it had We not strengthened her heart so
that she might be of the believers. And she said to his sister: Follow
him up. So she watched him from a distance while they did not
perceive.

And We caused him to refuse the nurses his sister came and said: Shall
I point to you the people of a house who will take care of him for you
and they will be benevolent to him. So We restored him to Ids mother
that her eyes might be refreshed and that she might not grieve and that
she might know that the promise of Allah is true, but most of them do
not know." (28:8-13).

So Moses was brought up in the house of Pharaoh like a prince; a
reference of this is given in another place in the Qur'an in these
words:

"So Pharaoh said: Did we not bring thee up as a child among us for many
years of thy life." (26:18)


