Chapter 6: Demand For Helper in Aaron
=====================================

"So, these two shall be two arguments from thy Lord to Fir'aun and his
chiefs. Surely they are a transgressing people. He said: My Lord; Surely
I killed one of them, so I fear lest they slay me. And my brother Harun,
he is more eloquent of tongue than I; therefore send him with me as an
aide, verifying me.

Surely I fear they would reject me. He said: We will strengthen thy arm
with .thy brother and We will give you both an authority so that they
shall not be able to injure you. Go with Our signs, you two, and those
who follow you shall be uppermost." (28:32-35)

"He said: O my Lord! Expand my breast for me and make my affair easy to
me. And loosen the knot from my tongue that they may understand my
world.3 And give to me an aide from my family, Harun, my brother -
strengthen my back by him and associate him with me in my affair, so
that we should glorify Thee much and remember Thee aught oft; surely
Thou art seeing us. He said: Thou art indeed granted thy petition! O
Musa!" (20:25-36).


**Chapter 7: Moses Ordered to go to Pharaoh and Demand the Deliverance
of the Israelites**

"And certainly We tried before them the people of Fir'aun. And there
came to them a noble apostle saying: Deliver to me the servants of
Allah; surely I am a faithful apostle to you. (44:17-18). "And when you
Lord called out to Musa saying: Go to the unjust people, the people of
Fir'aun: Will they not guard themselves against evil? He said: O my
Lord! Surely I fear they will reject me, and my breast straitens, and my
tongue is not eloquent. Therefore send Thou Harun to help me.

And they have a crime against me; therefore I fear they may slay me. He
said: By no means, go you both with Our signs, surely We are with you,
hearing. Then, come to Fir'aun and say: Surely we are the messengers of
the Lord of the worlds. Then send with us the children of Israel."
(26:10-17).

"Go both to Fir'aun; surely he has become inordinate. Then speak to him
a gentle word, happily he may mind or fear. Both said: O our Lord!
Surely we fear that he may hasten to do evil to us or that he may become
inordinate.

He said: Fear not, surely I am with you both. I do hear and see. So go
you both to him and say: Surely we are two apostles of the Lord:
therefore and the children of Israel with us and do not torment them.
Indeed we have brought to thee a message from thy Lord and peace is on
him who follows the guidance. Surely it has been revealed to us that the
chastisement will surely come upon him who rejects and turns back."
(20:43-48)


**Chapter 8: Discussion with Pharaoh**

"Fir'aun asked: Who is your Lord, O Musa? He said: Our Lord is He Who
gave to everything its creation, then guided it to its goal. He said:.
Then what is the state of the former generations? He said: The knowledge
there of is with my Lord in the book of His decrees. My Lord errs not
nor does He forget, Who made the earth for you an expanse, and made for
you therein paths and sent down water from the clouds; then thereby We
have brought forth pairs of various herbs. Eat and pasture you cattle.

Most surely there are signs in this for those endowed with
understanding." (20:49-54). "Fir'aun asked: Who is then the Lord of the
worlds? He said: The Lord of the heavens and the earth and of all that
is between them, if you believe it. Said Fir'aun to those around him:
Hear you this? Your Lord, said Musa, and the Lord of your sires of old.
In sooth, your apostle whom He hath sent to you, said Fir'aun, is
certainly possessed.

He said: The Lord of the east and the west is He and what is between
them, if you can understand' He said: If you take any god beside me I
will surely put thee in prison. Said Musa: What if I show thee that
which shall be proof of my mission? He said: Forth with it then if thou
speakest the truth. Then threw he down his staff and lo! it was an
obvious serpent. And he drew forth his hand and to! it appeared white to
the beholders." (26:23-33)4


**Chapter 9 :Pharaoh's Enchanters Vanquished**

"The chiefs at Fir'aun's people said: Most surely this is an enchanter
possessed of knowledge. He intends to turn you out of your land. Said
Fir'aun: What counsel do you then give? They said: Put him off and his
brother and send collectors into the cities that they bring to thee ever
enchanter possessed of knowledge.

And the enchanters came to Fir'aun and said: We must surely have a
reward if we are the prevailing ones. He said: Yes, and ye shall be
certainly of those who are near to me. They said: O Musa! Will you cast
or shall we be the first to cast? He said: Cast. So when they cast, they
deceived the people's eyes and frightened them and they produced a
mighty enchantment.

And We revealed to Musa saying: Cast thy rod. Then lo! it devoured
their lying wonders. So the truth was made strong and that which: they
had wrought proved in vain. And they were vanquished on the spot and
drew back humiliated. And the enchanters prostrated themselves
adoring.

They said: We believe in the Lord of the worlds, the Lord of Musa and
Harun.5 Fir'aun said: Do you believe in him before I gave you
permission? Surely this is a plot secretly devised in this city that you
may turn out of it its people, but you shall know what shall happen. I
shall certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, then
will I crucify you all together." (7:109-124)

"They said: We do not prefer thee to what has come to us of clear
arguments and to Him Who has made us. Therefore decide what thou art
going to decide: thou canst decide only about this world's life. Surely
we have believed in our Lord that He may pardon us our sins and the
sorcery to which thou hast forced us, for Allah is better and more
abiding than thou.

Whoever comes to his Lord being guilty, for him is surely hell; he
shall not die therein nor shall he live. And whoever comes to Him a
believer and he has done good deeds, indeed these it is who shall have
the high ranks, the gardens of perpetuity beneath which rivers flow, to
abide therein, and this is the reward of him who has purified himself."
(20:72-76)


**Chapter 10: Pharaoh's Opposition to Moses**

"When he (Musa) came to them with our signs, lo! they laughed at them.
And We did not show them a sign but it was greater than its like and We
overtook them with chastisement that they may turn. And they said: O
enchanter! Call on thy Lord for our sake and He has made the covenant
with thee.

We shall surely be the followers of the right way. But when We removed
from them the chastisement, lo! they broke the pledge. And Fir'aun
proclaimed among his people: O my people: Is not the kingdom of Egypt
mine? And these rivers that flow beneath me, do you not then see? Nay! I
am better than this fellow who is contemptible and who can hardly speak
distinctly.

Why have not bracelets of gold been put upon him or why have there not
come with him angels as companions? So he incited his people to levity
and they obeyed him. Surely they were a transgressing people."
(13:47-54).

"And the chief of Fir'aun's people said: Dost thou leave Musa and his
people to make mischief in the land and to forsake thee and thy gods? He
said: We will slay their sons and spare their women and surely we are
masters over them. Musa said to his people: Ask help from Allah and be
patient. Surely the land is Allah's.

He causes such of His servants to inherit it as he pleases and the end
is for those who guard against evil. They said: We have been persecuted
before thou came to us and since thou hast come to us. He said:" It may
be that your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you rulers in the
land, then He will see how you act." (7:127-129)

"And Musa said: O my people! If you believe in Allah, then rely on Him
alone if you submit to Allah. So they said: On Allah we rely. O Our
Lord! Make us not subject to the persecution of the unjust people. And
do Thou deliver us by Thy mercy from the unbelieving people. And We
revealed to Musa and his brother saying: Take for your people houses to
abide in Egypt and make your houses places of worship and keep prayer
and give good news to the believers. And Musa said: Our Lord!

Surely Thou hast given to Fir'aun and his chiefs finery and riches in
this world's life, to this end, our Lord, that they lead people astray
from Thy way? Our Lord! Destroy their riches and harden their hearts so
that they believe not until they see the painful chastisement. He said:
The prayer of you both has indeed been accepted. Therefore continue in
the right was and do not follow the path of those who do not know."
(20:84-89)


