Chapter 11: Moses Commanded To Leave Egypt: Splitting the Sea and Drowning of Pharaoh and His Hosts
===================================================================================================

"And certainly We revealed to Musa saying: Travel by night with My
servants, then make for them a dry path in the sea, not fearing to be
overtaken nor being afraid." (20:77)

"And We revealed to Musa saying: Go away with My servants travelling by
night. Surely you will be pursued. So Fir'aun sent heralds into the
cities. These Israelites, said they, are a scanty band and yet they have
enraged us and most surely we are numerous and wary. Thus we caused them
to quite of gardens and springs and treasures and goodly dwellings.

Even so, and We gave them as a heritage to the children of Israel. Then
the Egyptians pursued them at sunrise. So when the two hosts saw each
other the companions of Musa cried out: Most surely we are being
overtaken. He said: By no means. Surely my Lord is with Me. He will show
me a way out. And We revealed this order to Musa: Strike the sea with
thy rod.

And it clove as under and each part became like a large mountain. Then
made We the others draw on and We saved Musa and those who were with him
all, but We drowned the others." (26:52-66)

"And We made the children of Israel to pass through the sea, then
Fir'aun and his hosts followed them in hostility and for oppression
until, when drowning overtook him, he said: I believe that there is no
god but He in whom the children of Israel believe and I am of those who
submit. What now! said God, and indeed thou has been rebellious hitherto
and was of the mischief-makers.

But this day We save thee in thy body6 that thou mayest be a sign to
those after thee and most surely most people are heedless of Our signs."
(20:90-92).


**Chapter 12: Moses Receives the Law**

"And We appointed with Musa a time of thirty nights and completed them
with ten more. So the appointed time of his Lord was complete forty
nights. And Musa said to his brother Harun: Take my place among my
people and act will and do not follow the way of the mischief-makers.
And when Musa came at Our appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he
said: My Lord! Show me Thyself, so that I may look upon Thee. He said:
Thou canst not bear to see Me.

But look at the mountain; if it remains firm in its place, than will
thou see Me. But when his Lord manifested His glory to the mountain, He
made it crumble and Musa fell down in swoon. Then, when he recovered he
said: Glory be to Thee: I turn to Thee and I am the first of
believers.

He said: O Musa! Surely I have chosen thee above the people with My
messages and with My words; therefore, take hold of what I give to thee
and be of the grateful ones. And We ordained for him in the tablets
admonition of every kind and clear explanation of all things. Take hold
of them with firmness and enjoin the people to take hold of what is best
thereof." (7:142-145)7


**Chapter 13: Israelites Worship the Calf**

"And Musa people made of their ornaments a calf after him, a mere body
which had a hollow sound. What! Could they not see that it did not speak
to them nor guide them in the way? They took it for worship and they
were unjust. And when they repented and saw that they had gone astray
they said; If our Lord show not mercy to us, we shall certainly be of
the losers. And when Musa returned to his people wrathful and in violent
grief, he said; Evil is it that you have done after me. Did you turn
away from the bidding of your Lord.

And he threw down the tablets8 and seized his brother by the head
dragging him towards him. He said: Son of my mother, surely the people
reckoned me weak and had well nigh slain me, therefore make not the
enemies rejoice over me and count me not among the unjust people.9 He
said: My Lord! Forgive me and my brother and cause us to enter into Thy
mercy, for Thou art the Most Merciful of the merciful ones."
(7:148-151)

This incident of the worship of the calf is described in another
context by the Qur'an thus:

"He said: We have tried thy people after thee and the Samiri10 has led
them astray. So, Musa returned to his people wrathful and sorrowing.
Said he: O my people! Did not your Lord promise you a goodly promise;
did then the time seem long to you of my absence or desired ye that
wrath from your Lord should light upon you that ye failed in your
promise to me? They said: We did not break our promise to thee of Our
Own accord but we were made to bear the burden of the ornaments of the
people, then we cast them away. Thus did Samiri suggest to us.

So he brought forth for them a calf, a mere body which had a hollow
sound and they said: This is your God and the God of Musa whom he hath
forgotten. What! Could they not see that it did not return to them a
reply and that it did not control any harm or benefit for them. And
Harun certainly had said to them before: O my people! You are only tried
by it and surely your Lord is the Beneficent God; therefore follow me
and obey my orders. They said: We will by no means cease to keep to it
worship until Musa returns to us.

Musa said: O Harun! What prevented thee when thou sawest them go astray
from following me? Hast thou then disobeyed me commands? He said: O son
of my mother! Seize me not by my beard or by my head. Surely I was
afraid lest thou shouldst say: Thou hast caused a division among the
children of Israel and not waited for my word. He said: What was then
thy object, O Samiri? He said: I saw what they did not see. So I
followed only partly the way of the apostle, then I cast it away; thus
did my soul embellish to me.

He said: Begone, then, surely for thee it will be in this life to say,
touch me not, and surely there is a threat for thee which thou shalt not
escape. Look at thy god to whose worship thou didst keep so long. We
will certainly burn it, then we will certainly scatter it a wide
scattering in the sea.11 You God is only Allah; there is no god but He
and He comprehends all things in His knowledge." (20:85-98)


