Chapter 14: Order To Slaughter a Cow
====================================

The idea of calf or bull-worship seems to have been taken from the
Egyptians. In the opinion of Renan, Maspers, and Konig, "Bull-worship
may have been an imitation of the worship of Apis at Memphis or Mendes
at Heliopolis." (Encyclopaedia Biblica, col. 631)

The writer of the article on the golden calf is, however, of
opinion-that "Adoption from Egypt is unlikely," and his chief reason is
that "the Egyptians worshipped only living animals." But the Israelites
too seemed to have been addicted to the worship of living animals in the
time of Moses as the incident given below shows and the calf was only an
image of the living animal

At any rate, four hundred years of contact with the Egyptians could not
have been without its influence, a bull worship dating from a very
remote antiquity in Egypt must have had some effect. It was for this
reason that the Mosaic law laid great stress on the slaughter of cows
and the commandment mentioned below seems to have been given for the
same reason.

Notwithstanding all that Moses did to uproot this form of idolatry from
among the Israelites, the worshipping of the bull appears to have
continued up to the time of Hosea who rails at it in very strong terms.
(Vide Hosea, 8: 5 and 10: 5)

"When Musa said to his people: Surely Allah commands you that you
should sacrifice a cow.12 They said: Dost thou ridicule us? He said: I
seek the protection of Allah from being one of the ignorant. They said:
Call on thy Lord for our sake to make it plain to us what she is. Musa
said: He says, surely she is a cow neither, advanced in age nor too
young, or middle age between that and this. Do therefore what you are
commanded. They said: Call on thy Lord for our sake to make it plain to
us what her colour is.

Musa said: He says, she is a yellow cow; her colour is intensely
yellow, giving delight to the beholders. They said: Call on thy Lord for
our sake to make it plain to us what she is, for, surely to us the cows
are all alike and if Allah please, we shall surely be guided aright.

Musa said: He says, surely she is a cow not made submissive to plough
the land nor does she irrigate the tilth, sound, without a blemish in
her. They said: Now you have brought the truth. So they sacrificed her
though they had not the mind to do it". (2:67-71)


**Chapter 15: Divine Favours on Israelites and their Stubbornness**

"We made the clouds to give shade over you and We sent to you Manna and
Salwa. Eat of the good things that We have given you." (2:57)

"And when Musa prayed for drink for his people, We said: Strike the
rock with thy rod and from it there gushed twelve fountains, each tribe
knew their drinking place. Eat and drink, said We, of what God hath
supplied and do no wrong on the earth by licentious deeds." (2:60)

"And (remember) when ye said: O Musa! we will not put up with one sort
of food; pray therefore to thy Lord for us that He may bring forth for
us of that which the earth groweth, its herbs, and its cucumbers and its
garlic and its lentils and its onions. He said: what! will you exchange
that which is worse for what is better? Then enter a city that you may
have what you ask for." (2:61).

"And We made a covenant with you under the lofty mountain heights and
(said): Take hold of what We have given you with firmness and bear in
mind what is in it, so that you become righteous, you turned back after
that. Were it not for the grace of Allah and His mercy on you, you would
certainly have been losers;" (2:63-64)

**Chapter 16:Mose's Own People Make False Imputations Against Him.
**
"O you who believe! Be not like those who spoke evil things of Musa but
Allah cleared him of what they said and he was worthy of regard with
Allah." (33:69)13

"And when Musa said to his people: O my people! Why do you cause me
grief when you know that I am Allah's apostle to you. But when they
turned aside, Allah made the hearts turn aside and Allah doth not guide
the transgressing people." (61:5)


