Chapter 10: On Reasons For The Formation Of The Waqifites
=========================================================

**Chapter 10:** **On Reasons For The Formation Of The Waqifites**[^1]

10-1 Ali ibn Abdillah al-Warraq - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Sa’d ibn Abdillah quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abi Abdillah
al-Barqi, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Rabi ibn
Abdurrahman, “I swear by God that Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) was extremely
intelligent. He knew those who will stop believing in Divine Leadership
after him, and not accept the next Divine Leaders. However, he (a.s.)
quenched his anger and did not divulge what he (a.s.) knew about them.
That is why he (a.s.) is called *'Kazim*.[^2]“

10-2 Muhammad ibn Al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Waleed - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Al-Husayn ibn Sa'eed, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Jomhoor, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Al-Fadhl, on the
authority of Yunus ibn Abdurrahman, “A lot of wealth was collected and
was in the possession of each of the representatives of Abul Hassan
(a.s.) when he (a.s.) passed away. This was a reason they denied his
death, and considered the Imamate to be terminated with him (a.s.).
Ziyad al-Qandi had seventy-thousand *Dinars*, and Ali ibn Abi Hamzeh had
thirty-thousand *Dinars* (for example). When I noted this and the truth
became clear to me, and I recognized that Abil Hassan Al-Ridha’ (a.s.)
is in charge of affairs, I expressed what I knew and invited the people
to (follow) Al-Ridha’ (a.s.). Those two people sent for me and asked,
‘Why are you doing this? We will make you needless if you are after
money.’ They offered me ten-thousand *Dinars* and asked me to stop. But
I replied, ‘Those two Imams (a.s.) were narrated to have said, ‘Whenever
innovations became known, it is incumbent upon the knowledgeable ones to
express what they know. Else they will be deprived of the light of
faith.’ I am not one who would stop my struggling in the way of God.’
Thus those two (Ziyad al-Qandi and Ali ibn Abi Hamzeh) became my
enemies.”

10

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بابُ السَبَبِ الَّذِي قِيلَ مِن أَجَلِهِ بِالْوَقْفِ عَلَى مُوسَى بْنِ
جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 1 - حَدَّثَنا عَلِىُّ بْنُ عَبْدِ اللَّه الوَرَّاقُ رَضِىَ اللهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْهُ قالَ: حَدَّثَنا سَعْدُ بْنُ عَبْدِ اللَّه قالَ: حَدَّثَنا
أَحْمَدُ بْنُ أَبي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ البَرْقِيُّ، عَنْ أَبيهِ، عَنْ
رَبِيعِ بْنِ عَبْدُ الرَّحْمنِ قالَ: كانَ وَاللَّهِ مُوسَى بْنِ
جَعْفَرٍعَلَيْهِمَا السَّلاَمُ مِنَ المُتَوَسِّمِينَ، يَعْلَمُ مَن
يَقِفُ عَلَيْهِ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهِ وَيَجحَدُ الإِمامَ بَعْدَ إِمامَتِهِ،
فَكانَ يَكظِمُ غَيظَهُ عَلَيْهِمْ و لا يُبدِي لَهُم ما يَعرِفُهُ
مِنْهُمْ فَسُمِّي الكاظِمِ لِذلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 2 - حَدَّثَنا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ الحَسَن بْنِ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ الوَلِيدِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَضِىَ اللهُ عَنْهُ قالَ: حَدَّثَنا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ يَحْيَى العَطَّارُ،
عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ الحُسَيْنِ بْنِ سَعِيدٍ، عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
جُمهُورٍ، عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ الفَضْلِ، عَنْ يُونُسَ بْنِ عَبْدِ
الرَّحْمنِ قالَ: لَمّا ماتَ أَبُو الحَسَنِ‏ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
وَلَيْسَ مِن قُوَّامِهِ أَحَدٌ إِلاّ وَعنْدَهُ المالُ الكَثِيرُ،
فَكانَ ذلِكَ سَبَبَ وَقفِهِم وَجُحُودِهِم لِمَوتِهِ، وَكانَ عِنْدَ
زِيادٍ القَنْدِيِّ سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ دِينارٍ وَعِنْدَ عَلِىِّ بْنِ
أَبِي حَمْزَةَ ثَلاثُونَ أَلْفَ دِينارٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا رَأَيْتُ ذلِكَ وَتَبَيَّنَ ليَ الحَقُّ وَعَرَفتُ مِن أَمْرِ
أَبي الحَسَنِ‏الرِّضا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ ما عَرَفتُ تَكَلَّمتُ
وَدَعَوْتَ النَّاسَ إِلَيْهِ، قالَ: فَبَعَثا إِلَىَّ وَقالا لي‏: ما
يَدْعُوكَ إِلى‏ هذا؟ إِن كُنْتَ تُرِيدُ المالَ فَنَحنُ نُغنِيكَ
وَضَمِنا لي‏ عَشَرَةَ أَلْفَ دِينارٍ وَقالا لي‏: كُفَّ فَأَبَيتُ،
فَقُلْتُ لَهُما: إِنّا رُوِّينا عَنِ الصَّادِقَينِ‏عَلَيْهِمَا
السَّلاَمُ أَنَّهُمْ قالُوا: إِذا ظَهَرَتِ البِدَعُ فَعَلَى العالِمِ
أَن يُظْهِرَ عِلمَهُ، فَإِن لَم يَفعَل سُلِبَ نُورُ الإِيمانِ، وَما
كُنْتُ لأَدَعَ الجِهادَ فِي أَمْرِ اللَّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عَلَى كُلِّ
حالٍ، فَناصَبانِي وَأَظمَرا العَداوَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10-3 My father and Muhammad ibn Al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Waleed - may
God be pleased with them - narrated that Mohammad ibn Yahya al-Attar
quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Al-Husayn ibn Sa'eed, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Jomhoor, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Hammad,
“Uthman ibn Isa Ar-Ravasay was one of the representatives (of Imam
Al-Kazim (a.s.)) who lived in Egypt. A lot of (Imam Al-Kazim's (a.s.))
property and six slave maids were in his possession. Abul Hassan
Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) sent someone to him and asked him to return the slave
maids and the property. Uthman ibn Isa Ar-Rawasi wrote a letter in
response and said, ‘Your father has not died yet.’ Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.)
wrote a letter to him and said, ‘My father (a.s.) has passed away and we
have divided up his possessions. There is correct news to confirm his
death.’ Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) presented some proofs. Uthman wrote to him
(a.s.) in reply, ‘If your father is alive, you have no rights over his
property. If he (a.s.) has died as you say, he (a.s.) has not given me
any orders to dispose of these possessions to you. I freed the slave
maids and married them.’”

The author of this book (a.s.heikh Sadooq) said, “Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.)
was not a man who would collect wealth. However, he lived during the
region of (Harun) Ar-Rashid and had a lot of enemies. He could not give
the collected property to the deprived, so he gave them secretly to a
few to divide among the poor people. This is how this wealth was
collected. He did not want to do what the ill-wishers told Ar-Rashid
about him. Things like ‘he has collected a lot of wealth’, ’he believes
he is the Imam’, ’and he incites the people to revolt against you,’ etc.
If it were not for these accusations, he would have given the wealth to
various people. Rather it consisted of gifts that his friends had
brought for him in order to honor him.”[^3]

[^1]: See footnote (1) of Section 4, No.4-1

[^2]: That means one who quenches his anger.

[^3]: It seems that this is not the best justification. The followers of
Imam Al-Kazim (a.s.) used to pay their one-fifth levy to him. Since he
was imprisoned, they had to give it to his representative.


