Chapter 20: On What Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) Has Said Regarding Divine Leadership, Its Nobilities And The Rank Of The Divine Leader
===========================================================================================================================

20-1 Abul Abbas Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abu Ahmad Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Ali
al-Haruni quoted on the authority of Sa’eed Al-Husayn ibn Ali al-Adawi
quoted on the authority of Abu Hamid Imran ibn Musa ibn Ibrahim, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Al-Qasim Ar-Raqqam, on the authority of
Al-Qasim ibn Muslim, on the authority of his brother Abdul Aziz ibn
Muslim, “At the times[^1] of Ali ibn Musa Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) we were in
Marv. We had gathered together in the Jami’a mosque where the people
were talking about the concept of Divine Leadership and the many
differences which the people have with each other in that respect. I
went to see my Master and my Friend Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) and told him what
the people said in that regard. He (a.s.) smiled and said, ‘O Abdul
Aziz! The people are ignorant and have been tricked regarding their
religion. The Blessed the Sublime God did not take away the life of His
Prophet (S) until after He perfected the religion for him and sent him
the Quran in which everything including the allowed, the forbidden, the
bounds, the decrees and everything which is needed is clarified. Then
the Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘*…Nothing have we omitted from the
Book…’*[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِي يَجِبُ أَن يُقالُ لَهُم: أَنَّ عِيسَى هُوَمَولُودٍ مِن غَيرِ
أَبٍ فَلَمْ لا يَجُوزُ أَنْ يَكُونُوا مَولُودٍين مِن غَيرِ آباءِ؟
فَإِنَّهُم لا يَجسُرُونَ عَلَى إِظهارِ مَذْهَبِهم - لَعنَهُمُ اللَّه
فِي ذلِكَ - وَمَتى‏ جازَ أَنْ يَكُونَ جَمِيعَ أَنبياءِ اللَّه
وَرُسُلِهِ حُجَجِهِ بَعْدَ آدَمَ مَولُودينَ مِنَ الآباءِ
وَالأُمَّهاتِ، وَكانَ عِيسَى مِنْ بَيْنِهِمُ‏ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ
مَولُوداً مِن غَيرِ أَبٍ جازَ أَن يُشَبَّهُ أَمْرُهُ غَيْرِهِ مِنَ
الأَنْبِياءِ وَالحُجَجِ‏ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ كَما جازَ أَن يُولَدَ
مِن غَيرِ أَبٍ دُونَهُم و إِنَّما أَرادَ اللَّه عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَن
يَجعَلَ أَمْرَهُ آيَةً وَعَلامةً لِيَعلَمَ بِذلِكَ أَنَّهُ عَلَى كُلِّ
شَي‏ءٍ قَديرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بابُ ما جاءَ عَنِ الرِّضا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فِي وَصفِ الإِمامَة
وَالإِمام وَذِكرِ فَضْلِ الإِمام وَرُتبَتِهِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 1 - حَدَّثَنا أَبُو العَبَّاسِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ إِبْراهيمِ بْنِ إِسْحاق
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الطَّالِقانِيُّ رَضِىَ اللهُ عَنْهُ قالَ: حَدَّثَنا أَبُوالقاسِمِ بن
مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عَلِى الهارونِي قالَ: حَدَّثَني أَبُو حامد عِمْران بْنِ
مُوسَى بْنِ إِبْراهيم عَنِ الحَسَن بْنِ القاسِمِ الرقام قالَ:
حَدَّثَني القاسِم بْنِ مُسْلِم، عَن أَخِيهِ عَبْد العَزِيز بْنِ
مُسْلِم قالَ كُنَّا فِي أَيَّامِ عَلِيِّ بْنِ مُوسَى الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ بِمَرْوَ فَاجْتَمَعْنَا فِي مَسْجِدِ جَامِعِهَا فِي يَوْمِ
جُمُعَةٍ فِي بَدْءِ مَقْدَمِنَا فَأَدَارَ النَّاسُ أَمْرَ الإِمَامَةِ
وَذَكَرُوا كَثْرَةَ اخْتِلافِ النَّاسِ فِيهَا فَدَخَلْتُ عَلَى
سَيِّدِي وَمَوْلايَ الرِّضَافَأَعْلَمْتُهُ مَا خَاضَ النَّاسُ فِيهِ
فَتَبَسَّمَ ثُمَّ قَالَ يَا عَبْدَ الْعَزِيزِ جَهِلَ الْقَوْمُ
وَخُدِعُوا عَنْ أَدْيَانِهِمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى لَمْ
يَقْبِضْ نَبِيَّهُ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ حَتَّى أَكْمَلَ لَهُ
الدِّينَ وَأَنْزَلَ عَلَيْهِ الْقُرْآنَ فِيهِ تَفْصِيلُ كُلِّ شَيْ‏ءٍ
بَيَّنَ فِيهِ الْحَلالَ وَالْحَرَامَ وَالْحُدُودَ وَالأَحْكَامَ
وَجَمِيعَ مَا يَحْتَاجُ إِلَيْهِ النَّاسُ كَمَلاً فَقَالَ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ (ما فَرَّطْنا فِي الْكِتابِ مِنْ شَيْ‏ءٍ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

During the Farewell Pilgrimage, which was made in the last days of the
Prophet’s (a.s.) lifetime, God revealed to him, ‘…This day have I
perfected your religion for you, completed My favour upon you, and have
chosen for you Islam as your religion…’[^3] It is the issue of Divine
Leadership which completes the religion. The Prophet (S) did not die
until he (a.s.) clarified the knowledge of their religion for them,
showed them their way, put them on the straight path, established Ali
(a.s.) as their Guide and Divine Leader, and stated whatever the people
needed. Whoever thinks that God has not completed His Religion has, in
fact, denied God’s Book. Whoever denies God’s Book is an atheist. Are
the people aware of the degree and worth of Divine Leadership and its
rank amongst the nation so that their choosing a leader be acceptable?
Divine Leadership is much more magnificent, nobler in status, higher in
position and much more deep-rooted than to be understood by the
intellect or views of the people so that they can elect a leader by
themselves. Divine Leadership is what has been placed in the third rank
by God after Prophethood and Friendship of God and granted to Abraham
(a.s.). God has given him great nobility by that and made him
well-known.

The Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘…I will make thee an Imam to the
Nations…’[^4] Then Abraham (a.s.) got happy and said, ‘…And also (Imams)
from my offspring!…’[^5] Then the Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘But
My Promise is not within the reach of evil-doers.’[^6] Thus this verse
will forever close any possibility of Divine Leadership for any
oppressor up until the Resurrection Day. Therefore, Divine Leadership
has been limited to the chosen ones. Then the Honorable the Exalted God
honored him by establishing Divine Leadership for the chosen pure ones
from Abraham’s (a.s.) progeny. The Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘And
We bestowed on him Isaac and, as an additional gift, (a grandson),
Jacob, and We made righteous men of every one (of them). And We made
them Divine Leaders, guiding (men) by Our Command, and We sent them
inspiration to do good deeds, to establish regular prayers, and to
practice regular charity; and they constantly served Us (and Us
only).’[^7]

Thus Divine Leadership remained in his progeny from one generation to
the next until the Prophet (S) inherited it. The Honorable the Exalted
God said, *‘Without doubt, among men, the nearest of kin to Abraham, are
those who follow him, as are also this Messenger and those who believe:*
*And Allah is the Protector of those who have faith.’*[^8] Therefore,
this

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْزَلَ فِي حَجَّةِ الْوَدَاعِ وَهِيَ آخِرُ عُمُرِهِ (الْيَوْمَ
أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ وَأَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ نِعْمَتِي
وَرَضِيتُ لَكُمُ الإِسْلامَ دِيناً).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمْرُ الإِمَامَةِ مِنْ تَمَامِ الدِّينِ وَلَمْ يَمْضِ‏ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ حَتَّى بَيَّنَ لامَّتِهِ مَعَالِمَ دِينِهِ وَأَوْضَحَ لَهُمْ
سُبُلَهُ وَتَرَكَهُمْ عَلَى قَصْدِ الْحَقِّ وَأَقَامَ لَهُمْ عَلِيّاً
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ عَلَماً وَإِمَاماً وَمَا تَرَكَ شَيْئاً تَحْتَاجُ
إِلَيْهِ الأُمَّةُ إِلا بَيَّنَهُ فَمَنْ زَعَمَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ لَمْ يُكْمِلْ دِينَهُ فَقَدْ رَدَّ كِتَابَ اللَّهِ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ وَمَنْ رَدَّ كِتَابَ اللَّهِ فَهُوَكَافِرٌ هَلْ يَعْرِفُونَ
قَدْرَ الإِمَامَةِ وَمَحَلَّهَا مِنَ الأُمَّةِ فَيَجُوزَ فِيهَا
اخْتِيَارُهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الإِمَامَةَ أَجَلُّ قَدْراً وَأَعْظَمُ شَأْناً وَأَعْلَى
مَكَاناً وَأَمْنَعُ جَانِباً وَأَبْعَدُ غَوْراً مِنْ أَنْ يَبْلُغَهَا
النَّاسُ بِعُقُولِهِمْ أَوْ يَنَالُوهَا بِ‏آرَائِهِمْ أَوْ يُقِيمُوا
إِمَاماً بِاخْتِيَارِهِمْ إِنَّ الإِمَامَةَ خَصَّ اللَّهُ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ بِهَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْخَلِيلَ‏ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ بَعْدَ
النُّبُوَّةِ وَالْخُلَّةِ مَرْتَبَةً ثَالِثَةً وَفَضِيلَةً شَرَّفَهُ
بِهَا وَأَشَادَ بِهَا ذِكْرَهُ فَقَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: (إِنِّي جاعِلُكَ
لِلنَّاس إِماماً) فَقَالَ الْخَلِيلُ‏ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ سُرُوراً
بِهَا (وَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِي) قَالَ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ (لا يَنالُ
عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ) فَأَبْطَلَتْ هَذِهِ الآْيَةُ إِمَامَةَ كُلِّ
ظَالِمٍ إِلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَصَارَتْ فِي الصَّفْوَةِ ثُمَّ
أَكْرَمَهُ اللَّهُ بِأَنْ جَعَلَهَا فِي ذُرِّيَّتِهِ أَهْلِ
الصَّفْوَةِ وَالطَّهَارَةِ فَقَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ (وَوَهَبْنا لَهُ
إِسْحاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ نافِلَةً وَكُلّاً جَعَلْنا صالِحِينَ
وَجَعَلْناهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنا وَأَوْحَيْنا إِلَيْهِمْ
فِعْلَ الْخَيْراتِ وَإِقامَ الصَّلاةِ وَإِيتاءَ الزَّكاةِ وَكانُوا
لَنا عابِدِينَ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمْ تَزَلْ فِي ذُرِّيَّتِهِ يَرِثُهَا بَعْضٌ عَنْ بَعْضٍ قَرْناً
فَقَرْناً حَتَّى وَرِثَهَا النَّبِيُ ‏فَقَالَ اللَّهُ جَلَّ جَلالُهُ:
(إِنَّ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِإِبْراهِيمَ لَلَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ وَهذَا
النَّبِيُّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ)
فَكَانَتْ لَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Divine Leadership was especially for the Prophet (S) and by God’s orders
he (a.s.) handed it down to Ali (a.s.). It then remained in the hands of
those of his (Ali’s) progeny who were chosen and who were granted
knowledge and faith by God as the Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘*But
those endued with knowledge and faith will say, ‘Indeed ye did tarry,
within Allah’s Decree, to the Day of Resurrection, and this is the Day
of Resurrection…’’*[^9] Therefore, Divine Leadership remains in the
hands of the progeny of Ali (a.s.) until the Resurrection Day since
there will be no Prophets after Muhammad (a.s.). Now how can these
ignorant ones choose? Divine Leadership is the rank of the Prophets, and
the Inheritance of the Trustees. Divine Leadership is the position of
Vicegerency of the Honorable the Exalted God and vicegerency of the
Prophet. It is the position of the Commander of the Faithful. It is the
Inheritance of Al-Hassan (a.s.) and Al-Husayn (a.s.). Divine Leadership
is the reign of religion, the order for the Muslims, the good of this
world and the honor of the believers. Divine Leadership is the firm
foundation of Islam and its greatest product.

The perfection of the prayers, paying of the alms-tax, fasting,
pilgrimage to Mecca (*Hajj*), engaging in holy wars is done by the
Divine Leader. The booties gained without any bloodshed, and charities
are blessed by the Divine Leader. The Divine Doctrinal Provisions and
the Punishments are put into practice by the Divine Leader, and the
borders are safeguarded by him.

The Divine Leader legalizes whatever God deems legal, forbids whatever
God deems illegal, and executes the doctrinal provisions that God has
decreed, protects the religion of God, and calls to the path of his Lord
using wisdom, good advice, and strong proofs. The Divine Leader is like
a brilliant sun in the world which is way out in the horizon out of the
reach of the hands and the eyes. The Divine Leader is like a luminous
full moon shining as a bright lamp and incident light, a guiding star in
dark gloom, arid deserts and awesome oceans. The Divine Leader is like
delicious water for the thirsty and like a guide to lead away from
destruction. The Divine Leader is like the guiding fire on the desert
highlands whose heat will warm the seekers of his warmth. He directs us
out of dangers. Whoever abandons him will surely perish.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَاصَّةً فَقَلَّدَهَا صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ عَلِيّاً عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ بِأَمْرِ اللَّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عَلَى رَسْمِ مَا فَرَضَهَا
اللَّهُ فَصَارَتْ فِي ذُرِّيَّتِهِ الأَصْفِيَاءِ الَّذِينَ آتَاهُمُ
اللَّهُ الْعِلْمَ وَالإِيمَانَ بِقَوْلِهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ (وَقالَ
الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ وَالإِيمانَ لَقَدْ لَبِثْتُمْ فِي كِتابِ
اللَّهِ إِلى‏ يَوْمِ الْبَعْثِ) فَهِيَ فِي وُلْدِ عَلِيٍ‏ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ خَاصَّةً إِلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ إِذْ لا نَبِيَّ بَعْدَ
مُحَمَّدٍ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَمِنْ أَيْنَ يَخْتَارُ
هَؤُلاءِ الْجُهَّالُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الإِمَامَةَ هِيَ مَنْزِلَةُ الأَنْبِيَاءِ وَإِرْثُ الأَوْصِيَاءِ
إِنَّ الإِمَامَةَ خِلافَةُ اللَّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَخِلافَةُ الرَّسُولِ
وَمَقَامُ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَمِيرَاثُ الْحَسَنِ وَالْحُسَيْنِ‏
عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الإِمَامَةَ زِمَامُ الدِّينِ وَنِظَامُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ وَصَلاحُ
الدُّنْيَا وَعِزُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِنَّ الإِمَامَةَ أُسُّ الإِسْلامِ
النَّامِي وَفَرْعُهُ السَّامِي بِالإِمَامِ تَمَامُ الصَّلاةِ
وَالزَّكَاةِ وَالصِّيَامِ وَالْحَجِّ وَالْجِهَادِ وَتَوْفِيرُ
الْفَيْ‏ءِ وَالصَّدَقَاتِ وَإِمْضَاءُ الْحُدُودِ وَالأَحْكَامِ
وَمَنْعُ الثُّغُورِ وَالأَطْرَافِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالإِمَامُ يُحَلِّلُ حَلالَ اللَّهِ وَيُحَرِّمُ حَرَامَ اللَّهِ
وَيُقِيمُ حُدُودَ اللَّهِ وَيَذُبُّ عَنْ دِينِ اللَّهِ وَيَدْعُو إِلَى
سَبِيلِ رَبِّهِ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ الْحَسَنَةِ وَالْحُجَّةِ
الْبَالِغَةِ الإِمَامُ كَالشَّمْسِ الطَّالِعَةِ لِلْعَالَمِ وَهِيَ فِي
الأُفُقِ بِحَيْثُ لا تَنَالُهُ الأَيْدِي وَالأَبْصَارُ الإِمَامُ
الْبَدْرُ الْمُنِيرُ وَالسِّرَاجُ الزَّاهِرُ وَالنُّورُ السَّاطِعُ
وَالنَّجْمُ الْهَادِي فِي غَيَاهِبِ الدُّجَى وَالْبَلَدِ الْقِفَارِ
وَلُجَجِ الْبِحَارِ الإِمَامُ الْمَاءُ الْعَذْبُ عَلَى الظَّمَإِ
وَالدَّالُّ عَلَى الْهُدَى وَالْمُنْجِي مِنَ الرَّدَى الإِمَامُ
النَّارُ عَلَى الْيَفَاعِ الْحَارُّ لِمَنِ اصْطَلَى بِهِ وَالدَّلِيلُ
فِي الْمَهَالِكِ مَنْ فَارَقَهُ فَهَالِكٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Divine Leader is like the raining clouds and the torrential
downpour. He is like the shining sun and the vast land. He is like a
gushing spring, a garden and a creek. The Divine Leader is like a
trustworthy companion, a kind father and a real brother. He is like the
shelter for the servants.

The Divine Leader is the Trustee of God on His land. He is His Proof for
His servants and His Vicegerent in His towns. He is the Caller to God,
and the protector of the sanctities of the Honorable the Exalted God.

The Divine Leader is purified from sins and free from defects, is given
exclusive knowledge, is characterized with forbearance, is the order of
the religion, is the Stronghold of the believers, is the cause of anger
of the hypocrites, and the perdition of the unbelievers.

The Divine Leader is the unsurpassed one in his own time. No one can
catch up with him and no scholar can equal him. There is no substitute
for him and there is no like or match for him. Perfect virtue is
dedicated to him without him seeking it or acquiring it. Rather, it is
dedicated to him by the Favorer the Endower God.

How is it then possible for anybody to attain the true recognition of
the Divine Leader? How impossible this is! Minds are too astray,
intellects are too lost, wits are too perplexed, speakers are too mute,
poets are too unversed, authors are too impotent, eloquent ones are too
wordless, and scholars are too weak to describe a single feature or a
single virtue of the features and virtues of the Divine Leader.
Consequently, they all confess their shortcomings and inadequacies to do
so. How is it then possible to describe him as a whole or portray his
manners? How it is possible to find anyone who can act out his role or
represent him? How is this possible while the Divine Leader is as far
away as the stars are from the reach of the debaters and the describers?
Then where does the choice of the people stand and where does this rank
stand? Where are the intellects and how can this rank be understood?
Where can anyone find such a person? Do they think they can find Divine
Leadership in anyone outside of the Household of the Prophet (S)?

By God, they are deceived by themselves and their false claims have led
them into indulging in false hopes. They are surely climbing a rugged
ascent and a slippery mount that will surely cause them to stumble to
the rock bottom with wandering, insufficient, and impoverished
intellects and deviating opinions, because they have intended to choose
a Divine

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإِمَامُ السَّحَابُ الْمَاطِرُ وَالْغَيْثُ الْهَاطِلُ وَالشَّمْسُ
الْمُضِيئَةُ وَالسَّمَاءُ الظَّلِيلَةُ وَالأَرْضُ الْبَسِيطَةُ
وَالْعَيْنُ الْغَزِيرَةُ وَالْغَدِيرُ وَالرَّوْضَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإِمَامُ الأَمِينُ الرَّفِيقُ وَالأَخُ الشَّقِيقُ [الشَّفِيقُ]
وَمَفْزَعُ الْعِبَادِ فِي الدَّاهِيَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإِمَامُ أَمِينُ اللَّهِ فِي أَرْضِهِ وَحُجَّتُهُ عَلَى عِبَادِهِ
وَخَلِيفَتُهُ فِي بِلادِهِ الدَّاعِي إِلَى اللَّهِ وَالذَّابُّ عَنْ
حُرَمِ اللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإِمَامُ الْمُطَهَّرُ مِنَ الذُّنُوبِ الْمُبَرَّأُ مِنَ الْعُيُوبِ
مَخْصُوصٌ بِالْعِلْمِ مَوْسُومٌ بِالْحِلْمِ نِظَامُ الدِّينِ وَعِزُّ
الْمُسْلِمِينَ وَغَيْظُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَبَوَارُ الْكَافِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإِمَامُ وَاحِدُ دَهْرِهِ لا يُدَانِيهِ أَحَدٌ وَلا يُعَادِلُهُ
عَالِمٌ وَلا يُوجَدُ مِنْهُ بَدَلٌ وَلا لَهُ مِثْلٌ وَلا نَظِيرٌ
مَخْصُوصٌ بِالْفَضْلِ كُلِّهِ مِنْ غَيْرِ طَلَبٍ مِنْهُ لَهُ وَلا
اكْتِسَابٍ بَلِ اخْتِصَاصٌ مِنَ الْمُفْضِلِ الْوَهَّابِ فَمَنْ ذَا
الَّذِي يَبْلُغُ مَعْرِفَةَ الإِمَامِ وَيُمْكِنُهُ اخْتِيَارُهُ
هَيْهَاتَ هَيْهَاتَ ضَلَّتِ الْعُقُولُ وَتَاهَتِ الْحُلُومُ وَحَارَتِ
الأَلْبَابُ وَحَسَرَتِ الْعُيُونُ وَتَصَاغَرَتِ الْعُظَمَاءُ
وَتَحَيَّرَتِ الْحُكَمَاءُ وَتَقَاصَرَتِ الْحُلَمَاءُ وَحَصِرَتِ
الْخُطَبَاءُ وَجَهِلَتِ الأَلِبَّاءُ وَكَلَّتِ الشُّعَرَاءُ وَعَجَزَتِ
الأُدَبَاءُ وَعَيِيَتِ الْبُلَغَاءُ عَنْ وَصْفِ شَأْنٍ مِنْ شَأْنِهِ
أَوْ فَضِيلَةٍ مِنْ فَضَائِلِهِ فَأَقَرَّتْ بِالْعَجْزِ وَالتَّقْصِيرِ
وَكَيْفَ يُوصَفُ أَوْ يُنْعَتُ بِكُنْهِهِ أَوْ يُفْهَمُ شَيْ‏ءٌ مِنْ
أَمْرِهِ أَوْ يُوجَدُ مَنْ يَقُومُ مَقَامَهُ وَيُغْنِي غَنَاءَهُ لا
كَيْفَ وَأَنَّى وَهُوَبِحَيْثُ النَّجْمِ مِنْ أَيْدِي
الْمُتَنَاوِلِينَ وَوَصْفِ الْوَاصِفِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَيْنَ الاخْتِيَارُ مِنْ هَذَا وَأَيْنَ الْعُقُولُ عَنْ هَذَا أَوْ
أَيْنَ يُوجَدُ مِثْلُ هَذَا ظَنُّوا أَنَّ ذَلِكَ يُوجَدُ فِي غَيْرِ
آلِ الرَّسُولِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ كَذَبَتْهُمْ وَاللَّهِ
أَنْفُسُهُمْ وَمَنَّتْهُمُ الْبَاطِلَ فَارْتَقَوْا مُرْتَقًى صَعْباً
دَحْضاً تَزِلُّ عَنْهُ إِلَى الْحَضِيضِ أَقْدَامُهُمْ رَامُوا
إِقَـامَةَ الإِمَـامَةِ بِعُقُولٍ حَـائِرَةٍ بَـائِرَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Leader on their own. They will only get farther away from where they
intend to go. ‘*The Curse of God be on them! How are they deluded (away
from the Truth)!’*[^10] They have decided to go along a difficult road.
They have said false things. They ‘*…have verily strayed far, far away
from the Path…’*[^11] and do not know what to do since they have
knowingly abandoned the Divine Leader. Satan adorned their deeds in
their own sight and hindered them from following the right path while
they were able to see. They have abandoned the choice of God and His
Prophet (S) and have considered their own choice. The Quran calls them
and says, ‘*Thy Lord does create and choose as He pleases: no choice
have they (in the matter): Glory be to Allah. and far is He above the
partners they ascribe (to Him)!’*[^12]

And the Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘It is not fitting for a
Believer, man or woman, when a matter has been decided by Allah and His
Messenger to have any option about their decision: if anyone disobeys
Allah and His Messenger, he is indeed on a clearly wrong Path.’[^13]

The Honorable the Exalted God also says, ‘What is the matter with you?
How judge ye? Or have ye a book through which ye learn that ye shall
have, through it whatever ye choose? Or have ye Covenants with Us to
oath, reaching to the Day of Judgment, (providing) that ye shall have
whatever ye shall demand? Ask thou of them, which of them will stand
surety for that!’[^14]

The Honorable the Exalted God also says, ‘*Do they not then earnestly
seek to understand the Qur'an, or are their hearts locked up by
them?’*[^15] Or has God placed a seal on their hearts and they no longer
understand. Or they say, ‘*…We hear, but listen not.’*[^16] ‘*For the
worst of beasts in the sight of Allah are the deaf and the dumb - those
who understand not. If Allah had found in them any good. He would indeed
have made them listen: (As it is), if He had made them listen, they
would but have turned back and declined (Faith).’*[^17]

Then how could they nominate a Divine Leader while the true Divine
Leader is one so versed in knowledge that ignorance never approaches him
and is a custodian that never betrays? He is the mine of holiness,
purity, worship, knowledge and servitude. In fact, the Prophet (S)
himself has especially called upon him to become the Divine Leader.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَاقِصَةٍ وَآرَاءٍ مُضِلَّةٍ فَلَمْ يَزْدَادُوا مِنْهُ إِلا بُعْداً:
(قاتَلَهُمُ اللَّهُ أَنَّى يُؤْفَكُونَ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ رَامُوا صَعْباً وَقَالُوا إِفْكاً وَضَلُّوا ضَلالاً بَعِيداً
وَوَقَعُوا فِي الْحَيْرَةِ إِذْ تَرَكُوا الإِمَامَ عَنْ بَصِيرَةٍ
(وَزَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ فَصَدَّهُمْ عَنِ
السَّبِيلِ وَكَانُوا مُسْتَبْصِرِينَ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَغِبُوا عَنِ اخْتِيَارِ اللَّهِ وَاخْتِيَارِ رَسُولِهِ إِلَى
اخْتِيَارِهِمْ وَالْقُرْآنُ يُنَادِيهِمْ: (وَرَبُّكَ يَخْلُقُ ما
يَشاءُ وَيَخْتارُ ما كانَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ سُبْحانَ اللَّهِ
وَتَعالى‏ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ (وَما كانَ لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلا مُؤْمِنَةٍ إِذا قَضَى
اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ أَمْراً أَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ مِنْ
أَمْرِهِمْ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ (ما لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ أَمْ لَكُمْ كِتابٌ
فِيهِ تَدْرُسُونَ إِنَّ لَكُمْ فِيهِ لَما تَخَيَّرُونَ أَمْ لَكُمْ
أَيْمانٌ عَلَيْنا بالِغَةٌ إِلى‏ يَوْمِ الْقِيامَةِ إِنَّ لَكُمْ لَما
تَحْكُمُونَ سَلْهُمْ أَيُّهُمْ بِذلِكَ زَعِيمٌ أَمْ لَهُمْ شُرَكاءُ
فَلْيَأْتُوا بِشُرَكائِهِمْ إِنْ كانُوا صادِقِينَ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ (أَفَلا يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْآنَ أَمْ عَلى‏
قُلُوبٍ أَقْفالُها). (أَمْ طَبَعَ اللَّهُ عَلَى قُلُوبِهِمْ فَهُمْ لا
يَفْقَهُونَ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ (قَالُوا سَمِعْنَا وَهُمْ لا يَسْمَعُونَ إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابِّ
عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الصُّمُّ الْبُكْمُ الَّذِينَ لا يَعْقِلُونَ وَلَوْ
عَلِمَ اللَّهُ فِيهِمْ خَيْراً لاسْمَعَهُمْ وَلَوْ أَسْمَعَهُمْ
لَتَوَلَّوْا وَهُمْ مُعْرِضُونَ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ(قالُوا سَمِعْنا وَعَصَيْنا)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ هُوَ(فَضْلُ اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَنْ يَشاءُ وَاللَّهُ ذُو الْفَضْلِ
الْعَظِيمِ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ لَهُمْ بِاخْتِيَارِ الإِمَامِ وَالإِمَامُ عَالِمٌ لا يَجْهَلُ
داعي [دَاعٍ] لا يَنْكُلُ مَعْدِنُ الْقُدْسِ وَالطَّهَارَةِ وَالنُّسُكِ
وَالزَّهَادَةِ وَالْعِلْمِ وَالْعِبَادَةِ مَخْصُوصٌ بِدَعْوَةِ
الرَّسُولِ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Divine Leader is from the progeny of the pure al-Batool (Fatima)
(a.s.). There are no flaws in this lineage. There are no honorable ones
to equal him (i.e. the Divine Leader). He is from the *Quraysh* tribe.
His clan is the *Hashemites* and his root is the Messenger of God
(a.s.). God is pleased with the Divine Leader. He is the master of the
celebrities, and he is of the progeny of Abd Minaf.[^18] The Divine
Leader’s knowledge is ever-increasing. His forbearance is perfect. He is
cognizant of politics and is worthy of Divine Leadership. Obedience to
him is obligatory. He is the executor of God’s commandments and an
adviser for God’s servants. He is the protector of God’s religion. God
will grant success to the Prophets (a.s.) and the Divine Leaders (a.s.).
God will exclusively grant them a part of His stored knowledge and
wisdom so that they become the most knowledgeable of people. The Sublime
God says, ‘*…is then He Who gives guidance to truth more worthy to be
followed, or he who finds not guidance (himself) unless he is guided?
What then is the matter with you? How judge ye?’*[^19] Also the
Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘*He granteth wisdom to whom He
pleaseth; and he to whom wisdom is granted receiveth indeed a benefit
overflowing…’*[^20]

Relating the story of Saul[^21], the Honorable the Exalted God says,
‘God hath Chosen him above you, and hath gifted him abundantly with
knowledge and bodily prowess: God Granteth His authority to whom He
pleaseth. God careth for all, and He knoweth all things.’[^22]

About the Prophet David (a.s.), the Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘…
and David slew Goliath; and God gave him power and wisdom and taught him
whatever (else) He willed…’[^23]

Addressing the Prophet Muhammad (S), the Honorable the Exalted God says,
‘*…And great is the Grace of God unto thee.’*[^24]

About the Divine Leaders from the Prophet’s family, progeny, and
offspring, the Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘Or do they envy mankind
for what God hath given them of his bounty? But We had already given the
people of Abraham the Book and Wisdom, and conferred upon them a great
kingdom. Some of them believed, and some of them averted their faces
from him: And enough is Hell for a burning fire.’[^25]

When God selects someone for managing the affairs of His servants, He
grants him the will to do so, fills his heart with gushing springs of

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ نَسْلُ الْمُطَهَّرَةِ الْبَتُولِ، لا مَغْمَزَ فِيهِ فِي نَسَبٍ
وَلا يُدَانِيهِ ذُو حَسَبٍ فِي الْبَيْتِ مِنْ قُرَيْشٍ وَالذِّرْوَةِ
مِنْ هَاشِمٍ وَالْعِتْرَةِ مِنْ آلِ الرَّسُولِ وَالرِّضَا مِنَ اللَّهِ
شَرَفُ الأَشْرَافِ وَالْفَرْعُ مِنْ عَبْدِ مَنَافٍ نَامِي الْعِلْمِ
كَامِلُ الْحِلْمِ مُضْطَلِعٌ بِالإِمَامَةِ عَالِمٌ بِالسِّيَاسَةِ
مَفْرُوضُ الطَّاعَةِ قَائِمٌ بِأَمْرِ اللَّهِ نَاصِحٌ لِعِبَادِ
اللَّهِ حَافِظٌ لِدِينِ اللَّهِ إِنَّ الأَنْبِيَاءَ وَالأَئِمَّةَ
يُوَفِّقُهُمُ اللَّهُ وَيُؤْتِيهِمْ مِنْ مَخْزُونِ عِلْمِهِ وَحُكْمِهِ
مَا لا يُؤْتِيهِ غَيْرَهُمْ فَيَكُونُ عِلْمُهُمْ فَوْقَ كُلِّ عِلْمِ
أَهْلِ زَمَانِهِمْ فِي قَوْلِهِ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى (أَفَمَنْ يَهْدِي
إِلَى الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَنْ يُتَّبَعَ أَمَّنْ لا يَهِدِّي إِلا أَنْ
يُهْدى‏ فَما لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَوْلِهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ (وَمَنْ يُؤْتَ الْحِكْمَةَ فَقَدْ أُوتِيَ
خَيْراً كَثِيراً).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَوْلِهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِي طَالُوتَ (إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفاهُ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَزادَهُ بَسْطَةً فِي الْعِلْمِ وَالْجِسْمِ وَاللَّهُ
يُؤْتِي مُلْكَهُ مَنْ يَشاءُ وَاللَّهُ واسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لِنَبِيِّهِ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ:
(وَكانَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكَ عَظِيماً).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِي الأَئِمَّةِ مِنْ أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ
وَعِتْرَتِهِ وَذُرِّيَّتِهِ (أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلى‏ ما
آتاهُمُ اللَّهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ فَقَدْ آتَيْنا آلَ إِبْراهِيمَ الْكِتابَ
وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَآتَيْناهُمْ مُلْكاً عَظِيماً فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ آمَنَ
بِهِ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ صَدَّ عَنْهُ وَكَفى‏ بِجَهَنَّمَ سَعِيراً).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ الْعَبْـدَ إِذَا اخْتَـارَهُ اللَّهُ عَـزَّ وَجَلَّ لأمُورِ
عِبَادِهِ شَرَحَ صَدْرَهُ لِذَلِكَ وَأَوْدَعَ قَلْبَهُ يَنَابِيعَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

wisdom, and bestows upon him full knowledge so that he will have the
ability to answer any questions and say nothing but the truth. The
Divine Leader is Immaculate and Approved of. God will grant him success.
He will be immune from erring, slipping and destruction. God will make
him especially this way to serve as His Proof for His servants (people),
and His Witness over His creatures. ‘*Such is the Bounty of God, which
He bestows on whom He will: and God is the Lord of the highest
bounty.’*[^26] Do they then have such powers or access to such powers to
be able to chose the Divine Leader? Or does the one chosen by them have
such characteristics to be preferred to others? I swear by God’s House
that they have transgressed beyond what is right and have pushed aside
God’s Book as if they know nothing. There is healing and guidance in
God’s Book and they have put it aside and have followed their own
selfish desires. That is why God admonishes them, hates them and
destroys them. The Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘*…and who is more
astray than one who follow his own lusts, devoid of guidance from God?
For God guides not people given to wrong-doing.’*[^27]

The Honorable the Exalted God also said, ‘…and (Allah) will render their
deeds astray (from their mark).’[^28] The Honorable the Exalted God also
said, ‘(a.s.uch) as dispute about the Signs of Allah, without any
authority that hath reached them, grievous and odious (is such conduct)
in the sight of Allah and of the Believers. Thus doth Allah, seal up
every heart - of arrogant and obstinate Transgressors.’”[^29]

20-2 The same tradition has been narrated by Muhammad ibn Isam
al-Kolayni, Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq, Ali ibn
Abdullah al-Warraq, Al-Hassan ibn Ahmad al-Mu’addib, and Al-Husayn ibn
Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Hisham al-Mu’addib - may God be pleased with
them - who narrated it on the authority of Muhammad ibn Yaqoob
al-Kolayni, on the authority of Abu Muhammad Al-Qasim ibn al-Ula, on the
authority of Al-Qasim ibn Muslim, on the authority of his brother Abdul
Aziz ibn Muslim, on the authority of Al-Ridha’ (a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحِكْمَةِ وَأَلْهَمَهُ الْعِلْمَ إِلْهَاماً فَلَمْ يَعْيَ بَعْدَهُ
بِجَوَابٍ وَلا يُحَيَّرُ فِيهِ عَنِ الصَّوَابِ وَهُوَمَعْصُومٌ
مُؤَيَّدٌ مُوَفَّقٌ مُسَدَّدٌ قَدْ أَمِنَ الْخَطَايَا وَالزَّلَلَ
وَالْعِثَارَ يَخُصُّهُ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِذَلِكَ لِيَكُونَ
حُجَّتَهُ عَلَى عِبَادِهِ وَشَاهِدَهُ عَلَى خَلْقِهِ وَذلِكَ فَضْلُ
اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَنْ يَشاءُ وَاللَّهُ ذُو الْفَضْلِ الْعَظِيمِ
فَهَلْ يَقْدِرُونَ عَلَى مِثْلِ هَذَا فَيَخْتَارُوهُ أَوْ يَكُونُ
مُخْتَارُهُمْ بِهَذِهِ الصِّفَةِ فَيُقَدِّمُوهُ تَعَدَّوْا وَبَيْتِ
اللَّهِ الْحَقَّ وَنَبَذُوا كِتَابَ اللَّهِ وَرَاءَ ظُهُورِهِمْ
كَأَنَّهُمْ لا يَعْلَمُونَ وَفِي كِتَابِ اللَّهِ الْهُدَى وَالشِّفَاءُ
فَنَبَذُوهُ وَاتَّبَعُوا أَهْوَاءَهُمْ فَذَمَّهُمُ اللَّهُ
وَمَقَتَهُمْ وَأَتْعَسَهُمْ فَقَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ (وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ
مِمَّنِ اتَّبَعَ هَواهُ بِغَيْرِ هُدىً مِنَ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لا
يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ (فَتَعْساً لَهُمْ وَأَضَلَّ أَعْمالَهُمْ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ (كَبُرَ مَقْتاً عِنْدَ اللَّهِ وَعِنْدَ
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كَذلِكَ يَطْبَعُ اللَّهُ عَلى‏ كُلِّ قَلْبِ
مُتَكَبِّرٍ جَبَّارٍ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَدَّثَني بِهذَا الْحَدِيث مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عصام
الكُلَيْنِيُّ وَعَلِىِّ بْنِ ِحْمَد بْنِ‏عِمْران الدقاق وَعَلِىِّ بْنِ
عَبْدِ اللَّه الوَرَّاقُ وَالحَسَن بْنِ أحْمَد المُؤَدِّبُ
وَالحُسَيْنِ بْنِ إِبْراهيمِ بْنِ هِشامِ المُؤَدِّبُ رَضِيَ اللَّهُ
عَنْهُمْ قالُوا حَدَّثَنا مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبِ الكُلَيْنِيُّ قالَ:
حَدَّثَنا مُحَمَّد القاسِم بْنِ العلا قالَ: حَدَّثَنا القاسِم بْنِ
مُسْلِم، عَن أَخِيهِ عَبْد العَزِيز بْنِ مُسْلِم عَنِ الرِّضا عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: When Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) was in Marv.

[^2]: Qur’an, 6:38

[^3]: Qur’an, 5:3

[^4]: Qur’an, 2:124

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Qur’an, 21:72-73

[^8]: Qur’an, 3:68

[^9]: Qur’an, 30:56

[^10]: Qur’an, 63:4

[^11]: Qur’an, 4:167

[^12]: Qur’an, 28:68

[^13]: Qur’an, 33:36

[^14]: Qur’an, 68:36-40

[^15]: Qur’an, 47:24

[^16]: Quran, 8:12

[^17]: Qur’an, 8:22-23

[^18]: The father of Hashem from whom the Hashemites are. The
grandfather of Abdul Muttalib. The Prophet Muhammad’s (a.s.) roots go
all the way to the Prophet Abraham (a.s.) as follows: Muhammad (a.s.),
son of Abdullah, son of Abdul Muttalib, son of Abd Minaf, son of Qusay,
son of Kalab, son of Murra, son of Ka’b, son of Lo’ay, son of Ghalib,
son of Fahr, son of Malik, son of al-Nadhr, son of Kinana, son of
Khozayma, son of Modraka, son of Elyas, son of Mazr, son of Nazar, son
of Ma’ad, son of Adnan, son of Adad, son of Maqoom, son of Nahoor, son
of Tarokh, son of Ya’arib, son of Yashjeb, son of Nabit, son of Isma’il,
son of Abraham (a.s.). Derived from Nahayat ul-Arb Fi Ma’refat Ansab
al-Arab by Abil Ab’bas Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Abdullah
al-Qul-Qashandi- Darul Kotob al-Elmieh, Beirut, Lebanon.

[^19]: Qur’an, 10:35

[^20]: Qur’an, 2:269

[^21]: Talut is the Arabic name for Saul, who was tall and handsome, but
belonged to the tribe of Benjamin, the smallest tribe in Israel. His
worldly belongings were little, and it was when he went out to search
for some asses which had been lost from his father's house that he met
Samuel, and was appointed king by him. The people's fickleness appeared
immediately after he was appointed king. They raised all sorts of petty
objections to him. The chief consideration in their minds was
selfishness: each one wanted to be leader and king himself, instead of
desiring sincerely the good of the people as a whole, as a leader should
do.

[^22]: Qur’an, 2:247

[^23]: Qur’an, 2:251

[^24]: Qur’an, 4:113

[^25]: Qur’an, 4:54-55

[^26]: Qur’an, 62:4

[^27]: Qur’an, 28:50

[^28]: Qur’an, 47:8

[^29]: Qur’an, 40:35


