Publisher’s Introduction
========================

***In the Name of Allah, the All–beneficent, the All–merciful***

The legacy of the Household [*Ahl al–Bayt*] of the Prophet (saws) stored
in their school of thought and preserved by their followers, is
comprehensive and embraces all branches of Islamic knowledge. This
school has been able to produce brilliant scholars who have drawn
inspiration from this rich and pure resource.

It has presented to the Muslim *ummah* many scholars who, following in
the footsteps of Imāms (as) who belong to the Prophet’s Household (Peace
be upon them), have provided convincing answers to the questions and
doubts raised by various schools and intellectual friends within and
outside the Muslim nation. Throughout the past centuries, these scholars
have given well reasoned answers and clarifications to these questions
and doubts.

To meet the responsibilities assigned to it, the *Ahl al–Bayt* World
Assembly (ABWA) has undertaken to defend the Islamic message and its
verities, often obscured by the followers of various sects and by the
proponents of the trends which show hostility to Islam. The Assembly
follows in the footsteps of *Ahl al–Bayt* (as) and the followers of
their rightly guided school of thought which has been ready to confront
these challenges and be in the frontline in consonance with the demands
of every age.

The arguments contained in the works of the scholars belonging to the
School of the *Ahl al–Bayt* (as) are of unique significance because they
are based on genuine knowledge, appeal to reason, and avoid prejudice
and bias. These arguments address scholars and thinkers in a manner that
appeals to minds and wholesome human nature.

To assist the seekers of truth, the *Ahl al–Bayt* World Assembly has
endeavoured to present a new phase of these rich arguments through the
studies and translations of contemporary Shia writers and of those who
have embraced this sublime school of thought through divine blessing.

The Assembly is also engaged in the edition and publication of the
valuable works of the leading Shia scholars of earlier ages to assist
the seekers of the truth to discover the truths which the School of the
Prophet’s Household (P.b.u.th) has offered to the entire world.

The *Ahl al–Bayt* World Assembly looks forward to benefitting from the
opinions suggestions and constructive criticism of the readers in this
area.

We beseech God, the Most High, to accept our humble efforts and enable
us to enhance them under the auspices of Imām al–Mahdī, His vicegerent
on the earth (may Allah expedite his advent).

We express our gratitude to Mr. Rida Kardan the author of the present
book, and Sayyid Iraj Razzaqi, its translator. We also thank our
colleagues who have participated in producing this work, especially the
staff of the Translation Office.

**Cultural Affairs Department**

**The Ahl al–Bayt (as) World Assembly**


