Bibliography
============

1. The Glorious Qur’an.

2. *Al–Itqan*, Suyuti; died in 911 A.H.; Dar–ibn –Katheer; Beirut.

3. *Ihqaq al–Haqq*, Qazi Sayyid Nur Allah Tustari; martyred in 1019 A.H.

4. *Ahkam al–Qur’an,* Jessas, printed in 370 A.H.

5. *Ahkam al–Qur’an,* Abu Bakr ibn Al–Arabi al–M’afiri died in 546 A.H.

6. *Arba’in*, Mohammad ibn Abi al–Fawaris, manuscript; Astan–Quds
Razavi, index number 8443.

7. *Arajah al–Matalib*, Abdullah al–Hanafi, died in l381 A.H.; Lahur (as
quoted by Ihaq al–Haqq).

8. *Irshad al–Aql al–Salim*, Abul Su’ud*,* died in 951 A.H.; Dar Ihya’
al–Turath al–Arabi; Beirut; Lebanon.

9. *Asbab al–Nozool*, Wahidi al–Nisaburi; died in 468 A.H.; Dar al–Kutub
al–Ilmiyyeh; Beirut; Lebanon.

10. *Asad al–Gabah* *fi Ma’rifat al–Sahabah; ibn* Athir; died in 630
A.H.; Dar Ihya’ al–Turath al–Arabi; Beirut; Lebanon.

11. *Al–Isabah fi Tamiyeez al–Sahabah*; Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Hajar
Asqalani; died in 852 A.H.; Dar al–Fikr.

12. *Adhwa’ al–Bayan*, Shanqiti; died in1393 A.H..; Alam al–Kutub;
Beirut.

13. *A’yah al–Shi’ah*, Sayyid Muhsin al–Amin; died in1372 A.H.; Darl–
l–T’aruf lil Matbu’at; Beirut.

14. *Al–Imamah wa al–Siyasah*; ibn Qutaybah Dinwari; died in 376 A.H.,
Al–Sharif al–Radi Publications Qom.

15. *Ansab al–Ashraf*, Ahmad ibn Yahya Balaziri; born in 279 A.H. Dar
al–Fikr.

16. *Izah al–Maknun*, Isma’il Basha; born in 463 A.H., Dar al–Fikr.

17. *Bihar al–Anwar*, Mohammad Baqir Majlisi; born in 1111 A.H.; Al–Wifa
Institute, Beirut.

18. *Bahr al–Ulum* , Nasr ibn Mohammad Samarqandi; born in 375 A.H.; Dar
al–Kutub al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

19. *Al–Bahr al–Muheet*, Abu Hayan Andulusi; died in 754 A.H.;
al–Maktabat al–Tijariyyah of Ahmad al–Baz; Mecca.

20. *Al–Bidayah wa al–Nihayah*, ibn Katheer al-Dimashqi; died in 774
A.H. Dar al–Kutub al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

21. *Al–Burhan*, Sayyid Hashim Bahrani; died in 1107 A.H. Ismailiyan
Press.

22. *Al–Bahjat al–Marziyyeh*, Suyuti, died in 911; Maktibat al–Mufid;

23. *Al–Taj al–Jami’ lil–Usol*; Mansur Ali Nasif; died in1371 A.H.; Dar
Ihya al–Turath al–Arabi, Beirut.

24. *Taj al–Firdaws*, Sayyid Mohammad Murtada al–Husaini Zubaydi; died
in 1250 A.H.; Dar al–Hidayah Lil–Tiba’ah wal Nashr wal Tawzi’; Maktibat
al–Hayat, Beirut.

25. *Tarikh al–Islam*, Sham al–Din Dhahabi; died in 748 A.H. Dar
al–Kitab al–Arabi.

26. History of Baghdad; Ahmad ibn Ali Khatib Baghdadi died in 463; Dar
al–Firkr.

27. *Tarikhal–Tabari*, Mohammad ibn Jariral–Tabari; died in 310 A.H., Iz
al–Din lil Tiba’ah wal–Nashr, Beirut, Lebanon.

28. *The History of Damascus*, ibn Asakr; died in 571 A.H., Dar al–Fikr,
Beirut.

29. *The History of Nayshabur*, Abd al–Gafir Nayshaburi; died in 529
A.H..

30. Dhahabi’s *Tadhkirat al–Huffaz*, died in 748 A.H. Dar al–Kutub
al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut, Lebanon.

31. *Tadhkirat al–Khawas*, Sibt ibn Jawzi; died in 654 A.H. printed in
Najaf.

32. *Al–Tasheel li–Uloom al–Tanzeel*, ibn Hazi al–Kalbi, died in 292
A.H.; Dar al–Kitab al–Arabi, Beirut.

33. *Tafsir ibn Abi Hatam* Abdul Rahman ibn Mohammad Idrisi al–Razi,
died in 327 A.H.; al–Maktabat al–Misriyyah, Beirut.

34. *Tafsir al–Baydawi*, Qazi Baydawi; died in 791 A.H..

35. *Tafsir al–Khazin* (Lubab al–Ta’wil)*, Ala’Din Baghdadi*, died in
725 A.H.; Dar al–Fikr.

36. *Tafsir* Ali ibn Ibrahim Qommi, died towards the end of the 3rd
century A.H.; Najaf press.

37. *Tafsir al–Qur’an al–Azim*, ibn Katheer; died in 774 A.H.; Dar
al–Ma’rifah, Beirut.

38. *Al–Tafsir al–Kabeer*, Fakhr al–Razi; died in 606 A.H.; Dar Ihya’
al–Turath al–Arabi, Beirut, Lebanon.

39. Tafsir al–Mawardi, Mohammad ibn Habib al–Mawardi al– Basri; died 450
A.H.; Dar al–Ma’rifah, Beirut.

40. *Tafsir al–Nasfi* (Madarik al–Tanzeel wa Haqayeq al–Ta’weel);
Hashiyeh Tafsir Khazin, Abdullah al–Nasfi; died in 710 A.H. Dar al–Fikr.

41. *Tafsir al–Manar*, Rashid al–Rida, died in 1354 A.H.; Dar
al–Ma’rifah, Beirut.

42. *Talkhis al–Mustadrak*, Dhahabi, died 748 A.H. Dar al–Ma’rifah,
Beirut.

43. *Tahdhib* *al*–*Tahdhib*, ibn Hajar Asqalani; died in 852 A.H. Dar
al–Fikr.

44. *Tahdhib al–Kamal*, Mozzi; died in 742 A.H., Al–Risalah Institute
Beirut.

45. *Jami’ al–Ahadith*, Suyuti; died in 911 A.H. Dar al–Fikr;

46. *Jami’ al–Bayan*, Mohammad ibn Jariral–Tabari; died in 310 A.H. Dar
al–Ma’rifah, , Beirut, Lebanon.

47. *Jami’ Ahkam al–Qur’an*, Qortobi; died in 671; Dar al–Fikr.

48. *Al–Jami’ al–Sahih al–Tirmidhi*; Mohammad ibn Isa; died in 279; Dar
al–Fikhr.

49. *Jami’ al–Jawami’,* Suyuti; died in 911 A.H..

50. *Jamharat al–Luqah*, ibn Durayt; died in 321 A.H..

51. *Al–Jawahir al–Hisan*, Abu Zayd al–Tha’alabi; died in 876 A.H. Dar
Ihya’ al–Turath al–Arabi, Beirut.

52. *Jawahir al–-Aqdayn*, Samhoodi, died in 911 A.H.; Dar al–Kutub
al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

53. *Al–Hawi Lil–Fatawi*, Suyuti; died in 911 A.H.; Maktibat al–Quds;
Cairo (quoted by Ihqaq al–Haqq).

54. *Hashiyato Shahab* *Ala Tafsir al–Baydawi*, Ahmad Khafaji, al–Misri,
the Hanafite; died in 1069 A.H. Dar Ihya’ al–Turath al–Arabi, Beirut.

55. *Hashiyato Sawi Ala Tafssir al–Jalalayn*, Sheikh Ahmad al–Sawi
al–Maliki; died in 1241 A.H., Dar al–Fikr.

56. *Hilyatol Awliya*, Abu Na’im Isfahani; died in 430 A.H. Dar al–Fikr.

57. *Khasa’is Amir al–Mumenin* (as) Ahmad ibn Shuayb Nasaii; died in 303
A.H.; Dar al–Kitab al–Arabi.

58. Khisal, Mohammad ibn Ali ibn Babiwayh Qommi (Saduq); died in 381
A.H.; published by Intisharat Islami.

59. Safinatol Bihar, Sheikh Abbas Qommi; died 1359 A.H.; Mahmudi Press.

60. *Al–Sunan al–Kubra*, Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn al–Husain Beihaqi, died in
458 A.H.; Dar al–Ma’rifah, Beirut.

61. *Al–Sunan al–Kubra*, Nisa’i; died 303 in 303 A.H.; Dar al–Kutub
al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

62. *Siyar A’lam al–Nubalah*, Dhahabi; died in 748; Al–Risalah
Institute, Beirut, Lebanon.

63. *Al–Siratol Nabawiyeh* *wa al–Athar al–Mohammadiyyah* (Hashiyatol
Huluwiyeh), Sayyid Zayni Dahlan; died 1304; Dar Ihya’ al–Turath
al–Arabi, Beirut, Lebanon.

64. *Al–Siratol Nabawiyeh*, ibn Hisham; died in 218 A.H. Dar Ihya’
al–Turath al–Arabi, Beirut, Lebanon.

65. *Al–Tajrid Commentary*, Qushchi, died in 879 A.H..

66. *Al–Sunna Commentary*, Bagawi, died in 510 A.H.; Al–Maktab
al–Islami, Beirut.

67. *Al–Maqasid Commentary*, Taftazani, died in 793, A.H.; Asharif
al–Radi Publications.

68. *Sharh al–Mawaqif*, Jorjani; died in 812 A.H.; Asharif al–Radi
publications.

69. *Nahjul Balagah Commentary*; ibn Abil Hadid, died in 656 A.H..

70. *Shawahid al–Tanzeel*, Hakim Hasakani, died towards the end of 5th
century A.H.; al–Tab’ wan Nashr Institute.

71. *Sihah al–Lugah*, Jawhari, died in 393 A.H..

72. *Ibn Habban’s Sahih*, Mohammad ibn Habban Basti, died in 354 A.H.,
al–Risalah Institute.

73. *Bukhari Sahih’s*, Mohammad ibn Ismail Bukhari, died in 256 A.H. Dar
al–Qalam, Beirut, Lebanon; Dar al–Ma’rifah, Beirut, Lebanon.

74. *Muslim Sahih’s*, Muslim ibn Hajaj Nayshaburi, died in 261 A.H.,
Izo–din Institute Lil–tiba’ wan Nashr, Beirut, Lebanon.

75. *As–Salat wal Bushra*, Firoozabadi, died in 817 A.H.; Dar al–Kutub
al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut, Lebanon.

76. *As–Sawa’q al–Muhriqa*, ibn Hajar Haytami, died in 954 A.H.;
Maktabat al–Qahirah.

77. *Al–Tabaqat al–Kubra*, ibn Sa’d, died in 230 A.H., Dar–Beirut
Lil–tiba’ wan Nashr.

78. *Al–Tara’if*, Ali ibn Musa Tawus, died 662 A.H. Matba’at al–Khayyam,
Qom.

79. *Al–Umdeh*, ibn Batriq, died 533 A.H. al–Nashr al–Islami Institute.

80. *'Awwam Ulum*, Sayyid Hashim Bahrani, died 1107 A.H.; al–Imam
al–Mahdi Institute.

81. *Oyoon Akhbar al–Rida*, Saduq, died in 381 A.H.

82. *Ghayatol Maram*; Sayyid Hashim Bahrani, died 1107 A.H.

83. *Gara’ib al–Qur’an*, Nayshaburi, died in 850 A.H., Dar al–Kutub
al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

84. *Fath al–Bri,* ibn Hajar Asqalani, died in 852 A.H.

85. *Fath al–Ghadir*, Showkani, died in 1250 A.H., Dar al–Kutub
al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut, Lebanon.

86. *Fara’id al–Simtayn*, Ibrahim ibn Mohammad ibn Jowayni, died in 722,
al–Mahmoodi Lil–Tiba’ wan Nashr Institute, Beirut.

87. *Al–Fosool al–Muhimmeh*, ibn Sabag Maliki, died in 855 A.H.

88. *Faza’il al–Sahabah*, Samani, died in 562 A.H.

89. *Al–Qamoos al–Muheet*, Firoozabadi, died in 817 A.H., Dar
al–Ma’rifah, Beirut.

90. *Qawa’id fi Ulum al–Hadith*, Zafar Ahmad Tahanawi Shafi’i; reviewd
by Abul Fatah Abu Gudeh.

91. *Al–Kafi, Kulayni*, died in 329 A.H.; Dar al–Kutub al–Islamiyyah.

92. *As–Thiqat, ibn Habban*; died in 354 A.H., al–Kutub al–Thaqafiyyah
Institute, Beirut.

93. *Kitab al–Ayn*, Khalil ibn Ahmad Farahidi, died in 175 A.H. Dar
al–Hijrah Institute.

94. *Al–Kashshaf*, Zamakhshari, died in 583, Dar al–Kitab al–Arabi,
Beirut;

95. *Al–Kashf wal–Bayan*, Tha’alabi Naysaburi; died in 427 or 437 A.H.,
Dar Ihya’ al–Turath al–Arabi, Beirut, Lebanon.

96. *Kifayto–Talib*, Mohammad ibn Yusef Ganji Shafi’i, died in 658 A.H.
Dar Ihya’ Turath Ahl–Bayt.

97. *Kamal al–Deen*, Mohammad ibn Ali ibn Babiwayh, died in 381 A.H..

98. *Kanz al–Ummal*, Muttaqi Hindi, died in 975 A.H., al–Risalah
Institute, Beirut.

99. *Al–Lubab fi Ulum al–Kitab*, Umar ibn Ali ibn Adil al–Damishqi
al–Hanbali, d. 880 A.H., Dar al–Kutub al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

100. *Lisan al–Arab*, ibn Manzur, died in 711 A.H. Dar Ihya’ al–Turath
al–Arabi, Beirut, Lebanon.

101. *Ma Nazala min al–Qur’an fi Ali*, Abu Bakr al–Shirazi, died in 407,
A.H..

102. *Ma Nazala min al–Qur’an fi Ali*, Abu Na’im Isfahani, died in 430
A.H. (as quoted by Ihqaq).

103. *Al–Mutafiq wal Mutafariq*, Khatib Baghdadi, died in 463 (through
Kanz al–Ummal).

104. *Majma’ al–Bahrayn*, Turayhi, died in 1085 A.H. Nashr–e Farhanq
Islami Office.

105. *Majma’ al–Bayan*, Tabarsi, died in 560 A.H. Dar al–Ma’rifah,
Beirut.

106. *Majma’ al–Zawaid*, Haythami, died in 807 A.H. Dar al–Kitab
al–Arabi, Dar al–Fikr, Beirut.

107. *Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihyan*, Hakim Nayshabur, died in 405 A.H.
Dar al–Ma’rifah, Beirut.

108. *Musnad of Abi Dawood Tayalisi*, died in 204 A.H., Dar al–Kitab
al–Lobnany.

109. *Musnad of Abi Ya’li Musili*, died in 307 A.H..

110. *Musnad of Ahmad*, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, died in 241 A.H., Dar Sadir,
Beirut, Dar al–Fikr.

111. *Musnad of Ishaq* *ibn* *Rahuyah*, died in 238 A.H., Maktabat
al–Iman, Madina.

112. *Musnad Abd ibn Hamid*, died in 249, A.H.; Alam al–Kutub.

113. *Mushkil al–Athar*, Tahawi, died in 321, A.H. Majlis Da’ratol
Ma’arif al–Nizamiyyah bil Hind.

114. *Al–Misbah al–Muneer*, Ahmad Fayoomi, died in 770 A.H.; printed by
Mustafa al–Babi al–Halabi wa Awladah, Egypt.

115. *Misbah al–Hidayah*, Bihbihani, Salman Fari Press, Qom.

116. *Al–Musannaf*, ibn Abi Shaybah, died in 235 A.H..

117. *Matalib al–Suool*, ibn Talha Nasibi Shafii, died in 652 A.H.

118. *Ma’alim al–Tanzeel*, Baghawi, died in 210 A.H..

119. *Al–Mo’jam al–Awsat*, Tabrani, died 360 A.H..

120. *Al–Mo’jam al–Sageer*,Tabrani, died in 360 A.H..

121. *Al–Mo’jam al–Kabir*, Tabrani, died 360 A.H..

122. *Al–Mo’jam al–Mukhtas* bi *Muhaddithin*, Dhahabi, died in 748 A.H.
Maktabat al–Siddiqh, Saudi.

123. *Mo’jam Maqaiis al–Lugha*, ibn Faris ibn Zakariya al–Qazwini
al–Razi, died in 390 A.H..

124. *Ma’rifahto Uloom al–Hadith*, Hakim Nayshaburi, died in 405 A.H.,
Dar al–Kutub al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

125. *Al–Ma’rifah wa al–Tarikh*, Ya’qub ibn Sufyan ibn Baswi, died in
277 A.H..

126. *Mugni al–Labib*, ibn Hisham, died in 761 A.H. Dar al–Kutub
al–Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

127. *Al–Mufradat*, Ragib Isfahani, died in 502 A.H..

128. *Maqtal al–Husain*, Khwarizmi, died in 568 A.H., Maktabat al–Mufid

    129 *. Al–Manaqib*, Mowafaq ibn Ahmad Khwarizmi, died in 568 A.H..

    130 *Manaqib of ibn Magazili the Shafi’i*, died in 483, al–Maktabat
al–Islamiyyah.

    131 *Manqib Ali Al Abi Talib*, ibn Shahr Ashoob, died in 588 A.H.,
Dhawil Qurba.

    132 *Muntaha al–Arab*, Abdul Rahim ibn Abdul Karim al–Hindi, died in
1257 A.H..

    133 *Al–Mizan*, Mohammad al–Husain Tabatabii, died in 1402, Dar
al–Kutub al–Islamiyyah.

    134. *Mizan al–I’tidal*, Dhahabi, died in 748 A.H. Dar al–Fikr.

    135. *Nahj al–Balaghah.*

    136. *Nazm Durar al–Simtayn*, Mohammad ibn Yusef Zarandi al–Hanafi.

    137. *Al–Nihayeh*, ibn al–Atheer Jazri, died in 606 A.H.,
al–Maktabahul Ilmiyyeh, Beirut, Lebanon.

    138. *Noor al–Absar*, Shiblinji, died in 1308, Dar al–Fikr.

    139. *Noor al–Thaqalayn*, al–Howayzi, died in 1112 A.H.,
al–Matba’tol Ilmiyyah, Qom.

    140. *Yanabi al–Mawadeh*, Sheikh Sulayman Qundozi.


