Chapter 2: Imamate in the Qur’anic Verse of Mubahalah
=====================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَمَنْ حَاجَّكَ فِيهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ ما جاءَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ
تَعالَوْا نَدْعُ أَبْناءَنا وَ أَبْناءَكُمْ وَ نِساءَنا وَ نِساءَكُمْ
وَ أَنْفُسَنا وَ أَنْفُسَكُمْ ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَلْ لَعْنَتَ
اللَّهِ عَلَى الْكاذِبِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****So, whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come
to you of the knowledge, then sa Come, We will call our sons and your
sons and our women and your women and our souls and your souls, then we
will pray humbly*** **(*****to our Lord*****)*****, and***
**(*****solemnly*****)** ***invoke for the curse of Allah upon those who
lie*****”*****. (3:61)***

The Christians of Najran and Their False Claim
----------------------------------------------

The above Qur’anic verse refers to the Christians of Najran, who
considered Jesus Christ, peace be on him, a deity and assumed that his
having no father is a sign of his being a deity. The Qur’anic verse
preceding the afore mentioned verse refutes their claim.

“***Surely the likeness of Jesus is with Allah as the likeness of Adam;
He created him from dust, then said to him, Be, and he was*****”
(3:59)**

The verse above tells the Christians that if Jesus’ birth of no father
is a sign of his being a deity as they claim, then Adam (as) is worthier
of being a deity because he was born of no father and no mother. But the
Christians would not accept the truth however compelling the argument
was. Thus, the Prophet was ordered to invite them to *mubahalah*. (A
contest of prayer to God)

Although there are many things to discuss in the Qur’anic verse of
*mubahalah*, we will consider here certain issues concerning the
Household of the Prophet (saws), particularly ‘Ali (as), who accompanied
the Prophet to the *mubahalah*. These issues are concerned with the
following:

1. Who was the Prophet (saws) assigned to invite to *mubahalah*?  
 2. What was the aim of their presence?  
 3. In compliance with the divine order mentioned in the verse, who did
the Prophet take with him?  
 4. Clarifying the rank of ‘Ali (as) referred to in the Qur’anic verse,
and his being “the Prophet’s soul” with traditions to support this
point.  
 5. Answering the questions posed about the stated verse.

### One: Those Accompanying the Prophet (saws) as in the Verse of Mubahalah

Concerning the first question about who the Prophet was supposed to
invite to *Mubahalah*, it is necessary to deliberate on two things:

a) To whom do “*our sons*” and “*our women*” refer?

b) Who are meant by “our souls”?

The verse:  
**“…*****Come! We call our sons and your sons…*****”**

Contains the plural noun “*sons*” preceded by “our”[^1] which refers to
the Prophet meaning that the Prophet has to invite at least three people
from among his sons.

Next comes the phrase “***our women and your women*****”,** in which the
plural form “*women*”, preceeded by “our” means that the Prophet has to
invite all the women of his Household (if the phrase is taken to mean
all of them), or at least three of them – which is the smallest number
in a plural noun in Arabic.

This discussion is intended to see to whom the words “*our sons, our
women and our souls*” refer and to examine the aim of *mubahalah*
(contest of the prayer to God). As for how many or who are the people to
whom the Qur’anic verse refers in the words “*our sons*” *and “our
women*” this will be discussed in a later section*.*

The plural noun “souls” preceded by “our”, which refers to the Prophet,
means that he has to invite to *mubahalah* at least three people whom he
considers as his soul.

#### Can “our souls” be referred to the Prophet (saws)?

The word “soul” in the phrase “*our souls*” literally means the blessed
soul of the Prophet (saws) but when we notice the context, we find that
it does not mean so. Let us consider the following indications:

1) The word “souls” is a plural form and a person has only one soul.

2) The statement, “***Then say Come! We will call*****”** makes it
incumbent on the Prophet to really issue a call, and the very speaker is
never meant by the word “call” when it is used in its real meaning; it
would be unreasonable to say that it is incumbent on one to call
oneself.

Therefore, those who imagine that in such examples like “فطوعت له نفسه”
or “دعوت نفسی”, the word “نفس”, meaning “soul or self”, and the very
speaker is concerned, have overlooked the fact that  
 Either the word “soul” is not used in its real meaning which refers to
the very person, or the word “call” is used figuratively.

For example, in the verse “فطوعت له نفسه قتل اخيه” – “*his soul prompted
him to slay his brother*” the real meaning of the word “soul” is man’s
inclination.

Likewise, the phrase means I prepared myself to do something, not *I
invited myself*. Thus, the word “دعوت” means something different from
“*inviting*”.

3. Since the holy Prophet has already referred to himself in the phrase
“*We call*”*,* there is no need for him to invite himself to
*mubahalah*.

### Two: the Aim of the Presence of the Prophet’s Family in Mubahalah

Why was the Prophet ordered to invite his family members to *mubahalah*
when the dispute was seemingly between two sides the very Prophet of
Islam (saws) and the representatives of Najran Christians?

Some maintain that the presence of the dearest of the Prophet’s close
relatives in *mubahalah*, merely expresses his certainty of and
confidence in the truth of his words and his claim. Such a decision will
not be wise unless one is completely certain of the truth of one’s words
and claim. If he had not had such confidence, he would have exposed his
relatives to the danger of annihilation and destruction, an act, which
no sensible person will do.

Such a justification cannot explain why the holy Prophet (saws) invited
from among all his relatives only the members of his family to attend
*mubahalah*, because if we suppose that the above view is true, the
event would seem an ordinary one and their accompanying the Prophet to
*mubahalah* would be of no value.

A deliberation on the Qur’anic verse and the *hadith*s on the verse of
*mubahalah* will reveal the overwhelming superiority of those who
accompanied the Prophet in this event.

a) Al–Zamakhshari, a great Sunni scholar says, that the verse of
“***mubahalah*** contains a strongest evidence about the superiority of
*Ashab al– Kisa*”[^2]

b) In his *Rooh al–M’ani*, al–Alusi says, “That the above Qur’anic verse
indicates the superiority of **Al–al–Allah** i.e. the Household of the
Prophet (saws),– is something which no believer can doubt; because
showing enmity towards them invalidates faith”.[^3]

Following this observation, al–Alusi, however, tries to say something
else about the superiority of the Prophet’s Household.[^4]

Now, let’s see why God, the Exalted, ordered that the Prophet’s family
should accompany the Prophet for *mubahalah*. In order to answer this
question, we to need refer to the Qur’anic verse that says,

“***Come! We will call our sons and your sons and our women and your
women and our souls and your souls, then will pray*** ***humbly***
**(*****to our Lord*****)*****, and*** **(*****solemnly*****)**
***invoke for the curse of Allah upon those who lie*****”*****.
(3:61)***

First comes the idea of inviting “*the sons*”*, “the women*” and “*the
souls*”*,* then their “humble praying” followed by “invoking for the
*curse of Allah upon* *those who lie*”*.*

#### The Highest Status of Prophet’s Family in the Verse of Mubahalah

Commentators of the Qur’an take ibtihal to mean “praying humbly” or
“uttering a curse”.  
 The Qur’anic verse deals with two things: *ibtihal* from which the word
*nabtihil* (we pray) is derived as well as invoking for the curse upon
liars as in the phrase

***“Then we will pray humbly for the curse of Allah upon those who
lie”.***

Each of these things has its particular objective concept. Also, the
latter i.e. “*invoking* *for* *the curse of Allah upon those who lie*”
is combined with the previous part, i.e “praying humbly” by using
“then”.

This means that praying humbly by the Prophet and his family represents
the cause and invoking for the curse of Allah as the effect. God’s
exposing disbelievers to dread torment due to the humbly praying of the
Prophet and his family, may God bless them, lends them a very high
status.

One may say that the letter **“ف”** meaning “then” in the Qur’anic
verse*, “***فنجعل لعنت الله** *then we will pray and invoke for the
curse of Allah upon those who lie*” in this particular case interprets
the sentence rather than indicates sequence, as in the Qur’anic verse 45
of chapter 11,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ نادى نُوحٌ رَبَّهُ فَقالَ رَبِّ إِنَّ ابْنِي مِنْ أَهْلِي﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Nuh cried out to his Lord and said: My Lord! Surely my son is of
my family*****”** **(11:45)**

Where the word “**ف** –then” is intended to explain the previous part
(i.e. explain why Nuh called his Lord). The answer to his claim is as
follows:

a) The letter “فا– then” indicates two things: ordering and grouping
which make the second part dependent on the first part. We can thus come
to the conclusion that the Qur’anic verse of *mubahalah* underlines the
elevated rank of the Prophet’s Household for it shows that their
*ibtihal* (praying humbly) is as important as that of the Prophet’s and
all this leads to exposing to God’s dread torment those who lie.

b) In the statement: “*then we pray for the* *curse of Allah upon those
who lie*”, the role of those who pray is (merely) to request from God
not to put curses upon the liars. Thus, invoking for the curse is
ascribed to the Prophet as well as his Household, may Gods bless them
all, and invoking for the curse is one of the effects of their *ibtihal*
as is indicated by the word “فا”.

This fact seems to have been grasped by the Christians of Najran too.
Al–Fakhr al–Razi mentions in his *Commentary*: “Having seen their
angelic faces, the Bishop of Najran was so impressed that he said, O
Christians! I behold faces (of people) who, if they ask God to erase a
mountain He will erase it. Therefore, do not dispute with them, lest you
should perish and then no Christian will exist on earth until the Day of
Judgment”.[^5]

A deliberation on this Qur’anic verse will reveal the following:

1. The holy Prophet (saws) had the members of his family attend the very
important *ibtihal* (contest of prayer) so that his and their family
invocation for the curse would be effective.  
 2. The faith and confidence of the Prophet and his family in his
message and invitation have become very evident.  
 3. Everyone has realized the most elevated position of the members of
the Prophet’s family and of their nearness to God.

We will see now who the Prophet meant by “*our sons*”*, “our women*”
*and “our souls*” and whom he took along for *mubahalah*.

### Three: Whom Did the Prophet Bring along to Mubahalah?

The Shi’ites and Sunnis unanimously hold that in order to participate in
*mubahalah* (the contest of prayer to God), the Prophet (saws) took no
one with him other than ‘Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and al–Husain, May God’s
blessing be on them. Here, the following points are worth considering:

a. There are traditions that confirm the presence of the members of the
Prophet’s family in the contest.  
 b. The authenticity of these traditions.  
 c. The *hadith*s recorded in some Sunni books of traditions and are
worth noticing.

Traditions (Hadiths) on the Participation of the Members of the Prophet’s Family in Mubahalah
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1) Hadiths in Sunni Resources

Since the present discussion is directed mainly to the Sunnis, the
traditions that follow are taken mostly from their *hadith* sources:

#### The First Tradition

Muslim has reported in his *Sahih*[^6], Tirmidhi in his *Sunan*[^7] and
Ahmad in his *Musnad*[^8]:

“Qotaibah ibn Sa’id and Mohammad ibn ‘Abbad have narrated from ‘Amir ibn
Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas, on the authority of his father (Sa’d ibn Abi
Waqqas) that the latter said: Mu’awiyyah asked Sa’d, “Why don’t you
curse Abu Turab (he meant Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him)?”

Saa’d answered: “I remember three outstanding merits that the Prophet
(saws) attributed to Ali (as). So I will never curse him. If I had only
one of these merits, it would be more valuable to me than my red hair
camels.

a) One day the Prophet (saws) wanted to set out for a military
expedition, and have Ali, peace on him, stay in Medina, so Ali said, “O
Messenger of God! Do you leave me to take care of the women and
children?” The Messenger of God replied, “Are you not content to be to
me what Aaron was to Moses, except that there will be no prophet after
me?”

b) During the battle of Khaybar, I heard the Prophet (saws) say, “I will
give the banner to someone who loves God and His Apostle, and whom God
and His Apostle love”. Sa’d added, “We were then craving for that. Then
the Prophet of God said, “Call Ali to come”.

When he came, the Prophet let some of his saliva go into Ali’s eyes (to
cure him of eye–ache),

submitted the standard to him, and then God granted victory to Muslims
at his hands”.

c) “When the Qur’anic verse

***‘Then say, ‘Come, we will call our sons and your sons…”***

was revealed, the Prophet (saws) asked Ali and Fatimah, al–Hasan and
al–Husain (p.b.u.th.), to come and said, “O God, these are *Ahli* (my
family).

#### What can be inferred from the aforementioned tradition?

1. The last words of the Prophet: “O God, these are my family” confirm
the idea that “*our sons*”, “*our women*” and “*our souls*” in the
Qur’anic verse refer to the Prophet’s family.

2. Each of these words: “*sons*”*, “women*” *and “souls*” is in the
plural from, as a result the Prophet had to invite to *mubahalah* all
the sons and women of his family and those who are like himself, whereas
he invited only “Hasan and al–Husain” for his “*sons*”*, “Fatimah*” for
his “*women*” and “*Ali,* peace be on him” for his “souls”

An event signifying that it is only these people whom the Prophet meant
by *Ahli* (my family), and so his wives are not included.

3. The words “*Ahl*” and “*Ahl al–Bayt*” technically mean only the five
people known as “*Ashab al–Kisa*”*,* as is clearly demonstrated by a
large number of the Prophet’s traditions relating to the verse of
*Tatheer* and proclaimed in other occasions.

#### The Second Tradition

In his *al–Tafseer al–Kabeer*, a Qur’an commentary, when Fakhr al–Razi
comes to the verse of *mubahalah* he states:

“It has been recounted that after the Prophet (saws) had presented to
Najran Christians proofs (concerning his divine mission) and they
persisted on their ignorance, he said to them, “God, the Almighty, has
informed me to have *mubahalah* (a contest of prayer) with you if you do
not accept the proofs”.

“O Abu al–Qasim, we will return (to our tribe) to consider (what you
say) and come to you later” they said.

Having gone back to their tribe, they asked *al–aqib,* who was their
advisor, called Abd al–Masih*,* to give them his opinion on the issue.
He said, “O Christians! You know Mohammad, and you know that he is a
prophet sent by Allah, and he has said the truth as regards your
prophet, Jesus Christ.

By God! No people have ever had a contest of prayer with a prophet
unless their younger ones and older ones were annihilated. If you have
contest of prayer to God, you will all die. If you are determined to
abide by your religion, leave him and go back to your land”.

When the Prophet (saws) came out (of Medina), he carried al–Husain (as)
in his lap and held al–Hasan (as) by the hand, while Fatimah, God’s
blessing on her, was following him, and Ali, peace be on him came next.
The Prophet (saws) said, “When I pray to God, say: ‘*Amen!’* “

The bishop of Najran said, “O Christians! I behold faces (of people)
who, if they ask God to erase a mountain, He will erase it. Therefore,
do not dispute with them lest you should perish and then no Christian
will exist on earth until the Day of Judgment.

The bishop of Najran said, “O Abu al–Qasim, we have decided not to have
a contest of prayer with you and we acknowledge you as a prophet”. The
Prophet (saws) said, “If you refuse to have a contest of prayers, you
can profess Islam and share Muslims’ faith” but, they refused. He (saws)
said, “Then, there will be war between us”.

They said, “We are too weak to fight the Arabs. We are ready to
compromise with you (that you) will not make us break away with our
religion and in return, we will annually give you two–thousand dirham
worth of silk clothes in the month of Safar and one–thousand worth of
them in the month of Rajab in addition to thirty protective
breastplates”.

So, the Prophet (saws) accepted their proposal and said “By the One in
whose hand my life is impending destruction was awaiting the people of
Najran. If *mubahalah* had been held, they would have transformed into
monkeys and pigs, the valley in which they are would have been burnt,
and all the Christians would have died before the year ends and no bird
would have remained on the trees”.

It has been reported that when the Prophet (saws) left Medina he had a
black cloak on (*kisa*)*.* When al–Hasan arrived, the Prophet (saws) let
him go inside it. Then came al–Husain (as), and he (the Prophet) also
let him go inside it.

Then came Ali(as) and Fatimah (sa) and joined them respectively. So, the
Prophet recited,

“***Allah only desires to keep away uncleanness from you, O people of
the House, and purify you a*** **(*****thorough*****)**
***purifying*****”*****.*** (33:33)

“This tradition has been confirmed as authentic and correct by
traditionists and authorities on Qur’an commentary”.[^9]

#### What can be inferred from the aforementioned Tradition?

1. The tradition describes the way the Prophet’s family, God bless them
all, were moving along for the contest of prayer as follows: Carrying
al–Husain (as), who was still a child, the Prophet led the procession
holding the hand of al–Hasan (as), who was not much older than al–Husain
(as).

Then came Fatimah (sa), his dear daughter, followed by Ali (as), God’s
blessing on them. This striking array, quite in line with the verse of
*mubahalah*, has the following aspects:

a) The sequence they followed matches that which is mentioned in the
verse of *mubahalah* –that is, “*our son*”, “*our women*” and “*our
souls*”, respectively.

b) The way the Prophet (saws) carried his youngest son, al–Husain ibn
Ali (as) to his bosom, and held the hand of his other young son,
al–Husain ibn Ali (as) is a precise definition of “*our sons*” in the
verse*.*

c) Having in between Fatimah (sa), peace be upon her, the only person in
the group to which “*our women*” refers gives her protection and veil,
which can be a good explanation of “*our women*” in the verse.

2. The Prophet (saws) told the members of his family to say: “Amen!”
after he prayed to God; the very idea which is referred to in the above
verse as: “then we will pray humbly for the curse of God upon those who
lie”.

In order to actualize the *ibtihal* and make the divine punishment
befall those who lie, the contest was not to be performed only by the
Prophet (saws) but by the Prophet as well as those who were told, i.e.
to say: “Amen!”

3. The Christians’ acknowledgment of the high position of the members of
the Prophet’s family when they saw them and finally their decision not
to have *mubahalah* (contest of prayer to God) with the Prophet and
those who accompanied him.

#### The Third Tradition

Another tradition confirming that “*our son*”*, “our women*” and “*our
souls*” refer to no one other than Ali, Fatimah al–Hasan and al–Husain,
is called مناشدة يوم الشوری. *Monashadat Yawm al–Shura.* The Commander
of the Faithful, Ali, peace be on him, mentions his merits before the
members of the consultative assembly, namely Uthman ibn Affan, Abd
al–Rahman ibn ‘Awf, Talha, Zubayr, and Sa’di ibn Abi Waqass.

This assembly finally elected Uthman to caliphate. In this meeting
whenever Ali, peace be on him, mentioned one of his merits the members
of the assembly confessed and swore that the merits are exclusively
ascribed to him. The tradition is as follows:

“Asim ibn Zamrah has related from Hubayrah, on the authority of Amr ibn
Wathala, that he said, ‘On the day when the consultative assembly was
held, Ali, peace be on him, addressing Uthman, Abd al–Rahman ibn ‘Awf,
al–Zubayr, Talha and Sa’ad, said, “I will advance to them very
convincing arguments which no one from *Quraysh*, the Arab, or the
non–Arab can refute.

I adjure you by God, the One – to say if there is anyone from among you
who had professed the Unity of God before I did”.

“By God, there is no one”. They said.

‘I adjure you by God to tell me if there is anyone –other than me– whom
the Prophet has made his brother when he made me to him what Aaron was
to Moses, except that I am not a prophet?”

“There is no one”. They said.

“I adjure you by God to tell me if there is anyone other than me who has
been purified, when the Prophet, God bless him and his family, ordered
that the doors of all houses be closed except the door of my house in
addition to my constant presence beside him in his house and in the
mosque and when his uncle (Abbas) stood up and said ‘O Prophet of God!
You closed the doors of all our houses but left Ali’s door open’, and
the Prophet (saws) answered, ‘It is God who ordered the door of his
house be left open and the doors of your houses be closed”.

They confirmed Ali’s words.

“I adjure you by God to tell me if there is anyone other than me who is
most loved by God and His messenger, a fact which was stated by the
Prophet on the day of Khaybar when he, God bless him and his family,
submitted the banner to me and said,

“I will give the banner to one who loves God and His apostle and is
loved by God and his apostle’ and when he (saws) wanted to eat the bird
and called upon God to bring to him the person most loved by God to eat
with him and I arrived”.

They said, “By God, there is no one”.

“I adjure you by God to tell me if there is anyone –other than me– who
helped the poor while praying in his whispered prayer until God
abrogated this injunction?”

They said “By God there is none”.

“I adjure you by God to tell me if there is anyone –other than me– who
killed the unbelievers of *Quraysh* and Arab for the sake of God and His
Messenger?”

“By God, there is one”.

“I adjure you by God to tell me, if there is anyone among you for whom
the Prophet (saws) prayed to increase his knowledge and to be his
hearing ear, as he did for me?” “By God there is no one”. They said.

“I adjure you by God to tell me if there is anyone among you who is
closer to the Prophet in kinship than I am, or whom the Prophet called
“my soul”, or whose sons the Prophet called “my sons?” They said “By
God, there’s no one”.

As we see, the above narration establishes the idea that the Prophet
(saws) had taken along only Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and al–Husain (as)
for the prayer of contest as God had ordered him to.

#### The Authenticity of the Traditions

The stated narrations taken from Sunni sources prove our viewpoint.
Regarding the authenticity of these narrations, which state that the
people who participated in *mubahalah* (contest of prayer) beside the
Prophet were exclusively the five pure members from the house of the
Prophet, (Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan, and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.)),

We quote Hakim Nayshaburi’s words on page fifty of his *Ma’rifat Uloom
al–Hadith.*[^10] He first mentions ibn Abbas’s report on the revelation
of the verse of *mubahalah*, indicating that “our soul” refers to Ali
(as), “our women” to Fatimah, and “our sons” to al–Hasan (as) and
al–Husain (as).

Then, he states that the narrations that have been related from ibn
Abbas and others in this concern are authenticated and that the Prophet
pointed to his Household and said, “These are our sons, our souls and
our women”.

It would be impossible for us to cite, in this short book, all the
relevant narrations reported from the Prophet’s companions such as Jabir
ibn Abdillah, ibn Abbas and the Commander of the Faithful. Therefore, we
have listed in the footnote the sources in which such narrations are
included[^11].

### 2) The Traditions of Imamiyyah Shi’ites

There is a large number of Shi’ite reports on this event. We will
mention only a few of them.

#### The First Tradition

Imam al–Sadiq, (as) is quoted to have said, when “Najran Christians came
to visit the Prophet, their arrival coincided with the time of prayer.
They chimed their bells and performed their ritual prayers in their own
way. So the companions of the Prophet said, ‘Look, Messenger of Allah!
Can’t you see what they are doing here, in your mosque”. He replied,
‘Let them do what they like’.

When they finished their prayers, the Christians came to the Prophet
(Ssaws) and asked ‘What do you invite us for?’ He said, ‘For worshipping
God, the One, and professing that I am Allah’s Messenger and Jesus is a
servant of God and His creature, who eats, drinks and (satisfies his
needs)**’**

They inquired, ‘If he is a servant of God, who is his father, then?’ The
Prophet saws) was inspired to ask them about Adam, and say ‘Wasn’t Adam
a servant of God, created by Him and ate and drank, and got married,
too?

They said, ‘Yes’. Then, the following verse was revealed:

“***Surely the likeness of Isa is with Allah as the likeness of Adam; He
created him from dust, then said to him, Be, and he was*****”*****.***
***(3:59)***

*“**But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and
our women and your women and our souls and your souls…*****” (3:61)**

So, the Prophet (saws) invited them for *mubahalah* (a contest of
prayer)**.** If what I say is right, chastisement will befall you; if
what I say is false, it will catch me.’

‘What a fair judgment!” They said, and a time was appointed for the
contest of prayer. When they returned home their chiefs said to them,
“If Mohammad (saws) comes with his people, we knew that he is not a
prophet and we will have *mubahalah* (contest of prayer) with him, but
if he comes with the members of his family we won’t”.

The following morning they came and saw that the Prophet (saws) was
accompanied by the Commander of the Faithful, Fatimah, al–Hasan and
al–Husain (as).

‘Who are they?’ they asked.

The answer was ‘They are Ali ibn Abi Talib, the Prophet’s cousin,
inheritor and son–in–lawFatimah (sa) his daughter; and the two children
are al–Hasan and al–Husain (as).’

The Christians decided not to have *mubahalah* (contest of prayer), and
said to the Prophet, ‘We will agree to do that which will please you.
Excuse us from having the contest of prayer.’

The Prophet agreed on a compromise agreement, and it was decided that
the Christians pay *jiziyyeh*.[^12]

#### The Second Tradition

In his *al–Burhan*, Sayyid al–Bahrani who relates from ibn Babaway from
Imam al–Rida, peace be on him, states that in his talk with Ma’mun and
some learned men about the difference between the Prophet’s Household
(*itrah*) and the community (*ummah*) and the superiority of (*itrah*)
over *ummah* Imam al–Rida points to the fact that concerning those
enjoying the divine purity, God says in the Qur’anic verse:

***‘Then say, ‘Come, we will call our sons and your sons and our women
and your women and our souls and your souls…*****”**

The scholars who were present said that the very Prophet (saws) is meant
by ‘our souls’. Imam al–Rida (as) said to them, “You are mistaken. By
*our souls* Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) is meant because the Prophet (saws)
once said, ‘If the people of *Wali*’ tribe do not abandon what they are
doing, I will dispatch someone similar to me, *ka–nafsi.* By “*our
sons*” al–Hasan and al–Husain is meant, and by “*our women*” Fatimah is
meant. ‘Ali’s being similar to the Prophet is superiority which no one
can have, a merit which no one can attain, and an honour which no one
can acquire.[^13]

#### The Third Tradition

It is reported that Harun al–Rasheed said to Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (as),
“You consider yourself to be the Prophet’s offspring, whereas one’s
progeny should descend from his son. You descend from the Prophet’s
daughter”.

Imam did not want to reply but Harun insisted that Imam present a proof
and said to him, ‘You have to present your proof. You claim to be Imam
Ali’s (as) progeny and you are fully versed in the Qur’an and there is
not a single letter in the Qur’anic verses which you do not know. You
have heard God’s words:

“***We have not neglected anything in the Book…*****”** **(6:38)**

And you claim you are not in need of the *ulama*’s verdict and the
analogy they follow.’

In answer to Harun, Imam recited the following Qur’anic verse:

“***and of his descendants, Dawood and Sulaiman and Ayub and Yusuf and
Haroon; and thus we reward those who do good*** **(*****to
others*****)*****… and Zakariya and Yahya and Isa and
Ilyas…*****”*****.*** ***(6:84-85)***

Imam then asked Harun, ‘Who was Jesus’s father?’ Harun answered, ‘Jesus
had no father.’ Imam said, ‘God has linked him to the Prophets through
Mary. He has likewise linked us to the Prophet (saws) through our
mother, Fatimah (sa), peace be on her.’

Presenting another evidence, Imam recited the verse of *mubahalah* verse
and said, ‘No one has ever claimed that the Prophet (saws) has admitted
anyone other than Ali (as), Fatimah (sa), Al–Hasan(as) and Al–Husain
(as) into his cloak on the day of *mubahalah* (prayer of contest).
Therefore, “*our sons*”, in the verse refers to al–Hasan and al–Husain
(p.b.u.th.), “*our women*” refers to Fatimah, peace be on her, and “*our
souls*” refers to Ali (as).[^14]

#### The Fourth Tradition

In his al–*Ikhtisas*, Sheikh Mufeed, relates from Imam Musa ibn Jaffar
(as) that he said, “The community, as a whole, unanimously hold that on
the day the Prophet (saws.) Invited Najran Christians to the contest of
prayer, no one was sitting under the *kissa* other than the Prophet,
Ali(as), Fatimah(sa), Al–Hasan(as) and Al–Husain(as).

Therefore, in the words of God, the Almighty, “***Then come, we will
call our sons and your sons, our women and your women, and our souls and
your souls*****”***, “our sons*” refer to al–Hasan and al–Husain, “*our
women*” to Fatimah, and “*our souls*” to Ali ibn Abi Talib, God’s peace
and blessing on them all.[^15]

##### Comments on Sheikh Mohammad Abdah and Rasheed al–Rida’s Remarks

The author of al–*Minar* commentary first says: “It has been reported
that the Prophet (saws.)  
 Singled out Ali (as), Fatimah (sa), and their two children, may God’s
peace and blessing be on them, to accompany him to the scene of the
prayer of contest and said, “When I pray, say: Amen!” Then, the author
briefly quotes Muslim and Tirmidhi and adds:

“(Our) master and imam (Sheikh Mohammad Abdah) says, “The narrations
unanimously maintain that the Prophet (saws) singled out Ali (as),
Fatimah (sa) and their children to participate in the prayer of contest
and that in the Qur’anic verse, the words “*our* women”, refers to
Fatima, and “*our souls*” to Ali (as)

But these narrations originally come from Shi’ite sources. (They have
forged these *hadiths*) and their objective is quite known. They do
their best, to propagate such accounts, a style which is in vogue among
most Sunnis, too.

Those who had forged such traditions were not able to properly associate
the verse with that to which it refers, because no Arabic dialect uses
the word “our women” to mean one’s daughter, especially when one has
wives. Their (interpretation) is not consistent with the standard Arabic
and to take “our souls” to mean Ali is quite impossible”.[^16]

How strange it is of Mohammad Abdah supposedly a great reformer and a
well versed man! On the one hand he admits that there is a large number
of reports and a consensus of opinion on the soundness of the
narrations, and on the other, he holds that they have been fabricated.
How can a Muslim, not to say a great scholar, so simply reject the truth
which is firmly rooted in the Prophetic practice?

If the narrations in *Sahihs* and *Masanid*, including Muslim’s *Sahih*,
which Sunnis consider to be one of the two most perfect books after the
Qur’an, are subject to criticism, then to what source can one refer in
order to accept or reject an issue related to Islamic schools of
thought?

Which narration can be taken as valid if they reject the *hadith* which
they themselves consider *mutawatir*? Should one accept or reject
narrations according to certain rules or according to one’s desire?
Won’t such observations disparage the Prophetic traditions?

Abdah has not pondered over the meaning of the Qur’anic verse and so, he
takes it for granted that “*our women*” refers to Fatimah, God’s peace
and blessing be on her, whereas it has been used in its literal meaning
and no one of the Prophet’s wives, nine at that time, had requirements
for such a high rank.

The only woman, who had this merit and was considered among his *Ahl
al–Bayt*, was Fatimah (sa), God’s peace and blessing be on her, who was
with the Prophet during the prayer of contest.

##### A Faked Narration Rejected by the Sunnis

The above mentioned narrations make clear that no one other than the
five pure persons people of *kisa* were taken along to the prayer of
contest. Thus, the narration which some books have quoted from ibn
Asaker reporting that the Prophet (saws) took with him Abu Bakr and his
children, Umar and his children, Uthman and his children, and Ali (as)
and his children, is by no means valid, for the following reasons:

a) In his *Rooh al–Ma’ani*,[^17] al–Alusi says, “This *hadith*
contradicts the narration of most scholars; therefore, it should be
discarded”.

b) In the chain of transmission of the (above) tradition, some narrators
accused of lying have been recognized. For example, Sa’id ibn ‘Anbasa
al–Razi, whom al–Dhahabi has mentioned, in his Mizan al–I’tidal.[^18] He
said that Yahya ibn Mo’in says, “Sa’id is a big liar”.

Also Abu Hatam says, “He does not tell the truth”. Another narrator in
the chain of transmission who is accused of lying is Haytham ibn ‘Uday
whom al–Dhahabi has mentioned in his Siyar A’lam al–Nobala,[^19] and
said, “Ibn Mo’in and ibn Dawood say, ‘He is a big liar “and al–Nisa’i
and others say that his traditions he has narrated should be discarded.”

Regrettably, the contents of the above mentioned fabricated *hadith*,
are ascribed to Imam Al–Sadiq (as) and Imam Al–Baqir (as).

### Four: Ali, peace be on him, is the Prophet’s soul

In the previous discussions, it was made clear that the phrase “*our
souls*” cannot be taken to mean the Prophet (saws) himself and since the
narrations already cited confirm that those who were present during the
contest of prayers were Ali (as), Fatimah (sa),Al–Hasan (as) and
Al–Husain (as), God’s blessing on them all, it follows that the phrase
“our soul” applies to no one other than Ali (as), and this is one of his
outstanding merits, or perhaps one of the most remarkable virtues.

In these Qur’anic words, Ali (as) is referred to as the Prophet’s
soul**.** Because an individual has only one soul, and because it will
be meaningless to say that Ali (as) is really the Prophet’s soul, it is
apparent that the word ‘soul’ is not used in its literal meaning, rather
it indicates his similarity (to the Prophet).

Since this similarity between them is absolute, it follows that Ali (as)
enjoys each and every attribute of perfection and dignity that the
Prophet (saws) has, except that which logic has excluded, and that is
being a prophet. Consequently he enjoys all the perfections and
particularities which the Prophet has, such as leadership over the
people and superiority over all human beings including the past
prophets.

Given this, the Qur’anic verse provides an evidence for the imamate of
Ali (as), his superiority over the community after the Prophet (saws)
and his outstanding precedence over other Prophets.

#### Fakhr al–Razi’s Comments on the Verse of Mubahalah

In his *al–Tafseer al–Kabir*, Fakhr al–Razi says:

“There lived in Ray a teacher who followed Twelver Shi’ism.[^20] he
maintained that Ali had priority over all prophets except Mohammad
(saws). This man used to say, ‘An indication of Ali’s superiority over
all the earlier prophets is the verse of *mubahalah* wherein God, the
Most High, says, “*and our souls and your souls*”.

This, “*Our souls*”*,* does not mean the Prophet (saws) himself because
one cannot call one’s self. Therefore, it implies someone else, namely
Ali ibn Abi Talib (as), peace be on him, an idea on which there is a
consensus of opinion.

The Qur’anic verse, therefore, means that Ali is the Prophet’s “soul”,
God bless them both. Since it is impossible for Ali (as) to be actually
the Prophet, the phrase naturally means this soul is similar to that
soul, which entails that both have the same characteristics except for
two things prophet hood, (*nubuwwat*) and Ali’s superiority over the
Prophet, because all agree that Ali (as) is not a prophet, nor is he
superior to the Prophet (saws).

He (Hamsi al–Razi) adds, ‘This argument is confirmed by a *hadith*
accepted by both supporters and opponents. In this *hadith* the Prophet
states,” If one desires to see Adam (as) in his knowledge, Noah (as) in
his piety, Ibrahim (as) in his friendship (with God), Moses in his awe
of God, Jesus (as) in his devotion to God, one can look at Ali, God’s
peace and blessing be on him’.

Fakhr al–Razi continues:

“Other learned Shi’ite scholars cite the stated Qur’anic verse as a
proof to support the idea that Ali, peace be on him, is superior to any
one of the Companions because when the Qur’anic verse considers Ali’s
soul similar to that of the Prophet’s (saws) except for what is excluded
by reason, and since the Prophet’s soul is superior to any one of the
companions’, then Ali’s soul. is superior to any one of the Companions”.

Fakhr al–Razi, however, raises an objection to one of the sentences in
this argument. This will be discussed and answered in the final part of
the questions about the verse.

#### The Narrations that Consider Ali (as) as the Prophet’s Soul

The narrations that consider Ali (as) as the Prophet’s soul can be
grouped under three headings:

#### Narrations about the Verse of Mubahalah

Some of these narrations deal with the presence of the five pure ones,
*the people of Kisa*, in the prayer of contest, as we have already
stated. Below are brief sentences about this subject:

1. Having quoted the Qur’anic verse (of *Mubahalah*), ibn Abbas says,
“and Ali is the Prophet’s soul”, as confirmed by the verse of
*mubahalah*.[^21]

2. After quoting Jabir ibn Abdullah al–*Ansari’s* words concerning the
Prophet’s family, (*Ahl al–Bayt*) *(p.b.u.th.),* Sh’abi says, by “*our
sons*” al–Hasan and al–Husain, are meant by “*our women*” Fatimah and by
“*our souls*” Ali ibn Abi Talib”.[^22]

3. Having mentioned the authenticity of the reports related from ibn
Abbas and other Companions about the fact that the Prophet (saws) had
brought with him Ali, Fatimah and al–Hasan and al–Husain to the contest
of prayer, Hakim Nayshaburi establishes the authenticity of the reports
which hold that “*our son*” refers to al–Hasan and al–Husain, “*our
women*” to Fatimah and “*our souls*” to Ali ibn Abi Talib.[^23]

4. According to the narration wherein Ali, peace be on him, has the
members of the consultative assembly swear, he says, “I adjure you by
God to tell me whether there is anyone from among you who is closer to
the Prophet in kinship than I am, or whom the Prophet called “my soul”,
and whose sons the Prophet called “my sons?” They said “There
isn’t”.[^24]

#### Narrations Concerning Bani Wali’ah Clan

These narrations have been quoted from a number of Companions such as
Abu Dhar, Jabir ibn Abdullah and Abdullah ibn Hantab According to these
narrations, the Prophet (saws) has, as stated by Abi Dhar, said “The
(people of) Bani Wali’ah (tribe) have to submit or, I will send to them
someone who is similar to me to execute my orders, kill those who fight,
and capture their offspring”.[^25]

Abu Dhar adds, “Umar, who was standing behind me, asked, “Whom does the
Prophet mean?”

I said, “Neither you nor your friend (Abu Bakr)”.

He asked, “Who is that person, then?”

I said, “He is the one who is mending his shoes now”.

He said, “It is who is mending his shoes”.

#### Narrations about the Beloved of the Prophet (saws)

Some narrations report that the Prophet (saws) was asked about the best
or most beloved person by him. After the Prophet (saws) answered he was
asked about Ali’s popularity and precedence over others. So, the Prophet
(saws) turned to his companions and said “This man is asking me about my
soul” indicating to Ali (as) who is the Prophet’s soul.[^26]

Some other narrations report that once Hazrat Fatimah, God’s blessing be
on her, asked the Prophet (saws) to make a mention about Ali (as). The
Prophet said, “Ali is my soul. Can a person speak about his own
soul?[^27]

These *hadiths* have been reported on the authority of a number of
Companions such as Amr Aas, A’isheh, and Amr ibn Shoayb’s grandfather.

From these narrations, which are great in number and varied in the
manner of transmission we realize that Ali (as) is the soul of the
Prophet (saws) and the Qur’anic verse emphasizes on the similarity
between them, except for what is definitely and logically excluded, e.g.
Prophet Hood.

Accordingly, all the other merits and characteristics which the Prophet
enjoys, such as his superiority over the community and over the whole
creation and his leadership over the whole Islamic community, are
included in this similarity.

### Five: Questions and Answers about the Verse

#### A) Comments on al–Alusi’s View

Al–Alusi, who has interpreted this verse in his *Rooh al–Ma’ani*[^28]
states “No believer can doubt the fact that this verse indicates the
outstanding merits of Prophet’s family, Ahlul Bayt, God bless them all,
and whoever tries to ignore the fact that they enjoy such merits, will
be bearing animosity, an act which renders one’s faith futile”.

#### B) Stating the Shi’ites’ Argument

Al–Alusi then mentions the Shi’ites’ argument based on the stated verse
concerning Ali’s immediate succession to the Prophet, God bless them
both.

Then, al–Alusi cites the narration which states that the noble Prophet
accompanied Ali (as), Fatimah (sa), Al–Hasan (as) and Al–Husain (as),
God bless them all, after the verse of *mubahalah* had been revealed. He
says, “Thus, *our son*” refers to al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.)
*our women* to Fatimah, God’s blessing be on her, and *our sons* to Ali,
peace be on him.

When Ali (as) is referred to as the Prophet’s soul, not in its literal
meaning, (because Ali, peace be on him, cannot in reality be the
Prophet’s soul), it follows that his being the Prophet’s soul suggests
nothing but Ali’s similitude to the Prophet.

Also, because the Prophet (saws) has full authority and priority over
others in managing the affairs of the Muslims, the one who is similar to
him must have such authority and precedence. Therefore, the Qur’anic
verse is an evidence for Ali’s excellence and guardianship over the
whole community”.

##### Al–Alusi Answers the Shi’ites

In his attempt to comment on the Shi’ites’ view, al–Alusi observes:

“We do not accept the idea that “*our souls*” refers to Ali (as),
because “our soul” refers to the Prophet himself (saws) and Ali (as) is
included in the phrase “*our sons*” because usually one’s son-in-law is
called one’s son”.

Then al–Alusi quotes Sheikh Tabarsi, the renowned Shi’ite scholar as
saying “*our souls*” cannot be taken to mean the Prophet himself because
one cannot invite oneself (to a meeting). Tabarsi says that such a claim
is a kind of “hallucination”!

##### Responding to al–Alusi’s Claim

Al-Alusi first admits that the Qur’anic verse refers to the outstanding
merits of the Prophet’s Household (*itrah*) and considers denying this
fact a kind of animosity. Now, he himself tries to deny the honourable
Household their excellence, thus rejecting all the narrations handed
down which confirm this view, a view that ibn Taymiyyah did not adopt,
i.e. denying that “*our souls*” is ascribed to Ali (as).

Although at the outset of the discussion, we mentioned something about
the Qur’anic phrase “*our souls*” and made clear that it does not refer
to the Prophet, we would like to show that al–Alusi’s claim –taking
“*our souls*” to mean the Prophet and Ali (as) to be referred to in the
phrase “*our sons*”– is not correct for it is inappropriate and counters
sound arguments.

It is not correct because the word invitation is used in its literal
meaning and al-Alusi’s citing such phrase as دعته نفسه and concluding
that these two words are commonly used in their literal meanings.

And so the Qur’anic phrase “our souls” refers to the Prophet, shows his
overlooking the fact that is the phrase دعته نفسه the verbدعته is used
figuratively and requires a contextual clue to (to spell it out),  
 Whereas there is no such a clue in the Qur’anic verse. دعته نفسه means
“urging oneself, or making up one’s mind”, it does not mean “calling” or
inviting oneself”.

Supposing that the phrase “*our sons*” includes The Commander of the
Faithful, the Prophet’s son–in–law (as) requires a figurative use of the
word. Therefore, the phrase “*our sons*” the verse cannot mean anyone
other than al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.), and “*our souls*” is
applicable to Ali (as).

One may ask: “How come that the clause ندع , *we call–* has a literal
meaning, and the phrase “*our sons*” has a figurative sense and is
applicable to Ali (as)? Why don’t you take the phrase “*our souls*” to
have a literal meaning and say that it refers to the very person? And
why don’t you take “ندع” to mean, “*make present*”? The answer will be:

If the clause –*we will call–* has a literal meaning, there will exist
only one allusion and that is, ascribing “*our souls*” to Ali ibn Abi
Talib (as). But if we assume that the clause “*we call*” is also used
figuratively, another figurative example will be needed, and that is,
referring to Ali (as), the Prophet’s son–in–law, as “*our sons*” whereas
there is no clue about such figurative example.

The contextual clue to using “*our souls*” which refers to Ali (as) is
the contradiction between “*we call*” and “*our souls*” that is
logically and customarily impossible.

Al–Alusi’s claim counters sound arguments because most authenticated
traditions say that the phrase “*our souls*” refers to Ali (as). These
narrations oppose al–Alusi’s words.[^29]

##### Al–Alusi’s Second Answer to the Shi’ites’ Argument

Al–Alusi’s second answer to the Shi’ite argument is as follows: Even if
we assume that the Qur’anic expression “*our souls*” implies Ali (as),
it cannot be a proof for the idea of his being the immediate successor
to the Prophet (saws). The expression “*our souls*” is used to mean that
Ali is the Prophet’s close relative and shares his faith, perhaps
because Ali (as) is Prophet’s (saws) relative, i.e. his son–in–law and
they are united in religion.

Besides, if it is taken to mean that he is equal to the Prophet, are
they equal in all aspects or only in some? If they were equal in all
aspects, it would inevitably imply that Ali (as) shares the (offices of)
prophet hood, Termination of prophet hood, and being raised (as a
prophet) to mankind. Such equality is unanimously rejected. However, if
it is taken to mean equality in some aspects, it cannot be a proof for
the Shi’ites’ claim of Ali’s superiority and succession to the Prophet
(saws)”.

##### Refuting al–Alusi’s Claim

1. To address a close relative or one who is related with another in
religion as “my soul” brings (that one) no privilege, whereas *hadiths*
say that it has brought Ali, peace be on him, an outstanding merit. As
we already mentioned, Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas is reported to have rejected
Mu’awiyyah’s suggestion to curse Ali, peace be on him, and pointed to
Ali’s virtues as a reason for his rejection.

2. Of the word “*soul*” is to refer to the person of the same religion
or to a close relative, which is a figurative usage, it needs a
contextual clue; such a clue does not exist in the Qur’anic verse.

3. When it is not possible to use the word “soul” in its real sense, it
will mean someone other than the Prophet (saws), an absolute similarity
and equality including all aspects except (the rank of) prophet hood.

4. Thus, there will be no place for the doubt al–Alusi has cast. The
answer to the question: “Does it mean equality in all aspects or only in
some?” is: “Equality” is absolute, including all aspects except for what
is definitely excluded by reason- prophet hood. Thus the Prophet’s
superiority and guardianship (of the community), like his other perfect
qualifications, are among the aspects which the successor must enjoy.

##### Al–Alusi’s Third Claim

Al-Alusi says: “If the verse signified Ali’s right to succeed the
Prophet, he should have been (made) Imam during the lifetime of the
Prophet, and this is unanimously rejected”.

Concerning the idea that this caliphate is limited to a scertain time,
the answer is:

a) There is no evidence for the limitation of Imamate to a certain time.

b) The Sunnis themselves assert that Ali (ash.) was Imam at a certain
period, that is, during his caliphate.

##### Responding to al–Alusi’s aforementioned Claim

Numerous traditions prove that Ali (as) was appointed as the Prophet’s
successor during the latter’s lifetime. The clearest evidence which
supports this view is the narration of Manzilah, i.e. when Ali (as) was
made to the Prophet as Haroon was to Moses during the latter’s lifetime.

It is stated in the holy Qur’an that Prophet Moses said to his brother,
Haroon, “***Take my place among my people*****”**[^30]. If Haroon had
not deputized Prophet Moses, the Qur’an would not have used the words:
“*take my place among my people*”. As confirmed by this Qur’anic verse,
whenever the Prophet (saws) was absent, Ali (as) took his place as was
the case during Tabuk war. In the commentary on the narration of
*Manzilah* this point has been discussed.[^31]

a) The rank assigning Ali (as) in the verse of *Mubahalah* as the
Prophet’s soul is absolute. However, if there is a consensus of opinion
that Ali (as) had not been the successor of the Prophet (saws) this
consensus of opinion would have restricted the absoluteness during the
Prophet’s lifetime. Therefore, this absoluteness remained in force after
the Prophet’s demise.

Thus, all al–Alusi’s critical remarks are baseless. There is no
controversy about the fact that the verse indicates Ali’s Imamate and
caliphate.

##### A Word with Fakhr al–Razi

Having quoted Mahmood ibn Hasan al–Hamsi’s argument on the superiority
of Ali (as) over the Prophets of the earlier times, Fakhr al–Razi
observes

a) There is unanimous agreement that a prophet is superior to a non
prophet.

b) There is also unanimous agreement that Ali, peace be on him, was not
a prophet. Therefore, the stated Qur’anic verse does not prove Ali’s
superiority over other prophets.

##### Responding to Fakhr al–Razi

First: To say that there is unanimous agreement that “a prophet is
superior to non–prophets” cannot be generalized to prove that any
prophet is superior to any individual of the people including those who
are not from his own community. It is certain, however, that a prophet
is superior to his own people.

To say that “Men are superior to women” means that a male person is
superior to a female one; it does not denote that any man is superior to
any woman. That is, it is not a problem to say that among the women
there are some who are superior to men.

Second: That there is a general agreement on this point is not certain;
the Shi’ite scholars have always opposed this idea and they believe that
their infallible Imams are, according to conclusive evidence, superior
to the past prophets.

In answer to the Shi’ites’ argument that “the word *‘soul’* in the
Qur’anic verse means “similarity and equality in attributes”, Abu
Hayysan al–Andalusi has quoted al–Razi[^32], in his *Al–Bahr
al–Muheet,*[^33] and said:

“It is not necessary in using the (word) “soul” to take it to mean
“similarity” in all attributes theologians say. Because it is something
which they themselves have made up. In Arabic the word “soul” may be
used to refer to certain attributes too, as in the example “هذا من
انفسنا” meaning “this person is from our tribe”.

##### Answer

“Similarity” in all or in some attributes is neither a philological
discussion nor a theological one; it has to do with the fundamentals of
Islamic jurisprudence**.** When it is not possible to use the word
“soul” in its literal meaning, it should be taken to express a
figurative idea, and the closest meaning to the literal one must be
sought.

The closest figurative meaning of “soul” that has literal meaning is
“being similar”. This similarity is absolute, with no conditions,
meaning that Ali (as) is equal to the prophet in all attributes except
for prophet hood which for external reasons is not included in this
“similarity”.

All other attributes, including Ali’s superiority over other prophets,
may God’s peace and blessing be on them, and his absolute authority over
the Islamic community are included in this similarity.

##### A Word with ibn Taymiyyah

Discussing the argument Allamah Helli had presented concerning the
Imamate of Ali, peace be on him, based on the verse of *mubahalah*, ibn
Taymiyyah says:

“The tradition that the Prophet (saws) had taken Ali (as), Fatimah (sa),
Al–Hasan (as) and Al–Husain (as) with him for the contest of prayer is
sound.[^34] But this does not indicate Ali’s Imamate and superiority. It
would do so if the verse had an evidence for Ali’s equality to the
Prophet (saws) but the verse does not, and no one ranks equal to the
Prophet, neither Ali (as), peace be on him, nor anyone else”.

In Arabic, the word “our souls” does not necessarily mean equality,[^35]
but merely means congruity and similarity; similarity in such aspects
like faith or religion will do; it would even be better if common
lineage is added to it”.

“The phrase “*our souls*” in the verse “*our souls and your souls*”,
therefore, points to men who are nearer to one another in religion and
ancestry than to any other one. That is why the Prophet took with him
from among the sons Al–Hasan (as) and Al–Husain (as), from among the
women Fatimah (sa), and from among the men Ali (as) and these people
were closer to the Prophet than any other people”.

“Besides, the contest of prayer to God is held with the close kinsmen
(taking part), not with those who have distant family relations, however
dear to God the latter may be”.

Concerning Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle, who was alive and closer in
family line than Ali, peace be on him, ibn Taymiyyah says:

“Although Abbas was alive, he was not one of the first people who
embraced Islam. None was closer to the Prophet (saws) than Ali (as).
Thus the reason that Ali was chosen to take part in the contest of
prayer was because there was no one among the Prophet’s relatives to
take his place. This, however, by no means proves that Ali was equal to
the Prophet”.

##### Refuting ibn Taymiyyah’s Claim

1. Ibn Taymiyyah would be right if he meant that no one can equal the
Prophet (saws) in everything including prophet hood. But for the
definite reasons previously stated that Mohammad (saws) is the Seal of
the Prophets, this “equality” is limited (to certain attributes). Thus,
to the exclusion of that, it is absolute.

Ibn Taymiyyah’s other argument to prove that the phrase “our souls”,
does not denote “equality” is not correct either, even though he has
cited Qur’anic verses containing “انفسهم” or “انفسكم” to prove his clam,
because these words do imply “equality” in the verses he was cited.

For example, when the lexical item **“انفس”** meaning “souls” in

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ولا تلمزوا انفسكم ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not find fault with your own people”*** (49:11)

Is used to refer to others it does not mean that they are really similar
to the very person. It denotes that there is a certain kind of equality
and similarity among them it is clear that in such usages each of those
addressed is a member of the group have the same belief or they are of
the same clan; **(otherwise they would not have been addressed in this
way)**

Thus, in the above verses, there *is* (the idea of) similarity, but
there is a contextual clue which suggests that this equality is in a
certain thing. It is possible that where there is no contextual clue,
the idea of absolute equality except for what reason excludes will
exist.

2. To ibn Taymiyyah family relation is a contributory parameter in this
respect, but this is not correct for two reasons:

a) It is incompatible with the phrase “*our women and your women*” (in
the Qur’anic verse), because the idea of “*our women*” has nothing to do
with blood relationship. Of course, it is not contradictory to say that
Fatimah Zahra, God’s blessing be on her, is the daughter of the Prophet
(saws) and his daughter.

The verse has not referred to her as “**بناتنا** means our daughters”
that indicates the blood–relationship, but as “our women” and she was
with the group (to take part in the contest of prayer) because she is
from among the women of the family. Besides, there was no woman who was
as meritorious as she to attend the contest of prayers to God.

b) If “blood–relationship” was the criterion, then Abbas, the Prophet’s
uncle, was closer to the Prophet (saws) but he was not invited to take
part in *mubahalah*. “Being close to the Prophet (saws)” means “being
spiritually close to” him. Ibn Taymiyyah felt that he had to admit to
this fact when he said, “Ali (as), peace be on him, was one of the first
people who embraced (Islam), and therefore he is closer to the Prophet
than the others”.

The group who attended the contest of prayer were especially related to
the Prophet (saws) as confirmed by *hadith*s, they are referred to as
the Prophet’s *Ahl al–Bayt,* and each of them is given another title:
some are referred to as: “*our sons*”, others as “*our women*” and
others as “*our souls*”*.*

It is thus clear that the phrase “*our souls*” indicates something other
than “blood–relation” and the equality, similarity and homogeneity
between Ali (as) and the Prophet (saws) are absolute, in all attributes,
particularities, ranks and positions, except for that which is excluded
by reason.

In our discussing of the aim of the Household of the Prophet’s attending
the contest of prayer to God, it was made clear that their role in
*mubahalah* is equal in force to that of the Prophet, producing the same
effects, which lends the beloved family, the *Ahl al–Bayt* of the
Prophet, God bless them all a lofty station.

[^1]: – The pronoun “ن” in “ندع – we call” differs in meaning from the
pronoun “نا” in “ابنائنا – our sons”, and from the one in “نسائنا –our
women” and– “our souls”: the first one refers to both sides of the
dispute (the Prophet –S.A.W.– and the Christians); thus “our sons”, “our
women” and “our souls” are excluded, whereas the second and the third
refer to the Prophet’s side, thus the other side of the dispute and
their “sons”, their “women” and their “souls” are not included. As for
the phrase “we will pray (humbly)”, it includes all: the Prophet
(S.A.W.), the other side of the dispute, the sons, the women, and the
souls.

[^2]: – Al-Kashaf Commentary, vol. 1, p. 370, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi;
Beirut.

[^3]: – Rooh al-M’ani, vol. 3, p. 189, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Arabi;
Beirut.

[^4]: – We will duly answer his observations in the section titled
“Answering the Objections”.

[^5]: – Tafseer al-Kabir by Fakhr al-Razi, vol. 8, p. 80, Dar Ihya’
al-Torath al-Arabiyyah.

[^6]: – Muslim’s Sahih, vol. 5, p. 23, Kitab Fadha’il al-Sahabah, the
chapter on Ali ibn Abi Talib’s outstanding merits, hadith 32, Izz
al-Deen Institute.

[^7]: – Tirmidhi’s Sunan, vol. 5, p. 565, Dar al-Fikr.

[^8]: – Ahmad’s Musnad, vol. 1, p. 185, Dar Sader, Beirut.

[^9]: – Al-Tafsir al-Kabeer by Fakhr al-Razi, vol.8, p.80.

[^10]: – Ma’rifat Uloom al-Hadith, p.50, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah,
Beirut.

[^11]: – Ahkam al-Qur’an by al-Jesas; vol. 2, p. 14, Dar al-Kitab
al-Arabi, Beirut. Mufeed’s Ikhtesas, p. 56; Jami’at al-Mudarriseen fil
Howzatol Ilmiyyah. Asbab al-Nozool, p. 68, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah,
Beirut. Asad al-Ghabah, vol. 4, p.25; Dar Ihiya’ al-Turath al-Arabi,
Beirut. Al- Isabah, vol.2, part 4, p.271. Al-Bahr al-Muheet, vol. 3, p.
479, Dar Ihiya’al-Turath al-Arabi, Beirut. Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah,
vol. 5, p. 49, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut. Al-Burhan, vol. 1, p.
289, Isma’ilyan Publications. Al-Taj al-Jami’ lil–Usool, vol. 3, p. 333,
Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Arabi, Beirut. The History of the City of
Damascus, vol. 42, p. 431, Dar Fikr. Tadhkirat Khawas al-Ummah, p. 17,
printed in Najaf. Ibn Katheer’s Commentary, vol. 1, p. 378, Dar
al-Ma’rafih, Beirut. Baydawi’s Commentary, vol. 1, p. 163, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut. Khazin’s Commentary (Bab al-Ta’weel), vol. 1, p.
236, Dar al-Fikr. Al-Razi’s Commentary, vol. 8, p. 80, Dar Ihiya’
al-Turath al-Arabi, Beirut. Al-Samarqandi’s Commentary (Bahr al-Uloom),
vol. 1, p. 274, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut. Al-Tabari’s
Commentary, vol. 3, p. 299–301, Dar al-Fikr. Al-Tantawi’s Commentary,
vol. 2, p. 130, Dar al-M’arif, Cairo. Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qommi’s
Commentary, vol. 1, p. 104. Al-Mawardi’s Commentary, vol. 1, pp.389 and
399, the Institute of al-Kutub al-Thaqafiyyah, and Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut. Al-Muneer Commentary, vol.3, pp. 245, 248 and 249,
Dar al-Fikr. Al-Nasfi’s Commentary, vol. 1, p. 236, Dar al-Fikr.
Al-Nayshaburi’s Commentary, vol. 3, p. 213, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut A
Summary of al-Mustakrak, vol. 3, p. 150, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut.
Qortobi’s Jami’ Ahkam al-Qur’an, vol. 4, p. 104, Dar al-Firkr. Jami’
al-Usool, vol. 9, p. 469, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Arabi. Al-Tirmidhi’s,
Jami’ al-Saheeh, vol. 5, p. 596, Dar al-Fikr. Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol.2,
p.230–233, Dar al-Fikr. Abu Na’eem al-Isfahan’s Dala’il al-Nubuwwah.
p.297. Thakha’ir al-Uqba, p. 25, al-Wafa Institute, Beirut Rooh
al-Ma’ani, vol. 3, p. 189, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Arabi Al-Riyadh
al-Nadirah, vol. 3, p. 134, Dar al-Nadwah al-Jadeedah, Beirut. Zad
al-Maseer fi Ilm al-Tafseer, vol.1, p. 339, Dar al-Fikr. Al-Hakim
al-Hasakani’s Shawahid al-Tanzeel, vol. 1, p. 155–167, Majma’ Ihya’
al-Thaqafat al-Islamiyyah. Muslim’s Sahih, vol. 5, p. 23, Kitab Fadha’il
al-Sahabah, the chapter on Ali ibn Abi Talib’s outstanding merits,
hadith 32, Izz al-Deen Institute. Al-Sawa’q al-Muhriqah, p. 145, Maktabt
al-Qahirah. Fath al-Gadeer, vol. 1, p. 316, Egypt. Fara’id al-Simteyn,
vol. 2, pp. 23 and 24, al-Mahmoodi Institute, Beirut. Al-Fosool
al-Muhimmeh, pp. 23 – 25 and 126 –127, Manshoorat al-‘A’lami. Kitab
al-Tasheelli–Uloom al-Tanzeel, vol. 1, p. 109, DarFikr. Al-Kashshaf,
vol. 1, p. 193, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut. Madarij al-Nubuwwah, p. 500,
Bambay. Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihyan, vol. 3, p. 150, Dar al-Ma’rifah,
Beirut. Ahmad’s Musnad, vol. 1, p. 185, Dar Sader, Beirut Mishkat
al-Masabeeh, vol. 3, p. 1731, al-Maktab al-Islami. Masabeeh al-Sunnah,
vol. 4, p. 183, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut. Matalib al-Su’ool, p. 7,
Tehran. Ma’alim al-Tanzeel, vol. 1, p. 480, Dar al-Fikr. Ma’rifaht Usool
al-Hadith, p. 50, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut. Ibn Magazili’s
Manaqib, p. 263, al-Maktabit al-Islamiyyah, Tehran.

[^12]: – Ali ibn Ibrahim’s Commentary, vol. 1, p. 104, Matba’at
al-Najaf; al-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 285.

[^13]: – Al-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 289, Isma’ilyan Publications.

[^14]: – Al-Buhran, vol.1, p.289 Isma’ilyan Puplishing House.

[^15]: – Al-Ikhtisas, p. 56, Jami’t al-Mudariseen fil Huzatul Ilmiyyah.

[^16]: – Al-Manar Commentary, vol. 3, p. 322, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut.

[^17]: – Rooh al-Ma’ani, vol. 3, p. 190, Dar Ihya’ al-Torath al-Arabi.

[^18]: – Mizan al-I’tidal, vol. 2, p. 154, Dar al-Fikr.

[^19]: – Siyra A’lam al-Nobala, vol. 10, p. 104, Mu’ssasat al-Risala.

[^20]: – According to the accounts written in some books about this
great scholar, thus mentioned by Fakhr al-Razi, he is a renowned Shi’ite
mujtahid, theologian, and professor of Fakhr al-Razi, whom the late
traditionist, Qommi, mentions in volume 1, page 340 of his Safinah
al-Bihar and says:: “Sheikh Sadeed al-Deen Mahmood ibn Ali ibn al-Hasan
al-Himsi of Rayy, is a religious scholar, an authority on theology and
author of al-Ta’leeq al-Iraqi, a book on rhetoric”. Sheikh Baha’i has
been quoted as saying: “He was a learned scholar among the Shi’ite
ulama. He came from Hims, a village in Rayy, now a ruin. Safina
al-Bihar, vol.1, p.340, Kitabkhana Mahmuod. The late Sayyid Mohsen Amin
Jibal Ameli quotes from a manuscript of al-Ta’leeq al-Iraqi or
al-Munqidh min al-Taqleed, on which the following sentence is written:
“This is written by our master, the great Sheikh, Hojjat al-Islam
wal-Muslimin, the Tongue of the Sect and theologians, the Lion of
Debaters, Mahmood ibn Ali ibn al-Hasan al-Himsi, may God prolong his
life in glory and humiliate his enemies”. Ayan al-Shiah, vol. 10, p.
105, Dar al-Ta’aruf lil Matbo’at, Beirut. In Al-Qamoos al-Moheet vol.2,
p.299, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut. Firoozabadi refers to Himsi and says:
Mahmood ibn Ali al-Himsi is a theologian and al-imam Fakhr al-Deen’s
teacher”. From the above statement of Firoozabadi we realize that this
eminent theologian was Fakhr al-Razi’s teacher, a position which has not
been mentioned by Fakhr al-Razi.

[^21]: – Ma’rifaht Uloom al-Hadith, p. 50, Dar al-Kutub al-Illmiyyah,
Beirut .

[^22]: – Asbab al-Nuzool, [. 67, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

[^23]: – Ma’rifaht Uloom al-Hadith, p. 50, Dar al-Kutub al-Illmiyyah,
Beirut.

[^24]: – The History of the City of Damascus, vol. 42, p. 431, Dar
al-Fikr.

[^25]: – Al-Sunan al-Kobra lil–Nisai’i, vol. 5, p. 127; Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut; a research–worker has said, “There are trustworthy
narrators within the chain of narrators of the hadit. al-Musannaf li–ibn
Abi Shaybah, vol. 6, p. 374; Dar al-Taj; al-Mo’jam al-Awsat
lil–Tabarani, vol. 4, p. 477; Maktabat al-Moarif, Riadh Note: al-Mo’jam
al-Awsat has used the word “Li–Nafsi” rather than “Ka–Nafsi”, this being
an error, intentional or otherwise, for Haythami who had quoted Tabarani
in his Majma’ al-Zawai’d used the word “Ka–Nafsi”. Majma’ al-Zawai’d of
Haythami, vol. 7, p. 110, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabiyyah, also p. 240 (of the
same source printed) by Dar al-Fikr.

[^26]: – Al-Suyuti’s Jami’ al-Ahadith,, vol. 16, pp. 256–7, Dar al-Fikr;
Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 13, pp. 142–3, al-Risalih Institute.

[^27]: – Al- Khawrazmi’s Manaqib, p. 148, Mu’asasat al-Nashr al-Islami;
Maqtal al-Husain, p. 43, Maktabat al-Mufeed.

[^28]: – Ruh al-Ma’ani, vol.3, p.189, Dar Ihiya’ al-Turath al-‘Arabi.

[^29]: – Ma’rifaht Uloom al-Hadith, p. 50, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah,
Beirut.

[^30]: – Surah 7, verse 142.

[^31]: – See our article “Imamate in Ghadeer, Thaqalayn and the
Narration of Manzilah”.

[^32]: – It is not clear whether Abu Hayan had Fakhr al-Razi in mind
when he mentioned “Razi”, because Fakhr al-Razi’s Tafseer contains only
the stated objection. Therefore, Abu Hayan must have quoted the above
argument from other works by al-Razi.

[^33]: – Al-Bahr al-Muheet, vol. 2, p. 481, the Institute of al-Tarikh
al-Arabi and Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Arabi.

[^34]: – Ibn Taymiyyah accepts the fact that “our soul” refers to Ali,
peace be on him.

[^35]: – To support his argument, ibn Taymiyyah quotes five Qur’anic
verses among which are the following: “لولا اذ سمعتموه ظن المومنون و
المؤمنات بانفسهم خيرا Why did not the believing men and the believing
women, when you heard it, think well of their own people?” Surah 24,
verse 12, “انفسكم ولا تلمزوا …and do not find fault with your own
people” Surah 49, verse 11.


