Chapter 4: Imamate As Envisaged in the Verse of Wilayah
=======================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّما وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَ رَسُولُهُ وَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
الَّذِينَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاةَ وَ يُؤْتُونَ الزَّكاةَ وَ هُمْ
راكِعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****Only Allah is your wali and His Apostle and those who believe,
those who keep up prayers and pay the poor rate while they
bow*****”*****. (5:55)***

One of the strong arguments advanced by Imamiyyah Shi’ites in support of
Imamate and wilayah of Ali (as) is the Qur’anic verse of *wilayah*.

In order to confirm the idea presented in the Qur’anic verse about the
word “*wali*”, we have to prove the following:

1. The word “انما” meaning “only”*,* indicates restriction.

2. “*Wali*”, in the stated verse, means most worthy of possession of
authority and being a guardian.

3. The phrase “*bow down*” refers to a ritual movement while praying,
not to a humbleness and humility.

4. It is certain that this Qur’anic verse refers to the occasion when
the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (as), paid *Zakat*, to the poor for
the sake of God, while he was bowing in praying.

Here, we seek to prove the aforementioned points and to finally answer
the questions posed in regard to this Qur’anic verse.

The Use of “انما” (only) for Restriction
----------------------------------------

Arabic lexicographers say that, the word انما indicates restriction:

a) Ibn Manzur says, “A combination of ان, and ما that, indicates
specification. An instance for this the Qur’anic verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا الصَّدَقاتُ لِلْفُقَراءِ وَ الْمَساكِينِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Alms are only*** ***for the poor and the needy*****”** **(9:160)**

In which انما shows that the following command includes the mentioned
group and excludes others.[^1]

b) Jawhari, another lexicographer, says something similar to that.[^2]

c) Firoozabadi says, “Like أنما, the word إنما indicates restriction and
both are found in the Qur’anic verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ إِنَّما يُوحى إِلَيَّ أَنَّما إِلهُكُمْ إِلهٌ واحِدٌ فَهَلْ
أَنْتُمْ مُسْلِمُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say:***  
 ***It is only revealed to me that your God is one will you then
submit?*****”** **(21:108)**

Contains both انما and انما.[^3]

d) Ibn Hisham says the same thing.[^4]

Therefore, there is no doubt that “انما” is used to indicate
restriction. It may also be used to indicate something else. If there is
a contextual clue, which is a figurative use of the word.

An Investigation into the Meaning of “Wali”
-------------------------------------------

The word “ولی” is a derivative of “وَلی” meaning “made *wali*”, and
“ولایه” meaning “guardianship” a word that has various meanings. An
investigation into the meanings, however, shows that it originally means
“guardian”, “one who has preference over others”, and “possessor of free
will”.

a) Ibn Manzur’s *Lisan al–Arab* says the following: “*Wali* means an
orphan’s guardian who manages the orphan’s affairs, and provides him or
her. The *wali* (guardian) of a woman is the one who supervises her
marriage contact.

It has been reported that if a woman gets married without the permission
of her *muwalli*, her marriage contract will be nil and void. Yet
another report contains the word “*her wali*” rather than her *muwalli*,
which means someone who has full authority”.[^5]

b) Fayoomi says in his *al–Misbah al–Muneer*,[^6] “the word *wali,*
pronounced in the same way as *fa–eel* فعيل, has the meaning of agent,
as in the holy Qur’anic verse

“***Allah is the guardian of those who believe*****” (2:257)**

c) Ibn Faris has said, “The person who is delegated to manage someone’s
affairs is his or her *wali*. This word is sometimes used to mean the
one who sets a slave free, the freed slave, the cousin, the helper, or
the friend”.

From what this great lexicographer says, it can be understood that such
meanings as “helper” and “friend” are not the real meanings of *wali*,
but sometimes it can be used figuratively.

To define *wali*, dictionaries[^7] usually the following example: “The
one who manages someone’s affairs is his *wali,* (guardian).”

It can thus be understood that *wali* conventionally means “one who has
free will and authority”; this is confirmed by the Qur’anic verses
mentioned below:[^8]

A Few Basic Points to Notice
----------------------------

**A)** Dictionaries usually give the various meaning of a word. This
does not mean that each word has a real meaning According to linguists’
view the idea that each lexical item has many real meanings opposes the
principle rule (of language).

For example: Jamal al–Deen ibn Hisham al–Misri, a leading Sunni scholar
of (Arabic), grammar and literature, and author of *Mugni al–Labib*,
comments on the way some grammar scholars interpret the Qur’anic verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَ مَلائِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah and His angels bless the Prophet*****”**, **(33:56)**

Has not been mentioned explicitly. These scholars maintain that the word
angles in the Qur’anic statement is a predicate. (In answer to them) he
says, “There are reasons to believe that what these people say is far
from reality first, on the basis of their claim the word صلاه “blessing”
must have various meanings, and this opposes the linguistic principle so
that some have denied (such possibility) and those who have not, prefer
to consider it a figurative usage.

Firoozabadi, a lexicographer, has written in a book on “calling for
(divine) blessing on the Prophet”, and investigated the Qur’anic verse,
citing what ibn Hisham has said in this regard.[^9]

**“*****Surely Allah and His angels bless the Prophet…*****”**

Accordingly, as regards the meaning of the word *wilayah*, which has
several meanings, it definitely means “guardianship” and “authority”
whereas “friendship” and “helper” are excluded from the province of the
meaning. Thus, whenever the word “*wali*” is used without a contextual
clue, it denotes “guardian” and “authority”.

**B)** Some lexicographers assume that the root “*w-l-i*” means
closeness and some commentators take the lexicographers’ view for
granted. It should, however, be noticed that:

1) Such view is based merely on guessing; not on reasoning.

2) What contributes to understanding the real meaning of a lexical item
is the time in which it is used. There is no doubt that most often the
word “*wali*” does not mean “closeness”, but in some cases when there is
a contextual clue, it does as in the phrase المطر الولی. This phrase
means: a second rain close in time to the first one.

Even if we assume that the word “*wali*” formerly meant “*closeness*”,
but now it does not because it is obsolete.

**C)** Certain lexicographers, for instance, ibn al–Atheer in his
*al–Nihayah ,*and ibn Manzur in his *Lisan al–Arab*, say at the outset
of their discussion of the meaning of *wali* that it is one of the names
of God, and it means “*helper*”, and it can mean “*Administrator of the
universe*”*.*

This, however, is not true because the word *wali* comes from the root
which is pronounced like *fa*–*eel.* Were it mean “*helper*”, it would
convey this idea both when it is a root and derivative provided that it
gives the meaning of a subject.

It should be added that neither of the two has a proof, besides, the
word that is pronounced like *fa–eel* is a verb–like *adjective*,
implying a constancy (in the attributes it refers to**),** whereas
*fa-eel*, denotes an occurrence, and each of them oppose the other.

So, the word *wali* which is considered as a name of God means possessor
of authority and administrator of the affairs of the world. However, the
two above mentioned lexicographers, give their own opinion about the
meaning, using the word *qeel* which means “it is said that”.

**D)** The word *wali* has, in many Qur’anic verses, been juxtaposed
with *Naseer* (helper), as in the Qur’anic verse,  
 “***…and that besides Allah, you have no guardian or helper*****”
(2:107)**

. If *naseer* was one of the meanings of the word *wali*, it would not
be used next to *wali*. Semantically, the two words differ from each
other.

**E)** On the basis of many Qur’anic verses such as

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ما لَكُمْ مِنْ وَلايَتِهِمْ مِنْ شَيْ‏ءٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Not yours is their guardianship”***, (**8:72)**

Some people have taken ***wali*****,** and *wilayah,* to indicate “help”
and “assistance”, whereas (*wilayah*) could mean “guardian with giving
assistance”. The (actual meaning of) *wilayah* is not “assistance”
because assistance is part of (the responsibility of) *wilayah.* The
only sense of *wilayah* in the above mentioned verse is guardianship and
(giving) assistance is observed, too.

We can thus conclude that “guardianship and authority” are the only
meanings for *wali* in the mentioned Qur’anic verse.

Besides, the verse contains a definite clue to indicate that it does not
mean “friend” and “helper”. This will be explained in the forthcoming
pages.

The Meaning of Ruku’
--------------------

*Ruku’* literally means bowing down. This word is also used to mean a
certain ritual act when we perform our prayers.[^10]

Zubaydi says in his *Taj al–Aroos*,[^11] “The phrase *raka’a al–Rajul*,
ركع الرجل may mean that the person was once wealthy but is poor now”.
Here, the word “bow down” is used figuratively. Thus, the real meaning
of *ruku*’ is “bowing down” in praying; but when it is used to indicate
poverty or humbleness, it will be a figurative use and needs a
contextual clue.

The Occasion of the Revelation of the Verse of Wilayah
------------------------------------------------------

According to many reports in Shi’ite and Sunni commentaries of the
Qur’an, the holy verse of *wilayah* – “*Only Allah is your wali and His
Apostle and those who believe, those who keep up prayers and pay the
poor–rate while they bow*” – was revealed in favour of Ali ibn Abi
Talib, God’s peace be on him. Below is a narrative related by
Tha’alabi[^12] in his *Tafseer*[^13] on the authority of Sunni leading
commentators, and by Sheikh Tusi, a great Shi’ite commentator, in his
*Majm’a al–Bayan*[^14]:

“It is reported that Abayat ibn Rab’i said, ‘Abdullah ibn Abbas was
sitting by the Zam Zam well (in the House of God) relating *hadith*s
from the Holy Prophet (saws). Then, a man with a turban on his head
entered. Ibn Abbas began saying, ‘The Holy Prophet, may God bless him
and his descendants said...’ and the man repeated (the same phrase,
saying), ‘The Holy Prophet, may God bless him and his descendant said…

This statement was repeated (several times). Finally, ibn Abbas said to
him, ‘For God’s sake tell us who you are.’ The man took his turban off
and said, ‘I will introduce myself to those who do not know me. I am
Jundub, the son of Junadah al–Badri, that is, Abu Dhar Ghifari. ‘I heard
the Prophet (saws) and saw him say, ‘Ali (as) is the leader of those who
do good and killer of those who disbelieve.

Whoever helps him will be helped (by God) and whoever abandons him will
be abandoned (by God).’ As he said the first phrase Jundub pointed to
his ears and said,’ May my ears become deaf if I am not telling you the
truth,’ and pointed to his eyes and said ‘May my eyes become blind if I
am not telling you the truth”.

“The Jundub also said, ‘Once I performed the noon prayers in a mosque,
behind the Prophet (saws) then, a beggar came in but no one attended to
him. The beggar extended his hands towards the heaven and said, ‘O God,
bear witness! Here, in the mosque of the Prophet of God (saws) I asked
(to be given something), but no one attended to me.’

Ali (as), who was in *ruku’,* saying his prayers gestured with his hand,
inviting the beggar to take a ring which was on his little finger. The
beggar stepped closer, and removed the ring from Ali’s (as) finger. This
incident took place in the presence of the Prophet (saws).

“When the prayer finished, the Prophet (saws) extended his hand towards
the heaven and said,

***“My God! My brother Moses supplicated to you, and said: O my Lord!
Expand my breast for me, and make my affair easy to me, and loose the
knot from my tongue (that) they may understand my word; and give to me
an aider from my family: Haroun, my brother”***. **(20:25-30)**

There and then came a revelation (to Moses)

***‘We will strengthen your arm with your brother, and We will give you
both an authority’ (28:35)***

‘O My God, I am Mohammad(saws), Thy Prophet and Thy Chosen one; expand
my breast for me and make my affairs easy to me and give me an aider
from my family, Ali (as), and back me up by him.’

“Abu Dhar continued ‘By God! No sooner had the Prophet (saws) finished
his words than Gabriel descended and said: O Mohammad! Recite.’ The
Prophet (saws) asked, ‘What should I recite?’ Gabriel said, *‘Only Allah
is your wali and His Apostle and those who believe, those who keep up
prayers and pay the poor–rate while they bow*”*.*

There are many narratives that mention this specific reason for the
revelation of Qur’anic verse. Some of these *hadith*s will be cited
later on, and some others will come on the page containing responses to
ibn Taymiyyah’s objections.

When we come across these *hadith*s it will become clear that the
mentioned reason for the revelation of this Qur’anic verse is definite.

Questions and Answers on the Verse of Wilayah
---------------------------------------------

In this section it is appropriate to answer the questions raised
concerning the verse of “wilayah”.

### Question One: Doesn’t the word “Wali”, in the verse, mean “friend”?

The Qur’anic verse in question comes in the same context as those verses
that prohibit believers from taking the Jews and the Christians as their
*wali*. Inasmuch the word *wali* means “helper” and “friend” in those
verses, in this particular verse of *wilayah* it must also mean helper
or friend because these verses make them integrated with the other
verses.

Given this, the verse means: your friends are only Allah and His Apostle
and those believers who keep up prayers and pay the poor–rate when they
stand before God in humbleness.

**Answer**  
**First**: It is unsound to say that these verses are integrated with
the verses preceding them because, as we already stated the reason for
the revelation of this particular verse and on the basis of the
elaboration that will follow the reason for the revelation of this verse
is different. By “different” we mean that there is no relationship
between the content and the subject matter of this verse and the content
and subject matter of the other verses.

Without doubt the arrangement of the Qur’anic verses, which we usually
read, differs from the order in which the verses were revealed. There
are verses, such as those revealed in Mecca, that come in the final part
of the Qur’an, and vice versa. For example the chapter “Baqara” is the
second in the present order, whereas it was the first chapter revealed
in Medina. The way the Qur’an is arranged does not correspond with the
time the verses and chapters were revealed.

The verses and chapters of the Qur’an have been arranged under the
supervision of the Prophet (saws). While determining the order of each
verse and chapter, he considered the occasion and spiritual pertinence
of the verses. Therefore, the difference between the present arrangement
of the verses and the time of their revelation does not harm the
contextual integrity.

**Answer**

It is true that the present order of the verses was arranged under the
Prophet’s supervision and there is a reason for locating every verse and
chapter. There is no evidence to support the claim that the Prophet
(saws) observed the wisest order, occasions and spiritual relations
between the verses.

Thus, when there is solid evidence that a certain verse has been
revealed after another, (we can say that) they make a structural whole
but when a verse has been independently revealed or there is doubt about
that, we cannot say that the two verses make a structural whole.

The Qur’anic verse in question has been independently revealed.
Therefore, it is not contextually related to the previous verses.

Secondly, it is not certain that *wali*, in the Qur’anic verse means
“friend” or “helper”.

“***O you who believe! Do not take the Jews and the Christians as wali,
some of them act as walis for one another…*****” (5:51)**

Based on the previous discussions, *wali* in the above verse can also
mean “guardian” and “authority”.

Third: If the word “*wilayah*” in verse 55 of chapter 5 is taken to mean
“friendship” and “assistance”, the content of the verse will contradict
the reality, because the verse would mean “Only Allah and His apostle
are your friends **or** helpers and those who believe, those who keep up
prayers and pay the poor–rate while they bow”.

It is evident that the “friends” and “helpers” of those who believe are
not only those who pay the poor–rate while they bow, but all believers
are each other’s “helpers” and “friends”. If the word راكعون (*they
bow*) in the verse is interpreted to as “they humble themselves before
God” it will be a metaphorical usage. As we said before, the word
“راكعون” means “bowing down (in prayers)”.

Thus, to claim that there is a contextual relationship between verse 51
of chapter 5 and those before it is groundless.

However, even if there is a contextual relationship between verse 51 of
chapter 5 and the preceding ones, it will not have a negative influence
on the meaning the verse wants to convey.

### Question Two: That the verse has been revealed on the occasion of Ali’s paying the poor–rate while he was bowing down should be proved

Certain people express their doubt about the idea that the verse has
been revealed on the occasion of Ali’s (as) paying the poor–rate while
he was bowing down in prayers. Tha’alabi, one of those who have narrated
the event, is not qualified enough to differentiate between sound and
unsound reports. Great traditionists, such as al–Tabari, ibn Hatam and
others have not mentioned such faked stories.

Answer: A large number of books of hadith and Qur’an commentary written
by Shi’ite and Sunni authors confirm this particular reason for the
revelation of the verse: i.e. paying the poor rate by Ali (as) while he
was bowing in prayers. Since These books are too many to mention here,
we will mention some of them in the footnote.[^15]

To call such an authentic report “a forged story” is an infuriating
insult both to the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (as) and to the great
traditionists who have narrated this *hadith*. Tha’alibi, whom this
reckless critic considers “unable to distinguish between sound and
unsound *hadiths*” is highly commended by Sunni scholars of *ilm–Rijal*.
Let us see the view of two of them:

    1. Dhahabi, a great Sunni scholar of *ilm–al–Rijal*, and a renowned
*hadith* expert says about Tha’alabi: “He is an imam, who has learned
the Qur’an by heart, an authority on the Qur’an commentary, a treasury
of science, who was truthful and trustworthy and has a good insight in
Arabic”.[^16]

    2. In his *Selection of the History* *of Nayshabour*, Abd al–Ghafir
Nayshaburi says, “Ahmad ibn Mohammad ibn Ibrahim who is well qualified
in recitation of the Qur’an; a commentator (of the Qur’an), a preacher,
a man of letters, a trustworthy one who has learned the Qur’an by heart,
has written invaluable books of the Qur’an commentary containing various
(lexical) meanings and allusions”. Then, he says, “His *hadith*s are
authentic and reliable”.[^17]

Besides the fact that Tha’alabi is a trustworthy and great scholar, the
incident of giving the ring by Ali (as) to the needy man can be found in
many *hadith* books of both Shi’ites and Sunnis, including Tabari and
ibn Abi Hatem, who are among the critics about whom some say do not
narrate such forged stories” have narrated it. It is appropriate here to
quote these two scholars.

Ibn Katheer says, in his *Commentary*:

“Ibn Abi Hatem said: Abu Sa’id al–Ashaj told us: al–Fazl ibn Dekeen Abu
Na’im al–Ahwal told us: Musa ibn Qays informed us on the authority of
Salamat ibn Kuhyal, who said: Ali (as), gave his ring while he was
bowing in prayer. Then (the following) verse was revealed,

“***Only*** ***Allah is your wali and His Apostle and those who believe,
those who keep up prayers and pay the poor–rate while they
bow.”***’[^18]

Also Ibn Jarir al–Tabari says in his *Commentary*: Mohammad ibn
al–Husain told us: ‘Ahmad ibn al–Mofazzal told us: Asbat related from
al–Seddi to have said “Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) was in the mosque, in the
position of bowing in prayer, and when a need person passed by, he gave
him his ring”[^19]

### Question Three: Does the word انما only indicate restriction?

Fakhr al–Razi’s answer is no, and, in order to support his view, he
cites this verse:

“***The likeness of this world’s life is only as water which We send
down from the cloud, then the herbage of the earth of which men and
cattle eat grows luxuriantly thereby; until when the earth puts on its
golden raiment and it becomes garnished, and its people think that they
have power over it, Our command comes to it, by night or by day, so We
render it as reaped seed–produce, as though it had not been in existence
yesterday; thus do We make clear the communication for a people who
reflect*****” (10:24)**.

He says, “This is not the only parable for the life in this world,
–there are other parables too. Therefore, the word انما (*only*) in this
verse*,* does not really indicate restriction.

**Answer**

First: The word انما, meaning “only”*,* does indicate restriction, even
in the verse Fakhr al–Razi has quoted (as an example in his attempt to
justify his point). This is called, *hasr*, (exclusiveness) in Arabic.
There are, however, two kinds of *hasr:* real and relative the idea of
the addressee in the latter, is omitted. For example, when someone says,
“A certain person, (a), is standing”, and another one says “*Only* (b)
is standing”, this means that the idea that someone other than “b” is
standing is rendered null and void.

In the same way, the verse 24 in chapter 10 quoted above, wants to say
that the life in this world is like (rain) water falling from the sky,
causing the plants to grow and finally the plants’ wither which is an
indication of annihilation and the end of life in this world. This means
that the life in this world is not permanent.

Second: The word انما (only) that indicates restriction may not mean
restriction, provided that there is a contextual clue. The word *only*
is figuratively used in the mentioned verse and this cannot be a reason
for using it in the cases where there is no contextual clue. Therefore,
in the verse of ***wilayah***, the word *only* has been used in its real
meaning i.e. to indicate restriction.

### Question Four: Is referring to Ali (as) as “those who believe” – in the verse of wilayah – used figuratively?

If the phrase “*those who believe*” – plural in meaning – is used to
refer to Ali (as), then it has a figurative sense, and this cannot
acceptable if there is no contextual clue.  
**Answer:** First: Based on Imamiyyah Shi’ite hadiths, the phrase “those
who believe” does not to refer only to Ali (as). It also includes all
infallible Imams (p.b.u.th.), who according to our traditions have the
privilege of having given a needy person a ring when they were in
prayer.[^20]

Second: If we assume that the Qur’anic phrase wants to allude
specifically to Ali (as), and that it is used figuratively, there are
*hadith*s that explain the reasons for the revelation of the Qur’anic
verse which serve as contextual clue.

### Question Five: Did Ali (as) possess a ring to give in the cause of God?

It is quite known that Ali (as) himself was of little means, and did not
own an expensive ring to give to a needy person.

Answer: Ali (as) was not poor. Traditions and history attest to the fact
that he personally worked hard, planting palm trees and digging grooves,
but he never amassed wealth; rather, he donated all his wealth in the
cause of Allah.

### Question Six: Is giving of the ring congruent with complete absorption in prayers?

When he performed ritual prayer, Ali (as) got totally absorbed in
praying so that he did not hear others. How could he hear the needy
person asking for help? How did he give the ring to the needy man?

Answer: Although, when he said his ritual prayer, Ali (as) paid no heed
to what was going around him because he concentrated on praying, it is
quite possible that God, the Mighty and High, who is capable of changing
one’s condition, had turned Ali’s attention to the needy person so that
he could give him something, a valuable act of worship which led to the
revelation of the Qur’anic verse.

A number of the traditions about the occasion of the revelation of the
verse we have already mentioned prove that Ali (as) did notice the
beggar and as a result he gave the poor man poor–rate.

### Question Seven: Does giving something during the prayer, invalidate it?

Giving of the ring harms the formal rules of ritual prayer, an act which
can never be attributed to, Ali (as).

Answer: What invalidates the (formal rules of) prayer is, according to
Shi’ite and Sunni jurists, making katheer (major) moves. Minor gestures
do not invalidate ritual prayer.

In a section under the title of *Minor moves in prayers*, Abu Bakr
Jassas discusses the Qur’anic verse in question in his book, *Ahkam
al–Qur’an*,[^21] and says ‘If the Qur’anic verse refers to the giving of
*sadaka* (poor–rate) while (the donor is) bowing down in prayers, this
means that minor motions are permissible while performing ritual
prayers.

There are reports about some of the minor moves made by the Prophet
(saws) while he was performing his prayers, such as touching his beard,
and pointing to something and so on. These reports clearly show that it
is permissible to give poor–rate while performing ritual prayer”.

In his *Jami’ Ahkam al–Qur’an,*[^22] Qortubi quotes al–Tabari to have
said, “This (event of) donation of ring by the Commander of the Faithful
(as) indicates that slight moves do not invalidate ritual prayers.
Consequently, giving a poor man *sadaka* (a donation in the cause of
God) while performing prayers, does not invalidate the prayers”.

### Question Eight: Can recommended Sadaka be called Zakat?

Fakhr al–Razi says that the term *Zaka*t, in the Qur’anic verse means
obligatory *Zakat* (alms), not voluntary *sadaka* (poor–rate or
charity), as is understood from God’s oft–repeated “*…* اتوالزكوه
meaning pay the alms”, an imperative form making it obligatory.

Now that the term “*Zakat*” is considered an “obligatory act”*,* if Ali
(as) had given an obligatory alms when he was performing ritual prayers,
he would have delayed, an obligatory act, which most scholars consider a
sin. No one, however, can attribute such a thing to Ali (as).

If (on the other hand) the term *Zakat* is taken to mean “recommended
poor–rate”, it will contradict the principle because it is understood
from the (Qur’anic verse) “*pay the alms*” that any *sadaka* that is
called *Zakat* is obligatory.

Answer: First: There is no doubt that “Zakat” in the verse means
“recommended poor–rate”. The hadiths about the occasion of the
revelation of the stated Qur’anic verse, emphasize this fact. It is not
correct to assume that since the verse “pay the alms” refers to
“obligatory Zakat” then any kind of “Zakat” must be obligatory. What is
obligatory in the verse “and pay the alms” is the imperative “pay”,
whereas the word “Zakat” has a general sense.

In fact “*Zakat*”, regardless of any contextual clue, is divided into
two kinds: obligatory and recommended. Thus, “*wujub* (obligation)” or
“*istihbab* (being recommended)” falls outside the province of
denotation. This view is supported by Shi’ite and Sunni jurists, who
divide *Zakat* into two kinds: “obligatory” and *mandub*
**(**recommended)”.

Therefore, the assumption that anything (paid as) *Zakat* must be
“obligatory contradicts what we have stated”.

Second: The Qur’anic verse does not contain the imperative verb “*pay*”,
and the sentence: “(*they*) *pay the poor–rate*” is a statement. That
*sadaka* (poor–rate), in the Qur’anic verse is “recommended”, not
“obligatory” is confirmed by some Sunni jurists.

For example, in his *Ahkam al–Qur’an*, Jassas says: the Qur’anic phrase
“*they pay the poor rate while they bow*” shows that recommended
*sadaka* is called *Zakat* because Ali (as) gave his ring as
“recommended *sadaka*”.

*Zakat* in the Qur’anic verse “***and whatever you give in charity,
desiring Allah’s pleasure it is these*** **(*****persons*****)** ***that
shall get manifold*****”** covers both obligatory and recommended
*sadaka* (poor–rate). Similarly, the word *salat* (ritual prayer)
includes both prescribed and *mustahab* (recommended) ritual
prayers”[^23]

### Question Nine: Is giving poor–due while bowing in prayer a highly praised act?

If by bowing down it is meant ruku which is part of ritual prayers, (we
should say that) giving things, in this particular part of prayer does
not deserve praise, because there is no difference between giving
something in this particular part and in any other part.

Answer: Concerning the incident of giving Zakat by Ali (as), the
Qur’anic verse refers to bowing down not because it is highly praised to
give zakat in this particular part of prayer, but because it is the time
that the needy man asked Ali (as) for something.

In other words, it is merely an external proposition: there is nothing
particular in the term *ruku*’, but it is the act of worship done by Ali
(as) that deserves praise. If Ali (as) had not given the ring, the needy
man would have left the mosque disappointed.

### Question Ten: Does the content of this verse contradict that of the verse before it?

Fakhr al–Razi says, “If this Qur’anic verse is taken as a proof of the
Imamate of Ali (as), the verse will then contradict the verse preceding
it because the latter indicates the legitimacy of the caliphate of Abu
Bakr.

Answer: The verse preceding the verse of wilayah in the Qur’an never
indicates the legitimacy of the caliphate of Abu Bakr. The verse says

“***O you who believe! Whoever from among you turns back from his
religion, then Allah will bring a people, He shall love them and they
shall love Him, lowly before the believers, mighty against the
unbelievers; they shall strive in Allah’s way and shall not fear the
censure of any censurer; this is Allah’s grace. He gives it to whom He
pleases, and Allah is Ample–giving, Knowing*****”**[^24].

Fakhr al–Razi, however, says that the above verse points to the
legitimacy of Abu Bakr’s caliphate because God, the Mighty and High, has
told the believers that if they turn back from their religion, He will
bring a group of people who have the attributes mentioned in the verse
to fight them.

Fakhr al–Razi then says that after the death of the Prophet (saws) Abu
Bakr was the only person who fought against the apostates. Because this
Qur’anic verse is taken to be in favour of Abu Bakr, it is an indication
of the legitimacy of his caliphate, too.

b) In order to support his argument of the legitimacy of Abu Bakr’s
caliphate, Fakhr al–Razi adds a phrase of his own: “fighting against
apostates”. The verse refers to a group with certain attributes
including readiness “to strive in Allah’s way”. The verse has not said
that “these people will fight the apostates”.

Similar to the content of this verse is found in some other verses:  
 1. **“*****… if these disbelieve in it We have already entrusted with
it a people who are not disbelievers in it*****”*****.***[^25]

2. **“*****… and if you turn back He will bring in your place another
people, then they will not be like you*****”*****.***[^26]

3. **“*****If you do not go forth, He will chastise you with a painful
chastisement and bring in your place a people other than you, and you
will do Him no harm*****”*****.***[^27]

The content of the Qur’anic verse (in question) is similar to that of
the above mentioned verses. In the verse Fakhr al–Razi has cited, there
is no mention of a group of people who will fight the apostates.

### Question Eleven: Doesn’t the restriction in the verse invalidate the Imamate of the Infallible Imams?

If we say that the Qur’anic verse indicates the Imamate of Ali (as),
this will oppose the doctrine of Imamiyyah School of thought just as it
contradicts the Sunni doctrine, because the Shi’ites’ do not believe
only in Ali’s Imamate, but in the imamate of other eleven Imams, as
well.

Answer: First: On the basis of the solid evidence already presented, the
term wilayah means “divine authority and guardianship” and “bowing down”
means a bowing down in prayer. It has become clear that the word only,
indicating restriction, shows that hasr (restriction) in the verse is
relative, not real, because besides the Prophet and the Imams there are
other “guardians” such as jurists, rulers, the judges, fathers,
grandparents, and executors.

If we take *hasr* to have real meaning, the verse will negate the
authority of all these *walis* (guardians), but such is not the case.
This is a clue indicating that the restriction in the Qur’anic verse is
(functionally) relative, meaning authority, guardianship and succession
of the Commander of the Faithful (as) after the Prophet (saws).
Therefore, this is not incompatible with the idea of the Imamate of the
other (infallible) Imams.

Second: Based on the traditions in *hadith* sources of both Imamiyyah
Shi’ites and Sunnis, the Qur’anic phrase “*those who believe*”[^28] does
not refer only to Ali (as), because all the (infallible) Imams have had
the privilege of giving *Zakat* while they were bowing down in their
prayers just as Imam Ali (as) did. Thus, the Qur’anic verse has shown,
from the outset, that Imamate is granted to True Imams only.

### Question Twelve: Did Ali (as) have the office of guardianship in the lifetime of the Prophet (saws)?

If the Qur’anic verse provides evidence for the Imamate of Ali (as), Ali
(as) must to have had such a rank during the lifetime of the Prophet
(saws but this was not the case.

Answer: First: Multitude evidence prove that Ali (as) also had authority
in the lifetime of the Prophet (saws) and whenever the Prophet (saws)
was not present (in the town) he appointed Ali (as) as his deputy. The
tradition of Manzilah clearly shows that Ali (as) held all the ranks and
positions the Prophet had, just as Aaron had all the ranks held by
Moses, peace be on him.

When Prophet Moses wanted to leave for Mount Sinai, he said to his
brother Aaron “*Be my deputy*". As Sunni scholars hold, Aaron’s
succeeding Moses is not limited to the time when Moses was staying in
Mount Sinai.[^29] Therefore Ali (as) is the Prophet’s successor.

Second: If there is no evidence to prove Ali’s authority in the lifetime
of the Prophet (saws), the verse of *Wilayah* (certainly) indicates his
authority from the moment of the Prophet’s death.

### Question Thirteen: Considering the verse of Wilayah, can we consider Ali (as) as the fourth caliph?

Assuming that the Holy Qur’anic verse denotes, the appointment of Ali
(as) to the rank of Imamate, it does not negate the caliphate of the
three caliphs before him, because on the basis of the consensus and
consultative assembly, we accept the caliphate of the caliphs who came
before Ali (as) first and then observe the verse of *wilayah* which
indicates his Imamate.

Answer: First: The consultative assembly and consensus can be relied on
only if they are credible. Concerning Sunnis’ claim, the Imamiyyah
Shi’ites do not consider them satisfactory.

Second: The consultative assembly and the consensus of opinion can be
based on if there is no *nass* (divine decree). When there is an
explicit *nass* neither the consultative assembly nor consensus of
opinion is rendered effective, as God, may His majesty be extolled, has
said,

“***And it behoves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His apostle have
decided a matter*****”*****. (33:36)***

### Question Fourteen: Did Ali (as) invoke the verse of Wilayah to support his claim?

If the holy verse of *wilayah* indicates Ali’s Imamate, why didn’t he
invoke it to prove his claim although, for example, on the day of the
consultative assembly (**see p. 31)** and on many other occasions he
made known many of his merits to the people he met?

Answer: Some great Shi’ite and Sunni traditionists have reported the
occasions when Ali (as) introduced arguments for his Imamate including
the verse of wilayah.

For example, Ibrahim ibn Mohammad Jowayni*,* in his *Fara’id
al–Simtayn*[^30] and ibn Babaway, a Shi’ite scholar, in his *Kamal
al–Deen*[^31], have reported that during the caliphate of Uthman, when a
group of the Companions, Emigrants and *Ansar* were gathering in the
Prophet’s mosque, Ali (as) reminded them of his merits and excellence,
and of the verse of *wilayah*.

We have mentioned this long tradition at the end of the discussion on
the verse of *Aulu al–Amr*. The readers may refer to the last part of
the commentary of this verse in order to have a clear idea about the
personality of the author of *Fara’id al–Simtayn.*

[^1]: – Lisan al-’Arab, vol. 1, p. 245.

[^2]: – Sihah al-Lughah, vol. 5, p. 2073.

[^3]: – Al-Qamus al-Muheet, vol. 4, p. 198, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut.

[^4]: – Mughni al-Labeeb, vol. 1, p. 88, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah,
Beirut.

[^5]: – Lisan al-Arab, vol. 15, p. 401, Dar Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi,
Beirut.

[^6]: – Al-Misbah al-Muneer, vol. 2, p. 350, Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabi
wa Awladah, Egypt.

[^7]: – Lisan al-Arab, vol. 15, p. 410; al-Misbah al-Muneer, vol. 2, p.
350, Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabi, Egypt; An–Nihayah, vol. 5, p. 228,
al-Maktibtah al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut; Muntahil al-Irab, vol. 4, p. 1339,
Sanaii Library; Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 4, p. 554, Nashr Farhang Islami;
Sihah, p. 2529, Dar al-Ilm lil–Malyeen; al-Mufradat, p. 535, Daftar
Nashr Kitab; Mo’jam Maqaiis al-Lughah, vol. 6, p. 141.

[^8]: – a) “Allah is the guardian of those who believe. He brings them
out of the darkness into the light”. 2: 257. b) “Surely my guardian is
Allah, Who revealed the Book, and He befriends the good”. 7: 196. c) “Or
have they taken guardians besides Him? But Allah is the Guardian, and He
gives life to the dead”. 42:9. d) “Say, Shall I take a guardian besides
Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, and He feeds
(others) and is not (Himself) fed”. 6:14. e) “Thou art our Guardian,
therefore forgive us and have mercy on us, and Thou art the best of the
forgivers”. 7:155. f) “but if he who owes the debt is unsound in
understanding, or weak, or (if) he is not able to dictate himself, let
his guardian dictate with fairness” 2:282. g) “and whoever is slain
unjustly, We have indeed given to his heir authority”. 17:33. Also the
Qur’anic verses that follow: 12:101; 11:113; 42:46; 42:31; 16:63: 2:107,
and 120; 9:74 and 116; 29:22; 42: 8 and 31; 4: 45, 75, 89, 123 and 173;
33:17 and 65; 48: 22 where wali and naseer (helper) are used
simultaneously; 4:119; 19:5; 34:41; 27:49; 2: 139; 10:62; 17:97; 39:3;
42:6; 60:1; 3:175; 8:40; 47:11; 2:286; 9:51; 22:78.

[^9]: – Assalat wa al-Bashar fi Assalat ala Khayr al-Bashar, p. 33, Dar
al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

[^10]: – Jawhari’s Sihah, vol. 3, p. 1222, Dar al-Ilm Lil–Malyeen;
Firoozabadi’s al-Qamoos al-Moheet, vol. 3, p. 31, Dar al-Ma’rifah,
Beirut; Fayoomi’s al-Misbah al-Muneer, p. 254, printed in Egypt; ibn
Durayd’s Jamharat al–Lughah, vol. 2, p. 770; Khalil ibn Ahmad
Faraheedi’s Kital al-Ein, vol. 1, p. 200.

[^11]: – Taj al-Aroos, vol. 21, p. 122, Dar al-Hidayah lil–Tiba’a wa
al-Nashr wal Tuzee’.

[^12]: – Dhahabi’s words will be discussed in "Answer Two” to the
objections.

[^13]: – Al-Kashf wal-Bayan, vol. 4, pp 80–81, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath
al-Arabi.

[^14]: – Majm’a al-Bayan, vol. 3, p. 324.

[^15]: – Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 3, pp. 399–411; Jesass’s Ahkam al-Qur’an,
vol. 2, p. 446; Arba’in Abu al–Fawaris, p.22; Arjah al-Matalib, (as
quoted by Ihqaq al-Haqq) p. 169, printed in Lahoor; Asbab al-Nuzool, p.
133, Shareef Radhi printing Press; Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1, p.143;
tradition 7; p. 146, tradition 16; p.228, tradition 3, al-Maktabitah
al-Islamiyyah; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 2, p.381, Dar al-Fikr; Al-Bidayah
wa al-Nihayah, (Ibn Katheer’s History), vol. 7, p. 371, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyyah; Bahr al-Uloom, vol. 1, p. 445, Dar al–Kutub al-Ilmiyyah;
Bahr al-Muheet, vol. 3, p. 514, al-Tarikh al-Arabi Institute; History of
the City of Damascus, vol. 42, pp. 356 and 357, Dar al-Fikr; Tarjamat
al-Imam Amir al-Mumineen, vol. 2, pp. 409 and 410, Dar al-Ta’aruf
Lil-Matbooat; Al-Tasheel Li-Uloom, al-Tanzeel, vol. 1, p. 181, Dar
al-Fikr; Ibn Katheer’s Commentary, vol. 2, p. 74, Dar al-Ma’rifah,
Beirut; Baydawi’s Tafseer, vol. 1, p. 272, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah;
Al-Khazin Commentary vol. 1,p. 468, Dar al-Fikr; Forat Commentary,vol.1,
pp. 123–129; Ibn Abi Hatam’s Tafseer al-Qur’an, vol. 4, p. 1162,
al-Maktabah al-Ahliyyah, Beirut; Fakhr al-Razi’s Tafseer al-Kabeer, vol.
6, part 12, p. 26, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Arabi, Beirut;; Jami’ Ahkam
al-Qur’an, vol. 6, pp 221 and 222, Dar al-Fikr; Jam’i al-Usool, vol. 9,
p. 478, tradition 6503, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Arabi; Tabari’s Jami’
al-Bayan, vol. 4, part 6, p. 186, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut; Al-Jawahir
al-Hisan, vol. 2, p. 396, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Arabi, Beirut;
Hashiya–Shahab Ala Tafseer, Al-Baydawi, vol. 3, p. 257, Dar Ihya’
al-Turath al-Arabi, Beirut; Hashiyat al-Sawi Ala Tafseer al-Jalayan,
vol. 1, p. 291, Dar al-Fikr; Al-Hawi Lil–Fatawi, (as in Ihqaq al-Haqq),
Maktabah al-Quds, Cairo; Al–Dur al-Manthur, vol. 3, pp. 105 and 106, Dar
al-Fikr; Dhakhar al-Uqba, p. 88, al-Wafa’ Institute of Beirut; Rooh
al-M’ani,vol. 6, p.167, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Arabi; Al-Riyad
al-Nadarah, vol. 2, p. 182, Dar al-Nadwat al-Jadidah; Taftazani’s Sharh
al-Maqasid; vol. 5, pp. 270–1; Jorjani’s Sharh al-Mawaqif, vol. 8,p.
360; Ibn Abi Hadeed’s Commentary of Nahj al-Balaghah; Shawahid
al-Tanzeel, pp. 209 to 248; tradition 26; Nayshabur’s Gara’ib al-Qur’an;
vol. 2, part 6, p. 606, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut; Fath
al-Gadeer, Shokani’s Commentary; vol. 2, p. 66, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut; Ibrahim ibn Mohammad Jowayni’s Fara’id al-Simtayn,
vol. 1, pp. 187 and 195, al-Mahoodi Institute; Al-Fosool al-Mohimmah,
pp. 123 and 124, al-’Alami Publishing House, Tehran; Zamakhshari’s
al-Kashaf, vol. 1, p. 347, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut; Kifayat al–Talib,
pp.249–50, Dar Ihya’ Turath of Ahl al–Bayt; Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 13, pp.
108 and 165, Al-Risalah Institute; Al-Bab fi Uloom al-Kitab, vol. 7, pp.
390 and 398, Dar al-Kitab al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut; Majma’ al-Zawaid, vol. 7,
p. 80, Dar al-Fikr; Al-Muraj’at, p. 257; Murqat al-Mafateeh, vol. 10, p.
462, Dar al-Fikr; Matalib al-Su’ool; vol. 1, pp. 86–7; Ma’alim
al-Tanzeel, vol. 2, p. 47; Al-Mu’jam al-Awsat, vol. 7, p. 129–30,
Makitbat al-Mu’arif al-Riyadh; Ma’rifaht Uloom al-Hadith, p. 102, Dar
al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah; Manaqib, Ibn Magazili, p. 331, al-Maktib
al-Islamiyyah; Manaqib, Khawarizmi, pp. 264–6, Al-Nashr al-Islami
Institute; Eeji’s Mawaqif, vol. 8, p. 360; Nazm Durr al-Simtayn, (as in
Ihqaq al-Haqq) p. 86, Al-Qadha’ Publishing House; Al-Nokat wa al-Oyoon,
(al-Mawrodi’s Commentary), vol. 2, p.49, al-Kutub al-Thaqafiya
Institute; Noor al-Absar, pp. 86–7, Dar al-Fikr.

[^16]: – Siyar A’lam al-Nubalah’, vol. 17, p. 435, al-Risalah Institute,
Beirut.

[^17]: – History of Nayshabur, p. 109.

[^18]: – Ibn Katheer’s Commentary, vol. 2, p. 74.

[^19]: –Al–Tabari’s Commentary, vol. 6, p. 186, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut.

[^20]: – Usool Kafi, vol. 1, p.143, tradition 7, p. 146, tradition 16,
p.228, tradition 3, al-Maktabah al-Islamiyyah; Kamal al-Deen, vol.1,pp.
274–279, Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah; Far’id al-Simtayn; vol. 1, p. 312,
tradition 250, al-Mahmoodi li–Tiba’ah wa al-Nashr Institute; Yanabi’
al-Mawadah, pp. 114–116.

[^21]: – Ahkam al-Qur’an, vol. 2, p. 446, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah,
Beirut.

[^22]: – Jami’ Ahkam al-Qur’an, vol. 6, p. 221, Dar al-Fikr.

[^23]: – Ahkam al-Qur’an, vol. 2, p.446.

[^24]: – Surah 5, verse 55.

[^25]: – Surah 6, verse 89.

[^26]: – Surah 47, verse 38.

[^27]: – Surah 9, verse 39.

[^28]: – Usool Kafi, vol. 1, p. 143, tradition 7; p. 146, tradition 16;
p. 228, and tradition 3, Al-Maktabah al-Islamiyyah; Kamal al-Deen, vol.
1, pp. 274–279, Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah; Fara’id al-Simtayn, vol. 1,
p. 312, tradition 250, al-Mahmoodi Institute lil–Tibah; Yanabi
al-Mawadah, pp. 114–116.

[^29]: – Taftazani’s Sharh al-Maqasid, vol. 5, p. 276, al-Shareef
al-Razi Publications.

[^30]: – Fara’id al-Simtayn, vol. 1, p. 312, Al-Mahmoodi Institute
lil–Tibah wa al-Nashr.

[^31]: – Kamal al-Deen, vol. 1, p. 274.


