Chapter 6: Imamate in the Qur’anic Verse of Tatheer
===================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّما يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَ يُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيراً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O
people of the House and to purify you a*** **(*****thorough*****)**
***purifying*****”**[^1]

Another verse indicating the impeccability of the Shi’ite Infallible
Imams is the verse of *Tatheer*, which points to the inerrancy of the
Prophet (saws) and his dear family: Hazrat Fatimah, God’s peace be on
her, and the twelve inerrant (*ma’sum*) the Imams of Imamiyyiah Shi’ism.

In order to clarify the argument of the verse, let us consider the
following points:

1. The word انما which means only, in the verse indicates *hasr*
(restriction).

2. The word *iradeh* (will) from which the verb يريد is derived, is an
ontological will, not a legislative one

3. The phrase “*Ahl al–Bayt*” in the verse refers exclusively to Ali,
Fatimah, al–Hasan and al–Husain, (p.b.u.th.), and the other Shi’ite
Infallible Imams (p.b.u.th.). The verse does not include wives of the
Prophet (saws).

4. Questions and answers concerning the Qur’anic verse.

The Word انما Indicating Restriction
------------------------------------

Just as we observed in the discussion of the verse, of *wilayah*
lexicographers maintain that the word انما indicates restriction. One
can review the objections of Fakhr al–Razi included in the chapter about
the objections on the verse of *wilayah*.

### “Iradeh” in the Verse of Tatheer has Ontological, not Legislative Connotation

“*Iradeh*” in the above Qur’anic verse (translated as “desire”) is
ontological, not legislative. The desire of God, the Most Exalted, is of
two kinds:

a) Ontological (*takweeni*) desire*,* is a kind of desire the object of
which occurs (immediately) after the desire is expressed, just like the
case when God willed that fire be “ *comfort and peace*” to Prophet
Ibrahim, and it did.

b) Legislative desire is a kind of desire which concerns man’s duties.
It is evident that this kinds of desire is not integrated with the
object of desire. God has willed that people perform their prayers, but
many do not pray. Contrary to ontological desire, which cannot be
ignored, legislative desire may be ignored.

“Desire” in the above holy Qur’anic verse is of ontological, not
legislative kind. This means that God has willed that the People of the
House (*Ahl al–Bayt*) be free from any uncleanness and defilement,
including the dross of sins and disobedience (to Him). He has purified
them. This wish of the Majestic God, is behind their impeccability and
spiritual purity. It is not that God has willed that they keep aloof
from sins, and that they purify themselves by obeying divine orders and
obligations.

Evidence for the Idea that “desire” in the Verse of Tatheer has Ontological Connotations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Like any obligation, legislative desire concerns what others do,
whereas desire in the holy verse concerns keeping away of abomination
and uncleanness which is regarded an act of God. This indicates that
“desire” in the stated verse does not have legislative connotations.

2. God’s legislative desire is not intended for the removal of
impurities and purification of only the family of Prophet (saws) but God
has desired and demanded all people to avoid impurities and be pure,
whereas desire in the verse is restricted to the family of the Prophet,
which is expressed by the use of *hasr* at the onset of the verse of
*Tatheer*, making clear that the object of the desire i.e. keeping away
from impurity and God’s specially endowed purification has been achieved
externally

3. Many reports and narrations in both Shi’ite and Sunni *hadith* and
commentary sources bear witness that the holy Qur’anic verse praises the
Prophet’s family. If the desire (stated) in the Qur’anic verse had
legislative connotations, it would contain such praise.

What we learn from the holy Qur’anic verse is “the accomplishment of
God’s desire” regarding the utter purification of the Household of the
Prophet (saws) and keeping from them impurities. This indicates the
divine impeccability (*ismah*), of these chosen people.

Another solid evidence supporting (the idea) that this desire has
ontological connotations are the *hadith*s indicating the particular
divine purity of the Household of the Prophet (*Ahl al–Bayt*). Below are
two such *hadith*s:

1) It is stated in *al–Dala–il* by Hakim Tirmadhi, Tabarani, ibn
Murdawayh, Abu Na’im and Beihaqi that ibn Abbas has said, “The Prophet
(saws) said, ‘God has divided people into two groups and placed me in
the best group. Hence, He says,

“***And the Companions of the right*****”** ***(56:27)***

“***And those of the left hand*****”** ***(56:41)***

And I am better than any of the Companions of the right. He then divided
each of these two groups, into three and placed me in the best one.
Hence, He says,

“***Then*** **(*****as to*****)** ***the Companions of the right hand;
how happy are the Companions of the right hand, and*** **(*****as
to*****)** ***the Companions of the left hand; how wretched are the
Companions of the left hand. And the foremost are the foremost*****”
(56:8-10)**.

I am among the foremost and I am the best of the foremost. He then
divided these three groups into tribes and families. He placed me, in
the best tribe. He, therefore, says,

“***And made you tribes and families that you may know each other;
surely the most honourable of you with Allah is the one among you most
careful*** **(*****of his duty*****)”*****.*** (49:13)

Humbly speaking, I am the one who is most careful of my duty and most
honourable (toward Allah), of all mankind. God then divided the tribes
into houses, and placed me in the best one. He, thus, says,

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House and to purify you a*** **(*****thorough*****)**
***purifying*****”**. (33:33)

So, I and my family have been purified”.[^2]

2) “Husain ibn Zayd told me on the authority of Umar ibn Ali who
reported from his father Ali ibn al–Husain (as), that ‘After Imam
al–Hasan’s dear father, Imam Ali (as) had died, Imam al–Hasan (as) gave
a speech in which he glorified God and said, “tonight God has taken to
Him a man whom neither the early (Muslims) surpassed nor the later
Muslims can surpass in good actions.

The Prophet (saws) used to give him his standards in wars and he (Ali,
peace be upon him) fought with Gabriel, (the intermediary angel for
God’s grace in legal matters) supporting him on his right and Michael
(the intermediary angel for God’s grace in matters of the divine
sustenance) supporting him on his left until God made him score victory.

He has left behind him neither gold nor silver but seven hundred
dirham’s of his stipend (‘ata), with which to buy a servant for his
family”. He (Imam al–Hasan -p.b.u.h.-) continued, “Those who (already)
know me, know me. As for those who do not know me, I am al–Hasan ibn
Ali, the (grand) son of the Prophet, and the son of his vicegerent. I am
the (grand) son of the one who has brought good news, *basheer.*

I am the (grand) son of the one who, with God’s permission, summoned the
people to God. I am the (grand) son of the divinely illuminating light
(*al–Siraj al–Muneer).* I belong to the House, wherein Gabriel descended
and whence Gabriel ascended. I belong to the House from whose members
God has sent away abomination and whose members God has purified
thoroughly.

I belong to the House, the love for whose members God has made incumbent
on people, as He, the Most High, states, *‘I do not ask of you any
reward but love for* (*my*) *near relatives; and whoever earns good, We
give him more of good therein; surely Allah is Forgiving Grateful*’ So,
to do good is to show love towards us, the People of the House, *Ahl
al–Bayt*”*.*[^3]

It is concluded from these two *hadith*s that the external fulfilment of
specifically divine purity of *Ahl al–Bayt* is nothing but their
inerrancy. This illustration clearly indicates that “the desire” in the
Qur’anic verse of *Tatheer* has ontological connotations.

Ahl al–Bayt in the Verse of Tatheer
-----------------------------------

The third point in the discussion on the verse is about who *the Ahl
al–Bayt* are. Below are the two focal points:

a) The meaning of *Ahl al–Bayt.*

b) To whom the term *Ahl al–Bayt* is applicable.

When in isolation, the word *Ahl* means deserving. But in collocation
with other words, it acquires a special meaning. For example, *Ahl
al–Ilm* meaning the knowledgeable, *Ahl al–Madina* or *Qariyah* meaning
“those living in a town or a village” and “people of the house” those
residing in a house.

As for the word *Bayt*, it may mean residence, and it may mean lineage.
It may also mean The Prophet’s Household, which is the most probable
meaning. Further explanation of this meaning will follow. Thus, *Ahl
al–Bayt* refers to those who are closely related, to the Prophet’s House
and are fully aware of what goes on in it.

Now, let’s see who it externally applies to and who the *People of the
House* (*Ahl al–Bayt*), are. There are three views it this regard:

**First:** “*Ahl al–Bayt*” means only the Prophet’s wives.

**Second**: *Ahl al–Bayt*, means only the Prophet, Ali, Fatimah,
al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.), and the Prophet’s wives.[^4]

**Third:** According to Imamiyyah Shi’ites, “*Ahl al–Bayt*” refers to
the Prophet (saws), his beloved daughter Hazrat Fatimah, and to the
twelve Infallible Imams, God bless them all.

Some Sunni scholars, such as Tahawi in his *Mushkil al–Athar* and Hakim
Nayshaburi in his *al–Mustadrak*, take *Ahl al–Bayt* to mean only “the
five people”.

In order to clarify who is meant by *Ahl al–Bayt*, we need to examine
the following points:

1) The purport of the holy Qur’anic verse.

2) A review of the reports and narrations concerning this Qur’anic
verse.

The Purport of the Qur’anic Verse
---------------------------------

For examining the purport of the Qur’anic verse, it is necessary to take
a look at these points:

a) Literally and traditionally, *Ahl al–Bayt* includes these five
persons.

b) Using the pronoun عنكم, which is a plural masculine form indicates
that the verse does not refer to wives.

c) There is a large number of narrations which state that *Ahl al–Bayt*
includes the five persons. To say that the Prophet’s wives are among
*Ahl al–Bayt* is an unfounded allegation and does not sound reasonable.
One of such allegations has been put forward by Ukromah who says, “I am
ready to have a contest of prayer with anyone to prove that *Ahl
al–Bayt* exclusively means the wives of the Prophet (saws)”.[^5]

If only Ukromah had a contest of prayer, he would have been exposed to
God’s punishment! He ignores the bulk of *hadiths* which confirms the
lofty rank of these five persons and the revelation of the verse of
*Tatheer*.

In addition to that, a large number of Sunnis take *Ahl al–Bayt* to mean
the wives of the Prophet (saws) as well as Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and
al–Husain (p.b.u.th.). In order to prove their point of view the Sunnis
resort to the context of some verses, for example in the verse of
*Tatheer* the verse which precedes it and the verse which follows it
concern the wives of the Prophet (saws).

(They say that) the appropriateness of the meaning of the Prophet’s
wives to *Ahl al–Bayt* as well as the contextual clues indicate that the
Prophet’s wives are included among *Ahl al–Bayt*.

In his *commentary*, Ibn Katheer, considers the contextual clue as a
convincing proof for including the wives of the Prophet among *Ahl
al–Bayt*.

The Context of the Verse of Tatheer
-----------------------------------

Can the alleged context (*siaq*), apply to the verse of *Tatheer*? Can
it be proved that the wives of the Prophet (saws) are included among
*Ahl al–Bayt?* In order to answer this question, it is necessary to
consider the following points:

**First:** The mere succession of two verses does not indicate that the
verses belong to a structural whole (*siaq*) and one cannot confirm that
these verses were revealed together, because forming a structural whole,
requires that the verses be revealed at the same time.

For this very reason we are not certain that we can affirm the existence
of (*siaq*). Besides, because the present arrangement of the Qur’anic
verses does not correspond to the chronology of revelation of the
verses, one can never be certain that the verse of *Tatheer* was
revealed after the verses about the wives of the Prophet (saws).

If someone says: Although these verses were not revealed at the same
time, they form a structural whole (*siaq*) because the verses and
chapters were arranged on the basis of a especial position owing to
spiritual link under the supervision of the Prophet (saws), and so *Ahl
al–Bayt* consists of the wives of the Prophet as well as the five
persons (p.b.u.th.).

**Answer:** There is no evidence (at hand to prove) that due to the
particular position which the verse of *Tatheer* has owing to the
spiritual link between the verses, the Prophet (saws) has placed this
verse among the verses related to his wives for he thought it was the
wisest thing.

But to consider the spiritual link as the only wise thing to do cannot
be substantiated for, it may be considered as an admonition for the
wives of the Prophet to observe their behaviour due to their relation
with “*Ahl al–Bayt*, not because they are included among *Ahl al–Bayt*.

**Second:** There are some reasons which make us conclude that the
context of the verse of *Tatheer* varies from the context of any of the
verses preceding of following it. There are two separate contexts, each
one is independent of the other. The reason are as follows:

a) The context of the verses about the wives of the Prophet (saws)
conveys reproach (as is in the verses 28 and on) and there is no sign
and praise of the wives, whereas the context of the verse of *Tatheer*
speaks of praise and admiration. When we go through the *hadith*s
related to the verse of *Tatheer*, this will be more distinct.

b) The conditions of the revelation of the verse of *Tatheer* are
different from those of the verses concerned with the Prophet’s wives.
The latter verses were revealed at a time when the Prophet’s wives
demanded from him more expenses than was their due. The reader may refer
to the commentaries of both the Shi’ites and the Sunnis.

We will first quote the verses concerned with the wives of the Prophet
(saws) and then introduce the tradition reported by ibn Katheer
concerning the conditions of the revelation of the verses.

**“*****O Prophet! Say to your wives: If you desire this world’s life
and its adornment, then come, I will give you a provision and allow you
to depart a goodly departing. And if you desire Allah and His Apostle
and the latter abode, then surely Allah has prepared for the doers of
good among you a mighty reward. O wives of the Prophet! Whoever of you
commits an open indecency, the*** ***punishment shall be increased to
her doubly; and this is easy to Allah. And whoever of you is obedient to
Allah and His Apostle and does good, We will give to her reward doubly,
and We have prepared for her an honourable sustenance. O wives of the
Prophet! You are not like any other of the women; if you will be on your
guard, then be not soft in*** **(*****your*****)*****speech, lest he in
whose heart is a disease yearn; and speak a good word. And stay in your
houses and do not display your finery like the displaying of the
ignorance of yore; and keep up prayer, and pay the poor–rate, and obey
Allah and His Apostle. Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness
from you, O people of the House! and to purify you a***
**(*****thorough*****)** ***purifying. And keep to mind what is recited
in your houses of the communications of Allah and the*** ***wisdom;
surely Allah is Knower of subtleties, Aware*****”*****. (33:28-34)***

Ibn Katheer has related on the authority of Abi Zubayr, that Jabir said,
“While people were sitting opposite the Prophet’s house, Abu Bakr and
Umar came and asked permission to enter (the house), which they were
first denied. Then, when they were allowed to enter they noticed the
Prophet (saws) sitting. Around him sat his wives. The Prophet (saws) was
silent.

Umar, who wanted to make the Prophet smile, said: O! Messenger of God, I
wish you had seen how I beat Zayd’s daughter (he meant his wife) when
she asked for expenses.

The Prophet (saws) smiled so that his blessed teeth were visible, and
said “They (my wives) are sitting around me asking for (more) payment”.

Then Abu Bakr got up, and went towards ‘A’ishah to beat her, and then
Umar got up, and they addressed their daughters saying, ‘Do you want the
Prophet (saws) to give you something which he does not have?” The
Prophet forbad them (from beating their daughters).

Then the Prophet’s wives said, “From now on, we will never ask the
Prophet (saws) for things which he does not have”. God, the Most High,
revealed the verses that leave it to the Prophet’s wives to choose
between remaining as the Prophet’s wives or getting divorced”.[^6]

This is the condition of the revelation of the verses concerning the
wives of the Prophet (saws) whereas the verse of *Tatheer* was revealed
in favour of the five blessed ones of *al–Aba* and the Infallible Imams
(p.b.u.th.). Commentary and *hadith* sources of both the Shi’ites and
the Sunnits are replete with narrations in this regard. Some of these
narrations will be presented when we deal with these traditions.

Probably there is a long period between the condition of the revelation
of the verses concerned with the Prophet’s wives and that of the verse
of *Tatheer*. So how could one take these verses to belong to a single
structural whole (*siaq*) and justify one’s interpretation of the verse
according to this idea while these Qur’anic verses belong to two
separate periods.

**Third:** The third reason that shatters the idea of unity of context
is the dissimilarity of the pronouns in the verses concerned with the
wives of the Prophet (saws) and those in the verse of *Tatheer*.

There are twenty two plural feminine pronouns in the imperative, twenty
of them in the verses preceding the verse of *Tatheer* and two in the
verse following it, whereas in the verse of *Tatheer* there are two
pronouns in the imperative, both of them are macular. Given this, how
can we assume that these verses form one single structural whole?

**Objection:** In the verse of *Tatheer*, the phrases عنكم “*from you*”,
and يطهركم, “*to purify* *you*” do not refer to men only; because in
addition to the women, Ali, al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th), are
included. That is why the pronoun كم (you) is used here. In Arabic this
is called *taqleeb* (dominance) and that is when two various genders are
to be referred to the masculine gender dominates and it is used for
both.

We can see in the Qur’an similar cases of using masculine pronouns to
refer to the feminine gender. For example:

a)  

**  
**

﴿

**  
**
قالُوا أَ تَعْجَبِينَ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ رَحْمَتُ اللَّهِ وَ بَرَكاتُهُ
عَلَيْكُمْ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ

**  
**
﴾

**“*****They said: Do you wonder at Allah’s bidding? The mercy of Allah
and His blessings are on you,*** ***O people of the house*****”*****.***
(11:73)

Here, Prophet Ibrahim’s wife is addressed; and the masculine plural
pronoun before *Ahl al–Bayt* in which she is included.

b) **﴿قالَ لأَِهْلِهِ امْكُثُوا﴾**

**“*****He said to his family: Wait*****”** (28:29)

Having mentioned Prophet Moses’ *Ahl* (meaning wife), the Qur’an uses
the plural verb of masculine gender.

**Answer**

The basis of any discourse, is to associate the words with their real
meanings which is a logical principle of any conversation in any
language. On the basis of this principle, whenever we are uncertain
whether or not a word is used in its real meaning, we should refer to
its real sense.

Thus, the pronoun عنكم, which comes twice in the verse of *Tatheer*,
which is a plural masculine pronoun in the imperative, refers to all the
male members of *Ahl al–Bayt*, and according to external clues and
*hadiths*, Hazrat Fatimah, peace be on her, and no other female, is
definitely included among *Ahl al–Bayt.* Thus, the principle of “closest
figurative meaning” applies to this verse.

As a contextual clue, the Qur’anic verses quoted as testimony, contains
a masculine pronoun used figuratively for a feminine (noun) and a
figurative usage of a word together with a contextual clue cannot prove
that this can also occur without a clue. As stated before, the basic
principle is to associate words with their real meanings. But where this
is not possible, the “closest figurative meaning” should be observed.

Narrations Concerning the Verse of Tatheer
------------------------------------------

Abundant traditions in Shi’ite and Sunni *hadith* sources, clearly tell
us that *Ahl al–Bayt* means only the Five Pure People and that the wives
of the Prophet (saws) are not included. Such narrations are so plentiful
that Hakim Hasakani,[^7] has devoted pages 18 to 140 of his *Shawahid
al–Tanzeel* to this issue.[^8]

In the footnote, there is a list of some Sunnite sources containing such
narrations:[^9]

Below is a partial list of the Sunnite sources of the above–mentioned
hadith.

The Companions of the Prophet, from whom these *hadiths* have been
quoted, are:

The Commander of the Faithful, Ali, peace be on him.

1. Fatimah Zahra, peace be on her

2. Al–Hasan ibn Ali, peace be on him

3. Anas ibn Malik

4. Bara’ ibn ’Azib al–Ansari

5. Jabir ibn Abdullah al–Ansari

6. Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas

7. S’ad ibn Malik (Abu Sa’eed al–Khidri)

8. Abdullah ibn Abbas

9. Abdullah ibn Jaffar al–Tayyar

10. ‘A’ishah

11. Umm Salamah

12. Umar ibn Abi Salamah

13. Wathilat ibn Asqa’

14. Abi al–Hamra’

In addition to the sources stated in the footnote, it is understood from
the *hadiths* included in Shi’ite sources of *hadith* and Qur’an
commentary and in some Sunnite sources that by “*Ahl al–Bayt*” it is
meant the Prophet, Ali, Fatimah, and the eleven Infallible Imams of the
Shi’ites (p.b.u.th.).

### Classification of the Narrations on the Verse of Tatheer

When we study the narrations on the verse of *Tatheer* recorded in
Sunnite sources, and look through the Shi’ite texts we will find that
these narrations can be divided into the following groups:

1. Narrations which say that “*Ahl al–*Bayt” means Ali, Fatimah,
al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th).

2. Narrations which state that the Prophet (saws) placed Ali, Fatimah,
al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.) under a kind of dress (*kisa*) and
the verse of *Tatheer* was revealed. This is known as *hadith al–Kisa*.
Some narrations also say that Umm Salamah or ‘A’ishah asked the Prophet
“Am I one of them?”

3. Narrations which report that the Prophet (saws) used to call at
Hazrat Ali and Fatimah’s house, (peace be upon them) every morning or
five times a day and greet them and recite the verse of *Tatheer*.

4. Narrations indicating that the holy verse of *Tatheer* has been
revealed in favour of the Five People, or in favour of the Five People
and Gabriel and Michael.

Below are some examples of these five groups:

#### 1– The Traditions which say that “the Ahl al–Bayt” means the Five pure People

a) In *Al–Mustadrak ‘ala al–Sahihyan,* Abdullah ibn Ja’far is quoted to
have said:

“When the Prophet (saws) noticed God’s mercy descending from heavens, he
said ‘Call (them) to me, call (them) to me.’ Saffiyyeh asked, ‘Whom
should I call, O Messenger of Allah?’ He said, ‘Call my *Ahl al–Bayt*:
Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and al–Husain.’

When they were brought forth, the Prophet (saws) covered them with his
*kisa*, and extended his hands and said, God, these are my *Ahl
al–Bayt*. Send Thy blessings on Mohammad and his descendants.’ At this
time the Qur’anic verse: “*Allah only desires to keep away the
uncleaness from you, O People of the House and purify you a thorough
purifying*” was revealed. This narration has an authentic chain of
transmission”.[^10]

Hakim Nayshaburi, a forerunner in (science of) *hadith* and
*ilm–al–rijal*, says:

“The chain of transmission of this *hadith* is authentic, although
Bukhari and Muslim have not mentioned it in their *Sahihs*”.[^11]

b) Abu Sa’id al–Khidri quotes Umm Salamah to have said, “This Qur’anic
verse: ‘*Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O Ahl
al–Bayt and purify you a thorough purifying*’ was revealed in my house.

Then, I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah, am I not one of them?’ The Prophet
(saws) said, ‘You are on the good path. You are one of the wives of the
Prophet’. Umm Salamah (then) said, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Hussein
(p.b.u.th.) are the Prophet’s Household, *Ahl al– Bayt*”.[^12]

#### 2– Expressions in Hadith al–Kisa Used in the Interpretation of the Verse of Tatheer

In Shi’ite and Sunnite sources of *hadith* and commentary there are a
large number of narrations which say that the Prophet (saws) had his
*Ahl al–Bayt* go under a covering (*kisa*) and the verse of *Tatheer*
was then revealed in favour of them. Below are some examples of such
narrations.

It should be noted that *Hadith al–Kisa* has a particularly outstanding
position among the Shi’ites. This *hadith* is narrated by Hazrat Fatimah
Zahra, peace be on her, and included in the late Bahrani’s[^13] book
*'Awwam al–Uloom*. The chain of transmissions of this *hadith* is
ornamented with the names of great Shi’ite scholars and jurists of
various epochs and it is read by the Shi’ite’s in special gathering to
attain God’s blessings.

The expressions, in the above-mentioned group of reports which confirm
that *Ahl al–Bayt* means the Five Pure People, are worth considering.
They are as follows:

1. “You are on the good path”, or annexed with the expression “You are
one of the Prophet’s wives”.[^14]

2. “ Keep away, you are on the good path”.[^15]

3. “He took it away from my hand”.[^16]

4. He did not say, ‘You are one of (members of) the Household’.[^17]

5. “No, and you are on the good path”.[^18]

6. By God, he did not say, ‘Yes’.[^19]

7. “Stay where you are; you are on the good path”.[^20]

8. I wished he had said, ‘Yes’.[^21]

9. Stay away from my Household.[^22]

10. You are on the good path, but he did not include me with them[^23]

11. By God, he did not say, ‘You are with them’.[^24]

12. Sit where you are; you are on the good path.[^25]

13. You are on the good path, and these are my *Ahl al–Bayt.*[^26]

We will cite a narration for each of these expressions.

##### A. The Expression “You Are on the Good Path”

“Ibn Jarir, ibn Abi Hatam, al–Tabarni and ibn Murdaway state that Umm
Salamah, the Prophet’s wife, has said, ‘The Prophet was in her house
when Hazrat Fatimah Zahra (sa) brought food for the Prophet (saws).

The Prophet (saws) told her to call her husband, Ali, and her children
al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.), to go to him. So, they went. While
they were having food, the verse of *Tatheer* was revealed, and the holy
Prophet (saws) extend his hands towards the sky and said, “God , These
are my *Ahl al–Bayt* and my special close relatives (*khassati*), so
take uncleanness away from them and purify them a thorough purifying.
Umm Salamah said, ‘I placed my head under Khaybari covering (*kisa*)*,*
and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Am I with you?’ The Prophet answered,
‘You are on the good path”. He said it twice.

It should be noted that if Umm Salamah had been, according to the verse
of *Tatheer*, among the *Ahl al–Bayt,* the Prophet would have clearly
given her a positive answer. But his excellent attributes, praised in
the Qur’an, would not allow him to explicitly give her a negative
answer. Thus, the Prophet’s words, in the various *hadith*s, can be a
clear indication that the Prophet’s wives are excluded from the *Ahl
al–Bayt*.

##### B. The expression “Keep away; you are on the good path”

“Al–Awwam i.e. ibn Hawshab quotes his cousin to have said, “My father
and I went to *‘A’ishah* and I asked her about Ali (as). She answered,
‘You are asking me about someone who is most loved by the Messenger of
God (saws), someone whose wife is the Prophet’s daughter who is most
loved by the Prophet.

I saw the Messenger of God (saws) call Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and
al–Husain (p.b.u.th.) and put some kind of dress (*thawb*) on them and
say, “O God, these are *Ahl Bayti* (my Household); take uncleanness away
from them and purify them a thorough purifying”. Then, I went close to
them and said, ‘O Messenger of God, am I one of your *Ahl al–Bayt*?’ He
(saws) said ‘Keep away, you are on the good path”.[^27]

##### C. The expression “He took it away from my hand”

Umm Salamah is quoted to have said, “The Messenger of God (saws) said to
Fatimah, peace be on her, “Call your husband and your children to me”.
Fatimah (sa) told them to go and they did. Then, the Prophet (saws) cast
on them a *kisa* woven in Fadak, put his hand on them and said,

‘O God, these are Mohammad’s *Ahl* (Household), (in another version he
said *Al*); send your blessings on Mohammad’s Household, just as you
sent blessings on the Household of Ibrahim, Thou art the Praised,
Glorious. Umm Salamah said, “Then I lifted the *kisa* to join them. He
took it away from my hand and said, ‘You are on the good path”.

##### D. The expression “He did not say: You are one of (the members of) the Household”

Umrah, the daughter of Af’a is quoted to have said, “I heard Umm Salamah
say, ‘This verse: *Allah only desires to keep away uncleanness from you
O Ahl al–Bayt and purify you a thorough purifying* was revealed in my
house*.* At that time there were seven individuals in the house:
Gabriel, Michael, the Messenger of God, Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and
al–Husain (p.b.u.th.).

Standing at the door of the house, I said, ‘O Messenger of God, am I not
one of them?’ He said, ‘ you are on the good path; you are one of the
Prophet’s wives. He did not say, ‘You are one of (the members of) the
Household’*.*[^28]

##### E. The expression “No, and you are on the good path”

“Attiyyah has reported on the authority of Abi Sa’id, that Umm Salamah
said, ‘The Prophet (saws) covered Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and al–Husain
(p.b.u.th.) with *kisa*. Then, he said, ‘O God, these are my *Ahl
al–Bayt* (Household) who will return to You, not to the fire.’ Umm
Salamah added, ‘I asked, O Messenger of God, am I with them?’ He said
‘No, and you are on the good path”.[^29]

##### F. The expression “By God, he did not say ‘Yes’”

A’mash has quoted Hakim ibn Sa’ad to have said, “When we mentioned the
name of Ali (as) before Umm Salamah, she told us that it was in his
favour that the verse of *Tatheer* was revealed, and added that after
the Prophet (saws) had placed Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and al–Husain
(p.b.u.th.) under the *kisa*, the verse and *Tatheer* was revealed, and
when Umm Salamah asked the Messenger of God, if she was one of them she
heard no positive reply. She conveyed this idea when she said “By God,
he did not say ‘Yes’”). He only said, “You are on the good path”.[^30]

##### G. The expression “Stay where you are; you are on the good path”

Shahr ibn Hawshab has quoted Umm Samalah to have said, “The Messenger of
God (saws) took *thawb* a garment, *,* and put it on Ali, Fatimah,
al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.); he then recited this verse “*Allah
only desires to keep away uncleanness from you O Ahl al–Bayt and purify
you a* *thorough purifying*” Umm Salamah added, ‘When I went (closer) to
step in, under the garment the Prophet (saws) said, “Stay where you are,
you are on the good path”.[^31]

There is another version of the *hadith* which is as follows: “Keep to
your own place, and you will gain good”, or as follows: “Sit where you
are, you are on the good path”.[^32]

##### H. The expression “I wished he had said, ‘Yes’ ”

Umrat al–Hamdaniyyeh is quoted to have said, “I went to Umm Salamah’s
(house) and greeted her. She asked me ‘Who are you?’ I said, ‘I am Umrat
al–Hamdaniyyeh.’ Then, Ummrah said, ‘O Mother of the Believers, tell me
about the man (referring to Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be on him) who was
recently murdered, and whom some people love and others hate.’

Umm Salamah asked, ‘Do you love him or hate him?’ Ummrah said, ‘I
neither love him nor hate him.’… Then, God, the Mighty and High,
revealed the verse “*Allah only desires to keep away uncleanness…”*at a
time when there was no one in the house other than Gabriel, the
Messenger of God, Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.) all.

Then I asked the Messenger of God, ‘Am I (a member of the) *Ahl
al–Bayt*? He said, “For you there is a good reward with god.” At that
time I wished he had said, ‘Yes’; which was more dear to me than that
over which the sun rises and when it sets.[^33]

##### I. The expression “Stay away from my Household”

Abi al–Mo’addel Attiyyeh al–Tafawi reported on the authority of his
father, who quoted Umm Salamah to have said, ‘The Messenger of God
(saws) was in my house when the servant said, ‘Ali, and Fatimah
(p.b.u.th.) are at the door’. The Prophet (saws) said (to me) ‘Get up
and stay away from my Household’.

Then, Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.) entered, and the
Prophet (saws) prayed (to God) sayings’ God, these are my Household, to
You, not to the fire.’ Umm Salamah said, ‘O Messenger of God, and I?’
The Prophet said, “You, too”[^34].

It is evident that in his words, the Prophet (saws) first stated clearly
that Umm Salamah was not included among the Household– but then in his
prayer for keeping them away from the Fire he joined her with them.

##### J. The expression “You are on the good path; but he did not include me with them”

'Awwam ibn Hawshab quoted Jami’ al–Taymi to have said, “My mother and I
went to ‘A’ishah’s house. My mother asked her about Ali (as). ‘A’ishah
said, ‘What do you think of a man whose spouse is Fatimah, peace be on
her, and whose children are al–Hasan and al–Husain?

I saw the Prophet (saws) place a garment on them and say ‘These are my
Household. O God, take away uncleanness from them and purify them a
thorough purifying’. Then, I said, ‘O Messenger of God, am I one of your
Household?’ He said ‘You are on the good path.’ He did not include me
with them”[^35].

##### K. The expression “By God, he did not say ‘you are with them’ ”

Umm Salama said, “The Messenger of God (saws) placed Ali, Fatimah,
al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.) under the *kisa*. Then, he prayed,
saying ‘O God, these are my Household, take away uncleanness from them
and purify them a thorough purifying’. So, I said, “O Messenger of God,
am I (included) among them?’ Then, Umm Salamah adds, ‘By God, he did not
say, ‘you are among them’, but he said ‘You are on the good path and
towards the good’.[^36]”

##### L. The expression “You are on the good path, and these are my Ahl al–Bayt (Household)”

Atta ibn Yasar reported that Umm Salamah, may God be pleased with her,
had said, “The Prophet (saws) sent some one for Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan
and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.). When they arrived, the Prophet (S.A.) said,’
O God, these are my Household.’ Umm Salamah said, “O, Messenger of God,
Am I not one of (your) Household?’ The Prophet said, ‘You are on the
good path, but these are my Household. O God, my Household are more
worthy.’

Having narrated the *hadith,* Hakim Nayshaburi said, ‘This *hadith* has
all the conditions that make it genuine to Bukhari, but he did not
mention it.’[^37]

#### 3– Recitation of the Verse of Tatheer at the Door of Ali and Fatimah’s House

There are narrations which report that the Prophet (saws) used to call
at Hazrat Ali and Fatimah’s house, (peace be upon them) five times a day
at the praying times, and recite the verse of *Tatheer*. These
narrations are of various types. In order to avoid lengthy details we
will only refer to the headings.

Some of these narrations state that the Prophet (saws) did that for a
month,[^38] some others say for forty days,[^39] still some others say
for six,[^40] seven**,**[^41] eight**,**[^42] nine,[^43] ten or even
seventeen months[^44].

It is necessary to mention two important things concerning these
traditions:

1. These traditions, each of which talks about a particular period, do
not (in fact) contradict each other. The difference in the period of
time reported indicates the period reported by the individual Companions
who were with the Prophet (saws). For instance, Abu al–Hamra once
reported that the period was six months, and in another *hadith*, he
said seven months, in another eight or ten, and still in another
seventeen months.

2. Repeating this act by the Prophet (saws) for such a long period
reminds us of the fact that after the literal use of the word *Ahl
al–Bayt*, it is used technically to mean Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and
al–Husain (p.b.u.th.) besides the holy Prophet himself (saws). This
being the new application. This is a very significant point in all the
traditions related to the verse of *Tatheer*, and *hadiths* of
*Thaqalayn* and *Saffinah*.

#### 4– The Qur’anic Verse was Revealed in Favour of the Five Pure People

There are other *hadiths* stating that the verse of *Tatheer* was
revealed in favour of the Prophet (saws) Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and
al–Husain (p.b.u.th.). Some of these traditions are ascribed to the
Prophet. For example, “Abi Sa’id al–Khidri quotes the Messenger of God
(saws) to have said, ‘This verse: Allah *only desires to keep away
uncleanness from you O Ahl al–Bayt and purify you a thorough purifying*”
was revealed in favour of me, Ali, Hasan, Husain and Fatimah’.[^45]

Other traditions state that Abu Sa’id Khidri believes that the verse of
*Tatheer*: *Allah only desires to* *keep away uncleanness from you O Ahl
al–Bayt and purify you a thorough purifying* had been revealed in favour
of the five people: the Messenger of God, Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and
al–Husain (p.b.u.th.).

Also, Abu Sa’id Khidri is quoted to have said that Attiyyeh asked “Who
are the Household?". Abu Sa’id answered ‘They are the Prophet, Ali,
Fatimah, al–Hasan and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.).’[^46]

Some other *hadiths* quote Umm Salamah to have said that the holy
Qur’anic verse is in favour of the five pure people, such as the
following:

“Umm Salamah said “This verse *Allah only desires to keep away
uncleanness from you O Ahl al–Bayt and purify you a thorough purifying’*
was revealed in favour of the Prophet (saws), Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan and
al–Husain (p.b.u.th.)”.[^47]

Two More Notes about the Verse of Tatheer and Hadiths Related to it
-------------------------------------------------------------------

1) From the foregoing discussions it is clear that the word “*Bayt*” in
“*Ahl al–Bayt*” does not mean “residence” because other people such as
Abil–Hamra, Wathileh, Umm Ayman, and Fizzeh also lived in the same
house, but none of them is regarded as a member of *Ahl al–Bayt*.

“*Bayt*” does not mean kinship either because there are some other
people such as Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle, and his sons, some of whom
were closer to the Prophet than Ali (as) are not included with “*Ahl
al–Bayt*”. (There is a tradition concerning Abbas, with which we will
deal in the section on questions and answers concerning the Qur’anic
verse).

By “*Bayt*’ it is meant the Prophet’s Household, consisting exclusively
of “The Five Members of al–Aba”, the members of this House, to whom the
secrets of this House have been entrusted. It is worth considering
Suyooti’s words[^48] concerning the Qur’anic verse “***In houses which
Allah has permitted to be exalted and that His name may*** ***be
remembered in them*****”**[^49] which are as follows interesting to
note:

“Ibn Murdawayh has quoted Anas ibn Malik and Buraydah to have said,
‘After the Prophet (saws) had recited this Qur’anic verse: “*In houses
which Allah has permitted to be exalted…*” someone got up and asked
“What houses are these?” The Prophet (saws) said, “The Prophets’
houses”. Then, Abu Bakr got up and asked, “O Messenger of God, is Ali
and Fatimah’s house (p.b.u.th.) one of them?” The Prophet said, “Yes, it
is. It is one of the best of them”.

2) A deliberation upon these narrations clearly shows that there is an
instance of restriction which is intended to exclude the wives of the
Prophet (saws) and his other relatives such as Abbas, (the Prophet’s
uncle), and his children from *Ahl al–Bayt*).

This, however, does not oppose other *hadiths* which define the *Ahl
al–Bayt* as the fourteen infallible persons – i.e. the holy Prophet,
Ali, Fatimah, al–Hasan, al–Husain and the other nine Infallible Imams
(p.b.u.th.) – because the verse of *Tatheer* has, in addition to using
the phrase “*to keep away uncleanness from* you”, stressed (the
significance) of the phrase “*Ahl al–Bayt*”*.*

The reason why *hadith al–Kisa* reports that (only) the five pure people
have been covered with *kisa* and that the holy Prophet (saws) prayed
for them is because at that time the Prophet’s grand family consisted of
only these five people. Yet, all the infallible Shi’ite Imams including
Hazrat Mahdi (as) are among *Ahl al–Bayt.*

The fourth Imam, Zayn al–‘Abidin (as) cites the verse of *Tatheer* as an
evidence of his being a member of *Ahl al–Bayt*.[^50] Many traditions in
both Shi’ite and Sunni sources consider Hazrat Mahdi (as) among the *Ahl
al–Bayt* (saws).[^51]

According to the definitely authentic tradition, *hadith* of
*Thaqalayn*, the holy Prophet (saws) says about the Qur’an and *Ahl
al–Bayt*, “…the two will never separate until they return to me by the
pond (of *Kawthar*)”[^52]

From this tradition it is understood that the Qur’an and *Ahl al–Bayt*
will remain side by side until the Day of Resurrection. The tradition
also indicates that the members of the Household of the Prophet are
infallible, and that there will be at least one of them at all times
worthy of being followed.

Some Sunni scholars support the idea inferred from the tradition of
*Thaqalayn* that there will always be people from among *Ahl al–Bayt* at
all times.[^53]

Bellow is one of the traditions which interpret *Ahl al–Bayt* as the
fourteen infallible (Imams), narrated by both Sunnis and Shi’ites.

In his *Fara’id al–Simtayn*, Ibrahim ibn Mohammad Jowayni has quoted a
detailed narration of which we cite only the sentences which are related
to the verse of *Tatheer*.

In this *hadith*, Imam Ali (as) addresses a group of distinguished men
from the Immigrants (*Muhajrin*) and the Helpers (*Ansar*), reminding
them of his merits and pointing to some verses of the Qur’an such as the
verse of *Tatheer* which was revealed in favour of him and *Ahl
al–Bayt.* He says:

“O people, you know that after God, (the Mighty and High) had revealed
the verse: *Allah only desires to keep away uncleanness from you O Ahl
al–Bayt and purify you a thorough purifying*, the Prophet (saws)
gathered me, Fatimah and my children, al–Hasan and al–Husain, covered us
with *kisa* and said

‘O God, these are *Ahl al–Bayti* (my Household) and whoever hurts them,
has hurt me whoever displeases them, has displeased me. So keep away
uncleanness from them and purify them a thorough purifying’. Umm Salama
said, ‘O Messenger of God, ‘And I?’ The Prophet said, ‘You are on the
good path.

This verse has been revealed in favour of me, (and my daughter), as well
as my brother, Ali ibn Abi Talib, my children (al–Hasan and al–Husain)
and the nine descendants of al–Husain; no one else is included with us
(in this verse)’. You know these, don’t you?”

All those who were present said, “We bear witness that Umm Salamah told
us the same thing and we, ourselves, asked the Prophet (saws) and he
told us the same thing which Umm Salamah had told us”.[^54]

Questions and Answers about the Qur’anic Verse of Tatheer
---------------------------------------------------------

It is appropriate now to answer some questions about the Qur’anic verse
of *Tatheer*

### Question One

It is understood from the aforementioned discussions that the desire
expressed in the Qur’anic verse is ontological. It follows that the
spiritual purification of *Ahl al–Bay*, is definite and immutable.
Wouldn’t the acceptance of this idea lead to ascribing determinism to
them?

**Answer**

God’s, ontological desire will entail determinism only if they do not
have the will to act but if God has ontologically desired that the *Ahl
al–Bayt* be kept away from uncleanness and sin on the basis of insight
and knowledge, it will not lead determinism, but will affirm a free
choice and negate of determinism. According to this assumption, God has
not willed that they are not to do things which they do not want. God’s
desire is that they are to obey (Him) by exercising a free choice. The
existence of free will contests (the idea) of determinism.

Furthermore, we can say that *ismah* (inerrancy), means an extensive and
profound insight and knowledge which an infallible person enjoys and
which never lets him deviate from obeying God or think of committing
sins. Enjoying such insight and knowledge will make the evil of sins so
manifest that one will never seek to commit sins voluntarily, just as it
is impossible for ordinary people to drink dirty water. The reason is
that their insight and knowledge prevents them from doing so.

### Question Two

In the holy Qur’anic verse: “*Allah only desires to keep away
uncleanness from you O Ahl al–Bayt and purify you a thorough
purifying*”, the use of the two phrases “اذهاب”*,* “to keep away” and
“تطهير”, “to purify” indicate that “*uncleanness*” previously existed
but was removed when these words were revealed. This use of the phrases
“*to keep away*” and “*to purify*” indicates that *Ahl al–Bayt* used to
commit sins, but their “*uncleanness*” is then removed. They, therefore,
became “*pure* after a time”

**Answer**

In this verse the word “اذهاب”, “preceded by” “عن” meaning “from” is a
transitive verb which means “to keep away” uncleanness from *Ahl al–Bay*
and this desire is pre–existent, not that the opposite state existed in
*Ahl al–Bayt* and God removed it from them. The word “تطهير”,
“purifying” does not mean “removal of not previously uncleanness, been
clean”, but it refers to the pre–existence of *Ahl al–Bayt’s* purity”.
This is similar to the idea in the Qur’anic verse,  
 “***and they shall have pure mates*****”.** ***(2:25)***

The definite evidence supporting the above view, is that “*Ahl al–Bayt*”
includes the very Prophet (saws) about whose being “*Ma’sum*” from the
very beginning no one doubts. No one can say that he was not so before
the revelation of the verse of *Tatheer* and became “*inerrant*”
afterwards. When we say that the two concepts i.e. “*keeping away*” and
“*purifying*” do not indicate previous “uncleanness” in the case of the
Prophet (saws) the same can be said about the members of *Ahl al–Bayt*,
otherwise the two concepts with regard to the Prophet (saws) would mean
something and regarding his Household something else.

### Question Three

The holy Qur’anic verse contains no clue to indicate that *Ahl al–Bayt*
enjoy this kind of purity before the verse was revealed; rather the
verse indicates that this God’s desire concerns the future because the
verb يريد refers to something to come.

**Answer**

**First:** The verb *yurid* يريد (want) does not indicate futurity, and
this is clear in similar applications, as in these examples:

“***God desires to explain to you, and to guide you into the*** ***ways
of those before you*****”** ***(4:26)***

Also, “***And Allah desires that He should turn to you***
**(*****mercifully*****)”** ***(4:27)***.

Accordingly, in the Qur’anic verse (in question) God’s desire does not
indicate futurity but it means that God, the Mighty and High, still has
this desire and it is still in effect.

**Second:** Including the Prophet (saws) in the desire is a confirmation
of this idea, for none would say that previously God’s desire of
purification did not include the Prophet, and it occurred later on. The
purity of the noble Prophet (saws) is pre–existent. It is thus evident
that *“yuridu”* is not used with regard to the Prophet in a different
meaning from that of his Household.

### Question Four

Probably the letter “L, ل” in “ليذهب” expresses cause and the object of
the verb “يريد” is the duties assigned to the noble Prophet’s family,
God bless them. Then the meaning of the verse will be: in view of the
particular obligations and duties assigned to you, the Household, God,
the Most High, “desires” to remove uncleanness from you, and make you
thoroughly pure. If so, the verse cannot be an indication of the
Household’s inerrancy.

**Answer**

**First:** (To claim) that the object of the verb “desire” is omitted
and unsaid opposes the rule, which leaves nothing unsaid**.** If there
is a contextual clue, it will be possible to ignore this principle. But
there is no such clue in the Qur’anic verse (under discussion).

**Second:** Since there are several possible views concerning the
function of the letter “ل” with the verb “يذهب” (to keep away) some
consider God’s “desire” to be ontological and some consider it to be
legislative, the most probable one that agrees with the context is its
being ontological. We already introduced some reasons for its being
ontological, for example, with legislative desire” there is no need to
praise this dear family, whereas we see that Prophet’s Household are
highly praised in the Qur’anic verse, as in the aforementioned *hadiths*
have clearly stated.

Therefore, in this case, the letter “ل” has special purpose; i.e. to
make the verb transitive, and what follows it, is the object of the verb
*yuridu* as can be seen in other Qur’anic verses where the verb ‘desire’
can be in the transitive form whether with or without the letter “ل”.

Now, let us consider the following examples:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَلا تُعْجِبْكَ أَمْوالُهُمْ وَ لا أَوْلادُهُمْ إِنَّما يُرِيدُ
اللَّهُ لِيُعَذِّبَهُمْ بِها فِي الْحَياةِ الدُّنْيا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***Let not then their property and their children excite your
admiration; Allah only wishes to chastise them with these in this
world’s life…*****”**[^55]

Also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ لا تُعْجِبْكَ أَمْوالُهُمْ وَ أَوْلادُهُمْ إِنَّما يُرِيدُ
اللَّهُ أَنْ يُعَذِّبَهُمْ بِها فِي الدُّنْيا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***And let not their property and their children excite your
admiration; Allah only wishes to chastise them with these in this
world*****”*****.***[^56].

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يُطْفِؤُا نُورَ اللَّهِ بِأَفْواهِهِمْ وَ يَأْبَى
اللَّهُ إِلاَّ أَنْ يُتِمَّ نُورَهُ وَ لَوْ كَرِهَ الْكافِرُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and
Allah will not consent save to perfect His light though the unbelievers
are averse*****”*****.***[^57]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يُرِيدُونَ لِيُطْفِؤُا نُورَ اللَّهِ بِأَفْواهِهِمْ وَ اللَّهُ
مُتِمُّ نُورِهِ وَ لَوْ كَرِهَ الْكافِرُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but
Allah will perfect His light, though the unbelievers may be
averse*****”*****.***[^58] In one of the verses the verb *yuridun* (they
desire) has been made transitive without the use of letter “ل” and in
another by using the of letter “ل”

### Question Five

“The Household” in the verse, do not mean only five people. It includes
other relatives of the Prophet (saws) too, because some traditions
mention that the Prophet (saws) placed his uncle Abbas and his children
under a covering, and said, “These are my Household” and prayed for
them.

**Answer**

There are so many *hadiths* confirming that “The Household” includes
only the five or the fourteen infallible persons, and so, the mentioned
*traditions* are by no means valid. Besides, they are not trustworthy
(for the following reasons):

In the chain of the narrators of this *hadith* there is the name of
Mohammad ibn Yunus, concerning whom ibn Hajar has quoted ibn Habban to
have said, “He fabricates *hadiths*. He has made up more than thousand
*hadith*s, falsely attributing them to trustworthy people. “Ibn Adi has
also accused him of making up narrations”.[^59]

Another narrator of this *hadith* is Malik ibn Hamzeh, about whom
Bukhari mentions in his book that he is among the weak narrators[^60]

Abdullah ibn Uthman ibn Ishaq is another narrator of this *hadith*,
concerning whom ibn Hajar has quoted Uthman to have said, “I asked ibn
Mo’in about this narrator. He answered that he did not know him. Ibn Adi
said, ‘He is not known”.

In view of the above notes, the mentioned tradition cannot challenge the
(authentic) hadiths at all.

### Question Six

When Umm Salamah asked the Prophet (saws) if she was among the members
of *Ahl al–Bayt*, the noble Prophet said, “You are (moving) towards the
good”; in another version, “You are on the good path”, meaning: there is
no need for me to pray for you because the Qur’anic verses have, from
the beginning, commended you. The expression “You are on the good path”
also means: you are in a better position. This does not suggest that
Umma Salamah was not among the members of *Ahl al–Bayt*.

**Answer**

From the previous discussions on the context of verse, it can be
concluded that the verse of *Tatheer* and those preceding it do does not
have the same *siaq* (context) thus the wives of the Prophet (saws) are
excluded from *Ahl al–Bayt.*

The word “good” in the expression “on the good path” or “moving towards
the good” does not mean preference and not indicate that the Prophet’s
wives are superior to the five pure people. There are some indications
in these *hadiths* which support this idea, such as Umm Salamah’s
wishing that she was joined to the Household, a position which she
preferred to all that on which the sun shines.

A deliberation upon the Qur’anic verses related to the wives of the
Prophet (saws) including those preceding the verse of *Tatheer* and what
the reasons and conditions of their revelation are and those in the
*Surah of Prohibition* makes the above mentioned point completely clear.
Let us, for example see the following Qur’anic:

“***If you both turn to Allah*** **(*****in repentance*****)*****, then
indeed your hearts are already inclined*** **(*****to this*****)”*****;
“Perhaps should he divorce you, his Lord would grant him even better
wives than you are in your stead wives better than you, submissive***
**(*****to Allah*****)*****, believing, pious, penitent, devout,
inclined to fasting, widows and maids*****”*****. “Allah sets forth an
example to those who disbelieve the wife of Nuh and the wife of Lut:
they were both under two of Our righteous servants, but they acted
treacherously towards them so they availed them naught against Allah,
and it was said: Enter both the fire with those who enter*****”*****.
(66:4, 5 & 10)***

### Question Seven

Traditions report that the Prophet (saws) prayed for his family after
the verse of *Tatheer* was revealed. He said, “O God, take uncleanness
away from them and purify them a thorough purifying”. This request of
the Prophet (saws) is inconsistent with the idea that inerrancy can be
inferred from the verse, because it would not be reasonable to ask God
to confer inerrancy on *Ahl al–Bayt* if the Qur’anic verse indicated
their inerrancy.

**Answer**

First: This supplication clearly indicates that God’s desire to purify
the Household is an ontological not a legislative one, because asking
God “to take away uncleanness” and (to grant) “purification” is in no
way not a legislative matter and the Prophet’s supplication is certainly
granted. Therefore, this supplication emphasizes the content of the
verse of *Tatheer*.

Second: Inerrancy is a blessing granted by God to chosen people in each
and every moment of their lifetime because, like other creatures, they
always need God in each and every moment. One cannot assume that God’s
grace given to them in one moment will make them needless of God’s
blessings in other moments.

This is like the case of the Prophet’s repeatedly saying, “*Guide us
along the Straight Road*”, asking God for guidance, although he has
attained guidance in its most perfect form. It is an indication that
whatever ranks a God’s servant attains, essentially he is still in need
of Allah, and so his expressing the need and imploring God’s blessings
is but perfection.

One’s knowledge that God’s blessings will be granted in the future does
not prevent one from praying and a similar example is found in *Ulu
al–Albab’s* supplication to which God refers here:

“***Our Lord! And grant us what Thou has promised us by Thy apostles and
disgrace us not on the day of resurrection; surely Thou does not fail to
perform the promise*** ***(3:194)***

They implore God although they know that Allah, the Mighty and High,
will not fail to perform His promise to the believers.

With regard to the noble Prophet’s supplication, we notice that although
“purification” and “divine protection” have already been attained and
will also be granted in the future, the Prophet’s supplication indicates
that in spite of the lofty rank of the Household they are always in need
of Allah, whose great and invaluable bliss reaches them every moment.

Therefore, the holy Prophet’s supplicating before or after the
revelation of the verse of *Tatheer*, does not contest their inerrancy.

### Question Eight

Prophets’ inerrancy is necessary for safeguarding divine revelation. Why
should we believe that those who are not prophets are infallible?

**Answer**

First: In the Shi’ites’ view, Imamate is a continuation of prophet hood,
and is equal to or higher in position than prophet hood.[^61] Imams play
the same role as that of the Prophet (saws) except that they are not
revealed to. The belief of Imamiyyah Shi’ites in the inerrancy of Imam
is based on intellectual (*aqli*) and transmitted (*naqli*) proofs.

Second: Having no necessary intellectual condition for the inerrancy of
Imam does not justify the absence of inerrancy.

**Explanation:** As regards the prophet and Imam intellect is the
criterion of their being, but those other than the Prophet and the Imam
do not have such privilege. Inerrancy is a special divine blessing that
God gives to whoever He considers good.

As for the Prophet and the Imams, there is an intellectual demonstration
of their being inerrant, but regarding other than them, if there is a
transmitted proof supporting their being inerrant, it must be taken for
granted, and the verse of *Tatheer* is a proof of the inerrancy of the
Prophet, Imams, and Hazarat Fatimah (p.b.u.th.) all.

### Question Nine

In his *Sahih*,[^62]Muslim has quoted Zayd ibn Arqam, one of the
Companions, to have reported that the Prophet (saws) said, “I am leaving
behind two precious things among you: the book of Allah … and *Ahl
al–Bayti* (my Household)”. Zayd ibn Arqam was asked, “Who are *the Ahl
al–Bayt*?” Are the women included with the Prophet’s Household?”

He said, “No”. When he was asked, “Who are they?”, he said, “The
Prophet’s Household are those to whom paying of *sadaka* (the voluntary
alms) is forbidden. They are: Ali’s family, Abbas’s family, Ja’far’s
family and Aqil’s family”. Now, how can *Ahl al–Bayt* be confined to the
five pure members of *Ale al–Aba*, or to the fourteen infallibles
(p.b.u.th.)?

**Answer**

First: This tradition indicates that the wives of the Prophet (saws) are
excluded from Ahl al–Bayt.

Second: This tradition, though reported by various transmitters, ends a
Yazid ibn Hayan, who is not qualified to challenge the content of
(*thaqalayn*) tradition and many other *hadiths*.

Third: Even if (he) is proved (to be qualified), we cannot consider the
independent judgement of one of the Companion as a convincing argument.

Fourth: Zayd ibn Arqam has reported the tradition of *Thaqalayn* in
different ways all of which contain the following sentence: “if you hold
fast to them, you will not be misguided at all, i.e. the Book of Allah
and my *Ahl al–Bayt* will never separate until they return to me by the
pond (of *Kawthar*)”.

These notes which indicate *Ahl al–Bayt’s* leadership and their
inseparability from the Qur’an, do not agree with the above mentioned
interpretation quoted from Zayd ibn Arqam, according to which the
Abbasid caliphs are, in spite of their oppression and tyranny, regarded
among *Ahl al–Bayt*. This is in opposition with the content of the verse
of *Thaqalayn.*

### Question Ten

Some traditions report that in answer to Umm Salamah’s inquiry: “Am I
among *Ahl al–Bayt*?” and in another version “Let me be with them”, the
Prophet (saws) answered “Yes, if God wills”, and “You are among my
family”. It can, therefore, be said that the term *Ahl al–Bayt* is not
limited to five people.

**Answer**

In the numerous traditions previously cited, the particular term *Ahl
al–Bayt*, includes no one other than the Five People of *Ale al–Aba*. It
can be said that the traditions referred to in the above question which
are concerned with the literal meaning of “*Ahl*” or “*Ahl al–Bayt*”
include the wives of the Prophet (saws).

Mention is made here of a Sunni leading figure in *fiqh* and *hadith*,
Abu Ja’far al–Tahawi, who considers *Ahl al–Bayt* only five people, and
that the wives of the Prophet (saws) are not among those referred to in
the holy Qur’anic verse. On pages 332–3 of his *Mushkil al–Athar* he
quotes

Umm Salamah to have asked the Prophet (saws) to let her be among them (
*Ahl al–Bayt*). The Prophet (saws) said, “انت من اهلی, you are among my
family”. Tahawi then continues: “From these traditions it can be
understood that it is sometimes permissible to consider Umm Salamah one
of the Prophet’s *Ahl**,*** because she is a wife of the Prophet, and
his wives are his *Ahl*”.

Having quoted eight traditions supporting the idea that Umm Salamah is
not one of *Ahl al–Bayt* referred to in the verse of *Tatheer,*
al–Tahawi adds:

“It can be understood from the words of the Prophet (saws) to Umm
Salamah, as we previously mentioned ,that there exists no *hadith* which
states that Umm Salamah is one of (the members of) *Ahl al–Bayt* as it
is meant by the Qur’anic verse recited. No one is meant by this verse
other than God’s Messenger, peace be on him and his family, Ali,
Fatimah, al–Hasan, and al–Husain (p.b.u.th.)”.

Another possible explanation given by al–Tahawi is that by the phrase
“انت من اهلی *You are among my Ahl*” the Prophet (saws) meant to tell
Umm Salamah that she was among his family because she was following his
creed, expressing the same idea in the case of the Prophet Nuh when he
was told that his son was excluded from his family as in the verse,
“***surely he is not of your family*****”**[^63] which indicates that
the members of his family are those who (believe) and do good deeds.

Tahawi offers the above possible explanation after he quotes Wathileh’s
report which confirms the presence of the five pure persons, their being
covered with *kisa*, and the Prophet’s supplicating “*O God, these are
my Ahl al–Bayti*, *and my Ahl al–Bayt are most deserving*”. Then,
Wathileh says: I asked, “O Messenger of God, am I among (the members of)
your *Ahl*?” The Prophet said, “You are among my *Ahl*”.

Tahawi continues in this way:

“Wathila, a member of *Bani Layth* not a *Qurayshi*, was farther from
the Prophet (saws) than Umm Salamh whereas Umm Salamah, the Prophet’s
wife, belonged to the *Quraysh* tribe yet the Prophet says to him, “You
are among my *Ahl*”, meaning “because you follow the religion and have
faith in me you are among my family”.

In his book al–Sunan al–Kubra, Bayhaki quotes Wathila’s narration and
says,

“The Prophet seems to have used a metaphorical, not literal way when
placing Wathila among the members of his family”.

Therefore, it is not a problem to say that Ahl al–Bayt has an
exclusively reference.

### Question Eleven

The Qur’anic verse:  
 “***Allah only desires…*****”** ***(33:33)*** is similar to the
verse:  
 “***…Allah does not desire to put on you any difficulty, but He wishes
to purify you and that He may complete His favour on you…*****”**
***(5:6)*** and similar to the verse,  
 “***…and to take away from you the uncleanness of Satan…*****”**
***(8:11)***  
 Now, if the verse of *Tatheer* suggests “inerrancy”, then we can
attribute inerrancy to many Companions.

**Answer**

The first sentence comes at the end of the verse dealing with *wudu*
(i.e.washing for the ritual prayer) and total ablution. The verse is:

“***O you who believe! When you rise up to prayer, wash your faces and
your hands as far as the*** ***elbows, and wipe your heads and your feet
to the ankles; and if you are under an obligation to perform a total
ablution, then wash*** **(*****yourselves*****)** ***and if you are sick
or on a journey, or one of you come from the privy, or you have touched
the women, and you cannot find water, betake yourselves to pure earth
and wipe your faces and your hands therewith, Allah does not desire to
put on you any difficulty, but He wishes to purify you and that He may
complete His favour on you, so that you may be grateful*****”*****.
(5:6)***

In the above verse, God, the Mighty and High, having issued the command
on washing for prayers, total ablution, and betaking to pure earth, says
that (by legislating these laws) He does not desire to put you in any
difficulty, but wishes to purify you by your washing and betaking to
pure water. “Purity” in this verse has nothing to do with the
ontological purity mentioned in the verse of *Tatheer*.

In the second verse “uncleanliness of Satan", refers to the wet dream
which (a group of) Muslims had during the Battle of Badr. God, the
Mighty and High, sent down rain on them. They washed themselves with it
and removed the defilement.

This verse too refers to a particular purification required for removing
the stain which occurred as a result of wet dream to (a number of) the
Companions who had participated in the war. This purification has
nothing to do with the absolute ontological purification referred to in
the Qur’anic verse ot *Tatheer*.

[^1]: – Surah 33, verse 33.

[^2]: – Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 5, p. 378, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah,
Beirut; Showkani’s Fath al-Qadeer, vol. 4, p. 350, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut; al-Ma’rifah wal-Tarikh, vol.1,p. 498.

[^3]: – Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihyan, vol. 3, p. 172, Darl–al-Kutub
al-Imiyyah, Beirut.

[^4]: – Ibn Katheer’s Commentary, vol. 3, p. 491.

[^5]: – Ruh al-Ma’ani, vol.22, p. 13, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Arabi,
Beirut.

[^6]: – Ibn Katheer’s Commentary, vol. 3, p. 491.

[^7]: –In Tadhkiratol Hoffaz, p. 1200, vol. 2, Dhahabi says, “Hakim
Hasakani, is master, firm and unwavering in the science of hadith”.

[^8]: – Asad al-Ghabah, vol. 5, p. 521, Dar Ihya’ al-Torath al-Arabi,
Beirut.

[^9]: – Al-Isabah, vol. 2, p. 509, Dar al-Fikr; Adhwa al-Bayan, vol. 6,
p. 578, ‘Alam al-Kutub; Beirut; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 2, p. 354, Dar
al-Fikr; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 35, pp 206 – 232, on the verse of Tatheer,
al-Wafa Institute; Beirut; History of Baghdad, vol. 9, p. 126, and vol.
10, p. 278; Dar al-Fikr; History of the City of Damascus, vol. 13, pp,
203, 206 and 207; vol. 14, pp. 141 and 145; Ibn Abi Hatim’s Commentary,
vol. 9, p. 3129; al-Maktabah al-Misriyyah; Beirut; Abi al-Saud’s
Commentary, vol.7, p. 103; Dar Ihya’ al-Torath al-Arabi; Beirut;
Al-Baidawi’s Commentary, vol. 33, p. 382; Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah;
Forat al-Kufi’s Commentary, vol. 1,p. 332 – 342; An–No’man Institute;
Ibn Katheer’s Commentary of al-Qur’an al-Azim, vol. 3,p.492, Dar
al-Ma’rifah; Beirut; Ibn Adil al-Dimashqi’s Al-Lubab Commentary, vol.
15, p. 548; Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah; Beirut; Al-Mawardi’s Commentary,
vol. 4,p. 401; Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut; Al-Tafsir al-Muneer, vol. 23, p.
14; Dar al-Fik al-Mo’asir; Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol. 2, p. 258; Dar
al-Fikr; Tabari’s Jami’ al-Bayan, vol., 22, p. 5; Dar al-Ma’rifah,
Beirut; Qurtubi’s Jami’ Ahkam al-Qur’an, vol. 14, p. 183; Dar al-Fikr;
Al-Durr al-Manthur; vol. 6, p. 604; Dar al-Fikr; Dhakha’ir al-‘Uqba, pp.
21 – 24; Rooh al-Bayan, vol., 7, p. 171; Dar Ihya’ al-Torath al-Arabi;
Al-Aloosi’s Rooh al-Ma’ani, vol 22, p. 14; Dar Ihya’ al-Torath al-Arabi;
Al-Riyadh al-Nadarah, vol. 2 (3–4), p. 135; Dar al-Nadwat al-Jadiddah;
Beirut; Ibn al–Jawzi’s Zad al-Maseer, vol. 6, p. 198; Dar al-Fikr;
Tirmidhi’s Sunan, vol. 5, pp. 327–328 and 656; Dar al-Fikr; Beihaqi’s
Al-Sunan al-Kobra, vol. 2, p. 149; Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut; Dhahabi’s
Siyar A’lam al-Nubalah’, vol. 3, pp. 254 and 283; al-Risalah Institute;
Beirut; An Exposition of al-Sunnat–al-Nabawiyah, vol. 14, p. 116;
al-Maktab al-Islami; Beirut; Shawahid al-Tanzeel, vol. 2, pp. 18–140;
al-Tab’ wa al-Nashr Institute, Wizarat al-Irshad; Ibn Habban’s Sahih,
vol. 15, pp. 442 to 443; al-Risalah Institute; Beirut; Muslim’s Sahih,
vol. 5,p. 37; Kitab al-Fada’il, the section: Fada’il; ‘Ezzodin
Institute; Beirut; Showkani’s Fath al-Gadeer; vol. 4, pp. 349–350; Dar
al-Kutub al-Ilmiya; Beirut; Jowayni’s Far’id al-Simtayn, vol. 1, p. 367;
al-Mahmoodi Institute; Beirut; Kifayato–Talib; pp. 371 to 377; Dar Ihya’
Turath Ahl al-Bayt; Majma' al-Zawa’id; vol. 9; pp. 166–169; Dar al-Kitab
al-Arabi; Beirut; Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihyan, vol. 2, p. 416, and
vol. 3, p. 147; Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut; Abi Y’ali’s Musnad; vol. 12,
pp. 344 and 456; Dar al-Hamoon Lil–Turath; Ahmad’s Musnad, vol. 4,
p.107, and vol. 6, p. 292; Dar Sadir; Beirut; Ishaq ibn Rahawiyih’s
Musnad; vol. 3, p. 678; Maktabt al-Eman; City al-Munawarah; Tayalisi’s
Musnad; p. 274; Dar al-Kitab al-Lubnani; Tahawi’s Mushkil al-Athar; vol.
1, p. 335; Dar al-Baz; Tabarani’s al-Mo’jam al-Sagir;vol. 1, p. 135, Dar
al-Fikr; Tabarani’s al-Mo’jam al-Awsat, vol. 2, p. 491; Maktabat
al-Ma’arif; Riyadh; Tabarani’s al-Mo’jam al-Kabir; vol. 23; pp. 245,
281, 286, 308, 327, 330, 333, 334, 337, 357, 393, and 396; Baswi’s
al-Ma’rifah wa al-Tarikh; vol. 1, p. 498; al-Muntakhab min ‘Abd ibn
Hamid’s Musnad, pp. 173 and 367; ‘Alam al-Kutub, Cairo; Ibn Magazili’s
Manaqib; pp. 301–302; al-Maktibah al-Islamiyyah.

[^10]: – Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihyan, vol. 3, p. 148.

[^11]: – Hakim Nayshaburi has listed in his al-Mustadrak ‘ala
al-Sahihyan, narrations containing the conditions of the narrations that
Bukhari and Muslim consider as authentic, but have not quoted in their
works. In his Talkhis, Dhahabi expresses his idea concerning “Molaiki”,
one of the transmitters of this hadith. He says, “al-Molaiki takes the
narrations away (i.e.deletes the narrations)”. (On the other hand), in
vol. 6, p. 132, of his Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, ibn Hajar says he is
“truthful”, this being subsequent to Saji’s opinion who used the same
term, which is an indication of Molaiki’s truthfulness (in narrations).
Criticisms are directed against his narration of hadiths. Many other
narrators of hadith have been criticized by Bukhari and Muslim.

[^12]: – History of the City of Damascus.

[^13]: – 'Awwam al-Uloom, vol. 11, p. 638, al-Imam Mahdi (A.S.)
Institute. (This volume is about Hazrat Fatimah Zahra, peace be on her).

[^14]: – Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p.603.

[^15]: – Ibn Katheer’s Commentary, vol.3, p. 493.

[^16]: – Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 604; al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer, vol. 23,
p. 336.

[^17]: – History of the City of Damascus,vol. 14, p.145.

[^18]: – Ibid. vol. 13, p. 206.

[^19]: – Ibn Katheer’s Commentary,vol. 3, p. 492;al–Tabari’s Commentary,
vol. 22, p. 5.

[^20]: – History of the City of Damascus, vol. 14, p. 141.

[^21]: – Mushkil al-Athar, vol.1, p. 336.

[^22]: – History of the City of Damascus, vol. 13, p. 203.

[^23]: – Shawahid al-Tanzeel, vol. 2, p. 61.

[^24]: – Ibid, vol. 2, p. 134.

[^25]: – Ibid, vol. 2, p.119.

[^26]: – Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihyan, vol. 2, p. 416

[^27]: – Ibn Katheer’s Commentary, vol. 3, p. 493.

[^28]: – Mushkil al-Athar, vol. 1, p. 333, Dal al-Baz; History of City
of Damscus, vol. 14, p. 145; Dar al-Fikr.

[^29]: – History of the City of Damascus, vol. 13, p. 206, Dar al-Fikr.
The chain of transmission of the hadith is as follows: Abu Abdullah
al-Frawi and abul Mozafar al-Qushayri informed us on the authority of
Abu Sa’d al-Adeeb, on the authority of Abu Amru ibn Hamdan, and Umm
al-Mujtaba al-Alawiyyeh informed us on the authority of Ibrahim ibn
Mansoor, on the authority of Abu Bakr ibn al-Muqri, on the authority of
Abu Ya’li, on the authority of Mohammad ibn Ismail ibn Abi Samina, on
the authority of Abdullah ibn Dawood, on the authority of Fuzayl on the
authority of Attiyyeh. Verification of the chain of transmission of the
hadith: a). Abu Abdullah Farawi Mohammad ibn Fuzayl ibn Ahmad,
concerning who Dhahabi says, “He is a master, a leader, a jurist, a
theologian, Faqih, a Mufti, a famous hadith scholar in Khorasan, and the
jurist of the Shrine. Regarding him Sam’ani says, “In Marv, I heard
Abdul Rasheedal–Tabari say, ‘Al-Farawi is as knowledgeable as a thousand
narrators (of hadith). Siyar A’lam al-Nubalah’, vol. 19, p. 615,
al-Risalah Institute; b). Abu Sa’id Adeeb Kunjroodi, concerning whom
Dhahabi says, ‘He is a master, a jurist, a leader, a man of letters, a
grammarian, a physician, a hadith scholar in Khorasan. Siyar A’lam
al-Nubalah’, vol. 18, p. 101. Regarding him Sam’ani says, “He is a man
of letters, knowledgeable, wise, well-bred; trustworthy and truthful".
Al-Ansab, vol. 5, p.100, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut. c). Abu Umar
ibn Hamdan, concerning whom Dhahabi says, “He is a leader, a
traditionist, trustworthy, fully versed in syntax, an ascetic, pious,
and hadith scholar in Khorasan” Siyar A’lam al-Nubalah’, vol. 16, p.
356. d). Ibrahim ibn Mansur, concerning whom Dhahabi says, “He is a
righteous and trustworthy master; the Qur’an by” Siyar A’lam
al-Nubalah’, vol. 18, p. 73. e). Abu Bakr ibn al-Moqri, Mohammad ibn
Ibrahim, concerning whom Dhahabi says, “He is a trustworthy master who
has learnd the Qur’an by heart”; Siyar A’lam al-Nubalah’, vol. 16, p.
398 f). Abu Y’ali, the author of a Musnad, Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Muthanna; a
traditionist of Musil; Siyar A’lam al-Nubalah’, vol. 140, p. 174. g).
Mohammad ibn Isma’il ibn Abi Samineh; concerning whom ibn Hajar has
quoted in Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb Abu Hatim and Salih ibn Mohammad to have
said, “He is trustworthy”. Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol, 9, p. 50; Dar
al-Firkr. h). Abdullah ibn Dawood; concerning whom Mazzi has quoted in
Tabaqat Mohammad ibn Sa’d to have said, “He is trustworthy, and
worshipping”, Tahdheeb al-Kamal, vol. 14,p. 458. i). Fuzayl ibn Gazwan;
about whom ibn Jahar has quoted Ahmad and ibn Mo’in to have said, “He is
trustworthy; ibn Habban has mentioned his name in his al-Thiqat”.
Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb; vol. 8, p. 267; j). Attiyyeh (ibn Sa’d); as it is
understood from Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol. 7, p. 200, Sa’ad considers
him trustworthy, and ibn Mo’in says that he is meritorious. Some leaders
of ilm–ar–rijal have criticized his reports. These criticisms made by
such people as Nisa’i are very harsh. Experts of Dihayah and hadith,
such as Tahanawi, in his Qawaid fi Uloom al-hadith, p. 117, considered
the criticisms, of people as invalid. Hajaj had Attiyyeh flogged four
hundred times because he refused to revile Ali (p.b.u.h) on him. One who
is so steadfast in his faith will never tell lies. Some criticisms made
by scholars of ilm–ar–rijal may have been made against Attiyyeh because
he was a Shi’ite.

[^30]: –Al–Tabari’s Jami’ al-Bayan, vol. 22, p. 7; Dar al-Ma’rifah,
Beirut; ibn Katheer’s Commentary, vol. 3, p. 493; Dar al-Ma’rifah,
Beirut.

[^31]: – History of the City of Damascus, vol. 14, p. 141; Dar al-Fikr.
The chain of transmission of the hadith is as follows: Abu Talib ibn Abi
Aqeel informed us on the authority of Abu al–Hasan al–Khal’i on the
authority of Abu Mohammad al-Nahas, on the authority of Abu Sa’id ibn
al-Arabi, on the authority of Abdol Rahman ibn Mohammad ibn Mansur, on
the authority of al-Husain ibn al-Ahsqar, on the authority of Mansur ibn
Abi al-Aswad, on the authority of al-A’mash, on the authority of Habib
ibn Abi Thabit, on the authority of Shahr ibn Hawshab on the authority
of Umma Salamah…”. Verification of the chain of transmission of the
hadith: a). Abu Talib ibn Abi Aqeel; concerning whom Dhahabi says, ‘He
is a religious sheikh’, vol. 20 p. 108; Siyar A’lamal-Nubalah’, Dar
al-Risalah Institute; b). Abul al-Hasan al-Khul’i, Ali ibn al-Hasan
concerning whom Dhahabi says, ‘He is a religious Sheikh and a hadith
scholar in Egypt’; Siyar A’lam al-Nubalah; p. 74, vol. 19; c). Abu
Mohammad al-Nahas; concerning whom Dhahabi says, “He is a truthful
Sheikh, an imam (leader), a jurist, a traditionist, truthful and a
hadith scholar in Egypt; vol. 17, p. 313; Siyar A’lam al-Nubalah.; d).
Abu Sa’id ibn al-Arabi, Ahmad ibn Mohammad ibn Ziyad; about whom Dhahabi
says, ‘He is an imam, a traditionist, a truthful good example, who has
memorized the Qur’an, and Sheikh al-Islam; p. 407, vol. 15, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubalah; e). Abu Sa’id Abdul Rahman ibn Mohammad ibn Mansur; whose
name ibn Habban has mentioned in his al-Thiqat, p. 383, vol. 8; al-Kutub
al-Thaqafiyyah Institute; f). Husain al-Ashqar al-Fizari; ibn Habban has
mentioned his name in his book al-Thiqat; and Ahmad ibn Hanbal has said
about him, “I do not consider him among those who tell lies”. When asked
whether al-Fizari was a truthful person, ibn Mo’in said “Yes he is”.
Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol. 2, p. 91; Dar al-Fikr; It was because of the
school of thought al-Ashqar followed that certain criticisms were made
against him which is not valid. g). Mansur ibn Abi al-Aswad; ibn Hajar
has reported ibn Mo’in’s statement in favor of Abi al-Aswad, and said
that ibn Habban has mentioned Abi al-Aswad’s name in his book al-Thiqat
as ‘one of the trustworthy’. Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol. 10, p. 271, Dar
al-Fikr; h). Al-A’mash; that he is truthful goes without saying.
Numerous narrations are found in Bukhari and Muslim’s Sahihs which
confirm his truthfulness. He is so truthfulness that certain Sunni
leaders of hadith say he is like a Mushaf; Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol. 4,
p. 196, Dar al-Fikr; i). Habib ibn Abi Thabit, he is withour doubt, a
trustworthy person. Numerous narrations in Sihahs confirm this
truthfulness. Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol. 2, p. 156; j). Shahr ibn
Hawshab, Ibn Hajar quotes ibn Mo’in, Ijli, and Ya’qub ibn Shaybah to
have said that ibn Hawshab is a trustworthy person. Tahdheeb
al-Tahdheeb, p. 325, vol. 4, Dar al-Fikr.

[^32]: – Shawahid al-Tanzeel, p. 119, vol. 2.

[^33]: Mushkil al-Athar, vol. 1, p. 336, Da’irt al-Ma’rifahl-Nizamiyyah
bil–Hind.

[^34]: – History of the City of Damascus, vol,. 13, pp. 202–3; Dar
al-Fikr.

[^35]: – Shawahid al-Tanzeel, vol. 2, pp. 61–2.

[^36]: – Shawahid al-Tanzeel, vol. 2, pp. 133–4.

[^37]: – Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihyan, A commentary on the Qur’anic
Surah of al-Ahzab, vol. 2, p. 416, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut.

[^38]: – Abi Dawood Tayalesi’s Musnad, p. 274; Dar al-Kitab al-Lubnani.

[^39]: – Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vol. 9, p. 267, tradition 14987; Dar
al-Fikr; al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 606; Shawahid al-Tanzeel, vol.
2, p. 44, The Institute of al-Tab’ wa al-Nashr Li–Wizarat al-Irshad
al-Islamiyya.

[^40]: – Tabari’s Jami’ al-Bayan, vol. 22, pp. 5–6; Dar al-Ma’rifah;
Beirut; Haythami’s Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vol. 9, p. 266, tradition 14985;
Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 2, pp. 354–5, Dar al-Fikr; al-Muntakhab min Musnad
Abd ibn Hameed, pp. 367–8; ‘Alam al-Kutub; Tirmidhi’s Sunan, vol. 5, p.
328, Dar al-Fikr; Ahmad’s Musnad, vol. 3, p. 259, Dar Sadir; Beirut; ibn
Katheer’s Commentary, vol,. 3, p. 492, Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut;
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihyan, and Dhahabi’s Talkhees, vol. 3, p.158,
Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut, and other books.

[^41]: – Tabari’s Jami’ al-Bayan, vol. 22, p. 6, Dar al-Ma’rifah,
Beirut; ibn Katheer’s Commentary, vol. 3, p. 492, Dar al-Ma’rifah,
Beirut; Fath al-Gadeer, vol. 4, p. 350, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyeh,
Beirut.

[^42]: – Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 5, p. 613, and vol. 6, p. 606, Dar
al-Fikr; Shawahid al-Tanzeel, vol. 2, p. 46.

[^43]: – Al-Muntakhab min Musnad Abd ibn Hameed, p. 173, ‘Alam al-Kutub;
Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, p. 25, Al-Wafa Institute, Beirut; al-Durr al-Manthur,
vol. 6, p. 604, Dar al-Fikr; Shawahid al-Tanzeel, vol. 2, p. 47.

[^44]: – Majma’ al-Zawa’id vol. 9, p. 267, tradition 14986, Dar al-Fikr;
Shawahid al-Tanzeel, vol. 2, p. 78.

[^45]: –Al–Tabari’s Jami’ Al-Bayan, vol. 22, p. 5, Dar al-Ma’rifah,
Beirut. The chain of transmission of the hadith is as follows: “Mohammad
ibn al-Muthanna told me: Bakr ibn Yahya ibn Zaban al-Anazi told us:
Mundal informed us on the authority of al-A’mash, on the authority of
Attiyyeh, on the authority of Abu Sa’id Khidri. The name of Bakr ibn
Yahya ibn Zaban, is mentioned in the chain of transmission of this
hadith and also in Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol. 1, p. 428, Dar al-Fikr,
Ibn Habban says’ in his book al-Thiqat that Bakr ibn Yahya is among the
trustworthy narrators of hadith. As regards Mundal (ibn Ali), Ibn Hajar
says in vol. 10, p. 265, of Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, that Yaq’b ibn Shaybah
and the companions of Yaya ibn Mo’in, and Ali ibn Madeeni consider
Mundal (ibn Ali) weak in narrating hadiths, besides his being pious,
learned, truthful. It is, thus, understood that he (Mundal) is
criticized for no reason but because. as Eijli has said, he is a
Shi’ite. Another narrator of the tradition is A’mash (Sulayman ibn
Mehran) whose truthfulness is confirmed in many rijal books and he is so
well known for his truthfulness that he is compared to the Mushaf;
Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol. 4, p. 196, Dar al-Fikr. Attiyyeh ibn Sa’id
Awfi is another narrator of the hadith. As previously stated when
explaining the verse of Tatheer, he has quoted the expression “No, and
you are on the good path”.

[^46]: – History of The City of Damascus, vol. 13, p. 206, Dar al-Fikr.

[^47]: – Ibid, vol. 1, p. 332.

[^48]: – Al-Durr Manthur, vol. 6, p. 202, Dar al-Firk.

[^49]: – Surah 24, verse 36.

[^50]: – Ibn Katheer’s Commentary, vol. 3, p. 493.

[^51]: – See Muntakhab al-Athar.

[^52]: – For futher knowledge about the various transmitters, see “Kitab
Allah wa Ahl al-Bayt fi Hadith al-Thaqalayn”.

[^53]: – Samhoodi’s Jawahir al-Iqdayn, p. 244, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyeh,
Beirut; ibn Hajar’s al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, “On Ahl al-Bayt’s Merits”.

[^54]: – Fara’id al-Simtayn, vol. 1, p. 316, Al-Mahmoodi Institute
lil–Tiba’a wa al-Nashr, Beirut.

[^55]: – Surah 9, verse 55.

[^56]: – Surah 9, verse 85.

[^57]: – Surah 9, verse 32.

[^58]: – Surah 61, verse 8.

[^59]: – Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol. 9, p. 542, printed in India.

[^60]: – Mizan al-I’tidal, vol. 3, p. 425; Dar al-Ma’rifah, Beirut.

[^61]: – See the pamphlet on “Imammate in the hadiths of Ghadeer,
Thaqalayn an Manzilat, by Rida Kardan.

[^62]: – Muslim’s Sahih, the book of Faza’il, the section on “the Merits
of Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be on him”.

[^63]: – Surah 11, verse 46.


