Introduction
============

Since I was young I always loved discussing religion with others. I
always wanted to know where the truth lay. The more discussions I had
the more I learned about Islam. More and more I found Islam to be a
truly great religion.

In 1988 I went to the United States of America where a new world of
religious information was available to me. I found Christianity. A
religion that encompassed the greatest number of people around the
world. I wanted to talk to other people about it. I wanted to learn more
about this religion. That was when I met a Christian group that invited
me to their home. They were a very kind group of people.

Their aim was to invite me and my friends into Christianity, and I
thought it would be a great opportunity to learn more about this
religion. At the dinner table they started talking to us about the
Bible, and started to give us some idea about Christianity. The person
who was talking had a Bible in his hand, so I asked if I could take a
look at it.

I remember flipping through the Bible until I reached an objectionable
point. I stopped with amazement! I couldn’t believe that the word of God
could have such a problem. (I don’t recall the details of the problem.)
I started discussing the point with one of the hosts. A few minutes into
the discussion and he was cornered with no way of responding. His face
turned red and he got very upset! Nevertheless, every time a Christian
couldn’t respond to objections I raised after that, I would either be
told that I would have to believe in Christianity, and thus be inspired
first in order to understand it, or the version of the Bible I was using
was not the proper one for discussion.

So I found out I would have to believe in Christianity before I could
believe in it! This was a dilemma! Then I reflected on this situation
and with more research on the Christian community, I found that there
were hundreds of denominations holding different and quite opposite
views from one another. The strange thing was that many members of most
denominations were talked to or inspired by God. Yet these messages were
contradictory. I couldn’t understand why God delivered a message to one
denomination telling them that Jesus was His son and only His son,
another that Jesus was Himself, and another that Jesus was neither. All
these people swore wholeheartedly they were talked to by God.

I finally decided I should really look at the Bible closely and decide
with the power of my own God given mind. I, therefore, started to listen
to tapes and preachers, read the Bible, and discuss different topics
from the Bible with Christian Fathers, Brothers, Preachers, and laymen.

As far as the other objection in relation to the version of the Bible, I
couldn’t find a real solution to the problem. If I talked to someone
using one version he told me to use another, and if I used the other I
was told to use another, and so on. I even asked a Brother, my teacher
of religion in a Christian university, if he would direct me to the most
accurate version of the Bible.

He said, “Do you want the most accurate historically or the most
spiritually uplifting?” I responded, “If the most accurate historically
is not

the most uplifting then we have a problem!”, and we both laughed. That’s
when I decided to use the most common and widely accepted version of the
Bible, the King James version. It dropped most of the objections raised
with regards to the version.

Most Christians (and I admire this quality in them) are very emotionally
involved with Christianity. They love their religion and are moved by
some of its ideas. However, most Christians don’t know very much about
their own religion. It is not because they lack any capability to learn,
but they always depend on preachers to deliver the different concepts to
them, never question the Bible, and look at Christianity from one angle
only.

This was why I wrote these few pages. I wrote them not to provoke the
feeling of anger but to heighten the sense of awareness in my Christian
brothers. These few pages include the net experience of my discussions
that which cannot be refuted. I have tested these ideas in many
discussions, and I have even posted them on the Internet where I had to
confront lots of people responding to the points I made. None was
successful in refuting a single one of these points, and I hope they
will make sense to you. I also hope that after reading these pages you
will make real steps towards learning more about Islam, the final
religion to humans handed down from God Almighty.

**Mohamed Qasem**


