What does begotten mean?
========================

If Jesus is not the only begotten son of God and not the only born son
of God, then what does begotten or born mean? Should the two words be
taken literally? The only way we can justify these words is by looking
at the Bible again. In I Peter 1:3 the Bible says,***“Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant
mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead.”*** The word begotten is also used here. God
can beget us unto lively hope. Does the word***“begotten”*** here mean
conception? No. It is a form of expression. This word means***“gave rise
to”*** or***“brought”.***

Also in Job 38:28 the Bible says,***“Hath the rain a father? or who hath
begotten the drops of dew?”*** Can the drops of dew be begotten? No.
It’s just a form of expression. Rain does not have a father nor are
drops of dew begotten in a literal sense.

If we cannot take the word begotten in literal sense with David, the
drops of dew, or***“us unto a lively hope*** ” then why should we take
Jesus as the literal begotten son of God?

Finally, in the book Revelation 1:5 says,***“And from Jesus Christ, who
is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the
prince of the kings of the earth. Unto him that loved us, and washed us
from our sins in his own blood.”*** Why is it that when Jesus is
mentioned as being begotten of God it is taken literally, and when he is
mentioned that he is begotten from the dead it is not taken literally?
The truth is because the word begotten here does not mean any one could
be conceived of the dead; it is a form of expression. The same thing
with God, He begets not, and this word***“begotten”*** is only a form of
expression.


