Who was Jesus if not the literal son of God?
============================================

According to the Bible in Matthew 21:11 “And the multitude said, This is
Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee.” This was Jesus. He was a
prophet of God. He was sent like other prophets to deliver the message
of his ONE and only ONE God (glory be to Him). Also, in Luke 24:19 the
Bible says***“And he said unto them, What things? And they said unto
him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in deed
and word before God and all the people.”***

Jesus was a true messenger of God Almighty. He was sent by Him to
deliver His will. The Bible says in John 5:30***“I can of mine own self
do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek
not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me.”***
These are the true characteristics of a prophet. They do as they are
commanded.

They are sent to deliver a message, and the only difference between them
and other humans is their utmost righteousness,***“mighty in deed and
word”*** (Luke 24:19). They are the best of all the people of their
time. They are the only ones who could bear and act upon the
commandments of God completely and fully. They are loved by God because
of that, and their nearness to God comes from that.

The same applies to all other prophets. Adam, Noah, Abraham, Ismael,
Isaac, Jacob, Jonah, Moses, Jesus, Jonas, Muhammad and all the other
prophets shared the same qualities. The qualities of those who could
withstand all forms of tribulations in God’s name. They all fully abided
by what God has commanded them. The Quran says,

“Say: (O’ Our Apostle Muhammad!) (unto the People) ‘We believe in God,
and what hath been sent down to us, and what hath been sent down to
Abraham and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Tribes, and what was
given to Moses, and Jesus and the Prophets from their Lord, we make no
difference between any of them, and we unto Him are muslims’” (CH 3: Vr
84).

(Note that***“what was given to Moses, and Jesus”*** is not the same as
the current Bible written by Paul, John, Luke, Matthew, and so on.
Rather they were the true books of Moses and Jesus. These are not to be
found today.)


