Are Jesus and God the same?
===========================

I have already talked about this topic in the second chapter, and showed
the difference between God and Jesus. If you have not read that yet
please do so.

Let us see what Jesus himself says

One of the scribes asked Jesus, Mark 12:28***“…Which is the first
commandment of all?”*** Clearly from the question the man wanted to know
the first of all commandments, and the most important one. Jesus replied
to him in the following verse:

Mark 12:29***And Jesus answered him, The first of all the commandments
is, Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord:***

Mark 12:30***And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength:
this is the first commandment.***

• Jesus was not talking to this man only, but he made sure to call the
attention of all Israel***“Hear, O Israel.”*** This indicates the
importance of this message.

• Jesus says, “***the Lord our God.”*** This clearly indicates that God
is not only the God of the people Jesus is talking to, but He is also
Jesus’ God (“our”).

• Jesus continues to say,***“is one Lord.”*** This clearly indicates the
Oneness of God.

• Finally, in Mark 12:30 Jesus reiterates that this is the first
commandment***“this is the first commandment .”*** A commandment before
all others.

Jesus in these verses showed how important this message was by calling
the attention of the Israelites, and when he talked about the Oneness of
God he excluded himself from that***“Oneness”*** when he said,***“our
God.”*** He stated that this One God is his God as well as every one
else’s. Had he been one of the three mentioned in John (according to
John) then he would not have said***“the Lord our God,”*** but he would
have said “the Lord your God.”

Then it continues in Mark after Jesus told the second commandment:

Mark 12:32***And the scribe said unto him, Well, Master, thou hast said
the truth: for there is one God; and there is none other but he:***

Mark 12:33***And to love him with all the heart, and with all the
understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to
love his neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings
and sacrifices.***

Mark 12:34***And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said
unto him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after
that durst ask him any question.***

When the scribe reiterated the message Jesus delivered, and
said,***“there is none other but he”*** (Mark 12:32), Jesus told him
that he was not far from the kingdom of God. Certainly the scribe
understood that there is only one God, and had his understanding been
wrong, Jesus would have told him, or Jesus would have clarified to all
who were listening that it is really three in

one. This was supposed to be an important commandment. It was the
commandment that came before all others.

According to my understanding the verse in I John 5:7***“For there are
three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost: and these three are one,”*** is the only record of the idea that
God is three in one rather than One and only One. The rest of the Bible
is filled with verses indicating the absolute Oneness of God, and they
carry no record of the idea of John in such way.


