The Absolute Oneness of God from the rest of the Bible
======================================================

In many instances in the Bible, God and His prophets mention that God is
only One, and not three in one. The following are some of the many
verses from the Bible:

• Deuteronomy 6:4 “***Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God is one LORD.”***
God is one and not three in one.

• Isaiah 43:10-11***“Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, and my servant
whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that
I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after
me. I, even I, am the LORD; and beside me there is no saviour.”*** God
wants us to***“know,” “believe,”*** and***“understand”*** that He is the
LORD, and***“beside”*** Him there is no other. Had there been any other
“beside” Him then He would have said it.

• Ephesians 4:6***“One God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in you all.***

• I Timothy 2:5***“For there is one God, and one mediator between God
and men, the man Christ Jesus*** .

• James 2:19***“Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well:
the devils also believe, and tremble.”*** What makes the devil tremble
is the belief that God is one, and not three.

• Deuteronomy 4:35***“Unto thee it was showed, that thou mightest know
that the LORD he is God; there is none else beside him.”***

• I Samuel 2:***2 “There is none holy as the LORD: for there is none
beside thee: neither is there any rock like our God.”***

• Isaiah 44:6***“Thus saith the LORD the King of Israel, and his
redeemer the LORD of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and
beside me there is no God.”***

• Isaiah 44:8***“Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee
from that time, and have declared it? ye are even my witnesses. Is there
a God beside me? yea, there is no God; I know not any.”***

• Isaiah 45:5***“I am the LORD, and there is none else, there is no God
beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known me.”***

• Isaiah 45:6 “***That they may know from the rising of the sun, and
from the west, that there is none beside me. I am the LORD, and there is
none else.”***

• Hosea 13:4***“Yet I am the LORD thy God from the land of Egypt, and
thou shalt know no god but me: for there is no saviour beside me.”***

Some of these verses testify that God is***“one,”*** others attest that
there is nothing***“beside”*** Him, one of them declares that nothing
is***“like”*** Him, and so on. None of the above verses include anything
that describes that God is three in one. Jesus did not say that he was
one of three, nor did God in His own words.

I am told that although God and Jesus never mentioned the idea of the
trinity, yet John who was inspired by God clarified this idea for all of
us, the idea that God, Jesus, and the Holy Ghost are one.

My argument is: God never said that He is three in one, never were any
prophets of God ever instructed to say that God is three in one, not
even

Jesus was instructed to say that, yet John who was not a prophet of God
(he was an apostle of Jesus, or a disciple) said that God is really
three in one, and the whole world of Christians believe him! I am
wondering, who has more authority? What is more powerful? That which was
quoted from Jesus’ mouth and God’s words, or the interpretation of John?

Before I end this section,***“The Absolute Oneness of God from the rest
of the Bible,”*** I would like to raise some points about the idea of
inspiration:

• If the idea that the Bible is the book of God because it was inspired
is to be believed, then we should disregard the book of Luke if we are
willing to take Luke for his own words, when we read Luke 1:1-3***“For
as much as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration
of those things which are most surely believed among us, Even as they
delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were eyewitnesses, and
ministers of the word; It seemed good to me also, having had perfect
understanding of all things from the very first, to write unto thee in
order, most excellent Theophilus.”*** Luke tells us that he saw it good
to write his book. It was his own choice, and not an inspiration.

• If we should believe that the Bible is the book of God because it was
inspired, then we should also believe in the book***“The Book of Mormon,
Another Testament of Jesus Christ.”*** The Author of this book, Joseph
Smith, claims he too was inspired by God. Why should we stop at the
Bible alone?

• There are hundreds of different denominations in Christianity, and
many in almost all denominations claim to be inspired by God, yet they
are all different in their beliefs and convictions. Who are we to
believe? Who is right and who is wrong? Especially when some of these
denominations differ with others on the most crucial points in
Christianity. Also, why does God deliver different message to each
denomination, is God the author of confusion? I Corinthians 14:33***“For
God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all churches of
the saints.”***


