What about worshipping God through Jesus?
=========================================

The worship of God should be aimed directly to God. God does not need a
medium for prayers to come to Him. This is clear from the Bible. When
God says in such a bold manner:

Exodus 20:1-5:

***“And God spake all these words, saying,***

***I am the LORD thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage.***

***Thou shalt have no other gods before me.***

***Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of
any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or
that is in the water under the earth:***

***Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the
LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon
the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate
me.”***

***We should not make any images or likeness of any thing that is in the
heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water
under the earth as something to worship. God is the only One that we
should bow down to. God, the God of everything, is a Jealous God, and he
does not like us to worship anything but Him, not even Jesus. God shows
how jealous He is when people worship images in Exodus 34:14 “For thou
shalt worship no other god: for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a
jealous God.”***

Romans 1:21-32:

***“Because that, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened.***

***Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools,***

***And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made
like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and
creeping things.***

***Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of
their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves:***

***Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served
the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.***

***For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their
women did change the natural use into that which is against nature:***

***And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman,
burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which
is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompense of their error
which was meet.***

***And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God
gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient;***

***Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit,
malignity; whisperers,***

***Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of
evil things, disobedient to parents,***

***Without understanding, covenantbreakers, without natural affection,
implacable, unmerciful:***

***Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things
are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them
that do them.”***


