Who was his mother?
===================

His mother was The Virgin Mariam (Mary) the daughter of Imran (father)
and Hinnah (mother). When Hinnah carried Mariam in her womb she vowed to
offer Mariam to God by letting her serve Him in one of His houses of
worship. When Mariam was born her mother wrapped her in a piece of
cloth, and took her to Al-Aqsa Mosque where she was handed over to the
priests.

When the priests looked at her, and found out that she was the daughter
of their lord and leader Imran they all wanted to take care of her.
Although Zachariah the prophet (P.B.U.H.) was the person in charge of
sacrificial offerings he was not allowed to take charge of Mariam’s
matter this time. After a long quarrel over her, they all decided that
the person who wins the lottery is the one that takes her in.

Zachariah won, and sponsored Mariam. He gave her a place to live,
assigned her a female caretaker and personally watched over her until
she was old enough to take care of herself and didn’t need the caretaker
anymore.

When Zachariah came to Mariam in her place of worship he used to find
fruits that would normally grow in other seasons. When he asked her
where she acquired these fruits from, she would say that it was from God
Almighty. The following verse relates the story of Mariam after she was
born and offered by her mother to God:

“So her Lord accepted her with gracious acceptance and caused her to
grow an excellent growth and made Zachariah her guardian. Whenever
Zachariah visited her in the chamber, he found with her provisions. He
said, ‘O Mary whence hast thou this?’ She replied, ‘It is from ALLAH.’
Surely ALLAH gives to whomsoever HE pleases without measure.” (CH 3: Vr
37)

Angels used to always come to Mariam and tell her of her purity, and
chastity. They also used tell her that God has chosen her above the
women of the world, and that He has protected her from all types of
corruption. She was constantly inspired to work harder and apply herself
more in worship, supplication, and prostration for God. The Quran says,

“And remember when the angels said, ‘ALLAH has chosen thee and purified
thee and chosen thee above all women of the time. \`O Mary, be obedient
to thy Lord and prostrate thyself and worship the one God with those who
worship HIM.’” (Ch 3: Vr 42-43)


