How was Jesus born?
===================

The following verses from the Chapter 19 (Mariam) narrate the story of
the birth of Jesus Christ the prophet who was born without a father:

And relate the story of Mary as mentioned in the Book, when she withdrew
from her people to an eastern place; [16] And screened herself off from
them. Then WE sent OUR angel to her and he appeared to her in the form
of a well proportioned man. [17] She said, “I seek refuge with the
Gracious God from thee if indeed thou dost fear HIM.” [18] The angel
said, “I am only a messenger of thy Lord, that I may give thee glad
tidings of a righteous son.” [19]

She said, “How can I have a son when no man has touched me, neither have
I been unchaste?” [20] The angel said, “Thus it shall be.” But says thy
Lord, “It is easy for ME; and WE shall do so that WE may make him a Sign
unto men, and a mercy from US, and it is a thing decreed.” [21]

So she conceived him, and withdrew with him to a remote place. [22] And
the pains of child-birth drove her unto the trunk of a palm-tree. She
said, “O, would that I had died before this and had become a thing quite
forgotten!” [23] Then the angel called her from beneath her, saying,
“Grieve not. Thy Lord has placed a rivulet below thee; [24]

“And shake towards thyself the trunk of the palm-tree; it will drop upon
thee fresh ripe dates; [25] “So, eat and drink and cool thine eye. And
if thou seest any man, say, ‘I have vowed a fast to the Gracious God; I
will, therefore, not speak this day to any human being.’” [26]

Then she brought him to her people, mounted. They said, “O Mary, surely,
thou hast committed a monstrous thing! [27] “O sister of Aaron, thy
father was not a wicked man, nor was thy mother an unchaste woman!” [28]
Thereupon she pointed to him. They said, “How can we talk to one who is
a child in the cradle?” [29]

Jesus said, “I am a servant of ALLAH. HE has given me the Book, and has
made me a Prophet; [30] And HE has made me blessed wheresoever I may be,
and has enjoined upon me Prayer and almsgiving so long as I live; [31]
And HE has made me dutiful towards my mother, and has not made me
arrogant and graceless; [32] And peace was on me the day I was born, and
peace will be on me the day I shall die, and the day I shall be raised
up to life again.” [33] That was Jesus, son of Mary. This is a statement
of the truth concerning which they entertain doubt. [34]

This was the story behind Jesus’ birth. Two of the most magnificent
miracles were connected to his birth: the first was the birth to a
chaste mother, and without the need for a father. This miracle shows
that God has the ability to do anything He wishes. God says after the
above verse, “It does not befit the Majesty of ALLAH to take unto
Himself a son. Holy is HE. When HE decrees a thing, HE says to it, ‘Be,’
and it comes into being.’” (Ch 19, Vr 35).

The idea of Sonship is ambiguous. What does it mean for God to have a
son when everything in this world is His creation, and a mere command of
His?

The other miracle was that Jesus spoke when he was in the cradle. God
gave him the ability to talk to people to fend off any accusations made
to his

virtuous mother, and to notify the world that he was a prophet of God.
That was Jesus. He was sent to tell people about the true God. The One
and only One God of this universe. It was people who then changed this
idea, and took Jesus as the Son of God. The Quran relates,

“said Jesus, ‘Surely, ALLAH is my Lord and your Lord, so worship HIM
alone, this is the right path.’” (Ch 19: Vr 36).


