What is My Responsibility Now?
==============================

I remember once in my callow years when I did not pay attention to a
call for help from a friend in the US. He asked me if I would give him a
copy of the Holy Quran. When I asked why, he said something to this
effect, “The Bible doesn’t make sense to me. It’s too mythical. I want
to read the Quran and see if it’s any different.” I never gave him a
copy of the Holy Quran. I was too busy being selfish! I was busy
playing! Now, I sincerely regret my inaction, and hope I can someday
reach him again.

I feel sorry because people like him are hard to find. It is very hard
to find people who are self motivated to look for the truth. People who
need very little direction in order to make serious decisions about
their future. People who have an open mind!

And this is why I present these pages to you. I present them to you so
you would seize the opportunity. After reading these few pages
surrounding Jesus Christ (P.B.U.H.) you should take more steps to find
the truth about the Bible and the Quran. I guarantee if you keep an open
mind, and make some effort in searching for the truth, God will come to
your aid and help you. I guarantee you will find Islam to be your choice
for your “hereafter” investment.

People on a daily basis invest money and time towards their well being
in this short life of seventy years or so. What about your infinite life
that starts right after death? Are you willing to invest in it?

There you will find many people who are more than willing to help answer
any of your questions and steer you in the right direction.


