Willingness of Jesus Christ to die for our sins
===============================================

Peter and the two sons of Zebedee were with Jesus Christ before the
elders of the people and the chief priests came to take him to be
crucified. Jesus at this point talked to Peter and the two sons of
Zebedee as in Matthew 26:38***“Then saith he unto them, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with
me.”***

Then Jesus went a little further away from them and prayed to God as in
Matthew 26:39***“And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and
prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from
me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.”***

It is very clear from the above verse in Matthew 26:39 that Jesus had no
intention of dying. In this verse it is shown that Jesus was praying
strongly (Matthew mentions Jesus repeating this prayer three times) to
have this death removed from him. Had Jesus Christ been sent to be
crucified, he would not have hesitated to be killed at all.

When I raise this point in front of my Christian brothers, they tell me
that this hesitation came from the flesh side of him (in other words he
was tempted), and that his soul which is godly did not have this
hesitation at all. When we look at Matthew 26:38 we see that Jesus was
contradicting this idea by saying,***“My soul is exceeding sorrowful,
even unto death.”*** (Matthew 26:38). He himself said that it’s really
his soul that was hesitating and not his body. These were Jesus’ own
words.


