The post crucifixion prophesied events never happened
=====================================================

When people were asking Jesus Christ if he was going to show them a
sign, he replied by saying that the only sign they should expect is the
sign of Jonas. Jesus also made sure to specify what exactly this sign
was. The details are shown in the following verses:

Matthew 12:38***Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees
answered, saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee.***

Matthew 12:39***But he answered and said unto them, An evil and
adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be
given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas:***

Matthew 12:40***For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the
whale’s belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in
the heart of the earth.***

Jesus here emphasized what will happen to him by specifically saying
that he will be like Jonas in terms of the number of days and nights he
will be in the heart of the earth,***“For as Jonas was three days and
three nights in the whale’s belly; so shall the Son of man be three days
and three nights in the heart of the earth.”*** (Matthew 12:40). Now let
us see if this prophecy came to pass.

Jesus was crucified on Friday, this is certainly known among all
Christians, and it’s the reason for calling that Friday by*“Good
Friday.”* Jesus was buried on Friday night. Now let us start counting:

1. Friday night Jesus was buried.*This is night \#1.*

2. Saturday day Jesus was still in the grave.*This is day \#1.*

3. Saturday night Jesus was still in the grave.*This is night \#2.*

Mary Magdalene, very early in the morning before sun rise and after the
Sabbath (Saturday), went to see Jesus, and found that he was not there.
The following verses describe this event:

Mark 16:1***And when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the
mother of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might
come and anoint him.***

Mark 16:2***And very early in the morning the first day of the week,
they came unto the sepulcher at the rising of the sun.***

Mark 16:3***And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the
stone from the door of the sepulcher?***

Mark 16:4***And when they looked, they saw that the stone was rolled
away: for it was very great.***

Mark 16:5***And entering into the sepulcher, they saw a young man
sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they
were affrighted.***

Mark 16:6***And he saith unto them, Be not affrighted: Ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the
place where they laid him.***

The number of days and nights Jesus spent in the heart of the earth is 1
day and 2 nights. This challenges what Jesus had prophesied.

When I tell this to my Christian brothers, some of them responded by
saying that what Jesus wanted to really say was that he will be gone for
a

while, and not that he will be in the heart of the earth for three days
and three nights. This is clearly not the case. Had Jesus meant that, he
would have said it, but it is clear that he wanted people to know this
was a sign (miracle) and it will be like Jonas’ sign, and he will be in
the heart of the earth for three days and three nights. These were his
own words.

Another argument is that the Jews used a different system for the day
and night which makes the prophecy come true. The idea says that Jews
used to consider a day shorter than we consider it now. If you would ask
a Jewish person about their calendar you would find that this is not the
case, and a day does not become shorter at all. The difference between a
Jewish day and a regular day is the time when the day starts and ends.
Jewish people considered the day over when the sun went down, whereas
now we consider midnight to be the end of a day. There is no difference
in the length of the day, and accepting the Jewish day would only make
things worse as far as the prophecy goes.


