Why would Jesus have to die on the cross?
=========================================

According to the Christian doctrine, Jesus died on the cross as a
sacrifice for our sins. Every human is born with sins, or all humans
will eventually sin, and therefore it was necessary that someone as pure
as Jesus would be crucified to nullify these sins. The question is; why
does anyone have to die for our sins when God, the all merciful, could
as easily grant us forgiveness if we asked for it? Why does He have to
make someone suffer for our sins or for someone else’s sins? Isn’t that
unjust of Him? According to the Bible the way to redemption could be
obtained without the need for sacrifice. The Bible says:

Ezekiel 18:20***The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not
bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the
iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon
him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.***

Ezekiel 18:21***But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he
hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.***

Clearly the soul that sins shall die. Clearly, no one shall bear the
iniquity (sins) of others. So Jesus cannot bear the sins of others
either. If one is righteous then it shall be upon him, and if one
commits a sin then it shall be upon him, and not on Jesus. Finally, the
way to repentance and forgiveness is by turning from all sins, doing
what is right, and keeping the commandments.

Also we see the same message given by Solomon. He says in the book of
Ecclesiastes 12:13***“Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter:
Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of
man.”*** This is the whole message, and this is the conclusion of
messages. It is that one should fear God, keep His commandments, and
nothing else.

Again in II Chronicles 7:14 “***If my people, which are called by my
name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from
their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their
sin, and will heal their land.”*** This clearly states that to seek
forgiveness from God we have to humble ourselves, pray, seek God, and
turn away from wickedness.

Finally the Bible says in I Samuel 15:22***“And Samuel said, Hath the
LORD as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying
the voice of the LORD? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to
hearken than the fat of rams.”***

This clearly states that obeying God is better than sacrifice whether
this sacrifice is of objects, animals, or humans, or any other type.
What God likes is for us to heed and obey Him, and if that is what God
likes then it is not of Him to come later and change His mind and His
ways. God says in the Holy Quran,***“Verily God is All-Knowing,
All-Wise”*** (Ch 9: Vr 28).

Now that we have seen this, Christians say that Jesus has changed some
of these laws. Did Jesus come to change laws? Let’s look at what Jesus
says. In Matthew 5:17***“Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or
the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.”*** Jesus clearly
states that

he was not sent to abolish the law, the law of which had already
existed. What is mentioned above cannot be discounted.

Then Jesus continues to say, in Matthew 5:18 and 19***“For verily I say
unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no
wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall
break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall
be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and
teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.”***
Jesus here asserts that not even as much as a tittle (dot) shall pass
from the law. Every thing is kept the way it was. This is why the
previous laws cannot be removed or discarded, and those who willfully
change these laws***“he shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven.”***


