Is Jesus the Same as God?
=========================

In John 10:30 Jesus said,***“I and my Father are one.”*** This verse,
according to Christians, shows God and Jesus Christ to be same. On the
other hand, we read in John 20:17,***“Jesus saith unto her, Touch me
not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and
say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God,
and your God.”***

Here Jesus stated that there was a distinction between him and God. In
other words that Jesus himself had a God. Also, Matthew 27:***46 “And
about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli,
lama sabachthani? That is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me?*** ” Here Jesus Christ cried in loud voice calling for his God.

These are two different and opposite ways Jesus relates himself to God.
The first one, he and God are one, and the second, he refers to a higher
authority than him which is God. Now assuming that both are correct
statements then we have a contradiction. If, for example, Jesus Christ
was God himself as in John 10:30 then it would be more appropriate for
him to say***“...and to myself, and your God.”*** in John 20:17,
or***“Myself, Myself, why hast thou forsaken me?”*** in Matthew 27:46.
If, on the other hand, one of them is wrong and the other is correct
then we have to discard the one we believe to be incorrect! Since God
does not make mistakes then we no longer believe the Bible is the word
of God (because we believe there is a contradiction of God’s words in
the Bible).

A third possibility is that we have to look at how we can interpret the
words of Jesus in those verses. As far as John 20:17 and Matthew 27:46
it is very clear Jesus had a God whom he prayed to and Whom had a higher
authority than his own. We can back this up with other verses from the
Bible that say,***“I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I
judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but
the will of the Father which hath sent me.”*** (John 5:30). Also Jesus
said,***“...for my Father is greater than I”*** (John 14:28). If Jesus
and God were the same then he would not have said what he said in the
above verses.

Now, the only verse that can be interpreted is John 10:30. It is the
only one that does not render itself clear. The only way John 10:30
could be interpreted such that it does not contradict all the other
verses is by saying that Jesus meant he and God had something in common.

To find out what the common grounds were, we have to look at the context
in which this verse came:

John 10:27***My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me:***

John 10:28***And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.***

John 10:29***My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no
man is able to pluck them out of my Father’s hand.***

John 10:30***I and my Father are one.***

As can be seen from John 10:28 and John 10:29 Jesus was telling the Jews
that he and God share something in common, and it was: no one can pluck
the faithful from either of their hands. This was the common factor

between Jesus and God in this case, and not that Jesus was himself God,
or that they were exactly the same.

Let us go on to see what Jesus says in John 10:

John 10:31***Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him*** .

John 10:32***Jesus answered them, Many good works have I showed you from
my Father; for which of those works do ye stone me?***

John 10:33***The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone
thee not; but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest
thyself God.***

John 10:34***Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said,
Ye are gods?***

John 10:35***If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and
the scripture cannot be broken;***

John 10:36***Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent
into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of
God?***

John 10:37***If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not.***

John 10:38***But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works:
that ye may know, and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in
him.***

John 10:39***Therefore they sought again to take him: but he escaped out
of their hand,***

John 10:40***And went away again beyond Jordan…***

In John 10:31 we see that the Jews misunderstood what Jesus had meant
by***“I and my Father are one.”*** (John 10:30). And in John 10:33 they
accused him of blasphemy. Now, had Jesus been God, or had he and God
been one in a literal sense then he wouldn’t have hesitated to clarify
the matter at that point. Jesus at that point said,***“Is it not written
in your law, I said, Ye are gods?”*** What he was trying to say was that
if the Jews called***“I and my Father are one”*** blasphemy then they
should call what was written in their law***“Ye are gods”*** blasphemy
too.

The reasoning behind this is***“Ye are gods”*** does not mean that you,
the Jews, are Gods, it is rather an expression. It just means that you
are godly people. The same applies to***“I and my Father are one.”*** It
does not mean that Jesus is God or that he and God are the same
literally. It’s just an expression. (The same goes for calling
himself***“the Son of God.”*** This statement should not be taken
literally either).

The Holy Quran says,

“...Nothing whatsoever (is there) like the like of Him, and He (alone)
is All-Hearing and All-Seeing” (Ch 42: Vr 11).

Nothing at all is like God, not Moses, not Jesus, not Muhammad, and
certainly nothing of His creation.


