Chapter 1: Root Word
====================

The words, *Walaâ€™,* *Wilayat, Wilayat, Waly, Mawla, Awla*and the like
have been derived from the same root, viz. *Waly*. The various forms of
this root-word and its derivatives are the most oft-recurring words in
the Holy Qur'an. It is said that they have been used 124 times in the
form of a noun and 112 times in the form of a verb.

The original meaning of this root-word as mentioned by Raghib in his
lexicon "Mufradatul Qur'an" is one thing taking place by the side of
another in such a way that there is no distance between them i.e. if two
things are placed side by side in such a manner that there is no other
thing between them the root-word 'Waly' is used.

For example, if some persons are sitting side by side with one another
and we wish to mention the manner and order in which they have taken
their seats we say that Zayd is the head of the assembly and i.e. Amr is
sitting by Zayd without there being any distance between them and
similarly Bakr is sitting by Amr without there being any distance
between them.

That is why this root-word is naturally used for nearness and proximity
also, both physical and figurative. And again for this very reason it
has been used in the sense of friendship, love, patronage, guardianship,
control etc., because all these conceptions involve some sort of contact
and proximity.

A number of meanings have been given for this root word and its
derivatives. For example, some 27 meanings of the word Mawla have been
given. It is obvious that originally it was not coined for all of them
and could not have more than one original meaning. Other meanings are to
be obtained from contextual indications.

This word has been used in the case of material and corporeal matters as
well as in the case of spiritual and abstract matters, but in the
beginning it has admittedly been used in connection with material
matters and has also been used in spiritual matters by way of likening
contemplative with perceptible or by way of abstraction of the meaning
of perceptible from its material and palpable characteristic.

This is so because whether it be from the point of view of an individual
during his lifetime or from the point of view of human society during
its history the attention of man has always been directed towards
perceptible things before he has reflected rationally. After perceiving
palpable meanings and concepts man has gradually moved towards spiritual
meanings and concepts. And naturally he has used and employed the same
words which he first utilized in connection with material matters.

It is just as the scientists do not coin new terminology for their
sciences and do not make use of the words which are in use in common
parlance, but give them particular meanings which are different from
those which they carry in common terminology.

In regard to the use of the words *Wilayat* and *Wilayat*, Raghib says
that the former means "help" and the latter denotes to be "in charge".
It may be said that in reality both the words have the same sense i.e.
in charge.

In regard to the words, *Waly* and *Mawla*, Raghib says that both of
them have the same meaning. The only thing is that they are used
sometimes in the active and sometimes in the passive sense.

Then he mentions the occasions on which these words are used.


