Chapter 2: Two Kinds of Wala’
=============================

The Holy Qur'an has talked much of *Wala’*, *Muwalat* and *Tawalla*
(friendship and cooperation). This Celestial Book has discussed a number
of questions under these headings. A thorough study of the Holy Qur'an
indicates that from the Islamic point of view there are two kinds of
*Wala’*; negative and positive i.e. on the one hand the Muslims have
been asked not to accept one kind of *Wala’* and to refrain from it, and
on the other hand they have been asked to observe another kind of
*Wala’*.

The positive *Wala’* enjoined by Islam has two forms; general and
special. Again the special form of *Wala’* is further subdivided into
several categories; *Wala’* of Love, *Wala’* of Imamate, *Wala’* of
Leadership and *Wala’* of Control. Now we take up each of them briefly.

Negative Wala’
--------------

The Holy Qur'an has strictly warned the Muslims against accepting the
friendship or tutelage of the non-Muslims. This does not mean that Islam
is in any way against the Muslims having good relations with the fellow
human beings or it exhorts them to be always hostile to the non-Muslims
and not to do any good to them. The Holy Qur'an expressly says:

"***Allah does not forbid you to show kindness or to deal justly with
those who did not fight against you on account of your religion and did
not drive you out from your homes. Surely Allah does not love the unjust
people***" (Mumtahina, 60: 8)

Islam does not say that good fellowship should be exclusively confined
to the Muslims or that a Muslim should not be philanthropic to others.
How could a religion, which, in the words of the Qur'an, has described
its Prophet as a blessing to all the worlds, say that?

Actually the idea is that the Muslims must never be unmindful of the
designs of the enemy despite his claim of friendship. They should always
be vigilant and should not take the pretensions of the enemy on their
face value.

A Muslim must regard himself as a member of the Muslim body politic and
a part of the whole. To be a member of a particular society
automatically imposes certain conditions and limits. The non-Muslims
being members of a different society, the relations of the Muslims with
them must be such as may not be incompatible with their being members of
their own society. They should in no way jeopardize their own
independence and integrity. Hence the relations of a Muslim with the
non-Muslims cannot be similar to those which he has with the fellow
Muslims.

The Muslims should have as close and cordial relations with one another
as the members of the same body politic should normally have. According
to Islam the negative aspect of this friendship demands that a Muslim,
while dealing with a non-Muslim, should always be alive to the fact that
he is facing a member of an alien body; and the relations of a Muslim
with a non-Muslim should not be similar to those with a Muslim, in the
sense that Muslim should not practically become a member of the non-
Muslim society or assume such a shape that his membership of the Muslim
society should in no way be unrecognizable. He should at no time ignore
that he is a member of the Muslim body politic.

A Muslim may be nice and friendly to a non-Muslim but at the same time
he should not take him as a member of the same body to which he himself
belongs. There is no contradiction between these two attitudes.

Thus there is no contradiction between negative *Wala’* and the
principles of fellow-feeling and philanthropy. Fellow-feeling requires a
man to be concerned with the destiny, welfare and happiness of all human
beings. As such a Muslim is naturally concerned with the salvation of
all other human beings and is interested in their becoming Muslims. But
so long as this target is not achieved those who have embraced Islam
cannot be sacrificed for the sake of those who have not come under the
fold of Islam.

Suppose certain people are afflicted with a certain disease. The
fellow-feeling requires us to do everything possible to see that they
are cured and to treat them with tenderness and sympathy so long as they
are ill. But that does not mean that those who are suffering from a
contagious disease should not be segregated from those who are sound in
health. That is why Islam allows a Muslim to be benevolent to the
non-Muslims but it does not permit him to undertake allegiance to them.

Islam is a religion of love towards mankind. It loves even a polytheist,
not because of his polytheism, but because of his being a creation of
Allah. At the same time it feels concerned because he has gone astray.

Had it not loved him, it would have been indifferent to his bad- luck.

In Islam there exists love and hatred both. But both are logical and
reasonable, not emotional and haphazard. The friendship and enmity
produced by pure emotions are blind feelings and have no logical basis.
On the other hand, rational friendship and enmity produced by a sort of
consciousness, stem from a concern in the destiny of a fellow being.

Let us take an example. The parents have two kinds of attachment to
their child, one logical and the other sentimental. Logical attachment
sometimes may impel them to take an action, which may apparently cause
pain and distress to their child. For instance they may submit him to a
surgeon.

In such a case they may weep and shed tears, but they ask the surgeon to
perform the operation as early as possible and amputate the festering
limb, if necessary. They shed tears out of their emotional attachment,
and ask for surgical operation and amputation out of their logical
attachment.

In case they give preference to their emotional attachment and do not
agree to amputation, they virtually acquiesce in giving their child in
the pale of death. But because of their intellectual logic and keen
interest in his welfare, they ignore their emotions and agree to the
pain and inconvenience to their child.

To get himself cured any sensible person may occasionally submit himself
to the surgeon and ask him, for example, to amputate one of his fingers.
He does not like to suffer the pain of amputation. He knows that the
loss of a finger will cause him much inconvenience. Still his reason and
logic require him to bear the pain and agree to this organic defect. In
such cases it is reason and logic, and not emotions, which induce a
person to ask for a surgical operation.

In order to eliminate corruption from a society in which infidelity and
ignorance prevail, Islam gives instruction for armed struggle, "***Fight
them until revolt is rooted out"*** (al-Baqarah, 2:193).

At the same time for the security of the society it warns the Muslims
against opening their heart to the infidels. There is no contradiction
between this policy and the principle of entertaining goodwill towards
all. 

Imitating is human nature. Man-often unconsciously adopts the ideas and
notions of others. The Qur'an says 

"***O you who believe! Take not My enemies and your enemies for friends.
Would you offer them strong love while they have rejected the Truth
which has come to you***" (al-Mumtahina, 60: 1). 

It continues to say 

"***If they have the upper hand of you, they will be your enemies and
will stretch out their hands and tongues towards you with evil intent.
They love to see you turn away from your faith***". (al-Mumtahina, 60:
2)

Here the Holy Qur'an gives the reason why the Muslims should be cautious
and vigilant while dealing with the non-Muslims. It says that they like
to persuade others to adopt their customs, their way of thinking and
religion. Had it been merely a question of their wish and liking, there
was not much danger in it. The Holy Qur'an points out that they
earnestly strive for misleading the Muslims. 

This position makes it essential that the Muslims should be prudent
about their relations with the non-Muslims. They should always remember
that they belong to a Unitarian society totally different from that of
the non-Muslims. Anyhow, that does not mean that the Muslims should have
no social, economic or political contact with them. The point to be kept
in mind is that all such relations must be in keeping with the overall
interests of the Muslim society.

General Form of Positive Wala’
------------------------------

Islam wants the Muslims to live an independent life as a militarily
coordinated and socially homogeneous unit. To enable the Muslim society
to grow strong and vigorous every Muslim is expected to consider himself
to be a member of it. The Holy Qur'an wants the Muslim society to be
superior to all others. It says:

"***Don't be discouraged or grieved. You alone will have true dignity if
you are true believers***". (Ale Imran, 3:139)

Faith is the criterion of the superiority of the Muslim society. It is
its motivating force, the sanction for its independence, the mainstay of
its personality and the essential pre-requisite of its unity. The Holy
Qur'an says 

"***Don't dispute with one another lest you falter and your strength
departs from you: But be steadfast!*** "(al-Anfal, 8: 46)

Internal discord and dissension pull down the structure and personality
of the society. Faith is the basis of mutual friendship, love and
loyalty among the Muslims.  
 The Holy Qur'an says: 

"***The believers, men and women are the Waly (guide) of each other;
they enjoin the right and forbid the wrong. They keep up prayers and pay
zakat and obey Allah and His Messenger***". (al-Tauba,9:71)

The Muslims are closely linked together and as such they support one
another. They are interested in one another's fate, in reality in their
own fate, for they, all together form one compact unit. That is why they
exhort one another to do the good and abstain from doing the evil.

This exhortation and this restraint stem from mutual *Wala’*. That is
why in the Holy Qur'an the sentence "***They enjoin the right and forbid
the wrong***", has been placed immediately after the statement that the
Muslims are Waly of one another.

Interest in the fate of another person originates from the interest in
that person himself. A father who is interested in his children
automatically feels himself concerned with their future. But he may not
feel interested in the children of others, and because of his not being
interested in them, he is not likely to be concerned about their fate.
Hence their good or bad behavior is not likely to produce positive or
negative feelings in him.

The exhortation to do the right and to restrain others from doing the
wrong are the outcome of these very positive and negative feelings. Such
feelings do not arise without the existence of love and attachment.

If a man is disinterested in a particular person, he will be indifferent
to his behavior and conduct. But if he is interested, his attachment
will not allow him to remain unconcerned. That is why the Holy Qur'an
has connected the exhortation for the good and the restraint from the
wrong under the head of *Wala’*.

The Holy Qur'an has mentioned two other things which follow this
exhortation and restraint. It says: "***They offer prayers and pay
zakat***". Prayer represents the relation between the Creator and man
and zakat represents the goodwill among the Muslims who support one
another because of their mutual affection and sympathy. Then the Qur'an
says "***As for these, Allah will have mercy on them; and they will have
lasting happiness*** ". Later we will elucidate this passage further and
will show that not only this but many other verses of the Holy Qur'an
which mention general *Wala’*, imply a sort of responsibility of the
Muslims in respect of the mutual goodwill among them. 

The Holy Prophet has said "***The Muslims in their mutual affection and
sympathy are like the human body. If one part of it suffers, all other
parts feel uneasy***".

In respect of the Holy Prophet and those who received training under him
the Holy Qur'an says :

"***Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and those with him are hard to
the disbelievers yet kind among themselves***". (al-Fath 48: 29). 

This verse refers both to the special form of positive *Wala’* and the
negative *Wala’*. As we have said above many verses of the Holy Qur'an
point out that the enemies of Islam have always been trying to turn the
negative *Wala’* into a positive one and the positive *Wala’* into a
negative one. In other words they do their utmost to make the relations
between the Muslims and the non-Muslims cordial and between the Muslims
themselves hostile on one pretext or another.

For this purpose they fan the sectarian differences. In our own time
these aliens have become more active in this respect.[^1] They have been
spending huge sums of money to sow the seeds of discord among the
Muslims. Unfortunately they have been able to produce certain elements
among the Muslims whose only concern is to convert the positive Islamic
*Wala’* into a negative one and the negative Islamic *Wala’* into a
positive one and this is the most severe blow which these wicked persons
deal to the Holy Prophet.  
 This is the most deplorable tragedy with which Islam is faced today.
Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib has said "It is really disturbing and most
surprising that the enemies, despite their being in the wrong, are
united, and you despite your being in the right, are divided".

We pray to Allah to protect the Muslims from the machinations of these
wicked people.

[^1]: "Muslims should be awake, Muslims should be alert that if a
dispute takes place among Sunni and Shi'ah brothers, it is harmful to
Muslim ummah. Those who want to sow discord are neither Sunni nor
Shi'ah; they are agents of the superpowers and work for them. Those who
attempt to cause discord among Muslims are people who conspire for the
enemies of Islam and want them to triumph over Muslims. They are the
supporters of America and Russia." (Imam Khumayni).


