Chapter 3: Special Form of Positive Wala’
=========================================

The affection toward the Ahl al-Bayt (the Prophet's progeny) is the
special form of the positive *Wala’*. It is an incontrovertible fact
that the Holy Prophet himself has urged the Muslims to have special
affection toward his progeny. Even the Sunni scholars do not deny that.
It is this affection which has been mentioned in the verse about the Ahl
al-Bayt. 

"***Say: I ask you no reward for my preaching save love and affection
toward my progeny***". (al-Shura;42 23).

The well-known and authentic hadith of Ghadir, according to which the
Prophet said "***Whoever regards me as his master and guardian, must
regard Ali, too, as his master and guardian***"[^1] also implies a sort
of affection which will be explained later. It is agreed by both the
Shi'ah and the Sunni that the verse: 

"***Your Waly can be only Allah, His Messenger and those who believe and
establish prayers, and pay zakat while they kneel down in prayer***".
(al-Ma'idah, 5:55); 

was revealed in respect of Imam Ali. Tabari, in his ''Exegesis''[^2]of
the Holy Qur'an quotes a number of reports in this connection.
Zamakhshari, who is one of the most eminent Sunni scholars, is definite
when he says: "This verse was revealed in respect of Ali ibn Abi Talib.
Though it refers to a single person, plural form has been used with the
intention of exhorting the Muslims to follow the good example set by
him, and to emphasize that even prayers may be delayed for doing good to
the poor and the needy".[^3]

In other words if an occasion arises to pay zakat while one is offering
prayers, the payment should not be postponed for that reason alone.

Fakhruddin al-Razi is another important scholar. He also says that this
verse is related to Ali ibn Abi Talib for no other person except him
paid zakat while offering prayers.[^4]  
 At the most there may be some difference of opinion as regards the
meaning of Waly. We will discuss this point while explaining the purport
of the verse.

Ali ibn Hammad Baghdadi, who was one of the most outstanding Shi'ah
poets of the fourth century of the Hijri era, referring to this verse
says that because Imam Ali paid zakat while offering prayers Allah has
associated the *Wala’* toward the Imam with the *Wala’* towards himself.
On the occasion of Mubahilah.[^5] He called Imam Ali the self of the
Holy Prophet Muhammad. This is a fact which cannot be denied.[^6]

As we pointed out earlier Islam has enjoined a sort of general form of
the positive *Wala’* towards all Muslims. The verse "***The believers,
men and women, are waly of one another***", refers to it.

But the verse which says: "***Your Waly can be only Allah, His Messenger
and those who believe ..***" is not general in its import. It cannot be
said that it refers to general *Wala’* for in this case the Qur'an does
not intend to lay down a general rule. It does not want to say that as a
rule it is obligatory or even desirable to pay zakat while offering
prayers. It only mentions a particular action characteristic of the
person who did it and alludes to his being entitled to special
affection.  
 This style of using the plural form of a word while describing an event
which related to a single person is not unparalleled in the Holy Qur'an.
For example it says 

"***They say: When we return to Medina, the honourable ones will
certainly drive out the mean ones***". (al-Munafiqun, 63: 8). 

In this case also the verse refers to an incident relating to a single
person. It says "They say". In fact only one person, viz. Abdullah ibn
Ubayy had said that.

According to modern idiom also we sometimes say that "they say so" while
we know well that only one single person has made the statement in
question.

To pay zakat while bowing in prayers is not a common event. Hence it
cannot be presumed that Allah extols all those who do such an action and
affirms Wilayat for all of them, in whatever sense it may be.

This shows that the verse in question has a particular and personal
application. It means to say that there is a person, who while engaged
in the worship of Allah, was not unmindful of his fellow being and
performed this act. Now the Holy Qur'an says that like Allah and His
Messenger he is also the Waly of the believers (is entitled to their
affection) and they should accept this *Wala’*.

As to what the nature of this affection is, and whether it is something
higher than the special love and esteem, which the people should have
for Imam Ali, we will shortly take up that question. At present we only
want to emphasize that this verse has a particular application and not a
general one.

[^1]: Sahih Tirmizi Vol. 5, p. 297. Sahih Muslim Vol. 2, p. 362 printed
in Egypt. Mustadrak 'ala al-Sahihayn—Hakim Vol.3 p.109 Al-Bidayah wa'l
Nihayah—Ibn Kathir Vol.4, p.211 printed in Egypt. Sawaiq al-Mohriqa —
Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani Shafi'i p. 25. Tarikh-i Ya'qubi—Mus'udi Vol.2, p.93.
Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah—Ibn Asbagh Maliki p. 23 printed in Egypt. Yanabi
al-Mawaddah—Sulayman al-Qandozy al-Hanafi p. 29 — 38. Shawahid al-Tanzil
—Hakim al-Haskani Vol. 1 p. 190 printed in Beirut. Usud al-Ghaba—Ibn
Athir Shafi'i Vol. 1 p.367 printedin Egypt. Khasais Amirul Mo'minin
Nisai Shafi'i p. 96 printed in Egypt. Tarjuma al-lmam Ali bin Abi Talib
min Tarikh Damshiq—Ibn Asakir Shafi'i Vol. 1 p.211Abaqat al-Anwar—Sayyid
Hamid Husayn. Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah —Ibn Abi'l Hadid Mo'tazili Vol. 4
p. 388 First print (Egypt). Al-Ghadir Allama Amini Vol.1, p.14.

[^2]: Tafsir al-Tabari Vol. 6, pp. 288—289.

[^3]: Al-Kashshaf Vol.1 p.505 printed in Egypt in 1373 A.D.

[^4]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir Vol .12 p . 30 printed in Egypt in 1 3 7 5 A.D.

[^5]: The Christians of Najran (a town in Arabia Felix) were inimical to
Islam. When the Holy Prophet of Islam invited them to his faith and
according to the Divine command they were challenged to come forward for
a contest. At first they agreed to contest. But when the Holy Prophet
brought with him his grandsons Hasan and Husayn for his sons, Fatima her
daughter, for his women, and Ali his vicegerant for his 'self', the
christians seeing the awe-inspiring faces of the Prophet's family
members began trembling. Fearing a terrible disaster for them they
acquiesced in the terms imposed by the Holy Prophet. This historical
event is one of the most glaring examples of the superior merits of the
Holy Five.

[^6]: Raihanatul Adab Vol. 5, p. 311.


