Chapter 6: Wala’ of Leadership
==============================

It means the right of social and political leadership. Indeed a society
must have a leader. The person qualified to take charge of the social
affairs of the Muslims and to control their destinies is called Walyy-ul
Amr al-Muslimin (Administrator of the affairs of the Muslims). During
his lifetime Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, held this position which
was granted to him by Allah. Following his death, it was attained by the
Ahl al-Bayt. There exists undeniable evidence to prove this fact.
Besides the Hadith of Ghadir, several verses of the Holy Qur'an point
out this kind of *Wala’*. "

***Obey Allah, the Messenger and those of you who are in charge of your
affairs***''.[^1] (al-Nisa, 4 59).

"***The Prophet has more authority over the believers than that which
they have over their selves***". (al-Ahzab, 33:6)

There is no dispute about the fact that the Prophet held this position
which was a right given to him by Allah and not by the people. Our Sunni
brethren also agree with us on this point. The only debatable question
is regarding the person, who holds this position after him. To avoid
chaos and confusion there must be somebody who may administer the
affairs of the Muslims and whom they must obey. Did Islam devise any
procedure in this respect? If it has, what is that? Has it allowed the
Muslims to choose somebody as a successor to the Prophet or did the
Prophet before his demise designate a particular person to succeed him?

In this connection we should see what duties, according to the Holy
Qur'an, the Prophet performed with regard to the social affairs of
Muslim community.

It is inferred from the Holy Qur'an and the life of the Prophet that he
simultaneously held three positions.

Firstly he was the Imam, religious leader and the law-giver. Whatever he
said or did was authoritative. The Qur'an says 

"***If the Messenger orders you to do something, obey it, and if he
forbids somethings abstain from it***". (al-Hashr, 59:7)

Secondly his decisions with regard to any internal disputes and any
lawsuits were binding and valid.

Allah says in the Holy Qur'an:

"***I swear by your Lord, they will not be true believers until they
make you judge of what is in dispute between them and find in themselves
no dislike of that which you decide, and submit with full submission***
". (al-Nisa, 4: 65)

In this sense the use of the word 'Wilayat" is correct, but, in fact, we
do not find it being used as a judicial term.

Thirdly he held political and social Wilayat. Besides preaching and
explaining the commands of Allah and adjudicating the disputes among the
Muslims, he administered their social and political affairs. He was
Walyy-u Amr al-Muslimin. The following verses envisage this aspect 

"***Obey Allah, His Messenger and those of you who*** ***are in charge
of your affairs***". (al-Nisa, 4: 59) 

"***The Prophet has more authority over the believers than that which
they have over their selves***". (al-Ahzab, 33: 6)

The Prophet had a fourth position also. We will mention it later.

The Holy Prophet ruled over the people formally and led them
politically. He collected taxes from them and administered their
financial and economic affairs according to the command of the Holy
Qur'an. (Vide al-Tauba 9 103)

This position of the Holy Prophet out of the three preceding positions,
constitutes the basis of the question of Caliphate.

It may be mentioned that the word "imam" is also used for the religious
leaders and guides from whom the outlines of religion are to be
acquired. In this sense the Sunni Muslims apply it to Abu Hanifah,
Shafi'i, Malik and Ahmad ibn Hanbal.[^2] It is also often applied to the
political and social leaders.

The Holy Prophet has said: "The heart of a Muslim cannot put up with
treachery in respect of three things  
    
 1. Devotion to the cause of Allah (i.e. whatever one does should be
only to seek Divine pleasure). 

2. Benevolence for the leaders in the matter of the guidance of the
Muslims (i.e. to render them sincere advice, whether they like it or
not, and to guide them to the right path as and when there is a danger
of their deviating from it).

3. Unwavering support to the community (i.e. to prefer the interests of
the society to one's own interests).

Imam Ali in one of his letters recorded in Nahj al-Balaghah says "The
betrayal of the community is the worst treachery and the deceiving of
the Muslim leaders is the most abominable fraud".

It is evident that deceiving the Imam amounts to deceiving all the
Muslims. If a person by deceiving his captain, endangers the ship, he in
reality betrays all the passengers aboard it.

It is evident that in the above saying of Imam Ali the word "Imam" has
been applied to the social and political leader.

We have read in Islamic history that the Muslims including the Holy
Imams often addressed their contemporary Caliphs as Imams. In this
connection it may be borne in mind that the Imam in this sense may
either be just or unjust. In either case the Muslims have certain
duties.

According to a well-known hadith, which is considered to be authentic by
both the Shi'ah and the Sunni, the Holy Prophet said: "The best jihad is
to say what is true before an unjust Imam". Similarly the Holy Prophet
is reported to have said "Three persons cause damage to religion: an
unjust Imam, an ignorant pietist and an immoral scholar".

On the top of all these the Qur'an itself mentions the Imams who invite
the people to Hell.

"***We have made them Imams inviting to Hell***". (al-Qasas, 28 41)

Anyhow, there is no doubt that the word "Imam" is applied mostly to the
just and virtuous leaders. According to the Shi'ah terminology it is
applied exclusively to the twelve infallibles whose names are  
    
 • Imam Ali b. Abi Talib—al-Murtaza

• Imam Hasan b. Ali—al-Mujtaba

• Imam Husayn b. Ali—al-Shaheed

• Imam Ali b. Husayn—al-Sajjad

• Imam Muhammad b. Ali—al-Baqir

• Imam Ja'far b. Muhammad—al-Sadiq

• Imam Musa b. Ja'far—al-Kazim

• Imam Ali b. Musa—al-Riza

• Imam Muhammad b. Ali - al-Taqi

• Imam Ali b. Muhammad—al-Naqi

• Imam Hasan b. Ali—al-Askari

• Imam Muhammad b. Hasan—al-Mahdi, (May peace be upon Muhammad and his
vicegerents)

[^1]: From the Shi'ah point of view, since the Major Occultation of
Mahdi, the Imam of the Age in 329 A.H. no particular person has been
appointed to be the head and leader of the Muslim ummah. That is why in
the hadiths related to leadership during this period only the general
qualities and characteristics required to be possessed by a leader have
been mentioned. This shows that it is up to the people themselves to
choose a person as their leader, having those qualities and
characteristics. The main qualifications of a ruler during Occultation
are: (a) Faith in Allah, His revelations and the teachings of His
Prophet. The Holy Qur'an says: "Allah will never let the disbelievers
triumph over the believers". (al-Nisa, 4 141). (b) Integrity, adherence
to the laws of Islam, and earnestness about their enforcement. When
Allah told Prophet Ibrahim that he had been appointed the Imam, the
latter asked whether anyone of his family would also attain that
position. In reply Allah said "My covenant does not include the
wrong-doers". (al-Baqarah, 2:124). Prophet Daud was told by Allah "O
Daud! We have made you our representative on the earth. Therefore judge
rightly between people ". (Sad, 38 26). (c) Adequate knowledge of Islam,
appropriate to his prominent position. The Holy Qur'an says: "Is he who
guides the people to the truth more worthy to be followed or he who does
not guide unless he himself is guided?"(Yunus, 10:35). (d) Enough
competence for holding such a position and freedom from every defect not
in keeping with Islamic leadership. (e) His standard of living being
equal to that of the low-income people . In this connection there is
enough material in the sermons of Imam Ali and in the epistles he sent
to his officials. In a number of episodes it has been emphasized that an
administrative officer should be free from love of money, ignorance,
inefficiency, outrage, timid-ness, bribery, and violation of Islamic
injunctions and conventions and should not be guilty of shedding blood.

[^2]: The four Imams of the Sunnis are Abu Hanifah No'man bin Thabit who
was a slave of Banu Taymullah. He died in 150 A.H. Abu Abdillah Malik
bin Anas died in 179 A.H., Abu Abdillah Muhammad bin Idris Shafi'i
Muttalibi died in 204 A.H. and Abu Abdillah Ahmad bin Hanbal Zahli
Sheybani, died in 241 A.H.


