Chapter 7: Wala’ of Control
===========================

It is the highest stage of Wilayat. All the other kinds of Wilayat
besides being due to the personal purity and sanctity of the Ahl al-Bayt
are either related to their kinship to the Holy Prophet or to their own
intellectual and social capability. Anyhow, in both these cases, it is
not more than a legal arrangement. But the Wilayat of Control implies a
sort of extraordinary and God-given power and authority. Let us first
see what its meaning and significance are according to those who believe
in it.

The idea of innate Wilayat is related on the one hand to the hidden
human capacity to attain perfection, and on the other to the bond which
exists between man and Allah. The God-given supernatural Wilayat means
that man by marching on the path of submission and worship gets closer
and closer to Allah and can even reach a position, where his
spirituality, which is a reality, gets concentrated in him. He becomes
the head of the caravan of spirituality, the master of the conscience of
the people, the witness to their deeds and the competent authority of
his age. The world has never been without such a spiritual leader. In
other words it has never been without a perfect man.

In this sense Wilayat is different from Prophethood (Risalat), Caliphate
(Khilafat), Executorship (Wisayat) and Imamate (Imamat) in the sense of
authority in religious matters. Its non-identity with Prophethood,
Caliphate and the factual non-identity of Wilayat with Prophethood,
Caliphate and Executorship does not mean that a Prophet, his executor or
successor is not a Waly. It means only that the nature of Prophethood
and similarly that of Caliphate and Executorship is different from that
of Wilayat. Otherwise all great Prophets, especially the last one of
them, were holders of Divine Wilayat in full measure.

When we say that the non-identity of Wilayat with Imamate is only
conceptual, we mean that both the terms signify the same position,
though from different points of view. In Islamic terminology the word
"Imamate" has also been used frequently in the sense of this spiritual
Wilayat. In its wider sense Imamate means leadership. A religious
authority, a political or social leader and a spiritual guide are all
called Imams.

From the Shi'ah point of view there are three aspects of Wilayat and in
respect of each of them the word "Imamate" has been used.

Its first aspect is political. The question is as to who was the most
competent and eligible person to succeed the Prophet and to be the
political and social leader of the Muslim ummah. The Shi'ah believe that
Imam Ali was designated by Allah to this position. This question at
present has only doctrinal and historical value, and not practical. 

The second point is as to who are the authorities to whom the questions
of religious law may be referred after the Holy Prophet; through what
source do those authorities acquire their knowledge; and whether they
are liable to err in giving their verdicts. As we know, the Shi'ah
believe that all their Imams are infallible and this belief has a
doctrinal as well as a practical value. 

The third aspect is ideological. According to the Shi'ah belief in every
age there has been a perfect man having a supernatural influence over
the world and a sort of control on the hearts and the souls of men and
on this account he is called Hujjat. The Qur'anic verse "***The Prophet
has more authority over the believers than that which they have over
their selves***", is supposed to be referring to this sense of Wilayat
as well.

Wilayat of Control or supernatural power does not mean, as some ignorant
persons believe, that any human being can acquire the power of running
the affairs of the universe and carrying out the functions of creating,
sustaining, giving life and causing death on behalf of Allah.

Allah has organized the order of the universe on the basis of a system
of cause and effect. Though the beings called angels have been described
as "***governors of the events***" (al-Nazi'at, 79:5) and
"***distributors of the affairs***" (al-Zariyat, 51:4), this aspect is
not in any way inconsistent with the principle of the Unity of Allah and
His having no associate or partner as Creator and true Owner. No one is
Allah's Waly in the sense of being His helper, assistant or even His
tool. The Qur'an says:

"***He has no partner in the Sovereignty nor has He any protecting
friend because of weakness. Magnify Him with all magnifcence***". (Surah
Bani Israel, 17:111).

The relationship of the Creator and the created is only that of
creation, sustenance and non-entity. The Holy Qur'an describes Allah as
fully Independent. But while it says, for example;

"***Allah takes the souls (of men) at the time of their death***".
(al-Zumar 39:42), 

it also says: 

"***Say: The angel of death is given charge of causing you to die; then
to your Lord you will be returned***". (al-Sajdah 41: 11). 

Similarly while it says: 

"***Surely my Lord is the Protector of all things***". (Surah Hud, 11:
57); 

it also says: 

"***He sends protectors to watch over you until death approaches you.
Then Our angelic messengers will, without fail, take away your
souls***". (al-An'am 6:61). 

In this verse the angels have been described both as protectors and the
extractors of souls.

Hence from the monotheistic point of view the existence of any medium is
not objectionable, nor is there any harm in ascribing an arrangement to
someone who carries out the Will of Allah with His permission.

Anyhow, firstly Islamic decorum requires us not to ascribe creation,
sustenance, giving life and causing death, to anyone else but to
concentrate our attention on the real source running the universe. The
mediums or angels are only Allah's creation and a manifestation of His
supreme power and wisdom. And secondly to run the affairs of the
universe, Allah has devised a unique system in which angels are employed
as mediums.

Man occasionally can attain a position higher than that of the angels as
a result of his evolutionary advancement but he cannot replace any of
them as a medium. Revelation always comes through an angel, and it is an
angel who is always detailed to extract the soul of everybody.

We cannot determine exactly the limits of the Wilayat of Control and
supernatural power of a perfect or virtually perfect man. On the whole
the Qur'anic and other religious texts indicate that man can definitely
reach a position where he dominates the world. But what is the exact
nature of this domination and whether it has any limits or not is
besides our scope.

Another point worth mentioning is that the Wilayat of Control is
attained only by him who is absolutely free from the control of his
passions and evil desires. It is not bestowed on any arrogant
self-seeker.

A man who is swayed by his personal whims and desires is not fit for
such a miraculous position. The person who holds this Wilayat is so pure
that, his will, unlike our will, emanates from an inner motivation and a
Divine signal. What the nature of this signal is and how he receives it
is not known to us. Such persons are sometimes guided by Divine light
but occasionally they appear to be unaware of the most ordinary things .

As for the Qur'anic verse, 

"***Muhammad, say, I have no control over my benefits or sufferings
without the Will of Allah***". (al-A'raf, 7: 188) 

it is evident that it wants the Prophet to say that all favourable and
unfavourable circumstances are in reality controlled by Allah. Otherwise
it cannot be imagined that while other people are masters of their gains
and losses within certain limits, the Prophet is not.

We may mention here three points as a prelude to the fuller discussion
of the Wilayat of supernatural power. It is to be remembered that it is
a subject which is rarely discussed, but as a number of people have
shown interest in it, we propose to dwell on it at some length. 

We admit that it is somewhat difficult to acknowledge Wilayat in this
sense. Our liberal minded people are not happy with such questions. They
often ask as to the necessity of discussing the question whether the
Prophet and the Imams have or have not the supernatural power of
domination and control when the Muslims have many other more urgent
problems to face. Some of them give a religious colour to their
rejection of such a power and say that to believe in this sort of
domination amounts to giving the status of demi-gods to the human
beings, and hence it is repugnant to the basic principle of the Unity of
Allah, which is a cardinal tenet of Islam.

The fact is that we are no body to judge the question as to what is
consistent and what is not consistent with the doctrine of Divine Unity.
The common people have no idea of the elaborate standards which have
been laid down by Islam and the Holy Qur'an in this respect. Similarly
the sole criterion of the importance of a question is not its popularity
at any particular time. It is wrong to assume that only that should be
required the need of which is generally felt.

The importance which the Holy Qur'an attaches to this point should never
be overlooked. The Wilayat of supernatural power and control is related
to the dignity and capability of man. The Qur'an gives much importance
to human capability and the extraordinary aspect of man's creation.

For the present it is enough to dwell on this point briefly and to make
clear the Qur'anic concept of Wilayat.

Sometimes such questions appear to be difficult to comprehend, but it is
better to admit our own inadequacy rather than deny the whole idea.

There is no doubt that Wilayat in its fourth sense is a mystic subject,
but that does not mean that we should reject it off-hand. From Shi'ah
point of view it is an Islamic question also. Shiaiism is a doctrine,
while mysticism, irrespective of all the myths attached to it, is a
system. They both meet at the point of Wilayat. If it is necessary to
believe that either of them must have borrowed the idea from the other,
all historical indications point out that it is mysticism which has
acquired it from Shi'aism and not vice versa. Here we mention the basis
of the idea briefly. 

The most important question which should be considered in this
connection is that of nearness or seeking nearness to Allah. As we know,
the ultimate aim of all religious acts in Islam and all other heavenly
religions is to secure this objective.

What Nearness to Allah Means
----------------------------

Our familiarity with the popular conception of the words as we use them
in our social life often misleads us. We tend to strip the Islamic terms
of their real connotation and take them as if they were conveying their
primary or popular meaning.

We often use the words, "nearness" and "near" in their primary sense of
physical proximity. For example we say: "There is a spring near that
hill; or say, I went near that hill". In these cases we mean actual
nearness in space and shortness of distance. But when we say that such
and such person is near to the heart of such and such man, we mean that
the former is the favourite of the latter. In this case the word "near"
has been used figuratively, as obviously the question of physical
distance is not involved. The bond of love and affection has been
expressed as nearness.

Now what is the nature of nearness or proximity to Allah? Do the people,
consequent upon their obedience, worship, and earnestness, actually
ascend towards Allah and get closer to him? Does the distance between
them and Allah continue to become shorter till it disappears, and in the
words of the Holy Qur'an, "***they meet their Lord?***"

If these expressions are figurative, what does getting closer to Allah
mean? Evidently distance has no meaning in relation to Allah. He is
neither near nor far.

To get closer to Allah means to earn His pleasure. Allah is pleased with
a person and favours him with His grace and kindness.

Here another question arises. What does pleasure of Allah mean? Allah is
not subject to emotions and changes of temperament. It is not possible
that He should be displeased with somebody and then should get pleased;
or that He should be pleased with a person and then should get
displeased. The answer is that the expression of pleasure is also
figurative. What is meant by pleasure is Divine blessing and favour
bestowed on those who obey Allah and worship Him.

Again what is the nature of Divine blessing and favour? On this point
the views differ. According to some people blessing includes both
material and physical bounties such as paradisaical gardens, palaces and
houries, and conceptual and spiritual such as the knowledge and the
pleasure which it gives.

Some others deny the conceptual kind of blessings, and confine Divine
favour to the physical pleasure of paradisiacal gardens, palaces and
houries. What they say amounts to the assertion that proximity to Allah
means nothing more than that the person favoured by Him gets more
physical pleasure in Paradise than theirs.

This means that according to those who deny the real proximity,
obedience and worship change neither the relationship of Allah to man
(this is admitted by the upholders of real proximity also) nor that of
man to Allah. According to their view in this respect the foremost
personality of the human world, viz. the Holy Prophet and the most
wicked persons like the Pharaoh and Abu Jahl stand on the same footing.

In fact this erroneous notion is due to a particular material outlook
about Allah and man, especially about man. Those who hold that man is a
mere piece of clay, naturally do not acknowledge the principle 

"***When I have made him and breathed in him of My Spirit***". (al-Hijr,
15: 29) 

As they interpret this verse allegorically, they have no alternative but
to denty real proximity.  
 But is there any compelling reason to regard man so insignificant and
interpret everything allegorically? Allah is absolute perfection. He is
limitless. At the same time the essence of existence is perfection.
Every kind of perfection such as knowledge, power, life, will, mercy,
goodness etc. returns to the existence which is a genuine reality.

Allah is pure existence and perfection and all existing things, in
proportion to the intensity and strength of their existence and
perfection, are close to Him. Naturally the angels are closer to him
than the minerals and the plants. Among the angels some are closer than
others, and for that reason they command other angels and have authority
over them. This difference is related to divergence in their creation.
Terminologically it may be called the difference of "descending arc".

All existing things, especially man, are returned to Allah. The Holy
Qur'an says 

"***Surely we are Allah's and to Him we shall return***". (al-Baqarah,
2:156)

As man occupies a high stage of existence, his return should be in the
form of obeying the commands of Allah willingly and voluntarily. By
marching on the path of virtue and obedience to Allah, he can advance
forward from the animal stage to a position above that of angels. His
ascension or promotion is neither honorary nor administrative, nor
contractual, like the appointment of an ordinary member of the Assembly
to the post of a minister or the upgrading of an ordinary member of a
party to its leader— strengthening and intensification of existence and
perfection. It means increase in knowledge, power, life, will and
determination. It means the widening of the circle of influence and
control. To get near to Allah means to traverse the stages of existence.

It is impossible that a man as a result of his obedience and submission
should not reach the position of the angels. He may even go further. The
Holy Qur'an affirming the position of man, says 

"***We said to the angels: Prostrate yourselves before Adam. They all
fell prostrate save Iblis***". (al-Baqarah, 2: 34) 

It may be said that he who denies this position of man is but Iblis
(Satan).

Exoteric and Esoteric Life
--------------------------

Man inside his exoteric animal life has an esoteric life also. The
esoteric life, the capability of which is hidden in every individual,
emanates from the maturity and perfection of his deeds and aims. His
well-being and distress are related to his esoteric life which depends
on his intention and the goal to which he is advancing.

We are mostly familiar with those aspects of the Islamic teachings which
are concerned with the individual and social life of this world. There
is no doubt that the teachings of Islam are repleted with philosophy of
life in every field. Islam does not look down upon the problems of life.
From the Islamic point of view no esoterism bereft of life does exist.
As soul once separated from body has no longer anything to do with this
world; similarly, exoterism without life is not a thing of this world.
It is absurd to talk of esoterism minus life in this world.

But that should not be construed to mean that the philosophy of the
Islamic teachings is confined to the solution of the problems of life
only. The teachings of Islam are a means of traversing the path of
submission to Allah, marching forward towards attaining proximity to
Him, and thus acquiring completion of existence.

Man can make an evolutionary march beyond the limits of body, matter,
and individual and social life. Such a march emanates from a series of
spiritual stations. Man treads on this path practically by means of his
earnestness and occasionally in this world or in the other world when
the curtains are lifted he witnesses the stages of proximity ultimately
leading to Wilayat which he has crossed.

Prophethood and Wilayat
-----------------------

The renowned philosopher and exegete of our age Allamah Tabatabai says
"A part of the teachings of Islam constitutes social regulations which
apparently are the product of social thinking. Their relation to the
felicity and distress of the next world, or in religious terms, to the
rewards of Paradise and the punishments of Hell, is due to certain
phenomena which come into being and grow imperceptibly as one acts upon
or contravenes these regulations.

After a person is shifted to the life of the next world and the curtain
of ego is torn asunder, this relationship is unveiled and becomes
manifest to him. Hidden under the wrappings of social life, passed
strictly in accordance with the religious teachings, there exists a
living reality—an esoteric life from which the eternal blessings of the
next world originate and they are, in other words, its manifestation.

This is a reality which is called Wilayat. Prophethood is a reality
which receives Divine commands and injunctions in regard to life and
conveys them to the people, and Wilayat is a reality, which comes into
being as a result of acting upon the Divine commands received through
Prophethood".

Imam as a Holder of Wilayat
---------------------------

Dealing with the proof of Wilayat and its holder, the Imam, and the fact
that the world has never been without a holder of Wilayat, i.e. a
perfect man, Allamah Tabatabai says "'There is no doubt about the
existence of a path of Wilayat by treading on which man traverses the
stages of esoteric perfection and reaches the stage of proximity to
Allah. The existence of the outer religious trappings, without an inner
reality, is unimaginable. The creative ability or source which has
provided for religious teachings of practical, ethical and social nature
and has preached them, must have provided for the inner reality also,
which is the soul of the outer religious phenomena.

The arguments, which prove the existence of Prophethood and the
continuity of the religious laws, also prove the existence and
continuity of the system of Wilayat. How can it be imagined that the
tenets and laws should have a real existence, but the inner reality
should not exist or the contact of the human world with it should be
severed? The chief holder of Wilayat, who maintains this contact, has
been called Imam by the Qur'an, as is borne out by this verse. 

"***When his Lord tested Ibrahim with certain commands and he fulplled
them. He said: Surely I am appointing you an Imam of man***"
(al-Baqarah, 2: 124)

The Imam is a person who is selected by Allah to be the leader of the
path of Wilayat. It is he who holds the reins of esoteric Wilayat in his
hands. He is the centre of the rays of Wilayat which reflect on the
hearts of the people".

In the Usul al-Kafi there is a report by Abu Khalid Kabuli, who narrates
that he asked Imam al-Baqir about the Qur'anic verse,

"***So believe in Allah, His Messenger and the light which We have
sent***". (al-Taghabun, 64:8). 

The Imam explaining the verse said: "O Abu Khalid! I swear by Allah that
the light of the Imam shines more brilliantly in the hearts of the
believers than the sun at day". 

What he meant was that it was wrong to confine the aim of the religious
teachings to the good results which might be obtained in the worldly
life, and to interpret proximity to Allah, which is the direct result of
good deeds, allegorically to mean attaining favour of Allah in the same
sense as the favour of those in power and authority is gained in this
world.

Such an interpretation ignores the effective role which proximity to
Allah plays in spiritual life. Proximity to Allah raises man up on a
higher plane of existence. Those who traverse the highest stages of
proximity to Allah and really get closer to the centre of existence,
naturally dominate the world. It is they who control the souls and the
conscience of others and are witnesses to their deeds.

Basically every existing thing that advances on the way to its
perfection, traverses some stages towards proximity to Allah. Man is
also one of the existing things. His perfection is not confined merely
to what is called nowadays civilization i.e. the development of a series
of sciences, arts and rules of personal and social behaviour useful in
the present life. Man has another dimension also, for which he has to
purify his soul and secure contact with Allah.

From Subservience to Mastership
-------------------------------

There is a hadith which says that submission to Allah is a jewel, the
essence of which is mastership, i.e. power. Man has always been looking
for a way to control himself and the universe.

At present we are not concerned with the methods he chose for this
purpose and whether he succeeded in his efforts or not. We know there is
a wonderful way to achieve this object. When man chooses that, he does
not aim at gaining power and dominating the world. In this case his aim
is just the opposite. He aims at humility and self-annihilation. This
wonderful way is that of subservience to Allah. He who submits to Allah,
gets everything, though attaches no importance to anything.

Stages
------

Mastership or in other words the power man gains as a result of his
earnestness, total submission and complete subservience to Allah has
several stages:

The first stage is very inspiring. It gives him control over himself. In
other words the minimum effect of the acceptance of good deeds by Allah
is that they produce a penetrating and clear insight into self.

The Holy Qur'an says: 

"***Believers, if you fear Allah, He will make for you a differentiator
(between right and wrong)***" (al-Anfal, 8: 29). 

Again it says: 

"***Those who struggle for Our cause, We will show them Our ways***"
(al-Ankabut 29:69)

Secondly man gains control over his passions and animal propensities and
becomes master of himself. The Qur'an says regarding prayer: 

"***Surely, prayer restrains one away from indecency and evil*** ".
(al-Ankabut, 29: 45) 

It says about fasting 

"***Believers! fasting has been enjoined on you as it was enjoined on
those who were before you, so that you may become pious***" (al-Baqarah,
2:183) 

Regarding both of them it says: 

"***Believers! Help yourselves (in your affairs) through patience (fast)
and prayer***". (al-Baqarah, 2:153)

At this stage of submission to Allah what man gets is a special insight
and power to control his passions. In other words the first outcome of
submission is self-discipline and control of evil desires.

The second stage is that of the control of the faculty of imagination.
It is through this faculty that our mind conceives ideas and every
moment shifts our attention from one subject to another.

This faculty is not under our control. In contrast it dominates us. that
is why however hard we try, we cannot keep our attention concentrated on
any one particular subject for example, even with our best efforts we
cannot keep our thoughts concentrated during prayers. The Holy Prophet
illustrated this fact with a charming example. He compared heart which
is influenced by the faculty of imagination to a feather hung to a tree
in the desert and being turned every moment topsy-turvy by the wind.[^1]

In the course of another hadith the Prophet has said that the heart of
man is subject to more commotion than a boiling kettle.[^2]

Now the question is, Has man no option but to be a subject to his
thoughts willy-nilly and to be swayed away by this mysterious power
which turns him into a bird ever flying from one branch of a tree to
another; or is the inability to resist this power a sign of immaturity
and underdevelopment, and are those whose spiritual power is adequately
developed, capable of rolling over this faculty of theirs? 

The second alternative is correct. It is a duty of man to keep his
thoughts under control. Otherwise the diabolic power of this faculty
will nullify his capabilities and will impede his advancement on the
path of proximity to Allah. 

The celebrated mystic poet, Mowlawi points out: "If man is all the time
engrossed in the ideas of his personal comforts and discomforts and
profit and loss, he is prone to lose the serenity of his soul and is not
likely to soar to the higher regions of heaven".

The Holy Prophet has said: "My eyes sleep, but my heart keeps awake".
Commenting on this saying of the Prophet, Mowlawi says that the heart of
the Prophet was always awake because he was the master of his thoughts.
He was able to control them and was never over-powered by them.

At this second stage those who choose the path of submission to Allah
feel that by keeping their faculty of imagination under control their
soul is free to soar higher and higher without any check or hindrance.

Imam Ali used to be so engrossed in his prayers that once an arrow which
had struck him was extracted from his foot while he was offering his
prayer and he did not feel it. During this operation his attention could
not be diverted in the least.

Similarly a young child of Imam Zayn al-Abidin fell down from a height
and had a fracture in his hand. The hue and cry that followed the
accident could not disturb the Imam who was offering his prayers. A
bone-setter was called. He set the bone. When after the prayers the Imam
saw the bandaged hand of the child, he was surprised and inquired about
the matter. All the hustle and bustle and the hue and cry had not
distracted the attention of the Imam who was absorbed in his prayers.

Leaving aside the personalities of this stature, even among their
followers we have seen with our own eyes persons who get so absorbed
while offering their prayers that they totally become inattentive to
everything around them. Their attention is only towards Allah. The late
Ali Agha Shirazi, an eminent scholar, was one of such persons.

To achieve this success nothing is more useful than incessant worship,
the basis of which is attention to Allah. The ascetics adopt their own
methods. They renounce life, retire in solitude and subject their body
to torture. But Islam ensures the desired result without resorting to
such unhealthy acts. Full attention to Allah and remembering that one is
standing before the Lord of lords, the Creator, paves the way for mental
concentration.

It will not be out of place to quote here Abu Ali ibn Sina (Avicenna),
the most outstanding philosopher of Islam. This great scholar after
dealing with popular worship which is practised in expectation of reward
only which has little value, takes up in his book, Isharat, the worship
accompanied by cognition. He says: "To the gnostics worship is an
exercise of the faculties of thinking and imagination with a view to
divert them from material things to Divine conceptions. With constant
practice these faculties get in harmony with the real human instinct of
devotion to Allah, and they do not resist when the inner soul of man
wants to attain illumination".

At the third stage the soul becomes so vigorous and strong that it can
do a number of things without the help of body, though body needs soul
in all cases.

Normally soul and body are inter-dependent. Body depends on soul for its
life and very existence, and without soul it is soon disintegrated.
Similarly soul depends on body for all its activities and can do nothing
without it. Only in very exceptional cases soul can dispense with body.
Sometimes it can do so just for a few moments and sometimes recurrently
or even permanently. This phenomenon is known as "disembodiment".

The famous illuminant sufi-theosophist Suhrawardi has said "We do not
consider a person to be a theosophist unless he can disembody himself".
Mir Damad says "We do not regard a person as a theosophist unless he has
such a practice that he can disembody himself at will. 

Anyhow, the experts say that the 'disembodiment' is not a proof of
attaining perfection.

At the fourth stage one's body becomes absolutely at his beck and call
and can perform marvellous things as and when desired by him. Anyhow,
this is a point which requires lengthy discussion. Imam al-Sadiq said
"Body does not show inability to do what will wants".

The fifth is the highest stage. At this stage even external nature
becomes subject to the will of man and obeys him. The miracles wrought
by the Prophets and saints come under this category.

Though the issue of miracles requires extensive discussion, briefly it
may be said that no Muslim who believes in the Holy Qur'an can deny
them. From the Islamic point of view they present no problem. At present
we propose to look at the issue of miracles from the viewpoint of
Wilayat of Control only. Of course our discussion is directed to those
who believe in the Holy Qur'an and admit the occurrence of the miracles.

What we want to stress upon is that a miracle is nothing but a
manifestation of the Wilayat of Control and supernatural power. Apart
from considering the Holy Qur'an, which, besides being a miracle, is the
word of Allah, not of the Prophet; and as such has an exceptional
position. A miracle is wrought by a Prophet or a saint because he is
granted a sort of special power. He can do with the universe what he
likes, but only with the permission and consent of Allah. He can convert
a rod into a serpent, can cure those who are born blind and can even
bring a dead person to life. This extraordinary power he gets by
treading in the path of proximity to Allah and getting closer to the
centre of existence and it is nothing else than the Wilayat of Control.

Some people are under the impression that a miracle is effected direct
by Allah, and the Prophets and the saints have no hand in its
performance, for it is beyond human power to change the laws of nature.
The Prophets and the saints work only as showmen. According to this
view, miracles are wrought direct by Allah without any human
participation.

Anyhow, this view is not correct. Not only that Allah would not allow a
natural phenomenon to take place direct outside the order set up by Him,
but this conception is also contrary to the Qur'anic text. The Qur'an
has expressly ascribed the working of miracles to the Prophets though,
of course with the permission of Allah.

It may be remembered that permission of Allah does not mean lifting any
moral or social ban by means of words or signs. In this case His
permission is the bestowal of that perfection which produces a
Supernatural power. He can take away that power if He does not want the
miracle to be effected. The Holy Qur'an says; 

"***A prophet is not supposed to show a miracle without the permission
of Allah***". (al-Mo'min, 40:78). 

In this verse the Prophets have been described as the actual workers of
the miracles. The phrase, "Without the permission of Allah" has been
added to obviate any misunderstanding that the Prophets can take any
miraculous action independently. Everyone should know that, ''There is
no might or power save with Allah ".

Anyhow, we admit that Allah is the ultimate source of every kind of
power big or small, and every existing thing is a manifestation of His
Will. The Prophets depend on Allah in all what they do; and always seek
help from Him.

In the Surah al-Naml, the Holy Qur'an narrates the story of Prophet
Sulayman and the Queen of Saba. At the invitation of Sulayman, the Queen
sets out to call on him. Sulayman, wishes that her throne is brought to
him before she arrives. Some of his courtiers volunteer, but Sulayman
does not accept their offer. At last the one having knowledge of the
Book said, "***I can bring it in the twinkling of an eye***".

Thus he ascribed the power and ability to himself. At the same time the
Holy Qur'an describes him as having knowledge of the Book. This means
that he performed the supernatural task with the help of the knowledge
till then unknown to the human beings which he had acquired direct from
the ''Protected Tablet" (al-Lawh al-Mahfuz)because of his proximity to
Allah.

Again the Holy Qur'an says in respect of the same Prophet 

"***We made the winds subservient to him. They moved softly at his
command in whichever direction he intended. We made the devils obey him.
They included builders, divers and others bound in chains. (We said):
This is Our gift. (Therefore you may bestow or withhold it without
reckoning***". (Sad, 38: 36—39). 

The verses describing the miracles of Prophet Isa also support this
stand, but we avoid to quote them for lack of space.

What we intend to emphasize is that nobody who believes in the Holy
Qur'an, can deny the Wilayat of Control. But if somebody wants to judge
this issue purely on scientific or philosophical standard, it would be
off the point. At present we want to look at the issue from the Qur'anic
angle only.

In the end we would like to further stress upon a point to which we
referred in the beginning. All the stages of mastership mentioned above
are the outcome of proximity to Allah, which is a factual reality and
not a figurative or allegorical expression. A well-known hadith, Hadith
al-Qudsi (a saying of the Prophet reproducing what Allah said) which is
reported both by the Shi'ah and the Sunni sources, has expressed this
fact beautifully.

Imam al-Sadiq reports that the Holy Prophet said: "Allah says The best
means of seeking proximity to Me is the performance of what I have
enjoined on My slaves. If somebody performs the super-numeraries also, I
love him. When I love a person I become his eyes with which he sees, his
ears with which he hears, his tongue with which he speaks and his hands
with which he holds. If he calls Me, I respond to him. If he asks Me for
a thing I give it to him'' [^3]

This hadith clearly shows that devotion brings man close to Allah. As he
gets closer to Him, he is loved and favoured by Him. Then he begins to
see, hear and speak with Divine power. His prayer is responded to and
his wishes are granted.

The fact is that the distinctive feature of Shi'aism is its special
outlook on man. It believes, as we have stated earlier, that man has
marvellous capabilities and that the world has never been without a
perfect man whose capabilities are fully developed. It also believes
that man can secure his rightful position only by treading in the path
of submission and subservience to Allah under the leadership of a
perfect man, a Waly and leader appointed by Him. That is why the leaders
(awliya) of Shi'aism say:

The tenets which constitute the basis of Islam are five Salat (prayer),
Saum (fast), Zakat (religious tax), Hajj (pilgrimage), and Wilayat and
Islam has laid the greatest stress on Wilayat.[^4]

[^1]: Jam'e al-Sagheer Vol. 1 p. 102.

[^2]: Musnad Ahmad b. Hanbal Vol. 6, p. 4.

[^3]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 352.

[^4]: Al-Wasail al-Shi'ah, Vol. 1, p. 4.


