Appendix: Spiritual Guidance of the Imam
========================================

The life and behaviour of the Holy Prophet represent the true teachings
of Islam. He was both the political leader and the social head of the
Muslim ummah, and in that capacity enforced in the territory of the
Islamic government the laws and the rules he received from Allah through
revelation. What he said or did was the law (Shari'ah). His behaviour
constituted the ethical principles. His instructions formed wise and
true guidance. He not only advised the people and gave counsel to them,
but also formed a model society based on justice.

To ensure the prosperity of society, Islam has prescribed executive
action in this world also. It does not leave the case of those who
deliver a blow to the happiness of society to be dealt with in the next
world only. It punishes the culprits in this world as well. Hence
leadership and governing were both an integral part of the duties of the
Holy Prophet.

Anyhow, as compared with other systems of government in the world, Islam
has the distinction of having an eye on the other side of man's
existence also. That is why side by side with its other teachings, it
exhorts the people to acquire spiritual qualities and human virtues

It is humanity, spirituality and future life which have in modern human
culture been consigned to oblivion, and the evil consequences of
forgetting are being seen everyday. But Islam has paid special attention
to these very things, and the Muslim leadership has based its philosophy
on the spiritual training of mankind.

Most people are aware of the reality of their sublime human essence,
because it is so fine and subtle that it can be observed by the
clear-sighted only. That is why as far as the ordinary people are
concerned, this verdant land of man's existence is situated so far away
from their ideas that they can neither notice it nor pay attention to
it, so how can they be the leaders in that field?

When man, despite the passage of so many centuries, has not yet known
even 50 per cent of the physical actions and reactions of his body, how
can he be expected to understand its metaphysical aspects or to lay down
a program to secure that remote objective?

Hence there can be no denying the fact that there should be a leader the
essence of whose existence may have a link with the metaphysical world,
and who may be conversant enough with its intricate ways to be able to
lead mankind, for he, who himself does not know the way, cannot be a
guide.

Nevertheless, will it be proper to make no effort to know the destiny of
man or to overlook his spiritual genius and his sublime essence?

Can we take him to be a beast living in the world of appetite, sleep,
passion and sex, and leave him to wriggle like a worm to meet his animal
desires only?

Obviously that will not be in conformity with the high status of man.

Man has his special spiritual and celestial needs. Allah has put a
special genius in his nature. He is the master-piece of creation and the
bright star of the creative world. It is his duty to reach the
inaccessible heights and from there shed light and energy everywhere
like the sun.

Man is not a forlorn being in the creative system. Though he is a small
speck, he is illuminated with Divine Light. Allah has chosen him out of
all His creatures for His special favour.

We see the signs of this favour throughout the long history of mankind.
It is because of Allah's Grace and Favour to man that He sent His
Prophets to guide him and lead his turbulent soul to salvation and
eminence.

The Qur'an in numerous verses has referred to this truth. For instance,
Prophet Ibrahim praying to Allah says 

"***Our Lord! Raise up in their midst a Messenger from among them who
shall recite to them Your revelations, shall instruct them in the Book
and in the wisdom and purify them. Indeed You are the Mighty, the
Wise***". (Surah al-Baqarah, 2 129)

This verse shows that apart from knowledge, wisdom and guidance, the
purification of soul, viz. spiritual training, is an essential part of
the prophetic mission.

In the School of the Holy Prophet a number of people acquired this
special training and made a marvellous and dazzling progress. Salman
Farsi, Abuzar Ghifari, Miqdad bin al-Aswad, Ammar bin al-Yasir, Maytham
al-Tammar, Uwais al-Qarani and many more were among this distinguished
group.

Their very existence was a source of purity and uprightness. They were
purged of all that was evil. They wanted nothing but Allah and saw
nothing but Him. Allah alone ruled their soul, their heart and their
body. Their entire existence was dominated by Him alone (i.e. they bowed
down before none but Allah).

For this reason each of them was an example of a spiritually developed
man and each of them rendered a great service to the cause of human
dignity and the elevation of his society.

Hence moral virtue and spiritual purification are not a superfluous
thing nor a matter of mere formality so that we may attend to them at
our leisure and when we have settled all other affairs of our life. In
fact, virtue is the builder of life, a part of it, and even much more
important than life itself. By the testimony of reason and consciousness
the high qualities of moral virtue and spiritual purity are so great
that under their patronage man can pass from mere appearance to the
reality of his human truth and, so to say, can see what is invisible.

Evidence of the Qur'an in regard to the Spiritual Life of Man
-------------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Qur'an says: 

"***We will grant a blessed happy life to a believer, whether male or
female who is virtuous, and will repay such people according to their
deeds***" (Surah al-Nahl, 16:97) "***O you who believe! Respond to Allah
and the Messenger when he calls you to that which gives you (virtuous)
life***". (Surah al-Anfal, 8 24)

Evidently the life mentioned in the above verses is different from the
ordinary life. It can be no life other than the spiritual life which is
true human life and which can be obtained only through good conduct and
spiritual purification.[^1]

How does Spiritual Life Come into Existence
-------------------------------------------

Like all other phenomena, the emergence of spiritual life also requires
the fulfilment of certain conditions. It is the outcome of man's own
behaviour and actions, but naturally his behaviour and action must be in
conformity with the true Divine teachings. There exist complete concord
and harmony between the commands of Allah, terminologically known as
Shari'ah and the realities of the world of creation and the realm of
existence.

Since because of the inadequacy of our intellectual faculties we are
unaware of the realities of the world and the advantages and
disadvantages of all that happens, we do not know what is conducive to a
spiritual life. But the Imam, like a wise and affectionate teacher,
reveals these sublime realities to us and tells us what is to our
advantage so that we may succeed in attaining a spiritual life.

The Islamic teachings and instructions consist of the realities which
may not be ordinarily grasped by us. In order to infuse spiritual life
into us and to ensure our everlasting happiness, Allah has made an
arrangement to explain them through the Holy Prophet and his rightful
and infallible successors.

Now if we obey the Divine commands, we shall attain salvation; otherwise
we shall suffer a great loss. In this respect we are just like a child
given under the tutelage of a tutor. The child receives his orders and
does what he is required to do without any argument even if he does not
understand the advantage of doing that. Anyhow, after completing his
education, he will pass a happy life as a result of the moral virtues
and good habits inculcated in him. But if he disobeyed the orders of his
tutor, he would realize later how much loss he had incurred.

Guide to Spiritual Life
-----------------------

There is no doubt that a guide is needed for the attainment and the
development of spiritual life. Now let us see who is fit to undertake
the task of such a guidance.

Naturally this task cannot be performed by an ordinary man. The guide
must be a person whose speech is dependable, who is infallible, and who
himself stands on the pinnacle of spiritual life.  
 As we know, Allah does not entrust the duty of guiding others to anyone
unless He Himself has guided him fully.  
 The Qur'an says: 

"***Is He who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or he who
does not guide unless he himself is guided***" (Surah Yunus, 10:35 )

A guide to spiritual life or the Imam must possess special qualities,
because the function of Imamate is not ordinary guidance, which is the
duty of every Muslim and is not confined to the Imam.

In the case of the Imam guidance means 'guidance by behest'. Those who
have not attained spiritual life and to whom the realities of the world
have not been revealed, cannot undertake such guidance.

A study of those verses of the Qur'an in which there is a mention of
Imamate will show that in most cases the mention of Imamate has been
followed by that of 'guidance by behest' as an explanation of the
meaning of Imamate.

What is Guidance by Behest
--------------------------

The Imam besides giving instructions in Islamic law and guiding the
people on the exoteric side of Islam, holds the responsibility of
esoteric guidance also and has been given a special power and authority
for the purpose.

In an esoteric way he leads to perfection those who have the required
capacity and qualifications.  
 As this guidance is carried out on the basis of spiritual blessing and
esoteric status, it is called 'guidance by behest'.

To be the esoteric guide is such a superior status that the great
Prophets reached it after they had been appointed a Prophet. Accordingly
Prophet Ibrahim was raised by Allah to the status of esoteric guidance
after he had been appointed a Prophet.  
 Allah said:

"***Surely I appoint you an Imam for mankind***". (Surah al-Baqarah, 2
124).

As the Imam reaches the status of Wilayat (special authority) and
guidance by behest, he can apply himself to the tasks which from the
viewpoint of ordinary people appear to be astonishing and even
impossible.

As the Holy Qur'an tells us, Asif bin Barkhia, a courtier of Prophet
Sulayman could bring in the twinking of an eye the throne of the Queen
of Saba to Sulayman before her own arrival, for he had a supernatural
power and some knowledge of the hidden realities of this world.

The infallible Imams of Prophet Muhammad's Family occupied a position
far above that of Asif bin Barkhia.

This fact is proved by the authentic history and the documented
narratives where we find many stories of the spiritual and esoteric
Wilayat of the Imams of the Shi'ah.

Wonderful Power
---------------

As the Imam himself is endowed with the highest degree of spiritual
life, he has a sort of power of guidance and a spiritual attraction by
means of which he can influence the hearts of the people. He can mould
their character and can lead them to perfection.

In history we can read the account of a number of the disciples of the
Imams and see how they illuminated the pages of history with their
brilliance.

The Man from Damascus
---------------------

Ali ibn Khalid was a Zaydite, and as such he did not acknowledge the
Imams who came after Imam Ali Zayn al-Abidin, the fourth Imam. (37—95
A.H.) He lived in the time of Imam Muhammad Taqi al-Jawad, the ninth
Imam. (195—220 A.H.)He says "I was in the city of Samarrah, when I was
told that a man from Damascus who claimed to be a prophet had been
brought there and put in prison. Ali ibn Khalid went to see him and
asked him what the matter with him was".

He said "I was in Syria where I was busy in worship at the site supposed
to be the resting place of the Holy head of Imam Husayn, the Doyen of
the Martyrs. One night I found all of a sudden a man standing before me.
He asked me to get up. I rose unconsciously and went a short distance
with him when I found myself in the Masjid of Kufah. He asked me if I
knew that masjid.

I said that I did and that it was the Masjid of Kufah. He offered his
prayers. I too offered my prayers along with him. Then we set out again.
We had not gone far, when I noticed that we were in the Masjid al-Nabi.
There he invoked blessings on the Holy Prophet, and then we both offered
our prayers.

Thereafter, we left that place too and set out again. A moment later I
found myself in Mecca. There we circumambulated the Ka'bah, and then
left the Masjid al-Haram.

After walking a few steps I found myself at my original place in
Damascus. Then all of a sudden that man disappeared from my sight as if
he was a slight draught of breeze which swept my face and vanished.

A year had passed since this incident when I met that man again. He took
me on the same journey and we two visited once again all the Holy places
which we had visited the first time.

When he wanted to leave me, I said to him: 'I beseech you in the name of
Him who has given you such a wonderful power to be so kind as to let me
know your name'. He said 'I am Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja'far'. He
was the ninth Imam.

Now I proceeded to tell this extraordinary event to everyone whom I met,
till the news reached Muhammad ibn Abd al-Malik al-Zayyat. He ordered my
arrest and accused me of posing as a prophet. Now, as you see, I am in
prison".

Ali ibn Khalid says further: "I said to him would you like me to write
to Muhammad ibn Abd al-Malik about your case?"

"You may", he said: I wrote, but in my reply he wrote back: "Tell him to
ask the person who took him in one night from Damascus to Kufah and then
to Mecca and Medina and then brought him back to Damascus to get him
released from this prison also".

I was distressed by this reply. Next morning I went to the prison to
convey the reply to that man. There I saw a large number of soldiers and
a big crowd of other people coming and going around the prison. I asked
the people what had happened? They told me that the prisoner who claimed
to be a prophet had escaped from the prison and it was not known how he
had escaped whether he had gone into the ground or had flown to the sky
like a bird.

Ali ibn Khalid says "After seeing this incident I gave up my Zaydite
creed and became a Twelver Shi'ah, believing in the Imamate of Imam
Jawad, the ninth Imam in the line of Ali ibn Abi Talib.[^2]

Maytham al-Tammar
-----------------

Imam Ali bought Maytham as a slave and then freed him. He asked him what
his name was; "Salim", he said: "But I heard the Prophet saying that
your true name was Maytham". "He was correct and you are also correct.
My true name is Maytham".  
 "Then stay with the name mentioned by the Holy Prophet and give up the
other name".

Imam Ali bought and freed him, but he put a bond of love around his neck
so that he remained with him up to the last moment of his life. Even
death could not break this bond.

Maytham was a wonderful man. With his remarkable ability he gradually
secured an honourable position among the companions of Imam Ali. He
became aware of the realities and could understand their fine
distinctions. He had great love for Imam Ali. He was as fond of him as a
thirsty plant is of rain. He took his inspiration from Imam Ali. With
him he lived and in him he remained fully absorbed. Imam Ali was the
light of his heart and the rejoicing of his soul; and he was not willing
to lose this rejoicing even to gain all the wealth of the whole world.

One day Imam Ali said to Maytham "After my death you will be hanged. A
spear will be thrust into your body. On the third day your beard will be
stained with the blood of your nose and mouth. You will be hanged beside
the house of Amr ibn Hurayth along with nine others. The gallows on
which you will be hanged will be the shortest. Come along I'll show you
the date-palm from the branches of which you will be ultimately hanged".
And then he showed Maytham the tree.

Years passed. Imam Ali was martyred. The Umayyads gained power over the
people.  
 Maytham went out from time to time to look at the tree; offered his
prayers and spoke to it thus "Tree, may Allah bless you! I have been
created for you and you are growing for me".

In the year of his martyrdom Maytham had the honour of visiting Ka'bah,
the House of Allah. There, he met Umme Salama, the Mother of the
Faithful.  
 "I've often heard your name from the Holy Prophet", she said. "He
recommended you to Ali", she added.

Maytham asked about Imam Husayn and learnt that he had left the city.

"Convey my regards to him", he said, "and tell him that it will not be
long before he and I see each other in the presence of our Lord"

Umme Salama ordered perfume to be brought. She applied it to the beard
of Maytham. Then she said to him. "Before long your beard will be
painted with your own blood" (because of your love for the Prophet and
his progeny).

Maytham then went to Kufah, where Ibn Ziyad's agents arrested him. When
he was produced before Ibn Ziyad, the following dialogue took place
between them.  
 Ibn Ziyad "Where is your Allah?" 

Maytham "He is lying in wait for the oppressors, and you are one of
them".   
 Ibn Ziyad 'What did your master Ali say about me and you? "   
 Maytham "He said that you will hang me along with nine others, and my
gollows will be shorter than those of others". 

Ibn Ziyad "I would like to go against what your master said and kill you
in some other way".   
 Maytham "How can you? He learnt that from the Prophet and the Prophet
learnt it from Allah. Can you go against Allah? I even know the place of
my martyrdom. I also know that I am the first Muslim in whose mouth a
bridlebit will be laid".

Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad was enraged. He ordered that for the time being
Maytham might be taken back to prison. It was in this very prison that
Maytham gave Mukhtar Thaqafi the good news of his release, and said "In
revenging for the Doyen of the Martyrs you will kill Ibn Ziyad". And so
it was.

Anyhow, at last Maytham was taken to the place where he was to make
supreme sacrifice; to the place of his spiritual rise; the place from
which he was to soar to the greatest heights of human spirituality. He
was hanged beside the house of Amr ibn Hurayth from the tree that he
already knew. The people gathered round him, and on the gallows he found
a good opportunity to tell them of the virtues of Imam Ali.

He spoke and moved the hearts of the people. He made them acquainted
with the truth.

Ibn Ziyad was informed that Maytham was defaming him whereupon he
ordered him to be gagged so that he might not utter a word further.

As Imam Ali had foretold, a spear was thrust into Maytham's body.  
 "Allabu Akbar", he cried.  
 At the end of the third day the blood from his mouth and nose flowed
down and coloured his beard. May peace of Allah be upon him![^3]

Uwas al-Qarani
--------------

The Holy Prophet said "The sweet smell of Paradisc is coming from the
direction of Qaran. Uwais al-Qarani, I am eager to see you! Let anyone
who meets him, convey my regards to him''.[^4]  
 While people were pledging their allegiance to him in the area of
Zi-qar. Imam Ali announced: "From Kufah a thousand soldiers, neither
more nor less, are about to come and pledge their allegiance to me".

When these soldiers arrived, Ibn Abbas counted them. He found that their
number was 999 only. He was surprised why one man was short.

In a few moments a man appeared wearing woolen clothes and having a
sword, a shield, and other war accoutrements. He went direct to Imam Ali
and said "I want to pledge my allegiance to you up to death".

Imam Ali said: 'What is your name?" "Uwais" he said. The Imam asked "Are
you Uwais al-Qarani?" "Yes" replied he.

"Allah o Akbar! My well-beloved Prophet, may Allah bless him, told me
that I would meet one of his followers, named Uwais, al-Qarani, who was
one of the favourites of Allah and His Messenger. He would lay down his
life for the cause of Allah and would have the privilege of interceding
on behalf of many'.[^5]

So it was. He was martyred in the company of Imam Ali.[^6] Uwais is
known for his high position from spiritual angle. He took pleasure in
worship and had little interest in worldly riches.[^7]  
 We can judge the depth of the spirituality of this man from his
sayings. He says: "By Allah, the thought of death and the fear of the
ultimate end leave no room for happiness in this world for a man of
faith".

"People abuse us when we exhort them to do good and restrain them from
evil, but we still rise for the cause of Allah".[^8]

Qambar
------

Qambar was also one of those brave men who secured a high position
through the influence of the spiritual power of the Prophet Muhammad and
Imam Ali.

He was not afraid of telling the truth and following the right path.
Though from the viewpoint of the worldly people he was apparently no
more than a slave, he spiritually secured such a high position that he
became a confidant of Imam Ali.

The powerful and piercing words with which this man of iron will replied
to Hajjaj bin Yusuf, the bloodthirsty sadist, are well-known:

Once Hajjaj said "Qambar! What were your duties when you were in the
service of Ali?" Qambar "I used to bring him water for ablution". Hajjaj
"On finishing ablution, what did he use to say?" Qambar "He used to
recite this verse of the Qur'an

"***When they forgot Our admonition, We opened to them the gates of
everything they desired; but just as they were rejoicing in what they
were given, We seized them unawares with the*** ***result that they were
left confused. Thus the last remnant of the people who did wrong was cut
off. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds***". (Surah al-An'am,
6:44—45)

Hajjaj "I think that he applied this verse to us".  
 "Yes", said Qambar boldly.   
 Hajjaj: "If I put you to death, what will you do?"   
 Qambar "I shall be lucky and you will be unlucky".   
 Hajjaj "Confess that you no longer acknowledge Ali to be your
master".   
 Qambar "If I renounce his way, can you show me a better way? "

Hajjaj did not answer this question, and said "In any case I am going to
put you to death. Now tell me how you would like to be killed".   
 Qambar "I leave that choice to you". Hajjaj "Why?"   
 Qambar "The way you will kill me, the same way I'll kill you in the
next world. Ali, my master told me that I'd be beheaded unjustly".  
 So Hajjaj ordered him to be beheaded.

Indeed, if a man obeys Allah, the Holy Prophet and his Ahl al-Bayt, he
can have spiritual and esoteric guidance even today and can tread the
path of perfection and proximity. For him then, there shall be no fear
nor grief for because he will be a Muslim perfectly spiritual and
divine.  
 The Holy Qur'an declares 

"***As for those who say that our Lord is Allah and then they remain
firm in their faith, the angels will descend on them saying: Neither be
afraid nor be grieved*** ". (Surah al-Fussilat, 41: 30)

[^1]: These verses should not be interpreted allegorically. They
indicate that a fresh and a pure life will actually be granted to the
believers having a befitting character. As the most conspicuous signs of
real life are understanding, consciousness, power and energy, we may
infer that some believers will have such knowledge and power as others
do not have. We have reproduced the view expressed by Allamah Tabatabai
in his valuable exegesis, al-Mizan. For further explanation a reference
may be made to it.

[^2]: Al-Irshad by Shaykh Mufid, p. 304—305.

[^3]: Al-Irshad by Shaykh Mufid, p. 152

[^4]: Safinah al-Bihar by Shaykh Abbas Qummi, Vol. 1, p. 53.

[^5]: Al-Irshad by Shaykh Mufid, p. 149.

[^6]: Usud al-Ghabah Fi Ma'rifah al-Sahabah by Ibn al-Athir al-Shafi'i,
Vol. 1, p. 152.

[^7]: A'yan al-Shi'ah by Allamah Mohsin al-Amin, Vol. 13, page 81—93
Second Edition.

[^8]: Safinah al-Bihar by Shaykh Abbas Qummi, Vol. 1, p. 53.


