Section 6: The Triumph of Truth
===============================

Surah As-Saba- Verse 46
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ اِنَّمَآ أَعِظُكُم بِوَاحِدَةٍ أَن تَقُومُوا لِلَّهِ مَثْنَي
وَفُرَادَيثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُوا مَا بِصَاحِبِكُم مِن جِنَّةٍ إِنْ هُوَ
اِلاَّ نَذِيرٌ لَّكُم بَيْنَ يَدَيْ عَذَابٍ شَدِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. “Say: ‘I exhort you only to one (thing), that rise up for Allah’s
sake two by two and one by one, then ponder: there is no madness in your
comrade (the Prophet), he is only a Warner to you before a severe
chastisement’.”***

One of the duties of the Divine prophets (as) is giving admonition to
people.

In this verse, and the next verses, Allah again commands the Prophet of
Islam (S) that he should invite them to the Truth by means of different
proofs, and dissuade them from aberration.

Similar to the contents of the former discussions, the Prophet (S) is
addressed for five times and is told to say to them as follows:

***“Say: ‘I exhort you only to one (thing), that rise up for Allah’s
sake two by two and one by one, then ponder: there is no madness in your
comrade (the Prophet), he is only a Warner to you before a severe
chastisement’.”***

Each of the words and meanings mentioned in this verse points to an
important matter that ten points of which are referred to in the
following:

1- The sentence ‘I exhort you’ in fact points to this fact that your
goodness and interest is considered in this saying, not in any other
matter.

2- The application of the Arabic word ***/wahidah/ (only one thing)***,
specially with the term /’innama/ (only) for emphasis, is a clear
indication to this reality that the root of all individual and social
improvements is the utilization of intellects.

Whenever the thought of a nation is inactive, it will be invaded by the
thieves and robbers of faith, religion, freedom, and independence. But
when thoughts become active the way will be closed to those robbers.

3- The application of the Arabic term ***/qiyam/*** here does not mean
‘to stand on one’s two feet’, but it means readiness for performing
affairs, because when a person stands on his feet he is almost ready to
fulfil different programs of the life.

Therefore, contemplation needs a former preparation which brings a
motion and motive into being in man so that he willingly and
intentionally begins to contemplate.

4- The application of the word /lillah/ (for the sake of Allah) points
to this meaning that standing and preparation must have a divine godly
motive, and the contemplation which originates from such a motive is
worthy.

In principle, sincerity in affairs, and even in thinking, is the cause
of deliverance, happiness, and beatitude.

It is interesting that the faith in Allah has here been taken certain so
contemplation for other issues is an indication to this fact that
Monotheism is an innate thing which is clear even without thinking.

5- The application of the Qur’anic phrase: ***/mathna wa furada/ (two by
two and one by one)*** points to this fact that pondering and
contemplation must be done far from tumults.

People ought to rise singly or maximum two by two and utilize their
thoughts, because contemplation inside a tumult will not be so deep, in
particular that the factors of egotism and bigotry in the path of
defending from one’s own belief in front of a crowd is rather more
evident.

Some other commentators also believe that these two meanings are
probably for this purpose that men must learn the ‘individual’ thought
and the congregational thought, i.e., with consultation.

A person must both contemplate lonely and enjoy the others’ proper
thoughts, because despotism in thought and judgment is often the cause
of destruction; and cooperation in thought and struggle for solving the
scientific difficulties, where it does not stretch to tumult, has a
better effect, and it is perhaps for this reason that the word /mathna/
(two by two) has been preceded by the word /furada/ (one by one).

6- The application of the Qur’anic word ***/sahibikum/ (your
companion)***, in respect to the holy Prophet (S), has an indication to
this fact that he is not an unfamiliar person for you.

He has lived among you for many years, and you have known him for his
deposit, perspicacity, truthfulness, and veracity. You have never seen
any dark or weak point in his biography. Therefore, justly all the
accusations you attribute to him are baseless.

7- The Arabic word ***/jinnah/*** in the sense of madness is originally
derived from the word /jinn/ with the sense of ‘cover’, and in view of
the fact that a mad man is such that as if his wisdom were covered, this
meaning has been used about him.

However, the notable point is in this that it seems to say this fact
that how is it possible that an inviter to contemplation to be mad
himself? And this fact that he is caller to thinking itself is an
indication to his utmost wisdom and perspicacity.

8- The sentence saying:

***“…he is only a Warner to you…”***

summarizes the messengership of the Prophet of Islam (S) in the subject
of ‘warning’, that is, to give warning unto people concerning the
responsibilities and the court and retribution of Allah.

It is true that the Prophet has the messengership of glad tiding, too,
but that which mostly makes man move is ‘warning’.

So, in some other verses of the Qur’an, ‘giving warning’ has been
mentioned as the only duty of the Prophet (S); such as Surah Al-Ahqaf,
No. 46, verse 9 which says:

***“…and I am not but an open Warner.”***

The like of this meaning is recited in Surah Sad, No. 38, verse 65, as
well as in other verses, too.

9- The application of the Qur’anic sentence:

***“…before a severe chastisement”***

points to this meaning that Hereafter is so nigh that as if it is in
front of you; and verily, in comparison with the life-time of this world
it is so, too. This meaning has also been referred to in a few Islamic
narrations.

The holy Prophet (S) said:

*“My appointment (to prophecy) and the establishment of Hereafter are
like these two; (then he put his fore-finger and his middle finger with
together and showed the audience).”*[^1]

Thus, how is it possible that our religion like Islam be a means of
stupefaction or be resulted by ignorance, while its bringer addresses
all human beings, in its best form, and says that they mobilize for
enlivening the asleep thoughts, in a quiet environment which is empty of
any tumult.

It must be in an environment far from sensual desires, and poisonous
atmosphere of propaganda.

It should be far from bigotries and aloof from obstinacies.

You must rise for the sake of Allah, and contemplate only for Him.

This is the only admonition of the Prophet (S) to you, and nothing else.

Is not this laughable that such a religion, that has repeated this very
invitation both here and in many other instances, be accused to
stupefaction of thoughts?

In particular that he says to you to contemplate not only in solitude
and individually, but also you may ponder two by two and with the help
of each other. You must hearken to the content of the invitation of the
divine prophets, study their reasoning and if they adapt to wisdom, you
accept it.

The recent events which happened because of the raise of revolutionary
Muslims during our time in different countries against the hellish
powers of the East and the West, and made the world dark in the view of
the tyrants and threatened the pillars of their power, showed that they
had understood this point correctly that the noble religious beliefs
work as their severe enemy and is counted a great danger for them; and
it also showed what was the aim of these hostile accusations that they
attributed to Islam.

It is verily wonderful that in the philosophical analysis of the Western
sociologists this subject has been considered certain that there is not
any supernatural world, and religion is an artificial phenomena made by
man. Then they quarrel upon this matter that: what is its cause? Is its
cause the economical affairs, or the men’s fear, or the man’s lack of
cognizance, or some spiritual complexes?

But they are not ready to, for a moment, empty their mind of this wrong
pre-judgment and think that there is probably another world beyond the
world of nature; and that they may contemplate about the clear proofs of
Monotheism and the manifest signs of the prophecy of some divine
prophets, such as: Muhammad (S).

These people are not unlike to the pagans of the Age of Ignorance, with
this difference that the pagans were some illiterate zealous and
obstinate people, while these are also zealous and obstinate but are
literate, and for this reason, they are more dangerous and more
seductive.

It is interesting that the last part of many of the verses of the Qur’an
contains invitation to contemplation, or comprehension, or admonition.

Sometimes it says:

***“…Verily there is a sign in that for a people who reflect.”*** [^2]

And sometimes it says:

***“…Certainly there are signs in that for a people who reflect.”***[^3]

And sometimes it says:

***“…that they may ponder.”*** [^4]

And sometimes the same sentence is stated as addressing the believers:

***“…Thus does Allah make the signs clear to you, in order that you may
ponder?”*** [^5]

There are a great deal of such meanings in the Qur’an, like invitation
to: understanding, wise, wisdom, and admiring those who use their
wisdom, and intensively blaming those who do not apply their thought.
This meaning has been referred to in the verse under discussion.[^6]

There are many explanations in the Qur’an about men of knowledge,
scientists, and the rank of knowledge that if we try to gather all of
them with together and give commentary for them, it will become an
independent book by itself.

In this respect it is enough to say that the holy Qur’an has mentioned
one of the qualities of hellish people the lack of contemplation and
wisdom, where it says about them:

***“They will say: ‘Had we but listened or used our intelligence, we
should not be among the companions of the Blazing Fire’.”***[^7]

In another occurrence, it implies that, in principle, there are some
persons who have ears but they do not hear, they have eyes but they do
not see, they have mind but they do not ponder.

The verse says:

***“Indeed We have created for Hell many jinn and humans; they have
hearts with which they do not understand, and they have eyes with which
they do not see, and they have ears with which they do not hear. They
are as cattle, rather they are more astray. These are the heedless
ones.”***[^8]

### Some Traditions Upon the Importance of Contemplation

1- In a tradition Imam Ali-ibn-Musa-ar-Rida (as) says:

*“Worship is not by abundant prayer and fasting. Verily the real worship
is contemplation in the work of Allah, Almighty and Glorious.”*[^9]

2- Another tradition indicates that most of the worship of Abuthar was
contemplation.[^10]

3- In a tradition we read that once someone asked Imam Sadiq (as) about
the meaning of the statement of the Prophet (S) who said:

*“One hour of contemplation is better than one night of worship.”*

And how should this contemplation be done?

The Imam (as), in answer to him, said:

*“When he passes by a ruin or a (ruined) house (empty of dwellers) he
should say to the house:*

*‘Where have your dwellers gone? What happened to your founders? Why do
not you speak?”*[^11]

4- Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) says:

*“Contemplation invites to goodness and acting to it.”*[^12]

Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Before making decision do ponder, consult before that you regret, and
think deeply before you attack.”*[^13]

Surah As-Saba- Verses 47-48
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَآ سَأَلْتُكُم مِنْ أَجْرٍ فَهُوَ لَكُمْ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلاَّ
عَلَي اللَّهِ وَهُوَ عَلَي كُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّ رَبّـِي يَقْذِفُ بِالْحَقِ عَلاَّمُ الْغُيُوبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. “Say: ‘Whatever reward I have asked of you, it is for yourselves;
my reward is only with Allah; and He is witness over all things’.”***  
***48. “Say: ‘My Lord hurls the truth (on hearts), the great Knower of
the Unseen’.”***

The Divine emissaries ought to announce for people that they expect
nothing from them; because if a spiritual leader expect some material
thing from people, the society may not bear him.

In this holy verse and the following verses Allah orders His Messenger
for five times that he should speak with those faithless aberrant people
in different ways and shut the door of excuse to them.

In the previous verse, the words were about invitation to contemplation
and about the negation of any lack of spiritual equilibrium in the
Prophet (S).

In the first verse under discussion the words are about the lack of
asking any reward from people for the Messengership.

He commands:

***“Say: ‘Whatever reward I have asked of you, it is for yourselves…”***

***“…my reward is only with Allah…”***

This matter points to this fact that whatever a wise person does must
naturally have a motive. When my perfect intellect is proved to you and
you see that I have no material motive, you should know that the Divine
and spiritual motive has made me do it.

In other words, I invited you to ponder. Now you do think and ask your
own conscience what has caused me to warn you against the intense
punishment of Allah? What benefit do I get from this, and what kind of
material profit does it have for me?

In addition, if your pretext for this turning away from the truth is
this that you must pay a dear price for it, principally, I have asked no
compensate and reward from you.

This very meaning is clearly mentioned in Surah Al-Qalam, No. 68, verse
46 which says:

***“Or do you ask from them a reward, so that they are burdened with
debt?”***

Upon the meaning of the Qur’anic phrase ***/fa huwa lakum/ (it is for
yourselves)*** there are two commentaries: the first is that it may be
an implicit declaration of the lack of asking for any kind of reward
absolutely; like that we say:

***“Whatever I have wanted from you can be yours.”***

Indicating that, I have wanted nothing from you. The witness to this
statement is the sentence next to it which says:

***“…my reward is only with Allah…”***

The second is that: if you see that in some of my words that I have
brought from my Lord I have told you:

***“…‘No reward do I ask of you for this except the love of those near
of kin.’…”***[^14]

The profit of this also returns to you, because the concept of the
sentence: ‘The love of those near of kin’ returns to ‘deposit and
Wilayah’ which is the continuation of the subject of messengership, that
which is also necessary for the continuation of your guidance.

The evidence upon this recent statement is the occasion of revelation
narrated here by some commentators.

They have said when the verse saying:

***“…say: ‘No reward do I ask of you for this except the love of those
near of kin…”***

was revealed, the Prophet (S) told the pagans of Mecca:

“*Do not annoy my relatives*”

and they accepted this suggestion, too. But when the Prophet (S) said
something bad against their idols, they said that Muhammad did not treat
us justly.

From one side he wanted us we would not annoy his relatives, but on the
other side, by saying something bad against our gods, he annoys us. It
was here that the recently mentioned verse was revealed and told them
that whatever the Prophet (S) wanted from them in this regard was for
their own benefit, now the pagans may hurt them or not.[^15]

And, at the end of the verse, it says:

***“…and He is witness over all things’.”***

If I ask my reward from him it is for the sake that He is aware of all
my deeds and intentions.

Moreover, He is a witness to my legitimacy, because it is He Who has
given me these clear signs and miracles.

And verily He is the best witness, because the one who knows the facts
better than all, and can deliver it better than anyone, and there comes
out of him nothing but the truth, he is the best witness, and He is
Allah.

Regarding to what was said about the legitimacy of the invitation of the
Prophet (S), the next verse implicitly says that Qur’an is a reality
which is undeniable and it has been cast on the heart of the Prophet (S)
from the side of Allah, and it announces:

***“Say: ‘My Lord hurls the truth (on hearts), the great Knower of the
Unseen’.”***

Regarding to the fact that the Arabic word ***/yaqŏifu/*** is derived
from /qaŏf/ in the sense of ‘to throw from a far point’ or ‘to throw
from a far distance’, there have been delivered different commentaries
upon this verse which are consistent with each other.

The first is that: the purpose of ‘***hurls the truth***’ is casting the
content of the heavenly Books and Divine revelation upon the hearts of
the Divine prophets and the messengers of Allah, because as the result
of being ‘***Knower of the Unseen***’ He knows the receptive hearts and
chooses them and casts the revelation upon them so that it penetrates
deeply into them.

Thus, this statement is not unlike to the tradition which says:

***“The knowledge is a light that Allah casts it into the heat of the
one He pleases.”***

The application of ‘Knower of the Unseen’ verifies this.

Some others have said that its purpose is: ‘casting the Truth on the
falsehood and knocking down the wrong by the ‘Truth. That is, the Truth
has such a power that it removes all the barriers out of its way and
none is able to stand against it. So, it is a threat against the
opponents that they might not rise against the Qur’an, and know that the
legitimacy of the Qur’an will defeat them.

In this case, it is similar to the matter which is mentioned in Surah
Al-’Anbiya’, No. 21, verse 18 which says:

***“Nay! But We hurl the truth against falsehood so that it breaks out
its brain, and behold, falsehood vanishes away…”***

This probability has also been suggested that the purpose of the
application of /qaŏf/ here is the penetration of the legitimacy of the
Qur’an in both near and far points of the world and pointing to this
fact that finally this heavenly revelation will be worldly and its light
will light everywhere.

Surah As-Saba- Verses 49-50
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ جَآءَ الْحَقُّ وَمَا يُبْدِئُ الْبَاطِلُ وَمَا يُعِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِن ضَلَلْتُ فَإِنَّمَآ أَضِلُّ عَلَي نَفْسِي وَإِنِ اهْتَدَيْتُ
فَبِمَـا يُوحِي اِلَيَّ رَبّـِي اِنَّهُ سَمِيعٌ قَرِيبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. “Say: ‘The Truth has come, and falsehood neither brings forth
anything nor does it reproduce (it)’.”***  
***50. “Say: ‘If I astray, I astray only against my own self, and if I
am guided aright, it is of what my Lord has revealed unto me. Verily He
is All-Hearing, the (Most) Nigh’.”***

The Truth defeats the falsehood and is victorious over it.

In this verse, Allah commands:

***“Say: ‘The Truth has come, and falsehood neither brings forth
anything nor does it reproduce (it)’.”***

Thus, falsehood can do nothing against the Truth and it has no function
before it: neither a new function which is initiator, nor a repeated
function, because its plans are entirely destroyed, and that is just why
it cannot cover the light of the truth and wipe out its effect from the
memories.

Some commentators have tried to limit the denotation expansions of the
‘right’ and ‘wrong’ in this verse into some few ones, but it is clear
that the concept of those two is very vast.

The Qur’an, the Divine revelation and the whole teachings of Islam are
all gathered in the concept of ‘the Truth’, and polytheism, paganism,
misguidance, injustice, sin, satanic temptations, and tyrannical
primordial innovation all are simply compiled in the meaning of
‘falsehood’.

In fact, this verse is like Surah Al-’Isra’, No. 17, verse 81 which
says:

***“And say: ‘The truth has come and the falsehood’ has vanished away,
verily the ‘falsehood’ is (something) vanishing.”***

**Question:** Why does falsehood still exist after coming the Qur’an and
the Prophet of the Truth?

**Answer:** The logical and scientific sovereignty is different from
practical and executive sovereignty. Whatever relates to Allah is
sending the Truth, and that which relates to us is action and executing
the Truth.

This is what we practically did not perform. Yes, the return of the
health of a sick person depends on a correct prescription and consuming
its medicine. One of them is the duty of physician and the other is the
duty of the sick person.

Then, in order to make clear that whatever he says is from the side of
Allah, and that the entire guidance is from Him, and that there happens
no mistake in the Divine revelation, in the next verse,

He adds:

***“Say: ‘If I astray, I astray only against my own self, and if I am
guided aright, it is of what my Lord has revealed unto me…”***

That is, if I, too, be left alone to myself, as you claim, I will become
astray, because finding the way of the Truth from among the mass of
wrong ways is not possible except by His help; and the light of guidance
in which there is no aberration, is the light of His revelation.

Then, you may come nigh toward this light, the Divine revelation, in
order that you come out from the realm of darkness and arrive into the
realm of light.

At the end of the verse, the Qur’an says:

***“…Verily He is All-Hearing, the (Most) Nigh’.”***

You should not think that He may not hear our words and yours; or He
hears them but He is far from us. No, He is both Hearing and Nigh.
Therefore, nothing of our speaking and our demands is concealed to Him.

Surah As-Saba- Verses 51-52
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ تَرَي اِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلاَ فَوْتَ وَاُخِذُوا مِن مَكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا ءَامَنَّا بِهِ وَأَنَّي لَهُمُ التَّنَاوُشُ مِن مَكَانٍ
بَعِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. “And could you see when they shall become terrified, but (then)
there shall be no escape and they shall be seized upon a near place (you
will surprise),”***  
***52. “And they shall say: ‘We believe in it’, and how shall the
attaining (of faith) be possible to them from a distance place?”***

The impatience and fear of polytheists and their asking for help do not
solve any problem out of their problems for them, because polytheists
have no place of refuge.

Regarding to the discussions about the obstinate polytheists mentioned
in the former verses, the above verses address the Prophet (S) again and
illustrate the circumstance of this group when they are in the grips of
the Divine chastisement, showing that how they will think of Faith after
that they will be involved in it, but their faith will not be useful for
them.

It says:

***“And could you see when they shall become terrified, but (then) there
shall be no escape and they shall be seized upon a near place (you will
surprise),”***

The opinions of the commentators are divided upon that to which time
this impatience and fear relate.

Some of them believe that this status relates to the worldly
chastisement or to the chastisement at the time of their death, while
some others say that it relates to the punishment of the Day of
Hereafter.

But in the last verse of the verses under discussion, there is a meaning
which shows that these verses are all related to this world and the
worldly sudden punishment for incorrigible wrong doers, or the
punishment of the time of giving up one’s life, because in that verse
the Qur’an says:

***“And a*** ***barrier shall be set between them and that which they
desire, as was done unto the likes of them afore-time…”***[^16]

This meaning does not adapt to the punishment of the Day of Hereafter,
because, on that Day, all will be gathered with together for Reckoning,
as Surah Hud, No. 11, verse 103 says:

***“…That is a Day (when) mankind are to be gathered to, and that is a
Day that shall be witnessed (by all).”***

And Surah Al-Waqi‘ah, No. 56, verses 49-50 say:

***“Say: ‘Those of old and those of later times,” “All will certainly be
gathered together for the meeting appointed for a Day well-known.”***

Therefore, the purpose of the sentence: ***“…they shall be seized upon a
near place”*** is that these faithless and cruel persons not only cannot
escape from the realm of the Power of Allah, but also He will seize them
from a place which is very near to them.

Were not the Pharaohs buried under the waves of the Nile which was the
capital of their honour? Did not Korah sink into the earth with his
treasures?

Did not the people of Sheba whose story is referred to in this very
Surah afflict from the nearest place, i.e., the same great dam which was
in the midst of their city and was the cause of their life and motion?
So, Allah afflicts them from the nearest place in order that they see
His Power.

A great deal of unjust kings were killed or destroyed by their nearest
men; and many of the cruel powerful men received the last stroke from
the inside of their homes.

Many Islamic narrations, introduced by the way of the Shi‘ites and the
Sunnites, have adapted this verse to the revolt of Sufyani.

(There are a group of people who follow the school of thought of
Abu-Sufyan, the continuation of the thought of the Age of Ignorance, who
will raise against the adherents of the Truth in the threshold of the
reappearance of Mahdi (as) and his army.)

At time when they will be going toward Mecca to occupy it they will
afflict the Divine punishment. A severe earth-quake causes that the
earth will split asunder and they will fall into it.

This meaning, in fact, is the statement of one of the expansions of the
Qur’anic phrase:

***“…they shall be seized upon a near place”***,

that they shall meet the Divine punishment in a place where on they are
standing.

Ibn-’Abbas, Ibn-Mas‘ud, Abu-Hurayrah, Abu-Hathifah, Umm-us-Salamah, and
‘Ayishah, according to what has been mentioned in the books of the
Sunnites, have narrated the content of this tradition from the Messenger
of Allah (S).[^17]

And many of the commentators of the Shi‘ites have recorded this
tradition in their commentary Books, such as: Qummi, Majma‘-ul-Bayan,
Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, and As-Safi. Also a group of the commentators of the
Sunnites such as the writer of the Commentary of Ruh-ul-Ma‘ani and
Rauh-ul-Bayan, and Qurtubi have narrated it following to the verses
under discussion.

The Late ‘Allamah Majlisi has narrated a lot of traditions in this
regard in Bihar-ul-’Anwar from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) and from the
Prophet (S) which show that one of the denotation expansions of the
verses under discussion is the revolt of Sufyani at the time of
reappearance of Hadrat Mahdi (as), when Allah will seize and destroy
them from the nearest place to them.[^18]

As it has repeatedly been said, the narrations which are mentioned upon
the commentary of the verses of the Qur’an mostly refer to the clear
denotation expansions and they are never as a reason for limiting the
concepts of them.

In the next verse, their circumstance, when they are involved in the
grips of the Divine chastisement, is explained. It implicitly says that
they will say they believe in the Qur’an, in its bringer, and in Origin
and End.

It says:

***“And they shall say: ‘We believe in it’…”***

***“…and how shall the attaining (of faith) be possible to them from a
distance place?”***

Yes, when the death and the sudden punishment come, the doors of return
will absolutely be closed, and, as if, there will be created a firm dam
between man and recompense of the past wrong deeds. For this very
reason, expression of Faith at that time is done from a very far
distance.

Principally, such a faith which is compulsory, and is because of
extraordinary terror of the punishment they see by their own eyes, is
not valuable.

Therefore, some other verses of the Qur’an say:

***“…and even if they were returned, they would revert to what they were
prohibited, and most certainly they are liars.”*** [^19]

The Arabic word ***/tanawuš/*** is derived from /nauš/ in the sense of
‘taking something’, and some have taken it in the sense of ‘to take
easily’, i.e., how can they reach an aim easily which is very far?

Surah As-Saba- Verses 53-54
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ كَفَرُوا بِهِ مِن قَبْلُ وَيَقْذِفُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ مِن مَكَانٍ
بَعِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحِيلَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَيْنَ مَا يَشْتَهُونَ كَمَا فُعِلَ
بِاَشْيَاعِهِم مِن قَبْلُ اِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا فِي شَكٍّ مُّرِيبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***53. “And indeed they did disbelieve in it before, and aim their
conjectures about the unseen from a distant place.”***  
***54. “And a barrier shall be set between them and that which they
desire, as was done unto the likes of them afore-time; for they have
been in a disquieting doubt.”***

Those who were denigrating the Prophet (S) and the Qur’an yesterday,
today that they have encountered a straiten circumstance, they believe,
but what is its benefit?

In these verses, which are the last verses of Surah Saba, the Qur’an
implicitly says: now that every thing has ended, how can they compensate
their faults and believe? While before that when they were in the utmost
freedom and authority, they disbelieved.

The verse says:

***“And indeed they did disbelieve in it before…”***

They not only disbelieved, but forged kinds of accusations to the
Prophet of Islam (S) and his teachings.

The verse continues sayings:

***“…and aim their conjectures about the unseen from a distant
place.”***

As we said before, the Arabic word ***/qaŏf/*** means ‘to throw
something’, and the Qur’anic word ***/qayb/*** means the world of beyond
sense, and the Arabic phrase ***/makanin ba‘id/*** means ‘a distant
place’, and totally is a tender allusion of a person who judges about
the world of supper-nature without having any knowledge, in the same
manner that throwing something from a distant place rarely strikes to
the target.

This conjecture and judgment of their does not strike the aim either.

Sometimes they called the Prophet (S) ‘sorcerer’, sometimes ‘mad’, and
sometimes ‘a liar’.

Sometimes they considered the Qur’an as the production of the thought of
a man, and sometimes they entirely denied the Paradise, the Hell, and
Hereafter. All of these were a kind of ‘stoning to unseen’, ‘throwing an
arrow in darkness’, and ‘throwing something from a distant place’.

Then it adds that finally death separated them from what they desired:

***“And a barrier shall be set between them and that which they desire,
as was done unto the likes of them afore-time…”***

In a painful moment, they see that all their wealth and properties, all
their castles and positions, and their desires are separated from them.
Those who had clasped to even a penny and could not leave the least
material possibilities, how will they be at the moment when they must
suddenly say farewell to all of them and shut their eyes and go toward a
dark and terrible future?

How beautiful says Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) when he illustrates the
moments of death and separation from the bounties of the world through
his delightful words in the clearest form. He (as) says:

*“…Pangs of death and grief for losing (this world) have surrounded
them. Consequently their limbs become languid and their complexion
changes. Then death increases its struggle over them.*

*In one of them, it stands in between him and his power of speaking
although he lies among his people, looking with eyes, hearing with his
ears, with full wits and intelligence. He then thinks over how he wasted
his life and in what (activities) he passed his time.*

*He recalls the wealth he collected when he had blinded himself in
seeking it, and acquired it from fair and foul sources. Now the
consequences of collecting it have overtaken him. He gets ready to leave
it. It would remain for those who are behind him. They would enjoy it
and benefit by it.*

*It would be an easy acquisition for others but a burden on his back,
and the man cannot get rid of it. He would thereupon bite his hands with
teeth out of shame for what was disclosed to him about his affairs at
the time of his death.*

*He would dislike what he coveted during the days of his life and would
wish that he who envied him on account of it and felt jealous over him
for it should have amassed it instead of he himself.”*

Finally, in the last sentence of the verse under discussion, it implies
that the reason of all these things is that they always spent their life
in doubt and, naturally, such fate was waiting for them.

The verse says:

***“…for they have been in a disquieting doubt.”***

*O’ Lord! Set us among those believers who before losing opportunities
awaken and try to compensate whatever they had missed.*

*O’ Lord! Appoint us of those who at the time of affluence begin
thanksgiving and do not become proud and neglectful, and that at the
time of afflictions they do not complain but they take a lesson.*

[^1]: The of Rauh-ul-Ma‘ali, Vol. 22, P. 143

[^2]: Surah An-Nahl, No. 16, verses 11 and 69

[^3]: Surah Ar-Ra‘d, No. 13, verse 3 and Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 42;
Al-Jathiyah, No. 45, verse 13

[^4]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 176, and Hashr, verse 21

[^5]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verses 219 and 266

[^6]: No. 46

[^7]: Surah Al-Mulk, No. 67, verse 10

[^8]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 179

[^9]: ’Usul-i-Kafi, Vol. 2, P. 45

[^10]: Safinat-ul-Bihar, Vol. 2, P. 383

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Ibid

[^13]: Nasikh-ut-Tawarikh, Vol. 2, P. 142

[^14]: Surah Ash-Shaura, No. 42, verse 23

[^15]: The commentary of Rauh-ul-Bayan, Vol. 7, P. 308

[^16]: The current Surah, verse 54

[^17]: Al-Mizan, Vol. 16, P. 419

[^18]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 52, P. 185

[^19]: Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 28


