Section 4: A Scene of the Resurrection
======================================

Surah Ya-Sin - Verses 51-53
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَإِذَا هُم مِنَ الأَجْدَاثِ إِلَي رَبّـِهِمْ
يَنسِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَاوَيْلَنَا مَنْ بَعَثَنَا مِن مَّرْقَدِنَا هَذَا مَا وَعَدَ
الرَّحْمَنُ وَصَدَقَ الْمُرْسَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن كَانَتْ إِلاَّ صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً فَإِذَا هُمْ جَمِيعٌ لَّدَيْنَا
مُحْضَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. “And the Trumpet shall be blown, then behold, from their graves
they shall hasten on to their Lord.”***  
***52. “They shall say: ‘Oh! woe to us! Who has raised us up from our
sleeping-place? This is what the Beneficent (Allah) promised; and the
apostles told the truth.”***  
***53. “There would be naught but a single Blast, when they shall all
brought before Us.”***

Hereafter is a scene of awareness, acknowledgement and confession. The
establishment of Hereafter and reckoning is the requisite of the
Attribute of Allah Who is Beneficent.

That which the disbelievers denied in the world, they will confess it on
That Day. (When the name of Rahman was mentioned in the world they used
to say:

“***What is Rahman?***”,

but on that Day they will say:

“***This is what the Beneficent (Allah) promised***”.

In this verse, the Qur’an points to another stage which is the stage of
life after death. It says:

***“And the Trumpet shall be blown, then behold, from their graves they
shall hasten on to their Lord.”***

By the command of Allah, the dust and the rotten bones will have life
again and come out from their graves and attend that wonderful court for
trial and reckoning.

They will have life again and will be quickened by a single Blast, in
the same manner that all of them died with a single Blast (blown in the
Trumpet). Neither their death nor their being quickened is difficult for
Allah.

Just like the trumpet which is blown for the soldiers of the army to
gather and be ready, and then, in a short time, they all get up and come
out from their tents and attend in the row, the act of raising the dead
is, like that, quick for Allah, too.

The Qur’anic word /’ajdath/ is the plural form of /jadath/ in the sense
of ‘grave’. This meaning shows well that resurrection, besides having
the spiritual aspect, has the bodily aspect, too, and the man’s new body
will be made from the same former materials.

The application of the Arabic term ***/nufixa/ (shall be blown)*** in
the past tense form is for the sake that in the Arabic language the
certain future affairs are stated in past verb form indicating that
there is no doubt in it, as if it had happened before.

The Arabic term ***/yansilun/*** is derived from /nasl/ in the sense of
‘walking quickly’. Raqib in Mufradat says: this word originally means:
‘to separate from something’, and that a person’s children in Arabic are
called ***/nasl/ (offspring)*** it is for the sake that they have
separated from father and mother. Therefore, when a person quickly gets
away and separates, this word is used.

The application of the Arabic term ***/rabbihim/ (their Lord)*** seems
that it refers to this fact that the Lordship, ownership and training of
Allah require that there should be a reckoning and Resurrection for the
affairs.

However, it is clearly understood from the verses of the Holy Qur’an
that ending of this world and the beginning of the next world both will
happen suddenly and with a revolutionary movement and each of them has
been rendered into ‘blowing in the Tempest’, the full explanation of
which will be mentioned in the commentary of Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39,
verse 68.

In the next verse, the Qur’an adds:

***“They shall say: ‘Oh! woe to us! who has raised us up from our
sleeping-place? This is what the Beneficent (Allah) promised; and the
apostles told the truth.”***

Yes, the scene is so expressive and terrible that man forgets all the
false and superstitious matters, and he will not have any way except
confessing the facts explicitly. It likens the graves to
sleeping-places, and the Resurrection to getting up from sleep.

This has also been mentioned in a famous tradition which says:

*“You will pass away like that you sleep, and you will be raised as you
get up from sleep.”*[^1]

Here they terrify and cry that woe to us! Who did awaken us from
sleeping, and rose up from our sleeping-place?

But soon they will realize and remember that the true prophets in the
world have given them promise of this Day from the side of Allah. They
answer themselves that this is the promise of the Beneficent, Allah; the
Lord Whose general mercy has enveloped all and Whose prophets told the
truth and made us aware of this Day, but alas we mocked them all.

Therefore, the Qur’anic sentence:

***“…this is what the Beneficent (Allah) promised and the apostles told
the truth”***

is the continuation of the statement of the rejecters of Resurrection,
but some commentators have considered it as the statement of the angels
or the believers, which contrasts the apparent of the verse, and there
is no necessity upon it, because the confusion of the rejecters on the
fact on that Day is not a matter that is mentioned only in this verse.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’, No. 21, verse 97 says:

***“And the true promise has drawn nigh; then behold, staring wide (in
terror), the eyes of those who disbelieve! (They say:) ‘Alas for us! We
were heedless of this (Day); nay; we were unjust ones’.”***

However, the application of the Arabic term ***/marqad/***, which is
used in the sense of ‘sleeping-place’ and ‘sleep’, denotes to this fact
that in the world of purgatory they are in a state similar to sleep, and
as it is said in the commentary of Surah Al-Mu’minun, No. 23, verse 100,
due to the majority of people, who are in a status between infidelity
and faith, ‘purgatory’ is not unlike to the state of sleeping, where
both the excellent believers and extraordinary vice disbelievers are
completely aware and enjoy the blessings or are faced with kinds of
chastisement.

Some of the commentators have given this probability that the terror and
grief in Hereafter is so much that the purgatory chastisement, compared
with it, is like naught but a peaceful sleep.

Then, in order to explain the speed of the occurrence of the blast of
the trumpet, in the third verse the Qur’an says:

***“There would be naught but a single Blast, when they shall all
brought before Us.”***

Therefore, there will not need a long time for the dead to be quickened
and that they rise from their graves and attend in the just court of
Allah, in the same manner that there needs not a long time for the death
of individuals. The first Blast is a cry for death and the second Blast
is a cry for life and attending in the court of Allah, the Just.

The application of the word ***‘Blast’ (a cry)*** and emphasizing it
with the word ‘single’ and then the application of the Arabic term
***/’iŏa/***, which in such instances informs of the sudden occurrence
of something, and the application of:

“***They shall all be brought before Us***”

in the form of a nominal sentence all are as evidence to the quick
occurrence of this part of Resurrection.

The conclusive tone of these verses and the piercing influence of them
in the men’s hearts is so effective that as if they hear this cry with
their ears saying: O’ men who are asleep! O’ the scattered dusts! And O’
rotten bones! Stand up! Stand up! And be ready for Reckoning and
recompense! How beautiful the verses of the Qur’an are, and how
expressive their warnings are!

Surah Ya-Sin - Verse 54
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْيَوْمَ لاَ تُظْلَمُ نَفْسٌ شَيْئاً وَلاَ تُجْزَوْنَ إِلاَّ مَا
كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “So this day no soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least,
nor shall you be recompensed but that which you used to do.”***

Allah is just, and the Hereafter is the Day of appearance and
manifestation of Allah’s Justice. The retribution and reward on the
Hereafter Day is on the basis of our deeds in the world.

This verse refers to the end of the righteous believers and the wicked
disbelievers. It implies that on that Day nobody shall be dealt with
unjustly. Neither the reward of anybody will be decreased, nor will the
retribution of anybody be increased.

It says:

***“So this day no soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least…”***

Then it refers to a statement which, in fact, is a clear and vivid
evidence for the lack of injustice in that great court. It continues
saying:

***“…nor shall you be recompensed but that which you used to do.”***

In other words, the deeds you do in this world, good or bad, will be
with you there on that Day. The same deeds will be incarnated and in all
stations of the gathering place of resurrection, and after the end of
Reckoning, will be with you as your companion. Is the deliverance of the
fruit of someone’s deeds to him contrary to justice?

Or is the carnation of deeds and making it as a person’s companion
injustice? And by this it is made clear that, basically, in that sense
‘injustice’ does not have any concept. If here, amongst human beings,
there is sometimes justice and sometimes injustice, it is for the reason
that they have not the ability of showing and delivering the deeds of
everybody to him.

Some of the commentators have considered that the recent sentence refers
to the evil doers and pagans who will face with retribution equal to
their deeds and it does not refer to the believers, because Allah will
give them the rewards more than their deeds because of His Grace and His
Mercy.

Surah Ya-Sin - Verses 55-58
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَصْحَابَ الْجَنَّةِ الْيَوْمَ فِي شُغُلٍ فَاكِهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمْ وَأَزْوَاجُهُمْ فِي ظِلاَلٍ عَلَي الأَرَآئِكِ مُتَّكِئُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُمْ فِيهَا فَاكِهَةٌ وَلَهُم مَّا يَدَّعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلاَمٌ قَوْلاً مِن رَّبٍّ رَّحِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***55. “Verily the inhabitants of Paradise that ِay are busy in
rejoicing,”***  
***56. “They and their wives shall be in the shades, reclining on raised
coaches;”***  
***57. “They shall have fruits therein, and they shall have whatever
they desire.”***  
***58. “‘Peace’: is the word from a Merciful Lord (for them).”***

In Paradise, there will be life without death, health with no sickness,
youth with no senility, honour with no disgrace, favour with no
indebtedness, permanence with no distraction, joy with no wrath, and
intimate ease with no fear. Moreover, in Paradise there will be received
a consent and a significant greeting from the side of Allah.

And, however, this holy verse refers to the part of the rewards of the
believers and, before anything else, emphasizes on the peace of mind and
says:

***“Verily the inhabitants of Paradise that Day are busy in
rejoicing,”***

They are busy with the bounties of Allah and are aloof from any annoying
thought, so they will be in the utmost joy and happiness.

The Arabic word ***/šuqul/*** and the term ***/šuql/*** both are with
the sense of events and moods that come to man and make him busy to them
whether they are happy or sad.

But since the Qur’anic term /fakihun/ has immediately been mentioned
after it, and this term is the plural form of /fakih/ in the sense of
joyful, happy, and laughing, it can be a hint to the affairs which make
man so busy to him that he may neglect the annoying affairs totally in a
way that he will be in full rejoicing and no grief or sorrow dominates
him, and he forgets even the horror and fear that he gets at the time of
the establishment of Hereafter and attending in the Divine court of
justice.

If this horror does not really go, the shade of anxiety and sorrow will
constantly have heaviness on the man’s heart. Therefore, one of the
effects of this business of mind is forgetting the terror of the
Hereafter.

However, next to the peace of mind which is the source of all bounties,
and it is the condition of using all merits, it refers to the
explanation of other bounties.

It says:

***“They and their wives shall be in the shades, reclining on raised
coaches;”***

The Arabic term ***/’azwaj/*** here means ‘***the heavenly wives***’, or
it means the faithful wives whom they had in this world.

And that some have said that it may be in the sense of ‘their
associates’, like Surah As-Saffat, No. 37, verse 22 which says:

***“(And Allah will command the angels:) ‘Gather you together those who
were unjust and their mates and what they used to worship,”***

that here it seems very improbable, in particular that the Qur’anic term
/’ara’ik/, the plural form of /’arikah/, according to a group of
commentators and philologists is in the sense of some beds which are in
bridal chamber.[^2]

The application of the Arabic word ***/zilal/ (shades)*** refers to the
shades of the trees in Paradise amidst which the thrones of the people
of Heaven have been erected. Or it refers to the shades of the castles
in Paradise.

All of these show that there is sunshine there, too; but there is not a
tormenting sunshine. Yes, they have some other kind of pleasure and
happiness under the pleasant shades of the Heavenly trees.

In addition to that, the verse says:

***“They shall have fruits therein, and they shall have whatever they
desire.”***

It is clearly understood from other verses of the Qur’an that the food
of the people of Paradise is not only fruits, but the abovementioned
verse shows that the best food of the people of Heaven is fruit, the
special fruits which are completely different from the fruits of this
world.

And, even in this world, according to the confession of the specialists
of nutriment, fruits are the best and the most suitable nutriment for
man.

The Qur’anic term /yadda‘un/ is derived from /da‘ayah/in the sense of
‘demand’, i.e. whatever they demand and desire it will available for
them, and they will not have any wish which will not be done for them.

In Majma‘-ul-Bayan the Late Tabarsi says:

*“An Arab uses this meaning in respect to /tamanni/ and he says:
‘whatever you desire you may demand from me’.”*

And thus, whatever today man may think of and whatever does not come
into his mind from among the kinds of merits and the bounties, they will
be available and prepared there, and the entertainment of Allah from His
guests will be done in the highest possible level.

But, the most important of all are the spiritual merits which are
referred to in the last verse of the verses under discussion.

It says:

***“‘Peace’: is the word from a Merciful Lord (for them).”***

This enlivening and pleasant call, which is full of His love and
affection, attracts the man’s attention to itself so deeply, and gives
him joy, happiness and spirituality, that does not match any other
bounty.

Yes hearing the call of the beloved one, is a call filled with love and
mixed with grace which causes the people of Paradise to be thoroughly
rejoicing, a moment of which is superior to the whole world and whatever
exists in it.

A tradition narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) indicates that he
said:

*“While the people of Paradise are busy enjoying the bounties of Heaven
there will appear a light above them.*

*This is the light of Allah which is cast upon them and at the same time
a call will be heard saying:*

*‘Peace and greeting on you, O’ the people of Paradise!’*

*And this is the same thing which has been mentioned in the Qur’an. It
is here that the view of Allah attracts them so strongly that they
neglect His all other things and, in that state, they forget the whole
bounties of Paradise.*

*It is here that the angels come out from every door and say:*

*‘Peace upon you’.”*[^3]

Yes, the ecstasy of the intuition and presence of the Beloved and the
visit of the Lord’s Grace are so delightful and gratifying that a moment
of which is not equal with any blessing, even with the whole world.

The lovers of visiting Him are so that if this spiritual gift might be
ceased from them, they would die. Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) in a
tradition said:

*“If I remain walled from the visit of the Lord for a moment, I will
die.”*

It is interesting that the apparent of the verse is that this greeting
of Allah unto the believers in Paradise is a direct greeting without any
intermediator. It is a greeting from the Lord, Allah, the greeting which
originates from His special Mercy, i.e., the rank of His specific Mercy,
and all grace and favours are gathered in it. Oh, what a blessing it is!

In principle, Paradise is ‘the Abode of Peace’, as Surah Yunus, No. 10,
verse 25 says:

***“And Allah does call mankind to the Abode of Peace…”***

And the people of Paradise, who are the dwellers of this abode, will
sometimes face with the angel’s greeting.

At the time of arrival into Paradise, the angels arrive to them from
every door and say:

***“Peace (be) upon you (saying) that you persevered in patience! (And
now) how excellent is the Ultimate Abode.”***[^4]

And sometimes the dwellers of ’A‘raf call them and say:

***“…Peace be upon you!…”***[^5]

And sometimes they will be faced with the angels’ greeting after
entering into Paradise:

***“…and the warders thereof say unto them: ‘Peace be*** ***unto
you…”***[^6]

Sometimes, at the time of taking their souls, this greeting is delivered
to them from the side of the angels of death.

They say:

***“…Peace be upon you! Enter the Paradise because of what you used to
do.”***[^7]

And sometimes they themselves greet each other.

And, in principle, in their greeting there is ‘Peace’, the Qur’an says:

***“…their greetings therein is: ‘Peace!’.”***[^8]

And, finally, the superior and above all of these is the greeting of
Allah:

***“‘Peace’: is the word from a Merciful Lord (for them).”***

Briefly speaking, there will be heard there neither a vain word nor a
sinful thing. There will be only ‘peace’ and ‘peace’.

The Qur’an says:

***“They shall not hear therein vain or sinful discourse,”***

Of course, it is not a greeting in mere pronunciation, but it is a
greeting the effect of which penetrates in the depth of man’s soul and
makes it thoroughly full of tranquillity, peace, and health.

Surah Ya-Sin - Verses 59-62
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَامْتَازُوا الْيَوْمَ أَيُّهَا الْمُـجْرِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَا بَنِي ءَادَمَ أَن لاَّ تَعْبُدُوا
الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنِ اعْبُدُونِي هَذَا صِرَاطٌ مُّسْتَقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَضَلَّ مِنكُمْ جِبِلاًّ كَثِيراً أَفَلَمْ تَكُونُوا
تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***59. “And (they will be told) get you aside this day O’ you the guilty
ones!”***  
***60. “Did I not make covenant with you, O’ children of Adam, that you
should not serve the Satan, verily he is a manifest foe to you;”***  
***61. “And that you should serve Me? This is the straight path.”***  
***62. “And yet he has led astray a great number of you. Did you not
then understand?”***

The separation of the guilty ones from the righteous ones is according
to the law of Divine Justice Who said that the faithful and the pagan
are not equal.

The Qur’an says:

***“Is he then who is a believer like him who is a transgressor? They
are not equal.”***[^9]

In the verses under discussion, a short part of the fate of the hellish
people and the followers of Satan is referred to.

The first is that the Qur’an implies that, on that Day, with a
contemptuous tone, it will be said to the guilty ones to get aloof from
the believers.

The Qur’an says:

***“And (they will be told) get you aside this day O’ you the guilty
ones!”***

It was you who, in the world, had substituted yourself deceitfully in
the rows of the believers and sometimes took benefit of their honour and
credit. Now you must separate your rows from theirs, and appear in your
own real feature.

This is, in fact, the actualization of the promise of Allah that in
Surah Sad, No. 38, verse 28 He says:

***“Shall We treat those who believe and do good like the
mischief-makers in the earth? Or shall We make the pious ones like the
wicked?”***

However, the apparent of the verse under discussion refers to the
separation of the rows of the guilty from those of the believers, though
the commentators have delivered some other probabilities, among them is
the separation of the rows of the guilty from each other, and every
group of them will be in a definite line.

The next verse refers to the expressive rebukes and blames of Allah unto
the sinners on the Day of Hereafter and says:

***“Did I not make covenant with you, O’ children of Adam, that you
should not serve the Satan, verily he is a manifest foe to you;”***

This Divine covenant has been taken from man in different ways, and He
has repeatedly mentioned this matter to him.

At first, on the day when the children of Adam were living on the earth,
they were addressed by this word of Allah, saying:

***“O’ children of Adam! Let not Satan seduce you as he expelled your
parents from the Garden, stripping them both of their clothing that he
might expose unto them their shameful parts. Surely he sees you, he and
his tribe, from where you do not see them. We have made the Satans the
friends of those who do not believe.”***[^10]

Then, this very warning was expressed by the tongues of Divine
messengers, as Surah Zukhruf, No. 43, verse 62 says:

***“And let not the Satan prevent you, surely he is manifest enemy.”***

And in Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 168 we recite:

***“…and do not follow the footsteps of Satan surely he is a manifest
foe for you.”***

On the other side, this covenant has also been taken in the world of
nature with the tongue of bestowing wisdom on man, because the
intellectual proofs clearly testify that man should not obey the command
of the one who has been his enemy from the first day and has sent him
out from the Paradise, and has sworn to seduce the children of Adam.

From the third side, by the Divine constitution and innate disposition
of all human beings upon Monotheism, and the restriction of obedience
for the Pure Essence of Allah, this covenant has also been taken from
man. And thus, not only by one mere language but also by several
languages this Divine recommendation has been performed and this promise
and covenant has been signed.

By the way, we recite in a narration from Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

*“Whoever obeys a person in committing a sin, he has worshipped
him.”*[^11]

In another tradition Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Whoever listens to a speaker (and accepts his statement) he has
worshipped him. If the speaker reiterates the ordinance of Allah, he has
worshipped Him, but if the speaker speaks from the side of Satan, he has
worshipped Satan.”*[^12]

And in the third verse, for more emphasis and stating the duty of the
children of Adam, it says:

***“And that you should serve Me? This is the straight path.”***

From one side, He has taken covenant from men that they should not obey
Satan, because he has proved his enmity and hatred from the first day.
Which wise person follows the command of his ancient and manifest foe?

And in the opposite side, He has taken covenant that he obeys Him and He
has defined its reason by saying:

“***This is the straight path.***”

This, in fact, is the best motivation for human beings, because, for
instance, when it happens that a person finds himself in the middle of a
dry and hot desert and sees his soul, his wife and children, as well as
his wealth, in the danger of the thieves and wolves, the most important
thing he may think of, as finding the straight way toward the
destination, a way which can lead him easier and sooner to the point of
safety.

However, it is understood from this meaning that this world is not the
abode of residence, because the path is shown to the person who passes a
passage and he has a destination in front of him.

Again, for being more acquainted with this clear dangerous enemy, in the
fourth verse, it says:

***“And yet he has led astray a great number of you. Did you not then
understand?”***

Do you not see that how many miseries Satan has provided for his
followers? Have you not studied the history of the ancient nations to
see how painful and evil fates his followers had? The ruins of their
afflicted cities are in front of your eyes; and their sorrowful end is
clear for anyone who has the least understanding and thought.

Then, why do not you take earnest the enmity of the one who has
repeatedly shown the examination of his enmity? You make friends with
him again, and, even, you choose him as your own leader and as your own
friend.

The Qur’anic term /jibill/, as Raqib says in Mufradat, is in the sense
of ‘society’ and ‘group’; and the application of the Arabic term
***/kathir/*** is for emphasis concerning the followers of Satan who
form a great number of people.

However, a safe wisdom requires that man should seriously avoid of such
a dangerous foe who shows no mercy to anyone and his prays are seen over
the soil of destruction everywhere, and he should not let himself be in
negligence.

As Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as), the aware leader, in one of his
sermons[^13], addressing people, attracts their attention to this fact
by saying:

*“Therefore, O’ the servants of Allah! You should fear lest Satan
infects you with his disease (pride), or leads you astray through his
call, or marches on you with his horsemen and foot-men, because, by my
life, he has put the (dangerous) arrow in the bow for you, has stretched
the bow very strongly, and has aimed at you from a nearby position, and
he (Satan) said:*

***‘O’ Lord! Because you have left me to stray, certainly I will adorn
(evil) to them on the earth, and certainly I will cause them all to go
astray’.***[^14]”[^15]

(While Allah was not the cause of his mislead, but his low desire made
him astray.)

And, really, it is surprising that we choose such an enemy as our
friend!

Surah Ya-Sin - Verses 63-64
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذِهِ جَهَنَّمُ الَّتِي كُنتُمْ تُوعَدُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اصْلَوْهَا الْيَوْمَ بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَكْفُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***63. “This is the Hell which you were promised.”***  
***64. “Enter you into it today for what you were disbelieving.”***

Allah has completed the argument to the hellish people and has
constantly conveyed the danger of Hell to them.

Yes, on that day, while the blazing and flaming Fire of Hell is in front
of the eyes of the wrong-doers, pointing to it, He addresses the guilty
and says:

***“This is the Hell which you were promised.”***

One after another the Divine prophets came and made you avoid such a
Fire on such a Day, but you mocked them all. So, in the next verse, it
implicitly says: you should enter it and burn by its blazing Fire,
because this is the fruit of the rejection you used to have.

It says:

***“Enter you into it today for what you were disbelieving.”***

Surah Ya-Sin - Verse 65
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ نَخْتِمُ عَلَي أَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَتُكَلّـِمُنَآ أَيْدِيهِمْ
وَتَشْهَدُ أَرْجُلُهُم بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. “Today we set a seal on their mouths, and their hands speak to
Us, and their feet bear witness as to what they have been earning.”***

The mention of the head and of the feet, are as an example, because in
other verses of the Qur’an we recite that, the ear, the eye, and the
heart will be questioned of, too, and even the skin will bear witness.

In this verse, the Qur’an hints to the witnesses on the Day of
Hereafter. These are some witnesses that are as parts of the man’s body
and there is no room for denying their words.

It says:

***“Today we set a seal on their mouths, and their hands speak to Us,
and their feet bear witness as to what they have been earning.”***

Yes, on that Day the man’s limbs are not submitted to his wishes any
more. They will separate their account from the entire entity of man and
will submit to Allah and obey Him only, the Sacred Essence, and by their
witness they make the facts manifest.

What a wonderful court it is, where its witnesses are the limbs of the
man’s body. They are the means by which they have committed the sins.

Perhaps, the witness of the limbs is for the sake that when these
sinners are told their recompense is Hell for the deeds they did, they
deny them thinking that it is the worldly court and they can deny the
facts by tricks.

Here, the bearing witness of the limbs will begin and wonder accompanied
with terror will overcome their entity thoroughly, and all the ways of
escape will ilat, No. 41, verse 20 says:

***“Until when theysbe shut to them. As Surah Fus come to it, their ears
and their eyes and their skins shall bear witness against them as to
what they used to do.”***

And Surah An-Nur, No. 24, verse 24 says:

***“On the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet testify
against them as to what they used to do.”***

This point is also noteworthy that in one place the Qur’an says ‘their
tongues testify’ (like Surah An-Nur), and in the verse under discussion
He says:

***“…We set a seal on their mouths.”***

This meaning may be for the sake that at first on the man’s tongue will
be set a seal and his limbs will begin to bear witness. When he sees the
witness of the limbs, his tongue will start speaking, and since there is
no room for denials the tongue will confess the truth, too.

There is also this probability that the objective meaning of the witness
of the tongue is not the ordinary speaking, but it is a speech like the
speech of other limbs which comes from its inside not from its outside.

Concerning the number of witness in that great Court and that how they
will testify, we will explain it in more details when commenting on
Surah Fussilat, No. 41, verses 19-23, Allah willing.

The final word is that the witness of the limbs is about the pagans and
sinners; otherwise, the account of the believers is clear.

Imam Baqir (as) in a tradition says:

*“The limbs of a believer do not testify against him, but they testify
against the one on whom the command of punishment has been decreed.*

*As for the believer, his record (of deeds) will be given to his right
hand, (and he will recite it himself), as Allah has said:*

***‘… then whoever is given his book in his right hand, then these will
read their book (joyfully) and they will not be treated unjustly in the
least’***.”[^16]

Surah Ya-Sin - Verses 66-67
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ نَشَآءُ لَطَمَسْنَا عَلَي أَعْيُنِهِمْ فَاسْتَبَقُوا
الصّـِرَاطَ فَاَنَّي يُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ نَشَآءُ لَمَسَخْنَاهُمْ عَلَي مَكَانَتِهِمْ فَمَا اسْتَطَاعُوا
مُضِيّاً وَلاَ يَرْجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***66. “And if We please, We would obliterate their eyes, then they
would race to the way, but how would they see?”***  
***67. “And if We please, We would surely transform them in their place,
then they would not be able to go on, nor will they return.”***

We should not be neglectful of the wrath of Allah (s.w.t.) and change of
His bounties. Before the descent of punishment, obstinacy should be put
aside.

This verse points to one of the punishments which Allah may afflict the
guilty group in this very present world, and it is a terrible painful
punishment.

It says:

***“And if We please, We would obliterate their eyes…”***

In this state, an extraordinary horror will envelop them. They want to
go in the path they usually used to go and to precede each other, but
how can they do?

***“…then they would race to the way, but how would they see?”***

They will be unable even to find the road toward their houses, let alone
they find the path of the truth and step in the straight way.

Then, the next verse refers to another painful chastisement.

It says:

***“And if We please, We would surely transform them in their place…”***

(They may be transformed into some motionless statues that have no soul,
or into some palsied animals.)

The verse continues saying:

***“…then they would not be able to go on, nor will they return.”***

However, the two abovementioned verses are about the chastisements in
the world. They are as threatening to the disbelievers and the sinners
that Allah is able to afflict them to such painful fates in this very
world, but, because of His Grace and Mercy, He has not done so, haply
these obstinate sinners become aware and return to the path of the
truth.

[^1]: Tafsir-us-Safi, (old edition), P. 352; and ’Athar-us-Sadiqin, Vol.
21, P. 381

[^2]: Lisan-ul-‘Arab, Mufradat Raqib, Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Qurtabi,
Rouh-ul-Ma‘ani, and some other commentaries

[^3]: The commentary of Rouh-ul-Ma‘ani, Vol. 23, P. 35

[^4]: Surah Ar-Ra‘d, No. 13, verse 24

[^5]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 46

[^6]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 73

[^7]: Surah An-Nahl, No. 16, verse 32

[^8]: Surah ’Ibrahim, No. 14, verse 23

[^9]: Surah As-Sajdah, No. 32, verse 18

[^10]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 27

[^11]: Wasa’il, Vol. 18, P. 91

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: No. 192, Nahj-ul-Balaqah

[^14]: Qur’an, 15:39

[^15]: the commentary of Fakhr-Razi, under the verse; Nur-uth-Thaqalayn,
vol. 4, P. 392

[^16]: Tafsir-us-Safi, under the verse; verse 7 from Surah Isra’, No. 17


