Section 2: The Sufferings of the Guilty
=======================================

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 22-24
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
احْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ وَمَا كَانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ فَاهْدُوهُمْ إِلَي صِرَاطِ الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِفُوهُمْ اِنَّهُم مَّسْؤُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “(And Allah will command the angels:) ‘Gather you together those
who were unjust and their mates and what they used to worship,”***  
***23. “Besides Allah, and lead them (all) unto the path of Hell’.”***  
***24. “And stop them, for verily they must be questioned:”***

He, who does not accept the Divine guidance in the world, will be lead
to the Hell on the Day of Hereafter.

Therefore, Allah will command the angels, who are responsible to send
the guilty toward the Hell, as follows:

***“(And Allah will command the angels:) ‘Gather you together those who
were unjust and their mates and what they used to worship,”***

This is enough for the wretchedness of man that he should be mustered
together with inanimate idols.

And in the next verse the noble Qur’an implies that whatever they
worshipped, besides Allah, should be lead to the Hell. Thus, the wrong
objects of worship not only are not able to solve any problem, but also
they themselves will have difficulty.

The Qur’anic term /’uhšuru/ is derived from /hašr/, and as Raqib says in
Mufradat, it means to excel a group of people from their place and to
send them to a battle-field, and the like. In many instances, this word
has been used in the sense of: ‘gathering javelins’.

However, this statement is either from the side of Allah or from the
side of a group of angels unto another group who are responsible to
gathering and moving the guilty toward the Hell, and the consequence is
the same.

The Arabic word ***/’azwaj/ (wives)*** here refers to their guilty wives
who are idol worshippers, or to those who have the same opinion and
manner with theirs, because this word has been used in both of these two
meanings; as we recite in Surah Al-Waqi‘ah, No. 56, verse 7:

***“And you shall be sorted out into three classes.”***

Therefore, the polytheists together with polytheists, and wrong doers
together with people and things like them, will be sent into the Hell in
some rows.

Or the purpose is the Satans who had the same shape and the same action
as theirs.

In the meanwhile, these three meanings do not contrast with each other,
and they all may be found in the concept of the verse.

The Qur’anic sentence:

***‘… and what they used to worship’***

refers to the polytheists’ object, of worship, irrespective of idols,
Satans, and the cruel people such as Pharaohs and Namruds. And this
meaning may be for the sake of this that their objects of worship were
some inanimate things that had no intellect.

The Qur’anic word /jahim/ means Hell and is derived from /jahmah/ with
the sense of ‘violence of the burning fire’.

The Qur’an says:

***“Besides Allah, and lead them (all) unto the path of Hell’.”***

It is interesting that the Qur’an renders it into:

‘***lead them (all) unto the path of Hell***’.

What a wonderful sentence it is! One day they were lead unto the
Straight Way, but they did not accept it, but today they must be lead
unto the path of Hell, and they have to accept it. This is a heavy blame
which burns their souls deeply.

The next verse implies that the command will be issued saying:

***“And stop them, for verily they must be questioned:”***

Yes, they must be stopped and answer some different questions. But, what
will they be questioned of? Some commentators have said that they will
be questioned of the innovations they have left.

Some other commentators of the Holy Qur’an have said they will be
questioned of the ugly deeds and sins they have committed.

Some have added that they will be asked of Unity, and of ‘there is no
god but Allah’.

A group of them have said they will be questioned of different bounties:
the bounties of their youth, health, lifetime, wealth, and the like. A
well known tradition narrated by the Sunnites and Shi‘ites indicates
that they will be questioned of ‘the friendship (Wilayah) of Ali (as)’.

This matter has also been narrated in Sawa‘iq from Abu Sa‘id Khidri,
from the Prophet (S); and also in Shawahid-ut-Tanzil by Hakim
Abul-Ghasim Huskani it has also been narrated from him (S). It has also
been recorded in ‘Uyun ’Akhbar-ur-Rida narrated from Ali-ibn-Musar-Rida
(as)[^1].

These commentaries, of course, do not contradict with each other,
because on that Day everything will be questioned of: of beliefs, of
Unity, of friendship (Wilayah), of sayings and deeds, and of the
bounties and merits that Allah has bestowed on man.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 25-27
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ هُمُ الْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَي بَعْضٍ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “(They will be told:) ‘How now, that you help not one
another?’”***  
***26. “Nay! this day they make full submission.”***  
***27. “And some of them shall turn to the others questioning each
other.”***

On the Day of Hereafter, the guilty cannot help anything to each other.
These miserable hellish people can do nothing when they will be leading
in the path to Hell.

They will be told that they used to refuge to each other in the world
forgetting help in their difficulties, but in Hereafter, the verse says:

***“(They will be told:) ‘How now, that you help not one another?’”***

Yes, all the supports they imagined for themselves in the world have
been ruined here. They can neither get help from each other, nor their
object of worship come to aid them, because they are themselves
helpless.

It is said that on the day of the Battle of Badr, Abu-Jahl shouted,
saying:

***“We all help each other (and will overcome Muslims).”***

This statement has been reiterated in the Qur’an, Surah Al-Qamar, No.
54, verse 44 saying:

***“…We are a host allied together to help each other.”***

But in Hereafter the people who are like Abu-Jahl, and those who have
such qualities, will be asked why they do not help each other, while
they have no answer to this question, and they can do nothing save
having a disgraceful silence.

The next holy verse adds implying that they will submit the command of
Allah (s.w.t.) and will not be able to do anything let alone opposition.

It says:

***“Nay! this day they make full submission.”***

It is here that they begin to blame each other and everyone of them
tries to put his sin on the shoulder of another.

The followers count their chiefs and leaders guilty and vice versa; as
in the next verse, it says:

***“And some of them shall turn to the others questioning each
other.”***

Surah As-Saffat – Verse s 28-29
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا إِنَّكُمْ كُنتُمْ تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ الْيَـمِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا بَل لَمْ تَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. “They will say: ‘Verily you used to come unto us, from the right
side.”***  
***29. “They answer: ‘Nay! you (yourselves) were not believers.”***

One of the current styles of the leaders of the infidels and polytheists
for beguiling others is using force or pretending to benediction.

In this verse, the aberrant followers tell their perversive leaders that
through the way of advice and benevolence and sympathy and as guidance,
and leading, you came to us, but you had nothing except plot and
delusion.

The verse says:

***“They will say: ‘Verily you used to come unto us, from the right
side.”***

Because of our nature, we were seeking for benevolence, purity, and
happiness that we accepted your invitation. We were unaware that under
your benevolent feature there is hidden a Satanic feature which drives
us to the valley of wretchedness.

Yes, all our sins originate from you. We had no capital save good
intention and purity in heart, but you, the satans, the liars, had no
means but deceit and illusion.

The Arabic word ***/yamin/*** which means ‘right hand’, or ‘right side’,
is sometimes used ironically by Arabs in the sense of goodness,
blessing, and advice. And Arabs, basically, used to whatever comes to
them from the right side take as a ‘good omen’.

That is why, as we said in the above, many of the Islamic commentators
have commented the Qur’anic sentence: /kuntum ta’tunana ‘anil yamin/
(you used to come unto us from the right side) ‘showing benediction and
advice’.

However, this is a common culture that the right limb and the right side
is considered ‘honoured’, and the left side rather ‘dishonoured’, and
this very thing has caused ‘right’ to be used in good things and
charitable deeds.

A group of commentators have mentioned here another interpretation and
said that the purpose is that ‘you came to us by relying on your force’,
since the right side is usually stronger. It is for this reason that
most people do their important actions by their right hand, and
therefore, this application has been ironically understood as power.

However, in the second verse it implies that their leaders will not be
silent, either, and as the verse says:

***“They answer: ‘Nay! you (yourselves) were not believers.”***

If your innate state were not receptive of deviation and if you
yourselves were not the seeker of vice and Satanic actions, how would
you come to us? Why did you not answer to the invitation of the
prophets, the sages, and the purified ones, and as soon as we hinted you
hastened to us?

Thus, it is certain that the fault is in you, yourselves. You must blame
yourselves, and send all your curses to yourselves.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 30-31
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لَنَا عَلَيْكُم مِن سُلْطَانٍ بَلْ كُنتُمْ قَوْماً
طَاغِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَحَقَّ عَلَيْنَا قَوْلُ رَبّـِنَآ إِنَآ لَذَآئِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. “And there was not for us any authority over you. Nay! You were a
rebellious people!”***  
***31. “So, now the word of our Lord has been proved against us that
verily we shall taste (the chastisement).”***

The leaders of infidelity both confess to their own aberration and
accept the responsibility of deceiving and misleading their followers,
but they do not accept the responsibility of force and authority over
others.

In this verse they say:

***“And there was not for us any authority over you. Nay! You were a
rebellious people!”***

How painful is that a person sees that the leader, in whom he believed
for a life-long-time, has provided the causes of his wretchedness and
then he repudiates from him like that! He puts the whole sin and fault
on his shoulder and acquits himself entirely.

The fact is that each of these two groups is right from one point of
view. Neither these nor those are sinless. Those were seductive and
evil, and these were practically submissive to their seductions.

So, the second holy verse implies that these debates result nothing and,
at last, these aberrant leaders confess this fact and say that for this
reason the command of Allah has been fixed against all of them and the
order of punishment has been issued about them and they all shall taste
it.

The verse says:

***“So, now the word of our Lord has been proved against us that verily
we shall taste (the chastisement).”***

You were disobedient and this is the end of the disobedient persons (to
the command of Allah), and we were both pervertible and perversive.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 32-33
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَغْوَيْنَاكُمْ إِنَّا كُنَّا غَاوِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ فِي الْعَذَابِ مُشْتَرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. “So we misled you, for verily we were ourselves astray.”***  
***33. “So verily they (both) on that Day are sharers in the (Divine)
chastisement.”***

In the world, the leaders and chiefs of polytheists have heard the
promise and warning of Allah, but they have denied it intentionally.

In the above verses and in some other verses of the Qur’an there are
some expressive hints to the enmity between the aberrant leaders and
their followers in Hereafter or in the Hell.

The verse says:

***“So we misled you, for verily we were ourselves astray.”***

This is an instructive warning to all of those who put their intellect
and religion in the authority of aberrant leaders.

On that Day, when everybody tries to acquit from another, and even puts
his own sin on that one’s shoulder, yet neither of them can prove his
innocence.

Therefore, this verse implies that, on that Day, everyone irrespective
of obedient and obeyed, follower and leader, all are sharers in the
punishment of Allah.

The verse says:

***“So verily they (both) on that Day are sharers in the (Divine)
chastisement.”***

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 34-36
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا كَذَلِكَ نَفْعَلُ بِالْمُـجْرِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لآ اِلَهَ اِلاَّ اللَّهُ
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُونَ أَئِنَّا لَتَارِكُواْ ءَالِهَتِنَا لِشَاعِرٍ مَّجْنُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. “Verily thus do We deal with the guilty.”***  
***35. “Verily they used to be proud when it was said to them: ‘There is
no god but Allah’.”***  
***36. “And said: ‘Shall we give up our gods for the sake of a mad
poet?”***

The first verse indicates that Allah implicitly says that He will deal
with the guilty seriously by His punishment. This is the everlasting way
of treatment of Allah; a way of treatment that has originated from the
law of justice.

The verse says:

***“Verily thus do We deal with the guilty.”***

The sign of a guilty is that he has proud manner concerning Monotheism.
So, this verse says:

***“Verily they used to be proud when it was said to them: ‘There is no
god but Allah’.”***

Yes, the root of all their deviations was mostly pride, self-admiration
and assumption, refusing the clear right, having obstinacy and often
insisting on the wrong customs and false imitations, and looking at
everything contemptuously.

The opposite point of pride is humbleness and submission to the Truth,
and the true Islam is only this. That pride is the cause of
wretchedness, and this humbleness and submission is the source of
happiness.

And in the next holy verse the Qur’an implies that for this great sin of
theirs the polytheists brought a clumsy excuse, and always they
murmured:

***“And said: ‘Shall we give up our gods for the sake of a mad poet?”***

They called him a poet because his statements influenced so deeply in
the hearts and attracted the people’s emotions that as if he made the
most rhythmical poets, while his ordinary talk was never poetry.

They called him mad, because he did not follow the current custom of his
environment, and he stood against the superstitious beliefs of the crowd
of zealous obstinate people. From the view of some groups of aberrant
people, this action was a kind of self-murder and insanity. But this was
the greatest honour of the Prophet (S), and he did not submit to those
circumstances.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 37-39
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ جَآءَ بِالْحَقّ‌ِ وَصَدَّقَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكُمْ لَذَآئِقُواْ الْعَذَابِ الأَلِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومَا تُجْزَوْنَ إِلاَّ مَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. “Nay: he has come with the Truth and verified the (former)
messengers.”***  
***38. “Verily you will taste the painful punishment, (too).”***  
***39. “And you are not requited except (for) what you were doing.”***

The teachings of all Divine prophets are the same, and all prophets
invite to Unity and the Truth, and the Prophet of Islam (S) has verified
them, too.

In this verse, in order to negate these baseless words and to defend the
rank of revelation and prophecy of the holy Prophet (S), the Qur’an
adds:

***“Nay: He has come with the Truth and verified the (former)
messengers.”***

But you, O blind-hearted people! And you, O’ aberrant and foul-mouthed
ones! You will surely taste the painful chastisement of Allah, because
the retribution of those who intentionally called the content of the
Holy Qur’an poems, and considered the holy Prophet of Islam (S) mad is a
painful punishment.

***“Verily you will taste the painful punishment, (too).”***

This verse implies that they should not imagine that Allah is taker of
vengeance and He wants to take vengeance from them.

It is not such, as the verse says:

***“And you are not requited except (for) what you were doing.”***

In fact, it is the result of your own deeds that incarnates in front of
you and remains with you and hurts you. Your retribution is that very
deed of yours.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 40-44
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُـخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اُوْلَئِكَ لَهُمْ رِزْقٌ مَّعْلُومٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَاكِهُ وَهُم مُّكْرَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَي سُرُرٍ مُّتَقَابِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***40. “Save the servants of Allah, the purified ones,”***  
***41. “For them is a known sustenance,”***  
***42. “(Kinds of) fruits, and they shall be highly honoured,”***  
***43. “In the gardens bountiful,”***  
***44. “Upon thrones facing each other.”***

In this holy verse the Qur’an says:

***“Save the servants of Allah, the purified ones,”***

For the relation of this group to Allah, only the phrase /‘ibad-allah/
(servants of Allah) is enough, but when the word /muxlasin/ (the
purified) comes beside it, the phrase will earn another kind of depth in
its meaning.

The Arabic word ***/muxlas/*** is in passive participle form, which
means: ‘the one whom Allah has purified’. He is purified from any kind
of polytheism and hypocrisy, and also from any kind of Satanic
temptation and blemishes of low desire.

Yes, it is only this group whose deeds will not be simply rewarded, but
Allah (s.w.t.) will treat them with His Grace and generosity and will
give them innumerable rewards.

In the second verse under discussion, the Qur’an mentions the numerous
merits and blessings that Allah bestows on the purified servants. They
can be referred to shortly in a few divisions.

At first, it says:

***“For them is a known sustenance,”***

Is this an extract of the bounties which will be explained in later
verses of the Qur’an, or it refers to the unknown spiritual and
unexplainable blessings which are at the top of the blessings of
Paradise?

According to the interpretation of a group of commentators, the
proportion of discussion and totality of blessings are more consistent
with the second meaning, and, thus, the first blessing from the
blessings which have been mentioned in the verses under discussion, are
spiritual merits, spiritual pleasures, and apprehension of the splendour
of the Pure Essence of Allah, and being drunk from the pure wine of His
love.

The same pleasure which none knows unless he sees it.

And that the material merits of the Paradise have been mentioned
frequently in the verses of the Holy Qur’an, but the spiritual merits
and the pleasures of soul have been stated ambiguously is for this very
sake that the former ones are explainable and the latter ones are not
explainable.

Concerning the Arabic phrase: ***/rizqun ma‘lum/*** (a known sustenance)
there have been delivered many statements: whether its time is known; or
its duration, or its other qualifications. But, based on what was said
in the above, the Arabic word ***/ma‘lum/*** is an ambiguous sense for
these unexplainable merits.

In the third verse, the Qur’an has referred to stating other blessings,
and before anything else, it has mentioned the blessings of heaven. They
are the blessings which will be given to the people of Paradise with the
utmost respect.

It says:

***“(Kinds of) fruits, and they shall be highly honoured,”***

They will be entertained honourably as some dear guests who are received
with utmost esteem, not like some animals that food is poured in front
of them.

And in the fourth verse, after mentioning the blessings: the colourful
fruits and respecting and honouring the purified servants, the words are
about their position in the green, bountiful gardens.

The verse says:

***“In the gardens bountiful,”***

Whatever blessing they wish they can find there, and whatever they
intend to have will be ready in front of them.

In view of the fact that the greatest delight of man is enjoying the
meeting of sincere friends, this bounty is pointed out in the fourth
stage. It says about the people of Paradise that they sit therein:

***“Upon thrones facing each other.”***

They look each other, and speak about everything.

They sometimes talk about their past deeds in the world, and sometimes
about the great bounties of Allah in Hereafter, sometimes about the
attributes of beauty and dignity of Allah, and sometimes about the ranks
of the saints and their extraordinary acts, and some other affairs the
information upon which is not conceivable for us, the prisoners of this
world.

The Arabic word ***/surur/*** is the plural form of /sarir/ which is
called to the thrones on which people sit in the meetings of pleasure
and intimacy; though it has also been used in a vaster scope of meaning,
so far that sometimes the shroud of a dead has been called /sarir/,
perhaps for the hope that it may be a mount of happiness for him toward
he Divine forgiveness and His eternal garden.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 45-47
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُطَافُ عَلَيْهِم بِكَأْسٍ مِن مَّعِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَيْضَآءَ لَذَّةٍ لّـِلشَّارِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ فِيهَا غَوْلٌ وَلاَ هُمْ عَنْهَا يُنزَفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. “Round will go unto them a cup (of wine) from a clear
spring,”***  
***46. “Crystal-white, delicious to the drinkers,”***  
***47. “Free from headiness, nor will they suffer intoxication from
it.”***

Being entertained in Paradise is not limited to a particular side, but
the bounties are turned round from every side of the people of Paradise.

In the fifth stage of the statement of the merits of the people of
Paradise, the words are about their purified drink. It says:

***“Round will go unto them a cup (of wine) from a clear spring,”***

Whenever they decide they can be satiated from its cup and can feel its
world of mirth and spirituality.

These cups are not set in a corner or a place that they come and ask for
one of them, but these cups will be turned round unto them.

The Arabic word ***/ka’s/*** philologically is called to a cup which is
completely full, and if it is rather empty it is called ‘goblet’.

Raqib in Mufradat says:

*“Cup is a container which is full of beverage.”*

The Qur’anic term ***/ma‘in/*** is derived from /ma‘n/ in the sense of
‘flow’. It points to this fact that there are some flowing springs
therein which have purified wine out of which every moment the cups are
filled and turned round among the people of Paradise.

It is not such that this purified wine finishes or that it may need any
trouble, pain, and task to be provided, or that it may become old,
decayed, and imperfect.

Then, the second holy verse explains these cups of purified wine.

It says:

***“Crystal-white, delicious to the drinkers,”***

The pleasures in Heaven have no hidden and manifest evil sequels. The
heavenly wine is delicious, but it has not the intoxication and other
sequels of the worldly wine.

The third holy verse, by mentioning a short and expressive sentence,
explaining that purified wine, says:

***“Free from headiness, nor will they suffer intoxication from it.”***

And there is nothing in it but spiritual intelligence, mirth, and joy.

The Arabic word ***/qaul/*** originally is in the sense of a corruption
which penetrates into a thing in a hidden manner and it is for this
reason that, in the literature of Arab, the hidden murders and terrors
are called /qilah/.

The Arabic term ***/yunzafun/*** originally is derived from /nazf/ in
the sense of ‘to destroy something gradually’. When this word is used
for the water of a well, its concept is that the water is gradually
taken out from the well until when it finishes.

However, the purpose of it in the verse under discussion is that the
gradual destruction of intellect does not absolutely exist in the
purified wine of Paradise. It neither decreases the intellect, nor does
it cause any infection.

These two meanings are implicitly very thin and exact about the worldly
wines and alcoholic materials which gradually influence in man’s body
and cause destruction and decadence in it.

It not only spoils intellect and the system of nerves, but also it has
an undeniable destructive effect on all systems of man’s body,
irrespective of heart, blood vessels, stomach, kidneys, and liver. As if
it destroys man. And also like the water of a well, it gradually
decreases the man’s intellect and intelligence until when it empties it.

But, in Hereafter the purified wine of Allah is free from all these
qualities.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 48-49
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِندَهُمْ قَاصِرَاتُ الطَّرْفِ عِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَكْنُونٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. “And with them will be chaste women; restraining their
glances,”***  
***49. “As if they were (as white as) eggs (secured) hidden.”***

Among the characteristics of the women in Paradise is that they restrain
their eyes from other than their husbands. The women in Paradise are not
only beautiful and charming, but also chaste and covered.

And finally, in the sixth stage, the Qur’an points to the chaste women
in Paradise, who do not make love to anyone save their husbands, and do
not look at anybody except them. They have beautiful large eyes.

It says:

***“And with them will be chaste women; restraining their glances,”***

The Arabic word ***/tarf/*** originally means eyelids, and since at the
time of looking the eyelids move, this word ironically refers to the act
of looking. Thus, the Qur’anic phrase /qasirat-ut-tarf/ means the women
who have a short glance; and in commenting it, there have been delivered
different numerous probabilities of meaning which, at the meanwhile, can
be gathered with together.

The first meaning is that: they look only at their husbands, and
restraining their eyes from anything, they look at them alone.

The second meaning is that: this application canonically shows that they
make love only to their husbands, and except their love, they have no
other love in their hearts. This is one of the greatest privileges of a
wife that she does not think of anyone but her husband and makes love to
none but to him.

The Arabic word ***/‘iyn/*** is the plural form of /‘iyna’/ in the sense
of ‘a large-eyed woman’.

The next verse explains these very women in Paradise in another form of
statement, and introduces their chastity and the sanctity of their
bodies as follow:

***“As if they were (as white as) eggs (secured) hidden.”***

Indicating that: from the point of intense of purity, delicacy,
whiteness, and serenity, their bodies are like some eggs that neither
the hand of a man has touched, nor has any dust covered them, but they
have been as if covered and hidden under the wing and feather of a hen.

The Arabic word ***/bayd/*** is the plural form of /baydah/ with the
sense of ‘egg’, (the egg of any bird); and the term ***/maknun/*** is
derived from /kin/ in the sense of ‘covered’.

This resemblance of the Qur’an will exactly be made clear when a person
sees closely the egg of a hen at the time when it separates from the hen
and no man’s hand has still touched it and it is under the wing and
feather of the hen. At this time, it has a wonderful transparency and
pleasantness.

Some commentators have taken the Qur’anic term /maknun/ in the sense of
the content of an egg which is concealed under the egg-shell and, in
fact, the above resemblance refers to the time when the egg has been
cooked and its shell has been entirely separated. In that state, besides
its whiteness and its brightness, it has a special delicacy and
smoothness.

However, the Qur’anic meanings in stating the facts are so deep and
comprehensive that in a short and tender expression it conveys a lot of
matters with a particular delicacy.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 50-52
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَي بَعْضٍ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ قَآئِلٌ مّـِنْهُمْ إِنّـِي كَانَ لِي قَرِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقُولُ أَءِنَّكَ لَمِنَ الْمُصَدّ‌ِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. “Then shall some of them advance to others, questioning each
other.”***  
***51. “One of them will say: ‘Verily I had an intimate companion (in
the world),”***  
***52. “Who used to say: ‘Are you really among the believers (of
Hereafter)?’”***

In the feast of the people of Paradise, where they have sat on the
thrones in front of each other, they begin questioning about their
worldly companions.

Through this verse the Qur’an implies that the sincere servants of Allah
who, according to the previous verse, are in the spiritual and material
bounties of Paradise, including the kinds of fruits of Paradise, from
one side, and with the maidens (a nymph) of Paradise, from the other
side, and the cups of the purified wine turned round them while they are
leaning against the thrones in Paradise busy speaking with their sincere
friends, suddenly some of them think of their past and their friends in
the world, the same friends who separated their way and they are missed
in Paradise and among them.

They want to know what their destiny is.

Yes, while they are busy speaking and talk about everything, as the
verse says:

***“Then shall some of them advance to others, questioning each
other.”***

Then, in the second and third verse, the Qur’an implicitly says that one
of them remembers some events and then he turns to the others, talking
as follows:

***“One of them will say: ‘Verily I had an intimate companion (in the
world),”***

But unfortunately, he was led astray and paved the way of the rejecters
of Resurrection. He repeatedly used to ask me whether I had really
believed this word of theirs and confirmed it.

The verse says:

***“Who used to say: ‘Are you really among the believers (of
Hereafter)?’”***

Surah As-Saffat – Verse 53
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَءِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَاباً وَعِظَاماً أَءِنَّا لَمَدِينُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***53. “When we die and have become dust and bones, shall we then in
fact be brought in account?”***

Pagans never have any proof upon their saying of lack of Resurrection.

Whatever they have in this regard is mostly improbability and wonder,
so, concerning the disbelievers, this verse says:

***“When we die and have become dust and bones, shall we then in fact be
brought in account?”***

They say this and strengthen it by announcing that they do not believe
in it.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 54-55
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ هَلْ أَنتُم مُطَّلِعُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاطَّلَعَ فَرَءَاهُ فِي سَوَآءِ الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “He says: ‘Can you take a look?’”***  
***55. “Then he looks and sees him in the midst of Hell.”***

The people of Paradise get information about the state of the people of
Hell that the rejecters of Hereafter are in the midst of Fire.

So, the first verse from the tongue of him about his friend, says:

***“He says: ‘Can you take a look?’”***

Then, the second holy verse implies that it is here that this friend
also begins searching about him and looks toward the Hell and suddenly
he sees his friend in the middle of Hell.

The verse says:

***“Then he looks and sees him in the midst of Hell.”***

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 56-57
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ تَاللَّهِ اِن كِدتَّ لَتُرْدِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْلاَ نِعْمَةُ رَبّـِي لَكُنتُ مِنَ الْمُـحْضَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. “He says: ‘By Allah! You had almost caused me to perish;”***  
***57. “And had it not been the bounty of my Lord, certainly would I
have been brought into (the Hell)’.”***

The Qur’anic term /turdin/ is derived from /’ida’/ in the sense of ‘to
fall from a height which is accompanied with destruction’.

In these two verses the Qur’an implies that he addresses his deviated
friend and:

***“He says: ‘By Allah! You had almost caused me to perish;”***

And also it was nigh that your temptations would affect on my pure heart
and bring me into the same deviated path that you were in.

The verse says:

***“And had it not been the bounty of my Lord, certainly would I have
been brought into (the Hell)’.”***

It was the Divine success which helped me in my way and it was the grace
of Allah that came to me and guided me aright.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 58-61
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَيِّتِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ مَوْتَتَنَا الأُولَي وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هَذَا لَهُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِمِثْلِ هَذَا فَلْيَعْمَلِ الْعَامِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***58. “Is it that we do not die,”***  
***59. “Save our first death; and we shall not be chastised?”***  
***60. “Verily this is the mighty triumph,”***  
***61. “And for the like of this let the workers work.”***

In the first two verses in the above, the Qur’an implicitly says that
the believing person turns to his hellish friend and, as a blame,
reminds this word to him, saying:

***“Is it that we do not die,”***

And that, except the first death in the world, there is not any death
and life again after it, and there will not be any punishment.

The verse says:

***“Save our first death; and we shall not be chastised?”***

Now you may look and see that what a great mistake you made. After
death, there is such a life and such reward, recompense, and
retribution. Now all the facts have been made manifest for you, but
alas, there is no way to return.

According to the commentator of these two holy verses, by the statement
of the faithful person to his hellish friend, he reminds him his words
upon the denial of Resurrection.

But some other commentators have mentioned another probable commentary
on these two verses. It says that the talk of the man in Paradise with
his hellish friend has finished and the people of Paradise speak again
with each other.

One of them happily cries:

***“Is it then that we do not die,”***

***“Save our first death; and we shall not be chastised?”***

Do we have an eternal life here and does this grace of Allah remains for
ever and we will not be chastised?

These words, of course, are not said doubtfully, but they are expressed
because of joy and happiness. Just like the person who, after a long
time of expectation, gains a vast and comfortable house.

He surprisingly says:

*“Is this mine? O’ Lord! What a blessing it is! Will it not be taken
from me?”*

However, in the next two verses, this debate finishes with an
expressive, meaningful fall of feelings and is emphasized by kinds of
emphasis.

It says:

***“Verily this is the mighty triumph,”***

What a triumph is greater than this that a person is given an eternal
bounty and a permanent life that has kinds of Divine bounties? What can
be considered better and more superior than this?

And, finally, by an expressive, awakening and short sentence, Allah, the
Great, puts an end to this discussion:

***“And for the like of this let the workers work.”***

Some commentators have thought that the recent verse may also be said by
the people of Paradise. But it seems very improbable, because on that
Day there is no deed to be done.

And, in other words, on that Day there is not any program that by this
sentence people may be encouraged to it, while the apparent of the verse
shows that the aim is that, by mentioning this sentence, all the former
verses can be concluded and people may be driven toward faith and
action. Therefore, it is suitable that this word of Allah comes at the
end of this discussion.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 62-64
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ نُّزُلاً أَمْ شَجَرَةُ الزَّقُّومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاهَا فِتْنَةً لّـِلظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهَا شَجَرَةٌ تَخْرُجُ فِي أَصْلِ الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***62. “Is that the better entertainment or the Tree of Zaqqum?”***  
***63. “Verily We have appointed it as a trial for the unjust.”***  
***64. “Verily, it is a tree that grows in the bottom of the Hell.”***

We must compare the examples of the grace of Allah with His wrath so
that we may act better. The tyrants, who cause others to feel smarting
grief in the world, will be entertained with a blazing food in the
Hereafter.

After stating the pleasant and worthy bounties of Paradise, the verses
under discussion refer to the painful and grievous chastisement of the
Hell, and illustrate them in such a way that, comparing the
aforementioned Divine bounties, they affect deeply on the receptive
persons and restrain them from performing any ugly and impure action.

At first, I implicitly ask whether these eternal and pleasant bounties
with which the people of Paradise are entertained are better or the Tree
of Zaqqum.

The verse says:

***“Is that the better entertainment or the Tree of Zaqqum?”***

Regarding to its concept, the application of the Arabic term
***/nuzul/*** is called to something which is prepared for the
entertainment of a guest. Some commentators have said that it is the
first thing by which a guest is entertained. This shows that the people
of Paradise will be entertained as some dear and respectful guests.

The Holy Qur’an asks whether this is better or the Tree of Zaqqum.

The application of the word ‘better’ is not any evidence that the tree
of Zaqqum is a good thing and the bounty of the people of Paradise is
better than that. These meanings are sometimes used in the Arabic
language for the aspects that, from one side, they have no goodness at
all. But there is this probability that this is a kind of allusion.

It is just like this that a person, as the result of being polluted by
kinds of sins, has become seriously disgrace among people and we tell
him whether this disgrace is better or honour and honesty.

As for the Arabic word ***/zaqqum/*** according to the philologists, it
is the name of a plant which has some small leaves that are bitter with
bad smell. It grows in the land of Tahamah and polytheists were
acquainted with it.[^2] And it is also said in Tafsir-Rauh-ul-Ma‘ani
that this plant has a sap that when it reaches the body of a person, it
swells.[^3]

Raqib in Mufradat says that Zaqqum is any kind of hateful food for the
people of Hell.

However, the Arabic word does not always mean ‘Tree’. Sometimes it is
also used in the sense of ‘plant’, and the context shows that its
objective meaning here is ‘plant’.

Then, in the second verse, referring to some qualities of this plant,
the Qur’an says:

***“Verily We have appointed it as a trial for the unjust.”***

The Qur’anic term /fitnah/ may be used in the sense of punishment, or
with the sense of trial, as the Qur’an has often applied it in this
meaning. Thus, it points to this concept that when they heard the name
of Zaqqum, they began to mock and, therefore, it became a mean of trial
against the unjust.

In the next verse, the Qur’an says:

***“Verily, it is a tree that grows in the bottom of the Hell.”***

But these proud unjust people continued mocking and said that:

*“Is it possible that a tree grows in the bottom of Hell?”*

*“How different is between Fire and a tree and plant?”*

Therefore, hearing the name of this plant and its qualities is the
source of their trial in this world, and the tree itself is the source
of their pain and punishment in Hereafter.

It seems that they were neglectful of this fact that the principle
governed on the life of the next world is very different from that of
this world. The plant and tree which grows in the bottom of Hell is of
the same nature of Hell, and it has grown up with the conditions of
Hell.

It is not a plant like the plants that grow in the gardens of this
world. And perhaps they are unaware of this point; but their aim is only
mock and ridicule.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 65-68
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طَلْعُهَا كَأَنَّهُ رُؤُوسُ الشَّيَاطِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّهُمْ لأَكِلُونَ مِنْهَا فَمَالِؤُونَ مِنْهَا الْبُطُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ اِنَّ لَهُمْ عَلَيْهَا لَشَوْباً مِنْ حَمِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ إِنَّ مَرْجِعَهُمْ لإِلَي الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. “The shoots of its fruit-stalks are like the heads of
devils,”***  
***66. “Then verily they eat from it and fill (their bellies with
it.”***  
***67. “Then verily on Top of it they will have a mixture made of
boiling water.”***  
***68. “Then verily their return shall be unto the Hell.”***

Like the people of Paradise, the people of Hell have also some things to
eat and to drink, but the latter not only is not delicious and pleasant,
but also they are ugly, distasteful, and injurious.

For being far from the foods of Hell, there is no way to escape, nor any
way to evade.

The people of Hell are so hungry that they fill their bellies with the
worst food.

***(… and fill (their) bellies with it.)***

The first verse says:

***“The shoots of its fruit-stalks are like the heads of devils,”***

The Arabic word ***/tal‘/*** is usually used for the shoot of some white
strings that later they change into a cluster of dates. This term is
derived from /tulu‘/, because it is the first fruit that appears on the
tree as if it rises.

Here, there comes forth a question asking whether people had seen the
heads of devils that the Qur’an likens the shoots of Zaqqum to it.

The commentators have answered this question by different answers. Some
of them have said: one of the meanings of ‘Satan’ is a kind of ugly
snake that the shoots of Zaqqum have been likened to it.

Some have said that it is a kind of ugly plant. It is cited in
Muntah-il-Adab: /ra’s-uš-šaytan/ or /ru’us-uš-šayatin/ is an ugly plant.

But what is more correct is that this likening is for the statement of
the utmost ugliness and its hateful shape.

Then, in the second verse, the Qur’an implies that these proud unjust
people will certainly eat of this plant and fill their bellies from it.

The verse says:

***“Then verily they eat from it and fill (their bellies with it.”***

This is the same punishment and trial which was mentioned on the
previous verse. Eating from this hellish plant, with that bad smell and
bitter taste, and with that sap, the touch of which with the body causes
hurt and swelling, and specially eating abundantly, is a painful
chastisement.

It is evident that eating this bitter and unwholesome food brings
thirst, but what do they drink when they become thirsty?

The Qur’an in the third verse says:

***“Then verily on Top of it they will have a mixture made of boiling
water.”***

The Arabic word ***/šaub/*** means something which is mixed with
something else; and the Qur’anic term /hamim/ is ‘hot blazing water’.
So, the hot water they drink is not unmixed, but it is polluted.

That is the food of the people of Hell and this is their drink, but
where do they go after this entertainment?

The Qur’an in the fourth verse says:

***“Then verily their return shall be unto the Hell.”***

Some of the commentators have understood from this meaning that this hot
polluted water comes from a spring from outside of Hell. The people of
Hell are formerly taken there like animals that are taken to a pond, and
after drinking from it, they are returned into the Hell.

As we pointed out before, neither the blessings of Heaven are available
for us in this world as they are, nor the chastisements of the people of
Hell. Only by some short sentences their outline from a far distance are
partly illustrated in our mind.

*(O’ Lord! Protect us, by Your grace, from these punishments.)*

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 69-70
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ أَلْفَوْا ءَابَآءَهُمْ ضَآلّـِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهُمْ عَلَي ءَاثَارِهِمْ يُهْرَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***69. “Verily they found their fathers on the wrong path.”***  
***70. “So in their footsteps they are being hastened on.”***

One of the qualities of the people of the Hell is blindly imitation from
their fathers and ancestors, while imitation in beliefs is not
permissible and one’s beliefs should be based on the basis of intellect
and reasoning.

In these two verses, the Qur’an states the main cause of the inflection
of the people of Hell in the grips of these painful punishments through
two short and expressive sentences.

It says:

***“Verily they found their fathers on the wrong path.”***

Yet, involuntarily they hasten to follow them.

The Qur’an says:

***“So in their footsteps they are being hastened on.”***

It is interesting that the Arabic term ***/yuhra‘un/*** is mentioned in
the passive form derived from /’ihra‘/ which means ‘to run swiftly’. It
indicates that they have so believed in imitating from their ancestors
that as if they had not any act of willing from their own selves. And
this is a sign of their utmost bigotry and being interested in their
ancestors’ superstitions.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 71-74
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ضَلَّ قَبْلَهُمْ أَكْثَرُ الأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا فِيهِم مُنذِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانظُرْ كَيفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُنذَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُـخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. “And indeed most of the ancient went astray before them.”***  
***72. “And certainly We sent among them warners.”***  
***73. “Then see how was the end of those warned,”***  
***74. “Except the servants of Allah, the purified ones.”***

In the atmosphere of deviation, the most important dusty is ‘warning’.
Allah has sent some warners for the deviated nations.

Through these verses, the Qur’an prepares the ground for the life story
of many former nations, the information of whose states is an expressive
proof for the former discussions. These are nations such as: the peoples
of Noah, Abraham, Moses and Aaron, Lot, Yunus, and the like.

At first, it says:

***“And indeed most of the ancient went astray before them.”***

It is not only the polytheists of Mecca who, imitating their ancestors,
are involved in a deep corruption, but before them, the majority of the
ancient nations were involved in the same fate, too, and the number of
their believers comparing those who went astray were very small.

This is a solace for the Prophet (S) and the believers of Mecca whose
number was small and were surrounded by the enemy from every side.

Then, in the second verse, the Holy Qur’an adds that their aberration
was because of having no leader or guide.

So, He says:

***“And certainly We sent among them warners.”***

These warners were the Divine prophets who used to warn them from
polytheism, disbelief, injustice, tyranny, and blindly imitation from
others, and made them acquainted with their responsibilities.

It is true that the Divine prophets had the letter of warning in one
hand and the letter of glad tiding in the other hand, but since the
great pillar of their teaching, specially for such a corrupt and
rebellious nation, was ‘warning’, it has been emphasized on here.

And, in the third verse, through a short and meaningful sentence, it
says:

***“Then see how was the end of those warned,”***

The addressee in the Qur’anic sentence /fanzur/ (then see) may be the
Prophet (S) himself, or any other wise and aware person.

This sentence, in fact, is a hint to the end of the nations whose
explanation will be expressed in the coming verses.

Through the fourth verse, as an exception, it says:

***“Except the servants of Allah, the purified ones.”***

In fact, this sentence points to this fact that you may see the end of
these nations that how Allah caused them to be involved in a painful
punishment and destroyed them, except the purified faithful servants who
were saved from this destruction.

It is noteworthy that in this Surah ‘the purified servants of Allah’ are
emphasized on five times in different verses, and this is a sign upon
the greatness of their rank.

And, as we pointed out before, they are those who have been so
victorious in the path of Knowledge, faith, and struggle against carnal
soul that Allah has elected them and purified them, and that is why they
have become secured from deviations and faults.

Satan cannot influence in them and, from the first day, hopelessly he
expressed his inability before them.

The uproar of the environment, the temptations of the seductive factors,
the imitation from ancestors, and the wrong and oppressive cultures can
never mislead them from their way.

And this, in fact, is a message for the persisting believers of that day
in Mecca, and for us, the Muslims of the world of today that we should
not be afraid of the abundance of the enemies and try to stand in the
row of the purified servants of Allah, because it is only the purified
servants of Allah who take the warnings of the prophets earnest.

***“Then see how was the end of those warned,”***

***“Except the servants of Allah, the purified ones.”***

[^1]: Among those who have narrated this tradition are the following
scholars: A) Ibn-Hajar Hiythami, in Sawa‘iq-ul-Muhraghah, P. 147 B)
‘Abd-ur-Razzaq Hanbali, according to Kashf-ul-Qummah, P. 92 C) ‘Allamah
Sibt-ibn-Jauzi, in Tathkirah, P. 21 D) ’Alusi, in Rauh-ul-Ma‘ani,
following the verse under discussion E) ’Abu-Na‘im Esfahani, according
to Kifayat-ul-Khisal, P. 360 And some others that for more information
you may refer to the worthy book entitled ‘’Ihqaq-ul-Haqq’, Vol. 3, P.
104 (new edition), and Al-Murajirat, P. 58.

[^2]: Tafsir-i-Rouh-ul-Bayan, Vol. 7, P. 464

[^3]: Rauh-ul-Ma‘ani, Vol. 23, P. 85


