Section 3: The Great Sacrifice Shifted
======================================

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 75-79
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ نَادَانَا نُوحٌ فَلَنِعْمَ الْمُـجِيبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَأَهْلَهُ مِنَ الْكَرْبِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا ذُرّ‌ِيَّتَه هُمُ الْبَاقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَكْنَا عَلَيْهِ فِي الأَخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلاَمٌ عَلَي نُوحٍ فِي الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***75. “And indeed Noah did call upon Us, and the most excellent
answerer (of prayer are We).”***  
***76. “And We delivered him and his people from the great
distress,”***  
***77. “And We made (only) his progeny the survivors.”***  
***78. “And We perpetuated to him (praise) among the later
generations.”***  
***79. “Peace be on Noah among the nations.”***

If a person calls Allah sincerely, his supplication will be accepted and
answered.

From here on, the story life of three great prophets, which was secretly
pointed out in the former verses, begins. At first, Noah, the chief of
the Divine prophets, and the first arch-prophet, is referred to and,
before anything else, his pungent prayer, when he became disappointed
from the guidance of his people, is pointed out.

It says:

***“And indeed Noah did call upon Us, and the most excellent answerer
(of prayer are We).”***

This call may point to the same thing which is mentioned in Surah Noah:

***“And Noah said: ‘O’ my Lord! Leave not of the unbelievers, a single
one on the earth!”***

***“For, if You do not leave (any of) them, they will but mislead Your
devotees, and they will breed none but wicked ungrateful ones.”***[^1]

Or it is the prayer which he asked Allah before embarking on the Ark.

He said:

***“…‘My Lord! Cause me to land with a blessed landing, for You are the
Best to cause to land’.”***[^2]

Or it is the prayer which is mentioned in Surah Al-Qamar, No. 54, verse
10, saying:

***“Then he called on his Lord: ‘I am one overcome; do You then help
(me)!’”***

Of course, there is no problem that the verse under discussion might be
a hint to all of these prayers and Allah answered them all in the best
way.

So, in the next verse, it immediately says:

***“And We delivered him and his people from the great distress,”***

According to Raqib in Mufradat, the Arabic term ***/karb/*** means ‘a
severe grief’.

Which grief has been this great grief that troubled Noah seriously? It
may refer to the mockeries of the proud faithless people, and their oral
hurts, such as their violation and affront to him and his followers. Or
it may refer to the consecutive denials of this obstinate nation.

They hurt this patient Divine prophet, Noah, and acted so impolitely
unto him and said that he was mad, that as the Qur’an says:

***“He (Noah) said: ‘My Lord help me against what they belie’.”***[^3]

However, a group of these unwholesome events and harsh sarcasms presses
his heart violently until when the flood came, and Allah delivered him
from the grip of that cruel nation and that great distress.

Some of the commentators have said that the probable purpose of the
Qur’anic phrase ***/karbin ‘azim/*** has been that very Flood in which
none delivered except Noah and his followers, but this meaning seems
improbable.

Then, in the next verse, it adds:

***“And We made (only his progeny the survivors.”***

Are really all the human beings, who are living on the earth at the
present time, from among the progeny of Noah? And does the above verse
say the same meaning? Or did great group of prophets, saints, and
righteous ones remain from his seed, though all human beings are not
from his seed?

Some of the great commentators have said that all the members of
humankind after Noah have come into being from his generation and, just
now, all people are the Children of Noah.

A great deal of the historians have cited that there have remained three
sons from Noah, by the names of: Sam, Ham, and Yafith, and all the
present nations living on the earth terminate to them. The races of
Arab, Persian, and Roman are called Semitic (races).

The Turkish race and another group of people are considered as the
progeny of Yafith. The races in Sudan, India, Nubia, Ethiopia, Qibt, and
Barbary are counted as the progeny of Ham.

The discussion is not upon this matter that, for example, this race is
from which son of Noah, because there are many different ideas delivered
by the commentators and historians upon this subject. The discussion is
upon this matter that do all the human races terminate to these three
ones?

This question arises here that: did not some other believers embark in
the Ark with Noah? Then, what fate did they have? Did they all pass away
without having any offspring after them? Or, if they had some children,
would they be girls who married with Noah’s sons?

This problem is not so clear from the point of history, but it can be
understood from Some Islamic narrations that, in relation with the hints
in the verses of the Qur’an, there remained some children from them on
the earth and there exist some people from those children, too.

Upon the explanation of the above holy verse, there is a tradition
recorded in the Commentary of Ali-ibn-’Ibrahim narrated from Imam Baqir
(as) who said:

*“The purpose of Allah from the verse saying:*

***‘And We made (only) his progeny the survivors’”***

*is that the Truth, prophethood, the (heavenly) Book, and Faith remained
in the progeny of Noah, but the entire people who are living on the
earth from the children of Adam are not from the offspring of Noah (as),
because Allah, the Exalted, says in His Book:*

***‘… We said: ‘Embark therein, of each kind a pair and your family (a
part from your wife and a son) except for those against whom the Word
has already passed – and whoever believed. And there believed not with
him but a few.”***[^4]

*And also He, the Almighty, (addressing the Children of Israel,) says:*

***‘(O’ you!) the offspring of those whom We embarked along with Noah
(on the Ark).…’***[^5]*”*[^6]

And thus, whatever is known about the whole races on the earth
terminating to the Noah’s sons is not fixed.

In the Next verse, the Qur’an says:

***“And We perpetuated to him (praise) among the later generations.”***

Noah is known as a steadfast, brave, patient, sympathetic, and kind
prophet, and he is called ‘the chief of the Divine prophets’.

Noah’s life story is usually the example of persistence and
perseverance, and his manner and program is as a sample for all those
who pave the path of Truth against the hard hindrances of the enemies.

In the last verse of this group of verses, the Qur’an says:

***“Peace be on Noah among the nations.”***

What an honour is higher than this that Allah, the Exalted, sends
greeting to him? It is a greeting that remains in the world among the
nations of the world and will be stretched until the Hereafter. Allah’s
greeting is accompanied with the beautiful praise and good mention of
the servants of Allah.

It is interesting that there is hardly a greeting in the Qur’an about
anyone as vast as this one, specially that the Qur’anic word
***/‘alamin/ (nations)***, which is in plural form and with the Arabic
signs (of definite article).

It contains such a vast meaning that it may envelop not only all human
beings but also the whole angels and those who are in the entire
Universe.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 80-82
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا كَذَلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُـحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَغْرَقْنَا الأَخَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***80. “Verily thus do We recompense the doers of good.”***  
***81. “Verily he was (one) of Our faithful servants.”***  
***82. “Then We drowned the others.”***

The reward of Allah for the righteous ones is a course and an Allah’s
way of treatment, not a temporary event and an eventual happening.

Therefore, in this holy verse the Qur’an clearly says:

***“Verily thus do We recompense the doers of good.”***

That is why, when there comes a Divine chastisement in the world, only
believers and the righteous ones may be delivered and the others will be
punished whether they are disbelievers or inattentive.

And in the next holy verse, concerning Noah (as), it says:

***“Verily he was (one) of Our faithful servants.”***

In fact, the rank of servitude and submission as well as Faith
accompanied with kindness and benevolence, which have been referred to
in the recent two verses, are the main evidence of the grace of Allah
unto Noah and delivering him from the great grief, and the greeting of
Allah unto him.

If this program is followed by others, too, they will be inside the same
mercy and grace that Noah (as) was in, since the criterions of Allah’s
graces are unchangeable and they have not a personal and private aspect.

In the third verse, through a short and awakening sentence, the Qur’an
states the fate of that unjust, vicious, and anonymous nation, where it
says:

***“Then We drowned the others.”***

There came a flood from the sky, water gushed out from the earth, and
all over the sphere of the earth turned to a rough ocean. It ruined the
castles of the tyrant ones, and their corps remained floating over the
face of water.

It is interesting that He states His favours unto Noah in several
verses, but He mentions the chastisement of that rebellious people
through a short sentence heedlessly and contemptuously, because the rank
of stating the honours and victories of the believers, and the aid of
Allah unto them, is the rank of explanation, while the rank of stating
the circumstance of the disobedient ones is the rank of heedlessness.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 83-84
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ مِن شِيعَتِهِ لإِبْرَاهِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ جَآءَ رَبَّهُ بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***83. “And verily Abraham was of his persuasion.”***  
***84. “When he came unto his Lord with a sound (pure) heart.”***

We ought to purify inside of ourselves at first, and then we may try to
purify the society. The necessary condition of the success of the
religious leaders is to have a sound pure heart.

In these verses a considerable part of the life story of ’Ibrahim, the
iconoclastic hero (as), together with some parts of the adventurous
history of Noah (as) are referred to.

Here, at first it begins with the event of Abraham’s idol-breaking and
the harsh reaction of the idolaters against him, and in another part, it
speaks about the greatest scene of Abraham’s self-sacrifice, sacrificing
his son. This part of the event has exclusively been mentioned only in
this section of the Qur’an.

The first verse relates the event of Abraham with the event of Noah as
this:

***“And verily Abraham was of his persuasion.”***

Abraham paved the same way of Unity and Justice, the same path of piety
and sincerity that Noah paved, since all divine prophets were the
preachers of the same school and the teachers of the same university,
and every one of then continued and completed the program of the
previous one.

What an interesting meaning this is! Abraham was one of the followers of
Noah! Though there was a long time between them, (according to some
commentators, about (600 years), but we know that time has not any
effect on the relation of religious schools.

In the second verse, it says remember the time:

***“When he came unto his Lord with a sound (pure) heart.”***

The commentators of the Qur’an have delivered different meanings for the
Qur’anic term /qalb/ (heart), each of which refers to one of the
dimensions of it: a heart which is free from polytheism; the sincere
heart which is far from sins, grudges, and hypocrisies; a heart empty of
the love of the world, because the love of the world is the source of
faults, and, finally, a heart which contains nothing but Allah.

The fact is that the Qur’anic term /salim/ is derived from /salamat/
(health), and when healthy is propounded in its absolute state, it
envelops health from all kinds of ethical and creedal sicknesses.

Concerning the hypocrites, the Qur’an implies that there is a disease in
their hearts and, as the result of their obstinacy and sins, Allah will
increase this sickness:

***“In their hearts is a disease, so Allah has increased their
disease…”***[^7]

Imam Sadiq (as) has stated the best commentary on the Qur’anic phrase
/qalbin salim/ where he says: “A sound heart is the one which meets his
Lord while there is none in it except Him.”[^8]

This clear commentary is conclusive of all aforementioned qualities.

Again, in another authentic tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) he
said:

*“Whoever has a truthful intention is the possessor of a sound heart,
because the soundness of the heart from polytheism and doubt, purifies
the intention for Allah in all affairs.”* [^9]

This is sufficient about the importance of the sound heart that the
Qur’an counts it as the capital of safety in Hereafter, as in Surah
As-Shu‘ara, No. 26, verses 88 and 89 from the tongue of this very
prophet, Abraham (as), we recite:

***“The Day whereon neither wealth nor sons will avail,” “Except for him
who comes to Allah with a pure heart.”***

In a tradition from Imam Sadiq (as) we recite he said:

*“The heart is the sanctuary of Allah; do settle no one in the sanctuary
of Allah, except Him.”*

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 85-87
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ لأَبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَاذَا تَعْبُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَئِفْكاً ءَالِهَةً دُونَ اللَّهِ تُرِيدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا ظَنُّكُم بِرَبّ‌ِ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***85. “When he said to his father and his people: ‘What is it that you
worship?’”***  
***86. “Is it a falsehood – gods other than Allah that you desire?”***  
***87. “What is then your idea about the Lord of the Worlds?”***

In invitation to Monotheism, clarity, explicitness, bravery,
inattentiveness to the tribal and genealogical considerations, are the
sings of a firm Faith. In this regard, Abraham condemned the creed of
the father.

Yes, Abraham was ordered to struggle against idolatry with a sound pure
heart, a pure spirit, a strong will, and a firm decision.

He began from his father (uncle) and his own relatives, as the Qur’an
says:

***“When he said to his father and his people: ‘What is it that you
worship?’”***

Is it not a pity that man, with his natural honour and his good
intellect, stands in front of some worthless pieces of stone and wood
and bows? Where is your wisdom?

Then, in the next holy verse, the Qur’an completed this meaning, which
was a clear contempt, with another sentence, saying:

***“Is it a falsehood – gods other than Allah that you desire?”***

Regarding to the fact that the Arabic term ***/’ifk/*** means a great
lie or the ugliest lies the decisiveness of Abraham’s talk about the
idols will become more clear.

He concluded his speech in this regard with another severe sentence, and
said:

***“What is then your idea about the Lord of the Worlds?”***

You consume His sustenance, His merits have surrounded your selves
thoroughly, yet you have worshipped some worthless things instead of
Him, and yet do you expect Him to have mercy on you, and that He would
not give you retribution with a terrible chastisement? What a great
mistake, and what a dangerous aberration you have!

The application of the Qur’anic phrase /rabb-il-‘alamin/ (the Lord of
the worlds) points to this fact that the whole universe is being managed
under the Lordship of Allah, but you have left Him and attached to some
conjectures and illusions which have no source of effect.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 88-92
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَنَظَرَ نَظْرَةً فِي النُّجُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالَ إِنّـِي سَقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَوَلَّوْا عَنْهُ مُدْبِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَاغَ إِلَي ءَالِهَتِهِمْ فَقَالَ أَلاَ تَأْكُلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَالَكُمْ لاَ تَنطِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***88. “Then he glanced, casting glance at the stars,”***  
***89. “Then he said: ‘Verily I am sick (and I cannot participate in
your festival).”***  
***90. “So they went away from him, turning back.”***  
***91. “Then he turned unto their gods secretly and (mockingly) said:
‘Why do you not eat?’”***  
***92. “What is the matter with you that you do not speak?”***

The logic of Divine prophets is negation of idolatry, and it is very
clear, natural, and rational.

History and commentary books indicate that every year the idolaters of
Babylon had some special festival ceremonies when they used to cook and
prepare some food, in idol temple, and put them there imagining that the
foods would become blessed.

Then they went out from the city and returned back in the evening when
they went into their idol temple in order to worship and to eat food.

That day, the city became empty of people, and it was a good opportunity
for Abraham to break idols. It was an opportunity for which Abraham was
waiting for a long time and he did not like to lose it easily.

So, at night, when he was invited to participate in their ceremonies,
the verse says:

***“Then he glanced, casting glance at the stars,”***

***“Then he said: ‘Verily I am sick (and I cannot participate in your
festival).”***

And in this way, Abraham (as) excused himself, and the verse says:

***“So they went away from him, turning back.”***

Here, there come forth two questions:

The first: Why did Abraham look at stars? What was his aim of this
glance?

The second is that whether he was really sick when he said:

‘***Verily I am sick’***?

And What ailment did he have?

The answer to the first question: Regarding to the beliefs of the people
of Babylon, and their customs, its answer is clear, because they had
some studies in astronomy, and even it is said that their idols were in
the shape of stars, and they respected them because they were the
symbols of stars.

Beside their astrologic information, of course, there were also many
superstitions in this field current among them, including that they
believed stars were effective in their fates, and asked goodness and
blessing from them. They reasoned their situation for the future events.

In order to make them convenient, according to their custom, Abraham
(as) cast a glance to the stars in the sky in order that they thought he
had foresighted his sickness by studying the situations of the stars,
and they might be convinced, some of the great commentators have also
offered this probability that he wanted to find out exactly the time of
his sickness from the movement of the stars; because there was a kind of
sickness, like fever, which came to him between some particular points
of time.

But, regarding to the condition of the thoughts of the people of
Babylon, the first probable is more fitting.

Some other commentators have also said that perhaps his glance to the
sky was, in fact, a glance of study in the secrets of the creation,
though they considered his glance as the glance of an astronomer who
wanted to foresight the future events by the situations of the stars.

Concerning the second question, there have been delivered numerous
answers, including that he was really sick, although if he had been safe
either, he would not have participated in the ceremonies of the festival
of idols.

But his sickness was a good excuse for his absence in that festival and
utilizing the golden opportunity for breaking the idols, and there is no
evidence for us to say he equivocated, because equivocation is not
suitable for prophets.

Some others have said that Abraham had not really a bodily ailment, but
as the result of the wrong actions of those people and their infidelity,
polytheism, injustice, and corruption, his soul was sick. Thus, he
stated a fact though they thought differently and considered him bodily
sick.

So, in the fourth holy verse the Qur’an implies that only Abraham
remained in the city and the idolaters, leaving the city empty, went
outside of it.

Abraham cast a glance around him, there appeared a light of happiness in
his eyes, because the moments, he had been waiting for from a long time
ago, had come. He thought he should begin fighting against idols lonely
and strike a hard blow on their bodies, a strike that might shake the
minds of the idolaters and awaken them from their sleep.

The Qur’an says:

***“Then he turned unto their gods secretly and (mockingly) said: ‘Why
do you not eat?’”***

Abraham implicitly said to the idols that their worshippers had prepared
those sweet, various, delicious and colourful foods:

***“Why do you not eat?”***

Then, in the next verse he, addressing the idols, tells them why they do
not speak, as if they were dumb.

The above verse says:

***“What is the matter with you that you do not speak?”***

In this way, Abraham mocked all their superstitious beliefs. No doubt he
knew well that the idols did neither speak nor eat food and they were
not anything but some inanimate beings. He wanted, in fact, to give the
reason of his breaking idols in this beautiful and tender form.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 93-94
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَاغَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضَرْباً بِالْيَـمِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَقْبَلُوا إِلَيْهِ يَزِفُّونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***93. “Then he turned against them in secret, striking (them) with the
right hand.”***  
***94. “So they (people) advanced towards him hastening.”***

There are some stages in the act of ‘forbid from doing evil’, if the
first stage, which is speaking, did not affect, the second stage would
be the practical action. According to this verse, Abraham decided to
begin the action. He took the axe in his hand and moved it with strength
and intentionally struck a severe stroke on their bodies.

The verse says:

***“Then he turned against them in secret, striking (them) with the
right hand.”***

The objective meaning of the Arabic word ***/yamin/*** is really here
‘right hand’ that man often does his most actions with it, or it
ironically means ‘power’ and ‘force’, (both of the meanings can also be
used).

However, before soon, he made that beautiful furnished idol temple as a
terrible ruined place. The idols were totally turned into pieces, and
each of them, with broken hands and feet, was fallen in a corner, and,
verily, they got a state of sad, grievous, and heart-rending scenery for
the idol-worshippers.

Abraham did what he should do, and silently, and calmly he came out from
the idol temple and went toward his home, while he was preparing himself
for the future events.

He knew that he had created a great explosion not only in the city but
also throughout the country, Babylon, the news of which would be heard
later. Because of anger he began walking since he was alone in the midst
of that tempest! But he had Allah with him and that very One was enough
for him.

And, the next holy verse implicitly denotes that the idol worshippers
returned to the city and went into the idol temple. They encountered a
horrible view and astonished, as if they had been fixed there as
statues.

They could not think for some moments and were gazing, looking at those
ruined scattered idols. They saw that the idols, which they imagined as
the shelter of their day of wander, were defenceless over there.

Then their amazing motionless state changed into the state of shouting,
crying, and roaring.

They protested saying:

“***Who has done this? Which unjust one has committed it?***”

And before long, they remembered that there was a young theistic man in
that city by the name of Abraham, who mocked idols and had threatened
that he had designed a dangerous plan for their idols. They thought it
might be his action.

The verse says:

***“So they (people) advanced towards him hastening.”***

The Arabic term ***/yaziffun/*** is derived from /zaf/ which has
originally been applied for the blow of the wind, and fast motion of the
ostrich, which is a mixture of walking and flying. Then this word has
ironically been used in the sense of taking bride toward the house of
bridegroom.

However, the purpose is that the idolaters came hastily toward Abraham.
(The rest of the event will be mentioned through later verses.)

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 95-98
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَتَعْبُدُونَ مَا تَنْحِتُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ خَلَقَكُمْ وَمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا ابْنُواْ لَهُ بُنْيَاناً فَأَلْقُوهُ فِي الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَرَادُوا بِهِ كَيْداً فَجَعَلْنَاهُمُ الأَسْفَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***95. “He said: ‘Do you worship what you (yourselves) hew out?’”***  
***96. “While Allah has created you and what you make.”***  
***97. “They said: ‘Build for him a furnace, then cast him into the
burning fire’.”***  
***98. “So they desired a plot against him, but We made them lower
ones.”***

Everything in the world must be devoted to Monotheism and Monotheistic
thought. Imam Hussayn (as) is sacrificed in order that false deity might
no dominate over people. All the troubles, and even the souls of the
Divine prophets, were devoted for Monotheism. Here Abraham risked and
did a dangerous action in order to root out idolatry.

At last, after the event of breaking idols, Abraham was taken to the
court with the same accusation.

Abraham was inquired, and he was ordered to explain who accomplished the
horrible event of the idol temple.

The Holy Qur’an has explained this event in Surah Al-Anbiya’, No. 21,
and, in the verses under discussion, it suffices to one sensitive point
of it which is the last statement of Abraham with them about the
falsehood of idolatry.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘Do you worship what you (yourselves) hew out?’”***

Does any wise man worship his own handicraft? Does any intellectual
person knee before his own created thing? Which intellect and logic have
given you such a permission?

In the next verse, the Qur’an implies that the heavens and the earth all
are created by Allah and the entire time and place belong to him. Such a
Creator must be worshipped.

The verse says:

***“While Allah has created you and what you make.”***

This is a very strong proof. They had no response to give against it.

Oppressors and tyrants have never been familiar with logic and
reasoning. It was for the same reason that the evident and strong
argumentation of Abraham (as) did not affect on the hearts of the cruel
rulers of Babylon, though it awakened a group of the oppressed people of
the time.

But, the proud tyrants, who found out the advance of this Monotheistic
logic as a barrier for their own benefits, came in with the logic of
force, weapon, and fire: a logic except which they understood nothing.

They relied on their own power and, the verse says:

***“They said: ‘Build for him a furnace, then cast him into the burning
fire’.”***

It is understood from his meaning that, at first it was ordered that a
large place with four walls to be built. Then inside of it some fire was
made ready. Perhaps for the purpose that not only they could control the
fire from scattering and from probable dangers, but also they might
practically prepare a hell fire by which Abraham threatened the
idolaters.

It is true that for burning a man like Abraham only a small load of wood
was enough, but in order to quench the fire of their hearts resulted by
breaking the idols and so to speak, to take their vengeance in utmost
level, and, by the way, to give a glory and greatness to the idols in
order that their lost honour might be returned, and also to use severity
upon all their opponents so that that event would not happen again in
the history of Babylon, they prepared that vast, huge fire.

(Be careful that the Arabic word ***/jahim/*** philologically means:
‘Some fires which are heaped up with together.)

Some commentators have rendered the Qur’anic word /bunyan/ here into
catapult (mangonel), which was a means of throwing heavy things from a
distance. But most of the commentators have chosen the first
interpretation.

The fourth holy verse, in a condensed and interesting conclusion, states
the end of this event as follows:

***“So they desired a plot against him, but We made them lower ones.”***

The Arabic word ***/kayd/*** means any ‘thinking of a mean’ whether it
is in a correct way or a wrong one, though it is often used for an evil
aspect; and regarding to the form of the word here as an indefinite
article which indicates to greatness and importance, it refers to the
vast plot that they had designed for the annihilation of Abraham and
wiping out the effects of his oral and practical propagation.

Yes, Allah set them the lower ones, and set Abraham in a ‘high rank’,
like his logic which had superiority.

In the event of burning and fire, Allah gave him superiority, too, and
caused his powerful enemies to be low. He made the fire cold and safe
for him, and without that even his hair burnt, he came out safely from
that huge heap of fire.

One day He delivers Noah from being drowned, and on the other day He
delivers Abraham from being burnt, in order to make it clear that both
water and fire obey His command and whatever Allah says to do they do
accordingly.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 99-102
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ إِنّـِي ذَاهِبٌ إِلَي رَبّـِي سَيَهْدِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبّ‌ِ هَبْ لِي مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبَشَّرْنَاهُ بِغُلاَمٍ حَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا بَلَغَ مَعَهُ السَّعْيَ قَالَ يَا بُنَيَّ إِنّـِي أَرَي فِي
الْمَنَامِ أَنّـِي أَذْبَحُكَ فَانظُرْ مَاذَا تَرَي قَالَ يَآ أَبَتِ
افْعَلْ مَا تُؤْمَرُ سَتَجِدُنِي إِن شَآءَ اللَّهُ مِنَ الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***99. “And he said: ‘Verily, I am going unto my Lord, He will guide
me’.”***  
***100. “My Lord! Grant me a righteous (son)!”***  
***101. “So We gave him the glad tidings of a forbearing boy,”***  
***102. “And when he (the son) reached (the age of working) with him he
said: ‘O my son! Verily I see in a dream that I shall sacrifice you. Now
see what is your view. He said: ‘O’ my father! Do what you are
commanded; you will find me, Allah willing, of the patient ones’.”***

A righteous son is one of the Divine remittals, and one of prophets’
supplications is for it, and he is the best helper along side the path
of the movement of the family toward Allah.

The former verses indicated that, after fulfilling his duty of prophecy
in Babylon, Abraham emigrated from that place. His first beseech from
Allah was that He would give him a righteous son, because he had had no
child until that day.

The first verse of the verses under discussion talks about the
acceptance of this prayer of Abraham.

It says:

***“And he said: ‘Verily, I am going unto my Lord, He will guide
me’.”***

***“My Lord! Grant me a righteous (son)!”***

***“So We gave him the glad tidings of a forbearing boy,”***

In fact, there are three glad tidings in this sentence: the glad tiding
of a son, the glad tiding of reaching the son to the age of adolescence,
and the glad tiding of the good quality of being for bearing.

Upon the commentary of the Arabic word ***/halim/*** it is said that he
is the one who does not haste in any action before its proper time,
while he has its ability; and does not haste in the retribution of the
guilty. He has a great spirit, and can control his emotions.

Raqib in Mufradat says that: the term /hilm/ means: forbearing at the
time of commotion of anger, and since this status originates from
wisdom, it has sometimes been used in the sense of intellect, too, else
the real meaning of /hilm/ is the same thing which was said at the
beginning.

By the way, it is understood from this quality that Allah has given the
glad tiding of the existence of this son until he reaches an age that he
can be qualified by ‘forbearing’. As we will recite in the following
verses, he proved the rank of his being forbearing at the time of the
event of ‘sacrifice’. Also, Abraham showed his being forbearing both at
that time and at the time of the fire accident.

It is interesting that the word /halim/ (forbearing) has been used
fifteen times in the Qur’an, and is often used as an attribution for
Allah, except in two cases which has been mentioned in the word of Allah
as a quality for Abraham and his son, and in one occurrence it is a
quality for Shu‘ayb from the tongue of others.

As some commentators believe, the Arabic word ***/qulam/ (boy)*** is
used for any child before reaching the age of adolescence, while some
others have used it for the child who is more than ten years old and has
not reached the age of puberty.

By the different meanings which have come in the Arabic language, it can
be understood that ***/qulam/*** is an age between childhood and youth
that is usually meant into adolescence.

Then, in the next verse, the Qur’an implies that at last according to
the glad tiding of Allah, the promised son of Abraham was born, and
enlightened the heart of the father who was waiting for a righteous son
and was expectant for many years. This child passed his childhood and
reached the age of adolescence.

Here, the Qur’an says:

***“And when he (the son) reached (the age of working) with him…”***

That is, he reached a stage in which he could work and struggle in the
different affairs of life, accompanying his father and helping him.

Some commentators believe that the Qur’anic word /sa‘y/ here means
worship and working for Allah. This term, of course, has a vast meaning
and encompasses this concept, too, but it is not restricted to it. And
the application of the Arabic word ***/ma‘ahu/ (with him)*** shows that
its purpose is his assistance to the father in the affairs of life.

However, as some of the commentators have said, at that time his son was
thirteen years old when Abraham sees a wonderful dream which denotes the
beginning of another great trial in respect to this respectable prophet.
In his dream he sees that he was ordered from the side of Allah to
sacrifice his only son by his own hand and to cut his head.

Being very terrified, Abraham awoke. He knew that the prophets’ dream
was true and it was far from the Satanic temptations. Yet the same dream
was repeated two times more, which was an emphasis on the necessity of
that action as well as its urgency.

It is said that at the first time Abraham saw this dream in the night of
‘Tarwiyah’ (the eighth night of Zil-Hajjah), and on the night of ‘Arafah
and the night of Feast of Sacrifice (the ninth and tenth of Zil-Hajjah)
the dream was repeated, so there remained no doubt for him that it was
the decisive command of Allah.

Abraham, who had repeatedly become successful in the hard trials of
Allah, this time again he must obey the command of Allah, either, and
kill the son for whom he waited for a lifetime and now he was a handsome
adolescent by his own hand.

But, before anything else, he ought to make the son prepared for this
action.

So, Abraham, addressing him, informed him as follows:

***“…he said: ‘O my son! Verily I see in a dream that I shall sacrifice
you. Now see what is your view…”***

The son, who was as a copy of the father, the donator, and had learnt
the lesson of patience and perseverance, and faith in his father’s
school during his short lifetime, happily and eagerly accepted that
Divine commandment, and explicitly and with conclusiveness, answered as
follows:

***“…He said: ‘O’ my father! Do what you are commanded; you will find
me, Allah willing, of the patient ones’.”***

How expressive and meaningful the sentences of the father and son are!
And how many delicate things there are inside them!

From one side, the father suggests the subject of sacrifice to his
thirteen-year-old son and asks his view about it. He considers
independent personality and freedom of decision for him, because he does
never intend to deceive his son and blindly invites him to this great
field of trial.

He wishes that the son may also participate in this excellent struggle
willingly and, like the father tastes the pleasure of submission and
contentment.

On the other side, the son intends that the father would be firm in his
decision, then he does not say ‘sacrifice me’, but he says:

‘***Do what you are commanded***’

and that he submits to His commandment.

The son specially addresses the father by the phrase: ‘***O my
father!***’ in order to show that this subject does not decrease the
least from the affection between father and son, since the commandment
of Allah (s.w.t.) prevails over everything.

And, on the third side, he keeps the state of courtesy at the presence
of Allah in the best form. He never relies on the power of his own
faith, will, and decision, but he relies on the divine will and
providence of Allah and, through this sentence, he seeks success,
perseverance and steadfastness from Him.

And thus both father and son (as) pass completely and successfully the
first stage of this great examination.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 103-106
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّآ أَسْلَمَا وَتَلَّهُ لِلْجَبِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَادَيْنَاهُ أَن يَآ إِبْرَاهِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ صَدَّقْتَ الرُّؤْيَآ كَذَلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُـحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هَذَا لَهُوَ الْبَلآءُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***103. “So when they both submitted (to Our command) and he (Abraham)
laid him (the son) prostrate on his forehead (for sacrifice),”***  
***104. “And We called out to him: ‘O Abraham!’”***  
***105. “Indeed you have proved true the dream; verily thus do We reward
the doers of good!”***  
***106. “This is indeed the manifest trial.”***

The commandments of Allah (s.w.t.) are sometimes for trial. Allah wanted
that Abraham would detach his heart, not that the Ishmael’s blood might
be shed.

In these holy verses, the Qur’an says:

***“So when they both submitted (to Our command) and he (Abraham) laid
him (the son) prostrate on his forehead (for sacrifice),”***

Again here the Qur’an explains shortly and lets the hearer pursue the
story with the waves of his affections.

Some commentators have said that the objective meaning of the Qur’anic
phrase /tallahu lil jabin/[^10] was that Abraham put the forehead of
Ishmael on the dust according to the son’s own suggestion, lest his eyes
might see the son’s face and the fatherly affections would be exited and
might hinder the fulfilment of the command of Allah/.[^11]

However, Abraham put the son’s face on the dust and moved the knife and,
swiftly and powerfully, put it on the child’s throat, while his soul had
been filled with excitement, and it was only the love of Allah which
forwarded him undoubtedly alongside his way. But the sharp knife left
the least effect on the smooth throat of his child.

Abraham was in full surprise. He tried again and used the knife, but for
the second time it affected naught. Yes, Abraham, the friend, says:
“*Cut it*”, but Allah, the Majestic, says: “*Do not cut*”; and the knife
obeyed only Allah’s command.

In the next verse, the Qur’an with a short and expressive sentence, puts
an end to all expectations and says:

***“And We called out to him: ‘O Abraham!’”***

***“Indeed you have proved true the dream; verily thus do We reward the
doers of good!”***

That is, We give them both the success of triumph in trial, and We do
not let his beloved child be lost for him. Yes, he who submits
thoroughly to Him and has one goodness in its highest degree will not
have any recompense, but this.

Then, in the next verses it adds:

***“This is indeed the manifest trial.”***

To sacrifice a child by his own hand, a young child who is worthy
enough, for a father who has been expecting such a son, is not simple
action.

How can he detach his heart from such a child? And more important than
that without showing any frowning, but with the utmost submission and
contentment, he hastens to fulfil this commandment. He accomplished all
the primary affairs up to the last stage, so that he would not neglect
anything from the point of psychological and practical preparations.

And more wonderful than that, there was the absolute submission of this
lad before this command, who eagerly and with certainty of mind, by the
grace of Allah and submitting to His will, hastened to receive the
sacrifice.

Some Islamic narrations indicate when this action was done, Gabriel
(surprisingly) shouted:

‘*Allahu Akbar! Allahu Akbar’ (Allah is the greatest! Allah is the
greatest).*

And Abraham’s son cried:

“*There is no god but Allah. Allah is the greatest!*”

And the devoted father, the hero, also said:

*“Allah is the greatest and the praise belongs to Allah.”*[^12]

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 107-113
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفَدَيْنَاهُ بِذِبْحٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَكْنَا عَلَيْهِ فِي الأَخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلاَمٌ عَلَي اِبْرَاهِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَشَّرْنَاهُ بِإِسْحَاقَ نَبِيّاً مّـِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَارَكْنَا عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَي إِسْحَاقَ وَمِن ذُرّ‌ِيَّتِهِمَا
مُحْسِنٌ وَظَالِمٌ لِّنَفْسِهِ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***107. “And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice.”***  
***108. “And We left (praise) for him among generations (to come) in
later times.”***  
***109. “Peace be on Abraham.”***  
***110. “Thus do We recompense the doers of good,”***  
***111. “Verily he was (one) of Our believing servants.”***  
***112. “And We gave him the glad tidings of Isaac, a prophet among the
righteous ones.”***  
***113. “And We bestowed Our blessings on him and on Isaac, and of their
offspring are the doers of good, and (also) those who are clearly unjust
to their own selves.”***

The act of sacrifice is one of Abraham’s way of treatment. A sincere
action turns to be a great current in the history, and every year
hundreds of thousand sheep, cows, and camels are sacrificed in the altar
of Ishmael in his remembrance.

This holy verse indicates that in order that Abraham would complete the
program of his sacrifice at the presence of Allah and attain his wish,
Allah sent a big sheep for him to sacrifice it instead of the child and
that could be a manner left from Abraham for the coming generations in
the rites of Hajj and the land of Muna, as the Qur’an says:

***“And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice.”***

There are different ideas among the Islamic commentators concerning the
greatness of this sacrifice and that from which point of view it was
great: from the bodily and appearance point, or from this point that it
became the ransom of Abraham’s child, or from the point that it was for
the sake of Allah and in the path of Allah, or from this point that this
sacrifice was sent for Abraham from the side of Allah?

But it does not matter that all these aspects can be found in the ‘great
sacrifice’, and that it has greatness from different points of view.

One of the signs of the greatness of this sacrifice is that by the past
of time every year its scope increases, and now more than one million
sacrifices are ransomed each year, and its remembrance is kept alive.

The Arabic phrase ***/fadaynah/*** is derived from /fada/ which
originally means: ‘appointing something as alms and designed to avert
evil from a person or something else. That is why the sum which is paid
for manumission of a captive is called /fidyah/ (ransom). And also the
atonement which some sick people pay instead of fasting is called by
this name.

Upon the idea that how was this big sheep given to Abraham, many
commentators believed that Gabriel brought it? Some believe that it came
down from the sides of the hills of Muna, but whatever it was, it was
done by the command of Allah and by His will.

The next holy verse implies that not only Allah praised the victory of
Abraham in this great trial on that day, but also He made its
remembrance eternal.

The verse says:

***“And We left (praise) for him among generations (to come) in later
times.”***

Abraham (as) became an example for all the coming generations and as a
paradigm for all the lovers of Allah, and Allah made his program eternal
as a rite of Hajj during the future centuries until the end of the
world. He was the father of the great prophets, the father of the Ummah
of Islam, and the father of the Prophet of Islam.

Then, in the third and fourth verses, the Qur’an says:

***“Peace be on Abraham.”***

***“Thus do We recompense the doers of good,”***

It is a recompense as great as the world; a recompense eternal
throughout the time; a recompense fit for the peace of Allah, the
Almighty!

It is interesting that the sentence:

“***Thus do We recompense the doers of Good***”

one time has been mentioned here and another time in former verses. This
repetition certainly contains a proper point.

Its reason may be in this that in the first stage Allah verifies
Abraham’s victory in his great trial, and He approves his success. This
is a great reward and recompense, and this was the most important glad
tidings that Allah gave Abraham.

Then there is the subject of ‘the great sacrifice’ and that it and his
name remained as ever lasting. And the greeting of Allah to him which is
another great merit and Allah introduces it as the recompense of the
righteous.

By the way, there are many authentic narrations stated in the commentary
books such as Majma‘-ul-Bayan and Nur-uth-Thaqalayn recorded under these
verses which you can refer to.

The fifth verse says:

***“Verily he was (one) of Our believing servants.”***

This sentence, in fact, is a witness upon what was said, and also stated
this reality that if Abraham sincerely gave his entire entity and his
dear son in a lump and sacrificed them in the path of his Lord, it was
because of his deep faith and his promise. Yes, all of these have a
wonderful manifestation.

However, this meaning expands and generalizes the act of Abraham, and
separates it from a personal and private form, and shows that wherever
there is faith, you can find donation, love self-sacrifice, and
remittal.

Abraham liked whatever Allah liked, and he wanted the thing that Allah
wanted; and every believer can be like that.

The sixth verse refers to another merit of Allah bestowed on Abraham.

It says:

***“And We gave him the glad tidings of Isaac, a prophet among the
righteous ones.”***

Regarding to the holy verse saying:

“***Verily thus do We recompense the doers of good***”

which has been mentioned at the beginning of this event[^13], it is made
clear that these two glad tidings relate to two children.

If the recent glad tidings according to the explicit mentioning of the
verse under discussion relates to Isaac, then the Qur’anic holy phrase
‘***forbearing boy***’, the patient adolescence, surely refers to
’Isma‘il, and those who urge to consider Isaac as ‘the sacrificed one’
have taken both verses referring to one thing, with this difference that
they think of the first verses as the statement of the main glad tidings
and the second verse as a glad tiding to the prophethood; but this
meaning is very improbable, and the abovementioned verses clearly say
that these two glad tidings relate to two offspring.

Moreover, the glad tiding of prophethood shows that Isaac should remain
alive and perform the duties of prophethood, and this does not adopt to
the subject of sacrifice.

It is interesting that here again we confront the greatness of the rank
of the righteous, and for the qualification of Isaac it implies that he
must become a prophet and become one of the righteous and how excellent
is the rank of the righteous with Allah, the Almighty!

And in the seventh verse the words are about the blessing that Allah
bestowed on Abraham and his sin, Isaac.

It says:

***“And We bestowed Our blessings on him and on Isaac…”***

But there is not any explanation saying in which thing the blessing was
given, and We know that when a verb is usually said absolutely and there
is not any condition in it, has a general sense. Therefore, it concludes
blessing in every thing: in lifetime and in living, in the coming
generations, in history and school of thought, and in all things.

Here, it is clear that the verse under discussion points to prophethood,
and all Divine blessings unto Abraham and Isaac (and their family). One
of the blessings that Allah granted to Abraham and Isaac was this that
all the Divine prophets of the Children of Israel came into being from
the progeny of Isaac, while the great Prophet of Islam (S) was from the
progeny of ’Isma‘il.

But in order that there does not come forth an imagination that the
existence of this blessing in the family of Abraham has the aspect of
genealogy and race, but it is in relation with religion, school of
thought, and faith, at the end of the verse it adds:

***“…and of their offspring are the doers of good, and (also) those who
are clearly unjust to their own selves.”***

The Arabic term ***/muhsin/*** here means: a believer and the one who is
obedient to Allah (s.w.t.); and what a kindness and goodness can be
considered better than this!

The term /zalim/ is in the sense of disbeliever and sinful, and the
application of /linafsihi/ points to this fact that disbelief and sin
are at the first degree of being unjust to oneself, a clear injustice.

And thus, the above verse answers to a group of the Jews and the
Christians who boasted that they were from the progeny of the prophets,
that only the relative relation is not an honour unless it comes under
the shelter of mental and religious relation.

The reference of this statement is the tradition narrated from the holy
Prophet (S) who, addressing Bani Hashim, said:

*“O Bani Hashim! Let it not be that on the Day of Hereafter people come
to me with their deeds and you come with your relations and relatives,
in a manner that they may have religious relation and you may have
bodily relation.”*[^14]

[^1]: Surah Noah, No. 71, verses 26-27

[^2]: Surah Al-Mu’minun, No. 23, verse 29

[^3]: Surah Al-Mu’minun, No. 23, verse 26

[^4]: Surah Hud, No. 11, verse 40

[^5]: Surah ’Isra’, No. 17, verse 3

[^6]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 4, P. 405; and Tafsir-us-Safi, following
the verse

[^7]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 10

[^8]: Al-Kafi, according to Tafsir-us-Safi under Surah As-Shu‘ara’, No.
26, verse 89.

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: The Qur’anic word /tallahu/ is derived from /tal/ originally in
the sense of a high place and the whole phrase means that he put one
side of his face on the ground in a high place.

[^11]: The Qur’anic word /tallahu/ is derived from /tal/ originally in
the sense of ‘a high place’ and the whole phrase means that he put one
side of his face on the ground in a large place.

[^12]: The commentaries of Qurtabi, and Rauh-ul-Bayan.

[^13]: verse 80

[^14]: Rauh-ul-Bayan, Vol. 7, P. 479


