Section 5: Jonah’s Delivery From Distress
=========================================

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 139-141
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ يُونُسَ لَمِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ أَبَقَ إِلَي الْفُلْكِ الْمَشْحُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَاهَمَ فَكَانَ مِنَ الْمُدْحَضِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***139. “Verily Jonah was (one) of the Envoys,”***  
***140. “When he ran away to the laden ship.”***  
***141. “So he cast lots, and was of the rebutted,”***

To become familiar with the history of prophets is a lesson for us
today.

It says:

***“Verily Jonah was (one) of the Envoys,”***

The last life story of the Divine prophets and the former nations, which
has been mentioned in this Surah is the life-story of Yunus (Jonah) and
his repentant people who, by seeing the signs of Divine punishment, came
out of their negligence and repented.

Therefore Allah showered His favours over them and caused them to enjoy
His material and spiritual blessings. Even Yunus (Jonah) (as)
encountered some difficulties and problems because of the leaving the
better he performed in hastening for emigration from among his people.

And even the Qur’anic word ***/’abaq/ (ran away)***, which is usually
used for the run-away servants, is used for him. This meaning refers to
this fact that whether the pagans of Arab and the polytheists in the
length of history want to be like the people of Jonah. Do they seek for
that evil and painful end or a happy prosperous fate? It depends on
their decision.

However, like other prophets, Jonah began his invitation from Monotheism
and struggled against idolatry and then he referred to struggling
against the corruptions which were current in the society.

But those zealous people, who blindly used to follow their ancestors,
did not accept his invitation. Like a kind father, Jonah (as)
sympathetically and benevolently continued admonishing that deviated
nation, but in spite of this wise logic he did not hear from those
enemies anything save fallacy and sophistry.

Only a very small group, who were perhaps no more than a few persons,
believed in him. There was a servant of Allah and a knowledgeable man
among them. Jonah (as) preached so much that he approximately became
disappointed from them.

Some Islamic authentic narrations indicate that, considering the
circumstances of that aberrant nation, he decided to curse them. This
decision was performed and Jonah cursed them. It was revealed to him
that the Divine punishment would come to them at so and so time.

When the appointed time of punishment was approaching, Jonah accompanied
the servant of Allah went out from among those people while he was
angry. He went as far as he reached the shore. Over there he saw a ship
full of people and laden with loads. He asked them to take him with
them, too.

The next verse implies that this is the same thing which the Qur’an
points to, and announces that you do remember when he ran away toward
the ship full of loads and people.

It says:

***“When he ran away to the laden ship.”***

The application of the Qur’anic term ***/’abaqa/*** is derived from
/’ibaq/ in the sense of ‘to run away a servant from his master’ which
here is a wonderful application. It shows that how much important a very
small ‘leaving the better’ from the side of the high rank stationed
prophets is with Allah and is taken so hard from His side that He calls
His prophet ‘a ran away servant’.

No doubt Jonah was an immaculate prophet, and never did he commit a sin,
but it was better that he would tolerate more again and remain among
people until the last moment, perhaps they could awaken.

It is true that according to some narrations he preached for forty
years, but it was better for him to add some more days or hours to it,
and since he did not so, he was likened to a run away servant.

The third verse implies that Jonah embarked a ship and, according to
some Islamic narrations, a great fish, opening his mouth wide, came
across the ship and intercepted its way as if it demanded its food. The
people in the ship said it seemed there was a sinner among them, and he
had to become the bait of that fish. They could not help it save casting
lots.

Here they cast lots and the lot fell upon Jonah. According to a
narration the lot was repeated three times and every time the lot fell
upon Jonah’s name. Therefore, they took Jonah and threw him into the
mouth of the great fish.

Through a short sentence the Qur’an points to this event where it says:

***“So he cast lots, and was of the rebutted,”***

The Qur’anic term ***/sahama/*** is derived from /sahm/ which originally
means ‘arrow’ and the term ***/sahama/*** has been used in the sense of
‘lottery’, because at the time of lottery the names were written on the
end of the arrows rejected out and everyone whose name was fallen by the
lot he was involved in it.

The Arabic term ***/mudhad/*** is derived from /’idhad/ in the sense of:
‘to nullify, to wipe out, and to overcome’, and here the purpose is that
the lot fell upon his name.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 142-144
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْتَقَمَهُ الْحُوتُ وَهُوَ مُلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَوْلآ أَنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُسَبّـِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَلَبِثَ فِي بَطْنِهِ اِلَي يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***142. “Then the fish swallowed him while he blamed himself;”***  
***143. “So had he not been of those that glorify Allah,”***  
***144. “He would have tarried in its belly until the Day of
Resurrection.***

Sometimes animals are ordered from the side of Allah to do something.

So, the great fish swallowed Jonah while he deserved to be blamed.

The verse says:

***“Then the fish swallowed him while he blamed himself;”***

The Arabic term ***/mulim/*** originally is derived from /lawama/ in the
sense of ‘blame’ and when it is conjugated in this Arabic form it means:
to be deserved of blame.

It is certain that this blame and scorn was not because of a lesser sin
or a heinous sin but its cause was only the leaving the better which he
committed.

That he hastened in going out and emigrated from among his people. But
the Lord Who makes fire safe inside water and glass beside stone,
ordered this great animal that it would not hurt his servant, Jonah, the
least hurt.

Jonah should pass an unprecedented term in prison in order to note his
own ‘leaving the better’ and to try to recompense it. An Islamic
narration indicates that Allah inspired the fish not to break any bone
and not to cease any join of him.[^1]

In the second and third verses, the Qur’an implies that Jonah realized
the situation very soon and thoroughly he turned to Allah and asked Him
forgiveness for his ‘leaving the better’. So, in this verse, through a
short sentence, it says:

***“So had he not been of those that glorify Allah,”***

***“He would have tarried in its belly until the Day of Resurrection.***

Thus, this temporary prison would be changed into a permanent prison,
and that permanent prison would be changed into his grave. Or the fish
might remain alive forever and Jonah would be kept prisoner in its belly
until the Hereafter.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 145-147
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَنَبَذْنَاهُ بِالْعَرَآءِ وَهُوَ سَقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنبَتْنَا عَلَيْهِ شَجَرَةً مِن يَقْطِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَرْسَلْنَاهُ إِلَي مِاْئَةِ أَلْفٍ أَوْ يَزِيدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***145. “But We cast him forth on the naked shore while he was
sick,”***  
***146. “And We caused to grow over him a plant of gourds.”***  
***147. “And We sent him to a hundred thousand (people) or more.”***

Allah protected four prophets in relation with water in different forms:
Jonah was protected under the water; Noah on the water; Moses and Yusuf
beside the water.

In a tradition Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Jonah was kept prisoner in the belly of a fish for a few days where
his hairs went away and the skin of his body became thin. Then he came
out from the belly of the fish. He sucked the bush of gourd and rested
under the shade of the gourd.”*[^2]

The verse says:

***“But We cast him forth on the naked shore while he was sick,”***

The great fish approached the dry shore where there was no tree or plant
and, by the command of Allah, it threw out the morsel which was extra
inside it. But it is clear that this wonderful prison disturbed the
bodily health of Jonah and he was delivered from that prison while he
was sick.

The second verse indicates that again the grace of Allah came to him.
Since his body was sick and he was bodily tired and feeble, the shore
sunshine hurt him and his tender face. It was necessary for him to rest
under the shade of the wide leaves of that plant.

The Qur’an says:

***“And We caused to grow over him a plant of gourds.”***

As many of the philologists and commentators have said, the Arabic word
***/yaqtin/*** is called to every plant which has not a stalk and has
wide leaves, such as the bush of melon, cucumber, watermelon and the
like. But a great deal of commentators and Islamic narrators here have
stipulated that the purpose here is particularly gourd.

It should be noted that the Arabic word ***/šajarah/*** is used for both
the plants which have stalk and branches, and those without stalk and
branches, and in other words, it is irrespective of tree and plant.

There has been narrated a tradition from the holy Prophet of Islam (S)
that someone asked him whether he liked gourd, and he (S) answered:

*“Yes, it is the plant of my brother Jonah.”*[^3]

By the way, besides that a gourd has some wide leaves full of water
which can be used as a good shady recess, flies and other insects do not
approach it.

When Jonah left his people angrily, and the sign of the Divine Wrath was
also going to appear to them, they were shocked severely and came to
themselves. They went toward the learned man who was among them and by
his leadership they decided to repent.

Some Islamic narrations denote that they entirely moved toward the
desert and they caused a separation between men and women, and their
children, and also between animals and their children. Then they began
crying loudly and for the sins and wrongs they had performed against the
prophet of Allah, Jonah, repented sincerely.

It was then that the Divine punishment went away and was poured on the
mountains, and the faithful people who had repented returned safely by
the mercy of Allah.[^4]

After this event Jonah came back to his people to see what the
punishment had done upon them. When he came he wondered that how they
were all idol worshippers on the day of his emigration and now they were
wholly worshippers of Allah.

The Qur’an says:

***“And We sent him to a hundred thousand (people) or more.”***

Surah As-Saffat – Verse 148
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَنُوا فَمَتَّعْنَاهُمْ إِلَي حِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***148. “And they believed, so We gave them enjoyment for a while.”***

Repentance for the past actions accompanied with sincere faith is a
ground for the future success. Jonah’s people repented and Allah took
back His Wrath and made them successful.

So, this verse says:

***“And they believed, so We gave them enjoyment for a while.”***

Their beginning faith and repentance were formerly existed, but their
detailed faith in Allah and His prophet Jonah and his teachings and
instructions performed when Jonah (as) returned back among them.

It is noteworthy that it is understood from the verses of the Qur’an
that this second return has been toward that very former people and that
some commentators have considered this return as a new duty for him does
not adopt to the verses of the Qur’an, because from one side, we recite
here that these people, whom Jonah was appointed to guide, believed and
Allah gave them enjoyment for a certain time.

This makes it clear that the purpose of ‘for a while’ is the same as the
end of their life and their natural death. There is a question that why
in the previous verses it has been said ‘a hundred thousand people or
more’ the apparent state is that these kinds of meanings are for
emphasis and the greatness of something, not for the sake of the doubt
of the speaker.

Surah As-Saffat – Verse 149
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْتَفْتِهِمْ أَلِرَبّـِكَ الْبَنَاتُ وَلَهُمُ الْبَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***149. “Then ask them whether your Lord has daughters and they have
sons.”***

Asking from conscience is the key to contemplation and warning of
people.

A group of the polytheists theists of Arab, because of the lack of
knowledge and degradation of thought, compared Allah with their selves,
and considered child, and sometimes wife, for Him.

Among them there were mainly the tribes of Jahinah, Salim, Khuza‘ah, and
Bani Malih who believed that the angels were Allah’s daughters, and also
a great deal of Arab polytheists imagined jinn as His offspring, or some
of them believed that Allah had a wife from jinn.

These baseless and superstitious imaginations had completely deviated
them from the path of truth in a manner that the signs of Monotheism and
Oneness of Allah had disappeared from among them.

It is said in a tradition that an ant thinks that its Lord has two small
feelers, like an ant.[^5]

Yes the low thought drives man into gossip. The comparison of the
Creator with the creature is the worst factor of aberration in
recognizing Allah. However, at first the Qur’an refers to those who
considered the angels as the daughters of Allah and answers them in
three various ways: experimental, intellectual, and traditional.

It says:

***“Then ask them whether your Lord has daughters and they have
sons.”***

The Qur’anic phrase ***/’istaftihim/*** is derived from /’istifta’/
which is taken from /fatwa/ which is in the sense of ‘the answer to
difficult problems.’

However, it implicitly asks them how they consider for Allah that which
they do not desire for themselves.

This statement is according to their wrong belief who severely hated
daughters and were seriously interested in sons, since sons had a very
effective function in their lives, their fights, and their robberies
while daughters could not help them in these affairs.

No doubt, from the point of value and being a ‘human’, a daughter and a
son are the same with Allah and the criterion of both of them is piety,
but the reasoning the Qur’an here, in terminology, is for mentioning the
certain issues of the enemy in which the subjects of the opposite party
is taken and they are returned to him again.

The like of this meaning has been mentioned in some other Suras of the
Qur’an: such as Surah An-Najm, No. 53, verses 22-23 where it says:

***“What! For you the male sex and for Him the female?”***

***“Behold, such would be indeed a division most unfair.”***

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 150-152
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ خَلَقْنَا الْمَلآَئِكَةَ إِنَاثاً وَهُمْ شَاهِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلآ إِنَّهُم مّـِنْ إِفْكِهِمْ لَيَقُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَدَ اللَّهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***150. “Or did We create the angels females while they were
witnesses?”***  
***151. “Beware! Verily it is of their own lie that they say.”***  
***152. “Allah has begotten, and verily they are liars.”***

Those who consider the angels as pregnant women will be called to
account by Allah.

In this verse, it refers to a sensible proof of the subject and, again
by the way of appositive interrogative with a negative sense, the Qur’an
asks whether Allah created the angels as girls and those people were as
witnesses over it. No doubt their answer in this regard will be negative
because none of them can claim that they were present at the creation of
the angels.

The verse says:

***“Or did We create the angels females while they were witnesses?”***

In the second and third verses the Qur’an returns to the rational proof
which has been taken from their certain mental issues and says:

***“Beware! Verily it is of their own lie that they say.”***

***“Allah has begotten, and verily they are liars.”***

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 153-156
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَصْطَفَي الْبَنَاتِ عَلَي الْبَنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلاَ تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ لَكُمْ سُلْطَانٌ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***153. “Has He chosen daughters in preference to sons?”***  
***154. “What has happened to you, how is it that you judge?”***  
***155. “Will you not then receive admonition?”***  
***156. “Or have you a clear authority?”***

Man may reach a point that, basing on a wrong opinion, he considers
daughter bad and son good. Then, it happens that he may imagine
daughters for Allah (s.w.t.) and sons belonging to him.

So, with the sense of blame and reprimand, in these four verses the Holy
Qur’an implies whether they have preferred daughters to sons. What is
the matter with them and how do they judge? Do they understand what they
say?

Is it not the time they would leave these vanities and ugly
superstitions, because these words are so vain and baseless that if a
person has a little intellect and contemplates he will realize its
vanity.

Here are the verses:

***“Has He chosen daughters in preference to sons?”***

***“What has happened to you, how is it that you judge?”***

***“Will you not then receive admonition?”***

***“Or have you a clear authority?”***

After the nullification of their superstitious claim, by a sensible
reasoning and a rational reasoning, it refers to the third evidence
which is a reasoning stated in tradition. It indicates that if the thing
you say is correct, there must be a remark or symptom from it in the
former Books. Do you have any clear evidence in this regard?

Surah As-Saffat – Verse 157
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأْتُوا بِكِتَابِكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***157. “Then bring your book if you are truthful.”***

The heavenly Books are mostly proofs and documents for judgment about
Allah, and in neither of these Books there is any word saying that Allah
has child.

So, in this verse, the Qur’an says if you have anything in this regard
and you are truthful, bring your Book and show in which Book, in which
writing and in which heavenly revelation such a thing has been mentioned
and to which prophet it has been revealed.

The verse says:

***“Then bring your book if you are truthful.”***

No, these are not the things found in the heavenly Books. These are some
superstitions which have been transferred from one ignorant generation
to another ignorant generation and have no acceptable source.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 158-160
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلُوا بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ الْجِنَّةِ نَسَباً وَلَقَدْ عَلِمَتِ
الْجِنَّةُ إِنَّهُمْ لَمُـحْضَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُـخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***158. “And they have set up a kinship between Him and the jinn, while
the jinn know (quite well) that they shall surely be brought up (to
account).”***  
***159. “Glory be to Allah! (He is free) from what they ascribe (to
Him)!”***  
***160. “Except for Allah’s sincere servants.”***

The beliefs of polytheists are artificial and false. Beliefs should be
based on intellect, nature, and tradition. This verse refers to another
superstition of polytheists. They believed in a kinship between Allah
and the jinn.

The Qur’an changes the form of the statement from the kind of ‘address’
to the form of absent one, as if they were so worthless that they had
not the eligibility of being spoken to face in face.

It says:

***“And they have set up a kinship between Him and the jinn…”***

What kind of kinship was it that they believed between Allah and the
jinn? In answer to this question it has been said that the purpose of it
is any kind of kinship and relation although they have no relationship.
And we know that a group of pagan Arabs used to worship the jinn and
considered them as partners of Allah and thus they believed in a
communication between them and Allah.

However, the Qur’an seriously rejected this superstitious idea and
implies that the jinn whom the superstitious idol worshippers imagine as
their objects of worship, or they believe in a kinship relation between
Allah and them, themselves know well that these superstitious idol
worshippers will be brought up to the court of justice of Allah for
reckoning and punishment.

It continues saying:

***“…while the jinn know (quite well) that they shall surely be brought
up (to account).”***

In the next verse, the Qur’an says:

***“Glory be to Allah! (He is free) from what they ascribe (to Him)!”***

And in the third verse, it implicitly says: except for the explanation
that the sincere servants of Allah have about Him knowingly, there is no
other explanation suitable for the Pure Essence of Allah. It says:

***“Except for Allah’s sincere servants.”***

Thus, every qualification that man may have about Allah from himself is
incorrect and Allah is free from it, except for that which the sincere
servants have about him. These are the true servants who are quit of any
kind of polytheism, low desire, ignorance, and aberration.

They do not qualify Allah save that which He Himself has allowed them to
explain.

For obtaining more knowledge in this regard, we must refer to the words
of the Prophet (S), the sermons of Ali (as) in Nahj-ul-Balaqah, and the
comprehensive supplications of Imam Sajjad (as) in Sahifah Sajjadiyyah,
and know Allah under the light of the explanations of these servants of
Allah.

Imam Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) says:

*“…He has not informed (human) wit about the limits of His qualities.
Nevertheless, He has not prevented it from securing essential knowledge
of Him…”*[^6]

In another place, upon qualifying Allah, he (as) says:

*“…Imagination cannot reach Him so as to assign Him quantity.
Understanding cannot think of Him so as to give him shape. Senses do not
perceive Him so as to feel Him. Hands cannot touch Him so as to rub
against Him.*

*He does not change into any condition. He does not pass from one state
to another. Nights and days do not turn Him old. Light and darkness do
not alter him. He is not qualified by anything of the limbs, nor by the
parts of the body, nor by the length and width.*

*It cannot be said that He has a limit, extremity, or end, or
termination, nor do things control him so as to raise Him or lower Him,
nor anything carry Him…”* [^7]

Ali-ibn-il-Hussayn (as) in Sahifah Sajjadiyyah says:

*“Praise belongs only to Allah Whose Existence is the source of
creation, an Essence that the eyes of the lookers cannot see Him and the
understanding and thought of the explainers are not able to explain His
qualities…”*[^8]

The cognition and knowledge of Allah must be learnt from the school of
the leaders of the religion.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 161-163
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّكُمْ وَمَا تَعْبُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَآ أَنتُمْ عَلَيْهِ بِفَاتِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ مَنْ هُوَ صَالِ الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***161. “So verily you and what you worship,”***  
***162. “Can never excite (anyone) against Him.”***  
***163. “Except such as are (themselves) going to the blazing Fire.”***

Through the first and second verses, the Qur’an implies that the
temptations of idol worshippers do not affect on the hearts of the pure
and righteous ones, and only the polluted hearts and hellish souls,
which tend to their mischief, surrender themselves to these temptations.

It says:

***“So verily you and what you worship,”***

***“Can never excite (anyone) against Him.”***

It indicates that neither you nor what you worship can deceive anyone by
it and separate them from Allah, or deviate them by means of delusion
and mischief.

In the third verse the Qur’an says:

***“Except such as are (themselves) going to the blazing Fire.”***

These verses are as a hint to this fact that none can consider himself
excused before deviations and claims that he has been deceived and
driven to idol worship. The Qur’an implies that you idol worshipper have
not the ability of deceiving persons except for those who choose the
path of Hell willingly.

The evidence for this meaning is the phrase: ‘going to the blazing
Fire’, since the Arabic word ***/sali/*** has originally been in the
form of ‘active participle’, and usually when an active participle form
is used for an intellectual being its concept is that the accomplishment
of an action is done willingly and with authority like the Arabic words:
***/qatil/ (murderer)***, and ***/darib/ (striker)***.

Therefore, the Arabic phrase ***/sal-il-jahim/*** means a person who is
willing to burn himself in the Fire of Hell. Thus, the Holy Qur’an shut
the way of pretext to every deviated one.

By the way, it is necessary to note to this point that the word /sali/
is derived from /saly/ in the sense of candling fire and entering into
fire, or being burnt and roasted by it.

The Arabic term ***/fatin/*** is an active participle derived from
/fitnah/ in the sense of tempter.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 164-166
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مِنَّآ إِلاَّ لَهُ مَقَامٌ مَعْلُومٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الصَّآفُّونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الْمُسَبّـِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***164. “And (the angels say:) ‘There is not (any one) of us, but for
him is an assigned place,”***  
***165. “And verily we are they who range ourselves in order.”***  
***166. “And verily we are they who celebrate His glory.”***

In the world of angels, there is a rank, position, special
responsibility and hierarchy for every one of them, the same angels whom
the idol worshippers used to imagine as the daughters of Allah.

It is interesting that the Qur’an narrates this statement from their own
tongue, and says:

***“And (the angels say:) ‘There is not (any one) of us, but for him is
an assigned place,”***

And, in the second and third verses the Qur’an announces that they said
they were all ready to obey the command of Allah and waiting to receive
His order while celebrating His glory.

Yes, they say that they are some servants who are always ready, with
their whole entity, to perform His order. They say they are far off to
be Allah’s offspring and they count Him free from these kinds of ugly
and false attributes, and that they hate these superstitions and
delusions of the polytheists.

The abovementioned three verses, in fact, refer to three qualities of
the angels. The first is that each of them has a proper rank which they
do not exceed. The second is that they are always ready to obey the
command of Allah in the expanse of creation and execute His orders in
the whole world of existence.

The third is that they constantly celebrate the glory of Allah and
exempt Him from whatever is not suitable for him.

It is noteworthy that, concerning these verses, a group of the
commentators have narrated a tradition from the Prophet (S) who said
that in all heavens there is no room, even as large as a span, except
that an angel is over there busy praying and glorifying Allah.[^9]

Another narration indicates that one day the prophet of Islam (S) was
sitting with some of his companions when he said:

*“Once the heaven began moaning (because of its heavy burden), and it is
right to moan because there is no space in it even as large as a
footstep save that an angel is bowing or prostrating there”,*

then he recited these verses.[^10]

These different meanings are as a tender hint to the fact that the world
of existence is full of the obedient beings of Allah and those who
glorify Him.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 167-169
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كَانُوا لَيَقُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ أَنَّ عِندَنَا ذِكْراً مِنَ الأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَكُنَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُـخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***167. “And verily they used to say:”***  
***168. “If we had had but a reminder from the men of old.”***  
***169. “We would certainly have been Allah’s sincere servants.”***

The history of the past should not be taken as a pretext against logic
and reasoning. So in the above three verses the Qur’an announces that
the polytheists used to say if they had had one of the old heavenly
Books with them, they would have been among the sincere servants of
Allah.

This statement is just like the words of the lazy students who have
failed in their examinations and in order to cover their own laziness
they say if they had had some good and clever teachers they would have
certainly been some first grade students, too.

Here are the concerning verses:

***“And verily they used to say:”***

***“If we had had but a reminder from the men of old.”***

***“We would Certainly have been Allah’s sincere servants.”***

Surah As-Saffat – Verse 170
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَفَرُوا بِهِ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***170. “Then they disbelieved in it, so soon they will know.”***

We must be careful of the end of the affairs, because being neglectful
unto the future can be the cause of disbelief and denial.

There has been narrated from Imam Baqir (as) who said that the
polytheists of Mecca and the pagans of Quraysh used to curse the Jews
and the Christians who belied their prophets.

They swore by Allah that if they had had one of the heavenly Books of
old with them, they would have believed in it, but when the holy Prophet
of Islam, Muhammad, (S) was appointed as a Divine prophet, they
disbelieved in him and denied him.

The verse says:

***“Then they disbelieved in it, so soon they will know.”***

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 171-173
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ سَبَقَتْ كَلِمَتُنَا لِعِبَادِنَا الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ لَهُمُ الْمَنْصُورُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ جُنْدَنَا لَهُمُ الْغَالِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***171. “And certainly Our word has already gone forth for Our servants,
the apostles:”***  
***172. “Verily they shall be the assisted ones.”***  
***173. “And verily Our host alone shall be the victorious ones.”***

The prophets of Allah being helped is Allah’s way of treatment. The
future will also witness the victory of the Divine prophets and the
failure of their enemies. The prophets and their followers are the
troops of Allah, and certainly the army of Allah is victorious in all
sense.

Therefore, these three verses indicate that the conclusive promise of
Allah about the sincere servants of Allah has already been confirmed
that they will be helped and the army of Allah is always victorious in
all scenes. What an explicit and expressive sentence, and what an
enlivening and pleasant promise this is!

Allah says:

***“And certainly Our word has already gone forth for Our servants, the
apostles:”***

***“Verily they shall be the assisted ones.”***

***“And verily Our host alone shall be the victorious ones.”***

Yes, the victory of the army of truth over the troops of falsehood and
the help of Allah unto the sincere servants is among the certain
promises of Allah and is one of His decisive treatments which has been
mentioned in the above verses as an Allah’s way of treatment done from
the beginning.

It is evident that Allah, Who is Mighty over everything, and there has
not been any failure in His promises, can fulfill these great promises
and, like the unchangeable precedent custom of the world of existence,
will make the men of truth completely victorious.

This Divine promise is one of the most important issues by which the
people of the way of truth are encouraged and take spirit from it
whenever they become tired.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 174-176
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ حَتَّي حِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَبْصِرْهُمْ فَسَوْفَ يُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَبِعَذَابِنَا يَسْتَعْجِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***174. “So turn you away from them for a time,”***  
***175. “And see them, for they soon shall see (their retribution)”***  
***176. “Do they seek to hasten Our chastisement?”***

At first there must be warning, admonition, and ultimatum and after that
there comes punishment. In these verses, both for the condolence of the
Prophet (S) and the believers, and for emphasis on their victory, and
also for threatening the neglectful polytheists the Qur’an says:

***“So turn you away from them for a time,”***

This is an expressive and frightful threat which originates from the
certainty in final Divine victory, specially that it has ambiguously
been said ‘for a time’.

The length of this time is not known, whether it is the time of
migration, the time of the Battle of Badr, the time of the Conquer of
Mecca, or the exact time when the conditions of ultimate and common
raise of Muslims against these blind-hearted people will be provided.

Similar to these threats, of course, are seen in some other verses of
the Qur’an, such as Surah an-Nisa’, No. 4, verse 81, and Surah Al
’An‘am, No. 6, verse 91.

This sentence is emphasised with another threat in the second verse
where it implicitly points to their situation to be seen that it is
empty of content: their obstinacy, their lies, their superstitions, and
their pertinacities; but they will see the result of their evil deeds
soon.

The verse says:

***“And see them, for they soon shall see (their retribution)”***

Soon they will see the victory of you and the believers over them and
their humiliating failure in this world and the Divine punishment in the
next world.

Since those obstinate shameless people used to repeat this word that
what happened to the promise of Allah about His punishment, and if you,
the Prophet, are truthful why do you hesitate?

So, in the third verse, the Qur’an with a threatening tone answers them,
saying:

***“Do they seek to hasten Our chastisement?”***

Sometimes they say:

***“…‘When will this promise be, if you are truthful?’”***[^11],

and sometimes they say:

***“…‘When shall be this victory, if you are truthful?’”***[^12]

They should know that the chastisement of Allah will seize them soon.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 177-179
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا نَزَلَ بِسَاحَتِهِمْ فَسَآءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنذَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ حَتَّي حِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَبْصِرْ فَسَوْفَ يُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***177. “But when it shall descend in their courtyard, how evil will be
the morning of them that are warned!”***  
***178. “And turn you away from them for a time.”***  
***179. “And see you, for they shall soon see (their fate).”***

Against the heedlessness of the pagans to the threats of Allah,
repetition is necessary. The Qur’anic commandments: ***/tawalla ‘anhum/
(turn you away from them)*** and ***/wa ’absir fasaufa yubsirun/ (and
see you, for they shall soon see)*** have been repeated two times.

The first verse indicates that when the punishment of Allah will come
down in the courtyard of their houses and their circumstances become
dark for them, that time they will understand how bad and dangerous the
morning of those who are warned is.

It says:

***“But when it shall descend in their courtyard, how evil will be the
morning of them that are warned!”***

The application of the Arabic word ***/sahat/ (courtyard)*** is for the
sake that it may illustrate the descent of the punishment inside their
life and living, and that it shows them that the centre of their peace
and tranquillity changes into a terror and terrible centre.

The application of the Qur’anic phrase ***/sabah ul munŏarin/ (the
morning of them that are warned)*** points to this meaning that the
chastisement of Allah upon this cruel nation, like in many ancient
nations, will come in the morning. Or that morning is the time of
awakening and they will awaken when there has been no way to salvation
and everything has been done.

The subject discussed in the second and third verse is the same thing
which was mentioned formerly, too, and it is repeated here again for
emphasis.

The Qur’an, with a threatening tone, says:

***“And turn you away from them for a time.”***

***“And see you, for they shall soon see (their fate).”***

As we said before, this repetition is for emphasis, so that they know
that this is a decisive subject that they will meet the painful results
of their evil deeds, and that the believers are surely victorious
either.

Or it is for the sake that, at first, it threatens them to the worldly
punishment, and in the second time it threatens them to the chastisement
and retribution of Allah in Hereafter.

Surah As-Saffat – Verses 180-182
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ رَبّـِكَ رَبّ‌ِ الْعِزَّةِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَلاَمٌ عَلَي الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبّ‌ِ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***180. “Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Honour, far above that which
they ascribe (unto Him).”***  
***181. “And peace be upon the messengers,”***  
***182. “And (all) praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.”***

The world of creation is the manifestation of the Lordship of Allah. The
Lordship of Allah is the doorway to the praise of Allah. The attributes
that the polytheists ascribed to Allah do not agree with the rank of
honour and Lordship of Allah, because He is the Owner and Manager of the
whole world of existence.

This verse says:

***“Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Honour, far above that which they
ascribe (unto Him).”***

They sometimes call the angels as the daughters of Allah, and sometimes
they consider a communication between Him and the jinn, and sometimes
they put some worthless things, such as pieces of stone, and wood, in a
row with Allah. The emphasis on the honour and might of Allah, in fact,
is in the sense of nullifying all these imaginary objects of worship.

The verses of this Surah have sometimes spoken of the glorification of
the sincere servants of Allah, and sometimes the glorification of the
angels are referred to, and here the words are about the glorification
of Allah due to His Pure Essence.

In the second verse Allah has involved all the messengers in His endless
grace and favour and says:

***“And peace be upon the messengers,”***

This is a greeting which is the sign of health and security from any
kind of punishment and retribution in Hereafter. It is a peace that is
security against failures and is an evidence to victory over the
enemies.

In the third verse the Qur’an concludes the words with the praise of
Allah when it says:

***“And (all) praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.”***

These three recent verses can be a short review over all the materials
of this Surah, because an important part of this Surah is about Unity
and struggling against kinds of polytheism. The first verse, by
glorifying Allah, nullifies all the undue qualities that the polytheists
attribute to Him.

Another part of this Surah is the statement about the states of former
seven great prophets; and the second verse refers to them. And, finally,
another part of this holy Surah is about the Divine bounties, specially
the kinds of blessings in Paradise, and the victory of the army of Allah
against the troops of the pagans. The praise of Allah, mentioned at the
end, is an indication to all of them.

Numerous traditions narrated from the holy Prophet of Islam (S), from
Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as), and sometimes from Imam Baqir (as) indicate
that whoever desires that on the Day of Hereafter his container of
reward would be filled and given fully with the great container, his
last word in any meeting he participates should be this, saying:

***“Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Honour, far above that which they
ascribe (unto Him).”***

***“And peace be upon the messengers,”***

***“And (all) praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.”***[^13]

Yes, our meetings must be concluded by the glory to the Pure Essence of
Allah, and peace to his prophets, and praises and thank to Him for His
blessings, so that if we have done something wrong or said some undue
words in this meeting they may be recompensed.

*O Lord! You have promised to help Your messengers and to make Your army
victorious; set us in the line of Your messengers and in the rows of
Your army, and make us victorious over the blood-thirsty enemies who
have raised from the east and west of the world against the Qur’an to
vanish it and to quench its light!*

*O Lord! Protect and secure us from being polluted to any polytheism and
deviation from the way of Monotheism!*

*O Lord! Those difficulties which the appointed prophets faced with
during the length of history against the troops of infidelity and
polytheism, have just now appeared in our Islamic society, may* *You
involve us in the same peace that was the cause of the health of the
appointed messengers in these events!*

*Amin, O’ the Lord of the Worlds.*

[^1]: The commentary by Fakhr-i-Razi, and Burhan under the verse.

[^2]: The commentary book of Qummi and Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, under the
verse.

[^3]: Al-Bayan, Vol. 7, P. 489; Nur-uth-Thaqalayn under the verse

[^4]: You can read these matters in Burhan commentary, under the verse

[^5]: Tafsir-i-Nimunah, Vol. 19, P. 171

[^6]: Nahj-ul-Balaqah, sermon 49

[^7]: Nahj-ul-Balaqah, sermon 186

[^8]: Sahifah Sajjadiyyah, Supplication One

[^9]: Tafsir-i-Qurtabi, Vol. 8, P. 5581

[^10]: Durr-ul-Manthur and Al-Mizan, under the verses

[^11]: Surah Yunus, No. 10, verse 48

[^12]: Surah As-Sajdah, No. 32, verse 28

[^13]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, under the verses, Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 4, P.
440


