Surah Sad, Chapter 38
=====================

**No. 38 (Revealed at Mecca)**

**88 Verses in 5 Sections**

The Feature of Surah Sad
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

This Surah was revealed at Mecca and contains eighty eight verses.

The name of this Surah, which is one of the Qur’anic abbreviated
letters, is taken from its first verse. Similar to Surah As-Saffat, the
verses of this Surah are about the continuation of the current of
prophethood during the length of history and the opposition of the
polytheists and pagans against the belief of Unity and Resurrection.

In Surah As-Saffat, the names of some Divine prophets such as: Noah,
Abraham, Lot, Moses, Aaron, Elyas (Elija) and Yunus were mentioned.
Here, this Surah mostly refers to the life history of David, Solomon,
and ’Ayyub (Job).

The ending part of this holy Surah refers to the event of the creation
of man, the angels’ prostration unto Adam and the disobedience of Satan
in order that the believers recognize the innate greatness of man with
Allah and that they avoid following Satan.

The Virtue of Recitation of This Surah
--------------------------------------

In the virtue of this Surah that for its beginning has been called Surah
Sad, a tradition narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) denotes that he
said:

*“Whoever recites Surah Sad, will Allah give him reward as much as the
weight of every mountain that Allah had subjected it for David (as), and
He protects him from persisting in committing sins whether minor or
major.”*[^1]

In another tradition Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Whoever recites Surah Sad in the night before Friday will be given
good rewards of the world and the Hereafter (by Allah) as much that have
not been given to anyone of the people save the Divine prophets and the
near-stationed angels, and Allah admits him and all those he loves from
among his household in Paradise, even the servant who served him.”*[^2]

If we put the content of this Surah beside these rewards, the relation
of these rewards with those instructions will be made clear, and again
it is an emphasis on this fact that the purpose is not a mere dry
recitation of the Surah, but it is a recitation that inspires
contemplation and creates decision, a contemplation and decision which
leads to action, in a manner that the content of the Surah may be
practised in man’s living.

[^1]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Vol. 8, P. 463

[^2]: Ibid


