The Concept of Imamat
=====================

There is a verse in the Quran which is a part of that series of verses
which we are at present discussing. The remarkable verse is not
connected with Imam Ali's person, but deals with the doctrine of Imamat
in the sense which we have already explained and now we propose to
explain it briefly.

As we have already said, it is an old mistake of the Muslim scholastic
theologians to discuss the question of Imamat in a way as if both the
Shi'ah and the Sunnis subscribe to the same conception of Imamat but
hold different opinions with regard to its conditions.

The Shi'ah say that an Imam must be infallible, and is to be appointed
by Divine ordinance; whereas the Sunnis do not subscribe to that point
of view. The actual fact is that the Sunnis do not believe at all in
that conception of Imamat in which the Shi'ah believe. The Imamat in
which the Sunnis believe is only to this worldly aspect of the actual
Imamat and one of its functions.

In the case of Prophethood also we see that the Holy Prophet was the
leader of the Muslim community but this leadership or the administration
of the State was only one of his functions as a Prophet. His leadership
does not mean that Prophethood and leadership are synonymous.
Prophethood is a reality which has so many aspects and features. One of
the characteristics of a Prophet is that in his presence nobody else can
be the ruler or the head of the Muslims. The Sunnis say that Imamat
means, no more than the administration of the government and that an
Imam is the head of this administration or the ruler of the Muslims. He
is to be elected by the Muslims from among themselves.

The Sunni concept of an Imam does not go beyond the status of the head
of the Muslim State. But according to the Shi'ah Imamat is a rank
similar to Prophethood and in some respects, even higher than
Prophethood by certain degrees. The high-ranking Prophets are those who
were Imams also. Many Prophets were not Imams at all. Even the high
ranking Prophets attained the assignment of Imamat long after they had
been Prophets.

In short,

if we admit that Imamat is like Prophethood, we will have to admit also
that as in the presence of a Prophet who has a superhuman aspect, the
question who should be the ruler does not arise, similarly in the
presence of an Imam; this question is out of question. This question
arises only when there is no Imam, either because no Imam exists at all
or because the Imam is in occultation as is the case during our times.
We should not mix up the question of Imamat with that of government and
then ask what the Sunnis say in this respect and what the Shi'ah hold.
As a matter of fact the question of the government is different from
that of Imamat.

According to the Shi'ah, Imamat is a phenomenon exactly like that of
Prophethood, and that too like the highest degree of it. As such we the
Shi'ah believe in Imamat whereas the Sunnis do not. It is not that they
also believe in it, but the conditions required for an Imam, according
to them are different.

Imam in Prophet Ibrahim's Progeny

The verse which we now would like to quote clearly denotes the concept
of Imamat in which the Shi'ah believes. The Shi'ah maintain that this
verse shows that there does exist a truth called Imamat, and that it has
existed not only during the period following the death of the Prophet of
Islam, but has been existing since the first appearance of the Prophets
and will continue to exist in Prophet Ibrahim's progeny up to the Day of
Resurrection. The Holy Qur'an says:

"And (remember) when his Lord tried Ibrahim with His commands, and he
fulfilled them, He said: I have appointed you an Imam for mankind.
Ibrahim said: And of my offspring? He said: My covenant includes not the
unjust." (Surah al Baqarah, 11:124)

Prophet Ibrahim's Trials - Command to Migrate to Hijaz

The Qur'an itself has mentioned a number of trials which Prophet
Ibrahim had to face. They included his struggle against Namrud and his
henchmen who threw him into a burning fire as well as several subsequent
events. One of these events was that Ibrahim received an astonishing
command which could not be implemented by anybody not fully devoted to
Allah. The old man had no children. For the first time his wife, Hagar
gave birth to a child at the age of seventy eight. Prophet Ibrahim
receives a Divine command to go from Syria to Hijaz, take his wife and
that child on the spot where at present Masjidul Haram is located and
keep them there and then leave the place. This command was not in
keeping with any logic except that of complete self-submission and total
devotion. As he was sure that it was a Divine command which he had
received through revelation, he carried it out. He said:

"Our Lord: I have settled some of my posterity in an uncultivable
valley near Your Holy House so that they may establish prayers." (Surah
Ibrahim, 14:37)

Command to Slaughter His Son

More astonishing than these events is the story of Prophet Ibrahim's
slaughtering his son at Mina. It is in memory of this extraordinary
self-surrender that we now sacrifice goats and sheep. (As we perform
what we have been told by Allah, there can be no question of why and
what for in this connection.) After seeing two or three times in dream
as if he was sacrificing his son, Ibrahim was convinced that it was
Allah's Command to him to do so. He told his son about it. His son
readily agreed and said: Father, do that which you are commanded. Allah
willing you will find me of the steadfast. The Qur'an depicts a
wonderful picture. When they had both surrendered (to Allah) and he had
flung him down upon his face. (At last when Ibrahim was absolutely sure
that he would cut off the head of his son, and Isma'il had no doubt in
his mind that his head would be severed:

We called to him: Ibrahim, you have already fulfilled the vision.
(Surah as-Saffat, 37:102-105).

What Allah says is that He did not actually want Isma'ils head to be
cut off. He only wanted to see that Ibrahim and Isma'il showed their
complete submission to His will, which they did.

The Quran expressly says that Allah gave a son to Prophet Ibrahim in
his old age. It says when the angels came to him and told him that he
would be granted a son by Allah, his wife said:

"Shall I bear a child when I am an old woman and this my husband is an
old man? The angels said to her: Do you wonder at the commandment of
Allah? The mercy of Allah and His blessings be upon you, people of the
house." (Surah Hud, 11:72-73)

According to this verse Allah gave a child to Ibrahim when he was an
old man. So long as he was young, he did not have any child. When he got
a child, he was already a Prophet. In the Qur'an there are fairly a
large number of verses about Ibrahim. They show that he got a child
towards the end of his life when he was seventy or eighty years old.
After that also he lived for ten or twenty years more, Ishaq and Isma'il
both grew up during his lifetime. Isma'il becomes so mature to help his
father build the Ka'bah.

The Qur'an says:

"And (remember) when his Lord tried Ibrahim with his commands, and he
fulfilled them. He said: I have appointed you an Imam for mankind.
Ibrahim said: And of my offspring? He said: My covenant includes not
wrong-doers." (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:124)

What period of Ibrahim's life do these verses refer to? Do they pertain
to his early age?

There is no doubt that they refer to that period of his life when he
was already a Prophet, for they speak of a revelation. Further, they
pertain to the concluding period of his Prophethood, for they speak of
the trials through which Prophet Ibrahim had passed. These trials
covered his whole life, most important of them having taken place during
the declining period of his age. Furthermore in these verses there is a
mention of his offspring. That shows that when this conversation took
place, he already had at least one child.

In fact according to this verse Prophet Ibrahim was told toward the end
of his lifetime: I have made you an Imam for mankind. Thus he was given
a fresh assignment. That shows that he was already a Prophet and a
Messenger of Allah. But there was still a stage which he had not reached
so far. He reached it only after successfully passing through all the
trials. Does it not show that according to the Quran there is one more
reality the name of which is Imamat? Now what is the meaning of it?

**Imamat is a Divine Covenant**

Imamat means the stage of becoming a perfect man and a perfect leader
of all others. When Ibrahim was appointed an Imam, he at once thought of
his progeny and offspring and said: 'What about my offspring? How about
my descendants? He was told: My covenant includes not the wrong doers.

Here Imamat has been described as Allah's covenant. That is why the
Shi'ah say that the Imamat in which they believe is Divine. The Qur'an
also describes it as "My covenant". It is Allah's covenant, not of the
people. If we take into consideration the fact that Imamat is different
from the guardianship of the Muslim community, we will not find it
surprising that Imamat is a Divine assignment. People ask who is to set
up the government, Allah or people? We say that the question of
government is different from that of Imamat. Allah says to Ibrahim:
Imamat is My covenant and it will not include the wrong doers among your
children. In reply to Prophet Ibrahim's question Allah neither says
'no', nor 'yes' to him. He makes discrimination and excludes wrongdoers
from the scope of Imamat. Thereafter only the non-wrongdoers of
Ibrahim's progeny remained. This verse shows that among them Imamat will
always be existing.

In this respect there is one more verse in the Qur'an:

"And He made it a word enduring in his descendants." (Surah az-Zukhruf,
43:28)

Who is a Wrongdoer?

Now the question is what is meant by a wrongdoer. The Imams (Peace be
on them) have based their arguments on the use of this term in this
verse. From the point of view of the Qur'an everybody who is unjust to
himself or others is a wrongdoer. In common parlance, a wrongdoer is
only he who violates the rights of others. But according to the Qur'anic
terminology he is also a wrongdoer who is unjust to himself. There are
many Qur'anic verses in which those who were guilty of transgression
against themselves, have been called wrongdoers.

In connection with Prophet Ibrahim's question about his offspring
Allamah Tabataba'i quotes one of his teachers as having said that
Prophet Ibrahim's descendants from the point of view of being good or
bad can be divided into four categories:

" Those who throughout their life have been wrongdoers;

" those who were wrongdoers in the beginning, but became virtuous
later;

" those who were virtuous in the beginning but became wrongdoers
subsequently;

" those who were not wrongdoers at any time.

Prophet Ibrahim fully realized the importance of the high office of
Imamat; which was granted to him after he had been a Prophet for a
fairly long time. As such it is impossible that he would ask this
position for those of his descendants who were bad throughout their life
or who were good at first but turned wrongdoers later. Prophet Ibrahim
must have asked this position only for those who were good. Hence his
good descendants included: those who had been good throughout their life
and those who were bad in the beginning but became good later. It is
certain that he could not have asked this position for those who were
not included in these two categories. Now we see that the Holy Qur'an
says:

"My covenant does not include those who have been wrongdoers."

It is evident that Ibrahim's question did not include those who had
been wrongdoers throughout their life or those who had been good in the
beginning, but turned wrongdoers in the later part of their life.
Therefore what the Qur'an says amounts to saying that those whose past
has not been above reproach, will not get Imamat.

It is on this basis that the Shi'ah argues that those who have been
polytheists in any part of their life are not fit for holding Imamat.

Questions and Answers

What does the infallible mean? Is the conception of infallibility a
by-product of our Shi'ah logic or has it any basis which we have further
developed and improved? Who is infallible, he who does not commit any
sin or he who besides not committing any sin does not commit any mistake
too? Some twenty years ago I attended a lecture by the late Mirza Abdul
Hasan Faroghi, who had made a special study of the question of
infallibility and had formed his own opinion about it. He gave a
detailed and neat talk. I did not understand 80% of it, but from the 20%
that I understood, I came to the conclusion that he defined
infallibility in an unfamiliar way.

He said that the infallible was not he who did not commit any sin, for
there were so many people who never committed a sin during their whole
life. Still they were not called infallible. Now I have nothing to do
with that talk. I would like His Eminence (Mutahhari) to say who the
infallible is. If the infallible is he who does not commit any mistake,
I see that out of the 12 Imams only two, Imam- Ali and for a short
period Imam Hasan were able to assume Khilafat, and even they committed
mistakes in the administration of the State. This is a point beyond any
dispute from historical point of view. This position is not in
consonance with the definition of the infallible. For example, we see
that Imam Hasan detailed Ubaydullah ibn Abbas to conduct fighting
against Mu'awiyah

Imam Ali himself appointed Abdullah ibn Abbas Governor of Basrah. It is
certain that he would never have appointed him if he had known what
disgrace he would bring about and how dirty his behaviour would be. This
means that he did not know in advance the consequences of his action. He
thought that he had selected the best man for the particular job, but
Ibn Abbas proved contrary to his expectations.

If we carry out further investigation into Imam Ali's period of
government, we will come across many more examples of this kind. From
historical point of view such mistakes are all right, but they are not
in keeping with this definition of infallibility. As I have said, any
unilateral discussion all the participants of which subscribe to a
particular ideology is not very useful. The reason is that when a man
has a particular belief, he begins to love it and is not willing to
listen to anything contrary to that belief.

This principle applies especially to us, the Shi'ites in whose hearts
love of Shi'ism and Imam Ali's house has been ingrained from childhood
and who have never heard any criticism against them. We might have heard
some criticism against our religion, its principles and even against
monotheism and religiousness, but have never heard anybody criticizing
Shi'ism, the Imams or the actions taken by them. That is why we feel
very much perturbed if anybody raises any objection against, for
example, Imam Hasan. To listen to anything against Imam Husayn is far
more difficult.

His Eminence has laid stress on the verse that says:

"Those who offer prayers and pay zakat while they are bowing (in
prayers)."

He has argued that this verse refers to none but to Imam Ali and that
it was revealed in connection with his giving away his ring while bowing
in prayers. In my opinion this argument is not very sound and logical
because: We have heard and have read in Imam Ali's life account that
while offering prayers he was so devoted to Allah that he was unable to
recognize any individual. It is also said that while performing ablution
he did not recognize anyone passing in front of him.

Then how can it be expected of such a person that he would be so
vigilant while offering prayers that he would pull out his ring and give
it to a beggar who had appeared before him and to whom nobody else had
given anything. Further it is not a good thing to give money to a
beggar. At least giving money to a beggar was not so important that for
the sake of it one should impair one's prayers. Furthermore, zakat is
not due on a ring. According to the verdict of the Shi'ah jurists a ring
is not one of those things on which zakat is due. Besides that, some
people who are biased in this respect, have with a view to magnify this
incident, said that the ring was very costly, while we know that Imam
Ali never wore a costly ring.

Answer: In respect of the question of infallibility very few
individuals hold a different opinion. Anyhow, it is a useful practice to
ask questions.

What is the meaning of infallibility? Sometimes man tends to think that
Allah keeps a watch on certain selected people and does not allow them
to commit a sin. Whenever they intend to commit it, He prevents them
from carrying out their intention. Of course that is not infallibility
and even if that be; it does not bring any credit to anybody. If
somebody always keeps a watch on a child and does not allow him to do
anything wrong, that cannot be considered to be a merit of the child.
But there is another meaning of infallibility which can be deduced from
the Qur'an. In the story of Prophet Yusuf whom a particular woman tried
to seduce him, the Quran says:

"She verily desired him and he would have desired her if it had not
been that he saw the argument of his Lord." (Surah Yusuf, 12: 24).

Prophet Yusuf after all was a human being. He was young and had innate
impulse. That woman advanced towards him but he did not advance towards
her. If it had not been that he' knew that he was being watched by
Allah, he also would certainly have advanced. The perfect faith with
which he was endowed by Allah prevented him from during a wrong thing
and made him conscious of its harmful consequences.

Each one of us without the intervention of any outside force desists
from committing many sins and lapses because we all are fully convinced
of their dangerous consequences. For example it is a sin to fling
oneself from the top of a four-storied building or throw oneself into a
burning fire. We never commit such a sin, because we are fully conscious
of the danger which it involves. We know to touch an electric live wire
means instant death. We commit this sin only when we ignore its
underlying danger. A child touches fire without hesitation, because he
does not realize its danger as we the grown ups do. Piety becomes a
trait of a righteous man's character and therefore he does not commit
many sins at all.

This trait of his character makes him infallible to a certain extent.
Therefore infallibility depends on man's faith and his conviction. We
have accepted certain acts to be sinful because they are prohibited by
our religion. We say that as Islam has forbidden drinking wine, we do
not drink it, and as Islam has forbidden gambling, we do not gamble. We
more or less know that these things are bad. But the risk that these
sins involve is not as clear to us as the risk involved in throwing
ourselves into a burning fire. If we had been as much convinced of the
harm of these sins as we are convinced of the harm of throwing ourselves
into a fire, we would have been infallible as far as these sins were
concerned.

Therefore infallibility means perfect faith and conviction. He who has
said: "Even if the curtain was lifted, my conviction would not increase"
39, was certainly infallible, for while this side of the curtain, he
could clearly see the other side of it. He could feel that if he used
foul language against anyone he would be creating a scorpion for
himself, and for that reason he would not talk abusively.

The Quran itself mentions some examples of the faith of this degree.
That is why it is said that infallibility is relative term and
infallibility has several degrees and stages. Those who are infallible
never commit those sins which we sometimes commit and sometimes avoid.
They are impeccable. Still they have stages and degrees and all of them
are not alike. In certain stages they are like us. As we are not immune
from committing sins, they are also not immune from committing certain
types of mistakes.

They do not do anything which we regard as a sin, but they may do
certain things which they themselves regard as sins although we may not
regard them as such at all, for we have not reached that stage which
they have. If a student of class V solves a question of class VI, it is
creditable to him and he may get a reward for that, but if a student of
IX class solves the same question, it does not bring him any credit.
What is meritorious to us may be sinful to the infallible. As the
proverb goes, one man's food is another man's poison.

That is why we find that in the Qur'an disobedience has been ascribed
to some Prophets also.

"And Adam disobeyed his Lord and went astray." (Surah Taha, 20:121)

To the Holy Prophet Allah says:

"So that Allah may forgive you of your sin, that which is past and that
which is to come." (Surah al Fath 48:2)

These verses show that infallibility is a relative term. The Prophets
and the Imams are infallible according to their capacity and we are
according to our capacity. The very nature of infallibility protects one
against sins. The scope of this protection depends on the degree of the
perfection of one's faith. A man is as much near the stage of "if it had
not been that he saw the argument of his Lord" as much his faith is
perfect. Infallibility is automatic. It is not that an infallible person
desires like us to commit a sin, but someone is sent by Allah to hold
his hand and prevent him from carrying out his intention. Had that been
the case, there would have been no difference between me and Imam Ali.
Like me he also would have desired to commit sins.

At the most he would have been prevented from actually committing them
by someone sent by Allah, whereas for me no such arrangement exists. If
someone from outside prevents a man from committing a sin that is not
creditable to that man. Suppose someone committed theft, but I did not
merely because I was always being escorted by a watchman. In this case I
am as good a thief as that man is; with the difference that no watchman
prevented him from committing the crime whereas a watchman prevented me.
This can bring no credit to me.

The main ingredient of infallibility is the incapability of making a
sin. The incapability of making a mistake is quite a different matter.
Anyhow, we cannot say that the Holy Prophet might have made a mistake in
conveying the commandments of Islam or might have conveyed anything
contrary to what was revealed to him, as often happens in the case of
ordinary messengers, who sometimes deliver a wrong message. In regard to
the Holy Prophet it is not possible to say that in the delivery of his
message he might have made a mistake.

As for other questions, the questioner has been hasty in drawing his
conclusions. He has been unjust even to Imam Ali. If he were in Imam
Ali's place, is he sure that he would not have selected Ubaydullah ibn
Abbas? There is no harm if one draws a speculative conclusion in such
historical matters. Anybody can easily say that he thinks that it would
have been better if such and such person instead of doing that 500 years
ago would have done this. If somebody asked him whether he was sure
about that, he could say that it was his personal guess. But it is
dangerous to come to a definite conclusion in such matters, not only in
respect of Imam Ali but in respect of other individuals also. Imam Ali
was aware of the situation as it prevailed. He knew Abdullah ibn Abbas
and his other companions better than you and me.

But still we say if he had selected someone else instead of Abdullah
ibn Abbas, he would have done the job better. This is a hasty conclusion
in this matter. Further you yourself have always stated that Imam Ali
had a special policy of his own and he did not want to budge an inch
from it. But he did not have any supporters of his policy.

He always said that he did not have any man. This Abdullah ibn Abbas
and other often advised him to be flexible. They urged him to pursue
that which was now-a-days called diplomacy. I ask you to prove to me
that Imam Ali had enough men to choose from, but he made a mistake in
his selection. I for one cannot prove that. All that I know is that the
Holy Prophet designated Imam Ali as his successor. Imam Ali himself
complained that Khilafat had been snatched from him. When after Uthman
people came to him to pledge their allegiance to him, he retracted and
said:

"Leave me alone and seek someone else, for we are facing a many-sided
situation. The atmosphere is overcast and the route has changed beyond
recognition."

What Imam Ali meant was that the conditions were extremely bad and he
lacked supporters and workers with whose help he might be able to
improve the conditions and reform society. Then he said what amounted to
saying:

"Still I have no excuse. If I make an excuse, history will not accept
it. People will say that Ali through his own negligence lost the
opportunity. Though in fact it is not an opportunity; I accept your
suggestion so that history may not blame me."

Thus Imam Ali himself admitted that he did not have enough men, and the
time was not opportune for his Caliphate.

One may doubt anything, but even history does not doubt that Imam Ali
believed that his claim to Khilafat was stronger than that of anybody
else. Sunnis admit that Imam Ali considered himself to be a more
legitimate candidate for Khilafat than Abu Bakr and Umar. Nevertheless
when after Uthman people went to him and asked him to accept Khilafat,
he declined and said that he would rather like to continue to be an
adviser and guide than to become a ruler. From this it is clear that he
did not have enough competent men around him. Why so?

That is a different question.

As for the verse, They establish prayers and pay zakat while they are
bowing, you say that zakat is not due on a ring In fact zakat includes
everything given for a good cause. Its modern use as a technical term
for the obligatory zakat is the use of the jurists. In the Qur'an this
word has not been used everywhere in this sense. Zakat means
purification of property and money.

This word is used in connection with spiritual purification also. The
Qur'an has at different places described spending for the sake of Allah
as Zakat of wealth, Zakat of soul, and Zakat of self. The same case is
with the word, "Sadaqah" (charity alms). Today it has a special
significance. For example we say 'secret sadaqah', but according to the
Qur'an every good deed is called sadaqah. If you build a hospital or
write a beneficial book, that will be a sadaqah jariyah (running
charity) in the words of the Qur'an. That is why even the Sunnis who do
not accept the conception deduced from this verse, have not objected to
this word. They being conversant with Arabic literature know that zakat
does not always mean obligatory Zakat only.

Now the question is how comes it that Imam Ali gave his ring while
bowing in prayers. This is an objection which was raised by some early
scholars like Fakhruddin Razi also. They say that Ali was always so
absorbed in his prayers that he never paid any attention to what was
going on around him. Then how could all this happen while he was
offering prayers? In reply, it may be said that it is true that Imam Ali
used to be fully absorbed in his prayers, but it is also a fact that the
state of the Holy men is not always the same.

It has been reported about the Holy Prophet that sometimes he was so
violently carried away by a desire to offer prayers that he could not
wait for the call to prayers by Bilal to be finished and asked him to
make haste. On some other occasions while he was prostrating in prayers
it often happened that Imam Hasan, Imam Husayn or some other grandchild
of his came to him and rode his shoulders, and he waited calmly until
the child got down. Once while he was standing in prayers, he found that
some spittle was lying in front of him, he took two steps forward,
covered it with dust by his foot and then returned to his place. From
this incident the jurists have deduced a number of rules concerning
prayers.

Bahrul Ulum has said:

"The most noble person walked while offering prayers. This incident
solves many questions."

For example the jurists have on the basis of this incident decided what
amount of action not relevant to prayers is permissible during prayers.
A number of other rules also have been deduced.

All this shows that the Holy men have different spiritual states, and
according to these states they behave differently on different
occasions.

There is another point. The Gnostics according to their taste say that
when man reaches the most perfect spiritual state of being fully
attracted towards Allah, he returns to this world. In other words in
this state he attends to Allah as well as to the creation. That is what
the Gnostics say, and I agree to their view, although it may not be
acceptable to many.

Another spiritual state is that of disincarnating or casting off the
body. Those who reach this stage, in the beginning cast off their body
for one or two seconds or at the most for an hour or so. But some
individuals ultimately reach a stage at which they are in this state all
the time. (I believe that and have personally observed it.) Sometimes it
may happen that you see some individuals sitting with you like ordinary
people, but actually they are in this state.

According to these people the state in which an arrow was pulled out of
Imam Ali's body while he was offering prayers without his being
conscious of it was a lower state than that in which he attended to a
beggar without being unconscious of Allah. He was so attentive to Allah
that he could see the whole world. In the presence of all this evidence
this incident cannot be denied.

Notes

38. She is held in very high respect by the Shi'ah and is regarded as
the most eminent wife of the Holy Prophet (SA) after Khadijah. She is
greatly respected by the Sunnis also. According to them, she ranks next
to Khadijah and 'Ayishah.

39. Imam Ali (AS) is reported to have said so. (Safinat ul Bihar, vol.
2)


