Chapter 8: Imamat From the Viewpoint of the Imams
=================================================

The general discussion of the question of Imamat is coming to an end
with this discourse. A further discussion of this question will consist
of the study of the Prophetic traditions relating to Imam Ali and other
Imams and the sayings of the early Imams in respect of the subsequent
Imams. All these traditions are of the nature of authoritative
directive, in regard to the designation and appointment of the Imams.

Perhaps a number of points included in the present discourse have
already been covered by the discussion already made, but as these points
reflect the spirit of the question of Imamat, we propose to discuss them
again with reference to the sayings of the Imams in this connection. We
also propose to quote some extracts from al-Kafi, Book of Hujjah.

We have several times said that Imamat in the sense in which the Shi'ah
or at least their Imams talk about it is different from the Imamat of
which the Sunnis speak. The question of Imamat is also different from
that of government, which is so often the subject of discussion
nowadays. Basically the question of Imamat closely follows that of
Prophethood, not in the sense that Imamat is something inferior to
Prophethood, but in the sense that it resembles Prophethood. The great
Prophets were both Prophets and Imams at one and the same time. Imamat
is a spiritual state. In this connection the Imam have laid stress on
the concept of man. Let us review our concept of him so that this point
may become clear.

What Kind of a Being is Man?

Do you know what kind of a being basically man is? There are two points
of view. According to one of them man, like all other living beings, is
a 100% material being, which as a result of a series of material changes
has developed to the utmost possible to which degree a material being
could develop. Life whether in plants, animals or men is a manifestation
of the gradual development of the matter without the interference of any
non-material element in their existence. (We have used the word element
only for want of any better expression.) Every wonderful quality
existing in any being emanates from its material structure. On this
basis the first man or the first man who appeared in this world must
have been the most primitive men. It is with the passage of time that
man has gradually developed. That is true whether we consider man to
have been created direct from clay according to the ancient conception,
or to have developed from lower animal kingdom on the basis of natural
selection according to the theory put forward by some modern gentlemen
whose idea is also worth consideration at least as a theory, according
to this theory also man has his ultimate roots in the earth although
according to it the first man was not created direct from clay.

First Man in the Quran

Not only according to the Islamic and Qur'anic belief, but according to
all religions, the first man was not only more developed that all the
subsequent men; but was more developed than even the modern man. From
the moment he stepped his foot in the world the first man was the
vicegerent of Allah as well as His Prophet. It is a point worth
consideration why the first man who appeared, appeared as a divinely
appointed authority and Prophet, while it seems more natural according
to the evolutionary process that first ordinary men should appear and
after they have attained a fairly high degree of development, one of
them be appointed a Prophet.

According to the Qur'an the first man held a very high position: When
your Lord said to the angels:

"Surely I am about to place a vicegerent in the earth, they said: Will
you place therein one who will do harm in it, and will shed blood, while
we hymn Your praise and sanctify You? He said: Surely I know that which
you know not. And He taught Adam all the names, and then showed them to
the angels, saying: Inform Me of the names of these if you are
truthful." (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:30-31 )

In short the first man who came into being caused surprise to the
angels. What is the secret of this? In respect of the first man the
expression used:

I breathed in him of My spirit (Surah al-Hijr, 15:29)

This shows that the structure of this being had in it a higher element
besides the material elements and it is this higher element which has
been described by the above expression. In other words in the structure
of this being something very special was put by Allah, who made him His
vicegerent:

"I am about to place a vicegerent (My vicegerent) in the earth." (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:30)

Thus the Qur'an gives the impression that the first man who stepped his
foot on the earth did so as a Divine authority, a Prophet and a being
having contact with the unseen world. Our Imams have laid stress on this
origin of man in order to establish that the last man on the face of the
earth would also be holding the same dignified position as the first
man. Actually the world of humanity can never be devoid of a being
possessing the spirit of I am about to place a vicegerent in the earth.
The existence of all other men depends on his existence. If such a man
does not exist, others also cannot exist. Such a man is called 'Divine
authority'. By Allah, the world cannot be devoid of an authoritative
master appointed by Allah. This sentence has been extracted from the
sayings of Nahjul Balaghah and quoted in many books.

I have heard the late Ayatullah Burujardi citing it, said that it was a
sentence which Imam Ali pronounced while in Basra and that it was
regularly reproduced both by the Shi'ah and the Sunnis. This sentence is
the concluding part of a tradition reported by Kumayl. He says that one
day Imam Ali caught hold of his hand and took him out of the city. When
they reached a secluded place known as Jabbin, Imam Ali heaved a deep
sigh and said:

"Kumayl, the hearts are receptacles. The most retentive of them are the
best. Therefore remember what I tell you. The men are of three types: a
Divine scholar, a pupil seeking salvation and a buzzing fly". (See
Nahjul Balagha, Saying 146).

According to Imam Ali's terminology a divine scholar is not an ordinary
scholar, although we often apply this term indiscriminately. He means a
scholar 100 per cent devoted to Allah. In this sense perhaps this term
can apply only to the Prophets and the Imams. The second group is that
of the pupils who receive knowledge from the first group. The third
group is of those "who have not sought the light of knowledge and have
not resorted to a strong support." After saying this Imam Ali complained
of the people of his time.

He said that he had great amount of knowledge to impart, but he did not
find any one fit to receive it. He added that there were some people
intelligent enough, but they wanted to use what they learnt to gain
their selfish ends and to exploit religion for their worldly gains.
Therefore he had to withhold knowledge from them. There were others who
were good people, but they were fools. They did not understand or
understood wrongly. From what Imam Ali said so far it appeared that he
was totally disappointed. But that was not the case. He was talking of
the majority only, for he added:

"No, not indeed: The earth is never without a divine authority, whether
visible and known or hidden and unseen. The existence of such an
authority is necessary so that Allah's proofs and arguments may not
become invalid. But how many and where are such people? Indeed very few,
but very dear to Allah. It is through them that Allah preserves His
proofs and arguments. They pass on their knowledge to their likes and
cultivate it in the hearts of their counterparts."

Speaking further about these individuals who receive their knowledge
from Divine source, Imam Ali said:

"Knowledge rushes to them giving them insight into the truth."

In other words their knowledge is intuitive, not acquired, and is free
from every error and mistake. "They are endowed direct with the spirit
of conviction", for they are in direct touch with the unseen world.
"What is difficult for those who are accustomed to luxurious living, is
easy to them.

"The most difficult thing for those who live in ease and luxury is to
devote themselves to Allah." "They are familiar with that to which the
ignorant are averse. They live in the world while their souls are
attached to the highest place." Their bodies are with the people in this
world, but their souls are somewhere else. The people find them among
themselves, but do not know that their souls are attached to some
elevated place."

That is the logic of Imamat. That is the reason why there is a chapter
in al-Kafi entitled, Babul Hujjah. Reports in this chapter say that even
if only two persons were left in the world, one of them would be a
hujjah or divinely appointed authority. I propose to quote some extracts
from the Babul Hujjah of al-Kafi so that you may become better
acquainted with this logic. All other questions such as that the people
must have an Imam so that he may dispense justice to them or so that he
may resolve the controversies about religious matters, are subsidiary
questions. An Imam is not required to administer the government and
hence he is not to be chosen by the people. He is above all such things.
The administration of government may be called a side business of him.
Now we put forward selected words of various traditions so that the
logic of Imamat may become clear.

A report from Imam Sadiq: This is a report relating to the Prophets. It
is said that a zindiq (a free thinker or an atheist)40 asked Imam Sadiq
how he could prove the existence of the Prophets and the Divine
Messengers. The Imam basing his reply on the doctrine of monotheism,
said:

"We know for certain that we have a Creator, who is far above us and
above all that He has created. That Creator is wise and sublime, but we
cannot have direct contact with Him. It is not possible for His creation
to see Him, to touch Him or to argue with Him. But we need His guidance,
for He alone knows what is in our interest and what is beneficial to us.
Therefore there must be some messengers of Him to convey His message to
His creation and His slaves and to tell them what is to their advantage
and what is detrimental to them. This proves that there are some
admonishers appointed by Allah, the Wise, the All-knowing."

About these admonishers (Prophets and Imams) Imam Sadiq says:

"They are wise men, wisely trained and sent with a wise message. They
have been created exactly like other people, but still they are
different from them." They have an additional dimension and an
additional spirit. "They enjoy the support of the All-wise and
All-knowing who has granted them wisdom. The existence of such a person
is essential in every age and every period of time, so that the world
may not be devoid of a master (hujjah) having signs showing his veracity
and irreproachability."

Zayd ibn Ali and Imamat

Imam Muhammad Baqir's brother, Zayd ibn Ali was a pious and virtuous
man. Our Imams have sanctified him and his uprising. But it is a
controversial point whether he claimed Khilafat for himself or sought it
for his brother, and his campaign aimed at only 'enjoining good and
forbidding evil'. However, it is certain that our Imams have venerated
him and have described him as a martyr. A report in al-Kafi says: "By
Allah! He passed away as a martyr." Another report which we are going to
reproduce now shows that he was mistaken. It is a different matter how
such a great man made such a grave mistake.

One of the companions of Imam Muhammad Baqir is known as Abu Ja'far
Ahwal. He says that while Zayd ibn Ali was under-ground, one day he sent
for me and said to me: "If anyone of us rises against the present
government will you be prepared to cooperate?" I said: "Yes, provided
your father and the brother agree." "I intend to rise myself and have
nothing to do with my brother", said he. "In that case I will not
cooperate", said I. He said: "Why? Are you not willing to sacrifice your
life for me?" I said: "I have one life only. If in this world there was
a master (hujjah), appointed by Allah, then he who stayed away, would be
safe, and he who went out with you, would perish. If there was no master
appointed by Allah, then he who stayed away and he who went out with you
were alike."

[Hence it was immaterial whether I did or did not join you in your
uprising].

Abu Ja'far Ahwal knew what Zayd meant. According to this tradition
Ahwal told him that there was a master or a hujjah existing in the world
and that hujjah was Zayd's brother, not Zayd himself. In reply Zayd said
what amounted to saying: "How do you know (that my brother is the
hujjah) while I do not know? My father loved me very much, but he never
told me anything about that. He was so fond of me that in my childhood
while taking food, he always seated me beside him. Whenever he found
that any food was too hot for me, he always cooled it and then put it
into my mouth. How can you expect a loving father, who was so
affectionate and never allowed my mouth to burn, that he would ever
allow me to be burnt in Hell?" Abu Ja'far Ahwal said: "It was because
your father was very fond of you that he did not tell you anything about
this question. He was afraid that if he told you, you would deny it and
thus earn Hell. He was aware of your impertinent spirit. He
intentionally kept you in the dark so that at least you might not become
hostile to your brother. But he told me the truth so that if I accepted
it, I might be saved and if not, I shall be doomed. Fortunately I have
accepted the truth".

Abu Ja'far Ahwal says that he asked Zayd who was superior, the members
of his family or the Prophets. Zayd replied that the Prophets were. Then
Abu Ja'far said: "Prophet Ya'qub said to his son Yousuf who was also a
Prophet: 'My dear son, tell not your brothers of your vision, lest they
plot a plot against you.' Prophet Ya'qub gave this advice because he
loved Yousuf, and he knew that if his brothers came to know that he
would attain such a high position, they would immediately become his
enemies. The story of your father and brother with you is exactly like
the story of Ya'qub with Yousuf and his brothers."

Zayd had no reply to give. At last he said: "Now that you have told me
all this, I also may tell you that your friend in Medina (He meant 'your
Imam', that is Imam Muhammad Baqir) has apprised me that I would be
killed and crucified at the garbage dump of Kufa and that he had a book,
in which there was a prediction about my being killed and crucified."

Here Zayd, so to say, turned a new leaf. He advanced an entirely new
argument. Anyhow, what he said, supported the view that he believed in
the Imamat of his brother. First he said something to Abu Ja'far and
continued to talk in the same vein. But when he saw that Abu Ja'far
firmly believed in Imamat, he changed the trend of his talk and made
clear that he was not unmindful of the true position. He implied that he
was launching his struggle with the knowledge and approval of his
brother. Abu Ja'far adds that one year he went to Makkah. There he
related this story to Imam Ja'far Sadiq, who confirmed his view.

According to another tradition Imam Ja'far Sadiq said:

"In the world there will always be an Imam."

He is also reported to have said:

"If only two persons were left, one of them would be the master
(hujjah) of the other."

A report from Imam Riza: In this connection we have a large number of
traditions. There is a detailed report which is connected with Imam
Riza. A man named Abdul Aziz ibn Muslim says: "We were in Marv with Imam
Riza when he went to Khurasan while he was still a heir apparent. Once
on Friday we were in the Jami' Mosque. The Imam was not present there.
In the mosque there were people in a large number and they were
discussing the question of Imamat. After the prayers I went to Imam Riza
and told him what had transpired there. The Imam sarcastically smiled
and said: "These people are ignorant and have deceptive opinions. Allah
carried away His Prophet only after He had completed his mission. Allah
has revealed the Holy Qur'an which contains all the rules of law and all
that is permissible or forbidden. In the Holy Qur'an there is everything
that the people need in connection with their religion. The Holy Quran
itself says:

"We have not neglected anything in this Book." (Surah al-An'am, 6:38)

In other words, nothing is missing in it. (At least all the rules of
law have been described in it). On the occasion of the Farewell
Pilgrimage towards the end of his life the Holy Prophet recited this
verse:

"This day I have completed your religion and have perfected My favour
on you and chose Islam as a religion for you." (Surah al-Ma'ida, 5:3)

Imam Riza continued:

"The religion cannot be complete without the doctrine of Imamat. The
Holy Prophet departed this world only after he had explained to his
ummah (followers) all the main points of their religion, showed them the
right way and set up Imam Ali as a conspicuous sign and a rallying
point."

In short the Quran expressly says that it has not left out anything
unsaid. But has it not left out the details and the minor points?
Actually it has dealt only with the principal points and the general
rules required by the people. One of the main issues dealt with by the
Qur'an is the question of Imamat.

The Qur'an indicates that the Holy Prophet was to be succeeded by a man
who knew the interpretation of the Quran and its true meaning based not
on any independent judgement or individual deduction, which might
sometimes be right and sometimes be wrong, but based on his Divine
knowledge of the true nature of Islam. Allah says that He has mentioned
in the Qur'an everything. Even the details were not totally ignored, but
were left with him who knew Islam thoroughly. A man knowing Islam
thoroughly has always existed and will always be existing among the
people. "If anyone thinks that Allah has not completed His religion, he
refutes the Book of Allah. And anyone who refutes the Book of Allah is
an infidel. "Do those who maintain that an Imam can be appointed by the
choice of the people; know the value of Imamat and its position in the
Ummah?

They think that the selection of an Imam is just like the selection of
a commander of the army, while Imam means the person with whose
designation, according to the Qur'an, religion has been completed. We
know that the Quran does not deal with the minor issues. The knowledge
of them has been imparted to the Imam, whose knowledge of Islam is very
thorough. People cannot say who is such a person. That is why they
cannot elect him, as they cannot elect a Prophet.

"Imamat is too valuable, too sublime, too lofty, too impregnable and
too deep for the people to perceive it with their mind or to get to it
through their own thinking."

Imamat is above the comprehension of the people. Hence it cannot be
decided by election. Only that question can be called elective which can
be determined by the people. Religion does not interfere with such a
question direct, and basically it should not, because if it does, then
what is the use of reason and intellect?

Within the range of human thinking man himself is to decide, but beyond
that there is no question of human choice. "Imamat is too valuable, too
sublime, too lofty, too impregnable and too deep for people to know
their Imam or to select him on their own. Allah first chose Ibrahim as
His Prophet and friend and only then conferred Imamat on him."

If you want to know the real meaning of Imamat, then you must
understand that Imamat is different from what our people nowadays say.
It is not the election of a successor to the Holy Prophet for the
administration of public affairs only. Imamat is a position that was
attained by Prophet Ibrahim after he had been a Prophet. On attaining it
he felt so happy that he said: "And of my offspring" (Will there be any
Imam)? He wanted some of his offspring also to attain the position he
had attained.

The reply was: "My covenant included not the wrongdoers." We have
already explained what this reply means. Does Allah refer only to those
who are wrongdoers at the time of the grant of Imamat irrespective of
the fact whether previously they had been the wrongdoers or not? It is
evident that Prophet Ibrahim could not possibly have asked Allah to
grant Imamat to the wrongdoers. Obviously he had in mind only those of
his offspring who were good. Therefore this reply meant that Imamat
would be granted only to those whose past record was also unblemished.

Imam Riza further said: "This verse has nullified the possibility of
Imamat being conferred on any wrongdoer till the Day of Resurrection and
has confined Imamat to the cream among the posterity of Prophet Ibrahim.
Allah has honoured him by placing Imamat in those of his posterity who
were the chosen and pure." It means those who were infallible. After
saying that, Imam Riza quoted these verses of the Qur'an and based his
argument on them:

"And we bestowed on him Ishaq, and Yaqub as a grandson. Each of them we
made righteous And we made them Imams who guide by our Command and we
inspired in them the doing of good deeds." (Surah al-Ambiya, 21:72-73)

The Qur'an stresses the fact that Imamat will forever continue in the
posterity of Prophet Ibrahim. The renowned Islamic scholar Muhammad Taqi
Shari'ati has in his book, Khilafat and Wilayat elaborately discussed
the question why the Quran which does not believe in ethnic
discrimination, has said so. From ethnic point of view posterity is a
technical term. How did Prophet Ibrahim's posterity exclusively acquire
the capability of holding Imamat is a different question.

Imam Riza added: "How can these ignorant people elect an Imam?".
Prophet Ibrahim attained Imamat only after he had attained Prophethood.
How can these ignorant people elect anybody for such a high position?
Can such an assignment be elective? "Imamat is a grade of the Prophets
and heritage of the legatees." It is something traditional in the sense
that the competence to get it is transferred from generation to
generation, but still it is not strictly hereditary.

"Imamat is vicegerency of Allah and Caliphate of the Holy Prophet." It
is the same vicegerency which Adam was the first to hold. "Imamat
regulates the religion." It is an organization of the Muslims and a
system of their life. Their prosperity and honour depend on it. It is
the basis of Islam and the highest department of it. "The accomplishment
of Prayers, Zakat, Fasting, Hajj and Jihad etc. is linked with the
existence of an Imam."

Conclusion:

All this leads us to a logical course of thinking. If we accept it, it
has a basis. If somebody rejects it by chance, that is a different
matter. This logical course is different from the pursuit of superficial
and ordinary questions discussed by the majority of the scholastic
theologians. For example, they say that Abu Bakr succeeded the Holy
Prophet as the first Caliph, while Ali was the fourth. Now the
theologians discuss the point whether Ali should have been the first
Caliph or, for example, the fourth, and whether Abu Bakr fulfilled the
conditions necessary for Imamat. They then discuss the qualification
which an Imam, in the sense of a head of the Muslim State must
possess.

No doubt this question is also of basic importance, and from this point
of view the Shi'ah have in this connection raised some objections and
quite valid too, but on principle it is not proper to confuse the issue
of Imamat with the question whether Abu Bakr did or did not possess the
qualifications necessary for being an Imam. As a matter of fact the
Sunnis do not believe in Imamat in that sense in which the Shi'ah do. In
short, the Sunnis hold that the metaphysical aspects of man mentioned by
Allah in connection with Adam, Ibrahim and others up to the Holy
Prophet, have come to an end. Now all men are ordinary human beings. At
the most there are scholars who have acquired knowledge.

They sometimes make a mistake and sometimes do not. Similarly there are
rulers. Some of them are irreproachable, whereas some others are wicked.
That is the end of the question. The Sunnis do not believe, as we do, in
the 'Divine masters' (hujjah) having contact with the metaphysical
world, for they think that with the demise of the Holy Prophet all this
has terminated.

The Shi'ah says that there is no doubt that with the Holy Prophet the
Prophethood has come to an end. Now no Prophet will come and no new
religion will be brought by any human being. There is only one religion
and that is Islam. The Prophet of Islam is the last Prophet. But the
question of the hujjah and perfect man has not come to an end at all. As
the first man was of this category, the last man must also be like him.
Among the Sunnis only the sufis believe in this doctrine, though they
also give it a different name. That is why we see that some sufis
despite their being Sunnis accept the doctrine of Imamat in some of
their writings in the same sense in which the Shi'ah do. Muhyuddin ibn
Arabi is an Andalusian.

Andalus (Spain) was one of those countries, the inhabitants of which
were not only Sunnis but were also fanatically anti-Shi'ah, having a
smack of Nasibiism in them. The reason was that Andalus was originally
conquered by the Umayyads who ruled over it for a long time. The
Umayyads, bore malice against the Holy Prophet's household. Perhaps in
Andalus there were not any Shiites and if there were, their number was
as very small.

Muhyuddin is an Andalusian, but on account of his Gnostic taste he
believes that the earth can never be devoid of a Wali and hujjah. He
accepts the Shi'ah point of view in this connection and recounts the
names of the Imams. While mentioning the last Imam, he goes so far as to
claim that he personally met Muhammad ibn Hasan 'Askari at such and such
place a few years after 600 A.H. But despite all this he has made many
statements against Shiah doctrines, and is basically a biased Sunni, but
because of his Gnostic inclination he admits that it is not possible
that at any time there is no Wali (or hujjah as our Imams say) on the
earth. He even claims:

"I had an audience with Muhammad ibn Hasan Askari, who is now in
occultation and whose age at present is more than 300 years."


