Imamat of Imams
===============

One of the proofs of Imamat is the Divine knowledge of an Imam and the
extraordinary respect that the eminent Alawis and others showed to the
Imams while they were still children. When it was said to Ali ibn Jafar,
an uncle of Imam Jawad's father: "In spite of being a grand old man and
son of Ja'far ibn Muhammad you say so about this chief, " he said: "I
think you are a devil." He then took hold of his beard and said: "What
can I do, when Allah considered him fit for this position and did not
consider me fit in spite of my grey hair?" (Imam as Sadiq p. 150)

**Notes**

41. A compromise on principles may be in the name of expedience which
includes undue regard for someone. A compromise may also be due to
making discrimination in showing favour or accepting an intercession. It
is a known fact that the Holy Prophet awarded legal punishment even to
prominent men of the Quraysh. He abstained from showing undue favour to
anybody. There are three main reasons of a compromise on principles: One
is fear; another is greed.

Therefore a reformer must be bold, and must not be liable to be
influenced by any kind of bribe including money, flattery, women etc.
The third cause of compromise on principles is nepotism and showing
undue favour to friends. A reformer's friendship must be for the sake of
Allah only. It may be noted that undue favour has been described in the
Qur'an as 'idhan' which originally meant lubricating and oiling, and
hence includes flattery and deceit, and is used in the sense of
compromising also.

Who wish you to compromise so that they may also compromise? A
compromise on principles may be conscious but tacit or may be
unconscious. Another form of a compromise on principles is the
exploitation of the weak points of society instead of combating them,
and being carried away by the prevailing trend of society. The examples
of this attitude are the acceptance of the kissing of hands and showing
too much sensitiveness to the questions of dispute between the Shi'ah
and the Sunnis. The story of the late Mirza Muhammad Arbab can be cited
as an example. The following Qur'anic verse also refers to this
subject:

"My people, I delivered my Lord's message to you and gave you good
advice, but you do not like those who give you good advice." (Surah
al-A'raf, 7:79)

Sufyan Thawri says: "If you find a scholar having many friends, you can
be sure that he is indiscriminate. Had he been telling the truth only,
people would not have liked him." Abuzar said: "Enjoining the right and
forbidding the wrong have left for me no friends." Imam Ali said: "Do
not try to use artificial manners to be intimate with me and do not
address me with those words with which the tyrants are addressed." These
words of the Imam show that to like flattery and the use of high
sounding titles is also a sort of a compromise on principles.

Those who like such cheap things do not succeed in reforming society.
Imam Ali further said: "For me the strong is weak till I force him to
restore the rights of others." He means to say that he is not one of
those who compromise on principles. We frequently meet with the word
compromise in connection with the Mu'awiya affair and the proposals put
to Imam Ali to come to terms with him. Imam Ali said that a leader must
not be a specimen of the depravity of his people. "He should not be an
impious man commanding others to piety or an ailing physician treating
other people." How can a man who is eating dates himself ask others not
to eat them.

"He who puts himself as a leader of the people, should begin the reform
with himself...." A leader must not be greedy for avarice means
permanent bondage, which is contrary to spiritual and moral freedom. In
respect of Christ Imam Ali says: "He had no wife to seduce him, no child
to grieve him, no property to divert his attention and no cupidity to
disgrace him." (Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 160). In short, a man who is
morally a materialist cannot be a true reformer and a materialist
philosopher cannot morally be a 100 per cent non materialistic. Other
qualities of a reformer: Calmness in spite of sensitiveness. An example
of calmness in Imam Ali's behaviour.

A woman from Basrah and a Kharijite once abused him, but he paid no
attention to their foul language. A reformer must be iron-clad. He
should not be delicate, but he should be sensitive. An example of being
sensitive without being delicate is the story of Sufiyan Ghamidi, who
arrived in Anbar. "If any Muslim dies henceforth on account of sorrow
........ "Should I pass the night while I have overeaten and there are
hungry stomachs around me?"

42.It may be noted that these notes were written before Islamic
revolution had taken place in Iran.

43. A part of the life account of the Holy Prophet should be studied
from the viewpoint of the principles of leadership.

44. Item No. 33 deals with signs of immaturity, which have been
mentioned in the article on Islamic maturity in the Book, Divine Succur
in Human Life.


