Chapter 10: Life of the Next World
==================================

The principle of belief in the eternal life of the next world is one of
the important points of Islamic conception of cosmos and a fundamental
tenet of Islam. A belief in the next world is an essential condition of
being a Muslim and anyone who denies that is not a Muslim.

Next to the confession of monotheism, this is the most important
doctrine preached by all the Prophets without any exception. The
scholastic theologians of Islam call it the doctrine of the
Resurrection.

In the Holy Quran we come across hundreds of verses, which in some way
or other deal with the Day of Judgement, the life after death, the
resurrection of the dead, the great account, the deed-sheets, the
heaven, the hell, the eternality of the next world and other questions
relating to the world after death. In 12 verses, a belief in the Last
Day has been formally mentioned next to the belief in Allah.

The Holy Qur'an has used different expressions to denote the Day of
Resurrection. Each one of these expressions is full of Gnostic
significance. The Last Day is one of them. By using this expression the
Holy Quran wants to draw our attention to two points:

" That human life, and for that matter the entire length of time of the
existence of the world, is divided into two periods, each of which may
be called a day. The First Day (the period of the duration of this
world) will come to an end, but the Last Day (the period of the duration
of the next world) is endless. The Qur'an has called this world life the
first and the next world life the last. (Vide Surah al-Layl, 92:13 and
az-Zuha, 93:4)

" That even now when we are passing through the first period and have
not reached the second period and the second day, our success during
this day as well as that day depends on our faith, which draws our
attention to good deeds and their reaction. We must understand that like
us our thoughts, words, deeds and habits also, from the slightest to the
biggest, have the first day and the last day. It is not that our words
and deeds vanish and are obliterated during the first day. They continue
to exist and will have to be accounted for on the Day of Judgement.
Therefore we must do our best to put right ourselves, our actions and
our intentions, and abstain from bad thoughts and evil deeds. Thus we
should always step forward on the way of righteousness and good
behaviour, for on our faith depends our bliss on that day. It is man's
conduct in this world that makes his life happy or miserable in the
next. That is why the Qur'an regards the belief in the next world or the
Last Day absolutely necessary for man's prosperity.

**Source of Belief in the Life of the Next World**

The chief source of belief in the eternal life of the next world is the
Divine revelation conveyed to mankind through the Prophets.

Following his recognition of Allah, belief in the veracity of the
Prophets and knowing for certain that what the Prophets convey as
revelation has really come from Allah and is therefore true, man comes
to believe in the Day of Resurrection and the eternal life of the next
world. This doctrine has been described by the Prophets as the most
important doctrine next to Monotheism.

As such, the degree of the faith a person has in the life of the next
world depends, on the one hand, on the degree of his faith in
Prophethood and the veracity of the Prophets, and on the other, on the
degree of the correctness and rationality of his conception of the
Hereafter, and its being free from vulgar and absurd ideas.

In addition to the Divine revelation conveyed by the Prophets, there
are some other methods of acquiring belief in the Hereafter. Man through
his intellectual and scientific efforts can get to, at least, some
strong indications which support what the Prophets say about the next
world. These methods are as under:

" Through knowing Allah;

" Through knowing the World;

" Through knowing the spirit and mentality of man.

For the present we do not propose to enter into the discussion of these
methods which requires lengthy philosophical and scientific arguments.
We intend to confine our attention to considering the method of
Prophethood and revelation only. But as the Qur'an itself has in some
verses expressly mentioned these methods and in some other verses hinted
at them, we will refer to them in a subsequent section under the
heading, the Arguments of the Quran in Respect of the Next world. So
that the question of eternal life in the next world may become clear
from the viewpoint of Islam, it is necessary to consider the following
questions:

" Nature of death;

" Life after death;

" Purgatory or Barzakh;

" Resurrection;

" Connection of this worldly life with the life after death, Eternal
existence of human deeds in a corporeal form;

" Common and distinguishing features of the life of this world and the
life of the next world, Arguments of the Quran in respect of the next
world.

Nature of Death

What is death? Is it destruction, annihilation, and non-existence or is
it a change, a development and a shifting from one world to another?

This is a question which has always engaged man's attention. Everyone
is keen either to find out an answer to it direct or to accept an answer
already given.

By virtue of being Muslims we would like to draw the answer to this
question from the Holy Qur'an and have faith in what the Qur'an has said
in this respect.

The Qur'an has its own explanation regarding the nature of death. It
has used the word, 'tawaffi' in this connection.

This word means to receive in full. In 14 verses, the Qur'an has used
this expression. All these verses show that from the Qur'anic point of
view death means gathering and receiving into custody. In other words
man at the time of his death gets into the custody of the Divine
authorities, who receive him in full. From this expression the following
points may be inferred:

i. Death does not mean annihilation and obliteration. It is just a
shifting from one world to another world and from one stage of life to
another stage. Human life continues after death, though in a different
form.

ii. What actually constitutes man and his self is not his body and his
physical and ancillary systems, which gradually decay and decompose in
this very world. What really constitutes his personality and ego is that
which has been described by the Qur'an as 'self' and occasionally as
soul.

iii. Man's soul or his 'self' is the real constituent of his
personality. Man is immortal because his soul is immortal. His soul
rests and exists at a horizon above the horizon of matter and material
things. Although it is an outcome of the evolution of the essence of
natural phenomena which is transformed into the soul as the result of
its evolution, its horizon is changed and it becomes a thing of another
world which is extra-natural. With the death the soul shifts to a
different category and class, that is the class of soul. In other words
this extra-material reality is taken back and received into angelic
custody.

The verses which deal with the genesis and are not concerned with the
other worldly life, the Qur'an has advanced the 596 point that man is a
reality belonging to an extra-material class. The Quran in respect of
Adam, the first man says:

"I have breathed into him of My spirit." (Surah al-Hijr 15:29).

The question of soul and its survival after death is one of the basic
teachings of Islam. One half of the undeniable teachings of Islam is
based on the doctrine that soul is independent of the body and that it
continues to exist after death. All real human values are based on this
truth, without which they will be nothing more than a figment of
imagination.

All the verses that speak of life immediately after death, a few
examples of which we propose to quote, prove that the soul is a reality
independent of the body and that it continues to exist even when the
body has been annihilated.

Some people think that from the viewpoint of the Quran there exists no
soul or spirit. The existence of man comes to an end with his death,
after which he neither possesses consciousness nor has he any feeling of
joy or pain. At the time of Resurrection man will get a new life and it
is at that time alone that he will rediscover himself and the world. But
this theory is totally belied by the verses which mention life
immediately following death.

The exponents of this theory think that those who believe in the
existence of soul or spirit base their claim on the verse:

"Say: The spirit is by command of my Lord." (Surah Bani Israil,
17:55).

They say that although the word, 'ruh' has been repeatedly mentioned in
the Quran, yet it means something different from what is called soul. In
this verse also it signifies the same thing as meant in other verses.

These people do not know that those who believe in the existence of
soul do not base their argument on this verse. There are about 20 other
verses, in which soul has been mentioned either absolutely or in the
form of a possessive case, an adjectival phase etc. such as Our spirit,
My spirit, holy spirit, a spirit by Our Command. Concerning man it has
been said:

And I breathed into him of My spirit.

This expression shows that from the viewpoint of the Qur'an there
exists a reality superior to the angels and the men and it is this
reality which is called the spirit. As a blessing of Allah the angels
and the men have this reality described as "by My Command". The verse, I
breathed into him of My spirit along with other verses shows that the
spirit of man has an extraordinary reality.

Not only many verses of the Qur'an confirm the independent existence of
human soul, but this view is also corroborated by numerous reports of
uninterrupted chain of transmission in the books of Ahadith as well as
by many passages in Nahjul Balaghah (See: Peak of Eloquence, I.S.P.
1984) and the supplications of the holy Imams.

The fact is that the denial of the existence of soul is a filthy
Western idea inspired by the materialism of the West. Unfortunately some
well-intentioned followers of the Quran have also adopted it.

Now we quote by the way of examples, three out of the four verses in
which the word 'tawaffi' (to gather or receive in full) has been used in
connection with death. In some of these verses such actions have been
attributed to the people immediately after their death as are performed
by living persons (such as speaking, wishing and demanding).

(i) "As for those whom the angels took (in death) while they wronged
themselves, the angels said to them: In what were you engaged? They
said: We were oppressed in the land. The angels said: Was not Allah's
earth spacious so that you would have migrated therein? The dwelling of
such people will be Hell fire, a terrible destination." (Surah An Nisa',
4:97)

This verse is in respect of those people who succumb to the pressure of
their circumstances because they live in an unfavorable environment
controlled by their opponents. Their excuse is that their environment
being unfavorable to them, they cannot do anything. Instead of trying to
bring about a change in their atmosphere and if that was not possible,
shift to a better environment, they continue to live in the same corrupt
environment and submerge themselves in its quagmire. After extracting
their souls the angels of Allah talk to them and say that their plea was
unsatisfactory, for they failed to at least emigrate to another
environment. The angels remind them that they themselves are responsible
for their acts of omission and commission.

The Holy Qur'an tells us in this verse that helplessness in a certain
place cannot be a valid excuse unless the way of emigration from it to
another place is also closed.

As we see, in this verse death, which is apparently annihilation and
termination, has been expressed by the word, tawaffi which signifies
receiving into custody. Further, this verse report of a dialogue between
the angels and a man after his death. Should the reality of man not
continue after his death and should his reality become merely his
insensitive and unconscious body, evidently this dialogue would be
meaningless. This verse makes it clear that man after leaving this world
and this life, can talk with the invisible creatures known as the
angels, although with a different set of eyes, ears and tongue.

(ii) And they say:

"When we are lost in the earth, how can we then be recreated? In fact,
they have no faith in the Day of Judgement. Muhammad, say: 'The angel of
death who has charge concerning you, will cause you to die and afterward
to your Lord you will be returned." (Surah as-Sajdah, 32 : 10)

In this verse the Holy Qur'an removes the doubt of those who denied the
Hereafter. They asked how they could be raised again when following
their death every particle of them would have been totally decomposed
and destroyed.

The Qur'an clearly says that the doubt expressed by them is a mere
pretext to conceal their obstinacy. Anyhow, replying to their question
the Qur'an says that contrary to what they assert, their real
personality and their real 'self' are not the things which, as they
allege, are lost. Actually they with their entire personality are
gathered by the angel of death.

Those who raised this doubt meant by being lost in the earth that when
all the parts of their body would have been scattered and every particle
of their body would have been decomposed, how would it be possible to
recreate and revive it?

The same doubt has been mentioned in some other verses also and there a
different answer has been given to this question. There it has been
pointed out that the dead body is lost from the viewpoint of man only.
No doubt it is impossible for a human being to recollect all its
particles, but for Allah Who is Omnipotent and Omniscient, it is not
difficult to do so.

In the previous verse the argument of those who deny Resurrection was
based on the impossibility of the recollection of the particles of the
dead bodies. But here their argument is different and that is why it has
been answered differently. Here it has been argued that with the loss of
the particles of his body, the real personality of man is also lost and
no question of 'I' or 'We' is left. The Qur'an says that contrary to
what they think, the real personality of man is never lost, and hence
there is no need of finding it again. On the contrary men as well as his
personality are gathered by the angels at the time of his death.

The following verse also expressly mentions the continuation of the
real personality of man (his soul) after his death, although his body
ceases to exist then:

(iii) "Allah receives man's souls at the time of their death. Their
souls do not die when they are sleeping. During people's sleep He
withholds those souls which He has decreed to die and releases the
others for an appointed time. In this, in fact, there is an evidence (of
truth) for the thoughtful people." (Surah az Zumar, 39 : 42)

This verse describes the similarity of sleep and death, and inters alia
the similarity of waking and resurrection. Sleep is a slight and weak
form of death and death is an intense and strong form of sleep. In both
these cases the human soul shifts from one state of life to another. The
difference is that in the case of sleep man usually does not notice the
change and when he wakes up he does not realize that he has actually
returned from some journey. In contrast in the case of death everything
becomes clear to him.

It may be gathered from all these three verses put together that from
the Qur'anic point of view, the nature of death is not annihilation,
termination and non-existence. It is only shifting from one state of
life to another.

Incidentally the last verse throws light on the viewpoint of the Qur'an
about the nature of sleep also. Although physically sleep is the
suspension of certain natural faculties, from spiritual point of view it
is an escape to the kingdom of heaven. Like the question of death, the
question of sleep is also one of those things the true nature of which
is not fully known. All that is known in this connection is merely a
part of the physical developments that take place in the physical
domain.

After Death

Does man immediately after death pass direct to the stage of
resurrection and is his case finally decided then and there? Or does he
during the period between death and resurrection pass through a special
world to be resurrected only on the Day of Resurrection? We know that it
is known to Allah only when the Day of Resurrection will arrive. Even
the Prophets have expressed their unawareness in that respect.

It is gathered from the Qur'an and numerous reliable reports which have
come down to us from the Holy Prophet and the Imams, that no one reaches
the stage of Resurrection immediately after death, because that stage
will be accompanied by so many upheavals and revolutionary changes in
everything known to us, such as the mountains, the oceans, the moon, the
sun, the stars and the galaxies. At that time nothing will be left
intact. Further, at the time of Resurrection all men of the past and the
present will be gathered together. But we see that the world is still
intact and probably will remain so for another billion of years.
Meanwhile innumerable human beings are still to be born.

Similarly it is gathered from the foregoing and so many other verses of
the Quran that no one during the period between death and Resurrection
shall remain motionless and unconscious. In other words, man shall not
be in a torpid state, feeling neither pleasure or joy nor grief or pain.
Immediately after his death man enters a new stage of life, in which he
feels everything. Certain things give him pleasure and certain other
things give him pain. Anyhow, his pleasure and pain are related to his
conduct in this world only. This stage will continue till the
Resurrection takes place. At that time so many upheavals will overtake
the whole world in a moment that from the farthest stars to our earth
everything will be revolutionized. With this that world which is the
intermediary stage between this world and the Resurrection will come to
an end.

Thus from the viewpoint of the Qur'an the post-death world has two
stages or, to be more exact, after his death man passes through two
worlds. The world which will come to an end like the present world is
called the barzakh or purgatory. The other is the post-resurrection
world which shall never come to an end. Now let us briefly discuss these
two worlds.

Barzakh or Purgatory

A thing which lies between two other things as a barrier and separates
them is called barzakh. The Qur'an has used this word to indicate the
life between death and the Resurrection. The Qur'an says:

"Until, when death comes to one of them, he says: My Lord, send me
back, so that I may do some good I did not do (in the world). But nay!
These are mere words which he utters and behind them is a barzakh until
the day of their Resurrection." (Surah al Mu'minun 23:100)

This is the only verse that calls the interval between death and
resurrection the barzakh. The Muslim scholars have borrowed this word
from here and named the world between death and resurrection the
barzakh.

About the continuity of life after death this verse says only that men
after their death repent and request their return to the world, but
their request is turned down. This verse shows specifically that man
after his death has a sort of life. That is why he asks for being sent
back to the earthly world, although his request is not accepted.

About the continuity of life after death this verse says only that men
after their death repent and request their return to the world, but
their request is turned down. This verse shows specifically that man
after his death has a sort of life. That is why he asks for being sent
back to the earthly world, although his request is not accepted.

There are many verses which indicate that man during the period,
between his death and Resurrection is endowed with a sort of life in
which he speaks, has feelings of pleasure and pain and can enjoy a sort
of happy life. On the whole, there are about 15 verses in the Qur'an
which in some way or other speak of a life process, from which it may be
gathered that between the period of death and Resurrection man enjoys a
full-fledged life. These verses may be divided into several
categories.

(i) There are verses which quote some conversations between the
righteous or the wicked men on the one hand and the angels on the other.
These conversations took place immediately after death. Such verses are
many. We have already cited the verse 97 of the surah an-Nisa' and the
verse 100 of the surah al-Mu'minun.

(ii) There are some other verses according to which the angels talk to
the righteous and tell them to enjoy the bounties of Allah from that
time onward. They do not keep them waiting for the Day of Resurrection.
The following two verses contain this point:

"They will be received by the angels of mercy with the greetings: Peace
be on you! Enter the Garden as a reward for your good deeds." (Surah
an-Nahl, 16 : 32)

It was said to him (after his death): Enter paradise. He said:

"Would that my people knew that my Lord had pardoned me and made me of
the honoured ones." (Surah Yasin, 36:26 - 27)

In the verses preceding to this verse a conversation of this believer
with his people was quoted. He called upon his people to follow the
Prophets who invited them towards monotheism in Antioch (Antakiyah). He
announced his faith and asked others to listen to him and follow his
example. But his people did not listen to him till he died, and went to
the other world. When he saw that he was pardoned by Allah and honoured
by Him he wished that his people who were still in the mundane world
knew how happy he was in the other world. Evidently all this happened
before Resurrection for after Resurrection none would be left on the
earth.

Incidentally it may be noted that for the righteous after their death
there are several paradises, not one single paradise. In the next world
they vary according to degree of their inmates' proximity to Allah. In
addition to these paradises, there are some other paradises, as reported
by the chosen descendants of the Holy Prophet which relate to the world
of Barzakh, not to the Day of Judgement. Hence the paradise mentioned in
the above quoted two verses should not give the wrong impression that it
relates to the Day of Judgement.

(iii) The third group of verses does not report any conversation
between the angels and the men. They only describe the happy life of the
righteous and the miserable life of the wicked during the period between
death and Resurrection. The following two verses belong to this
category:

1. "Think not of those who have been slain in the way of Allah as dead.
Nay, they are living with their Lord and are being provided with the
means of living. They are jubilant because of that which Allah has
bestowed upon them of His bounty, and wish that those who have been left
behind join them." (Surah Ale Imran, 3: 169 - 170)

2. "A dreadful doom encompassed Firawn's folk. They will be exposed to
the Fire mornings and evenings and on the Day of Resurrection it will be
said: People of Firawn's folk suffer the most awful doom." (Surah
al-Mu'nim, 40:45-46)

This verse mentions two kinds of punishment in respect of the Fir'awn's
followers. The first is the pre-Resurrection punishment described as a
dreadful doom. Fir'awn's men are exposed to the Fire two times every
day. The other punishment is the Post-Resurrection punishment described
as the most awful doom. On the Day of Judgement an order will be given
to throw these people into the Hell. Only in respect of the first
punishment the time of morning and evening has been specified.

Interpreting this verse Imam Ali has said that the first punishment is
meted out in the Barzakh where the same system of morning, evening, year
and month prevails as in this world. In contrast, the second punishment
relates to the post-Resurrection world where there is no morning,
evening, week, month or year.

In the reports which have come down to us from the Holy Prophet, Imam
Ali and other Imams in respect of the Barzakh, much stress has been laid
on the life of the believers and the sinners during their stay in the
Barzakh.

During the Battle of Badr a number of the prominent leaders of Quraysh
were killed. When fighting was over, the Holy Prophet ordered their
bodies to be thrown into a well near Badr. Then the Holy Prophet himself
went to that well, and putting his head inside the well and addressing
the dead said:

"We have found that what Allah had promised to us has come true. Have
you also got what He had promised to you?"

Some companions of the Holy Prophet said:

"Prophet of Allah, do you talk with those who have been slain and are
dead? Do they hear what you say?"

The Holy Prophet said:

"Now they hear better than you."

From this tradition and other similar traditions we can see that in
spite of the separation between the body and the soul with death, the
soul does not totally sever its relation with the body with which it was
united for years.

On the 10th Muharram Imam Husayn offered his morning prayers in
congregation. Then he turned to his companions and delivered a short
speech in which he said:

"Be calm and patient for a little while. Death is nothing but a bridge
by means of which you cross from the bank of pain and grief to the bank
of happiness, honour and vast paradise."

There is a tradition which says that people are asleep. As soon as they
die, they wake up. That means that the degree of life after death is
higher than that before death. During sleep man's consciousness becomes
weak. It is a state between life and death. When man is awake his life
is more perfect. Similarly his life in the Barzakh is to some extent
more perfect than that in this world.

There are two points worth mentioning here:

i. According to the reports from the Imams, in the Barzakh man is
interrogated about his faith and belief only. Other questions are left
to the Day of Resurrection.

ii. The meritorious deeds performed by his relatives with the intention
that their reward should go to the dead person, make the dead person
happy and are to his advantage. If alms and charities whether in the
form of endowments or otherwise, are given with the intention that their
reward should go to one's departed father, mother, friend, teacher or
anyone else, these charities may be regarded as a gift to the deceased
person concerned. They make him blissful.

The same is the case with the invocation, asking for Allah's
forgiveness, circumambulation of the Ka'bah and the pilgrimage to Makkah
and other Holy place if performed on behalf of a dead person. It is
possible for the children who have displeased their parents during their
lifetime to do something to please them after their death. The other way
round is also possible.

Resurrection

The second stage of the eternal life is Resurrection which, unlike the
Barzakh, is not an individual affair but shall involve the entire
mankind and the whole world. With Resurrection the whole universe shall
enter a new stage and a new phase of life. The entire system will be
changed.

Where the Qur'an has told us of this great event, it has said that at
the time of the Resurrection the stars shall fade, the sun shall lose
its brilliance, the oceans shall become dry, everything shall go flat,
the mountains shall be obliterated and there shall be screams, yells and
violent convulsions all over the world followed by unprecedented
changes.

What is gathered from the Quran is that the whole world shall be
devastated and everything shall be obliterated. Then a new world shall
be born which shall be basically different from the existing world. The
new world shall have absolutely different laws and different systems,
and shall continue to exist for ever.

In the Holy Quran Resurrection has been given various names, each name
representing a certain characteristic of it. As it is the day of which
the whole mankind will be gathered together, it is called the Day of
Assemblage, the Day of Gathering and the Day of Meeting. As on that day
all secrets will be disclosed and all realities will be laid bare it is
called the day of unfolding and the day when the hidden thoughts will be
searched out. As it is the day that will last forever, it is called the
day of eternity. As it is the day when men will be disillusioned and win
be repenting and regretting, it is called the day of grief and the day
of mutual disillusion. And as the Resurrection is the greatest event and
the biggest piece of news, it is called the Great Tidings.


