Relation Between This Life and the Next
=======================================

A very basic point to which the revealed Books have drawn our attention
is the relation between the life of these two worlds. The life of the
next world is inseparable from the life of this world. The seed of the
life after death is sown in this world by man himself, who determines in
this life what is going to happen to him in the next life.

Pure faith, correct belief, realistic conception of the world,
excellent human habits free from jealousy, cheating, malice, hatred and
fraud, as well as the good deeds conducive to the development of the
individual and society performed with sincerity of purpose, are the
things which ensure happy eternal life. In contrast, disbelief, wrong
conceptions, dirty habits, selfishness, self-importance,
self-conceitedness, tyranny, oppression, hypocrisy, taking usury,
telling lies, calumny, back-biting, fault-finding, creating rift,
abstention from the worship of the Creator and other similar qualities
and habits are the things which make one's life very miserable in the
next world.

There is a beautiful saying of the Holy Prophet. He said:

"This world is the cultivation field of the next world. As you sow in
this world, so you will reap in the next."

AS it is not possible for anyone to sow barley and reap wheat, to sow
thorns and pluck flowers, or to sow colocynth and pick dates, similarly
it is also impossible for a man whose conduct is bad in this world, to
be happy and comfortable in the next.

Embodiment and Eternity of Human Deeds

It is gathered from the Holy Quran and the sayings of the Imams that
not only man continues to exist after his death, but his deeds and works
are also so preserved that they do not disappear. In his
post-Resurrection life man will see all his past deeds depicted and
embodied. Good deeds will have very beautiful, attractive and pleasing
forms. They will be a source of delight and enjoyment. The forms of the
evil deeds will be very ugly, repulsive and horrible. They will be a
source of pain, suffering and torture.

Here we confine ourselves to the mention of three verses of the Quran
and two sayings of the Holy Prophet in this connection:

(i) "On the Day when every soul will find itself confronted with all
that it has done of good and all that it has done of evil. Every soul
will long that there might be a mighty space between it and that evil."
(Surah Ale Imran, 3 : 30)

This verse expressly says that man will find before him the actual good
and bad deeds of his. The good deeds will be presented in pleasing and
attractive forms, but the forms in which bad deeds will appear will be
so repulsive and loathsome, that man would like to remove them from his
sight or to run away from them. But he would not be able to do either,
because in that world man's deeds are almost a part of his existence and
cannot be separated from him.

(ii) "They will find before them whatever they did in this world."
(Surah al-Kahf, 18 : 49)

This verse says exactly the same thing as the previous one.

(iii) "That day mankind will issue forth in scattered groups to be
shown their deeds (in the display centre of the deeds). And whosoever
does an atom's weight of good will see it then, and whosoever does an
atom's weight of evil will see it then." (Surah Zilzal, 99:6-8)

Man is immortal and eternal, and so are his deeds and works. In the
next world he will be living with the deeds with which he has lived in
this world. Man's deeds are his good or bad assets. It depends on them
whether his everlasting life in the next world will be happy or
miserable.

Traditions (Ahadith)

Some Muslims who came from a distant place were received by the Holy
Prophet. In the course of their conversation with him they asked the
Holy Prophet to prescribe for them some useful rules of conduct. Among
other things the Holy Prophet counselled them to take immediate action
to choose good companions for the next world, where the living
companions of everybody would be the embodiments of his own deeds.

A man who has a belief in the eternal life of the next world is always
very particular about his thoughts, habits and actions, for he knows
that these things should not be looked upon as transient affairs. They
constitute his baggage which he sends to the next world in advance. He
will have to live with it.

Common and Uncommon Points of This Life and the Next

A point common to the life of this world and to the life of the next is
that both the lives are real and exist actually. In both the lives man
is conscious of himself and whatever relates to him. In both the lives
he feels pain and pleasure and is happy and miserable. In both the lives
his actions are governed by his instincts, both animal and purely human.
In both the lives he lives with his body and all his limbs and organs.
Anyhow, there are some basic differences also.

In this world there is a system of procreation and reproduction as well
as that of childhood, youth and old age followed by death. These systems
do not exist in the next world. In this world it is necessary to work,
to sow seeds and prepare the ground. In the next world that which was
sown in this world will be reaped. This world is the place of doing work
and the next world is the place of drawing results and giving account.
In this world man can change his destiny by changing the course of his
actions. In the next world there is no such possibility. In this world
life is mixed with death. Every life is entwined with lifeless matter.
In addition to that, the dead comes out of the living and the living
comes out of the dead. The lifeless matter under certain conditions
turns into the living organism and the living organism turns into the
lifeless matter. But in that world pure life prevails. The matter of
that world is also living. The earth and the sky of that world are
living. The gardens and their fruits are living as much as man's own
embodied works. The fire and its chastisement are also living and
conscious. Here everything is governed by its causes and spatial and
temporal conditions. This world is that of motion and development. In
that world there exist only Divine Will and Divine sovereignty. There
man's perception and his consciousness are stronger and his faculties of
sight and hearing sharper than in this world. In other words, there the
curtains will be lifted and man will see the inner truths far better.
The Holy Quran says:

"Now we have removed from you your covering and piercing is your sight
this day." (Surah Qaf, 55:22)

Here in this world man always had a feeling of being dejected, tired
and fed up, especially of monotony. It appears as if he has lost
something and is looking for it. Anything he comes across he takes it to
be his lost thing, and feels happy for a while. But soon he realizes
that it is not what he wanted. He again begins to feel dejected and goes
after something else. Man always wants something which he has not and is
fed up with that which he has.

But in the next world, where man will get what he has wanted from the
depth of his heart and what he has really missed, that is eternal life
in the proximity of Allah, there will be no question of being tired, fed
up or dejected. The Qur'an hints at this very point when it says:

"They have no desire to be removed from there." (Surah al-Khaf,
18:108)

Unlike this world, in the next world people will not wish any change.
In spite of abiding in Paradise forever, its inmates will never be
bored. As everything they may desire will be available to them, they
will not be troubled by any unsatisfied craving.

Arguments of the Quran

Although our belief in Resurrection is a corollary of our belief in the
Holy Quran and the teachings of the Prophets and hence it is not
necessary to advance any arguments or to produce any scientific evidence
in respect of it, yet in view of the fact that the Qur'an itself in
order to impress the point logically on our minds, has put forward some
arguments, we propose to mention them here briefly.

The arguments of the Quran consist of a series of replies to those who
denied Resurrection. Some of these replies have been given to show that
there is nothing wrong with the idea of Resurrection. They have been
given to those who claimed that Resurrection was impossible to take
place. Some other verses go a step further and say that even in this
world there exist certain phenomena resembling Resurrection and hence
there is no reason why it should be regarded as impossible or
improbable. Some verses go even further and declare that Resurrection is
an inevitable and natural result of the judicious scheme of the creation
of the universe. Thus these verses can be arranged into three groups. We
mention them here one by one.

I. The Holy Quran says:

"He has coined for Us a similitude and forgotten the fact of his
creation, saying: 'Who will revive them bones when they have rotten
away.' Say: 'He will revive them who produced them for the first time.
He is the Knower of every creation." (Surah Yasin 36 : 78)

This verse is in reply to that disbeliever who came to the Holy Prophet
with a rotten bone in his hand. He pressed the bone and powdered it.
Then he scattered the powder in the air. Thereafter he asked: 'Who will
revive these scattered particles'. The Quran answers: 'He who created
the bones at the first. '

Sometimes man judges the things by the standard of his own capacity and
on this basis divides them into those that are possible and those that
are impossible. When he finds a thing to be beyond his power he declares
it to be impossible in itself. The Qur'an says that to accomplish a
thing may be impossible for man, but that cannot be impossible for the
Power that created life in the dead matter for the first time. For that
Power it is possible to revive the dead also.

II. The second group of the verses which mention some instances of the
revival is further divided into two sets of verses.

" There are verses which recount a particular event of the past when a
dead body was revived, like the verses which narrate the story of
Prophet Ibrahim, who said to Allah:

"My Lord, show me how You give life to the dead. He said: 'Do you not
believe? 'Ibrahim said: 'Yes, but I ask in order that my heart be at
ease.' His Lord said: 'Take four of the birds, cut off their heads and
cut their bodies into pieces. Then place a part of them on each hill.
Then call those birds. You will see that the birds will come to life and
will rush to you." (Surah al Baqarah 2 : 260)

" There are other verses which are not based on any supernatural event.
They cite the existing system known to everybody. The grass which
withers and dies during autumn and winter again comes to life during
spring. As it is observed by everybody, the earth after being verdant
and full of life loses its vitality and vigor and dies, and when the
conditions change with the change of season, it once again comes to life
and the plants, the trees and the grass begin to thrive and blossom. A
time will come when the entire system of the world will shrivel and dry
up. The sun and the stars will be blown up. The whole world will die,
but not for ever. Everything will come to life again, though in a
different form and under different conditions.

At present we, human beings live on the earth. We see that in 365 days
the earth passes through a cycle of death and life. Normally we live up
to 50, 60 or 70 and sometime even up to 100 years or more. During this
period we see this cycle of life and death dozens of times. That is why
it causes us no surprise that the earth dies and again comes to life.
Suppose the duration of our life had been only a few months as is the
case with some insects, and suppose we had not known how to read and
were not aware of the annual revolution of the earth, we would not have
believed that the dead earth comes to life again, because we would not
have observed this phenomenon. Naturally for a mosquito that appears in
the spring and dies in the autumn and winter the conception of the
renewal of the life of a garden is unimaginable.

Can a worm living in a tree or a mosquito living in a garden, whose
entire world is that tree or that garden, imagine that that tree or that
garden is a subordinate part of a bigger system called farm, that farm
in its turn is a part of another system called district, that district
is a part of another system called province, that province is a part of
another system called country, that country is a part of another system
called the system of the earth and that the earth is a part of our solar
system?

How can we be sure that our solar system, the stars and the galaxies of
which we know are not a part of an overall bigger system? May be that
millions and billions years of the existence of the universe known to us
are equivalent to just a part or just a day of an overall season. May be
that the present season of life is to be followed by another season of
silence and dullness, and thereafter once again the entire system
including our solar system, the stars and the galaxies will acquire a
new lease of life in some other form.

The Prophets have told us on behalf of Allah of an all round
destruction and silence followed by a new life and the Resurrection of
the dead under a new system. As we are sure of their truthfulness, we
believe what they have said is true, including what they have said about
the universal renewal of life.

The Qur'an has cited an example of the system of life and death on the
face of the earth so that we may regard it as a small specimen of the
universal system of life and may not think that Resurrection is
improbable and inconsistent with the total system of creation.

The Qur'an says that Resurrection is a renewal of life and the renewal
of life is a thing of which a small specimen we see on the face of the
earth. The Holy Prophet has said:

"When you see the spring, think much of Resurrection."

In other words the spring is a specimen of Resurrection.

Rumi says:

"Spring time after the falling of leaves from the trees is a proof of
the Resurrection. Fire, air, clouds, water and sun dispel many
illusions. In the spring season many mysteries are unveiled. The earth
springs up what it has absorbed."

There are so many Qur'anic verses which cite the existing system of
life and death as evidence:

"Allah it is who sends the winds and they raise a cloud; then We lead
it to a dead land and revive therewith the earth after its death. Such
is the Resurrection." (Surah Fatir 35 : 9)

"You see the earth barren, but when We send down water thereon, it does
thrill and swell and put forth every lovely kind of growth. That is
because only Allah is the Truth. He brings the dead to life. Surely He
is Able to do everything. And surely the Hour will come. There is no
doubt about that. And Allah will surely raise those who are in the
graves." (Surah al-Hajj 22:5-7)

There are many other verses which consider Resurrection a part of the
system of life and death prevailing in the universe. We see a small
specimen of Resurrection ourselves on the face of the earth. Here we
confine ourselves to quoting two verses only. These verses differ from
the verses of the first set in as much as these verses do not
exclusively rely on Allah's ability. They also cite a specimen
resembling Resurrection to show that in the perceptible world also
Allah's Power has been manifesting itself on the same pattern.

The third group of verses describes the Resurrection as inevitable.
Should there be no Resurrection that would amount to something improper
on Allah's part. This point has been elaborated in two ways:

" On the Basis of Divine Justice - Allah bestows on every creation of
His what that creation deserves and what is befitting of that
creation;

" On the basis of Infinite Divine Wisdom - Allah has created everything
for a purpose. The Divine wisdom requires that everything should be led
to its appropriate perfection and target.

The Qur'an says that it would be a sort of injustice if there were no
Resurrection, eternal life, ever-lasting bliss and Divine retribution,
and injustice cannot be imputed to Allah because that would be contrary
to the principle of Divine justice. It also says that if there was no
eternal life the creation would be futile, and it is wrong to say that
Allah does anything in vain.

There are so many verses in which return to Allah and eternal life have
been described as inevitable and unfailing either because of Divine
justice or because of Divine wisdom.

Here we quote verses from two surahs of the Qur'an in which the
argument has been based either on Divine justice or Divine wisdom or
both.

(i) The Holy Quran, after declaring that those who deviate from the
right path and forget the Day of Reckoning will be severely punished,
says:

"We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them
in vain. That is the opinion of those who disbelieve. And woe unto those
who disbelieve from the Fire. Shall We regard those who believe and do
good works as those who spread corruption in the earth or shall we treat
the pious as the wicked?" (Surah Sad, 38:27-28)

As we see, in the first one of these two verses the argument is based
on Divine wisdom and sensibility of the creation and in the second verse
it is based on Divine justice.

II. In the first of these two verses a reference has been made to the
principle of justice and in the second to the principle of wisdom. Then
in the second verse also Divine justice has been mentioned once again
and described as the ultimate aim of the Resurrection.

"Do those who commit evil deeds suppose that We shall make them as
those who believe and do good deeds, while their life and death is just
the same? Bad is their judgement! And Allah has created the heavens and
the earth with truth, and that everyone may be repaid what he has
earned. And they will not be wronged." (Surah al Jathiyah, 45:21 - 22)


Explanation: Here it is necessary to give an explanation as to how the
two principles of Divine justice and Divine wisdom necessitate eternal
life, and how it is that if we presume that the limited life of this
world is not going to be followed by an eternal life, the creation of
man cannot be justified, neither from the angle of Divine justice nor
from that of Divine wisdom. Let us begin with Divine justice.

Divine Justice: Justice in its wider sense means to render everyone his
due without any discrimination. As it is against justice not to give
anyone his due, it is also against justice to make discrimination in
this regard and to give what is their due to some and not to give it to
some others.

It would be injustice if a teacher at the time of examination gives to
the students less marks than they deserve or gives to some of them as
many as they deserve but gives to some other less.

Justice is in a way concomitant with equality, which means to treat all
equally and not to believe in discrimination. Such an equality results
in justice, that is giving everyone as much as is his due. But equality
in giving in disregard of what is due and how much is due is tantamount
to injustice. Similarly equality in withholding is also contrary to
justice. It is also objectionable to deprive all of what is due to them
without any discrimination.

As such Divine justice means that the blessing of Allah is extended to
every existing thing in accordance with the degree of its potential
capacity and ability to receive it. If any existing thing lacks some
quality that means that under the existing conditions it has not the
capacity of possessing it.

We may further say that it would have been contrary to Divine justice
if favors befitting their potential capacity were permanently withheld
from any existing things. Justice requires that favours appropriate to
and commensurate with their ability and merit should be conferred on all
existing things without any discrimination.

Among existing things man has been furnished with a especially high
degree of capacity and potentiality. Man is not motivated merely by his
animal instincts and propensities. Animals have only those instincts
which are related to their material life. On the other hand, man has, as
we explained earlier, certain higher instincts also, which are of the
level of eternity and not of this world.

Man has moral, scientific, aesthetic and religious motives. He
accomplishes so many things under the impact of these motives, and
sometimes even sacrifices his material and animal life for the sake of
his high human objectives.

It is man who sets up, in the words of the Qur'an, his system of
actions' on the basis of faith and good deeds, and aims at attaining
eternal life and Allah's good pleasure. The idea of eternity and a
desire to achieve it; His instincts push him in that direction.

All this indicates that man is capable of being eternal, and that his
soul is not material. This means that in this world man is like an
embryo. A fetus in the mother's womb is furnished with certain systems
and faculties, such as respiratory system, circulatory system, nervous
system, reproductive system, hearing system and the system of vision.

But all these systems are in keeping only with the requirements of the
post-natal world. They are not consistent with the temporary nine-month
life of the womb.

It is true that in this world also man is benefitted by the system of
faith and good deeds. But this benefit is of secondary importance.
Actually this system is tantamount to a seed which can grow and bear
fruit only in the happy eternal life. In other words, the real
significance of this system is only in relation with the life of the
other world.

Not only in the system of faith and good deeds man soars above nature
and scatters the seeds of supernatural relations but also in the
opposite system called by the Quran the system of disbelief and
wickedness his actions go outside the domain of natural calculations and
physical needs, and acquire spiritual and eternal aspect, although in a
devious way. Thus the disbelievers and the wicked also in a way become
fit to attain eternal life, but unfortunately their eternal life brings
to them pain and grief and in religious terms, consigns them to Hell.

If man does not move in the orbit of faith and good deeds, it is not
that he confines himself to the orbit of the animals, but he falls below
zero. In the words of the Qur'an such people are lower in rank and more
erroneous than the animals.

Should there be no eternal life, those who work under the system of
faith and good deeds and those who work under the opposite system will
be like the students some of whom did their duty well and some of whom
wasted their time in joking and gossip, but the teacher treated them all
alike and gave no marks to anyone of them. This whole-sale depriving
obviously is bad and against the principle of justice.

To explain this point in simpler terms it may be said that Allah has
called people to faith and piety.

Some people have accepted this call and modified their conduct, their
way of thinking and their moral system accordingly. Some others have not
responded to the call and have taken to evil-doing and corruption. But
in this world we see no such system wherein all good deeds be rewarded
and all wicked men be punished. Therefore there must be another world
where the righteous and the wicked could be reattributed according to
their deeds. Otherwise, there can be no Divine justice.

Divine Wisdom: Our acts that are the acts of the human beings are of
two kinds:

I. Frivolous Acts, which are of no real advantage to us and are
ineffectual in helping us attain the virtues latent in us;

II. Wise and Rational Acts, which produce good results and help us,
attain the befitting virtues.

The first kinds of acts are futile and meaningless and the second kinds
of acts are wise and judicious. As such our wise acts are those which
lead us to a perfection befitting us. Now what about the wise acts of
Allah? Are His wise acts also those which lead Him to perfection and His
frivolous acts those which do not lead Him to perfection? No, that is
not valid in the case of Allah, who is above all needs, wants and
imperfections. Whatever He does is His favour, blessing and
benevolence.

He does not do anything to meet any need of His or to gain anything for
Himself. His wise acts are those which lead any of His creation to a
perfection befitting it. A futile act may be imputed to Him only in the
sense that He may create something and may not lead it to a perfection
befitting it. Thus the conception of wisdom in respect of Allah is
different from that which applies to man.

Wisdom of man consists in his sagacity and his taking steps to advance
towards human perfection. Wisdom of Allah consists in leading His
creation to perfection befitting it or, in other words, creating things
on the basis of pushing them to a goal befitting them.

As wisdom in so far as it concerns man, means his doing things with a
view to achieve his own betterment, it is not necessary that there
should be any real relationship between what he does and the result that
he desires. In other words, it is not necessary that the desired result
should be a natural consequence of his actions or that it should be
regarded as the merit of his actions. For example, man makes so many
useful things of clay, wood, stone, metal, leather, wool, cotton etc.

and obtains sensible results. For instance, he makes a chair, a house,
a motor car or some cloth. But a chair cannot be considered a merit of
wood, nor a house a merit of stones, bricks and mortar, nor a motor car
of a number of different metals used in its manufacture, for these
stuffs themselves do not move towards their final forms and shapes. Of
course, the results which man obtains from these products such as
sitting on the chair, living in the house, moving in the car or wearing
the clothes may be regarded as his merit or at least something useful to
him.

In the case of Allah, on the other hand, there exists a real and
natural relationship between His action and the results which they
produce. In other words, the result of every action of His is really a
merit of that action. As we see, every seed and every grain in this
world moves itself to its goal and its best form.

Now the position is that this world and everything in it is unstable
and liable to a change. Any final shape of anything which we may take
into consideration is not final, and is liable to a change in its turn.
In other words, everything is temporary, transient and will come to an
end. All stages of nature are halting places on the way and none of them
is the final destination.

From here some people have got the idea that the creation has no
definite purpose or plan. The world is a caravan which is always on the
move, going from one stage to another. Obviously a journey can be
meaningful only if it has some destination in view. A journey can have
no meaning if all destinations are no more than halting places and there
is no possibility of finally reaching anywhere.

As every existence in the world is followed by its non-existence and
every construction is followed by its destruction, the whole system
governing the world is nothing but bewilderment and a repetition of what
has already been repeated. Thus the whole system of life and existence
is based on frivolity.

The Qur'an's reply is that this specious argument would have been
correct if there had been this world alone, all births had ended in
death and the fate of all that grew and bloomed had been to dry up and
vanish. But such a view is short sighted and based on the presumption
that life is confined to this world, while the fact is that life is not
so confined. This world is the First Day. It will be followed by the
Last Day. As Imam Ali has put it:

"This world is the abode of passing and the next world will be the
abode of staying".

It is the next world which gives a meaning to the present world. It is
the next world which is the destination and which gives a meaning to the
motion and the hustle and bustle of this world.

Had not there been the next world, which is eternal, there would have
been no final destination, this world would have been a sort of
labyrinth, and the creation, in the words of the Qur'an, would have been
in vain, futile and a mere pastime. But the Prophets have come to remove
any doubts in this respect and to acquaint us with the truth, the
ignorance of which would have made the entire world meaningless in our
eyes. With the fixation of this idea of frivolity in our minds, our own
existence becomes meaningless and to no purpose. One effect of the
belief in the next world is that it delivers us from thinking that our
existence has no purpose and gives a meaning to ourselves, our thinking
and our life.


