Chapter 3: Significance of Imamat
=================================

The subject of our present discussion is Imamat. We know that for us,
the Shi'ah though it is a question of extraordinary importance, other
Muslim sects do not attach so much importance to it. The reason is that
the conception of Imamat which we have is different from that conception
of it which other sects have.

There is no doubt that there are some common features too, but those
features of Imamat, which have given extraordinary importance to it, are
peculiar to the Shi'ah creed. For example when we, the Shi'ah want to
enumerate the cardinal principles of religion according to the Shi'ah
doctrine, we say that these principles are Monotheism, Prophethood,
Divine Justice, Imamat and the Hereafter. We regard Imamat as a cardinal
principle of religion.

In a sense the Sunnis also do not reject the idea of Imamat totally,
but according to their belief, Imamat is not a cardinal principle of
religion. They regard it only as a collateral matter. In fact there
exists a basic difference of opinion with regard to Imamat. We believe
in one sort of Imamat and the Sunnis believe in another sort of it. The
reason why the Shi'ah regard Imamat as a cardinal principle of religion
whereas the Sunnis regard it as a collateral matters, is that the Shi'ah
conception of Imamat is quite different from the Sunni conception of
it.

The Meaning of Imam

Imam means a leader or one who goes in front. The word Imam in Arabic
does not imply any sense of sanctity. And Imam is the person who has
some followers irrespective of the fact whether he is virtuous or
depraved. The Quran itself has used the word in both the senses. At one
place it says:

"We appointed them Imams who guide with our permission." (Surah Anbiya,
21:73)

At another place it says:

"The Imams who invite people to the Hell." (Surah al Qasas, 28:41)

In respect of Fir'awn the Quran has used a phrase which conveys a sense
similar to that of an Imam or a leader. It says:

"On the Day of Judgement he will lead his people down into the Hell
fire." (Surah Hud, 11:98)

Thus Imam literally means simply a leader. But at present we are not
concerned with a bad leader. Let us now discuss the conception of
Imamat.

The word Imamat is applied to several cases. Some concepts of it are
acknowledged by the Sunnis also. But they differ with us as to who is an
Imam and what qualities he must possess. They totally disbelieve in
certain concepts of Imamat. It is not that they believe in Imamat in the
sense in which we believe but disagree as to the person who holds this
assignment. The Imamat in which they believe is nothing but social
leadership and this is the sense in which this word has been used in the
books of the old scholastic theologians.

Khwaja Nasiruddin Tusi in at-Tajrid defines Imamat as general charge of
society. Here it seems necessary to mention another point also:

Various Aspects of the Holy Prophet

The Holy Prophet in his lifetime by virtue of his special position in
Islam had several aspects as is indicated by the Qur'an and his own life
account. At one and the same time he held several assignments. In the
first instance he was a Prophet of Allah and in this capacity he
conveyed, Allah's message and commandments to the people. The Holy Quran
says:

"Whatever the Messenger gives, take it, and whatever he forbids abstain
from it." (Surah al Hashr, 59:7)

In other words, whatever instructions and orders the Prophet gives to
the people, he gives them on behalf of Allah.

From this point of view the Prophet communicates only that which has
been revealed to him. Another assignment of the Holy Prophet was that he
held the post of the supreme judge, by virtue of which he administered
justice among the Muslims. According to Islam every Tom, Dick and Harry
cannot be a judge, for from the viewpoint of Islam arbitration is a
Divine affair. Allah has enjoined justice and a Judge is the person who
administers it in cases of disputes and differences. This assignment was
also expressly conferred on the Holy Prophet by the Qur'an, which
says:

"By your Lord, they will not believe in truth until they make you judge
of what is in dispute between them and find within themselves no dislike
of that which you decide and submit to your decision whole-heartedly."
(Surah an Nisa, 4:65 )

The Holy Prophet was appointed a judge by Allah and hence this
assignment was not an ordinary one; it was Divine. Practically also he
was the Prophet-judge. The third assignment which he officially held and
which was conferred on him by the Quran was that of the head of the
State. He was the head of the State and leader of Muslim society. In
other words; in Muslim society he was the policy maker as well as the
administrator. It is believed that it is this aspect of the Holy Prophet
which is visualized by the Quranic verse:

"Believers, obey Allah, and obey His Messenger and your (qualified)
leaders." (Surah an Nisa, 4:59)

In fact, the three positions held by the Holy Prophet were not merely
formal or ceremonial. The directions which we have received from him are
basically of three kinds.

" The first kind comprises Divine revelations, in regard to which the
Holy Prophet could do nothing of his own accord. His sole function was
to convey to the people what was revealed to him.

" In the field of religious instructions, for example, he told the
people how to offer prayers and keep fast. But when he administered
justice his judgements were not revealed. In the case of a dispute
between two persons, he decided the matter according to the Islamic
standards and judged who was right and who was wrong. In such a case
Jibra'il did not bring any revelation to him. Exceptional cases are a
different matter. On the whole he decided all judicial cases on the
basis of available evidence in the same way as others do.

At the most it may be said that his judgements were better than those
of others. He himself said that he had orders to pronounce judgement on
the basis of what appears to be specious. Suppose a plaintiff and a
respondent appear and the plaintiff produces two irreproachable
witnesses. The Prophet would decide the case on the basis of their
evidence. Evidently this judgement will be the Prophet's own judgement
and not a judgement revealed to him.

" In this third capacity also when the Prophet issued an order as the
leader of society, the nature of this order of his was different from
the nature of what he conveyed as Divine revelation. Allah appointed the
Holy Prophet the leader of society and authorized him to work as such.
In this capacity he sometimes consulted others also. We see that he
consulted his companions on the occasion of the Battles of Badr and Uhud
and on many other occasions. Evidently there can be no consultation
about a divinely revealed order.

The Holy Prophet never consulted his companions as to how the dusk time
(Magrib) prayers should be offered. There have been occasions when the
Holy Prophet said about certain questions referred to him that Allah had
commanded thus and hence he had to abide by His command. But on matters
in which he had received no Divine injunction, he often consulted others
and asked for their opinion. If in such cases he issued his own orders,
he did so because he was authorized by Allah to do so. In a few cases
connected with social administration also he received revelation, but
those were exceptional cases. Otherwise as a rule he did not receive any
detailed instructions on social and political questions and he did not
work as a mere messenger in respect of these questions. It is an
undisputed fact that the Holy Prophet worked in all these capacities
concurrently.

Imamat in the Sense of Leadership of Society

The first meaning of Imamat as mentioned above is the general charge of
society. One of his assignments which fell vacant on the demise of the
Holy Prophet, was the leadership of society. There is no doubt that
society needs a leader. Who was the leader of society after the Holy
Prophet? Both the Shi'ah and the Sunnis agree that society is in need of
a leader and a supreme commander. It is here that the question of
Khilafat arises. The Shi'ah say that the Holy Prophet himself nominated
his successor and announced that after him Imam Ali would take the reins
of the affairs of the Muslims in his hands. The Sunnis who have a
different logic do not accept this view at least in the form in which
the Shi'ah accepts it. According to them the Holy Prophet did not
designate any particular person as his successor and it was the duty of
the Muslims themselves to elect their leader. The Sunnis accept the
principle of Imamat when they say that the Muslims need a leader. All
that they say is that the leader was to be chosen by the Muslims. In
contrast, the Shi'ah claim that the Holy Prophet himself appointed his
successor by Divine revelation.

Had the question of Imamat been merely that of political leadership
after the Holy Prophet?

We the Shi'ah also should not have regarded it as a cardinal principle
of religion. It would have been fit to include this question in the
collateral matters. We could say that the question of Imamat in which
the Shi'ah believe is confined to declaring that Imam Ali was one of the
companions of the Holy Prophet like Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and so many
others or even like Abuzar and Salman, but he was better, more learned,
more pious and more capable than all of them and that the Prophet
designated him to be his successor. But the Shi'ah do not stop here.
They believe in two tenets in which the Sunnis do not share with them at
all. One of these two tenets is Imamat in the sense of religious
authority.

Imamat in the Sense of Religious Authority

We have said that the Holy Prophet conveyed the Divine revelations
received by him to the people who were at liberty to ask him whatever
they wanted to know about the teachings of Islam. Similarly they asked
of him what they did not find in the Qur'an. Now the question is whether
what the Qur'an contains and what the Holy Prophet has told the general
people is all that Islam wanted to convey of its instructions; teachings
and knowledge? Evidently the Holy Prophet did not have time enough to
convey all the teachings of Islam.

Therefore, he trained Imam Ali, his successor as an extraordinary
scholar and taught him everything about Islam, at least all the
principles and the general rules of it. Imam Ali was the most
outstanding of his companions. He was infallible like himself, and knew
even that which was not expressly told by Allah.

Introducing him, the Holy Prophet said:

"0' People, after me refer all religious questions to Ali and ask him
and my other successors whatever you want to know."

In this respect Imamat is a sort of specialization in Islam, but an
extraordinary and Divine specialization, far above the degree of the
specialization which a mujtahid (jurist) can acquire. The Imams are
experts in Islam but their special knowledge of it is not derived from
their own thinking and reason which are liable to commit mistakes.

They receive their knowledge in a mysterious and secret way unknown to
us. Imam Ali received his knowledge of Islamic sciences direct from the
Holy Prophet and the subsequent Imams received it through him. In the
case of each Imam this knowledge was infallible and impeccable. It was
handed down by each Imam to the subsequent Imams.

The Sunnis do not believe that anybody holds such a position. In other
words they do not believe in the existence of any Imam in this sense. It
is not that they do not accept Ali as an Imam but say that Abu Bakr is
an Imam instead of him. In fact they do not admit that any of the
companions of the Holy Prophet, neither Abu Bakr, nor Umar nor Uthman,
holds such a position.

That is why they attribute so many mistakes in religious matters to Abu
Bakr and Umar. In contrast the Shi'ah believes their Imams to be
infallible, and will never admit that any of their Imams has ever
committed a mistake. But the Sunnis in their books say that on such and
such occasion Abu Bakr said so, but he was wrong. When he realized his
mistake he said that he had a Satan (Devil) who overwhelmed him from
time to time. Similarly the Sunnis say that once Umar made a mistake and
then referring to certain women declared that they were more learned
than him.

It is said that when Abu Bakr died the women of his family, including
his daughter - the Holy Prophet's wife, 'Ayishah began to weep and cry.
When Umar heard the din of their lamentation, he sent a message to the
women, asking them to be quiet, but they did not comply with his
request. He again sent a message and then threatened to punish them. At
last 'Ayishah was told by some women that Umar was threatening them and
asking them to become quiet. She sent for Umar and when he came to her
asked him what he wanted to say and why he was sending a message after
message. Umar said that he had heard the Holy Prophet saying: "If any
one died and his people wept over him, he would be punished."

'Ayishah said: "You haven't understood. You are mistaken. That's a
different matter. I know what that is. Once a wicked Jew died. His folk
were weeping over him. The Holy Prophet said that they were weeping and
he was being punished. The Holy Prophet did not say that he was being
punished because they were weeping. He said that they were weeping over
him, but didn't know that he was being punished. What connection has it
with this question? Even if weeping be prohibited, why should Allah
punish an innocent person for the sin which we commit?" "Strange! said
Umar. "Was that the case"? "Yes", said 'Ayishah, "that was the case".
Umar said: "Hadn't these women been there, Umar would have been
ruined."

The Sunnis themselves say that on seventy (very many) occasions Umar
said: "Had there not been Ali, Umar would have been ruined." He himself
confessed on so many occasions that Ali often rectified his mistakes,
and Umar used to confess his mistakes.

In short, the Sunnis do not believe in any Imam in the sense in which
we believe. Anyhow it is an indisputable fact that it was the Holy
Prophet alone who received the celestial revelation. We do not say that
revelation is received by the Imams also. The message of Islam was
delivered to mankind by the Holy Prophet alone and to him alone Allah
revealed all the necessary teachings of Islam.

There are no injunctions of Islam which were not revealed to him. But
the question whether all injunctions of Islam were conveyed to the
people at large, is a different matter. The Sunnis say that the Holy
Prophet conveyed all Islamic injunctions to his companions. But still
the Sunnis find themselves in a fix when they face problems about which
nothing has been reported from the companions of the Holy Prophet. To
resolve this situation they have introduced the law of analogy, by means
of which they claim that they complete what is missing. In this
connection Imam Ali says:

"Do you mean to say that Allah's religion was incomplete and you have
come to complete it?" (See Nahjul Balagha - Sermon 18)

The Shi'ah on the other hand say that neither Allah revealed the
Islamic injunctions incompletely to the Holy Prophet, nor did the Holy
Prophet convey them incompletely to the people. He conveyed them
completely but he did not say everything to the general people. In fact
many questions did not arise during his lifetime. Anyhow, he conveyed
all injunctions which he received from Allah to his special disciple,
Imam Ali and asked him to pass them on to the people as and when
necessary.

It is here that the question of infallibility arises. The Shi'ah say
that just as the Holy Prophet could be neither intentionally nor
unintentionally wrong in what he said, similarly his special pupil Imam
Ali also could not go wrong, for just as the Holy Prophet was backed by
Divine support in many ways, this special pupil of his also enjoyed
Divine support. This was one more feature of Imamat.

Imamat in the Sense of Wilayat

This is the third sense of Imamat and the highest sense for that
matter. Great stress is laid on this sense in the Shi'ah doctrine In a
way Wilayat is a common point between Shi'ism and mysticism (tasawwuf).
But when we say so, we should not be misunderstood, for you may come
across what the orientalists have said in this respect.

They say that Wilayat is a question in which the mystics are greatly
interested and which has been of interest for the Shi'ah also from the
early days of Islam. I remember that some ten years back an orientalist
interviewed Allama Tabatabi. One of the questions he put was whether the
Shi'ah had borrowed the idea of Wilayat from the mystics or the mystics
had taken it from the Shi'ah.

The fact is that the doctrine of Wilayat existed among the Shi'ah even
when mysticism had not emerged yet. If it is supposed that either of
these two have borrowed the idea from the other, it must be said that
the mystics have adopted it from the Shi'ah. The question of Wilayat is
analogous to the questions of the perfect man and the master of the
time. The mystics have laid great stress on this point. Moulavi says
that in every age there exists a wali, qa'im or the master of the age.
In every age there exists a perfect man possessing all human
qualities.

There is no age in which, a perfect wali, often described as 'qutb'
(pole, pivot, and authority) is not present. The mystics believe that a
perfect wali is also a perfect man. They ascribe to him many positions
some of which are unintelligible to us. One of his positions is his
control of the hearts in the sense that he is the universal spirit
transcending all spirits. Moulavi hints at this position in his story of
Ibrahim Adham. This story is no more than a fictitious tale. But Moulavi
narrates tales to make his points clear.

His aim is not to narrate history. He tells a story only to press his
point. Moulavi says that Ibrahim Adham went to the river and threw a
needle into it. Afterwards he recalled the needle. The fish put their
heads out of the river. Each fish had a needle in its mouth. Continuing,
Maulavi says: '0 you having no endowments, take care of your heart in
the presence of those who are gifted with the qualities of heart.'

Continuing further he says: "That Shaykh (spiritual guide) became aware
of that which was in the heart of the other people. The Shaykh could
know that because he was like a lion and the hearts of other people were
his dens."

The Shi'ah generally use the word Wilayat in its most exalted sense.
They believe that the Wali and Imam is the master of the time, and there
has always been and there will always be one perfect man in the world.
In most of the ziyarats (homages) which we recite, we acknowledge the
existence of Wilayat and Imamat in this sense, and believe that the Imam
has a universal spirit. In the ziyarats which we all recite and which we
regard as a part of Shi'ah doctrine we say:

"I testify that you see where I stand; you hear what I say and return
my salutation." It is to be noted that we address that to an Imam who is
dead. From our point of view in this respect there is no difference
between a dead and a living Imam. It is not that we say so to a dead
Imam only. We say: "Peace be on you, Ali ibn Musa al-Riza. I admit and
testify that you hear my salutation and return it."

The Sunnis with the exception of the Wahhabis, believe that only the
Holy Prophet is endowed with this quality of knowing and hearing.
According to them nobody else in the world occupies such a high
spiritual status and has such a spiritual comprehension. But we, the
Shiites believe that this position is held by all our Imams.

This belief is a part of our religious principles and we always
acknowledge it.

In short the question of Imamat has three degrees and if we do not make
a distinction between these degrees, we may be faced with difficulties
in respect to certain inferences in this connection. Based on these
degrees Shiism has three groups. Some Shiites believe in Imamat only in
the sense of social and political leadership of society. They say that
the Holy Prophet designated Imam Ali to the leadership of society after
him, and that Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman could not claim this position.
These people are Shiites only to this extent.

They either do not believe in the two further degrees or keep quiet
about them. Some others believe in the second degree also but do not
believe in the third one. It is said that the late Sayyid Muhammad Baqir
Durchal who was Ayatullah Burujardi's teacher in Isfahan, disbelieved in
this third degree. Anyhow, the majority of the Shi'ah and the Shi'ah
scholars believe in the third degree also.

If we want to discuss Imamat, we should discuss it in three stages:

" Imamat according to the Qur'an;

" Imamat according to the tradition;

" Imamat according to reason.

First of all let us see whether the Quranic verses relating to Imamat
indicate that sense of Imamat in which the Shi'ah believe. And if they
do so, do they indicate Imamat in the sense of political and social
leadership only, or do they indicate it in the sense of religious
authority and spiritual Wilayat also. After explaining this we should
see what the Prophetic traditions say about Imamat. Finally we should
analyse Imamat from the viewpoint of reason and see what reason says
about each stage of it. Is the Sunni point of view that the Holy
Prophet's successor should be elected by the people more reasonable or
is it a fact that the Holy Prophet himself has nominated his successor?
Similarly what is agreeing to reason in regard to the other two sense of
Imamat.


