Prohibition of Recording of Traditions
======================================

The Sunnis themselves have created a situation which has weakened their
case. Umar disallowed the writing of traditions (Ahadith). This is a
historical fact, not a story invented by any hostile Shi'ah. It is
admitted by the European Orientalists also who are neither the Shi'ah
nor the Sunnis. Even the most sympathetic Orientalists say that Umar
disallowed the writing of traditions because of his fear that tradition
would divert the attention of the people from the Qur'an, which he
wanted to be the sole source of law. This is definitely a historical
fact and not an allegation of the Shi'ites.

During the days of Umar nobody could venture to write a Prophetic
tradition and show his writing to others. Oral transmission of
traditions was of course allowed. This situation continued till the time
of Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz, who became Caliph in 99 A.H. and died in 101
A.H. He issued instructions that Prophetic traditions should be
collected and put down in writing.

Thus he changed Umar's policy. It is to be noted that immediately
following Umar ibn Abdul Aziz's instructions those who were so far
transmitting Prophetic traditions orally, undertook the work of writing
them, but in the meanwhile a part of them had already been lost.

We know that the rules of Islamic law mentioned in the Qur'an are very
brief. The Qur'an mostly mentions general rules only. For example, the
Qur'an lays great stress on prayers. But still all that it says about
them does not go beyond saying:

"Establish prayers, prostrate and bow down."

Even it has not been explained how prayers are to be offered. Similarly
there are so many rites connected with pilgrimage. The Holy Prophet
personally observed them. Had not the Prophetic traditions assumed the
present practical form, the Muslims could not know anything about them.
But the question is what opportunities the Holy Prophet had to enunciate
all the Islamic injunctions. During his 13 years' stay in Makkah because
of stern opposition and very tight situation there, the number of those
who were converted to Islam could not probably exceed 400. People used
to meet the Holy Prophet only secretly. Some 70 families which
constituted half or even more than half of the total population of the
Muslims, had to migrate to Ethiopia.

From this point of view Medina was a better place, but there the Holy
Prophet had so many other commitments. Even if he worked like a
whole-time teacher, during all these 23 years he did not have enough
time at his disposal to impart all the teachings of Islam, especially in
view of the fact that Islam is a complete code of human life
particularly in our present age.

Use of Analogy

As a result of what they hold in this connection, the Sunnis had to
face many practical difficulties in regard to the rules of Islamic law.
They came across questions about which nothing was mentioned in the
Qur'an. They checked the collections of traditions which they had, but
there also they did not find the answer. What to do then? To solve the
problem they resorted to analogy which means to extend on the basis of
some existing similarity the rule of a text to a case not provided for
in the Quran and the Sunnah.

For example we say that the law says so in that case. As this case is
somewhat similar to that, the same rule should apply to this case also.
Possibly, in that case the Holy Prophet gave that particular order for
such and such reason and as that reason exists in this case also, the
same order should apply to it also.

As may be seen, the analogical deduction is based on possibilities
only. The cases where Prophetic traditions were not available were too
many. The world of Islam greatly extended during the Abbasid period.
Many countries were conquered. Consequently new problems arose everyday;
the solution of which was not found in the Qur'an and the Sunnah. The
result was that analogical deduction became a regular practice. The
Sunnis were divided into two groups. The first group which included
Ahmad ibn Hambal and Malik ibn Anas, looked at analogical deduction with
suspicion.

It is said that Malik ibn Anas resorted to this process only in two
cases. The other group which included Abu Hanifah made use of analogy on
a too wide scale. Abu Hanifah used to say that the sayings attributed to
the Holy Prophet were not reliable. He declared that he found only
fifteen Prophetic traditions trustworthy. In all other cases he resorted
to analogical deduction. Shafi'i had a midway position. In some cases he
relied on Prophetic traditions and in others he applied analogy, with
the result that he produced a sort of hotchpotch code of law. It is said
that Abu Hanifah made so much use of analogy because he was of Irani
origin and the Iranians by nature tend to take much interest in mental
exercises, and because he lived in Iraq which was far away from Medina,
the centre of the traditionalists. Anyhow, he indulged too much in
analogy.

A Sunni writer says that one day Abu Hanifah went to a barber.

His beard had a mixture of black and grey hair but the number of the
grey hair was not very large. He asked the barber to pull out the grey
hair. The barber said: "If grey hair is pulled out, it tends to grow
more copiously." Abu Hanifah said: "Then pull out the black hair, for my
analogy says that in case grey hair grows copiously if it is pulled out,
the same thing should happen in the case of black hair also." But the
fact is that if there is any such rule, it applies to grey hair only,
not to black hair. Anyhow, Abu Hanifah made similar deductions in the
case of jurisprudence also.

Analogy from the Shi'ah Point of View

When we refer to the Shi'ah traditions we find that according to them
the need of analogy is felt only because of the wrong notion that the
Qur'an and the Sunnah are not enough to provide all the necessary rules
of law. The fact is that this notion is totally wrong. We have received
such a quantity of Prophetic traditions either directly or through the
chosen descendants of the Holy Prophet, that if we refer to the
principles laid down therein, we need not resort to analogical deduction
at all.

That is the spirit of Imamat from religious point of view.

Islam is not merely a creed or a doctrine. It cannot be said that after
its ideology has been enunciated by its founder it only requires a
government to implement that ideology. It is a complete code and that
position of it must be kept in mind.

No Question of Election in the Presence of an Infallible Imam

From the viewpoint of leadership and rulership the position is that
Imam Ali the Holy Prophet's successor who is as infallible as the
Prophet himself and who has been designated by him to be his successor,
cannot be placed at par with other people. His position is exceptional
like that of the Prophet himself.

Therefore in his case there is no room for any election, consultation
or any other such thing. In the case of the Prophet nobody ever said
that he was only the Messenger of Allah and the people were at liberty
to choose him or anybody else to be their ruler. Everybody knew that as
he was superhuman and had contact with the Divine world, in his presence
there could be no question of any election or selection. After the Holy
Prophet also there was no room for any such thing.

He had designated twelve successors to strengthen Islam during the next
two or three centuries and to expound it in a way free from every error.
In the presence of such persons capable of explaining all the
injunctions of Islam, there could be no question of any election etc. Is
it reasonable to choose someone else in the presence of a person
absolutely infallible and extremely competent and learned in every sense
of the word?

Furthermore, when Imam Ali had been appointed an Imam in the sense
mentioned by us, worldly leadership was also naturally due to him. In
fact the Holy Prophet designated Imam Ali to this assignment because
Imam Ali was an Imam and infallible. Anyhow, the case is different
during the occultation of the present Imam, for there exists no
infallible Imam free to exercise his worldly authority. Similarly the
case would have been different if the events of the early period of
Islam had not taken place and.

Imam Ali had become Caliph immediately after the Holy Prophet and had
been succeeded by Imam Hasan, then by Imam Husayn and so on till the
times of the last Imam. In this case there would have been no reason for
occultation. After the demise of the last infallible Imam the question
of rulership would have assumed a different shape. Then it could be
asked how this question is to be solved. Is it or is it not necessary
that a jurist fulfilling all the prerequisite conditions should be the
ruler? Can people elect their ruler?

As such from the very beginning we should not regard the question of
Imamat as a simple question of worldly government. It would be wrong to
ask at this stage whether Islam wants a government based on nomination
or a government based on election, and then to ask why the Shi'ah
advocate a particular form of government. The question is not so
simple.

It must be admitted that in the presence of an infallible Imam, nobody
else can have a claim to the rulership in the same way as in the
presence of the Holy Prophet nobody else could be the ruler. The Holy
Prophet had appointed Imam Ali the Imam and as such it was his privilege
to be the ruler also. Besides, on several occasion the Holy Prophet made
it clear that Imam Ali was to succeed him as the ruler of the Muslims.
Anyhow, it is to be remembered that he made this nomination on the basis
that Imam Ali was the Imam after him.

Question of Spiritual Wilayat:

Earlier I mentioned a point in which I believe persona and consider it
to be a basic doctrine, though it might not be a cardinal principle of
Shi'ism. The question is what the special characteristics of the Holy
Prophet's position were? What was revealed to him, did it only confine
to Divine injunctions; and the fundamental principles and collateral
teachings of Islam? Was his knowledge confined to the realities of
Islam, or was any other information also communicated to him by Allah?

Is his excellence in regard to piety confined to his being infallible
and immune from all errors? Almost the same questions arise in respect
of the Imams also. Though they received no revelation from Allah, yet
they received thorough knowledge of Islam, through the Holy Prophet and
their knowledge was as free from the possibility of any error as that of
the Holy Prophet himself. As regards piety, the Imams are also
infallible.

Now the question is whether a Prophet or an Imam has besides these
features some other. special features or qualities also reposed in his
person. Besides religious knowledge what are the other branches of
knowledge with which he is endowed? Is it true that the reports about
the deeds performed by his Ummah (followers) are presented to the Holy
Prophet, and similar reports are also presented to each Imam during his
lifetime? Now the present Imam knows, hears and sees everything that
happens in the world.

He watches the deeds not of the Shi'ites only but of all people. In
this respect there is no difference between a living and a dead Imam. As
stated earlier, when you visit the grave of Imam Riza, and greet him,
this action takes place as if you are calling on a person living in this
world. When you greet the Imam, he hears you and looks at you. That is a
manifestation of spiritual Wilayat.

We said earlier that the question of Wilayat is the point where
mysticism and Shi'ism meet each other. Their ideas in this respect are
very close. The mystics say that in every age there must exist a perfect
man whom they call the qutb. The Shi'ah hold that in every age there
must be an Imam and religious authority, who is a perfect man. As this
question is not a matter of dispute between the Shi'ah and the Sunnis,
we do not propose to dwell on it further at this stage. The disputed
points are two, namely Imamat in the sense of expounding religion and
Imamat in the sense of worldly leadership of the Muslims.

Importance of the Tradition of Thaqalayn

In regard to the question of Imamat, you should not ignore the
importance of this tradition. If by chance you have to face a Sunni
scholar or even a non-scholar, you should ask him whether the Holy
Prophet did or did not utter such a sentence. If he says that he did
not, you can put before him so many books of the Sunnis themselves. In
fact the Sunni scholars cannot, and generally do not, deny the existence
and veracity of such a tradition.29

Then say to him: "The Holy Prophet has designated the Qur'an as the
authority No. 1 and his 'descendants' as the authority No. 2. Now tell
us who these descendants are."

It may be noted that the Sunnis make no difference between the Holy
Prophet's descendants and others. They narrate Prophetic traditions more
often on the authority of other companions than on the authority of Imam
Ali. Even when they quote Imam Ali, they quote him as a transmitter of a
Prophet's tradition, not as an authority.

The Tradition of Ghadir

As we have said, he who is the authority for a religion must also be
the leader of that religion. Further, as far as leadership is concerned,
the Holy Prophet expressly designated Imam Ali to that. The tradition of
Ghadir is an instance of such a declaration. The Ghadir declaration was
made by the Holy Prophet on the occasion of the farewell pilgrimage at a
place called Ghadir al-Khum.

This pilgrimage was the last Hajj performed by the Holy Prophet. In all
probability he did not perform more than one Hajj after the conquest of
Makkah, but he performed one 'Umrah before his farewell Pilgrimage. On
the occasion of the farewell Pilgrimage he issued a general invitation
to all the Muslims to attend that Hajj. When all of them assembled, he
delivered sermons on different occasions in the Masjidul Haram, at
Arafat, at Mina, outside Mina and at Ghadir al-Khum. After mentioning
some other points at Ghadir al-Khum he finally mentioned a point which
he greatly emphasized. In our opinion he made it the last point because
of this verse which he recited there:

"0 Messenger! Make known that which has been revealed to you from your
Lord, for if you do it not, you will not have conveyed His message."
(Surah al Ma'idah, 5:67)

The Holy Prophet mentioned many principles of Islam and collateral
matters in his sermons which he delivered at Arafat, Mina and Masjidul
Haram. On all these occasions he dealt with important matters. But at
Ghadir al-Khum he made an announcement about which he said that if he
did not make it, all that he had said would become void. Then he said:

"Am I not closer to you than your own selves?"

He was referring to a Qur'anic verse which says:

"The Prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves." (Surah
al Ahzab 33:6 )

He continued to say

"Do I not have more authority over you than you yourselves have?"

All those who were present said:

"Yes, Messenger of Allah, you have."

Then the Holy Prophet announced:

"This Ali is the master (Maula) of him, whose master I am."

A comprehensive summary of the question of Ghadir was published a few
years back at Mashhad in the form of a book by the Society for
Publication of Islamic Truths. I have not yet read this book, but those
friends of mine who have read it, say that it is a very good book, at
least worth reading.

It will require too much space if we attempt to study all the sources
of the tradition of Ghadir which we claim to be a mutawatir tradition or
the tradition of Thaqalayn, the sources of which Mir Hamid Husayn, the
author of the 'Abaqatul Anwar has traced in 400 pages of large size.
While dealing with the crux of the problem of Imamat, we would like to
make only a brief mention of the authorities on which the Shi'ah base
their claim in this regard, although the question might need rather a
more elaborate discussion.

Notes

29. Some preachers have made a gross misuse of this tradition, for they
invariably use it as a prelude to narrating the misfortunes of the
Prophet's chosen descendants. One may think that when the Holy Prophet
said that he was leaving two things behind him: the Qur'an and his
descendants, what he meant was only that those two things were to be
held in high respect and were not to be insulted at all. In fact what
the Holy Prophet meant was that he was living behind two authorities to
which all religious and social questions were to be referred.

In the concluding part of this tradition the Holy Prophet has said: "So
long as you adhere to them, you will not go astray." So the question is
that of adherence. The Holy Prophet has declared his descendants equal
with the Quran. He himself has said that the Qur'an was the major
'thaqal' and his descendants the minor 'thaqal'.


