Prophetic Texts Relating To Imamat of Imam Ali
==============================================

Once the Holy Prophet addressing his companions said:

"Greet Ali and address him as "Commander of the Faithful".

He said so on the occasion of Ghadir, but somehow or other this
sentence is reported separately from the event of Ghadir. The Sunnis do
not accept this report as continuous one but the Shi'ah scholars have
proved that it is so. The Tajrid does not make any further comment on
this tradition which it describes as reliable though disconnected in its
chain of transmission.

Mulla Ali Qushchi says that this tradition cannot be accepted as
continuous, and that it must be an isolated one, for it has been quoted
only by some, not all. The books like the 'Abaqat and al-Ghadir have
concentrated their efforts on proving that all the reports relating to
Imam Ali's Imamat are continuous and mutawatir. In these two books,
especially in al-Ghadir the transmitters of the tradition of Ghadir in
every generation till the 14th century have been enumerated. It names
more than 60 companions of the Holy Prophet who have reported this
tradition. It is interesting to note that all these names have been
collected from the Sunni books.

Similarly this book mentions the transmitters of this tradition from
among the successors of the companions. All these approximately belong
to the first century. Then in the same way it names the transmitters of
this tradition in every generation and every century. A special feature
of al-Ghadir is that it has cited literary sources also in support of
this tradition. While 'Abaqat and other books have only mentioned the
names of those persons who transmitted it in each age and century.

The poets in every age reflect the main ideas current among the people
during that age. Had it been true that the event of Ghadir was invented
in the fourth century, it would not have been mentioned in the verses
composed by the poets of the first, the second and the third centuries.
In every century we find that the question of Ghadir is a part of the
literature of that century.

Then how can we deny this tradition from historical point of view? We
often go after men of letters to ascertain whether a subject existed
over history. If it is found that many men of letters have referred to
it in each century, it becomes certain that the idea has existed during
their times. The author of the 'Abaqat has devoted a whole book to one
single tradition and has critically examined all its transmitters.
Seeing what a gorgeous bouquet he has arranged, one is filled with
wonder.

There is another tradition which the Holy Prophet is reported to have
pronounced addressing Imam Ali. He is reported to have said: "You will
be the Caliph after me."

Besides these two there are several other such traditions too.

Sirah Ibn Hisham is a book written in the second century. Ibn Hisham
himself probably belonged to the third century, but this book was
originally written by Ibn Ishaq, who lived in the second century. It was
later summarized by Ibn Hisham in whose authorship it has come down to
us. This book which is considered to be reliable by the Sunnis, recounts
two events which have not been mentioned by the Tajrid. Anyhow, the
events are relevant and as such we reproduce them here.

The Event of the Day of Warning

One of these events relates to the Day of warning, a name taken from
the Qur'anic verse revealed in the early days of Islam:

"Warn your close relatives" (Surah ash-Shu'ara 26:214).

Till then the Holy Prophet had not begun to propagate Islam openly. As
we know, at that time Imam Ali was still a boy, and lived in the Holy
Prophet's house. That is itself an event. The Holy Prophet asked Imam
Ali to arrange some food and invite the descendants of Hashim and Abdul
Muttalib to it. Imam Ali prepared a meal of meat and arranged some milk
as a dessert. After the guests had taken food, the Holy Prophet said:

"I am a Prophet of Allah, raised by Him as such. If you accept what I
say, you will be happy in this world and the Hereafter."

As soon as the Holy Prophet's uncle, Abu Lahab heard these words, he
was enraged, and said:

"Have you invited us to tell us all this nonsense?"

Abu Lahab raised so much hue and cry that the meeting ended in a
fiasco.

The Holy Prophet asked Imam Ali to arrange another meeting. Imam Ali
himself says that the number of the persons who attended the second
meeting was more or less forty. The Prophet said to the audience:

"Whosoever of you accepts my call first, he will be my legatee, vizir
and successor."

He made this announcement several times, but nobody responded. At last
Imam Ali rose from his place and accepted the offer. The Holy Prophet
said:

"You will be my legatee, vizir and caliph after me."

Meeting of the Head of a Tribe with the Holy Prophet

This is another event found in the Sirah Ibn Hisham. It is still more
significant. The Holy Prophet was still in Makkah. The Quraysh were not
allowing him to propagate Islam. The situation was very tense. Anyhow,
during the sacred months31 the Quraysh stopped harassing the Holy
Prophet or at least did not harass him to the extent of inflicting any
bodily injury, although even during these months they did not allow him
to pursue any activity connected with the propagation of Islam. Anyhow
the Holy Prophet always took advantage of this temporary truce. He
called upon various tribes who assembled at the 'Ukaz fair and at
Arafat, (The pre-Islamic Arabs also performed Hajj, although they had
their own style of it.) and invited them to Islam. While the Holy
Prophet went round the tribes, Abu Lahab chased him, and contradicted
and belied him. The head of a tribe was very shrewd. He talked with the
Holy Prophet for a little while and they said to his people:

"Had this man been of my tribe, I would have devoured the Arabs with
his help."

What he meant was that the Holy Prophet was so multi-talented that with
his help all the Arabs could be subdued. Then that man turned to the
Holy Prophet and said:

"I and my people are ready to have faith in you provided you give us
your word to appoint me or one of my people to be your successor."

The Holy Prophet said:

"It is not up to me to say who would succeed me. It is with Allah."

This is an event mentioned in the books of the Sunnis.

The Tradition of Ghadir and Its Continuity

Another argument of the Shi'ah is the tradition of Ghadir. Khwaja
Nasiruddin says that the Tradition of Ghadir is mutawatir. Mutawatir is
a technical term. A tradition may either be mutawatir (continuous) or
khabar wahid (isolated). An isolated tradition does not mean that it has
been reported only by one person. It is a tradition which has not been
reported in a convincing way. It is immaterial whether it has been
reported by one person or by ten. For example, somebody says that he has
heard such and such report from the radio. You think that he is right,
but you still want to see what others say. If the report is confirmed by
someone else, you are a little more convinced. When you see that many
others say the same thing, you become sure that there is no chance that
all of them may be telling a lie. The number of the reporters of a
continuous tradition must be so large that there should be no
possibility of their conspiring.

In the above example it is possible that ten persons conspire to say
that they have heard the particular report from the radio. Even 200
persons may combine. But there are cases in which there is no such
possibility. For example, you go to South Africa and find a person
saying that the radio has broadcast such and such report. Then you go to
East Africa and again find some persons reporting the same thing. Then
you go to West Africa and the same story is repeated. In this case you
cannot say that all these persons have conspired to tell a lie. This is
called tawatur or continuity. The Shi'ah claim that the tradition
(hadith) of Ghadir has been reported by so many people that any
conspiracy is out of question. For example in the case of the tradition
of Ghadir we cannot say that 40 companions of the Holy Prophet had
conspired to tell a lie, especially when we see that many of them were
hostile to Imam Ali, or at least were not friendly with him. Had these
reporters been of the type of Salman, Abuzar and Miqdad, who dearly
loved and followed Imam Ali, it would have been possible to suspect that
because of their excessive attachment to Imam Ali they combined to
invent a story. The people like Qushchi allege that this tradition is an
isolated report, but the Shi'ah say emphatically that it is continuous.
According to this tradition, the Holy Prophet addressing the audience,
said:

"Do I not have more authority over you than you yourselves have?"32

All said:

"Yes, you have."

Then he said:

"This Ali is the master of him, whose master I am".

The Holy Prophet wanted to affirm that Ali was as superior to others as
he himself was.

There is another tradition, which is also continuous according to
Khwaja Nasiruddin, but Mulla Ali Qushchi says that it is isolated,
although even he does not deny its substance. Regarding this tradition
also scholars like Mir Hamid Husayn, the author of the 'Abaqat and
Allama Amini, the author of al-Ghadir have paid much attention. Mir
Hamid Husayn has devoted one full book to it. This tradition is known as
the tradition of Manzilat. The Holy Prophet is reported to have said to
Imam Ali:

"In relation to me you occupy the same position as Harun occupied in
relation to Musa with the exception that there will be on prophet after
me."

The Holy Prophet said that when he was proceeding for the Tabuk
operation, which was only a campaign, not a battle. It took place after
the Battle of Mu'tah, which was the last battle fought by the Arabs
against the Romans during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet. This battle
took place to the east of Medina. Istambul (Constantinople) was the
capital of the Eastern Roman Empire. Syria was also under the Romans.
Brisk preparations were going on there to launch an attack against
Medina. The Holy Prophet deemed it advisable to take troops up to the
border of the Romans and he successfully accomplished that mission.33

The Holy Prophet, as the politicians put it, wanted to make a show of
his power. The Muslims went up to the Roman border and then came back.
In this expedition the Holy Prophet did not take Imam Ali with him. He
left Ali as his successor in Medina. The Shi'ah scholars say that this
action of the Holy Prophet shows that he knew that fighting was not
going to take place. Naturally Imam Ali did not like the idea of being
left behind. As he felt dejected, he said to the Holy Prophet:

"Would you not take me with you? Do you leave me here with the women
and the children?"

The Holy Prophet said:

"Do you not like to occupy the same position in relation to me as Harun
occupied in relation to Musa, except that there would be no prophet
after me?"

The Holy Prophet meant to say that whatever relationship Harun bore to
Musa, Imam Ali bore to him with the exception of Prophethood. Now let us
refer to the Qur'an to find out what relationship existed between Harun
and Musa. We find that the Quran reports that in the beginning of his
mission Musa asked Allah:

"My Lord! Relieve my mind and ease my task for me; and elaborate my
tongue, so that they may understand my saying. Appoint for me a Vazir
from my folk, Harun, my brother. Strengthen my back with him. And let
him share my task, so that we glorify you much, and much remember you."
(Surah TaHa, 20:34)

The word Vazir is derived from the root, Vizr which means a burden or a
responsibility. A Vazir is the person who relieves the burden of his
master and shares his responsibility. Later this word came into use in
the sense of the minister of a king.

Hence, Prophet Musa asked Allah to appoint a person to help him and
share his task. For this purpose he suggested the name of Harun.

At another place in the Qur'an we see that Prophet Musa says to
Harun:

"Harun, take my place among my people." (Surah al-A'raf, 7:142 )

Thus we find that according to the Qur'an Harun was Musa's Vazir, his
chief supporter, his partner in his task and his successor among his
people. That was the relationship between Prophet Musa and Harun and the
same should be the relationship between the Holy Prophet and Imam Ali.
Had the Holy Prophet not said, "Except that there would be no prophet
after me", We could say that the Holy Prophet had some particular
likeness in mind, but when he excluded Prophethood, it became clear that
this relationship existed in all other fields (of course social, not
physical). It appears as if the Holy Prophet wanted to say to Imam Ali:
You occupy the same position in relation to me as Harun occupied in
relation to Musa in all divinely appointed fields.

The answer which the Sunnis give to this argument is that they could
accept this tradition, if it had been continuous, but it is an isolated
one. But as we said earlier, the scholars like Mir Hamid Husayn have
proved in their books that this tradition is continuous.

Question and Answer

Question: The impression which I have gathered from the foregoing
discussion is that there exists to a certain extent a frontier between
Imamat and the administration of government. You have (Ayatullah
Mutahhari) said that Imamat involves certain duties and functions, and
the administration of government is only one of them. I do not know what
the other duties are which do not imply administration in any way. What
so far we know of Islam shows that there is no frontier between this
world and the Hereafter or between this worldly and the next worldly
activities. The deeds relating to the Hereafter have a bearing on this
worldly life and the deeds relating to this world are meant to improve
and perfect social life and to help establishing a just system of
government. We see that the Quran puts forward as a model the life of
those whose devotional acts were directed to improving this worldly life
and establishing just administration. It attaches greatest importance to
Jihad. We find that all the efforts and the life style of the Imams were
directed to regaining their right of rulership and administering the
government. In this respect there was no difference between those who
made open struggle and those who organized their campaign secretly in
their prison or their hiding places. I am not aware of any duties other
than the administration of government which can justify the institution
of Imamat, for it is the administration of government alone which can
justify all the activities relating to Imamat.

Answer: The question of frontier has been raised by you only. I never
used this word and I do not think that it is proper to use it. As I have
said the Shi'ah believe that the level of Imamat is higher than that of
the government, which is only one of its functions. Another function
which is of a higher level is the duty of an Imam to expound and explain
Islam. Furthermore, an Imam is the infallible authority on religious
laws. We say that one of the functions of the Holy Prophet was the
administration of government. But the right to administer government was
not given to him by the people. It was a right given to him by Allah, by
virtue of his being superior to all other men. In other words the Holy
Prophet ruled because he was the expounder of the Divine laws and had a
spiritual contact with the hidden world. I never wanted to say that
there was a frontier between this world and the Hereafter, nor did I
mean to set apart the functions of an Imam and a ruler. I did not say
that an Imam looks after those affairs of the people which relate to the
Hereafter and a ruler looks after those affairs of the people which
relate to this world. If I had said so, your criticism would have been
justified. The Shi'ah have a theory. If it is proved, the question of
rulership, is automatically settled.

We believe that Imamat is next to Prophethood. As in the presence of a
Prophet, the question of the rulership of anybody else does not arise,
similarly in the presence of an Imam also this question does not arise.
The question of the form of government in the modern sense arises only
when we suppose that no Imam exists or when the Imam is in occultation
as the position is during our times. Otherwise in the presence of an
Imam of that level in which the Shi'ah believes, the position is quite
clear.

Question: Which of the two reports according to Sunnis is isolated, the
report relating to the Ghadir al-Khum or the report which you have
quoted and according to which the Holy Prophet has said: "Greet Ali; he
is your Amir"?

Answer: Perhaps even the Sunnis cannot deny the continuity of that part
of the tradition of Ghadir which says: "Ali is the master of him whose
master I am", although Mulla Ali Qushchi says that even this part is an
isolated report.

Anyhow it has been reported by so many traditionalists that it is not
possible to deny it.34 A very large number of persons have even reported
the first part of this tradition, which says: "Do I not have more
authority over you than you yourselves have." The Shi'ah believes this
part of the tradition also to be continuous. But as far as the other
tradition: "Greet Ali and address him as the Commander of the Faithful",
is concerned, the Sunnis do not at all admit that it is a continuous
report. Perhaps we also cannot prove that it is continuous. Anyhow that
makes no difference. From our point of view the continuity of the
following tradition, which is of basic importance, is obvious:

The Holy Prophet said:

"Do I not have more authority over you than you yourselves have?"

The people said:

"Yes, you have."

Then the Holy Prophet said:

"This Ali is the master of him, whose master I am. My God! Be friendly
to him who is friendly to Ali and be hostile to him who is hostile to
Ali."

Furthermore, the Sunni scholars are not unanimous as to whether this
tradition is continuous or isolated. Some say it is isolated and others
admit that it is continuous, but say that it does not mean what the
Shi'ah claim. The Holy Prophet has only said: "Whoever is my friend let
him be Ali's friend also." We say that it does not make sense that the
Holy Prophet assembled people at Ghadir al-Khum only to ask them to make
friends with Imam Ali, especially in view of the fact that he also
added: "Do I not have more authority over you than you yourselves have."
It also may be noted that the word Mawla is not used in the sense of
friend.

Question: Was the verse: "This day have I perfected your religion for
you and completed My favour to you, and have chosen Islam for you as
religion" revealed after the event of Ghadir al-Khum?

Answer: No, it was revealed at Ghadir al-Khum.

Notes

30. The Shi'ah attach great importance to the religious aspect of
Imamat. As we said earlier in our times Imamat who mostly considered to
be tantamount to the administration of government, but that was a wrong
notion. Imamat is mostly a religious question and the administration of
government is only a function which it involves.

In a sense Imamat and administration of government are two terms which
in certain respects overlap each other. But basically Imamat is one
question and administration of government, although a part of the
functions which an Imam should discharge, a different question. It is
funny that during the period of occultation we talk about the
administration of government, but keep quiet about the real significance
of Imamat, which must not be considered to be equivalent to the
administration of government. According to the terminology of the Shi'ah
scholars an Imam is in charge of religious as well as secular affairs.

Being in charge of religious affairs, he automatically holds the charge
of worldly affairs also, just like the Holy Prophet, who being the
religious head, was the head of the government too. If we suppose
hypothetically that no Imam existed at any time or if we know that the
Imam is in occultation, in both these cases no religious head would be
present. Therefore in these cases the question would of course arise how
should be the head of the government.

31. The months of Zil Qa'dah, Zil Hijjah, Muharram and Rajab are the
sacred months, during which fighting was kept suspended and vengeance
was not sought. Routes were safe during these months and coming and
going of persons and goods normal. An annual fair was also held at a
Place near Makkah named 'Ukaz.

32. The Holy Prophet referred to the following verse, "The Prophet has
more authority over the believers than they themselves have." (Surah al
Ahzab 33:6) Being a Prophet of Allah, the Holy Prophet had authority
over the life, property and everything of the people. He had more
authority over the people than the people themselves had. Of course he
never exercised this authority for his own selfish ends. Allah appointed
him the representative of the whole Muslim society and as such he had
authority over the life and property of the Muslims on behalf of Muslim
society as a whole.

33. Last year we had a chance to go to Khayber. Till then we had no
idea how far Khayber and Tabuk were from Medina by the direct route via
Shusa. The whole distance was found to be exactly 600 kilometers. By the
ancient routes the distance might have been greater. The distance
between Medina and Khayber is 360 kilometers. We were really astonished
by the courage and resolution of the Muslims who traversed this long
distance with the poor means available to them at that time.

34. The reason why it has been reported by a very large number of
transmitters is that at that time the sayings of the Holy Prophet were
only remembered and not written. Naturally the traditions containing
Imam Ali's name could be remembered by more people than any other
traditions.


