Introduction
============

Respected Reader,  
 'assalamu alaykum,

The editor of this work is pleased to announce the release of the "Shia
Encyclopedia", which forms itself as the collection of articles that
emanated from an intra-faith dialogue, ranging from exploring
commonalities, differences and a train of thought specific to the Shia
(also known as the school of the Ahlul Bayt).

We are pleased to release a collection of information which addresses
inter-school related issues between the school of Ahlul Bayt and the
Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama'ah. This encyclopedia which covers the most
important lines of thought of the Ahlul Bayt, is the contribution of
various individuals.

Most of the articles provided in this encyclopedia are original
contributions, while the rest are excerpts from the Ahlul Bayt and the
Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama'ah books.

The information presented in this encyclopedia is based on the
understanding and the knowledge of the contributors. The subjects are
classified and are divided into several chapters, so that one can get an
overhead view of all the major issues.

The approach taken with respect to the sources can be delineated as
follows:

1. When an article references both sources from the school of the Ahlul
Bayt and the school of the Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama'ah it is meant to
impress on the reader the common areas of understanding

2. When an article references both sources from the school of the Ahlul
Bayt and the school of the Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama'ah it is also meant to
impress on the reader the areas where the understanding has diverged

3. When an article references both sources from the school of the Ahlul
Bayt and the school of the Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama'ah it is also meant to
impress on the reader the areas where the understanding is common, but
whether they school of Ahlul Bayt has more detail to shed light in the
subject matter

4. When an article references only sources from the school of the Ahlul
Bayt, it is meant to impress on the reader that this subject only finds
its mention in this school and not the school of the Ahlul Sunnah wal
Jama'ah

5. When an article references only sources from the school of Ahlul
Sunnah wal Jama'ah, it is meant to impress that the same beliefs also
exist in the school of the Ahlul Bayt but that the former school
followers are not privy to

6. When an article references only sources from the school of Ahlul
Sunnah wal Jama'ah in detail, it is meant to impress to the reader of
the divergence of opinion on that particular matter

This approach ensures that each school of thought is properly
represented, for more than often, it is the deliberate
misrepresentation, distortion, that is meant not just to villify the
other school, but also wilfully misrepresent them, that is the
underlying cause of dis-information

We are grateful that in this day and age, when avenues of communication
are wide open, access to the primary texts is easily attainable,
scholarship is available in the form of written books from both schools,
that the need to forge an understanding on the truth becomes critical
and even leaves us with the ethical and moral obligation to undertake
such an endeavor.

This is the magnificent path which Prophet Muhammad (S) introduced to
humanity centuries ago, as mentioned in Qur’an:

***"(O’ Prophet) Say: ‘This is my way: I do invite you unto Allah, on
discernment (insight and enlightenment), I and whoever follows
me.’“(Qur’an 12:108)***

***Invite to the way of your Lord with wisdom and good instruction, and
argue with them in a way that is best. Indeed, your Lord is most knowing
of who has strayed from His way, and He is most knowing of who is
[rightly] guided. (Qur'an, 16:125)***

We hope you’ll find this encyclopedia helpful and constructive, and we
thank God for giving us this opportunity.

The articles are being modified and improved. We appreciate your
comments, improvements and corrections. Your feedback makes this work
more insightful. Please do not hesitate to contact us by clicking on the
"Contact Us” link.

Blessings of Allah be upon Muhammad and the Members of his House.

Best wishes,  
 ‘Ali Abbas  
 Editor


