Belief of Shi’a in the Completeness of Qur’an
=============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Wahhabi contributor mentioned that Shi’a believe Qur’an is not
complete.

My answer to this matter is:

***"Glory to (Allah), this is a big slander! (Qur’an 24:16)."***

Shi’a do NOT believe that Qur’an is missing something. There are few
weak traditions which “might “imply to the contrary. Such reports are
rejected and unacceptable if they want to imply such a thing.

It is interesting to point out that there are numerous traditions
reported in Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim which allege that many
verses of Qur’an are missing. Not only that, but also they these Sunni
reports allege that two chapters from the Qur’an are missing one of them
was similar to chapter 9 (al-Bara’ah) in length!!! Some Sunni traditions
even claim that the Chapter al-Ahzab (Ch. 33) was as lengthy as the
Chapter of Cow (Ch. 2)!!!

The Chapter of Cow is the biggest Chapter of the present Qur’an. The
traditions inside Sahih al-Bukhari and Muslim even present some of the
missing verses. (Some of these traditions will be mentioned in the
following articles with full references.). Yet, fortunately Shi’a never
accuse the Sunni brothers and sisters of believing that the Qur’an is
incomplete. We say that either these Sunni reports are either weak or
fabricated.

The completeness of Qur’an is so indisputable among Shi’a that the
greatest scholar of Shi’a in Hadith, Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn
al-Husayn Ibn Babwayh, known as "Shaykh Saduq”(309/919-381/991), wrote:

"Our belief is that the Qur’an which Allah revealed to His Prophet
Muhammad is (the same as) the one between the two covers (daffatayn).

And it is the one which is in the hands of the people, and is not
greater in extent than that. The number of surahs as generally accepted
is one hundred and fourteen ...And he who asserts that we say that it is
greater in extent than that, is a liar."

Shi’i reference: Shi’ite Creed (al-I’tiqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh
Saduq, English version, p77.

It should be noted that Shaykh Saduq (ra) is the greatest scholar of
Hadith among the Imami Shi’a and was given the name of Shaykh
al-Muhaddithin (i.e., the most eminent of the scholars of Hadith). And
since he wrote the above in a book with the name of "The beliefs of the
Imami Shi’a,”it is quite impossible that there could be any authentic
Hadith in contrary to it.

It is noteworthy that Shaykh Saduq lived at the time of minor
occultation of Imam Mahdi (as) and he was one of the earliest Shi’a
scholars. He had the honor that he was born with the prayer of Imam
Mahdi (as).

Another prominent Shi’a scholar is Allama Muhammad Ridha Mudhaffar who
wrote in his Shi’a Creed book that:

***"We believe that the Holy Qur’an is revealed by Allah through the
Holy Prophet of Islam dealing with every thing which is necessary for
the guidance of mankind. It is an everlasting miracle of the Holy
Prophet the like of which can not be produced by human mind. It excels
in its eloquence, clarity, truth and knowledge. This Divine Book has not
been tampered with by any*** ***one. This Holy Book which we recite
today is the same Holy Qur’an which was revealed to the Holy Prophet.
Any one who claims it to be otherwise is an evil-doer, a mere sophist,
or else he is sadly mistaken. All of those who have this line of
thinking have gone astray as Allah in Qur’an said: "Falsehood can not
reach the Qur’an from any direction (Qur’an 41:42)"***

- Shi’i reference: The Beliefs of Shi’ite School, by Muhammad Ridha
Mudhaffar, English version, pp 50-51

Sayyid al-Murtadha, another prominent Shi’ite Scholar said:

"... our certainty of the completeness of the Qur’an is like our
certainty of the existence of countries or major events that are self
evident. Motives and reasons for recording and guarding the Holy Qur’an
are numerous. Because the Qur’an is a miracle of the Prophethood and the
source of Islamic Knowledge and religious rule, their concern with the
Qur’an made the Muslim Scholars highly efficient concerning grammar, its
reading, and its verses."

With this various concern by the most eminent Shi’a scholars, there is
no possibility that the Qur’an was added or deleted in some parts.
Besides what Allah mentioned in Qur’an about its protection, we can use
our logic to derive the same result. Allah sent his last Messenger to
show people (to the end of the time) His Right Path. Therefore if Allah
does not preserve His message, He would be contradicting His own aim.
Obviously, such negligence is evil according to reason. Thus, in
essence, Allah preserves His message as He preserved Moses in the house
of His Enemy, Pharaoh.

May Allah Bless Muhammad and his pure Ahlul-Bayt.

Different Arrangements of Qur’an
--------------------------------

A Wahhabi alleged that it is reported in al-Kafi (one of the Shi’ite
Hadith collection) that the Shi’a Imam said: "No one compiled the Qur’an
completely except the Imams".

There is no such a tradition in Usul Kafi. I question the validity of
the booklets that have misquoted the traditions. What is written in Usul
Kafi in a tradition is as follows:

I heard Abu Ja’far (as) saying: "No one (among ordinary people) claimed
that he gathered the Qur’an completely as it was revealed except a liar;
(since) no one has gathered it and memorized it completely as revealed
by Allah, the Most High, except ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as) and the Imams
after him (as)". (Usul al-Kafi, v1, p228, Hadith \#1).

There are two other traditions which I will mention few lines later. The
above tradition does not say Qur’an is incomplete. Rather it states it
is not completely in the arrangement as it was sent down. The above
tradition is not something new. As a matter of fact, the Qur’an that we
use which was compiled by the companions is not in the sequence that has
been revealed. In fact, the Sunni scholars confirm that the first
Chapter of Qur’an which was sent down to the Prophet (S) was Chapter
al-Iqra’ (al-Alaq, Ch. 96).

Sunni References:

- al-Burhan, by al-Zarkashi, v1, p259

- al-Itqan, by al-Suyuti, v1, p202

- Fathul Bari, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v10, p417

- Irshad al-sari, by al-Qastalani, v7, p454

As you know the Chapter al-Alaq is not at the beginning of the present
Qur’an. Also Muslims agree that the verse (5:3) was among one of the
last revealed verses of Qur’an (but not the very last one), yet it is
not toward the end of the present Qur’an. This proves that although the
Qur’an that we have available is complete, it is not in the order that
has been revealed.

I should point out that Imam ‘Ali was not the only one who had a Qur’an
with different arrangements. According to the authentic Sunni reports,
many companions had different arrangement (sequence) of Qur’an, one of
them was Abdullah Ibn Masud:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6.518

Narrated Shaqiq:

Abdullah said, "I learnt An-Naza’ir which the Prophet used to recite in
pairs in each Rak’a.”Then Abdullah got up and Alqama accompanied him to
his house, and when Alqama came out, we asked him (about those Suras).

He said, "They are twenty Suras that start from the beginning of
al-Mufassal, according to the arrangement done be Ibn Mas’ud, and end
with the Suras starting with Ha Mim, e.g. Ha Mim (the Smoke). And

***"About what they question one another?”(Qur’an78.1)***

Thus this is nothing exclusive to Imam ‘Ali. I should mention that the
prophet clearly indicated (by Sunni sources) that Abdullah Ibn masud is
one of whom should be trusted on the matter of Qur’an:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6.521

Narrated Masriq:

‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr mentioned ‘Abdullah bin Masud and said, "I shall ever
love that man, for I heard the Prophet saying, ‘Take (learn) the Qur’an
from four: ‘Abdullah bin Masud, Salim, Mu’adh and Ubai bin Ka’b.’ “

This man (Abdullah Ibn Masud) not only had a different Qur’an but also
(based on Sunni sources) he had a different sequence of chapters and
different set of aayaat. He alleged that the present Qur’an has some
extra words, and he swears in the name of Allah for his claim! (see
Sahih al- Bukhari, Arabic-English version, 6.468, 5.105, 5.85). He also
falsely alleged that the last two chapters of Qur’an are not Qur’anic
chapters and they are only some prayers (Du’aa). (see Sahih al-Bukhari,
Arabic-English version, 6.501)

According to the Shi’a, these allegations by the companions reported in
Sahih al-Bukhari concerning Qur’an having extra words are FALSE. No
single verse of Qur’an is extra.

Also it seems that Aisha has a different opinion as to which chapter was
revealed first:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6.515

Narrated Yusuf bin Mahk:

While I was with Aisha, the mother of the Believers, a person from Iraq
came and asked, "What type of shroud is the best?”‘Aisha said, "May
Allah be merciful to you! What does it matter?”He said, "O mother of the
Believers! Show me (the copy of) your Qur’an,”She said, "Why?”He said,
"In order to compile and arrange the Qur’an according to it, for people
recite it with its Surahs not in proper order.”‘Aisha said, "What does
it matter which part of it you read first? (Be informed) that the first
thing that was revealed thereof was a Sura from al-Mufassal, and in it
was mentioned Paradise and the Fire.

The second tradition in Usul Kafi which has been widely misinterpreted,
states that what has been revealed to Prophet was as much as 17000
verses. Although this tradition is not rated authentic, there are two
explanations for that. The first possibility mentioned by our scholars
is that, the verses of Qur’an were originally shorter, and when the
companions compiled the Qur’an, they appended short verses and thereby
the number of verses reduced without any change to content of Qur’an.

The second possibility is that which was given by Shaikh Saduq (ra) who
is the number one Shi’a scholar in the field of Hadith:

"We say that so much of revelation has come down which is not embodied
in the present Qur’an that if it were to be collected, its extent would
undoubtedly be 17000 verses ... Although all of them were revelation but
they (the extra ones) are NOT a part of Qur’an. If they would be a part
of Qur’an, it would surely have been included in the Qur’an we have."

Shi’i reference: Shi’ite Creed (al-I’tiqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh
Saduq, English version, pp 78-79.

The transcript of the Qur’an that Imam ‘Ali wrote contained commentary
and hermeneutic interpretation (Tafsir and Ta’wil) from the Holy Prophet
some of which had been sent down as revelation but not as a part of the
text of Qur’an. A small amount of such texts can be found in some
traditions in Usul al-Kafi and else. These pieces of information were
Divine commentary of the text of Qur’an which was revealed along with
Qur’anic verses but were NOT parts of Qur’an.

Thus the commentary verses and Qur’anic verses could sum up to 17000
verses. As Sunnis know, Hadith Qudsi is also revelation, but they are
not a part of Qur’an. In fact Qur’an testifies that anything that
Prophet said was revelation. Allah Almighty said in Qur’an about Prophet
Muhammad that:

***"Nor does he (Muhammad) speak out of his desire. It is no less than a
revelation that is revealed.”(Qur’an 53:3-4).***

Thus all the speeches of Prophet were revelation, and surely the
speeches of Prophet was not limitted to Qur’an. It includes
interpretation of Qur’an (part of which were direct revelation) as well
as his Sunnah (part of which were indirect revelation).

The third tradition in Usul Kafi which is misinterpreted is as follows:

Abu Jafar said: "No one can claim that he completely has the Qur’an with
its appearance (Dhahir) and its meaning (Batin), except the executors
(Awsiyaa).”(Usul al-Kafi, Tradition \#608).

again this tradition is referring to the fact that the commentary of
Qur’an is missing. Although we have the appearance of Qur’an, its
meaning (i.e., divine commentary) is not with it. The traditions refers
to the Qur’an which was compiled by Imam ‘Ali (as) which included the
commentary.

In a follow up article, I will give some information about the Qur’an
which was compiled by Imam ‘Ali (as) which included all the
above-mentioned divine commentaries.

It is necessary to emphasize here that all grand scholars of the Imami
Shi’a are in agreement that the Qur’an which is at present among the
Muslims is the very same Qur’an that was sent down to the Holy Prophet,
and that it has not been altered. Nothing has been added to it, and
nothing is missing from it.

The Qur’an which was compiled by Imam ‘Ali (excluding the commentaries)
and the Qur’an that is in the hand of people today, are identical in
terms of words and sentences. No word, verse, chapter is missing. A
Wahhabi mentioned that al-Kafi is an authentic book of Hadith for the
Shi’a, and as such Shi’a believe that Qur’an is not complete.

The above conclusion is based on two wrong hypotesis. First what was
mentioned in the book of al-Kafi does not necessarily indicate that
Qur’an is incomplete (see the above explanation). Second, we do not
consider al- Kafi to be all-authentic book of tradition, nor his auther
ever mentioned such a thing.

It is true that al-Kafi is among the most important Shi’a collections of
traditions. The traditions of al-Kafi cover all the branches of faith
and ethics, and all the fundamental of fiqh (jurisprudence). It includes
more traditions than all 6 Sunni collections together (provided that if
we remove the repetitions). For instance, al-Kafi has 16121 traditions,
while Sahih al-Bukhari which has many repetition in itself has only 7275
traditions. If we remove the repetitions, al-Kafi has 15176 traditions
while Sahih al-Bukhari will end up with 4000 traditions. The traditions
mentioned here include both Usul al-Kafi and Furu’ al-Kafi.

The author of al-Kafi, Shaikh Muhammad Ibn Yaqub al-Kulain al-Razi (d.
329/941), may Allah have mercy upon his soul, is considered to be highly
honest and highly reliable. However, we should emphasize that neither
the traditions are equal in value and significance, nor are the
supportive evidence for the narrations. The authorities of the chain of
narrations are not also equal in terms of reliability and credibility,
and one can in NO way regard them as equally dependable.

A glance at the book entitled "Mir’atul Uqul”(reflection of the minds)
will reveal this very point to the researcher in more detail. "Mir’atul
Uqul”is an explanatory book to al-Kafi written by another great Shi’a
scholar of Hadith, Muhammad Baqir Majlisi (d. 1111/1700) who is among
the most loyal and faithful to the book of al-Kafi. Majlisi has rated
some of the traditions of al-Kafi as weak.

However, being weak, does not mean the tradition is forged. If one of
the chain of the authorities of a tradition is missing, then the
tradition is weak in Isnad without regard to its content.

In fact, there are a number of traditions in al-Kafi which have one or
more elements from the chain of narrators are missing. As such, all of
them are regarded weak in Isnad. It might also be that a tradition is
specific for a person who reported it from Imam, and may not have meant
for the whole people. This very point is mentioned in Usul al-Kafi
itself:

Ibn Abi Ya’fur said, I inquired of Abu Abdillah (as) about the different
traditions related by those whom we trust and also by those whom we
don’t.”Hearing this, the Imam (as) replied: "Whenever you receive a
tradition which is borne out by any verse from the book of Allah or by a
(established) saying of the Prophet (S), then accept it. Otherwise, the
tradition is meant only for the one who has brought it to you.”(Usul
al-Kafi, Arabic-English version, Tradition \#202)

Shaikh al-Kulaini (ra), the author of al-Kafi, in the introduction of
his book, mentioned the following:

Brother, may Allah lead you to the right path. You ought to know that it
is not for anyone to distinguish the truth in the conflicting narrations
attributed to the Ulama (i.e., Imams), peace be upon them, except
through the standards which were declared by al-Alim (i.e., the Imam),
peace be upon him: "Test the (conflicting) traditions by the Book of
Allah, and that which agrees with it take it, and that which disagrees
with it reject it...”(Usul al-Kafi, Arabic version, Introduction by
al-  
 Kulaini, v1)

Is there any explanation better than that of the author? He mentioned
that there are some conflicting narrations in his book, al-Kafi. He also
mentioned that we should follow those Hadiths that are in agreement with
the Book of Allah, and leave that which is in clear disagreement with
Qur’an. To prove this point, al-Kulaini (ra) quoted a part of the Hadith
of Ahlul-Bayt (as) that, in fact, confirms it as a criterion for the all
the followers of Ahlul-Bayt (as).

After all, do the opponents of Shi’a expect us to leave what the author
of al-Kafi confirmed in his own book, and to believe their false
accusation that al-Kafi is all-authentic Hadith collection for the
Shi’a?

Also a Wahhabi mentioned that in the introduction to the al-Kafi, it is
written that the al-Mahdi has examined the book and said that it is good
for his followers.

There is no such a thing in the introduction written by al-Kulain
himself (who is the author of al-Kafi). This is what another person has
mentioned in his own introduction to introduce al-Kafi and its author,
which is placed before the introduction of the author. Also you did not
correctly mentioned what is attributed to Imam Mahdi (as). If such
report is ever true, Imam Mahdi (as) said:

"al-Kafi is sufficient of our Shi’a (followers)."

There is nothing wrong with this. In fact, as I mentioned, al-Kafi’s
traditions cover all the branches of faith and ethics, and all the
fundamentals of fiqh. Imam Mahdi (as) did NOT say whatever written in it
is correct. Rather he (reportedly) said, it is sufficient, and includes
all what his followers need in terms of the traditions. Again, such
tradition is not mentioned by al-Kulain himself. al-Kafi means something
that is sufficient. It does not mean all its content are perfectly
correct, since the narrators were not perfect.

Actually the reason that the author named his book al-Kafi was explained
in the introduction of the book written by himself. The scholars of his
time asked him to compile a book of traditions which covers all
necessary branches of religion of Islam. He wrote in his introduction
that:

... and you complained that there is no book that could cover all the
branches of the knowledge of religion (Ilm al-Din) to save the seeker of
truth from referring to many books and which could not suffice as a
guide and source of spiritual light in the matters of theology and the
traditions of rightly guided Imams, peace be upon them. You expressedthe
urgent need of such a book and I hope that the present book would serve
this purpose. (Usul al-Kafi, Arabic-English version, Introduction by
al-Kulaini, part 1, pp 17-18)

al-Kulaini (ra) is not one of the twelve Imams of the Shi’ites. He was
only a Hadith recorder who reported what was conveyed to him through one
or more sources. He never said that he heard from Imam al-Sadiq (as),
and he stated only a Hadith that came to him through some reporters. Let
it be stated that the tradition of al-Kafi or any other Shi’a/Sunni book
is not acceptable to the Imami Shi’ites if it wants to ever imply the
incompleteness of the Qur’an.

These few traditions are rated weak. Even if we suppose that they are
true, then the extra verses would mean the divine commentary of Qur’an
which were revealed to the Prophet Muhammad along with Qur’an but not as
a part of Qur’an as Shaykh Saduq and other scholars specified.

So, if one brings a weak tradition from Usul al-Kafi and then
misinterpret the Hadith, it can not represent a belief of the Shi’a.
However, when Sunnis claim that Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim are
all-authentic, they will have a big problem when they reach to those
traditions in these books which allegedly imply the incompleteness of
Qur’an. Do you see the difference, my friend?

In book, entitled "Science of Hadith”written by Zainul-Abideen Qurbani,
discusses in great detail the traditions in which may imply the
incompleteness of the Qur’an. Here is one passage from it:

More than 95% of Shi’a scholars believe that there has been absolutely
no tampering of the Qur’an and that the Qur’an we hold in our hands
today is exactly the same Qur’an that was revealed to Muhammad (saw),
without a single word missing or being extra. To quote the words of  
 Shi’a scholars in this regard would require a whole separate treatise.
But we briefly name just a few of them:

Beginning with Shaikh Suduq, whose words we already quoted, to Shaikh
Mofid, Sayyed Murtada, Shaikh Tusi,..., Allamah Hilli, Muqaddas
Aridibili, Khashif al-ghitaa, Shaikh Bahai, Fayz Kashani, Shaikh Hurr
Ameli, Mohaqiq Kurki, Sayyed Mehdi Bahr ul-Uloom, Sayyed Muhammad
Mujahid Tabataba’i, Shaikh Muhammad Husayn Ashtiyani, Shaikh Abdullah
Mamqani, Shaikh Javad Balaghi, Sayyed Hibbat al-Din Shahristani, Sharif
Radi, Ibn Idris, Sayyed Mohsin Amin Ameli, Sayyed Abdul-Husayn Sharif
al-Din, Sayyed Hadi Milani, Sayyed Muhammad Husayn Allamah  
 Tabataba’i, Sayyed Abul-Ghasim Khoei, Sayyed Muhammad Rada Golbayegani,
Sayyed Shahab al-Din Mar’ashi Najafi, Ruhullah Khomeini, etc.

The author then goes on to quote several pages of statements by top
Shi’a scholars about the completeness and perfect authenticity of the
Holy Qur’an. It is hoped that what was offered on this subject is
sufficient for those who try to find the truth, that the Shi’a are the
true believers in Qur’an.

It is improper for those who seek the truth to accuse others of
something which they are entirely innocent of.

Wassalam

Some of the references of this article:

- Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic English version  
 - al-Imam al-Sadiq, printed by Dar al-Fikr al-Arabi Egypt  
 - al-Burhan, by al-Zarkashi  
 - al-Itqan, by al-Suyuti  
 - Fathul Bari, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani  
 - Irshad al-sari, by al-Qastalani  
 - al-Kafi, printed by al-Haidari Printings - Tehran, Iran  
 - Shi’ite Creed (al-I’tiqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh Saduq  
 - Masadir al-Hadith ‘Indal Shi’a al-Imamiyyah", by Muhammad Husayn
Jalali  
 - Science of Hadith, by Zainul-Abidin Qurbani

Some Sunni Reports on the Incompleteness of Qur’an
--------------------------------------------------

There are some traditions in Sihah Sittah (six authentic Sunni
collections) which are not accepted by Shi’a scholars. Among them, some
are talking about the changes made in Qur’an “after “the death of the
Prophet. As I will show, in some Sunnis report 345 verses, two chapters
of Qur’an (one of which is was as much as ch.9 in length) are missing
from Qur’an. Here I give you some references in Sahih al-Bukhari, Sahih
Muslim, and other important collections which falsely allege that Qur’an
is incomplete. Let me first start with Sahih Muslim.

### Sahih Muslim

Muslim in the Seventh (7th) part of his Sahih, in the book of Al Zakat
about the virtue of being satisfied with what ever God gives about
urging people to have that virtue, pp 139-140 (Arabic), reported that
Abu al-Aswad reported that his father said:

“(For English version of Sahih Muslim see)”

“(Chapter CCCXCI, p500, Tradition \#2286)”

Abu Musa al-Ashari invited the Qur’an readers of Basra. Three hundred
(300) readers responded to his invitation. He told them

You are the readers and the choice of the People of Basra. Recite the
Qur’an and don’t neglect it. Other wise a long time may elapse and your
hearts will ne hardened as the hearts of those who came before you were
hardened.

We used to read a Chapter from the Qur’an similar to Bara’ah in length
and seriousness, but I forgot it.  
 I can remember from the Chapter only the following words:

Should a son of Adam own two valleys full of wealth, he should seek a
third valley and nothing would fill Ibn Adam’s abdomen but the soil.

We also used to read a chapter similiar to the Musabbihat and I forgot
it. I only remember out of it the following:

***"Oh you who believe, why do you say what you do not do? (which is now
in another place in Qur’an 61:2) Thus a testimony shall be written on
your necks and you will be questioned about it*** ***on the day of
judgment.”(which is a little different than what is in another place in
Qur’an 17:13)***

It is obvious that the above underlined words which Abu Musa mentioned
are not from the Qur’an nor they are similar to any of the Words of God
in the Qur’an. It is amazing that Abu Musa claims that two (2) chapters
from the Qur’an are missing one of them is similar to Bara’ah in
length!!! The following traditions are before the above tradition in
Sahih Muslim:

Sahih Muslim (English), Chapter 391, Tradition \#2282:

Anas reported Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him) as saying: "If
the son of Adam were to possess two valleys of riches, he would long for
the third one. And the stomach of the son of Adam is not filled but with
dust. And Allah returns to him who repents.”

Sahih Muslim (English), Chapter 391, Tradition \#2283:

Anas b. Malik reported: I heard the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon
him) as saying this (the sentence of the above tradition), but I do not
know whether this thing was revealed to him or not,  
 but he said so.

Sahih Muslim (English), Chapter 391, Tradition \#2284:

Anas b. Malik reported Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him) as
saying: If there were two valleys of gold for the son of Adam, he would
long for another one, and his mouth will not be filled with dust, and
Allah returns to him who repents.

Sahih Muslim (English), Chapter 391, Tradition \#2285:

Ibn Abbas reported Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him) as saying:
If there were for the son of Adam a valley full of riches, he would long
to possess another one like it, and Ibn Adam does not feel satisfied but
with dust. And Allah returns to him who returns (to Him). Ibn Abbas
said: I do not know whether it is from Qur’an or not, and in the
narration transmitted by Zubair it was said: I do not know whether it is
from the Qur’an, and he made no mention of Ibn Abbas.

Muslim also reported in the book of nursing (al-Ridha), v10 pages 29
(Arabic), that Aisha said the following:

There was in what was revealed in the Qur’an that ten (10) times of
nursing known with certainty makes the nursing woman a mother of the
nursed child. This number of nursing would make the woman ‘Haram’ to the
child. Then this verse was replaced by ‘ five (5) known nursing ‘ to
make the woman forbidden to the child. The Prophet died while these
words were recorded and read in the Qur’an.

Also al-Zamakhshari recorded that Aisha said that the Qur’anic verse
enjoining stoning for adultery was written on a leaf, but the leaf was
accidentally eaten by a goat while the Prophet Muhammad was on his
death-bed, and thus the verse was lost.

Umar (reportedly) Said Chapter 33 Is Incomplete:

al-Muttaqi ‘Ali Ibn Husam al-Din in his book (Mukhtasar Kanz al-Ummal,
printed on the margin of Imam Ahmed’s Musnad, v2, p2) in his Hadith
about chapter 33, that said Ibn Mardawayh

reported that Huthaifah said:

Umar said to me: How many verses are contained in the Chapter al-Ahzab ?
I said 72 (seventy two) or 73 (seventy three) verses. He said: It was
almost as long as the chapter of the Cow, which contains 287 (two eighty
seven) verses, and in it there was the verse of stoning.

If we take the report of Ibn Mardawayh which Huthaifah attributed to
Umar in which he said that the Chapter of al-Ahzab, which contained 72
(Seventy two) verses, was as long as the Chapter of the Cow (containing
287) and take the report of Abu Musa which says that a chapter equal in
length to the Chapter of Bara’ah (contains 130) was deleted from the
Qur’an, then the deletion in the Qur’an according to these reports would
be 345 Verses.

### Sahih al-Bukhari

Al-Bukhari recorded in his Sahih, v8, pp 209-210, that Ibn Abbas
reported that Umar Ibn al-Khattab said the following in a discourse
which he delivered during the last years of the caliphate.

“(For Arabic-English version of Sahih al-Bukhari see 8.817:)”When Umar
performed his last Hajj, he said:

Certainly Allah sent Muhammad with the truth and revealed him the Book.
One of the revelations which came to him was the verse of stoning. We
read it and understood it.

The Messenger of God stoned and we stoned after him. I am concerned that
if time goes on, some one may say ‘ By God we do not find the verse of
stoning in the Book of God ‘; thus, the Muslims will deviate by
neglecting a commandment the Almighty revealed.

Again, we used to read in what we found in the Book of God:  
 Do not deny the fatherhood of your fathers in contempt because it is a
disbelief on your part to be ashamed of your fathers.

More references of similar tradition:

- Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal (in the Musnad of Umar under the caption of
the Hadith al-Saqeefah, pp 47,55)

- Sirah of Ibn Hisham (Pub. by Issa al-Babi al-Halabi of Egypt 1955),
v2, p658

The above Hadith in Sahih al-Bukhari (Tradition 8.817) as well as
similar ones in Sahih al-Bukhari (Tradition 8.816 and 9.424(B)) all say
"Umar’s last Hajj". Would you tell us when this Hadith could have been
told originally? How long had it been passed by then from the death of
prophet? Or from the gathering of Qur’an?

Please also note that the above verse which was recited by Umar in the
above tradition, is not in present Qur’an.

The following Hadith is narrated without any Hadith number in Bukhari.
It is in the title of one of the chapter of Bukhari. Fortunately, it was
translated by the translator.

Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English version, vol 9, p212:

{Between Traditions 9.281 and 9.282}

(21) Chapter. If a judge has to witness in favor of a litigant when he
is a judge or he had it before he became a judge (can he pass a judgment
in his favor accordingly or should he refer the case to another judge
before whom he would bear witness?).

And the judge Shuraih said to a person who sought his witness, "Go to
the ruler so that I may bear witness(before him) for you.”And ‘Ikrima
said, "Umar said to ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Auf, ‘If I saw a man committing
illegal sexual intercourse or theft, and you were the ruler (what would
you do)?. ‘Abdur-Rahman said, ‘I would regard your witness as equal to
the witness of any other man among the Muslims. ‘Umar said, ‘You have
said the truth.’ ‘Umar added:

If I were not afraid of the fact that people may say that ‘Umar has
added to the Qur’an extra (verses), I would have written the Verse al-
Rajm (stoning to death of married adulterers) with my own hands. and
Ma’iz confessed before the Prophet that he had committed illegal
intercourse, whereupon the prophet ordered him to be stoned to death.

It is not mentioned that the prophet sought witness of those who were
present there.

Hammad said, "If an adulterer confesses before a ruler once only, he
should be stoned to death.”But al-Hakam said, "He must confess four
times.

My questions here are:

1)- Do you agree that Umar stated clearly that the verse famous as Rajm
was in Qur’an originally (or was revealed originally)?

2)- To discuss the second part, I have given it more closely below:

If I were not afraid of the fact that people may say that ‘Umar has
added to the Qur’an extra (verses), I would have written the Verse
Ar-Rajm (stoning to death of married adulterers) with my own hands.

2.a)- Was Umar afraid of people talking behind him so and so?

2.b)- Was he afraid of God MORE at the same time he was saying?

(Was he MORE fearful of God, or afraid of people MORE than God?)

2.c)- Is anybody allowed to be afraid of people when revealing the truth
about Qur’an is more important?

3)-

3.1)- If Umar were NOT afraid of people, would he have been writing the
verse inside of Qur’an by his hand or not?

3.2)- If you were Umar, with the same knowledge and courage, would you
have been adding this verse to Qur’an by your hand or not?

4)-

4.1)- Was Umar aware of abrogation or not?

4.2)- Was he aware of abrogation more than present scholars or not?

5)- Did he know that he should (or should not) have been adding the
verse inside of Qur’an if it is abrogated or not? (This is not accepted
by Shi’a. I will explain this situation very shortly. Some Sunnis say
that it can be abrogated practically, and remained outside of Qur’an.

My question is that

Did he know that he should not have been adding this verse inside Qur’an
since it is only practically abrogated?)

In other words, if he knew the rule, why he insisted on adding it, If he
did not know that, is the above rule an invention of some of Sunni
people who wanted to justify missing this verse?

Here is another example, that after the death of Prophet its is alleged
that the phrase "Him who created”has been added to verse 92:3.

One of the narrator of this counterversy is Abdullah bin Masud. As I
mentioned, The prophet clearly indicated (by Sunni sources) that
Abdullah Ibn Masud is one of whom should be trusted on the matter of
Qur’an.

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6.468:

Narrated Ibrahim:

The companions of ‘Abdullah (Ibn Mas’ud) came to Abu Darda’, (and before
they arrived at his home), he looked for them and found them. Then he
asked them,: ‘Who among you can recite (Qur’an) as ‘Abdullah recites
it?”They replied, "All of us.”He asked, "Who among you knows it by
heart?”They pointed at ‘Alqama. Then he asked Alqama. "How did you hear
‘Abdullah bin Mas’ud reciting Surat al-Lail (The Night)?”

Alqama recited:

‘By the male and the female.’ Abu Ad-Darda said, "I testify that I heard
me Prophet reciting it likewise, but these people want me to recite
it:--

‘And by Him Who created male and female.’ but by Allah, I will not
follow them."

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 5. 85:

Narrated ‘Alqama:

...Abu Darda further asked, "How does ‘Abdullah (bin Mas’ud) recite the
Surah starting with, ‘By the Night as it conceals (the light).”(92.1)

Then I recited before him:

***‘By the Night as it envelops: And by the Day as it appears in
brightness; And by male and female.’ (Qur’an 91.1-3)***

On this Abu Ad-Darda’ said, "By Allah, the Prophet made me recite the
Surah in this way while

I was listening to him (reciting it)."

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 5.105:

Narrated Alqama:

I went to Sham and was offering a two-Rak’at prayer; I said, "O Allah!
Bless me with a (pious) companion.”Then I saw an old man coming towards
me, and when he came near I said, (to myself), "I hope Allah has given
me my request.”The man asked (me), "Where are you from?”I replied, "I am
from the people of Kufa.”He said, "Weren’t there amongst you the Carrier
of the (Prophet’s) shoes, Siwak and the ablution water container?
Weren’t there amongst you the man who was given Allah’s Refuge from the
Satan? And weren’t there amongst you the man who used to keep the
(Prophet’s) secrets which nobody else knew?

How did Ibn Um ‘Abd (i.e. ‘Abdullah bin Mas’ud) use to recite Surat
al-Layl (The Night; ch. 92)?”I recited:--

"By the Night as it envelops By the Day as it appears in brightness. And
by male and female.”(92.1-3) On that, Abu Darda said, "By Allah, the
Prophet made me read the Verse in this way after listening to him, but
these people (of Sham) tried their best to let me say something
different."

Comments:

Please read the Verse itself. It is

***By Him Who created male and the female.’ (Qur’an 92:3)***

Do you see the word "Him who created”in that aayah? If no, please verify
the Qur’an that you have. If yes, please tell us that these words are
added to Qur’an or not?

As you see, what is written in the parentheses is missing in the Hadith
while it is in the Qur’an. Do you think that the aayah is abrogated? If
yes, please define the word "abrogation “for us.

{Abrogation is to delete something from Qur’an by the order of the
prophet himself. For example, there is a rule for a while, then the
prophet brings God’s order that the rule is extended and the previous
rule is not acceptable any more. Therefore, the previous rule is
abrogated. Now, do you think that "Him who created”is abrogated?

If yes, tell us what you understand from abrogation. Since these words
are added, there is no room for abrogation here. If something were
deleted, you could say that. Here, nothing is deleted from the present
Qur’an. Something is added already based on these traditions.}

Do you think that these words were explanatory words? Your answer: Yes,
they were:

Please tell us if the narrators of these traditions knew what is aayah
and what is explanatory(commentary) statement?

These narrators say that the people of their time did not recite their
way, however, they will not change anything, and they will continue
reciting Qur’an that way  
 .

In addition, the commentary statements is not inside the Qur’an itself.
It is in tafsir. However, present Qur’an contains these words "him who
created”inside them. Now, please tell us that  
 the present Qur’an contains the commentary words of Sahabah or not?

Sunnis narrated that after the death of prophet, Qur’an was gathered in
different ways, and by different people. Those who did not accept the
government’ Qur’an (which was gathered by Abu-Bakr) kept their version
of Qur’an at home and did not show it publicly. However, they did recite
them as they wanted in public domain.

Abdullah Ibn Masud is one of famous narrators of sunni sources.

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6.521:

Narrated Masriq:

‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr mentioned ‘Abdullah bin Masud and said, "I shall ever
love that man, for I heard the Prophet saying, ‘Take (learn) the Qur’an
from four: ‘Abdullah bin Masud, Salim, Mu’adh and Ubai bin Ka’b.’

The prophet clearly indicated (by sunni sources) that Abdullah Ibn Masud
is one of whom should be trusted on the matter of Qur’an.

He, himself, says that:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6.524:

Narrated ‘Abdullah (bin Mas’ud): By Allah other than Whom none has the
right to be worshipped! There is no Sura revealed in Allah’s Book but I
know at what place it was revealed; and there is no Verse revealed in
Allah’s Book but I know about whom.

This man had a different Qur’an (based on Sunni sources) with a
different sequence of chapters and different set of aayaat. As I pointed
out , he narrated that one aayat inside the present Qur’an has an extra
word

"Him Who created". and He told this to people in different area. One of
these differences are the last two chapters of Qur’an. He believed that
these two chapters are not Qur’anic chapters and they are only some
prayers (Du’aa).

Please read the following traditions very carefully.

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6.501:

Narrated Zirr bin Hubaish:

I asked Ubai bin Ka’b, "O Abu AlMundhir! Your brother, Ibn Mas’ud said
so-and-so (i.e., the two Mu’awwidh-at do not belong to the Qur’an).”

Ubai said, "I asked Allah’s Apostle about them, and he said, ‘They have
been revealed to me, and I have recited them (as a part of the
Qur’an),”So Ubai added, "So we say as Allah’s Apostle has said."

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6.500:

Narrated Zirr bin Hubaish:

I asked Ubai bin Ka’b regarding the two Muwwidhat (Surats of taking
refuge with Allah). He said, "I asked the Prophet about them, He said,
‘These two Surats have been recited to me and I have recited them (and
are present in the Qur’an).’ So, we say as Allah’s Apostle said (i.e.,
they are part of the Qur’an"

Note:

The explanations inside the parentheses are from the translator
(Muhammad Muhsin Khan, University of al-Medina, Saudi Arabia). They are
not mine.

My comments:

1)- Do you agree that the speaker of these two traditions are "Ubai-ibn-
Ka’b"?

2)- Do you agree that he was talking about these two chapters of Qur’an?

3)- Do you agree that in the first Hadith, the subject is about
"Ibn-Masud"?

4)- Do you agree that Ubai-Ibn-Ka’b said that these two chapters are
inside of Qur’an, and Ibn-Masud thought that these two are not inside of
Qur’an?

5)- Do you trust Ubai-Ibn-Ka’b on this matter, or do you trust  
 "Ibn-Masud”on THIS matter?

6)- If you reject any of them, how do you justify your act with the
first Hadith in this article where both of them are trusted by the
prophet? How can you REMOVE and NOT remove these two chapters from
Qur’an? Please explain, bring evidences, and references for any Hadith
you may quote. Thanks. (I already know what you may quote, so please be
careful in quoting them.)

As I said, these traditions are REJECTED by Shi’a since they are clearly
illogical, and against the true content of Qur’an. This man,
Abdullah-Ibn-Masud, had a different set of Qur’an too.

Please read the following Hadith and explain to us whether the Qur’an of
Abdullah Ibn Masud was the same as your Qur’an.

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6.518:

Narrated Shaqiq:

Abdullah said, "I learnt An-Naza’ir which the Prophet used to recite in
pairs in each Rak’a.”Then Abdullah got up and Alqama accompanied him to
his house, and when Alqama came out, we asked him (about those Suras).
He said, "They are twenty Suras that start from the beginning of
al-Mufassal, according to the arrangement done be Ibn Mas’ud, and end
with the Suras starting with Ha Mim, e.g. Ha Mim (the Smoke). And

***"About what they question one another?”(Qur’an, 78.1)***

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6.514:

Narrated ‘Umar bin al-Khattab:

I heard Hisham bin Hakim reciting Surat al-Furqan during the lifetime of
Allah’s Apostle and I listened to his recitation and noticed that he
recited in several different ways which Allah’s Apostle had not taught
me. I was about to jump over him during his prayer, but I controlled my
temper, and when he had completed his prayer, I put his upper garment
around his neck and seized him by it and said, "Who taught you this
Surah which I heard you reciting?”He replied, "Allah’s Apostle taught it
to me.”I said, "You have told a lie, for Allah’s Apostle has taught it
to me in a different way from yours.”So I dragged him to Allah’s Apostle
and said (to Allah’s Apostle),

"I heard this person reciting Surat al-Furqan in a way which you haven’t
taught me!”On that Allah’s Apostle said, "Release him, (O ‘Umar!)
Recite, O Hisham!”Then he recited in the same way as I heard him
reciting. Then Allah’s Apostle said, "It was revealed in this way,”and
added, "Recite, O ‘Umar!”I recited it as he had taught me. Allah’s
Apostle then said, "It was revealed in this way.

This Qur’an has been revealed to be recited in seven different ways, so
recite of it whichever (way) is easier for you (or read as much of it as
may be easy for you)."

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6. 53:

Narrated Ibn Az-Zubair:

I said to ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan (while he was collecting the Qur’an)
regarding the Verse:-- ***"Those of you who die and leave wives
...”(2.240)*** "This Verse was abrogated by an other Verse. So why
should you write it? (Or leave it in the Qur’an)?”‘Uthman said. "O son
of my brother! I will not shift anything of it from its place."

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 6. 60:

Narrated Ibn Az-Zubair:

I said to ‘Uthman, "This Verse which is in Surat-al-Baqara: "Those of
you who die and leave widows behind...without turning them out.”has been
abrogated by another Verse. Why then do you write it (in the
Qur’an)?”‘Uthman said. "Leave it (where it is), O the son of my brother,
for I will not shift anything of it (i.e. the Qur’an) from its original
position."

My comments: If the previously mentioned verses which are alleged to be
in Qur’an as Sahih al-Bukhari claims, are abrogated, then why are they
missing in the Qur’an? How can we justify the last two traditions? More
over, how can something become abrogated after the death of Prophet?

If a verse is abrogated, there has to be an existing verse which is
better or equal than the previous one. This is what Qur’an testifies:

***None of Our revelations do We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, but
We substitute something better or similar Do you not know that Allah has
power over all things? (Qur’an 2:106)***

Thus the abrogated and abrogating verses are always in pair.

As the above Sunni traditions confirm, the abrogated verse must be in
Qur’an. There are quite a few verses in present Qur’an which are clearly
stated in Tafaseer (of Sunni and Shi’a) that specific verses are
abrogated by such and such verses. The only abrogated verses which do
not exist in the Qur’an are those which Allah cause them to be
"forgotten”(see the above verse of Qur’an). Since the forgotten verses
were not in the mind of the prophet and the people, it is normal that
these verses are not in the present Qur’an, since nobody could remember
them because of Allah’s will.

The traditions mentioned from Sihah Sittah claim that some verses in
Qur’an are missing and the companions not only “*remember* “them, but
also recite them in public. So it can not be abrogated since it is not
forgotten nor we have any similar verses (abrogating pairs) in Qur’an
for them.

Moreover, the abrogation is only at the time of Prophet, and not after
his death. However some of the above traditions allege that some
companions believed that people after the death of Prophet have changed
the words of Qur’an, however, they will not change anything, and they
will continue reciting their own version of Qur’an. Abrogation can not
be an answer for such disputes.

Also al-Hakim An-Nisaboori in his book "Al-Mustadrak”in the section of
commentary on the Qur’an, part two, p224, reported that Ubai Ibn Kaab
(whom the Prophet called the leader of al-ansar), said that the
Messenger of God said to him:

Certainly the Almighty commanded me to read the Qur’an in front of you,
and he read "The unbelievers from the people of the Book and the pagans
will not change their way until they see the evidence. Those who
disbelieve among the people of the scripture and the idolaters could not
change until the clear proof came unto them. A Messenger from Allah,
reading purified pages...”And of the very excellent part of it:

"Should Ibn Adam ask for a valley full of wealth and I grant it to him,
he would ask for another valley. And if I grant him that, he would ask
for a third valley. Nothing would fill the abdomen of Ibn Adam except
the soil. God accepts the repentance of anyone who repents. The religion
in the eyes of God is the Hanafiyah (Islam) rather than Yahudiyya
(Judaism) or Nasraniya (Christianity). Whoever does good, his goodness
will not be denied."

Sunni reference: al-Mustadrak by al-Hakim, section of commentary on the
Qur’an, v2, p224

Al-Hakim wrote: This is an authentic Hadith. al-Dhahabi also considered
it authentic in his commentary (on al-Mustadrak). al-Hakim reported that

Obei Ibn Kabb used to read:

"Those who disbelieved had set up in their hearts the zealotry of the
age of ignorance; and if you had had a similar zealotry, the Sacred
Mosque would have been corrupted, and God (would have) brought down His
peace of reassurance upon His Messenger"

When al-Hakim said this is authentic according to the standards of the
two sheikhs (Al-Bukhari and Muslim)!!! and when al-Dhahabi also
considered it authentic in his Commentary on al-Mustadrak, v2, pp
225-226, and when Muslim report similar to this from Abu Musa Ash’ari
which I mentioned earlier, then what will be the conclusion?

Those who claim that anyone who has recoded a tradition which implies
the incompleteness of Qur’an is Kafir, should first pass this verdict
for al-Bukhari, Muslim, al-Hakim, because they testified that such
absurd traditions are authentic and have named their book "Sahih"! This
is while the author of al-Kafi never claimed that his book is
all-authentic, and mentioned that those traditions which contradict
Qur’an should be rejected.

Furthermore, let’s suppose that al-Kulaini in his book, al-Kafi, had
recorded some traditions which may imply the incompleteness of Qur’an.
Why should all the Shi’a be accused of the belief in the incompleteness
of the Qur’an? al-Kulaini was not an infallible, and if a scholar like
him makes a mistake in recording a tradition which later found to be
weak, why should we attribute the mistake to millions of the Shi’a?

If such an accusation is possible and permissible, why should we not
accuse all the Sunnis of the belief of the incompleteness of the Qur’an
because they are the followers of Umar who was quoted by al-Bukhari,
Muslim, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Ibn Mardawayh to have said that the Qur’an
was incomplete, and that more than 200 verses were deleted? Why should
Umar, Aisha, Abu Musa not be accused of the same thing because of all of
them stated the incompleteness of the Qur’an?

We believe that the Qur’an as it is now is the entire Qur’an without any
subtraction or addition. It is the Qur’an which no false hood from the
era of pre revelation or post revelation entered it. It is a revelation
from the Mighty, the Praised. Allah promised that He will protect the
Qur’an. He said:

***"Certainly We sent down the Reminder (i.e., Qur’an), and certainly we
shall protect it”(Qur’an 15:9)***

**  
**
إِنَّا

**  
**
 

**  
**
نَحْنُ

**  
**
 

**  
**
نَزَّلْنَا

**  
**
 

**  
**
الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ

**  
**
 

**  
**
﴿الحجر: ٩﴾

It is the Qur’an through which the Messenger and the Members of his
House commanded us to test the authenticity of every Hadith, and accept
the Hadith that agrees with the Qur’an and reject the Hadith which
contradicts the Qur’an. We believe that whoever says that the Qur’an is
incomplete, was added is completely wrong. What was reported on this
subject from Umar, Abu Musa, Bukhari, Muslim, Ahmad Hanbal, al-Hakim,
and Kulaini is completely rejected and absolutely unacceptable, if they
want to mean the incompleteness of Qur’an.

Despite the Sunni brothers who believe they have some authentic books,
Shi’a believe that only Qur’an is all-authentic, and all the traditions
attributed to prophet and Imams, are subject to check with well
understood concepts in Qur’an.

Some of the references of this article:

- Sahih Bukhari printed by Muhammad ‘Ali Subaih in Egypt  
 - Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic English version  
 - Sahih Muslim printed by Muhammad ‘Ali Subaih in Egypt  
 - Sahih Muslim, English version  
 - Mustadrak by Hakim printed by al-Nasr in al-Riyadh 1335  
 - Musnad of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, printed Sader Beirute Lebanon 1969

The Qur’an Compiled by Imam ‘Ali (as)
-------------------------------------

There is no dispute among Muslim scholars, whether they are Sunni or
Shi’a, concerning the fact that the Commander of Believers, ‘Ali (as),
possessed a special transcript of the text of Qur’an which he had
collected himself, and he was THE FIRST who compiled Qur’an. There are a
great number of traditions from Sunni and Shi’a which states that after
the death of the Holy Prophet (S), Imam ‘Ali sat down in his house and
said that he had sworn an oath that he would not put on his outdoor
clothes or leave his house until he collects together the Qur’an.

Sunni references:

- Fat’hul Bari fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v10,
p386  
 - al-fihrist, by (Ibn) an-Nadim, p30  
 - al-Itqan, by al-Suyuti, v1, p165  
 - al-Masahif, by Ibn Abi Dawud, p10  
 - Hilyatul awliya’, by Abu Nu’aym, v1, p67  
 - al-Sahibi, by Ibn Faris, p79  
 - ‘Umdatul Qari, by al-Ayni, v20, p16  
 - Kanzul Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v15, pp 112-113  
 - al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 9, Section 4,
p197  
 - Ma’rifat al-Qurra’ al-kibar, by al-Dhahabi, v1, p31

There are also traditions from the Imams of Ahlul Bayt which tell us
that this was done by Imam ‘Ali by order of the Holy Prophet (See
al-Bihar, v92, pp 40-41,48,51-52).

This transcript of Qur’an which compiled by Imam ‘Ali (as) had the
following unique specifications:

a) It was collected according to its revelation, i.e., in the order in
which it had been sent down. This is the reason that Muhammad Ibn Sireen
(33/653 - 110/729), the famous scholar and Tabi’i (disciples of the
companions of the Holy Prophet), regretted that this transcript had not
passed into the hands of the Muslims, and said: "If that transcript were
in our hands, we would found a great knowledge in it.”

Sunni References:

- at-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v2, part 2, p101  
 - Ansab al-ashraf, by al-Baladhuri, v1, p587  
 - al-Istiab, by Ibn Abd al-Barr, v3, pp 973-974  
 - Sharh Ibn Abi al-Hadid, v6, pp 40-41  
 - al-Tas’hil, by Ibn Juzzi al-Kalbi, v1, p4  
 - al-Itqan, by al-Suyuti, v1, p166  
 - al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 9, Section 4,
p197  
 - Ma’rifat al-Qurra’ al-kibar, by al-Dhahabi, v1, p32

It is according to this transcript that Sunni scholars relate that the
first Chapter of Qur’an which was sent down to the Prophet (S) was
Chapter al-Iqra (al-Alaq, Ch. 96).

Sunni References:

- al-Burhan, by al-Zarkashi, v1, p259  
 - al-Itqan, by al-Suyuti, v1, p202  
 - Fathul Bari, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v10, p417  
 - Irshad al-sari, by al-Qastalani, v7, p454

As you know the Chapter al-Alaq is not at the beginning of the present
Qur’an. Also Muslims agree that the verse (5:3) was among one of the
last revealed verses of Qur’an (but not the very last one), yet it is
not toward the end of the present Qur’an. This clearly proves that
although the Qur’an that we have available is complete, it is not in the
order that has been revealed. These few misplacements were done by some
companions on purpose at worst, or out of ignorance at least.

It was for this reason that the Commander of Believers, ‘Ali (as)
frequently stated in his sermons: "Ask me before you lose me. By Allah,
if you ask me about anything that could happen up to the Day of
Judgment, I will tell you about it. Ask me, for, by Allah, you will not
be able to ask me a question about anything without my informing you.
Ask me about the Book of Allah, for by Allah, there is no verse about
which I do not know whether it was sent down at night or during the day,
or whether it was revealed on a plain or in a mountain."

Sunni References:

- al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah, by al-Muhib al-Tabari, v2, p198  
 - at-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v2, part 2, p101  
 - al-Isabah, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v4, p568  
 - Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v7, pp 337-338  
 - Fathul Bari, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v8, p485  
 - al-Istiab, by Ibn Abd al-Barr, v3, p1107  
 - Tarikh al-Khulafa, by al-Suyuti, p124  
 - al-Itqan, by al-Suyuti, v2, p319

b) This transcript contained commentary and hermeneutic interpretation
(Tafsir and Ta’wil) from the Holy Prophet some of which had been sent
down as revelation but NOT as a part of the text of Qur’an. A small
amount of such texts can be found in some traditions in Usul al-Kafi.
These pieces of information were the Divine commentary of the text of
Qur’an which were revealed along with Qur’anic verses. Thus the
commentary verses and Qur’anic verses could sum up to 17000 verses. As
Sunnis know, Hadith al-Qudsi (the Hadith in which the speaker is Allah)
is also direct revelation, but they are not a part of Qur’an. In fact
Qur’an testifies that anything that Prophet said was (either direct or
indirect) revelation (See Qur’an 53:3-4). The direct revelation includes
the interpretation/commentary of the Qur’an.

In addition, this unique transcript contained the information from the
Holy Prophet about which verse was abrogated and which was abrogating,
which verse was clear (Muhkam) and which was ambiguous (Mutashabih),
which verse was general and which was specific.

c) This unique transcript also contained references to the persons,
places etc., about which the verses were revealed, what is called "Asbab
al- Nuzul". Since the Commander of Believers was aware of these facts,
he frequently said: "By Allah, no verse has been sent down without my
knowing about whom or what it was revealed and where it was revealed. My
Lord has gifted me with a mind which has a quick and retaining
understanding, and a tongue which speaks eloquently."

Sunni References:

- Hilyatul Awliyaa, by Abu Nu’aym, v1, pp 67-68  
 - at-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v2, part 2, p101  
 - Kanzul Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v15, p113  
 - al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 9, Section 4,
p197

After he compiled this transcript, Imam ‘Ali (as) took it and presented
it to the rulers who came after the Holy Prophet, and said: "Here is the
book of Allah, your Lord, in the order that was revealed to your
Prophet.”but they did not accept it and replied: "We have no need of
this. We have with us what you possess.”Thereupon, Imam ‘Ali (as) took
the transcript back and informed them that they will never see it again.
It is reported that Imam ‘Ali recited the latter part of the following
verse of Qur’an:

***"And when Allah took a Covenant from the People of the Book to
clarify it to mankind and not to hide its (clarification); but they
threw it away behind their backs and purchased with it some***  
***miserable gain! and what an evil was the bargain they made!”(Qur’an
3:187)***

By "its clarification", Imam ‘Ali meant the unique divine commentaries.
The Commander of Believers then concealed that transcript, and after him
it was passed to the Imams who also kept it concealed. It remained
concealed with the Imams, one after the other to this day, because they
wished to be only one sequence of Qur’an among the Muslims. Because
otherwise if people have had two different sequences, it might later
result to some alteration in Qur’an by some sick-minded people.

They wished people have strictly one sequence of Qur’an. The Qur’an and
its commentary which were collected by Imam ‘Ali (as) is not available
for any Shi’a in the world except to the Imam Mahdi (as). If the
transcript of the Commander of Believers had been accepted, that would
have been the Qur’an with unique commentary in the hand of people, but
it turned out to be otherwise.

This gives the meaning of the traditions in Usul al-Kafi which say that
no one but the Commander of Believers and the later Imams had the Qur’an
in the order it was revealed, and that the Qur’an which they had
contains "what can be understood of the heaven, etc.”and "the Knowledge
of the Book, all of it,”because they were the commentaries and
interpretations noted in the transcript of Imam ‘Ali directly from the
Holy Prophet (S). Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty, said:

***"And We have sent down on you a Book in which is the clarification of
ALL the things.”(Qur’an 16:89)***

Sometimes the word "tahrif”is used in some traditions, and it must be
made clear that the meaning of this word is changing of something from
its proper place to another place, like changing the right position of
sentence, or giving it a meaning other than its true or intended
meaning.

Therefore, it has absolutely nothing to do with addition or subtraction
from the text. It is thus with this meaning that the Qur’an states:

***"Some of the Jews distort (yuharrifuna) words from their
meaning”(Qur’an 4:46).***

This meaning of "tahrif", i.e., changing of meaning or changing the
context, as it appears in the Qur’an, has not only been applied in the
Muslim community to the verses of the Qur’an but also to the ahadith of
the Holy Prophet, even by rulers who have been prepared to use Islam to
their own personal advantage. It is this "tahrif", with this meaning,
that the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt have constantly sought to oppose. As one
example, Imam al-Baqir (as) complained about the situation of the
Muslims and their corrupt rulers, and said:

"One of the manifestations of their rejecting the Book (of Allah behind
their backs) (see Qur’an 2:101) is that they have fixed its words. but
they have altered the limits (of its command) (harrafu hududah). They
have (correctly) narrated it, but they do not observe (what) it (says).
Ignorant people delight in their preservation of its narration, but the
knowledgeable people deplore their ignoring to observe (what) it
(says)."

Shi’i references:

- al-Kafi, v8, p53  
 - al-Wafi, v5, p274 and v14, p214

This use of "tahrif”is taken as a definition for the word wherever it
appears in the ahadith of the Imams, similar to what Qur’an (4:46) has
used.

It is necessary to emphasize here that all grand scholars of the Imami
Shi’a are in agreement that the Qur’an which is at present among the
Muslims is the very same Qur’an that was sent down to the Holy Prophet,
and that it has not been altered. Nothing has been added to it, and
nothing is missing from it.

The Qur’an which was compiled by Imam ‘Ali (excluding the commentaries)
and the Qur’an that is in the hand of people today, are identical in
terms of words and sentences. No word, verse, chapter is missing. The
only difference is that the current Qur’an (collected by the companions)
is not in the order that was revealed.

The completeness of Qur’an is so indisputable among Shi’a that the great
Shi’a scholar, Abu Ja’far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn Ibn Babwayh,
known as

"Shaikh Saduq”(309/919-381/991), wrote:

"Our belief is that the Qur’an which Allah revealed to His Prophet
Muhammad is (the same as) the one between the two covers (daffatayn).
And it is the one which is in the hands of the people, and is not
greater in extent than that. The number of Surahs as generally accepted
is one hundred and fourteen...And he who asserts that we say that it is
greater in extent than that, is a liar."

Shi’i reference: Shi’ite Creed (al-I’tiqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaikh
Saduq, English version, p77.

It should be noted that Shaikh Saduq (ra) was the greatest scholars of
Hadith among the Imami Shi’a and was given the name of Shaikh
al-Muhaddithin (i.e., the most eminent of the scholars of Hadith). And
since he wrote the above in a book with the name of "The beliefs of the
Imami Shi’a,”it is quite impossible that there could be any authentic
Hadith in contrary to it. It is noteworthy that Shaikh Saduq lived at
the time of minor occultation of Imam Mahdi (as) and he is one of the
earliest Shi’a scholars.

He had the honor that he was born with the prayer of Imam Mahdi (as).
For a more detailed discussion of completeness of Qur’an as well as the
opinion of the Shi’a, interested readers may look at "al-Bayan,”by Abul
Qasim al-Khoei, pp 214-278.

Some ignorant opponents of the Shi’a mentioned that we apply al-Taqiyya
(dissimulation) and we do not release our actual belief on Qur’an. These
people never tried to understand that Taqiyya is for the time when my
life or the life of the other fellow is in danger. There is no need to
conceal my belief here since I am not under prosecution. The above
article is witness to what I say.

Taqiyya is not a good excuse for these people in front of Allah to
disregard what Shi’a present. They have liberty to check the traditions
which we have mentioned in different articles, or they can else ask
their "honest”scholars to do that.

And the truth is the best to be followed...

Wassalam.

Tabarsi and Incompleteness of Qur’an
------------------------------------

A Wahhabi wrote:

As for Khomeini, in his book Alhukumatul Islamia he speaks very highly
of Nuri Tabrasi. He has even quoted from certain of his books in support
of his teories. Tabrasi is the very same person who wrote a book titled
"Faslul Khitaab fi tahrifi kitaabi Rabbil Arbaab”(the decisive say on
the proof of Alteration of the book of the lord of lords) printed in
Iran, 1298 A.H., to see that not only he claims the Qur’an is not
complete but also he present examples of Surah that is deleted from the
Qur’an

There are three individuals with the title of Tabarsi among the Shi’a.
The one you mentioned who wrote a booklet on the incompleteness of
Qur’an, is al-Nuri al-Tabarsi (Husayn Ibn Muhammad Taqi al-Nuri al-
Tabarsi) (c 1254/1838 - 1320/1902).

Those who call the Shi’a Kafir due to this booklet will be surprised if
they know that many of the Hadiths that al-Nuri al-Tabarsi has quoted
are, in fact, from the Sunni documents and were quoted from their most
authentic books!

Actually his book has two parts. In one part he has gathered the Sunni
reports and in the other part he provided the Shi’a reports in this
regard. The Wahhabis, who have recently distributed copies of this book
to attack the Shi’a, have intentionally omitted the part related to the
Sunni reports!

Nonetheless, the Shi’a scholars of his time disagreed with his
conclusion regarding the alteration of Qur’an. This shows that the Shi’a
scholars strongly believed nothing is missing from Qur’an.

One important remark, here, is that, we cannot call any person (Shi’a or
Sunni) who claims Qur’an is incomplete, as Kafir. This is simply because
believing in the completeness of Qur’an is not an article of faith, nor
do we have any tradition saying that anyone who claims Qur’an is
incomplete, is a Kafir. Also, the verse of Qur’an that states that Allah
is the protector of the Reminder, can be interpreted differently.
(Logically we cannot prove the lack of alteration in Qur’an by Qur’an!)

We can not add anything to the articles of faith after the demise of the
Prophet (S), specially something like completeness of a Qur’an that was
compiled at the time of Uthman long after the demise of the Prophet (S).
Thus claiming Kufr would be an innovation and a false accusation and
according to Islamic teachings such accusation will result in serious
consequences for the accuser.

If a Muslim dose not agree with completeness of the Qur’an at hand, such
wrong idea does not make his belief deficient if he still believes in
all what have been revealed to the Prophet (S) is truth. Much the same
as all Muslims agree that all the Sunna of the Prophet (S) is truth,
though some of his Sunna may not have reached us.

What we can say about those individuals, who do not believe in
completeness of the Qur’an that we have at hand, is that they are sadly
mistaken in understanding the meaning of the traditions on which they
based their proof. Also one should distinguish between a person who
believes Qur’an is incomplete, and a person who has recorded some weak
traditions among others in his book, simply because he wants to pass
down all the information he has received (which are subject to
verification at a later time).

The second person with the title of Tabarsi is Abu Mansoor Ahmad Ibn
‘Ali who lived in the sixth century after Hijrah. He is famous for some
of his works. He never wrote any book to prove Qur’an is incomplete!
Ayatullah Khomeini (ra) quoted from this person in his book, and not the
first person as you alleged.

The highly-acknowledged Tabarsi in the Shi’a world is yet another
person. His name is Abu ‘Ali al-Fadl Ibn al-Hasan al-Tabarsi (c
486/1093 - 548/1154), who is one of the famous Imami traditionists and
the commentators Qur’an. His book on Tafsir is well-known. He believed
in the completeness of Qur’an as other Shi’a scholars do. Abu ‘Ali
al-Tabarsi mentioned:

"There are no words added to the Qur’an. Any claim of added words is
unanimously denied by the Shi’ites. As to the deletion, some Shi’ites
and some Sunnis said that there is deletion. But Our scholars deny
that."

- Shi’i reference: Quoted from al-Tabarsi, in the Commentary of the Holy
Qur’an, by al-Safi

- Sunni reference: Quoted from al-Tabarsi, by Professor Muhammad Abu
Zahrah in his book "Imam al-Sadiq".

First of all, Tabarsi has confirmed that nothing has been added in to
the Qur’an (as opposed to some of the traditions in Sahih al-Bukhari
which claim otherwise). Second, he has mentioned that our scholars (the
Shi’a scholars) rejected the idea that anything has been deleted from
the Qur’an. His saying clearly shows that the Shi’a scholars disagreed
with any idea concerning that Qur’an is missing something.

Thus the very small number of the traditions that might imply otherwise
should have proper interpretation. Also as Tabarsi mentioned, such
traditions which might imply deletion, are not exclusive to the Shi’ite
books, and can be found in the most important Sunni collections of
traditions such as Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Bukhari.

The Wahhabi opponent further wrote:

Nuri al-Tabarsi present examples of Surah that is deleted from the
Qur’an, like the Surah of Wali “Oh you who belive, belive in the prophet
and wali, the two whom we sent to guide you to the straight path. A
prophet and wali who are of each other...and celebrate the praise of
your lord, and ‘Ali is among the witnesses... What do you have to say to
this!!!

All the Shi’a scholars unanimously rejected the opinion of Noori
al-Tabarsi that there was a Chapter called Wali. But since you tried to
solve all the problems concerning numerous traditions reported in Sahih
al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim on the deletion of two chapters of Qur’an
with the “length “of chapter of al-Bara’ah! (ch. 9) by saying that they
were abrogated (even after the death of Prophet!!!), then let’s suppose
for the sake of argument that the above small chapter called Wali was
revealed, and then it was abrogated. How does that sound?

As for the concept of Wali, we do not need any new chapter to prove it.
The concept of Wali has been mentioned in Qur’an with its general as
well as its special meaning. Here is just one of the verses with its
special meaning:

***“Only “Allah is your WALI, and His Messenger and those among
believers who keep alive prayer and pay Zakat while they are in the
state of bowing. (Qur’an 5:55)***

The above verse clearly suggests that “not “all believers are your Wali
with the special meaning of Wali in this verse which is "master”and
"leader". Here again, Wali does not mean just friend, because all the
believers are friends of each other. The above verse mentions that only
three items are your special Wali: Allah, Prophet Muhammad, and Imam
‘Ali for he was the only one at the time of Prophet who paid Zakat while
he was in the state bowing (ruku’). Muslim scholars are unanimous in
reporting this event. Here are just some of the Sunni references which
mentioned the revelation of the above verse of Qur’an in the honor of
Imam ‘Ali:

(1) Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v5, p38

(2) Tafsir al-Kashshaf, by al-Zamakhshari, Egypt 1373, v1, pp 505,649

(3) Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ahmad Ibn Muhammad al-Tha’labi

(4) Tafsir al-Bayan, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, v6, pp 186,288-289

(5) Tafsir Jamiul Hukam al-Qur’an, by Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Qurtubi, v6,
p219

(6) Tafsir al-Khazin, v2, p68

(7) Durr al-Manthur, by al-Suyuti, v2, pp 293-294

(8) Asbab al-Nuzool, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, Egypt 1382, v1, p73 on the
authority of Ibn Abbas

(9) Asbab al-Nuzool, by al-Wahidi

(10) Sharh al-Tjrid, by Allama Qushji

(11) Ahkam al-Qur’an, al-Jassas, v2, pp 542-543

(12) Kanzul Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v6, p391

(13) al-Awsat, by Tabarani, narrated from Ammar Yasir

(14) Ibn Mardawayh, on the authority of Ibn Abbas

... and more ...

Please see the article of Ghadir Khum, Part II, for more information and
clarification about the above verse.

The Book of Fatimah (sa)
------------------------

Some anti-Shi’i booklets published by Wahhabis groups allege that based
on Usul Kafi, Shi’a believe there is a Qur’an called "Qur’an of
Fatimah"! This is a malicious accusation. There is no tradition in Usul
Kafi saying "Qur’an of Fatimah". There are however, very few traditions
in one chapter of Usul Kafi which assert that Fatimah (sa) wrote a book
(mushaf). The tradition states "The book of Fatimah". Surely Qur’an is a
book (mushaf), but any book is NOT Qur’an. This allegation is as silly
as saying "Qur’an of al-Bukhari”instead of "book of al-Bukhari"!

Also those few traditions in al-Kafi clearly state that there is no
single verse of Qur’an in the Book of Fatimah. This shows that the book
of Fatimah is totally different than Qur’an. Of course, it was three
time bigger than Qur’an in length.

In one tradition it said that Fatimah (sa), after the Prophet (S) passed
away, used to write what she was told that would happen to her
descendants and stories about other rulers to come (up to the day of
resurrection). Fatimah (sa) recorded (or asked Imam ‘Ali to record)
those information, which was kept in her family of Imams, and was called
"The Book (Mushaf) of Fatimah".

A tradition which follows this one clearly states that what is referred
to by "The Book of Fatimah”is not a part of Qur’an and has nothing to do
with Allah’s commandments/halals/harams. It does not have anything to do
with Shari’ah (divine law) and the religious practices. Let me give you
some of those traditions:

Abu Abdillah (as) said: "... We have with us the Book of Fatimah, but I
do not claim that anything of the Qur’an is in it.”(Usul al-Kafi,
Tradition \#637)

Abu Abdillah (as) also said about the book of Fatimah: "There is nothing
of what is permitted and what is forbidden (al-Halal and al- Haram) in
this; but in it is the knowledge of what will happen.”(Usul Kafi,
Tradition \#636)

Abdul Malik Ibn Ayan said to Abu Abdillah (as): "The Zaydiyyah and the
Mu’tazilah have gathered around Muhammad Ibn Abdillah (Ibn al-Hasan, the
second). Will have they any rule?”He (as) said: "By Allah there are two
books in my possession in which every prophet and every ruler who rules
on this earth (from the beginning of the earth till the day of Judgment)
has been named. No, by Allah, Muhammad Ibn Abdillah is not one of
them.”(Usul Kafi, Tradition \#641)

"Mushaf”refers to a collection of "Sahifa”which is singular for "page".
The literal meaning of Mushaf is "The manuscript bound between two
boards". In those days they used to write on leather and other
materials. They either rolled the writings -- what is known as scroll in
English. Or they kept the separable sheets and bound them together, in
what could be called as "Mushaf", a book in today’s terms. The
equivalent to the word book "Kitab”used to (and still is) refer to
either a letter (e.g. of correspondence) or to an document that was
written down or recorded. The Arabic word for wrote "Kataba”is a
derivative of the same word.

Although the Qur’an is commonly called a "Mushaf”today, perhaps
referring to its "collection”after it was dispersed. Qur’an is a Mushaf
(book), but any Mushaf (book) is not necessarily the Qur’an! There is no
Qur’an of Fatimah! As the above and many other traditions suggest, The
book of Fatimah has absolutely no connection with Qur’an. This concept
is commonly pulled out of context and published by anti-Shi’i groups due
to their hatred toward the Followers of the Members of the House of
Prophet (S). I have seen it mentioned in a book printed by the
government of Saudi Arabia.

What is also “very”important to recognize and understand is that belief
in Mushaf Fatimah is NOT a requirement of belief to the Shi’a. It is
just few traditions which report such a thing. It is nothing crucial for
us, nor any one (except Imam Mahdi) has access to it.

Can ANY human do that?
----------------------

There is an aayah inside Qur’an where Allah is saying:

***Surely We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be its
guardian (15:9)***

As this verse is telling us, Qur’an is protected by Allah himself. This
verse implies that Qur’an is not altered by the prophet, and it is not
altered by the end of the prophet’s life. There are two different
understandings, however, on this aayah, one is from sunni people and the
other is from Shi’a-athna-ashari. Shi’a-athna-ashari says that the book
of Allah is protected by Allah himself and along with the history.

Not even one single human being can add any letter, reduce any letter,
or change any letter of it. This does include all types of human beings.
It is , in reality, out of the power of human being to do that. As the
result of such understanding, Shi’a-athna-ashari says:

Even a Budist can not change Qur’an and publish it and widely.  
 Even a zionist can not do that.  
 A Shi’a can not do that.  
 The prophet, himself, can not do that.  
 ‘Ali and his sons can not do that,  
 None among SUNNI people can do that.  
 Not a pagan can do that.

Simply:

No single human being can alter Qur’an in any way.  
 On the other hand, there is sunni people who say that Shi’a have a
different Qur’an. Let us see what this claim lead to:

If you accept that a group of people such as shia (or any group named as
XXXX) has altered Qur’an, you are simply question the ability of Allah
in preserving Qur’an. You are saying that a group were able to do that
and publish such Qur’an among themselves and use it. Well, God was
supposed to protect Qur’an, right? If such Qur’an exists,then Allah must
be weak.

In other words, sunni people believe in a very weak version of
protection of Allah. While Shi’a-athan-ashari people do not accept such
weakness.

In other words, whoever says like this does indeed believe that a few
people (even one single human being) has already altered Qur’an. In
other words, he, himself, believes in the alteration of Qur’an, not by
himself, but by others.

One may say that there is no physical different Qur’an. But Shi’a
believe in that, just in their mind. You must be kidding. Don’t you
think that such Shi’a exists only in your mind and nowhere else? Few
ahaadith which are refering a different Qur’an also imply that the
different Qur’an was seen by the narrator of the hadith. Sometimes, as
you have seen by addition of "Who created”in Qur’an and I referred to
before.

The narrators even give you the exact words of such Qur’an, sometimes,
they even give the full aayah which is deleted or added, or even they
talk about full chapters of Qur’an. These two does not come along with
each other. If such Qur’an exists, then the God must be lying to people.
If the God is the most truthful and the most powerful, then there is no
such Qur’an.

Let me put this in another way: If you claim that such Qur’an did/does
exist, you simply attack muslims and the present Qur’an and you are
simply attacking the God.

I would like to ask sunni brothers to answer:

Do you think that a pagan indian can alter the Qur’an?

(Honest, sunni brothers know this. What they wanted to do was to attack
Shi’a in front of usual people who have come back from their farms.)

Before I end this article, I would like to bring something to your
attention. Have you ever played chess, or have you ever watched others
playing chess? (I am not playing)

It has happened that (A) is very expert in playing chess. He plays with
(B). When (B) is loosing and there is only one (or two) move(s) for (B)
to loose the game, (A) suggests something interesting.

He rotates the chess sheet 180 degree. By this, the place of winner and
looser will change. (A) who was winner before, is now looser, and (B)
who was looser before, becomes closer to winning. But the story does not
end here. (A) is so expert that he wins again. He can get rid of the
problems, solve them, and gain power and the key rule in the play of
chess.

The story of Shi’a-athna-ashari is very similar to this. If you attend
their religious classes, (not any class, though), you will find the same
game again. The teacher proves to you that one subject is such and such.
You become confident that you will leave this religion forever. Then he
starts explaining all the previous reasons and opens each problem, and
brings other sources and reasons, and you can see that how amazingly the
definition of the subject is changed. You become so happy that you have
got the truth. The difference is now that you think your faith is MORE
stronger.

This behavior is kept even inside of books. If a reader is not familiar
with this method, he simply thinks that the author is Kafir. If he does
not read the entire book, he will certainly be angry to some parts of
the book. On the other hand, if the reader is patience, he will shortly
see that the tone of the author is changed. This method has caused a lot
of problem. One is for those readers who read these books partially.
They simply accuse the author publicly that he is Kafir. If another
person has read that book already, he will laugh at the first person for
the lack of reading. Anyway:

The subject of alteration of Qur’an is one of these subjects. It is
quite possible to prove for you, the readers of SRI, that Qur’an is
altered using Qur’an itself. The problem is that this method is very
dangerous. If a person like me fails to correctly transfer the subject
to you, most of you will certainly loose your faith to Qur’an. I can
disprove all the reasons I bring for you, though, but it is too risky.

I just wanted you to know that Shi’a-athna-ashari are so expert on this
area that no other sects of islam have followed them in such subjects.
They show that Qur’an is not altered using Qur’an, Hadith, and
historical account. When the class ends, you will find a very firm
system of thought about that special subject.You will find it closed and
patched. They bring for you the sources from anywhere, simply anywhere,
and show you the truth. As you can imagine, some babies of this schools
of thought, such as me, know about 6 books of Sunni (Sehah Settah) even
more than a normal sunni. I am sorry to say that Shi’a of this school is
so progressed that they left others behind without paying any attention.

Early Debates on the Integrity of the Qur’an Part 1
---------------------------------------------------

(This article is written by Professor Hossein Modarresi from Princeton
University, NJ)

This short article attempts to shed some light on the origins of the
Sunnite-Shi’ite controversies on the integrity of the text of the
Qur’an. The development of these debates in the first Islamic centuries
represents an interest example of how ideas evolved in the early period
through sectarian disputes, as well as contacts and communication
between various Muslim sects and schools of thought.

Despite severe mistrust, various factors existed to facilitate the give
and take among different sects. Most prominent was a group of hadith
transmitters who frequented different sectatrian camps and, thereby,
introduced much of each sect’s literature to the others. Often confusion
on the part of these "bipolar”narrators of hadith helped
"naturalize”segments of one sect’s literature into that of another sect.

This was particularly true in Shi’ism, many of transmitters heard hadith
from both Shitite and Sunnite sources, and later misattributed much of
what they had heard.[^1] The early Shi’ite mutakallimun also quoted
statements from the Sunnite sources in their polemics against the
Sunnites as argumentum ad hominem.

But from the mid 3rd/9th century onward, it was common for some Shi’ite
authors and traditionisls to attribute a Shi’ite origin to this
material, since it was thought that whatever the companions of the Imams
and early Shl’ite mutakallimun said or wrote, even what they used in
their polemics, necessarily represented the views and statements of the
Imams. [^2] This assumption led to the introduction of much alien
material into Shi’ite thought.

Many of these early interchanges were forgotten over time. Hence it was
not known that many of the ideas that were later labeled as Sunnite,
Shi’ite, or the like were originally held by a different group or, at
least in the early period before the sects took on their final shape,
were shared by various mainstream elements of Islamic society.

The question of the integrity of the Uthmanic text of the Qur-an and the
controversies surrounding it are a prime example of that phenomenon. The
central issue in these debates was whether the Uthmanic text
comprehended the entire body of material that was revealed to the
Prophet, or whether there had been further material that was missing
from the Uthmanic text. In the following pages, we shall examine the
Sunnite-Shi’ite interchanges on this question.

The evidence in the text of the Qur’an itself as well as in hadith
indicates that the Prophet compiled a written scripture for Islam during
his own life-time, most likely in his first years in Medina.[^3] He
reportedly continued until the end of his life to personally instruct
the scribes where to insert new passages of the revelation in the
scripture.[^4] There are also indications that parts of earlier
revelations were not included in the scripture. One verse in the Qur’an
acknowledges the absence of a part of revelation which was abrogated or
"caused to be forgoeten,[^5] another spoke of verses that God
substituted for uthers.[^6]

Early Muslims reportedly used to recall verses of the revelation they
did not find in the new scripture. They were however, aware that those
passages were deliberately excluded by the Prophet, since the Muslims
frequently referred to them as what "abrogated”(nusikha),
"lifted”(rufi’a), "caused to be forgotten”(unsiya), or "dropped’t
(usqita)[^7].

The concept of abrogation of the revelation (naskh al Quran) apparently
referred originally to those parts were not included by the Prophet in
the scripture.[^8] Later, however, the concept was developed in the
Sunnite tradition to include several hypothetical categories, most of
them with examples preserved in the present text of the Qur’an. With a
single possible exception,[^9] however, it is highly doubtful that the
Qur’an includes any abrogated verse.

The Sunnite account of the collection of the Qur’an is completely
different from the above. It contends that the Qur’an was not compiled
in a single volume until after the Prophet died in the year 11/632.[^10]
The "recorders of the revelation”(kuttab al-wahy) used to jot down the
verses immediately after the Prophet received and recited them. Others
among the faithful memorized portions of the revelation or occasionally
recorded them on whatever primitive writing material was available.
According to the supporters of this account, the fact that the Qur’an
was not compiled as a book until the death of the Prophet is perfectly
logical. As long as he was alive there was always the expectation of
further revelation as well as occasional abrogations. Any formal
collection of the material already revealed could not properly be
considered a complete text.[^11]

Many people had memorized large parts of the revelation, which they
repeated in their prayers and recited to others. As long as the Prophet
was living among the faithful as the sole authority there was no need
for a formal reference book of religion or a code of law. All of these
considerations would change after his death and the new circumstances
would necessitate the collection of the Qur’an. The story as reported by
the Sunnis sources is as follows

Two years after the Prophet died, the Muslims were engaged in a bloody
battle with a rival community at Yarnama in the deserts of Arabia. Many
of the memorizers (qurra) of the Qur’an lost their lives at this
time.[^12] Fearing that a great portion of the Qur’an would be lost
should a similar situation arise and more memorizers of the Qur’an die,
Abu Bakr, the first successor to the Prophet, ordered that the Qur’an be
collected.

To this end, the Prophet’s companions and the memorizers of the Qur’an
were asked to come forward with any parts of the revelation they had
memorized or written down in any form. Abu Bakr ordered ‘Umar, his
successor to be, and Zayd b. Thabit, a young recorder of revelation
during the Prophet’s lifetime, to sit at the entrance to the mosque of
Medina and record any verse or part of the revelation that at least two
witnesses testified that they had heard from the Prophet. In one
particular case, though, the testimony of a single witness was
accepted.[^13] All of the material gathered in this manner was recorded
on sheets of paper,[^14] or parchment, but was not yet compiled as a
volume.

Furthermore, these materials were not made available to the Muslim
community, which continued to possess the Qur’an only in its primitive
scattered form. The sheets remained in the keeping of Abu Bakr and
‘Umar, and after ‘Umar’s death they passed to his daughter Hafsa.
‘Uthman took the sheets trom Hafsa during his caliphate and had them put
together in the form of a volume. He had several copies sent to dif-
ferent parts of the Muslim world and he then ordered that any other
collection or portion of the Qur’an found anywhere else be burned.[^15].
But he could not convince his colleagues to insert it in the Qur’an
because nobody else came forward to support him,[^16] and the
requirement that there be two witnesses for any text to be accepted as a
part of the Qur’an was therefore not met.

Later, however, some other Companions recalled that same verse,[^17]
including Aisha the Prophet’s youngest wife. She is alleged to have said
that a sheet on which two verses, including that on stoning, were
recorded was under her bedding and that after the Prophel died, a
domestic animal[^18] got into the room and gobbled up the sheet while
the household was preoccupied with his funeral.[^19] Umar also
remembered other verses he thought dropped out (saqata) from the
Qur’an[^20] or were lost, including one on being dutiful to parents[^21]
and another on jihad.[^22] His claim regarding the first of the two was
supported by three other early authorities on the Qur’an: Zayd b.
Thabit, ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas, and Ubayy b. Ka’b.[^23] Anas b. Malik
remembered a verse which was revealed in the occasion of some Muslims
who were killed in a battle, but was later "lifted".[^24] Umar’s learned
son, ‘Abd Allah[^25] as well as some later scholars[^26] maintained that
much of the Qur’an had perished before the collection was made. Similar
reports specifically addressed the official Uthmanic res- cension of the
Qur’an.

They reported that many prominent Companions could not find in that
official text portions of the revelation they had themselves heard from
the Prophet, or found them in a different form. Ubayy b. Ka’b, for
instance, recited sura 98 (al Bayyina) in a form he claimed to have
heard from the Prophet. It included two verses unrecorded in the
Uthmanic text.[^27]

He also thought that the original version of sura 33 (al- Ahzab) had
been much longer, from which he specifically remembered the stoning
verse that is missing from the Uthmanic text.[^28] His claim was
supported by Zayd b. Thabit,[^29] by Aisha who reported that during the
Prophet’s lifetime the sura was about three times as long, although when
Uthman collected the Qur’an he found only what was made available in his
text,[^30] and by Hudhayfa b. al-Yaman (who found some seventy verses
missing in the new official text, verses that he himself used to recite
during the lifetime of the Prophet.[^31]

Hudhayfa also contended that Sura 9 (al-Bara’a in its Uthmanic form was
perhaps one-fourth[^32] or one-third of what it had been during the time
of the Prophet, an idea later supported the prominent 2nd/8th century
jurist and traditionist Malik b. Anas, founder of the Maliki school of
Islamic law.[^33]

There are also reports that Suras 15 (al-Hijr) and 24 (al-Nur) had once
been of a different length.[^34] And Abu Musa al-Ash’ari recalled the
existence of two long suras (one verse of each he still remembered) that
he could not find in the present text.[^35] One of the two verses he
recalled ("If the son of Adam had two fields of gold he would seek a
third one...") is also quoted from other Companions such as Ubayy[^36] ,
Ibn Masud[^37], and Ibn ‘Abbas[^38]. Maslama b. Mukhallad al-Ansari
orfered two further verses that are not in the Uthmanic text[^39] and
Aisha came forward with a third[^40]. Two short chapters known as Sural
al-Hafd and Sura al-Khal were recorded in the collections of Ubayy[^41],
Ibn Abbas and Abu Musa[^42].

They were allegedly also known to Umar[^43] and other Companions[^44]
although no trace of either chapter is found in the of official text.
Ibn Masud did not have Suras 1, 113, and 114 in his collection[^45] but
he had some extra words and phrases that were missing from the Uthmanic
text.[^46] He and many other Companions also preserved some verses that
differed from the official text[^47]. There were also widely transmitted
reports that after the death of the Prophet, ‘‘Ali put all the parts of
the Qur’an together[^48] and presented it to the Companions; hut they
rejected it, and he had to take it back home[^49]. These reports also
suggested thal there were substantial differences between the various
versions of the Qur’an.

Early Debates on the Integrity of the Qur’an Part 2
---------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is universally acknowledged in the Islamic tradilion-based on the
collective memory of the early generations of Muslims rather than simply
on a number of isolated reports that Uthman promulgated an official
rescension of the Qur’an and banned all other versions.

There were certainly differences between that official Qur’an and other
early codices as there were differences among the variant codices
themselves. It was, after all, those differences that necessitated the
establihment of a standard and universally accepted text.

It is conceivable that close associates of the Prophet, especially those
who had joined him during his years in Mecca, still remembe- red parts
of the revelation that had not been included by the Prophet in the
Qur’an. It is also plausible to speculate that ‘Ali whose version of the
Scripture might have been one of the most complete and authentic, had
offered it to Uthman to be consecrated as the official text, but that
his offer was rejected by the caliph who preferred to select and combine
elements of all the competing early codices. This in turn may have
caused ‘‘Ali to withdraw his manuscript as a basis for compiling of the
official rescension. Another Companion, ‘Abd Allah b. Mas’ud, is also
reported to have stood aloof from the process and to have declined to
offer his own text.[^50]

The foregoing account of the first compilation of the Qur’an is,
otherwise, extremely problematic[^51]. Despite the significance of the
sources quoted therein this report, it does not appear tn any work
written by scholars of the 2nd/8th and early 3rd/9th centuries[^52].
Some details of the story reportedly took place later at the time that
Uthman ordered the creation of a standard Qur’an[^53]. Several reports
categorically deny that any official attempt to collect the Qur’an was
made before ‘Uthman’s time[^54], an assertion reportedly supported by
the collective recollections if the Muslim community[^55]. Different
versions of the story reveal major contradictions in regards to some of
its main particulars. The name of the Companion whose testimony alone
was accepted[^56] and the precise verses in question[^57] vary.
Contradictory accounts are also given of the role of Zayd b. Thabit in
the compilation process[^58]. The inclusion of the clause related to the
acceptance of the testimony of one man alone is an obvious attempt to
make the story more acceptable through references to the familiar and
widely quoted story Khuzayma Dhu ‘l-Shahadstayan, a man whos single
testimony was aid to hav ebeen accpted by the Prophet as equivalent to
the testimony of two witnesses[^59]. In a variation of this story, in

which the witness is an unidentified man from Ansar, Umar is reported to
have accepted the testimony of this single witness on the grounds that
the message of the verse he orfered was, in Umar’s judgement, true since
the verse described the Prophet with qualities that he had really
possessed[^60].

In other variations. The verse or verses were said to have been accepted
because ‘Umar[^61] , Uthman[^62] or Zayd[^63] themselves testified that
they, too, had heard those Verses from the Prophet; or, alternatively,
because the caliph had generally ordered that anybody’s testimony be
accepted provided that he took an oath that he had personally heard from
the Prophet the verse or part that he offered for inclusion[^64].
Moreover, the story contradicts numerous and widely  
 .

In an obvious attempt to purge the sotry of these terrible
contradictions a variation of it was authored by some later transmitters
that suggested that (a) the collection of the Qur’an started during the
reign of Abu Bakr but could not be completed before his death and was
put together during the reigns of Umar, that (b), Zayd was the one who
wrote the Qur’an first during the time of Abu Bakr on primitive writing
material and then on paper during the time of Umar, that (c), there was
no question of testimony or witness, but rather Zayd himself after
completing the text once went ovr it and could not find Verse 33:23.

He then looked around for it, untill he found the record of it with
Khuzayma b. Thabit. He then went over the text once more and this time
noticed that the Verses 9:12-129 were missing, so he looked around again
untill he found the record with another man who was incidently called
Khuzayma as well. When he went over the text for the third time, he
found no problem and so the text was completed. (Tabari, Jami, vol 1 p
59-61) transmitted reports[^65] which assert that a number of the
Companions, notably ‘Ali, Abd Allah b. Masud and Ubayy b. Kab, had
collected the Qur’an during the time of the Prophet[^66]. Furthermore, a
clear and suspicious attempt seems to have been made to somehow credit
the first three caliphs with achieving the compilation of the sacred
scripture of Islam to the exclusion of the fourth, ‘Ali.

Early Debates on the Integrity of the Qur’an Part 3
---------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

This latter point, when compared with the reports cited above on ‘Ali’s
collection of the Qur’an after the death of the Prophet, may shed some
light on the origins of the story. Taking into account some of the early
political, and later polemical, disputes within the Muslim community,
one may suggest the existence of a multi-stage process in the formation
of that account.

There was apparently a widely circulating rumor In the first century ot
the Hijra to the effect that ‘Ali did not attend the public meeting at
which Abu Bakr was declared ruler after the death of the Prophet, and
that it also took some time before he swore his allegiance to Abu Bakr.

From early times the partisans of ‘Ali have interpreted this as a
reflection of his dissatisfaction with the choice of Abu Bakr and used
this conclusion as a basis from which to attack the allege consensus of
thc Companions which was put forward by the supporters of the caliphs as
the legal hasis for the validity of Abu Bakr’s succession to caliphate.
This line of argument seems also have appeared quite early; possibly
even before the decline of the Umayyads in Lhe early 2nd/8th century
whem sectarian debates began to flare in the Muslim communily[^67].

With the decline of the Umayyads, ‘‘Ali could no longer be ignored and a
response had to be found. Many of the reports which alleged that ‘‘Ali
retreated from public life after the death of the prophet in order to
put the Qur’an together mention this as the explanation for his failure
to tender an early allegiance to the caliph[^68]. It scems very
likely[^69], therefore, that these reports were composed-using as
background material some pre-existing reports and recollections
concerning ‘Ali[^70] - the sectarian purpose of suggesting that ‘Ali was
known for his vast knowledge and of special dedication to the Qur’an.
(Ibn Sa’d vol 1 p 204)

In his codex of the Qur’an he had reportedly indicated the verses which
were abrogated and those which abrogated them (Itqan, vol 1 p 204).

The exact timing of when he had offered the codex for the official
consecration was already blurred by the early 2nd/8th Century. The
Shi’ites were themselves were now attributing it to the time of  
 Umar (Sulaymn, p 108, also quoted by Abu Mansur al Tabrisi, vol 1 p
228, vol 2 p 7), but a vague memory of it was presumably still extant.

‘Ali’s delay was not a sign of his dissatisfaction. Instead, ‘Ali was
quoted as telling Abu Bakr (when the caliph asked him whether he had
failed to swear allegiance because he was unhappy with Abu  
 Bakr’s election) that he "had vowed to God not to put on his outside
garment except for attending the communal prayer, until such a time as
he had put the Qur’an together."[^71]

The point that these reports had an anti Shi’ite polemical application
can also be attested to by the fact that in some of its later versions,
the report is quoted by the Sunnites on the authority of Jafar al Sadiq,
who quoted it from his fore fathers (Abu Hilal al Askari, vol 1 p 219)

It was a common practice in the sectarian reports to put the idea on the
tongue of the respected authority of the opponent, a practice whioch can
also be observed in the cases which shortly follow in the discussion
above. (See also Kashshi, p 393-97)

The episode, however, created other problems for the supporters of
orthodoxy for it added another item to the list of ‘Ali’s special
privileges used by the Shi’ites to argue with for his claim to the
caliphate. In addition to all his other alleged merits, he was now the
one who had undertaken the critical task of assembling the Islamic
scripture after the death of the Prophet[^72]. This was potentially a
dangerous weapon in the hands of his partisans in sectarian debates.

The partisans of ‘‘Ali might have already used it against the
Uthmaniyya, to counter their argument in support of ‘Uthman on the basis
that he was the one who established the official and standard Qur’an.
For the Uthmaniyya that constituted a real challenge that they met, as
in many other cases, by seeking to undermine Shi’ite claims for the
special quality of ‘Ali or the House of the Prophet. Some examples are
as follows[^73]:

1. Many reports suggest that the Prophet chose ‘Ali as his brother[^74]
at the time that he established the "brothering”among his
followers[^75]. A counter report claims this status for Abu Bakr[^76] ,
though it is widely believed that the Prophet made Abu Bakr and ‘ Umar
brothers[^77]. Many other reports quote the Prophet as saying that "if I
could adopt an intimate friend I would adopt Abu Bakr, but your
colleague (i.e. the Prophet) is already taken by God as His intimate
friend."[^78] These seem to have been composed to counter the claim of
‘Ali’s selection as the Prophet’s brother.

2. The partisans of ‘Ali regarded him as the most excellent among the
companions of the Prophet. Indeed, there are many indications in the
history of the Prophet that ‘Ali was in fact one of the pre-eminent
Companions. An obviously pro-Uthmaniyya report, however, emphasized that
during the time of the Prophet only Abu Bakr ‘ Umar and ‘ Uthman were
pre-eminent. All others followed with no distinctions of status or
eminence.[^79]

3. In an oft-quoted statement ascribed to the Prophet, he is reported as
having called his two grandsons by Fatimah- al Hasan and al-Husayn-the
"two masters of the youth of Paradise[^80]. Another report from the
Prophet applies the same epithet to ‘Ali[^81]. A counter report calls
Abu Bakr and Umar the to masters of the middle-aged of the
paradise[^82].

4. A widely circulating statement attributed to the Prophet stated that
he was the city of knowledge for which ‘‘Ali was the gate[^83]. A
counter statement described Abu Bakr as the foundation of the city,
‘Umar as the wall and ‘Uthman as the ceiling[^84].

5. It is reported that during the early years of the Prophet’s stay at
Medina, the Companions who had their houses around the mosque of the
Prophet had opened exit doors from their houses into the mosque in order
to make it easier for themselves to attend the communal prayer there
with the Prophet.

According to a widely quoted report, the Prophet later ordered all those
doors to be closed, excepting only the door that led from the house of
‘Ali, which was virtually the door leading from the house of the
Prophet’s daughter[^85]. (The exception was not, therefore, to signify a
merit or to establish a special status for ‘Ali himself.) A counter
report, however, tried to establish that it was the door from the house
of Abu Bakr which was the exception[^86].

6. It is unanimiously believed that during a ceremonial imprecation that
took place between the Prophet and the Christians of Najran towards the
end of the Prophet’s life he brought with him the members of his
immediate family ‘‘Ali, Fatimah, and their two sons[^87]. This clearly
followed the traditional rules for the Arabs’ custom of the mutual
curse, which required each party to attend in the company of his own
household. A counter report however, asserts that the Prophet. was
accompanied to the ceremony by Abu Bakr and his family, ‘Umar and his
family and  
 Uthman and his family[^88].

7. According to a widely transmitted report, the Prophet described
Fatimah, ‘Ali and their two sons as constituting his own household[^89].
This definition of the Prophet’s house is supported by almost all early
Muslim authorities[^90]. A clearly pro Uthma- niyya report, however,
quoted the Prophet as saying that ‘Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and Fatimah
were his own household while Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and A’isha were the
household of God[^91].

It seems safe to assume that this same model was followed with respect
to the reports about ‘Ali’s collection of the Qur’an and that the story
in question was composed as part of an anti-Shl’ite polemic. The process
seems to have beglin with assertions that, with the exception of Uthman,
none of the caliphs or any of the

Companions collected the Qur’an[^92] some made the point more
emphatically and stipulated that ‘Ali, in particular, passed away before
he could collect it[^93]. (In reality, of course, not only did ‘Ali
witness the collection of the Qur’an, he did not die until years after
the official Qur’an had been established.)

Another report asserted that the first person to collect the Qur’an was
Salim, a client of Abu Hudayfa, who after the death of the Prophet
"vowed to God not to put on his outside garment until such a time as he
had put the Qur’an together."[^94]This is exactly the statement
attributed to ‘Ali in other reports. Salim was among those who lost
their lives in the battle of Yamama[^95].

Other reports came forward with the straight forward assertion that the
first to collect the Qur’an was Abu Bakr.[^96] Employing popular beliefs
among Muslims concerning ‘Uthman’s establishment of the standard
Qur’an-including the role of Zayd b. Thabit as the project’s main
coordinator - the role of Abu Bakr in the collection of the Qur’an was
then developed to what is seen in the above-cited account which, at the
same time, reserves a major role for Umar as well, in the process.

To be completed...

[^1]: Kashshi, Marifat al naqilin = Kitba al Rijal, abridged by Muhammad
b. al Hasan al Tusi as Ikhtiyar Marifat ar Rijal p 590-91, where Shadhan
b. Khalil al Naysaburi askes the celebrated hadith transmitter, Abu
Ahmad Muhammad b. Abi Umayr al Azdi, who heard from bothe Shi'ite and
Sunnite sources, why he never quoted any Sunnite hadith to his tudents
in his works. He answered, that he deliberately avoided that since he
found many of the Shi'ites studied both Shi'ites and Sunnites
traditions, but later confused and ascribed Sunnite material to the
Shi'ites sourcesand vice versa.

[^2]: Kulayni, al Kafi, vol 1 p 99, Subhu al Salih, Mabahith fi ulum al
Qur’an, p 134

[^3]: Zarkashi, al Burhan fi ulum al Qur’an, vol 1 p 235, 237-38, 256,
258 Suyuti, al Itqan fi ulum al Qur’an, vol 1 p 212-13, 216

[^4]: Ahmad b. Hanbal, vol 1 p 57 Tirimidhi, Sunan, vol 4 p 336-37 al
Hakim al Naysaburi, al Mustadrak, vol 2 p 229

[^5]: Qur’an Chapter II Verse 106

[^6]: Qur’an Chapter XVI Verse 101

[^7]: Abu Byad, al Naskih wa'l mansukh fi l Qur’an an al Karim, ed. John
Burton (Cambridge 1987), p 6, Muhasibi, Fahm al Qur’an an wa manih ed.
H. Quwwatli (in the collection of al Aql wa fahm al Qur’an (n.p., 1971)
p 261-502) p 399 (quoting Anas b. Malik), 400 and 408 (quoting Amr b.
Dinar) 403 (quoting Abd al Rahman b. Awf), 405 (quoting Abu Musa al
Ashari), 406 Tabari, Jami al Bayan, vol 3 p 472-74, 476, 479-80 Ibn
Salama, al Nasikh wa l mansukh, p 21 (quoting Abd Allah b. Masud)
Suyuti, al Durr al manthur, vol 5 p 179 (quoting Ubayy b. Kab)

[^8]: Abu Ubayd, al Naskih, p 6, Bayhaqi, Dalail al Nubuwwa, vol 7 p 154
(where it is argued that the Prophet never put the Qur’an together since
there was always the expectation that some verses might be abrogated and
some later modification was thus in-evitable in any collection of the
Qur’an put together during his lifetime. Underlying this argument is the
assumption that the abrogated verses had to be physically removed from
the scripture.) Zarkashi, vol 2 p 30 (the first interpretation of the
concept of naskh)

[^9]: Abu al Qasim al Khui, al Bayan, p 305-403

[^10]: Ibn Sa'd, Kitab al Tabaqat al Kabir, vol 3 p 211, 281 Ibn Abi
Dawud, Kitab al Masahif, p 10 Ibn Babawayh, Kamal ad Din, p 31-32
Bayhaqi, Dalail, vol 7 p 147-8 Zarkashi, vol 1 p 262 Ibn al Hadid,
Sharah of Nahj al Balagha. vol 1 p 27 Ibn Juzayy, al Tashil li ulum al
tanzil, vol 1 p 4 Suyuti, Itqan, vol 1 p 202 Ibrahim al Harbi, Gharib al
hadith, vol 1 p 270

[^11]: Bayhaqi, Dalail, vol 7 p 154 Zarkashi, vol 1 p 235, 262 Suyutim
Itqan, vol 1 p 202 Ahmad al Naraqi, Manahij al ahkam, p 152

[^12]: Yaqubi, Kitab al Tarikh, vol 2 p 15, most of the bearers of the
Qur’an were killed during the battle. All together, some 360 persons
among the distinguished companions of the Prophet lost their lives on
that occasion.) Tabari, Tarikh, vol 3 p 296 Larger figures upto 500 for
Ibn al Jazari, al Nashr, p 7 Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al Qur’an, vol 7 p 439
Qurtubi, al Jami li Ahkam al Qur’an, vol 1 p 50 and a figure of 1200 for
Abd al Qahir al Baghdadi, Usul al Din p 283 are also given. The last
figure is however the number of all Muslims who were killed in the
battle, Companions and others see Tabari vol 3 p 300

[^13]: The case in question was the last two verses of Sura 9 in the
present Qur’an which was added on the authority of Khuzayma b. Thabit al
Ansari (or ABu Khuzayma according to some reports). Bukhari, Sahih, vol
3 p 392-93 Tirimidhi, vol 4 p 346-47 Abu Bakr al Marwazi, Musnad Abi
Bakr al Siddiq, p 97-99, 102-4 Ibn Abu Dawud, p 6-7, 9, 20 Ibn al Nadim,
p 27 al Khatib al Baghdadi, Mudih awham al jam wa l tafrig, vol 1 p 276
Bayhaqi, Dalail, vol 7 p 149-50

[^14]: Yaqubi, vol 2 p 135 Itqan, vol 1 p 185, 207, 208

[^15]: Bukhari, vol 3 p 393-94, Tirmidhi, vol 4 p 347-8 Abu Bakr al
Marwazi, p 99-101 Ibn Abi Dawud, p 18-21 Bayhaqi, Dalail, vol 7 p 15051
Abu Hilal Askari, Kitab al Awail, vol 1 p 218 This whole story about the
collection ot the Qur’an was accepeed by the Sunnite scholars as
trustworthy and served, as we shall see below, as the basis for the idea
that later emerged of the incompleteness of the text of the Qur’an.
Sunnite literature contains many reports that suggest that some of the
revelation had already been lost before the collection of the Qur’an
initiated by Abu Bakr. It is reported, for example, that ‘Umar was once
looking for the text of a specific verse of the Qur’an he vaguely
remembered. To his deep sorrow, he discovered that the only person who
had any record of that verse had been killed in the battle of Yamama and
that the verse was consequently lost. Ibn Abi Dawud, p 10 Itqan, vol 1 p
204 Umar allegedly had a recollection of a Qur’anic verse on stoning as
a punishment for adultery. Malik b. Anas, Muwatta, vol 2 p 824 Ahmad,
vol 1 p 47, 55 Muhasibi, p 398, 455 Bukhari, vol 4 p 305 Muslim, Sahih,
vol 2 p 1317 Ibn Maja, Sunan, vol 2 p 853 Tirmidhi, vol 2 p 442-3 Abu
Dawud, Sunan, vol 4 p 145 Ibn Qutayba, Tawil mukhtalif al hadith, p 313
Ibn Salama, p 22 Bayhaqi, al Sunan al Kubra, vol 8 p 211, 213

[^16]: Itqan, vol 1 p 206

[^17]: Ahmad, vol 5 p 183 (quoting Zayd b, Thabit and Said al-As Abd al
Razzaq, AL Musannaf, vol 7 p 330 Itqan, vol 3 p 82, 86 al Durr al
Manthur, vol 5 p 180 (quoting Ubayy b. Ka'b and Ikrima)

[^18]: Dajin can mean any kind of domestic animal, including fowl,
sheep, or goat. A narrative in Ibrahim b. Ishaq al Harbis, Gharib al
hadith makes it more specific, as it uses the word shal, that is sheep
or goat (see Zamakshari, al Kashaf, vol 3 p 518 footnote) The same is in
Qutaybas understanding from the word dajin in Tawil mukhtalif al hadith,
p 310, apparently because of the context, since it is said that the
animal ate the sheet of paper. Also see Sulaym b. Qays al Hilali, Kitab
Sulaymn b. Qays, p 108, Al Fadl b. Shadahn, al Idah, p 211 Abd al Jalil
al Qazwini, p 133

[^19]: Ahmad, vol 4 p 269 Ibn Maja, vol 1 p 626 Ibn Qutayba, Tawil, p
310 Shafi'i, Kitab al Umm, vol 5 p 23, vol 7 p 208

[^20]: Mabani, p 99 Itqan, vol 3 p 84 (See Also And al Razzaq vol 7 p
379-80; Ibn Abi Shayba, vol 14 p 564, where the expression Faqadnah, "we
lost it", is used) The expression "saqata" is also used by Aisha in the
case of another phrase that alledgly "dropped out" from the Qur’an. See
Ibn Maja, vol 1 p 625 (See also Itqan, vol 3 p 70) It is also used by
Malik (Zarkashi, vol 1 p 263).

[^21]: Abd al Razzaq, vol 9 p 50 Ahmad, vol 1 p 47, 55 Ibn Abi Shayba,
vol 7 p 431 Bukhari, vol 4 p 306 Ibn Salama, p 22 Itqan, vol 3 p 84
Zarkashi, vol 1 p 39 (Also quoted from Abu Bakr)

[^22]: Muhasibi, p 403 Mabani, p 99 Itqan, vol 3 p 84

[^23]: Abd al Razzaq, vol 9 p 52 Muhasibi, p 400 Itqan, vol 3 p 84

[^24]: Muhasibi, p 399 Tabari, Jami, vol 2 p 479

[^25]: Itqan, vol 3 p 81-82

[^26]: Ibn Abi Dawud, p 23 quoting Ibn Shihab (al Zuhri) Itqan, vol 5 p
179 quoting Sufyan al Thawri Ibn Qutaybah, Tawil, p 313 Ibn Lubb, Falh
al bab, p 92

[^27]: Ahmad, vol 5 p 132 Tirmidhi, vol 5 p 370 Hakim, vol 2 p 224
Itqan, vol 3 p 83

[^28]: Ahmad, vol 5 p 132 Muhasibi, p 405 Bayhaqi, vol 8 p 211 Hakim,
vol 2 p 415 Itqan, vol 3 p 82 (the same claim about the size of the Sura
and it included the stoning verse is quoted from Umar anmd Ikrima in
Suyuti, al Durre Manthur, vol 5 p 180)

[^29]: by Zarkasi, vol 2 p 35, where the verse is said to to have been
in Sura 25 (al Nur), and with Mabani, p 82, where Sura 7 (al Aaraf) is
mentioned instead. This latter is however a slip of the pen or mis
spelling as evidenced by the author's later mention of the Sura al Ahzab
in p 83 and 86.

[^30]: Al Raghib al Isfahani, Muhadarat al Udaba, vol 4 p 434 Suyuti, al
Durre Manthur, vol 5 p 180 Itqan, Suyuti, vol 1 p 226

[^31]: Suyuti, al Durre Manthur, vol 5 p 180, quoting from Bukhari book
Kitab at Tarikh

[^32]: Hakim, vol 2 p 331 Haytami, Majam al Zawaid, vol 7 p 28-29 Itqan,
vol 3 p 84

[^33]: Zarkshi, vol 1 p 263 Itqan, vol 1 p 226

[^34]: Sulaym, p 108 Abu Mansur al Tabrisi, al Intijaj, vol 1 p 222, 286
Zarkshi, vol 2 p 35

[^35]: Muslim, vol 2 p 726 Muhasibi, p 405 Abu Nuaym, Hilyat al Awliya,
vol 1 p 257 Bayhaqi, Dalai, vol 7 p 156 Itqan, vol 3 p 83

[^36]: Ahmad, vol 5 p 131-32 Muhasibi, p 400-01 Tirmidhi, vol 5 p 370
Hakim, vol 2 p 224

[^37]: Raghib, vol 4 p 433

[^38]: Itqan, vol 1 p 227

[^39]: Itqan, vol 3 p 84

[^40]: Abd al Razzaq, vol 7 p 470 Ibn Maja, vol 1 p 625, 626

[^41]: Muhasibi, p 400-1 Ibn al Nadim, p 30 Raghib, vol 4 p 433
Zarkashi, vol 2 p 37 Haytami, vol 7 p 157 Itqan, vol 1 p 226, 227

[^42]: Itqan, vol 1 p 227

[^43]: Itqan, vol 1 p 226-7

[^44]: Itqan, vol 1 p 227, vol 3 p 85

[^45]: Ibn Abi Shayba, vol 6 p 146-47 Ahmad, vol 5, p 129-30 Ibn
Qutayba, Tawail mushkil al Qur’an, p 33-34 Ibn al Nadim, p 29 Baqillani,
al Intisar, p 184 Raghib, vol 4 p 434 Zarkashi, vol 1 p 251, vol 2 p 128
Haytami, vol 7 p 149-50 Itqam, vol 1 p 224, 226, 270-73

[^46]: Arthur Jeffrey, Materials for the History of the Text of the
Qur’an, the Old Codices, p 20-113

[^47]: See the lists, Ibid, p 114-238

[^48]: Ibn Sa'd, vol 2 p 338 Ibn Abi Shayba, vol 6 p 148 Yaqubi, vol 2 p
135 Ibn Abu Dawud, p 10 Ibn al Nadim, p 30 Abu Hilal al Askari, vol 1 p
219-20 Abu Buaym, vol 1 p 67 Ibn Abd al Barr, al Istiab, p 333-34 Ibn
Juzay, vol 1 p 4 Ibn Abi al Hadid, vol 1 p 27 Itqan, vol 1 p 204, 248 al
Kafi, al Kulayni, vol 8 p 18

[^49]: Sulaym, p 72, 108 Basair al Darajat, p 193 Kulayni, vol 2 p 633
Abu Mansur al Tabrisi, vol 1 p 107, 255-28 Ibn Shahrashub, Manaqib Al
Abi Talib, vol 2 p 42 Yaqubi, vol 2 p 135-6

[^50]: Ibn Abi Dawud, p 15-17 Ibn Asakir, Tarikh madinat Dimashq, vol 39
p 87-91

[^51]: A.T Welch p 404-5

[^52]: Thus the story doesn't appear in for instance in Tabaqat of Ibn
Sa'd in sections of Abu Bakr, Umar and Zayd b. Thabit, nor in Musnad
Ahmad Hanbal or Fadail as Sahaba where he gathered so may reports about
their virtues and good services to Islam.

[^53]: Bukhari, vol 3 p 392-93, vol 4 p 398-99 Tirmidhi, vol 4 p 347 Ibn
Abi Dawud, p 7-9, 20, 29 with Bukhari vol 3 p 393-94 Tirmidhi, vol 4 p
348 Ibn Abi Dawud, p 17, 19, 24-26, 31 Ibn Asakir, Tarikh, Biography of
Uthman p 236

[^54]: Ibn Asakir, Biography of Uthman, p 170 Zarkashi, vol 1 p 241
Other reports suggest that the collection of the Qur’an had already been
started during the time of Umar, but he died before the project was
completed during the caliphate of Uthman (Abu Hilal al Askari, vol 1 p
219)

[^55]: Zarkashi, vol 1 p 235 Itqan, vol1 p 211 Ibn Asakir, p 243-46

[^56]: He is (a) Khuazyma b, Thabit al Ansari in Bukhari vol 3 p 310,
394 Tirmidhi, vol 4 p 347 Abu Bakr al Marwasi, p 103 Ibn Abi Dawud, p 7,
8, 9, 20, 29, 31 Bayhaqi, Dalial, vol 7 p 150 and (b) Abu Khuzayma (Aws
b. Yazid) in Bukhari, vol 3 p 392-93 Tirmidhi, vol 4 p 348 Abu Bakr al
Marwazi, p 99 Ibn Abi Dawud, p 19 Bayhaqi, Dalail, vol 7 p 149 and (c)
an un-identified man of Ansar in Ibn Abi Dawud, p 8 Tabari, Jami, vol 14
p 588 and (d) Unayy in Ibn Abi Dawud p 9, 30 Khatib, Talkhis al
Mustadrak, vol 1 p 403 There are also reports which indicate that Ubayy
not only knew these verses he knew that they were the last to have been
revealed to the Prophet, too (Tabari, Jami, vol 14 p 588-89)

[^57]: It is the last two verses of Sura 9 in Bukhari, vol 3 p 392-93
Tirmidhi, vol 4 p 347 ABu Bakr al Marwazi, p 99, 103 Ibn Abi Dawud, p 7,
9, 11, 20, 29, 30, 31 Tabari, Jami, vol 14 p 588 Bayhaqi, Dalail, vol 7
p 149 and Verse 23 of Sura 33 in Bukhari, vol 3 p 310, 393-94 Tirmidhi,
vol 4 p 348 Ibn Abi Dawud, p 8, 19 Bayhaqi, Dalail, vol 7 p 150 Khatib,
Mudih, vol 1 p 276

[^58]: In the above cited account of the collection of the Qur’an he is
the one who undertook the task of putting the Qur’an together in two
stages during the times of Abu Bakr and Uthman. Some other reports
ascribe the collection of the Qur’an, including Zayd's participation in
it, to the period of Uthman (Bukhari, vol 3 p 393-94; Tirmidhi, vol 4 p
348; Ibn Abi Dawud, p 31; Ibn Asakir, Biography of Uthman, p 234-36)
Other reports don't mention his name at all (Ibn Abi Dawud, p 10-11)
Yets others assert that he had already collected the Qur’an doing the
time of the Prophet, putting together all the fragments of it which were
recorded on various sorts of primitive writing material, as in Tirmidhi,
vol 5 p 390, Hakim, vol 2 p 229, 611 In another report, however, he is
quoted as stating by the time the Prophet died, the Qur’an had not been
collected, as in Itqan, vol 1 p 202

[^59]: Bukhari, vol 3 p 310 Ibn Abi Dawud, p 29 Khatib, Mudih, vol 1 p
276 Itqan, vol 1 p 206

[^60]: Tabari, Jami, vol 16, p 588

[^61]: Ibn Abi Dawud, p 30

[^62]: Ibid, p 31

[^63]: Ibid, p 8, 19, 29

[^64]: Ibn Asakir, p 236, where the episode is ascibed to the period of
Uthman who asked the Muslism to come forward with whatever art of the
Qur’an they had in hand. The Muslims came forward with whatever
primitive writing material on wwhich they had recorded parts of the
Qur’an. The Uthman asked every single one to swear that he had
personally heard what he had offered as a part of the Qur’an from the
Prophet. He then ordered the collected material to be put together as
Scriptures

[^65]: The list of the early collectors of the Qur’an is different in
different sources, for instance, Ibn Sa'd, vol 2 p 112-14 Ibn al Nadim,
Kitab al Fihrist, p 30 Tabarani, al Mujam al Kabir, vol 2 p 292
Baqillani, p 88-90 Dhahabi, al Maridat al qurra al kibar, vol 1 p 27
Zarkashim vol 1 p 242-43 Qurtubi, vol 1 p 57 Itqan, vol 1 p 248-49,
quoting Abu Ubayd in his Kitab al Qira'at

[^66]: In order to remove the obvious contradictions between these
reports and the story in question, the supporters of the story have
offered two suggestions. According to one, those who are said to have
collcted the Qur’an during the time of the Prophet, had each made a
collection of only a part of the revelation, not a complete version.
According to the other, the word "collected", had to be understood to
mean that those Companions memorized the Qur’an during the time of the
Prophet, not they they had put a complete record of it together. As
mentioned in Ibn Abi Dawud, p 10, Itqan, vol 1 p 204

[^67]: For instance the poem attributed to ‘Ali in the Sharif al Radi,
Nah al Balagha, p 503, "If you (claim that you) have come to power on
the basis of consultation, how did then it happen while those who had to
be consulted were absent."

[^68]: Ibn sa'd, vol 2 p 101 Ibn Abi Shayba, vol 6 p 148 Abu Hilal al
Askari, vol 1 p 219-20 Ibn ABi Dawud, p 10 Itqan, vol 1 p 204

[^69]: Alternatively, there might actually have existed some rumours
suggesting that ‘Ali, having noticed that the Seniors of Quraysh had
chosen one among themselves as the succesor to the Prophet and having
decided to withdraw from the public, kept himself busy with the Qur’an
and took that as an excuse not to participate in any social activity.
The Sunnites, however, put forward that excuse as the real cause and
denied that '‘Ali was unahppy with the Quraysh process of Caliph making.

[^70]: ‘Ali was among one of the early collectors of the Qur’an, one of
those who collected it during the life time of the Prophet as mentioned
in Ibn Asakir, vol 39 p 80.

[^71]: Abu Mansur al Tabrisi, vol 1 p 71

[^72]: Kitab Mihnat Amir al Muminin (an early Shi'ite text preserved in
Pseudo Mufid, al Ikhtisas, p 157-75), p 164 Sulaymn, p 113, 120

[^73]: For other interesting examples see Ibn Asakir, Biography of
Uthman, p 146-68. 290-94

[^74]: Nur Allah al Tastari, Ihqaq al haqq, vol 4 p 171-217; vol 6 p
461-86 p 450-17; vol 20 p 221-55 Abd al Husayn al Amini, vol 3 p 113-25

[^75]: Muakhat in the Encyclopedia of Islam, 2nd ed, vol 7 p 253-54

[^76]: Ahmad b, Handal, Fadail al Sahaba, p 99, 166-7, 378 Bukhari, col
3 p 113-25

[^77]: Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, vol 3 p 123

[^78]: Ahmad, Fadail, p 99, 166-67, 177, 183-84, 378-79, 411

[^79]: Ahmad, Fadail, p 86-92 Biography of Uthman, p 153-59 Bukhari, vol
2 p 418

[^80]: Tustari, vol 10 p 544-95; vol 19 p 232-51

[^81]: Ibn Asakir, Tarikh madinal Dimashq, Section on the Biography of
‘Ali, vol 2 p 260

[^82]: Ibn Sa'd, vol 3 p 124 Ahmad, Fadail, p 158-59, 771, 774, 780, 788
Daylami, vol 1 p 530

[^83]: Tustari, vol 5 p 468-515; vol 16 p 277-309; vol 21 p 415-28
Amini, vol 6 p 61-81

[^84]: Daylami, vol 1 p 76

[^85]: Ahmad, Fadail, p 581-82 Tustari, vol 5 p 540-86; vol 16 p 332-75;
vol 19 p 243-55; Amini vol 6 p 209-16

[^86]: Bukhari, vol 2 p 418; Ahmad, Fadail, p 70-71, 98, 152, 379

[^87]: Tustari, vol 3 p 46-62; vol 9 p 70-91; vol 14 p 131-47 vol 20 p
84-87

[^88]: Ibn Asakir, Biography of Uthman, p 168-89, quoting on the
authority of Imam Jafar al Sadiq, who acordingly related it from his
father. As noted above, this was a common phenomenon in this genre of
material which was auhtored for anto Shi'ite polemical purposes.

[^89]: Tustari, vol 2 501-62; vol 3 p 513-31; vol 9 p 1-69; vol 14 p
40-105 vol 18 p 359-83

[^90]: Tabari, Jami al Bayan, vol 22 p 6-8

[^91]: Daylami, vol 1 p 532 Tabari, Jami, vol 22 p 8 quotes that Ikrima,
a tabi'i well known for his anti Alid tendencies was crying in the
market, that the household of the Prophet were his wives only.

[^92]: See above footnote 57

[^93]: Ibn Asakir, Biography of Uthman, p 170

[^94]: Itqan, vol 1 p 205, quoting Ibn Ashta in his Kitab al Masahif

[^95]: Ibn Abd al Barr, p 562

[^96]: Ibn Abi Shayba, vol 6 p 148 Ibn Abi Dawud, both quoting the
report from ‘Ali


