Outline of Differences Between Shi’ite and Sunni Schools of Thought
===================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Introduction
------------

There is no difference of opinion amongst Muslim schools that the
religion of Allah is Islam; that the only way to know Islam is through
the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet; and that the Book
of Allah is what is known as the Qur’an, without any "addition”or
"deletion". The difference is in the interpretation of some of the
verses of the Qur’an; and in believing or not beliving some of the
sunnah as genuine; or in its interpretation.

This difference of approach has led towards the difference in some basic
principles and some laws of religion. As the basic principles of Islam
are well known, I do not think it is necessary to enumerate all the
beliefs. It will be sufficient if some of the important differences are
described here to give the readers a fairly comprehensive idea of the
main characteristics which distinguish the Shiats from the Sunnis.

All the Muslims argee that Allah is one, Muhammad (S) is His last
prophet, and that one day Allah will resurrect all the human beings, and
all will be questioned about their beliefs and actions. All of them
agree that anyone who does not believe in any of the above three basic
principles is not a Muslim. Also, they agree that anybody denying the
famous tenets of Islam, like salat (prayers), sawm (fasting), hajj
(pilgrimage to Mecca), zakat (religious tax), etc., or believing that
the famous sins, like drinkig wine, adultery, stealing, gambling, lie,
murder, etc., are not sins, is not a Muslim, though he might have been
believing in Allah and His Prophet Muhammad (S). That is because to deny
such things is like to deny the prophethood of Muhammad and his shariah
(Divine Laws).

When we go further, we come across those subjects which are not agreed
amongst Muslims, and the differences between different schools of Islam
begin there. Many people think that the difference between Shi’a and
Sunni is the issue of leadership after the death of prophet. This is
true, but as a matter of fact, different leaders instruct different ways
of approach to each issue. This may result to more differences as the
the time goes. I try to briefly explain these basic differences here.

Person Of God
-------------

Some Sunni scholars hold beliefs which would imply that Allah has body,
but not like the bodies that we know, of course. There are quite a
number of traditions in Sahih al-Bukhari describing that God has a sign
in his leg, and he put his leg over the hell and so on. For instance see
Sahih al- Bukhari, Arabic-Englich version, 9.532s in which alleges Allah
has a sign in His Shin (leg) and when He uncovers His Shin (leg) people
will recognize Him. Or in the same volume see Tradition 9.604 and 9.510
where it is said that Allah has fingers! Please also see the
consequetive articles given by Kaamran refrenced to Sahih al-Bukhari and
Sahih Muslim.

Wahhabis who follow Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728/1328) confirm that the organs
of God is physical entity and Allah is firmly seated in the trone.
However Ash’arites (followers of Abul-Hasan al-Ash’ari) which include a
vast amount of Sunnis, do NOT interpret face, hand, and leg as physical
organs. They believe that Allah has face, hand, and leg, but they say:
"We do not know how."

The Shi’a firmly believe that Allah has NOT got a body, nor face, nor
hands, nor fingers, nor legs. Shaykh Saduq, one of the most
distinguished of Shi’a scholars says:

"Verily, Allah is One, Unique, nothing is like Him, He is Eternal;
Hearing, Seeing, Omniscient, Living, Omnipotent, above every need. He
cannot be described in terms of substance, nor body, nor form, nor
accident, nor line, nor surface, nor heaviness, nor lightness, nor
color, nor movement, nor rest, nor time, nor space. He is above all the
descriptions which can be applied to His creatures. He is away from both
extremes: Neither He is just a non-entity (as atheists and in a lesser
degree Mutazilites implied), nor He is just like other things. He is
Existent, not like other existing things."

Shi’i reference: Shi’ite Creed (al-Itqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh
Saduq Of course, there are some verses in Qur’an which ascribe the words
used for limbs to the person of God. But according to the interpretation
of Shi’ite Imams, they are used in metaphorical and symbolic sense, not
literal sense.  
 for example, the verse (28:88) of Qur’an which says: "Every thing is
mortal except His face”means ‘except His person’. Surely, even Sunni
scholars can not say that only the face of God will remain, while His
other so-called limbs (either physical or not) will die! Similarly,
Allah has used  
 the word ‘Hand’ (Yad) in several places in the Qur’an. But it means His
power and His Mercy, as in the verse (5:64): "But His hands are
outspread".

In fact in the Qur’an and the Prophetic such mytaphorical meanings were
greatly used. For example, Allah describes his Prophets as:

***"Men of Hands and vision.”(Qur’an 38:45)***

Even all Sunni scholars agreed that here ‘hands’ means power and
strength. I should mention that the view of Shi’a is also different than
Mu’tazalites who take God to the boundary of non-existence.

Can Allah Be Seen?
------------------

As a direct result of the above-mentioned difference, Sunni scholars
believe that Allah can be seen. Some of them, like Imam Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal, say that He can be seen in this world, as well as in the word
after. Others say that He can only be seen in the hereafter. (Reference:
Sahih al- Bukhari, Arabic-English version, Traditions 9.530-532 which
clearly state that God can be seen, and God changes His look to be
recognized by people).

On the other hand, Shiats say that He cannot be seen physically
anywhere, because He has no body, and because Allah says in the Qur’an:

***"Sight cannot reach Him”(Qur’an 6:103).***

Sunni scholars use the following verse as their proof:

***"Some faces on that day (day of judgement) will be fresh (blooming),
looking towards their Lord”(Qur’an 75:22-23).***

But in Arabic language the word "nazar”(looking toward) does not imply
"seeing". Often it is said: "nazartu ilal-hilal falam arahu”which means
"I looked towards the new moon (crescent) but I did not see
it.”Therefore, the verse does not imply that they will see God.
According to the Shi’ite interpretstion, the verse means that they will
be looking forward to the blessing of Allah.

Attributes Of Allah
-------------------

According to the Shi’a belief, attributes of Allah can be put in two
distinct groups: first those attributes which denote His person, and
second, those attributes which denote His actions. Shaykh Saduq says:

"For example, we say that Allah was from ever Hearing, Seeing,
Omniscient, Wise, Omnipotent, Having power, Living, Self-existent, One
and Eternal. And these are His personal attributes. and we do not
saythat He was from ever Creating, Doing, Intending, pleased,
displeased, Giving sustenance, Speaking; because these virtues describe
His actions; and they are not eternal; it is not allowed to say that
Allah was doing all these actions from eternity.

The reason for this distinction is obvious. Actions need an object. For
example, if we say that Allah was giving sustenance from ever, then we
will have to admit the existence of sustained thing from ever. In other
words, we will have to admit that the world was from ever. but it is
against our belief that nothing except God is Eternal."

Shi’i reference: Shi’ite Creed (al-Itqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh
Saduq

It appears that the Sunni scholars have no clear view of this
distinction, and they say that all His attributes are Eternal. This is
the actual cause of their belief that Qur’an, being the Kalam (speech)
of God, is Eternal, and not created. Because they say that He was
mutakallim (speaking) from ever.

"Hanbalites”so far said that ‘Not only were the words and sounds of the
Qur’an eternal, so that even its recital was uncreated, but its
parchment and binding shared the same qualities. In the Testament of Abu
Hanifa a more moderate view is expressed: We confess that the Qur’an is
the speech of Allah, uncreated, His inspiration, and revelation, not He,
yet not other than He, but His real quality, written in the copies,
recited by the tongues. The ink, the paper, the writing are created, for
they are the work of man”(Revelation and Reason in Islam by A.J.
Arberry, pp 26-27).

But since Shi’a distinguish between His personal virtues and His
actions, they say:

"Our belief about the Qur’an is that it is the speech of God, and His
revelation sent by Him, and His word and His book... And that Allah is
its Creator and its Sender and its Guardian..."

Shi’i reference: Shi’ite Creed (al-Itqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh
Saduq

Among the Sunnis, the bitter quarrel between the Mutazilites and the
Asharites on this subject is well-known, and there is no need to release
it here.

Some claim that every created things has flaws in it and thus Qur’an
should be ethernal since it is without flaw. This argument is baseless
since we Muslims believe that angels, though created, are flawless,
otherwise how can we trust Gabriel when he brought Qur’an to the
Prophet? How can you trust Prophet himself? Is Allah unable to create a
flawless creature? As such, we believe that Qur’an as well as all other
things in the universe are all created. Nothing is eternal except Allah.
There is a tradition from the Prophet (S) which states that:

"(There was a time when) Allah existed, and there was nothing beside
Him".

Place Of Reason In Religion
---------------------------

This is one of the most important distinction between the Sunnis on one
side, and Shi’ites on another. To be more exact, I should have used the
word Asharites, in place of Sunnis since a vast number of Sunnis
nowadays are Asharites; Mutazilites have become extinct a long time ago,
though some of the great scholars of the recent time like Justice Amir
‘Ali were Mutazilites.

Anyhow, the Shiats say that irrespective of religious commandments,
there is real merit or demerit in different courses of actions, and it
is because a certain thing is good that God orders it, and because the
other is bad that He forbids it. Sunni scholars deny this conception.
They say that nothing is good or evil in itself. Only what God has
commanded us is goodand what He has forbidden us is evil. If something
is forbidden by God it is bad; then if God cancels the first order, and
allows it, it will become good, after being bad.

In other words, the Shiats say that God has forbidden us to tell lie
because it is bad; the Sunnis say that lie has become bad because God
has forbidden it. Shiats recognize the relation of cause and effect.
Sunni sholars deny it. They say that there is no cause except Allah. And
it is just a habit of Allah that whenever, for example, we drink water
He quenches our thirst.

Based upon the above difference of attitude about the position of reason
in religion are the following differences: Shiats say that God never
acts without purpose or aimlessly. All His actions are based on wisdom
and intelligent purpose (e.g., Because it is not commendable,
rationally, to act without purpose). The Sunni scholars on the other
hand, because of their denouncement of rational merit or demerit, say
that it is quite possible for God to act aimlessly.

It follows that, according to the Shiats, God does nothing which has
inherent demerit in it. The Sunnis deny it. Shiats say that all actions
of Allah are intended for the benefit of His creatures. Because He
Himself has no need; and if His actions become devoid of benefits for
His creation also, they will become aimless, which is rationally not
commendable. The Sunnis deny it, because of their stand about rational
merit or demerit.

Grace (Lutf Or Tafaddul)
------------------------

Based on the above differences, there is a difference about their
attitude towards the Grace of Allah. Shiats say that the Grace is
morally, incumbent upon Allah. They say Grace is the actions of God
which would help to bring His creatures closer to His devotion and
obedience and facilitate their moral correction (which is) morally
incumbent on Him. Allah has commanded us to be just, while He Himself
treats us with something better, namely Grace (tafaddul). The Sunni
scholars, on the other hand, say:

"God leades astray whom He wills and guides to right path whom He wills,
and it is not incumbent upon God, the Most High, to do something that
may be best for the creature."

Sunni reference: Creed of an-Nasafi

God’s Promises
--------------

Based upon Shi’a position on Justice and Grace, they say that:

"Whatever God has promised as reward for a good work, He will fulfill
it; but whatever He has threatened as punishment for a bad work, it is
upon His decision. If He enforces the punishment, it will be according
to His Justice; but if He forgives it, it will be according to His
Grace."

Shi’i reference: Shi’ite Creed (al-Itqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh
Saduq

Shi’a is confronted both by the Kharijites and Mutazilites on one side
and the Asharites on other side. The Mutazilites and Kharijites say that
it is incumbent upon God to fulfill His threats also. He has no power to
forgive.

The Asharites, on the other hand say that it is not incumbent upon Him
even to fulfill His promises of rewards. They go so far as to say, "Even
if Allah wants to send the prophets in Hell, and Satan to Paradise, it
is not against virtue, because there is no inherent demerit in any
action."

Why Believe In God
------------------

The Shiats say: Man is obliged by his reason to know God, and to obey
His commands. In other words, necessity of religion is proved, first of
all, by reason. Sunni scholars say it is necessary to believe in Allah,
but not on the account of reason. It is necessary because Allah has
ordered us to know Him. According to the Shi’ite point of view, this
type of proof creates vicious circle. Believe in God. why? Because God
has ordered it. But we do not know who God is. Why should we obey Him?

Limit Of Law
------------

The Shiats say: God cannot give us a command beyond our strength,
because it is wrong rationally (La Yokalleffollaho nafsan illa vosaaha).
Some Sunni scholars do not agree with it.

Our Actions: Taqdir
-------------------

Are our actions really ours? Or we are just a tool in the hands of
Allah!

Shi’a scholars say:

"Taqdir means that, Allah possesses foreknowledge of human action, but
He does not compel anybody to act in any particular way"

Shi’i reference: Shi’ite Creed (al-Itqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh
Saduq

The above quote gives evidence to the fact that according to Shi’a,
human has option either to obey God’s rules, or disobey. To make it
clear, it should be explained here, that man’s conditions or actions are
of two kinds

(i) Those actions about which he can be advised, ordered, praised or
blamed. Such actions are within his power and are dependent upon his
will.

(ii) Such conditions about which he cannot be praised or blamed, like
life, death, etc. Such conditions are outside of his sphere of will or
power.

For example, we can advise a patient to consult this or that doctor and
remain under his treatment; but we can not advise him to become cured.
Why this difference? Because getting treatment is under his power, but
getting cured is not in his power. It is something which comes from
Allah.

Freedom of action is a gift of Allah. He has given us power, freedom,
strength, limbs, wisdom and everything with which we do any work.

Therefore, we are not independent of Allah, because our freedom is not
only given but even sustained by Him. However our actions are not
compelled by God, because He, after His showing us the right and wrong
ways, and after His encouraging us to do right, has left us to our own
free will. If we go wrong, it is our own choice. Shaykh Saduq stated:

"Our belief in this respect is what has been taught by Imam Jafar al-
Sadiq (the sixth successor/grandson of Prophet): There is no compulsion
(by God) and no relinquishing the authority (of God); but a condition
between these two conditions. Then Imam was asked: How is it? He said:
Suppose you see a man intending to commit a sin; and you forbade him;
but he did not listen to you; and you left him; and he did commit that
sin. Now when he did not pay attention to you and you left him, nobody
can say that you ordered him or allowed him to sin."

Shi’i reference: Shi’ite Creed (al-Itqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh
Saduq

In other words, we believe that God has given us power and will and then
has left us free to do what we like. At the same time, He has taught us
through prophets, what is right and what is wrong. Now, as He is
Omniscient, He knows what will be our actions in different times of our
life. But this knowledge does not make Him responsible for our actions
more than a meteorologist can be responsible for cyclones and storms, if
his forecasts comes true. True forecasts are the result, not the cause
of the impending event. The Sunni scholars on the other hand say that
Allah is the

Creator of all of our acts:

"No act of any individual, even though it is done purely for his benefit
is independent of the will of Allah for its existence; and there does
not occur in either in physical or extra terrestrial world  
 the wink of an eye, the hint of a thought, or the most sudden glance,
except by the decree of Allah...of His power, desire and will. This
includes evil and good, benefit and hurt, success and failure, sin and
righteousness, obedience and disobedience, and polytheism or belief."

Sunni reference: al-Ghazali (as quoted in Shi’a of India, p43)

Prophethood
-----------

Based upon their belief of Lutf (Grace), the Shiats believe that it is
incumbent upon Allah to send prophets and their successors in this world
to put people on right path. The Sunni scholars say that it is not
incumbent upon Allah, because they do not accept necessity of Grace.

Sinlessness
-----------

The Shiats and Sunnis in first instance, and then the Sunnis among
themselves, disagree about the theory of Ismah (sinlessness; protection)
of the prophets. What is our conception of sinlessness? It is the Grace
of Allah which helps a person to refrain from sins, without effecting in
any way his will and power. A Masum (sinless person) has power to commit
sins; but he does not even think about sins because his spiritual
standard is so high that such inferior things do not enter his mind.

The Sunni scholars do not speak with one voice in this subject:

1. They first differ about the point when sinlessness of prophets
begins. Some Sunnis say it is after the declaration of prophet-hood;
others say that it is since childhood.

2. The scope of sinlessness before declaration of prophet-hood: Some
Sunni scholars say that it covers all sins; the majority say that they
are protected from KUFR (infidelity) only.

3. The scope of sinlessness after declaration of prophet-hood: It is
agreed that the prophets do not tell lie after prophet-hood. But what
about other sins? Some Sunni scholars say that they commit other sins
either intentionally or unintentionally; but the majority say that they
could commit it unintentionally, but not intentionally.

4. The minor sins: Some Sunni scholars say it was possible for prophets
to commit minor sins, even intentionally. But that they were protected
from such minor sins which might have degraded them in the eyes of
people.

The Shi’a point of view about sinlessness is that all the prophets were
sinless and infallible; they did not commit any sin, whether capital or
minor, and whether intentionally or unintentionally; and that they were
sinless from the beginning of their life till their last breath. About
the prophets, Shaykh Saduq wrote:

"Their word is the word of God, their order is the order of God, their
forbidding is the forbidding by God ... And that the Chiefs of the
prophets are five, and they are (called) ‘Ulul-Azm’ and they are Noah,
Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad (be blessings of Allah upon them all)
and that Muhammad is their Chief and best of all."

Imam (Leader)
-------------

Shiats say that Imam must be appointed by God; that appointment may be
known through the declaration of the Prophet or the preceding Imam. The
Sunni scholars say that Imam (or Caliph, as they prefer to say) can be
either elected, or nominated by the preceding Caliph, or selected by a
committee, or may gain the power through a military coup (as was in the
case of Muawiyah).

Shi’a scholars say that Imam must be sinless. The Sunni scholars
(including Mutazilites) say that sinlessness is not a condition for
leadership. Even if he is tyrant and sunk in sins (like in the case of
Yazid, or Today’s King Fahd), the majority of the scholars from the
shools of Hanbali, Shafi’i, and Maliki discourage people to rise against
that Caliph. They think that they should be presevered.

Shiats say that Imam must possess above all such qualities as knowledge,
bravery, justice, wisdom, piety, love of God etc. The Sunni scholars say
it is not necessary. A person inferior in these qualities may be elected
in preference to a person having all these qualities of superior degree.

Shiats say that ‘Ali was appointed by Allah to be the successor of the
Prophet, and that the Prophet declared it on several occasions. More
than one hundred of those occasions are recorded in the history. The
Sunni scholars believe that the Prophet did not appoint anybody to be
his successor. This is despite the fact that there are many traditions
in the six authentic Sunni collections which support this assignment.

Wassalam.


