Seeing Allah
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shi’a say God has no body. So can not be seen. If Sunnis say He can be
seen, they have to admit that He has a body. If not, how can be seen?

A brother wrote:

The answer is very simple. The Qur’an speaks of the hereafter as being
another kind of universe operating with different laws.

If you can understand the verse below, you will also be able to
understand the "hands”of Allah (far exalted above what they ascribe unto
Him).

***For indeed it is not the eyes that grow blind, but it is the hearts,
which are within the breasts, that grow blind. (Qur’an 22:46)***

Dear brother the Qur’anic verse you quoted has nothing to do with my
question. Hereafter has different laws, but it does not change the
Person of God. If you want to see God, you should either see the whole
God (i.e. your eyes should catch the whole God) which means you have
limited God, or you should see a part of God (i.e. your eyes has
captured a part of Him) which means you have partitioned God.

Both cases are in contradiction with Islamic belief that Allah, Exalted,
is unlimited and has no part and organ. Moreover your belief in seeing
God is in contradiction with clear text of Qur’an, in which Allah says
that:

***"Sight cannot catch Him”(Qur’an 6:103).***

The verse does not exclude Hereafter from this rule, therefore it covers
everywhere. There is no doubt that Sunni scholars believe that Allah can
be seen (at least in Hereafter). To prove that it is logically wrong, I
was using a counter argument. That was: If Sunnis believe that Allah can
be seen, then they have to admit that Allah has body. They have to admit
that either

He is limited or He has parts and organs.

Shi’a believes that Allah does not have any body. Also He can not be
seen anywhere. He has no part, no organ. He is unlimited.

Is it your personal preference or a part of shia teaching to use so  
 much logic? As you see when you use too much logic you may confuse
people

You are exactly pointing at one of the most important difference between
Shi’a and Sunni schools of thought. As mentioned in the article of
"Basic Differences...", the place of reason in religion is one of the
most important issues that distinguishes Shiats from Sunnis.

According to our teaching, all basic beliefs should be understood by
one’s ability. We can not follow what our scholars say about basic
beliefs unless our mind recognizes them to be right and rational. These
basic beliefs include believing in God, believing in the unity of God,
some of His attributes, believing in the necessity of sending prophets
and their successors, believing in the necessity of Justice and Grace
(Lutf) for God, etc.

No imitation is accepted by Allah for those basic beliefs. For a person
who imitates his mother and father and scholars on these kinds of
issues, his identity as being Muslim is under question. Of course, every
body is responsible in this matter to the range of his ability in
thinking and reasoning. Those proofs needs to be more sophisticated for
a person who has more ability in logical reasoning.

Once those basic beliefs were proved by mind, then the person can follow
other commands of Allah without asking about them, because they are not
included in those basic beliefs. We don’t ask why Fajr prayer is two
units (Rakat). We don’t ask why we should make ablution (Wudhu’) before
prayer. We don’t ask why we should fast during Ramadhan. We just follow
whatever Allah and His messenger asked us to do in these matters without
asking why.

So I think it is now clear that why do we use too much logic for the
basic beliefs. This is the difference between human and animal, that
human can THINK, and we should use this ability otherwise we are not
different from them. In hundreds of places of Qur’an, Allah invites us
to THINK and not to imitate the others since we may go astray.

Allah said in Qur’an:

***"They say: enough for us are the ways we found our fathers following.
What if their fathers had no*** ***knowledge and guidance?”(Qur’an
5:104)***

He also said:

***"The worst human for Allah, is the deaf and the dumb who does not use
his logic.”(Qur’an 8:22)***

He Exalted also said:

***"They say (in Hell) that if we had listened or used our intelligence,
we would not have been among the companions of the blazing Fire.”(Qur’an
67:10)***

So Allah encourages us to think rather than to follow blindly. Now, the
subject of seeing Allah is also one of the things that you should not
hesitate to ask your scholars why.

Is there any kind of teaching that human kind is going to have same
limitations in hereafter. Your postings in some context suggest that
people in paradise are going to function like they used to in this
world.

I never said so. We confirm that there are extended laws governing the
Hereafter. But the person of God will remain the same. Those laws will
not affect the person of God and His attributes.

From where do we get this teaching that Allah (SWT) needs a body or an
organ to be seen by the people in the paradise if He (SWT) wants to be
seen. To me you are still operating in this Dunya.  
 ...please do not give me logical reasoning

From logical reasoning. But since you don’t like it, I don’t continue.

Peace.

Allah said:

***Good news to My servants, those who listen to the sayings and follow
the best one. (Qur’an 39:17-18)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 ... فَبَشِّرْ عِبَادِ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَمِعُونَ الْقَوْلَ
فَيَتَّبِعُونَ أَحْسَنَهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

From <kaamran@sun14.vlsi.uwaterloo.ca>

Is The God A Shape-Shifter? (Does God Have Finger And Leg?)
-----------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Twelver Shi’ites believe that God has no shape, no physical hand, no
physical leg, no physical body, and no visible appearance. He does not
change along with the time, or does not occupy any physical place. Under
no circumstances, God changes. There comes no TIME frame upon him. He
has created time, and physical places. This is one of the most important
bases of shiat. However, there are quite a few traditions in Sehah
(specially Bukhari and Muslim) in which it is assumed that God has such
attributes.

Since shiat sect knows what is wrong with hadith, shiat was very kind
not to declare this sect of sunni as misguided (or Kafir) so far
(because of this subject only, other subjects have their own place).
This article is already long due to the references I am giving. Only a
few questions have accompanied with these references, and the discussion
will be for future.

1)-Does God Have Fingers? In the first and the fourth hadith, the
prophet smiles AND confirms this (from sunni sources). In the second and
the third, the prophet only smiles, which is known as confirmation of
the prophet toward a subject.

For your information, all of these traditions are declared as
"Israeeleeat”(which are intered by jews in islamic theology) and
rejected for one simple reason:

They are in logical disagreement with the book of the God.

The following traditions have been taken from:

The translation of the meaning of Sahih al-Bukhari  
 Arabic-English  
 Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan  
 Islamic University, Medina al-Munawwara  
 Kaze Publications.  
 1529 North Wells Street, Chicago. ILL.60610(USA)  
 (3rd revised, 1977)(4th revised Edition, March 1979)  
 Call Number: BP135.A124E54

9.510:

Narrated ‘Abdullah:

A Jew came to the Prophet and said, "O Muhammad! Allah will hold the
heavens on a Finger, and the mountains on a Finger, and the trees on a
Finger, and all the creation on a Finger, and then He will say, ‘I am
the King.’ “On that Allah’s Apostle smiled till his premolar teeth
became visible, and then recited:--

‘No just estimate have they made of Allah such as due to him....(39.67)
‘Abdullah added: Allah’s Apostle smiled (at the Jew’s  
 statement) expressing his wonder and believe in what was said.

9.511:

Narrated ‘Abdullah:

A man from the people of the scripture came to the Prophet and said, "O
Abal-Qasim! Allah will hold the Heavens upon a Finger, and the Earth on
a Finger and the land on a Finger, and all the creation on a Finger, and
will say, ‘I am the King! I am the King!’ “I saw the Prophet (after
hearing that), smiling till his premolar teeth became visible, and he
then recited: --

***‘No just estimate have they made of Allah such as due to him...
(Qur’an 39.67)***

9.543:

Narrated ‘Abdullah:

A Jewish Rabbi came to Allah’s Apostle and said, "O Muhammad! Allah will
put the Heavens on one finger and the earth on one finger, and the trees
and the rivers on one finger, and the rest of the creation on one
finger, and then will say, pointing out with His Hand, ‘I am the King.’
"On that Allah’s Apostle smiled and said,

***"No just estimate have they made of Allah such as due to Him. (Qur’an
39.67)***

9.604:

Narrated ‘Abdullah:

A priest from the Jews came (to the Prophet) and said, "On the Day of
Resurrection, Allah will place all the heavens on one finger, and the
Earth on one finger, and the waters and the land on one finger, and all
the creation on one finger, and then He will shake them and say.

‘I am the King! I am the King!’“I saw the Prophet smiling till his
premolar teeth became visible expressing his amazement and his belief in
what he had said. Then the Prophet recited: ‘No just estimate have they
made of Allah such as due to Him (up to)...;

***High is He above the partners they attribute to Him.’ (Qur’an
39.67)***

Sufuism is almost in every religion, in jewish, in christianity, in
sunni sect, and in shiat sect. However, Twelver Shi’ites does not agree
with this theology. Although some of knowledgeable people from this sect
have accepted this theology, it is widely rejected.

2)- In the following hadith, the God shifts his shape to allow his
believer to see him and accept him as true God. Just a few more
questions:

a)- How do you know God in this world (right now that you are reading
this article)? Assume that you are a faithful and you will certainly go
to heaven. My question is that based on this hadith, you know God’s
shape already, in this world. You will not know God when you see him
first and you will say that he is not your God. Can you tell me how is
your God?

b)- Is the God with the same visisbility of Moon and Sun?

c)- Does the God changes his shape to fit to your definition in the
other day?

d)- Why Allah comes and returns and then comes back. My question is why
time is passing on him on the other day?

(That is enough. Please be patient and see my comments on the second
hadith.)

(This hadith and the next one are narrated in sahih muslim too:;h

Chapter 82, pp 115-119, \#349, \#350, \#351, \#352, \#353, \#354, and
p1533, \#7078)

Sahih al-Bukhari, v9, p390, part (A):

9.532A:

Narrated ‘Ata’ bin Yazid al-Laithi:

On the authority of Abu Huraira: The people said, "O Allah’s Apostle!
Shall we see our Lord on the Day of Resurrection?”The Prophet said, "Do
you have any difficulty in seeing the moon on a full moon night?”

They said, "No, O Allah’s Apostle.”He said, "Do you have any difficulty
in seeing the sun when there are no clouds?”They said,

"No, O Allah’s Apostle.”He said, "So you will see Him, like that.

Allah will gather all the people on the Day of Resurrection, and say,
‘Whoever worshipped something (in the world) should follow (that
thing),’ so, whoever worshipped the sun will follow the sun, and whoever
worshiped the moon will follow the moon, and whoever used to worship
certain (other false) deities, he will follow those deities. And there
will remain only this nation with its good people (or its hypocrites).
(The sub-narrator, Ibrahim is in doubt.)

Allah will come to them and say, ‘I am your Lord.’ They will (deny Him
and) say, ‘We will stay here till our Lord comes, for when our Lord
comes, we will recognize Him.’ So Allah will come to them in His
appearance which they know, and will say, ‘I am your Lord.’ They will
say, ‘You are our Lord,’ so they will follow Him.

Then a bridge will be laid across Hell (Fire)’ I and my followers will
be the first ones to go across it and none will speak on that Day except
the Apostles. And the invocation of the Apostles on that Day will be, ‘O
Allah, save! Save!’ In Hell (or over The Bridge) there will be hooks
like the thorns of As-Sa’dan (thorny plant). Have you seen As-Sa’dan?
“They replied, "Yes, O Allah’s Apostle!”

He said, "So those hooks look like the thorns of As-Sa’dan, but none
knows how big they are except Allah. Those hooks will snap the people
away according to their deeds. Some of the people will stay in Hell (be
destroyed) because of their (evil) deeds, and some will be cut or torn
by the hooks (and fall into Hell) and some will be punished and then
relieved. When Allah has finished His Judgments among the people, He
will take whomever He will out of Hell through His Mercy.

He will then order the angels to take out of the Fire all those who used
to worship none but Allah from among those whom Allah wanted to be
merciful to and those who testified (in the world) that none has the
right to be worshipped but Allah. The angels will recognize them in the
Fire by the marks of prostration (on their foreheads), for the Fire will
eat up all the human body except the mark caused by prostration as Allah
has forbidden the Fire to eat the mark of prostration. They will come
out of the (Hell) Fire, completely burnt and then the water of life will
be poured over them and they will grow under it as does a seed that
comes in the mud of the torrent.

Then Allah will finish the judgments among the people, and there will
remain one man facing the (Hell) Fire and he will be the last person
among the people of Hell to enter Paradise. He will say, ‘O my Lord!

Please turn my face away from the fire because its air has hurt me and
its severe heat has burnt me.’ So he will invoke Allah in the way Allah
will wish him to invoke, and then Allah will say to him, ‘If I grant you
that, will you then ask for anything else?’ He will reply, ‘No, by Your
Power, (Honor) I will not ask You for anything else.’ He will give his
Lord whatever promises and covenants Allah will demand.

So Allah will turn his face away from Hell (Fire). When he will face
Paradise and will see it, he will remain quiet for as long as Allah will
wish him to remain quiet, then he will say, ‘O my Lord! Bring me near to
the gate of Paradise.’ Allah will say to him, ‘Didn’t you give your
promises and covenants that you would never ask for anything more than
what you had been given? Woe on you, O Adam’s son! How treacherous you
are!’ He will say, ‘O my lord,’ and will keep on invoking Allah till He
says to him, ‘If I give what you are asking, will you then ask for
anything else?’ He will reply, ‘No, by Your (Honor) Power, I will not
ask for anything else.’

Then he will give covenants and promises to Allah and then Allah will
bring him near to the gate of Paradise. When he stands at the gate of
Paradise, Paradise will be opened and spread before him, and he will see
its splendor and pleasures whereupon he will remain quiet as long as
Allah will wish him to remain quiet, and then he will say, O my Lord!
Admit me into Paradise.’ Allah will say, ‘Didn’t you give your covenants
and promises that you would not ask for anything more than what you had
been given?’ Allah will say, ‘Woe on you, O Adam’s son! How treacherous
you are! ‘

The man will say, ‘O my Lord! Do not make me the most miserable of Your
creation,’ and he will keep on invoking Allah till Allah will laugh
because of his sayings, and when Allah will laugh because of him, He
will say to him, ‘Enter Paradise,’ and when he will enter it, Allah will
say to him, ‘Wish for anything.’ So he will ask his Lord, and he will
wish for a great number of things, for Allah Himself will remind him to
wish for certain things by saying, ‘(Wish for) so-and-so.’

When there is nothing more to wish for, Allah will say, ‘This is for
you, and its equal (is for you) as well.”‘Ata’ bin Yazid added: Abu
Sa’id al-Khudri who was present with Abu Huraira, did not deny whatever
the latter said, but when Abu Huraira said that Allah had said, "That is
for you and its equal as well,”Abu Sa’id al-Khudri said, "And ten times
as much, O Abu Huraira!”Abu Huraira said, "I do not remember, except his
saying, ‘That is for you and its equal as well.’“Abu Sa’id al-Khudri
then said, "I testify that I remember the Prophet saying, ‘That is for
you, and ten times as much.’ ‘ Abu Huraira then added, "That man will be
the last person of the people of Paradise to enter Paradise."

In the following hadith which is very similar to that of mentioned
above, God has a special sign on his leg (or Shin). Would you please
tell us when you have observed such sign, what is this sign and how
misguided shiates can observe this sign such that they may know their
lord too? Please be kind, and let shiat become guided. Thanks.

9.532s:

Narrated Abu Sa’id al-Khudri:

We said, "O Allah’s Apostle! Shall we see our Lord on the Day of
Resurrection?”He said, "Do you have any difficulty in seeing the sun and
the moon when the sky is clear?”We said, "No.”He said, "So you will have
no difficulty in seeing your Lord on that Day as you have no difficulty
in seeing the sun and the moon (in a clear sky).”The Prophet then said,
"Somebody will then announce, ‘Let every nation follow what they used to
worship.’

So the companions of the cross will go with their cross, and the
idolators (will go) with their idols, and the companions of every god
(false deities) (will go) with their god, till there remain those who
used to worship Allah, both the obedient ones and the mischievous ones,
and some of the people of the Scripture. Then Hell will be presented to
them as if it were a mirage.

Then it will be said to the Jews, "What did you use to worship?’ They
will reply, ‘We used to worship Ezra, the son of Allah.’ It will be said
to them, ‘You are liars, for Allah has neither a wife nor a son. What do
you want (now)?’ They will reply, ‘We want You to provide us with
water.’ Then it will be said to them ‘Drink,’ and they will fall down in
Hell (instead). Then it will be said to the Christians, ‘What did you
use to worship?’

They will reply, ‘We used to worship Messiah, the son of Allah.’ It will
be said, ‘You are liars, for Allah has neither a wife nor a son. What:
do you want (now)?’ They will say, ‘We want You to provide us with
water.’ It will be said to them, ‘Drink,’ and they will fall down in
Hell (instead). When there remain only those who used to worship Allah
(Alone), both the obedient ones and the mischievous ones, it will be
said to them, ‘What keeps you here when all the people have gone?’ They
will say, ‘We parted with them (in the world) when we were in greater
need of them than we are today, we heard the call of one proclaiming,
‘Let every nation follow what they used to worship,’ and now we are
waiting for our Lord.’ Then the Almighty will come to them in a shape
other than the one which they saw the first time, and He will say, ‘I am
your Lord,’ and they will say, ‘You are not our Lord.’ And none will
speak: to Him then but the Prophets, and then it will be said to them,
‘Do you know any sign by which you can recognize Him?’

They will say. ‘The Shin,’ and so Allah will then uncover His Shin
whereupon every believer will prostrate before Him and there will remain
those who used to prostrate before Him just for showing off and for
gaining good reputation. These people will try to prostrate but their
backs will be rigid like one piece of a wood (and they will not be able
to prostrate). Then the bridge will be laid across Hell.”We, the
companions of the Prophet said, "O Allah’s Apostle! What is the bridge?’

He said, "It is a slippery (bridge) on which there are clamps and (Hooks
like) a thorny seed that is wide at one side and narrow at the other and
has thorns with bent ends. Such a thorny seed is found in Najd and is
called As-Sa’dan. Some of the believers will cross the bridge as quickly
as the wink of an eye, some others as quick as lightning, a strong wind,
fast horses or she-camels.

So some will be safe without any harm; some will be safe after receiving
some scratches, and some will fall down into Hell (Fire). The last
person will cross by being dragged (over the bridge).”The Prophet said,
"You (Muslims) cannot be more pressing in claiming from me a right that
has been clearly proved to be yours than the believers in interceding
with Almighty for their (Muslim) brothers on that Day, when they see
themselves safe.

They will say, ‘O Allah! (Save) our brothers (for they) used to pray
with us, fast with us and also do good deeds with us.’ Allah will say,
‘Go and take out (of Hell) anyone in whose heart you find faith equal to
the weight of one (gold) Dinar.’ Allah will forbid the Fire to burn the
faces of those sinners. They will go to them and find some of them in
Hell (Fire) up to their feet, and some up to the middle of their legs.

So they will take out those whom they will recognize and then they will
return, and Allah will say (to them), ‘Go and take out (of Hell) anyone
in whose heart you find faith equal to the weight of one half Dinar.’
They will take out whomever they will recognize and return, and then
Allah will say, ‘Go and take out (of Hell) anyone in whose heart you
find faith equal to the weight of an atom (or a smallest ant), and so
they will take out all those whom they will recognize.”Abu Sa’id said:
If you do not believe me then read the Holy Verse:--

***‘Surely! Allah wrongs not even of the weight of an atom (or a
smallest ant) but if there is any good (done) He doubles it.’ (Qur’an
4.40)***

The Prophet added, "Then the prophets and Angels and the believers will
intercede, and (last of all) the Almighty (Allah) will say, ‘Now remains
My Intercession. He will then hold a handful of the Fire from which He
will take out some people whose bodies have been burnt, and they will be
thrown into a river at the entrance of Paradise, called the water of
life.

They will grow on its banks, as a seed carried by the torrent grows. You
have noticed how it grows beside a rock or beside a tree, and how the
side facing the sun is usually green while the side facing the shade is
white. Those people will come out (of the River of Life) like pearls,
and they will have (golden) necklaces, and then they will enter Paradise
whereupon the people of Paradise will say, ‘These are the people
emancipated by the Beneficent. He has admitted them into Paradise
without them having done any good deeds and without sending forth any
good (for themselves).’ Then it will be said to them, ‘For you is what
you have seen and its equivalent as well.’"

The following traditions are also narrated in Bukhari.

9.529:

Narrated Jarir:

We were sitting with the Prophet and he looked at the moon on the night
of the full-moon and said, "You people will see your Lord as you see
this full moon, and you will have no trouble in seeing Him, so if you
can avoid missing (through sleep or business, etc.) a prayer before
sunrise (Fajr) and a prayer before sunset (Asr) you must do so.”(See
HadithNo.529,V1)

9.530:

Narrated Jarir bin ‘Abdullah:

The Prophet said, "You will definitely see your Lord with your own
eyes."

9.531:

Narrated Jarir:

Allah’s Apostle came out to us on the night of the full moon and said,
"You will see your Lord on the Day of Resurrection as you see this (full
moon) and you will have no difficulty in seeing Him."

The above traditions have been taken from:

The translation of the meaning of Sahih al-Bukhari  
 Arabic-English  
 Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan  
 Islamic University, Medina al-Munawwara  
 Kaze Publications.  
 1529 North Wells Street, Chicago. ILL.60610(USA)  
 (3rd revised, 1977)(4th revised Edition, March 1979)  
 Call Number: BP135.A124E54

The traditions from Sahih muslim can be found in:

Sahih Muslim,  
 Rendered into English by  
 Abdul Hamid Siddiqi  
 Printed at Hafeez Press,  
 Sh.Muhammad Ashraf  
 Kashmiri Bazar, Lahore(Pakistan)  
 Call Number(In library of Waterloo university): BP135.A144E57

From: <kaamran@sun14.vlsi.uwaterloo.ca>

Where Is This God? Where Is This Man?
-------------------------------------

If you remember, we discovered that Allah has a few fingers, two legs
which are left leg and right leg, and a special sign on one of his leg
which is known only to my sunni brothers and they will know God in
Ghyamat (the other day) using this special sign on the leg of the God.

When searching for the creation of Eva (woman) and Adam (man), I finally
found out more about the almighty God. He is smaller than one of the
buildings in New York city, or a tree. He is only 30 meters. Combining
these signs of the almighty, I hope to become more familiar with the
God, the most high (!!).

I also urge islamic and nonislamic scientists to search for the first
human being on earth, named as Adam. He is 30 meters tall. Also, if
scientists carefully examine the remained skeletons along with history,
they have to be able to find a linear pattern for the hight of human
beings up to their father. The reason is that human being is decreasing
in its hight from 30 meters to 1.7 meters these days. I assure
scientists that any other results is wrong, and they have to investigate
more about this before finalizing their research. For example, if they
find ice-man to be almost as tall as the present man, they must be
wrong. The older, the taller the skeleton must be.

May Allah guide our scientists to the right path.

(In fact, I wonder why they do any research. They have to obey these
traditions and issue their scientific rules immediately. Although a
hadith is not equal to one verse of Qur’an, are we not supposed to
listen to traditions and obey them?)

8.246:

Narrated Abu Huraira:

The Prophet said, "Allah created Adam in His picture, sixty cubits
(about 30 meters) in height. When He created him, He said (to him),

"Go and greet that group of angels sitting there, and listen what they
will say in reply to you, for that will be your greeting and the
greeting of your offspring.”Adam (went and) said, ‘As-Salamu alaikum

(Peace be upon you).’ They replied, ‘AsSalamu-’Alaika wa Rahmatullah

(Peace and Allah’s Mercy be on you) So they increased ‘Wa Rahmatullah’

The Prophet added ‘So whoever will enter Paradise, will be of the shape
and picture of Adam Since then the creation of Adam’s (offspring) (i.e.
stature of human beings is being diminished continuously) to the present
time."

4.543:

Narrated Abu Huraira:

The Prophet said, "Allah created Adam, making him 60 cubits tall. When
He created him, He said to him, "Go and greet that group of angels, and
listen to their reply, for it will be your greeting (salutation) and the
greeting (salutations of your offspring.”So, Adam said (to the angels),
As-Salamu Alaikum (i.e. Peace be upon you). The angels said, "As-salamu
Alaika wa Rahmatu-l-lahi”(i.e. Peace and Allah’s Mercy be upon you).
Thus the angels added to Adam’s salutation the expression, ‘Wa
Rahmatu-l-lahi,’ Any person who will enter Paradise will resemble Adam
(in appearance and figure). People have been decreasing in stature since
Adam’s creation.  
 From: <kaamran@sun14.vlsi.uwaterloo.ca>

Subject: Re: Allah does not resemble to his creatures

Article: 7575 of soc.religion.islam

From: <dabbous@milou.inria.fr> (Walid Dabbous)

Then you said:

Narrated Abu Huraira:

The Prophet said, "Allah created Adam in His picture, sixty cubits
(about 30 meters) in height. When He created him, He said (to him), The
"His”article here means Adam, which means that Allah created Adam in his
picture, i.e. Adam was not a child then grew up like other people. This
also means to refute darwinism: Adam was created in his known picture
(60 cubits...) and did not derive from any other animal creature.

In the Hadith, the word which is used as "his picture”is:

Ala Soorateh
------------

We know that Allah knew his plan for the entire world from the beginning
except that human beings are not aware of that. Such plan is "plan". It
is not a picture of something. When you say that you have a picture, it
means that you DO exist. You exist, hence, you have a picture. So,
picture is the attribute of an existing thing or human being. That is
why a photograph is called a "picture". If you see the picture of an
animal, you will say that such animal does exist, or it did exist. When
Allah wanted to created Adam, there was no Adam.

There was no picture of Adam, since there was no Adam. As the rsult of
this reasoning, "His”in "His picture”refers to the God, and does not
refer to Adam.

On the other hand, a plan which is not implemented yet remains a plan
and is never referred as picture. The hadith could have been spoken as:

And Allah created Adam based on his plan, Or  
 And Allah created Adam by his knowledge, Or  
 And Allah created Adam by his power.

You can never find a single hadith anywhere (Even a garbage Hadith) that
is said:

And Allah created the earth in its picture.  
 And Allah created a cow in its picture.

There is no single verse in the so called Twisted bible or the book of
traditions where God has created an ass in its picture. There is,
however, some lines at the beginning of the old testement like:

And Yahowah created Adam by his picture.

The reason is simple. When we are talking about a plan, it is a plan,
and it is not a picture. You doubt, ask 5 billion normal human beings
and they will tell you what they understand from this statement.

From: <kaamran@sun14.vlsi.uwaterloo.ca>

The Way That The God Fills The Hell
-----------------------------------

As you have realized by now, The God has a shape as human, 30 meters
tall, two legs with a special sign on one of his legs. This leg is very
helpful. Once it would be used to say "shut up”to the Hell. I am also
curious to know how many of you will use your feet to shut off the fire.
Thanks.

6.372:

Narrated Abu Huraira:

(that the Prophet said) "It will be said to the Hell, ‘Are you filled?’
It will say, ‘Are there any more (to come)?’ On that Allah will put His
Foot on it, and it will say ‘Qati! Qati! (Enough! Enough!)."

6.373:

Narrated Abu Huraira:

The Prophet said, "Paradise and the Fire (Hell) argued, and the Fire
(Hell) said, "I have been given the privilege of receiving the arrogant
and the tyrants.’ Paradise said, ‘What is the matter with me? Why do
only the weak and the humble among the people enter me?’ On that, Allah
said to Paradise. ‘You are My Mercy which I bestow on whoever I wish of
my servants.’

Then Allah said to the (Hell) Fire, ‘You are my (means of) punishment by
which I punish whoever I wish of my slaves. And each of you will have
its fill.’ As for the Fire (Hell), it will not be filled till Allah puts
His Foot over it whereupon it will say, ‘Qati! Qati!’ At that time it
will be filled, and its different parts will come closer to each other;
and Allah will not wrong any of His created beings. As regards Paradise,
Allah will create a new creation to fill it with."

Also, this Hell can not bear its hot environment on itself. I just do
not understand how such hot environment can creat cold weather too!!.

4.482:

Narrated Abu Huraira:

Allah’s Apostle said, "The (Hell) Fire complained to its Lord saying, ‘O
my Lord! My different parts eat up each other.’ So, He allowed it to
take two breaths, one in the winter and the other in summer, and this is
the reason for the severe heat and the bitter cold you find (in
weather)."

All traditions are from Sahih Bukhari:

The translation of the meaning of Sahih al-Bukhari  
 Arabic-English  
 Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan  
 Islamic University, Medina al-Munawwara  
 Kaze Publications.  
 1529 North Wells Street, Chicago. ILL.60610(USA)  
 (3rd revised, 1977)(4th revised Edition, March 1979)  
 Call Number(In library of Waterloo university): BP135.A124E54


