Wahhabis
========

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The following article is written by a Sunni brother

From: <bdogan@eecs.wsu.edu> (Bilge Dogan)

The founder of Wahhabism was Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab of Banu Tamim
tribe. He was born in Uyaina village near Huraimila town in the Najd
Desert in 1111 and died 1206(1792). Formerly, with the idea of
travelling and trading, he went to Basra , Baghdad, Iran, India and  
 Damascus, where he won the name "Shaikh an-Najdi”because of his clever
and defeatist attitude.

He saw and learnt a great deal at these places and set his heart on the
idea of becoming a chief. He had thought it proper a to found a new
religious reformation and movement to reach his goal , and, in
preparation for this goal, attended the lectures of the Hanbali ‘ulama’
in the blessed city of Medina and later in Damascus for some time.

When he went back to the Najid, he wrote pamphlets on religious subjects
for villagers. His harmful, heretical ideas which he took from Mu’tazila
and other bid’a-groups and introduced in these small books deceived many
ignorant villagers, particularly the inhabitants of Dar’iyya and their
ignorant chief, Muhammad ibn Sa’ud (grand grand father of saudi royal
family) as a tool to disseminate his reformation which he named
Wahhabism.

He introduced himself as the qadi and Muhammad ibn Saud as the Hakim. He
had it declared that both would be succeeded only by their children In
1306 when the book Mirat al-Haramain was written, the amir of the Najd,
‘Abdullah ibn Faisal, was a descendant of Muhammad ibn Sa’ud, and the
qadi, that is, the head of religious affairs, was a descendant of
Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab.Mumammed ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s father , ‘‘Abd
al-Wahhab, who was a pious pure alim in Medina, his brother Sulaiman ibn
‘Abd al-Wahhab and his masters had apprehended from his statements,
behaviour and heretical ideas, which he frequently had put forward as
questions to them when he was a student in Medina, that he would harm
Islam from inside in future.

They advised him to correct his ideas and the Muslims to avoid him. But
they encountered the very thing they were afraid of very untimely, and
he started disseminating his heretical ideas openly under the name of
Wahhabism.

To deceive the ignorant, stupid people, he came forward with reformism
and innovations much impetuous to deem as kafirs the true Muslims who
followed the Ahl as-Sunnat wa’l-Jamaa. He regarded it polytheism to ask
Allahu taala for something through the mediation of the Prophet or other
Prophets or awliya and to visit their graves.

According to Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, the person who talks to the
dead, when praying near a grave becomes a mushrik (Fat’h al-majid ,
p208) He asserted that attributing an action or effect to someone or
something beside Allah, for example , saying "(such and such) medicine
cured”or “I obtained whatI asked through our master Rasulullah”was
polytheism, and the Muslim who said so would become polytheist.

Although the false documents Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab made up to support his
statements were nothing but all lies and slanders, the ignorant people
who couldn’t distinguish right from wrong, the unemployed , opportunists
and the hard-hearted soon accepted his ideas and took part of his side
and regarded the pious Muslims of the rightpath as kafirs.

When Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab applied to the rulers of Dar’iyya with the view
of disseminating his heresies easily through them, they willingly
cooperated with him with the hope of extending their territories and
increasing their power. THey strove with all their might to disseminate
his ideas everywhere.

They declared war against those who refused and opposed another in
joining the army of Muhammad ibn Sa’ud when it was said that it is halal
to plunder and kill non-Wahhabis. In 1143, Muhammad ibn Sa’ud and
Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab hand in arrived at the conclusion, that
those who wouldn’t accept Wahhabism were kafirs and mushriks and it was
halal to kill them and confiscate their possessions, and publicly
announced their declaration seven years later. Then Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab
started fabricating ijtihad when he was thirty-two years old and
announced his false ijtihads at his forty.

As-Sayyid Ahmad ibn Zaini Dahlan, Mufti of the blessed city of Mecca,
described under the topic "Al-fitnat al-Wahhabiyya”the heretical tenest
of Wahhabism and the tortures of the Wahhabis inflicted upon Muslims
(Al-futuhat al-Islamiyya, v2, p228-233, Cairo 1968) Hw wrote: “To
deceive the Ahl as-Sunna ‘ulama’ in Mecca and Medina , the Wahhabis sent
their men to cities, but these men could not answer the questions of
ulama. It became evident that they were ignorant heretics. A verdict
about their being disbleivers was written and issued everywhere. Sharif
Mas’ud ibn Sa’id , Amir of Mecca, ordered that the Wahhabis shall be
imprisoned. Some Wahhabis fled to Dari’yya and told what had happened to
them.

The ulama of Hijaz belonging to all the four madhhabs, including
Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s brother Shaikh Sulaiman and also his
masters who trained him studied Muhammad’s books, prepared answers to
his disunioninst writings, which were distructive to Islam, and wrote,
to call the attention of Muslims, well-documented books in refutation to
his heretical writings and proclaimed Wahhabite tenets to be heretical
and harmful.

Bilge Dogan


