Abdullah Ibn Saba Part 4
========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Who Started The Battle Of Camel?
--------------------------------

The battle of Camel (Jamal) was the first war declared against Imam ‘Ali
(as) in Basra in year 36/656 after people appointed ‘Ali as their leader
of the Muslim community. It was called so, because Aisha, one of the
leaders of the opposition group was riding a camel. The other leaders
among the opposition were Talha and Zubair who were two well-known
companions of the messenger of Allah. This war is also known in the
history as the battle of Basra. The result was shedding the blood of
more than ten thousand Muslims.

The circulators of false accusation against the Followers of the Members
of the House of the Prophet quote from Sayf that the followers of Ibn
Saba started the battle of Basra at night just before the negotiations
between Imam ‘Ali and his three opponents (Aisha, Talha, and Zubair)
were about to succeed.

They started the battle at night by attacking the two armies
simultaneously in order to make them plunge into battle. Ibn Saba wanted
to make each of the two armies accuse the other of starting the battle.
This would abort the peaceful efforts whose stipulations were supposed
to include the punishment of Uthman’s killers.

This allegation is in contradiction with many clear historical facts, of
which the following events were recorded by the Sunni historians and
traditionists:

1. al-Sha’bi (Amir Ibn Sharahil al-shi-abi) reported the following:

The right side of the army of the Commander of Believers (‘Ali) attacked
the left side of Basra’s army. They fought each other and people
resorted to Aisha and most of them were from Dhubbah  
 and al-Azd tribes. The Battle started after sunrise and continued until
afternoon. The Basrites were defeated and a man from the tribe of al-Azd
said: ‘Come back and attack.’ Muhammad (Ibn al-Hanafiya), son of ‘Ali,
hit him with his sword and severed his hand. The man shouted: ‘Azdites,
run away.’ When the Azdites were overwhelmed by the army of the ‘Ali,
the Azdites shouted: ‘We belong to the religion of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.’

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, Arabic version, Events of year 36
AH v4, p312. (The English version of this part is not yet published at
the time of writing of this article)

The above report gives evidence to the fact that the fight did not start
during the night as the inventor of Ibn Saba claimed. Rather it started
after the sunrise. This collapses the whole alleged conspiracy of
simultaneous attack to both armies during the night.

2. Qatadah reported the following:  
 When the two armies faced each other, Zubair appeared on his horse
while he was well armed. People said to ‘Ali, ‘This is Zubair.’ Upon
that ‘Ali said: ‘Zubair is the more expected of the two to remember God,
if he is reminded.’ Talha also came to face ‘Ali. When ‘Ali faced them,
he said: ‘Certainly you have prepared arms, horses, and men. Did you
prepare an excuse for the Day of Judgment when you meet your Lord?

Fear God and do not be like the lady who unravels her weaving after she
had woven it strongly. Was I not your brother and you used to believe in
the sanctity of my blood? Did anything happen to make it legal for you
to shed my blood?’ Talha said: ‘You have instigated people against
Uthman.’

Imam ‘Ali replied, quoting from the Qur’an:

***‘On that day (the day of judgment), Allah will pay them their just
due, and they will know that, indeed, Allah is the Manifest
Truth.(Qur’an 24:25).’***

Then ‘Ali continued: ‘Talha, you are fighting for the blood of Uthman?

May God curse those who killed Uthman. Zubair, do you remember the day
when you passed by with the Messenger of God at Banu Ghunam and he
looked at me and smiled? I smiled back at him and you said to him: ‘Ibn
Abu Talib is always conceited. ‘The Messenger of God said to you: ‘He is
not conceited, and you shall fight him unjustly.’

Zubair said: ‘By God, this is true. Had I remembered that, I would not
have made this journey. By God, I shall never fight you.’ Then Zubair
left and informed Aisha and his son Abdullah that he took an oath to
never fight ‘Ali. His son counseled him to fight against ‘Ali and pay
atonement (Kaffaarah) for breaking his oath. Zubair agreed and made his
atonement by freeing his slave Mak’hul.

Sunni references:

- History of al-Tabari, Arabic version, Events of year 36 AH, v4,
pp501-502  
 - History of Ibn al-Athir, v3, p240  
 - al-Isti’ab, Ibn Abd al-Barr, v2, p515  
 - Usdul Ghabah, v2, p252  
 - al-Isabah, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v2, p557

This event clearly tells us that Talha and Zubair confronted Imam ‘Ali
(as) BEFORE the start of the battle, and the confrontation was in the
day time rather than at night. Otherwise, people could not have seen the
confrontation or heard the conversation between the Imam and his
opponents and recognize each other in the Helmet (metal head-cover). We
are sure that there was no electricity for light, nor was there any
voice amplifier to make conversations heard.

Since the conversation and the confrontation took place before the start
of the battle, it is clear that the report of Sayf about the battle
starting during the dark night and unpredictably, is a sheer lie.

3. al-Dhabbi narrated:

We were in the camp of ‘Ali on the day of Battle of Camel, where ‘Ali
sent for Talha to talk to him (before the beginning of war). Talha came
forward, and ‘Ali told him: I adjure you by Allah! Didn’t you hear the
Messenger of Allah (S) when he said: \`Whoever I am his MAWLA, this ‘Ali
is his MAWLA. O God, love whoever loves him, and be hostile to whoever
is hostile to him’?”Talha replied: "Yes.”‘Ali said: "Then why do you
want to fight me?"

Sunni references:

- al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, pp 169,371  
 - Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, on the authority of Ilyas al-Dhabbi  
 - Muruj al-Dhahab, by al-Mas’udi, v4, p321  
 - Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p107

4. Yahya Ibn Sa’id narrated:

Marwan Ibn al-Hakam who was in the ranks of Talha, saw Talha is
retreating (when his army was being defeated in the battlefield).

Since he and all Umayad recognized him and al-Zubair as the murderers of
Uthman, he shot an arrow at him and severely wounded him. He then said
to Aban, the son of Uthman, that: "I have spared you from one of your
father’s murderers.”Talha was taken to a ruined house in Basra  
 where he died.

Sunni references:

- Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’ad, v3, part 1, p159  
 - al-Isabah, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v3, pp 532-533  
 - History of Ibn al-Athir, v3, p244  
 - Usdul Ghabah, v3, pp 87-88  
 - al-Isti’ab, Ibn Abd al-Barr, v2, p766  
 - History of Ibn al-Kathir, v7, p248  
 - A similar report is given in al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, pp
169,371

5. al-Zuhri, another important Sunni narrator who is famous for his
dislike of Ahlul-Bayt, reported the following dialogue of Imam ‘Ali with
Zubair and

Talha before the battle:

"‘Ali said: ‘Zubair, do you fight me for the blood of Uthman after you
killed him? May God give the most hostile to Uthman among us the
consequence which that very person dislikes.’ He said to Talha: ‘Talha,
you have brought the wife of the Messenger of God (Aisha) to use her for
war and hid your wife at your house (in Medina)! Did you not give me
your allegiance?’ Talha said: ‘I gave you the allegiance while the sword
was on my neck.’

(At this point, ‘Ali tried to invite them to peace, leaving them no
excuse.) ‘Ali addressed his own army saying: ‘Who among you will display
this Qur’an and what is in it to the opposing army with the
understanding that if he loses one of his hand he will hold the Qur’an
with his other hand...?’

A youth from Kufa said: ‘I will take the mission.’ ‘Ali went through his
army offering them the mission. Only that youth accepted it. Then ‘Ali
said to him: ‘Exhibit this Qur’an and say to them: It is between you and
us from its beginning to its end. Remember God, and spare your blood and
our blood.’

As the youth called upon them to resort to the Qur’an and surrender to
its judgment, the Basrites army attacked and killed him. At this time,
‘Ali said to his army: ‘Now the fight has become legal.’ The battle then
started.

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, Arabic version, Events of year 36
AH v4, p905

All these reports and the similar ones clearly indicate that the battle
started in the day time rather than at night as Sayf Ibn Umar alleged.
The breaking war was not abrupt since the two armies met and talked to
each other just before the start of battle. Had the confrontation
between Imam

‘Ali and Talha and Zubair taken place at night, the final call of Imam
‘Ali would have had no benefit because the two armies would not have
been able to witness it or hear their conversation. Also, the
confrontation between the carrier of the Holy Qur’an and the Basrites
would have been useless.

None of the opposing soldiers could have seen the Qur’an in the hands of
the young man at night.

Furthermore, the alleged agreement between the Imam and the three
rebellious leaders, to punish the individuals who murdered Uthman, would
be logical only if the three leaders were serious in seeking punishment
for the killers. But the three leaders (Aisha, Talha, and Zubair) were
the main agitators who provoked people to kill the Third Caliph. As we
see in the above tradition, Imam ‘Ali clearly stated that Zubair was
among those who killed Uthman.

Had the revolters elected Talha or Zubair instead of Imam ‘Ali (as) as
Caliph, they would have given the killers of Uthman the biggest prize.
Certainly the leaders did not seek revenge for the blood of Uthman, for
they themselves were behind the plot. They only pretended to do that as
a means of destroying the Imam’s caliphate.

Imam ‘Ali said in the battle of Camel:

"Truth and falsehood can not be identified by the virtue of people.
First understand the truth, you will then realize who is adhering to
it.”(Nahjul Balaghah, by Imam ‘Ali)

**  
**
إنَّ الحقَّ و الباطل لا يعرفان بأقدارِ الرجال. إعرف الحق تعرف أهله.

Short Summary Of Comparing Reports On The Character Of Abdullah Ibn Saba
------------------------------------------------------------------------


