Kumayl’s Invocation and other Supplications
===========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Kumayl’s Invocation
-------------------

The following invocation is the teaching of Imam ‘Ali (as) to one of his
students, Kumayl Ibn Ziad, which is usually recited every Thursday
night.  
 For more information please see the end.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دُعَاء كُميل بن زياد (رحمه الله)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In The Name of Allah, The Compassionate, The Merciful**

O Allah! Bless Muhammad and his progeny.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسأَلُكَ بِرحَمتِكَ الَّتِي وَسِعَتْ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! I beseech Thee by Thy mercy which encompasses all things O
Allah! I beseech Thee by Thy mercy which encompasses all things

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِقُوَّتِكَ الَّتِي قَهرْتَ بِها كُلَّ شَيءٍ ، وَخضَعَ لَها كُلُّ
شَيْءٍ ، وَذَلَّ لَها كُلُّ شَيْءٍٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by Thy power by which Thou overcometh all things and submit to it
all things and humble before it all things

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِجَبَرُوتِكَ الَّتِي غَلَبْتَ بِها كُلَّ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by Thy might by which Thou hast conquered all thingsAnd by Thy might
by which Thou hast conquered all things

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبعَزَّتِكَ الَّتِي لا يَقُومُ لَها شَيْءٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by Thy majesty against which nothing can stand upAnd by Thy majesty
against which nothing can stand up

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِعَظَمَتِكَ الَّتِي مَلاَتْ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by Thy grandeur which prevails upon all thingsAnd by Thy grandeur
which prevails upon all things

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِسُلْطانِكَ الَّذِي عَلا كُلَّ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by Thy authority which is exercised over all thingsAnd by Thy
authority which is exercised over all things

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِوَجْهِكَ الباقِي بَعْدَ فَناءِ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by Thy own self that shall endure forever after all things have
vanishedAnd by Thy own self that shall endure forever after all things
have vanished

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِأَسْمائِكَ الَّتِي ملاَ َتْ أَرْكانَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by Thy Names which manifest Thy power over all thingsAnd by Thy
Names which manifest Thy power over all things

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِعِلْمِكَ الَّذِي أَحاطَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by Thy knowledge which pervades all thingsAnd by Thy knowledge which
pervades all things

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِنُورِ وَجْهِكَ الَّذِي أَضأَ لَهُ كُلُّ شَيءٍْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by the light of Thy countenance which illuminates everythingAnd by
the light of Thy countenance which illuminates everything

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا نوُرُ ياقُدُّوسُ ياأَوَّلَ الاوَّلِينَ ، وَيا آخِرَ الآخِرينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Thou who art the light! O Thou who art the most holy! O Thou who
existed before the foremost! O Thou who shall exist after the last!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِيَ الذُّنُوبَ الَّتِي تَهْتِكُ العِصَمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Forgive me my such sins as would affront my contingency

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِيَ الذُّنُوبَ الَّتِي تُنْزِلُ النِّقَمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Forgive me my such sins as would bring down calamity O Allah!
Forgive me my such sins as would bring down calamity

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِيَ الذُّنُوبَ الَّتِي تُغَيِّرُ النِّعَمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Forgive me my such sins as would change divine favours (into
disfavours)O Allah! Forgive me my such sins as would change divine
favours (into disfavours)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِيَ الذُّنُوبَ الَّتِي تَحْبِسُ الدُّعأَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Forgive me my such sins as would hinder my supplication O
Allah! Forgive me my such sins as would hinder my supplication

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِيَ الّذنُوبَ الّتي تُنْزِلُ البَلاَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Forgive me such sins as bring down misfortunes (or
afflictions)O Allah! Forgive me such sins as bring down misfortunes (or
afflictions)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِيَ كُلَّ ذَنْبٍ أذْنَبْتُهُ ، وَكُلَّ خَطِيئَةٍ
أَخْطَأْتُها
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Forgive every sin that I have committed and every error that I
have erred O Allah! Forgive every sin that I have committed and every
error that I have erred

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَتَقَرَّبُ إِلَيْكَ بِذِكْرِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! I endeavour to draw myself nigh to Thee through Thy invocation
O Allah! I endeavour to draw myself nigh to Thee through Thy invocation

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتَشفِعُ بِكَ إِلى نَفْسِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I pray to Thee to intercede on my behalfAnd I pray to Thee to
intercede on my behalf

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَسْأَلُكَ بِجوُدِكَ أَنْ تُدْنِيَنِي مِنْ قُرْبِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I entreat Thee by Thy benevolence to draw me nearer to TheeAnd I
entreat Thee by Thy benevolence to draw me nearer to Thee

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ تُوزِعَنِي شُكْرَكَ، وأَنْ تُلْهِمَنِي ذِكْرَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And grant me that I should be grateful to Thee and inspire me to
remember and to invoke TheeAnd grant me that I should be grateful to
Thee and inspire me to remember and to invoke Thee

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسأَلُكَ سُؤالَ خاضِعٍ مُتَذَلِّلٍ خاشِعٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! I entreat Thee begging Thee submissively, humbly and
awestricken

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْ تُسامِحَنِي وَتَرْحَمَنِي وَتَجْعَلَنِي بِقِسَمِكَ راضِياً
قانِعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

To treat me with clemency and mercy, and to make me pleased and
contented with what Thou hast allotted to me

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي جَمِيعِ الاحْوالِ مُتَواضِعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

And cause me to be modest and unassuming in all circumstancesAnd cause
me to be modest and unassuming in all circumstances

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ وَأَسأَلُكَ سُؤالَ مَنِ إِشْتَدَّتْ فاقَتُهُ وَأَنْزَلَ بِكَ
عِنْدَ الشَّدائِدِ حاجَتَهُ ، وَعَظُمَ فِيما عِنْدَكَ رَغْبَتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! I beg Thee as one who is passing through extreme privation and
who supplicates his needs to Thee and his hope has been greatly raised
by that which is with Thee

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ عَظُمَ سُلْطانُكَ وَعَلا مَكانُكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Great is Thy kingdom and exalted is Thy greatness O Allah!
Great is Thy kingdom and exalted is Thy greatness

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخَفِيَ مَكْرُكَ ، وَظَهَرَ أَمْرُك وَغَلَبَ قَهْرُكَ ، وَجَرَتْ
قُدْرَتُكَ ، وَلايُمْكِنُ الفِرارُ مِنْ حُكُومَتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thy plan is secret, Thy authority is manifest, Thy might is victorious
and subduing and Thy power is prevalent throughout and it is not
possible to escape from Thy dominion

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ لا أَجِدُ لِذُنُوبِي غافِراً وَلا لِقَبائِحِي ساتِراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Except Thee I do not find anyone able to pardon my sins nor to
conceal my loathsome acts O Allah! Except Thee I do not find any one
able to pardon my sins nor to conceal my loathsome acts

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا لِشَيٍْ مِنْ عَمَلِيَ القَبِيحِ بِالحَسَنِ مُبَدِّلاً غَيْرَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Nor have I any one except Thee to change my evil deeds into virtuesNor
have I any one except Thee to change my evil deeds into virtues

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا إِلهَ إِلا أَنْتَ ، سُبْحانَكَ وَبِحَمْدِكَ ظَلَمْتُ نَفْسِي ،
وَتَجَرَّأْتُ بِجَهْلِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no god but Thou glory and praise be to Thee I have made my own
soul to suffer I had the audacity (to sin) by my ignorance

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَكَنْتُ إِلى قَدِيمِ ذِكْرِكَ لِي ، وَمَنِّكَ عَلَيَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Relying upon my past remembrance of Thee and Thy grace towards meRelying
upon my past remembrance of Thee and Thy grace towards me

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ مَوْلايَ كَمْ مِنْ قَبيحٍ سَتَرْتَهُ ، وَكَمْ مِنْ فادِحٍ
مِنَ البَلاِ أَقَلْتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! My Lord! How many of my loathsome acts hast Thou screened (from
public gaze)O Allah! My Lord! How many of my loathsome acts hast Thou
screened (from public gaze)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَمْ مِنْ عِثارٍ وَقَيْتَهُ ، وَكَمْ مِنْ مَكْروُهٍ دَفَعْتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

How many of my grievous afflictions (distresses) hast Thou reduced in
severity

The word "Maula" has here been used in the sense of "Master" and the
word "Fadihin" means "heavy" or "grievous" (Malbubi).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَمْ مِنْ ثَنأٍ جَمِيلٍ لَسْتُ أَهْلاً لَهُ نَشَرْتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And how many of my stumblings hast Thou protected, how many of my
detestable acts has Thou averted, and how many of my undeserving praises
hast Thou spread abroad!

The Arabic word "ithar" has been translated by Malbubi as meaning
"laghzish" in Farsi language which means "a slip, slipping or
stumbling." " Makruhin" is used in the general sense to mean "any
blameworthy act."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ عَظُمَ بَلائِي ، وَأَفْرَطَ بِي سُؤُ حالِي ، وَقَصُرَتْ بِي
أَعْمالِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! My trails and sufferings have increased and my evilness has
worsened, my good deeds have diminished and my yokes (of misdeeds) have
become firm

According to Maibubi, the Arabic word "afrata" means "increased" and
that "aghlal" is the plural of "ghalla" meaning restrained like
imprisonment and deprived of Allah’s taufiq (the favour of Allah) to
accomplish good deeds." When the yokes of sins become heavy, they over
power the sinner and prevent him from accomplishing good deeds. (
Malbubi ) .

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَعَدَتْ بِي أَغْلالِي وَحَبَسَنِي عَنْ نَفْعِي بُعْدُ أَمَلِي
وَخَدَعَتْنِي الدُّنْيا بِغُرُورِها ، وَنَفْسِي بِجِنايَتِها وَمِطالِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

And remote hopes restrain me to profit (by good deeds) and the world has
deceived me with its allurements and my own self has been affected by
treachery and procrastination

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياسَيِّدِي فَأَسْأَلُكَ بِعِزَّتِكَ أَنْ لايَحْجُبَ عَنْكَ دُعائِي
سُؤُ عَمَلِي وَفِعالي وَلاتَفْضَحَنِي بِخَفِيِّ مااطَّلَعْتَ عَلَيْهِ
مِنْ سِرِّي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاتُعاجِلْنِي بِالعُقُوبَةِ عَلى ما عَمِلْتُهُ فِي خَلَواتِي مِنْ
سُؤِ فِعْلِي وَإِسأَتِي ، وَدَوامِ تَفْرِيطِي وَجَهالَتِي ، وَكَثْرَةِ
شَهَواتِي وَغَفْلَتِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Therefore, my Lord! I implore Thee by Thy greatness not to let my sins
and my misdeeds shut out access to my prayers from reaching Thy realm
and not to disgrace me by exposing those (hidden ones) of which Thou
hast knowledge nor to hasten my retribution for those vices and misdeeds
committed by me in secret which were due to evil-mindedness, ignorance,
excessive lustfulness and my negligence

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُنِ اللّهُمَّ بِعِزَّتِكَ لِي فِي كُلِّ الاحْوالِ رَؤُوفاً ،
وَعَلَيَّ فِي جَمِيعِ الامُورِ عَطُوفاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! I beg Thee by Thy greatness to be compassionate to me in all
circumstances and well disposed towards me in all matters

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلهِي وَرَبِّي مَنْ لِي غَيْرُكَ أَسأَلُهُ كَشْفَ ضُرِّي وَالنَّظَرَ
فِي أَمْرِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

My God! My Nourisher! Have I anyone except Thee from whom I can seek the
dislodging of my evils and understanding of my problems?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلهِي وَمَوْلايَ أَجْرَيْتَ عَلَيَّ حُكْماً اتَّبَعْتُ فِيهِ هَوى
نَفْسِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

My God! My Master! Thou decreed a law for me but instead I obeyed my own
low desiresMy God! My Master! Thou decreed a law for me but instead I
obeyed my own low desires

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ أَحْتَرِسْ فِيهِ مِنْ تَزْيينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I did not guard myself against the allurements of my enemy

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَدُوِّي فَغَرَّنِي بِما أَهْوى وَأَسْعَدَهُ عَلى ذلِكَ القَضاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

He deceived me with vain hopes whereby I was led astray and fate helped
him in that respectHe deceived me with vain hopes whereby I was led
astray and fate helped him in that respect

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَجاوَزْتُ بِما جَرى عَلَيَّ مِنْ ذلِكَ بَعْضَ حُدُودِكَ ،
وَخالَفْتُ بَعْضَ أَوامِرِكَ فَلَكَ الحَمْدُ عَلَيَّ فِي جَمِيعِ ذلِكَ
وَلاحُجَّةَ لِي فِيما جَرى عَلَيَّ فِيهِ قَضاؤُكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thus I transgressed some of its limits set for me by Thee and I
disobeyed some of Thy commandments; Thou hast therefore a (just) cause
against me in all those matters and I have no plea against Thy judgement
passed against me

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَلْزَمَنِي حُكْمُكَ وَبَلاؤُكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have therefore become (justifiably) liable to Thy judgement and
afflictionsI have therefore become (justifiably) liable to Thy judgement
and afflictions

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ أَتَيْتُكَ ياإِلهِي بَعْدَ تَقْصِيرِي وَإِسْرافِي عَلى نَفْسِي
مُعْتَذِراً نادِماً مُنْكَسِراً مُسْتَقِيلاً مُسْتَغْفِراً مُنِيباً
مُقِرّاً مُذْعِنا مُعْتَرِفاً لا أَجِدُ مَفَرّاً مِمّا كانَ مِنِّي
وَلا مَفْزَعاً أَتَوَجَّهُ إِلَيْهِ فِي أَمْرِي، غَيْرَ قَبُوُلِكَ
عُذْرِي وَإِدْخالِكَ إِيّايَ فِي سَعَةِ رَحْمَتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

But now I have turned Thee, my Lord, after being guilty of omissions and
transgressions against my soul, apologetically, repentantly, broken
heartedly, entreating earnestly for forgiveness, yieldingly confessing
(to my guilt) as I can find no escape from that which was done by me and
having no refuge to which I could turn except seeking Thy acceptance of
my excuse and admitting me into the realm of Thy capacious mercy

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ فَاقْبَلْ عُذْرِي ، وَارْحَمْ شِدَّةَ ضُرِّي وَفُكَّنِي مِنْ
شَدِّ وَثاقِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Accept my apology and have pity on my intense sufferings and
set me free from my heavy fetters (of evil deeds)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يارَبِّ ارْحَمْ ضَعْفَ بَدَنِي ، وَرِقَّةَ جِلْدِي ، وَدِقَّةَ عَظْمِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

My Nourisher! Have mercy on the infirmity of my body, the delicacy of my
skin and the brittleness of my bones

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يامَنْ بَدَأَ خَلْقِي وَذِكْرِي وَتَرْبِيَتِي وَبِرِّي وَتَغْذِيَتِي
هَبْنِي لابْتِدأِ كَرَمِكَ وَسالِفِ بِرِّكَ بِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ Thou! Who originated my creation and (accorded me) my individuality,
and (ensured) my upbringing and welfare (and provided) my sustenance (I
beg Thee) to restore Thy favours and blessings upon me as Thou didst in
the beginning of my life

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياإِلهِي وَسَيِّدِي وَرَبِّي ، أَتُراكَ مُعَذِّبِي بِنارِكَ بَعْدَ
تَوْحِيدِك وَبَعْدَما انْطَوى عَلَيْهِ قَلْبِي مِنْ مَعْرِفَتِكَ ،
وَلَهِجَ بِهِ لِسانِي مِنْ ذِكْرِكَ وَاعْتَقَدَهُ ضَمِيرِي مِنْ
حُبِّكَ وَبَعْدَ صِدْقِ إِعْتِرافِي وَدُعائِي خاضِعاً لِرُبُوبِيَّتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ my God! My master! My Lord! And my Nourisher! What! Wilt Thou see me
punished with the fire kindled by Thee despite my belief in Thy unity?
And despite the fact that my heart has been filled with (pure) knowledge
of Thee and when my tongue has repeatedly praised Thee and my conscience
has acknowledged Thy love and despite my sincere confessions (of my
sins) and my humble entreaties submissively made to Thy divinity?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَيْهاتَ ! أَنْتَ أَكْرَمُ مِنْ أَنْ تُضَيِّعَ مَنْ رَبَّيْتَهُ ، أَوْ
تُبَعِّدَ مَنْ أَدْنَيْتَهُ أَوْ تُشَرِّدَ مَنْ آوَيْتَهُ ، أَوْ
تُسَلِّمَ إِلى البَلاءِ مَنْ كَفَيْتَهُ وَرَحِمْتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Nay, Thou art far too kind and generous to destroy one whom thyself
nourished and supported, or to drive away from Thyself one whom Thou has
kept under Thy protection, or to scare away one whom Thy self hast given
shelter, or to abandon in affliction one Thou hast maintained and to
whom Thou hast been merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيْتَ شِعْرِي ياسَيِّدِي وَإِلهِي وَمَوْلايَ ! أَتُسَلِّطُ النّارَ
عَلى وُجُوهٍ خَرَّتْ لِعَظَمَتِكَ ساجِدَةً وَعَلى أَلْسُنٍ نَطَقَتْ
بِتَوْحِيدِكَ صادِقَةً وَبُشُكْرِكَ مادِحَةً وَعَلى قُلُوبٍ
أَعْتَرَفَتْ بِإِلهِيَّتِكَ مُحَقِّقَةً وَعَلَى ضَمائِرَ حَوَتْ مِنَ
العِلْمِ بِكَ حَتّى صارَتْ خاشِعَةً وَعَلى جَوارِحَ سَعَتْ إِلى
أَوْطانِ تَعَبُّدِكَ طائِعَةً ، وَأَشارَتْ بِإِسْتِغْفارِكَ مُذْعِنَةً
؟!
  </p>
</blockquote>

I wish I had known o’ my Master, my God and my Lord! Wilt Thou inflict
fire upon faces which have submissively bowed in prostration to Thy
greatness, or upon the tongues which have sincerely confirmed Thy unity
and have always expressed gratitude to Thee, or upon hearts which have
acknowledged Thy divinity with conviction, or upon the minds which
accumulated so much knowledge of Thee until they became submissive to
Thee, or upon the limbs which strove, at the places appointed for Thy
worship, to adore Thee willingly and seek Thy forgiveness submissively?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ماهكَذا الظَنُّ بِكَ وَلا اُخْبِرْنا بِفَضْلِكَ عَنْك
  </p>
</blockquote>

Such sort (of harshness) is not expected from Thee as it is remote from
Thy grace, o’ generous one!Such sort (of harshness) is not expected from
Thee as it is remote from Thy grace, o’ generous one!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياكَرِيمُ يارَبِّ وَأَنْتَ تَعْلَمُ ضَعْفِي عَنْ قَلِيلٍ مِنْ بَلاءِ
الدُّنْيا وَعُقُوباتِها وَمايَجْرِي فِيها مِنَ المَكارِهِ عَلى
أَهْلِها عَلى أَنَّ ذلِكَ بَلاٌ وَمَكْروهٌ قَلِيلٌ مَكْثُهُ ، يَسِيرٌ
بَقاؤهُ قَصِيٌر مُدَّتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ Lord! Thou art aware of my weakness to bear even a minor affliction
of this world and its consequence and adversity affecting the denizen of
this earth, although such afflictions are momentary, short-lived and
transient

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ إِحْتِمالِي لِبَلاءِ الاخِرَةِ وَجَلِيلِ وُقُوعِ المَكارِهِ
فِيها وَهُوَ بَلاٌ تَطُولُ مُدَّتُهُ وَيَدُومُ مَقامُهُ وَلايُخَفَّفُ
عَنْ أَهْلِهِ لاَنَّهُ لايَكُونُ إِلاّ عَنْ غَضَبِكَ وَانْتِقامِكَ
وَسَخَطِكَ وَهذا ما لاتَقُومُ لَهُ السَّماواتُ وَالارْضُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

How then can I bear the retributions and the punishments of the
hereafter which are enormous and of intensive sufferings, of prolonged
period and perpetual duration, and which shall never be alleviated for
those who deserve the same as those retributions will be the result of
Thy wrath; and Thy punishment which neither the heavens nor the earth
can withstand and bear!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياسَيِّدِي فَكَيْفَ لِي وَأَنا عَبْدُكَ الضَّعِيفُ الذَّلِيلُ
الحَقِيرُ المِسْكِينُ المُسْتَكِينُ ؟!
  </p>
</blockquote>

My Lord! How can I, a weak, insignificant, humble, poor and destitute
creature of Thine be able to bear them?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياإِلهِي وَرَبِّي وَسَيِّدِي وَمَوْلايَ ، لايِّ الاُمُورِ إِلَيْكَ
أَشْكُو ، وَلِما مِنها أَضِجُّ وَأَبْكِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ my God! My Lord! My King! And Master! Which of the matters shall I
complain to Thee and for which of them shall I bewail and weep?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَلِيمِ العَذابِ وَشِدَّتِهِ ، أَمْ لِطُولِ البَلاءِ وَمُدَّتِهِ ؟!
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shall I bewail for the pains and pangs of the punishment and their
intensity or for the length of sufferings and their duration?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَئِنْ صَيَّرْتَنِي لِلْعُقُوباتِ مَعَ أَعْدائِكَ ، وَجَمَعْتَ
بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَ أَهْلِ بَلائِكَ وَفَرَّقْتَ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَ
أَحِبّائِكَ وَأَوْلِيائِكَ فَهَبْنِي ياإِلهِي وَسَيِّدِي وَمَوْلايَ
وَرَبِّي ، صَبَرْتُ عَلى عَذابِكَ فَكَيْفَ أَصْبِرُ عَلى فِراقِكَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Therefore (my Lord!) If Thou wilt subject me to the penalties (of hell)
in company of Thy enemies and cast me with those who merited Thy
punishments and tear me apart from Thy friends and those who will be
near to Thee, then my God, my Lord and my Master, though I may patiently
bear Thy punishments, how can I calmly accept being kept away from Thee?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَبْنِي صَبَرْتُ عَلى حَرِّ نارِكَ فَكَيْفَ أَصْبِرُ عَنِ النَّظَرِ
إِلى كَرامَتِكَ ، أَمْ كَيْفَ أَسْكُنُ فِي النّارِ وَرَجائِي عَفْوُكَ
؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

I reckon that though I may patiently endure the scorching fire of Thy
hell, yet how can I resign myself to the denial of Thy pity and
clemency? How can I remain in the fire while I have hopes of Thy
forgiveness?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِعِزَّتِكَ ياسَيِّدِي وَمَوْلايَ اُقْسِمُ صادِقاً ، لَئِنْ
تَرَكْتَنِي ناطِقاً لاَضِجَّنَّ إِلَيْكَ بَيْنَ أَهْلِها ضَجِيجَ
الامِلِينَ وَلاَصْرُخَنَّ إِلَيْكَ صُراخَ المُسْتَصْرِخِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ my Lord! By Thy honour truly do I swear that, if Thou wilt allow my
power of speech to be retained by me in the hell, I shall amongst its
inmates cry out bewailingly unto Thee like the cry of those who have
faith in Thy kindness and compassion

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَبْكِيَنَّ عَلَيْكَ بُكأَ الفاقِدِينَ وَلاُنادِيَنَّكَ أَيْنَ
كُنْتَ ياوَلِيَّ المُؤْمِنِينَ ، ياغايَةَ اَّمالِ العارِفِينَ ياغِياثَ
المُسْتَغِيثِينَ ، ياحَبِيبَ قُلوُبِ الصّادِقِين وَيا إِلهَ العالَمينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I shall bemoan for Thee (for being deprived of nearness to Thee) the
lamentation of those who are bereaved, and I shall keep on calling unto
Thee: "Where art Thou o’ Friend of the believers! O’ (Thou who art) the
last hope and resort of those who acknowledge Thee and have faith in Thy
clemency and kindness; o’ Thou who art the helper of those seeking help!
O’ Thou who art dear to the hearts of those who truly believe in Thee!
And o’ Thou who art the Lord of the universe."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَتُراكَ سُبْحانَكَ ياإِلهي وَبِحَمْدِكَ تَسْمَعُ فِيها صَوتَ عَبْدٍ
مُسْلِمٍ سُجِنَ فِيها بِمُخالَفَتِهِ وَذاقَ طَعْمَ عَذابِها
بِمَعْصِيَتِهِ ، وَحُبِسَ بَيْنَ أَطْباقِها بِجُرْمِهِ وَجَرِيرَتِهِ
وَهُوَ يَضجُّ إِلَيْكَ ضَجِيجَ مُؤَمِّلٍ لِرَحْمَتِكَ وَيُنادِيكَ
بِلِسانِ أَهْلِ تَوْحِيدِكَ ، وَيَتَوَسَّلُ إِلَيْكَ بِرُبُوبِيَّتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

My Lord! Glory and praise be to Thee, wouldst Thou (wish) to be seen
(disregarding) the voice of a Muslim bondman, incarcerated therein (the
hell) for his disobedience and imprisoned within its pits for his
evildoings and misdeeds, crying out to Thee the utterance of one who has
faith in Thy mercy and calling out to Thee in the language of those who
believe in Thy unity and seeking to approach Thee by means of Thy
epithet "the Creator, the Nourisher, the Accomplisher and the Protector
of the entire existence"?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يامَوْلايَ فَكَيْفَ يَبْقى فِي العَذابِ وَهُوَ يَرْجوُ ماسَلفَ مِنْ
حِلْمِكَ ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

My Lord! Then how could he remain in torments when he hopefully relies
upon Thy past forbearance, compassion and mercy?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ كَيْفَ تُؤْلِمُهُ النَّارُ وَهُوَ يَأْمَلُ فَضْلَكَ وَرَحْمَتَكَ
؟ أَمْ كَيْفَ يُحْرِقُهُ لَهِيبُها وَأَنْتَ تَسْمَعُ صَوْتَهُ وَتَرى
مَكانَهُ ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ كَيْفَ يَشْتَمِلُ عَلَيْهِ زَفِيرُها وَأَنْتَ تَعْلَمُ ضَعْفَهُ ؟
أَمْ كَيْفَ يَتَقَلْقَلُ بَيْنَ أَطْباقِها وَأَنْتَ تَعْلَمُ صِدْقَهُ
؟ أَمْ كَيْفَ تَزْجُرُهُ زَبانِيَتُها وَهُوَ يُنادِيكَ يارَبَّاه ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

And how can the fire cause him suffering when he hopes for Thy grace and
mercy and how can its roaring flames char him when Thou hearest his
voice and sees his plight? And how can he withstand its roaring flames
when Thou knowest his frailness? And how can he be tossed about between
its layers when Thou knowest his sincerity? And how can the guards of
hell threaten him when he calls out to Thee?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ كَيْفَ يَرْجُو فَضْلَكَ فِي عِتْقِهِ مِنْها فَتَتْرُكُهُ فِيها ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

"My Lord", and how would Thou abandon him therein (the hell) when he has
faith in Thy grace to set him free?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَيْهاتَ ! ما ذَلِكَ الظَنُّ بِكَ ، وَلا المُعْروفُ مِنْ فَضْلِكَ ،
وَلامُشْبِهٌ لِما عامَلْتَ بِهِ المُوَحِّدِينَ مِنْ بِرِّكَ
وَإِحْسانِكَ !
  </p>
</blockquote>

Alas! That is not the concept (held by us) of Thee nor has Thy grace
such a reputation nor does it resemble that which Thou hast awarded by
Thy kindness and generosity to those who believe in Thy unity

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِالْيَقِينِ أَقَطَعُ ، لَولا ماحَكَمْتَ بِهِ مِنْ تَعْذِيبِ
جاحِدِيكَ وَقَضَيْتَ بِهِ مِنْ إِخْلادِ مُعانِدِيكَ ، لَجَعْلْتَ
النَّارَ كُلَّها بَرْداً وَسَلاماً ، وَما كَانَ لاَحَدٍ فِيها مَقَرّاً
وَلامُقاماً لكِنَّكَ تَقَدَّسَتْ أَسْماؤُكَ أَقْسَمْتَ أَنْ تَمْلاَها
مِنَ الكافِرِينَ ، مِنَ الجِنَّةِ وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ ، وَأَنْ
تُخَلِّدَ فِيها المُعانِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I definitely conclude that hadst Thou not ordained punishment for those
who disbelieved in Thee, and hadst Thou not decreed Thy enemies to
remain in hell, Thou wouldst have made the hell cold and peaceful and
there would never have been an abode or place for any one in it; but
sanctified be Thy Names, Thou hast sworn to fill the hell with the
disbelievers from amongst the jinns and mankind together and to place
forever Thy enemies therein

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْتَ جَلَّ ثَناؤُكَ قُلْتَ مُبْتَدِئاً ، وَتَطَوَّلْتَ
بِالاِنْعامِ مُتَكَرِّماً ، أَفَمَنْ كانَ مُؤْمِناً كَمَنْ كانَ
فاسِقاً ، لايَسْتَوُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Thou, exalted be Thy praises, hadst made manifest, out of Thy
generosity and kindness that a believer is not like unto him who is an
evil-liver

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلهِي وَسَيِّدِي ، فَأَسأَلُكَ بِالقُدْرَةِ الَّتِي قَدَّرْتَها
وَبِالقَضِيَّةِ الَّتِي حَتَمْتَها وَحَكَمْتَها ، وَغَلَبْتَ مَنْ
عَلَيْهِ أَجْرَيْتَها أَنْ تَهَبَ لِي فِي هذِهِ اللّيْلَةِ وَفِي هذِهِ
السَّاعَةِ ، كُلَّ جُرْمٍ أَجْرَمْتُهُ وَكُلَّ ذَنْبٍ أَذْنَبْتُهُ ،
وَكُلَّ قَبِيحٍ أَسْرَرْتُهُ ، وَكُلَّ جَهْلٍ عَمِلْتُهُ ، كَتَمْتُهُ
أَوْ أَعَلَنْتُهُ ، أَخْفَيْتُهُ أَوْ أَظْهَرْتُه وَكُلَّ سَيِّئَةٍ
أَمَرْتَ بِإِثْباتِها الكِرامَ الكاتِبِينَ ، الَّذِينَ وَكَّلْتَهُمْ
بِحِفْظِ مايَكُونُ مِنِّي وَجَعَلْتَهُمْ شُهُوداً عَلَيّ مَعَ
جَوارِحِي ، وَكُنْتَ أَنْتَ الرَّقِيبَ عَلَيَّ مِنْ وَرائِهِمْ ،
وَالشَّاهِدَ لِما خَفِي عَنْهُمْ ، وَبِرَحْمَتِكَ أَخْفَيْتَهُ ،
وَبِفَضْلِكَ سَتَرْتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

My Lord! My Master! I, therefore implore Thee by that power which Thou
determineth and by the decree which Thou hast finalised and ordained
whereby Thou hath prevailed upon whom Thou hast imposed it, to bestow
upon me this night and this very hour the forgiveness for all the
transgressions that I have been guilty of, for all the sins that I have
committed, for all the loathsome acts that I have kept secret and for
all the evils done by me, secretly or openly, in concealment or
outwardly and for every evil action that Thou hast ordered the two noble
scribes to confirm whom Thou hast appointed to record all my actions and
to be witnesses over me along with the limbs of my body, whilst Thou
observeth over me besides them and wast witness to those acts concealed
from them? Which Thou in Thy mercy hast kept secret and through Thy
kindness unexposed

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ تُوَفِّرَ حَظِّي مِنْ كُلِّ خَيْرٍ أَنْزَلْتَهُ ، أَوْ إِحْسانٍ
فَضَّلْتَهُ أَوْ بِرٍّ نَشَرْتَهُ، أَوْ رِزْقٍ بَسَطْتَهُ ، أَوْ
ذَنْبٍ تَغْفِرُهُ أَوْ خَطأ تَسْتُرُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I pray to Thee to make my share plentiful in all the good that Thou
dost bestow; in all the favours that Thou dost grant; and in all the
virtues that Thou dost allow to be known everywhere; and in all the
sustenance and livelihood that Thou dost expand and in respect of all
the sins that Thou dost forgive and the wrongs that Thou dost cover up

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يارَبِّ يارَبِّ يارَبِّ ، ياإِلهِي وَسَيِّدِي وَمَوْلايَ وَمالِكَ
رِقِّي ، يامَنْ بِيَدِهِ ناصِيَتِي ياعَلِيماً بِضُرِّي وَمَسْكَنَتِي ،
ياخَبِيراً بَفَقْرِي وَفاقَتِي يارَبِّ يارَبِّ يارَبِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ Lord! O’ Lord! O’ Lord! O’ my God! My Lord! My King! O’ Master of my
freedom! O’ Thou who holdeth my destiny and who art aware of my
suffering and poverty, o’ Thou who knoweth my destitution and
starvation, o’ my Lord! O’ Lord, o’ Lord!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسأَلُكَ بِحَقِكَ وَقُدْسِكَ وَأَعْظَمِ صِفاتِكَ وَأَسْمائِكَ أَنْ
تَجْعَلَ أَوْقاتِي مِنَ اللّيْلِ وَالنَّهارِ بَذِكْرِكَ مَعْمُورَةً ،
وَبِخِدْمَتِكَ مَوْصُولَةً وَأَعْمالِي عِنْدَكَ مَقْبُولَةًً ، حَتَّى
تَكُونَ أَعْمالِي وأوْرادِي كُلُّها وِرْداً وَاحِداً، وَحالِي فِي
خِدْمَتِكَ سَرْمَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

I beseech Thee by Thy glory and Thy honour, by Thy supremely high
attributes and by Thy names to cause me to utilise my time, day and
night, in Thy remembrance, by engaging myself in serving Thee (Thy
cause) and to let my deeds be such as to be acceptable to Thee, so much
so that all my actions and offerings (prayers) may be transformed into
one continuous and sustained effort and my life may take the form of
constant and perpetual service to Thee

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياسَيِّدِي يامَنْ عَلَيْهِ مُعَوَّلِي ، يامَنْ إِلَيْهِ شَكَوْتُ
أَحْوالِي يارَبِّ يارَبِّ يارَبِّ ، قَوِّ عَلى خَدْمَتِكَ جَوارِحِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاشْدُدْ عَلى العَزِيمَةِ جَوانِحِي وَهَبْ لِيَ الجِدَّ فِي
خَشْيَتِكَ ، وَالدَّوامَ فِي الاِتِّصالِ بِخِدْمَتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ my Master! O’ Thou upon Whom I rely! O’ Thou unto Whom I express my
distress! O’ my Lord! My Lord! My Lord! Strengthen my limbs for Thy
service and sustain the strength of my hands to persevere in Thy service
and bestow upon me the eagerness to fear Thee and constantly to serve
Thee

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّى أَسْرَحَ إِلَيْكَ فِي مَيادِينِ السابِقِينَ واُسْرِعَ إِلَيْكَ
فِي البارِزِينَ ، وَأَشْتاقَ إِلى قُرْبِكَ فِي المُشْتاقِينَ
وَأَدْنُوَ مِنْكَ دُنُوَّ المُخْلِصِينَ ، وَأَخافَكَ مَخافَةَ
المُوقِنِينَ ، وَأَجْتَمِعَ فِي جِوارِكَ مَعَ المُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

So that I may lead myself towards Thee in the field with the vanguards
who are in the fore rank and be swift towards Thee among those who
hasten towards Thee and urge eagerly to be near Thee and draw myself
towards Thee like them who sincerely draw themselves towards Thee and to
fear Thee like the fear of those who believe firmly in Thee and thus I
may join the congregation of the faithful congregated near Thee (for
protection)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ وَمَنْ أَرادَنِي بِسُؤٍ فَأَرِدْهُ ، وَمَنْ كادَنِي فَكِدْهُ
وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ أَحْسَنِ عَبِيدِكَ نَصِيباً عِنْدَكَ ،
وَأَقْرَبِهِمْ مَنْزِلَةً مِنْكَ ، وَأَخَصِّهِمْ زُلْفَةً لَدَيْكَ
فِإِنَّهُ لايُنالُ ذلِكَ إِلا بِفَضْلِكَ وَجُدْ لِي بِجُودِكَ،
وَاعْطِفْ عَلَيَّ بَمَجْدِكَ، وَأَحْفَظْنِي بِرَحْمَتِكَ وَأَجْعَلْ
لِسانِي بِذِكْرِكَ لَهِجاً ، وَقَلْبِي بِحُبِّكَ مُتَيَّماً وَمُنَّ
عَلَيَّ بِحُسْنِ إِجابَتِكَ ، وَأَقِلْنِي عَثْرَتِي ، وَاغْفِرْ
زَلَّتِي فَإِنَّكَ قَضيْتَ عَلى عِبادِكَ بِعِبادَتِكَ ، وَأَمَرْتَهُمْ
بِدُعائِكَ ، وَضَمِنْتَ لَهُمُ الاِجابَةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ Allah! Whosoever intendeth evil against me, let ill befall on him and
frustrate him who plots against me and assign for me a place in Thy
presence with the best of Thy bondsmen and nearer abode to Thee, for
verily that position cannot be attained except through Thy grace and
treat me benevolently, and through Thy greatness extend Thy munificence
towards me and through Thy mercy protect me and cause my tongue to
accentuate Thy remembrance and my heart filled with Thy love and be
liberal to me by Thy gracious response and cause my evils to appear
fewer and forgive me my errors for verily, Thou hast ordained for Thy
bondsmen Thy worship and bidden them to supplicate unto Thee and hast
assured them (of Thy) response

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِلَيْكَ يارَبِّ نَصَبْتُ وَجْهِي ، وَإِلَيْكَ يارَبِّ مَدَدْتُ
يَدِي فَبِعِزَّتِكَ أَسْتَجِبْ لِي دُعائِي ، وَبَلِّغْنِي مُنايَ
وَلاتَقْطَعْ مِنْ فَضْلِكَ رَجائِي ، وَاكْفِنِي شَرَّ الجِنِّ
وَالاِنْسِ مِنْ أعْدائِي ياسَرِيعَ الرِّضا إِغْفِرْ لِمَنْ لايَمْلِكُ
إِلا الدُّعأَ ،فَإِنَّكَ فَعَّالٌ لِما تَشأُ يامَنْ إِسْمُهُ دَوأٌ ،
وَذِكْرُهُ شِفأٌ ، وَطاعَتُهُ غِنىً إِرْحَمْ مَنْ رَأسُ مالِهِ
الرَّجأُ وَسِلاحُهُ البُكأُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, my Lord! I look earnestly towards Thee and towards Thee, my Lord! I
have stretched forth my hands therefore, by Thy honour, respond to my
supplication and let me attain my wishes and, by Thy bounty, frustrate
not my hopes and protect me from the evils of my enemies, from among the
jinns and mankind o’ Thou! Who readily pleased, forgive one who owns
nothing but supplication for Thou doest what Thou willest o’ Thou! Whose
Name is the remedy (for all ills) and Whose remembrance is a sure cure
for all ailments and obedience to Whom makes one self sufficient; have
mercy on one whose only asset is hope and whose only armour is
lamentation

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياسَابِغَ النِّعَمِ ، يادافِعَ النِّقَمِ ، يانُورَ المُسْتَوْحِشِينَ
فِي الظُّلَمِ ياعالِماً لايُعَلَّمُ ، صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ ، وَأَفْعَلْ بِي ماأَنْتَ أَهْلُه
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ Thou! Who perfected all bounties and Who warded off all misfortunes!
O’ Light! Who illuminated those who are in bewilderment! O’ Omniscient!
Who knoweth without (acquisition of) learning! Bless Muhammad and the
Descendants of Muhammad and do unto me in accordance with that which
befitteth Thee, and deal with me not in accordance to my worth

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَصَلَّى اللّهُ عَلى رَسُولِهِ وَالاَئِمَّةِ المَيامِينَ مِنْ آلِهِ
وَسَلَّمَ تَسْلِيماً كَثِيرا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

May the blessings of Allah be bestowed upon His Apostle and the Rightful
Imams from his Descendants and His peace be upon them plentifully

Ameen

Kumayl’s Life
-------------

Kumayl b. Ziyad b. Naheed b. Haytham b. Sa’d b. Malik b. Nakhai was
chief of his tribe in Kufah, Iraq. He was a reliable reporter of Hadith,
though he did not report much, and a great devotee to worship of, and
service to, Almighty God.

He was born c. 18 A.H., became the Governor of Heet, Iraq during the
time of

Imam ‘Ali, c. 35-40 A.H. The Imam used to advise him on the general
characteristics of a Muslim ruler. On one occasion, the Imam told him,

"Neglecting the (immediate) duty and being concerned about what is not
(urgent) is the permanent weakness,”i.e., in order to succeed, one must
have clear agenda with a list of priorities and focus on one duty at a
time.

In 81 or 88 A.H. the tyrant of Iraq, Hajjaj, killed Kumayl and many
other believers for no reason but their faith. The shrine of Kumayl is
in the suburb of Najaf, Iraq. (For details see al-Irshad by Shaykh
al-Mufeed, d. 413 Najaf 1962, and Tahdhib al-Tahdhib by Ibn Hajar
al-Asqalani,d. 852, Hyderabad, India, v8, P.448, 1328.)

The Invocation’s Merit
----------------------

Kumayl reports that he was with the commander of believers, Imam ‘Ali,
at Basra Mosque, listening to him who was saying, "Whoever worships (the
Almighty) on the night before the middle of Sha’ban (8th month of
Islamic calendar) and recites the Khidr invocation, his wishes would be
fulfilled.”

Shaykh al-Tusi, d. 460 A.H., reports the Kumayl had observed the
commander of the believers during his prostration on that night,
reciting this invocation.

Sayyid Ibn Tawus d.664 A.H. adds: Kumayl further asked the Imam about
the merit of the invocation. Then, Imam replied: "When you (fully)
understand the invocation, recite it every night before Friday, or once
every month, or once every year, or once in your lifetime, you will be
protected, helped, blessed, and forgiven (by the Almighty).”(for details
see al-Tusi d. 460, "Misbah al-Mutahajjid", p.774, and Ibn Tawus, d.664,
Iqbal al-Amal, p706.)

The Original Text
-----------------

The Arabic text of Kumayl’s Invocation is an excerpt from the following
sources:

1. "Key to Paradise", the concise edition of "Mafathih al-Jinan", by
Shaykh Abbas al-Qummi, d. 1359 A.H., edited by Sayyid Hadi Suhufi, and
the calligraphy by Abdul Rahim Afshari in 1381 A.H. However, the
original Arabic text has been compared with the following sources:

2. "Misbah al-Mutahajjid", by Shaykh Muhammad b. al-Hassan al-Tusi, d.
460 A.H., edited by Haj Ismail Ansari, Qum, Iran, 1401. This edition is
offset of the following:

3. Lithograph edition dated 1082 A.H., copyist, Muhammad Yahya b. Habib
Allah. this was copied from the following:

4. Manuscript dated 1068 A.H., Copyist Ahmad b. Haj Tawwali. This has
been compared with the following:

5. Manuscript dated 971 A.H., Copyist: ‘Imam al-Din’ ‘Ali al-Sharif al-
Istrabadi. This was copied from the following:

6. Manuscript dated 571 A.H., Copyist: Muhammad b. Idris al-’Ijli. This
has been compared with the original manuscript of "al-Misbah”written by
the author, Shaykh Muhammad b. al-Hassan Abu Jafar al-Tusi, d. 460 A.H.

The chain of documents to Shaykh al-Tusi is mentioned in "al-Mashikha”by
Shaykh Muhammad Muhsin al-Tehrani, d.1389 A.H. in Najaf, Iraq, as well
as other sources.

In this translation, we have made all possible efforts to present an
English version of Kumayl’s Invocation as close as possible to the
original Arabic text, based on the meanings of the equivalent roots in
both Arabic and English lexicons.

Why Invocation?
---------------

In Arabia, fourteen centuries ago, a man asked his friend for a
recommendation: what prayer would be the most useful to the one seeking
assurance of God’s mercy? This prayer was given in response. The man’s
name was Kumayl, son of Ziad, and his friend was ‘Ali (as), the Leader
of the Faithful.

Kumayl was a trusted companion of ‘Ali (as), well-known for his
devotion, and unflinching adherence to his great master. Kumayl has
transmitted a number of important sayings and teachings of the Leader of
the Faithful.

The famous supplication, known by the title Du’a-e-Kumayl or
supplication of Kumayl, is one of the most important of those teachings.

The instructions delivered with this prayer emphasize that it should be
recited as frequently as possible. Faithful Muslims enjoy a weekly
recitation, usually on the evening of Thursdays.

A sincere reading of this prayer can reveal many things: the Islamic
concept of God, His Attributes, man’s well-founded hopes for reply to
prayer and a tranquillity of spirit to be obtained with few other
prayers.

O’ Nourisher, how can we thank You enough for the kind permission You
have given us, that at any time and under any condition we can call upon
You and You will take our hands. You have insisted that at any incident
we should come to Your door, saying "I will support you and with My
assistance you can overcome your problems."

O’ Lord, people are constantly wondering about invocation, which should
be defined as relation with You. Sometimes people ask "what is
invocation (Du’a)?”or they often ask "What effect does it
have?”Sometimes they complain, saying their invocations (Du’a) are not
accepted. Questions are raised about the invocations (Du’a) by sinless
people and spiritual leaders, and the groans and wailing that accompany
these prayers into Your Holy Presence. I now ask for help from You, for
Your Aid in expressing this idea to present some points within a concise
essay, hoping to provide a solution to the problems of researchers.

Human beings live in a world with billions of creatures, known and
unknown. Their numbers seem impossible to know for human beings. The
span of man’s vision is so small that he can not even obtain knowledge
of creatures that are around him. Sometimes he can not even perceive
them or get information concerning their existence. With the recognition
of his own knowledge as so insufficient, when he reaches the climax of
mental greatness, he cries out by saying "I am uninformed of other than
myself."

How can a human being, a trivial portion of the Universe live in such a
way that he always finds success and prosperity? Every moment he is
surrounded by problems, with heavy waves pushing him through unbearable
ups and downs and blights. Can a path be found through all these
difficulties? The way that a human being can take to bring himself to
the coast of rescue? And in some manner continue his route and strive
for the development that he desires and find his God by reaching Him and
joining with the Sublime Essence, to grasp the real development that he
was created for?

Yes, the Creator of the World through the power which He entrusted to
human beings directs all them to development. All human beings eagerly
want to attain such development. This propensity that has been instilled
in everyhuman heart by the Nourisher pulls man to his Creator and aids
him in heading on the path of development. The only way to enhance this
inclination is an attempt that must be made, according to the order of
God, for the protection of the relation between the human being and his
Creator.

If this link to God is broken, it is like an electrical wire that is
cut. The connection between the power plant and the light bulb does not
exist any longer, and therefore the light is extinguished. When the
connection between man and God is cut, man becomes a corrupt being and a
painful element in the society, and he is only filling space and making
the space tighter for others.

This relation or connection is invocation (Du’a) that an alive human
being offers to his Nourisher. With an expressive language, the
supplicant presents his inability and helplessness and confesses to the
ability, complete independence and absolute power of his Nourisher.

Obviously the smaller we see ourselves and the greater we see Him, the
more potential and more ability is there for us realize the importance
of this connection, and we would therefore gain more benefit from it.
From the Reservoir of Power, humans ask for the fulfillment of their
needs. As a result of this connection, the invocation (Du’a) adds to his
scientific and moral abilities in every moment. The more intensively the
human being prays, the more his scientific grasp will be stronger, with
man viewing himself as less and less, and His Creator as stronger and
greater.

As a result of this attempt, it gets to a point that an advanced human
being according to his genuine nature does not make any hesitation in
following the path of Almighty God. In every step that he takes towards
development, the greatness and grandeur of the power of the Almighty
will become more obvious him, and he will look at his past from a higher
level. For what he has done he will sometimes apologize, even if what he
has done was his duties.

That is because he now comprehends its inadequacy. HE INTERPRETS HIS
PAST WORSHIPS AS SIN and does not see any value for his work when
presented to the Great position of the Lord. With his elevated view, he
perceives his submission to God’s presence as SINFUL and even an action
far from politeness.

What is My Performance?
-----------------------

Offering praise in Your Presence is a lack and a sin. I am nobody and
full of flaws and needs. Whatever goes from me to Your Presence is not
only valueless but it is a fault due to my weakness and incapability.
The only way out of this for me is to know myself with my imperfections
and know You by Your Perfection. With the net of kindness that you have
opened, I can reach complete development and benefit from the Grace
pouring from the Essence of Being.

We strive moment by moment to reach You. Of course, in this path all
people are not the same, and do not strive in the same manner. When the
range of our knowledge about ourselves and about the Creator increases
and we do not stray from the path of humanity, we can travel in a
better, easier, and stronger way.

The Prophets and the Imams have reached this point. Since they realize
the Magnificence of their Lord and comprehend the position of the
Life-Giver, they see themselves, their activities, and their
prostrations and praises so little that they interpret the worship of
that much affluence and greatness as sin, and with supplication and
invocation, they ask for pardon and they hope for forgiveness. When they
face the divine commandments and consider the Holy Position of the
Almighty, they submit themselves to the Master. They see this action in
front of the Lord as nothing, and recognize it as not suitable for
praise. They hope it would be accepted by the Generosity and Majesty of
the Creator, otherwise it is a sin to submit such inadequate worshop to
the holy presence of the Lord

Those people like the Prophet Muhammad and his Ahlul-Bayt realized the
Divine position with a much wider view. Continuously upon the two wings
of knowledge and action, they progressed to a higher and superior
position.

They were at every moment finding out more about the Magnificence of the
Life-Giver of the world, and more about their own incapability;
consequently better understanding their inadequate actions in comparison
with that much Power and Greatness. To compensate for that, they
confessed to their sins and asked the Lord for the permission to
apologize with the excuse that they CAN NOT do to the extent of what
Allah deserves, with the hope that He would guide them to a higher and
superior position until they could continue their development process in
order to reach the sublime of morality.

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (as) has proclaimed these instructions for
invocation: "First we must testify to the Omnipotence of Almighty God,
then we have to send greetings to the Prophet and his descendants, and
then confess to our sins, flaws, and shortcomings. Then whatever we
desire we should present before Him.”

It should be kept in mind that first a human being should make an
acquaintance with his Lord and confess to His Grandeur, and then
following the method of the Prophet (S) and the Chaste Leaders (as),
make a connection to him. He should then get to know himself, how many
imperfections he has that ask the submission of his worship an impolite
act toward Him. When he finds out about the two aspects: His ability and
his own incapability and how to reach to the Source of Power, then it is
time to share his statements with his Lord.

It is at this time that a human being discovers the greatness of
supplication and the degree of its value. This is the way of success in
the existing world. Indeed, supplication or prayer is recognition of God
and recognition of his own, and review and deliberation on one’s past
with an expectation to one’s future.

The more the human being becomes curious at these stages and studies the
world of nature, the greater will be his understanding: How great is his
Lord and with what ability He has created such a vast universe and how
small and incapable are human beings in such an environment. He must
realize that he could never be rescued all by himself in this world
which is full of disturbances, except to be under the Guidance of the
Creator of the world and ask assistance from Him.

In that way, he can attain the position (that according to the
tradition) he has been created for. In that way, he finds his way to the
door of the Prophets and Saints. With the help of the Guider of the
Righteous, he can continue his development process. When he makes
progress, he becomes more shameful of his past and becomes more needful.

With the power from the Hidden Source of the world, he enters society.
In his life, he overcomes all problems, solving any thing he faces, with
the favor of God. Under these circumstances he neither abjects himself
to others or is cruel to others. He is a human being that on his
humanistic path, he benefits from everything and is supported by the
Divine Power. He is not afraid of anyone except Him, and he is not lax
in action and work and he never fails on any battlefield. That is
because he sees himself connected to the endless Divine Power, with a
world of strength in the battles of life, and with a tireless power he
smoothes out all unevenness.

It is based on this principle that all Prophets and purified Imams, at
every small or important event were first praying and begging for help
from God, and then they began their task. The messenger of Islam first
of all worshipped God before he was preparing to go to battle; he was
offering his inability before the Holy Presence of the Almighty and
resorting to the infinite Divine Power; only then, he was entering the
battlefield with good moral, knowing that conditions for the real
victory were His.

Yes, first power must be obtained and then action. Invocation can be
this power-giver to all human beings.

Regards.

The Supplications for the Days of the Week
------------------------------------------

### The Supplication for Sunday

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دعاء يوم الأحد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of God, the All-merciful,

the All-compassionate

> 1. بِسْمِ اللهِ الَّذِي لاَ أَرْجُو إِلاَّ فَضْلَهُ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ أَخْشَى إلاَّ عَدْلَهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا أَعْتَمِدُ إلاَّ قَوْلَهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا أَتَمَسَّكُ إلاَّ بِحَبْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

1- In the Name of God,  
 from whom I hope for nothing but bounty,  
 and from whom I fear nothing but justice!  
 I rely only upon His word,  
 And I cling only to His cord!

> 2. بِكَ أَسْتَجِيرُ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا ذَا الْعَفْوِ وَالرِّضْوانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ الظُّلْمِ وَالْعُدْوانِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ غِيَرِ الزَّمانِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَواتُرِ الاَحْزانِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ طَوارِقِ الْحَدَثَانِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنِ انْقِضآءِ الْمُدَّةِ قَبْلَ التَّأَهُّبِ وَالْعُدَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2- In Thee I seek sanctuary –  
 O Possessor of pardon and good pleasure –  
 from wrong and enmity,  
 from the changes of time  
 and the recurrence of sorrows,  
 from the striking of mishaps,  
 and from the expiration of my term before preparation and readiness.

> 3. وَإيَّاكَ أَسْتَرْشِدُ لِما فِيهِ الصَّلاحُ وَالاِصْلاحُ،

3 – From Thee I seek guidance to that wherein is righteousness and being
set right.

> 4. وَبِكَ أَسْتَعِينُ فِيما يَقْتَرِنُ بِهِ النَّجاحُ وَالاِنْجاحُ.

4- From Thee I seek help in that which is linked to success and
favorable response.

> 5. وَإيَّاكَ أَرْغَبُ فِي لِباسِ الْعافِيَةِ وَتَمامِها،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشُمُولِ السَّلامَةِ وَدَوامِها،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ يارَبِّ مِنْ هَمَزاتِ الشَّياطِينِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَحْتَرِزُ بِسُلْطانِكَ مِنْ جَوْرِ السَّلاطِينِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَقَبَّلْ ما كانَ مِنْ صَلاتِي وَصَوْمِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واجْعَلْ غدي وَمَا بَعْدَهُ أفَضَلَ من سَاعَتي وَيَوْمِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعِزَّنِي فِي عَشِيرَتِي وَقَوْمِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاحْفَظْنِي فِي يَقْظَتِي وَنَوْمِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَنْتَ اللَّهُ خَيْرٌ حافِظاً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْتَ أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5- Thee I beseech for the garment of well-being and its completion  
 and for the covering of health and its permanence.  
 I seek refuge in Thee, my Lord, from the goadings of the satans,  
 and I seek protection in Thy sovereignty  
 from the injustice of the sovereigns.  
 So accept my past prayers and fasting  
 and make my tomorrow and what is after  
 better than my present hour and my today!  
 Exalt me in my clan and my people  
 and protect me in my waking and my sleeping!  
 For Thou art *God, the Best Guardian*,  
 And Thou art *the Most Merciful of the merciful*.[^1]

> 6. أَللَّهُمَّ إنِّي أَبْرَأُ إلَيْكَ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي يَوْمِي هذا وَ ما بَعْدَهُ مِنَ الاحادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ الشِّرْكَ وَالالْحَادِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُخْلِصُ لَكَ دُعآئِي تَعَرُّضَاً لِلاِجابَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واُقيم على طاعتِكَ رجاءً للأِثابَةِ خ ل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6- O God,  
 I am quit before Thee  
 on this day of mine  
 and on all Sundays that follow it  
 of associating others with Thee and of heresy,  
 and I devote my supplication sincerely to Thee,  
 addressing myself to Thy response.

> 7. فَصَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّد وَآلِ مُحَمَّد

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَيْرِ خَلْقِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدَّاعِي إلَى حَقِّكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعِزَّنِي بِعِزِّكَ الَّذِي لا يُضامُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاحْفَظْنِي بِعَيْنِك الَّتِي لاتَنامُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاخْتِمْ بِالانْقِطَاعِ إلَيْكَ أَمْرِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِالْمَغْفِرَةِ عُمْرِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7- So bless Muhammad and the household of Muhammad,  
 the best of Thy creation,  
 the summoner to Thy truth,  
 exalt me with Thy exaltation, which is never made to suffer loss,  
 protect me with Thy eye, which never sleeps,  
 and seal my affiar by cutting me off from everything but Thee  
 and my life with forgiveness!  
 Surely Thou art the All-forgiving, the All-compassionate!

### The Supplication for Monday

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دعاء يوم الاثنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of God, the All-Merciful,

the All-compassionate

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 1. أَلْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يُشْهِدْ أَحَدَاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حِينَ فَطَرَ السَّمواتِ وَالاَرْضَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ اتَّخَذَ مُعِيناً حِينَ بَرَأَ النَّسَماتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

1- Praise belongs to God,  
 who allowed none to witness  
 when He created the heavens and the earth,  
 and who took no helper when He authored the spirits!

> 2. لَمْ يُشارَكْ فِي الالهِيَّةِ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يُظَاهَرْ فِي الْوَحْدانِيَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2- He has no associate in Divinity  
 and no support in Unity.

> 3. كَلَّتِ الاَلْسُنُ عَنْ غايَةِ صِفَتِهِ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ انْحَسَرَتِ الْعُقُولُ عَنْ كُنْهِ مَعْرِفَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَوَاضَعَتِ الْجَبابِرَةُ لِهَيْبَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنَتِ الْوُجُوهُ لِخَشْيَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَانْقَادَ كُلُّ عَظِيم لِعَظَمَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3- Tongues fall silent before the limit of describing Him,  
 intellects fail before the core of knowing Him,  
 tyrants fall low in awe of Him,  
 faces are humbled in fear of Him,[^2]  
 and everything mighty yields to His mightiness!

> 4. فَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ مُتَوَاتِراً مُتَّسِقاً،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمُتَوَالِياً مُسْتَوْسِقَاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4- So to Thee belongs praise,  
 again and again, well-measured,  
 continually, methodically!

> 5. وَصَلَواتُهُ عَلَى رَسُولِهِ أَبَدَاً،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَلامُهُ دَآئِماً سَرْمَدَاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5- And may His blessings be upon His Messenger endlessly,  
 His salutation everlastingly, eternally!

> 6. أَللَّهُمَّ اجْعَلْ أَوَّلَ يَوْمِي هذَا صَلاحَاً،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْسَطَهُ فَلاحَاً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآخِرَهُ نَجاحَاً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ يَوْم أَوَّلُهُ فَزَعُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْسَطُهُ جَزَعٌ، وَآخِرُهُ وَجَعٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6- O God, make  
 the beginning of this day of mine righteousness, its middle
prosperity,  
 and its end success!  
 I seek refuge in Thee  
 from a day whose beginning is fright,  
 whose middle is anxiety,  
 and whose end is pain!

> 7. أَللَّهُمَّ إنِّي أَسْتَغْفِرُكَ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِكُلِّ نَذْر نَذَرْتُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلِّ وَعْد وَعَدْتُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلِّ عَهْد عاهَدْتُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ لَمْ أَفِ لَكَ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7- O God,  
 I pray forgiveness from Thee  
 for every vow I have vowed,  
 every promise I have promised,  
 and every pledge I have pledged  
 and then failed to keep for Thee.

> 8. وَأَسْأَلُكَ فِي مَظالِمِ عِبادِكَ عِنْدِي،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَيُّما عَبْد مِنْ عَبِيدِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ أَمَة مِنْ إمآئِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَتْ لَهُ قِبَلِي مَظْلَمَةٌ ظَلَمْتُها إيَّاهُ فِي نَفْسِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ فِي عِرْضِهِ، أَوْ فِي مالِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ فِي أَهْلِهِ وَوَلَدِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ غَيْبَةٌ اغْتَبْتَهُ بِها،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ تَحامُلٌ عَلَيْهِ بِمَيْل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ هَوَىً، أَوْ أَنَفَة، أَوْ حَمِيَّة، أَوْ رِيآء، أَوْ عَصَبِيَّة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غائِباً كانَ أَوْ شاهِداً، وَحَيّاً كانَ أَوْ مَيِّتاً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَصُرَتْ يَدِي، وَضاقَ وُسْعِي عَنْ رَدِّها إلَيْهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالتَّحَلُّلِ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8- I ask Thee concerning the complaints of Thy servants against me:  
 If there is a servant from among Thy servants  
 or a handmaid from among Thy handmaids,  
 who has against me  
 a complaint because I have wronged him in respect to himself,  
 his reputation, his property,  
 his wife or his child,  
 evil words I have spoken about him in his absence,  
 an imposition upon him through inclination,  
 caprice, scorn, zeal, false show, bigotry, whether he be absent or
present, alive or dead,  
 such that my hand has fallen short  
 and my capacity has been too narrow to make restitution to him  
 or to annul my obligation to him,

> 9. فَأَسْأَلُكَ يا مَنْ يَمْلِكُ الْحاجاتِ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهِيَ مُسْتَجِيبَةٌ بِمَشِيَّتِهِ، وَمُسْرِعَةٌ إلى إرادَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْ تُصَلِّيَ عَلَى مُحَمَّد وَآلِ مُحَمَّد ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ تُرْضِيَهُ عَنِّي بِما شِئْتَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَهَبَ لِي مِنْ عِنْدِكَ رَحْمَةً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُ لا تَنْقُصُكَ الْمَغْفِرَةُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَضُرُّكَ المَوْهِبَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9- I ask Thee,  
 O He who owns all objects of need  
 - which are granted by His will and hasten to His desire -  
 that Thou blessest Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad,  
 makest [the one I have wronged] satisfied with me in the manner that
Thou willest,  
 and givest me mercy from Thee!  
 Forgiveness decreases Thee not  
 and giving injures Thee not,  
 O Most Merciful of the merciful!

> 10. أَللَّهُمَّ أَوْلِنِي فِي كُلِّ يَوْمِ اثْنَيْنِ نِعْمَتَيْنِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْكَ ثِنْتَيْنِ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَعادَةً فِي أَوَّلِهِ بِطاعَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنِعْمَةً فِي آخِرِهِ بِمَغْفِرَتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يامَنْ هُوَ الاِلهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ سِواهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10- O God,  
 give me on every Monday two favours from Thee:  
 the felicity to obey Thee at its beginning  
 and the favour of Thy forgiveness at its end!  
 O He who is God  
 and none other than whom grants forgiveness for sins!

### The Supplication for Tuesday

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دعاء يوم الثلاثاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of God, the All-merciful,

the All-compassionate

> 1. أَلْحَمْدُ للّهِ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْحَمْدُ حَقُّهُ كَما يَسْتَحِقُّهُ حَمْداً كَثِيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

1- Praise belongs to God  
 - and praise is His right, since He deserves it -  
 abundant praise!

> 2. وَأَعُوذُ بِهِ مِنْ شَرِّ نَفْسِي،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ النَّفْسَ لاَمَّارَةٌ بِالسُّوءِ إلاَّ ما رَحِمَ رَبِّي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

2- I seek refuge in Him from the evil of my soul,  
*for surely the soul commands to evil except as my Lord has mercy.*[^3]

> 3. وَأَعُوذُ بِهِ مِنْ شَرِّ الشَّيْطَانِ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي يَزِيدُنِي ذَنْباً إلَى ذَنْبِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

3- I seek refuge in Him from the evil of Satan  
 who adds sins to my sin.

> 4. وَأَحْتَرِزُ بِهِ مِنْ كُلِّ جَبَّار فاجِر،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسُلْطان جآئر، وَعَدُوٍّ قاهِر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4- I seek protection with Him from every wicked tyrant,  
 unjust sovereign, and conquering enemy.

> 5. أَللَّهُمَّ اجْعَلْنِي مِنْ جُنْدِكَ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّ جُنْدَكَ هُمُ الْغالِبُونَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ حِزْبِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّ حِزْبَكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ أَوْلِيآئِكَ;
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّ أَوْلِيَاءَكَ لا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5- O God,  
 place me among Thy troops,  
 for Thy *troops - they are the victors,*[^4]   
 place me in Thy party,  
 for Thy *party - they are the ones who prosper*,[^5]  
 and place me among Thy friends,  
 for Thy *friends - no fear shall be upon them,*  
*nor shall they sorrow.*[^6]  
 and death an ease for me from every evil!

> 6. أَللَّهُمَّ أَصْلِحْ لِي دِيْنِي

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّهُ عِصْمَةُ أَمْرِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَصْلِحْ لِي آخِرَتِي فَإنَّهَا دارُ مَقَرِّي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإلَيْها مِنْ مُجاوَرَةِ اللِّئامِ مَفَرِّي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلِ الْحَياةَ زِيادَةً لِي فِي كُلِّ خَيْر،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْوَفاةَ رَاحَةً لِي مِنْ كُلِّ شَرٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6- O God, set right for me my religion,  
 for it is the preserving tie of my affair,  
 set right for me my hereafter,  
 for it is the abode of my permanent lodging  
 and to it I flee from the neighbourhood of the vile!  
 Make life an increase for me in every good

> 7. أَللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّد خاتَمِ النَّبِيِّينَ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَمَامِ عِدَّةِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى آلِهِ الطَّيِّبِينَ الطَّاهِرِينَ، وَأَصْحَابِهِ
الْمُنْتَجَبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَبْ لِي فِي الثُلُثآءِ ثَلاثاً:
  </p>
</blockquote>

7- O God, bless  
 Muhammad, the Seal of the Prophets  
 and the completion of the number of the envoys,  
 his Household, the good, the pure,  
 and his Companions, the distinguished,  
 and give me on the Tuesday three things:

> 8. لا تَدَعْ لِي ذَنْباً إلاَّ غَفَرْتَهُ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا غَمّاً إلاَّ أَذْهَبْتَهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا عَدُوّاً إلاَّ دَفَعْتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.بِسْمِ اللهِ خَيْرِ الاَسْمآءِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ رَبِّ الاَرْضِ وَالسَّمآءِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

8- Leave no sin for me unless Thou forgivest it,  
 no grief unless Thou takest it away,  
 and no enemy unless Thou repellest him!  
 By means of ‘in the name of "God" ‘, the best of the Names,  
 in the name of God, Lord of earth and heaven,

> 9. أَسْتَدْفِعُ كُلَّ مَكْرُوه أَوَّلُهُ سَخَطُهُ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَسْتَجْلِبُ كُلَّ مَحْبُوب أَوَّلُهُ رِضاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9- I seek to repulse every hateful thing,  
 the first of which is His anger,  
 and I seek to attract every loveable thing,  
 the first of which is His good pleasure!

> 10. فَاخْتِمْ لِي مِنْكَ بِالْغُفْرانِ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا وَلِيَّ الاِحْسانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

10- So seal me with forgiveness from Thee,  
 O Patron of beneficence!

### The Supplication for Wednesday

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دعاء يوم الأربعاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of God, the All-merciful,

the All-compassionate

> 1. أَلْحَمْدُ لِلّهِ الَّذِي جَعَلَ اللَّيْلَ لِباساً،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالنَّوْمَ سُباتَاً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَ النَّهارَ نُشُوراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

1- Praise belongs to God,  
*who appointed the night to be a garment,*  
*and sleep for a rest,*  
*and day He appointed for a rising!*[^7]

> 2. لَكَ الْحَمْدُ أَنْ بَعَثْتَنِي مِنْ مَرْقَدِي،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ شِئْتَ جَعَلْتَهُ سَرْمَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَمْداً دَائِمَاً لا يَنْقَطِعُ أَبَداً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يُحْصِي لَهُ الْخَلائِقُ عَدَدَاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2- To Thee belongs praise, for Thou roused me from my sleep,  
 - and hadst Thou willed, Thou wouldst have made it everlasting -  
 an everlasting praise that will never be cut off  
 and whose number the creatures will never count!

> 3. أَللَّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْ خَلَقْتَ فَسَوَّيْتَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدَّرْتَ وَقَضَيْتَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَتَّ وَأَحْيَيْتَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمْرَضْتَ وَشَفَيْتَ، وَعافَيْتَ وَأَبْلَيْتَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى الْعَرْشِ اسْتَوَيْتَ، وَعَلَى الْمُلْكِ احْتَوَيْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3- O God, to Thee belongs praise,  
 for Thou created, then proportioned,  
 ordained and decreed,  
 gave death and bestowed life,  
 made sick and healed,  
 made well and afflicted,  
 sat upon the Throne and encompassed the Kingdom![^8]

> 4. أَدْعُوكَ دُعآءَ مَنْ ضَعُفَتْ وَسِيلَتُهُ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَانْقَطَعَتْ حِيلَتُهُ، وَاقْتَرَبَ أَجَلُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَدانى فِي الدُّنْيا أَمَلُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاشْتَدَّتْ إلى رَحْمَتِكَ فاقَتُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَظُمَتْ لِتَفْرِيطِهِ حَسْرَتُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَثُرَتْ زَلَّتُهُ وَعَثْرَتُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخَلُصَتْ لِوَجْهِكَ تَوْبَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4- I supplicate Thee with the supplication of one whose mediation is
weak,  
 whose stratagems have been cut off,  
 whose term has drawn near,  
 whose expectation from this world has shrunk,  
 whose neediness for Thy mercy has intensified,  
 whose remorse for his neglect has become great,  
 whose slips and stumbles have become many,  
 and whose repentance is devoted sincerely to Thy face.

> 5 ـ فَصَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّد خاتَمِ النَّبِيِّينَ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلى أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ الطَّيِّبِينَ الطَّاهِرِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَارْزُقْنِي شَفاعَةَ مُحَمَّد صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَحْرِمْنِي صُحْبَتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّكَ أَنْتَ أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5- So bless Muhammad, the Seal of the Prophets,  
 and his Household, the good, the pure,  
 provide me with the intercession of Muhammad  
 (God bless him and his Household)  
 and deprive me not of his companionship!  
 Surely *Thou art the Most Merciful of the merciful*![^9]

> 6 ـ أَللَّهُمَّ اقْضِ لِي فِي الاَرْبِعآءِ أَرْبَعَا:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إجْعَلْ قُوَّتِي فِي طاعَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَشاطِي فِي عِبادَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَغْبَتِي فِي ثَوَابِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَزُهْدِي فِيما يُوجِبُ لِي أَلِيمَ عِقابِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّكَ لَطِيفٌ لِما تَشآءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6- O God,  
 decree for me on Wednesday four things:  
 Induce me  
 to be strong in obedience to Thee,  
 to be joyful in worshipping Thee,  
 to be desirous of Thy reward,  
 and to abstain from that which would make incumbent upon me Thy painful
punishment!  
 Thou art Gentle to whom Thou wilt!

### The Supplication for Thursday

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دعاء يوم الخميس
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of God, the All-merciful,

the All-compassionate

> 1. أَلْحَمْدُ لِلّهِ الَّذِي أَذْهَبَ اللَّيْلَ مُظْلِمَاً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِقُدْرَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجآءَ بِالنَّهارِ مُبْصِراً بِرَحْمَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَسانِي ضِيآءَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآتانِي نِعْمَتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

1- Praise belongs to God,  
 who has taken away the shadowy night by His power  
 and brought the sight-giving day through His mercy.  
 He has clothed me in its brightness  
 and given me its favour.

> 2. أَللَّهُمَّ فَكَما أَبْقَيْتَنِي لَهُ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَبْقِنِي لاِمْثالِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَصَلِّ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ مُحَمَّد وَآلِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَفْجَعْنِي فِيهِ وَفِي غَيْرِهِ مِنَ اللَّيالِي وَالاَيَّامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِارْتِكابِ الْمَحارِمِ، وَاكْتِسابِ الْمَاثِمِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَارْزُقْنِي خَيْرَهُ، وَخَيْرَ ما فِيهِ، وَخَيْرَ ما بَعْدَهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاصْرِفْ عَنِّي شَرَّهُ، وَشَرَّ ما فِيهِ، وَشَرَّ ما بَعْدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2- O God, just as Thou hast spared me for this day,  
 so also spare me for its likes,  
 bless the prophet Muhammad and his Household,  
 torment me not in it and in other nights and days  
 by allowing me to commit unlawful acts  
 and to clothe myself in sins;  
 provide me with its good, the good of all within it, and the good of
everything after it;  
 and turn away from me its evil, the evil of all within it, and the evil
of everything after it!

> 3. أَللَّهُمَّ إنِّي بِذِمَّةِ الاِسْلامِ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَوَسَّلُ إلَيْكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِحُرْمَةِ الْقُرْآنِ أَعْتَمِدُ عَلَيْكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِمُحَمَّد الْمُصْطَفى صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وآلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْتَشْفِعُ لَدَيْكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْرِفِ اللَّهُمَّ ذِمَّتِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّتِي رَجَوْتُ بِها قَضآءَ حاجَتِي، يا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3- O God, by the protective compact of Islam,  
 I seek mediation with Thee!  
 By the inviolability of the Qur’an,  
 I rely upon Thee!  
 By Muhammad the chosen (God bless him and his Household) I seek
intercession with Thee!  
 So recognize my protective compact  
 by which I hope my need will be granted,  
 O Most Merciful of the merciful!

> 4. أَللَّهُمَّ اقْضِ لِي فِي الخَمِيسِ خَمْساً

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يَتَّسِعُ لَها إلاَّ كَرَمُكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يُطِيقُها إلاَّ نِعَمُكَ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلامَةً أَقْوى بِها عَلَى طاعَتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِبادَةً أَسْتَحِقُّ بِها جَزِيلَ مَثُوبَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَعَةً فِي الْحالِ مِنَ الرِّزْقِ الْحَلالِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ تُؤْمِنَنِي فِي مَواقِفِ الْخَوْفِ بِأَمْنِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَجْعَلَنِي مِنْ طَوارِقِ الْهُمُومِ وَالْغُمُومِ فِي حِصْنِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّد وَآلِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَل تَوَسُّلِي بِهِ شافِعَاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ الْقِيامَةِ نافِعاً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّكَ أَنْتَ أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4 O God, decree for me on Thursday five things  
 which none embraces but Thy generosity  
 and none supports but Thy favours:  
 health through which I may have the strength to obey Thee,  
 worship by which I may deserve Thy plentiful reward,  
 plenty in my state through lawful provision,  
 and that Thou makest me secure in the places of fear through Thy
security,  
 and placest me in Thy fortress against the striking of worries and
sorrows!  
 Bless Muhammad and his Household,  
 and make my seeking his mediation as an intercessor  
 give profit on the Day of Resurrection!  
 Surely *Thou art the Most Merciful of the merciful*![^10]

### The Supplication for Friday

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دعاء يوم الجمعة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of God, the All-Merciful,  
 the All-compassionate

> 1. أَلْحَمْدُ لِلّهِ الاَوَّلِ قَبْلَ الانْشآءِ وَالاحْيآءِ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالاخِرِ بَعْدَ فَنآءِ الاَشْيَآءِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْعَلِيمِ الَّذِي لا يَنْسَى مَنْ ذَكَرَهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يَنْقُصُ مَنْ شَكَرَه،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يُخَيِّبُ مَنْ دَعاهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يَقْطَعُ رَجآءَ مَنْ رَجاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

1- All Praise belongs to God,  
 the First before the bringing forth and the giving of life,  
 and the Last after the annihilation of all things,  
 the All-knowing who forgets not him who remembers Him,[^11]  
 decreases not him who thanks Him,[^12]  
 disappoints not him who supplicates Him,  
 and cuts not off the hope of him who hopes in Him!

> 2. أَللَّهُمَّ إنِّي أُشْهِدُكَ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَفى بِكَ شَهِيداً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُشْهِدُ جَمِيعَ مَلائِكَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسُكَّانَ سَمواتِكَ، وَحَمَلَةَ عَرْشِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ بَعَثْتَ مِنْ أَنْبِيآئِكَ وَرُسُلِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْشَأْتَ مِنْ أَصْنافِ خَلْقِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنِّي أَشْهَدُ أَنَّكَ أَنْتَ اللَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا إلهَ إلاَّ أَنْتَ، وَحْدَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ شَرِيكَ لَكَ، وَلا عَدِيلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا خُلْفَ لِقَوْلِكَ وَلا تَبْدِيْلَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ مُحَمَّداً صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وآلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَبْدُكَ وَرَسُولُكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَدَّى ما حَمَّلْتَهُ إلَى الْعِبادِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجاهَدَ فِي اللَّهِ [عزّوجل خ ل ]حَقَّ الْجِهادِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ بَشَّرَ بِما هُوَ حَقٌّ مِنَ الثَّوابِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْذَرَ بِما هُوَ صِدْقٌ مِنَ الْعِقابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2- O God, I call Thee to witness  
 - and Thou art sufficient witness –  
 and I call to witness all Thy angels,  
 the inhabitants of Thy heavens, the bearers of Thy Throne,  
 Thy prophets and Thy messengers whom Thou hast sent out,  
 and the various kinds of creatures Thou hast brought forth,  
 that I bear witness that Thou art God;  
 there is no god but Thou, Thou alone,  
 who hast no associate nor any equal,  
 and Thy word has no failing, nor any change;[^13]  
 and that Muhammad (God bless him and his Household)  
 is Thy servant and Thy messenger;  
 he delivered to the servants that with which Thou charged him,  
 he struggled for God as is His due,[^14]  
 he gave the good news of the truth of reward,  
 and he warned of the veracity of punishment.

> 3. أَللَّهُمَّ ثَبِّتْنِي عَلى دِينِكَ ما أَحْيَيْتَنِي،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تُزِغْ قَلْبِي بَعْدَ إذْ هَدَيْتَنِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَبْ لِي مِنْ لَدُنْكَ رَحْمَةً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْوَهَّابُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّد وَآلِ مُحَمَّد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ أَتْباعِهِ وَشِيعَتِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاحْشُرْنِي فِي زُمْرَتِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَفِّقْنِي لاَداءِ فَرْضِ الْجُمُعاتِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَما أَوْجَبْتَ عَلَيَّ فِيها مِنَ الطَّاعاتِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَسَمْتَ لاِهْلِها مِنَ الْعَطآءِ فِي يَوْمِ الْجَزآءِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3- O God, make me firm in Thy religion as long as Thou keepest me
alive,  
*make not* my *heart to swerve* after *Thou hast guided* me,  
*and give* me *mercy from Thee*,  
*surely Thou art the Giver*.[^15]  
 Bless Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad,  
 make me one of his followers and his partisans,  
 muster me in his band,  
 and give me the success of accomplishing the obligatory observance of
Friday,  
 performing the acts of obedience which Thou has made incumbent upon me
within it,  
 and [receiving] the bestowal which Thou hast apportioned for its
people  
 on the Day of Recompense!  
*Surely Thou art Mighty, All-wise!*[^16]

### The Supplication for Saturday

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دعاء يوم السبت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of God, the All-merciful

the All-compassionate

> 1. بِسْمِ الِلّهِ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلِمَةِ الْمُعْتَصِمِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَقالَةِ الْمُتَحَرِّزِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعُوذُ بِالِلّه تَعالى مِنْ جَوْرِ الْجآئِرِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَيْدِ الْحاسِدِينَ، وَبَغْيِ الظَّالِمِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَحْمَدُهُ فَوْقَ حَمْدِ الْحامِدِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

1- ‘In the name of God’,  
 the word of those who hold fast to Him,  
 the speech of those who seek His protection!  
 I seek refuge in God (high exalted is He) from  
 the injustice of the unjust,  
 the trickery of the enviers,  
 and the oppression of the wrongdoers,  
 and I praise Him beyond the praise of the praisers!

> 2 ـ أَللَّهُمَّ أَنْتَ الْواحِدُ بِلا شَرِيك،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمَلِكُ بِلا تَمْلِيك،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تُضَادُّ فِي حُكْمِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تُنازَعُ فِي مُلْكِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2- O God,  
 Thou art the One without partner,  
 and the King without having been made sovereign;  
 no one opposes Thee in Thy decree  
 and no one contests Thee in Thy kingdom!

> 3. أَسْأَلُكَ أَنْ تُصَلِّىَ عَلَى مُحَمَّد وَآلِهِ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَبْدِكَ وَرَسُولِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ تُوزِعَنِي مِنْ شُكْرِ نُعْماكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما تَبْلُغُ بِي غايَةَ رِضاكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ تُعِينَنِي عَلى طاعَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلُزُومِ عِبادَتِكَ، وَاسْتِحْقاقِ مَثُوبَتِكَ بِلُطْفِ عِنايَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرْحَمَنِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَصُدَّنِي عَنْ مَعَاصِيكَ مَا أَحْيَيْتَنِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتُوَفِّقَنِي لِما يَنْفَعُنِي ما أَبْقَيْتَنِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ تَشْرَحَ بِكِتابِكَ صَدْرِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَحُطَّ بِتِلاوَتِهِ وِزْرِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَمْنَحَنِي السَّلامَةَ فِي دِينِي وَنَفْسِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تُوحِشَ بِي أَهْلَ أُنْسِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتُتِمَّ إحْسَانَكَ فِيما بَقِيَ مِنْ عُمُرِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَما أَحْسَنْتَ فِيما مَضَى مِنْهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3- I ask Thee to bless Muhammad and his Household,  
 Thy servant and Thy messenger,  
 inspire me with a thanksgiving for Thy favours  
 which will take me to the utmost limit of Thy good pleasure,  
 help me through the gentleness of Thy solitude to obey Thee, hold fast
to worshipping Thee,  
 and deserve Thy reward,  
 have mercy upon me,  
 bar me from acts of disobedience toward Thee  
 as long as Thou keepest me alive,  
 give me success in what profits me  
 as long as Thou sparest me,  
 expand my breast through Thy Book,  
 lessen my burden through its recitation,  
 bestow upon me health in my religion and my soul,  
 estrange not my intimates from me,  
 and complete Thy beneficence in what is left of my lifetime,  
 just as Thou hast shown beneficence in that of it which has passed!  
 O Most Merciful of the merciful!

[^1]: 12:64

[^2]: Allusion to 20:111: Faces shall be humbled unto the Living, the
Subsistent.

[^3]: 12:53

[^4]: 37:173

[^5]: 58:22

[^6]: 10:62

[^7]: 25:47

[^8]: There are a number of Qur'anic allusions in this passage,
including: He created, then proportioned (87:2), and He sat upon the
Throne (7:54 etc.).

[^9]: 7:151

[^10]: 7:151

[^11]: Allusion to such verses as: They forgot God, so He forgot them
(9:67); Today We forget you, just as you forgot the meeting on this your
Day (45:34; cf. 7:51).

[^12]: Allusion to 14:7: If you are thankful, surely I will increase
you, but if you are thankless, My chastisement is surely terrible.

[^13]: Cf. 59.9 and note 283.

[^14]: Reference to 22:78: Struggle for God as is His due!

[^15]: 3:8

[^16]: 2:129


