Sunni Feedback on the Issues of Infallibility and Ahlul-Bayt
============================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In this article, we reply on the comments of the Sunni brothers who
studied the previous articles regarding to who Ahlul-Bayt are, and why
they are infallible. More discussions on the issue of infallibility will
be presented later in the next chapter.

A Sunni brother mentioned that the verse 33:33 expresses the decision of
Allah to purify Ahlul-Bayt and make them spotless. How could this imply
that they are flawless/sinless? This is adding an incorrect implication
to the Arabic language!

To answer this question, we would like to ask: Isn’t sin a kind of
impurity? A person who commits sin is not a pure person.

If you think this is adding an incorrect meaning to the Arabic language,
then I would ask you to quote one example where a scholar of Qur’an,
Arabic grammar, and literature claims that committing sin is a sign of
purity!!!

Also, based on your translation, you used the word "spotless". Then what
will be the difference between "spotless”and "flawless"? Any spot is a
flaw and is sin; and vice versa.

Moreover, which scholar of Arabic language can we find better than the
Messenger of Allah? We quoted from the authentic Sunni collections that

The Messenger of Allah recited ***"Verily Allah intends to keep off from
you every kind of uncleanness O’ People of the House (Ahlul- Bayt), and
purify you a perfect purification".*** (Qur’an, the last sentence of
Verse 33:33) and then the Messenger of Allah said: "Thus Me and my
Ahlul-Bayt are clear from sins."

The word "thus”in the highlighted part means that the Prophet himself is
CONCLUDING that the verse means Ahlul-Bayt are sinless. Is the Prophet
violating the Arabic language?

Another Sunni brother commented that the Verse 33:33 does not make
Ahlul-Bayt infallible any more than verse 5:6 makes anyone who performs
ablution infallible! Allah sates:

***O you who believe! when you prepare for prayer wash your faces and
your hands to the elbows; rub your heads and your feet to the ankles. If
you are in a state of ceremonial impurity bathe your whole body. But if
you are ill or on a journey or one of you had call of nature or you have
touched women and you find no water then take for yourselves clean sand
or earth and rub therewith your faces and hands. Allah does not wish to
place you in a difficulty but*** ***to make you clean*** ***and to
complete His favor to you that you may be grateful. (Qur’an 5:6)***

To answer this brother, we would like to point out that purification/
cleansing has degrees and is of different types. If ones hand and face
become dirty, and then if he washes them with soap and warm water they
will become cleansed. The above verse (5:6) also tells us by ablution
one can become cleansed. Now if somebody argues that the degree of
cleansing with ablution is not any more than cleansing the hands and
face with soap, then what will be your answer to him? You will tell him
that ablution make different type of cleansing than of washing the body
by soap.

The same goes for the difference between cleansing of every kind of
impurity and the cleansing of ablution. Surely if a murderer makes
ablution, he will not cleans his crime by that, because the impurity
caused by murder can not go away by ablution even though Allah sent down
the verse 5:6. Qur’an never said that by ablution you will get a Perfect
purification.

There are different degrees of Purification. The only place that Allah
said I intend to do a perfect purification is in verse 33:33 where He is
addressing the Ahlul-Bayt. The word "perfect”comes from the emphasis of
Allah by "Tat’hiran”which has been used only in verse 33:33. This
emphatical word occur in any other place in Qur’an. Do you see the
difference brother?

Do you agree that any small sin is a type of impurity? If yes, then a
perfect purification will not leave any small sin for the Ahlul-Bayt. If
Allah intends to keep off every kind of uncleanless from Ahlul-Bayt, no
impurity, no matter how small, will reach them, because Allah is
omnipotent. (The phrase "every kind of “is due to article of "al-”at the
beginning of the world "al-Rijs").

A Sunni mentioned that saying ‘we have respect for the pious wives among
the wives of the Prophet’ indicate that you consider some of them to be
otherwise!

This is not something strange. After all, they were non-infallible
humans who may have had some or many mistakes. That’s exactly why they
are not among Ahlul-Bayt. Even Qur’an confirms that some of the wives of
the Prophet might have been wrong-doers:

***But if you seek Allah and His Apostle and the Home of the Hereafter
verily Allah has prepared for the*** ***well-doers amongst you*** ***a
great reward. (Qur’an 33:29)***

In the above verse, Allah states that He will only give the good reward
to the well-doers among the wives of the Prophet. If all the Prophet’s
wives were well-dowers, then there was no need for Allah to say this.
Allah would have said, "all of you will receive a great reward". Now
look at the next two verses after the above verse:

***O’ Consorts of the Prophet! if any of you were guilty of evident
misconduct conduct*** ***the*** ***Punishment would be doubled to her***
***and that is easy for Allah. (Qur’an 33:30)***

***But any of you that is devout in the service of Allah and His Apostle
and works righteousness to her*** ***shall*** ***We grant her reward
twice, and We have prepared for her a generous Sustenance. (Qur’an***
***33:31)***

Again Allah is threatening the wives of the Prophet that they will
receive a double punishment if they have misconduct, while giving glad
tidings that the good wives of the Prophet will receive twice reward.
You see, God is selective toward the wives of the Prophet (S), but you
are not!

Please check the traditions narrated in Sahih al-Bukhari on the
misconduct Aisha and Hafsa, some of which I provided in Parts IV through
VIII of the article of "Who are Ahlul-Bayt?”and then let me know what
you think of them? This is exactly what I mean by non-pious. If the
Allah threatened Aisha and Hafsa by divorce, because they backed each
other against the Prophet (S), then how can we render them as pure?

The verse of Qur’an tells us that Ahlul-Bayt are perfectly pure.
According to the traditions in Sahih al-Bukhari, Hafsa is swearing by
Allah that she argues with the Prophet (S) and keeps the Prophet angry
for the whole day. Umar is advising her not to imitate Aisha who is
proud of her beauty! Are these attitudes signs of perfect purity
mentioned for Ahlul-Bayt? Perhaps you might want to also look at the
history, and see who rode the Camel and allowed shedding the blood of
ten thousand Muslims.

I also would like to remind you there have been some prophets in the
past that some of their wives were not pious. Among them are the wife of
Prophet Noah, the wife of Prophet Lot, and so on. Allah informed those
prophets that those wives who don’t follow your instructions are not
related to them and they will perish along with the rest of people. Non
of those prophets took it as insult.

I also would like to say that it happened to me that I heard from a
Sunni Muslim claiming that Shi’a believe that Aisha committed adultery!
(May Allah protect us). This is a false accusation. Shi’a do NOT
attribute such a thing to any of the wives of the Prophet (S). The
problem of the Shi’a with Aisha is mainly around the line of politics
and her hostility toward Ahlul-Bayt.

A naive contributor mentioned that:

It is reported on the authority of ‘Akrama that Ibn Abbas said this
verse (33:33) is addressed to the wives of the Prophet.

There is no denial to the fact that the above report exists in some
Sunni books. Such reports also indicate that Akrama even had the
audacity to yell in the public places that the verse was revealed only
for the wives of the Prophet (S).

But the issue doesn’t stop here, and it is important to look at the very
personalities of those individuals involved. Surprisingly, al-Dhahabi
wrote in his work:

The very first reason to reject the tradition(s) of Akrama is based on
the fact that **he was Kharijite**. Secondly his being a Kharijite, he
even justified the killings of the fellow Muslim(s).

Sunni reference: al-Kashaf, by al-Dhahabi, v2, p272

Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani quoting from Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and others, wrote:

In the season of Hajj Akrama came to Africa, and said: It would be very
dear to me if I were at Hajj at this moment, I would have had swords in
both my hands, and I would massacre the Muslims. After these statements
by Akrama, the people of Africa avoided him.

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal says: Akrama narrates contradictory Hadiths.

Yahya Ibn Sa’id Ansari says: Akrama is a compulsive liar.

Sunni reference: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v8, p268

In fact, Akrama was a slave of the son of Ibn Abbas. Abdullah Ibn Harith
reported:

I once went to ‘Ali Ibn Abdullah Ibn Abbas, and I was surprised to see
that Akrama was tied to the rest room. I said to ‘Ali: Is this how you
treat your slaves, and he replied: Akrama associates many lies to my
father (Ibn Abbas).

Sunni reference: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v8, p268

At this point, it would be nice to quote another report which is also
falsely attributed to Ibn Abbas:

Abul Qasim Abdurrahman Ibn Muhammad Siraj says: it is related through
Muhammad Ibn Yaqub, through Hasan Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Affan through Abu Yahya
al-Hamanithrough Saleh Ibn Musa al-Qurshi through Khaseef through Sa’id
Ibn Jubair through Ibn Abbas that the verse 33:33 was revealed for the
wives of the Prophet.

Sunni reference: Asbab al-Nuzool, by al-Wahidi, p239

The scrutiny of the above tradition by the Sunni scholars yields the
following facts about three individuals in the chain of authorities of
the above report:

Imam al-Nisa’i says: Abu Yahya al-Hamani (one of the narrators in the
chain) is not a reliable reporter.

Sunni references:

• al-Kashaf, by al-Dhahabi, v2, p152

• Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v1, p469

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal says: Sa’id Ibn Jubair (one of the narrators in the
chain)is not an authority and this Hadith is not a reliable Hadith. Abu
Hatem Salah says: He has a weak memory and tends to mix up Hadiths.

al-Dhahabi writes: Khaseef Ibn Abdurrahman (one of the narrators in the
chain) is the slave of the Umayad, but he has a weak memory and Ahmad
has declared him as weak.

Sunni references:

• Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v3, pp 143-44

• al-Kashaf, by al-Dhahabi, v1, p280

A contributor claimed that there exists a tradition narrated by both
Shi’a and Sunni which reads: "al-Salmanu minna Ahlal-Bayt”and translates
to: "Salman (al-Farsi) is one of us, Ahlul-Bayt". This contradicts the
Shi’ite doctrine that Ahlul-Bayt are some selected individuals from the
progeny of the Prophet (S).

My comment is: Yes, there is a tradition with the above mentioned Arabic
words. However the correct translation is as follows:

The Messenger (S) of Allah said: "Salman is from us Ahlul-Bayt."

which means he is our agent and is attached to us Ahlul-Bayt. In fact,
Salman was an agent and a trustee for Ahlul-Bayt to the end of his
life-time. His affinity to Ahlul-Bayt was to the extent that he was
attached to them. An analogy would be a friend who would visit a family
a lot, such that one would consider him attached to the family, although
the blood relation is the only thing missing. Salman (ra) was one of the
best companions of the Messenger of Allah. It is narrated that:

The Messenger of God said: "Certainly Allah commanded me to love four
persons and informed me that He loves them.”The companions asked the
Prophet: "O’ Messenger of God, who are those four persons?”The Prophet
(S) replied: "‘Ali is from them (repeating that three times), Abu Dharr,
Salman al-Farsi, and Miqdad."

Sunni References:

• Sunan Ibn Majah, v1, p52, Tradition \#149

• al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p130

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v5, p356

• Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p648, Tradition \#1103

• Hilyatul Awliyaa, by Abu Nu’aym, v1, p172

Notice that the Prophet (S) said, "Salman is from us Ahlul-Bayt". This
does NOT necessarily mean that "Salman is one of us Ahlul-Bayt". The
Arabic word "min”has different meanings. In the above tradition (about
Salman) as well as many other traditions "min”does not mean "one of".
For instance, al-Bukhari recorded that:

The Prophet (S) said to ‘Ali: "You are from me, and I am from you"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنت مني و أنا منك
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni reference: Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English version, v5, Tradition
\#553.

There is no mention of Ahlul-Bayt here. So if we suppose that the only
meaning of "min”is "one of", then the saying of the Prophet will become:

"‘Ali is one of me and I am one of ‘Ali"

What a beautiful translation! How many persons is the Prophet, so that
one of the Prophet is ‘Ali? Funnier phrase in this translation is the
latter part, that is, the Prophet is one of ‘Ali!

Now, similarly it is narrated that:

The Messenger of Allah said: "Husayn is from me and I am from
al-Husayn."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسينٌ مني و أنا من حُسين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

(1) Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v4, p172

(2) Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Hanbal, v2, p772, Tradition \#1361

(3) al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p177

(4) Amali, by Abu Nu’aym al-Isbahani, p64

(5) al-Kuna wal Asmaa, by al-Dulabi, v1, p88

(6) al-Tabarani, v3, p21

(7) Adab by al-Bukhari, also al-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah, as quoted in:

(8) al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 3,
p291

(9) Mishkat al-Masabih, by Khatib al-Tabrizi, English Version, Tradition
\#6160

Again, if we suppose that the only meaning of "min”is "one of", then the
saying of the Prophet will become:

"Husayn is one of me and I am one of al-Husayn."

So this does not make sense either (specially the second phrase which is
"The Prophet is one of al-Husayn").

One meaning for the saying of the Prophet (S) who said: "Husayn is from
me and I am from al-Husayn,”is that al-Husayn is attached to him and he
is attached to al-Husayn. In other words, the path of the Prophet
Muhammad and the path of al-Husayn are non-separable. And their
instructions are the same and will not contradict each other.

Another contributor commented that if based on Sunni references we
quoted, Ahlul-Bayt are the Prophet, Fatimah, ‘Ali, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn, then how can you include the nine descendants of al-Husayn?

As we have already pointed out, only five members of Ahlul-Bayt were
alive at the time of the Prophet (S). They were Prophet Muhammad, Lady
Fatimah, Imam ‘Ali, Imam al-Hasan, and Imam al-Husayn. They were
mentioned as Ahlul-Bayt by the Prophet (S) and the most important Sunni
collections testify to this fact.

However the nine descendants of Imam al-Husayn were not alive at that
time so that the Prophet could not cover them by his mantle! But the
Prophet did, in fact, mention their names and their numbers. Let us
review some traditions from Sihah Sittah:

The Prophet (S) said: "al-Mahdi is one of us Ahlul-Bayt."

Sunni reference: Sunan Ibn Majah, v2, Tradition \#4085

also:

The Prophet (S) said: "The Mahdi will be of my family, of the
descendants of Fatimah (the Prophet’s daughter).

Sunni references:

• Sunan Abi Dawud, English version, Ch. 36, Tradition \#4271 (narrated
by Umm Salama, the wife of the Prophet)

• Sunan Ibn Majah, v2, Tradition \#4086

• al-Nisa’i and al-Bayhaqi, and others as quoted in:

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p249

By the above traditions, the Prophet extended Ahlul-Bayt up to Imam
al-Mahdi (as). So Ahlul-Bayt are not just those five, and Imam al-Mahdi
is the last member of Ahlul-Bayt, but he was not born at the time of the
Prophet so that he could take him into the Cloak as well! Also the
messenger of Allah said:

"There shall be twelve Imams/Caliphs/Amirs for my nation"

Sunni references:

• Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English, v9, Tradition \#329;

• Sahih Muslim, English version, Chapter DCCLIV, v3, pp 1009-1010,
Traditions \#4476 --\> \#4483;

• Sunan Abi Dawud, v2, p421 (three traditions);

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v4, p501;

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v5, p106;

• Others such as al-Tiyalasi, Ibn al-Athir, etc.

These 12 Imams will cover till the day of resurrection as Sahih Muslim
testifies. The last of them is surely Imam al-Mahdi (as) who will appear
in the last days and who is also from Ahlul-Bayt as the above tradition
specified. There are other traditions in the Sunni collections in which
the Prophet (S) has even mentioned the name of all these twelve
individuals one by one. (see Yanabi’ al-Mawaddah, by al-Qundoozi
al-Hanafi).

Referring to the tradition narrated by Aisha where the Messenger of
Allah named the members of his house, a Sunni brother commented that
Aisha is by no means a trusted source of Hadith for the Shi’a. Then why
do the Shi’a take her narration in this instance?

The first part is true. The Shi’a believe that all the narrators in the
chain of a document should have been just. If Aisha used to argue with
the Prophet, and keep him angry for the whole day, or led the battle of
Camel (the first civil war) then we consider these as BIG injustice. If
any narrator has done any injustice in the history their narrations are
void for us unless the same tradition has been narrated via another
chain of authorities who are all trustworthy. Thus some of the
traditions of six Sunni collections fall in this category, i.e.,
accepted for us.

Although Aisha is not a trustworthy narrator in the opinion of the
Shi’ites, any part of his narrations that has also been transmitted by a
trustworthy narrators such as Umm Salama (who also, by the way, reported
the tradition of Cloak), will be accepted. All those traditions which we
quoted from Sunni sources in support of the Shi’ite views, fall in this
category, and we believe in them.

Moreover, the reason that we brought the Tradition of Aisha is that this
is a tradition which is reported in Sahih Muslim and the Sunnis can not
dispute its authenticity.

After reading my article on the necessity of following Ahlul-Bayt, a
Sunni brother asked me what exactly following Ahlul-Bayt means, and if
there is anything which is taught by the Imams and not explained by the
Prophet himself?

As we have pointed out, following Ahlul-Bayt means to inquire about the
Sunnah of the Prophet (S) only through them. In fact, Ahlul-Bayt are THE
MEANS of identifying the true Sunnah of the Prophet from the
innovations.

No doubt that the Prophet (S) explained all the fundamentals of the
religion. However, people around him did not benefit from his knowledge
equally. We have only one companion whom the Prophet called him the Gate
of the City of Knowledge. Others got their knowledge based on their
capacity. The major duty of the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt was to PRESERVE the
Islamic teaching in its true spirit and reject the innovations and
mutilation of the religion.

The deputies/successors of the Prophet don’t bring any new massage, and
they just serve as leaders (Imams), Guardians for their true followers.
They explain/elaborate Shari’ah (Divine law) for people. They clear up
confusing things and events that may happen in each era. Also they are
the only individuals who can be trusted for the correct interpretation
of the Qur’anic verses as pointed in Qur’an and the traditions of the
Prophet (S). Adhering to Qur’an is not enough to guarantee our survival,
because Qur’an only specifies very general rules, and has lots of
ambiguous (Mutashabihat) verses which only Ahlul-Bayt know its true
meaning:

***He is Who has revealed unto thee (Muhammad) the Scripture wherein are
clear revelations, which are the Essence of the Book, and others (verses
which are) ambiguous. But those who have sickness in their hearts follow
the part of which that is ambiguous, seeking discord and searching for
its hidden meanings,*** ***but no one knows its hidden meanings except
Allah and those*** ***who are firmly grounded in knowledge*** ***who
say: We believe therein; the whole is from our Lord; but only men of
understanding really heed. (Qur’an 3:7)***

The term "Those who are firmly grounded in knowledge”refers to
Ahlul-Bayt. In fact Ahlul-Bayt are "Qur’an, the Speaker.”In another
verse, Allah states:

***"Ask the people of Reminder (the possessors of the Message, i.e.,
Qur’an) if you do not know.”(Qur’an 21:7)***

Again this is referring to Ahlul-Bayt. Ahlul-Bayt know the internal
meaning/commentary of Qur’an which was revealed to Prophet along with
Qur’an but were not a part of Qur’an. These pieces of information are
hidden but to the purified ones:

None touches (the depth of meaning of Qur’an) save the purified ones.
(56:79)

Please refer to the article titled: "Qur’an and Ahlul-Bayt”in which we
quoted authentic traditions from the Sunni sources where the Messenger
of Allah declared that Qur’an and Ahlul-Bayt are non-separable.

Regarding the necessity of following Ahlul-Bayt, a Wahhabi mentioned:

No thanks I am not a Christian, I only obey God and he is my savior. not
Christ, not Ahlul-Bayt.

This reminds me of what Imam ‘Ali said to al-Khawarij when they said
what is highlighted above! Imam ‘Ali commented: "kalimatu haqqin yuridu
biha al-batil”(a word of truth, but falsehood was meant by it). I should
even say that there is no truth in what you said. Do you believe in
Qur’an, or you say you only follow God and not Qur’an?! If you are a
true believer in Qur’an, then read the following verse please:

***"O’ you who believe! Obey Allah, and Obey Apostle and those from
among you who are given authority (by Allah).”(Qur’an 4:59)***

Allah tells you to obey His Messenger and His Ulul-Amr (Imam), but you
say you ONLY obey Allah! Khawarij said exactly the same thing! Don’t you
reflect? You insist to ONLY obey Allah while Allah orders you to obey
others also.

If you come down and say (for heck of it) you also obey the Prophet,
then according to the most authentic traditions the Prophet order you to
OBEY Ahlul-Bayt. But you mentioned you do not obey them. What kind of
rhetoric is this? You said you are not Christian. Do you think if you
obey the Prophet and his Ahlul-Bayt, you will become Christian? Exalted
be Allah (SWT) from such ignorant and stupid allegations against His
commandments by people who lack all knowledge!

You are mixing apples and oranges, my friend. Christians believe that
Jesus went on cross to save them. So if they commit any sins, they are
already forgiven by the Christ. And in this way they do what they wish
to do.

However, to your surprise, the Shi’a think exactly the other way around.
They say:

"The Prophet ordered you to OBEY him and his Ahlul-Bayt. The most
important books of the major Islamic schools testify to this fact. If
you do not OBEY them you will be doomed to Hell."

Do you see the difference? Christians say you do not really have to obey
to be saved. It is enough if you believe in Jesus. However Prophet
Muhammad (S) said that you should obey Ahlul-Bayt to be saved from Hell.
A person who calls himself a Shi’a, but does not really obey the
instructions of Ahlul-Bayt, is not any better than a Christian.

As I mentioned, true love requires the person to obey the one who loves.
If one claims the love of Ahlul-Bayt, but he does not obey their
instructions, then he is only fooling his own soul. Ibn Abbas (ra)
narrated that the Messenger of Allah said:

"Whoever wishes to live and die like me, and to abide in the Garden of
Eden after death, should acknowledge ‘Ali as WALI after me, and take his
WALI (i.e., Imams after him) as WALI, and should follow the Imams after
me for they are my Ahlul-Bayt and were created from my clay and are
gifted with the same knowledge and understanding as myself. Woe unto
those who deny their virtues and those who disregard their relationship
and affinity with me, for my intercession shall never reach them."

Sunni references:

(1) Hilyatul Awliyaa, by Abu Nu’aym, v1, pp 84,86

(2) al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p128

(3) al-Jami’ al-Kabir, by al-Tabarani

(4) al-Isabah, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani

(5) Kanz al-Ummal, v6, p155

(6) al-Manaqib, by al-Kharazmi, p34

(7) Yanabi’ al-Mawaddah, by al-Qundoozi al-Hanafi, p149

(8) History of Ibn Asakir, v2, p95


