Infallibility of the Prophets Part 2
====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In this part, we discuss the logical support for the infallibility of
the Prophets, and we then provide some traditions from Sahih al-Bukhari
and Sahih al-Tirmidhi with regard to the issue of infallibility.

Reason And Logic
----------------

Apart from the analysis of the character of a prophet historically or as
a character from the Qur’an, such character can also be judged within
the confines of reason and logic. As such, the obvious question is: Is
it rational and/or realistic for a Prophet sent by the Creator and
Sustainer of the Universe to be a sinner? Let’s find out:

First, when Allah (SWT) sends forth a Prophet, He (SWT) distinguishes
him from all the creatures by cleansing him from evil and sin, so that
he may serve as an example. Indeed, Allah (SWT) asserts:

***"You have indeed in the Messenger of Allah an excellent exemplar for
him who hopes in Allah and the Final Day, and who remember Allah much.
(Qur’an 33:21)”***

As such, a man that has been chosen by the Creator of the Universe to
represent Him (SWT) on the Earth, cannot be of an evil nature, nor can
he be a sinner that commits ignoble acts. If the Prophet is sent to
advice humanity to do good deeds, then he himself commits sins, do you
believe that he will serve as an outstanding example to be followed?
That would be like an Imam of Mosque who waves his right hand saying:
"Don’t drink beer!”while a holds a beer can in his left hand!!!

Second, if the Prophet (S) enjoins righteousness and forbids evil when
he himself is a sinner who commits evil, he has gone against what Allah
said in Qur’an that:

***O you who believe! why do you say that which you do not act? It is***
***most hateful*** ***in the sight of Allah that you say that which you
do not act. (Qur’an 61:2-3)***

Based on the above verse of Qur’an, if prophet was a sinner, he should
not have preached others in the first place!! As such, a sinful prophet
faces a dilemma: If he does not preach, he has disobeyed the order of
God who has ordered him to convey the message (Qur’an 5:67).

On the other hand, if he preaches, he again has disobeyed God where
Allah states "O you who believe! why do you say that which you do not
act? It is most hateful in the sight of Allah that you say that which
you do not act.!!!"

Didn’t Allah (SWT) reprimand the Jews by saying:

***"Do you enjoin right conduct on the people, and forget (to practice
it) yourselves, and yet you study the Scripture? Will you not
understand? (Qur’an 2:44)”***

Clearly, a Prophet cannot order a layman to perform prayer on a timely
basis, when the Prophet himself forgets to pray, and when he remembers,
he prays without ablution (Wudu) (as Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic version,
v1, p123; and v1, p37)!!! Purified be the Representatives of Allah (SWT)
from such false accusations!

Third, a prophet that sins is a repulsive character. We, as humans,
detest a person who comes to us and says don’t do this and don’t do
that, yet he himself commits wicked acts. He automatically becomes
repulsive to us, and we cannot stand to listen to him anymore.

Similarly, if Prophet Muhammad (S) was cruel to a blind man, which he
was not, how can he ask us to have good manners? (Note again: The blind
man’s story is not related to the Prophet (S) as some Sunnis state; it
was a chapter revealed to reprimand Uthman Ibn Affan, who was the one
who frowned in the face of the blind man. Please see the earlier article
which was exclusively in this regard).

Do you seriously believe that a Prophet of Allah (SWT) was a sinner and
so offensive? Why do you follow him then? I, personally, will not
believe in a man who claims to be sent by Allah (SWT), the Creator of
the Universe, and then sins and behaves in a manner that is not even
befitting of a beast!

Forth, was Allah (SWT) so incapable as to make His (SWT) prophets and
messengers sinless? Why would Allah (SWT) even bother to send a sinning
prophet to be an example to a community? If sin is something that even
the prophets and messengers can not avoid, then what is the purpose of
sending a religion to the mankind any way? Does God expect the ordinary
people to follow his instructions when his own deputies can not?

Fifth, a prophet or messenger is an interpreter of Allah’s commands. As
such, if the prophet is the first to violate these commands, who among
the Ummah will abide by these commands? Or if he is in a state that
deprives him of his mental faculties causing him to err, then he will
MISinterpret the commands of Allah (SWT). If that happens, then surely
Allah (SWT) is playing a game with His creation!

For He (SWT) sends them a man to interpret the religion for them, yet
this man is subject to magical spells, as the Israelites reports claim,
and mental hallucinations that cause him to become unaware of his own
behavior (See Sahih Bukhari, Arabic version, v7, p29)! What kind of
interpreter is that? Exalted be Allah (SWT) from such allegations
against His Prophet (S)!

sixth, for those among Sunnis who say that the Prophet (S) is sinless or
infallible ONLY in the delivery of Allah’s (SWT) message, and other than
that, just like any other man, he (S) sins and makes mistakes in many
things, such assertion is full of logical holes. For instance, Sunnis
narrated that once the Prophet gave advice on agriculture, and people
did it, but they suffered a big loss by following that advice!! Then
Prophet told them that what he said was his personal advice and not
revelation!!! (which is, by the way, in contradiction with the verse:

***"Nor does he (prophet) speak out of his desire. What he says is
nothing but revelation that is revealed.(Qur’an 53:3-4)")***

How do we know which of the Prophet’s sayings are from Allah (SWT), and
which are his personal sayings? He (S) may say something which the
companions take as Allah’s command, but it may be that he (S) was only
expressing his OWN opinion. If that happens, then all of Allah’s laws
will be in chaos and disarray!

That is why, even the Prophet’s opinion has to conform with Allah’s
orders, for fear of misinterpretation by the people. In fact the Prophet
had a perfect reason and his Ijtihad was in perfect compliance with the
Allah’s orders and satisfaction and that is why Qur’an orders us to obey
WHATEVER he states without condition.

Also, how can we understand which acts of the Prophet are wrong, and
which are right? What is the measure for us? Isn’t a part of this
measure the practice of the Prophet (S) himself? Since the practice of
the Prophet (S) is considered to be one of the sources of deriving the
rules of Islam, we can NOT evaluate the Prophet’s actions by the rules
which are derived from his actions! As such all the actions of the
Prophet should have been protected.

Seventh, for the Prophet (S) to be chosen to deliver Allah’s (SWT)
message (one of which was the Qur’an) and be himself a sinner, will cast
doubt on the authenticity of the Qur’an. When the Prophet (S) recites a
verse from the Qur’an, how do we know that that verse is indeed from
Allah (SWT), and not a side effect from the hallucinative episode that
the Prophet (S) was allegedly experiencing as a result of the magical
spell cast upon him?! That would mean that Allah’s (SWT) Book will be
distorted by the same man who was sent to deliver it!

Eighth, just imagine what impossible situation would have been created
if any prophet begin to exhort his followers to commit a mistake or sin.
The wretched followers would be condemned to the displeasure of Allah in
any case.

If they obey the Prophet and commit that sin, then they have disobeyed
the command given by Allah and thus are disgraced. If, on the other
hand, they disobey the Prophet, they again have disobeyed the command of
Allah about obeying the Prophet. So, it appears that a fallible prophet
could bring nothing but disgrace and condemnation to his people.

Ninth, a punishable sin will cause sadness and depression to the soul of
the believer. The believer who sincerely loves Allah (SWT) is angered
and depressed by the sin he has committed. Feelings of sadness begin to
roam the mind, and the believer will lose confidence many times.

Feelings of doubt are evoked in the sense that the believer feels that
Allah (SWT) may not support him at a certain point in time as punishment
for what he has rendered. This doubt is NOT in the sense that he feels
Allah (SWT) is not merciful enough to forgive him; rather, it is the
doubt about what will happen if Allah ever decides to retaliate for what
he has done.

With the above in mind, a prophet should not be a sinner, because that
would entail that he loses confidence at certain stages in his mission.
If doubt strikes the soul of a prophet, you can be assured that his
mission is in jeopardy.

Also, from a political and psychological standpoint, doubt automatically
translates into disaster. On the other hand, it is a known historical
fact that the Prophet (S) never displayed any doubt in his mission, and
thus he could not have been guilty of sins. Having doubt could not have
only undermined his mission, but it would also have undermined his
credibility among the believers.

Tenth, a Prophet is a teacher by virtue of his prophethood. If a teacher
errs when he is supposed to be sent directly by Allah (SWT) as a mercy
to mankind, then he will need a more knowledgeable and a more virtuous
teacher to guide him and to punish him in the case that he violates the
limits of God; which means that the Prophet himself will need an
unerring teacher sent by God, and so on, ad infinitum. Thus, it cannot
be except that the Prophet MUST be the number one teacher and the
highest in virtue among his own people, and that he be sinless and
infallible to begin with.

As for the Imams (divinely appointed Caliphs), the same argument
applies, but they are NOT prophets or messengers. They are, however,
successors and vicegerents to the Seal of Prophethood. As such, if these
Imams are to guide the Ummah of Muhammad (S), they also must have the
same qualities that the above argument illuminates. Please see the next
article which is exclusively about the infallibility of Imams.

Reference To Infallibility In Sahih Al-Bukhari
----------------------------------------------

There is an interesting tradition in Sahih al-Bukhari which asserts that
there are people who are Ma’soom (infallible/protected). The tradition
clearly specifies that these people are the prophets and their
successors (Caliphs). The tradition also illuminate the fact that He is
Allah who gives the position of Caliphate to the Caliph which implies
that the infallible Caliph is the one who is assigned by Allah, not by
people.

Moreover, the tradition asserts that there are good advisors/companions
and bad advisors/companions for the prophets and their successors, but
those who are protected by Allah will not be deceived by the evil
advisors around them. Here is the tradition:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 9.306

Narrated Abu Sa’id al-Khudri:

The Prophet said, "Allah never sends a prophet or gives the Caliphate to
a Caliph but that he (the Prophet or the Caliph) has two groups of
advisors: A group advising him to do good and exhorts him to do it, and
the other group advising him to do evil and exhorts him to do it. But
the protected person (Ma’soom) is the one who is protected by Allah.’"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فالمعصوم من عصم الله تعالى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do I need to make any comment?!

Is Any One Like Him?
--------------------

The Holy Qur’an states that the Prophet (S) is HUMAN being like us Human
beings. The likeness between us and him is in the sense that both of us
are human and both are accountable for our deeds. However there is no
similarity between us and him in terms of virtue, knowledge, closeness
to Allah. Allah gave him abilities and authorities which were not given
to us ordinary beings. In the following traditions in Sahih al-Bukhari,
the Prophet clearly stated that he is not like any of us, meaning that
although he is human, we can not compare our weak and sinful soul with
his:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 3.182

Narrated Anas:

The Prophet said, "Do not practice al-Wisal (fasting continuously
without breaking one’s fast in the evening or eating before the
following dawn).”The people said to the Prophet, "But you practice
al-Wisal?”The Prophet replied, "I am not like any of you, for I am given
food and drink (by Allah) during the night.”(Qala: Lastu Ka ahadin
minkum).

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 3.183

Narrated Abdullah Ibn Umar:

Allah’s Apostle forbade al-Wisal. The people said(to him),"but you
practice it?”He said, "**I am not like you**, for I am given food and
drink by Allah.”(Qala: Inni lastu mithlikum).

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 3.184

Narrated Abu Sa’id:

That he had heard the Prophet saying, "Do not fast continuously
(practice al-Wisal), and if you intend to lengthen your fast, then carry
it on only till the Suhur (before the following dawn).”The people said
to him, "But you practice (Al-Wisal), O Allah’s Apostle!”He replied, "I
am not similar to you, for during my sleep I have One Who makes me eat
and drink.”(Qala: Inni lastu ka Hay’atikum).

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 3.185

Narrated Aisha:

Allah’s Apostle forbade al-Wisal out of mercy to them. They said to him,
"But you practice al-Wisal?”He said, "I am not similar to you, for my
Lord gives me food and drink.”(Qala: Inni lastu ka Hay’atikum)

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 3.187

Narrated Abu Huraira:

The Prophet said twice, "(O you people) Be cautious! Do not practice
al-Wisal.”The people said to him, "But you practice al-Wisal?”The
Prophet replied, "My Lord gives me food and drink during my sleep. Do
that much of deeds which is within your ability."

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 3.188

Narrated Abu Said al-Khudri:

Allah’s Apostle said, "Do not fast continuously day and night (practice
al-Wisal) and if anyone of you intends to fast continuously day and
night, he should continue till the Suhur time.”They said, "But you
practice al-Wisal, O Allah’s Apostle!”The Prophet said,

"I am not similar to you; during my sleep I have One Who makes me eat
and drink.

It appears from these authentic Sunni evidences, among others, that the
Prophet is like us ONLY in the sense that he is human being (i.e., like
us, he has choice to do right or wrong and has a human flesh). Other
than that, there is no similarity between his Supreme soul/virtues and
ours.

Reference To Infallibility In Sahih Al-Tirmidhi
-----------------------------------------------

In fact, the Prophet (S) himself testified that he and his Ahlul-Bayt
are sinless. Interesting to see that Messenger of Allah used the
purification verse of Qur’an to prove his point. Ibn Abbas Narrated
that:

The Messenger of Allah recited "Verily Allah intends to keep off from
you every kind of uncleanness O’ People of the House (Ahlul-Bayt), and
purify you a perfect purification". (Qur’an, the last sentence of Verse
33:33) and then the Messenger of Allah said: "Thus Me and my Ahlul-Bayt
are clear from sins."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأنا و أهل بيتي مطهرون من الذنوب
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni reference:

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, as quoted in:

• al-Durr al-Manthoor, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, v5, pp 605-606,198 under
the commentary of Verse 33:33 of Qur’an

• Dala’il al-Nabawiyyah, by al-Bayhaqi

• Others such as al-Tabarani, Ibn Mardawayh, Abu Nu’aym, etc.

Please note the word "thus”in the highlighted part of the above
tradition. It means the Prophet himself is concluding that the verse
means Ahlul-Bayt (including himself) are sinless.


