Infallibility of the Prophets Part 3
====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

This part addresses the questions and counter arguments on this subject
in the current and the previous rounds of discussions, and the responses
to them.

Side Comments
-------------

A person asked how we explain the following verse of Qur’an considering
the subject of infallibility:

***Was Allah to seize the people immediately for their Dhulm
(wrong-doing; injustice), no living*** ***creature would be left on
earth. He gives them respite for an appointed time. When their term
is*** ***over, they will not be able to change the inevitable. (Qur’an
16:61)***

My comment is as follows: First, "the people”at the beginning of the
verse refers to "the unjust people”and "the disbelievers". Note that in
the preceding verse the disbelievers have been explicitly addressed.

The above verse does not imply that everyone on Earth is unjust. It
rather refers to the fact that, unlike the Hereafter, when an earthly
punishment comes as a result of injustice of the unjust people it will
inflict all leaving creatures on the Earth including good and bad people
as well as the animals. Of course, the affliction is a total loss and
punishment for wrong-doers while for the believers it will be test. In
another verse, Allah states:

***And fear the affliction that affects not just those of you who do
wrong: and know that Allah is strict in punishment (Qur’an 8:25)***

Thus, the verse (16:61) does not prove that everyone is Dhalim (unjust).

Moreover, the term "Dhulm”was used in Qur’an with different meanings.
Only one of the general meanings of Dhulm is "wrong doing”that entails
punishment in the Hereafter. Surely, the Prophets and the Imams were not
wrong-doers (Dhalim) and we can readily prove this by Qur’an (see few
paragraphs later).

However, before presenting the Qur’anic argument and in order to get a
better picture of the issue, let me quote a famous explanatory
statements of the Sufis mentioned by the Sunnis scholars including
al-Razi and al-Baidhawi, which states:

"The good deeds of the righteous people are sins for those who are close
(to Allah)."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسنات الابرار سيئات المقربين
  </p>
</blockquote>

This means that for people who are very close to Allah such as the
Prophets, sin has a much subtle meaning, and its meaning is much
different from what we usually consider as sin. In their high level,
they consider themselves sinful when they question themselves by saying:
"I should have done more good deeds than of what I have done till now.”

This is while they did their best. Or "I did not worship Allah to the
extent that He deserves by His Majesty.”Or "I could be closer to
God.”These are the sort of sins to them which is much more different
than what we think of as sin. Their sin is just a feeling of shyness
toward the Glory of Allah.

According to his genuine nature, an advanced human being does not make
any hesitation in following the path of Almighty God. In every step that
he takes towards development, the greatness and grandeur of the power of
the Almighty will become more obvious him, and he will look at his past
from a higher level. For what he has done he will sometimes apologize,
even if what he has done was his duties. That is because he now
comprehends its inadequacy.

He interprets his past worships as sin and does not see any value for
his work when presented to the Great position of the Lord. With his
elevated view, he perceives his submission to God’s presence as sinful
and even an action far from politeness.

The prophets and the divinely-appointed Imams have reached this point.
Since they realize the Magnificence of their Lord and comprehend the
position of the Life-Giver, they see themselves, their activities, and
their prostrations and praises so little that they interpret the worship
of that much affluence and greatness as sin, and with supplication and
invocation, they ask for pardon and they hope for forgiveness.

When they face the divine commandments and consider the Holy Position of
the Almighty, they submit themselves to the Master. They see their
action in front of the Lord as nothing, and recognize it as not suitable
for praise. They hope it would be accepted by the Generosity and Majesty
of the Creator, otherwise it is a sin to submit such inadequate worship
to the Holy Presence of the Lord.

Those people like the Prophet Muhammad and his Ahlul-Bayt (peace be upon
them all) realized the Divine position with a much wider view.
Continuously upon the two wings of knowledge and action, they progressed
to a higher and superior position. They were, at every moment, finding
out more about the Magnificence of the Life-Giver of the world, and more
about their own needs; consequently better understanding of their
inadequate actions in comparison with that much Power and Greatness.

To compensate for that, they confessed to their sins and asked the Lord
for the permission to apologize with the excuse that they can NOT do to
the extent of what Allah deserves, and with the hope that He would guide
them to a higher and superior position until they could continue their
development process in order to reach the sublime morality.

Now the verse you mentioned should be understood in this context. No
HUMAN could warship Allah to the extent of what Allah deserves to be
worshipped. It is like one wants to pay an infinite debt by finite
resources. Thus everybody is sinful and shameful in front of His Glory.
The closer to God, the more shameful of your insufficient worship in
front of God you are.

Let me also give you a proof from Qur’an that "Dhulm”for prophets has
much different meaning. Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty states
in Qur’an:

***"And when Abraham was tested by his Lord with certain commands and he
fulfilled them. Then He said: Lo! I appoint you an Imam for mankind.
(Abraham) said: And of my offspring (will there be Imam)? He said: My
covenant does not reach the wrong-doers (among them).”(Qur’an 2:124).***

In the above verse Allah states that the position of God-assigned
leadership does not reach to a person who is "Dhalim”(wrong-doer). Now,
there is no dispute that Prophet Muhammad (S) was a divinely appointed
leader and a descendant of Abraham (as). Not only him, but also Moses,
Jesus, David, Sulayman (Solomon) were also descendants of Abraham and
all of them were assigned by Allah as Imam. This goes to prove that non
of them were "Dhalim”(wrong-doer), otherwise the last sentence of Verse
2:124 will become untrue!

Thus, there is no conflict amongst verses 16:61, 2:124, 33:33, etc.
since firstly, the verse 16:61 does not attribute the Dhulm to all
people, and secondly, Dhulm has been used in Qur’an with more than one
meaning and not just the "wrong-doing”that deserves Allah’s punishment
in the Hereafter. Sin has a different meaning for those who are close to
Allah.

Their sins can only be interpreted as insufficient good deeds or worship
before Allah in comparison to the infinite worship that Allah deserves.
Such type of sin --that is even unobservable to the righteous people--
does not cause the wrath of Allah, nor does it lead to punishment in the
Hereafter.

\*\*\*  
 A Muslim convert (former Catholic) stated that there is a report of
David’s adultery in the Old Testament. The Prophets were human. Remember
that Muhammad’s past and future sins were forgiven. It is not that he
didn’t have any. The Prophet (S) used to ask forgiveness for himself.
Clearly, that would constitute the attitude of a sinner repenting after
an act of sin.

In reply to the disparaging quote about David (as) from the Bible, I
won’t even dignify that statement by the Bible writers with a comment!
one should know better than to quote a mutilated book!

As for the Prophet (S) asking for forgiveness from Allah (SWT), I have
just answered this few lines before and proved it by Qur’an and Hadith
that the sin of the Prophets and Imams are much different than what we
consider sin (which is punishable), and as such they will not be held
accountable for that. That is why Allah informed the Prophet (S) that
his past and his future "sins”are forgiven!

If Allah (SWT) had inspired "sinful”prophets and messengers to lead
people to the Right Path, it would mean that Allah (SWT) approves of
sinfulness! Why then does He prohibit it? What kind of game is Allah
(SWT) playing? What kind of Creator is He Who approves of something
while prohibiting it at the same time? Cease and desist from insulting
Allah (SWT) by claiming that His prophets and messengers were sinners.
Fear Allah (SWT) O People before the day comes when you will account for
your deeds! Exalted be the Merciful from these ludicrous insinuations!

\*\*\*

A reader mentioned that Moses (as) killed a man with his fist. What sin
could be greater than killing a human?

Well, The Prophet Muhammad (S) and Imam ‘Ali (as) killed many
unbelievers! They did this to comply with Allah’s regulations. Also
killing a person during self-defense or when protecting believers from
the assault of a non-believer, is not a crime.

Moreover, in many instances the sin of the prophets mentioned in Qur’an
is the act they have committed which is considered violation by the
tyrants of their time and NOT by Allah. It means that the governor
considered such prophet is GUILTY of a specific act. This does NOT mean
that they are guilty before Allah. The case of Prophet Moses killing a
non-believer in defense of one of his Shi’a (followers) falls into this
category. In fact Qur’an testifies the above mentioned fact by saying:

***Behold your Lord called Moses: "Go to unto the wrongdoing folk:
(Qur’an 26:10)***

***The people of Pharaoh, will they not fear Allah? (Qur’an 26:11)***

***He said: "O my Lord! I do fear that they will charge me with
falsehood"(Qur’an 26:12)***

***"My breast will be straitened and my speech may not go (smoothly), so
send Aaron (to help me). (Qur’an 26:13)***

***"And (further)*** ***they hold a charge of sin against me; and I fear
they may slay me.”(Qur’an 26:14)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَهُمْ عَلَيَّ ذَنبٌ فَأَخَافُ أَن يَقْتُلُونِ ﴿الشعراء: ١٤﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

As we can see in the last verse, the sin of murder is what the people of
Pharaoh considered to be sin and not Allah. They considered Moses
guilty. As such, that was not a sin before Allah, but rather the charge
of the government.

Prophet Moses did what he was supposed to do, that is helping the
oppressed believer against the oppressor. Although he did not intend to
kill the oppressor, it happened during that defense. It was a Satan’s
plan to make the situation more difficult for Moses (as). By that
unplanned murder, life was made harder for Moses (as) since he had to
stay away from Egypt, but this does not mean that he sinned. Sometimes
defending the truth may cause trouble but not sin.

Despite all such troubles, Allah finally granted Moses (as) victory over
the unbelievers. Again, Prophet Moses (as) was not a wrong-dower
(Dhalim) otherwise it contradicts Verse 2:124 where Allah said that the
position of God-assigned leadership shall not reach to the wrong-doers.

\*\*\*

Another brother argued that Allah (SWT) has forbidden us from purifying
anybody in verse: "... hold NOT yourselves purified (53:32)”As such,
even prophets and messengers can not be considered purified.

My response was that the verse is taken out of context, and thus has
clouded the meaning. Let us carefully study the WHOLE verse:

Those who avoid great sins and shameful deeds, and only fell into small
reprehensible faults, verily thy Lord is ample in forgiveness. He knows
you well when He brings you out of the earth and when you are hidden in
your mother’s wombs therefore justify not yourselves. He knows best who
(among you) guards against evil. (53:32)

This verse is saying: those who have committed small reprehensible
faults should not justify themselves. They should be careful not to fall
victim to their egoism and pretend that they are the best when only
Allah (SWT) knows what is really in their hearts.

As such, this verse does not apply to the Prophet (S) who did not have
any fault, or Allah (SWT) would have directed the verse at him (S) as He
(SWT) does when talking to or about him (S). Therefore, the verse does
not even come close to supporting an argument that the Prophet (S) was a
sinner.

Moreover Allah mentioned in Verse 33:33 of Qur’an that the Ahlul-Bayt of
Prophet (S) are perfectly pure and flawless, then we can conclude that
Allah is the one who is confirming that the Prophet is pure and thus it
is in conformity with the above quoted verse which states only Allah
knows who is the best and most purified. No need to mention that the
Prophet (S) is the first member of the Ahlul-Bayt, and if the Ahlul-Bayt
are perfectly pure, so is the Prophet (S).

\*\*\*  
 A reader mentioned that: We identify with the Prophets and Messengers
through their sin. That is, we look at the sin of the Prophets and the
Messengers, and we identify our OWN sins with theirs!

The above assertion is off base. We do NOT identify with the Prophets
through their SIN; we rather identify with them through their suffering.
There is a big difference between the two: Suffering necessitates
patience in times of tribulation and adversity to survive through the
ordeal one is undergoing.

All the prophets and messengers (May Allah bless them) suffered greatly
by virtue of their title as representatives of the of Supreme Being,
Allah (SWT). We identify with that, and remain steadfast during our
times of despair. As such, a prophet did NOT sin, but rather suffered.

The Mercy from Allah (SWT) is not, as you state, that the prophets and
messengers sin, but rather that they were sent to communicate and
deliver the message of Allah (SWT) to us. And in so doing, they were not
kings or high priests who would not be able to identify with the
oppressed masses. Indeed, look at Moses (as), the great Messenger from
Allah (SWT), whose entire life was a miracle. The suffering that Moses
(as) endured evoked a sense of peace in the minds of his (as) followers
that served to strengthen them in times of great hardship under
Pharaoh’s oppression.

Similarly, the Messenger of Allah (SWT), Muhammad (S), suffered when he
was struck in his head, causing a severe injury to his jaw. He also
suffered from hunger, rejection, a boycott from disbelievers, sarcasm,
temptation, wars, mutiny, distrust from some of his followers, the
hypocrites, betrayal, and then he, after his demise, also suffered by
virtue of the massacring of his family.

It is an authentic tradition that the Prophet (S) during his lifetime
said: "No Prophet has EVER suffered as I have suffered.”The indication
here was to how his own flesh and blood, his family-- which were dearer
to him than his own soul, would be treated after his demise; not to
mention the hardship he was exposed to during his lifetime. It is that
kind of suffering that allows us to identify with the Prophets, NOT
their sins!

Again, the argument clearly fails when we analyze it from the
perspective of the "example or model”par excellence sent to humanity: If
Allah (SWT) says:

***"You have indeed in the Messenger of Allah an excellent exemplar for
him who hopes in Allah and the Final Day, and who remember Allah much.
(Qur’an 33:21),”***

(Emphasis Mine) He (SWT) means that our lives should be modeled around
that "excellent exemplar.”That’s where the word "Sunnah --- the
Prophet’s (S) custom or tradition”comes from. Now, if that model was
corrupt (May Allah forgive us), then how can we model ourselves around
it; we, then, will NEVER be able to cleanse ourselves!

\*\*\*

Another brother stated To be human is to be a sinner; that is, sin is an
innate part of us as human beings. I find highly disturbing the tendency
among Muslims, Shi’a and Sunni likewise, to regard the Prophet Muhammad
(saws) almost as a species of infallible demigod.

I would like to first ask this brother if knows Muslims believe that
angels are infallible, i.e., they do not make any mistakes. (Otherwise,
some major flaws, among many, would be that the validity of Qur’an
transmitted by Gabriel which will go seriously under question; and that
the angels who record our deeds may write things incorrectly; and also
the angel of death may take the life of a wrong person instead of
another!!!!). Allah stated in Qur’an:

***"...the angels do not violate the Commands of Allah, and do
(precisely) what they are ordered. (Qur’an 66:6)"***

If you also agree that angels are infallible, and if your above
statement is true, then you consider angels are either god or demigod
(?!) (may Allah protect us). Therefore, your above statement is wrong. I
just gave you an example of infallible species who are nothing but the
creatures of God. They are neither God nor semi-god, nor demi-god, yet
infallible.

Angels are programmed and work like faultless bug-free computers. They
can not go against the orders of Allah. However, the prophets are NOT
angels. They are all human, but purified human beings. That purification
by Allah (SWT) as alluded to in the previously mentioned verses does NOT
make them divine, but it does elevate them above the level of ordinary
human beings in terms of denouncing sin.

The advantage of human over angel is that human is able to willingly
obey God. In other words, the prophet has choice to either go right or
wrong, but he chooses to go right always, and such, he is infallible
while he has choice.

A human can make mistakes, but he does not have to. If we make mistakes,
it is not because we have to, but it is because of our foolishness,
ignorance and lack of knowledge, or else because of the lack of control
of our carnal desires. Those who say human has to make mistakes to be
human, are generalizing their own weak soul to all others. They follow
their lusts, and are envious to see if one never does that.

Based on Qur’an, the level of human CAN BE much higher than angels. (and
of course, could go even lower than animals, on the other side!) Qur’an
states that all angels prostrated Prophet Adam (as). This is enough to
prove that the rank of the prophets is higher than that of angels. In
fact, the best human beings (in terms of Taqwa) are the best of all the
creatures, and the most honored before Allah. Remember also the story of
Mi’raaj where there were places in the heavens that only Prophet
Muhammad (S) could get into, but the Angel Gabriel could not fly to. The
Gabriel said to the Prophet that he (Gabriel) will burn if he wants to
go further with the Prophet (S).

One side remark, here, is that, Satan is not an angel. He was from Jinn
(unseen creatures). Witness to that is Qur’an where it quotes the
statement of Satan saying: "You have created me from fire.”The unseen
(Jinn) creatures are made of fire, and as such, they are not the angels.
The Jinns, like human beings, have choice to go right or wrong, and will
be accountable for their acts in the day of judgment.

\*\*\*

A brother mentioned that there is a religious part of the prophet’s life
and a non-religious part. The danger of believing that every thing the
prophet did was by order of God, causes that Muslims should imitate the
prophet (S) to the finest details otherwise they won’t be obeying God!!!
Even to what the prophet liked to drink and eat,...

My response to him was that ALL the acts of the Prophet were acts of
worship. Even his eating, sleeping, etc., were worship, and as such,
there was no non-religious part in his life! All he did were in full
accordance with Allah’s wishes and commandments. But religion is not
limited to what is obligatory and what is forbidden. Most of the
Prophet’s actions fall in the category of what is "Mustahabb”(i.e.,
recommended) or what is "Mubaah”(i.e., OK either way).

Moreover, no one said we are required to imitate all the actions of the
Prophet. If one eats what the Prophet preferred to eat, it will be all
right and no one can blame him unless he claims that one should eat only
what the Prophet ate. Obeying the Prophet (S) means that if the Prophet
ordered to do something or forbade to do something, then one is
religiously required to follow it, no matter if the order does not seem
to be religious (which is a false imagination).

In fact, all the orders and prohibitions of the Prophet were a part of
religion. This is actually what the religion is about. Even his Ijtihad
was in full accordance with the wish of Allah for Allah granted him the
most perfect reason. Whatever came to the heart of Prophet (S) is the
order of God, and such it is a part of religion. Forget about that
fabricated Hadith on agriculture.

As for eating food: Everything is Halaal, unless the Prophet prohibited
it explicitly or implicitly. For instance, pork has been prohibited
explicitly. Also any today’s new product which was not at the time of
the Prophet but has some ingredients which are extracts from those
Haraam products, becomes Haraam implicitly.

Therefore, if the Prophet (S) did not eat a special food, but he did not
prohibit it either, we still can eat it, because we follow his general
order that whatever has not been made Haraam, is Halaal. Also if he
preferred a special food, but he did not mention that it is obligatory
to eat it, it does not become obligatory to eat.

Thus, the preference of the prophet for a special food is not considered
to be the order of Prophet as you tried to imply. In religion, there are
many things that are neither obligatory nor prohibited, and we have
choice to do it or not. What the Prophet ate might be considered as
recommended food, and not obligatory unless otherwise specified.

\*\*\*

Regarding the verse:

***"Nor does he (Muhammad) speak out of his desire. It is no less than
revelation that is revealed (Qur’an 53:3-4),”***

a brother said: The above verse is only limited to Qur’an. The pagan
Arabs were calling the Prophet insane, and discrediting the Qur’anic
revelations as the handiwork of the prophet. The meaning of the above
verses is that the Qur’anic verses which the prophet is speaking about
are not out of his desire, but are indeed Revelation. If everything the
prophet said or did is revelation, then what is the difference between
Qur’an and authentic Hadith?

My answer to this brother was that: Neither the above verses, nor the
verses surrounding them specify limitation of any kind. There is no
mention of "Qur’an”in the above verses nor the verses before and after,
and therefor, your claim is unsupported, at least from the Qur’an.

The Verse 53:3 exactly talks about "the speech”of the Prophet and not
necessarily Qur’an, and thus, the rule mentioned in the next verse
covers ALL his speeches. The pagan Arabs did not criticize the Prophet
for the Qur’an alone. They also criticized him for his claim of
prophethood as well as his teachings and ideas.

As for the difference between Qur’an and Hadith: Both Qur’an and genuine
Hadith are from Allah. The Prophet did not say anything of his own
desire. However, there is a difference between Qur’an and Hadith:

• Qur’an is well-proven, but is NOT well-understood (see note below)

• Hadith is NOT well-proven, but is well-understood.

What I meant by "Qur’an is well-proven", is that we have no doubt about
its authenticity, genuineness, and that has not been fabricated.

What I meant by "Qur’an is NOT well-understood", is that most of its
verses are ambiguous and only "Those who are Firmly Grounded in
Knowledge”(i.e., the Prophet and his Ahlul-Bayt) have touched the depth
of its meaning. Also Qur’an only specifies the general rules. For all
these and many other reasons, Qur’an can not be considered as the
sources of Guidance ALONE. It needs an interpreter, and this is where
the Hadith plays its role. By genuine Hadith we can get close to the
understanding of Qur’an. Allah said in Qur’an:

He it is Who has sent down to thee the Book, in it are some clear
verses; they are the Essence of the Book; and others which are
ambiguous. But those in whose hearts is perversity follow the part there
of that is ambiguous seeking discord and searching for its hidden
meanings but no one knows its hidden meanings except Allah and those who
are firmly grounded in knowledge (Qur’an 3:7)

What I meant by "Hadith is NOT well-proven", is that, since we have not
personally met the Prophet (or his successors), we are not sure if such
and such Hadith are genuine. The important point which has the answer to
your question is: If we were at the time of the Prophet and would have
heard the Hadith from the mouth of the Prophet (S), then that Hadith
would have been as binding as Qur’an for us, and we can not prefer
Qur’an over that Hadith, rather I would say, that Hadith which was heard
in person is preferred to our defective understanding of Qur’an because
most verses of Qur’an are ambiguous, but the Hadith we heard from the
Prophet is clear. Also, there are many cases where the Hadith explains
the exceptions of the general Qur’anic rules, and as such, it may seem
to be contradictory with the Qur’an.

However, since we have not personally heard the Hadith from the Prophet
(or his true successors), we need to examine its documentation (i.e.,
the chain of narrators who passed the Hadith) and the number of similar
narrations in that regard to determine the overall strength of what has
been attributed to the Prophet (S). Some of the requirements of the
authenticity of Hadith are as follows:

• It should not be in clear contradiction with well-established concepts
in Qur’an;

• It should not be in clear contradiction with other well-established
traditions;

• All the transmitters of the Hadith in the chain of transmitters should
be righteous and just, etc.

Most Sunnis, however, do not consider the justice of the narrators as a
criterion. They narrate from whoever saw the Prophet (S) and claimed to
be Muslim.

The bother, then, asked: If the speech of prophet are the literal word
of God, then why are they not included in the Qur’an itself?

Not all the traditions are literal words of God. Only some traditions
are the literal words of God such as Hadith al-Qudsi. They are not a
part of Qur’an though. Some other traditions are the commands of Allah
transmitted by Gabriel, and thus, they are indirect words of Allah.

They include the divine commentaries of the verses of Qur’an which were
revealed along with Qur’an, but not as a part of Qur’an. The rest of
genuine traditions are the information and commandments that Allah
induced into the heart of the Prophet directly, and as such, they are
the indirect words of God. This includes his Ijtihad and whatever passed
through his mind.

Therefore, the some traditions are direct literal word of God, and some
are indirect words of God, and as such, all of them are either
revelation or inspiration, and are all from Allah. The Prophet did not
say anything of his own. The reason that they are not a part of Qur’an,
is because they were not supposed to be! A better answer is: Qur’an is
an encapsulated database which provides general information for all
ages. The Hadith is more specific and furnishes more details and also
provides commentary to the Qur’anic injunctions without which Qur’an can
not be understood correctly.

Conclusion
----------

In conclusion, I repeat the question: If Allah (SWT) had inspired
"sinful”Prophets and Messengers to lead people to the Right Path, it
would mean that Allah (SWT) approves of sinfulness! Why then does He
(SWT) prohibit it (sin, that is)?

***Allah and His Angels, send blessings on the Prophet: O you who
believe! Send your blessings on him, and salute him with all respect.
(Qur’an: 33:56)***

Wassalam.


