Leadership and Infallibility Part 1
===================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imamat Is Of Allah’s Grace
--------------------------

From the Shi’ite point of view, Imamat (God-assigned leadership) is an
Allah’s bounty upon mankind by which the religion was perfected. Allah,
to whom belong Might and Majesty, said:

***"Today I have perfected your religion and completed my bounty upon
you, and I was satisfied that Islam be your religion.”(Qur’an 5:3)***

See the articles on "Ghadir Khum”in Chapter 3 which provides the list of
Sunni commentators of Qur’an who confirmed the revelation of the above
verse in Ghadir Khum after the Prophet (S) announced ‘Ali (as) as the
master of all believers.

Imamat is the Grace (Lutf) of Allah which attracts mankind towards His
obedience and keeps them away from His disobedience, without compelling
them in any way. When Allah orders mankind to do something yet He is
aware that either they can not do it, or it is very difficult for them
to do it without His assistance, then if Allah does not provide His
assistance, He would be contradicting His own aim. Obviously, such
negligence is evil according to reason.

As such, Grace (Lutf) is one of Allah’s character, and He is
purified/exalted from inadequacy of lacking such attribute. In fact, the
holy Qur’an states that: "Allah is Gracious to His servants...”(Qur’an
42:19). And, there are many other places that Almighty uses the word
Grace (Lutf) in His book. See for instance, 6:103, 12:100, 22:63, 31:16,
33:34, 42:19, 67:14, etc.

The messengers of God were entrusted the responsibility of bringing new
commandments from Allah to the people. They were warners as Qur’an
testifies. However, some of the messengers were Also Imams/Guides. The
successors of the last Messenger of God were not messengers/prophets,
and as such, they did not bring any new massage nor did they cancel any
of the regulations set by the Prophet (S).

They just served as guides and guardians of religion. Their mission is
to explain, elaborate Shari’a (Divine law) for the people. They clear up
confusing things and events which may happen in each era. Also they are
the only individuals who have the full knowledge of Qur’an and the Sunna
of the Prophet Muhammad (S) after him, and as such, they are the only
qualified people who can properly interpret the verses of the holy
Qur’an and explain its meaning, as mentioned in Qur’an itself (See 3:7
and 21:7).

Imamat is a great bounty of Allah, because when people have a righteous
leader who guides them, they can get closer to righteousness and depart
from corruption and deviations in the matter of religion.

A divinely appointed Imam is also the most liable person to rule as the
head of the community who can maintain justice and remove oppression. Of
course, people have been given free will and can refrain from accepting
the Imam, but they will be held responsible for that, as was for the
case of the prophets. Nonetheless, the Imam would remain as a Proof of
God on the earth and as spiritual leader for the believers among people
who benefit his guidance.

Superiority Of The Imam
-----------------------

The Shi’a believe that, like the prophets, a divinely appointed Imam
should excel the community in all virtues, such as knowledge, bravery,
piety, and should possess complete knowledge of divine law.

If he does not, and Allah entrusts this high position to a less perfect
person when a more perfect person is available, the inferior has been
given preference over the superior, which is wrong rationally, and is
against divine justice. Therefore no inferior person may receive Imamat
from Allah when there exists a person superior to him.

Infallibility Of The Imam
-------------------------

If a divinely appointed leader is not infallible (Ma’sum), he would be
liable to errors and to deceive others as well. In such a case, no
implicit confidence may be placed in his sayings/commands/actions. A
divinely appointed Imam is the most liable person to rule as the head of
the community, and people are supposed to follow him in every matter.

Now if he commits a sin, people would be bound to follow him in that sin
as well, because of their ignorance of whether that action is sin or not
(Keep in mind the assumption that Imam is the most knowledgeable person
in his community).

Such a situation is not acceptable by the Grace of Allah since obedience
in sin is evil, unlawful, and forbidden. Moreover it would mean that
leader should be obeyed and disobeyed at the same time, that is
obedience to him is obligatory yet forbidden which is clearly a
contradiction and is not commendable.

Besides, if it would be possible for an Imam to commit sin, it would be
the duty of other people to prevent him from doing so. (Because every
Muslim is obliged to forbid other people from unlawful acts.) In such a
case, Imam will be held in contempt, and instead of being the leader of
community, he will become their followers, and his leadership will be of
no use as far as religion is concerned.

Imam is the defender of divine law, and this work can not be entrusted
to fallible hands, nor can any such person maintain this task properly.
Thus infallibility is an indispensable condition for a divinely
appointed Imam or Caliph who is the protector and interpreter of the
religious law.

Allah, Exalted, stated in Qur’an that:

***"O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those
vested with authority (Ulul-Amr) from among you.”(Qur’an 4:59).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّـهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ
مِنكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

This verse obliges the Muslims to obey two things: First, to obey Allah;
second, to obey Messenger and those vested with authority (Ulul-Amr).
The arrangement of the words shows that the obedience of Ulul-Amr is as
much obligatory as is the obedience of the Messenger because Qur’an uses
just one verb for both of them without repeating the verb again.

Naturally, it means that Ulul-Amr should be of the same importance as
the Messenger; otherwise Allah would not have joined them together in
this verse (Waw of Atf) under one verb. Interesting to note that Allah
employs a separate verb for Himself before mentioning the Messenger and
Ulul-Amr which shows that Allah has higher authority than that of the
Messenger and Ulul-Amr.

It is also clear from the above verse that Ulul-Amr are not restricted
to messengers otherwise Allah would only have said: "Obey Allah, and
Obey Messenger only.”But He added Ulul-Amr (those who are given
authority by Allah). This is one of the places where the concept of
Imams and the necessity of obedience to them come from.

In the previous article titled "Infallibility of the Prophets,”we quoted
many verses of Qur’an to prove the infallibility of the Prophet (S). All
those verses proved the following two points:

1. The authority of the Messenger of Allah (S) upon the believers was
unlimited and all-comprehensive. Any order given by him, under any
condition, in any place, at any time, was to be obeyed unconditionally.

2. Supreme authority was given to him because he was sinless (Ma’sum)
and free from all types of errors and sins. Otherwise, Allah would not
have ordered us to obey him with no questioning or doubt.

In that Article, we also gave reference to a tradition in Sahih
al-Bukhari which proves that both prophet and divinely appointed Caliphs
are infallible (Ma’sum).

Also from the verse 4:59 we concluded that Ulul-Amr have been given
exactly the same authority over Muslims as of Messenger, and that the
obedience of Ulul-Amr has the same standing as the obedience of the
Messenger.

It naturally follows that Ulul-Amr must also be sinless (Ma’sum) and
free from any type of error, otherwise, their obedience would not have
been joined with the obedience of the Prophet and without any condition.
The Commander of Believers, Imam ‘Ali (as), said:

The one who disobeys Allah is not to be obeyed; and "verily obedience is
for Allah and of His Messenger and those vested with authority.”Verily,
Allah ordered (people) to obey the Messenger because he was sinless and
clean (pure), who would not tell people to disobey Allah; and verily He
ordered (people) to obey those vested with authority because they are
sinless and clean (pure), and would not tell people to disobey
Allah.”(Ilal al-Sharaye’, by Shaikh al-Saduq, v1, p123).

Does Ulul-Amr Mean Muslim Rulers?
---------------------------------

Many of our Sunni brothers tend to interpret "Ulul-Amr Minkum”as the
rulers from among yourselves, i.e., Muslims rulers. This interpretation
is not based on any logical/Qur’anic reasoning; it is solely based on
the twists of history. The majority of the Muslims have remained as a
vassal of the monarchs and rulers, interpreting and reinterpreting Islam
and the Qur’an to strengthen their own kingdom.

The history of Muslims (like any other nations) is replete with the
names of rulers whose injustice, debauchery and tyranny have tarnished
the name of Islam. Such rulers have always been and will be. And we are
told that they are the Ulul-Amr mentioned in this verse!

If Allah were to order us to obey such kings and rulers, an impossible
situation would be created for Muslims. The wretched followers would be
condemned to the displeasure of Allah, no matter what they do. If they
obey these rulers, they have disobeyed the Command of Allah:

***"Do not obey a sinner”(Qur’an 76:24).***

And if they disobey such rulers, they have again disobeyed the Command
of Allah: "Obey the Muslim rulers”(if it would mean so). Therefore if we
accept this interpretation, Muslims are condemned to eternal disgrace
whether they obey or disobey their fallible (sinful) Muslim rulers.

Also, there are Muslim rulers of different schools and persuasions.
There are Shafi’is, Hanbalis, Malikis, Hanafis, as well as the Shi’a and
Ibadis. Now, according to this interpretation the Sunnis residing under
an Ibadi king (like in Amman) should follow Ibadi tenets; and those
residing under a Shi’a ruler (like in Iran) should follow the Shi’a
beliefs. Do these people have the conviction of courage to follow their
professed interpretation to its logical end?

The famous Sunni scholar, Fakhr al-Razi, concluded in his Tafsir
al-Kabir that this verse proves that Ulul-Amr must be infallible
(Ma’sum). He argues that Allah has commanded people to obey Ulul-Amr
unconditionally; therefore, it is essential for the Ulul-Amr to be
infallible; because if there is any possibility of their committing sin
(and sin is forbidden), it means that one has to obey them and also
disobey them in that very action, and this is impossible!

However, in order to dissuade his readers from the Ahlul-Bait, Fakhr
al-Razi invented the theory that the Muslim community as a whole is
infallible!!! (Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhruddin Muhammad Ibn Umar al-Razi,
v10, p144)

This interpretation is unique, and no Muslim scholar ever subscribed to
this theory and it is not based on any tradition. It is quite surprising
that Fakhr al-Razi accepts that each individual of the Muslim nation is
fallible, yet claims that their sum total is infallible. Even a primary
school student knows that 200 cows plus 200 cows makes 400 cows and not
one horse.

But Fakhr al-Razi says that 70 million fallible people plus 70 million
fallible people will make one infallible! Does he want us to believe
that if all the patients of a mental hospital join together they would
be equal to one sane person?

Obviously, with his knowledge of Qur’an, he was able to conclude that
Ulul-Amr must be infallible; yet he did not pause to see that the verse
contains the word "minkum”(from among you) which shows that Ulul-Amr
should be part of Muslim community, not the whole Muslim nation.
Moreover, if the whole Muslim nation is to be obeyed, then who is there
left to obey?

Moreover, the whole community have never had a single voice. Then who
should we follow among them? Also, the opinion of majority is not a good
criteria to distinguish the false from the truth. Looking at the Qur’an,
one could see that Qur’an severely denounces the majority of by
frequently saying that "the majority do not understand,”"the majority do
not use their logic,”"the majority follow their whims"... since the
vision of the majority of people is always impaired due to their
tendencies.(see e.g. 6:116, 5:49, 10:92, 30:8)

The Real Meaning Of Ulul-Amr
----------------------------

We now turn to the correct interpretation of the above verse, that is
the interpretation of the verse by Ahlul-Bait. Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (the
6th Imam) said that this verse was revealed about ‘Ali, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn, peace be upon them. Upon hearing this, someone asked the
Imam: "People say, why did Allah not mention the name of ‘Ali and his
family in His Book?”Imam answered: "Tell them that there came the
command of Salat (prayer), but Allah did not mention whether three or
four units to be performed; it was the Messenger of Allah who explained
all the details. And (the command of) Zakat (religious tax) was
revealed, but Allah did not say that it is one in every forty Dirhams;
it was the Messenger of Allah who explained it; and Hajj (pilgrimage to
Mecca) was ordered but Allah did not say to perform Tawaf (turning
around Ka’ba) seven times; it was the Messenger of Allah who explained
it. Likewise, the verse was revealed: Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger
and those vested with authority from among you, and it was revealed
about ‘Ali and al-Hasan and al-Husayn (who were the only living Imams at
the time of the Prophet)."

It is quite obvious that if Allah would have ever mentioned the name of
Imam ‘Ali (as) in Qur’an explicitly, those who bore mountains of hatred
against him would have attempted to alter the Qur’an. Thus this was the
Grace of Allah that He codified all the branches of knowledge of
religion in Qur’an to be understood only by the processors of the
understanding mind. And in this way, Allah kept Qur’an intact.

On the commentary of the verse 4:59 of Qur’an in which Allah orders us
to obey Ulul-Amr, al-Khazzaz in his book, Kifayatul Athar, gives a
tradition on the authority of the well-known companion of the Prophet
(S), Jabir Ibn Abdillah al-Ansari (ra):

When the verse (4:59) was revealed, Jabir asked the Prophet (S): "We
know Allah and the Prophet, but who are those vested with authority
whose obedience has been conjoined to that of Allah and yourself?"

The Prophet (S) said: "They are my Caliphs and the Imams of Muslims
after me. The first of them is ‘Ali; then al-Hasan; then al-Husayn; then
‘Ali son of al-Husayn; then Muhammad son of ‘Ali who has been mentioned
‘al-Baqir’ in the Torah (the old testament). O Jabir! You will meet him.
When you see him, convey my greetings to him. He will be succeeded by
his son, Ja’far al-Sadiq (the Truthful); then Musa son of Ja’far; then
‘Ali son of Musa; then Muhammad son of ‘Ali; then ‘Ali son of Muhammad;
then al-Hasan son of ‘Ali. He will be followed by his son whose name and
nick name will be the same as mine. He will be Proof of Allah
(Hujjatullah) on the earth, and the one spared by Allah (Baqiyyatullah)
to maintain the cause of faith among mankind. He shall conquer the whole
world from the east to the west. So long will he remain hidden from the
eyes of his followers and friends that the belief in his leadership will
remain only in those hearts which have been tested by Allah for faith."

Jabir said: "O Messenger of Allah! Will his followers benefit from his
seclusion?”The Prophet said: "Yes! by Him who sent me with prophethood!
They will be guided by his light, and benefit from his leadership during
his seclusion, just as people benefit from the sun even though it is
hidden in the clouds. O Jabir! This is from the hidden secrets of Allah
and the treasured knowledge of Allah. So guard it except from the people
who deserve to know.”(Kifayatul Athar, by al-Khazzaz, p53).

Now that we know who "those vested with authority”are, it is evident
that the question of obeying tyrant and unjust rulers does not rise at
all. Muslims are not required by the above verse to obey rulers who may
be unjust, tyrannical, ignorant, selfish and sunk in debauchery. They
are, in fact, ordered to obey the specified Twelve Imams, all of whom
were sinless and free from evil thoughts and deeds. Obeying them has no
risks whatsoever. Nay, it protects from all risks; because they will
never give an order against the order of Allah and will treat all human
beings with love, justice, and equity.


