Leadership and Infallibility Part 2
===================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Is Imamat A Matter Of Inheritance?
----------------------------------

According to the Shi’a, Imam is chosen by Allah. It is not the matter of
inheritance, for if it was the case, then Imam al-Husayn (as) should not
have become Imam after the martyrdom of Imam al-Hasan (as). Imam
al-Hasan had many children and descendants, yet non of them became Imam.
Rather, his brother, Imam al-Husayn (as), became Imam after him.

Also there have been some heretical sons and grandsons for some of the
Imams, non of whom received the position of Imamat. This shows that
leadership is not hereditary. Of course, a pure gene is necessary for
the Imam, but Imam needs many other qualifications as well. Allah knows
who has all such qualifications. It was just Allah’s wish to put all the
Imams in the Progeny of the Prophet (S).

In fact, if one study the history of the prophets of God, he will find
that they were from the same family. Allah, to whom belong Might and
Majesty, said:

***"And when Abraham was tested by his Lord with certain commands and he
fulfilled them. Then He said: Lo! I appoint you an Imam for mankind.
(Abraham) said: And of my offspring (will there be Imam)? He said: My
covenant does not reach the wrong-doers (among them).”(Qur’an 2:124).***

In the above verse, Allah did not deny leadership from the descendants
of Abraham, but He rather limited this position to the qualified progeny
of the Prophet Abraham. Allah said that God-assigned leadership does not
reach to a person who is a "Dhalim”(wrong-doer), even if such person is
the descendant of Abraham. Thus being the descendant of Abraham does not
necessarily make the person Imam because there should be other
qualifications beside it.

Those among them who were not wrong-doer (free from sin) were qualified,
since they not only had pure gene, but they have gained other
qualifications through hardship. As Allah had the foreknowledge of their
patience and qualifications, He entrusted them with this position, and
preferred them above all His creation:

***Lo! Allah preferred Adam and Noah and the Family of Abraham and the
Family of ‘Imran above (all His) creatures. (3:33)***

Prophet Muhammad’s lineage goes back to Prophet Ishmael (Isma’il) (as),
the son of Prophet Abraham (as). Also Prophet Moses (as) and Prophet
Jesus (as) were both from Prophet Isaac (as) who was the other son of
Prophet Abraham (as). In fact ALL the prophets after Abraham were from
his House. Yet, we do not claim that Prophethood is hereditary. He was
Allah who chose them one by one.

In other words, we do not say that the son of the Prophet should always
be a prophet. There should be many other qualifications beside it,
otherwise Kan’an, the son of Noah (as), would have survived. Prophet
Noah (as) had three other sons: Aam, Sam and Yafas who were believers
and who with their wives entered the Ark and were saved. They were from
different mother than that of Kan’an, however. Therefore being son of a
prophet or an Imam does not necessarily make the person prophet or Imam
or even righteous. In short, pure gene for the prophets and Imams is
necessary but NOT sufficient.

Ulul-Amr/Imam is assigned by Allah, the same way that prophet is
assigned by Allah. Look at Holy Qur’an in which Allah frequently stated
that He is the one who assigns Imam. (see Qur’an 2:124, 21:73, 32:24,
etc.)

There are twelve Imams who are assigned by Allah as the successors of
Prophet Muhammad (S). There is a widespread tradition in the Sunni
documents which states that the number of Imams after the Prophet are
twelve. (See for instance, Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English version, v9,
p250, tradition \#329; Sahih Muslim, English version, Chapter DCCLIV,
v3, p1009, traditions \#4477, \#4478; Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v4, p501; Sunan
Abu Dawud, v2, p421 ; Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v5, p106). There are
other Sunni documents in which the Prophet (S) even mentioned these
twelve Imams name by name. (see, for instance, "Yanabi’ al-Mawadda”by
al-Qunduzi al-Hanafi).

Allah assigned these twelve Imams, not just because they were from the
House of the Prophet (S), but because they were, in their times, the
most knowledgeable, the most illustrious, the most god-fearing, the most
pious, the best in personal virtues, and the most honored before Allah;
and their knowledge was derived from their ancestor (the Prophet)
through their fathers, and also by direct teachings from Allah through
inspiration (Ilham).

The successors of the prophets (except the successors of Prophet
Muhammad) were also prophets, and thus they were all assigned by Allah.
Also Qur’an tells that some prophets, with the order of Allah, assigned
Imams (who were not prophets). Let me give you some verses of Qur’an:

***Didn’t you turn your vision to the chiefs of the children of Israel
after Moses? They said to*** ***a Prophet (that was) among them:
"Appoint for us a*** ***king*** ***that we may fight in the cause of
Allah.”(Qur’an 2:246)***

Anyone who has been specifically assigned by Allah as king is an Imam. A
prophet can also be Imam/king but not all the prophets were Imam. If one
becomes a divinely appointed king/Imam, it does not necessarily mean
that he will physically govern. The above verse of Qur’an is about Talut
(as) Below is another verse of Qur’an which provides more details:

***Their Prophet(1)*** ***said to them: "Allah has*** ***appointed Talut
(Saul) as king(2)*** ***over you.”They say: "How can he exercise
authority over us when we are better fitted than he to have authority
and*** ***he has not been given wealth enough?(3)”He (i.e., their
Prophet) said: "Allah has chosen him(4)*** ***above you and*** ***has
gifted him abundantly with knowledge(5)*** ***and bodily prowess;***
***Allah grants His authority to whom He pleases.(6)*** ***Allah cares
for all and He knows all things.”(Qur’an 2:247)***

The first part of the above verse (marked 1) proves that the community
had a prophet and Talut was among the people of that community, so that
their Prophet was the prophet of Talut also. Thus Talut was not a
prophet.

The part marked 2, shows that Allah appointed Talut as Imam/leader/king.
Part 3 shows that divinely appointed king is not chosen based on wealth.
This kingship is primarily spiritual, and of course Talut is the most
qualified person to govern physically also, but the latter depends on
the adherence of people to them while the former position (spiritual
leadership) is always fixed for the Imam.

Electing Imam/king is not the duty of People, and as Part 4 suggests,
Allah chooses king/Imam for He knows who is the most qualified for such
eminent position. King here means the person who has authority by Allah.
This is proved by Part 6 of the above. The person who has this authority
is replete with knowledge and wisdom as Part 5 testified. In the next
verse, we read:

***And (further) their Prophet said to them: "A sign of*** ***his
authority*** ***is that there shall come to you the Ark of the Covenant
with (an assurance) therein of security from your Lord and the***
***relics left by the family of Moses and the family of Aaron***
***carried by angels. In this is a Symbol for you if you indeed have
faith.”(Qur’an 2:248)***

Also in another verse, Allah mentions:

***Or do they envy mankind for what Allah has given them of His bounty?
But We have bestowed the House of Abraham the Book and Wisdom and***
***bestowed upon them a great kingdom. (Qur’an 4:54)***

Again this kingdom is Imamat since only very few members of the House of
Abraham physically governed.

Can People Choose Imam?
-----------------------

The Sunnis claim that the issue of successor of the Prophet is resolved
by consultation (Shura) for Allah stated in Qur’an that their matter is
resolved through Shura.

The claim that the very issue of leadership is to be resolved through
consultation is unsupported. such claim is due to misunderstanding the
meaning of consultation (Shura). Consultation is different than
voting/election, and for that very reason, it can not be used for the
issue of Caliphate. Let me explain why:

When a leader wants to decide on a matter, based on the Islamic
regulations he may attempt to consult with a group of experts to get
their opinion on that specific matter. But he finally decides HIMSELF.
He does not take any vote. To prove my point, let us see the following
verse:

***"... And consult with them (Shawirhum) in the matter, then*** ***when
thou (Prophet) decided, put thy trust in Allah”(Qur’an 3:159)***

The above verse asks for the Shura, but Allah states "fa itha
azamta...”means only Prophet takes the final decision. There is no
voting at all. It is just the matter of getting the opinion. The final
decision by the Prophet may be different than of the majority of people
being consulted (because of "Maslaha”(discretion for the goodness) that
the leader realizes and because the leader is supposed to be superior in
knowledge, smarter, etc.).

One side remark here is that, due to his supreme knowledge, the Prophet
(S) did not even need to get the opinion of any of his people. However,
he did in some circumstances just to teach people the importance of
consultation.

In the issue of consultation (Shura), the existence of a leader is
already assumed who makes the final decision. This clearly proves that,
in the issue of successorship, consultation is meaningless (unless it is
done by the previous leader before his death).

After the death of a leader, there exists no leader who could do
consultation, unless such late leader had a deputy (or say
vice-president) who could carry out this function. Usually such
appointed deputy is the most qualified person for the position of
leadership, and even if he decides on somebody else to be the leader,
such leader is still appointed by this previously-appointed deputy, and
not by people!

Voting, however, is a totally different issue. In a democratic
community, all people have a chance to elect the choice of their
nominee. Such procedure has no support in Qur’an and Sunna for the issue
of leadership of the whole Muslims, because Islam is based on theocracy
(kingdom of Allah) and not democracy (government of people over people).

In fact, Qur’an denounces the opinion of the majority of people (see
6:116, 5:49, 10:92, 30:8) since the vision of the majority of people is
usually impaired due to their tendencies. Also, such popular election
did not happen for the first three rulers who came after the Prophet
(S), not even among the people of Medina.

Also, what if people choose an unqualified person who seems to be
qualified in their eyes, like a hypocrite? How can such corrupt person
becomes Ulul-Amr and his obedience becomes necessary? Certainly Allah
and His Prophet know better who is more qualified to be successor of the
Prophet (S).

Believe In Ulul-Amr
-------------------

If Qur’an tells us to unconditionally obey a person, it means that we

should believe in him and in his authority over us voluntarily (with
satisfaction). Note, however, that one should distinguish between
"believing that we should obey Ulul-Amr”and "obeying Ulul-Amr".

If one believes that he should obey Ulul-Amr, yet he sometimes disobeys
Ulul-Amr, he is a sinner and a weak believer. However if one does NOT
believe that he should obey Ulul-Amr, then such person is unbeliever
since he does not believe in a part of the religion of Allah, which is
explicitly mentioned in Qur’an.

In fact, both Shi’a and Sunni believe in Ulul-Amr since it is the clear
text of Qur’an. However they differ in how to choose Ulul-Amr. According
to the Shi’a, leadership of the whole Muslims is not a choice of people
so that the leader could be elected by people or selected by a
committee, and then is artificially made the Ulul-Amr whom Allah has
ordered people to obey!

I also remember a claim by a Sunni brother who mentioned that this verse
commands Muslims to obey people in authority (i.e., rulers) as long as
they do not interfere with religion!

To answer this claim, we would like to stress that there is no
restriction whatsoever given by Qur’an for obeying Ulul-Amr. In fact, in
the above verse, Ulul-Amr have been given exactly the same authority
over Muslims as that of Messenger, because both the Messenger and the
Ulul-Amr have been jointly mentioned (Waw of Atf) under one word "Obey",
which shows that the obedience of Ulul-Amr has the same standing as the
obedience of the Messenger, and therefore Ulul-Amr is the head of
religious affairs also.

He is the one who can properly interpret Qur’anic verses (See 3:7 and
21:7) and is the most knowledgeable to the Sunna of the Prophet (S).
Thus claiming that Ulul-Amr should not interfere with the religious
affairs is absurd, for he is the most qualified individuals to do
exactly such thing.


