The Twelve Imams Part 2
=======================

There is an interesting tradition in Sahih al-Bukhari as well as Sahih
Muslim, in which the Prophet (S) said the following:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 9.422

Narrated Abu Sa’id al-Khudri:

The Prophet said, "You will follow the ways of those nations who were
before you, span by span and cubit by cubit (i.e., inch by inch) so much
so that even if they entered a hole of a mastigure (lizard), you would
follow them.”We said, "O Allah’s Apostle! (Do you mean) the Jews and the
Christians?”He said, "Whom else?"

As the above tradition in Sahih al-Bukhari confirms, the Prophet stated
that the history of the Children of Israel will be repeated for Muslims.
In fact, Qur’an has mentioned the stories of the Children of Israel to
give us a way to understand the true history of Islam itself. There are
many striking similarities in this regard written in Qur’an including
the similarities of the leaders and the similarities of the people. I
just mention few of them here. Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty,
said:

***"Surely Allah aforetime*** ***took a covenant*** ***from the Children
of Israel and*** ***We appointed twelve*** ***leaders*** ***among
them”(Qur’an 5:12)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَخَذَ اللَّـهُ مِيثَاقَ بَنِي
إِسْرَائِيلَ وَبَعَثْنَا مِنْهُمُ اثْنَيْ عَشَرَ نَقِيبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Who are those twelve leaders among the Children of Muhammad (S)?

Allah, Exalted, also said:

***"And when Moses prayed for water for his (thirsty) people; We said:
‘Strike the rock with your staff.’ Then from there surged forth***
***twelve springs so that each group knew its own place to
drink.”(Qur’an 2:60).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذِ اسْتَسْقَىٰ مُوسَىٰ لِقَوْمِهِ فَقُلْنَا اضْرِب بِّعَصَاكَ
الْحَجَرَ فَانفَجَرَتْ مِنْهُ اثْنَتَا عَشْرَةَ عَيْنًا قَدْ عَلِمَ
كُلُّ أُنَاسٍ مَّشْرَبَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Who are those twelve springs (streams) of knowledge who quench the
thirst of Muslims to the end of the world so that each generation is
utilized with one of them? He, Exalted He is, also said:

***"We divided them into twelve nations. We directed Moses by revelation
when his (thirsty) people asked him for water: ‘Strike the rock with
your staff;’ out of it there gushed forth*** ***twelve springs*** ***so
that each group knew its own place for water. We gave them the shade of
clouds and sent down to them manna and quails (saying): ‘Eat of the good
things We have provided for you,’*** ***(but they rebelled.) To Us they
did no harm but they harmed their own souls.”(Qur’an 7:160).***

Verily those who did not follow those twelve leaders, harmed non but
themselves. The above verse suggests that the nation of the Prophet
Muhammad (S) in the span of history (after his demise till the day of
judgment) are divided into 12 intervals of time which coincides with one
Imam who is assigned as leader for them. In the next verse Allah said:

***"And when it was said unto them: ‘Dwell in this Town and eat therein
as you wish, and say Repentance, and enter the Gate (of the city) in a
posture of humility, in order that We forgive you your sins and increase
(the portion of) those who do good.’“(Qur’an 7:161)***

or:

***"And when We said: ‘Enter this Town and eat of the plenty therein as
you wish; but enter the Gate (of the City) with humility in posture and
in words so that We forgive you your sins and increase (the portion of)
those who do good.’“(Qur’an 2:58).***

The Gate in the above verses has a striking similarity with one of the
attributes of Imam ‘Ali (as) mentioned by our Prophet (S) that is: "The
Gate of the City of Knowledge."

The Messenger of Allah said: "I am the City of Knowledge, and ‘Ali is
its Gate. So whoever intends to enter the City and the Wisdom, he should
enter from its Gate."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنا مدينة العِلْم و عليٌ بابها، فَمَنْ أرادَ المدينة و الحكمة فليأتِها
من بابها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

- Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, pp 201,637

- al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, pp 126-127,226

- Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p635, Tradition \#1081

and many more...

Furthermore the following Prophetic tradition gives the utmost
similarity with the above two verses:

The Messenger of Allah said: "My Ahlul-Bait are like the Gate of
Repentance of the Children of Israel; whoever entered therein was
forgiven."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنما مثل أهل بيتي فيكم مثل باب حطة في بنى إسرائيل من دخله غفر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni References:

- Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haithami, v9, p168.

- al-Awsat, by al-Tabarani, Tradition \#18

- Arba’in, by al-Nabahani, p216

- A fairly similar tradition reported by al-Darqunti and by Ibn Hajar
al-Haithami in al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, Ch. 9, section 2, p193, in which
the Prophet (S) said: "‘Ali is the Gate of Repentance, whoever entered
therein was a believer and whoever went out was an unbeliever."

Also Allah (SWT) stated in Qur’an:

***Lo! The number of the months with Allah is twelve which is Allah’s
ordinance when He created the heavens and the earth. Four of them are
sacred. That is the firm religion. So wrong not your souls in them.
(Qur’an 9:36)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ عِدَّةَ الشُّهُورِ عِندَ اللَّـهِ اثْنَا عَشَرَ شَهْرًا فِي
كِتَابِ اللَّـهِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

In connection with the above verse of Qur’an, it would be nice to look
at the following tradition in Sahih al-Bukhari:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 5.688

Narrated Abu Bakra:

The Prophet said, "Time has taken its original shape which it had when
Allah created the Heavens and the Earth. The year is of twelve months,
four of which are sacred... Surely, you will meet your Lord, and He will
ask you about your deeds. Beware! Do not become infidels after me,
cutting the throats of one another. It is incumbent on those who are
present to convey this message (of mine) to those who are absent. May be
that some of those to whom it will be conveyed will understand it better
than those who have actually heard it.”He (i.e. Prophet) then added
twice, "No doubt! Haven’t I conveyed (Allah’s Message) to you?"

Now one may ask that what was in the above message that could not be
understood by the companions who were listening to the speech of the
Prophet during his last pilgrimage in Mecca? (For timing see also Sahih
al-Bukhari Hadith: 2.798).

The Message of the Prophet (S) had twofold meaning. The obvious meaning
is that the number of months are twelve and four months, namely
Dhul-Qa’da, Dhul-Hajja, Muharram, and Rajab are sacred months. In fact,
these months were believed to be sacred even before Islam. So there was
nothing in this message that the audience could not comprehend.

Moreover, the fact the above mentioned sacred months of the year were
accepted by the Jews and Christians, makes it clear that these months
can not be "the firm religion”as mentioned in the verse. So one should
look for a more delicate meaning.

The other meaning (as interpreted by Ahlul-Bait) is that the Prophet in
his last pilgrimage (less than three month before his demise) wanted to
convey that he will be followed by twelve Imams and people should not
wrong their souls by disobeying them in their leadership periods. Among
these twelve Imams, four have a sacred name, i.e., "‘Ali", which is
derived from the name of Allah. In fact, four Imams of Ahlul-Bait (peace
be upon them all) have been named "‘Ali".

In the Sira of Ibn Hisham, there is an extra sentence of the Messenger
of Allah which is, in fact, the verse of Qur’an. The Messenger of Allah
(S) said:

***"‘Postponement of a sacred month is only an excess of disbelief
whereby those who disbelieve are misled;*** ***they allow it one year
and forbid it another year*** ***that they may make up*** ***the number
of months which God has hallowed so that they permit what God has
forbidden (Qur’an 9:37),***

and forbid what God has allowed. Time has completed its cycle and is as
it was on the day that God created the heavens and the earth. The number
of months with God is twelve. Four of them are sacred."

Sunni references:

- Sira, by Ibn Hisham at the end of Chapter of "Farewell Pilgrimage",
p968

- The Life of Muhammad (English translation of Sira Ibn Hisham),
Translated into English by A. Guillaume, 1955 Edition, London, p651

Postponement of the sacred month is delay in accepting their leadership
and as the messenger of Allah said, those who disbelieve in their
leadership will be misled. They permit what God has forbidden, and
forbid what God has allowed. They try to make up the twelve Imams by
that which Allah has not honored.

The fact that some sects departed from the main body of the Shi’a in the
history was because they only accepted first few Imams and rejected the
rest. It is interesting to know that he who acknowledged all four
"‘Ali”among the Imams, he has acknowledged all the twelve Imams, since
there did not remain any sect believing in these four Imams and
rejecting others. In a tradition on the authority of Jabir (ra), Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir, the fifth Imam of Ahlul-Bait, interprets the above
verse which is as follows:

Jabir said: I asked Imam Muhammad al-Baqir about the meaning of the
verse: "Verily the number of the months … (9:36).”He (as) breathed long
(out of sorrow) and said: "O Jabir, The ‘year’ is my grandfather, the
messenger of Allah (S), and his family are its ‘months’ who are the
twelve Imams, and are … (naming the Imams one by one). They are the
Proofs of Allah on His creation, and Trusties of His revelations and His
knowledge. And Those of ‘four sacred who are the firm religion’ are
those four who have the same name, and are ‘Ali, the Commander of
Faithful (as), and my father ‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn (as), and later ‘Ali Ibn
Musa (as), and ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad (as). Thus acknowledging these four is
‘the firm religion, so wrong not your souls in them’ and believe in all
of them to be guided."

Shi’i reference: Kitab al-Ghaiba, by Shaikh Tusi.

Side Comments
-------------

A Sunni brother mentioned that there is a tradition which states "The
Caliphate will last 30 years after me then there will be kings.”These 30
years covered the Caliphate of Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib, as well as the 6 month rule of al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali. After these 30
years, the leadership went to Mu’awiya. As for the 5th Caliph through
the 11th Allah knows best, and the 12th will be al-Mahdi al-Muntadhar.

The above alleged tradition seems to be very odd, because Caliph means
successor/deputy. The successor of the Prophet (or the preceding Caliph)
should come right after the demise of the Prophet (or the preceding
Caliph) without any gap so that the word "successor”or "deputy”make any
sense. Also as narrated in Sahih Muslim, The Prophet (S) suggested those
twelve Caliphs cover till the day of resurrection.

See Qur’an 13:7 in which Allah states that Prophet Muhammad is a warner,
and for every community (generation) there exists a Guide (Imam). Who
was the Guide after the fifth Caliph? Who is the Guide today? Who is the
Ulul-Amr whose obedience is as much obligatory as the Prophet? Who is
the one spared by Allah (Baqiyyatullah) about whom Allah said:

***That who is spared by Allah (on the earth) is better for you if you
are believers. (Qur’an 11:86)***

The above verse is another proof for the fact that there exists one
individual at each era whom Allah has spared on the earth to maintain
the cause of faith and he is the Imam of that age. Thus the position of
God-assigned leadership is never vacated so long as the earth carries
even one human being. (Please see the article titled: "Necessity of the
Existence of Imam al-Mahdi (as)”for more detailed discussion of this
subject).

Moreover, You still did not answer who the rest of those twelve Imams
are? You claimed that Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, ‘Ali, al-Hasan are the
first five Caliphs, but you did not mention the rest. There is no doubt
that the Caliph should be known to his followers, otherwise an imaginary
Caliph can not be followed while the Prophet had asked us to closely
follow them. If you don’t know your leaders, how can you obey them?

It is very important to know that the saying of whom should be followed
(Which Caliph or Imam) since Allah unequivocally ordered us in Qur’an to
follow them as Ulul-Amr, and moreover, the Prophet ordered us to follow
them as one of the two weighty things. Obeying them is the only way of
salvation as the Prophet testified (Please see the article titled:
"Qur’an and Ahlul-Bait").

Now tell me my brother, what happened that after 30 years the kings were
going to come? Do you agree that misconduct of some people like Mu’awiya
caused such scandal for the Muslim nation? What went wrong? You claim
that these people were the best generation. Then how could they allow
themselves to convert the caliphate into a hereditary monarchy? It is
quite probable that the very same kings fabricated the tradition of
"Thirty Years”in order to dissuade people from the issue of twelve Imams
and to justify their usurping the rule.

Another Sunni brother commented that out of the twelve Shi’a Imams, only
Imam ‘Ali and his son Imam al-Hasan physically governed, and as such,
how do the Shi’a assert that the Prophet was referring to these
individuals when he mentioned the twelve Caliphs?

The answer is: Allah by His Grace, has assigned Prophets and their
successors to warn us and to guide us to the Right Path. It is upon our
decision whether we use our wisdom and accept their instructions or not.
We are not compelled to follow a divinely appointed Imam, though we will
be held responsible for that. It is our choice to go right or wrong.

Leadership has two parts. The first part is the leader. We believe that
since Allah knows who is the best for such position, He assigns the
leader for mankind, as indicated in Qur’an (see Qur’an 2:124, 21:73,
32:24, etc.). The appointment of Imam may be known through the
declaration of the Prophet or the preceding Imam.

In order that the leadership manifests itself in rulership, there is a
second part necessary, that is the followers. There should be some
followers for that leader to lead them and eventually be able establish
his government.

Allah has completed His bounty upon us by assigning leadership. It is
upon us to do the other part, that is to follow the leadership of the
Prophet and his Ahlul-Bait. If we do so, the leader will come
automatically into power in this worldly life. However, if we disobey
them, the leader seemingly has no power in appearance and he will remain
as the spiritual leader for his few loyal followers (Imam al-Muttaqin/
leader of god-fearing people).

Muslims can not deny that prophets (some of whom were Imams of their
time as well) were assigned by God. Now, if we study their lives, some
of which have been explained in Qur’an, we see that the majority of them
were oppressed in their communities. Let us look at the life of Prophet
John (Yahya). He was a prophet assigned by Allah, and people were
supposed to obey him, but they did not support him. Instead, they
slaughtered him and chopped his head off. Now, one may ask: Was not he
an Imam? Did Allah fail to support his Prophet? The answer is that Allah
has given people some free will to either accept or reject the
leadership He assigns. In the case of Prophet John, people rejected him,
and obviously they will go to Hell for their disobedience. The same goes
for the Prophet Abraham (as) who was also Imam. Qur’an states:

***"And when Abraham was tested by his Lord with certain commands and he
fulfilled them. Then He said: Lo! I appoint you an Imam for
mankind.”(Qur’an 2:124).***

People were supposed to follow such divinely appointed who was assigned
by Allah, but they stood against him. They even went as much as throwing
him into fire. Thus the above verse clearly shows that the Imam who is
assigned by Allah may not physically govern in appearance.

Therefore leadership has two parts. Allah does His part out of His
Grace. It is our choice if we fulfill the other part by adhering to such
leader in order to attain the prosperity of this world and of the
hereafter. In the case of our Imams, though they were the best qualified
people for leadership and though they were assigned by Allah and His
Prophet, the majority of people disobeyed them. This is not surprising
since the history of mankind repeats itself.

As such, Imam ‘Ali (as) was Imam during the time of the first three
rulers after the demise of the Prophet (S), and what these rulers could
take from him was the rulership and not the position of Imamat.

In other words, a divinely appointed Imam is the most the qualified
individual to be the ruler, but concept of Imamat has much more than
just rulership. Imam is the Guide for the God-fearing people, and
possesses the full knowledge of Qur’an and the Sunna of the Prophet, and
is the protected place of refuge for the disagreements in the matter of
religion.

A remark, however, is that the case for Imam al-Mahdi (as) would be
different. He is the one who will en his rule with the help of Allah
when Allah let him appear. That is why he has been given the title of
al-Qa’im (the one who shall stand).

\*\*\*

A Sunni brother replied that according to Qur’an Abraham (as) said: And
make me for the God fearing an Imam. Imam- you translate it as leader,
but with political connotation; however, it is clear here that the
meaning is leader in the sense of first. You make it seem as if he is
seeking to campaign for the position of Namrud or govern Iraq, or
something like that when the message of Abraham was to lay out the road
for the people to know Allah and worship him which is the main thing
prophets were sent for.

My response was: As to whether the Prophet Abraham was supposed to be
merely a spiritual Imam for the believers or an Imam who rules on the
earth, my argument was clear, and apparently this brother did not
comprehend it. I mentioned that a divinely appointed Imam such as
Abraham, is an Imam whether people follow him or not. If (say the
majority of) people follow him, he will automatically come into power,
and if they disobey him, he will still possess his spiritual leadership
for his few faithful followers (the God fearing people).

Brother, do you claim that Allah ordered only Muttaqin (the God fearing
people) to follow Abraham, and other people were not ordered to follow
him?! Every body at that time was supposed to obey Abraham, and those
who did not are doomed to Hell. Also the verse 2:124 of Qur’an clearly
sates Allah assigned him Imam for "mankind", not a specific group.

Moreover, your above comment that the prophets did not have any
political agenda is not correct. By the above statement you are
unintentionally opposing Prophet Muhammad who campaigned against the
unbelievers of the Arabian Peninsula like Abu Sufyan, and made the first
Islamic government. It is true that all the prophets were sent to
educate people and make them mindful of Allah. But this can not be fully
achieved without any political power.

Also I never mentioned that governing the state is the first goal of a
divinely appointed leader. Rather, I said that such leader is the most
qualified person for such position. People should realize this fact and
submit to his command, and if they do that he will be automatically on
the head of community without a need for "agenda".

A Sunni brother mentioned that even some individuals who disliked Shi’a
very much such as Ibn Kathir in his book "al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya”has
mentioned that al-Husayn (ra) is considered to be one of the twelve
Caliphs.

About this, I would like to comment that if these Sunnis really believe
that Imam al-Husayn (as) was one of the Caliphs, then they have already
acknowledged what the Shi’a say! That is, the position of
deputy/successor of the Prophet is not identified with the one who gains
the control of power, otherwise Imam al-Husayn who did not physically
govern, could not have been counted among the twelve Caliphs.

Also I agree that Ibn Kathir along with Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya hated the
Shi’a, and most probably they learnt their hatred from their teacher Ibn
Taimiyya. None of these personalities are admired by the Sunnis even
though the Wahhabis have filled the libraries with the books of these
individuals.


