The Reward of Loving Ahlul-Bayt
===============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I found the following astonishing tradition in one of the most famous
Tafsir book of the Sunni brothers, that is, "Tafsir al-Kabir", by Fakhr
al-Razi who is a leading Sunni scholar with multiple specialties in
Tafsir, Fiqh, and theology.

The full address of the document is given at the end. I have provided
Arabic text for each sentence of this tradition. This tradition can also
be found in other Sunni commentary books of Qur’an, "Tafsir
al-Kashshaf,”written by al-Zamakhshari, as well as "Tafsir al-Tha’labi."

Before going over the text of the tradition, it is important to point
out that a true love is always accompanied by obedience. A person who is
crazy about somebody, does every thing to satisfy the lover, and does
not allow himself to disobey the one who loves.

That is why the "true love”is necessary and sufficient. A true love
affects every single action of human being and directs it to a special
direction in harmony with the one who loves. Thus anyone who claims to
love the Prophet and his Ahlul-Bayt (peace be upon them all), but he
insists in disobeying them, is simply a liar.

After giving the text of the tradition I shall quote the related verse
of Qur’an under whose commentary this tradition was mentioned. I will
also present some other traditions transmitted by the Sunnis which
clearly specify the individuals whose love is obligatory.

“““““

The Messenger of Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات على حب آل محمد ، مات شهيداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who dies with love of the family of Muhammad is a Martyr.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ومن مات على حب آل محمد ، مات مغفورا له
  </p>
</blockquote>

And behold! He who dies with love of the family of Muhammad is forgiven.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 ألا ومن مات على حب آل محمد ، مات تائبا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And more! The one who dies with love of the family of Muhammad is died
repented.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ومن مات على حب آل محمد ، مات مؤمنا مستكمل الإيمان
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lo! He who dies with love of the family of Muhammad is died as a
believer with a COMPLETE belief.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ومن مات على حب آل محمد ، بشره ملك الموت بالجنة ،ثم منكر ونكير 
  </p>
</blockquote>

And no doubt! The one who dies with love of the family of Muhammad, the
angle of death gives him the glad tiding of Paradise, and so do the two
angels who question him (Munkar & Nakeer).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ومن مات على حب آل محمد ، يزف إلى الجنة كما تزف العروس إلى بيت
زوجها
  </p>
</blockquote>

And verily he who dies with love of the family of Muhammad, will be led
toward the Paradise as the bride is led to the house of her husband.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ومن مات على حب آل محمد ، فتح له في قبره بابان إلى الجنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Behold! And he who dies with love of the family of Muhammad, for him
there will open two gates in his grave toward the Paradise.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ومن مات على حب آل محمد ، جعل الله زوار قبره ملائكة الرحمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lo! And the one who dies with love of the family of Muhammad, Allah will
make his grave a sacred place of visit for the angels of mercy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ومن مات على حب آل محمد ، مات على السنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

And verily he who dies with love of the family of Muhammad, has died on
Sunnah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 ألا ومن مات على بغض آل محمد جاء يوم القيامة مكتوب بين عينيه "آيس من
رحمة الله"
  </p>
</blockquote>

And no doubt! The one who dies with the HATE of the family of Muhammad,
will arrive in the day of judgment while it is printed on his forehead
that he is desperate from the Mercy of Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ومن مات على بغض آل محمد ، مات كافرأ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

Behold! He who dies with the hate of the family of Muhammad, has died
unbeliever.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ومن مات على بغض آل محمد ، لم يشم رائحة الجنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

And verily he who dies with the hate of the family of Muhammad, will
never hear the smell of Paradise.

Sunni references:

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Din Muhammad Ibn Umar al-Razi, Pub. in
Egypt (1357/1938), under commentary of verse 42:23, Part 27, pp.
165-166.

• Tafsir al-Kashshaf, by al-Zamakhshari

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by al-Tha’labi

\*\*\*

Fakhr al-Razi and others mentioned the above tradition under the
commentary of the following verse of Qur’an, in which Allah tell his
Messenger:

***"(O Prophet) tell (people) I don’t ask you any wage (in return for my
prophethood) except to love my near kin. And if anyone earns any good We
shall give Him an increase of good (in return for it)”(Qur’an 42:23).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لَّا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been widely reported by the Sunni commentators of the Holy Qur’an
that:

Ibn Abbas narrated: When the above verse (42:23) was revealed, the
companions asked: "O’ the Messenger of Allah! Who are those near kin
whose love Allah has made obligatory for us?”Upon that the Prophet (S)
said: "‘Ali, Fatimah, and their two sons.”He (S) repeated this sentence
thrice.

Sunni references:

1. Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, Part 27, pp 165-166

2. Tafsir al-Tha’labi, under the commentary of verse 42:23 of Qur’an

3. Tafsir al-Tabari, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, under verse 42:23

4. Tafsir al-Qurtubi, under commentary of verse 42:23 of Qur’an

5. Tafsir al-Kashshaf, by al-Zamakhshari, under commentary of verse
42:23

6. Tafsir al-Baidhawi, under the commentary of verse 42:23 of Qur’an

7. Tafsir al-Kalbi, under commentary of verse 42:23 of Qur’an

8. al-Madarik, in connection with verse 42:23

9. Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, p25

10. Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal,

11. al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p259

12. Shawahid al-Tanzeel, Hakim Hasakani, al-Hanafi, v2, p132

13. Many others such as Ibn Abi Hatam, al-Tabarani, etc.

Then the Prophet (S) continued:

"Verily Allah has dedicated my wage (of prophethood) to love of my
Ahlul-Bayt, and I shall question you about it on the day of judgment."

Sunni references:

• Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, p26

• al-Sirah, by al-Mala

In another tradition, we read:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "I advice you to be kind to my
Ahlul-Bayt for verily I will dispute you about them on the day of
Judgment, and whoever I dispute him shall enter the Fire.”He (S) also
said: "One who regards me by regarding my Ahlul-Bayt, he has taken a
promise from Allah (to enter the Paradise)."

Sunni references:

• al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d

• al-Sirah, by al-Mala

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p231

Furthermore, al-Kateeb and Ibn Hajar narrated on the authority of Anas
Ibn Malik saying:

The Prophet (S) said: "The title of the Book (Saheefah) of believer is
love of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib."

Sunni references:

• Tarikh, by al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 9, section 2,
p193

In the above tradition, "The Book of believer”refers to the way a
believer conducts the affairs, i.e., his daily life, and his diary.

On the commentary of the Qur’anic verse: ***"Lo! those who believe and
do good, the Beneficent will appoint for them love (Qur’an
19:96),”***al-Hafidh al-Salafi wrote: Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyyah said:
"There will not be a believer unless in whose heart love of ‘Ali and his
family exists.”In this connection, al-Bayhaqi, Abu al-Shaikh, and
al-Daylami reported that the Messenger of Allah said: "A servant (of
God) will not be a (true) believer unless he loves me more than his own
soul, and loves my progeny more than his own soul and his own
family.”See al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11,
section 1, pp 261-262 quoted from al-Hafidh al-Salafi, al-Bayhaqi, Abu
al-Shaikh, and al-Daylami).

al-Tirmidhi and Ahmad narrated:

The Messenger of Allah said: "He who loves me and loves these two:
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and loves their father and mother, he will be
with me in Paradise."

Sunni reference:

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, p641

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, on the authority of Imam ‘Ali (as)

• Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p693, Tradition \#1185

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p264

It is also narrated that:

The Messenger of Allah said: "Verily the prosperous and the only
prosperous and the true prosperous is he who loves ‘Ali in his lifetime
and in his hereafter."

Sunni reference:

• Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p658, Tradition \#1121

• al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, v3, p176

• Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p132

• Sharh Ibn Abil Hadid, v2, p429

Sunni scholars also narrated that Imam al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali (as) said the
following in a discourse which he delivered on the martyrdom of Imam
‘Ali:

***"... I am among Ahlul-Bayt whom Allah has made their love obligatory
for any Muslim when He revealed to His Prophet (S): "Say: I don’t ask
you any wage except to love my near kin. And if anyone earns any good We
shall give Him an increase of good (Qur’an 42:23).”***

Thus earn the good deed through loving us Ahlul-Bayt."

Sunni references:

• al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, "Chapter of understanding the virtues of
companions,”v3, p172

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p259

• Many others such as al-Bazzar, al-Tabarani, etc.

Furthermore, it is narrated from Ibn Abbas:

Ibn Abbas said:

***"The good deed in the verse: ‘And if anyone earns any good We shall
give Him an increase of good (Qur’an 42:23)’***

is the love of family (Aal) of the Muhammad (S)."

Sunni references:

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, as mentioned in:

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p259

Sunni traditionists also narrated that:

After the murder of al-Husayn when his family were taken prisoners and
were moved to Damascus, a man in the city (who among others was looking
at the passing of prisoners in the city) said to Zain al-Abideen (Imam
‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn) that "Praise be to Allah who destroyed you and made
you helpless and cut the root of sedition.”On that, Zain al-Abideen
said: "Didn’t you read ‘Tell I don’t ask you any wage except to love my
near kin’?”The man answered: "Are you those?”He (Zain al-Abideen) said:
"Yes."

Sunni references:

• Tafsir Ibn Kathir (complete version), v4, p112, under commentary of
verse 42:23 of Qur’an

• al-Tabarani, as mentioned in:

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p259

In contrary to all above traditions, Yusuf ‘Ali has a very strange
commentary for the verse 42:23. He wrote:

No sort of tangible reward does the Prophet of Allah ask for proclaiming
the Glad Tidings of Allah. But at least he has the right to ask that his
kith and kin should not persecute him and put all sorts of obstacles in
his way, as did the Quraish against the holy Prophet. (Yusuf ‘Ali’s
commentary of 42:23)

What Yusuf ‘Ali implied was that, by the above verse, the Prophet was
asking his kin not to prosecute him and they should love his kin, i.e.,
the Prophet. The fact is that the above mentioned traditions of the
Prophet regarding the revelation of verse 42:23, contradict what Yusuf
‘Ali commented. I wonder if we Should take the opinion of the Prophet or
the opinion of Yusuf ‘Ali?! It is noteworthy that the above mentioned
traditions were narrated by the prominent Sunni traditionists through
various transmitters. Yusuf ‘Ali was not a traditionist nor do Sunnis
consider his commentary an authoritative one.

Besides, we can prove logically that Yusuf ‘Ali’s commentary is
incorrect. "Those of near kin”are the kin of the Prophet himself.
Because Prophet Muhammad is only one person. If Allah wanted to say
"Love the Prophet because he is your kin", He could say so, and He would
not use "Those of near kin". Moreover, from the verse it is clear that
Allah was not addressing non-Muslims, because the verse is about his
wage in return for his prophethood. Thus those unbelievers (among his
kin or else) who do not recognized him as a prophet, were not being
addressed. What kind of wage could the Prophet expect from an unbeliever
(among his kin or else) who do not recognize him as a prophet?!

Thus they are Muslims who are being addressed by the verse. Now, if
Yusuf ‘Ali meant that the verse was addressing those Muslims who were
his kin, then I would like to ask: Who among the near kin of the Prophet
who was Muslims but tried to prosecute the Prophet? The answer is Non.
If you think otherwise, please present your evidence from the history of
the life of the Prophet (S).

Therefore, the Yusuf ‘Ali’s commentary is neither in harmony with the
above-mentioned Sunni traditions in this regard, nor in harmony with
logic.

I do not intend to discuss all the mistakes which exist in the Yusuf
‘Ali’s works. I myself have found some trivial mistakes in his
translation of Qur’an, and there is even a book named "Discussion on the
errors of Yusuf ‘Ali", (Paperback, $12.00 in the United States) which
discusses some of his errors. Although I do not intend to fully
discredit his works, it would be beneficial to mention his translation
of a verse of Qur’an in connection with the current topic, and then
compare it to other translations. This verse is very similar to the
above-mentioned verse of Qur’an (42:23). Allah, to whom belong might and
majesty, similarly said:

***"(O Prophet) tell (people) whatever I asked you as wage (in return
for my prophethood) is in the benefit of you (people)”(Qur’an 34:47).***

Here is the Pickthall’s translation:

***"Say: Whatever reward I might have asked of you is yours”(34:47).***

Now, let us look at the Yusuf ‘Ali’s translation:

***"Say: No reward do I ask of you; it is (all) in your interest”Yusuf
‘Ali (34:47).***

One can see that the translation of Yusuf ‘Ali provides meaning quite
contradictory to the others. In the translation of the above verse,
Yusuf ‘Ali states that the Prophet did not ask any wage. By that, Yusuf
‘Ali contradicted his own translation of the other mentioned verse
(42:23) where he states the Prophet did, in fact, ask for the wage:

***"Say: No reward do I ask of you for this except the love of those
near of kin.”(42:23)***

There is no doubt that the reward of the Prophet is with Allah. However,
with the above order of Allah, the Prophet did ask People to love his
family as his wage. Such request is, in fact, for the benefit of people
as verse 34:47 testifies. The verses of Holy Qur’an explain one another.
More Surprisingly, there is a third verse with another wording which
implies that the benefit that people get by fulfilling the Prophet’s
request (i.e., affection and devotion to Ahlul-Bayt) is that they will
be led to the path (Sabeel) of Allah:

***"Say: I ask of you no reward for it except that one who wishes, may
adopt a Path (Sabeel) toward his Lord.”(Qur’an 25:57)***

Pickthall’s translation:

***"Say: I ask of you no reward for this save that whoso will, may
choose a Way unto his Lord.”(25:57)***

Putting verse 25:57 beside 42:23 and 34:47 gives evidence to the fact
that each member of Ahlul-Bayt is the Right Path (Sabeel) toward Allah,
and the way toward His satisfaction. The Right Path of Allah is no more
than one even though it manifested in a sequence of divinely appointed
leaders. As such, each of these leaders were the unique Path (Sabeel) of
Allah in their own time, and through whom people can attain protection
against disagreement in religious matters. In fact, the Messenger of
Allah confirmed the above conclusion from the latter verse. Ibn Sa’d and
Ibn Hajar recorded that:

The Messenger of Allah said: "Me and my Ahlul-Bayt are a tree in
Paradise whose branches came to this world (Dunyaa). Thus whoso will,
may choose a Path unto his Lord (by taking a branch and reaching to the
stem in Paradise)."

Sunni references:

• al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d

• Sharaf al-Nubuwwah, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, on the authority of Abu
Sa’id

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p231

The above underlined part of the Hadith of the Prophet (S) is the
Qur’anic verse mentioned above (25:57). The true love for Ahlul-Bayt
will, in fact, oblige us to follow their Right Path which guarantees the
human prosperity in this world as well the Paradise in the world after.

Wassalam.


