Al-Azhar Verdict on the Shi’a
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

What follows is the Fatwa (religious verdict/ruling) of one of the Sunni
world’s most revered scholars, Shaikh Mahmood Shaltoot with regard to
the Shi’a. Shaikh Shaltoot was the head of the renowned al-Azhar
Theological school in Egypt, one of the main centers of Sunni
scholarship in the world. It should be of interest to know that a few
decades ago, a group of Sunni and Shi’a scholars formed a center at
al-Azhar by the name of "Dar al-Taqreeb al-Madhahib al-Islamiyyah”which
translates into "Center for bringing together the various Islamic
schools of thought".

The aim of the effort, as the name of the center indicates, was to
bridge the gap between the various schools of thought, and bring about a
mutual respect, understanding and appreciation of each school’s
contributions to the development of Islamic Jurisprudence, among the
scholars of the different schools, so that they may in turn guide their
followers toward the ultimate goal of unity, and of clinging to one
rope, as the well-known Qur’anic verse, "Hold fast to the Rope of Allah
and do not diverge”clearly demands of Muslims.

This massive effort finally bore its major fruit when Shaikh Shaltoot
made the declaration whose translation is appended below. It should be
made unequivocally clear as well, that al-Azhar’s official position, vis
a vis the propriety of following any of the Madhaahib, including the
Shi’ite Imami school, has remained unchanged since Shaikh Shaltoot’s
declaration.

Some people who follow pseudo-scholars in Hijaz may beg to differ; that
notwithstanding, what you see below is the view held by the overwhelming
majority of Sunni scholars, and not just those at al-Azhar. Let it be
known to those who strive to divide us, that their efforts are but in
vain.

For the readership’s reference the phrase "al-Shi’a al-Imamiyyah
al-Ithna ‘Ashariyyah”means the Twelver Imami Shi’ite School of thought
which comprises the overwhelming majority of Shi’ites today. The phrase
"Twelver Shi’ites”is used interchangeably with "Ja’fari Shi’ites”and
"Imami Shi’ites”in various literature. They are merely different names
for the same school of thought.

"al-Shi’a al-Zaidiyyah”are a minority among the Shi’ites, concentrated
mainly in Yemen located in the Eastern part of Arabian peninsula. For a
more detailed description of the Zaidis vs. the Twelver Shi’ites, please
refer to the book, "Shi’ite Islam”written by the great Shi’ite scholar,
Allamah Tabataba’i, and translated by Seyyed Hossein Nasr, and published
by the State University of New York Press (SUNY).

And as for Shaikh Shaltoot’s declaration:

Head Office of al-Azhar University:

In the name of Allah, the Benefient, the Merciful

**Text of the Verdict (Fatwa) Issued by His Excellency Shaikh al-Akbar
Mahmood Shaltoot, Head of the al-Azhar University, on Permissibility of
Following "al-Shi’a al- Imamiyyah”School of Thought**

His Excellency was asked:

Some believe that, for a Muslim to have religiously correct worship and
dealing, it is necessary to follow one of the four known schools of
thought, whereas, "al-Shi’a al-Imamiyyah”school of thought is not one of
them nor "al-Shi’a al-Zaidiyyah.”Do your Excellency agree with this
opinion, and prohibit following "al-Shi’a al-Imamiyyah al-Ithna
Ashariyyah”school of thought, for example?

His Excellency replied:

1) Islam does not require a Muslim to follow a particular Madh’hab
(school of thought). Rather, we say: every Muslim has the right to
follow one of the schools of thought which has been correctly narrated
and its verdicts have been compiled in its books. And, everyone who is
following such Madhahib (schools of thought) can transfer to another
school, and there shall be no crime on him for doing so.

2) The Ja’fari school of thought, which is also known as "al-Shi’a al-
Imamiyyah al-Ithna Ashariyyah”(i.e., The Twelver Imami Shi’ites) is a
school of thought that is religiously correct to follow in worship as
are other Sunni schools of thought.

Muslims must know this, and ought to refrain from unjust prejudice to
any particular school of thought, since the religion of Allah and His
Divine Law (Shari’ah) was never restricted to a particular school of
thought. Their jurists (Mujtahidoon) are accepted by Almighty Allah, and
it is permissible to the "non-Mujtahid”to follow them and to accord with
their teaching whether in worship (Ibadaat) or transactions
(Mu’amilaat).

Signed,

Mahmood Shaltoot.

The above Fatwa was announced on July 6, 1959 from the Head of al-Azhar
University, and was subsequently published in many publications in the
Middle East which include, but are not limited to:

1. al-Sha’ab newspaper (Egypt), issue of July 7, 1959.

2. al-Kifah newspaper (Lebanon), issue of July 8, 1959.

The above segment can also be found in the book "Inquiries about Islam",
by Muhammad Jawad Chirri, Director of the Islamic Center of America,
1986 Detroit, Michigan.

English and Arabic text Images
------------------------------

![](/sites/default/files/shia1.png)

![](/sites/default/files/shia2.png)


