Qur’an and Ahlul-Bayt
=====================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Based on a parallel (Mutawatir) tradition upon whose authenticity all
Muslims agree, the Messenger of Allah (S) informed his followers in
several occasions that he would leave them two precious/weighty things
and that if Muslims adhere to both of them, they will never go astray
after him. They are the Book of Allah (Qur’an) and the Members of the
House of the Prophet (Ahlul-Bayt), peace be upon them all.

It is narrated in Sahih Muslim as well as many other sources that:

Someday (after his last pilgrimage) the Messenger of Allah (S) stood to
give us a speech beside a pond which is known as Khum (Ghadir Khum)
which is located between Mecca and Medina. Then he praised Allah and
reminded Him, and then said: "O’ people! Behold! It seems the time
approached when I shall be called away (by Allah) and I shall answer
that call. Behold! I am leaving for you two precious things. **First of
them is the book of Allah** in which there is light and guidance...**The
other one is my Ahlul-Bayt**. I remind you in the name of Allah about my
Ahlul-Bayt. I remind you in the name of Allah about my Ahlul-Bayt. I
remind you in the name of Allah about my Ahlul-Bayt. (three times)."

Sunni Reference:

• Sahih Muslim, Chapter of the virtues of the companions, section of the
virtues of ‘Ali, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, Arabic version, v 4,
p1873, Tradition \#36.

• And many others such as Sahih al-Tirmidhi, Musnad Ahmad (see below).

For the English version of Sahih Muslim, see Chapter CMXCVI, v4, p1286,
Tradition \#5920

Here is the Arabic text of the above tradition in Sahih Muslim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قام رسول الله يوما فينا خطيبا بماء يدعى خما بين مكة والمدينة ، فحمد
الله وأثنى عليه ، ووعظ وذكر ، ثم قال: أما بعد ، ألا أيها الناس ، فإنما
أنا بشر ، يوشك أن يأتي رسول ربي فأجيب ، وأنا تارك فيكم ثقلين ، أولهما:
كتاب الله ، فيه الهدى والنور ، فخذوا بكتاب الله ، واستمسكوا به ، فحث
على كتاب الله ورغب فيه ، ثم قال: وأهل بيتي ، أذكركم الله في أهل بيتي،
أذكركم الله في أهل بيتي ، أذكركم الله في أهل بيتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

As we can see in the above tradition in Sahih Muslim, not only
Ahlul-Bayt has been put beside the Qur’an, but also it has been
mentioned three times by the Prophet (S).

Despite the fact that the author of Sahih Muslim and many other Sunni
traditionists have recorded the above tradition in their authentic
books, it is regrettable that the majority of Sunnis are unaware of its
existence at the best, or deny it at the worst. Their counter argument
is that the most reliable tradition in this regard is the one recorded
by al-Hakim in his al-Mustadrak, on the authority of Abu Huraira,
attributing to the Messenger of Allah saying: "I leave amongst you two
things that if you follow or act upon, you will not go astray after me:
The Book of God and my Sunnah (traditions)."

There is no doubt that ALL Muslims are required to follow the Sunnah of
the Prophet (S). However, the question remains that which Sunnah is
genuine and which one is invented later and was falsely attributed to
the Prophet.

On tracing the source of this report of Abu Huraira which states "Qur’an
and Sunnah,”we found out that it has NOT been recorded in any of the six
authentic Sunni collections of the traditions (Sihah Sittah). Not only
that, but also al-Bukhari, al-Nisa’i, and al-Dhahabi and many others
rated this report (Qur’an and Sunnah) as weak because of its weak Isnad.
It should be noted that although the book of al-Hakim is an important
Sunni collection of traditions, yet it is ranked inferior to the six
major Sunni books. This is while Sahih Muslim is in the second rank
among the six Sunni collections of traditions.

al-Tirmidhi reported that the "Qur’an and Ahlul-Bayt”version of the
tradition is traced to 30+ companions. Ibn Hajar al-Haythami reported
that he knows of 20+ companions witnessed that also. This is while the
"Qur’an and Sunnah”version reported by al-Hakim has only one source!
Thus we must conclude that the "Qur’an and Ahlul-Bayt”version is much
more reliable. Moreover al-Hakim has also mentioned the "Qur’an and
Ahlul-Bayt”version in his book (al-Mustadrak) through several chain of
authorities and confirmed that the "Qur’an and Ahlul-Bayt”version of the
tradition is authentic based on the criteria of al-Bukhari and Muslim.

Moreover, the word "Sunnah”by itself does not serve the purpose of
knowledge. All Muslims irrespective to their persuasions claim that they
follow the Sunnah of the Prophet (S). The differences among Muslims come
from the transmitted Prophetic traditions through different avenues.
Such traditions serve as explanatory means of the Holy Qur’an upon whose
authenticity all Muslims agree.

Thus divergence in the transmitted traditions, which in turn has led to
differing interpretation of Qur’an and the prophetic Sunnah, has created
numerous versions of Sunnah. All Muslims, as a result, splintered into
different schools, groups, offshoots, which is believed to add up to
seventy three groups.

All of them are obeying their own version of Sunnah which they claim to
be the true one. Which of these groups follow the true Sunnah of the
Prophet? Which one (out of 73 groups) will be the prosperous one, and
will survive? Other than the tradition of Sahih Muslim mentioned above,
the following authentic traditions provide a unique detailed answer for
this question:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "I am leaving for you two precious and
weighty Symbols that **if** you adhere to BOTH of them you shall not go
astray after me. They are, the Book of Allah, and my progeny, that is my
Ahlul-Bayt. The Merciful has informed me that These two shall not
separate from each other till they come to me by the Pool (of
Paradise)."

Sunni references:

1. Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, pp 662-663,328, report of 30+ companions, with
reference to several chains of transmitters.

2. al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, Chapter of "Understanding (the virtues) of
Companions, v3, pp 109,110,148,533 who wrote this tradition is authentic
(Sahih) based on the criteria of the two Shaikhs (al-Bukhari and
Muslim).

3. Sunan, by Daarami, v2, p432

4. Musnad, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v3, pp 14,17,26,59, v4, pp 366,370-372,
v5, pp 182,189,350,366,419

5. Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p585, Tradition \#990

6. al-Khasa’is, by al-Nisa’i, pp 21,30

7. al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p230

8. al-Kabir, by al-Tabarani, v3, pp 62-63,137

9. Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Chapter al-Iti’sam bi Habl
Allah, v1, p44.

10. Tafsir Ibn Kathir (complete version), v4, p113, under commentary of
verse 42:23 of Qur’an (four traditions)

11. al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, by Ibn Sa’d, v2, p194, Pub. by Dar Isadder,
Lebanon.

12. al-Jami’ al-Saghir, by al-Suyuti, v1, p353, and also in v2

13. Majma’ al-Zawa’id, al-Haythami, v9, p163

14. al-Fateh al-Kabir, al-Binhani, v1, p451

15. Usdul Ghabah fi Ma’rifat al-Sahaba, Ibn al-Athir, v2, p12

16. Jami’ al-Usul, Ibn al-Athir, v1, p187

17. History of Ibn Asakir, v5, p436

18. al-Taj al-Jami’ Lil Usul, v3, p308

19. al-Durr al-Manthoor, al-Hafidh al-Suyuti, v2, p60

20. Yanabi al-Mawaddah, al-Qundoozi al-Hanafi, pp 38,183

21. Abaqat al-Anwar, v1, p16

... and many more ...

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 إني تارك فيكم ما إن تمسكتم بهما لن تضلو بعدي أبدا:كتاب الله وعترتي
أهل بيتي وهما لن يفترقا حتى يردا علي الحوض
  </p>
</blockquote>

Of course, any Muslim should follow the Sunnah of the Prophet (S), and
as such, we, the Followers of Ahlul-Bayt, submit to the genuine
(practice) Sunnah of the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) and consider it to be
the only path of salvation. But the above tradition gives evidence to
the fact that any so-called Sunnah (practice) which contradicts
Ahlul-Bayt is NOT a genuine Sunnah and has been innovated later on by
some pay-rolled individuals in support the tyrants.

That’s why the Prophet had emphasized so much on Ahlul-Bayt in loving
them and following them since they carry his genuine Sunnah. And this is
the basis of the Shi’a School of Thought (the School of Ahlul-Bayt). The
Ahlul-Bayt of the Prophet who are raised in his house know more than
anybody else about the Sunnah of the Prophet and what it entails, for as
the proverb goes: "The people of Mecca know its paths better than anyone
else."

For the sake of argument, if we accept that the two versions of the
tradition ("Qur’an and Ahlul-Bayt”vs. "Qur’an and Sunnah") are both
authentic, then one must submit to the interpretation that the word "my
Sunnah”given by al-Hakim means the Sunnah which is derived through
Ahlul- Bayt and not any other source, as it is evident from the
Ahlul-Bayt version given by both Mustadrak al-Hakim and Sahih Muslim.
Now let us take a look at the following tradition:

Narrated Umm Salama:

The Messenger of Allah said: "‘Ali is with Qur’an, and Qur’an is with
‘Ali. They shall not separate from each other till they both return to
me by the Pool (of Paradise)."

Sunni references:

• al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p124 on the authority of Umm Salama

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 9, section 2, pp 191,194

• al-Awsat, by al-Tabarani; also in al-Saghir

• Tarikh al-Khulafaa, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, p173

The above tradition gives evidence to the fact that Imam ‘Ali and Qur’an
are non-separable. If we accept the "Qur’an and Sunnah”version to be
authentic, then one can conclude that the one who carries the Sunnah of
Prophet is Imam ‘Ali since he is the one who has been put beside Qur’an.

Interesting to see, al-Hakim has many other traditions about necessity
of following Ahlul-Bayt, among which is the following tradition. This
tradition is also narrated by many other Sunni scholars and is known as
the "Tradition of the Ship”in which the Prophet (S) stated:

"Behold! My Ahlul-Bayt are like the Ark of Noah. Whoever embarked in it
was SAVED, and whoever turned away from it was PERISHED."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّما مثلُ أهلُ بيتي كَمَثل سَفينَةُ نوح
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ رَكَبها نَجى و مَنْ تَخَلَّفَ عنها هَلكْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

1. al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v2, p343, v3, pp 150-151 on the authority
of Abu Dharr. al-Hakim said this tradition is authentic (Sahih).

2. Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p786

3. Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, under the commentary of verse
42:23, Part 27, p167

4. al-Bazzar, on the authority of Ibn Abbas and Ibn Zubair with the
wording "drowned”instead of "perished".

5. al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p234 under Verse 8:33. Also in section 2, p282. He said this Hadith has
been transmitted via numerous authorities.

6. Tarikh al-Khulafaa and Jami’ al-Saghir, by al-Suyuti

7. al-Kabir, by al-Tabarani, v3, pp 37,38

8. al-Saghir, by al-Tabarani, v2, p22

9. Hilyatul Awliyaa, by Abu Nu’aym, v4, p306

10. al-Kuna wal Asmaa, by al-Dulabi, v1, p76

11. Yanabi al-Mawaddah, by al-Qundoozi al-Hanafi, pp 30,370

12. Is’af al-Raghibeen, by al-Saban

The above tradition gives evidence to the fact that those who adopt the
school of Ahlul-Bayt and follow them, shall be saved from the punishment
of Hell, while those who run away from them shall meet with the fate of
the one who tried to save his life by climbing up the mountain, with the
only difference that whereas he (Noah’s renegade son) was drowned in
water, but these people will be drowned the fire of Hell. The following
tradition also confirms it:

The Prophet (S) said about Ahlul-Bayt:

"Do not be ahead of them for you will perish, do not turn away from them
for you will perish, and do not try to teach them since they know more
than you do!"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لا تتقدموهم فتهلكوا ولا تتخلفوا عنهم فتهلكوا ولا تعلموهم فإنهم أعلم
منكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

1. al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Suyuti, v2, p60

2. al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p230, quoted from al-Tabarani, also in section 2, p342

3. Usdul Ghabah, by Ibn al-Athir, v3, p137

4. Yanabi’ al-Mawaddah, by al-Qundoozi al-Hanafi, p41, and P335

5. Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v1, p168

6. Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p163

7. Aqabat al-Anwar, v1, p184

8. A’alam al-Wara, pp 132-133

9. Tadhkirat al-Khawas al-Ummah, Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi al-Hanafi, pp 28-33

10. al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, by Noor al-Din al-Halabi, v3, p273

Here is another one:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "My Ahlul-Bayt are like the Gate of
Repentance of the Children of Israel; whoever entered therein was
forgiven."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنما مثل أهل بيتي فيكم مثل باب حطة في بنى إسرائيل من دخله غفر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni References:

• Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p168

• al-Awsat, by al-Tabarani, Tradition \#18

• Arba’in, by al-Nabahani, p216

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
pp 230,234

Another fairly similar tradition was recorded by al-Darqunti as well as
Ibn Hajar in his al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, Ch. 9, section 2, p193 where
the Prophet (S) said: "‘Ali is the Gate of Repentance, whoever entered
therein was a believer and whoever went out was an unbeliever."

The above tradition was in connection with verses 2:58 and 7:161 of
Qur’an which describe the Gate of Repentance of Bani Israel. Those of
companions of Moses who did not enter the Gate of the Repentance were
lost in the desert for forty years, while those who did not enter the
ark of Noah were drowned. Ibn Hajar concludes that:

"The analogy of the Ark of Noah signifies that those who love and honor
the Ahlul-Bayt and derive from their guidance will be rescued from the
darkness of opposition, and those who will turn against them will be
drowned in the sea of ingratitude and will perish in the desert of
insubordination and rebellion."

Sunni reference: al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, p. 91

Have we ever asked ourselves why the Prophet put so much emphasis on
Ahlul- Bayt? Was is just because they were members of his family, or was
it because they carried his true teachings (Sunnah) and they were the
most knowledgeable individuals among his community after him?

Different versions of the Tradition of Two Weighty Things (al-Thaqalain)
which prove conclusively that it is compulsory to follow the Qur’an and
the Ahlul-Bayt, are not ordinary traditions. They are repeated many
times and are related on the authority of more than thirty of the
companions of the Holy Prophet (S) through various sources.

The Holy Prophet (S) repeated these words over and over again (and not
merely in one isolated instance but on several occasions) publicly to
show that it is compulsory to follow and obey the Ahlul-Bayt. He made
the announcement during the Farewell Pilgrimage, on the day of Arafat,
on the day of Ghadir Khum, on the return from Ta’if, also in Medina from
the pulpit, and in his deathbed when the room was packed with his
disciples, he said:

"O folk! I am soon going to depart from here, and although I have
already told you, I repeat once more that I am leaving with you two
things, namely, the Book of Allah and my descendants, that is, my
Ahlul-Bayt.”Then he lifted ‘Ali by the hand and said: "Behold! this ‘Ali
is with the Qur’an and the Qur’an is with him. These two shall never
separate from each other until they come to me at the Pool of Kawthar."

Sunni reference: al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 9, section 2

Ibn Hajar al-Haythami wrote:

"The Traditions of Adherence has been handed down through a large number
of sources and more than twenty of the disciples have related it."

He further wrote:

"Here a doubt arises, and it is that while the Tradition has come down
through various sources, some say that the words were spoken during the
last pilgrimage, others that they were spoken at Medina when he lay on
his deathbed and the room was packed with his disciples, yet another
saying that he spoke these words at Ghadir Khum, or in another Hadith,
on the return from Ta’if.

But there is NO inconsistency in these, since having regards to the
importance and greatness of the Qur’an and the pure Ahlul-Bayt, and with
a view of emphasizing the point before the people, the Holy Prophet
might have repeated these words on all these occasions so that any one
who had not heard them before might hear them now."

Sunni reference: al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch.
11, section 1, p230

Concluding the above traditions, the Qur’an and Ahlul-Bayt are the only
two precious things that the Prophet left for Muslims, and stated that
if Muslims follow BOTH of them, they will not go astray after him, and
they will be led to Paradise, and that those who forsake Ahlul-Bayt will
not survive. The above traditions have been designed by Prophet (S) to
answer which "Sunnah”is genuine and which group caries the true
"Sunnah”of the Prophet. It is aimed at not leaving Muslims at loss as to
which way to go after the departure of the Prophet (S).

On the other hand, if we use the word "Sunnah”alone, it does not give us
any specific answer for this question since all the groups among the
Muslim nation follow their own version of Sunnah as well as their own
interpretation of the Qur’an and Sunnah. Thus the prophetic instructions
were clear in urging Muslims to follow the interpretation of Qur’an and
the Sunnah of the Prophet transmitted through the channel of Ahlul-Bayt
whose sinlessness, purity, and righteousness is confirmed by the Holy
Qur’an (the last sentence of verse 33:33).


