Sunni Documentation on Imam al-Mahdi (as)
=========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

For the Sunni brothers, there are six major collections of traditions
based on the Sunni standards for verifying the authenticity of a
tradition. These six books are: Sahih al-Bukhari, Sahih Muslim, Sahih
al-Tirmidhi, Sunan Ibn Majah, Sunan Abu Dawud, and Sahih al-Nisa’i. I
just quote few traditions from these six books to prove that a
knowledgeable Sunni brother/sister can NOT deny that:

• al-Mahdi (as) will come in the last days to make a universal
Government,

• al-Mahdi (as) is from the Ahlul-Bayt of the Prophet (S),

• al-Mahdi (as) is from the progeny of Fatimah (sa), the daughter of the
Prophet (S),

• al-Mahdi (as) is different than Prophet Jesus (the Messiah),

• Prophet Jesus (as) will come as one of the followers of Imam al-Mahdi
and will pray behind him in congressional prayer.

Another undeniable fact is that many leading Sunni scholars have written
books after books exclusively about Imam al-Mahdi (as) which I included
some of their names at the end of this article.

Moreover, Insha Allah in the next article, I will give a list of Sunni
scholars who believe that Imam al-Mahdi (as) is son of Imam Hasan
al-Askari (as), and is alive and went into occultation. In that article
will also discuss the special specifications of Imam al-Mahdi which are
the points of disagreement between the Shi’a and the Sunni.

The following are only some of the traditions about Imam al-Mahdi which
Sunnis admit to their authenticity and existence:

The Prophet (S) said: "Even if the entire duration of the world’s
existence has already been exhausted and only one day is left (before
the day of judgment), Allah will expand that day to such a length of
time, as to accommodate the kingdom of a person from my Ahlul-Bayt who
will be called by my name. He will fill out the earth with peace and
justice as it will have been full of injustice and tyranny (by then)."

Sunni References:

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v2, p86, v9, pp 74-75

• Sunan Abu Dawud, v2, p7

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v1, pp 84,376; V3, p63

• al-Mustadrak ala al-Sahihayn, by al-Hakim, v4, p557

• Jami’ al-Saghir, by al-Suyuti, pp 2,160

• al-Urful Wardi, by al-Suyuti, p2

• al-Majma’, by al-Tabarani, p217

• Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v9, p144

• Fat’h al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, by Ibn Hajar Asqalani, v7,
p305

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p249

• al-Tathkirah, by al-Qurtubi, p617

• al-Hawi, by al-Suyuti, v2, pp 165-166

• Sharh al-Mawahib al-Ladunniyyah, by al-Zurqani, v5, p348

• Fat’h al-Mugheeth, by al-Sakhawi, v3, p41

• Kanz al-Ummal, v7 P186

• Iqd al-Durar Fi Akhbar al-Mahdi al-Muntadhar, v12, Ch. 1,

• al-Bayan fi Akhbar Sahib al-Zaman, By Ganji al-Shafi’i, Ch. 12

• al-Fusool al-Muhimmah, by Ibn Sabbagh al-Maliki, Ch. 12

• Arjahul Matalib, by Ubaidallah Hindi al-Hanafi, p380

• Muqaddimah, by Ibn Khaldoon, p266

• and also in the works of Ibn Habban, Abu Nua’ym, Ibn Asakir, etc.

Also:

The Prophet (S) said: "al-Mahdi is one of us, the members of the
household (Ahlul-Bayt)."

Sunni reference: Sunan Ibn Majah, v2, Tradition \#4085

It is evident from the above traditions that Imam al-Mahdi (as) is from
the Ahlul-Bayt of Prophet Muhammad, so he can not be Jesus (the Messiah;
al-Maseeh). Thus, al-Mahdi and Messiah are two different personalities
but they come at the same time, al-Mahdi as Imam and Jesus as his
follower. The following tradition clearly mentions that Imam al-Mahdi is
one of descendants of the daughter of Prophet Muhammad (S):

The Prophet (S) said: The Mahdi will be of my family, of the descendants
of Fatimah (the Prophet’s daughter).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألمَهديُّ مِن عترتي من ولد فاطمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

• Sunan Abu Dawud, English version, Ch. 36, Tradition \#4271 (narrated
by Umm Salama, the wife of the Prophet)

• Sunan Ibn Majah, v2, Tradition \#4086

• al-Nisa’i and al-Bayhaqi, and others as quoted in:

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p249

Also:

The Prophet (S) said: "We the children of Abd al-Muttalib are the
Masters of the inhabitants of the heaven: Myself, Hamza (ra), ‘Ali (as),
Ja’far Ibn Abi Talib (ra), al-Hasan (as), al-Husayn (as), and al-Mahdi
(as)."

Sunni references:

• Sunan Ibn Majah, v2, Tradition \#4087

• al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik

• al-Daylami

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p245

The Prophet (S) said: "The Mahdi will appear in my Ummah. He will appear
for a minimum of 7 or a maximum of 9 years; at that time, my Ummah will
experience a bountiful favor like never before. It shall have a great
abundance of food, of which it need not save anything, and the wealth at
that time is in great quantities, such that if a man asks the Mahdi to
give him some, and the Mahdi (as) will say: Here! Take!"

Sunni reference: Sunan Ibn Majah, v2, Tradition \#5083

Remark: According to Shi’i sources, the Government of Peace and equality
that Imam al-Mahdi will establish will last hundreds of years with no
rival, and then the day of Judgment will commence. What is mentioned in
the above tradition as 7 or 9 years is the length of time that Imam
al-Mahdi (as) will fight to conquer the world when he starts his
mission.

The Prophet (S) said: "We (I and my family) are members of a household
that Allah (SWT) has chosen for them the life of the Hereafter over the
life of this world; and the members of my household (Ahlul-Bayt) shall
suffer a great affliction and they shall be forcefully expelled from
their homes after my death; then there will come people from the East
carrying black flags, and they will ask for some good to be given to
them, but they shall be refused service; as such, they will wage war and
emerge victorious, and will be offered that which they desired in the
first place, but they will refuse to accept it till they pass it to a
man from my family (Ahlul-Bayt) appears to fill the Earth with justice
as it has been filled with corruption. So whoever reaches that (time)
ought to come to them even if crawling on the ice/snow since among them
is the Vice-regent of Allah (Khalifatullah) al-Mahdi."

Sunni references:

• Sunan Ibn Majah, v2, Tradition \#4082,

• The History Tabari

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 11, section 1, pp 250-251

Also:

The Messenger of Allah said: "The world will not perish until a man
among the Arabs appears whose name matches my name."

Sunni reference: Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v9, p74

In Sahih Muslim, in the Chapter of al-Fitan, there are some interesting
traditions on what will happen in the last days of the world. I would
like to quote two of them here:

Abu Nadra reported: We were with the company of Jabir Ibn Abdillah...
Jabir Ibn Abdillah kept quite for a while and then reported Allah’s
Messenger (may peace be upon him) having said: "There would be a Caliph
in the last (period) of my Ummah who would freely give handfuls of
wealth to the people without counting it.”I said to Abu Nadra and Abu
al-Ala: Do you mean Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz? They said: NO, (he would be
Imam Mahdi).

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v4, chapter MCCV, p1508, Tradition
\#6961

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, Kitab al-Fitan, v4, p2234, Tradition
\#67

(NOTE: What are inside the parentheses in the above tradition are NOT my
comments. They are the words of the translator of Sahih Muslim (Abdul
Hamid Siddiqui).)

Similarly, we read in Sahih Muslim:

Abu Sa’id and Jabir Ibn Abdullah reported that Allah’s Messenger (may
peace be upon him) said: "There would be in the last (phase) of the time
a Caliph who would distribute wealth but would not count."

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v4, chapter MCCV, p1508, Tradition
\#6964

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, Kitab al-Fitan, v4, p2235, Tradition
\#69

It is also narrated:

In the end of the time, my Ummah will undergo very hard affliction like
never before, so that man can not find any way out. Then Allah will
appear a person from my progeny, that is my Ahlul-Bayt, who will fill
the earth with justice as it was filled with injustice. The inhabitants
of the earth and the inhabitants of the heaven love him. The sky will
bring down its water everywhere and the earth will bring all what it can
offer and will become green all over.

Sunni references:

• al-Sahih fi al-Hadith, by al-Hakim, as quoted in:

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p250

Ibn Majah in his Sunan quotes Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyyah and Imam ‘Ali
saying that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

"al-Mahdi is from our Ahlul-Bayt, no doubt Allah will enforce his
appearance within a night (i.e., his coming is very unpredictable and is
very sudden)."

Sunni references:

• Sunan Ibn Majah, v2, p269

• Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, as quoted in:

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p250

Moreover, it is narrated that:

‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as) said: "When the ‘Support’ of the family of
Muhammad (al-Qa’im Aale Muhammad) rises Allah will unite the people of
east and the people of west."

Sunni references:

• Ibn Asakir, as quoted in:

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p252

Ibn Hajar wrote that:

Muqatil Ibn Sulayman and those who followed him among the (Sunni)
commentators of Qur’an said that the verse: "And he shall be a Sign for
(the coming of) the Hour”(Qur’an 43:61) was revealed about al-Mahdi.

Sunni reference: al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 11, section
1, p247

Also Ahmad Ibn Hanbal recorded:

The Prophet (S) said: "Allah will bring out from concealment al-Mahdi
from my Family and just before the Day of Judgment; even if only one day
were to remain in the life of the world, and he will spread on this
earth justice and equity and will eradicate tyranny and oppression."

Sunni references:

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v1, p99

• A close version has also been narrated in Sunan Abu Dawud, English
version, Ch. 36, Tradition \#4270 narrated from ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as).

It is narrated in Sahih Muslim that:

Jabir Ibn Abdillah al-Ansari (ra) said: I heard the Messenger of Allah
saying: "A group of my Ummah will fight for the truth until near the day
of judgment when Jesus, the son of Marry, will descend, and the leader
of them will ask him to lead the prayer, but Jesus declines, saying:
"No, Verily, among you Allah has made leaders for others and He has
bestowed his bounty upon them."

Sunni reference:

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic, part 2, p193

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v3, pp 45,384

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p251

• Nuzool Isa Ibn Maryam Akhir al-Zaman, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, p57

• Musnad, by Abu Ya’ala which provides another version of the tradition
with more clear words on the authority of Jabir that the Messenger of
Allah said: "A group among my Ummah will continue to fight for the truth
until Jesus, the son of Marry, will descend, and the Imam of them will
ask him to lead the prayer, but Jesus replies: "You have more right to
it, and verily Allah has honored some of you over others in this Ummah."

• Sahih Ibn Habban, whose tradition reads: "their leader al-Mahdi”and
the rest of tradition is the same.

• Ibn Abu Shaybah, another Sunni traditionist, and the mentor of
al-Bukhari and Muslim, has reported several traditions about Imam
al-Mahdi (as). He has also reported that the Imam of the Muslims who
will lead Prophet Jesus in prayer is Imam al-Mahdi himself.

Jalaluddin al-Suyuti mentioned that: "I have heard some of the deniers
of (truth) deny what has been conveyed about Jesus that when he descends
will pray the Fajr prayer behind al-Mahdi. They say, Jesus has higher
status than to pray behind a non-Prophet.

This is a bizarre opinion since the issue of prayer of Jesus behind
al-Mahdi has been proven strongly via numerous authentic traditions from
the Messenger of Allah, who is the most truthful.”And then al-Suyuti
goes on narrating some of the traditions in this regard. (See Nuzool Isa
Ibn Maryam Akhir al-Zaman, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, p56).

Also al-Hafidh Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani mentioned that:

"The Mahdi is of this Ummah, and that Jesus (S) will come down and pray
behind him."

Sunni reference: Fat’h al-Bari, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v5, p362

This is also mentioned by another Sunni scholar, Ibn Hajar al-Haythami,
who wrote:

"The Ahlul-Bayt are like the stars through whom we are guided in the
right direction, and if the starts are taken away (or hidden) we would
come face to face with the signs of the Almighty as promised (i.e., the
Day of Resurrection). This will happen when the Mahdi will come, as
mentioned in the traditions, and the Prophet Jesus will say his prayers
behind him, the Dajjal will be slain, and then the signs of the Almighty
will appear one after another."

Sunni reference: al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 11, section
1, p234

Also Ibn Hajar quoted Abu al-Husayn al-Ajiri saying:

The traditions of al-Mustafa (S) on the rising of al-Mahdi has been
transmitted via numerous authorities and is more than the level of
(being sufficient for) Mutawatir, describing that he is of his
Ahlul-Bayt, and will fill the earth with justice, and that Jesus (as)
will come at the same time and he will assist Jesus for killing
al-Dajjal in the land of Palestine, and that he will lead this nation
and Jesus will pray behind him.

Sunni reference:

• Abu al-Husayn al-Ajiri as quoted in al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn
Hajar, Ch. 11, section 1, p254

So if al-Mahdi and Jesus are to be the same person as some ignorants
claim, then how can one prays behind himself?! Moreover this shows that
Imam al-Mahdi and Jesus (the Messiah) will come at the same time so that
they could pray the morning prayer together in Jerusalem.

In fact, the equivalent word of "Messiah”in Arabic is "al-Maseeh”which
means "Wiped Clean; Purified". This word has been used in Qur’an as the
title of Prophet Jesus (as). As such, the "Messiah”is the Prophet Jesus
(as) and not the Imam al-Mahdi (as).

However, the word "Messiah”in English has another meaning, that is
"savior". As a result, there have been some English translators who used
the word "Messiah”for Imam al-Mahdi (as) with the meaning of
"Savior”which does NOT have anything to do with Arabic word "al-Maseeh".

I should point out that, there exists a fabricated tradition which is
mainly used by Ahmadis and Qadianis to prove that al-Mahdi and Jesus are
the same. The tradition states: "And no Mahdi except Jesus.”

This tradition has been rated by al-Hakim as unknown and strange and he
said there are discrepancy in its chain of authorities. al-Bayhaqi said
Muhammad Ibn Khalid said this tradition is single (Mufrad). al-Nisa’i
has mentioned that this tradition is unfamiliar and is denied, and that
the memorizers of traditions confirm that the traditions which state
that al-Mahdi is the descendants of Fatimah are authentic and reliable.
(See al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, Ch. 11, section 1, p252 for details).

Prophet Jesus is not the Imam of Muslims, and when he comes back, he
will be the follower of the Imam of Muslims who is known as Imam
al-Mahdi (as).

In Sahih al-Bukhari, it is narrated that:

The Prophet (S) said: "What would be your situation if the Son of Marry
(i.e. Jesus) descends upon you and your Imam is among you?"

Sunni reference:

• Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English, v4, Tradition \#658

NOTE: The above is my own translation. The Saudi-paid translator of
Sahih al-Bukhari (Muhammad Muhsin Khan) has shown pure dishonesty in
translating the above tradition. His translation of the last portion of
the tradition does not bear any similarity what so ever with the Arabic
text of the tradition which is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كيف أنتم إذا نزل اْبنُ مريم فيكم و إمامكم منكم؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Now let us look at the false translation of Mr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan:

Sahih Bukhari Hadith: 4.658

Narrated Abu Huraira:

Allah’s Apostle said "How will you be when the son of Mary (i.e. Jesus)
descends amongst you and he will judge people by the Law of the Qur’an
and not by the law of Gospel.

Mr. Muhsin Khan has trimmed the last part of the tradition which states
that the Imam of Muslims (i.e., Imam al-Mahdi) is among Muslims when the
son of marry descends. Instead, the translator has added another
sentence which does not exists in the Arabic text. I should mention that
this is not the only place that he has altered the text, and there are
much more examples in this regard which proves his bias and his
dishonesty.

Al-Hafidh Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Shawkani (d. 1250/1834) wrote in a book
called "al-Tawdhih fi twawatur ma jaa’a fil muntadar wad-djjal wal
masih”(the explanation about the frequent reports concerning the Awaited
one, the Dajjal, and the messiah) in which he wrote about Imam al-Mahdi
(as) that: "The traditions about al-Mahdi have been related by numerous
authorities and are therefor reliable beyond doubt or confusion, because
in jurisprudence the qualification of Mutawatir is valid even for
(traditions) with less than this number of narrations.

There are also many sayings of the companions (of the Prophet) which
explicitly mention the Mahdi, which have the status of narrations from
the Prophet since there is no question of establishing such saying
through Ijtihad (one’s opinion and research)". The author gives the same
opinion in his other book "al-Fat’h al-Rabbani". (In this connection see
also Mawsu’atil Imam al-Mahdi, v1, pp 391-392,413-414,434, and also
Tuhfatul Ahwadhi, v6, p485).

The author of the book, "Ghayah al-Ma’amool,”mentioned that: "It is a
famous narration among the Scholars of the past and the present that
there has to appear a man from the family of the Prophet (S) named
al-Mahdi. In addition, the traditions about the Mahdi have been narrated
by the most renowned companions of the Prophet (S), as well as by the
most renowned scholars such as Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah,
al-Tabarani, Abu Ya’ala, al-Bazzar, Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, and al-Hakim
(May Allah be pleased with them all); furthermore, those who claim that
the traditions narrated with regard to the appearance of the Mahdi are
weak, are themselves in error."

Al-Saban in his book, "Is’af al-Raghibeen,”mentioned that: "The news
about the appearance of the Mahdi are traceable back to the Prophet (S),
and that he is one of the members of the family of the Prophet (S); and
that he will fill the Earth with justice."

Al-Suwaydi in his book, "Saba’iq al-Dhahab,”reported that: "The scholars
have a consensus that the Mahdi (as) will appear at the end of time and
fill the Earth with justice; and the traditions supporting his
appearance are indeed numerous."

al-Hafidh Abul-Hasan Muhammad Ibn al-Husayn al-Sijistani al-Aburi
al-Shafi’i (d. 363/974) said: "The traditions were related by numerous
authorities and were spread far and wide by many narrators, from
al-Mustafa (S) concerning al-Mahdi who is from the household (of the
Prophet) and who will fill the world with justice..”

This statement was accepted by the subsequent scholars as testified by
Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani (See Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, v9, p144; Fat’h al-Bari,
v7, p305), al-Qurtubi (al-Tathkirah, p617), al-Suyuti (al-Hawi, v2, pp
165-166), al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (al-Burhan fi Alamat Mahdi Akhir al-Zaman,
pp 175-176), Ibn Hajar al-Haythami (al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, Ch. 11,
section 1, p249), al-Zurqani (Sharh al-Mawahib al-Ladunniyyah, v5,
p348), al-Sakhawi (Fat’h al-Mugheeth, v3, p41), etc.

The best formulation of the belief of all Muslims about al-Mahdi (as)
has been given by a person who himself did not believe in his coming and
who denied the validity of the traditions concerning this matter. He was
Ibn Khaldoon (d. 808/1406), a famous historian, in whose book,
"al-Muqaddamah,”wrote:

"Let it be known that it is a narrated event by ALL Muslims in EVERY era
that at the end of time a man from the family of the Prophet (S) will,
without fail, make his appearance and will strengthen Islam and spread
justice; Muslims will follow him and he will gain domination over the
Muslim realm. He will be called al-Mahdi.”(An Introduction to History,
by Ibn Khaldoon, English version, London, 1967 Edition, pp 257-258)

The above quote proves that even Ibn Khaldoon was in the opinion that
the belief in Imam al-Mahdi was not a characteristic of a special sect
of Islam, but was a common belief to ALL Muslims.

Sunni scholars openly criticized those elements (like Ibn Khaldoon) who
tried to cast doubt the traditions about al-Mahdi (as), and have
strongly asserted that the belief in Mahdi is well-established for ALL
Muslims. See for instance: "Awnul Ma’bud”(which is the commentary of
Sunan Abu Dawud), by al-Azimabadi, v11, pp 361-362, Tuhfatul Ahwadhi
(which is the commentary of Sahih al-Tirmidhi), by al-Mubarakfuri, v6,
p484, al-Tajul Jami’ lil Usul, by Shaikh Mansoor ‘Ali Nasif, v5, p341.

Shaikh Ahmad Muhammad Shakir (d. 1377/1958), one of the greatest
contemporary scholar of Hadith and Tafsir, whose major work was his
commentary on Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal (for a biography of Ahmad Shakir,
see al-Aalam, v1, p253; Mu’jam al-Mu’allifeen, v13, p368) wrote in his
commentary: "Belief in al-Mahdi is not particular to the Shi’a because
it is from the narration of many companions of the Prophet in such way
that NO one can cast doubt the truth (of this belief).”After this, he
proceeds to a strong refutation of Ibn Khaldoon’s weakening the
traditions regarding al-Mahdi. (see Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal with
commentary of Ahmad Muhammad Shakir, Pub. by Dar al-Ma’arif, Egypt, v5,
pp 196-198, v14, p288).

Al-Sayid Sabiq, the Mufti for the "Muslim Brotherhood,”in his book, "al-
‘Aqa’id al-Islamiyyah,”that: "The idea about the Mahdi is indeed valid,
and is one of the Islamic tenets that one must believe in.”Mr. Sabiq
also narrated a variety of traditions relating to the appearance of
al-Mahdi (as) in the above book.

The recent Fatwa in this issue was given in Mecca by "The Muslim World
League”(Rabitatul ‘Alamil Islami) on Oct. 11, 1976 (23 Shawwal 1396).
This Fatwa states that more than twenty companions narrated traditions
concerning al-Mahdi, and gives a list of those scholars of Hadith who
have transmitted these narrations, and those who have written books on
al-Mahdi. The Fatwa states:

"The memorizers (Huffadh) and scholars of Hadith have verified that
there are authentic (Sahih) and acceptable (Hasan) reports among the
traditions related to al-Mahdi. The majority of these traditions are
related through numerous authorities (Mutawatir). There is no doubt that
the status of those reports are Sahih and Mutawatir. (They have also
verified) that the belief in Mahdi is obligatory, and that it is one of
the beliefs of Ahlussunnah wal Jama’a. Only those ignorant of the Sunnah
and innovators in doctrine deny it.

For the transcription and reproduction of this Fatwa, see, among others,
the Introduction of al-Ganji al-Shafi’i, in the book named
"al-Bayan,”Beirut, 1399/1979, pp 76-79 and in Appendix.

Two Shafi’i scholars, Ganji in his book "al-Bayan", and Shablanji in his
book "Noor al-Absar", on the verse 48:28 of Qur’an: "He is the One who
sent his Messenger (Muhammad) with the guidance and the true religion
that in order to prevail over all the religions”narrated from Sa’id Ibn
Jubair that "this promise to Prophet Muhammad will be fulfilled by
al-Mahdi who is in the progeny of Fatimah (sa)."

Even Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728/1328), who is acclaimed by the Wahhabis,
wrote in his book "Minhaj al-Sunnah”(v4, pp 211-212) that the traditions
concerning the Mahdi are certainly reliable, and his student,
al-Dhahabi, conformed with him in his summary of his teacher’s book.
(See Mukhtasar Minhaj al-Sunnah, pp 533-534).

Among the Shi’a scholars, I would like to mention the masterpiece of
Lutfullah al-Safi al-Golpaygani, who compiled an encyclopedia named
"Muntakhab al-Athar". In this book, there is a comprehensive narration
of the traditions regarding to the appearance of Imam al-Mahdi (as) and
the description of the world before and after his appearance. He has
used over 60 Sunni sources, including their six major book of Hadith;
and over 90 Shi’ite sources to illuminate the fact that al-Mahdi is not
a fabricated event.

As far as we have been able to discover, at least 35 prominent Sunni
scholars have written 46 of books exclusively about Imam al-Mahdi (as),
the leader of our time. Here are some of the name of some of these
books:

(1) "Kitab al-Mahdi,”by Abu Dawud.  
 (2)"Alamat al-Mahdi,”by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti.  
 (3)"al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntadhar,”by Ibn Hajar.

(4)"Al-Bayan fi Akhbar Sahib al-Zaman,”by Allamah Abu Abdillah Ibn
Muhammad Yusuf al-Ganji al-Shafi’i.  
 (5)"Iqd al-Durar fi Akbar al-Imam al-Muntadhar,”by Shaikh Jamaluddin
Yusuf al-Damishqi.  
 (6)"Mahdi Aale Rasool,”by ‘Ali Ibn Sultan Muhammad al-Harawi
al-Hanafi.  
 (7)"Manaqib al-Mahdi,”by al-Hafidh Abu Nu’aym al-Isbahani.  
 (8)"Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-Zaman,”by al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi.  
 (9)"Arba’in Hadith fi al-Mahdi,”by Abdul Ala al-Hamadani.  
 (10)"Akhbar al-Mahdi,”by al-Hafidh Abu Nu’aym.

In conclusion, the belief in the coming Mahdi (as) who is a person other
than Jesus (as), is an undeniable fact for the Sunnis. As we discussed
above, the Sunni scholars affirm that belief in "Mahdi of the House of
the Prophet”is one of the Islamic tenets for "Ahlussunnah wal Jama’a".
In the next part, however, we will discuss the points of differences
between the Shi’a and most Sunnis on the issue of Imam al-Mahdi.


