Special specifications of Imam al-Mahdi (as)
============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the previous part, I provided extensive traditions from the six
authentic Sunni collections concerning the fact that Imam al-Mahdi (as)
who is different than Jesus (the messiah) WILL come and he is the
descendant of the Prophet (S) and his daughter Fatimah (sa). The
traditions further illuminated the fact that Jesus (who was a great
Prophet) will pray behind al-Mahdi (who is a divinely appointed Imam).

Also I gave some of the Fatwa of Sunni scholars which state that the
belief in "the Mahdi of the House of the Prophet”is one of the Islamic
tenets for "Ahlussunnah wal Jama’a", and any one who denies it is either
ignorant or an innovator.

In this part however, I would like to talk about some special attributes
of Imam al-Mahdi which are not acknowledged by most Sunnis.

Imam Al-Mahdi’s Identification
------------------------------

The Shi’a believe that Imam al-Mahdi is the only son of Imam Hasan
al-Askari (the 11th Imam) who was born on the 15th of Sha’ban 255/869 in
Samarra, Iraq. He became the divinely appointed Imam when his father was
martyred in 260/874. Imam al-Mahdi went into occultation (disappearance;
leaving among people while he is not identified) at the same time. He
will re-appear when Allah wills. More specifically:

• His title is "al-Mahdi”which means "The Guided One."

• His name is Muhammad Ibn al-Hasan (as).

• His lineage, traced back to Imam ‘Ali (as), is: Muhammad Ibn al-Hasan
Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Musa Ibn Ja’far Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali
Ibn al-Husayn Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as).

On the other hand, most Sunnis are not so sure that he has been born
yet! They believe he will be born some time before his mission. The name
of Imam al-Mahdi is Muhammad (which is the same as what the Shi’a
believe). There is, however, one Sunni report which adds that the name
of the father of Imam al-Mahdi is Abdullah. Now let us see what is the
argument of each side:

### Q1) Some Sunnis question the Shi’a that how a five year old boy can become the Imam of mankind?

First, we must question whether or not in the history of religion, the
phenomenon of young leaders has a parallel. Undoubtedly, there is. The
Qur’an strikes a number of examples which are worthy of mentioning:

We have the example of Jesus (as) who became prophet and spoke to people
when he was a baby in the cradle:

***"But she pointed to the baby. They said: ‘How can we talk to one who
is a child in the cradle?’ He said: ‘I am indeed a servant of Allah. He
has given me Scripture and assigned me a prophet, and He has made me
blessed wherever I be, and has enjoined on me Prayer and Zakat as long
as I live.’“(Qur’an 19:29-31)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَشَارَتْ إِلَيْهِ قَالُوا كَيْفَ نُكَلِّمُ مَن كَانَ فِي الْمَهْدِ
صَبِيًّا ﴿٢٩﴾ قَالَ إِنِّي عَبْدُ اللَّـهِ آتَانِيَ الْكِتَابَ
وَجَعَلَنِي نَبِيًّا﴿٣٠﴾ وَجَعَلَنِي مُبَارَكًا أَيْنَ مَا كُنتُ
وَأَوْصَانِي بِالصَّلَاةِ وَالزَّكَاةِ مَا دُمْتُ حَيًّا ﴿٣١﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thus Jesus (as) became prophet and received revelation and Book while he
was less than two years old!

Furthermore, in few verses before, Qur’an mentions the case of Prophet
Yahya (John), to whom Allah (SWT) said:

***"‘O Yahya! Take hold of the Book with might,’ And We gave him the
appointment (of prophethood) in his childhood.”(Qur’an 19:12)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا يَحْيَىٰ خُذِ الْكِتَابَ بِقُوَّةٍ وَآتَيْنَاهُ الْحُكْمَ
صَبِيًّا ﴿١٢﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

So if a two-year old boy can become a prophet and receives revelation
and Scripture, then why cannot a five-year old boy become an Imam?

The third example is Prophet Solomon (Sulayman) who was appointed by
Allah the heir of his father, David (Dawud), and became the king of his
community while he had not reached the age of puberty.

Have you ever heard of prodigies? They are kids between the ages of four
to 18 that exhibit signs of exceptional skills that are usually found in
highly qualified adults only. Here are some examples from the modern
history:

John Stuart Mill (1806-73), a 19th-century English philosopher and
economist, advocated utilitarian reforms in his many writings and as
member of Parliament. A child prodigy, Mill had mastered Greek by the
age of 7 and studied economics at the age of 13. His works express his
social thought with great clarity and thoroughness. (The Bettmann
Archive).

The French thinker, mathematician, and scientist Blaise Pascal (1623-62)
has been credited not only with imaginative and subtle work in geometry
and other branches of mathematics, but with profoundly influencing later
generations of theologians and philosophers. A prodigy in mathematics,
Pascal had mastered Euclid’s Elements by the age of 12. Pascal invented
and sold the first calculating machine (1645).

Wolfgang was the greatest musical child prodigy who ever lived. He began
composing minuets at the age of 5 and symphonies at 9.

Beethoven’s own talent was such that at the age of 12 he was already an
assistant to the organist Christian Gottlob Neefe, with whom he studied.

Sarah Caldwell, born Maryville, Mo., Mar. 6, 1924, is a conductor and
producer. A child prodigy in both mathematics and music, before reaching
the age of ten.

While not exhaustive, the list serves the purpose of demonstrating that
this phenomenon occurs naturally among normal human beings from all
walks of life. Therefore, scientifically speaking, it is quite possible
that a child demonstrates abilities that adults can not. Also
religiously speaking anything Allah desires will happen no matter how
strange. Indeed Allah (SWT) asserts unequivocally in Qur’an that if He
wanted something, all He has to do is to say to it is: "Be! and it will
be!".

### Q2) Every human is mortal. Then, how can Imam al-Mahdi (as) live so long?

Yes, every one but Allah is mortal, and in fact, Imam al-Mahdi will pass
away too. But the difference is the length of life in this world. The
holy Qur’an and the prophetic traditions inform us that some people have
had/have long life in this world. Thus the possibility of the occurrence
of such phenomena is confirmed by the religion of Islam.

Are you aware that according to the Qur’an (see 29:14), Prophet Noah has
just been prophet for 950 years? His age should have been even more than
that because we should add his age before prophethood to the above
number.

Do you agree that Prophet Jesus (as) is still alive? He is, in fact,
1995 years old by now. Of course, he is not living on the earth. He is
rather in the heavens, and according to the Muslim’s belief, he will
come back to the earth, and will pray behind Imam al-Mahdi (as).

Do you agree that al-Khidr (as) is still alive? Qur’an mentions the
story of his meeting with Prophet Moses (as). He existed before the time
of the Prophet Moses (as), and as such, al-Khidr (as) is now more than
3000 years old! He lives right here on the earth, but we can not
recognize him (fairly similar to the case of Imam al-Mahdi). He serves
Allah (SWT) as one of His agents.

The Hanafi scholar, Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi, in his book "Tathkirat al-Khawas
al-Ummah", pp 325-328 gives the names of 22 people believed by Muslims
to have lived various ages from 3,000 down to 300 years! No doubt! Allah
has the ability to give a very long life to His servants, but He also
has assigned a death time for everyone (including the above mentioned
individuals) which can be very soon or very late.

Moreover, scientifically speaking, there are no objections whatsoever to
the extended life span assertion. A group of scientists conducted a
series of experiments at the Rockefeller Institute in New York in 1912
on certain "parts”of plants, animals, and humans. These scientists
included Dr. Alex Carl, Dr. Jack Lope, and Dr. Warren Lewis and his
wife, among others. Among the experiments conducted was one that
directly treated the nerves, muscles, hearts, skin, and kidneys of human
beings.

These organs were not connected to a human body; they were independent
organs that were perhaps donated for the experiment. It was concluded by
the scientists that these "parts or organs”can continue to live almost
indefinitely as long as they are nourished properly, and as long as they
are shielded from external negative interactions like microbes and other
obstacles that might inhibit the growth of these organs; furthermore,
the assertion was made that the cells would continue to grow normally
under the above conditions, and that the growth is directly related to
the nourishment provided.

Again, aging had no effect on these organs, and they grew every year
without any signs of deterioration. The scientists concluded that these
organs will continue to grow as long as the patience of the scientists
themselves is not exhausted, causing them to abandon the nourishment
process.

### Q3) Where is Imam al-Mahdi (as) now?

Imam al-Mahdi disappeared in 260/874 when he became Imam. The last time
that he was seen, was in the cellar of his father’s house in Samarra,
Iraq. That is why it is rumored regarding Shi’a that they believe
al-Mahdi is in the cave!!!

Some Sunni historians ignorantly attributed that Shi’a believe al-Mahdi
is hiding in the cellar. Shi’a do NOT believe that Imam al-Mahdi is in
the Cave or Cellar! He was just seen there for the last time. He can be
anywhere Allah wishes. However one thing is clear is that he lives on
the earth among people while people do not perceive.

If that cellar has become famous as "Cellar of Occultation”(Sardab
al-Ghaybah), it is because it was made so by the non-Shi’i sources.
There is NO mention of such name by the Shi’a scholars. Imam al-Mahdi
(as) may sometimes live in one place and travels around the world, just
the same as the common belief of Muslims about al-Khidr (as). (For more
details see Kashf al-Ghummah, by Abul Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Musa al-Irbili, v3,
p283; Kashf al-Astar, by Mirza Husayn al-Noori, pp 210-216).

Second, with regards to the occultation of al-Mahdi (as), the Qur’an
does NOT rule out such an occurrence at all. Again, the examples of
Jesus (as) and al-Khidr (as), who are both in occultation, are worthy of
mentioning.

### Q4) Why did Imam al-Mahdi (as) disappear?

The above question shares the same answer with the following two
questions:

**Q4.b. Why does not Imam al-Mahdi (as) appear now?**

**Q4.c. When will he (as) come?**

There are MANY reasons behind it. The most important reason of it will
be disclosed when Imam al-Mahdi (as) will appear. However, I mention few
reasons that I know.

1. A very easy answer would be: This is Allah’s Will. His Will is based
on His infinite wisdom. The appearance of Imam al-Mahdi solely depends
on the decision of Allah. He knows best how to act. The question might
be as naive as asking: Why some people are black and some are white? Why
some are beautiful while others are not? This is Allah’s decree.

2.A better answer (which also answers why some are beautiful and others
are not, etc.) would be: IT IS A TEST. Allah could send all people to
paradise directly. But He didn’t, because He wanted to TEST us. (The
test of Allah is actually a test that proves the facts for ourselves as
witness, otherwise Allah has the foreknowledge of everything).

Only those who are obedient to Allah deserve paradise. Now, Allah is
testing us that how we react in the sinful environment. If somebody
preserve himself in today’s world has much more reward than if he does
that at the time when Imam al-Mahdi appears, because at that time the
environment will be absolutely healthy and it will be much easier to
preserve oneself.

This was just one aspect, however. Remember that ONLY Imam al-Mahdi will
have an opportunity to conquer the whole world. Even our Prophet (S)
could not do that. So the difficult test was for all era and was not
just for us.

3.Imam al-Mahdi (as) will come as soon as people become ready for him.
People throughout the history were NEVER ready. They killed prophets,
and Imams one after the other. However Allah continued to send prophets
till He finally sent Prophet Muhammad who brought the last message at
the time when the evolution of the mind of human being reached its
maturity, and thus Allah provided them with the most complete and final
religion. After that there was no need to send a new message.

Thus He sent Guides (Imams) who preserved and explained the message
during the time of tribulation, for people. They also did that, and we
are proud that we have had Imams like Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) who
explained all aspects of Jurisprudence, etc. He had a golden opportunity
of teaching during the clashes between the Umayad and the Abbasids.
During that short period when the tyrants of both sides were busy with
each other, the Imam was teaching Jurisprudence and theology in classes
with as much as 5000 students. (No need to mention that Abu Hanifa was
one of his students). Now the time is for action. But unfortunately the
majority of people were/are reluctant to follow the right path, and
instead, they opposed and killed the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt, and treated
them in the same way that their ancestors treated the prophets. (Even
Prophet Muhammad said: "No Prophet was ever annoyed as much as me").

The situation will continue till such time when people realize that they
need a divinely appointed Imam who rule over them since they can’t solve
their problems by themselves. When this happens universally, and when
people become frustrated and disappointed from any type of "ism”(way of
life, ideology), and when all raise their hands for help, then people
are then ready for him. They will not kill him like they did with the
others, nor do they treat him unjustly. They will rather accept him.

Of course, this will not happen till people of the word undergo much
heavier afflictions, world-wide wars, mass destructions by satanic
powers (such as Dajjal and Sufyani) which are not difficult to foresee
in a near future.

4.Imam al-Mahdi will come when all types of ideologies are tested and
they fail. At that time people will understand that they do not have any
more solution and they will accept the solution of Imam al-Mahdi easily.
For instance, look at communism which came to practice in Russia 100
years ago. People of the world at that time thought that this would be
the best way of life which guarantees the prosperity of mankind.

But to their surprise, it crashed recently from within itself showing
that this solution is failed in practice. Now some people think that
Capitalism may solve their problems completely. This system is also
about to crash, because the whole system is based on interest (Riba).
The situation has reached to the point that people of the USA have the
heaviest debt in the world. The studies even show that People here will
never be able to pay their debt in full. And this was just from economy
point of view.

People also suffer from other type of corruption, lust, and lack of
spiritualities, etc. Such system is subject to crash sooner or later,
one way or another. And when all type of ways of life showed their
deficiency IN PRACTICE, people will, then, honor the truth.

5.Imam al-Mahdi (as) will come when he has 313 top virtuous helpers
become available. Imam al-Mahdi can not govern the world with no helper,
minister, etc. The communities should generate these top individuals. In
fact, non of our other 11 Imams had such number of high rank followers.
Let me give you two examples:

Before his demise, Prophet Muhammad (S) instructed Imam ‘Ali (as) that
if the number of his followers loyal to him (after the demise of the
Prophet) exceeds 40 men, he should use force to restore his right and
take the power, otherwise he should keep silent since the only remaining
pious people would be killed without being able to help Islam.
Unfortunately, the number of people who remained loyal to Imam ‘Ali (as)
did not reach to this amount, at that crucial moment. Another example:

Sahl Ibn al-Hasan al-Khurasani who was one of the followers of Ahlul-
Bayt in Khurasan (a province in Iran) came to Medina to meet Imam Ja’far
al-Sadiq (as). Sahl al-Khurasani said: "O son of the Messenger of Allah!
You are of the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt. What prevents you from getting your
right (i.e., the rule) while you find more than one hundred thousand
Shi’a who are ready to fight for you?”

The Imam (as) asked him to sit down, and then ordered to turn on the
oven that was in the house. After the oven became very hot and turned
red, the Imam (as) said: "O Khurasani step into the oven and sit in
it.”The Khurasani said: "My master, O son of the Messenger of Allah! Do
not punish me by fire and make it easy for me.”At this time, Harun al-
Makki (ra) entered the room, and after the greetings exchanged, the Imam
(as) told him to put down his shoes and to sit down inside the oven. He
did so and the Imam (as) started talking to Sahl about Khurasan as if
nothing has happened.

After some time, the Imam (as) said: "O Khurasani stand up and look
inside the oven.”Sahl looked into the oven and saw Harun sitting
cross-legged inside the fire. Then Imam al-Sadiq (as) asked Harun to
come out of oven and he came out healthy with no burn or injury. At this
time, the Imam (as) asked Sahl: "How many individuals do you know in
Khurasan like this man?”Sahl replied: "By Allah, not even one.”The Imam
(as) confirmed his saying and said, "We do not rise at this time when we
do not even have five helpers (like him). We know better about the
proper time.”(al- Bihar, v47, p123, Hadith \#172; also in Manaqib by Ibn
Shahr Ashub)

The traditions state that Imam al-Mahdi needs 313 followers which are
not only sincere and faithful, but also possess supreme knowledge and
wisdom. Imam al-Mahdi should also have another 40,000 faithful followers
who will fill the secondary positions. These people will not fall out of
sky! It is up to us to educate our communities which could help to bring
up such people, by first starting from our family, and friends, then
school, then city, and then country to the extent our ability. We should
however start from ourselves to avoid sin and to acquire more knowledge
and wisdom and become more obedient to Allah.

### Q5) The Shi’a state that the mother of Imam Mahdi (as) was a bondwoman. Isn’t it shameful that he (as) should be born to a slave-girl?

The answer would be in the form of the following questions: Wasn’t Hagar
(as), the Prophet Abraham’s wife, a bondwoman? Did she not bear Isma’il
(Ishmael) (as), whom the Prophet Muhammad (S) is a direct descendant of?
If it is acceptable for the Prophet Muhammad (S), the Seal of
Prophethood, to be a descendant of Isma’il (as) who was born to a
bondwoman, then why should that be shameful for Imam al-Mahdi (as)?

The Imam al-Mahdi’s mother was Narjis and was a roman captive who was
bought by Imam al-Askari (as) and then was married to him. She actually
saw the Lady Fatimah (sa) in dream who told her to travel near the
border where the Muslim army were fighting, and to become captive, and
to be sold to the agent of Imam al-Askari who would be waiting for the
arrival of the captives to the city.

I need to mention that the birth of al-Mahdi (as) was an event
surrounded with secrecy, because the Abbasid authorities knew that the
Mahdi who is to bring about a revolution is going to be the son of the
eleventh Imam of Ahlul-Bayt, and were awaiting his coming to capture him
for execution. Owing to that, Imam Hasan al-Askari (as), the Mahdi’s
father, could not behave conspicuously by revealing who the mother of
the Mahdi (as) was. Notwithstanding, what has created the confusion
among the critics of the Shi’a is the fact that Imam al-Askari (as) did
not refer to her with one name.

A variety of names were used in an effort to fool the authorities, and
to prevent them from recognizing who she was. That was part and parcel
of the plan to protect the Mahdi (as). Had the father (as) been slightly
negligent in protecting his son, it is clear that al-Mahdi (as) would
not have survived. The story of birth of Imam al-Mahdi is like that of
the Moses. All the women in the house of Imam al-Askari were being
regularly inspected by female specialists of the Abbasid to find out if
anyone has become pregnant.

In fact, the word "al-Askari”became the title of the father of Imam
al-Mahdi, because he was forced to live inside an army base so that his
house could be under full control of the authorities. Similar to Moses’s
mother, the Mahdi’s mother did not have any sign of pregnancy to the
last hours. But no doubt that what Allah wishes will certainly take
place.

Given these adverse conditions and hardships, the birth of the Imam (as)
was kept in utmost secrecy, that even the followers of Imam al-Askari
(as), did not know of the time of the birth of al-Mahdi (as). Only very
few close associates were notified. The obvious contention was that the
birth of Imam al-Mahdi (as) constituted a direct threat to the
continuance of the corrupt government to rule. This situation is best
understood when we refer back to the first few years of Islam when the
Prophet (S) preached the religion in utmost secrecy among a few loyal
followers. The Prophet (S) feared for the lives of these believers and,
as such, he forbade them from revealing any information that might
jeopardize the entire mission.

### Q6) Who was the father of Imam al-Mahdi (as)?

The Shi’a along with some Sunni scholars believe that his father was
Imam Hasan al-Askari (d. 260/874). Below I have included the name of 31
Sunni scholars who confirm this fact. The overwhelming majority of
prophetic traditions about Imam al-Mahdi (some of which I mentioned in
the previous part) state that the name of Imam al-Mahdi is the same as
the name of the Prophet (i.e., Muhammad).

However there exists a single Sunni report that has an additional phrase
concerning that "his father’s name is also similar to that of the
Prophet’s father (i.e., Abdullah).”This extra phrase does NOT exist in
all other reports transmitted by the Shi’a and the Sunni traditionists
who narrated the Hadith. Moreover, the extra phrase in some Shi’i
traditions is in the form of: "his nickname is the same as the Prophet’s
nickname (i.e., Abul Qasim)”which is correct. In fact, Sunnis narrated
that:

The Messenger of Allah said to ‘Ali: "An issue will be born to you whom
I have gifted him with my name and my nickname."

Sunni references:

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, p137

• Sunan Abu Dawud, v4, p292

• al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v4, p278 who said it is authentic based on
the criteria of the two Shaikhs (i.e., al-Bukhari and Muslim)

• Ma’arifat Ulum al-Hadith, by al-Hakim, p189

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v1, p95

• Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p676, Tradition \#1155

• al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v5, p91

The single report which has the additional phrase (that his father’s
name is the same as that of the Prophet’s father) has been probably
fabricated by Abdullah Ibn al-Hasan (Muthanna -- the second) Ibn (Imam)
al-Hasan (as). Abdullah (d. 145/762) had a son named Muhammad who called
him "Nafs al-Zakiyyah”and the Mahdi. (See Ibn Taqtuqa, al-Fikr fi
al-Adab al- Sultaniyyah, pp 165-166). Abdullah used all his power and
wealth to support the revolt of his son. Abdullah concealed his son
several times during the Umayad period when there was still no danger
for him. When he was asked why he did this, he said: "What an idea,
their time has not come yet.”(Murooj al-Dhahab, by al-Mas’udi, v6, pp
107-108). In the first letter that Muhammad wrote to the Abbasid Caliph,
al-Mansoor, he wrote: "From Muhammad Ibn Abdillah, the Mahdi,
...”(Tabari, v3, p29, Ibn Kathir V10, p85, Ibn Khaldoon, v4, p4).

Muhammad Ibn Abdillah started his claims at the end of the rule of the
Umayad caliphs. Muhammad became powerful and tried to gain the support
of the last Umayad Caliph who was Marwan Ibn Muhammad (132/750), but the
Caliph did not pay attention to him:

Abul Abbas al-Falasti said to Marwan: "Muhammad Ibn Abdillah is striving
to gain the power for he is claiming to be al-Mahdi". Marwan replied:
"What does he have to do with me? (the Mahdi) is not him, nor any of his
father’s descendants. He will be the son of a slave woman."

Sunni Reference:

• Maqatil al-Talibeen, by Abul Faraj al-Isbahani, Pub. in Saudi Arabia,
pp 247,258

When Marwan said that al-Mahdi (as) is not one of his father’s
descendants, he meant the descendants of Imam al-Hasan (as), for
al-Mahdi (as) is the descendant of Imam al-Husayn (as) and is son of a
slave woman (umm walad). Even Marwan was aware of these traditions
because of which he did not pay attention to Muhammad Ibn Abdillah. This
shows that the true versions of traditions from the Prophet were
wide-spread at that time.

There is also a possibility that the fabrication of that extra phrase
was done the Abbasid Caliph, Abdullah al-Mansoor, who called his son the
Mahdi:

Muslim Ibn Qutaybah said: "Mansoor called me and said: Muhammad Ibn
Abdillah rebelled and he called himself the Mahdi. By Allah he is not. I
will tell you something else which I have told no one before, and will
tell no one after you. By Allah my son is not the Mahdi either,... but I
did so to make a good future for him."

Sunni Reference:

• Maqatil al-Talibeen, by Abul Faraj al-Isbahani, Pub. in Saudi Arabia,
pp 246-247

Also the Caliph al-Mansoor fabricated the following "tradition":

Ibn Abbas (allegedly) said: "These four are from us Ahlul-Bayt:
al-Saffah, al-Mundhir, al-Mansoor, and al-Mahdi.”(Recorded by al-Hakim).

It is clear that by fabricating the above reports, al-Mansoor was
sorting the chain of Abbasid Caliphs and included his name and the name
of his son, Mahdi, among Ahlul-Bayt! Ibn Abbas (ra) never uttered such
words, and he himself is not among Ahlul-Bayt, let alone those Abbasid
tyrants.

From all above it can be seen that the fabrication of the report which
includes that extra phrase, could be reconciled on Muhammad Ibn Abdillah
and/or the Abbasid Caliph, al-Mahdi. This is not the place to examine
the Hadith critically, but merely to point out the historical background
of it.

As I mentioned, some Sunni scholars rejected that single report. The
following are the name of some Sunni scholars who wrote that Imam
al-Mahdi has already been born, and is the only son of Imam Hasan
al-Askari (as), and he is alive and in occultation, and will re-appear
to establish the government of Justice. With this, they are in agreement
with the Shi’a. Their names are:

1.Kamal al-Din Ibn Talha, in his book "Matalib al-Su’aal Fi Manaqib Aal
al-Rasool"

2.Sulayman Ibn Ibrahim al-Qundoozi, al-Hanafi (known as Khawajah Kalan),
in his book "Yanabi’ al-Mawaddah”who has also established from important
Sunni sources that love for Ahlul-Bayt is the only right path and the
Islamic Way of Life.

3.Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji, al-Shafi’i, (d. 658 AH), the
author of "Al-Bayan fi Akhbar Sahib al-Zaman”and "Kifayah al-Talib".

4.Shaikh Nooruddin ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn Sabbagh, al-Maliki, from Mecca,
in his book "al-Fusool al-Muhimmah", pp 310,319.

5.Ahmad Ibn Ibrahim Ibn Hashim al-Baladhuri is one of the great scholars
and traditionists who also asserts the Imamat and occultation of the
twelfth Imam in his book called "al-Hadith al-Mutasalsil"

6.Ibn Arabi (Muhyiddin Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Arabi),
al-Hanbali, in his book "Al-Futuhat al-Makkia”(Chapter 366) discusses a
detailed account of the birth of al-Mahdi, son of al-Askari (as), and of
his re-appearance before the day of resurrection.

7.Ibn Khashab (Abu Muhammad Abdullah Ibn Ahmad Ibn Ahmad Ibn Khashab),
has given a detailed account of the twelfth Imam in his biographical
book called "Tawarikh Mawaleed al-A’imma wa Wafiyatihim"

8.Shaikh Abdullah Sha’rani (d. 905 AH), the celebrated Sufi, in his work
"Yaqaqeet", Chapter 66, deals with the birth and the occultation of the
twelfth Imam. Also He extensively talks about Imam al-Mahdi (as) in his
other book "Aqa’id al-Akabir".

9.Shaikh Hasan Iraqi who accepts the twelfth Imam, praises Sha’rani as a
pious and a learned ascetic, and narrates the story of Sha’rani’s
meeting with the twelfth Imam.

10.Sayyid ‘Ali, known as Khawas, the teacher of Sha’rani, also a
believer of the twelfth Imam, confirms what Shaikh Hasan asserted about
the meeting of Sha’rani with the twelfth Imam.

11.Nooruddin Abdul Rahman Ibn Ahmad, known as Mulla Jami, in his book
Shawahid al-Nubuwwah (The Evidence of Prophethood of Muhammad) gives an
account of the birth of the twelfth Imam and his statement is in
complete agreement with the Shi’a records.

12.Muhammad Ibn Mahmood al-Bukhari, al-Hanafi, known as Khawaja Parsa in
his book "Fasl al-Khitab”gives the account of the birth, occultation,
and re-appearance of the twelfth Imam.

13.Shaikh Abdul Haq Dehlawi, in his book "Jazb e Qulub", narrates the
statements of Hakima, the daughter of the ninth Imam who was asked by
the eleventh Imam, Imam al-Askari, to stay with Narjis, mother of the
last Imam during the night at the end of which she gave birth to her
son.

14.Sayyid Jamaluddin Husayni Muhaddith who is the author of the
celebrated book "Rawdhat al-Ahbab". According to Dayar Bakri, Mulla ‘Ali
Qari, Abdul Haqq Dehlawi, "Rawdhat al-Ahbab”is one of the reliable
sources of reference. The author mentions the twelfth Imam in the most
reverential terms. He states:

The auspicious birth of the pearl of the Vicegerency and the precious
form of the mine of guidance took place on the 15th of Sha’ban in the
year of 225 AH at Samarra. He has described the Imam in the following
words:

• al-Mahdi al-Muntadhar (the expected Mahdi)

• al-Khalaf al-Salih (the righteous successor)

• Sahib al-Zaman (the master of the time)

15.al-Arif Abdul Rahman Sufi, in his works "Mir’at al-Asrar”(The Mirror
of Mysteries) gives a detailed account of the birth, and the occultation
of the twelfth Imam.

16.’Ali Akbar, son of Asadullah Maududi, in his book Mukashifaat
(Visions), which is a commentary on "Nafahat al-Uns”by Abdurrahman Jami,
asserts the existence of the Mahdi as being the pole of guidance after
his father Imam Hasan al-Askari, who was also the pole of guidance and
Imamat.

17.Malik al-Ulama Dulatabadi who is a well known scholar, in his work
"Hidayat al-Saada”has confirmed the Imamat and the occultation of
al-Mahdi.

18.Nasr Ibn ‘Ali Jahzami Nasri, one of the most reliable reporters of
traditions whom Khateeb al-Baghdadi has praised him in his works on
history, and Yusuf Ganji al-Shafi’i, in his book Manaqib has introduced
Nasr as one of the masters of al-Bukhari and Muslim. Nasr asserts the
existence of:

Qa’im Aale Muhammad (The ‘Support’ among the family of Muhammad), the
one among the Imams of the House of the Prophet (S) whose duty is to
establish Islam throughout the world.

19.Mulla ‘Ali Qari, one of the greatest traditionists, in his famous
book, "Mirqat", talks about Imam al-Mahdi after mentioning the
celebrated statement of the Holy Prophet (S) that after him there would
be twelve successors (Caliphs). Mulla ‘Ali states whether they are in
power or not makes no difference as they are the rightful Imams.

20.Kazi Jawad Sibti was a Christian but later became a Muslim. He wrote
"Baraheen Sibtiyya”(Proofs forwarded by Sibti), which is a refutation of
the Christian writers. He narrates the Prophecy from Ashaya (Joshua)
concerning the coming of a man from the chosen branch of the chosen
lineage of Adam who would be the seat of the spirit. In other words, he
will be filled with the spirit of wisdom, sympathy, justice and
knowledge and he will be God fearing. God will bestow on him a sound and
glorying reason and make him firm.

His judgment would be based on hearing an external evidence, but he will
have a guided insight about everything and judge people according to
what they really are in their hearts. He further states that his method
of judgment is peculiar to him and has not been adopted by any prophet
or Vice-regent of God. The Muslims are unanimous that the Mahdi of this
description shall be descendant of Fatimah, daughter of the holy Prophet
(S). Particularly the view of the Shi’a seems to be real interpretation
of this real prophecy.

21.Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Hanafi, (Shams al-Din Abul Mudhaffar Yusuf),
the author of "Tathkirat al-Khawas", pp 325-328 gives the names of 22
people believed by Muslims to have lived various ages from 3,000 down to
300 years! He also writes about the twelfth Imam as follows

• He (al-Mahdi) is Muhammad Ibn al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali
Ibn Musa al-Ridha

• His title is Abu Abdillah and Abul Qasim

• He is the last successor of the Prophet (S)

• He is the Last Imam of the House

• He is the authoritative proof of God (al-Hujjah)

• He is the master of time (Sahib al-Zaman)

• and he is the expected one (al-Muntadhar)

22. Abu Bakr Ahmad Ibn Hasan al-Bayhaqi, the famous Shafi’i jurist, has
confirmed the birth of the son of al-Askari and his being as the
expected Mahdi.

23.Shaikh Sadruddin, known as Hamavi, who has written a book about the
Last Imam of the House of the Prophet (S). He quotes a tradition of the
Holy Prophet (S) as follows

Prophet (S) said: "The learned one among my followers are in the rank of
the Prophets from among the Children of Israel", also referring to the
twelve Naqeeb (chiefs)of the Children of Israel (see Qur’an 5:12). But
the last Wali, who is the last of the successors of the Prophet (S) and
who is the Twelfth Wali in the chain of Awliaa, is al-Mahdi, "Sahib
al-Zaman", his appellation and title should not be used for any one
else.

24.Shaikh Ahmad Jami, (as quoted by Qundoozi, author of "Yanabi al-
Mawaddah", and Qadhi Noorullah author of "Majalis al-Mu’mineen") has
composed the following poem:

*My heart is fine and bright with the love of Haydar*

*Next to Haydar, al-Hasan is our Guide and Leader.*

*The dust beneath the Shoes of al-Husayn*

*is the eyeliner (surmah) for my eyes.*

*al-Abideen, the ornament of all devotees*

*is like a crown on my head.*

*al-Baqir is the light of both my eyes.*

*The religion of Ja’far is true and the path of Musa is right.*

*O, loyal, ones: listen to me praising the King of Kings (al-Ridha)*  
*who is buried in Khurasan.*

*A particle from the dust of his tomb is the cure of all pains*

*Leader of men of faith is al-Taqi, O dear Muslims*

*If you love al-Naqi in preference to all other people,*

*you have done the thing which is proper and right.*

*al-Askari is the light of the eyes of both Adam and the world.*

*Where can be found, in the world,*

*such a chief in command like al-Mahdi?*

25. Shaikh Amir Ibn Basri has composed an eulogy called Qasidah Tayya.
The composition contains theosophical lore, maxims, mystical points, and
matter of etiquette. Here are some lines quoted:

*O’ Imam al-Mahdi! How long will You be hidden?*

*Oblige us, O’ our father, with your return!*

*We feel sad the waiting time is prolonged.*

*For the sake of Thy Lord, bless us with your audience.*

*O the pole of being! Hasten, O our beloved!*

*Return, so that we may enjoy the sight.*

*Surely, it is a great a pleasure*

*for a lover to meet his beloved after a long absence.*

26.Husayn Ibn Hamdan al-Husayni, in his book "al-Hidaya”mentions the
twelfth Imam, the master of time, as the son of the eleventh Imam Hasan
al-Askari.

27.The well known biographer, Ibn Khallakan in his book "Wafayat
al-A’ayan", has given a brief account of the birth of the Imam.

28.Ibn al-Azraq, as quoted by Ibn Khallakan, asserts the existence of
the twelfth Imam.

29.Ibn al-Wardi the historian, in his work asserts the birth of the son
of al-Askari in 255 AH.

30.Sayyid Mu’min Shablanji in his work "Noor al-Absar”gives the
genealogy of Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi (as), the twelfth Imam.

After these and many more, those who deny his birth and his present life
have no proof against those who have accepted this fact, while they
still recognize the correctness of traditions about Imam al-Mahdi. The
Messenger of Allah (S) said:

"He who dies not knowing the Imam of his era, has died the death of
al-Jahiliyya (Days of Ignorance; the era before Islam)."


