The Knowledge of The Unseen & The Knowledge of The Book
=======================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

This article aims at clarifying two concepts namely "Ilm al-Ghayb”(the
Knowledge of the Unseen) and "Ilm al-Kitab”(the knowledge of the Book)
which both seem to be confusing in many people’s mind. The article
provides references to Qur’an and both Shi’ite and Sunnite collections
of traditions.

The Knowledge Of The Unseen
---------------------------

The original meaning of "Ghayb”in Arabic is "that which has been
concealed", and it is with this meaning which has appeared in the Holy
Qur’an (4:34, 12:52, etc.) It signifies a meaning opposite to
"Hadhir”which means "present to the senses", and thus denotes with
things to the external world (i.e., Ma’lumat; known things). This
opposition of Ghayb/Hadhir (unseen/present) should not be confused with
the opposition of Ilm/Jahl (knowledge/ignorance) in which the latter
pair is concerned with the internal act of knowing. So it may happen
that something is "Ghayb”in the dimension of time which does not exist
now but it will be or it was; or in the dimension of place that is the
knowledge of something which is located elsewhere but not here.

Thus we can divide own our knowledge into two parts:

A) The knowledge of something which is present to us right here and
right now (Ilm bil Hadhir),

B)The knowledge of something which we know but is not here now (Ilm bil
Ghayb/Gha’ib; the knowledge of what is concealed from the senses).

It should be noted however that the above division is according to
general/original linguistic meaning of the term. The knowledge of Ghayb
itself can be divided in two kinds:

1)The knowledge that comes to us through our senses, but indirectly.
Examples are our knowledge of history which comes either through
narration from one person to another, by speech or in writing or through
examining the relics and remainings of the past, and then deducing
certain historical facts from them.

2)The type of the knowledge of Ghayb which does not come through our
senses.

It should be observed that the first type can be by means of ordinary
senses (the five normal senses) or may be by a special sense which has
been given to a person like telepathic sense (if there is such a thing).
It is, however, only to the second type (the non-sensory one), that the
technical/special meaning of "The Knowledge of Ghayb/Gha’ib”is denoted.
The historical events mentioned in Qur’an has been named by Qur’an as
"the tidings/news of Ghayb”(11:49, 12:102, 25:4-6) which are all the
second kind which did not come via senses.

The Holy Qur’an is quite specific about the fact that Allah alone has
the knowledge of Ghayb (what is concealed) in the heavens and the earth.
Qur’an tells us that there are keys to the Ghayb which are with Allah:

***"With Him are the Keys of the Ghayb; non knows them but He.”(Qur’an
6:59)***

and that no one knows anything of Allah’s knowledge except if He will.
Qur’an tells about the knowledge and the intercession of the Prophet
Muhammad and his twelve successors that:

***"Who can intercede with Him except the cases He permits? He knows
what is in front of them (the Prophet and the Imams) and what is behind
them, and*** ***they encompass nothing of His knowledge except what He
will.”(Qur’an 2:255)***

This shows that the core/keys of the Knowledge of Ghayb is with Allah,
but He may release "a news of Ghayb”to the one He wills.

According to the Qur’an, things which are special property of Allah,
such as creation, giving life, curing without medicine, the knowledge of
what has happened and what will happen, may either be momentarily given
by Him at the moment they are required, or else the power and ability to
do them may be given so that they can be used when necessary, by the
permission of Allah. An example of the latter comes in the story of
Prophet Jesus (as) who, according to Qur’an, said:

***"I have come to you with a sign from your Lord; I will create for you
out of clay a figure of a bird, then I will breath into it, and it will
be a bird by leave of Allah; I will also heal the blind and the leper,
and bring to life the dead, by leave of Allah. I will also inform you of
what things you eat and what you treasure up in your houses. Surely, in
that is a sign for you, if you are believers.”(Qur’an 3:49; see also
5:110)***

To give a simple example, consider a person who looks at a monitor which
displays some part of a database located in the hard drive of a
computer. The user can retrieve any part of this database and see it on
the monitor. But the whole database is always in the computer and not in
the user’s head. Furthermore, the user is unaware of any real-time
modifications that may happen to this data base and the formulas behind
the modifications.

Allah let the Prophet and Imams know whatever they needed to know.
However, they don’t have the whole knowledge within themselves. But
Allah would give them whatever they needed any time. It is important to
understand that what the prophets or the Imams wish to know is exactly
what Allah wished to release to them. They do not wish to know anything
that Allah do not want to release to them (among which is the keys to
the knowledge of unseen).

Based on Qur’an and the transmitted traditions by Ahlul-Bayt, Allah has
two types of knowledge:

1-The knowledge that is withheld (i.e., Ghayb). As I mentioned Nobody
has control over this type of knowledge except Allah. Allah may inform
"a news from Ghayb”to some of His servants, but this is different than
"possessing Ghayb". In fact, there is a whole chapter in Usul al-Kafi
which discusses this type of knowledge where it is clearly mentioned
that neither the Imams nor the prophets possess the knowledge Ghayb.
"The Will (Mashiyyah) of Allah operates on this knowledge. If He wishes
He decrees it. And If He wishes He modifies it and does not carry it
out.”(See Usul al-Kafi, Kitab al-Hujjah, Tradition \#664)

2-The knowledge that is granted. "This is the knowledge that Allah fore-
ordained (Qadar, Taqdeer), He decrees it, and carries it out (with no
modification). And this is the knowledge that has 1been passed down to
the Prophet Muhammad, and then to the Imams.”(See Usul al-Kafi, Kitab
al-Hujjah, Tradition \#664)

If the Prophet or Imams possessed any knowledge about the future, it is
this second type of knowledge (the knowledge of what has been
foreordained), and NOT the first type of knowledge (the Knowledge of the
Unseen).

For the First type of knowledge, Qur’an states:

***"Allah removes what He wills, and confirms what He wills, and with
Him is the Essence of the Book.”(Qur’an 13:39).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَمْحُو اللَّـهُ مَا يَشَاءُ وَيُثْبِتُ وَعِندَهُ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Essence of the Book is the withheld knowledge (Ghayb) which is only
possessed by Allah, and nobody possesses this database but Him. Also see
the following verses:

***He said: "The knowledge of that is with my Lord in a Record. My Lord
neither errs nor forgets.”(Qur’an 20:52)***

Now, let us look at the following verse:

"He possesses the Ghayb and He does not discloses His Ghayb to anyone
**except to such a Messenger as He is well-pleased with**.”(Qur’an
72:26-27).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَىٰ غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا ﴿٢٦﴾إِلَّا
مَنِ ارْتَضَىٰ مِن رَّسُولٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

From the above verse, it is evident that although Allah alone possesses
the withheld knowledge (Ghayb), but He may disclose a news from it to
Prophet Muhammad (S). On the other hand, Prophet Muhammad transferred
whatever he was reached from the news of "Ghayb”to those who qualified,
as the following verse testifies:

***"And he (Muhammad) is not niggardly the Knowledge of the
Unseen.”(Qur’an 81:24).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هُوَ عَلَى الْغَيْبِ بِضَنِينٍ﴿٢٤﴾ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

Therefore, if the news of Ghayb reached to the Prophet Muhammad (and
consequently the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt), it is only because it was given
to him by Allah. It is for this reason that according to Qur’an the
messengers are all instructed to tell people that they do not possess
the Knowledge of Ghayb of their own, for it is reached to them by Allah
only as He wishes.

In Usul a-Kafi, it is narrated that:

Ammar al-Sabati said: I asked Abu Abdillah (Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq)
concerning if Imam knows al-Ghayb (Unseen). He replied: "No, but when he
wishes to know something, Allah causes him to know that.”(Usul al-Kafi,
Kitab al- Hujjah, Tradition \#666)

Shaikh al-Mufeed (d. 413/1022) who was one the outstanding Shi’a
scholars said:

“... Saying that they (Prophet and Imams) possess the knowledge of Ghayb
should be refuted as being something clearly incorrect, because the
attribute of this can only be for someone who possesses the knowledge of
(all) things within himself, not the knowledge obtained from another.
And this can only be for Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty. All
Imamis agree on this except those who deviated from them and are called
Mufawwidah and extremists (al-Ghulat).”(Awa’il al- Maqalaat, p38).

in fact, neither the prophets nor Imams ever claimed that they have all
the knowledge within themselves. Obviously they did not know those of
information which was "hidden”to them. However, this does not mean that
whatever they knew is "visible”to us as well. The information which is
considered to be "hidden”to us may be "visible”to them. Thus the
visibility of knowledge is relative to the person.

The Knowledge Of The Book
-------------------------

Qur’an mentions the second type of knowledge, explained above, which has
been released to the prophets and the Imams. This is the knowledge of
what has been foreordained and the knowledge of the rules governing the
universe. This type of knowledge is known as "the knowledge of the
Book". Qur’an testifies that some prophets and non-prophets had this
type of knowledge by which they could perform many extraordinary things
with the permission of Allah. We read in Qur’an that:

***So We did show Abraham*** ***the power and the laws of the heavens
and the earth*** ***that he might (with understanding) have certitude.
(Qur’an 6:75)***

Also earlier, we quoted a verse of Qur’an related to Prophet Jesus who
said: "I will also INFORM you of what things you eat and what you
treasure up in your houses.”(Qur’an 3:49; see also 5:110). References
can also be made in this respect to the power of the interpretation of
the tales given to Prophet Joseph (as) (see Qur’an 12:6,15,21,37), to
the language of the birds given to Prophet David (as) and Solomon
(Sulayman) (as) (see Qur’an 21:79). We also read:

***We gave knowledge to David and Solomon, and they both said: "Praise
be to Allah Who has favored us above many of His servants who
believe!”And Solomon was David’s heir. He said: "O People! we have been
taught the speech of Birds and*** ***we have been given (some knowledge)
from all things. This is indeed manifest favor.”(Qur’an 27:15-16)***

Having "the Knowledge of the Book", one can do many extraordinary things
with the permission of Allah. For example Qur’an mentions that at the
time of Prophet Solomon (Sulayman), a person in the name of Asaf, who
was the Minister of Solomon and had only a very small part of "the
Knowledge of the Book", was able to bring the throne of Queen Bilqis
from another place of the world within the twinkling of an eye:

"The One with whom was just a part of the Knowledge of the Book said: ‘I
shall bring it to you within the twinkling of an eye!’ Then when
(Solomon) saw (the throne) set in his presence, he said: ‘This is by the
grace of my Lord! to test me whether I am grateful or
ungrateful!’“(Qur’an 27:40).

The source of this Divine Knowledge is God. He gave part of it to
Prophet Adam (2:31), Jesus (5:110/113)... and some people who were not
prophets like Taloot (2:247), and Asaf (see the above verse). According
to Qur’an, "The knowledge of the Book”is for those who are immersed in
Knowledge (3:7, 4:162), who are given authority by Allah (4:83), who are
assigned by Allah as referee (16:43, 21:7), who are the stars of
Guidance (6:97).

According to some traditions, the Knowledge of The Book is a part of the
Greatest Name of Allah. The Greatest Name of Allah consists of seventy
three units. These are not letters, but they are rather the knowledge of
governing the universe. In one of the traditions in Usul al-Kafi, Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (as) explained this issue as well as the mystery of
the action of Asaf, the Minister of Solomon:

Abu Ja’far (as) said: "Verily, the Greatest Name of Allah consists of
seventy three units (Harf). Asaf possessed only one unit of it, and when
he spoke it (i.e., used it) the ground between him and the throne of
Bilqis (the Queen of Sheba/Saba) folded/subsided so that he could take
the throne with his hands, and then the ground opened out and returned
to what it was originally in less than the twinkling of an eye.

We (Ahlul-Bayt) have seventy two units of the Greatest Name, and one
unit remained with Allah which is kept exclusively in His knowledge of
Unseen (Ilm al-Ghayb); and there is no efficacy or power except by
Allah, the High, the Great.”(Usul al-Kafi, Kitab al-Hujjah, Tradition
\#613)

As stated in Verse 27:40 of Qur’an, the one who possessed a small part
of "the Knowledge of the Book", was able to bring the throne of King
Bilqis from another place of the world within the twinkling of an eye.
So those who have the whole "Knowledge of the Book”should be able to do
more! The whole knowledge of the Book was with Prophet Muhammad and his
twelve successors. Allah, Exalted, said in Qur’an:

***"(O’ Prophet) say: Enough for witness between me and you is Allah and
he who possesses the Knowledge of the Book.”(Qur’an 13:43)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قُلْ كَفَىٰ بِاللَّـهِ شَهِيدًا بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَمَنْ عِندَهُ
عِلْمُ الْكِتَابِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

From the verse, it is clear that in the phrase "he who possesses the
Knowledge of the Book", Qur’an is specifically referring to a person
other than Allah and Prophet Muhammad. Of course, the source of this
knowledge is Allah and He possesses it and He also granted it to Prophet
Muhammad (S) in full.

However, the choice words in the above verse shows that "he who
possesses the Knowledge of the Book”referred specifically in the above
verse, is a person (or persons) other than Allah and His Prophet (S). It
refers to Imam ‘Ali (as) and the Imams after him (see below for
details).

Also notice that in the above verse, Allah does NOT say "a part of the
knowledge of the Book”while Allah used the phrase "a part of”for the
case of minister of Solomon.

Some Sunnis have mentioned that the above verse refers to Abdullah Ibn
Sallam, the Jewish Rabbi who converted to Islam. some other Sunnis said
that it refers to all scholars of the Jews and the Christians who found
the attributes of the incoming Prophet in their ancient scriptures.

The above interpretation does not seem to be correct. "The knowledge of
the Book”as Qur’an mentions in one more place, is not as simple as
recognition of the attributes of the incoming Prophet in the scripture.
"The knowledge of the Book”includes the knowledge of governing rules in
the Universe. As Qur’an stated, Asaf had only a very small part of "the
Knowledge of the Book", and was able to do that extraordinary thing.

Thus this type of power has no connection with just knowing the name of
an incoming prophet from a book. Furthermore, if the Sunni
interpretation is correct, then it means whenever Muslims have a
question, they should refer to Christians and Jews, because they have
the whole knowledge of the Book while Muslims do not!

Some may argue that if the above verse is referring to Imam ‘Ali and the
rest of the twelve Imams, then what sort of evidence will this be for
the unbelievers who would not accept the words of Muslims by saying the
above verse to them?

The answer is that the verse starts with the phrase: "And the Kuffar
(unbelievers) say: You are not a messenger. Say: Sufficient as witness
is...”As such, the verse is about Kuffar (unbelievers). They don’t
believe in Allah either. Therefore, the same question may rise again: If
the Kuffar do not believe in Allah, then what sort of evidence will be
for them to say "Allah is the witness"?

The above verse is, in fact, just a threat by the Prophet (S) to
unbelievers, that that will be accounted on the day of judgment for
their blasphemy, and he (the Prophet) has enough two witness for that:
One is, Allah, the Creator, and the other one is Imam ‘Ali, the Prince
of Believers. In general, it refers to all the twelve Imams. But at that
time of the Prophet he was just Imam ‘Ali (as).

Witness to the fact that "he who possesses the Knowledge of the Book”in
verse 13:43 refers to Imam ‘Ali (as) and no other companions of the
Prophet, is the numerous traditions reported by both Shi’a and Sunni.

It is confirmed in the authentic Sunni books that Imam ‘Ali was the MOST
knowledgeable man in the Muslim community after the Prophet (S). Those
who testified this fact include: The Prophet (S), Imam ‘Ali himself, Abu
Bakr, Umar, Aisha, and many other companions.

The Holy Prophet (S) informed his followers of the very existence of a
man who was the treasurer of Knowledge of the Holy Prophet (S), and he
had declared to them that if they want to reach the Knowledge of the
Holy Prophet, they should take that Knowledge from the treasurer:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "I am the City of Knowledge, and ‘Ali
is its Gate. So whoever intends to enter the City and the Wisdom, he
should enter from its Gate."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنا مدينة العِلْم و عليٌ بابها، فَمَنْ أرادَ المدينة و الحكمة فليأتِها
من بابها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

1. Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, pp 201,637

2. al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, pp 126-127,226, Chapter of the Virtues
of ‘Ali, narrated on the authority of two reliable reporters: one, Ibn
Abbas, whose report has been transmitted through two different but chain
of authorities, and the other, Jabir Ibn Abdullah al-Ansari. He said
this tradition is Authentic (Sahih).

3. Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p635, Tradition \#1081

4. Jami’ al-Saghir, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, v1, pp 107,374; Also in
Jami’ al-Jawami’; Also in Tarikh al-Khulafaa, p171. He said this
tradition is accepted (Hasan).

5. al-Kabir, by al-Tabarani (d. 360); Also in al-Awsat

6. Ma’rifah al-Sahaba, by al-Hafidh Abu Nu’aym al-Isbahani

7. Ihyaa al-Ululm, by al-Ghazzali

8. History of Ibn Kathir, v7, p358

9. History of Ibn Asakir

10. Tarikh, by al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi, v2, p337; v4, p348; v7, p173;
v11, pp 48-50; v13, p204

11. al-Isti’ab, by Ibn Abd al-Barr, v3, p38; v2, p461

12. Usdul Ghabah, by Ibn al-Athir, v4, p22

13. Tahdhib al-Athar, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari

14. Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p114

15. Bahr al-Asateed, by al-Hafidh Abu Muhammad Hassan Samarghandi (d.
491)

16. Siraj al-Muneer, by al-Hafidh ‘Ali Ibn Ahmad Azizi Shafi’i (d.1070),
v2, p63

17. Manaqib, by ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn Tayyib al-Jalaabi Ibn Maghaazi (d.
483)

18. Firdaws al-Akhbar, by Abu Shuja’a Shirwayh Hamadani al-Daylami (d.
509)

19. Maqtal al-Husayn, by Khateeb Kharazmi (d. 568), v1, p43

20. Manaqib, by Khateeb Kharazmi (d. 568), p49

21. Alif Ba’a, by Abul Hajjaaj Yusuf Ibn Muhammad Andulesi (d.605), v1,
p222

22. Matalib al-Su’ul, by Abu Salim Muhammad Ibn Talhih Shafi’i (d. 652),
p22

23. Jawahi al-Aghdi’in, by Noor al-Din al-Shafi’i (d. 911)

24. Yanabi’ al-Mawaddah, by al-Qundoozi al-Hanafi, in Chapter 14

25. Tadhkirat al-Khawas al-Ummah, by Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi (d. 654), p29

26. Kunz al-Baraheen, by Shaikh Khathri

27. Kifayat al-Talib, by Yusuf al-Ganji al-Shafi’i (d. 658), Chapter 58

28. Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, part 15, p13, Traditions
\#348-379

29. al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 9, section 2,
p189

30. Hafidh Salah al-Din al-Ulai, after copying the weakening arguments
by al-Dhahabi, has remarked "There are in this only mean attempts to
oppose for the sake of opposition, and not a single valid argument."

31. Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Siddeeq al-Hasani al-Maghribi, from Cairo,
has compiled a magnificent book named "Fat’h al-Mulk al-’Ali bi Sihah
Hadith-e-Bab-e-Madinat al-Ilm”to prove the genuinness of the very above
tradition. This book was printed in the year 1354 AH in Matba’
al-Islamiyyah, Egypt.

32. Also reported by Ibn Adi on the authority of Ibn Umar, and by
al-Bazzar on the authority of Jabir Ibn Abdillah al-Ansari

... and more ...

In the Arabic form of this Hadith, the word "The Knowledge”comes as
"al-Ilm”which has the article "al”which makes the word universal. This
means that in the city of knowledge of the Prophet (S), all kind of the
knowledge (which could possibly be attained by human being) existed.

**Remark**: The above tradition also supports the infallibility of Imam
‘Ali (beside what is conveyed by Qur’an 33:33 on the issue of
infallibility of Ahlul-Bayt). The reason behind the non-intentional
mistakes is lack of knowledge, i.e., not to know what is right to do at
the time. Therefore, if Imam ‘Ali (as) contained all the knowledge of
the Prophet (S), it reasons that if the Prophet was infallible, so is
Imam ‘Ali (as).

In addition to that, al-Tirmidhi also recorded that:

The Messenger of Allah said: "I am the House of Wisdom and ‘Ali is it’s
door."

Sunni references:

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, pp 201,637

• Ibn Jarir al-Tabari recorder this tradition and wrote: "We believe
this tradition to be genuine and authentic.”(as quoted by al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi in Kanz al-Ummal, v6, p401)

• Jami’ al-Saghir, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, v1, p170; Also in Jami’
al-Jawami’

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 9, section 2, p189

Moreover:

The Messenger said to his daughter Fatimah al-Zahra (sa): "Would it not
please you that I have married you to the first Muslim in my nation,
**their most knowledgeable**, and their greatest in Wisdom."

Sunni reference: Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v3, p136; v5, p26

Similarly, Barida narrated:

The messenger of Allah (S) said to Fatimah (sa) that: "I gave you in
marriage to the best in my Ummah, the most knowledgeable in them, the
best in patience in them, and the first Muslim among them."

Sunni reference: Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v6, p398

Abu Bakr said: "May Allah never put me in a situation where I can not
have access to Abul Hasan (i.e., ‘Ali) to solve a problem.”Similarly,
Sa’id al-Musayyib said: "Umar Ibn al-Khattab used to beg God to preserve
him from a perplexing case which the father of al-Hasan was not present
to decide.”Furthermore Umar said: "If there was not ‘Ali, Umar would
have perished."

Sunni references:

• Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p647, Tradition \#1100

• al-Isti’ab, by Ibn Abd al-Barr, v3, p39

• Manaqib, by al-Khawarizmi, p48

• al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v2, p338

• al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, v2, p194

• Tarikh al-Khulafaa, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, p171

Aisha once said: "He (‘Ali) was the most knowledgeable person among
those who remained on the Sunnah (of the Prophet)."

Sunni References:

• al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d

• Tarikh al-Khulafaa, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, p171

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 9, section 3, p196

• Ibn Asakir

Ibn Abbas (ra) said: "There was 18 exclusive virtues for ‘Ali which was
not for any other person in the Muslim community."

Sunni Reference: al-Awsat, by al-Tabarani

Ibn Mas’ud said: "We were talking that the most trustful referee/Judge
in Medina to solve the problems was ‘Ali."

Sunni References:

• Tarikh al-Kabir, by al-Bukhari (the author of Sahih), v1, part 2, p6

• Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p646, Tradition \#1097

• al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v2, p352

• Tarikh al-Khulafaa, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, p171

• al-Isti’ab, by Ibn Abd al-Barr, section of word "Ain", v2, p462; v3,
p39

• al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v2, p338, He also reported that Umar said:
"‘Ali was our Judge."

• Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v1, p84

• Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p116

• al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, v3, p213

Furthermore:

Ibn Mas’ud said: "The Holy Qur’an has outward and inward meanings, and
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib has the knowledge of both."

Sunni references: Hilyatul Awliyaa, by Abu Nu’aym, v1, p65

Much of the knowledge of the Prophet was transferred to Imam ‘Ali (as)
when the Prophet was taking his last breath:

Imam ‘Ali said: "The Messenger of Allah at that time (before his last
breath) taught me a thousand chapters of knowledge, every one of which
opened for me one thousand other chapters."

Sunni references:

• Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v1, p392

• Hilyatul Awliyaa, by al-Hafidh Abu Nu’aym

• Nuskhatah, by Abu Ahmad al-Faradi

Furthermore, Imam ‘Ali (as) once said:

"By Allah, I am the Brother of the Messenger of Allah and his friend and
his cousin and the inheritor of his knowledge. Who has a better title
for succeeding him than me?

Sunni references:

• al-Khasa’is al-Alawiyyah, al-Nisa’i

• al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim v3, p112

• al-Dhahabi in his Talkhis of al-Mustadrak has admitted the above words
to be genuine.

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v5, p40

Also Imam ‘Ali (as) himself frequently stated in his sermons:

"Ask me before you lose me. By Allah, if you ask me about anything that
could happen up to the Day of Judgment, I will tell you about it. Ask
me, for, by Allah, you will not be able to ask me a question about
anything without my informing you. Ask me about the Book of Allah, for
by Allah, there is no verse about which I do not know whether it was
sent down at night or during the day, or whether it was revealed on a
plain or in a mountain."

Sunni References:

• al-Isabah, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v4, p568

• Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v7, pp 337-338

• Fat’hul Bari, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v8, p485

• Tarikh al-Khulafaa, by al-Suyuti, p124

• al-Itqan, by al-Suyuti, v2, p319

• al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, v2, p198

• at-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v2, Part 2, p101

• al-Isti’ab, by Ibn Abd al-Barr, v3, p1107

Sa’id Ibn Musayyib as well as Umar Ibn al-Khattab said:

"No companion of the Prophet ever said ‘Ask me’ except ‘Ali."

Sunni References:

• Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p647, Tradition \#1098

• al-Isabah, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v2, p509

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 9, section 3, p196

• al-Faqih wal Mutafaqih, by al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi, v2, p167

• Tarikh al-Khulafaa, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, p171

• al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v2, p338

• al-Isti’ab, by Ibn Abd al-Barr, v3, p40

• al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, v3, p212

• al-Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, p83

The conclusion is that "he who possesses the Knowledge of the Book”in
verse 13:43 refers to Imam ‘Ali (as) and no other companions. And if "a
part of Knowledge of the Book", provided a supernatural power for Asaf,
then it is clear that those who have the whole knowledge of the Book,
have more ability of this type by leave of Allah.

Also according to the above tradition written in Sihah Sittah, in which
the Prophet (S) said "I am the City of Knowledge, and ‘Ali is its Gate.
So whoever intends to enter the City and the Wisdom, he should enter
from its Gate", it is clear that the only source of knowledge after
Prophet Muhammad (S) was Imam ‘Ali (as), and those who seek other
sources do not gain the genuine Sunnah of the Prophet because nobody can
enter this City from a direction other than its door.

Concluding Remarks
------------------

It should be emphasized that The Twelver Shi’a Scholars believe that
neither the Prophet nor the Imams possess the Knowledge of Ghayb with
the special meaning used in Qur’an, since this type of knowledge is
something which belongs to Allah only. However, as Qur’an mentions "news
of Ghayb”have been transmitted to the Prophet Muhammad, and from that
channel, it has been transmitted to the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt. What they
fully possess is the Knowledge of the Book described above.

It should also be noted that the prophets and Imams share with the rest
of humanity the means for obtaining knowledge which Allah has given: the
senses, the intellect, etc. They also possess special powers and means
which other people do not have.

In carrying out the commands of Allah in which people have also
responsibility, and likewise in ordinary behavior, the prophets and
Imams only make use of the first way of knowing, that is the commonly
available means. The second means (extraordinary means) is only used by
them in duties and works which are connected with their position of
prophethood and Imamat.

Thus in matters such as knowing the beginning of the month, passing
judgment, finding out if something is unclean or pure, etc., they make
use of ordinary means such as sighting of the moon, and so forth, which
anyone else employs. The extraordinary means of knowledge can not be the
basis for their action, and what they volitionally do must be determined
by the means available to everyone. Thus, such knowledge has spiritual
aspect as being the Representative of Allah (Khalifatullah), and the
reason for it must be sought on this level, and it is not for the
purpose of influencing and controlling the events on the level of
ordinary understanding.

And Allah knows best.

Side Comments
-------------

A contributor mentioned that there exists another version of the
tradition of "The City of Knowledge”where the Prophet states: "I am the
city of knowledge and ‘Ali is its gate, and Abu Bakr is its foundation,
Umar its walls and Uthman its roof."

To answer this, I would like to first mention this weak tradition is not
reported in any of the six sound collections of the Sunnis, where as the
correct version of the tradition provided in our article is, in fact, in
the Sihah Sittah of the Sunnis.

Adding the words to the genuine traditions of the Prophet, was another
trick which the falsifiers of tradition narrators resorted to during the
time of the Umayad. When they found that a tradition was so widespread
amongst the people that there was no way to deny or refute it, they
decided to add a paragraph or words, or to change some phrases so as to
dampen the impact of the tradition or to make it lose its intended
meaning.

This trick is not hidden to the objective researchers who refute these
additions which, most of the time, indicate the lack of intelligence of
the falsifiers and their lack of wisdom in contrast to the light of the
Prophetic traditions. Even some well known Sunni scholars were aware of
such forgeries and have rated many of such traditions as forged or weak
due to the discrepancy in the Isnad as well as the contents.

For instance, in the above forged tradition, we can observe the saying
"Abu Bakr is it’s foundation”means the knowledge of the Prophet (S) is
derived from the knowledge of Abu Bakr and this is disbelief (Kufr).
Likewise, the statement "Umar is its walls”means Umar prevents people
from entering the city, i.e., prevents them from getting to the
knowledge. Also the saying "Uthman is its roof”is undoubtedly absurd
since there is no city which has a roof!!!

All praise is due to the Lord of the Worlds, who has given us
intelligence through which we will be able to differentiate between the
truth and falsehood, and He has made clear to us the Right Path and then
tests us by many things so that they can bear witness on the day of
judgment.


