The Major Difference Between the Shi’a and the Sunni
====================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

All the Muslims agree that Allah is One, Muhammad (S) is His last
Prophet, the Qur’an is His last Book for mankind, and that one day

Allah will resurrect all human beings, and they will be questioned about
their beliefs and actions. There are, however, disagreements between the
two schools in the following two areas:

1. The Caliphate (successorship/leadership) which the Shi’a believe is
the right of the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt.

2. The Islamic rule when there is no clear Qur’anic statement, nor is
there a Hadith upon which Muslim schools have agreed.

The second issue has root into the first one. The Shi’a bound themselves
to refer to Ahlul-Bayt for deriving the Sunnah of Prophet (S). They do
this in conformity with the order of Prophet reported in the authentic
Sunni and Shi’i collections of traditions beside what the Qur’an attests
to their perfect purity.

The disagreement about the caliphate should not be a source of division
between the two schools. Muslims agree that the caliphate of Abu Bakr
came through election by a limited number of people and was a surprise
for all other companions. By limited number, I mean, the majority of the
prominent companions of prophet had no knowledge of this election. ‘Ali,
Ibn Abbas,

Uthman, Talha, Zubair, Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas, Salman al-Farsi, Abu Dharr,

Ammar Ibn Yasir, Miqdad, Abdurrahman Ibn Owf were among those who were
not consulted nor even informed of. Even Umar confessed to the fact that
the election of Abu Bakr was without consultation of Muslims. (See sahih
al-

Bukhari, Arabic-English, Tradition 8.817)

On the other hand, election implies choice and freedom, and that every

Muslim has the right to elect the nominee. Whoever refuses to elect him
does not oppose God or His Messenger because neither God nor His
Messenger appointed the nominated person by people.

Election, by its nature, does not compel any Muslim to elect a specific
nominee. Otherwise, the election would be coercion. This means that the
election would lose its own nature and it would be a dictatorial
operation.

It is well known that the Prophet said: "There is no validity for any
allegiance given by force."

Imam ‘Ali refused to give his allegiance to Abu Bakr for six months. He
gave his allegiance to Abu Bakr only after the martyrdom of his wife

Fatimah al-Zahra (sa), Daughter of the Holy Prophet, six month after the
departure of Prophet. (see Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English version,
Tradition 5.546). If refusal to give allegiance to an elected nominee
was prohibited in Islam, Imam ‘Ali would not have allowed himself to
delay in giving his allegiance.

In the same tradition in Sahih al-Bukhari, Imam ‘Ali (as) said that he
had some rights in Caliphate which was not honored, and he complained
why Abu Bakr should have not consulted him in deciding upon the ruler.
He later gave his allegiance when he found that the only way to save
Islam is to leave the isolation which occured due to his refusal of
giving the oath of allegiance.

What’s more? The well known companions, Abdullah Ibn Umar and Sa’d Ibn
Abi

Waqqas, refused to give their allegiance to Imam ‘Ali for the entire
duration of his caliphate. (Ibn Al-Athir, his history Al-Kamil, v3,
p98).

But the Imam did not punish these companions.

If it was permissible for a Muslim, who was a contemporary of the
caliph,to refuse to give his allegiance, it would be more permissible
for a person who came in a later century to believe or not to believe in
the qualifications of that elected caliph. In doing so, he would not be
sinning, provided that the Caliph is not assigned by Allah.

The Shi’a say that Imam must be appointed by God; that appointment may
be known through the declaration of the Prophet or the preceding Imam.
The

Sunni scholars say that Imam (or Caliph, as they prefer to say) can be
either elected, or nominated by the preceding Caliph, or selected by a
committee, or may attempt to gain the power through a military coup (as
was in the case of Muawiyah).

The Shi’a scholars say that a divinely appointed Imam is sinless and

Allah does not grant such position to the sinful. The Sunni scholars
(including Mu’tazilites) say that Imam can be sinful as he is appointed
by other than Allah. Even if he is tyrant and sunk in sins (like in the
case of Muawiyah and Yazid), the majority of the scholars from the
schools of Hanbali, Shafi’i, and Maliki discourage people to rise
against that Caliph. They think that they should be preserved although
they disagree with the evil actions.

The Shi’a say that Imam must possess above all such qualities as
knowledge, bravery, justice, wisdom, piety, love of God etc. The Sunni
scholars say it is not necessary. A person inferior in these qualities
may be elected in preference to a person having all these qualities of
superior degree.


