Who is the successor of the Prophet (S)?
========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Once a person told me that Abu Bakr is more knowledgeable than Prophet
Muhammad (S) (Na’oozo Billah)! I asked him how come?! He said because
Abu Bakr understood that he should assign a person as his successor to
keep the system and community working in order. As it is well-known Abu
Bakr assigned Umar as his successor. But the Prophet failed to realize
this important task that the Islamic community needs a qualified leader
after him, or perhaps it was not important for the prophet that who is
going to take over the power after him!

When I heard that, I started asking the following question from myself:
Is it possible that the Prophet of Islam who has tried hard to implement
Islam, and tolerated a lot of problems, disasters, and paid big price to
establish Islam in Arabian peninsula, leaves people without assigning
any person to keep this religion alive after him?!

The religion that is to be the last religion of God for this world; the
religion that was supposed to be for every nation all over the world
both inwardly and outwardly (political authority). What happened that we
Muslims are in this miserable situation in the world for centuries? What
happened that the chain of successors/rulers (Ulul-Amr) has reached to
people like King Fahd, King Husayn, Saddam Husayn, Husni Mubarak, ...?

Something is terribly wrong! Yes, The problem is leadership and
Guardianship. Was this problem not so important for prophet or he didn’t
take it serious? Of course, he did ake it serious and he must have
assigned a chain of successors (Caliphs) who where the most qualified as
the head of Islamic state and as the guardian of Shari’ah (divine law).

Another question that came out to my mind was that: Are Allah and His
prophet more qualified to assign the Caliphs, or people? Is Islam on the
basis of democracy (government of people over people) or on the basis of
theocracy (Kingdom of Allah over the earth)? The history of Islam
testifies that the government after the death of prophet was neither
democratic nor theocratic. Just a few people gathered in "Saqifah bani
Saaedah”and assigned Abu Bakr as Caliph while Imam ‘Ali was busy of the
burial of the holy prophet in Medina. Is it our choice as to whom should
be a Prophet or it is Allah’s choice? Can we select Prophet by Shura?

The same goes for assigning the successor of Prophet, for Allah knows
best who is the most qualified for this position. It seems very strange
that a deputy of a chief is assigned by any person other than him.
Deputy of God (or prophet) is only assigned by God (or prophet), and it
is not people’s business! There are many examples in Qur’an where Allah
states that He is the one who assigns a successor on the earth. Allah,
Exalted He is, states in Qur’an:

***"O’ David, we assigned you as Caliph (successor) on the earth
...”(Qur’an 38:26)***

He also states:

***"... We have assigned you (Abraham) as Imam (leader) for people
...”(Qur’an 2:124)***

As we see, Caliph/Imam for the mankind is assigned by Allah. See also
2:30 (about Adam). Even Prophet Moses, when he wanted to go to Miqaat,
did not ask people to form a Shura to assign a Caliph for him. Qur’an
tells us that:

***(Moses said: "O’ Allah) assign me a vizier from my family, (that is)
my brother Aaron (Haroon)*** ***...,”(Allah) said: "We granted your
requests, O’ Moses.”(Qur’an 20:29-36).***

Allah, Exalted, also said:

***"Surely We gave the book to Moses and assigned his brother Aaron as
his vizier.”(Qur’an 25:35).***

Allah also said:

***"... And Moses said unto his brother Aaron:*** ***Take my place***
***among the people.”(Qur’an 7:142).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ مُوسَىٰ لِأَخِيهِ هَارُونَ اخْلُفْنِي فِي قَوْمِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Notice that "Ukhlufni”and "Khalifa”(Caliph) are exactly from the same
root.

In this connection, let us take a look at the following interesting
tradition in Sahih al-Bukhari:

The Messenger of Allah said to ‘Ali: "Your position to me is like the
position of Aaron (Haroon) to Moses, except that there shall be no
Prophet after me"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنتَ مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا إنَّهُ لا نبيَّ بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni References:

(1) Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English version, Traditions 5.56, 5.700

(2) Sahih Muslim, Arabic, v4, pp 1870-71

(3) Sunan Ibn Majah, p12

(4) Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v1, p174

(5) al-Khasa’is, by al-Nisa’i, pp 15-16

(6) Mushkil al-Athar, by al-Tahawi, v2, p309

The Prophet (S) thereby meant that as Moses had left behind Aaron to
look after his people when he went to Miqaat (meeting Allah), in the
same way he was leaving ‘Ali behind to look after the affairs of Islam
after he met Allah (i.e., his death). Let this reminder be food of
thought for the possessors of pure heart and open mind. The above verses
of Qur’an concerning Aaron show that even the prophet does not assign
his deputy/successor, and it is rather Allah who does that. Prophet
Moses prayed to Allah and requested that Aaron becomes his deputy, and
Allah approved the suggestion/request of Prophet Moses (as).


