The Prophet Announcing His Successor in His First Preach
========================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The following two traditions are written, one after the other, in the
History of al-Tabari which is one of the important history book for the
Sunnis. Besides al-Tabari, many other historians and traditionists and
commentators of Qur’an from among Sunnis have recorded this tradition in
their books. (see below for the list of references). The two traditions
explicitly indicate that the Holy Prophet of Islam (peace be upon him
and his family), with the order of Allah, has introduced ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib as his successor even in his first open preach to the people:

Narrated Ibn Humayed, from Salamah, from Muhammad Ibn Is’haq, from Abd
al- Ghaffar Ibn al-Qasim, from al-Minhal Ibn Amr, from abdallah Ibn
al-Harith Ibn Nawfal Ibn al-Harith Ibn Abd al-Muttalib, from Abdallah
Ibn Abbas, from ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib:

When the verse "And warn your close tribe (Qur’an 26:214)”was revealed
to the prophet, he called me and said to me, "‘Ali, God has commanded me
to warn my tribe of near kindred. I was troubled by this, since I knew
that when I discuss the matter to them they would respond in a way which
I would not like. I kept silent until Gabriel came to me and said "If
you do not do what you are commanded, your Lord will punish you.”So
prepare a measure of wheat for us, add a leg of lamb to it, fill a large
bowl of milk for us, and then invite sons of Abd al- Muttalib for me so
that I may speak to them what I have been commanded to tell them."

I did what he had told me to do. At that time they numbered forty men
more or less, including his uncles Abu Talib, Hamzah, al-Abbas, and Abu
Lahab. When they had gathered together, he called me to bring the food
which I had prepared. I brought it, and when I put it down, prophet took
a piece of meat, broke it with his teeth, put it in the dish.

Then he said, "Take in the name of God.”They ate until they could eat no
more, and yet the food was as it had been. I swear by God, in whose hand
‘Ali’s soul rests, that a single man could have eaten the amount of food
which I prepared for them. Then he said "Give them something to
drink.”So I brought them the bowl and they drank from it until they
became full, and I swear by God that one man could have drunk that
amount. When prophet wanted to speak to them, Abu Lahab interrupted him
and said "Your host has long since bewitched you.”Then they dispersed
without the prophet speaking to them.

On the following day he said to me "‘Ali, this man interrupted what I
wanted to say so that people dispersed before I could speak to them.
Prepare the same food for us as you did yesterday, and invite them
here.”I did this, and brought them food when he called me. He did as he
had done the other day, and they ate until they could eat no more.

Then he said, "Bring the bowl,”and they drank until they could drink no
more. Then he spoke to them, saying, "Banu Abd al-Muttalib, I don’t know
of any young man among Arabs who has brought for his people something
better than what I have brought to you. I bring the best of this world
and the world after, since God has commanded me to summon you to him.

Which of you will aid me in this matter, so that he will be my brother,
my executor (Wasi), my successor (Caliph) among you?”They all held back,
and even though I was the youngest, I said "I will be your helper, O’
prophet of God.”He put his hand on the back of my neck and said "This is
my brother, my executor (Wasi), my successor (Caliph) among you, so
listen to him and obey him.”They rose up laughing and saying to Abu
Talib, "He has commanded you to obey your son and to obey him!"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ هذا أخي و وصيِّي و خليفتي فيكم فاْسمًعوا لهُ و أطيعوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni References:

(1) History of al-Tabari, English version, v6, pp 88-91

(2) History of Ibn Athir, v2, p62

(3) History of Ibn Asakir, v1, p85

(4) Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Hafidh Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, v5,
p97

(5) Tafsir al-Khazin, by Ala’uddin al-Shafi’i, v3, p371

(6) Shawahid al-Tanzil, by al-Hasakani, v1, p371

(7) Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v15, p15, pp 100-117

(8) al-Sirah al-Halabiyah, v1, p311

(9) Dala’il al-Nabawiyyah, by al-Baihaqi, v1, pp 428-430

(10) al-Mukhtasar, by Abul Fida, v1, pp 116-117

(11) Life of Muhammad, by Hasan Haykal, p104 (First Arabic Edition only.
In the second edition the last sentence of Prophet is deleted.)

(12) Tahdhib al-Athar, v4, pp 62-63.

The above tradition was also narrated by important Sunni figures such as
Muhammad Ibn Is’haq, Ibn Abu Hatem, and Ibn Mardawayh. It is also
recorded by many orientalists including T. Carlyle, E. Gibbon, J.
Davenport, and W. Irving.

As we see, Prophet ordered people to LISTEN AND FOLLOW ‘ALI even in his
first open preach, that is, when he declared his prophethood openly.
"Shi’a”means "The Followers", and it is exclusively used for "The
Followers of Imam ‘Ali". Thus Shi’a school of thought was in fact
established by the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) from the beginning of his
mission.

If we follow Imam ‘Ali (as), this is because the Holy Prophet asked us
to do so. Moreover, whatever Imam ‘Ali (as) (and other 11 Imams) has
said is the exact teachings and sayings of the Prophet Muhammad, and
whatever Prophet Muhammad has said is the exact teachings and sayings of
Allah. This is because the prophets and Imams are infallible and they do
not say anything in contrary to what they have been commanded to say.

The next tradition in the History of al-Tabari is as follows:

Narrated Zakariyya Ibn Yahya al-Darir, from Affan Ibn Muslim, from Abu
Awanah, from Uthman Ibn al-Mughirah, from Abu Sadiq, from Rabiah Ibn
Najid:

A man said to ‘Ali: "O Commander of believers, how did you become the
heir of your cousin to the exclusion of your paternal uncle?”‘Ali
said:"Ahem”three times until every body craned their necks and pricked
up their ears, and then said "Prophet invited the whole of the Banu Abd
al-Muttalib, including his own closest relatives, to eat a year old lamb
and to drink some milk. He also prepared a quantity of wheat for them,
and they ate until they were full, while the food remained as it was, as
though it had not been touched.

Then he called for a drinking cup and they drank until they could drink
no more, while the drink remained as though it had not been touched and
they had not drunk. Then he said Banu abd al Muttalib, I have been sent
to all men in general and to you in particular. Now that you have seen
what you have seen, which of you will swear an oath of allegiance to me
to become my brother, my companion, and my inheritor? Not one of them
rose up, so I stood up before him even though I was the youngest there.
He said Sit down. He repeated the words he had spoken for three times
while I would rise up and he would say to me sit down. On the third
occasion, he struck his hand on mine. In this way I became the heir of
my cousin to the exclusion of my uncle."

Sunni References: History of al-Tabari, English version, v6, pp 91-92

Side Comments
-------------

A Sunni brother mentioned that in the above incedent the Prophet was
only addressing his own family Banu Abd al-Muttalib and not the whole of
the Muslims. The most probable explanation here is that the Prophet
intended ‘Ali as his successor in taking care of the affairs that relate
to the family of Banu Abd al-Muttalib only in his absence and after his
demise and not as a successor to the leadership of all Muslims.

Here I should state, first, that the Children of Abd al-Muttalib were
not the family of Prophet. They were the relatives of Prophet. From the
quoted tradition, we can not conclude that what he said was just for his
relatives. He just started with his relatives.

Now, do you honestly believe that Prophet assigned a successor after him
for the tribe of Abd al-Muttalib, but he forgot to assign any successor
for the rest of community? Prophet was not a nationalist. He was not
sent only for the children of Abd al-Muttalib. He was sent to all
mankind as he mentioned himself in the tradition. So why is this
negligence (about forgetting other people)? If assigning a successor is
duty of prophet, it can not be limited to a certain people, because the
Prophet was not sent just to a certain people.

Moreover, it was not the only time that the prophet declared ‘Ali as his
successor. However, it was the first time. There are many traditions
inside Sunni collections of traditions which either implicitly or
explicitly indicate whom the Prophet (S) chose as his successor. The
official announcement, however, was in "Ghadir Khum”as Sihah Sittah (the
six Sunni collections of the traditions) testify.

It is also important to recall that the historical accounts are always
written and controled by people who are in power. this is the case for
every era, and the tyrant governments of the Umayad and the Abbasid were
not exempt from this rule. As such, in most cases, facts are not
explicitly written in the history, but one can find them implicitly.
These are the peicies of information which have been mistakenly passed
trough the censorship of the Governors throughout history.

Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عليٌ مع الحق و الحقُ مع علي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali is with truth, and truth is with ‘Ali.

Sunni reference: Tarikh, by al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi

How is This Possible?
---------------------

*(The following article is adopted from the book "Brother of Muhammad
(S)”written by late Muhammad Jawad Chirri (ra). The event under
discussion is when the Prophet (S) were ordered by Allah (swt) to preach
to his relatives)*

The two Shaikhs: al-Bukhari and Muslim did not mention the important
event pertaining the first preach of the Prophet (S) though it was
reported by many historians and traditionists. Instead, Muslim and some
other traditionists reported an event that took place after this event.

They reported the appearance of the Messenger on Al-Safa and his call to
the Qureshite clans (the Meccans) and his invitation to them to believe
in the new faith. Muslim and these reporters mentioned this late event
and tied it with the verse of the warning of the closest relative of the
Holy Prophet.

Muslim recorded that Abu Huriarah reported the following:

When this verse was revealed: "And warn thy closest relatives,”the
Messenger of God called the Qureshites and they came together. He
addressed them in general and in particular. He said: "O children of
Ka’ab Ibn Lu’ay, save yourselves from Hell. O children of Murrah lbn
Ka’ab, save yourselves from Hell. O children of Hashim save yourselves
from Hell. O Fatimah, save yourself from Hell. For I do not possess any
protection for you from God, except that you have relations to me which
I would like to observe."

Sunni reference: Sahih Muslim, v3, pp 79-80

It is amazing that God commanded His Messenger to warn the closest of
his relatives, who were the children of Abdul-Muttalib, but the Prophet
called upon the children of Ka’ab Ibn Lu’ay and the children of Murrah
Ibn Ka’ab who are from the remotest of his relatives. It is
inconceivable that the Messenger of God disobeys what his Lord commanded
him to do.

And what is more amazing is that the messenger called upon his daughter
(Fatimah) publicly, to save herself from Hell, yet she was the purest
Muslim girl whose father and mother were the purest parents. Fatimah, at
the time of the revelation of the above verse was according to the
historians, either two years or eight years old. al-Hakim in his
al-Mustadrak, v3, p61 reported that she was born 41 years after the
birth of her father.

It would be illogical that the Prophet addresses himself to a two year
old child or that he put a pure Muslim girl (who was still a minor, not
exceeding eight years of age) on the same level with the pagans of Banu
Ka’ab and Banu Murrah.

And more curious is the Hadith of Aisha which Muslim recorded in his
Sahih as follows:

"When the verse of warning was revealed, the Messenger of God said: ‘O
Fatimah, daughter of Muhammad, Safiya, daughter of Abdul-Muttalib, I
have nothing in my power to protect you against God. Ask me from my
wealth whatever you want.’ "

Sunni reference: Sahih Muslim, v3, p79-80

This Hadith does not agree with the previous one. For this Hadith
reported that the Holy Prophet addressed himself to the children of
Abdul-Muttalib alone, while the other Hadith reported that the Holy
Prophet publicly addressed himself mostly to other than the Prophet’s
clan. And most weird in this Hadith is that the Messenger addressed
himself publicly while on the Safa mainly to his youngest daughter
Fatimah while she was living with him where he sees her every hour. It
is also curious that the address which he directed to her and to the
other members of the children of Abdul- Muttalib did not contain any
message, such as calling upon them to worship God or to avoid
idol-worshipping.

Furthermore, Aisha was not born at the time of the event. The Messenger
died when she was only eighteen years old. (See al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d,
v8, p61). And this event took place ten years before the Hijrah (twenty
years before his death). Abu Hurairah also was not an eye-witness to the
event because he saw the Messenger for the first time when the Messenger
was coming back from Khaibar in the 7th year after the Hijrah. (See
al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v4, p327).

And more curious than all is that Al-Zamakhshari reported that Aisha,
daughter of Abu Bakr and Hafsa, daughter of Omar, were among the ones
whom the Holy Prophet addressed after the revelation of this verse of
warning (which was revealed before the birth of Aisha). (See al-Sirah
al- Halabiyyah, by ‘Ali Ibn Burhanuddin al-Halabi, v1, p321)

This clearly indicates that recorders or the reporters of these
traditions were seriously confused. They overlooked the fact that the
verse commands the Prophet to warn his closest relatives, who were the
children of Abdul- Muttalib, and that the Holy Prophet is not expected
to disobey the order of God.

What these traditions convey is opposed to the verse itself, and
whatever disagrees with the Holy Qur’an has to be disregarded. The event
which the historians and many Hadith recorders reported of holding a
conference with his immediate relatives is the only logical course which
the Holy Prophet was expected to follow after the revelation of the
verse.


