The Opinion of Imam ‘Ali (as) on Caliphate
==========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

A contributor mentioned that, in one of the sermons of Nahjul Balagha it
is written that Imam ‘Ali mentioned consultation as one of the reason
why he has the legitimate right for Caliphate. Here, ‘Ali is
contradicting the Shi’a thesis that Muhammad wanted to appoint ‘Ali as
the Imam. What you are referring to is not a sermon of Imam ‘Ali to
Muslims, and you have also taken it out of context. it was a part of his
letter to Muawiyah when he refused to give his oath to Imam ‘Ali (as).

Moreover, in contrary to your claim, in that letter Imam ‘Ali (as) did
NOT say that he believes in the function of election for Caliphate.
(Please see the full text of the letter below). He rather wanted to use
the argument of his opponents against themselves.

When all the people of Medina unanimously swore allegiance to Imam ‘Ali
(as), Muawiyah refused to comply apprehending danger for his own power,
and in order to provide an excuse for his disloyalty, he claimed that
since he did not participate in the election, the election of Imam ‘Ali
(as) was unlawful, and thus there should be another general election.
This was while Abu Bakr was elected by a very few number of people and
there was no national vote so that one could consider the caliphate of
Abu Bakr as a result of people’s election.

But the rulers who came after the Prophet imposed upon people that this
is what election means, and this became a principle imposed on people
and assumed to be their verdict that whoever the nobles of Medina elect
would be deemed to represent the entire world of Islam, and no person
has right to question it, whether he was present at the time of election
or not, and that no one has right to reconsider the matter.

People, from whom Muawiyah was later receiving support, were those who
had clamored the loudest about that argument. But when the rulership of
the Muslim State in the form of caliphate came to Imam ‘Ali, they
rebelled against it, many of them were rebelling even after having sworn
the oath of allegiance to him.

Here, in this letter to Muawiyah, Imam ‘Ali (as) is quoting the argument
which was once employed against him when he refused to give his oath to
Abu Bakr. Imam ‘Ali (as) mentioned that if an election by people is the
criterion to decide on the Caliphate, a general election took place in
Medina to elect him as Caliph by Emigrants and Helpers and nobody can
deny this fact. Therefore even according to the principles formulated by
the opponents of Imam ‘Ali (as), his election was lawful, regular and
bonafide.

Thus Muslim who already accepted such principles to legitimize the
election of the Abu Bakr, have no the right to speak or act against him
(‘Ali). And Muawiyah had no right to propose re-election nor to refuse
allegiance when, in practice, he recognized this principle for Abu Bakr.

In his letter, the Imam wrote to Muawiyah:

"Verily those who swore allegiance to Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman have
sworn allegiance to me on the same basis on which they swore allegiance
to them. On this basis, he who was present has no choice (to
reconsider), and he who was absent has no right to reject. And
consultation was confined to Emigrant and Helpers. If they agree on an
individual and name him leader, it was supposed that it is Allah’s
satisfaction. If any one goes against such decision due to innovation,
they (used to) return him from what he kept away, and if he refuses (to
abide the decision) they (used to) fight him for following a course
other than of the believers, and Allah will put him back from where he
had run away."

"O’ Muawiyah, if you use your brain without your tendencies and desires,
you will find me the most innocent of all in respects to Uthman’s blood,
and you surely know that I was in seclusion from him, unless you conceal
what is quite open to you and attribute all these false rumors to me."

In the above letter Imam ‘Ali is using counter argument to demolish the
argument of Muawiyah. This method is known as arguing with the adversary
on the basis of his wrong premises so as to demolish his argument.

On the point of religion, Imam ‘Ali (as) never regarded consultation
with chiefs or the common vote to be the criterion of the validity of
Caliphate, otherwise he would not have allowed himself to delay to give
allegiance to Abu Bakr for the first six month of his Caliphate which is
an undeniable fact held by all Muslims. This is proof of the fact that
he did not regard these self- concocted methods as the criterion for the
validity of caliphate.

However, to place before Muawiyah meant opening the door to questions
and answers. He, therefore, attempted to convince him with his own
premises and beliefs so that there could be no scope for interpretation
or for confusing the matter. Imam ‘Ali cited the above argument merely
as a stopple against Muawiyah (and in another occasion to Talha and
Zubair) simply to prove how fictitious and flimsy were the points raised
by his enemies to deprive him of his just rights and how they would go
back upon their accepted principles to harm him.

One may recall that such counter argument was used by Prophet Abraham in
the Qur’an where he once claimed to be the worshipper of the Sun and the
moon to show people that how a wrong premise would result in self-
contradictory result.

On this occasion, Imam ‘Ali (as) did not argue on the strength of any
saying of the prophet which would serve as his final say about the
caliphate, because the grounds for refusal in his case was in respect of
the style of the principle of the election. Therefore, in keeping with
the requirements of the situation, a reply based on the opponent’s
principles could alone quiten him. Even if he had argued on the strength
of the Prophet’s command, it would have subjected to various
interpretations and the matter would have prolonged instead of being
settled.

In fact Muawiyah’s real aim was to prolong the matter that at some point
his own authority might get support. Imam ‘Ali had already witnessed
that soon after the death of Prophet (S) all his sayings regarding to
appointment of his successor had been set aside. Therefore, how after
the laps of a long time, could one be expected to accept it when habit
had been established to follow one’s free will against the Prophet’s
commandments?

Moreover, there are many sermons in Nhajul Balagha where Imam ‘Ali
unequivocally states his right was usurped from day one of the death of
the Mercy to Mankind, Muhammad (S). below is one example of it:

Sermon 7 of Nahjul Balagha: Survey of the Period After The Demise Of The Holy Prophet (S)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(This is the famous sermon of Shiqshiqiyyah. It is so named because
while Imam ‘Ali was delivering it an Iraqi got up and presented a letter
to him. He got busy in reading it. When he had finished the letter
Abdullah Ibn Abbas requested him to continue his sermon. The Imam
replied, “Ibn Abbas! This speech of mine was extempore and was being
delivered at the impulse of that moment like the Shiqshiqiyyah (the roar
of a camel), it can’t be continued.”So far as the subject is concerned
the sermon is self-explanatory.)

Beware! By Allah the son of Abu Quhafah (Abu Bakr) dressed himself with
it (the caliphate) and he certainly knew that my position in relation to
it was the same as the position of the axis in relation to the
hand-mill. The flood water flows down from me and the bird cannot fly
upto me. I put a curtain against the caliphate and kept myself detached
from it.

Then I began to think whether I should assault or endure calmly the
blinding darkness of tribulations wherein the grown up are made feeble
and the young grow old and the true believer acts under strain till he
meets Allah (on his death). I found that endurance thereon was wiser. So
I adopted patience although there was pricking in the eye and
suffocation (of mortification) in the throat. I watched the plundering
of my inheritance till the first one went his way but handed over the
Caliphate to Ibn al-Khattab after himself.

(Then he quoted al-A\`sha’s verse).

My days are now passed on the camel’s back (in difficulty) while there
were days (of ease) when I enjoyed the company of Jabir’s brother
Hayyan.

It is strange that during his lifetime he wished to be released from the
caliphate but he confirmed it for the other one after his death. No
doubt these two shared its udders strictly among themselves. This one
put the Caliphate in a tough enclosure where the utterance was haughty
and the touch was rough. Mistakes were in plenty and so also the excuses
therefore. One in contact with it was like the rider of an unruly camel.
If he pulled up its rein the very nostril would be slit, but if he let
it loose he would be thrown. Consequently, by Allah people got involved
in recklessness, wickedness, unsteadiness and deviation.

Nevertheless, I remained patient despite length of period and stiffness
of trial, till when he went his way (of death) he put the matter (of
Caliphate) in a group(4) and regarded me to be one of them. But good
Heavens! what had I to do with this "consultation"? Where was any doubt
about me with regard to the first of them that I was now considered akin
to these ones? But I remained low when they were low and flew high when
they flew high. One of them turned against me because of his hatred and
the other got inclined the other way due to his in-law relationship and
this thing and that thing, till the third man of these people stood up
with heaving breasts between his dung and fodder. With him his children
of his grand-father, (Umayyah) also stood up swallowing up Allah’s
wealth(5) like a camel devouring the foliage of spring, till his rope
broke down, his actions finished him and his gluttony brought him down
prostrate.

At that moment, nothing took me by surprise, but the crowd of people
rushing to me. It advanced towards me from every side like the mane of
the hyena so much so that Hasan and Husayn were getting crushed and both
the ends of my shoulder garment were torn. They collected around me like
the herd of sheep and goats. When I took up the reins of government one
party broke away and another turned disobedient while the rest began
acting wrongfully as if they had not heard the word of Allah saying:

***That abode in the hereafter, We assign it for those who intend not to
exult themselves in the earth, nor (to make) mischief (therein); and the
end is (best) for the pious ones. (Qur’an, 28:83)***

Yes, by Allah, they had heard it and understood it but the world
appeared glittering in their eyes and its embellishments seduced them.
Behold, by Him who split the grain (to grow) and created living beings,
if people had not come to me and supporters had not exhausted the
argument and if there had been no pledge of Allah with the learned to
the effect that they should not acquiesce in the gluttony of the
oppressor and the hunger of the oppressed I would have cast the rope of
Caliphate on its own shoulders, and would have given the last one the
same treatment as to the first one. Then you would have seen that in my
view this world of yours is no better than the sneezing of a goat.

Don’t tell me this is the product of Sayyed Radhi. In fact, this
particular sermon of Imam ‘Ali was being circulated among the Sunni
scholars 200 years before the birth of Sayyed Radhi and they
acknowledged that the above sermon is the genuine sayings of Imam ‘Ali
(as), and I have 27 documents to prove this. In fact, Nahjul Balagha is
not merely a Shi’ite source, and many Sunni scholars have also written
commentary to it.

Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كنتُ أنا نبيه فعليٌ أميره
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever I am his prophet, ‘Ali is his ruler.

- On the Khilafa of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as): Abdullah Ibn Masud
narrated:

The messenger of Allah (S) ordered me to follow him, on the night of the
Jinn. I went with him until we reached the hight of Macca... (the
prophet) said: "I was promised that the Jinn and human will believe in
me. As to the human they believed in me, as to the Jinn you have seen";
he continued: "I feel that my end is drawing near.”I said: O Messenger
of Allah, won’t you make Abu Bakr as your Caliph? He turned away from
me, so I realized that he disagreed; I said: O Messenger of Allah, won’t
you make Umar as your Caliph? He turned away from me, so I realized that
he disagreed; I said: O Messenger of Allah, won’t you make ‘Ali as your
Caliph? He said: "(That’s) him. By the One whom there is no God beside
Him, if you chose him and obeyd him He (Allah) entered you into Paradise
all together."

Sunni references:

- Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v8, p314  
 - Also mentioned by al-Tabarani


