Who Are Ahlul-Bayt? Part 1
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Introduction
------------

According to most authentic traditions in collections of both Sunni and
Shi’a, Ahlul-Bayt (People of the House) of the Prophet are one of the
two most precious Symbols of Islam after the departure of the Prophet
(S). There are numerous traditions in the collection of both schools
that the Prophet (S) has reminded us to stick to these two weighty
things (al-Thaqalain), namely Qur’an and Ahlul-Bayt, in order not to go
astray after him.

The Messenger of Allah also informed us that these two weights are
non-separable and are with each other till the day of Judgment. This
requires us that for understanding the interpretation of Qur’an and the
Sunnah of the Prophet (S) we should refer to those who are attached to
it, namely Ahlul-Bayt.

Knowing exactly who Ahlul-Bayt are, thus becomes a very vital matter
when one considers the above tradition of the Prophet (S) as well as
many other traditions which unequivocally state that adherence to
Ahlul-Bayt is the only way of salvation. This clearly implies that the
one who follows a wrong set of Ahlul-Bayt (!!), will be led astray.

Considering the critical importance of the subject, it will not be
surprising to see that the Shi’a differ from some Sunnis in this
subject. In fact, the Sunnis do not have one voice in specifying the
Members of the House the Prophet. Most Sunnis are in the opinion that
the Ahlul-Bayt of the Prophet (S) are:

• Fatimah al-Zahra (sa) (the daughter of the Messenger of Allah),

• Imam ‘Ali (as),

• Imam al-Hasan (as),

• Imam al-Husayn (as),

• Wives of the Prophet (S)

Others among the Sunnis further include ALL the descendants of the
Prophet to the list! Some other Sunnis are very generous and include all
the descendants of Abbas (the Abbasid) as well as the descendants of
Aqil & Ja’far (the two brothers of Imam ‘Ali) to the list. It should be
noted, however, that there have been some leading Sunni scholars who did
NOT consider the wives of the Prophet among Ahlul-Bayt. This happens to
be consistent with the Shi’a point of view.

To the Shi’a, the Ahlul-Bayt of the Prophet (S) consist of the following
individuals ONLY:

• Fatimah al-Zahra (sa),

• Imam ‘Ali (as),

• Imam al-Hasan (as),

• Imam al-Husayn (as),

• Nine descendants of Imam al-Husayn (as).

and including the Prophet (S) himself, they will become fourteen
individuals. Of course, at the time of the Holy Prophet only five of
them (including the Prophet) were living and the rest were not born yet.

The Shi’a further assert that these fourteen individuals are protected
by Allah from any kind of flaws, and thus worthy of being obeyed beside
Qur’an (the other Weighty Symbol), and they are the only people who have
the full knowledge of the interpretation of the Qur’anic verses.

In this discussion, we would like to explain why the Shi’a exclude the
wives of the Prophet from Ahlul-Bayt, and also we will briefly discuss
why Ahlul-Bayt are protected/infallible. (More detailed discussion on
the infallibility is provided in Chapter 2). We base our proofs on:

1. Qur’an,  
 2. Traditions from the authentic Sunni Collections,  
 3. Historical events.

Evidence From Qur’an
--------------------

The Holy Book of Allah mentions Ahlul-Bayt and their exceptional virtue
in the following verse which is known as "Purification Verse”(Ayah
al-Tat’hir):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّـهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Verily Allah intends to keep off from you every kind of uncleanness
O’ People of the House (Ahlul-Bayt), and purify you with a perfect
purification". (Qur’an, the last sentence of Verse 33:33)***

Note that the word "Rijs”in the above verse has got the article "al-”at
its beginning which makes the word universal. Thus "al-Rijs”means "EVERY
KIND of impurity". Also at the end of the verse, Allah states "and
purify you a PERFECT purification.”The word "perfect”comes from the
emphasis of "Tat’hiran". This is the only place in Qur’an that Allah
uses the emphasis of "PERFECT purification".

According to the above verse, Allah expresses his intention to keep
Ahlul-Bayt pure and flawless/sinless, and what Allah intends it will
certainly take place as Qur’an itself testifies (see 16:40).

Indeed, a human can be sinless because he is not forced to commit sin.
It is the human’s choice to accept the instructions of Allah and get His
help to avoid sin, or to neglect Allah’s commandments and commit the
sin. Allah is advisor, and encourager, and warner. A sinless human is
still a human; no doubt about it. Some people assert that in order to be
human, one SHOULD have some mistakes. Such claim is unsupported. The
truth is that Human CAN make mistakes but he does not have to.

It is the Grace of Allah that attracts His servants towards Him, WITHOUT
compelling them any way. This is our choice to pursue this attraction
and refrain from doing mistakes, or to turn away and commit the
mistakes. However, Allah has GUARANTEED to show the Right Path and to
provide a pure life for those who seek it:

***Whoever works righteousness man or woman and is faithful, We shall
revive a PURE life for him. (Qur’an 16:97)***

***And whosoever keeps his duty to Allah, Allah will appoint a way out
for him. (Qur’an 65:2)***

It is worth mentioning the sentence of Qur’an in verse 33:33 which is
related to purification of Ahlul-Bayt, has been placed at the middle of
verses related to the wives of the Prophet (S), and this was the main
reason why some Sunnis include the wives of the Prophet in Ahlul-Bayt.

However, the sentence related to Ahlul-Bayt (given above) distinguishes
itself from the sentences before and after it with a clear distinction.
The sentences before and after, use only feminine gender which clearly
shows they are addressing the wives of the Prophet (S). However, in
contrary, the above sentence uses only masculine gender which is a clear
indication that that Qur’an is changing the individuals who it is
referring to.

People who are familiar with Qur’an to some extent, know that such a
sharp change of addressee is not a weird-thing, and it has been applied
to several places in Qur’an. For instance we read in Qur’an:

***"O Joseph! pass this over and (O wife of Aziz!) ask forgiveness for
your sin, for truly you have been at fault."(Qur’an 12:29)***

In the above verse, "O wife of Aziz”has not been mentioned and the
address to Joseph (as) looks to continue. However the transition of the
address from masculine gender to feminine gender clearly shows that the
second sentence is addressing the Aziz’s wife and not Prophet Joseph
(as). Notice that both sentences are within one verse. Also note the
immediate change of addressing from Aziz’s wife to Joseph and again back
to the wife in verses before verse 29 and also within that verse.

In Arabic language, when a group of women are being addressed, feminine
gender is employed. However, if only one man exists among that group,
masculine gender is used instead. Thus the above sentence of Qur’an
clearly shows Allah is referring to a group other than the wives of the
Prophet, using masculine gender, and that group includes some male
members.

From the verse 33:33 alone, we cannot conclude that the wives of the
Prophet are not included in Ahlul-Bayt. This latter claim can be proven
by the authentic traditions of the Sunnis from Sihah Sittah in which the
Prophet mentioned who Ahlul-Bayt are; and also by comparing the
specifications of Ahlul-Bayt given in the verse of Qur’an with the
behavior of the some of the wives of the Prophet mentioned in Sihah
Sittah to prove the contrary.

What can be understood from the verse ALONE is that Allah is changing
His address (which was exclusively the wives of the Prophet at the
beginning of the verse) to some people who include some male members,
and may or may not include the wives of the Prophet.

Authentic Traditions
--------------------

It is interesting to see that both Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Tirmidhi as
well as many others confirm the Shi’ite point of view explained above.
In Sahih Muslim, there is a chapter named "Chapter of Virtues of the
Companions". Inside this chapter, there is a section called "Section of
the Virtues of the Ahlul-Bayt of the Prophet". There exists ONLY ONE
tradition in this section, and this tradition has no reference to the
wives of the Prophet (S). The tradition is known as "The Tradition of
Cloak/Mantle”(Hadith al-Kisaa), and is as follows:

Narrated Aisha:

One day the Prophet (S) came out afternoon wearing a black cloak (upper
garment or gown; long coat), then al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali came and the Prophet
accommodated him under the cloak, then al-Husayn came and entered the
cloak, then Fatimah came and the Prophet entered her under the cloak,
then ‘Ali came and the Prophet entered him to the cloak as well. Then
the Prophet recited: "Verily Allah intends to keep off from you every
kind of uncleanness O’ People of the House (Ahlul-Bayt), and purify you
a perfect purification (the last sentence of Verse 33:33)."

Sunni reference:

• Sahih Muslim, Chapter of virtues of companions, section of the virtues
of the Ahlul-Bayt of the Prophet (S), 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia,
Arabic version, v4, p1883, Tradition \#61.

Below is the Arabic text of above tradition given in Sahih Muslim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خرج النبي غداة وعليه مرط مرحل من شعر أسود فجاء الحسن فأدخله معه ، ثم
جاء الحسين فأدخله معه ، ثم جاءت فاطمة فأدخلها، ثم جاء علي فأدخله ثم
قال: إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

One can see that the author of Sahih Muslim confirms that:

1. Imam ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn are the Ahlul-Bayt,

2. The purification sentence in Qur’an (the last sentence of Verse
33:33) was revealed for the virtue of the above-mentioned individuals,
and NOT for the wives of the Prophet (S).

Muslim (the Author) did not put any other tradition in this section
(section of the virtues of Ahlul-Bayt). If the author of Sahih Muslim
believed that the wives of the Prophet were included in Ahlul-Bayt, he
would have quoted some traditions about them in this section.

It is interesting to see that Aisha, the wife of the Prophet (S) is the
narrator of the above tradition, and she herself is testifying that
Ahlul- Bayt are the above-mentioned individuals (i.e., Imam ‘Ali,
Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, may the blessing of Allah be upon them
all).

Another version of the "Tradition of Cloak”is written in Sahih
al-Tirmidhi, which is narrated in the authority of Umar Ibn Abi Salama,
the son of Umm Salama (another wife of Prophet), which is as follows:

The verse

***"Verily Allah intends to ... (33:33)"***

was revealed to the Prophet (S) in the house of Umm Salama. Upon that,
the Prophet gathered Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, and covered them
with a cloak, and he also covered ‘Ali who was behind him. Then the
Prophet said: "O’ Allah! These are the Members of my House (Ahlul-Bayt).
Keep them away from every impurity and purify them with a perfect
purification.”Umm Salama (the wife of Prophet) asked: "Am I also
included among them O Apostle of Allah?”the Prophet replied: "**You
remain in your position** and you are toward a good ending."

Sunni reference: Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, pp 351,663

Here is the Arabic text of above tradition given by Sahih al-Tirmidhi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نزلت هذه الآية على النبي "إنَّما يريدُ اللهَ...”في بيت أُم سلمه فدعا
النبي فاطمه و حسناً و حسيناً فجعلهم بكسائه و علي خلف ظهره ثم قال:
ألَّلهم هؤلاء أهل بيتي فاْذهب عنهم الرجس و طهرهم تطهيراً. قالت أمُّ
سلمه: و أنا معهم يا نبي الله؟ قال أنتِ على مكانك و أنتِ إلى خير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

As we see, al-Tirmidhi also confirms that Imam ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan,
and al-Husayn are the Ahlul-Bayt, and the purification sentence in
Qur’an (the last sentence of Verse 33:33) was revealed for the virtue of
the above-mentioned individuals, and NOT for the wives of the Prophet
(S). Also it is apparent from above authentic tradition that the Prophet
himself excluded his wives from Ahlul-Bayt. If Umm Salama (ra) was among
Ahlul-Bayt, why didn’t the Prophet answer her positively? Why didn’t he
enter her into the cloak? Why did the Prophet tell her that she remains
in her own position? If the Prophet (S) would consider Umm Salama among
Ahlul-Bayt, he would surely have entered her to the cloak and would have
prayed for her perfect purity as well.

It is also worth mentioning that the Prophet (S) did NOT say: "These are
among the Members of my House". He rather said: "These are THE Members
of my House”since there was no other member of Ahlul-Bayt who was alive
at the time of the Prophet (S). Also notice that Umm Salama (ra) who is
the virtuous wife of the Prophet is the narrator of the tradition to his
son and gives the testimony that who Ahlul-Bayt are.

In the tradition of al-Hakim the wording the last question and answer is
as follows:

Umm Salama said: "O Prophet of Allah! Am I not one of the members of
your family?”The Holy Prophet replied: "You have a good future but only
these are the members of my family. O Lord! The members of my family are
more deserving."

Sunni reference: al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v2, p416

Also the wording reported by al-Suyuti and Ibn al-Athir is as follows:

Umm Salama said to the Holy Prophet: "Am I also one of them?”He replied:
"No. You have your own special position and your future is good."

Sunni reference:

• Usdul Ghabah, by Ibn al-Athir, v2, p289

• Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Suyuti, v5, p198

Also al-Tabari quotes Umm Salama saying:

I said, "O Prophet of Allah! Am I not also one of your Ahlul-Bayt?”I
swear by the Almighty that the Holy Prophet did NOT grant me any
distinction and said: "You have a good future."

Sunni reference: Tafsir al-Tabari, v22, p7 under the commentary of verse
33:33

Beside Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Tirmidhi from which we quoted the
Tradition of Cloak on the authority of Aisha and Umm Salama
respectively, below are more Sunni references of the Tradition of Cloak
who reported both versions of the traditions:

(3) Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v6, pp 323,292,298; v1, pp 330-331; v3,
p252; v4, p107 from Abu Sa’id al-Khudri

(4) Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p578, Tradition \#978

(5) al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v2, p416 (two traditions) from Ibn Abi
Salama, v3, pp 146-148 (five traditions), pp 158,172

(6) al-Khasa’is, by an-Nisa’i, pp 4,8

(7) al-Sunan, by al-Bayhaqi, narrated from Aisha and Umm Salama

(8) Tafsir al-Kabir, by al-Bukhari (the author of Sahih), v1, part 2,
p69

(9) Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, v2, p700 (Istanbul), from Aisha

(10) Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Suyuti, v5, pp 198,605 from Aisha
and Umm Salama

(11) Tafsir Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, v22, pp 5-8 (from Aisha and Abu Sa’id
al-Khudri), pp 6,8 (from Ibn Abi Salama) (10 traditions)

(12) Tafsir al-Qurtubi, under the commentary of verse 33:33 from Umm
Salama

(13) Tafsir Ibn Kathir, v3, p485 (Complete version) from Aisha and Umar
Ibn Abi Salama

(14) Usdul Ghabah, by Ibn al-Athir, v2, p12; v4, p79 narrated from Ibn
Abi Salama

(15) Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, sec. 1, p221
from Umm Salama

(16) Tarikh, by al-Khateeb Baghdadi, v10, narrated from Ibn Abi Salama

(17) Tafsir al-Kashshaf, by al-Zamakhshari, v1, p193 narrated from Aisha

(18) Mushkil al-Athar, by al-Tahawi, v1, pp 332-336 (seven traditions)

(19) Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, by Muhibb al-Tabari, pp21-26, from Abu Sa’id
Khudri

(20) Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p166 (by several
transmitters)

... and more ...

Here is another authentic variation of "The Tradition of Cloak”which is
related to Safiyya who was another wife of the Prophet (S). Ja’far Ibn
Abi Talib narrated:

When the Messenger of Allah noticed that a blessing from Allah was to
descent, he told Safiyya (one of his wives): "Call for me! Call for
me!”Safiyya said: "Call who, O the Messenger of Allah?”He said: "Call
for me my Ahlul-Bayt who are ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan, and
al-Husayn.”Thus we sent for them and they came to him.

Then the Prophet (S) spread his cloak over them, and raised his hand
(toward sky) saying: "O Allah! These are my family (Aalee), so bless
Muhammad and the family (Aal) of Muhammad.”And Allah, to whom belong
Might and Majesty, revealed: "Verily Allah intends to keep off from you
every kind of uncleanness O’ People of the House (Ahlul-Bayt), and
purify you a thorough purification (Qur’an, the last sentence of Verse
33:33)".

Sunni references:

• al-Mustadrak by al-Hakim, Chapter of "Understanding (the virtues) of
Companions, v3, p148. The author then wrote: "This tradition is
authentic (Sahih) based on the criteria of the two Shaikhs (al-Bukhari
and Muslim)."

• Talkhis of al-Mustadrak, by al-Dhahabi, v3, p148

• Usdul Ghabah, by Ibn al-Athir, v3, p33

Although the majority of traditions on this issue show that the last
sentence of the verse 33:33 was revealed in the house of Umm Salama (as
quoted earlier), the above tradition implies that it might have been
revealed in the house of Safiyya.

Based on the opinion of the Sunni scholars including Ibn Hajar, it is
quite possible that the verse was revealed more than once. In each
occasion, the Prophet repeated his action in front of different wives so
that they all realize who his Ahlul-Bayt are.

The testimony of three wives of the Prophet (Aisha, Umm Salama, and
Safiyya) leaves us no room but to believe that the Ahlul-Bayt at the
time of the Prophet were no more than five individuals: Prophet
Muhammad, Lady Fatimah, Imam ‘Ali, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn (Peace be
upon them all).

The fact that the gender in later part of Verse 33:33 is switched from
feminine to masculine, has led the majority of Sunni commentators to
believe that the last part was revealed for Imam ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan
and al-Husayn, as Ibn Hajar al-Haythami indicated:

Based on the opinion of the majority of (Sunni) commentators, the saying
of Allah:"Verily Allah intends to ... (the last sentence of the verse
33:33)”was revealed for ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, because
of the usage of masculine gender in the word "Ankum”and after that.

Sunni reference: al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 11, section
1, p220

Although the Shi’a have great respect for the highly righteous wives
among the wives of the Prophet (S), such as Khadija, Umm Salama, Umm
Ayman and ... (may Allah be pleased with them) who closely followed the
Prophet and his Ahlul-Bayt before and after the demise of Prophet (S),
yet we do not include even those respected individuals into Ahlul-Bayt
since the Prophet clearly excluded them according to the authentic Sunni
and Shi’i traditions. Ahlul-Bayt have exceptional virtues that no other
pious person after the Prophet would possess them in the world, which
are according to Qur’an: sinlessness, flawlessness and perfect purity.


