Development of History and Hadith Collections
=============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Let us read the following tradition very carefully and judge for
ourselves if we can ever give a possibility that such words have been
uttered by the messenger of Allah. The tradition is in Sahih Muslim, and
is written in the section of necessity of joining to the majority of
people, and is as follows:

Narrated Hudayfh Ibn al-Yaman:

Prophet said: "There will come rulers after me who do not guide to my
guidance and do not practice my Sunnah, and the hearts of some them are
the hearts of Satans but they are in the body of human.”I said: "What
should we do at that time?”Prophet (S) said: "You should just listen to
them and obey those rulers. No matter if the hurt you and take your
wealth, you should follow them and obey them."

Sunni reference: Sahih Muslim, Chapter of al-Imaarah (chapter 33 for the
Arabic version), Section of necessity of joining the majority, 1980
Edition, Arabic version (Saudi Arabia), v3, p1476, Tradition \#52.

This is the Arabic text of the above tradition narrated by Sahih Muslim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يكون بعدي أئمة لا يهتدون بهداي ولا يستنون بسنتي، وسيقوم فيهم رجال
قلوبهم قلوب الشياطين، في جثمان إنس، قال قلت: كيف أصنع يا رسول الله إن
أدركت ذلك؟ قال: تسمع وتطيع، وإن ضرب ظهرك وأخذ مالك فاسمع وأطع
  </p>
</blockquote>

The above was just one example. There are more than 12 traditions
similar to this in the same section of Sahih Muslim. Who sold such
traditions as Sahih (authentic) to us? Aren’t they those who wanted to
make their kingdom strong and away from any possible opposition? Any
complaint is against the above alleged word of prophet, and those people
are sentenced to death. In another tradition in the following section in
Sahih Muslim, prophet has ordered to kill those who disobey these unjust
rulers. Let us see where the origins of these books are, and who
controlled the writing of them.

Muawiyah was the first one who turned his attention to write the history
and collecting the fabricated Hadiths (traditions). He got a history of
the ancients written by a person in the name of Ubayd whom he called him
from Yemen.

Marwan who had been exiled by the Prophet for his anti-Islamic
activities and who had a great influence with Uthman, was the implacable
foe of ‘Ali. His son, Abdul Malik ascended the throne in year 65 AH,
reestablished himself in year 73, and died in year 86. Abdul Malik was
the one under whose funding finally a set of Islamic History, Hadith
(tradition), and Tafsir (interpretation of the Qur’an) was provided.
al-Zuhri was the first historian who wrote the history of Islam under
the direct order and fund of Abdul Malik. He also wrote Hadith
collection. The works of al-Zuhri was one of the main source for
al-Bukhari. al-Zuhri was attached to the royal family of Abdul Malik,
and was the tutor of his sons. (See "al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah,”by Shibli
who is a great Sunni historian, part I, pp.13-17).

Among the students of al-Zuhri, two persons, namely Musa Ibn Uqbah, and
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq became famous historians. The former was a slave of
the house of Zubair. Although his history is not available today, it had
been the most popular work on history for a long time. You will find its
references in many history books on different subjects.

The second student, Muhammad Ibn Ishaq is the most famous historian for
Sunnis. His biography of the Prophet, called "Sirah Rasul Allah", is
still the accredited authority on the subject in the shape that was
given to it by Ibn Hisham, and is known as "al-Sirah of Ibn Hisham".

al-Zuhri is the first who compiled the Hadith also. (See "al-Sirah al-
Nabawiyyah,”by Shibli, part I, pp.13-17). All Sunni History and Hadith
books written afterwards by other people were in great influence of
these works.

The above gives evidence to the following facts:

1- Sunni Hadith and History books were first compiled under the direct
order of Umayyah Kings,

2- The first authors were al-Zuhri, and his two students Musa and
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq,

3- These authors were attached to the royal family of the Umayyah kings.

The hatred of the house of Umayyah against Bani Hashim (the house of
Prophet and ‘Ali) is well-known. The wars of Abu Sufyan and his son
Muawiyah against Prophet and ‘Ali respectively, also the horrible
massacre of the grandson of prophet at Karbala by the grandson of Abu
Sufyan, are only some of top items among the long list of such crimes.
These are the criminals who FIRST wrote the history and Hadith books.
(The books written afterwards by other people were in great influence of
these works.) They fabricated many traditions to justify their deeds,
and to say that prophet has ordered us to obey them even if they are
unjust. What I quoted above was just one example of such traditions.

Who was the first one that used the term "Ahlussunnah and al-Jama’ah"?
If one searches through the history books, he will find that they agreed
to call the year in which Muawiyah seized the power as "The Year of al-
Jama’ah”meaning the majority of people. It was called so, because the
nation had already become divided into two factions after the death of
Uthman: The Shi’a of ‘Ali and the followers of Muawiyah. When Imam ‘Ali
(as) was martyred and Muawiyah took over the power, the year was called
"al- Jama’ah". Out of these two parties, the majority leading by
Muawiyah won the throne, and the other party was considered as a
dangerous rival.

Therefore the name of "Ahl al-Sunnah and al-Jama’ah”indicates the Sunnah
of Prophet merged by the innovations by Muawiyah, and the agreement on
his leadership.

The Imams and members of Ahlul-Bayt who are the descendants of the
Prophet, know more than anybody else about the Sunnah of their
grandfather and what it entails, for as the proverb goes: "The people of
Mecca know its paths better than anyone else". But the majority of
people did/do not follow the 12 Imams whom prophet has mentioned their
numbers (see Sahih al-Bukhari) and their names (see Sunni books like
"Yanabi’ul Mawaddah”by al-Qunduzi al-Hanafi). Despite the acknowledgment
of al-Bukhari and Muslim about 12 Imams, they always stop at the four
Caliphs.

Shi’a-Sunni And Scrutinizing Hadith
-----------------------------------

One major difference between the Shi’a and the Sunnis is that Sunnis
accept any tradition from any companions no matter if these companions
fought each other, abused each other, rebelled against their righteous
Caliph, and or innovate new things in to the religion.

The Shi’a, however, believe that all the narrators in the chain of a
document should have been just. If they have done any injustice in the
history (such as those mentioned above) their narrations are void for us
unless the same tradition has been narrated with another chain of
narrators who all of them are proven to be trustworthy.

One of the Wahhabi friends said that Shi’a, when narrating a Hadith,
only say the Imam so and so said, one of our friends said...Now how we
can authenticise the Hadith?

If a person has heard something directly from the 12 Imams, and that
person is trustworthy for the Shi’a and his narration is not against
Qur’an, then the tradition is authentic for us, since we believe in the
infallibility of Imams as well as Prophets. The knowledge of Imam has
been derived from the knowledge of their fathers and forefathers up to
the Prophet (S).

However, the chain of narrators should be evaluated. If the chain turns
out to be broken (i.e., one element in the chain is missing), then the
tradition is considered weak in Isnad. Thus all the narrators should be
named, and this is the case for the majority of Shi’i collections of
traditions.

Nevertheless, there are only a number of traditions in Usul Kafi in
which the last element in the chain is missing, i.e., the name of the
person who reported to Kulaini in person. In stead of mentioning his
name, Kulaini has used the phrase "a group of our associates". But
Kulaini has mentioned all other elements in the chain.

The reason for this was that, as I mentioned, Shi’a have always been
under prosecution of unjust rulers including the Abbasids. If Kulaini
(ra) have mentioned the names of those who reported to him and were
still alive, and if the book could have found his way to the officials,
then all those reporters would have been killed. To protect them, he did
not mention their names and codified it by saying "a group of our
associates". However he mentioned the name of those who reported to him
but died during Kulaini’s life.

But the good news is that since Kulaini knew the regulations of
scrutinizing of the traditions by the Shi’a, he told some of his
students how the names of the last narrators are codieifed. More
specifically, it was mentioned that:

I. Whenever you read in Usul Kafi, that "a group of our associates
narrated from Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Isa", then the group here means the
following five persons:

1.Abu Ja’far Muhammad Ibn Yahya al-Attar al-Qummi  
 2.’Ali Ibn Musa Ibn Ja’far al-Kamandani  
 3.Abu Sulayman Dawud Ibn Kawrah al-Qummi  
 4.Abu ‘Ali Ahmad Ibn Idris Ibn Ahmad al-Ash’ari al-Qummi  
 5.Abul Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Ibrahim Ibn Hashim al-Qummi.

II. Whenever you read in Usul Kafi, that "a group of our associates
narrated from Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Khalid al-Barqi", then the group
here means the following four persons:

1.Abul Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Ibrahim Ibn Hashim al-Qummi  
 2.Muhammad Ibn Abdillah Ibn Udhaynah  
 3.Ahmad Ibn Abillah Ibn Umayyah  
 4. ‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn al-Sa’d Abadi.

III. Whenever you read in Usul Kafi, that "a group of our associates
narrated from Sahl Ibn Ziyad", then the group here means the following
four persons:

1. Abul Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim Ibn Aban al-Razi, who is
known as Allan al-Kulaini  
 2. Abul Husayn Muhammad Ibn Abdillah Ja’far Ibn Muhammad Ibn Awn al-
Asadi al-Kufi, resident of ray.  
 3. Muhammad Ibn al-Husayn Ibn Farrukh al-Saffar al-Qummi  
 4. Muhammad Ibn Aqil al-Kulaini.

IV. Whenever you read in Usul Kafi, that "a group of our associates
narrated from Ja’far Ibn Muhammad who narrated from al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali
Ibn al-Faddal", then the group here consists of the following person:

1. Abu Abdillah al-Husayn Ibn Muhammad Ibn Imran Ibn Abi Bakr al-
Ash’ari al-Qummi.

Thus the narrators of those traditions are known and can be evaluated
accordingly. Nontheless, we do not claim that al-Kafi is an all
authentic book of traditions for the Shi’a. There are certain traditions
in al-Kafi which are reported by weak narrators who are known to the
Shi’a scholars of Hadith.

Imam ‘Ali (as) said: Be the enemy of the oppressor and the helper of the
oppressed one.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قالَ الإمام علي عليه السلام: كونو للظالم خصماً و للمظلوم عوناً 
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Nahjul Balagha, the sayings of Imam ‘Ali)

Please compare this tradition of Imam ‘Ali with the tradition of Sahih
Muslim given at the beginning of the article.


