Who Are Ahlul-Bayt? Part 2
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the previous part, three authentic versions of "The Tradition of
Cloak/Mantle”(Hadith al-Kisaa) reported in Sahih Muslim and Sahih
al-Tirmidhi, and Mustadrak al-Hakim. In these traditions three wives of
the Prophet testified that the Prophet (S) specified that the Members of
his House (in his lifetime) are restricted to his daughter Fatimah (sa),
her husband ‘Ali (as) and their two sons: al-Hasan (as), and al-Husayn
(as).

Also according to the quoted traditions, the purification sentence in
Qur’an (the last sentence of Verse 33:33) was revealed for their virtue
and NOT for the wives of the Prophet (S). Now, let us see what the
Messenger of Allah used to do for quite some time after the revelation
of the verse:

The Long-Term Custom Of The Prophet After The Revelation Of The Purification Verse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It has been widely narrated that after the revelation of the
purification verse of Qur’an (Ayah al-Tat’hir), the Messenger of Allah
used to recited this verse at the door of the House of Fatimah and ‘Ali
before every prayer when people were gathering to pray with the
Messenger of Allah. He continued this practice for many months simply to
show the people who his Ahlul-Bayt are. Anas Ibn Malik narrated:

The Messenger of Allah (S), from the time the revelation of "Verily
Allah intends to... (the last part of Verse 33:33)”and for six (6)
months thereafter, stood by the door of the House of Fatimah and said:
"Time for Prayer Ahlul-Bayt; No doubt! Allah wished to remove all
abomination from you and make you pure and spotless."

Sunni references:

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v12, p85

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v3, p258

• Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p158 who wrote this tradition is authentic
as per the criteria of Muslim and Bukhari

• Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Suyuti, v5, pp 197,199

• Tafsir Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, v22, pp 5,6 (saying seven month)

• Tafsir Ibn Kathir, v3, p483

• Musnad, by al-Tiyalasi, v8, p274

• Usdul Ghabah, by Ibn al-Athir, v5, p146

Abu al-Hamra narrated:

"The Messenger of God continued eight (8) months in Medina, coming to
the door of ‘Ali at every morning prayer, putting his two hands on the
two sides of the door and exclaiming: "Assalat! Assalat! (prayer!
prayer!) Certainly God ward off all uncleanness from you, O Members of
the House of Muhammad, and to make you pure and spotless."

Sunni references:

• Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Suyuti, v5, pp 198-199

• Tafsir Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, v22, p6

• Tafsir Ibn Kathir, v3, p483

• Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, p24 on the authority of
Anas Ibn Malik

• Isti’ab, by Ibn Abd al-Barr, v5, p637

• Usdul Ghabah, by Ibn al-Athir, v5, p146

• Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, pp 121,168

• Mushkil al-Athar, by al-Tahawi, p338

Also Ibn Abbas (ra) narrated:

"We have witnessed the Messenger of God for nine (9) months coming to
the door of ‘Ali, son of Abu Talib, at the time of each prayer and
saying: ‘Assalamu Alaykum Wa Rahmatullah Ahlul-Bayt (Peace and Mercy of
God be upon you, O Members of the House). Certainly God wants only to
keep away all the evil from you, Members of the House, and purify you
with a thorough purification.’ He did this seven times a day."

Sunni reference: al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Hafidh al-Suyuti, v5, p198

In Majma’ al-Zawa’id and exegesis of Suyuti it has been quoted from Abu
Said Khudri with a variation in words that:

For forty days the Holy Prophet approached the house of Fatimah al-Zahra
(sa) every morning and used to say: ‘Peace be upon you O people of the
House! The time for the prayers has come’. And thereafter he used to
recite this verse: O people of the Prophet’s House.... And then said: ‘I
am in a state of war with him who fights with you and am in a state of
peace with him who is at peace with you’.

Sunni references:

• Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Hafidh al-Suyuti, v5, p199

• Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, pp 121,168

He repeated this openly at the time of each prayer so as to demonstrate
the meaning of this verse verbally as well as practically and he
explained it to his followers on the lines of the sacred verse: "We have
revealed the Qur’an to you so that you could tell the people what has
been revealed to them and that perhaps they will think. (Qur’an
16:44)”This concept became well known among the people and even the
companions of the Holy Prophet argued on its basis on behalf of the Holy
Prophet’s family:

Those Who Protested Based On The Purification Verse To Prove The Virtues Of The Holy Family
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. Imam al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali (as)

al-Hakim (in al-Mustadrak) in connection with the attainments of Imam
al-Hasan, and al-Haythami (in connection with the excellence of the Holy
Family) have narrated that Imam al-Hasan (as) addressed the people after
the martyrdom of his father Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as) and said during
his speech:

O People! Whoever knows me, knows me and whoever doesn't know me should
know that I am al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali; I am the son of the Holy Prophet and
of his executor (Wasi). I am the son him who invited people to Allah and
warned them of the torture of His Hell-fire. I am the son of the
luminous Lamp. I belong to the family upon whom Gabriel used to descend
and from there ascend to heavens. I belong to the family from whom Allah
has ward off all filth and made them pure.

Sunni references:

    • al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p172

    • Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p172

It has been narrated in Majma’ al-Zawa’id and Tafsir Ibn Kathir that:

After his father’s martyrdom when (Imam) al-Hasan attained the
Caliphate, one day while he was performing his prayers, a man attacked
him and thrust a sword in his thigh. He remained confined to bed for
some months.

Thereafter, he recovered and delivered a sermon and said: "O People of
Iraq! Fear Allah. We are your Amirs (leaders) and your guests and belong
to the family about whom Almighty Allah has said: ‘O People of the
Prophet’s House..’ Imam al-Hasan dwelt on this subject so much that all
those present in the Mosque began to cry."

Sunni references:

    • Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p172

    • Tafsir Ibn Kathir, v3, p486

    • This tradition has also been quoted by al-Tabarani and others

### 2. Ummul Mu’minin, Umm Salama (ra)

In Mushkil al-Athar, al-Tahawi has quoted Umrah al-Hamdaniyyah as
saying:

I went to Umm Salama and greeted her. She inquired: "Who are you?”I
replied: "I am Umrah Hamdaniyyah.”Umrah says, "I said O mother of the
Faithful! Say something about the man who has been killed among us
today. One group of the people like him and another group is inimical
towards him,”(He meant Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib). Umm Salama said, "Do
you like him or are you hostile to him?”I replied, "I neither like him
nor I am hostile to him.”(Here the narrative is defective and thereafter
it is like this:)

Umm Salama began to tell about the revelation of the verse of Tat’hir
and said in this behalf: "Allah revealed the verse: O People of the
Prophet’s House... There was none in the room at that time, except
Gabriel, the Holy Prophet, ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn. I
said: ‘O Prophet of Allah! Am I too one of the people of the House?’ He
replied: ‘Allah will reward you and recompense you.’ I wished that he
might have said ‘Yes’ and would have valued such a reply much more than
anything else in the world.’"

Sunni reference: Mushkil al-Athar, by al-Tahawi, v1, p336

Ahmad in Musnad; Tabari in his exegesis and al-Tahawi in Mushkil
al-Athar have quoted Shahr Ibn Haushab, to have said:

When the news of the martyrdom of al-Husayn reached Medina I heard Umm
Salama, wife of the Holy Prophet, saying: "They have killed al-Husayn. I
myself observed that the Holy Prophet spread his Khaibari cloak on them
and said: ‘O Allah! These are the members of my family! Ward off any
uncleanness from them and keep them clean and pure!’"

Sunni references:

    • Musnad, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v6, p298

    • Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, v22, p6

    • Mushkil al-Athar, by al-Tahawi, v1, p335

### 3. Ibn Abbas (ra)

Ahmad, al-Nisa’i, Muhibbuddin, and al-Haythami have reported (the
wording being of Ahmad’s Musnad):

‘Amr Ibn Maimoon said: "I was with Ibn Abbas when nine persons came to
him and said: ‘Ibn Abbas! Either come out with us or provide us
privacy.’ He said: ‘I shall go out with you.’ In those days the eyes of
Ibn Abbas were all right and he could see. They had mutual conversation
and I am not aware as to what they talked about. After some time Ibn
Abbas returned to us. He was then shaking off his dress saying: ‘Fie be
upon them! They are talking about the man who enjoys ten excellences.’

(Later in the narration Ibn Abbas details the virtues of the Imam till
he says:) ‘The Holy Prophet spread his cloak upon ‘Ali, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn and said: O People of the Prophet’s House! Allah intends to
keep you pure from all sorts of uncleanness and blemish and to purify
you with a thorough purification.’"

Sunni references:

    • Musnad, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v1, p331 (First edition)

In al-Khasa’is, al-Nisa’i has quoted Amir Ibn Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas as
saying:

Muawiyah said to Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas, "Why do you refrain from abusing
Abu Turab?”Sa’d said, "I don’t abuse ‘Ali for three attributes of his
which I heard from the Holy Prophet. If even one of them had been for
me, I would have valued it much more than anything else on earth. I
heard from the Holy Prophet that When he left Imam ‘Ali as his
representative in Medina and proceeded to fight a battle, ‘Ali said:
‘Are you leaving me with the women and the children in Medina?’ The Holy
Prophet replied: ‘Don't you like that your position vis-a-vis me should
be like that of Aaron (Haroon) with Moses. You enjoy the same position
in regard to me as Aaron enjoyed with Moses.’

On the fateful day of Khaibar, too, I heard the Holy Prophet as saying:
‘Tomorrow I shall give the standard (of the army) to one who loves Allah
and His Prophet and Allah and His Prophet also love him’. All of us were
keen to be graced and singled out in the face of this declaration and
wished that the standard might be in our hands. In the meantime the Holy
Prophet said: ‘Bring ‘Ali to me.’ ‘Ali came in such a condition that he
had some trouble in his eyes.

The Holy Prophet applied the saliva of his mouth to (Imam) ‘Ali’s eyes
and gave the standard in his hand. Moreover, when the verse of Tat’hir
was revealed, the Holy Prophet called ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn near himself and said: ‘O Allah! These are the People of my
House.’"

Sunni references:

        • al-Khasa’is, by al-Nisa’i, p4

        • A fairly similar narration is given in Sahih Muslim, English
version, Chapter CMXCVI (Virtues of ‘Ali), p1284, Tradition \#5916

Also al-Tabari, Ibn Kathir, al-Hakim, and al-Tahawi have quoted from
Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas that:

At the time of the revelation of the verse, the Holy Prophet called ‘Ali
along with his two sons and Fatimah and accommodated them under his own
cloak and said: ‘O Lord! These are the members of my family’.

Sunni references:

        • Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, v22, p7

        • Tafsir Ibn Kathir, v3, p485

        • al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p147

        • Mushkil al-Athar, by al-Tahawi, v1, p336; v2, p33

        • History of al-Tabari, Arabic version, v5, p31

    • Abu Sa’id al-Khudri

It narrated on that:

Abu Sa’id al-Khudri: I heard the Messenger of Allah saying: "This verse
has been revealed about five individuals: Myself, ‘Ali, al-Hasan,
al-Husayn, and Fatimah."

Sunni references:

        • Tafsir Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, v22, p5, under the verse 33:33

        • Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, p24

        • al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 11, section 1, p221

        • Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami

    • Wathilah Ibn Asqa’

al-Tabari while commenting on the verse 33:33, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, al-
Hakim who considers the tradition to be authentic according to the
criteria of Muslim and al-Bukhari, also Bayhaqi, al-Tahawi, and Haythami
quote Abu Ammar as having said (the wording is of al-Tabari):

I was sitting with Wathilah Ibn Asqa’ when a discussion took place about
‘Ali and the people abused him. When those present rose to leave he said
to me: ‘Keep sitting so that I may talk with you about the man whom they
have been abusing. I was with the Holy Prophet when ‘Ali, Fatimah,
al-Hasan and al-Husayn approached him and the Holy Prophet spread his
cloak on them and said: "O Allah! These are the members of my family.
Ward off every uncleanness from them and keep them clean and pure."

Sunni references:

        • Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, v22, p6

        • al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v2, p416; v3, p417

        • Musnad, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v6, p107

        • Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p167

        • Mushkil al-Athar, by al-Tahawi, v1, p346

        • Sunan, al-Bayhaqi, v2, p152

Also Ibn al-Athir quoted Shaddad Ibn Abdullah saying:

I heard from Wathilah Ibn Asqa’ that when the head of (Imam) al-Husayn
was brought, one of the Syrians abused (Imam) al-Husayn and his father,
Wathilah stood up and said: "I swear by Allah that ever since I heard
the Holy Prophet say about them: ‘O People of the Prophet’s House! Allah
intends to keep you pure from uncleanness and blemish and to purify you
with a thorough purification,’ I have always loved ‘Ali, Fatimah,
al-Hasan and al-Husayn (Peace be upon them).’"

Sunni reference: Usdul Ghabah, by Ibn al-Athir, v2, p20

    • ‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn, Zain al-Abideen (as)

While commenting on the verse 33:33, al-Tabari, Ibn Kathir and al-Suyuti
have stated in their exegesis:

‘Ali Ibn Husayn said to a Syrian: "Have you read this verse in Surah
al-Ahzab, O people of the House! Allah intends to keep you pure from
blemish and to purify you with a thorough purification (Qur’an 33:33)?"

The Syrian said: "Does this verse pertain to you?”The Imam replied:
"Yes, it pertains to us."

Sunni references:

        • Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, v22, p7

        • Tafsir Ibn Kathir, v3, p486

        • Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Hafidh al-Suyuti, v5, p199

al-Kharazmi has quoted this very narration in his Maqtal in the
following words:

When, after the martyrdom of (Imam) al-Husayn the grandson of the Holy
Prophet, (Imam) Zain al-Abideen and other prisoners belonging to the
House of the Holy Prophet were carried to Damascus and stationed in a
jail located by the side of the Grand Mosque of Damascus, an old man
approached them and said: "Praised be Allah who killed you and
annihilated you and relieved the people from your men and provided the
Commander of the Faithful (Yazid) with authority over you.”

‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn said: "O old man! Have you read the Holy Qur’an?” He
replied: "Yes.”Then the Imam said: "Have you read the verse: Muhammad!
‘Say, I do not ask you of any reward for my preaching except the love of
my kinsfolk’?”The old man said: "Yes. I have read it."

The Imam said: "Have you read the verse: ‘So give what is due to the
near ones, the needy and the wayfarer.’ and the verse: ‘Know that
whatever (income) you gain, one fifth belongs to Allah, the Messenger,
his near ones, orphans the needy and the wayfarers, if you believe in
Allah and what We revealed to Our servant in the Holy Qur’an’?” The old
man replied: "Yes. I have read them."

The Imam said: "I swear by Allah that the word ‘near ones’ refers to us
and these verses have been revealed about us. (The Imam added): And have
you also read this verse in the Holy Qur’an wherein Allah says: ‘O
people of the Prophet’s House...’ (33:33)?”The old man said: "Yes. I
have read it". The Imam said: "What is meant by people of the Prophet’s
House! It is we whom Allah has especially associated with the verse of
Tat’hir (purification)."

The old man said: "I ask you by Allah! Are you of the same family?”The
Imam replied: "I swear by my grandfather the Prophet of Allah that we
are the same people."

The old man was stunned and expressed regret for what he had said. Then
he raised his head towards the sky and said: "O Allah! I ask forgiveness
for what I have said, and forsake enmity against this family and hate
the enemies of the progeny of Muhammad."

Sunni reference: Maqtal al-Husayn, by al-Khateeb al-Kharazmi


