On the Companions Who Murdered Uthman
=====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Wahhabi mentioned:

Amirul Mu’mineen Mu’awiya ibn Abu Sufyan Radiya Allahu ‘anhu Siffin

Muawiya felt that the killers of Amirul Mumineen Uthmaan RA (the fathers
of Shiasm) should not be allowed to continue their evil against Islaam.
He did not fight for personal power.

‘Ali did not hand over these assassins to Muawiya due to some sound and
concrete proof that he possessed. Thus the people of Shaam joined forces
with Muawiya against ‘Ali.”

It is not surprising that this Wahhabi has overlooked what the Messenger
of Allah (S) said about the fate of those who will fight Imam ‘Ali (as)
which are recorded in what they call Sahih books, and stick to what is
fabricated by the Leader of the Hypocrites (Amir al-Munafiqeen) Muawiyah
(LA) himself. After all, I should not expect from their Wahhabi mentors
to do better than that for bread and butter.

The claim that Muawiyah raised against the legitimate Caliph of his time
and killed thousands of Muslims to take revenge from the murderers of
Uthman is a flat-out lie! Had Muawiyah this in mind, he should first
kill the commander of his army and many of his assistants for the Sunni
history testifies that those who killed Uthman were the companions who
were on the side of Muawiyah (as well as other opponents of Imam ‘Ali).

The fact is that any deceitful power-hungry leader needs to provide an
excuse for his horrible acts, and this was not unique to Muawiyah. As we
can see in the following Sunni references, those who agitated against
Uthman were ones who came first to revenge for his blood with one aim in
their mind, that was destroying the rule of Imam ‘Ali (as).

Sunni historians confirm that the agitation against the Caliph started
by some influential individuals among the companions. The weakness of
Uthman in handing the affairs of the State caused many companions to
oppose him. This naturally resulted in a power struggle among the
influential companions in Medina. Sunni historians such as al-Tabari,
Ibn Athir, and al-Baladhuri and many others provide traditions which
confirm that these companions were the first who asked the other
companions, resided in other cities, to join them in revolt against
Uthman. Ibn Jarir al-Tabari reported:

When the people saw what Uthman was doing, the companions of the Prophet
in Medina wrote to other companions who were scattered throughout the
frontier provinces: "You have gone forth but to struggle in the path of
Almighty God, for the sake of Muhammad’s religion. In your absence the
religion of Muhammad has been corrupted and forsaken. So come back to
reestablish Muhammad’s religion.”Thus, they came from every direction
until they killed the Caliph (Uthman).

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, p184

In fact al-Tabari quoted the above paragraph form Muhammad Ibn Is’haq
Ibn Yasar al-Madani who is the most celebrated Sunni Historian and the
author of "Sirah Rasool-Allah".

History testifies that those influential people who were the key element
in agitation against Uthman include Talha, Zubair, Aisha (the mother of
believers), Abdurrahman Ibn Ouf, and Amr Ibn al-Aas (the army commander
of Muawiyah).

A) Talha
--------

Talha Ibn Ubaydillah was one of the biggest agitator against Uthman and
was the one who plotted his murder. He then used that incident for
revenge against ‘Ali by starting the first civil war in the history of
Islam (i.e., the battle of Camel). I just give few paragraphs from both
of al-Tabari and Ibn Athir to prove my point. Here is the first one
which is narrated by Ibn Abbas (in some manuscripts it is Ibn Ayyash):

I entered Uthman’s presence (During the agitation against Uthman) and
talked with him for an hour. He said: "Come Ibn Abbas/Ayyash,”and he
took me by the hand and had me listen to what the people were saying at
his door. We heard some say, "what are you waiting for,”while others
were saying, "wait, perhaps he will repent.”While the two of us were
standing there (behind the door and listening), Talha Ibn Ubaydillah
passed by and said: "Where is Ibn Udays?”He was told, "He is over
there.”Ibn Udays came to (Talha) and whispered something with him, and
then went back to his associates and said: "Do not let anyone go in (to
the house of Uthman) to see this man or leave his house.”

Uthman said to me: "These are the orders of Talha.”He continued, "O God!
Protect me from Talha for he has provoked all these people against me.
By God, I hope nothing will come of it, and that his own blood will be
shed. Talha has abused me unlawfully. I heard the Messenger of God said:
‘The blood of a Muslim is lawful in three cases: apostasy, adultery, and
the one who kills except in legitimate retaliation for another.’ So why
should I be killed?"

Ibn Abbas/Ayyash continued: I wanted to leave (the house), but they
blocked my path until Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr who was passing by requested
them to let me go, and they did so.

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, pp 199-200

The following report also supports that the murder of Uthman was led by
Talha, and the killers came out to inform their leader that they took
care of Uthman:

Abzay said: I witnessed the day they went in against Uthman. They
entered the house through an opening in the residence of Amr Ibn Hazm.
There was a skirmishing and they got in. By God, I have not forgotten
that Sudan Ibn Humran came out and I heard him say: "Where is Talha Ibn
Ubaydillah? We have killed Ibn Affan!”

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, p200

Uthman was besieged in Medina while Imam ‘Ali (as) was in Khaibar. The
Imam (as) came to Medina and found people gathering at the residence of
Talha. Then Imam ‘Ali (as) went to met Uthman. Ibn Athir wrote:

Uthman said to ‘Ali: "You owe me my Islamic right and the right of
brotherhood and relationship. If I have non of these rights and if I
were in pre-Islamic era, it would be still shame for a descendants of
Abd Munaf (of whom both ‘Ali and Uthman are descendants) to let a man of
Tyme (Talha) rob us of our authority.”‘Ali said to Uthman: "You shall be
informed of what I do.”Then ‘Ali went to Talha’s house. There were a lot
of people there. ‘Ali spoke to Talha saying: "Talha, what is this
condition in which you have fallen?”Talha replied: "O’ Abul Hasan! it is
to late!"

Sunni reference: al-Kamil, by Ibn Athir, v3, p84

Tabari also reports the following conversation between Imam ‘Ali and
Talha during the siege over Uthman:

‘Ali said to Talha: "I ask you by Allah to send people away from
(attacking) Uthman.”Talha replied: "No, by God, not until the Umayad
voluntarily submit to what is right.”(Uthman was the head of Umayad).

Reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, p235

Talha even deprived Uthman of water:

Abdurrahman Ibn al-Aswad said: "I constantly saw ‘Ali avoiding (Uthman)
and not acting as he formerly had. However, I know that he spoke with
Talha when Uthman was under siege, to the effect that water skins should
be taken to him. ‘Ali was extremely upset (from Talha) about that until
finally water skins were allowed to reach Uthman.”

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, pp 180-181

Now let us take a look at a report from the battle of Camel which has
been mentioned in numerous Sunni books of History and Hadith. The
following report proves that even the Umayad leaders such as Marwan who
(along side with Talha) was fighting against Imam ‘Ali, knew that Talha
and Zubair were the killers of Uthman. Sunni scholars recorded that
Yahya Ibn Sa’id narrated:

Marwan Ibn al-Hakam who was in the ranks of Talha, saw Talha is
retreating (when his army was being defeated in the battlefield). Since
he and all Umayad recognized him and al-Zubair as the murderers of
Uthman, he shot an arrow at him and severely wounded him. He then said
to Aban, the son of Uthman, that: "I have spared you from one of your
father’s murderers.”Talha was taken to a ruined house in Basra where he
died.

Sunni references:

- Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’ad, v3, part 1, p159  
 - al-Isabah, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v3, pp 532-533  
 - History of Ibn al-Athir, v3, p244  
 - Usdul Ghabah, v3, pp 87-88  
 - al-Isti’ab, Ibn Abd al-Barr, v2, p766  
 - History of Ibn al-Kathir, v7, p248  
 - A similar report is given in al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, pp
169,371

B) Al-Zubair
------------

al-Zuhri, another important Sunni narrator who is famous for his dislike
of Ahlul-Bayt, reported the following dialogue of Imam ‘Ali with Zubair
and Talha before the start of battle of Camel:

"‘Ali said: ‘Zubair, do you fight me for the blood of Uthman after you
killed him? May God give the most hostile to Uthman among us the
consequence which that very person dislikes.’ He said to Talha:

‘Talha, you have brought the wife of the Messenger of God (Aisha) to use
her for war and hid your wife at your house (in Medina)! Did you not
give me your allegiance?’ Talha said: ‘I gave you the allegiance while
the sword was on my neck.’

(At this point, ‘Ali tried to invite them to peace, leaving them no
excuse.) ‘Ali addressed his own army saying: ‘Who among you will display
this Qur’an and what is in it to the opposing army with the
understanding that if he loses one of his hand he will hold the Qur’an
with his other hand...?’ A youth from Kufa said: ‘I will take the
mission.’ ‘Ali went through his army offering them the mission. Only
that youth accepted it. Then ‘Ali said to him: ‘Exhibit this Qur’an and
say to them: It is between you and us from its beginning to its end.

Remember God, and spare your blood and our blood.’ As the youth called
upon them to resort to the Qur’an and surrender to its judgment, the
Basrites army attacked and killed him. At this time, ‘Ali said to his
army: ‘Now the fight has become legal.’ The battle then started.

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, Arabic version, Events of year 36
AH v4, p905

As we see in the above tradition, Imam ‘Ali clearly stated that Zubair
was among those who killed Uthman. Had the revolters elected Talha or
Zubair instead of Imam ‘Ali (as) as Caliph, they would have given the
killers of Uthman the biggest prize. Certainly the leaders did not seek
revenge for the blood of Uthman, for they themselves were behind the
plot. They only pretended to do that as a means of destroying the Imam’s
caliphate.

C) Aisha
--------

Talha and Zubair were not the only collaborators against Uthman. Sunni
history tells us that Talha’s cousin, Aisha, was collaborating and
campaigning against Uthman as well. The following paragraph also from
the History of al-Tabari shows the cooperation of Aisha with Talha in
overthrowing Uthman:

While Ibn Abbas was setting out for Mecca, he found Aisha in al-Sulsul
(seven miles south of Medina). Aisha said: "O’ Ibn Abbas, I appeal to
you by God, to abandon this man (Uthman) and sow doubt about him among
the people, for you have been given a sharp tongue. (By the current
siege over Uthman) people have shown their understanding, and light is
raised to guide them. I have seen Talha has taken the possession of the
keys to the public treasuries and storehouses. If he becomes Caliph
(after Uthman), he will follow the path of his parental cousin
Abu-Bakr.”Ibn Abbas said: "O’ Mother (of believers), if something
happens to that man (i.e., Uthman), people would seek asylum only with
our companion (namely, ‘Ali).”Aisha replied: "Be quiet! I have no desire
to defy or quarrel with you."

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, pp 238-239

Many Sunni historian reported that Once Aisha went to Uthman and asked
for her share of inheritance of Prophet (after so many years passed from
the death of Prophet). Uthman refrained to give Aisha any money by
reminding her that she was one those who testified and encouraged
Abu-Bakr to refrain to pay the share of inheritance of Fatimah (sa). So
if Fatimah does not have any share of inheritance, then why should she?
Aisha became extremely angry at Uthman, and came out saying:

"Kill this old fool (Na’thal), for he is unbeliever."

Sunni references:

- History of Ibn Athir, v3, p206  
 - Lisan al-Arab, v14, p141  
 - al-Iqd al-Farid, v4, p290  
 - Sharh Ibn Abi al-Hadid, v16, pp 220-223

Another Sunni historian, al-Baladhuri, in his history (Ansab al-Ashraf)
said that when the situation became extremely grave, Uthman ordered
Marwan Ibn al-Hakam and Abdurrahman Ibn Attab Ibn Usayd to try to
persuade Aisha to stop campaigning against him. They went to her while
she was preparing to leave for pilgrimage, and they told her:

"We pray that you stay in Medina, and that Allah may save this man
(Uthman) through you.”Aisha said: "I have prepared my means of
transportation and vowed to perform the pilgrimage. By God, I shall not
honor your request... I wish he (Uthman) was in one of my sacks so that
I could carry him. I would then through him into the sea.”

Sunni reference: Ansab al-Ashraf, by al-Baladhuri, part 1, v4, p75

D) Amr Ibn Al-Aas
-----------------

Amr Ibn al-Aas (the number 2 person in the government of Muawiyah) was
one of the most dangerous agitators against Uthman and he had all the
reasons to conspire against him. He was the governor of Egypt during the
reign of the second Caliph. However, the third Caliph dismissed him and
replaced him with his foster brother, Abdullah Ibn Sa’d Ibn Abu Sharh.
As a result of this, Amr became extremely hostile towards Uthman.

He returned to Medina and started a malicious campaign against Uthman,
accusing him of many wrong doings. Uthman blamed Amr and spoke to him
harshly. This made Amr even more bitter. He used to meet Zubair and
Talha and conspire against Uthman. He used to meet pilgrims and inform
them of the numerous deviations of Uthman.

According to Tabari, when Uthman was besieged, Amr settled in the palace
of al-Ajlan and used to ask from people about the situation of Uthman:
..Amr had not left his seat before a second rider passed by. Amr called
him out: "How is Uthman doing?”The man replied: "He has been killed.”Amr
then said: "I am Abu Abdillah. When I scratch an ulcer, I cut it off.
(i.e., when I desire an object, I attain it). I have been provoking
(people) against him, even the shepherd on the top of mountains with his
flock.”

Then Salamah Ibn Rawh said to him: "You, the Quraishites, have broken a
strong tie between yourselves and the Arabs. Why did you do that?”Amr
replied: "We wanted to draw the truth out of the pit of falsehood, and
to have people be on an equal ooting as regards the truth.”

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, pp 171-172

The divider of Muslims ignored what is well known in the history of
Islam which was reported by important Sunni reporters. The revolt
against Uthman was as a result of the efforts of influential companions
in Medina, such as Aisha, Talha, Zubair, Aburrahman Ibn Ouf, and Amr Ibn
al-Aas. The murder of Uthman provided a nice scapegoat for those who
were fighting over more power, while serving under the government of
Uthman. They were mainly his relatives, the Umayad, such as Muawiyah and
Marwan, who thoroughly took advantage of Uthman’s life as well as his
death.

Imam ‘Ali said in the battle of Camel:

"Truth and falsehood can not be identified by the virtue of people.
First understand the truth, you will then realize who is adhering to
it.”(Nahjul Balaghah, by Imam ‘Ali)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الحقَّ و الباطل لا يعرفان بأقدارِ الرجال. إعرف الحق تعرف أهله.
  </p>
</blockquote>


