Are Munafiqeen counted among Sahabah?
=====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have some simple questions from my Sunni friends. Most of you say that
ALL Sahabah are not Munafiqeen, not even one single person. Let us
accept this opinion for a while. My question is:

Were Munafiqeen Counted As Sahabah?
-----------------------------------

In other words:

1)- Please define the word "Sahabah”clearly, and mathematically such
that it is complete without any lack.

2)- Please tell us that some people such as Abdullah-Ibn-Obai, who was
the most famous Munafiq, are considered Sahabah or not?

3)- Please tell us if other Munafiqeen who existed in the life time of
the prophet were among Sahabah or not?

4)- And if your answer to (3) is NO, please name all of Munafiqeen for
us who are not sahabah. In other words, you should be able to
distinguish between Sahabah and Munafiqeen. You should be able to
categorize and NAME the Munafiqeen for us, all of them. If not all of
them, at least 100 of them. If you can not put a border between Sahabah
and Munafiqeen, then how am I supposed to know who is Munafiq and who is
one of the sahabah?

5)- And if your answer to (3) is YES, which means that Munafiqeen were
Sahabah, do you agree that I can bring one person who was Sahabah and
was Munafiq as well, and his name is Abdullah-Ibn-Obai? Then, do you
agree that I can think of some other sahabah who were Munafiq too or
not?

The truth is (I do not care if a Shi’a/Sunni likes this or not) that you
can not announce a person as non-muslim when he says that:

1)- There is no God, but Allah,

2)- Muhammad is the true messenger of Allah.

If you call such person as non-muslim as easily as wind coming out of
your mouth, you must prepare yourself for the hard time when facing the
fire of Allah.

A person will remain muslim as long as he confesses the above two rules,
no matter if he/she says:

a)- A hadith is true or not,  
 b)- One of Sahabah lied upon prophet or not,  
 c)- One of sahabah has made adultry,  
 d)- One of Sahabah has stolen something (or he is thief),  
 e)- One of Sahabah has killed somebody intentionally and without having
the right to do so,  
 f)- One of sahabah has fought wrongly for the sake of Sheitan,  
 g)- ...

Replace "Sahabah”with "A very respected scholar", and read it again. The
problem with the present society of islam is that people allow
themselves to attack their brothers and sisters (Sunni or Shi’a) and
call each other as non-muslim. If these people get the power, they will
kill whoever disagrees with them, as they did hundred years ago. (Thanks
God that they do not have the power now.) This ugly habit which is
pleasing sheitan, and upsetting Allah is now spread over the entire
islamic societies.

I chanllenged you several times, and I saw you fail over and over again.
If you understand that there is no source for your ugly habit, at least
try to hide it. Such habit does not come from a true muslim.

Once a person said:

If a person says that one of Sahabah (named XXX) has lied upon the
prophet, he/she has meant that this one of Sahabah (XXX) is Kafir, or
non-muslim. Since he has declared a muslim (XXX) as non-muslim, he,
himself, becomes non-muslim.

I have no objection for the second part of the statement as I brought it
myself. My question is specifically for the first part. I asked you to
bring me a japanese or arabic dictionary and show this new word to me.

If you fail to bring such evidence, be human, and leave your ugly habit.
A person who uses such word upon another muslim, is considered to be
non-muslim. I am not saying this. I am nobody to say this. (This word
"non-muslim”is not a simple word, it is a very heavy word which comes
along with the fire of the Hell, and it should be spelled with the
authority of Allah and his messenger.) This is what is recorded in the
book of Sahih Bukhari and Muslim. If you care about these two books, and
if you "listen and obey”these two books, at least "obey”these ahaadith
in these two books. I am warning you explicitly that such person is
considered as non-muslim by the following rule:

If a person (XX) declares another muslim (YY) as non-muslim while he
(XX) knows that YY is muslim, XX becomes immediately non-muslim.

Such person is considered to be Mortadd, since he is leaving islam by
calling his muslim brother/sister as non-muslim intentionally.

The Pillars Of Islam
--------------------

In the name of Allah, who is aware of the hearts of people;

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 1.7

Narrated Ibn ‘Umar:

Allah’s Apostle said: Islam is based on (the following) five
(principles):

1. To testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and
Muhammad is Allah’s Apostle.  
 2. To offer the (compulsory congregational) prayers dutifully and
perfectly.  
 3. To pay Zakat (i.e. obligatory charity) .  
 4. To perform Hajj. (i.e. Pilgrimage to Mecca)  
 5. To observe fast during the month of Ramadan.

Do you see anything else?


