Imam Husayn (as): A brief Description and Analysis
==================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Since we are approaching to the day of Ashura (10th of Muharram), the
anniversary of the martyrdom of al-Husayn (as), the grandson of Prophet
(S), we use this opportunity to give a short biography of Imam Husayn.

Al-Husayn (as), the second child of ‘Ali and Fatimah, was born in the
year 4 AH, and after the martyrdom of his elder brother, al-Hasan,
became his successor. Husayn was Imam for 10 years which was mostly
during the reign of Muawiyah, except the last 6 month which coincided
with the reign of Yazid. Imam Husayn lived under the most difficult
conditions of suppression and persecution. This was due to the fact
that, first of all, religious laws and regulations had lost much of
their weight and credit, and the edicts of the Umayyah government had
gained complete authority and power.

Secondly, Muawiyah and his fans made use of every possible means to put
aside the Household of prophet and to move them out of the way. Above
all, Muawiyah wanted to strengthen the basis of future kingdom of his
son, Yazid, who because of his lack of principles and scruples was
opposed with a large group of Muslims. Therefore, in order to quell all
opposition, Muawiyah had undertaken more severe means until he died in
60 AH and his son Yazid took his place.

Giving the oath of allegiance, was an old Arab practice which was
carried out in important matters like governorship. Well-known people
would give the oath of allegiance as a sign of agreement and obedience
to their king and showing their support for his future actions. Braking
the agreement after the oath of allegiance, was considered as a definite
crime. Muawiyah during his life time, had asked well-known people to
give the oath of allegiance to Yazid, but did not impose this request
upon Imam Husayn.

He particularly told Yazid in his last will that if Imam Husayn refused
to give the oath of allegiance, he should take it easy because Muawiyah
knew the bad consequences of such enforcement. However because of his
egoism and recklessness, Yazid neglected his father’s advice, and
immediately after taking over the power, ordered the governor of Medina
to either take the pledge of allegiance from Imam Husayn, or send his
head to Damascus. After the governor of Medina informed this demand to
him, Imam Husayn asked for a delay to think about the matter, and moved
with his family toward Mecca overnight. He sought refuge in the
sanctuary of God in Mecca which is official place of refuge in Islam.
This happened at the beginning of Shaban 60 AH. Imam Husayn stayed in
Mecca for nearly four month.

This news spread throughout the Islamic world, and many people who were
tired of inequalities during Muawiyah reign and were even more disturbed
when Yazid took over, corresponded with Imam Husayn and expressed their
sympathy for him. On the other hand, a flood of letters began to flow,
specially from Iraq and particularly from the city of Kufah, inviting
the Imam to go there and to build up a government. Naturally such
situation was dangerous for Yazid.

The stay of Imam Husayn in Mecca continued until the season of
pilgrimage when Muslims from all over the Islamic world came to Mecca to
perform Hajj. The Imam realized that some of the followers of Yazid had
entered Mecca as pilgrims with the mission of killing Imam during the
ceremonies of Hajj with the arms they carried under the special
pilgrimage dress.

In order to safeguard the great sanctuary of Mecca, Imam Husayn decided
to leave for Iraq before completing the ceremony of Hajj. When he was
asked the reason for the mysterious departure, Imam Husayn said that he
would perform this year’s pilgrimage in the desert of Karbala, offering
the sacrifice of not any animals, but himself and his family and
friends. Giving a short speech in the vast crowd of people, he announced
that he was setting for Iraq, and said he would be martyred. He asked
people to join him in attaining the goal of offering their lives in the
path of God.

Imam Husayn was determined not to give his allegiance to Yazid and fully
knew that he would be killed. But it was not the time to save the life.
That moment was the right time to water the faded lawn of Islam by his
blood. Some of outstanding people of Mecca stood in the way of Imam
Husayn and warned him the danger of the move he was making.

But he answered that he refused to pay allegiance and to give his
approval to a government of injustice and tyranny. He added that
wherever he would go, he would be killed, so he would leave Mecca in
order to preserve the respect for the House of God, and not to allow
this respect be destroyed by letting his blood spilled there.

While on the way of Kufah, he received the striking news that under the
pressure of Yazid’s agents, people of Kufa did not support his
representatives and turned back, and some of them joined the Yazid’s
army to kill Imam’s representatives in Kufah. The feet of those martyrs
were tied and they were dragged through the streets of Kufah. The city
and its surroundings were under very strict marshal law by countless
soldiers of enemy who where waiting to face Imam. There was no way for
Imam to turn into unless to march ahead and face the death.

Approximately 44 miles from Kufah, in a desert called Karbala, Imam and
his followers were surrounded by the army of Yazid. They cut off the
water supply of the Household of Prophet and their companions and their
families among them were many women and children. For eight days they
stayed in that place under the heat of the sun, and the circle among
them narrowed and the number of enemy’s army increased by a number of
30,000 fully equipped soldiers of Yazid.

In the following night, Imam gathered his companions and gave the a
short speech saying that there was nothing ahead but martyrdom. He added
that since the enemy was concerned only with his person, he would free
them from all obligations so that any one who wished could escape in the
darkness of the night and save his life. Then he ordered the lights to
be turned off, and most of his companions who had joint him for their
own advantages, dispersed. Only those whose hearts were tested by Allah
remained who were about 40 companions and some from Bani Hashim (his
relatives).

Once again, Imam gathered those who remained to put them on the test. He
addressed his companions and Hashimite relatives, repeating that enemy
was only concerned with him and they could escape the danger in the
darkness of night. But this time the faithful companions answered each
in own way that they would not deviate from the right path and would
never leave him alone. They said that they would defend the Household of
Prophet to the last drop of their blood as long as they could carry a
sword.

The enemy intended to start the war in the eve of the ninth day of the
month, but Imam asked for a delay till next morning to worship all over
the night for the last time. During the night, some 30 soldiers of enemy
joint Imam, among them was Hurr who was one of the Generals of the army
of enemy. They finally chose their way to be with Imam, and Imam
accepted their repentance. In this way the number of his followers
became close to 90 people consisting of 72 companions and 18 male
members of his family and relatives, while enemy was more than 45,000 by
then.

On the tenth of Muharram of the year 61 (680) That inequitable war
began. That day, they fought from morning till their final breath, and
all the companions and the relatives were martyred. Among those who were
killed were two children of Imam Hasan, only thirteen and eleven years
old, and a five years old child of Imam Husayn.

When Imam himself was ready to fight, he saw his six-month-old baby is
dying from thirst. Imam brought his infant near to enemy demanded some
water for baby, saying: You want me but not this baby so take him and
give him some water. The words of Imam has not been finished that the
thirst of the baby was quenched by a deadly poisoned arrow from enemy
which pinned the baby’s neck to the arm of his father. Imam threw some
of his blood toward sky saing: "O’ Lord! Your Husayn has offered
whatever You have given him. Bless me by acceptance of this
sacrifice.”Finally Imam came to the field and fought for a long time and
was finally martyred. The army of Yazid having killed Imam Husayn, cut
his head and raised it on a lance.

The army of enemy, after ending the war, burned the tents of women and
children accompanying Imam and his companions, and plundered those
helpless women. They decapitated the bodies of the martyrs, denuded them
and threw them to the ground without burial. Then they moved women and
children along with the heads of the martyrs to Kufah. The bodies of the
martyrs were under the sunshine for three days till a tribe passing that
place found them and performed the burial.

The event of Karbala, the capture of women and children of the Household
of Prophet, their being taken as prisoners from town to town, and the
speeches made by Zaynab, the daughter of ‘Ali, who was one of the
prisons, became a scandal for Umayyah Kingdom. Such abuse of the
Household of Prophet nullified the propaganda which Muawiyah had built
up for years. The scandal reached to the extent that Yazid denounced the
action of his agents in public. That was what excactly Imam Husayn
wanted to do, otherwise he would not bring women and children with him
and sacrifice some, and let the rest to become captives. That was the
only way to make a wave in order to awaken the Muslim nation.

The event of Karbala was a major factor in the overthrow of Umayyah
kingdom though its effect was delayed. Among its immediate results were
the revolts and rebellions combined with bloody wars which continued for
twelve years.

During those riots non of the important elements in Karbala could escape
revenge and punishment, including Yazid.

Muhammad Iqbal (from Lahore, Pakistan) said:

"Imam Husayn uprooted despotism forever till the day of Judgment. He
watered the dry garden of freedom with surging wave of his blood, and
indeed he awakened the sleeping Muslim nation. If Imam Husayn had aimed
at acquiring a worldly empire, he would not have traveled he did. Husayn
weltered in blood and dust for the sake of truth. Verily he, therefore,
became bed-rock (foundation) of the Muslim creed; There is no God but
Allah."

Charles Dickens had said the following about Imam Husayn (as):

"If Husayn fought to quench his worldly desires, then I do not
understand why his sisters, wives and children accompanied him. It
stands to reason therefore that he sacrificed purely for Islam."

Thomas Carlyle has relayed this about the Tragedy of Karbala:

"The best lesson which we get from the tragedy of Karbala is that Husayn
and his companions were the rigid believers of God. They illustrated
that numerical superiority does not count when it comes to truth and
falsehood. The victory of Husayn despite his minority marvels me!"

The famous, Dr. K. Sheldrake on Imam Husayn (as) said this:

"Husayn marched with his little company not to glory, not to power or
wealth, but to a supreme sacrifice and every member of that gallant
band, male and female, knew that the foes were implacable, were not only
ready to fight but to kill. Denied even water for the children, they
remained parched under a burning sun, amid scorching sands yet no one
faltered for a moment and bravely faced the greatest odds without
flinching."

World famous Arab historian al-Fakhri has said this about Imam Husayn’s
sacrifice:

"This is a catastrophe whereof I care not to speak at length, deeming it
alike too grievous and too horrible. For verily, it was a catastrophe
than that which naught more shameful has happened in Islam...There
happened therein such a foul slaughter as to cause man’s flesh to creep
with horror. And again I have dispersed with my long description because
of it’s notoriety, for it is the most lamented of catastrophes."

The previous four quotes have been taken from "The Martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (as)”- Yousuf Lalljee


