Some Traditions on Imam al-Husayn (as)
======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In this article, I would like to present some of the traditions
recorderded in the Sunni collections of the traditions Regarding him:

The Messenger of Allah said: "Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the chiefs of
the youth of Paradise and Fatimah is the chief of their women."

Sunni references:

(1) Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, p660, on the authority of Abu Sa’id and
Hudhayfa  
 (2) Sunan Ibn Majah, Introduction 8  
 (3) al-Tabarani, on the authorities of: Umar, ‘Ali, Jabir, Abu
Hurayrah, Usamah Ibn Zaid, al-Baraa, Ibn ‘Adi, and Ibn Masud.  
 (4) al-Kubra, by al-Nisa’i  
 (5) Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v1, pp 62,82, v3, pp 3,64, v5, p391  
 (6) Fada’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Hanbal, v2, p771, Tradition \#1360  
 (7) al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, pp 166,167  
 (8) Hilyatul Awliyaa, by Abu Nu’aym, v5, p71  
 (9) Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p187  
 (10) Tuhfatul Ashraf, by Lumzi, v3, p31  
 (11) Ibn Habban, as mentioned in al-Mawarid, pp 551,553  
 (12) al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 3,
p290  
 (13) Mishkat al-Masabih, by Khatib al-Tabrizi, English Version,
Tdadition \#6154

Also it is narrated that:

The Messenger of Allah said: "Husayn is from me and I am from Husayn."

Sunni references:

(1) Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v4, p172  
 (2) Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Hanbal, v2, p772, Tradition \#1361  
 (3) al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p 177  
 (4) Amali, by Abu Nu’aym al-Isbahani, p 64  
 (5) al-Kuna wal Asmaa, by al-Dulabi, v1, p88  
 (6) al-Tabarani, v3, p21  
 (7) Adab by al-Bukhari, also al-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah, as quoted in:  
 (8) al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 3,
p291  
 (9) Mishkat al-Masabih, by Khatib al-Tabrizi, English Version,
Tdadition \#6160

The last part of the above tradition probably means that Imam Husayn
(as), by sacrificing himself and his family, preserved the religion of
Prophet Muhammad (S) from full annihilation.

Abu Huraira narrated:

The Prophet (S) looked toward ‘Ali, Hasan, Husayn, and Fatimah (sa), and
then said: "I am in war with those who will fight you, and in peace with
those who are peaceful to you."

Sunni references:

(1) Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, p699  
 (2) Sunan Ibn Majah, v1, p52  
 (3) Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p767, Tradition
\#1350  
 (4) al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p149  
 (5) Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p169  
 (6) al-Kabir, by al-Tabarani, v3, p30, also in al-Awsat  
 (7) Jami’ al-Saghir, by al-Ibani, v2, p17  
 (8) Tarikh, by al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi, v7, p137  
 (9) Sawaiq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, p144  
 (10) Talkhis, by al-Dhahabi, v3, p149  
 (11) Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, by al-Muhib al-Tabari, p25  
 (12) Mishkat al-Masabih, by Khatib al-Tabrizi, English Version,
Tdadition \#6145

Also:

The Messenger of Allah said: "He who loves al-Hasan and al-Husayn, loved
me, and he who makes them angry has made me angry."

Sunni reference:

- Sunan Ibn Majah,  
 - al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, from Abu Hurairah  
 - Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, as quited in:  
 - al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 3,
p292

It has been narrated in two wordings that:

The Messenger of Allah said: "I named Hasan and Husayn and Muhsin the
names of the sons of Aaron (Haroon) who were: Shubbar, Shubair, and
Mushbir."

Sunni references:

(1) Sunan Abu Dawud al-Tilyasi, v1, p232 (without mentioning Muhsin)  
 (2) Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p774, Tradition
\#1365  
 (3) al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, pp 165,168  
 (4) Kashf al-Astar, by al-Bazzar, v2, p416  
 (5) Ibn Habban, as quoted in al-Mawarid, p551  
 (6) al-Tabarani, v3, p100  
 (7) Idhaah, Abdul Ghani, from Salman al-Farsi  
 (8) al-Mu’jam, by al-Baghawi, as quoted in:  
 (9) al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 3,
p292

The third son of Lady Fatimah (sa) who was pre-named by the Prophet as
Muhsin, was miscarried shortly after the demise of Prophet.

Usamah ibn Zayd narrated:

I went to the Prophet (S) one night about something I required and he
came out with something (I did not know what) under his cloak. When I
had finished telling him my business I asked him what he had under his
cloak, and when he opened it I saw al-Hasan and al-Husayn on his hips.
He then said, "These are my sons and my daughter’s sons. O Allah, I love
them, so I beseech Thee to love them and those who love them.”

Sunni References:

- Sahih Tirmidhi, per:  
 - Mishkat al-Masabih, by Khatib al-Tabrizi, English Version, Tdadition
\#6156

Anas ibn Malik Narrated:

When Allah’s Messenger (S) was asked which member of his family was
dearest to him, he replied, "Al-Hasan and al-Husayn.”He used to say to
Fatimah, "Call my two sons to me,”and then would sniff and cuddle them.

Sunni References:

- Sahih Tirmidhi, per:  
 - Mishkat al-Masabih, by Khatib al-Tabrizi, English Version, Tdadition
\#6158

Imam Husayn (as) said: "Don’t you see that the truth is not followed and
the falsehood is not discouraged? (The situation is so severe) so that a
Believer wishes to meet Allah (i.e., to die). And today I don’t see
death but prosperity, and living with tyrants is nothing but disgust and
disgrace."

Sunni Reference: Hilyatul Awliyaa, by Abu Nu’aym, v2, p39

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إني لا أرى الموت إلا السعادة و الحياة مع الظالمين إلا برما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Husayn (as) said in the day of Ashura: "If you do not have any
religion, then at least be free (open-minded) in your present life."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن لم يكن لكم دين فكونوا أحراراً في دنياكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Husayn (as) said: "By Allah, I shall not give my oath to you like a
humiliated one, and nor shall I flee like the captive."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و الله لا أعطيكم بيدي إعطاء الذليل و لا أفِرُ فرار العبيد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

al-Bukhari Narrated from Ibn Abi Na’m:

I have heard Prophet saying: "They (Hasan and Husayn) are my two sweet-
smelling flowers in this world."

Sunni Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English, v8, Tradition \#23

Again al-Bukhari narrated from Ibn Abi Nu’m:

A person asked Abdullah Ibn Umar whether a Muslim could kill flies. I
heard him saying (in reply): "The people of Iraq are asking about the
killing of flies while they themselves murdered the son of the daughter
of Allah’s Apostle . The Prophet said, They (i.e. Hasan and Husayn) are
my two sweet basils in this world.”

Sunni Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English, v5, Tradition \#96

Narrated Anas Ibn Malik said:

"The head of al-Husayn was brought to Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad and was put
in a tray, and then Ibn Ziyad started playing with a stick at the nose
and mouth of al-Husayn’s head, and saying something about his handsome
features.”Anas then said (to him): "Al-Husayn resembled the Prophet more
than any other people."

Sunni Reference: Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English, v5, Tradition \#91

Imam Husayn said: "I revolted not for wickedness nor for fame. Verily I
rose only to seek for rectification in the nation of my grandfather, The
Messenger of Allah."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إني لم أخرج اشراً و لا بطراً و إنما خرجت لطلب الإصلاح في أمة جدي رسول
الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Husayn said: "The true life is all having a strong idea and
striving (for that idea)."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الحياة عقيدة و جهاد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Husayn said: "People are the slaves of this world, and religion is
just in their tong. They keep it as long as it meets their comfortable
life. But when the test comes, religion holders become very few."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الناس عبيد الدنيا و الدين لَعِقٌ على ألسِنَتهم يحوطونه ما درَّت
معائشهم. فإذا مُحِّصوا بالبلاء قل الديَّانون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace, with sception and hope, I seek, (congruity’s scope I know is
bleak)  
 To mend I crave (rather than kill)  
 To spill blood, abhor I will.  
 Intend I do, no force to use (If sense in you I can infuse)  
 But the rules, supreme, of the divine faith  
 Resolved I am, to defend till death.  
 Face your hostile moves I will.  
 Thought accord I covet, seek peace still.  
 A holy war it means indeed  
 If waged to crush the devil’s creed.  
 No rancor, \`against you,’ I hold  
 But faith do cherish - as I told.  
 Islam I will resolutely shield  
 Burnt will stand and never yield.  
 Would welcome death (and make it tame)  
 Would rather die than live in shame.  
 Your Prophet’s scion I’m - you know  
 At least some regard to his name show.  
 His singular dictum is my creed:  
 "Universal good”I adore, indeed.  
 ‘Ali, the paragon, the seraphic Imam  
 Cham of the faith, the shield of Islam  
 Inimitable, impeccable: I am his son  
 His peerless attributes I have won.  
 My heart is virtues’ abode and nest  
 Blessedness harbors in my breast.

The Prophet Crying For Imam Al-Husayn
-------------------------------------

Narrated Salma:

"I went to visit Umm Salamah and found her weeping. I asked her what was
making her weep and she replied that she had seen Allah’s Messenger (S)
(meaning in a dream) with dust on his head and beard. She asked him what
was the matter and he replied, \`I have just been present at the slaying
of al-Husayn.’"

- Sahih Tirmidhi, per:

- Mishkat al-Masabih, by Khatib al-Tabrizi, English Version, Tdadition
\#6157

Narrated Abdullah Ibn Abbas:

One day at midday he saw in a dream the Prophet (S) disheveled and dusty
with a bottle containing blood in his hand and said, "You for whom I
would give my father and mother as ransom, what is this?”

He replied, "This is the blood of al-Husayn and his companions which I
have been collecting today.”He told that he was reckoning that time and
found that he had been killed at that time.

- Musnad Ahmad Hanbal;  
 - Dala’il an-Nubuwwah, by al-Bayhaqi; per:  
 - Mishkat al-Masabih, by Khatib al-Tabrizi, English Version, Tdadition
\#6172

Aisha narrated:

The Prophet (S) said: "Gabriel informed me that my grandson al- Husayn
(as) will be killed after me in the land of al-Taff and brought me this
Turbah (mudd/soil) and informed me that this is the soil of the place he
will be martyred."

Sunni reference:

- Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d,  
 - al-Tabarani, as quoted in:  
 - al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 3,
p292

Not only human beings, but also the Jinns mourn for Imam al-Husayn. It
has been narrated that after his (as) martyrdom:

Um Salama (the wife of Prophet (S)) said: I heard the Jinns (the unseen
creatures) mourning for al-Husayn."

Sunni references:

(1) Tarikh al-Kabir, by al-Bukhari (the author of Sahih), v4, part 1,
p26  
 (2) Fada’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p776, Tradition
\#1373  
 (3) Tabarani, v3, pp 130-131  
 (4) Tahdhib, v7, p404 As for the Shi’ite references, there is a
traditions from the Prophet

(S) that: "When al-Khidr (as) met Moses (as), he explained and forecast
the catastrophe of Karbala (the place where this tragedy took place) in
the day of Ashura for Moses, and the calamities that will happen on that
day, and then both al-Khidr and Moses cried and screamed severely.”

Also Ibn Abbas (ra) narrated that he met Imam ‘Ali (as) in Ziqar, and
Imam ‘Ali pulled out a book that was written of the words of Prophet (S)
in which the Prophet had explained the tragedy of Ashura and the
slaughtering of his grandson al-Husayn and how he will be killed and who
kills him and who assist them and who will be martyred with him. Then
Imam ‘Ali (as) screamed severely and caused Ibn Abbas (ra) to cry.

Umayad Sanctifying Ashura
-------------------------

Bani Umayyah (Umayad) forced people to celebrate the day of Ashura (10th
of Muharram) as a blessed day, and encouraged people to buy and store
their annual food on that day and to fast that day as Sunnah, by
fabricating traditions in this regard which were solely designed to
overshadow and to cover up the great catastrophe of the slaughtering the
household of Prophet (S).

To make people believe that Ashura is a blessed day, day fabricated that
it was in that day when Allah saved Bani Israel from Pharaoh. this is
while Moses (as) and his companions were saved and passed the Nile river
in the month of Rabiul-Awwal.

They also invented that the repentance of Adam was accepted on that day,
while it was accepted in the month of Zil-Hajjah. They say that it was
the day that Jonah (Yunos) was saved from the body of fish and the ark
of Noah was settled on earth while it was on the 18th of Zil-Hajjah. All
those traditions were fabricated By Bani Umayyah to cover their crimes.
Imran ibn Husayn narrated that:

The Prophet (S) at the time of his death disliked three tribes:

Thaqif, the Banu Hanifah and the Banu Umayyah.

- Sahih Tirmidhi, per:  
 - Mishkat al-Masabih, by Khatib al-Tabrizi, English Version, Tdadition
\#5983

"The Children of Umayad shall ascend to my pulpit. I have seen them in
my dreams jumping on my pulpit like monkeys."

Then the Prophet said that the following verse was revealed about the
Umayad:

And We made that dream, which We have shown you, only as a test to the
people and the cursed tree in the Qur’an. And We warn them but it only
increases their extreme transgression! (17:60)

Sunni references:

- Sharh Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Volume 3 page 81  
 Printed by Muhammad ‘Ali Subaih in Egypt

- Fakhr al-Din al-Razi in his commentary of the Holy Qur’an, Chapter 17
Volume 5 Pages 413 - 414  
 Second Printing by al-Matbaah al-Sarafeyah 1304 H

Ashura is the day of mourning and lamentation. In a tradition from
Ahlul- Bayt, it is said that "whoever celebrates this day as a blessed
day, he will be resurrected in the day of judgment with Yazid.”The
reason is clear, and it is because there are traditions from Prophet
(S), every body who is pleased with an action, he will be resurrected in
the day of judgment with the one who did that action. Performing a
non-obligatory Fasting is a sign of being pleased and a sign of
happiness.

I know you say such traditions are narrated in Sahih xxxx. But remember
that there are many contradictory reports are within these xxxx which
disprove your hypothesis as being Sahih books.

Bismillah-hirehman-nirraheem

Muhammad came in the kingdom of God,  
 as a messenger of peace as the master of creed.  
 He influenced the world with ‘Ali’s help,  
 and all the sons from his daughter’s breed.

Fatimah the lady of God’s paradise,  
 ‘Ali the warrior, the leader, the wise.  
 Hassan, the heir of eternal lore,  
 Hussain, the martyr, the heaven’s door.

Call ‘Ali in the trouble, Almighty says,  
 because in his presence the evil decays.  
 He’s the lion of God, he’s the sword of God,  
 and all his believers are one righteous squad.  
 Islam’s prosperity is the gift of Hussain,  
 in the way of God, he sacrificed his clan.

He gave his head but not his grace,  
 His martyrdom is a slap on the devils face.  
 The grandson of prophet decided to fight,  
 to unveil the Satan, and bring him in light.  
 The food was banned, the water was stopped,  
 but on his mind the triumph had topped.

Zainab was with her brother all the time,  
 and participated as much to demolish the crime.  
 Her surety was Abbas, the holder of the flag,  
 whose hand on the emblem is the victory’s tag.

The thirst was a menace, the hunger a threat,  
 an example for all the mankind was set.  
 But the righteuos fought, and died on the faith,  
 and the right won, against the evils wraith.

More Sayings From The Holy Prophet About Imam Husayn:
-----------------------------------------------------

1. Whosoever wishes to such a person who lives on earth but whose
dignity is honoured by the Heaven-Dwellers, should see my grandson
Husayn.

2. O my son! Thy flesh is my flesh and thy blood is my blood; thou art a
leader, the son of a leader and the brother of a leader; thou art a
spiritual guide, the son of a spiritual guide and the brother of a
spiritual guide; thou art an Imam the son of an Imam and the brother of
an Imam; thou art the father of nine Imams, the ninth of whom would be
the Qaim (the last infallible spiritual guide)

3. The punishment inflicted on the murderer of Husayn in hell would be
equal to half of the total punishment to be imposed on the entire
sinners of the world.

4. When the Holy Prophet informed Lady Fatimah of the Martyrdom in store
for his grandson, she burst into tears as asked "O my father! when would
my son be martyred?”"In such a critical moment,”replied the Holy
Prophet, "when neither I nor you, nor ‘Ali would be alive.”

This accentuated her grief and she inquired again, "Who then, O my
father, would commemorate Husayn’s Martyrdom?”The Holy Prophet said,
"The men and the women of a particular group of my followers, who will
befriend my Ahlul Bayt, will mourn for Husayn and commemorate his
martyrdom each year in every century."


