Who Are Ahlul-Bayt? Part 3
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Incident Of Mubahala
------------------------

Here I would like to bring another evidence from Sahih Muslim and Sahih
al-Tirmidhi that why the wives of the Prophet are not included in
Ahlul-Bayt, which is also, by the way, another reason for the
superiority of ‘Ali (as) for the position of leadership after the
Prophet (S).

The following incident is related to the event of "Mubahala”(which means
imprecation, or invoking the curse of Allah upon the liar), which took
place in the 9th-10th year of Hijrah. In that year a delegation
consisting of 14 Christian priests came from Najran to meet the Prophet
(S).

When they met the Prophet they asked him what is his opinion about Jesus
(as). The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "You may take rest today and you
will receive the reply afterwards.”The next day, 3 verses of Qur’an
(3:59-61) about Jesus were revealed. When Christians did not accept the
words of Allah, The Prophet recited the last revealed verse:

***But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say:*** ***Come let us call our sons and your
sons, and our women and your women, and our selves and your selves; then
let us be earnest in prayer and invoke the curse of Allah upon the
liars. (Qur’an 3:61).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُلْ تَعَالَوْا نَدْعُ أَبْنَاءَنَا وَأَبْنَاءَكُمْ وَنِسَاءَنَاوَنِسَاءَكُمْ وَأَنفُسَنَا وَأَنفُسَكُمْ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

In this way, the Prophet (S) challenged the Christians. The next day the
Christian priests came out on one side of the field. Also on the other
side, the Prophet came out of his house carrying al-Husayn in his arm
with al-Hasan walking along with him while he was holding his hand.
Behind him was Fatimah al-Zahra (sa), and behind her was ‘Ali, peace be
upon them all.

When the Christians saw the five pure souls, and how determined the
Prophet is in his idea that he put the closest people to him at risk,
the Christians were terrified and abstained from the proposed
malediction (Mubahala) and submitted to a treaty with the Prophet (S).

al-Suyuti who was a great Sunni scholar, wrote:

In the above verse (3:61), according to what Jabir Ibn Abdillah
al-Ansari (the great companion of the Prophet) said, the word
"sons”refers to al-Hasan and al-Husayn, the word "women”refers to
Fatimah, and the word "our selves”refer to the Prophet and ‘Ali. Thus
‘Ali is referred as "the self”of the Prophet (Nafs of the Prophet).

Reference: al-Durr al-Manthoor by al-Hafidh Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, v2,
p38

It follows that just as it is unlawful to seek to be superior to the
Prophet, similarly it is unlawful to supersede ‘Ali (who is the "self”of
the Prophet according to the words of Allah). Any one who presumed to
supersede ‘Ali, was, in essence, presumed to supersede the Prophet! This
is another Qur’anic proof for the right of Imam ‘Ali as the immediate
successor of the Prophet (S).

Muslim and al-Tirmidhi both confirm the above incident, and recorded the
following tradition in their authentic collections of traditions:

Narrated Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas:

...And when the verse 3:61 was revealed, the Prophet called ‘Ali,
Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn. Then the Prophet said: "O Lord! These
are my family members (Ahli)."

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, Chapter of virtues of companions, section of virtues of
‘Ali, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, Arabic version, v4, p1871, the
end of tradition \#32.

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, p654

• al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p150, who said this tradition is
authentic based on the criteria set by two Shaikhs, al-Bukhari and
Muslim.

• Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, p25

Here is the Arabic text of the above tradition given by both

Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Tirmidhi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و لمَّا نزلَت هذه الآية: فقل تعالوا ندع أبنائنا و أبنائكم... دعا رسول
الله علياً و فاطمة و حسناً و حسيناً فقالَ اللهمَّ هؤلاءِ أهلي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The point, here, is that the Messenger of Allah (S) did not bring any of
his wives to the field of "Mubahala", and according to above tradition,
he used the word "Ahl”(family) ONLY for the above-mentioned individuals
(i.e., Imam ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn).

Note that in the verse 3:61 of Qur’an Allah uses plural form "women”by
saying "Let us bring our women", but the Prophet only brought his
daughter Fatimah (sa). If there were more than one woman in Ahlul-Bayt,
the Prophet was required by this verse to bring them, but since there
was not any other woman among his Ahlul-Bayt, he brought Fatimah (sa)
only.

Again, in that incident, the Prophet explicitly mentioned who Ahlul-Bayt
are, and named them one by one, and Muslim, al-Tirmidhi, al-Hakim, and
many other Sunni scholars recorded that and all confirmed its
authenticity. There was no mention of his wives in any of these reports.

Some Sunni scholars have narrated that on the day of consultation for
appointing the ruler after the death of Umar, Imam ‘Ali (as) argued with
the members of Shura reminding them his rights to the Caliphate, and one
of his reasons was the incident of Mubahala:

On the day of consultation, ‘Ali argued with the committee members
saying: "I adjure you in the name of Allah, is there anyone amongst you
closer in relationship to the Messenger of Allah than me? Is there any
other man whom the Prophet made him ‘his (own) soul’ (Nafs), and that he
made his children ‘his (own) children’, and his women ‘his (own)
women’?”They replied: "No, by God!"

Sunni reference:

• al-Darqunti, as per:

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p239

It is also narrated that:

The Prophet (S) said: "Verily, Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty,
has placed the progeny of each prophet into his backbone (Sulb), and He,
Exalted, has placed my progeny into the backbone of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib."

Sunni references:

• al-Tabarani

• Abul-Khair al-Haakimi, on the authority of al-Abbas

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p239

• al-Kunooz al-Mataalib

It is also narrated that:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "Me and ‘Ali are from one tree, and the
rest of people are from different trees."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنا و عليٍ من شجرةٍ واحدةٍ و سائرِ الناس من شجرٍ شتَّى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 9, section 2,
p190

• Tarikh al-Khulafaa, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, p171

• al-Awsat, by al-Tabarani, from Jabir Ibn Abdillah al-Ansari

In another Sunni commentary of Qur’an, it is narrated on the authority
of Abdullah Ibn Umar that:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "Had there been any soul on the whole
earth better than ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, Allah would
have commanded me to take them along with me to Mubahala. But as they
were superior in dignity and respect to all human be beings, Allah
confined His choice on them only for participation in Mubahala."

Sunni reference: Tafsir al-Baidhawi, under the commentary of Verse 3:61

Concluding, the event of Mubahala between the Prophet (S) the Christians
was significant in many aspects, among them are:

1. It proved to be a lesson for all the Christians of Arabia who no
longer dared any confrontation with the Holy Prophet (S).

2. The invitation of "Mubahala”(literally meaning cursing each other)
was directed by Allah and it was in compliance with His Command that the
Holy Prophet and his Ahlul-Bayt along with him to the field of Mubahala.
This serves to show how affairs pertaining to prophethood and Islam are
determined by the Will of Allah; allowing no margin of interference from
the common people (Ummah). (The matter of Imam ‘Ali’s (as) succession
after the Prophet should be viewed similarly)

3. The indispensability of Imam ‘Ali, Lady Fatimah, Imam al-Hasan and
Imam al-Husayn in the following of the precepts of the Holy Prophet
could no longer be disputed.

4. Notwithstanding their childhood, al-Hasan and al-Husayn did
nevertheless serve as two active partners of the Holy Prophet on the
field of Mubahala. This yields the conclusion that age is no criteria
for the greatness of those infallible souls.

5. That the Holy Prophet’s act of having preferred a few obviously
elevates their status above all others.

6. Traditions from the Prophet with regards to this event clearly
indicates who the Ahlul-Bayt are.

7. Imam ‘Ali (as) has been mentioned as the ‘Self’ of the Prophet (S)
according to the revelation of Allah, and is, in fact, superior to all
others with regard to the matter of succession.

Is It Just Blood Relationship?
------------------------------

It is narrated that:

The Messenger of Allah said: "Any relation will end on the day of
Judgment except my relation. And the root (identification) of everyone
is his father, except the progeny of Fatimah, since I am their father
and their root (identification)."

Sunni references:

• Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Bayhaqi, and al-Darqunti, al-Dhahabi on the
authorities of Umar Ibn al-Khattab, Ibn Abbas, Ibn Zubair, and Ibn Umar.

• al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p239

• Similar tradition has been narrated by Abu Ya’la, al-Tabarani on the
authority of Fatimah (sa) and Ibn Umar

The above precious tradition proves that, blood relationship is of
little value in Islam and it will soon melt away when the day of
Judgment appears. But what makes the relationship of the Prophet and his
Ahlul-Bayt different than others is the qualifications and spiritual
purity that they have besides their pure gene (which is also necessary).

It is worth mentioning that Lady Fatimah (sa) is the only surviving
child of the Messenger of Allah (S) who left progeny for him. All other
children of the Prophet died in their early ages, without being able to
leave an issue behind themselves. The infidels of Hijaz (Arabia) used to
dishonor the Prophet by saying that he does not have a son to preserve
his generation. For that reason, Allah revealed the Chapter of
"al-Kawthar":

***"Lo! We have given you Abundance (i.e., a long-standing pure
progeny). So pray unto your Lord, and sacrifice. Lo! It is your insulter
(and not you) who is without progeny.”(Qur’an, Chapter 108).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَعْطَيْنَاكَ الْكَوْثَرَ ﴿١﴾ فَصَلِّ لِرَبِّكَ
وَانْحَرْ ﴿٢﴾ إِنَّ شَانِئَكَ هُوَ الْأَبْتَرُ ﴿٣﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the above Chapter, Allah refers to Fatimah al-Zahra (sa) as Abundance
who brings for the Prophet a sanctified progeny. Again, by progeny we do
not mean all those whose ancestor are the Prophet (S). We rather mean
those among his descendants who have been thoroughly purified by Allah,
and the history and the Hadith can not count more that 14 of them
(including the Prophet). Here is the commentary of the above Chapter by
Yusuf ‘Ali (the translator of Qur’an):

Abu Jahl and his Pagan confederates vented their personal spite and
venom against the holy Prophet by taunting him with the loss of his two
infant sons by Khadija, but where were these venomous detractors a few
years afterwards, when the divine Light shone more brilliantly than
ever?

Fatimah received severe injuries and was martyred at the age of
eighteen, just six months after the demise of the Prophet, leaving two
sons: al-Hasan, and al-Husayn. After martyrdom of Imam ‘Ali (as), Imam
al-Hasan came to power.

But Muawiyah, the disloyal governor of Syria, continued his aggression
by preparing another attack (after the war of Siffin), and meanwhile he
bought the key elements of the army of Imam al-Hasan by money and bribe,
and by corrupting his army, was finally able to complete a peaceful
military coup, and to take over the power. Imam al-Hasan was poisoned to
death shortly after.

The second (and the last) grandson of the Prophet was Imam al-Husayn
(as), who was slaughtered along with his family (except one of his
sons), relatives, and companions, in the desert of Karbala, by the army
of Yazid, the corrupt and drunk son of Muawiyah. That catastrophe took
place only 50 years after the demise of the Prophet!!!

The above was a very short horrible story of what happened to
Ahlul-Bayt, whom Qur’an and the Prophet (S) ordered us to love them and
obey them beside the book of Allah.


