Temporary Marriage in Islam Part 1
==================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Introduction
------------

Fixed-Term/Temporary/Pleasure Marriage are different names for the
Arabic word of "Mut’a”which is a contract between a man and woman, much
in the same way the Long-Term/Permanent/Conventional Marriage is. The
main difference is that the temporary marriage longs only for a
specified period of time, and man and woman will become stranger to each
other after the expiration date without divorce.

One misconception regarding temporary marriage is that some people think
that the woman engaged in temporary marriage can have contract every
other hour. This is completely misrepresentation of temporary marriage.
After such contract has been expired, the woman has to wait for two
months (Iddah) before which she can not marry any one else. This issue,
among others, will be discussed later in detail.

The first one who legislated Mut’a with all the rules pertaining to it,
was the Messenger of Allah (S), after it was revealed in Qur’an. All
Muslims agree that the Messenger of Allah legislated Mut’a and made it
legal after his migration to Medina, and the Muslims practiced it during
his lifetime. (see al-Mughni, by Ibn Qudamah, v6, p644, 3rd Edition).

However there is a disagreement between the Shi’a and most of the Sunnis
concerning whether the Prophet later banned it or not. Most Sunnis
assert that although the Prophet legislated it, he later forbade it.
This is while the Shi’a believe that temporary marriage was never
abandoned by the Prophet (S). Allah revealed it in Qur’an, and it was
being widely practiced to the end of his lifetime and during the period
of Abu Bakr and the early days of Umar’s rule, until Umar forbade it.

In Parts I through IV, we study the verse of Mut’a marriage in Qur’an
and look into the Sunni commentary (Tafsir) of this verse, and review
the traditions reported in the six authentic Sunni collections about
Mut’a. In Part V we discuss the purposes of marriage as well as the
chronological orders of the prohibition of illegal sex and the
permission of Mut’a in the history of Islam. In Part VI the similarities
and differences which exist between the two types of marriage are
presented in detail. In Part VII we discuss the necessities and the
advantages of the temporary marriage, and finally in Part VIII we answer
some frequently asked questions regarding to the Mut’a.

Evidences From Qur’an And The Sunni Commentaries
------------------------------------------------

Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty, said:

***(...Except the forbidden women) the rest are lawful unto you to seek
them with gifts from your property (i.e., dowry), provided that you
desire protection (from sin), not fornication.*** ***So for whatever you
have had of pleasure (Istamta’tum) with them by the contract, give unto
them their appointed wages as a duty. And there is no sin for you in
what you both agree (in extending the contract) after fulfilling the
(first) duty. Lo! Allah is ever Knower, Wise. (Qur’an 4:24)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.. فَمَا اسْتَمْتَعْتُم بِهِ مِنْهُنَّ فَآتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ
فَرِيضَةً ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the above verse, the Arabic equivalent of the word "marriage”or any
of its derivatives has NOT been used. Rather the derivative of word
"Mut’a”(pleasure/temporary marriage) has been used, i.e., "Istamta’tum".
The word Istamta’a is the tenth verbal form of the root m-t-a. As we
will show shortly, the word Istamta’a has also been widely used in the
authentic Sunni collections for Temporary Marriage. Of course, Mut’a is
one type of marriage, but some of it’s regulations are different than
the permanent marriage, including the fact that the couple can extend
this contract by mutual agreement as the end of verse specifies.

Moreover, if we look at the Sunni commentaries of Qur’an, many Sunni
scholars such as Fakhr al-Razi confirm that the above verse (4:24) was
revealed about the Temporary Marriage (Mut’a). They straightforwardly
mentioned that temporary marriage became Halaal (permitted) DUE TO the
above verse, but they assert that it was later prohibited. It is
astonishing that many Sunni commentators mentioned under the above verse
that:

‘Ali (ra) said: The Mut’a is a mercy from Allah to his servants. If it
were not for Umar forbidding it, no one would commit (the sin) of
fornication except the wretched (Shaqi; an utmost wrong-doer)."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ المتعة رحمةٌ رحِمَ الله بها عباده. لولا أنَّ عمر نهيَّ عن المتعة
ما زنى إلا شقي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by al-Tha’labi, under commentary of verse 4:24 of
Qur’an;

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, v3, p200, commentary of verse 4:24;

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, under commentary of verse
4:24 with authentic chain of narrators, v8, p178, Tradition \#9042;

• Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Suyuti, v2, p140, from several chain
of transmitters;

• Tafsir al-Qurtubi, v5, p130, under commentary of verse 4:24 of Qur’an;

• Tafsir Ibn Hayyan, v3, p218, under commentary of verse 4:24 of Qur’an;

• Tafsir Nisaboori, by al-Nisaboori (8th century);

• Ahkam al-Qur’an, by Jassas, v2, p179, under commentary of verse 4:24.

A very similar tradition has also been narrated by Ibn Abbas (ra), and
was mentioned by al-Tabari and al-Tha’labi in their Tafsir of Qur’an.

It is interesting to note that Umar did not attribute the prohibition of
Mut’a to the Prophet (S). They were others who did that after Umar
mainly to justify what he did. Umar clearly mentioned that: "Mut’a WAS
permitted at the time of the Prophet and I PROHIBIT it!”The great Sunni
scholar, Fakhr al-Razi, who has been given the title of "Imam
al-Mushakkikeen”(the leader of ever-questioners/ever-doubtful) by the
Sunnis, in his voluminous commentary of Qur’an mentioned under the verse
of Temporary Marriage that:

Umar said: Two types of Mut’a were (legal) during the time of the
Prophet and I forbid them both, and I punish those who commit it.

They are: Mut’a of pilgrimage and Mut’a of women.

Sunni references:

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by al-Fakhr al-Razi, v3, p201 under verse 4:24

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v1, p52

Here is the Arabic text of the above masterpiece of Umar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متعتان كانتا على عهد الرسول و أنا انهي عنهما و أعاقب عليهما: متعة الحج
و متعة النساء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Notice that Mut’a can be of two kinds: Mut’a of women
(pleasure/temporary marriage) and Mut’a of Pilgrimage (Hajj
al-Tamattu’). The latter is a way of performing Pilgrimage and has no
relation with the former which is one way of performing marriage. Both
types of Mut’a were practiced at the time of the Prophet and Abu Bakr
and the early days of Umar’s rule. But they were prohibited by Umar.
There is another verse in Qur’an which gives evidence to the
permissibility of the Mut’a of Pilgrimage. However this type of
Pilgrimage is not the subject of our discussion here.

As we see from the above quote, Umar did NOT say that Mut’a was canceled
by the Prophet. If it was really the Prophet who canceled Mut’a, Umar
would have say: The two Mut’a were Halaal and then became Haraam at the
time of the Prophet, and I am informing you about the second law set by
the Prophet which canceled the first. But it is evident that Umar is
straightforwardly saying that he is the one who is making it Haraam!

Al-Zamakhshari, another Sunni commentator of Qur’an Under the commentary
of 4:24, reported that this verse is from the "Muhkamat”of Qur’an,
relating that from Ibn Abbas (ra). (Tafsir al-Kashshaf, by
al-Zamakhshari, v1, p519).

Also Both Ibn Jarir al-Tabari and al-Zamakhshari narrated that:

"al-Hakam Ibn Ayniyah was asked if the verse of Mut’a of women is
abrogated. He answered: ‘No’."

Sunni references:

• Tafsir al-Tabari, under commentary of verse 4:24 of Qur’an, v8, p178

• Tafsir al-Kashshaf, by al-Zamakhshari, under the verse 4:24, v1, p519

Also Ibn Kathir mentioned his commentary:

"al-Bukhari declared that Umar used to forbid people on Mut’a."

Sunni reference: Tafsir Ibn Kathir, v1, p233

Also in another Sunni commentary it is reported that:

Umar said, while on the pulpit: "O folk! Three were (allowed) during the
time of the Messenger of Allah (S), and I forbid them, and make them
Haraam, and punish on them. They were: Mut’a of women, Mut’a of Hajj
(pilgrimage), and saying ‘Hayya Ala Khair al-Amal’."

Sunni references:

• Sharh Al-Tajreed, by al-Fadhil al-Qoshaji, (Imama Section)

• al-Mustaniran, by al-Tabari

• al-Mustabeen, by al-Tabari

Remark: The third item mentioned above which was prohibited by Umar, is
what is said in the Call for Prayer and Iqaamah after the phrase "Hayya
Ala al-Falah", and it is practiced by the Shi’a to this date. It means
"Hasten for the best deed". This part of call for prayer was abolished
by Umar as well. Instead, he replaced it by the sentence: "Prayer is
better than sleep"!

Interesting to know that there are some Sunni scholars who accepted that
the Mut’a marriage is legal (Halaal) forever exactly based on the above
verse of Qur’an. Among those scholars are the Tunisian scholar, Shaikh
al-Tahir Ibn ‘Aashoor, under his Tafsir of the verse 4:24 of Qur’an.
(See al-Tahrir wa al-Tanwir", by al-Tahir Ibn ‘Aashoor, v3, p5). And
there has been such open-minded scholars who did not allow the love of
their leaders affect their judgment.

Some tried to cast doubt about the meaning of "Mut’a", by saying that it
literally means pleasure and not necessarily a special type of marriage.
These people, instead of searching for the practical definition of Mut’a
in the History, Hadith, and Jurisprudence, they look it up Arabic
dictionary!

Even the Arabic dictionary gives the practical meaning of Mut’a, that is
temporary marriage. All Shi’a and Sunni scholars agree to this very
fact. al-Qurtubi, who is one of the great Sunni commentators of Qur’an,
wrote: "There is no dispute among the scholars, either early (salaf) and
late (khalaf) scholars, that Mut’a is a marriage for a fixed period of
time and that it does not involve inheritance."

Replacing the practical meaning and the linguistic meaning is very
dangerous and is prohibited in the religious rules, because one may also
say, "Salat”(prayer) means praise/supplication and is not necessarily
the acts that Muslims do every day. Or "Zakat”(alms) means "to
cleans”and is not necessarily paying money, and so on...

Perhaps such people did not even read the traditions related to "Mut’a
of women”which gives its practical meaning used at the time of the
Prophet and the early Caliphs and how the companions used to contract by
a handful of date as dower.

Even the English version of Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim have
translated the word "Mut’a al-Nisa”to "Temporary Marriage,”and they also
translated "Istimta’a”to "marrying temporarily", and the traditions in
that section which is a section in the chapter of marriage, gives the
total picture of its meaning. (Please see Part II for the details of
these traditions from Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim). Have these
people ever heard of any other type of "Mut’a of women”in the history of
Islam?

Some also tried to cast doubt about the meaning of the verse of Mut’a in
Qur’an (4:24) by saying that the word "Istamta’a”refers to the
consummation of the permanent marriage, after which dowry should be
paid.

The above assertion is not correct. The best way to understand the
meaning of the verse, is first to learn Arabic (since the exact
translation of Qur’an to any other language is quite impossible), and
second, to look at various commentaries (not just a filtered one), and
third, to look at the traditions related to temporary marriage to see if
they have used the word "Istamta’a". If we do all the three and search
completely for different and controversial opinions, then we can say
that we are close to the target.

In this part, we already provided references to many Sunni commentaries
of Qur’an, in which the commentators confirmed that the verse was
revealed for the temporary marriage, and they mentioned many traditions
about the temporary marriage under the commentary of this verse. Then
how can this verse be related to permanent marriage?! or perhaps you
think these Sunni scholars had some loose screws upstairs. Few lines
later, more interesting traditions from the Sunni commentaries under
this verse are provided. Yet there many more available.

Moreover, who could we find better that Jabir Ibn Abdillah al-Ansari
(ra), the great companion of the Prophet, who according to Sahih Muslim
said: "Istamta’a means contracting temporary marriage”(Sahih Muslim,
English version, v2, chapter DXLI titled: Temporary Marriage, Tradition
\#3246. Please see part II for the full Arabic text of the tradition).
Jabir did not relate "Istamta’a”to consuming the marriage in general.

Furthermore, in the verse 4:24 Allah states, "...And there is no sin for
you in what you both agree after fulfilling the duty (i.e., dowry of the
first contract)". The mutual agreement after the duty refers to
extending the period of temporary marriage after full payment of the
previous dower, so that the woman can freely decide on the continuation
of the marriage with no pressure or temptation. In this way, Allah
encourages that people who are engaged in Mut’a will get more reward if
they extend it to a bigger period (or perhaps convert it to a permanent
marriage) by assigning a new dower after fulfilling the previous dower.
Ibn Jarir al-Tabari wrote in his commentary of Qur’an:

Some traditions mention that the meaning of "And there is no sin for you
in what you both agree after fulfilling the duty”means: O people! There
is no sin for you to have an agreement between you and the women who you
have had pleasure with them in a fixed-term contract, to extend the
period at the time when the first period expires, and thus to prolong
the temporary marriage by increasing the reward (of the Hereafter) as
well as the duty (dowry) before you leave them. It is narrated on the
authority of al-Suddy (ra) who said:

"And there is no sin for you in what you both agree after fulfilling the
requirement. If the husband wishes he could convince her (to accept the
renewal) after paying her the first dowry and just before the expiration
date of marriage. In that case he would say to his wife: I contract
Mut’a with you for such and such again. Thus he extends it before he
leaves her due to the expiration of the first contract, and this is what
the verse means.”(Tradition \#9046)

Sunni reference: Tafsir al-Tabari, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, under the
verse 4:24, v8, p180.

Another reason for the fact that the dowry mentioned in the above verse
does not refer to permanent marriage, is that Qur’an has already talked
about the dowry for permanent marriage at the early part of the very
same chapter by saying:

***"...Marry women of your choice two or three or four; but if you fear
that you shall not be able to deal justly (with them) then only
one...”(Qur’an 4:3)***

***"And*** ***give the women*** ***(of permanent marriage)*** ***their
dower*** ***as a free gift"(Qur’an 4:4)***

It is clear that the above verses are about permanent marriage and the
dowry associated with it. So there would be no need that Allah repeats
it along with its associated dowry again in the very same chapter.
However if Allah intended to discuss about Mut’a, then it is some thing
new. And this can be inferred from the choice of words which Allah used
in the verse of Mut’a (4:24) by using the derivative of Mut’a in
contrast with the other verses around it.

***(...Except the forbidden women) the rest are lawful unto you to seek
them with gifts from your property, provided that you desire protection
(from sin), not fornication. So for whatever you enjoyed (Istamta’tum)
them by the contract,*** ***give unto them their wages as a duty. And
there is no sin for you in what you both agree (in extending the
contract) after fulfilling the duty (i.e., dowry of the first contract).
Lo! Allah is ever Knower, Wise. (Qur’an 4:24)***

Thus, in fact, Allah is discussing different types of marriages: first,
permanent marriage in the verses before Verse 24, then temporary
marriage in Verse 24, and then marriage with the slave girls in Verse
25:

***If any of you have not the means wherewith to wed free believing
women they may wed believing bondwomen from among those whom you
rightfully possess, and Allah has full knowledge about*** ***your faith.
You are one from another; wed them with the leave of their owners and***
***give them their wages*** ***according to what is reasonable; they
should be chaste not lustful nor taking paramours; when they are taken
in wedlock if they fall into shame their punishment is half that for
free women. This (permission) is for those among you who fear sin; And
if you be patient, it is better for you; and Allah is forgiving and
Merciful. (Qur’an 4:25)***

Here Allah mentions the dower related to slave girls. Thus Allah
repeated the issue of dowry three times, one for permanent marriage, one
for temporary marriage and one for the bondwomen.

Again, to stress that Verse 4:24 was revealed about temporary marriage,
we present more traditions from the Sunni commentators. Al-Tabari
mentioned that:

Mujahid (ra) said: "The phrase ‘So for whatever you have had of pleasure
(Istamta’tum) with them by the contract (4:24)’ **means** the Temporary
Marriage (Nikah al-Mut’a)."

Sunni reference: Tafsir al-Tabari, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, under the
verse 4:24, v8, p176, Tradition \#9034.

Also many Sunni commentary books mentioned similar to the tradition of
Sahih al-Bukhari (see part II) with more details and put it under the
verse 4:24 of Qur’an:

Imran Ibn Husayn narrated: "The verse of Mut’a (4:24) was revealed in
Allah’s Book, and there did NOT came any other verse after that to
abrogate it; and the Prophet ORDERED US to do it, so we did it at the
time of Allah’s Apostle, and he did not forbade us from it till he died.
But a man (who regarded it illegal) expressed what his own mind
suggested."

Sunni reference:

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by al-Tha’labi, under commentary of verse 4:24 of
Qur’an

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, v3, pp 200,202, under the verse
4:24

• Tafsir Ibn Hayyan, v3, p218, under commentary of verse 4:24 of Qur’an

• Tafsir Nisaboori, by al-Nisaboori (8th century)

So it is clear that ‘Imran Ibn Husayn is talking about Mut’a of women
here, otherwise the above Sunni commentators would not put it under this
verse, or else such scholars are just stupid (may Allah protect us from
such words). The positioning of such traditions is another proof for the
fact that the verse 4:24 is about Mut’a of women.

In many traditions in the Sunni commentaries of Qur’an, the phrase "to
an appointed time”has been added to Verse 4:24 after the word
Istamta’tum. In other words, it reads "So for whatever you have enjoyed
(Istamta’tum) them by the contract to an appointed time":

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فما استمتعتم به منهن إلى أجلٍ مسمى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This however should be considered as commentary of the verse which was
revealed along with Qur’an, but NOT as a part of the Qur’an. In fact,
many verses were revealed by Allah which are not embodied in the present
Qur’an because they were commentaries of the verses of Qur’an, but not a
part of Qur’an itself. It is well-known that Hadith Qudsi is also
revelation, but it is not a part of Qur’an. In fact Qur’an testifies
that anything that the Prophet said was revelation. Allah Almighty said
in Qur’an about Prophet Muhammad (S) that:

***"Nor does he (Muhammad) speak out of his desire. Whatever he says is
nothing but a revelation that is revealed.”(Qur’an 53:3-4).***

Thus all the speeches of the Prophet were revelation, and surely the
speeches of the Prophet were not limited to Qur’an. It also includes
interpretation of Qur’an as well as his Sunnah. Now let’s go back to the
traditions which I wanted to present. It is narrated that:

Abu Nadhra said: Ibn Abbas (ra) recited the verse 4:24 with the addition
of "to an appointed time". I said to him: "I did not read it this
way.”Ibn Abbas replied: "I swear by Allah, this is how Allah revealed
it,”and Ibn Abbas repeated this statement three times."

Sunni references:

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, under the verse 4:24, v8,
p177, Tradition \#9038

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by al-Tha’labi, under commentary of verse 4:24 of
Qur’an narrating similar tradition from Jubair.

also:

Abu Nadhra said: I asked Ibn Abbas about temporary marriage (Mut’a of
women). Ibn Abbas (ra) said: "Do you not read ‘For whatever you enjoyed
(Istamta’tum) them by the contract to an appointed time’?”I said: "If I
would have read it this way, I wouldn’t ask you (about temporary
marriage)!”He replied: "Certainly the verse is about it."

Sunni reference: Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, under the
commentary of verse 4:24, v8, p177, Traditions \#9036-9037

It is also narrated that:

al-Suddy (ra) said: "The verse ‘So for those of whom you have had
pleasure with them by the contract **to an appointed time**’ is about
Mut’a, that is, a man marries a woman with a provision (i.e., dowry) for
a fixed period of time and makes two witnesses, and (if virgin,) he asks
the permission of her guardian, and when the time period is expired,
they should separate and they will not inherit each other."

Sunni reference: Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, under the
commentary of verse 4:24, v8, p176, Tradition \#9033

Moreover:

Abu Karib said Yahya said: "I saw a book with Nasir in which it was: ‘So
for whatever you have had of pleasure with them by the contract to an
appointed time.’"

Sunni references:

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, under the verse 4:24, pp
176-177, Tradition \#9035

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by al-Tha’labi, under commentary of verse 4:24 of
Qur’an narrating similar tradition from Ibn Abi Thabit.

Another companion, Ubay Ibn Ka’ab (who based on authentic Sunni sources
the Prophet ordered the companions to trust him in the matter of Qur’an
as one of the three trustee persons in this regard. See Sahih
al-Bukhari, English, vol. 6, Tradition \#521) also mentioned that
additional phrase:

Qatadah (ra) said: "The way that Ubay Ibn Ka’ab recited the verse was:
‘So for those of whom you enjoyed by the contract to an appointed
time.’"

Sunni reference: Tafsir al-Kabir, by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, under the
commentary of verse 4:24, v8, p178, Tradition \#9041

Beside the above mentioned authorities, there were others such as Sa’id
Ibn Jubair, Abi Is’haq, and Umay who have also mentioned this extra
phrase when reading this verse. Well, as I said, this extra phrase,
though revealed, was only commentary and not a part of Qur’an.

If one wants to write it, he should put it inside curly brackets showing
that it is not a part of Qur’an. There are many of such extra phrases
which can be found in both Shi’a and Sunni sources, but they are only
the divine interpretation of the verses.

This concludes the discussion on the Qur’anic verse of Mut’a and what
Sunni commentators had to say about the verse. In the next part, we
Insha Allah study the authentic Sunni collections of traditions with
regard to temporary marriage.


