Temporary Marriage in Islam Part 2: Evidences From the Sunni Hadith Collections
===============================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

After a brief overview of books of Tafsir in Part I, let us now look at
some of the Sunni collections of traditions. It is narrated in Sahih
Muslim that:

Jabir Ibn Abdullah and Salama Ibn al-Akwa’ narrated: There came to us
the proclaimer of Allah’s Messenger (May peace be upon him) and said:
"Allah’s Messenger has granted you to benefit yourself (Istamta’u),
i.e., to contract temporary marriage with women."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ رسول الله قد أذِنَ لكم أن تستمتعوا. يعني متعة النساء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3246

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1022, Tradition \#13, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

In the above tradition the verb Istamta’a (to enjoy; to have pleasure)
has been used which is the exact form of the verb used in Qur’an in the
verse of Mut’a 4:24, and moreover, Jabir said in the above tradition
that Istamta’a means performing Mut’a of women (temporary marriage).
Similarly it is narrated that:

Salama Ibn al-Akwa’ and Jabir Ibn Abdullah reported: Allah’s Messenger
(May peace be upon him) came to us and permitted us to contract
temporary marriage.

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3247

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1022, Tradition \#14, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

Moreover al-Bukhari narrated from another companion of the Prophet (S)
the following tradition:

Narrated ‘Imran bin Husayn:

**"The Verse of Mut’a was revealed in Allah’s Book, so we did it at the
time of Allah’s Apostle, and** **nothing was revealed in Qur’an to make
it illegal, nor did the Prophet prohibit it till he died. But a man (who
regarded it illegal) expressed what his own mind suggested."**

(Note: For the above Hadith, the Saudi translator of Sahih al-Bukhari
(Muhammad Muhsin Khan) has changed the word "Mut’a”to "Hajj-at-Tamatu".
This is while in the Arabic text of the Hadith of al-Bukhari which is
beside the English text, the word "Mut’a”has been used alone:)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نزلت آية المتعة في كتاب الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

• Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English, v6, Hadith \#43

• Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic, v2, p375, v6, p34

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v4, p436 on the authority of ‘Imran Ibn
al-Qasir

As we pointed out, Mut’a can be of two kinds: Mut’a of women (pleasure
marriage) and Mut’a of Hajj (Hajj-at-Tamatu). Both were practiced at the
time of the Prophet and Abu Bakr and the early days of Umar’s rule. But
they were abolished by Umar.

Thus basically, the above tradition refers to both types of Mut’a which
were prohibited by Umar. Moreover, as we gave evidences in Part I, many
Sunni commentators have put this very same tradition of Imran Ibn Husayn
under the commentary of verse of Mut’a marriage (4:24) showing that this
Mut’a refers to Mut’a marriage.

It is interesting to know that in Sahih Muslim as well as in the
commentaries of Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim it is mentioned that
the "man”mentioned in the above tradition ("But a man expressed what he
wished") is Umar:

"A person said according to his personal opinion, and it was Umar."

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter CDXLII, Tradition \#2825

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p898, Tradition \#166.

Also:

"The man intended here is the Caliph Umar Ibn al-Khattab."

Sunni references:

• Fat’h al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, by Ibn Hajar Asqalani, v4,
p177

• Sharh al-Nawawi on Sahih Muslim, v3, p364, Dar al-Sha’ab print

The reason that in the original tradition, Imran Ibn Husayn did not
mention the name of Umar is that he was mindful of the bad temper of
Umar, and because Umar said he will stone anyone who does that.

It is also narrated in Sahih Muslim that:

Abu Nadhra said: Ibn Abbas commanded to do Mut’a while Ibn Zubair
forbade to do it. I mentioned this to Jabir Ibn Abdillah and he said: It
is through me that this Hadith has been circulated. We did Mut’a (of
Hajj and women) at the time of the Messenger of Allah. When Umar was
installed as Caliph, he said:

Verily Allah made permissible for his Messenger whatever He like and as
He liked. And its command was revealed in Qur’an. Thus accomplish Hajj
and Umra for Allah as Allah has commanded you, and confirm (by reverting
to permanent marriage) the marriages of those women (with whom you have
performed Mut’a). And any person would come to me with a marriage of
appointed duration (i.e. Mut’a) I would stone him.

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter CDXLII, Tradition \#2801

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p885, Tradition \#145.

Again the above tradition has references to both Mut’a, and Umar said
that Allah made permissible what he wished at the time of the Prophet
and its corresponding command was revealed in Qur’an, yet he will stone
any one who contracts the fixed-term marriage.

Also, both al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated the following tradition from
Abdullah Ibn Masud who was another companion of the Prophet:

Narrated ‘Abdullah Ibn Masud:

We used to participate in the holy battles led by Allah’s Apostle and we
had nothing (no wives) with us. So we said, "Shall we get ourselves
castrated?”He forbade us (to castrate ourselves) and then allowed us to
marry women with a temporary contract (Mut’a) and recited to us:

***‘O you who believe! Make not unlawful*** ***the good things***
***which Allah has made lawful for you, but commit no transgression.’
(Qur’an 5:87)***

Sunni references:

• Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English version, v7, Tradition \#13a

• Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic, v6, p11, under Tafsir of verse 5:87 of
Qur’an

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1022, Tradition \#11, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3243

Following the above tradition in Sahih Muslim, it is narrated that:

This Hadith has been narrated on the authority of Isma’il with the same
chain of transmitters (but the words are): "We were young so we said: "O
Allah’s Apostle! should we not have ourselves castrated? But he (the
narrator) did NOT say we were on an expedition."

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3245

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1022, Tradition \#12, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

One side comment here is that, based on the above authentic traditions,
masturbation is forbidden, otherwise the Prophet (S) would have ordered
his companions to masturbate instead of contracting temporary marriage!

The above action of the Prophet (S) proves that if one is in danger of
fornication, he should contract temporary marriage and avoid
masturbation. The prohibition of masturbation is also supported by the
verses of Qur’an, as we will discuss in Part V.

Some claim that the Prophet used to allow temporary marriage in a
particular expedition and then prohibited it on the day of victory. This
allegation falls apart when we see that some of the famous companions
said that Mut’a was widely practiced from the time of the Prophet till
the time of Umar, and was continued to be promoted by some companions
even after the death of Umar.

Moreover, if Mut’a was just for an expedition, the Prophet would have
mentioned it at the time he allowed it. They, of course, did Mut’a in
the expeditions as well, but certainly it was not limited to that.
Moreover, the verse of Qur’an does not have any limitation of this kind.
This leads us to believe such allegation is just a mere excuse to
justify the present situation. As we will witness in the following
traditions, the companions supported Mut’a without mentioning the
battle. They did not mention that we only did it during the expeditions.

Beside what was quoted at the beginning, Sahih Muslim has more
traditions with reference to the prominent companion, Jabir Ibn Abdillah
al-Ansari (ra), which are as follows:

Narrated Abu Nadhra:

While I was in the company of Jabir Ibn Abdullah (ra), a person came to
him and said that Ibn Abbas (ra) and Ibn Zubair differed on the two
types of Mut’a (Mut’a of Hajj and Mut’a of women), whereupon Jabir said:
We used to do these two during the life time of Allah’s Messenger (S).
Umar then forbade us to do them, and so we did not revert to them.

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3250.

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1023, Tradition \#17, also v2, p914, Tradition \#1249.

Again the above tradition emphasizes that both Mut’a were abolished by
Umar, and some people did not return to it at least publicly, because
Umar threatened people that he will stone any one who does it. Below is
a more straight forward tradition:

Jabir Ibn Abdullah reported: "We contracted temporary marriage giving a
handful of the dates or flour as a dower during the life time of Allah’s
Messenger (may peace be upon him) and during the time of Abu Bakr until
Umar forbade it because of Amr Ibn Huraith.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كنا نستمتع
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3249

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1023, Tradition \#16, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

Again, in the Arabic text of the above tradition, the verb
"Istamta’a”has been used for the temporary marriage which exactly what
Qur’an has used. Also as we see, there is no mention of its restriction
to battle. It was being widely practiced at the time of the Prophet and
the rulers who came after him. Also:

Ibn Juraih reported: Ata’ reported that Jabir Ibn Abdullah came to
perform Umra, and we came to his abode, and the people asked him about
different things, and then they made a mention of **temporary marriage,
whereupon he said:** **Yes, we had been benefiting ourselves by this
temporary marriage during the life time of the Holy Prophet (may peace
be upon him) and during the time of Abu Bakr, and Umar.**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
استمتعنا على عهد رسول الله و أبي بكر و عمر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3248

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1023, Tradition \#15, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

As we witness here again, the verb "Istamta’a”has been used in the above
tradition for the temporary marriage which in conformity with the verse
of Qur’an.

Another person who opposed Umar’s idea in this regard, was Abdullah Ibn
Abbas (ra) who was one of the great companions of the Prophet (S).
Al-Bukhari wrote in his Sahih:

Narrated Abu Jamra: I heard Ibn Abbas (giving a verdict) when he was
asked about the Mut’a with the women, and he permitted it (Nikah
al-Mut’a). On that a freed slave of his said to him, "That is only when
it is very badly needed and (qualified permanent) women are scarce, or
similar cases.”On that, Ibn Abbas said, "Yes."

Sunni reference: Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English, v7, Hadith \#51

Do you see anything about battle as a condition here? Moreover, if Ibn
Abbas relied to what others alleged that the Prophet later prohibited
it, he would not allow himself to give Fatwa in this regard. He did that
since he knew these allegations are false and are solely to justify
Umar’s opinion. Also Muslim narrated in his Sahih that:

Urwa Ibn Zubair reported that Abdullah Ibn Zubair stood up (and
delivered an address) in Mecca saying: Allah has made blind the hearts
of some people as he has deprived them of eyesight that they give
religious verdict in favor of temporary marriage, while he was alluding
to a person (Ibn Abbas). Ibn Abbas called him and said: You are a rude
person and devoid of sense. By my life, Mut’a was Practiced during the
life time of the leader of pious (he meant Allah’s Messenger, may peace
be upon him), and Ibn Zubair said to him: Just do it yourself, and by
Allah, if you do that I will stone you with your stones.

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3261

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1026, Tradition \#27, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

Did Ibn Abbas say, just during a battle? certainly not. This is what
some Sunni scholars invented simply to justify the action of Umar. In
the above tradition Abdullah Ibn Zubair insults Ibn Abbas (ra) by saying
that his heart is blind, simply because he believed that Mut’a should be
promoted since it was the Sunnah of the Prophet (S). Ibn Zubair forgot
that he himself was born out of Mut’a! (See Sahih Muslim, v1, p354;
al-Iqd al-Fareed, v2, p139). Then Ibn Zubair threatened that he will
stone Ibn Abbas (ra). This is while Ibn Abbas (ra) was one of the
outstanding companions of the Prophet (S), and Abdullah Ibn Zubair
wanted to teach him his religion, after he fought both Imam ‘Ali and Ibn
Abbas in the battle of Camel, and shedding the blood of innocent
Muslims.

Also in Sahih Muslim it narrated that:

"Muslim al-Qurri said: I asked Ibn Abbas about Mut’a and he permitted
it, where as Ibn Zubair had forbidden it. So Ibn Abbas said: "This is
the mother of Ibn Zubair who states that Allah’s Messenger had permitted
it, so you better go to her and ask her about it. He (Muslim al-Qurri)
said: So we went to her and she was a bulky blind lady. She said: Verily
Allah’s Messenger permitted it.

• Sunni reference: Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in
Saudi Arabia, v2, p909, Traditions \#194-195. In Tradition \#195 the
subnarrator said: "The narrator used the word Mut’a alone, and I do not
know if it was Mut’a of Hajj or Mut’a of women.”However it is known that
what Ibn Zubair used to forbid was Mut’a of women as is clear from the
traditions mentioned earlier.

Even after the death of Umar, and even after Uthman, many companions did
not accept the order of Umar and insisted that temporary marriage is
lawful. These advocates of Mut’a never mentioned that it was restricted
to a battle.

Some people believe that a certain individual did Mut’a with one of the
daughters of Umar during the Umar’s rule, and when Umar got to know of
it, he decided to prohibit Mut’a.

Let me clear the fact that we do not have hatred toward Umar. We believe
that he was one of the companions of the Prophet, but we do not put him
in a high position since, as you witnessed partially, there are strong
proofs that he did some innovations based on his own Ijtihad which were
terribly wrong.

We strongly believe that Fatwa does not work when there is explicit text
of Qur’an or authentic Hadith to the contrary. Abolishing Temporary
Marriage is just one example of such innovations. Even according to
Sahih al-Bukhari Umar himself straightforwardly confessed that he did
some innovations in prayers and said: "What a nice innovation"!!! (See
Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic English version, v3, p227). He also did change
the regulations on Tayammum and many other rules of Islam.

Another companion who opposed this innovation of Umar, was his own son!!
His name was Abdullah Ibn Umar. He was in favor of both Mut’a of Hajj
and Mut’a of women. I give two traditions expressing each Mut’a. It is
narrated in Sahih al-Tirmidhi that:

"some one asked Abdullah Ibn Umar about Mut’a (of Hajj), he said: It is
permitted (Halaal). So he was asked: your father forbade it. He said: Do
you think that my father can forbid what the Prophet did? Should I
follow what my father said, or should I follow what the Prophet ordered?
The man said: Of course the orders of the Prophet (S)."

Sunni references:

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v1, p157

• Tafsir al-Qurtubi, v2, p365, reported from al-Darqunti

Another report in the above source:

"When a man from Syria asked Abdullah Ibn Umar about the Mut’a of women,
he said it is Halaal. The man said: Your father had made it forbidden!
Ibn Umar said: Do you think that if my father was forbidding it and the
Messenger of Allah used to (allow) its practice, then you should leave
the Sunnah and follow what my father said?"

Sunni reference: Sahih al-Tirmidhi

What I provided here was just some traditions, out of many, available in
the six Sunni collections of Hadith in support of Mut’a. There are much
more available. In the next parts, Insha Allah, we shall briefly review
the Sunni History/Fiqh/Misc. books, and then we will study and analyze
the few traditions which allege that the Prophet banned Mut’a towards
the end of his life.


