Who Are Ahlul-Bayt? Part 4
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Matrimonial Relationship
------------------------

In the previous parts, we quoted extensive authentic traditions from
Sahih Muslim and else, proving that during the lifetime of the Prophet,
his Ahlul-Bayt constituted only Imam ‘Ali, Fatimah al-Zahra (sa),
al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, and also the purification sentence in Qur’an
(the last sentence of Verse 33:33) was revealed on their virtue and NOT
for the wives of the Prophet (S). These facts were proven based on the
testimony of the Messenger of Allah as well as the testimony of his
wives and his companions.

Here I would like to quote another interesting tradition from Sahih
Muslim, in which another famous companion of the Prophet (S) swears in
the name of Allah that wives of the Prophet are NOT included in his
Ahlul-Bayt. The tradition explains the reasoning of this companion and
his justification. Here is the tradition recorded in Sahih Muslim:

Narrated Yazid Ibn Hayyan:

We went to Zaid Ibn Arqam and said to him: You have found goodness (for
you had the honor) to live in the company of the Prophet (S) and offered
prayer behind him, and the rest of the Hadith is the same (as 3
traditions before) but the Prophet said: "Behold, for I am leaving
amongst you two weighty things, one of them is the Book of Allah...",
and in this (Hadith) these words are also found: We said: "Who are his
Ahlul-Bayt (that the Prophet was referring to)? Are they his wives?”

Thereupon Zaid said: "No, by Allah! A woman lives with a man (as his
wife) for a while; he then divorces her and she goes back to her parents
and her people. The Ahlul-Bayt of the Prophet are his lineage and his
descendants (those who come from his blood) for whom the acceptance of
charity (Sadaqah) is prohibited."

Reference:

• Sahih Muslim, Chapter of virtues of companions, section of the virtues
of ‘Ali, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, Arabic version, v4, p1874,
Tradition \#37

For the English version of Sahih Muslim, please see Chapter CMXCVI,

Tradition \#5923

Here is the Arabic text of the above tradition narrated by Sahih Muslim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلنا: "مَنْ أهل بيته؟ نساؤه؟”قال: "لا، وأيم الله، إن المرأة تكون مع
الرجل العصر من الدهر، ثم يطلقـهــا فترجع إلى أبيها وقومها، أهل بيته:
أصله وعصبته الذين حرموا الصدقة من بعده"
  </p>
</blockquote>

As we see, even some of the companions of the Prophet swear in the name
of Allah that Ahlul-Bayt do NOT include the wives of the Prophet (S).
However Sahih Muslim has another tradition from Zaid Ibn Arqam in the
very same chapter which is:

Zaid Ibn Arqam said: I have grown old and have forgotten some of the
things which I remembered in connection with Allah’s Messenger (may
peace be upon him). So accept whatever I narrate to you, and which I do
not narrate do not compel me to do that. He then said: One day, Allah’s
Messenger (may peace be upon him) stood up to deliver sermon at a
watering place known as Khum (Ghadir Khum) which is situated between
Mecca and Medina.

He praised Allah, Extolled Him and delivered the sermon and exhorted
(us) and said: "Now to our purpose, O people, I am a human being. I am
about to receive a messenger (the angel of death) from my Lord and I
shall answer that call (would bid good-bye to you). But I am leaving
among you two weighty things: the one being the Book of Allah... The
second are the members of my household (Ahlul-Bayt). By Allah I remind
you (of your duties) to the Members of my House (saying three times)."

He (Husayn Ibn Sabra) said to Zaid: Who are the members of his
household? Aren’t his wives the members of his family? Thereupon Zaid
said: His wives are among Ahlul-Bayt but here Ahlul-Bayt are those for
whom acceptance of Zakat is forbidden. And he said: Who are they?
Thereupon he said: ‘Ali and the offspring of ‘Ali; Aqil and the
offspring of Aqil, and the offspring of Ja’far and the offspring of
Abbas.

Reference:

• Sahih Muslim, Chapter of the virtues of companions, section of the
virtues of ‘Ali, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, Arabic version, v4,
p1873, Tradition \#36.

For the English version of Sahih Muslim, see Chapter CMXCVI, p1286,
Tradition \#5920

Please note that the second Paragraph of the above tradition is NOT the
saying of the Prophet (S). It is the alleged opinion of Zaid Ibn Arqam.
In contradiction to the previous tradition, here Zaid asserts that: "The
wives of the Prophet are among his Ahlul-Bayt BUT HERE (what the Prophet
meant by) Ahlul-Bayt (were some other people who) are ‘Ali and his
offspring,... and the offspring of Abbas."

My question is that: Should we obey the saying of the Prophet who
specified who Ahlul-Bayt are, or we should accept the opinion of a
companion which, in this case at least, is in contradiction with the
opinion of the Prophet?

Besides, the history tells us that there were many tyrant rulers among
the Abbasid (the descendants of Abbas). So how can we obey them and love
them? Allah in Qur’an said:

***"...and obey not from among them a sinner or an ungrateful
one.”(Qur’an 76:24).***

Were Abbasid tyrants among Ahlul-Bayt who the Messenger of Allah put
them beside Qur’an as one of the two precious thing that he left for his
community to be obeyed after him?!

This shows Ahlul-Bayt are special individuals and do not cover all the
relatives of the Prophet (S). The word Ahlul-Bayt, linguistically, does
not cover all relatives at all. It means family who come from his blood
as pointed in the first tradition of Zaid. Thus, even the Prophet’s
wives are not going to be included in Ahlul-Bayt.

Those of Sunni brothers who believe all the traditions in Sahih Muslim
are authentic, can find a contradiction here between the two traditions
which are in the same chapter and only tree traditions away from each
other.

In one tradition, Zaid said that the Prophet’s wives are among
Ahlul-Bayt, and in three traditions away from it, the very same person
(Zaid) is swearing in the name of Allah that the Prophet’s wives are NOT
among his Ahlul-Bayt? What should we conclude?

• Should we disregard the clarification of the Prophet and stick to the
opinion of a companion?

• If yes, then should we accept the saying of a companion who tells two
contradicting opinion while he himself said in the second tradition that
he has grown old and he does not remember too much?

• Should we accept such contradicting narrations as Sahih (authentic)?

• If yes, then should we accept the one in which he swears in the name
of Allah, or the one in which he does not swear for?

When the Prophet clearly excludes his wives from Ahlul-Bayt, and when
his wives such as Aisha, Umm Salama and Safiyya also testify to this
fact (please see part I), and when Zaid Ibn Arqam swears by Allah that
the wives of the Prophet are NOT among Ahlul-Bayt, then there will
remain no choice but to accept the fact that the wives of the Messenger
of Allah were NOT included in the Ahlul-Bayt.

It might be possible to accepts both narrations, if we carefully look at
what Zaid said: "The wives are among his Ahlul-Bayt but here (what the
Prophet meant by) Ahlul-Bayt (were some other people who) are ‘Ali and
his offspring, ..."

Zaid is saying that we may say (in general sense) the wives included in
Ahlul-Bayt, BUT HERE the Prophet meant a special meaning for Ahlul-Bayt
which does not cover the wives of the Prophet. It is with this meaning
that the Prophet put Ahlul-Bayt beside the Qur’an. In this case, the
contradiction between the two traditions can reconciled.

Now, let us focus on the last part of saying of Zaid in the above
tradition where he said:

"A woman lives with a man (as his wife) for a while; he then divorces
her and she goes back to her parents and her people. The Ahlul-Bayt of
the Prophet are his lineage and his descendants (those who come from his
blood) for whom the acceptance of charity (Sadaqah) is prohibited."

This is a correct reasoning. The matrimonial relation between and a man
and a woman can never be considered permanent; it is only circumstantial
and can be given up at any moment since the wife could be divorced. In
fact two wives among the wives of the Prophet, namely Aisha (the
daughter of Abu Bakr) and Hafsa (the daughter of Umar) were threatened
to divorce by Qur’an, because of a secret news that they released to
their parents. It is well-known that the following verses of Qur’an were
revealed about Aisha and Hafsa:

***When the Prophet disclosed a matter in confidence to one of his wives
(i.e., Hafsa) and she then divulged it (to Aisha) and Allah made it
known to him, he made known (to her) part thereof and passed over part.
Then when he (i.e., the Prophet) told her thereof, she said: "Who told
you this?”He said "He who knows and is well-aware (of all things) told
me.”***(Qur’an 66:3)

***If you two (i.e., Aisha and Hafsa) turn unto Allah repentant, (you
have cause to do so) for your hearts indeed desired (against the order
of the Prophet); and*** ***if you two aid one another against him***
***(Muhammad) then lo! Truly Allah is his Protector and Gabriel and the
righteous one among those who believe and furthermore the angels will
back (him) up.*** (Qur’an 66:4)

***If he divorces you, Allah may give him instead wives better than you
who will be submissive (to Allah), believing, pious, penitent, inclined
to fasting, widows and maids.”***(Qur’an 66:5)

Explanation Sahih Al-Bukhari On Verse 66:5
------------------------------------------

In the Volume 6 of the Arabic-English version of Sahih al-Bukhari, in a
chapter titled: "It may be, if he divorces you, that his Lord (Allah)
will give him, instead of you, wives better than you ... (66:5),”we
read:

Sahih Bukhari Hadith: 6.438

Narrated Umar:

The wives of the Prophet out of their jealousy, backed each other
against the Prophet, so I said to them, "It may be, if he divorced you
all, that Allah will give him, instead of you wives better than you.”So
this Verse (66.5) was revealed.

Sahih Bukhari Hadith: 6.436

Narrated Ibn Abbas:

I intended to ask Umar so I said, "Who were those two ladies who tried
to back each other against the Prophet?”I hardly finished my speech when
he said, They were Aisha and Hafsa."

If the Allah threatened the two wives of the Prophet by divorce, because
they backed each other against the Prophet, then how can we render them
as pure and sinless? Moreover, the following tradition states that the
Prophet (S) deserted Aisha and Hafsa for one full month as punishment
for revealing the secret news:

Sahih Bukhari Hadith: 7.119

Narrated Ibn Abbas:

I had been eager to ask Umar bin al-Khattab about the two ladies from
among the wives of the Prophet regarding whom Allah said ‘If you two
(wives of the Prophet namely Aisha and Hafsa) turn in repentance to
Allah, your hearts are indeed so inclined (to oppose what the Prophet
likes). (66.4) till Umar performed the Hajj and I too, performed the
Hajj along with him... Then I said to him, "O chief of the Believers!
Who were the two ladies from among the wives of the Prophet regarding
whom Allah said:

***‘If you two (wives of the Prophet) turn in repentance to Allah your
hearts are indeed so inclined (to oppose what the Prophet
likes)?”(66.4)***

He said, "I am astonished at your question, O Ibn Abbas. They were Aisha
and Hafsa.”

Then Umar went on narrating the Hadith and said, "... I shouted at my
wife and she retorted against me and I disliked that she should answer
me back. She said to me, ‘Why are you so surprised at my answering you
back? By Allah, the wives of the Prophet answer him back and some of
them may leave (do not speak to) him throughout the day till the night.’

The (talk) scared me and I said to her, ‘Whoever has done so will be
ruined!’ Then I proceeded after dressing myself, and entered upon Hafsa
and said to her, ‘Does anyone of you keep the Prophet angry till night?’
She said, ‘Yes.’ I said, ‘You are a ruined losing person! Don’t you fear
that Allah may get angry for the anger of Allah’s Apostle and thus you
will be ruined?

So do not ask more from the Prophet and do not answer him back and do
not give up talking to him. Ask me whatever you need and do not be
tempted to imitate your neighbor (i.e., Aisha) in her manners for she is
more charming than you and more beloved to the Prophet."

Umar added, "At that time a talk was circulating among us that (the
tribe of) Ghassan were preparing their horses to invade us. My Ansari
companion, on the day of his turn, went (to the town) and returned to us
at night and knocked at my door violently and asked if I was there. I
became horrified and came out to him.

He said, ‘Today a great thing has happened.’ I asked, ‘What is it? Have
(the people of) Ghassan come?’ He said, ‘No, but (What has happened) is
greater and more horrifying than that: Allah’s Apostle; has divorced his
wives. Umar added, "The Prophet kept away from his wives and I said
"Hafsa is a ruined loser.’ I had already thought that most probably this
(divorce) would happen in the near future. So I dressed myself and
offered the morning prayer with the Prophet and then the Prophet entered
an upper room and stayed there in seclusion. I entered upon Hafsa and
saw her weeping. I asked, ‘What makes you weep? Did I not warn you about
that? Did the Prophet divorce you all?’ She said, ‘I do not know. There
he is retired alone in the upper room.’ ...

I said (to Allah’s Apostle) chatting, ‘Will you heed what I say, O
Allah’s Apostle? We, the people of Quraish used to have power over our
women, but when we arrived at Medina we found that the men (here) were
overpowered by their women.’

The Prophet smiled and then I said to him, ‘Will you heed what I say, O
Allah’s Apostle? I entered upon Hafsa and said to her, "Do not be
tempted to imitate your companion (Aisha), for she is more charming than
you and more beloved to the Prophet.’ ...Then the Prophet kept away from
his wives for twenty-nine days because of the story which Hafsa had
disclosed to Aisha. The Prophet had said, ‘I will not enter upon them
for one month,’ because of his anger towards them ... Some of his wives
were the cause of him taking that decision, therefore he deserted them
for one month. See Qur’an: (66.4)

Sahih Bukhari Hadith: 6.435

Narrated Ibn Abbas:

For the whole year I had the desire to ask Umar bin al-Khattab regarding
the explanation of a Verse (in Surat al-Tahrim) ... Umar went aside to
answer the call of nature by the Arak trees. I waited till he finished
and then I proceeded with him and asked him. "O chief of the Believers!
Who were the two wives of the Prophet who aided one another against
him?”He said, "They were Hafsa and Aisha.”...

Then Umar added, "Once while I was thinking over a certain matter, my
wife said, "I recommend that you do so-and-so.”I said to her, "What have
you got to do with the is matter? Why do you poke your nose in a matter
which I want to see fulfilled?”

She said, How strange you are, O son of al-Khattab! You don’t want to be
argued with whereas your daughter, Hafsa surely, argues with Allah’s
Apostle so much that he remains angry for a full day!”Umar then reported
how he at once put on his outer garment and went to Hafsa and said to
her, "O my daughter! Do you argue with Allah’s Apostle so that he
remains angry the whole day?”Hafsa said, "By Allah, we argue with him.”

Umar said, "Know that I warn you of Allah’s punishment and the anger of
Allah’s Apostle . . . O my daughter! Don’t be betrayed by the one who is
proud of her beauty because of the love of Allah’s Apostle for her (i.e.
Aisha).”... Umar added, (One day) my Ansari friend unexpectedly knocked
at my door, and said, "Open Open!”I said, "Has the king of Ghassan
come?”He said, "No, but something worse; Allah’s Apostle has isolated
himself from his wives.”I said, "Let the nose of Aisha and Hafsa be
stuck to dust (i.e., humiliated)!"

In the above tradition, Hafsa swears by Allah that she argues with the
Messenger of Allah and keeps him angry for the whole day! Is this a sign
of purity and righteousness? According to Qur’an (the last sentence of
Verse 33:33), perfect purity and sinlessness is the characteristic of
Ahlul-Bayt.

The above verses of Qur’an as well as the above traditions in Sahih
al-Bukhari proves that some of the wives of the Prophet were not
righteous and pure, otherwise Allah would not have threatened them in
Qur’an by divorce.

This is the main reason why I preferred the reference from Sahih Muslim
on the authority of Zaid Ibn Arqam in which he “swears by Allah “that
the Prophet’s wives are NOT among Ahlul-Bayt since they can be subject
to divorce and being substituted with women better than them (Qur’an
66:5).

Another astonishing tradition in Sahih al-Bukhari is as follows:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 4.336

Narrated Abdullah:

The Prophet stood up and delivered a sermon, and pointed to the house of
Aisha, and said: "Fitna (trouble/sedition) is right here,”saying three
times, "and from where the side of the Satan’s head comes out."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قام النبي خطيباً فأشار نحو مسكن عائشة فقال: ها هنا الفتنه، ثلاثاً، من
يطلع قرن الشيطان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

All these traditions give us more alarms not to include the wives of the
Prophet into the Ahlul-Bayt who are spotless and sinless based on the
testimony of the Messenger of Allah:

Ibn Abbas Narrated that:

The Messenger of Allah recited "Verily Allah intends to keep off from
you every kind of uncleanness O’ People of the House (Ahlul-Bayt), and
purify you a perfect purification". (Qur’an, the last sentence of Verse
33:33) and then the Messenger of Allah said: "Thus Me and my Ahlul-Bayt
are clear from the sins."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأنا و أهل بيتي مطهرون من الذنوب
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, as quoted in:

• al-Durr al-Manthoor, by Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, v5, pp 605-606,198 under
the commentary of Verse 33:33 of Qur’an

• Dala’il al-Nabawiyyah, by al-Bayhaqi

• Others such as al-Tabarani, Ibn Mardawayh, Abu Nu’aym, etc.

Please note the word "thus”in the highlighted part of the above
tradition. It means the Prophet himself is CONCLUDING that the verse
MEANS Ahlul-Bayt are sinless.

In his exegesis, Ibn Jarir Tabari quotes Qatadah who interpreted the
sacred verse of Tat’hir that people of the Holy Prophet’s family are
those whom Almighty Allah has purified from every sin and showered
special blessings on them. He also stated in explanation of the verse:

"It is this and nothing else that Allah willed to ward off every badness
and indecency from the people of the family of Muhammad and to keep them
clear from every contamination and **sin!"**

Sunni reference: Tafsir al-Tabari, v22, p5 under commentary of verse
33:33

Thus the Purification Verse (Ayah al-Tat’hir) and the Tradition of
Mantle (Hadith al-Kisaa) confer a special distinction and honor upon the
Holy Family that is: being free from every blemish and uncleanness,
being infallible, and being kept purified by Allah and absolved of any
sin.

They are therefore entitled to absolute obedience from the Muslim Ummah
not only as a logical inference, but as a fulfillment of the very
intention and utmost desire of the Prophet of Islam in pin pointing them
and making them distinguished from the rest of the Muslim Ummah.

As we discussed earlier, in the special meaning that the Prophet
elucidated in the previously mentioned traditions, Ahlul-Bayt even does
NOT cover all those who come from his blood. Only those among them who
are pure and sinless (Qur’an 33:33) are the Ahlul-Bayt. These are a very
selected individuals among his progeny.


