Temporary Marriage in Islam Part 4: Some Contradicting Reports
==============================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

There are few traditions which claim that the Prophet forbade Mut’a.
There are however many contradictions among these reports. Let us look
at the following traditions which alleged that the temporary marriage
was forbidden FOREVER in the battle of Khaibar (1/7 AH). We will discuss
what types of problems these traditions have shortly.

Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali narrated on the authority of his father ‘Ali that
Allah’s Apostle (may peace be upon him) on the Day of Khaibar prohibited
for ever the contracting of temporary marriage and eating of the flesh
of the domestic asses.

• Sunni reference: Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI
(titled: Temporary Marriage), Tradition \#3265

also:

‘Ali (may peace be upon him) heard that Ibn Abbas (Allah be pleased with
him) gave some relaxation in connection of temporary marriage, whereupon
he said: Don’t be hasty (in your religious verdict), Ibn Abbas, for
Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him) on the day of Khaibar
prohibited for ever the doing of it and eating of the flesh of domestic
asses.

• Sunni reference: Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI
(titled: Temporary Marriage), Tradition \#3266

Surprisingly, the following traditions claim that, long after the battle
of Khaibar, the Prophet ordered to do Mut’a when he Captured Mecca (9/8
AH) but he allegedly forbade it when they left Mecca:

Sabra al-Juhanni narrated: Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him)
ordered us to contract temporary marriage in the Year of Victory, as we
entered Mecca, and we did not come out of it (Mecca) till he forbade us.

(Note: The Saudi-paid translator has used "permitted”instead of
"ordered". This while the Arabic text of the Hadith uses "ordered". This
shows that the Prophet not only allowed Mut’a, but also promoted it in
Mecca.)

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3257

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1025, Tradition \#22, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

also:

Sabra narrated: Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him) ordered his
companions to contract temporary marriage in the Year of Victory...
(then I made Mut’a) and I remained with her for three (nights), and then
Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him) commanded us to part with
them.

(Note: Again the Saudi-paid translator has used "permitted”instead of
"ordered”while the Arabic text of the Hadith uses "ordered":)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ نبيِّ الله عام فتح مكة أمر أصحابه بالتمتع بالنساء...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3258

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1025, Tradition \#23, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

Now, let us look at the following traditions which claims that the
Temporary marriage was forbidden forever in Mecca when the Prophet (S)
was speaking beside Ka’ba. We will shortly see why these traditions do
not seem to be correct.

Sabra al-Juhanni reported on the authority of his father that while he
was with Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him), he said: O’ people,
I had permitted you to contract temporary marriage with women, but Allah
has forbidden it (now) until the Day of Resurrection. So he who has any
(woman with this type of marriage contract) he should let her off, and
do not take back anything you have given to them (as dower).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي قد كنت أذِنتُ لكم في الاستمتاع من النساء و انَّ الله قد حرَّمَ
ذلك إلى يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3255

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1025, Tradition \#21, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

A side comment here is that again the word "Istimta’a”has been used in
this tradition for temporary marriage which is exactly what Qur’an has
used.

In the next tradition after the above tradition in Sahih Muslim, the
same narrator (Sabra) has narrated the same tradition with addition
that:

"I saw Allah’s Messenger standing between the pillar and gate of Ka’ba
when speaking the Hadith."

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3256

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1025, Tradition \#21, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

The following tradition, however, indicates that the Prophet allowed
Temporary marriage after the battle of Hunain (after 10/8 AH) which was
after the conquest of Mecca:

Narrated Iyas Ibn Salama on the authority of his father that Allah’s
Messenger (may peace be upon him) gave sanction for contracting
temporary marriage for three nights in the year of Autas (this was after
the Battle of Hunain in 8H), and then forbade it.

{Note: The sentence inside parentheses is the Saudi translator’s
footnote, and is NOT mine.}

Sunni references:

Sahih Muslim, English version, v2, chapter DXLI (titled: Temporary
Marriage), Tradition \#3251

Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
p1023, Tradition \#18, "Kitab al-Nikah, Bab Nikah al-Mut’a"

Now, let us see what the problems are:

1. Some Sunni scholars have rated these traditions as single (Mufrad),
i.e., they are single reports. Ibn Asakir has mentioned the above
tradition attributed to ‘Ali, in whose chain of authority is Ibn Saa’ed.
Then he wrote: "Ibn Saa’ed is a liar". Also other Sunni Scholars such as
Darqunti mentioned that these traditions are single. (See Ifraad, by
Darqunti).

2. If the Prophet has forbidden the temporary marriage in the Day
forever of Khaibar (1/7 AH), why it was practiced even after the battle
of Hunain (after 10/8 AH) with the direct order of the Prophet? (See the
reference above) In other words:

3. How is that possible that one is forbidden forever and in two
different points of time, in the Day of Khaibar (1/7 AH) and on the
victory Mecca (9/8 AH) forever, and people were practicing it between
these two instants of time and after these two instances with the order
of the Prophet? In the mentioned tradition about the battle of Hunain,
it is said that the messenger of Allah allowed to do Mut’a for after the
battle of Hunain. So we can not say people did it because they did not
know it was forbidden forever.

The traditions confirms that Mut’a was done with the direct order of the
Prophet. So how can we justify these few alleged traditions that the
Prophet forbade it forever before that? This contradiction itself
supports the fact that all these few narrations were made up to cover up
and to justify what Umar enforced during his rule based on his idea. How
nice is the verse 4:82 of Qur’an describes that one can find many
contradictions in something that is not from Allah.

4. Two Sunni scholars: al-Qurtubi (in his commentary of Qur’an) and
al-Nawawi (in his commentary of Sahih Muslim) are in the opinion that
different traditions concerning the ban of Mut’a specify seven different
dates!!!

5. How is that possible that people after the demise of the Prophet were
practicing it? To answer this, some claim that although the Messenger of
Allah had forbidden it, but it had not been given wide publicity, and
thus some continued to practice it till Umar reinforced that law during
his rule.

6. If this allegation is true, then it implies that all the companions
except Umar were ignorant of the Sunnah of the Prophet, and ignorant of
the fact that Mut’a was forbidden forever, and they continued practicing
it after the demise of the Prophet, and quarreled amongst each other in
this issue. They committed the sin of fornication and encouraged others
to do that, and no body said to them not to do that BEFORE the rule of
Umar. All of a sudden, some of them started saying it after the rule of
Umar.

7. Then how can we conclude that they all carried the Sunnah of the
Prophet and if we follow anyone among them we will go to paradise,
because any single one of them is a star of guidance (no matter if it
came out to be Muawiyah). What will be wrong if we follow Jabir who said
Umar forbade it? What about Imran Ibn Husayn who believed that Umar said
what he wished, and neither Allah nor His Prophet prohibited it? What
will be wrong if we take the opinion of Imam ‘Ali (as), the most
knowledgeable one among the companions who said:

The Mut’a is a mercy from Allah to his servants. If it were not for Umar
forbidding it, no one would commit (the sin) of fornication except the
wretched (Shaqi).”(See above for two set of references given before, one
set from books on Tafsir and one set from books on history and misc. in
Parts I & III respectively.)

Imam ‘Ali (as), Abu Dharr, Jabir Ibn Abdillah, Abdullah Ibn Abbas,
Abdullah Ibn Masud, Zubair Ibn al-Awwam, Imran Ibn Husayn, and Abdullah
Ibn Umar, Ubay Ibn Ka’ab, Abu Sa’id al-Khudri, Salama Ibn Umayyah, Awka’
Ibn Abdillah, Salama Ibn al-Awka’, Khalid Ibn Muhajir, ‘Amr Ibn Huraith,
Rabi’a Ibn Umayya, Suhair, Sa’id Ibn Jubair Tawoos, Qotadah, Mujahid,
Ataa al-Madani al-Suddy, and Imam al-Hasan (as), ... are also the stars
of guidance if that Sunni tradition is true. So if we follow them with
regard to permissibility of Mut’a, are we not guided then?

Also if the claim that the Messenger of Allah (S) allowed it for a
single instance is true, then he would have told them at the same time
that they can do it only for this certain period of time, and it will be
forbidden after that for ever. In other words, he should have mentioned
its prohibition at the time that he prescribed it. In this way there
would be no confusion, and we can say the Prophet (S) delivered the
Message in this regard. Now the question is: Did the Prophet mentioned
its prohibition at the time when he allowed it momentarily?

If yes, then why did prominent companions such as Jabir Ibn Abdillah al-
Ansari, Ibn Abbas, Abdullah Ibn Masud, Imran bin Husayn, and Abdullah
Ibn Umar, practiced (and some even promoted) Mut’a long after the demise
of the Prophet?

If no (i.e., the Prophet did not mention its prohibition at the time he
allowed it momentarily), then the Prophet intentionally confused some of
his own companions such as those I mentioned above, because as a result
of their "ignorance", some of them even practiced and promoted Temporary
Marriage even after the rule of Umar!

Moreover if the prohibition of Mut’a was not given wide publicity by the
Prophet, then it would contradict the following verse of Qur’an:

"He (Allah) has explained to you in detail what is forbidden to
you”(Qur’an 6:119)

Is it possible that the Messenger of Allah does not publicize what has
been prohibited by Allah, which led the companions commit adultery till
near the end of the rule of Umar, until it was finally decided that it
is time to publicize this fact and stop the Muslims and companions from
committing adultery!! How can we justify the above verse of Qur’an if
the Prophet did not inform his companions the prohibition of Mut’a so
that they do not quarrel amongst each other because of their ignorance
of such important subject?

Also, do Sunnis think that the above mentioned companions did not have
any fear of Allah? If they had any fear of Allah, and if they did not
have strong proof that Mut’a is allowed forever, they would quit
promoting Mut’a after Umar. Ibn Abbas did not accept what Umar said and
he continued to promote Mut’a even after the battle of Camel when he
argued with Ibn Zubair.

Was Ibn Abbas suspicious to Umar? Why didn’t he believe in him? The
reason simply is the fact that Umar did not attribute this prohibition
to the Prophet. Umar said: "The Prophet allowed it and I prohibit
it.”Then if I were Ibn Abbas, I would do the same. Reviving the Sunnah
of the Prophet which has been forsaken is a duty and has a lot of
reward, and this was the concern of Ibn Abbas.  
 This goes for other companions who supported Mut’a even after the death
of Umar, because they were sure that this is a man-made prohibition, and
is not issued by Allah, nor by His Prophet (S). Otherwise, if these
companions were unsure then they would at least keep silent for the fear
of Allah. But the fact is that they knew what they were doing.

8. The speeches of the Prophet in Mecca was narrated through different
narrators. Why only one narrator, named as Sabra al-Juhanni, had heard
these words from the Prophet, and this part of the speech of the Prophet
was not narrated by others? It is hardly conceivable that the Prophet
could have stood before the Ka’ba in front of a large group of Muslims
and ban something until the Day of Resurrection, and that then only one
person Sabra should have heard him or related his words.

9. Moreover, there are discrepancies in the various versions of Sabra’s
in different Sunni collections of Hadith. In some versions the
prohibition is said to have occurred in the year of the victory of Mecca
(8 AH), in others in the year of the Farewell Pilgrimage (10 AH). This
discrepancy makes the Hadith even more untrustworthy.

The version of the Hadith of Sabra which states that the Prophet
momentarily permitted Mut’a at the Farewell Pilgrimage in Mecca in the
year 10/632, shows another fact. People could not have complained from
the separation of their wives during the Farewell Pilgrimage, since all
of the wives were present, and the single men could have taken permanent
wives in Mecca.

This is another proof for absurdity of the allegation that temporary
marriage was in the case of battles! This is beside many traditions
mentioned above that the companions never mentioned practicing Mut’a was
limited to battles, and acknowledged that it was a usual practice up to
the end of Umar’s rule.

10. Another contradiction with the narration of Prohibition of Mut’a in
Mecca, is that the Prophet is alleged to have said:

I had permitted you to contract temporary marriage, and Allah has
forbidden?

The problem is that the sentence is in reverse order based on the
alleged narration attributed to ‘Ali that the Prophet have forbidden it.
Based on the one of the early references of this article, the Prophet
did not allow the temporary marriage when there was no command from
Allah. Then the verse was revealed and Allah made it lawful and the
Prophet permitted it, then. Based on what was attributed to ‘Ali
(mentioned above from Sahih Muslim), it was the Prophet who had
forbidden the temporary marriage. So, the sentence, must have been:

Allah had permitted you and I have forbidden you.

While this is in reverse order for the narration of Sabra. Why? Does any
of them make sense?! How can the Prophet’s word and Allah’s word
contradict each other. It is reported that:

"The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "I did not make anything Halaal except
what Allah made Halaal, and I did not make anything Haraam except what
Allah made Haraam."

    • Sunni reference: Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v4, p72

Then, how can the Prophet’s word and Allah’s word contradict each other?

11. The other problem with the tradition by Sabra al-Juhanni is that, if
Allah has forbidden an Islamic law, he must have revealed some verse(s),
or He must have whispered in the ears of the Prophet that the verse of
Mut’a is abrogated. Since there is no record that Allah has whispered
such important order in the ears of the Prophet, Allah must have
revealed a verse about abolishing temporary marriage. Where is the
abrogating verse(s)? Also, is it possible that Allah has whispered in
the ears of his Prophet privately that the verse is abrogated, and the
Prophet did NOT tell people when there was no new verse revealed in this
regard?

12. The traditions can not abrogate the existing verses of Qur’an.
Qur’an is always in higher authority. The traditions are always subject
to check with Qur’an, and if they are found to be in contradiction with
Qur’an, those contradicting traditions are rejected.

13. More over, the abrogated verse is either deleted from Qur’an by the
Prophet, or if it is present in Qur’an, there should be another verse
revealed at a later time to abrogate the previous one. In other words,
the only way to establish that a verse which is present in Qur’an is
abrogated, is to have an abrogating verse which should have been
revealed after that verse, since the traditions alone can not abrogate
an existing verse of Qur’an. Since there is no verse revealed after 4:24
abrogating it, it is still in effect.

14. And there are more problems with these three traditions on
forbidding the temporary marriage which will be discussed later. Our
humble suggestion is what the Prophet recited when he allowed the
Temporary marriage:

O’ those who believe, do not make unlawful the good things which Allah
has made lawful for you, and do not transgress. Allah does not like
transgressors. (Qur’an 5:87)

This was the verse mentioned in the tradition of Abdullah Ibn Masud
about temporary marriage (see the previously-mentioned tradition from
Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim). What do Sunnis think of the
Prophet’s intention for mentioning this verse to people? How come
temporary marriage is a bad thing for the Sunnis while the above verse
of Qur’an refers it as a "good thing"? Do Sunnis want to listen to this
verse about something like temporary marriage?:-)


