Debate on the Legitimacy of Mut’a
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The following piece is adopted from the book "Temporary Marriage in
Islamic Law,” by Abul Qasim Gourji, and is presented with some
modifications.

Introduction
------------

The word Mut’a was more commonly used than other terms for temporary
marriage both during the lifetime of the Prophet and afterwards. Both
its proponents and opponents preferred this word and its derivatives. In
books on jurisprudence the terms Mut’a, al-Nikah al-Munqati’
(discontinued marriage), and al-Nikah al-Muwaqqat (temporary marriage),
Istimta’ (having pleasure), and the related word of tamattu’ (pleasure)
are all employed.

The scholars both Sunni and Shi’a, agree that Mut’a was permitted at the
beginning of Islam. However, they disagree as to the reasons it was
permitted.

The Shi’a View
--------------

In the chapter titled "Women", after listing those women to whom
marriage is forbidden, the Qur’an states as follows:

***"Lawful for you is what is beyond all that, that you may seek, using
your wealth, in wedlock and not in license. So those of them whom you
enjoy, give them their appointed wages; it is no fault in you in
mutually agreeing after fulfillment (of the wage). God is All-Knowing,
All-Wise”(4:24).***

All Shi’a scholars and many Sunni scholars hold that this verse -
especially the words: "Such woman as you enjoy (Istamta’tum)”- refers to
the permissibility of Mut’a. The Shi’a present several arguments to
prove this point. (See Sharh al-Lum’a, v5, p248-253; Jawahir, v5, p163).

This verse was revealed towards the beginning of the Prophet’s stay in
Medina. By the revelation of this verse, the temporary marriage became a
legal custom in Medina and was looked upon as one kind of marriage and
was referred to by the term Istimta’a, the same word employed in the
Qur’anic verse - even though the literal meaning of the word is "to seek
benefit”or "to take enjoyment".

Hence the meaning of the Qur’anic verse must be understood in terms of
the conventional usage of the time, for as is well-known in the science
of Qur’anic commentary and Islamic jurisprudence, the Qur’an follows the
conventional usage of the people in all edicts and legal prescriptions.
If someone wants to understand a word in the Qur’an in other than the
conventional meaning of the time, he must supply a strong reason for
doing so.

Moreover if one looks up the traditions of the chapter of temporary
marriage in the authentic Sunni collections such as Sahih al-Bukhari and
Sahih Muslim, one can see that the messenger of Allah and his companions
exactly used the word Istimta’a when referring to this contract, which
is exactly the same word as what Qur’an employed.

The context of the verse also indicates that it is referring to the
temporary marriage. In the previous verse, i.e. 4:23, the Qur’an
enumerates the women who are forbidden to men. These are divided into
seven kinds stemming from blood relationship and seven more stemming
from other causes: ***"Forbidden to you are your mothers and
daughters...".***

The next verse adds a fifteenth category of women forbidden to men: "And
married women, save what your right hands own.”It continues with the
words quoted above: "Lawful for you is what is beyond all that.”In other
words, any woman not belonging to one of the fifteen categories is
permitted, whether by marriage or ownership.

Next the verse states: "that you may seek, using your wealth, in wedlock
and not in license.”Grammatically, this clause is in apposition to "what
is beyond all that.”It explains the legitimate mode of seeking sexual
relationships with women, whether as the result of marriage or the
purchase of slaves.

The next part of this same verse states as follows: "So those of them
whom you enjoy, give them their appointed wages.”The word "so”(fa) shows
that this part of the verse is either part of the previous subject
matter, or an example of it; in other words, its relation to the
previous section is either that of the part which is completing the
whole, or the particular example to the universal principle.

And since the previous section deals with the different kinds of
legitimate sexual relationships, either by marriage or the purchase of
slaves, we can conclude that this section of the verse is the exposition
of a further kinds of marriage, not mentioned previously; a kind which
also requires that the man pay the wages of his wife.

Many sayings have been related from the Companions of the Prophet and
those who followed them (al-Tabi’een) confirming the Shi’a view that
verse 24 of this chapter concerns Mut’a. Several of the companions,
including Ibn-Abbas, one of the highly respected companions of the
Prophet, Ibn Masud, one of the first to accept Islam, and Ubayy Ibn
Ka’ab, one of the scribes of the revelation, and many others used to
read the verse with three more words resulting in the sentence of the
form: "So those of them whom you enjoy to an appointed time (Ila Ajal
Musamma).”This clearly indicates that the verse refers to Mut’a.

In Majma’ al-Bayan, Abu ‘Ali al-Fadl Ibn al-Hasan al-Tabarsi (d.
548/1153), one of the Shi’a commentator of the Qur’an summarizes the
Shi’a arguments:

the word ‘enjoy’ in this verse refers to the marriage of Mut’a, i.e., a
marriage for a specified dower and a determined time period. This
opinion has been related from Ibn Abbas and many of the ‘followers’ of
the Companions such as Isma’il Ibn Abdurrahman al-Suddy (d. 127/744-45)
and Sa’id Ibn Jubair al-Asadi (95/713-14).

In fact, this clearly must be the case, for although the words Istimta’a
and Mut’a have the literal meaning of ‘enjoyment’, in Shari’ah (divine
law) they refer to the contract of temporary marriage, especially when
they are followed by the word ‘women’. Hence the meaning of the verse
is: ‘Whenever you draw up a contract of Mut’a with a woman, you must pay
her wages.’

Reference: Majma’ al-Bayan, by Abu ‘Ali al-Tabarsi, v3, p32

The Sunni View
--------------

As was indicated above, the Sunnis agree that at the beginning of Islam
Mut’a was permitted. For example, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (d. 606/1209),
the famous Sunni theologian, writes in his Commentary on the Qur’an that
Mut’a was at first permitted. The Prophet made a lesser pilgrimage
(Umrah) to Mecca, and the women of Mecca made themselves up especially
for the occasion. Some of the Companions complained about the long
separation from their wives, and the Prophet replied: "Then go and enjoy
(Istamta’a) these women.”(Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, v3, p286)

Those Sunnis who hold that the Qur’anic verse mentioned above (4:23)
does indeed refer to the permissibility of Mut’a also maintain that the
verse was subsequently abrogated (Naskh) by other Qur’anic verses. They
offer three arguments to prove their point: other Qur’anic verses, the
sermon of Umar banning Mut’a, and the Hadith transmitted by some
Companions. The Shi’a, in turn, reject each of the arguments:

Debate On The Qur’anic Verse Of Mut’a
-------------------------------------

Some Sunnis argue that sexual intercourse is forbidden except with one’s
wife or a slave by reason of the verse:

***"Prosperous are the believers ... who guard their private parts save
from their wives and what their right hands own.”(Qur’an 23:14).***

According to the Prophet’s wife Aisha and others: ‘Mut’a is forbidden
and abrogated in the Qur’an where God says: "who guard their private
parts..."

(al-Jami’ li Ahkam al-Qur’an, by al-Qurtubi, v5, p130).

The Sunni argument continues by pointing out that without question a
woman enjoyed through Mut’a is not a slave. Nor is she a wife, for
several reasons: if she were a wife, she and her husband would inherit
from each other, since God says:

***"And for you a half of what your wives leave...”(Qur’an 4:12).***

But everyone agrees that Mut’a does not involve inheritance. If she were
a wife, the child would belong to the husband, since according to the
Prophet: "The child belongs to the bed.”But again this is not the case.
And finally, if she were a wife, it would be necessary for her to
maintain the waiting period, since this is commanded by God (2:234); but
this also is not the case.

We have already seen that some of these arguments, taken from Fakhr
al-Razi’s Commentary, do not in fact apply to Mut’a as the Shi’a
understand it. It is the Ijma’ of the Shi’a scholars that the child born
of Mut’a belongs to the husband and that the woman is obliged to observe
the waiting period after the expiration date of the marriage. However,
it will be useful to see how the Shi’a answer each of the above Sunni
claims:

As for the ‘abrogation’ of the verse concerning Mut’a, historical
considerations show that this can not be the case. The verse mentioned
as abrogating Mut’a was revealed in Mecca before the migration, while
the verse establishing Mut’a was revealed after the Prophet had
emigrated to Medina. But a verse which abrogates another verse must have
been revealed after it, not before it.

It is also well-known that the Prophet allowed the companions to
practice Mut’a in Medina, and if Mut’a had already been illegalized in
Mecca (before Hijra) by Qur’an, then the Prophet would not have allowed
his companions to practice it after the migration. (Tafsir al-Mizan, by
al-Tabatabai, v3, p132).

As for the Sunni claim that a wife by Mut’a is not a legitimate wife
because she does not fulfill the religious requirements for being a
‘wife’, this also is false. In the question of inheritance, the Qur’anic
verse is a general one, and there is no reason to suppose that it may
not have certain exceptions. In fact, the specific requirements of Mut’a
as established by the Hadith literature show that Mut’a is an exception.
Nor is it the only exception, since a non-Muslim cannot inherit from a
Muslim, nor can a murderer inherit from his victim.

Also if a man is sick and marries a woman, but dies due to that sickness
before consummating the marriage, the woman will not inherit from his
husband. Thus being husband and wife (even in the permanent marriage)
does not always necessitate the inheritance. Qur’an usually provides the
general rules and he was the Messenger of Allah who clarified the
exceptions as well as the conditions for applying the rule.

In short, inheritance pertains to permanent marriage, but even in
permanent marriage it has certain exceptions, so that the verse
establishing it cannot be interpreted as nullifying the validity of
Mut’a. Also inheritance is possible in the temporary marriage as long as
it is made condition at the time of contract. (See Asl al-Shi’a wa
Usuliha, by Kashif al-Ghita’, p116; al-Bayan Fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, by
al-Khoei, p219)

In the question of the child, there is no reason to claim that it is
illegitimate. In Mut’a the "bed”is legitimate, so is the offspring.
(Sharh al-Lum’a, v5, p277)

The Imam Ja’far was asked: "If the wife becomes pregnant as a result of
Mut’a, to whom does the child belong?”He replied: "To the father,”i.e.,
the child is legitimate. (Wasa’il al-Shi’a, v14, p488)

In a similar manner numerous traditions exist to prove that a wife by
Mut’a must observe the waiting period of two months. Some of such
traditions are even documented in the Sunni sources. For example Fakhr
al-Razi himself quotes a relevant saying from Ibn Abbas that:

Ibn Abbas was asked: "Is Mut’a fornication or marriage?”He answered:
‘Neither the one nor the other.’ The questioner then asked: "Well then,
what is it?”Ibn Abbas replied: "It is Mut’a’, just as God has said.”The
questioner continued: "Is there a waiting period in Mut’a?”He replied:
"Yes, a menstrual period.”He was also asked: "Do the husband and wife
inherit from each other?”He answered: "No."

Reference: Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, v3, p286

Certain Sunnis also argue that Mut’a cannot be considered a legitimate
form of sexual union because it excludes such things as inheritance,
divorce, sworn allegation, forswearing, and Bihar. Since these necessary
concomitants of marriage do not apply to Mut’a, it cannot be considered
marriage, so the woman cannot be considered a legitimate wife.

If she is neither a wife nor property, sexual intercourse with her is
illegitimate: "Prosperous are the believers, who... guard their private
parts, save from their wives and what their right hands own. . .; but
whosoever seeks after more than that, those are the
transgressors”(23:1-7). Hence, people who engage in Mut’a transgress
God’s law.

A typical Shi’a answer to this argument runs as follows: First, the
Qur’anic verse is a general statement, and there is no reason why its
specific applications may not be clarified by other verses and the
traditions. Second, it is not true that the above things are
concomitants of marriage: there is no inheritance in the case of a
non-Muslim wife, a murderer, or a slave-girl.

A legitimate sexual relationship may be dissolved without divorce in the
case of a wife who is the subject of a sworn allegation, a spouse who
leaves Islam, or a slave-girl who is sold. Sworn allegation,
forswearing, and Bihar are all concomitants of permanent marriage, not
of legitimate sexual relationships in general (i.e., they do not apply
to sexual relationships with a slave).

Even if we suppose that these things do in fact pertain to legitimate
sexual relationships, then it will be necessary to specify that there
are certain exceptions. This is the only way we will be able to combine
the Qur’anic verses and the traditions which show that these pertain to
legitimate sexual relationships with those traditions which demonstrate
that they do not pertain to Mut’a. (Jawahir, v5, p163).

Debate Over The Sermon Of Umar
------------------------------

In a famous sermons the second caliph Umar banned Mut’a with the
following words: "Two Mut’a were practiced during the time of the
Prophet: Mut’a of women and Mut’a of Hajj, but I forbid both of them and
will punish anyone who practices either."

References:

• Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, v3, commentary of verse 4:24

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v1, p52

Al-Razi summarizes the Sunni interpretation of Umar’s words by saying
that they were pronounced in a gathering of Companions and no one
protested. Therefore, the situation must have been as follows: either

1. everyone knew that Mut’a was forbidden, so they remained silent; or

2. they all knew that it was permitted, yet they remained silent out of
negligence and in order to placate Umar; or

3. they did not know whether it was forbidden or permitted, so they
remained silent since the matter had just then been clarified for them,
so they had no reason to protest.

Reference: al-Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, v3, p287

Al-Razi continues by saying that the first possibility is what he is
trying to prove. If we maintain the second possibility, then we must
call Umar and the companions who were with him unbelievers. For they
knew that the Qur’an and the Prophet had permitted Mut’a, yet Umar went
ahead and banned it without the Qur’anic verse permitting it having been
abrogated. This is unbelief (Kufr); and those who knew Umar was wrong
without protesting shared in his unbelief. But such a supposition
requires that we call Islam a religion of unbelief, which is absurd.

The third possibility that Umar’s listeners had not known whether Mut’a
was permitted or forbidden is also absurd. For, if we suppose that Mut’a
was permitted, then people would need to have knowledge of that fact in
their everyday lives, just as they need to have knowledge about the
permissibility of marriage. So the legal situation of Mut’a must have
been known, just as everyone knew about marriage.

Al-Razi concludes that as soon as we see that the second and third
possibilities are in absurd, then we know for certain that the
companions remained silent only because they all knew that Mut’a had
already been abrogated.

The Shi’a answer Fakhr al-Razi’s arguments as follows: Umar’s sermon
demonstrates that during the lifetime of the Prophet Mut’a was
permitted. The reason Umar attributed the banning to himself is that he
wanted to show that he was expressing his own view. If the Prophet
himself had prohibited Mut’a, or if its permissibility pertained only to
a specific period in time, then Umar would have attributed its
prohibition to the Prophet, not to himself. (Majma’ al-Bayan, v3, p32).

Another saying concerning Mut’a is also attributed to Umar: "God
permitted for His Prophet what He willed, and the Qur’an has been
revealed in its entirety. So complete the Hajj and the Umrah as God has
commanded you. But avoid marrying these women, and do not bring before
me any man who has married a woman for a specified period, or I will
stone him.”(Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi
Arabia, v2, p885, Tradition \#145. For English version see: v2, chapter
442, Tradition \#2801)

As for the fact that no one protested against Umar’s pronouncement
cannot be considered proof that the Prophet himself had forbidden Mut’a.
For Umar threatened the people with stoning, and considering his fabled
severity and harsh temper, no one would have dared to speak against him

. If ‘Ali had been able to protest against Umar, he would not have
remained silent. But because of the circumstances he had no choice but
to have patience and to bide his time. The case of Mut’a is similar. For
it was ‘Ali himself who said: "If Umar had not prohibited Mut’a, no one
would commit fornication except the wretched!”(Sunni commentaries of
Qur’an by Tabari, Tha’labi, Qurtubi, Fakhr al-Razi, Suyuti, Ibn Hayyan,
Nishaboori, and Jassas. As for Shi’a, see al-Mut’a, by al-Dizfuli, pp
68-69).

The Shi’a scholars also point out that without question stoning as a
punishment for having performed Mut’a could not be permissible, even if
we were to accept that Mut’a is forbidden. For stoning can only be a
punishment when a married man has committed fornication with a woman.
Hence Umar had no right for laying down this edict. (Jawahir, v5 p161,
al-Bayan, p229).

Fakhr al-Razi answers this line of reasoning by saying that perhaps Umar
only mentioned stoning to intimidate his listeners and make them think
more seriously about the consequences of temporary marriage. (al-Tafsir
al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, v3, p287).

Concerning Umar’s two sayings banning Mut’a, the Shi’a argue as follows:
If his prohibition was based on "independent judgment”(Ijtihad), then it
is baseless, since all scholars agree that independent judgment can
never gain or contradict the saying of the Qur’an or the traditions.
(Sharh al-Lum’a, v5, p182-183; Jawahir, v5, p161; al-Bayan, p229).

As for the Qur’anic basis of Mut’a, we have already seen that as far as
the Shi’a and certain individual Sunnis are concerned, the Qur’an
permits it in the chapter of Women. As for its basis in the prophetic
Hadith, many traditions have been related in the standard Sunni
collections which proves the permissibility of Mut’a of women at the
time of the Prophet.

Concerning Umar’s "independent judgment", one of the contemporary Shi’a
scholars argues as follows: Umar may have made his judgment completely
on his own initiative and in direct contradiction to the words of the
Prophet; or he may have based his judgment on a prohibition issued by
the Prophet himself. If the first case is true, then Umar’s judgment is
groundless, as noted above. And the second case cannot be true, since a
number of the companions have given witness to the fact that Mut’a was
permitted during the lifetime of the Prophet and up until the time of
his demise. (al-Bayan, p229).

In general the Shi’a argue that if Umar’s prohibition had been based
upon the words of the Prophet, then other Companions would have known
about it. How is it possible for the Prophet to have forbidden Mut’a,
yet, during the rest of his life, the period of Abu Bakr’s caliphate and
the beginning of Umar’s caliphate, for prohibition to have remained
unknown to everyone but Umar? Moreover, if his prohibition were based
upon the words of the Prophet, why did he not attribute it to the
Prophet instead of to himself?

Fakhr al-Razi answers that it might be that beside Umar, some other
Companions had heard the prohibition from the Prophet, but they forgot
it later. But when Umar mentioned the prohibition in a large gathering,
everyone knew he was speaking the truth, so they remained silent.

The Shi’a reply to the argument of Fakhr al-Razi as follows: It is
impossible to imagine that all of the Companions other than Umar had
forgotten that Mut’a had been forbidden, considering its everyday
importance. People need legitimate sexual relationships almost as much
as they need food and water. They could not have forgotten when they
continued practicing Mut’a after the demise of the Prophet till the time
of Umar’s rule.

The Shi’a authors also point out that Umar banned the two kinds of Mut’a
together, whereas everyone, Sunnis and Shi’a agree that the Mut’a of
al-Hajj is permissible. Hence the Mut’a pertaining to women should also
be permissible. (Majma’ al-Bayan, v3, p33).

Debate On The Controversial Reports
-----------------------------------

In the Sunni sources few traditions have been attributed the Prophet
showing that he banned Mut’a during his lifetime. In most of the Sunni
"sound”collections (Sihah), it is related from ‘Ali that he said:
"Verily the Prophet of God banned the Mut’a of temporary marriage and
the eating of the meat of domesticated asses on the day of Khaibar."

Ibn Sabra relates from his father the following: I came upon the Prophet
of God who was leaning against the Ka’ba. He said: "O People! I
commanded you to seek enjoyment (Istimta’a) from these women, but now
God has forbidden that to you until the Day of Resurrection. So if you
have a temporary wife, let her go her way; and do not take back anything
of what you have given her."

Another Hadith is related from Salama Ibn al-Akwa’. Through his father
he reported that the Prophet of God permitted Mut’a in the year of Autas
(8/629) for three days; but then he prohibited it.

Shi’a do not consider these three traditions of any authority. To
illustrate how they reject them, we can summarize the arguments of
al-Khoei. The Hadith attributed to ‘Ali cannot be authentic, since all
Muslims agree that Mut’a was permitted in the year Mecca was conquered.
So how could ‘Ali have claimed that Mut’a was banned on the Day of
Khaibar (close to two years before Mecca’s conquest)?!

Because of this obvious discrepancy, some of the great Sunni authorities
have maintained that the words "on the day of Khaibar”probably refer
only to the meat of domestic asses. But this is absurd, for two reasons:
First, it is counter to the rules of Arabic grammar: if the phrase
referred only to asses, the verb would have to be repeated.

Thus, in Arabic one says: "I honored Zaid and Amr on Friday", or one
says: "I honored Zaid and I honored Amr on Friday", thus making it clear
that "on Friday”refers only to Amr. If the adverbial phrase referred
only to the meat, the text of the Hadith would have to read: "Verily the
Prophet of God banned Mut’a, and he banned the eating of the meat of
domesticated asses on the Day of Khaibar.”In short, since everyone
agrees that Mut’a was permitted when Mecca was conquered, the Prophet
cannot have banned it three years before that. Hence the Hadith is not
authentic. (al-Bayan, pp 222-224).

The second reason that the "Day of Khaibar”cannot refer only to the meat
of domesticated asses is that this clearly conflicts with Hadith related
by al-Bukhari, Muslim, and Ahmad Ibn Hanbal (three of the authoritative
Sunni collections). For their versions of ‘Ali’s Hadith is as follows:
"The Prophet banned the Mut’a of marriage on the Day of Khaibar, as well
as the meat of domesticated asses."

As for the tradition related by Ibn Sabra from his father, al-Khoei
points out that although his Hadith has been related by many chains of
authority, they ALL go back to Ibn Sabra himself, and thus the Hadith is
of the type known as Wahid, i.e., it derives from a single companion.
And a Qur’anic verse cannot be abrogated even by the most authentic kind
of Hadith, and thus by far, it can not be abrogated by a relatively weak
one.

Moreover the very content of the Hadith shows that it is not correct. It
is hardly conceivable that the Prophet could have stood before the Ka’ba
in front of a large group of Muslims and ban something until the Day of
Resurrection, and that then only one person Sabra should have heard him
or related his words.

Where were those Companions who recorded even the gestures and the
glances of the Prophet? Certainly they should have joined Sabra in
reporting the prohibition of Mut’a until the Day of Resurrection. And
where was Umar himself? He certainly should have known about the
prohibition so that it would not have been necessary to attribute the
banning of Mut’a to himself.

Finally, there are discrepancies in the various versions of the Hadith
of Sabra. In some versions the prohibition is said to have occurred in
the year of the victory of Mecca (8/630), in others in the year of the
Farewell Pilgrimage (10/632). This discrepancy makes the Hadith even
more untrustworthy.

Shahid al-Thani points out another problem concerning the Hadith of Ibn
Sabra. He mentioned Ibn Sabra himself is the only source for his
father’s words, but no one knows anything about him. He is not mentioned
in any of the books on Hadith as a transmitter, nor has any other Hadith
been related from him. For this reason al-Bukhari the most famous Sunni
authority, and generally considered the most reliable for the Sunnis,
left the Hadith of Ibn Sabra out of his collection. (Sharh al-Lum’a, v5,
pp 264-282).

As for the Hadith of Salama Ibn al-Akwa, al-Khoei remarks that again it
is a saying related from only one Companion (Wahid) and cannot abrogate
a Qur’anic verse. In addition, if it is an authentic Hadith, it is
strange that it remained unknown to such important Companions as Ibn
Abbas, Ibn Masud, and Jabir Ibn Abdillah. How is it possible for the
Hadith to be authentic, while Abu Bakr did not forbid Mut’a during the
whole period of his caliphate and Umar only banned it towards the end of
his own? (al-Bayan, pp 222-223).

There are many sayings of the Companions which indicate that Mut’a was
permitted up until the time of Umar’s prohibition. Three of the most
famous are those of ‘Ali, Ibn Abbas, and Imran Ibn al-Husayn. As we have
already seen, ‘Ali said: ‘If Umar had not prohibited Mut’a, no one would
commit fornication except the wretched.’ This is the most famous form of
a saying reported in numerous sources and a number of different
versions.

The above version is derived from Sunni works; a Shi’a version is
related from the fifth Imam, al-Baqir: "If it were not for that (i.e.,
Mut’a) with which (Umar) Ibn al-Khattab preceded me, no one would commit
fornication except the wretched."

The saying related from Ibn Abbas is reported by the tenth/sixteenth
century Sunni scholar al-Suyuti in this form: "God have mercy on Umar!
Mut’a was naught but a mercy from God, through which He showed mercy to
Muhammad’s community. If Umar had not banned it, no one would need
fornication except the wretched.”(al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Suyuti, v2,
p141).

More Arguments On The Hadith
----------------------------

The Sunni argument for the prohibition of Mut’a based upon the Hadith
can be summarized as follows: The reason that the scholars have differed
concerning Mut’a is that it was permitted and then banned a number of
times.

Ibn al-Arabi (d. 638/1240), the famous Sufi who wrote on the meaning of
the Shari’ah, calls Mut’a one of the most remarkable edicts in Islamic
law, since it was permitted at the beginning of Islam, then forbidden at
the Battle of Khaibar, then permitted again at the war of Autas. Finally
it was forbidden and remained forbidden. No other edict in Islam was
changed a number of times with the exception of the Qibla (the direction
of prayer), for that was abrogated twice before being finalized.

Al-Qurtubi reports that other authorities who have studied the
traditions concerning Mut’a say that its edict was changed seven times.
He refers to the traditions in six Sunni collections explaining how the
situation of Mut’a was changed.

As for the Hadith of Sabra, which states that the Prophet permitted
Mut’a at the Farewell Pilgrimage in the year 10/632, Abu Ja’far
al-Tahawi acknowledges that this is not in keeping with the other
Hadith. He explains that the Prophet permitted Mut’a at the conquest of
Mecca, when the men complained of separation from their wives. They
could not have complained of such separation during the Farewell
Pilgrimage, since all of the wives were present, and the single men
could have taken permanent wives in Mecca.

So the special situation that existed during the other journeys and
battles was lacking. However, we can explain the situation as follows:
Since the Prophet usually permitted Mut’a during journeys away from
Medina, in this case also he permitted it; but then he banned it for the
final time wanting all the Muslims to know about it, for all of them
were present for the Farewell Pilgrimage. There is also the fact that
the Meccans were in the habit of practicing Mut’a widely. Thus the
Prophet banned Mut’a in Mecca so that they would understand that they
could not continue in their former custom.

The Shi’a answer to the Sunni argument on the basis of Hadith can be
summarized as follows: As has been mentioned already, if Mut’a was made
forbidden in the last pilgrimage where according to al-Tahawi’s argument
most of the Muslims were with the Prophet, then how can only Sabra have
heard of the saying of the Prophet?! Moreover, the Hadith demonstrating
that Mut’a is forbidden are in conflict with those that show it is
permitted. They also conflict with Hadith that show that Mut’a continued
to be permitted during the times of the Prophet, Abu Bakr, and Umar, up
until the time that Umar banned it. The correct course of action is to
prefer those Hadith which establish its permissibility, for a number of
reasons:

• The Hadith indicating the permissibility of Mut’a outnumber those
which show that it is banned.

• Everyone agrees that the, traditions indicating that Mut’a was
permitted at certain times are authentic and have been transmitted in
parallel, but this is not the case concerning those which indicate that
it was banned. Hence one can speak of a consensus (Ijma’) in the sense
that all Muslims at one time agreed that Mut’a was permitted, even
though afterwards a disagreement arose. In order to choose the right
course, we can not base ourselves upon opinion but must hold fast to
that which we have certainty. Hence we must conclude that Mut’a is still
permitted, as long as we do not have firm knowledge to the contrary.

• The traditions which point to the banning of Mut’a are themselves
questionable. When we realize that one of the incontestable elements of
Shi’a as established by the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt is the permissibility of
Mut’a, then no Hadith related from ‘Ali stating that Mut’a is forbidden
can be authentic. Someone who held without question that Mut’a is
permissible would not relate a Hadith from the Prophet that it is
forbidden. On many occasions ‘Ali censured Umar’s banning of Mut’a. His
saying: ‘If Umar had not banned Mut’a, no one but the wretched would
practice fornication’ is well-known, and no one has questioned its
authenticity.

Reference: Jawahir, v5, pp 162-163.

Those who hold that Mut’a is forbidden have also claimed the consensus
of the Community as one of their proofs. They say that after Umar banned
Mut’a, all of the Prophet’s Companions went along with him with the
exception of Ibn Abbas, and perhaps he might have changed his opinion
towards the end of his life.

In answer to this claim, the Shi’a point out that ‘consensus’ was never
established for the banning of Mut’a; and in any case, the very fact
that the Shi’a Imams (the Household of the Prophet) who are the very
pillars of Islam, have all agreed that Mut’a is permitted shows that
there was in fact no consensus. Moreover, from the first the Shi’a have
agreed on the permissibility of Mut’a, to such an extent that this view
has always been singled out as one of the specific features of Shi’a.
Given this fact, to claim consensus is meaningless.

In addition, as we have seen above, many of the Prophet’s outstanding
Companions and their followers held that Mut’a was permitted. Finally,
the claim that Ibn Abbas changed his view on Mut’a toward the end of his
life has never been substantiated. Even if it were to be proven, one
could only claim consensus if we were certain that no one was opposed to
the view that Mut’a is forbidden; whereas we know that in fact the
number of opponents was quite large. In short, the Shi’a conclude, there
is no real evidence to show that Mut’a is not permitted; and when the
Hadith are investigated, the conclusion is likely to be reached that not
only is it permitted (Mubaah), it is even recommended (Mustahabb).

The Opinion Of The Four Sunni Schools Of Law
--------------------------------------------

The four Sunni schools of law agree that temporary marriage is invalid.
That which invalidates the contract is the stipulation of a time period.
If such a marriage takes place, it must be annulled, and if it is
consummated before the annulment takes place, the woman must be paid the
"normal dowry".

The Shafi’i school adds that even if the time period stipulated by the
contract is the life-time of the husband or the wife, the contract is
still invalid, since the contract of marriage requires that its effects
continue after death. That is why a spouse may give his or her spouse
the ritual purification of the dead before burial (otherwise, the washer
of the dead must be of the same sex as the corpse). A marriage
contracted with a stipulation that it comes to an end when one of the
spouses dies would mean that the effects of the marriage would end at
death. So such a stipulation invalidates the contract.

The Hanafis add that if the time period stipulated is so long that as a
rule the spouses could not remain alive until it comes to an end (e.g.,
if the man were to say: "I will marry you until the hour of
Resurrection"), then we can no longer call the marriage "temporary". in
effect this stipulation means forever.

Hence it is not considered as a stipulation of a time-period and the
contract is sound. If the husband’s intention in contracting the
marriage is to enjoy the woman’s company only for a period of time, but
he does not make such a stipulation in the contract, the marriage is
correct. In the same way, if a person should marry making it a condition
of the contract that a divorce will take place after a certain period of
time, the contract is correct but the condition is nullified, since such
a condition can not limit the contract.

Reference: Fiqh Ala al-Madhahib al-Arba’a, v4, pp 90-94

In any case the four Sunni sects agree that the punishment for a person
who enters into a temporary marriage is not the same as that of the
fornication. In the latter case the punishment (Hadd) is 100 lashes for
each party in the case of an unmarried woman, and stoning to death in
the case of a married woman. But the punishment for Mut’a is defined as
Ta’zeer, i.e., less than the full punishment for fornication, depending
on circumstances and the opinion of the judge. The penalty for
fornication is not specified by the Sunnis because certain doubts remain
concerning the status of Mut’a as a result of the traditions of Ibn
Abbas.

The Opinion Of The Shi’a School Of Law
--------------------------------------

The Shi’a have always considered Mut’a to be of special importance and
have tried to keep it alive as an institution of Islamic society. The
Shi’a law of Jurisprudence is often referred to as the "Ja’fari school
of law", since in reality the sixth Imam, Ja’far al-Sadiq (as), had a
golden opportunity of teaching during the clashes between the Umayad and
the Abbasid.

During that short period when the tyrants of both sides were busy with
each other, the Imam was teaching Jurisprudence and theology in classes
with as much as 5000 students. Hence it is appropriate to quote a few of
his many sayings concerning the Mut’a.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: "Mut’a was approved by the text of the
Qur’an and became part of the Sunnah of the Prophet.”(Wasa’il al-Shi’a,
v14, p437).

Imam Ja’far considered the Qur’anic verse referred to above (4:24) the
basis for Mut’a. He said: "The verse proves the permissibility of
Mut’a.”(Wasa’il al-Shi’a, v14, p439).

Once Abu Hanifa, the founder of one of the four Sunni sects (who was a
student of the Imam Ja’far before he starts his business), asked the
Imam about Mut’a. He replied: "Which of the two Mut’a do you mean?”Abu
Hanifa answered: "I have already asked you about the Mut’a of the Hajj.
So tell me about the Mut’a of marriage.”The Imam said, "Glory be to God!
Have you not read the Qur’an? ‘So those of them whom you enjoy, give to
them their appointed wages’ (4:24).”(Wasa’il al-Shi’a, v14, p437).

Someone asked Imam Ja’far (as): "Why is it that four witnesses are
necessary (for proof to be established) in cases of adultery, but two
are sufficient in the case of murder?”He replied: "God made Mut’a
permissible for you, but He knew that you would not approve of it. So He
made the witnesses to number four as a protection for you. If it were
not for that, it would be brought against you (that you are committing
fornication, whereas you are in fact practicing Mut’a). But seldom do
four witnesses come together on a single matter.”(Wasa’il al-Shi’a, v14,
p439).

The Imam Ja’far (as) considered Mut’a a divine mercy by means of which
people were saved from the sin of fornication and delivered from God’s
retribution. Concerning the Qur’anic verse: "Whatsoever mercy God opens
to men, none can withhold (35:2),”the Imam said: "Mut’a is part of that
mercy.”(Wasa’il al-Shi’a, v14, p439).

The Imam Ja’far said: "I do not like a man to leave this world without
having married temporarily, even if only on one occasion.”(Wasa’il
al-Shi’a, v14, p444).

The Imam Ja’far said: "It is reprehensible in my eyes that a man dies
while there yet remains a practice of the Messenger of God that he has
not adopted.”He was asked: "And did the Messenger of God practice Mut’a
?”He replied: "Yes.”Then he recited the Qur’anic verse: "And when the
Prophet confided to one of his wives a certain
matter...(66:3-5)”(Wasa’il al-Shi’a, v14, p442).

Note how beautiful the Imam explains the reason why one should uphold
the practice of Mut’a. The encouragement, promotion, and rewards for the
Mut’a are not for the physical/sexual action, but are rather due to
REVIVING the Sunnah of the Prophet (S) which has been forsaken by the
majority of Muslims. If Umar would not have abolished this Sunnah of the
Prophet, such reward would not have been attached to the Mut’a.

The Shi’a call Abu Ja’far Muhammad al-Tusi (d. 460/1068) the "Elder of
the Denomination”(Shaikh al-Ta’ifa), since he was the first who
organized a systematic methodology for demonstrative jurisprudence
(al-Fiqh al-Istidlali). We can conclude this discussion with a summary
of his views on Mut’a. He writes that the Shi’a reasons for considering
Mut’a permissible are as follows:

• The Consensus of the Twelver Shi’ites.

• The words of the Qur’an:

***"Marry such women as seen good to you! (Qur’an 4:3),”***

since Mut’a is a kind of marriage, but one which men desire to perform
by expending their property.

• The words of the Qur’an:

***"So those of them whom you enjoy, give to them their appointed wages
(Qur’an 4:24).”***

The word Istimta’a (enjoy), unless otherwise qualified, signifies
temporary marriage.

• Ibn Masud’s version of the Qur’an, which adds the words "to an
appointed time”to the above verse.

• There is no disagreement over the fact that Mut’a was allowed at the
beginning of Islam. So those who claim that the verse was abrogated must
prove their assertion.

• The principle from which discussion must begin is that Mut’a is
permitted. That it should be forbidden should be proven.

• The words of Umar concerning the two types of Mut’a. Here Umar tells
us that at the time of the Prophet, Mut’a was permitted, i.e., that it
was a part of the religion of Islam. Proof must be provided that it is
no longer so.

Reference: al-Khilaf, v2, pp 179-180

After referring to the above reasons, al-Tusi answers the arguments of
those who claim Mut’a is forbidden in much the same way that we have
seen above.

References
----------

(1) al-Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, Istanbul, 1307/1889-90

(2) al-Durr al-Manthoor, by Jalaluddin Suyuti, 1377/1957

(3) al-Jami’ li Ahkam al-Qur’an, by Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn Abi Bakr
al-Ansari al-Qurtubi (d. 671/1273), Cairo, 1967

(4) al-Musnad, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Published in Beirut

(5) Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, Saudi Arabia, 1980

(6) Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English version, Saudi Arabia

(7) al-Fiqh Ala al-Madhahib al-Arba’a,by Abd al Rahman al-Jaziri, Cairo
1969

(8) Wasa’il al-Shi’a, by Muhammad Ibn al-Hasan al-Hurr al-Amili, Tehran,
1385/1965-66

(9) Sharh al-Lum’a (al-Rawdat al-Bahiyya fi Sharh al-Lum’at
al-Dimashqiyya), by al-Shahid al-Thani (Zayn al-Din Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali
al-Jab-i al-Amili d. 965/1558), Beirut 1967.

(10) Jawahir al-Kalam, by Shaykh Muhammad Hasan (d. 1266/1850), Tehran,
1325/1907.

(11) al-Khilaf, by Abu jafar Ibn al-Hasan al-Tusi, Tehran 1372/1952-53

(12) Tafsir al-Mizan, by Muhammad Husayn Tabatabai (d. 1982), Beirut
1974.

(13) Majma’ al-Bayan, cited as al-Bayan, by Abu ‘Ali al-Fadl Ibn
al-Hasan al-Tabarsi (d. 548/1153) Tehran, 1339/1960

(14) al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, by Abul Qasim al-Musawi al-Khoei,
Najaf, 1375/1955-56

(15) al-Mut’a, by Murtada Ibn Muhammad Amin al-Dizfuli (1214-81/1800-64)
Tehran, 1352/1973

(16) Temporary Marriage in Islam, by Abdullatif Berry, Arabic-English,
Al-Zahra International Co.

(17) Fixed Term Marriage, by Muhammad Sharif, English, Islamic Seminary
Publications.

(18) Temporary Marriage in Islamic Law, by Abul Qasim Gourji, rendered
to English by Sachiko Murata.


