Al-Taqiyya, Dissimulation Part 2
================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Taqiyya According To The Shi’a
---------------------------------

The Shi’a did NOT innovate or concoct anything new, they simply followed
the injunctions of Allah (SWT), as stated in the Qur’an, and the custom
of the Seal of Prophethood, Muhammad (S). Nonetheless, one must also
examine what the Shi’a themselves say about al-Taqiyya:

al-Shaykh Muhammad Ridha al-Mudhaffar in his book, "Aqa’id
al-Imamiyah,”wrote that:

"al-Taqiyya should conform to specific rules vis-a-vis the situation
wherein eminent danger is present; these rules, listed in many books of
Fiqh (Jurisprudence), along with the severity of the danger determine
the validity, or lack of, al-Taqiyya itself. It is not mandatory to
practice it (al-Taqiyya) at all times; on the contrary, it is
permissible, and sometimes necessary, to abandon it (al-Taqiyya)
altogether; as in the case where revealing the truth will further the
cause of the religion, and provide a direct service to Islam; and (when
the revealing of the truth is such that it constitutes) a jihad
(striving) for (Islam’s) sake; (verily,) in such a situation, wealth and
life should be forsaken. Furthermore, al-Taqiyya is prohibited in
instances wherein the killing of innocent people and the spread of
corruption will result; and in cases wherein the marring of the religion
will result, and/or a significant harm will befall the Muslims, either
by leading them astray or corrupting and oppressing them.

Either way, al-Taqiyya, as the Shi’a uphold it, does not make of the
Shi’a a secret cooperative that seeks to destroy and corrupt, as the
enemies (of the Shi’a) wish to present them; (these critics launch their
verbal attacks) without really heeding the subject (of al- Taqiyya); and
(without even) laboring to understand our own opinion on the matter (of
al-Taqiyya).

Nor does it (al-Taqiyya) mandate that the religion and its injunctions
become a secret of secrets that cannot be disclosed to those who do not
subscribe to its teachings. How so, when the books of the  
 Imamiyah (the Shi’a) that deal with the (subjects of) Fiqh, Kalam, and
beliefs are in abundant supply, and have exceeded the limits (of
publications) expected from any nation professing its beliefs."

Imam Khomeini in his book, "Islamic Government,”also presents his view
on al-Taqiyya. He believes that al-Taqiyya is permitted only when one’s
life is jeopardized. Whereas in cases wherein the religion of Allah
(SWT), Islam, is in danger, it is not permitted even if it leads to
one’s death:

The Imams, may peace be upon them, imposed on the jurisprudence very
important ordinances and committed them to shouldering and preserving
the trust. It is not right to resort to dissimulation on every issue,
small and big. Dissimulation was legislated to preserve one’s life or
others from damage on subsidiary issues of the laws. But if Islam in its
entirety is in danger, then there is no place for dissimulation and for
silence. What do you think a jurisprudent should do if they force him to
legislate or innovate?... If dissimulation forces on us to jump on the
sultan’s bandwagon then it should not be resorted to even if such
refrainment leads to the death of the person concerned, unless his
jumping on the bandwagon constitutes a real victory for Islam and the
Muslims, as in the case of ‘Ali Ibn Yaqtin and Nasiruddin in al-Tusi,
may Allah have mercy upon their souls.

In his book, "Shi’ite Islam”(translated into English by Sayyed Hussein
Nasr), the Shi’i scholar Allama Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabatabai defines
Taqiyya as the situation where a person "hides his religion or certain
of his religious practices in situations that would cause definite or
probable danger as a result of the actions of those who are opposed to
his religion or particular religious practices.”He goes on to define the
nature of the danger:

The exact extent of danger which would make permissible the practice of
Taqiyya has been debated among different Shi’a scholars. In our view
point, the practice of Taqiyya is permitted if there is definite danger
facing one’s own life or the life of one’s family, or the possibility of
the loss of the honor and virtue of one’s wife or of other female
members of the family, or the danger of the loss of one’s material
belongings to such an extent as to cause complete destitution and
prevent a man from being able to continue to support himself and his
family.

Tabatabai cited two verses from the Qur’an in support of al-Taqiyya:

***"...except for precaution and dissimulation that you may protect
yourselves against them..."(Qur’an 3:28)***

**  
**
 

**  
**
إِلَّا أَن

**  
**
 

**  
**
تَتَّقُوا

**  
**
 

**  
**
مِنْهُمْ

**  
**
 

**  
**
تُقَاةً

**  
**
...

For the above verse, the great Sunni scholar, Mawdudi, has a commentary
in support of Taqiyya. Notice that in the above verse, the words
"tattaqu”and "toqat”have exactly the same root as Taqiyya.

The second verse is the following:

***"Any one who becomes unbeliever after being believer, EXCLUDING the
one who is under compulsion and force while his hurt is firm in faith,
but the one go on in disbelief, Wrath of Allah is on to them and they
will have a dreadful penalty,”(Qur’an 16:106)***

**  
**
مَن كَفَرَ بِاللَّـهِ مِن بَعْدِ إِيمَانِهِ إِلَّا مَنْ أُكْرِهَ
وَقَلْبُهُ مُطْمَئِنٌّ بِالْإِيمَانِ وَلَـٰكِن مَّن شَرَحَ بِالْكُفْرِ
صَدْرًا فَعَلَيْهِمْ غَضَبٌ مِّنَ اللَّـهِ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ

**  
**
 

Then Tabatabai explained:

As mentioned in both Sunni and Shi’ite sources this verse was revealed
concerning ‘Ammar Ibn Yasir. After the migration (hijrah) of the
Prophet, the infidels of Mecca imprisoned some of the Muslims of that
city and tortured them, forcing them to leave Islam and to return to
their former religion of idolatry.

Included in this group who were tortured were Ammar and his father and
mother. Ammar’s parents refused to turn away from Islam and died under
torture. But Ammar, in order to escape torture and death, outwardly left
Islam and accepted idol worship, thereby escaping from danger. Having
become free, he left Mecca secretly for Medina. In Medina he went before
the Holy Prophet--upon whom be blessings and peace--and in a state of
penitence and distress concerning what he had done, he asked the Prophet
if by acting as he did, he had fallen outside the sacred precinct of
religion. Then Prophet said that his duty was what he had accomplished.
The above verse was then revealed.

The two verses cited above were revealed concerning particular cases but
their meaning is such that they embrace all situations in which the
outward expression of doctrinal belief and religious practice might
bring about a dangerous situation. Besides these verses, there exist
many traditions from the members of the Household of the Prophet,
ordering Taqiyya when there is fear of danger.

Some have criticized Shi’a by saying that to employ the practice of
Taqiyya in religion is opposed to the virtues of courage and bravery.
The least amount of thought about this accusation will bring to light
its invalidity, for Taqiyya must be practiced in a situation where man
faces a danger which he cannot resist and against which he cannot fight.

Resistance to such a danger and failure to practice Taqiyya in such
circumstances shows rashness and foolhardiness, not courage and bravery.
The qualities of courage and bravery can be applied only when there is
at least the possibility of success in man’s efforts. But before a
definite or probable danger against which there is no possibility of
victory--such as drinking water in which there is probably poison or
throwing oneself before a cannon that is being fired or lying down on
the tracks before an onrushing train—any action of this kind is nothing
but a form of madness and contrary to logic and common sense. Therefore,
we can summarize by saying that Taqiyya must be practiced only when
there is a definite danger which cannot be avoided and against which
there is no hope of a successful struggle and victory.

Please refer to Shi’ite Islam  
 Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabatai  
 Translated by Seyyed Hossein Nasr  
 pp 223-225

It is apparent then, from the above quotes, that the Shi’a are NOT
advocates of hypocrisy, secrecy, and cowardice, as some of the Wahhabis,
among others, purport.

The following is from the book of Moojan Momen, which is entitled "An
Introduction to Shi’i Islam: History and Doctrines of Twelver Shi’ism,”

When discussing the sixth Shi’i Imam (successor to the prophet), Imam
Ja’far al-Sadiq (as), he writes:

The doctrine of Taqiyya (dissimulation) was widely used at that time. It
served to protect the followers of Imam al-Sadiq at a time when al-
Mansur (the caliph) was conducting a brutally oppressive campaign
against the Followers of the Members of the House of Prophet and their
supporters.


