Al-Taqiyya, Dissimulation Part 3
================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qur’an Speaks: Al-Taqiyya Vs. Hypocrisy
---------------------------------------

Some people have fallen victim to confusing al-Taqiyya with hypocrisy,
when in fact they (al-Taqiyya and Hypocrisy) are two opposite extremes.
al- Taqiyya is concealing faith and displaying nonbelief; while
Hypocrisy is the concealment of unbelief and the display of belief. They
are TOTAL opposites in function, form, and meaning.

The Qur’an reveals the nature of hypocrisy with the following verse:

***"When they meet those who believe, they say: \`We Believe;’ but when
they are alone with their evil ones, they say: \`We are really with you,
we (were) only jesting (2:14)."***

The Qur’an then reveals al-Taqiyya with the following verses:

***"A Believer, a man from among the people of Pharaoh, who had
CONCEALED his faith, said: "Will ye slay a man because he says, \`My
Lord is Allah’?....(40:28)”***(Emphasis Mine.)

Also:

***"Any one who, after accepting Faith in Allah, utters unbelief, EXCEPT
under compulsion, his heart remaining firm in faith -- but such as open
their breast to unbelief, -- on them is Wrath from Allah, and theirs
will be a dreadful Chastisement (16:106).”***(Emphasis Mine.)

And also:

***"Let not the believers take for friends or helpers unbelievers rather
than believers: if any do that, (they) shall have no relation left with
Allah except by way of precaution ("tat-taqooh"), that ye may guard
yourselves ("tooqatan") from them....(3:28)"***

Moreover:

And when Moses returned unto his people, angry and grieved, he said:
Evil is that (course) which ye took after I had left you. Would ye
hasten on the judgment of your Lord? And he cast down the tablets, and
he seized his brother by the head, dragging him toward him. (Aaron)
said:

***"Son of my mother! Lo! People did oppress me and they were about to
kill me. Make not the enemies rejoice over my misfortune nor count thou
me amongst the sinful people. (Qur’an 7:150)"***

**  
**
وَلَمَّا رَجَعَ مُوسَىٰ إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ غَضْبَانَ أَسِفًا قَالَ
بِئْسَمَا خَلَفْتُمُونِي مِن بَعْدِي أَعَجِلْتُمْ أَمْرَ رَبِّكُمْ
وَأَلْقَى الْأَلْوَاحَ وَأَخَذَ بِرَأْسِ أَخِيهِ يَجُرُّهُ إِلَيْهِ
قَالَ ابْنَ أُمَّ إِنَّ الْقَوْمَ اسْتَضْعَفُونِي وَكَادُوا
يَقْتُلُونَنِي فَلَا تُشْمِتْ بِيَ الْأَعْدَاءَ وَلَا تَجْعَلْنِي مَعَ
الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ ﴿الأعراف: ١٥٠﴾

Now, we see that Allah (SWT) Himself has stated that one of His (SWT)
faithful servants concealed his faith and pretended that he was a
follower of the Pharaoh’s religion to escape persecution. We also see
that Prophet Aaron (Haroon) observed Taqiyya when his life was in
danger. We also observe that al-Taqiyya is clearly permitted in a time
of need. In fact, the Book of Allah instructs us that we should escape a
situation which causes our destruction for nothing:

***"and make not your own hands contribute to your destruction
(2:195)"***

Reason And Logic
----------------

Aside from the instuctions of Quan and Hadith on the permissibility and
necessity of Taqiyya, such necessity can also be derived from a logical
and rational standpoint. It is apparent to any discerning observer that
Allah (SWT) has bestowed upon His (SWT) creation certain defense
mechanisms and instincts to protect themselves from impending danger.
What follows are some examples that serve to illustrate the above point.

The following quote is taken from the Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia
(1992) under the topic of "Instinct:"

"Instinct is inherited, essentially unlearned, and generally adaptive
animal behavior that is typical to each species. Instinct is prominent
in aggression, courtship, and mating, and in various social behaviors,
although learning, maturation, growth, or circumstance can modify the
behavior. Human behavior is mostly a product of learning, whereas the
behavior of a moth, a snail, or a bird mainly depends on instinct."

"Behaviors that are most instinctive include reproduction, concealment,
defense, escape, threats or warnings, and aggression, all of which are
essential to the survival of the species."

"A species’ instinctive behaviors appear similar in form: chickens and
turkeys seek a high place to roost at night, cats stalk prey in a
characteristic manner, and dogs mark their territories in a species-  
 specific method.

Typical behavior patterns appear even in animals that are raised
isolated from other members of their own species, a situation in which
learning by observation, imitation, or instruction cannot occur. Many,
but not all, birds sing the songs of their conspecifics (other members
of their species) even though they are removed from the nest before
hatching and are raised in a quiet room.

Others sing a simplified version of the species’ song."

It is apparent then that instincts play a crucial role in the animal
kingdom, as well as the human one. Furthermore, the above quote asserts
that: "Behaviors that are most instinctive include reproduction,
CONCEALMENT, DEFENSE, escape, threats or warnings, and aggression, all
of which are essential to the survival of the species.”(Emphasis Mine)

Given the above, we may suggest that although al-Taqiyya is a learned
behavior, it nonetheless originates from the survival instinct that is
innate to creation. That is, out of fear and the instinct to survive,
one conceals that which may jeopardize his well-being. It is a fact that
one can overcome the fear within him, and utter the truth even if it
jeopardized him; but one must also set priorities and judge when the
telling of the truth will serve a noble purpose, and when it won’t make
a difference.

If a person is about to be slaughtered because he is a Shi’i, then his
concealment of his beliefs is of utmost importance, IF that concealment
does not serve as an injustice to someone else. For example, if I, a
Shi’i, deny my beliefs to protect myself; and, as a result, an innocent
man is blamed instead, then I must come forward, at the risk of death,
to protect that man; but when my denial serves no injustice whatsoever,
then I must conceal my beliefs to protect myself.

The following quote is taken from the Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia
(1992) under the topic of "Insect:"

"Most insects try to escape when threatened and some insects "play
dead,”for example, some beetles fall to the ground after folding up
their legs, giving the appearance of a clump of dirt. Many insects use
shelters ranging from burrows in the ground to elaborate shelters
constructed of various materials. Insects also employ camouflage.

Many are so colored that they blend into their background, such as moths
colored like the bark of trees. Some insects bear a close resemblance to
objects in the environment, such as inchworms, which resemble twigs.
Other insects will cover themselves with debris or excrement.

Chemical defenses often involve distasteful body secretions, repellent
secretions, or poisonous injection into an attacker. The use of the
sting is probably the most effective and often a severe method. The only
stinging insects are Hymenoptera (bees, wasps, and some ants)."

The following quote is taken from the Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia
(1992) under the topic of "Mammal:"

"The name pangolin is from a Malay word for "round cushion”and refers to
the animal’s DEFENSE of curling up into a ball. As a further defense,
the pangolin will spray urine and anal gland secretions on a persistent
intruder.”(Emphasis Mine)

The following quote is taken from the Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia
(1992) under the topic of "Coloration, Biological:”

"Both the ringed plover chick and its egg are cryptically colored.
Plovers are shore birds that dig shallow nests in the open ground; the
coloration acts as camouflage, helping the young blend with their
surroundings as protection against predators."

The following quote is taken from the Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia
(1992) under the topic of "Bear:"

"The polar bear, Thalarctos maritimus, travels great distances along
arctic coasts. Its white fur furnishes camouflage against snow and ice."

The following quote is taken from the Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia
(1992) under the topic of "Deep-Sea Life:"

"Fishes of the shallower parts of the deep sea often have very large
eyes relative to their size, suggesting that they respond to the minimal
light present in the upper zones. Both fishes and invertebrates in these
zones also often possess complex organs capable of producing light (see
BIOLUMINESCENCE). These organs frequently exist in definite patterns on
the body and may be important in species and sexual recognition, in the
attracting of prey or repelling of predators, in camouflage, or in other
ways not yet understood."

Other examples of naturally-occurring defense mechanisms include, but
are not limited to, the thorns on certain flower stems and the poisonous
chemicals in plants to protect them from danger.

It is clear from the above quotations that defense mechanisms are
Allah’s (SWT) mercy to His (SWT) creation, such that He (SWT) has not
left them unprotected. As such, al-Taqiyya, I contend, is an instinctive
defense mechanism that Allah (SWT) has endowed humans with. The ability
to use one’s tongue to escape persecution is indeed a supreme example of
defense.

I read once in a Sufi book that "Islam is truth without form.”Indeed,
that is so; and Islam is Allah’s (SWT) natural religion, it is the
Primordial Truth, it is the ONLY religion that conforms to man’s
instincts and natural inclinations. Given that, al-Taqiyya, I contend,
is a truism because it satisfies an instinctive need to survive and
prosper.

Comments
--------

It has been demonstrated under the section of "Sunni Sources In Support
of al-Taqiyya”that it is permissible to lie to save oneself, as
al-Ghazzali asserted; and that it is legitimate to utter words of
unbelief as al-Suyuti stated; and that it is acceptable to smile at a
person while your heart curses him as al-Bukhari confirms; and that al-
Taqiyya is an integral part of the Qur’an itself, as has been shown
under the section of "The Qur’an Speaks: al-Taqiyya vs. Hypocrisy;”and
that it was practiced by one of the most notable companions of the
Prophet (S), none other than \`Ammar Ibn Yasir (May Allah Reward him
generously); and we have seen that al- Suyuti narrates that al-Taqiyya
is permissible until the Day of Judgment; and that a person can say
anything he wants, even to badmouth the Prophet (S) if he is in a
dangerous and restrictive situation; and we have also seen that even the
Prophet (S) himself practiced al-Taqiyya in a manner of diplomacy that
served to advance good relations among the people.

Furthermore, the Prophet did not disclose his mission for the first
three years of his prophethood, which was, in fact, another practice of
al- Taqiyya by the Prophet to save the young Islam from annihilation.

Now, the question to our opponent is: If your MOST authentic books
explicitly advocate al-Taqiyya, as has been demonstrated above, why then
do you mock the Shi’a and accuse them of hypocrisy? By Allah (SWT), who
is the hypocrite now?

Apparently now, there is no difference between the Sunnis and Shi’a
vis-a- vis al-Taqiyya, except that the Shi’a practice al-Taqiyya for
fear of persecution, while the Sunnis don’t.

The Shi’a have to practice al-Taqiyya as part of the persecution that
they have suffered from day one of the death of the Mercy to Mankind,
Muhammad (S). It is enough to say "I am a Shi’i”to get your head chopped
off, even today in countries like Saudi Arabia. As for the Sunnis, they
were never subjected to what the Shi’a have been subjected to, primarily
because they have always been the friends of the so-called Islamic
governments throughout the ages.

My comment here is that Wahhabis themselves do indeed practice
al-Taqiyya, but they have been psychologically programmed by their
mentors in such a way that they don’t even recognize al-Taqiyya when
they do actually practice it. Ahmad Didat said that the Christians have
been programmed in such a way that they may read the Bible a million
times, but will never spot an error! They are fixed on believing it
because their scholars say so, and they read at a superficial level. I
say that this also applies to those who oppose al-Taqiyya.

Dr. al-Tijani wrote a short event where he was sitting next to a Sunni
scholar on a flight to London; they were both on their way to attend an
Islamic Conference. At that time, there was still some tension due to
the Salman Rushdi affair. The conversation between the two was naturally
concerned with the unity of the Ummah. Consequently, the Sunni/Shi’a
issue introduced itself as part of the conversation.

The Sunni scholar said: "The Shi’a must drop certain beliefs and
convictions that cause disunity and animosity among the Muslims.”Dr.
al-Tijani answered: "Like what?”The Sunni scholar answered: "Like the
Taqiyya and Muta’ ideas.”Dr. al-Tijani immediately provided him with
plenty of proofs in support of these notions, but the Sunni scholar was
not convinced, and said that although these proofs are all authentic and
correct, we must discard them for the sake of uniting the Ummah!!! When
they both got to London, the immigration officer asked the Sunni
scholar: "What is the purpose of your visit sir?”The Sunni scholar said:
"For medical treatment.”Then Dr. al-Tijani was asked the same question,
and he answered: "To visit some friends.”Dr. al-Tijani followed the
Sunni scholar and said: "Didn’t I tell you that al-Taqiyya is for all
times and occasions!”The Sunni scholar said: "How so?”Dr. al- Tijani
answered: "Because we both lied to the airport police: I by saying that
I came to visit some friends, and you by saying that you are here for
medical treatment; when, in fact, we are here to attend the Islamic
Conference!”The Sunni scholar smiled, and said: "Well, doesn’t an
Islamic Conference provide healing for the soul?!”Dr. al-Tijani was
swift to say:

"And doesn’t it provide an opportunity to visit friends?!"

So you see, the Sunnis practice al-Taqiyya whether they acknowledge the
fact or not. It is an innate part of human nature to save oneself, and
most often we do it without even noticing.

My comment again is: Who, in Allah’s (SWT) Name, is this Scholar to
state that although the proofs provided to him by Dr. al-Tijani are ALL
authentic, they must be discarded for the sake of uniting the Ummah???!
Do you truly believe that the Ummah will be united by abandoning Allah’s
(SWT) commandments?

Does the above statement represent scholarly merit, or pure rhetoric,
ignorance, and hypocrisy on the part of that scholar? Is a scholar who
utters such words of ignorance worthy of being obeyed and listened to?
Who is he to tell Allah (SWT), the Creator of the Universe, and His
(SWT) Messenger (S) what is right and wrong? Does he know more than
Allah (SWT) about al-Taqiyya? Exalted be Allah (SWT) from being insulted
by those who lack all forms of intelligence to interpret His (SWT)
religion.

al-Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) (The Sixth Imam of Ahlul-Bayt) said:

"al-Taqiyya is my religion, and the religion of my ancestors.”He
(as)also said: "He who doesn’t practice al-Taqiyya, doesn’t practice his
religion."

In conclusion, I repeat my appeal to you to comprehend what I say in
these discussions. The Shi’a are Muslims, no doubt about it. Be your own
judge, and verify what I say here. Better yet, download everything and
go to the scholar that you trust the most; ask him to refute what the
Shi’a claim; and then judge whether he himself is honest or not.
Remember:

***"Let there be no compulsion in religion: Truth stands out clear from
error: Whoever rejects Taghoot and believes in Allah, (he) hath grasped
the most trustworthy hand- hold, that never breaks. And Allah heareth
and knoweth all things. (2:256)”***

Wassalam.


