Who Are Ahlul-Bayt? Part 5
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Mother Of Believers
-----------------------

One thing that our Sunni brothers/sisters usually say as means of
justifying Aisha is that she was "Ummul Mu’minin”-- the mother of
believers. In fact, Qur’an states that the wives of the Prophet (S) are
the mothers of the believers. But let us ponder the following points:

1. Let’s consider someone who is a believer. It naturally follows that
his mother becomes a mother of believer. Does it automatically mean that
his mother is also a good believer? Most certainly not! Being a mother
of believer does not make that mother a good believer and righteous. The
same argument applies for the mother of all the believers.

2. All the Sunni collections of traditions are replete with the
traditions reported by Ummul Mu’minin Aisha. The Prophet (S) had many
other wives, and all of them were mothers of believers. Many of the
wives of the Prophet were highly pious and righteous, such as Umm Salama
and Umm Ayman.

But unfortunately there are not many traditions from them in the Sihah
Sittah (not even 5% of what is conveyed by Aisha). But we hear from
Aisha in a bulk rate. Was it because she was the daughter of Abu Bakr?
Or because she was the only one among the wives of the Prophet who
fought Imam ‘Ali (as)?

3. According to Islam, a believer is required to respect his mother.
However, if such mother goes against the instruction of the Messenger of
Allah, conducts and leads the rebellions, and kills innocents, we are
religiously required to disassociate ourselves from such mother, and
more importantly, we can NOT trust such mother for transmitting the
traditions of the Prophet in such volume.

4. Indeed, there is a good reason why Allah gave them the title of
"Mothers of Believers.”Allah gave them this title in order to prevent
people to marry them after the demise of the Prophet (S). We cannot
marry our mother. Right?

If Allah wouldn’t have given this title to them, some influential people
would have married them and would probably have brought sons from them
and would have ordered people to follow them as the Ahlul-Bayt, or even
worst, they might have claimed that they are the real sons of the
Prophet and would have claimed prophethood for them and many more
possible dangerous consequences. As such, Allah (SWT) gave them this
title (the mother of believers) to prevent such marriages.

The Best Wife Of The Prophet Vs. The Most Envious
-------------------------------------------------

It is well-known among Muslims that the best wife of the Prophet (S) was
Khadija (ra). She was the first woman who embraced Islam and spent all
her wealth for the cause of Allah and the Prophet never married another
woman as long as Khadija was alive.

The Messenger of Allah gave the name of the best women of the world in
chronological order and one should not be surprised that the name of
Aisha is missing:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "The most excellent of the women of all
worlds whom Allah chose over all women are: Asiya the wife of Pharaoh,
Mary the daughter of Imran, Khadija the daughter of Khuwaylid, and
Fatimah the daughter of Muhammad."

Sunni references:

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, p702

• al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p157, who said this tradition is
authentic based on the criteria of two Shaikhs (al-Bukhari and Muslim)

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v3, p135

• Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p755, Tradition \#1325

• Hilyatul Awliyaa, by Abu Nu’aym, v2, p344

• Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p223

• al-Isti’ab, by Ibn Abd al-Barr, v4, p377

• al-Awsat by al-Tabarani, as well as Ibn Habban, etc.

Furthermore, Ibn Abbas (ra) narrated:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: Four women are the mistress of the
worlds: Mary, Asiya (the wife of Pharaoh), Khadija, and Fatimah. And the
most excellent one among them in the world is Fatimah."

Sunni references: Ibn Asakir, as quoted in Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor

Moreover, after the demise of Khadija (ra) when the Prophet (S) married
Aisha and others, he explicitly preferred some of them over Aisha and
said they are better than Aisha (see Sahih al-Tirmidhi; al-Isti’ab by
Ibn Abd al-Barr; and al-Isabah, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, in the
biography of Safiyya).

Also the verse:

***"Perhaps if he divorces you, his Lord will give him wives who are
better than you, who submit and believe (Qur’an 66:5)”***

clearly indicates that there were believing women among the Muslims who
were much better than Aisha.

Envy so controlled her heart and her mind that she conducted herself in
the presence of the Messenger of Allah (S) without respect or manners.
On one occasion, Aisha said to the Prophet (S), when he mentioned
Khadija in her presence:

Sahih Bukhari Hadith: 5.168.b

... Narrated Aisha: Once Hala Bint Khuwailid, Khadija’s sister, asked
the permission of the Prophet to enter. On that, the Prophet remembered
the way Khadija used to ask permission, and that made him sad. He said,
"O Allah! Hala!”So I became jealous and said, "What makes you remember
an old woman amongst the old women of Quraish an old woman (with a
teethless mouth) of red gums who died long ago, and in whose place Allah
has given you somebody better than her?"

The Prophet of Allah (S) became very angry at this until his hair stood.
(also reported in Muslim). Moreover, al-Bukhari narrated that Aisha
confessed:

Sahih Bukhari Hadith: 5.166

Narrated Aisha:

I did not feel jealous of any of the wives of the Prophet as much as I
did of Khadija though I did not see her, but the Prophet used to mention
her very often, and whenever he slaughtered a sheep, he would cut its
parts and send them to the women friends of Khadija. When I sometimes
said to him, "(You treat Khadija in such a way) as if there is no woman
on earth except Khadija,”he would say, "Khadija was such-and-such, and
from her I had children."

Khadija was the foremost believing woman, to whom Gabriel gave
Greetings, and was given the glad tidings of Paradise:

Sahih Bukhari Hadith: 9.588

Narrated Abu Huraira:

The Prophet said that Gabriel said, "Here is Khadija coming to you with
a dish of food or a tumbler containing something to drink. Convey to her
a greeting from her Lord (Allah) and give her the glad tidings that she
will have a palace in Paradise built of Qasab wherein there will be
neither any noise nor any fatigue (trouble)."

Similar traditions was reported by the authority of Isma’il and Aisha
(See Sahih al-Bukhari, Traditions: 3.19, 5.164, 5.165, 5.167, 5.168,
7.156, 8.33, and 9.576).

When Aisha was jealous, she would exceed her bounds and would do strange
things like breaking dishes or tearing clothes. On another occasion when
the Prophet was in the house of Aisha, one of the mothers of the
believers (namely Safiyya) sent to the Prophet a dish that he really
loved. She destroyed the dish, together with the food in it. Let us see
how Aisha herself described this episode:

Aisha said: "Safiyya, the wife of the Prophet (S), sent a dish she had
made for him when he was with me. When I saw the maidservant, I trembled
with rage and fury, and I took the bowl and hurled it away. The Prophet
of Allah (S) then looked at me; I saw the anger in his face and I said
to him: ‘I seek refuge from Allah’s Apostle cursing me today.’ The
Prophet said: ‘Undo it’. I said: ‘What is its compensation, O Prophet of
Allah?’ He said: ‘The food like her food, and a bowl like her bowl.’"

Sunni references:

• Musnad, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v6, p227

• Sahih al-Nisa’i, v2, p148

Al-Bukhari confirms this episode as well:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 7.152 (The Chapter of Envy)

Narrated Anas:

While the Prophet was in the house of one of his wives, one of the
mothers of the believers sent a meal in a dish. The wife at whose house
the Prophet was, struck the hand of the servant, causing the dish to
fall and break.

The Prophet gathered the broken pieces of the dish and then started
collecting on them the food which had been in the dish and said, "Your
mother (my wife) felt jealous.”Then he detained the servant till a
(sound) dish was brought from the wife at whose house he was. He gave
the sound dish to the wife whose dish had been broken and kept the
broken one at the house where it had been broken.

And on another occasion, speaking of herself:

Aisha said: "I said to the Prophet (S) ‘Enough for you about Safiyya is
such and such.’ The Prophet of Allah (S) said to me: ‘You have uttered
words which, if they were mixed with the waters of the sea, would color
it.’"

Sunni reference: Sahih al-Tirmidhi, and al-Zamakhshari has related it
from him on, p73

By this Aisha was trying to disclose Safiyya’s faults. Glory be to
Allah! How far was this mother of the believers away from the ethics and
basic rights which Islam has enjoined concerning forbidding of
backbiting and slander? No doubt her speech: "Enough for you about
Safiyya is such and such”and the response of the Prophet of Allah (S)
"You have uttered words which, if they were mixed with the waters of the
sea, would color it”shows what Aisha had said regarding Safiyya was a
grave thing and of immense concern. The narrators of the Hadith found it
repulsive, and since they respected her, they changed the words to "so
and so”as is their normal practice in such scandals.

And here is Aisha, the mother of the believers, narrating, once again,
of her envy of Mariya (another mother of the believers). Aisha said:

"I have never been as jealous of any woman as I have been of Mariya.
That was because she had beautiful ringlets. She used to stay in the
house of Haritha Ibn al-Numan. We frightened her and I became concerned.
The Prophet of Allah (S) sent her to a higher place and he would visit
her there. That was very hard upon us, and then Allah blessed him with a
boy through her and we shunned him".

Sunni references:

• al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v8, p212

• al-Ansab al-Ashraf, by al-Baladhuri, v1, p339

Aisha’s jealousy went beyond the person of Mariya, and was directed even
against Ibrahim, the innocent, newly born suckling baby:

Aisha said: "When Ibrahim was born, the Prophet of Allah (S) brought him
to me and said: ‘Look how much he resembles me.’ I said: ‘I do not see
any resemblance.’ The Prophet of Allah (S) said: ‘Don’t you see how
robust and fair he is?"‘ Aisha said: "I said: ‘Whoever is fed with the
milk of sheep becomes fair and robust.’"

Sunni references:

• al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v1, p37

• also in al-Ansab al-Ashraf, by al-Baladhuri

Aisha was very partial and yielded to emotions and selfish motives. When
some people maliciously accused Mariya (the wife of the Prophet), she
was Aisha who supported the accusers and tried to confirm the false
blame.

But Allah, the Mighty and Glorious, absolved her from blame and saved
her from injustice, through the Commander of Believers, Imam ‘Ali (as).
(For details refer to the account of Lady Mariya, may Allah be gracious
to her, in al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v4, p30, or Talkhis of
al-Mustadrak, by al-Dhahabi).

When she was overcome by suspicion and devilish insinuation, her
jealousy crossed all boundaries and was beyond the expression of words,
leading her to suspect the Prophet of Allah (S). Quite often, she used
to pretend to be asleep when the Prophet stayed the night at her house,
but, in fact, she would closely observe her husband, spying upon him in
the darkness, following behind where he went. Here is a report, in her
own words, which was narrated by Muslim in his Sahih, and Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal in his Musnad and other Sunni scholars:

Aisha said: When it was my turn for Allah’s Messenger to spend the night
with me, he turned his side, put on his mantle, and took off his shoes
and placed them near his feet and spread the corner of his shawl on his
bed and then lay down till he thought that I had gone to sleep.

He then took hold of his mantle and put on the shoes slowly, and opened
the door and went out and then closed the door lightly. I covered my
head, put on my veil, and tightened my waist wrapper, and then went out
following his steps till he reached (the cemetery of) al-Baqi.

He stood there for a long time and then he lifted his hand three times
and then returned, and I also returned. He hastened his steps and I also
hastened my steps. He ran and I also ran. He came (to the home) and I
also came (to the home). I, however, preceded him and entered and lay
down on the bed. He entered and said: Why is it, O Aisha, that you are
out of breath? I said: There is nothing. He said: Tell me or the Subtle
and the Aware will inform me. I told him the story. He said: Was it the
darkness (of your shadow) that I saw in front of me? I said: Yes. He
struck me on the chest which caused me pain and the said: Did you think
Allah and His Apostle would deal unjustly with you?

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, chapter CCCLII (titled: What is to be
said while visiting the graveyard), v2, pp 461-462, Tradition \#2127

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
pp 669-670, Tradition \#103

• Musnad, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v6, p147

On another occasion, she said:

"I lost track of the Prophet of Allah (S), and I suspected that he had
gone to another of his wives. I went looking for him and I found him in
prostration, saying. "O My Lord! Forgive me"

Sunni reference: Musnad, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v6, p147

On another occasion:

Aisha said: "One night, when he was with me, the Messenger of Allah (S)
went out". She said: "I became jealous. When he came and saw what I had
done, he said: ‘What is the matter, O Aisha? Are you jealous?’ I
replied: ‘And why should not those like me be jealous of those like
you?’ The Prophet of Allah (S) then said: ‘Has your devil taken
possession of you?’".

Sunni reference: Musnad, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v6, p115

No doubt Aisha was quite often overcome or confused by her devil, for he
found a way to her heart through jealousy. It has been narrated that the
Prophet (S) said: "Jealousy for a man is faith and for a woman
disbelief", meaning that a man may get jealous concerning his wife, for
his wife is not religiously allowed to have sexual relation with another
man.

The woman, however, does not have the right to be jealous of her
husband, because Allah, Glory be to Him, has allowed him to marry more
than one wife. An upright and believing woman who submits to the rulings
of Allah, accepts her co-wife wholeheartedly, especially if her husband
is just, upright, and God-fearing. How about the leader of humanity, the
symbol of perfection and justice, and the most noble character, the
Messenger of Allah?

Once the Prophet asked Aisha to collect certain information about a
particular woman, namely, Sharraf, the sister of Dihya al-Kalbi. The
information that she conveyed to him was not the information she had
gathered, but wrong information prompted by selfish motives. When the
Prophet (S) informed her of the truth of what she had observed, Aisha
replied: "O Prophet of Allah! No secret is unknown to you. Who is able
to hide anything from you?"

Sunni references:

• Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v6, p294

• al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v8, p115

She said once she addressed to the Messenger of Allah: "I smell Maghafir
(a kind of flower having a very bad odor) from you.”She said this in
order to prevent him from visiting the house of Umm al-Mu’minin Zainab
(ra) and eating honey there. This is the claim of Aisha. No other people
mentioned this. As I will point out shortly, the story said by Umar
regarding the revelation of divorce verses, is much different than the
context of what Aisha said.

Sahih Bukhari Hadith: 6.434

Narrated Aisha:

Allah’s Apostle used to drink honey in the house of Zainab, the daughter
of Jahsh, and would stay there with her. So Hafsa and I agreed secretly
that, if he come to either of us, she would say to him "It seems you
have eaten Maghafir (a kind of bad-smelling resin), for I smell in you
the smell of Maghafir."

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith 7.192

Narrated ‘Ubaid bin Umar:

I heard Aisha saying, "The Prophet used to stay for a long while with
Zainab Bint Jahsh and drink honey at her house. So Hafsa and I decided
that if the Prophet came to anyone of us, she should say him, "I detect
the smell of Maghafir (a nasty smelling gum) in you. Have you eaten
Maghafir?’... So there was revealed: ‘O Prophet! Why do you ban (for
you) that which Allah has made lawful for you . . . If you two (wives of
Prophet) turn in repentance to Allah,’ (66:1-4) addressing Aisha and
Hafsa. ‘When the Prophet disclosed a matter in confidence to some of his
wives.’(66:3)

Tradition 8.682 of Sahih al-Bukhari is also similar to above and is
narrated by Aisha himself. No other person narrated the story of honey
in connection with the divorce verses. Please also see the previous
article where we mentioned Sahih al-Bukhari, Tradition 7.119. In that
tradition which is narrated by Umar, the Prophet (S) did not enter to
the house of Aisha and Hafsa for one full month as a punishment for
their aggressive actions.

Considering the compassionate and the gentle personality of the Prophet
(S), such severe punishment and the threat to divorce just for their
saying to the Prophet "You smell Maghafir”(as Aisha claimed) does not
seem reasonable. Qur’an confirms that the charges against Hafsa and
Aisha was revealing a secret news:

When the Prophet disclosed a matter in confidence to one of his wives
(i.e., Hafsa) and she then divulged it (i.e., to Aisha) and Allah made
it known to him, he made known (to her) part thereof and passed over
part. Then when he (i.e., the Prophet) told her thereof, she said: "Who
told you this?”He said "He who knows and is well-aware (of all things)
told me.”(Qur’an 66.3)

It seems that the report of Umar is more accurate. Umar said: "The
Prophet kept away from his wives for twenty-nine days because of the
story which Hafsa had disclosed to Aisha.”(See Sahih al-Bukhari 7.119
and 6.435). This is much different than the story made by Aisha about
honey.

After one month that the Prophet deserted his wives, and when the words
of Allah: "You may defer any one of them you wish and take to your self
any you wish and there is no sin for you to take back any of them you
have (temporarily) set aside (33:51)”were revealed, Aisha said to the
Prophet:

"It seems to me that your Lord hastens to satisfy your desire!"

Sunni references:

• Sahih Muslim, English version, Chapter DLXXII (titled: Permissibility
of bestowing the turn on one’s fellow wife), v2, pp 748-749, Traditions
\#3453-3454

• Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, 1980 Edition Pub. in Saudi Arabia, v2,
pp 1085-1086, Traditions \#49-50

Her evil conduct in the presence of the Prophet of Allah (S) reached a
point that while he was praying, she would spread her feet towards his
direction of prostration. When he prostrated and pinched them, she
retracted them. When he stood up for the rest of the prayer, she would
spread her feet out again:

Sahih Bukhari Hadith: 1.492 & 1.379

Narrated Aisha:

"I used to sleep in front of Allah’s Apostle with my legs opposite his
Qibla (facing him); and whenever he prostrated, he pushed my feet and I
withdrew them and whenever he stood, I stretched them."

One day, in the presence of her father, she started a quarrel with the
Prophet and told him: "Be just.”Her father punished her for the
impudence by giving a powerful a slap on her face so that she bled
profusely and the blood ran onto her clothes.

Sunni references:

• Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v7, p116, Tradition \#1020

• Ihyaa al-Ulum, by al-Ghazzali, Chapter 3, Bab al-Nikah, v2, p35

• Mukashifat al-Qulub, by al-Ghazzali, Chapter 94, p238

If Aisha got angry at the Prophet - which she did quite often - she
would avoid uttering the name of the Prophet (S). She would not mention
the name of Muhammad, but rather used to say: "By the Lord of
Abraham”(Sahih al-Bukhari, Arabic-English version, Tradition \#7.155 and
\#8.101, The Chapter of Jealousy and Wiles of a woman).

Once she angrily said to the Messenger of Allah (S):

"It is you who pretend to be a prophet from Allah."

Sunni references:

• Ihyaa al-Ulum, by al-Ghazzali, Chapter 3, v2, p29, The Book on the
Etiquettes of Marriage

• Mukashifat al-Qulub, by al-Ghazzali, Chapter 94

Subhana Allah!!! This is the Messenger of Allah, and submitting to his
order is obligatory for every believing men and women. Disputing him is
a sign of great impurity and the one who does that cannot be regarded as
pure and righteous since s/he has committed a grave sin, let alone
casting doubt on the prophethood of Muhammad (S).


