Side Comments on al-Taqiyya
===========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Wahhabi contributor mentiond:

Taqqiyah means to pretend by doing or saying exactly the opposite of
what you believe or feel

Not a correct definition. It does not necessarily have to be in exact
opposite, though it might be so in some cases. al-Taqiyya is primarily
concealing the belief. You might want to refresh your memory by reading
my original article in which I mentioned the definition of al-Taqiyya as

"Concealing or disguising one’s beliefs, convictions, ideas,
feelings,opinions, and/or strategies at a time of eminent danger,
whether now or later in time, to save oneself from physical and/or
mental injury."

e.g. to pretend to be nice while cursing the person in the heart without
a present danger (al-Kafi fi alFrua’, Vol. 3, pp. 188-9).

Again you are scrupulously quoting from a 33-page booklet written by
"Saeed Ismaeel". The minimum amount of decency requires you to mention
this since you did not directly looked up the above tradition. I doubt
even Saeed Ismaeel (your mentor) has also touched al-Kafi. He got them
from the books of "Ihsan Ilahi Zahir”and "Muhammad Manzoor Nomani", etc.
I have read the books of these individuals from cover to cover. What I
have found was malicious misquotations or quoting the traditions out of
context. Sometimes they do not even bother themselves to quote the
tradition (even partially) similar to above.

We do not have any authentic tradition which sates you may apply
al-Taqiyya without present or future danger. If you think otherwise,
please quote a tradition which explicitly states the above. These are
all interpretation of your mentors from the traditions. No tradition
explicitly states as such.

The danger might be present of later in time. Also the danger might be
for oneself our for another person related to you. As such, the Imam may
conceal some information from his own followers, if he knows that if
they do that they will be trapped into the hand of officials.

In fact, I have seen some Wahhabis, to mock Shi’a in the concept of
Taqiyya, refer to a tradition in Usul Kafi and partially quote it out of
context in order to misrepresent the concept of Taqiyya for the Sunni
brothers. The correct translation of the tradition that they refer to,
is as follows:

Usul Kafi, Tradition \#195:

Zurarah said: I asked Abu Ja’far (as) a question, for which the Imam
gave me an answer. Afterwards another person came to the Imam and asked
him the same question but Imam gave him a different answer.

Again, a third person came and asked Imam the same question to which
Imam gave an answer which was still different from mine and the second
person. When the two had left, I asked "O son of Prophet, two of your
followers from Iraq asked you a question and you gave them two different
answers.”Hearing this, the Imam replied, "O Zurarah, these different
answers are in our own interests and they contribute to the stability of
both (me and my followers). (In such severe moments) if all of you
present a unite stand, it will enable the people (opponents and rulers)
to verify the allegiance of yours to us and this will endanger and
shorten the life of you (Shi’ites) as well as the life of ours."

I have seen these Wahhabis that they quote the first part of the
tradition and drop the explanation of Imam to show that Imam applied
al-Taqiyya two his own followers with no reason. From the tradition, it
is not clear what exactly the question of those followers was. However
the clarification of the Imam at the end implies that the question was
related to some social and political actions which were planted by the
ruler of the time in order to identify and trap the Shi’ites. This is
exactly what al-Taqiyya is used for. Note that the Imam is emphasizing
that he is preserving the life of his followers as well as the
Ahlul-Bayt.

Another example is explained by another tradition where the Imam
attended the funeral prayer of one of the officials who was a hypocrite
form Umayad Government, in order to fool the authorities which would
cause to decrease the prosecution of Ahlul-Bayt and their followers.
These kinds of diplomacies were widely used even by Prophet (S) himself.

Have you ever thought why Prophet applied al-Taqiyya and did not
disclose his mission for the first three years of his prophethood? It
was because, if he have done that, Islam would have been destroyed from
the very beginning.

The specific purpose of Taqqiyah is the "preservation of Islam and the
Shii school of thought; if the people had not resorted to it, our school
of thought would have been destroyed"

If the Prophet applied al-Taqiyya for the first three years of his
prophethood, and concealed his mission, then why not Shi’a do that to
escape the prosecutions of so-called Islamic governors? Was the Prophet
a coward? Or he wanted to preserve Islam from being destroyed?

Also let me give you another example from another prophet who concealed
his belief. Qur’an states that: Moses (as) with the order of Allah,
assigned Haroon (as) as his successor (Caliph) and left his people to
him, to go to Miqaat (appointment with Allah) for a total of forty days.
After leaving of Moses, all his companions (except very few) turned
against Haroon, and were deceived by Sameri, and became worshipers of a
golden calf. (See Qur’an 7:142, 20:90-97, 20:83-88).

When Moses (as) came back from Miqaat he was very angry since Allah had
informed him that his community went astray during his absence. Moses
came and started questioning his brother Haroon, that why he did not
take action to prevent this corruption. Qur’an states that Haroon
replied:

***"(O’ Moses) people did oppress me and they were about to kill
me.”(Qur’an 7:150).***

If you believe in Haroon as a true prophet of God, you do not allow
yourself to call him coward. Or do you think that Aaron was a Shi’a? In
fact, he was a Shi’a (follower) of Prophet Moses (as). It was his duty
to save his life, though it appears that Wahhabis think he should have
killed himself.

As Ibn Taymiyyah said, the verse 3:28 about Taqiyyah is applicable in
the case of a non-believer only under special cases, e.g., a Muslim
cannot apply it against a Muslim.

A so-called Muslim who prosecute an innocent person, is not any better
than a non-Muslim. If you look around the world, from Saudi Arabia, to
Iraq, to Afghanistan,... the majority of those who prosecute Muslims
call themselves Muslims too. If you look at the History also, they
majority of Muslim rulers who called themselves Muslims and Khalifa,
were oppressors and tyrant (like Umayad and Abbasid Caliphs). Are you
suggesting that we should not safeguard our lives from those tyrants who
label themselves as Muslims?

Moreover, by his above saying, Ibn Taymiyyah did not accept Sahih Muslim
as authentic, or else Ibn Taymiyyah has rejected the testimony of
Prophet (S). Even the Prophet (S) himself practiced al-Taqiyya in a
manner of diplomacy that served to advance good relations among the
people.

The tradition from Sahih Muslim which I mentioned in my article talks
about Muslims. In the case that there is a dispute between two Muslims
to such extent that it is considered as an eminent danger, and if
nothing else works, it is permitted to twist the words in order to make
the reconciliation. You see, there always exists a requirement of an
eminent DANGER for al-Taqiyya. For instance, the danger of divorce for a
Muslim couple who have a dispute. The commentary of the tradition talks
about Muslims too.

Verse 16:106 is applicable only when a Muslim faces a situation smilar
to a situation of the great Companion Ammar when he had to choose
between dying under torture like his parents or pretending to be an
unbeliever hy tongue These cases are not the basic rule but only
exceptions

This a basic rule, otherwise Allah would not have mentioned it in Qur’an
in a number of verses.

Could you ever trust a Muslim if this were the case?

If a Muslim is not in danger he should not apply al-Taqiyya, the same
way that I do not apply al-Taqiyya behind this terminal. But if I were
in a country like Saudi Arabia, then I would have practiced it.

If a person considers that Iying about Allah, His Prophet (pbuh) and the
Muslims to serve his biased and misguided goals as an essential part of
his bliefs, can we trust him? Surely not. But who said so?

The verse (3:28) is not only an exception but also a restricted
exception. Not only is it forbidden to be used against Muslims but it
also does not give permission to lie to others. What it means is that if
you oppose certain behaviors and you are in a situation where
condemnation would endanger Islam or Muslim community you can keep
silent but you must avoid Iying. (ibn Taymiyah, Minhaj, Vol. p. 213 and
ibn Kathir, Tafseer).

Again, the saying of your "clergymen”such as Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn
Kathir is clearly in contradiction with Qur’an where Allah stated:

***"Any one who, after accepting Faith in Allah, utters unbelief, except
under compulsion while his heart remaining firm in faith... (Qur’an
16:106)***

As you see, Qur’an states "uttering unbelief". This does not mean
keeping silent. Uttering means either saying or acting something in
contrary to belief. What lie is bigger than uttering unbelief?

Also, if the most authentic Sunni collections of Hadith such as Sahih
al- Bukhari and Sahih Muslim advocate al-Taqiyya, then why do Wahhabis
insist to the contrary? Is this not a sign of pure hypocrisy by itself?


