Did Muhammad Receive Revelation by Mistake?!
============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The following article is adopted from the "Shi’ites Under Attack”by
Muhammad Jawad Chirri with some modification.

Do The Shi’ite Muslims Say That The Revelation Came To Muhammad By Mistake, And That It Was Intended For ‘Ali?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This (false accusation is) widely spread in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and
other Arab countries in order to discredit the followers of the members
of the House of the Prophet. This accusation was made during periods of
oppression against the Shiites. The rulers of the periods of the Omayads
and Abbasids used to consider every follower of the Members of the House
of the Prophet revolutionary and dangerous. They conspired against these
Shiites and accused them of heresy and disbelief in order to encourage
the Muslims to shed their blood and usurp their rights and wealth.

The centuries of oppression passed with all their injustices and
terrors. It was expected that during the new period of freedom, the
mistakes of the past would be corrected. It was hoped that Muslim
scholars would make a serious study in order to see if there is any
justification for such terrible accusations.

It is very easy to know the truth.

There are hundreds of books written by Shiite scholars about their
beliefs. Had the Sunni scholars read any of these books, they would have
found that the Shiite beliefs are in full agreement with the Book of God
and the well- known statements of the Prophet.

We are living in the era of speed and easy movement. It is easy for
Muslim scholars to have conferences, discuss problems, and find
solutions.

The simplest principle of justice is to follow the commandment of the
Holy Qur’an:

"Oh you who believe, if a transgressor comes to you with news, try to
verify it, lest you inflict damage on people unwittingly; then you may
consequently regret your hasty action”(ch. 49, v.6)

The Almighty commanded us to try to find out whether an accusation is
true or false, and that we ought not to try people and convict them
without questioning them.

We do not know of any court in the world in which the judge convicts a
person before interviewing him, provided the accused is available and
honors the summons.

In spite of the ease with which one can find the correct information
nowadays, we find that those who accuse and spread hatred among Muslims
do not take one single step in order to find the truth which may unite
the Muslim world.

While writing these words, I recollect that the Egyptian government
during the fifties sent the late Dr. Muhammad Bisar to Washington, D.C.,
as director of the Islamic Center there. I went to visit him and he
received me kindly and informed me of the knowledge that he had acquired
concerning  
 American Muslims. He initiated a dialogue between us, saying:

"Some of the Muslims in this country asked me about the various Islamic
sects. I declared to them that all Muslim sects are good except the
Shiite Ithnashari."

I immediately realized that R. Bisar did not know the meaning of Shiite
Ithnashari. Otherwise, he would not have been rude enough to say that to
me while I am a Shiite Ithnashari (meaning The Twelvers). Thus, we had
the following dialogue:

Chirri: What is wrong with the Ithnashari?

Bisar: They believe in things opposed to Islam.

Chirri: Give us an example of their wrong belief.

Bisar: They say the revelation came to Muhammad by mistake, and that
‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib was supposed to receive the revelation.

Chirri: How did you learn that?

Bisar: I read it in the book of al-milal and al-nihal by al-Shahristani.

Chirri: Have you asked any Shiite scholar about this subject?

Bisar: No, I have not.

Chirri: Then you have convicted millions of Muslims and considered them
"kafir”without asking any of them about this serious accusation. Did the
Almighty command you to do that? And did Egypt send you to propagate
such (an unjust) message?

A year after our meeting in Washington, I met Dr. Bisar in Philadelphia
at an Islamic conference. He informed me that he re-examined the book of
al- milal and al-nihal by al-Shihristani and found that what was
attributed to Shiites, that the revelation came to Muhammad by mistake,
was not the  
 belief of the Ithnashari Shiite school of thought. It was rather, a
sect which existed and disappeared hundreds of years ago. Hearing that
from him, I accepted his apology. Yet, I was amazed that it took him a
whole year to re-read the book and discover the truth.

I spent years studying hadith and Islamic history in books which were
written by Sunni and Ithnashari scholars. I never found in any Shiite
book a hadith or a historical report indicating that ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib
was hugher than or equal to Muhammad. As a matter of fact, I found only
the opposite. The Shittes consider ‘Ali to be the best man after the
Messenger because he was the most obedient to him.

One of the hadith which the Shiites pride themselves upon is a hadith
attributed to the Messenger of God:

The Prophet (S) said to the tribe of Wolai-ah:

"Bani Wolai-ah, you must change your attitude, or I shall send to you a
man who is from me to punish you severely."

Some of the people who were present asked the Prophet "Who is the man
you are going to send to them?”The Prophet replied: "He is the man who
was patching the sole of my shoes.”They looked around and found ‘Ali
patching the sole of the Prophet’s shoes.

Sunni references:

- Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, p634  
 - Fada’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Hanbal, v2, p571, Tradition \#966  
 - al-Riyad al-Nadirah, by al-Muhib al-Tabari, v3, p152  
 - Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, v1, p349  
 - Matalib al-’Aliyah, v4, p56  
 - Majma’ al-Zawa’id, by al-Haythami, v9, p163

It is inconceivable that the Shiites can be proud of the fact that ‘Ali
was the patcher of the Prophet Muhammad’s shoes and claim that the Imam
is higher than or equal to the Prophet. Therefore, I do not find any
justification for directing such an accusation at the Shiites who
glorify the Prophet the most.

The Shiites say that the highest honor that Imam ‘Ali acquired is that
he was chosen by the Prophet to be his brother. When the Prophet
commanded every two Muslims to become brothers, he held ‘Ali’s hand and
said, "This is my brother.”Thus, the Messenger of God, the highest
Messenger, the Imam of all righteous people, the one who had no equal
among the servants of God, made ‘Ali his brother. (Al-Seerah
Al-Nabawiyah, by Ibn Hisham, part 1, p505).

Side Comments
-------------

A Wahhabi mentioned that:  
 There was a sect that claimed Gibreel (Alaihi Alsalam) erred in
delivering the message. This sect were called the "Sheeah Ghurabiah".
They might no longer exist by that name -- and they are a different sect
than the Twelvers sect. ...

Dear friend, the Ghurabiyyah and similar sects are fictitious sects
created y some story tellers such as al-Shahrastani and Abdul-Qahir Ibn
Tahir al- Baghdadi, etc.

Nonetheless, we do not deny that there existed some extremist sects (al-
Ghulat) who departed from the body of Shi’a, who believed ‘Ali is God,
or those who believed in incarnation (Hulool). The reason was that they
found so many virtues in Imam ‘Ali, and by their narrow-minded-brain,
they could not believe that a human can possess all such virtues. As a
result of that, they believed in the deity of ‘Ali. Surely they have
gone astray. Thanks to God that they have perished in the course of
History in a great deal.

However the leaders of such extremist groups and other deviated groups
from Shi’a (whose leaders falsely claimed to be Imams) were not as
simple minded as their followers. Those leaders were agents of the
tyrranical rullers and their activities were purely political.

The Imams of Ahlul-Bayt and their followers disassociated themselves
from these groups who were being established by the governments of each
era to deviate the followers of Ahlul-Bayt and to destroy their path by
keeping them away from the Imams and moving them toward the puppets of
governments.

But these groups were melting down few months after their appearance,
since people soon recognized the falsehood and ignorance of their
leaders and their connection with the rulers, and thus people did not
subscribe to these groups. A group without followers can not live for
long, and its leader becomes out of business shortly after. Allah,
Exalted He is, said in Qur’an:

"... and in this way, Allah strikes the examples of truth and falsehood.
Then, as for the bubbles, it passes away (like disappearance of
scum/foam upon the banks), while that which is for the good of mankind,
remains in the earth...”(Qur’an 13:17)

What remained from these artificial groups was just a history written by
those officials (who created those groups in the first place) which also
includes fictitious stories.

We do not call such bankrupt groups Shi’a. From the demise of Prophet
till today, the followers of Imam ‘Ali (as) are The Twelver Shi’ites.
There are however few Zaydis and Ismailis around the world. Although the
majority of scholars believe that they are Muslims (except those of them
who abandoned the Islamic practices), yet we consider them out of the
circle of Ahlul- Bayt. All other groups such as Alavi (or Nudhayri),
etc. are NOT Shi’a for sure, and their emergance did not have anything
to do with the Shi’a. To be a Shi’a one should meet all the following
specifications:

1. Believing in all the articles of faith. These are comon amongst
Muslims.

2. Believing that Imam ‘Ali is the immediate successor/executor of the
Prophet Muhammad (S), appointed by Allah.

3. Believing that one should follow the genuine Sunnah of Prophet, and
this Sunnah is transmitted by Ahlul-Bayt who are pure and sinless
according to Qur’an. Furthermore, the instructions of the twelve Imams
of Ahlul-Bayt are binding since they are in fact the instructions of the
Prophet (S).

4. Believing that Imam Mahdi (as), the son of the 11th Imam is the Imam
of our time and is living (contrary to the majority of Sunnis who
believe he will be born later).

If any of the above conditions is missing for a person, he is not
considered to be a Shi’a. Also in contrary to the rumors, to curse any
of the companions is not a part of our belief.

The wahhabi contributor further mentioned:

The muslims who say one of the beliefs of shia is the above are not
wrong; therefore, because the Ghurabi sect is a part of the shiaah
herecy throught the history - but to attribute this claim to the  
 Ithnaasharis "official”beleifs is not just to say the least.

It is interesting to see that the above writer forgot that many deviant
groups departed from the body of Sunnis such as Nation of Islam who
believe God was a human, yet I haven’t heard of any Shi’a to say:

The muslims who say one of the beliefs of Sunni is the above are not
wrong, because the Nation of Islam parted from the Sunnis - but to
attribute this claim to the "official”beleifs of Sunnis is not just  
 to say the least.

You may replace the "nation of Islam”with "Ahmadis", "Qadianis", ... and
the followers of Muhammad Ibn Abdil Wahhab, and you can see how silly
the above statement is going to be. Thanks to God that Shi’a do not
attribute such things to the four Sunni schools.


