Imamat versus Prophethood Part 2
================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Difference Between Nabi And Rasool
----------------------------------

In Arabic there are no separate words for Messenger and Apostle. The
distinction is between Nabi (Prophet) and Rasool (Messenger or Apostle).

1- Nabi (=Prophet)  
 2- Rasool (=Messenger=Apostle)

Note that the degree of prophethood is lower than the degree of
messengership/apostleship.

By definition:

1. A Prophet (Nabi) is a person to whom the Divine Law (Shari’ah)
descends; this divine law may be concerned with beliefs (\`aqa-id) or
with practical activities (Ibadat, like prayer). This Divine Law either
deals with the Nabi’s OWN life or with that of his community; or both.

This is the fundamental definition of prophethood, though the prophet
may also be informed of other things. The descent of the Divine Law
(Shari’ah) may be direct, or through an intermediary like an angel.

2. A Human Messenger/Apostle (Rasool) is a Prophet who receives a Divine
Law that concerns himself and people other than himself. So every
(human) Rasool is Nabi, while the reverse is not true. Also every Nabi
whom Qur’an has mentioned along with a community (Umma), is consequently
a Rasool.

Thus when Qur’an states that Muhammad (S) is the last Prophet (33:40),
then by the above definition, he is the last Messenger/Apostle also.
Note that the word "Human”is important in the definition of Rasool
because the Qur’an uses the term "Rasool”also for angels who issue a
command at the will of Allah (SWT):

***"Allah chooses Messengers from ANGELS and from men, for Allah is He
Who hears and sees (all things). (Qur’an 22:75)"***

***"There came Our Messengers to Abraham with glad tidings. They said,
"Peace!”he answered, "Peace!”and hastened to entertain them with a
roasted calf. (Qur’an 11:69)"***

***"When Our Messengers came to Lut, he was grieved on their account and
felt himself powerless (to protect) them. He said: This is a distressful
day. (Qur’an 11:77)"***

***"(The Messengers) said: O Lut! we are Messengers from thy
Lord!...(Qur’an 11:81)"***

----Also see: 7:37, 15:57, 15:61, 19:19, 29:31, 29:33.

However, a Nabi is only a human being -- no angel can be called a Nabi.
So every (human) Rasool is a Nabi, while every human Nabi is not
necessarily a Rasool.

The number of Messengers (Rusul) is less than the number of Prophets
(Nabiyoon); and every Rasool received a book, while some Nabees received
abook. In addition, since he has to convince his people to accept a new
religion with new practices, a Rasool’s work is much harder than that of
a Nabi.

This is on top of the fact that people’s needs, minds, and abilities
have changed; and accepting a new religion is not an easy task. This is
while a Nabi’s new religious instructions are for himself (unless he is
a Rasool). Surely a Nabi invites people toward Allah (SWT); however, he
does not set any new practices for the people. So, in essence, if a Nabi
is NOT a Rasool, the people that he invites to Allah (SWT) would be
ordered to follow the custom and practices of a previous Rasool.

Among Rasools, however, there are five individuals who are higher than
the others. As you might know, the only difference between those five
and other rasools is that they are assigned universally (for the whole
mankind at their time), while the rest of rasools were locally (just for
one city or area). My recollection is that the word ‘Alameen and/or
Jamee’an has been used in Qur’an for Prophet Jesus (as) supporting this
idea.

Once a Bahai claimed that Rasools (who came before Bab!) were only those
five who had book. But the rest were Nabi. This is not correct since
Qur’an states that Dawood had Zaboor and yet he is not counted among
those five great Messengers. So he is Rasool because he brought a book
for people.

Imam/Muhaddath
--------------

Imam means a person who is appointed by God as a leader and as a guide
(see Qur’an 21:73 and 32:24) to whom obedience is due, and whom people
should follow. Messengers are Warners and Imams are Guides (13:7). Imams
are the Stars of Guidance (6:97).

Imam does not receive divine revelation about Sharia (divine law). He
does not receive any commands concerning new religous paractices, and so
on.

However, he may be informed of the events about the past and future.
Another difference between Rasool and Nabi and Muhaddath (i.e., Imam) is
on how they communicate with the angels, and is given in Usul Kafi,
kitabul Hujjah usder verse 22:52:

Rasool sees and hears the angel in awakness and sleep. Nabi hears the
angel and sees him while asleep, but does not see him while awake though
hears the speech. Imam (muhaddith) is the one who hears the angel in
awakness while does not see him in awakness or sleep.

In the previous part we quoted from Qur’an that Mary (as) had
communication with angels. If according to Sahih al-Bukhari, Fatimah
(sa) was the best of ladies in this world and in hereafter, then why
can’t she communicate with the angels?

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 4.819

Narrated ‘Aisha:

The Messenger of Allah said to Fatimah (who was crying at her father’s
deathbed): "Are you not satisfied that you are the chief of all the
ladies of Paradise or the chief of all the believing women?"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما ترضين أن تكوني سيدة نساء أهل الجنة أو نساء المؤمنين؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Furthermore, Ibn Abbas (ra) narrated:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: Four women are the mistress of the
worlds: Mary, Asiya (the wife of Pharaoh), Khadija, and Fatimah. And the
most excellent one among them in the world is Fatimah."

Sunni references: Ibn Asakir, as quoted in Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor

For those who love Sahih al-Bukhari, I will quote this book once more
which confirms that Lady Fatimah (sa) had, indeed, communication with
Gabriel:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 5.739

Narrated Anas:

When the ailment of the Prophet (S) got aggravated, he became
unconscious whereupon Fatimah said, "Oh, how distressed my father is!”

He said, "Your father will have no more distress after today.”When he
expired, she said, "O Father! Who has responded to the call of the Lord
Who has invited him! O Father, whose dwelling place is the Garden of
Paradise (i.e. al-Firdaus)! O Father! We convey this news (of your
death) to Gabriel.”When he was buried, Fatimah said, "O Anas! Do you
feel pleased to throw earth over Allah’s Apostle?"

Not only that, but also Sunnis reported that Imam Hasan Ibn ‘Ali has
said that Gabriel used to descend to Ahlul-Bayt. It is reported that
Imam al- Hasan Ibn ‘Ali (as) said the following in a discourse which he
delivered on the martyrdom of Imam ‘Ali:

"I am from the Ahlul-Bayt that Gabriel used to descend on us and ascend
(back to heavens) from among us."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّا من أهل البيت الذي كان جبرئيل ينزل إلينا و يصعد من عندنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sunni reference: al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, "Chapter of understanding
the virtues of companions,”v3, p172

Now, when Imam Hasan uses the word "us", it means that it was not just
prophet who used to received Gabriel. Surely Gabriel did NOT reveal
anything of Qur’an to Imam Hasan. But, the above Sunni tradition shows
that, they could communicate with the Gabriel.

Mushaf (book) of Fatimah (sa) was also of this type. Some booklets of
hatred and lie published by anti-Shi’i groups allege that based on Usul
Kafi, Shi’a believe there is a Qur’an called "Qur’an of Fatimah"! This
is a false accusation. There is no tradition in Usul Kafi saying "Qur’an
of Fatimah". There are however, very few traditions in one chapter of
Usul Kafi which assert that Fatimah (sa) wrote a book (mushaf). The
tradition states "The book of Fatimah". Surely Qur’an is a book
(mushaf), but any book is NOT Qur’an. This allegation is as silly as
saying "Qur’an of al-Bukhari”instead of "book of al-Bukhari"!

Also those few traditions in al-Kafi clearly state that there is no
single verse of Qur’an in the Book of Fatimah. This shows that the book
of Fatimah is totally different than Qur’an. Of course, it was three
time bigger than Qur’an in length.

In one tradition it said that Lady Fatimah (sa), after the Prophet (S)
passed away, used to write what she was told that would happen to her
descendants and stories about other rulers to come (up to the day of
resurrection). It was the sayings of Gabriel about what will happen. As
I mentioned and proved by Qur’an and Hadith, talking to angels is not
exclussive to the prophets and messengers.

Fatimah (sa) recorded (or asked Imam ‘Ali to record) those information,
which was kept in her family of Imams, and was called "The Book (Mushaf)
of Fatimah". A tradition which follows this one clearly states that what
is referred to by "The Book of Fatimah”is not a part of Qur’an and has
nothing to do with Allah’s commandments/halals/harams. It does NOT have
anything to do with Shari’ah (divine law) and the religious practices.
Let me give you some of those traditions:

Abu Abdillah (as) said: "... We have with us the Book of Fatimah, but I
do not claim that anything of the Qur’an is in it.”(Usul al-Kafi,
Tradition \#637)

Abu Abdillah (as) also said about the book of Fatimah: "There is nothing
of what is permitted and what is forbidden (al-Halal and al- Haram) in
this; but in it is the knowledge of what will happen.”(Usul Kafi,
Tradition \#636)

Abdul Malik Ibn Ayan said to Abu Abdillah (as): "The Zaydiyyah and the
Mu’tazilah have gathered around Muhammad Ibn Abdillah (Ibn al-Hasan, the
second). Will have they any rule?”He (as) said: "By Allah there are two
books in my possession in which every prophet and every ruler who rules
on this earth (from the beginning of the earth till the day of Judgment)
has been named. No, by Allah, Muhammad Ibn Abdillah is not one of
them.”(Usul Kafi, Tradition \#641)

"Mushaf”refers to a collection of "Sahifa”which is singular for "page".
The literal meaning of Mushaf is "The manuscript bound between two
boards". In those days they used to write on leather and other
materials. They either rolled the writings -- what is known as scroll in
English.

Or they kept the separable sheets and bound them together, in what could
be called as "Mushaf", a book in today’s terms. The equivalent to the
word book "Kitab”used to (and still is) refer to either a letter (e.g.
of correspondence) or to an document that was written down or recorded.
The Arabic word for wrote "Kataba”is a derivative of the same word.

Although the Qur’an is commonly called a "Mushaf”today, perhaps
referring to its "collection”after it was dispersed. Qur’an is a Mushaf
(book), but any Mushaf (book) is not necessarily the Qur’an! There is no
Qur’an of Fatimah! As the above and many other traditions suggest, The
book of Fatimah has absolutely no connection with Qur’an. This concept
is commonly pulled out of context and published by anti-Shi’i groups due
to their hatred toward the Followers of the Members of the House of
Prophet (S). I have seen it mentioned in a book printed by the
government of Saudi Arabia.

What is also very important to recognize and understand is that belief
in Mushaf Fatimah is not a requirement of belief to the Shi’a. It is
just very few traditions which report such a thing. It is nothing
crucial for us as the followers, nor any Shi’a (except Imam Mahdi) has
access to it.

Some Side Comments
------------------

A Wahhabi mentioned that the Shi’a believe:

“The Imams know when they will die, and they do not die execpt with
their choice.

Well, this is also granted to the prophets. So consequently I don’t see
why Imam should not have it. Here are the two traditions in Sahih
al-Bukhari which confirms such claim for Moses:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 2.423 and 4.619

Narrated Abu Huraira:

The angel of death was sent to Moses and when he went to him, Moses
slapped him severely, spoiling one of his eyes. The angel went back to
his Lord, and said, "You sent me to a slave who does not want to die.”

Allah restored his eye and said, "Go back and tell him (i.e. Moses) to
place his hand over the back of an ox, for he will be allowed to live
for a number of years equal to the number of hairs coming under his
hand.”(So the angel came to him and told him the same). Then Moses
asked, "O my Lord! What will be then?”He said, "Death will be then."

He said, "Let it be now.”He asked Allah that He bring him near the
Sacred Land at a distance of a stone’s throw. Allah’s Apostle (S) said,
"Were I there I would show you the grave of Moses by the way near the
red sand hill."

Sahih Al Bukhari  
 Arabic English  
 Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan v2, p236 (2.423 reference)  
 Chapter: Whoever desired to be buried in the Sacred Land .....

Sahih Al Bukhari  
 Arabic English  
 Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan  
 v4, p409 (4.619 reference)  
 Chapter: The death Of Moses and his rememberance after his death.

According to the above tradition in Sahih al-Bukhari, Moses alleged to
resist against death, and then was told by Allah when he would die (the
number of hairs). Again Moses asked God to change that decision to be
now.

The mockery tone of the above tradition by al-Bukhari is questionable
for us, but since you call it authentic, then you should agree that
prophets may know their death time. So why not Imam?

Here I should mention that according to Islamic teaching, Allah
didn’t/doesn’t relinquish His authority to prophets and Imams. The
authority of prophets and Imams is not independent of God. This
authority is given to them by Allah and is controlled by Allah too. If
they disobey Allah, such authority will be taken away immediately.

So if Moses or other prophets and Imams died in their choice, we should
keep in mind that such sinless people do not desire anything that Allah
does not desire. So their wish about the time of their death is exactly
what Allah wished, since they are absolutely obedient toward Allah.
Actually what I just said here is somehow contradicting the report of
Abu Huraira given by al-Bukhari (saying that Moses resisted).

But since you believe in al-Bukhari, then you actually go further than
the claim written in al-Kafi. In other words, the above tradition of
al-Bukhari suggests that a prophet can resist and change the order of
God and even knock out the angel of death. (May Allah protect us from
such evil words).

“All of the Earth belongs to the Imams. (p.407)

Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty said:

***"The earth is Allah’s. He gives it as a heritage to whom He will, and
the good end is for the righteous servants.”(Qur’an 7:128).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... إِنَّ الْأَرْضَ لِلَّـهِ يُورِثُهَا مَن يَشَاءُ مِنْ
عِبَادِهِ وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

May Allah guide those who have such beliefs to the True Islam. And make
this net and its members a cause to that.

May Allah help all of us to understand the above Qur’anic verses, and
may Allah let us understand the traditions mentioned above which are
from authentic Sunni books and let us not die in ignorance. Amen

Their is no denying that ‘Ali was one of the most knowledgeable of the
sahaba. Even if we do accept that ‘Ali is the most knowledgeable, what
then? Would that mean no one else had any knowledge?

No. It means others had much less knowledge. This implies those who
chose other inferior people in knowledge to lead the community for their
own desires, are responsible for the Misfortune of all Muslims
throughout the history. Shiats say that Imam must possess above all such
qualities as knowledge, bravery, justice, wisdom, piety, love of God
etc., in order to assure the prosperity of the Islamic community.

Is Qur’an correct that Imamat is a degree higher than prophethood and
messengership?

There are different levels of imamat. The imamat of the Prophets is
higher than any other imamat. Certainly, an imam of a masjid is by no
means higher than a Prophet or Messenger.

Certainly you did not answer my question. I was not talking about the
degrees of Imamat. Please read the question again. As for Imam of
Masjid, this shows you did not read the definition that I gave for the
Imam in my original article. I said:

Imam means a person who is appointed by God as a leader and as a guide
to whom obedience is due, and whom people should follow.

Does the above definition fit to Imam of Masjid?! Allah said that
Prophet Muhammad is a warner, and for every community (generation) there
exists a guide (Imam). (Qur’an 13:7). It is clear that there is no
prophet after Prophet Muhammad. So those guides who are for every
generation are not prophets.

because even the best pious person can only be pious if he believes in
all the Prophets, how then can he become better than one in whom he must
believe in order to be considered pious?

Prophet Muhammad believed in all prophets before him, but his position
is higher than all of them. Agreed?


