Shia Scholars
=============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The topic of the following discussion deals with the Shi’ite view of
religious scholars. I will attempt to illuminate the differences and
similarities between Sunni and Shi’a.

The Shi’a in matters of jurisprudence and legal effort to interpret new
issues offer three alternatives to the believer:

First, IF the believer is competent and capable according to Islamic
requirements to analyze the texts, then he can exert his own judicial
effort to interpret the issue and abide by his own ruling.

Second, the concept of (Ihtiyat--Cautiousness) can be used. Ihtiyat
really means that when in doubt, do that which is not doubtful. The
Prophet (S) said: "Leave the one which makes you doubtful and prefer the
alternative which does not cause you to be doubtful.”For example, in
performing Ihtiyat, the believer might be faced with a scenario where he
is traveling and he is not sure whether to shorten the prayer or not. He
performs Ihtiyat, and prays the prayer as usual without shortening it.

Then he prays it shortened. This way, he has fulfilled the obligation no
matter what the judicial opinion is. Keep in mind that Ihtiyat is only
to be performed when you really donot n’t know what to do.

Third, the concept of (Taqleed--Imitating or Following) would be used.
Taqleed is where a believer who is not qualified according to Islamic
mandates to perform Ijtihad (the effort by scholars to interpret new
issues) will follow what a learned scholar issues as permissible or
prohibited. For example, I am qualified to render Islamic injunctions
regarding issues that face every believer; moreover, I do not possess a
high level of fluency in the Arabic language such that I can interpret
the texts that deal with these issues.

As such, I follow a scholar and adhere to all that he says. The Scholar
that a believer follows is a matter of choice, not compulsion. He cannot
be less than a Mujtahid, however. Also it is necessary to follow a
Mujtahid who is the most knowledgable among others and must be righteous
in every aspect of the definition of righteousness, otherwise he should
not be followed.

These qualifications should be investigated by the follower personally,
or he/she can the opinon of two just and trsutfull person in order to
know which Mujtahid is the most knowledgable (provided that he does not
find two other just friends who tell him/her in the contrary of the
first two). As a result people may follow different Mujtahids based on
their investigations on the qualifications of Mujtahids.

Moreover, Mujtahid has to be alive when you decide to follow him. You
cannot follow a dead scholar to begin with. However, if you follow a
scholar and he dies after you have already decided to follow him, you
may stay his follower with some conditions, but you must consult with
the dead scholar’s Wakeel --Agent. Every Mujtahid in Shi’a has several
agents in many countries to address the questions of his followers. Some
scholars, however, are in the opinon that one can not continue with a
dead Mujtahid.

Others say that one is allowed to continue to follow his previous
Mujtahid if nothing new comes up or if he does not forget the fatwa of
the dead Mujtahid. If you look carefully at this condition, you will see
that people have to eventually choose a live Marja’ since confusing and
debating issues will come up sooner or later , and this is what Marja’
for. It is important to understand that you cannot begin your Islamic
life by following a dead scholar, but you can remain a follower of that
scholar if he dies and you were one of his followers before his death
and meet the above conditions.

The Prophet (S) said:

"Whosoever Allah (SWT) wishes to grant him a favorable bounty, He (SWT)
will teach him the Fiqh (Deep-Rooted Religious Knowledge) of religion."

As such, being a scholar in religion and reaching the level of Ijtihad,
thereby earning the title of Mujtahid, is NOT an easy task, nor is it
achievable by every individual.

Now, for the Sunnis, they also acknowledge the concept of Taqleed, but
they understand it differently. For the Sunnis, Taqleed is following any
one of the Four Schools of thought -- Shafeea’i, Hanbali, Maliki, and
Hanafi. If you follow one of these Mujtahids, who died more than 10
centuries ago, then you must adhere to their mandates which vary
significantly in many issues. Some Sunnis will shop around and take from
here and there.

The Sunnis also believe that the differences among the four schools of
law are a mercy from Allah (SWT). Dr. Tijani narrates a story of a girl
who loved a man, but her father refused to allow the marriage for some
unknown reason. The girl, who was never married before and was 25 years
of age, ran away with the man and got married. Her father, a Maliki
Sunni, took her to court before a Qadi--Judge to arbitrate the matter.
When the girl appeared, she said: "My father wants to force me into a
marriage which I do not desire; and it is my right under the Hanafite
school to choose my husband even though I have never been married
before.”

The Qadi agreed with the girl and granted her her request to marry the
man of her choice. The Judge, a personal friend of Dr. Tijani, told Dr.
Tijani that as the girl’s father was leaving the court, he said: "That
dog has become a Hanafite!!!”Moreover, the father has disowned his
daughter as a result of that marriage.

Now, Dr. Tijani questions where is that mercy that the Sunnis claim when
the Scholars are at different poles of an argument? We have seen, at
least in the above true story, that due to the difference of opinion
between Malik and Abu Haneefa, a daughter was disowned and insulted by
her own father!

As we have seen, the difference between the Sunnis and Shi’a in relation
to Taqleed is not that great. There are, however, a few differences:
First, while the Sunnis will allow a believer to follow a dead scholar,
at least initially, the Shi’a will not.

Second, the Mujtahid in the perspective of the Shi’a is also a
legitimate ruler of the affairs of the Muslims. He is also a general
agent of al- Mahdi. (As I mentioned before, there is no special agent
from Imam Mahdi in this time. All Mujtahids are his general agent
without being able to contact with him.) Mujtahid also receives the
shares of Zakat (The Alms) and Khums (20% of excess wealth--I have also
addressed this topic in a previous article.) from the believers and is
in charge of distributing it and doing what he feels is necessary for
the Ummah’s (Nation) best interest.

Given the above, it is most apparent that a Shi’ite scholar has far more
power and influence than a regular Sunni scholar. The Sunnis have
accused the Shi’a, on many occasions, of elevating these scholars to the
level of spiritual leaders that have been appointed by Allah (SWT).

Needless to say, these scholars are not sinless or infallible, they are
simple human beings who have passed the tests of belief and have reached
an elevated spiritual stage of belief and learning that entitles them to
be scholars who should be followed and obeyed. It is a given fact that
you will blindly follow, for example, an individual with a Ph.D. in
Computer Science at your early stages of learning how to program a
computer. Why? Because he is more learned and experienced than you are.
Is he a spiritual leader?

Of course not! He is simply a mentor and a person who is more qualified
than you are at this stage. As such, you surrender to him in an effort
to learn from his vast knowledge. Similarly, that’s how the Shi’a view
their scholars. We do NOT consider them infalliables. They may make
mistakes every now and then, but surely less than us.

It should be noted that for the Shi’a there are TWO stages to the
concept of Taqleed or Following a scholar. The First stage was during
the lives of the Twelve Imams, which lasted for approximately 350 years
after the death of the Prophet (S). During these years, the believers
followed the Imams themselves. After those 350 years, there began the
period of the occultation of the final Imam, al-Mahdi (as). It is in
this period that the Twelve Imams instructed the believers to follow the
righteous scholars; that initiated the second stage of Taqleed.

As a final note, I would like to state my personal opinion about the
Wahabis.

The Wahabis, on the other hand, which are situated primarily in Saudi
Arabia, Qatar, and a few other places, have rejected the four schools of
thought and any Ijtihad. They claim that they follow al-Salaf al-Saleh--
(The Righteous First Group). By that they are alluding to the
companions.

Their reasoning is that the companions did not need a scholar, so they
too don’t need one either. However, their sect is full of shortcomings.
For example, they might make the above claims, but they don’t adhere to
them.

They are followers of Muhammad Ibn Abdul al-Wahab, a so-called scholar
that propagated his beliefs about 200 years ago. His motives were
primarily political, and he is not a scholar by any stretch of the
imagination.

Furthermore, all their teachings are based on Ibn Taymiyah’s
interpretations. Ibn Taymiyah, in turn, had based all his teachings on
those of Ibn Hanbal. Indeed, the Wahabis identify themselves as
Hanbalis, not Wahabis, among strangers (people who they don’t trust
yet.); but among themselves they admit to being Wahabis. As such, no
matter how we look at it, the Wahabis are still followers of scholars,
NOT the companions, as they claim. What’s more, the companions did not
need a scholar because they had the Prophet (S) himself as a teacher;
why would they need a scholar to teach them the religion when they
enjoyed the company of the Vehicle of the Message himself (S)?

In conclusion, you have know seen how the Shi’a view the reality of an
ever- changing life: they adpat to it by maintaining an open-minded
approach, and by leaving the doors of Ijtihad (thee effort by scholars
to interpret new issues) wide open to address new and perplexing issues
that face the Ummah (Nation).

And you have seen how the Sunnis are still stuck in the 10th century
trying to implement laws and regulations that are both outdated and
obsolete. If Ijtihaad is forbidden, then why they allow it for their
four Imams, but forbid it for the previous or later generations? Why
just four schools?

It is this fact, among others, that should evoke a nerve of curiosity
within you to question: Are the Shi’a really Kufar, given the above? Are
they not the true followers of the Prophet Muhammad (S)? Does it not
make sense to leave the door of Ijtihad open? Question and reflect, and
remember that the Prophet (S) said: "Knowledge is a locked closet whose
key is the Question!"

Wassalam.


