The Rules of Modesty According to Five Islamic Schools of Law
=============================================================

By: ‘Allamah Muhammad Jawad Maghniyyah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

This issue is one of those from which numerous bylaws are derived, such
as those specifying the parts of one’s body that must be covered
(‘awrah) and the parts of another person’s body which it is haram to
look at, those relating to the difference between maharim (relatives
through lineage or marriage with whom marriage is prohibited) and
non-maharim persons in this regard, the difference in this regard due to
sameness or difference of sex, the difference between looking and
touching and similar rules which are discussed below.

1. Looking at One’s Own Body: The schools differ concerning covering of
one’s ‘awrah (private parts) from one’s own view and whether it is haram
for one to uncover one’s ‘awrah in privacy.

The Hanafis and the Hanbalis observe: In the same way that it is not
permissible for a person to expose his ‘awrah in the presence of anyone
for whom it is not permissible to look at it, it is not permissible for
him to expose it when alone without necessity, as arises at the time or
bathing or answering the call of nature.

The Malikis and Shafi’is say: It is not unlawful but reprehensible
(makruh) to be bare without necessity.

The Imamis, state: It is neither haram nor makruh when no one else is
looking at.

2. Woman and Her Maharim: The schools differ concerning the parts of the
body a woman must cover in the presence of her maharim (except the
husband) and Muslim women.(6) In other words, what constitutes the
‘awrah of a woman in the presence of Muslim women as well as her
maharim, both through lineage and marriage?

The Hanafis and the Shafi’is say: It is wajib for her to cover the area
between the navel and the knees in their presence.

The Malikis and the Hanbalis observe: She must cover the area between
the navel and the knees in front of women, and in the presence of her
maharim, her whole body except the head and the arms.

Most Imamis state: It is wajib for her to cover her rear and private
parts in the presence of women and her maharim; to cover other parts as
well is better though not wajib, except where there is a fear of sin.

3. Women and ‘stranger’: About the extent of the body to be covered by a
woman in the presence of a ‘stranger’ (any male apart from the mahrim),
the schools concur that it is wajib for her to cover her whole body
except the face and hands (up to the wrists) in accordance with the
verse 31 of Surat al-Nur:

***...And reveal not their adornment save such as is outward; and let
them cast their veils over their bosoms (Qur’an 24:31)***

considering that ‘outward adornment’ (al-zeenah) implies the face and
hands. The word ‘al-khimar’ (whose plural ‘khumur’ occurs in the verse)
means the veil which covers the head, not the face, and the word
‘al-jayb’ (whose plural ‘juyub’ occurs in the verse) means the chest.
The women have been commanded to put a covering on their heads and to
lower it over their chests. As to verse 59 of Surat ‘Ahzab:

***‘0 Prophet, say to your wives and daughters and the believing women
that they draw their veils close to them..., (Qur’an 33:59)***

the word ‘al-jilbab’ (whose plural jalabib occurs in the verse) means a
veil covering the head; rather it is a shirt or garment.

4. Man’s ‘Awrah: The schools differ concerning the parts of man’s body
which it is haram for others to see and for him to expose. The hanafis
and the Hanbalis state: It is wajib for a male to cover the area between
the navel and the knees before all except his wife. It is permissible
for others, irrespective of their being men or women maharim or
strangers, to look at the rest of his body when there is no fear of sin.

The Malikis and the Shafi’is say: There are two different situations for
a male with respect to the extent he can expose his body:

the first, in the presence of men or those women who are his maharim;
the second, in the presence of women who are not his maharim. In the
former instance he is only supposed to cover the area between the waist
and the knees, while in the latter it is, haram for a woman stranger to
look at any  
 part of a man’s body. Though the Malikis exclude the face and the arms
if looked at without any sensual motive, the Shafi’is do not permit any
exception (al-Fiqh ‘ala al-madhahib al’arba’ah, vol. mabhath satr
al-’awrah).

The Imamis differentiate between the parts of other person body which
can be looked at and those parts of one’s own body which ought to be
covered. They observe: It is wajib for a male to cover only his rear and
private parts, though it is wajib for women who are not his maharim to
abstain from looking at any part of his body except his head and hands
(up to the wrist).

To summarize the Imami opinion, it is permissible for a male to view the
body of other men and his female maharim except the rear and private
parts provided no sensual motive is involved. Similarly, a woman can
view the body of other woman and her male maharim excepting the rear and
private parts provided no sensual motive is involved.

5. Children: Concerning the body of a child, the Hanbalis say: It is not
prohibited to touch or look at the body of a child below seven years. It
is not permissible to look at the rear and private parts of a male child
between the age of 7 to 9 years, and for ‘strangers’ the whole body of a
female child above the age of seven.

The Hanafis observe: No part of the body of a boy of four years and
below is prohibited from being looked at. Above this age only his rear
and private parts are prohibited from being looked at as long as sexual
desire has not awakened in him. If he reaches the age of sexual desire,
the rule applicable to adults will be applicable to him with respect to
both the sexes.

The Malikis state: It is permissible for a woman to look at and touch
the body of a boy below the age of eight years, and only look at it till
the age of twelve. A boy above the age of twelve is considered similar
to an adult. It is permissible for a man to look at and touch the body
of girl below two years and eight months, and to look at, though not
touch, till she reaches the age of four years.

According to the Shafi’is, the rules applicable to an adult apply to an
adolescent male child. But if a child is below that age and is also
incapable of describing what he sees, all parts of his body can be
looked at. But if he can describe what he sees with a sexual interest,
he will be considered similar to an adult. As to a girl below the age of
adolescence, only if she has developed sexual appeal will she be
considered similar to a full-grown woman, not otherwise, though it will
be haram for anyone except someone who looks after her to look at her
parts.

The Imamiyyah observe: It is wajib to cover one’s ‘awrah in front of a
child of discriminating age, who can describe what he sees, though it is
not wajib before the one who is incapable of doing so. That was
regarding the covering of the body in the presence of a child, but with
respect to looking at a child’s ‘awrah, al-Shaykh Ja’far in his book
Kashf al-ghita’ states: It is not unwise to abstain from looking at the
parts of a child below five years, though it is absolutely impermissible
to look at them with a sexual interest.

From what I have been able to ascertain from the traditions of the Ahlul
Bayt, the age limit for the permissibility of looking at the child’s
‘awrah is six years, not five.

6. Woman’s Voice: All the schools concur that listening to the voice of
a woman is not prohibited, except where pleasure is involved or when
there is a fear of sin. The (Imami) author of al-Jawahir, at the
beginning of the chapter on marriage, has mentioned as his proof the
continuing practice of Muslims belonging to different periods and
regions, the sermons of Fatimah (sa) and her daughters, the innumerable
instances of conversations of the wives of the Prophet (S) and the
Imams, and also the holding of mourning and wedding ceremonies by women
in the presence of men from early times, the conversations between
opposite sexes while conducting transactions, as well as the Qur’anic
verse (Be not complaisant (attractive) with your speech, 33:32), in
which not speech itself but its complaisant manner has been prohibited.

8. The difference Between Looking and Touching: Every part that is
permissible to touch, may be looked at, and every part that is haram to
be looked at may not be touched. Here there is a general consent among
the schools because touching involves greater pleasure than looking, and
no leggiest of any school claims concomitance between the permissibility
of looking and the permissibility of touching.

Hence though it is permissible for a man to look at a female stranger’s
face or bands, it is not permissible for him to touch her except in an
emergency such as for medical treatment or for rescuing her from
drowning. The following tradition has been narrated from al-’Imam
al-Sadiq (as) (Al-’Imam al-Sadiq (A) was asked:) "Can a man shake hands
with a woman who is not his mahrim?”The Imam (A) replied: "No, unless
there is cloth in between..”

The Hanafis exclude shaking hands with an old woman from prohibition. In
the book of Ibn ‘Abidin (v1, p284) it is stated: It is not permissible
to touch the hands or face of a young woman even with the assurance of
absence of any sexual motive. As to an old woman who has no sexual
appeal, there is nothing wrong in shaking hands with her with the
assurance of absence of a sexual motive.

The Imamis and the Hanafis allow touching the body mahrim provided no
sexual motive or pleasure is involved.

The Shafi’is prohibit touching even those parts of a mahram’s body which
it is permissible to look at. It is even not permissible in their
opinion for a person to touch the belly or back of his mother, pinch her
ankles or beet or kiss her face. Similarly, it is not permissible for a
person to ask his daughter or sister to press his legs.

9. The Difference Between Exposing and Looking at: The Imamis observe:

There is no concomitance between the permissibility of exposing the body
and the permissibility of looking at it. Hence it is permissible in
their opinion for a man to expose the whole of his body except his rear
and private parts, while it is not permissible for a non-mahram woman to
look at it. I have not found anyone expressing this opinion in the
numerous books of the four Sunni schools.

10. Old Women: God Almighty says in the Qur’an:

***"And such women as are past child-bearing and have no hope of
marriage, it is no sin for them if they put off their clothes, so be it
that they flaunt no ornament; but to abstain is better for them, and God
is All-hearing, All- knowing.”(Qur’an 24:60)***

This noble verse indicates that it is permissible for old women who have
no desire for marriage due to their old age "to expose their face and a
part of their hair and arms, and such other parts which aged women
usually keep exposed. The traditions of the Ahlul Bayt (as) also point
to the same, on condition that such exposure is not with the intent of
display. Rather, it is to allow them to come out for fulfilling their
needs, though it is better for them to keep themselves covered."(7)

This permission is with the assumption that it is not permissible to
expose any of the above-mentioned parts of the body if there is fear of
its leading to something haram, because a woman, regardless of her
elderly age, may remain sexually attractive. Therefore, if there is any
likelihood of that kind, the rule applicable to her will be the rule
applicable to young women.

Islam is lenient with respect to elderly women and strict regarding
young women. But in practice we observe the opposite of what the Qur’an
has ordered. We see shamelessness and display of charms among some young
women, while elderly women keep themselves covered and are reserved. So
where God is strict, they are lenient, and where He is lenient, they are
strict.

The Numbers that follow some of the words refer to notes that will
appended in the coming issues in shaa Allah.


