Non-Muslims Admit
=================

Even the non-Muslim scholars admit to the authenticity of the Qur’an.
For example, Laura Veccia Vaglieri, professor at the University of
Naples, has the following to say: “The heavenly book of Islam is
miraculous and inimitable. Its style is totally unprecedented in Arabic
literature, and its peculiar impact on the spirit of the human being
derives from its special and superior characteristics. How is it
possible that such a book should be the work of Muhammad, an Arab who
had never studied? We find in this book a treasury of knowledge beyond
the capacity of the greatest philosophers and statesman, and for this
reason it is also impossible to regard the Qur’an as the work of an
educated person”.  
    
 Smith writes in his book Muhammad and Islam: “I boldly assert that one
day the loftiest of human philosophers and the most veracious principles
of Christianity will confess and bear witness that the Qur’an is the
Word of God. An unlettered and unlearned Prophet was chosen by God to
bring the Qur’an to Mankind, a book that has in the course of history
produced thousands of other books and treatises, brought libraries into
being and filled them with books, and placed before mankind laws and
philosophies and educational, intellectual and ideological systems.  
    
 “He arose in an environment where there was no trace of learning and
civilization. In the whole of Madina, there were only eleven people who
knew how to read and write, and in all the branches of Quraysh, in Mecca
and its environs, not more than seventeen people were literate.  
    
 “The teachings of the Qur’an, which mentions knowledge and the pen in
its opening verses, brought about a tremendous transformation. Islam
proclaimed study to be a religious duty, and made the black ink of
scribe and the scholar to be superior to the red blood of the martyr.  
    
 “Thanks to the teachings of the Qur’an and its emphasis on the
cultivation of knowledge, countless scholars made their appearance and
wrote innumerable books. Different scientific disciplines were derived
from the Qur’an and spread across the world by Muslim thinkers. The
world was illuminated with the lights of the Qur’an and the culture of
Islam.”      
    
 Numerous other non-Muslim Scholars have attested to the fact that
Qur’an is the word of God. However, we shall not mention them for the
sake of brevity.  
*** ***  
*** ***


