The Exclusive Eloquence of the Qur’an
=====================================

The Prophet of Islam began conveying his heavenly messages in the midst
of society where people’s minds revolved exclusively around eloquent
speech and the composition of beautiful and attractive poetry and
literary excellence. Under these conditions, God equipped His prophet
with a weapon, the Qur’an, that apparently belonged to the same category
as the literary works of the age but possessed unique and astonishing
characteristics that were beyond the capacity of the human being to
reproduce.  
*** ***

a) The Role of Poetry in the lives of the Pre-Islamic Arabs
-----------------------------------------------------------

To understand why Muhammad's strongest argument or miracle was a book,
the Holy Qur'an, it is necessary to understand the role language and
linguistic composition played in the lives of the pre-Islamic Arabs. It
is also important to understand the nature of the Arabic language itself
during the pre-Islamic period. This understanding will help to show why
the revelation of the Qur'an through Muhammad (S) found attentive ears
among his contemporaries, who not only were articulate users of the
language but held those skilled in the arts of linguistic composition in
high esteem.

Before the rise of Islam, Arabic was mainly a spoken language with an
oral literature of elaborate poetry and, to a lesser extent, prose.
Writing had not yet fully developed and memorization was the most common
means of preserving the literature. Both poetry and prose in the
pre-Islamic era dealt with a rather limited range of topics which
included in the case of poetry praise, eulogy (panegyric), defamation,
and love, and in the case of prose superstition, legends, parables, and
wisdom tales.

Pre-Islamic Arabs took great pride in their language and in articulate
and accurate speech, the latter being one of the main requisites for
social prominence. On this particular point, Professor Hitti writes: “No
people in the world manifest such enthusiastic admiration for literary
expression and are moved by the word, spoken or written, as the Arabs.
Hardly any language seems capable of exercising over the minds of its
users such an irresistible influence as Arabic”.

Such was the role that the spoken word played in the life of pre-Islamic
Arabs. With the emphasis placed on eloquent and articulate speech, the
prominent position occupied by those who had the talent for linguistic
composition, and the pride the early Arabs took in their language, it is
little wonder that the Qur'an was revealed in the most eloquent,
articulate, and elaborate style the Arabic language has known. The
Qur'an has without doubt provided a level of linguistic excellence
unparalleled in the history of the Arabic language.

Theologians explain this phenomenon as God's wisdom in addressing the
articulate Arabs through the medium in which they were most adept and
with which they felt most comfortable. The effectiveness of the Qur'an
was thus ensured by the fact that it represented a level of eloquence
unattainable even by their most eloquent speakers.  
*** ***

b) Miracles should be relevant to the Time
------------------------------------------

God offered the Qur'an as the Prophet's sign in the same way as He
offered signs for all the other prophets. He sent the things most
appropriate to the time in which they were sent. Thus Prophet Musa (as)
had the power to divide the sea with his hand and rod, and to let the
rock burst forth with water in the desert, and all his other signs in a
time of magic.

And Prophet Issa (as) had the power to bring the dead back to life, to
make birds out of clay, to cure those who had been blind from birth and
the leprous, and all his other signs in a time of medicine. And Prophet
Muhammad (S) had the book and all his other signs in a time of
eloquence.

If the Prophet had performed some miracle other than the Qur’an, it
would have no meaning for that people, given their mental structure. The
path would have been open for all kinds of doubt and hesitation. But the
Arabs of that age who were addressed by the Qur’an could never have any
doubts about its extraordinary eloquence, for they were all aware of all
the mysteries of rhetoric and had living among them masters of language
and literary composition, hence their admitting that the Qur’an could
not have been the production of Prophet Muhammad (S).  
  


