The Scientific Miracle of the Qur’an
====================================

The Qur’an is definitely not a Science book, but since the Qur’an is
intended to be an eternal miracle, revealed to make science and learning
blossom among human beings, it is also a scientific miracle. It has
expounded, in the most eloquent fashion, truths of a physical nature
together with everything that touches. Although those who are not
acquainted with the scientific truths cannot fully appreciate its
miraculousness, they can perceive the miraculous nature of the meanings
and truths it contains.  
*** ***

a) Holy Qur’an is everlasting Miracle
-------------------------------------

The limitation in time of the miracles performed by the earlier Prophets
was an indication of the impermanence of their religions and the laws
that they brought. By contrast, the miracle attesting to the prophethood
for the Prophet of Islam cannot be temporally limited, because his
message is universal and represents the culmination of all preceding
religions; his prophethood requires an eternal miracle, a brilliant and
eloquent proof of its immortality embedded with the ongoing scientific
discoveries.

A permanent message must display to mankind a permanent and everlasting
miracle, one which advances with time, so that just as it offered
convincing proof to people of the past, it may do the same to people of
the future. A short-lived miracle that is imperceptible to later
generations cannot be a source of reference or judgment for the future.

For this reason, the Qur’an is presented as a permanent and everlasting
miracle, the final manifestation of God's revelation. The Qur’an itself
says:

***"The true and well-formulated message of your Lord has now been
completed, and none is able to change it." (6:115)***

For Muslims, the miraculousness of the Qur’an is not only a matter of
religious belief, but for scholars and researchers it is a matter of
scientific belief.

The Qur’an possesses a remarkable comprehensiveness and richness, with
respect to its world view and scientific content, and its ability to
guide not only the individual and society in spiritual aspect, but also
in the realms of natural environment and mysteries of life. There are
still many matters contained in the Qur’an that call for investigation
and await discovery by further research.  
*** ***

b) Holy Qur’an is in Total Agreement with Modern Scientific Data
----------------------------------------------------------------

Throughout ages, mankind has undergone numerous changes, and passing
through repeated stages of development and growth, it has attained a
more comprehensive awareness of the mysteries of creation. Nonetheless,
the Qur’an has at all times retained its proud and dignified presence on
the stage of human history and scientific discoveries.  
    
 Dr. Maurice Bucaille, the French scientist, writes as follows: “A
crucial fact is that the Qur’an, while inviting us to cultivate science,
itself contains many observations on natural phenomena and includes
explanatory details which are seen to be in total agreement with modern
scientific data......  
    
 “These scientific considerations, which are very specific to the
Qur’an, greatly surprised me first. Up until then, I had not thought it
possible for one to find so many statements in a text compiled more than
thirteen centuries ago referring to extremely diverse subjects and all
of them totally in keeping with modern scientific knowledge. .....

A thorough linguistic knowledge is not in itself sufficient to
understand these verses from the Qur’an. What is needed along with this
is a highly diversified knowledge of Science. ..... The hypothesis
advanced by those who see Muhammad as the author of Qur’an is quite
untenable. How could a man, from being illiterate, become the most
important author, in terms of literary merit, in the whole of Arabic
literature? How could he then pronounce truths of a scientific nature
that no other human being could possibly have developed at the time, and
all this without once making the slightest error in his pronouncements
on the subject?  
    
 “The ideas in this study are developed from a purely scientific point
of view. They lead to the conclusion that it is inconceivable from a
human being living in the seventh century A.D. To have made statements
in the Qur’an on a great variety of subjects that do not belong to his
period and for them to be in keeping with what was to be known only
centuries later. For me, there can be no human explanation to the
Qur’an”.  
  

c) Holy Qur’an encourages seeking of Science and Knowledge
----------------------------------------------------------

No other revealed book praises and encourages science and knowledge as
does the Qur'an and it is for this reason that the Qur'an names the age
of the desert Arabs, together with their pagan cultures, before Islam as
the "age of ignorance." In over a hundred verses reference is made to
science and knowledge in a variety of ways; and many of these verses
praise the value of scientific knowledge.

In Qur’an, God indicates the favour he has done man by bringing him out
of his state of ignorance.

**"*****He teaches man what he did not know.*****" (96:5)**

Likewise, we read in Qur’an:

**"*****God will exalt those who believe among you and those who have
knowledge to high ranks,*****" (58:11);**

and Allah (swt) also says,

**"*****Are those who know equal to those who do not*****". (39:9).**

Besides the many verses in the Qur'an concerning knowledge, there are
also countless traditions of the Prophet and the Imams on this subject
which rank second only in importance to the Qur'an.

In verses too numerous to mention, the Qur'an invites one to reflect
upon the signs Of creation: the heavens, the shining stars and their
astonishing celestial movements, and the cosmic order which rules over
them all.

Similarly, the Qur'an urges one to reflect upon the creation of the
earth, the seas, the mountains, the desert, and the wonders contained
below the surface of the earth, the difference between night and day and
the changing cycle of seasons. It urges mankind to meditate on the extra
ordinary creation of the plants and the order and symmetry governing
their growth, as well as the multiplicity of the animal kingdom.

The Qur'an invites one to witness the interdependence of beings and how
all live in harmony with nature. It calls upon man also, to ponder on
his own make-up, on the secrets of creation which are hidden within him,
on his soul, on the depth of his perception, and on his relationship
with the world of the spirit.

The Qur'an commands man to travel in the world in order to witness other
cultures and to investigate the social orders, history and philosophies
of past people. Thus it calls man to a study of the natural sciences,
mathematics, philosophy, the arts and all sciences available to man, and
to study them for the benefit of man and the well-being of society.

The Qur'an strongly recommends the study of these sciences on the
condition that it leads to truth and reality, that it produces a correct
view of the world based on an understanding of God.

Knowledge, which merely keeps a man occupied and prevents him from
knowing the reality of his own existence, is equated with ignorance.
Allah (swt) says in Qur’an:

**"*****They know only some appearance of the life of one world and are
heedless of the Hereafter*****" (30:7).**

**"*****Have you seen him who makes his Desire his goal, and God sends
him astray purposely and seals up his Heart and sets a covering on his
Heart. Then who will lead him after God (has condemned him).*****"
(45:23)**

However, one important point which should be considered while discussing
the Scientific miracles in Qur’an is that: Scientific interpretations
are always unstable due to the instability of the hypotheses and the
theories adopted by the theoreticians. Since no hypothesis is the last
one, every new invention requires a new theory for its interpretation or
explanation.

Therefore, scientific theories are subject to change. Like the
Einstein's theory of relativity that changed the Newton's physics, the
results of archaeological studies cannot be taken for granted to be the
definite meaning. Of course, this possibility also helps us to solve
some of the obscurities to some extent.  
** **  
** **


