Some Brief Examples of Scientific Data in the Qur’an
====================================================

a) The Earth and Heavens were Joined Together
---------------------------------------------

All scientific circles in the world today agree that the planets were
originally composed of a mass of Sodium gas and that first the heavens
and the earth were joined together as a single entity and then they
separated from each other. Centuries ago, the Qur’an referred to this
scientific theory.  
    
 It says when describing the creation of the heavens:

***“Then God turned to the creation of the heavens (the planets), when
they were but a smoky substance.” (41:11)***  
* *  
***“Do the unbelievers not see that the heavens and the earth were
joined together before we separated them, and that We brought all living
things into existence from water? Why do they still not believe in God?”
(21:30)***  
    
 Thus the Qur’an unveils one of the great mysteries of nature: the
planets were originally composed of smoky substance (mass of Sodium
gas), and the separation of the planets from a huge object and then
their separation from each other. Since at the time of revelation of the
Qur’an, the general level of knowledge and science was extremely low,
does this not constitute a proof of the heavenly nature of the Qur’an?  
  

b) Expansion of Universe
------------------------

One of the most subtle discoveries in science concerns the expansion of
universe, its tendency constantly to extend its boundaries. This was
something completely unknown to the human being until the last century.
This mystery is, however, mentioned by the Qur’an in the following
terms, which again bear witness to its remarkable profundity when
discussing such matters:  
    
***“We created the heavens with Our strength and power, and constantly
expand them”. (51:47)***  
  

c) Force of Gravity
-------------------

We know that before the time of Newton, that great scientific
personality, no one was aware of the force of gravity. Newton proved
that the falling of objects to earth, the rotation of the moon and the
Venus, the motion of the planets, and other instances of attraction are
all subject to the single law, the law of universal gravity.  
    
 The Qur’an describes the above mentioned gravitational force as
‘invisible pillars’:

***“God it is Who raised up the heavenly bodies to invisible pillars
.....” (13:2).***  
* *  
 In conveying this scientific truth, the Qur’an has used an expression
that is comprehensible for the men of all ages. Are these ‘unseen
pillars’, which prevent the planets from colliding with each other or
falling, anything other than the mysterious and invisible force of
universal gravity, a law to which the Creator of the universe has
subjected all of the heavenly bodies?  
** **

d) Production of Milk in Animals
--------------------------------

The Qur’an describes the factors which give rise to milk in animals in a
way that is entirely compatible with the data of modern science. This is
what God’s book has to say:

***“There is in truth for you a lesson in your animals and flocks. We
give you to drink a pure milk derived from that which is contained in
their bodies, from the merging of what is held in their intestines with
blood. The drinking of that is then made easy for those who drink it.”
(16:16).***  
* *  
 Dr. Bucaille writes in his book:

“From a scientific point of view, physiological notions must be called
upon to grasp the meaning of this verse. The substances that ensure the
general nutrition of the body come from chemical transformations which
occur along the length of the digestive tract. These substances come
from the contents of the intestine. On arrival in the intestine at the
appropriate stage of chemical transformation, they pass through its wall
and towards the systemic circulation (of blood)...... This very precise
concept is the result of the discoveries made in the chemistry and
physiology of the digestive system. It was totally unknown at the time
of the Prophet Muhammad and has been understood only in recent times.”  
  

e) In Pairs
-----------

It is only recently that researchers have come aware of insemination in
plants and learned that every living being including plants comes into
existence as the result of the merging of a male and female parts.  
    
 In verses that are totally free of ambiguity, the noble Qur’an, sets
forth clearly the principle of gender in the gender world, together with
the existence of male and female parts even in plants.

***“Do they not look at the earth, where we created the plants in
pairs”. (42:7).***  
  

f) Role of Wind
---------------

The Qur’an also mentions the role and operation of an important factor
in the bringing of things to fruition: the wind.

***“We have sent the winds as a means of insemination and impregnation,
and then sent down rain from the heavens.” (15:22).***  
* *  
 In this verse, the Qur’an unveils another a great mystery of creation,
the fundamental role played by the wind in the fertilization of
plants.          
  

g) Light in the Moon is merely a Reflection
-------------------------------------------

It is known that the sun is a star that generates intense heat and light
by its internal combustion, and that the moon which does not give off
light itself, merely reflects the light received from the sun.  
    
 The Qur’an testifies the above fact:

***“Blessed is the One Who placed the constellations in heaven and
placed in it a lamp (SIRAJ) and a moon, giving light (MUNIIRA)”.
(25:61)***  
    
 Here the moon is defined as a body that gives reflection of light
(Muniira), while the sun is compared to a blazing lamp or torch
(Siraj).  
  

h) High Altitude
----------------

It is infact a highly common place reflection on the discomfort
experienced at high altitude, which increases the higher one climbs,
that is expressed in the Qur’an:  
    
***“Those whom God wills to guide, He opens their breast to Islam. While
those whom He wills to let straying, He makes their breath closed and
constricted, as if they had to climb up the skies”.*** ***(6:125)***  
* *  
 Who informed the Prophet that by climbing up in the skies, the pressure
increases and breathing becomes difficult?  
* *

i) Honey Bees
-------------

Concerning bees, the Qur’an says:

***“Your Lord inspired the (female) bee, choose your dwelling in the
hills, in the trees and in what (man) build. Eat of all fruit and follow
the ways of your Lord in humility. From within their bodies comes a
liquid of different colours where is cure for men”. (16:68-69)***  
    
 The Qur’an refers that the worker-bees who are searching for food are
females. The verbs used in Arabic refer to female bees. This is very
amazing. For all along, until only recently, people imagined that the
“soldier-bees” were males.  
  

j) Development of the Embryo
----------------------------

The Qur’anic description of certain stages in the development of the
embryo corresponds exactly to what we today know about it. After ‘the
thing which clings’, the Qur’an informs us that the embryo passes
through the stage of ‘chewed flesh’, then tissue appears and is clad in
flesh:  
    
***“We fashioned the thing which clings into a chewed lump of flesh and
We fashioned the chewed flesh into bones, and We clothed the bones with
intact flesh”. (23:14).***  
    
 It was only during the nineteenth century that people had a slightly
clearer view of this question.      
    
 All the afore mentioned and many other modern scientific concepts found
abundantly in the Glorious Qur’an, that was revealed 14 centuries ago,
with utmost accuracy and free from any error, prove beyond any iota of
doubt the divine source of its revelation.  
  


