Lack of Contradictions in the Qur’an
====================================

The Noble Qur’an contains profound and exact statements on a wide
variety of subjects. It establishes and legislates principles and
regulations for the practical and ethical duties of the human being and
for the ordering and administration of society. It gives accurate
account of future predictions, anecdotes of past communities and
Prophets, as well as Scientific truths unknown at the time of
revelation. However, slightest variation or contradiction whatsoever is
not to be seen in this great mass of material.  
    
 Every scientist and researcher is liable to change from time to time,
his attitude to scientific topics under investigation and the opinions
he bases on them. Relying on the knowledge and conclusions he has
accumulated, he may express a certain opinion on a given topic at one
time and later repudiate that opinion in the light of continuing and
more extensive research and the solution of certain problems. However,
as regards to Qur’an, although it was revealed over a period of twenty
three years, it is completely uniform and lacking in contradiction. The
uniformity, unity and the consistency of the ideas in the Qur’an signify
its coming from the Unique One, Allah (swt). The Qur’an says:

***“Do they not reflect on the*** ***Qur’an? If this book were from
other than GOD, they would certainly find much variation and
contradiction in it”. (4:82)***  
    
 Since everything in the world is in a state of growth and
self-perfection, then the Qur'an would of necessity lack harmony since
it was revealed over a period of twenty-three years; it would lack
harmony that is if we were to suppose that it was the work of a man
rather than of a prophet. Thus, lack of contradiction in the Qur’an
proves a Divine hand in the its authorship.  
  


