Introduction:
=============

This dictionary is an aid to the readers of Muslim philosophical works
that are in Arabic. It includes most of the terminology that was
developed by Muslim philosophers in their works and the terms that they
borrowed -and sometimes translated- from Greek (Hellenistic), Syraic,
Persian and Indian philosophical works. Also included are concepts that
are Islamic but of a philosophical nature and were used by Muslim
philosophers.

The dictionary also includes the Arabized names of the philosophers and
scientist of Greek, Roman, Byzantine, Persian and Indian Origin -namely
those that worked with Helenistic and Indo-Persian works of science,
mathematics and philosophy.

At times it only includes the names of the non-Muslim scholars and
little else, as very little is known about them. Also the Greek schools
of thoughts are included and briefly defined. There are philosophers and
ideas that were erroneously attributed by the philosophers who worked in
Arabic -Muslim and non-Muslim- and that is brought to light. An example
of this is some the works of Poltinus was attributed to Aristotle.

This dictionary is based on the work by Prof. M. Saeed Sheikh
"Dictionary of Muslim Philosophy" published by the Institute of Islamic
Culture -of Lahore, Pakistan- first published in 1970. For the web it
has been updated with corrections and additions as needed as there was
some missing terms that were alluded to in the text but are missing.
Professor Alparslan Acikgenc of Fatih University, Turkey,Â  a user of
this dictionary of many years, has kindly provided us with many
additional terms and they are marked as such with (AnAc).

**Disclaimer:**

*Pure Arabic or strictly Fiqhi (including Islamic concepts) and Sufi
terminology are NOT included in this dictionary. Also if you are looking
for Arabic Names - male or female- this is not the place for it.*


