Daal
====

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image009.gif)

dakhilatan taht al-tadadd
-------------------------

The two sub-contrary propositions; see al-qadiyatan al-dakhilatan taht
al-tadadd.

da‘im
-----

Perpetual. (AnAc)

darajah
-------

Stage. (AnAc)

dalalah
-------

The manner in which a vocable (lafz) signifies the meaning of a thing
that it designates; it is of three kinds: dalalat al-mutabaqah (q.v.),
dalalat al-tadammun (q.v.) and. dalalat al-iltizam (q.v.). {Also:
connotation, signify the meaning (of something) [see S. Afnan, Avicenna:
His Life and Works, 92-3]. (updated by: AnAc)}

dalalat al-iltizam
------------------

Signification by association or implication between the word and its
designatum, when, for example, the word "roof" is used to designate the
walls as well; the latter designatum is associated with or implied in
the former.

dalalat al-tadammun
-------------------

Signification of partial accord between the word and its designatum,
when, for example, the word "house" is used to signify only a part of
the house, i.e. its roof only or walls only, etc.

dalalat al-tatafful
-------------------

A term used by Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi Maqtul (549-587/1153-1191) for
dalalat al-iltizam (q.v.).

dalalat al-haitah
-----------------

A term used by Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi Maqtul for dalalat al-tadammun
(q.v.)

dalalat al-mutabaqah
--------------------

Signification of complete accord between a word and its designatum,
when, for example, the word "house" is used to signify the whole of the
house taking all its parts, the walls, the roofs, the floors, etc. into
consideration.

dalil
-----

A word of common use in philosophical discourse but bearing different
meanings among which the following should be distinguished: ( i )
designation or indication by which a sign "leads" to another sign or
thing; (2) proof in a general sense to be distinguished from a proof in
the strict sense, i.e. from the syllogistic proof [al-burhan al-mutlaq
(q.v.) or al-burhan al-qati‘ (q.v.)] in deductive logic by which the
particular is deduced from the

universal; (3) more specifically the proof by which the cause is
inferred from the effect or universal from the particular; see also
istidlal and al-burhan al-’inni.

al-dalil al-iqna‘i
------------------

The persuasive argument; see iqna and qiyas al-iqna‘i.

al-dalil al-murafa‘ah ila al-shakhs

The fallacy of argumentum ad hominem: a kind of the fallacy of ignoratio
elenchi (mughalatat al-natijah ghair al-muta‘alliqah, q.v.) ; see also
mughalatat al-dalil al-murafa‘ah ila al-shakhs.

dahr
----

The eternal duration in which eternity in past (azal, q.v.) is in a
constant union with eternity in future (abad, q.v.). Dahr being the
innermost essence or part of time (zaman, q.v.), encompasses it
altogether. Dahr, compared with time and measured by it, is found to
have a permanence corresponding exactly to the permanence of time with
reference to what is contained in it; see also sarmad.

daur
----

A term used in logic to denote the circularity in argument or proof
which occurs when a proposition is put forward followed by a number of
propositions successively and at the end the last proposition is posited
as the proof of the original proposition. It is, thus, a kind of petitio
principii. In a simpler form it may be merely the rotation of two
proposition, one used as a proof of the other. See also al-musadarah
‘ala’l-matlub al-awwal and muqati‘.

Dimiqratis
----------

Democritus of Abdera (c. 460-370 B.C.): famous in Muslim philosophy for
his theory of atoms; generally considered to be the founder of Greek
atomism and also of the notion of empty space.

Dayujans al-Kalabi
------------------

Diogenes of Sinope (412-323 B.C.): Greek cynic philosopher; studied
under Antisthenes (c. 444-368 B.C.); the founder of cynicism (kalabiyah,
q.v.). Diogenes rejected all social conventions. According to a
tradition current in Arabic as well as in Persian literature, he once
went through streets holding up a lantern "looking for an honest man".
According to another similar tradition, he was visited at Corinth by
Alexander the Great who asked if he could oblige the philosopher in any
way, "Yes", Diogenes, "stand from between me and the sun."


