Dhal
====

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image010.gif)

dha’i‘at
--------

Generally accepted or widespread data or premises, i.e. propositions to
which the evidence of the majority of people as well as of those learned
in the sciences causes our assent.

dhat
----

A common term in philosophical discourse but used in different senses of
which the following should be noted: (1) Thing or individual (in this
sense identical with shai or ‘ain, q.v.). (2) Being or self (identical
with anniyah, q.v.). (3) The essence of a thing, its inner meaning or
its essential qualities (in this sense identical with mahiyah, q.v.).
(4) Substance or substratum of a thing in which the qualities inhere or
of which the attributes can be predicated (in this sense more or less
identical with jauhar, q.v.).

dhakirah
--------

The faculty of memory or reminiscence; see al-quwwat al-mutadhakirah.

dhubul
------

Dimunition or decay of body due to lack of nourishment; one of the four
kinds of harakah fi’l-kamm (q.v.).

dhu
---

The category of "ownership" or possession as one of the ten Aristotelian
categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.); see also milk.

dhu al-jihatain
---------------

Dilemma, i.e. the complex syllogism which has for its major premise the
two conditional conjunctive propositions (al-sharti al-muttasilah, q.v.)
and for the minor premise the conditional disjunctive (al-sharti
al-munfasil, q.v.) which together lead to a conclusion either in the
categorical or in the conditional disjunctive; see also qiyas dhu
al-jihatain.

dhauq
-----

Taste sensation, a power placed in the gustatory nerves. spread out on
the skin of the tongue. By this power or faculty tastes are perceived
through the mixing of the saliva which is in the mouth with the thing
tasted and through its stimulating the gustatory nerves. The two senses
of touch and taste are found in all animals for these are of primary
importance for the animal life. The rest of the three senses, i.e.
smell, sight and hearing, being of secondary importance, are found in
some animals only. See also tu‘um.

Dhiyasquridhus
--------------

Dioscorides: Greek physician of first century C.E.; his work on Materia
Medica was translated into Arabic by Hunain ibn Ishaq (d. 264/877).

Dhayufantus
-----------

Diophantus: Greek mathematician of the second half of third century
C.E., said to be a great Greek writer on algebra.


