Raa
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image011.gif)

ribatah
-------

Lit. "connection", technically the copula, i.e. the relation between
subject and predicate in a proposition.

al-radd ‘ala al-imtina‘
-----------------------

Reductio ad impossibile, the refutation of a proposition by showing that
its consequences are impossible or logically absurd. See also muqati‘.

ridf
----

Lit. "consequent"; a term sometimes used in logic to denote the
conclusion in a syllogism, i.e. the inferred propositions or premises.
See also qiyas.

al-rasm al-tamm
---------------

The complete description of a thing as distinguished from its complete
definition (al- hadd al-tamm, q.v.); it generally refers to the
proximate genus and the proprium of a thing, e.g. the description of man
as a laughing animal.

al-rasm al-naqis
----------------

The imperfect description of a thing which refers to one of its
properties (propria) or the property along with the remote genus
(al-jins al-ba‘id), e.g. the description of man as one who laughs or a
"body" that laughs. More often it refers merely to the accidents (a‘rad)
of a thing, e.g. when we describe man as one who stands erect, walks on
his feet, grasps things with his hands, etc.

raf‘ al-tali
------------

The denial of the consequent in the minor premise of a hypothetical
syllogism (al-qiyas al-sharti al-istithna’i, q.v.) leading to the denial
of the antecedent in the conclusion; a valid mode of reasoning know as
Modus Tollens, i.e. the negative mode of hypothetical syllogism; opposed
to wad‘ al-tali (affirmation of the consequent in the minor premise)
which is a form of logical fallacy. See also mughalatah wad‘ al-tali.

raf‘ al-muqaddam
----------------

The fallacy of the denial of antecedent; see also mughalatah raf‘
al-muqaddam.

Rawaqiyah
---------

Stoicism, so named by the Muslim philosophers because the founder of the
school of Stoicism, Zeno (Zainun, q.v. as distinguished from Zainun
al-Akbar, q.v.) used to teach in a rawaq, i.e. in Stoa Poecile or a
Painted Porch at Athens. According to the Stoics, virtue alone is good
while there are no degrees of moral goodness: it is all or nothing. One
ought to have a full control of one’s passions and desires by becoming
completely indifferent to pain and pleasure; for, thus, alone could one
attain to the life of virtue. The Stoics enlarge the area of moral
responsibility from the confines of a City-

State to include all human beings. Everyone is a citizen of one and the
same state, i.e. the State of Humanity. All men are of one blood, of one
family and so each should treat everyone else as "scared beings". In
their view of the universe they included a kind of pantheism. The Muslim
philosophers welcomed their humanitarianism and cosmopolitanism, and
also keenly studied their theory of knowledge and logic.

al-ruh al-jariyah
-----------------

The travelling spirit or soul which is supposed to leave the body during
sleep and give rise to dreams; opposed to (al-ruh al-muhkam, q.v.).

al-ruh al-hayawaniyah
---------------------

The animal soul, common to the rational and the non-rational animals. It
is supposed to be located in the heart from where the animal spirits
spread into the arteries and capillaries and thus in all parts of the
body; also called (al-ruh al-ghariziyah, q.v.). See also al-nafs
al-hayawaniyah.

al-ruh al-tabi‘iyah
-------------------

"The natural soul", common to animals and plants. In animals it is
supposed to be located in the liver from where it spreads into all the
veins of the body. See also al-nafs al-nabatiyah and al-nafs
al-hayawaniyah.

al-ruh al-ghariziyah
--------------------

The animal spirits emanating from the heart and spreading in all parts
of the body. See also al-ruh al-hayawaniyah and al-nafs al-hayawaniyah.

al-ruh al-muhkam
----------------

The resident soul which unlike the travelling soul (al-ruh al-jariyah,
q.v.) is supposed never to leave the body.

al-ruh al-nabatiyah
-------------------

The vegetable soul; see al-ruh al-tabi‘iyah and al-nafs al-nabatiyah.

al-ruh al-nafsaniyah
--------------------

The sensual soul; it is supposed to reside in the brain from where,
through the nerves, it spreads itself in all parts of the body.

ru’us al-fada’il
----------------

Four cardinal virtues, viz. wisdom (hikmah), courage (shaja‘ah),
temperance (‘iffah) and justice (‘adalah); each of them has been further
divided by Muslim ethicists into many sub-species of virtues. See also
ummahat al-fada’il.

Rituriqa
--------

Rhetorica or the Rhetoric: Aristotle’s seventh book on logic, also
entitled as al-Khatabah (q.v.) in Arabic; it deals with the art of
persuading through oratorical devices.


