Seen
====

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image013.gif)

al-salibat al-juz’iyah
----------------------

The particular affirmative proposition; see al-qadiyat al-salibat
al-juz’iyah.

al-salibat al-kulliyah
----------------------

The universal negative proposition; see al-qadiyat al-salibat
al-kulliyah.

Sirr al-Asrar
-------------

Secreta Secretorum, an apocryphal work ascribed by Muslim scholars to
Aristotle (Aristatalis, q.v.). It is a work on folklore, physiognomy and
dietetics and is superstitious in its tone rather than scientific; hence
its wide popularity in medieval times. It was also well known in the
Western Caliphate, for a reference to it is found in al-‘Iqd al-Farid
(The Unique Necklace), an anthology by Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih (d. 328/940) of
Cordova. The first Arabic translation of the work from Greek original is
ascribed to Yahya ibn Batriq (3rd/9th century C.E.).

sarmad
------

Absolute eternity, i.e. eternity without beginning (azal, q.v.) and also
without end (abad, q.v.); sometimes considered time as absolutely fixed
and unchanging. Sarmad is distinguished from dahr (q.v.) by maintaining
that whereas dahr encompasses zaman (q.v.) sarmad encompasses dahr.
Sarmad is used with reference to the relation between the two eternals
(as, for example, between the essence of God and His attributes); dahr
with reference to the relation between the eternal and the changing (as,
for example, between God and the world); and zaman with reference to the
relation between the two changing series (as, for example, between the
movement of the heavenly spheres and the phenomenal changes on earth).
See also zaman.

sufustah
--------

Sophism, i.e. a piece of false reasoning which is employed. with the
intention of deceiving somebody.

Suqratis
--------

Socrates (c. 470-399 B.C.): Greek philosopher, the teacher of Plato
whose Dialogues represent the essential philosophical teachings of the
master. As Socrates did not himself write anything on philosophy, his
influence on Muslim philosophical thought was only through Plato.

sam‘
----

a power placed in the nerves spread out in the cavity of the ear-hole
(meatus) by which sounds are perceived. Sound is a vibratory movement of
the outer air which is transmitted to the air in the ear-hole through
impact. This transmitted vibration in the inner air stimulates the
auditory nerves resulting in the sensation of hearing.

Sinibliqus
----------

Simplicus : Greek philosopher, one of the last Neoplatonists. After the
closing of Plato’s Academy in 529 C.E. he sought refuge at the court of
Chosroës and remained there until about 533. He wrote commentaries on a
number of Aristotle’s works, viz. De Coelo, Physica, De Anima and
Categoriae.

su’ i‘tibar al-haml
-------------------

The fallacy of secundum quid; see mughalatah su’ i‘tibar al-haml.

sur
---

The quantifier of a proposition indicated by the expressions. like
"all", "some", "not all", "not some", "one", or "not one" specifying the
quantity of a proposition; such a proposition is named al-qadiyat
al-mussawarah (q.v.) or al-qadiyat al-mahsurah (q.v.) as opposed to
al-qadiyat al-muhmalah (q.v.).

Sufistiqa
---------

Sophistici Elenchi, Aristotle’s sixth book on logic, also entitled as
al-Maghalit or al-Hikmat al-Muwwahmah (q.v.) in Arabic; it deals with
the fallacies of logical reasoning, intentional or otherwise.


