Da
==

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image017.gif)

iddan
-----

Two contraries like black and white or like sweet and bitter; the two
contrary states or qualities cannot be true of one and the same thing or
individual at the same time and in the same respect. To be distinguished
from two contradictories (naqidan, q.v.): while the two contradictories
are mutually exclusive (mani‘at al-jam‘, q.v.) as well as totally
exhaustive (mani‘at al-khuluww, q.v.), two contraries are only mutually
exclusive.

darb
----

Mood of a syllogism (qiyas q.v.), i.e. the form of a syllogism
determined by the quality and quantity of the propositions used as major
(al-muqaddamat al-kubra, q.v.) and minor (al-muqaddamat al-sughra, q.v.)
premises.

al-durub al-tahani
------------------

The subaltern moods, i.e. the moods of syllogism in which a particular
conclusion is drawn when a universal conclusion is really justified by
the premises; these (in modern logic) are five in number: Barbari,
Celaront, Cesaro, Camestros and Camenos.

al-durub al-taqwiyah
--------------------

The moods of strengthened syllogism, i.e. those forms of syllogism in
which one of the premises is unnecessarily stronger than what is
required to prove the conclusion. Among them may be included Darapti,
Felapton, Bramantip and Fesapo; in each case one of the premises is
universal which even if it had been particular the conclusion would have
remained the same.

al-durub al-‘aqim
-----------------

Invalid moods of syllogism. Opposed to al-durub al-muntaj; see below.

al-durub al-muntaj
------------------

The valid moods of a syllogism which, considering the syllogism to be
categorical (al-qiyas al-iqtirani, q.v.), are four in the first figure
(al-shakl al-awwal, q.v.): Barbara, Celarent, Darii and Ferii; four in
the second figure (al-shakl al-thani, q.v.): Cesare, Camestres, Festino
and Baroco; and five in the third figure (al-shakl al-thalith, q.v.):
Darapti, Disamis, Datisi, Felapton, Bocardo and Ferison; opposed to
al-‘durub al-‘aqim (q.v.).


