Tah
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image018.gif)

tarafain (sing. tarf)
---------------------

Lit. "two extremes" or "two sides"; technically it denotes major term
(al-hadd al-akbar, q.v.) and minor term (al-hadd al-asghar, q.v.) as
opposed to middle term (al-hadd al-ausat, q.v.).

tu‘um
-----

Tastes, i.e. gustatory sensations. Muslim philosophers mention nine
species of tastes; sweetness (halawah), saltishness (malahah), acidity
or sourness (humudah), bitterness (mararah), pungency or sharpness
(harafah), astringency (‘ufusah), puckeriness (qabd), greasiness
(dusumah) and insipidity (tafahah).

Tafrah
------

Jerk, jump (F. Rahman, Mulla Sadra, 97, line 40); leap. (AnAc)

Tubiqa
------

Topica or the Topics, Aristotle’s fifth book on logic, also entitled as
al-Jadal or al-Mawadi‘ al-Jadaliyah in Arabic; it deals with the truth
and falsity of the statements of the two opponents involved in a
disputation (al-jadal).

Taima’us
--------

Timaeus, (´µa) one of Plato’s Dialogues: the most influential of his
works during the Middle Ages. It deals with Plato's cosmogony and
cosmology and particularly with his theory of creation. The work is
permeated with many mythical elements and such as to contradict Plato’s
other teachings; but he claims for them nothing more than probability.
Though clothed in mythical garb, Plato’s cosmology as given in this work
on the whole is a teleological world-view. It is an attempt to explain
reality as a purposeful, well-ordered cosmos-the world, being governed
by an intelligence, is guided by reason and directed towards an ethical
goal. (Online text and also in English translation (B. Jowett) of the
text is available online)


