Ain
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image019.gif)

‘alam al-mufariqat
------------------

The world of the souls and intelligences of the celestial spheres; see
al-‘uqul al-‘asharah.

al-‘Ibarah
----------

De Interpretatione: the Arabic title of Aristotle’s second book on
logic. See also Bari Irminiyas.

al-‘adad al-fard
----------------

Prime number, i.e. a number having no integral factors except itself and
unity -for example, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, etc.

‘adl
----

Obversion, i.e. deriving a propsition by way of an immediate inference
from a given propsition without transposing its subject and predicate
(as is done in ‘aks, q.v.) and without changing its quantity but merely
by changing its quality which is done by negativising the original
predicate, e.g. propositon "No men are non-mortal"; the former
proposition is called ma‘adul minhu (q.v.) and the latter ma‘dul (q.v.).

‘adm al-luzum bi’l-tab‘
-----------------------

The fallacy of non-sequitur, i.e. the one in which there is complete lak
of logical connection between the premises advanced and the conclusion
drawn. See also mughalatah ‘adm al-luzum bi’l-tab‘.

‘ard (pl. a‘rad)
----------------

Accident. As one of the predicables (al-alfaz al-khamasa) ‘ard is that
quality which adhere to a subject (maudu, q.v.), but-opposed to
property -it neither constitutes its essense, nor does it necessarily
flow form it, e.g. the color of man. According to the Peripatetics
(al-Mashsha’un, q.v.), accidents may change, disappear, or be added,
while substances (jauhar, q.v.) remains the same. Accident, thus, has no
independent existence, but exists only in another being, a substance or
another accident. According to the Mutakallimun, more particularly the
Ash‘arites, however, an accident cannot exist in another accident but
only in a substance. But no substance can ever exist apart form its
qualities or accidents. Hence, the substance being inseparable from its
accidents, like the latter, is also merely transitory, i.e. has only a
momentary existence. Everything that exists, thus, consists of mere
transitory units (atoms) having only a moment’s duration and needs must,
therefore, be perpetually re-created by the will of God. See also
al-fasl al-khass and al-fasl al-‘amm.

‘asabiyah
---------

A term made current by the great Muslim philosopher and sociologist, Ibn
Khaldun (732/808/1332-1406), for the sense of common honor and loyalty
which binds together the members of a family, clan, or tribe and thus is
the cause of the solidarity of such institutions.

‘Utarid
-------

The planet Mercury or its sphere (falak); see also al-kawakib
al-sayyarah.

al-‘aql al-awwal

The first intelligence, i.e. the first effusion or emanation from God,
the Necessary Being (al-wajib al-wujud) or the First Principle
(al-mabda’ al-awwal). The existence of the first intelligence is
possible in itself as well as necessary through the First Principle;
further it knows its own essence as well as the essence of the First
Principle. From its twofold existence and twofold knowledge springs,
according to the Muslim Peripatetic philosophers like al-Farabi and Ibn
Sina, the whole series of emanations, i.e. the nine celestial spheres
with their nine intelligences as well as their nine souls. See also
al-‘uqul al-‘asharah.

al-‘aql bi’l-fi‘l
-----------------

Intellect in action or the actualised intellect which, through the
illumination that it receives from the agent intellect al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al
(q.v.), is activated into thinking upon the universal forms of objects
as well as ultimate concepts.

al-‘aql bi’l-malakah
--------------------

Habitual intellect; see al-‘aql al-mustafad.

al-‘aql al-‘amali
-----------------

Practical reason or intellect which enables us to adopt the right course
of action to attain what is useful and good.

al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al
-----------------

The active intellect or the agent intellect, the lowest of the
intelligences of the celestial spheres which gives "form" (surah, q.v.)
to individual things, and so is called wahib al-suwar (q.v.), i.e. the
giver of forms or dator formarum. Active intellect is continually in
action and it rouses the material or potential intellect (al-‘aql
al-hayulani, q.v. al-‘aql bi’lfi‘l, q.v.) from its state of latency by
activating in it the thought of the universal forms and eternal truths.
This transforms the material or potential intellect in to intellect in
action (al-‘aql bi’l-fi‘l) which being more and more actualised through
the illumination of al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al becomes similar to it and thus
attains the status of the acquired intellect, i.e. of al-‘aql
al-mustafad (q.v.).

The problem of intellects so keenly discussed by all the Muslim
Peripatetics is much more complicated and subtle than can be described
here. It, however, originated from somewhat obscure and ambiguous
statement of Aristotle  in the last book of his treatise on the soul (De
Anima), in which he makes the distinction between the creative or active
intellect and the passive intellect. Active intellect, he states, is the
third besides the object and the passive intellect, as light is the
third besides the eye and the object. Thus, active intellect is said to
create the truths that we know, just as light may be said to make colors
which we perceive by its aid. We see here at work Aristotle’s general
principle that "what is potentially comes to be actually by the agency
of something that already is actually" (Metaphysica, 1049b 24).
Aristotle  in this entire discussion leaves unexplained the unity and
individuality of human personality. Hence the

uslim philosophers reformulated the whole theory and brought to it many
refinements and elaborations not to be found in Aristotle or his
commentators.

al-‘aql al-mustafad
-------------------

Accquired intellect, i.e. the intellect possessed with the comprehension
of the universal forms, ultimate concepts and verities of knowledge by
which possession it partakes more and more of the agent intellect
(al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al, q.v.); also sometimes called al-‘aql bi’l-malakah.

al-‘aql al-mufariq
------------------

The seperated intellect, i.e. the intellect or intelligence of a
heavenly sphere which is the cause of its motion; see also al-‘uqul
al-‘asharah.

al-‘aql al-nazari
-----------------

Theoretical reason or intellect which enables us to form universal
concepts, comprehend meanings and interconnections of things, enter into
argumentative discussion and have abstract thinking in general. See also
al-quwwat al-‘aqliyah.

al-‘aql al-hayulani
-------------------

The material intellect, also called al-‘aql bi’l-quwwah, i.e. potential
intellect. It is the human intellect in its dormant form, merely a
latent capacity to apprehend the universals and eternal truths
subsistent in the active or agent intellect (al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al, q.v.).

al-‘uqul al-‘asharah
--------------------

The ten intelligences, i.e. the first intelligence (al-‘aql l-awwal,
q.v.) in combination with the nine intelligences one for each of the
following nine celestial spheres in a decending order: (1) the second
intelligence of the sphere of the primum mobile; (2) the third
intelligence of the sphere of the fixed stars (al-kawakib al-thabitah,
q.v.); (3) the fourth intelligence of the sphere of Saturn (Zhhal);
(4)the fifth intelligence of the sphere of Jupiter (Mushtari); (5) the
sixth intelligence of the sphere of Mars (Marikh); (6)the seventh
intelligence of the sphere of the Sun (Shams); (7)the eighth
intelligence of the sphere of Venus (Zuhrah); (8)the ninth intelligence
of the sphere of Mercury (‘Utarid); (9) the tenth intelligence of the
sphere of the Moon (Qamar). This last is named as (al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al,
q.v.) which is a kind of creative and regulating power governing this
world of ours. It is noteworthy that the belief that each celestial
sphere has a separate intelligence of it own, originated from Aristotle
who even held that there were not ten intelligences but fifty or more.

‘aqim
-----

An invalid mode of reasoning which does not warrant any logical
conclusion, e.g. the denial of antecedent (raf‘ al-muqaddam, q.v.) or
the affirmation of consequent (wad’ al-tali) in a hypothetical
syllogism; opposed to muntij (q.v.). See also mughalatah wad‘ al-tali.

‘aks
----

Conversion, i.e. deriving a proposition by way of an immediate inference
from a given propositon by transposing its subject and predicate but
without changing its quality and without distributing a term in the
inferred proposition (ma‘kus, q.v.) which is not already distributed in
the given proposition (ma‘kus minhu, q.v.); sometimes called al-‘aks
al-mustawi to distinguish it from al-‘aks al-naqid (q.v.) see also
mun‘akis.

al-‘aks al-mustawi
------------------

Conversion; see ‘aks.

al-‘aks al-naqid
----------------

Contrapositon, i.e. an immediate inference in which from a given
proposition we infer another proposition, having for its subject the
contradictory of the given predicat, e.g. from the propostion of the
form "All S is P" we have through al-‘aks al-naqid "No not-P is S"; it
thus involves first obversion (‘adl, q.v.) of the given proposition then
conversion (‘aks, q.v.) of the obverse (ma‘dul, q.v.).

al-‘illat al-tammah
-------------------

The sufficient cause of a thing, i.e. the cause which is adequate to
produce an effect, e.g. a certain quantity of medicine to bring about
the desired cure; more usually it consists of a number of positive
casual conditions; opposed to al-‘illat al-naqisah (q.v.).

al-‘illat al-suriyah
--------------------

The formal cause of a thing, i.e. the form or shape (surah, q.v.) given
to a thing while producing it; with Aristotle it is also the inner idea
or essence of a thing.

al-‘illat al-gha’iyah
---------------------

The final cause of a thing, i.e. the purpose, aim or final end for which
a thing is produced; with Aristotle it is primarily the realisation of
the inner idea or essence of a thing in actuality; sometimes also called
al-‘illat al-lima’iyah (q.v.).

al-‘illat al-fa‘iliyah
----------------------

The efficient cause of a thing, i.e. the efficiency or labor of an
active agent that produces a thing, e.g. the efficiency or labor of a
carpenter in producing a table.

al-‘illat al-lima’iyah
----------------------

The final cause of a thing, the purpose or final end for which a thing
is produced; also called al-‘illat al-gha’iyah (q.v.).

al-‘illat al-maddiyah
---------------------

The material cause of a thing; see al-‘illat al-hayullaniyah.

al-‘illat al-naqisah
--------------------

The insufficient cause of a thing, i.e. the cause which by itself is
inadequate to produce an effect, e.g. medicine alone may not be adequate
to bring about the desired cure without careful nursing, proper dieting,

complete rest and other hygienic conditions; opposed to al-‘illat
al-tammah (q.v.).

al-‘illat al-hayullaniyah
-------------------------

The material cause of a thing, i.e. the stuff or substance of which a
thing is made; with Aristotle it does not have to be necessarily a
physical substance but anything: physical, mental, or, spiritual, e.g.
the human passions, interests and conflicts are the material cause of a
novel or a drama.

al-‘ilal al-arba‘ah
-------------------

The four causes, viz. the material cause (al-‘illat al-hayullaniyah,
q.v.), the formal cause (al-‘illat al-suriyah, q.v.), efficient cause
(al-‘illat al-fa‘iliyah, q.v.) and the final cause (al-‘illat
al-gha’iyah, q.v.). These four causes may all appear together in the
defination of a thing, for example, a knife may be defined as an iron
implement (material cause) of such shape (formal cause) made by the
ironsmith (efficient cause) for cutting things (final cause).

al-‘ilm al-ladunni
------------------

"Inspired knowledge", or "knowledge derived from the presence of God",
i.e. mystical comprehension-inspired by an encounter with God-of things
spiritual.

‘anasir
-------

Element. Theory of elements current with Muslim philosophers was that of
four elements: fire, air, water and earth, which originated with
Empedocles (Anbadqulis, q.v.) though they sometimes added to them ether
as the fifth element specific to the body of celestial spheres; the
terms used cognate with ‘anasir were ustuqussat (q.v.) and arkan (see
al-arkan al-arb‘ah)

al-‘anasir al-‘uqud
-------------------

Modes of being, viz. necessity (wujub), possibility (imkan) and
impossibility (imtina‘); the term is also used to denote the
corresponding modalities of propositions (see jihah).

al-‘anasir al-a‘zam
-------------------

The supreme element, an expression used to denote the first
intelligence; see al-‘aql al-awwal.

al-‘anasir al-thaqil
--------------------

The heavy element, the atoms of which always move downward like the
atoms of earth which are said to be absolutely heavy or like those of
water which are relatively so.

al-‘anasir al-khafif
--------------------

The light element, the atoms of which always move upward like the atoms
of fire which are said to be absolutely light or like those of air which
are relatively so.

‘ain (pl. a‘yan)
----------------

Lit. "eye". With the philosophers it denotes a particular concrete thing
perceived in the outside world as distinguished from the concept of that
thing in the mind; in this sense it is synonymous with the term shaks
(q.v.). It is also sometimes used in the sense of substance (jauhar,
q.v.). The Sufis, on the other hand, use the term ‘ain for the inner
essence of a ting and more specifically for the universal idea of a
thing eternally existing in the mind of God. Hence the term al-a‘yan
al-thabitha (q.v.) (where thabitha means stable or eternal) for the
eternal ideas existing in the mind of God which are said to be really
real, of which this world is a mere shadow or dream according to the
Platonic tradition.

‘ain al-tali
------------

Affirmation of the consequent, an involved mode of reasoning which does
not warrant any logical conclusion; opposed to naqid al-tali (q.v.). See
also mughalatah wad‘ al-tali.

‘ain al-muqaddam
----------------

The affirmation of the antecedent in the minor premise of a mixed
hypothetical syllogism (al-qiyas al-sharti al-muttasil, q.v.) leading to
the affirmation of the consequent (tali, q.v.) in the conclusion, a
valid mode of reasoning called the positive mode (Modus Ponens) of
hypothetical syllogism; opposed to naqid al-muqaddam (denial of the
antecedent) which is a form of logical fallacy. See also mughalatah raf‘
al-muqaddam.


