PREFACE
=======

A Dictionary of Muslim Philosophy

In this short work, the first of its kind in the English language, an
attempt has been made to give reliable definitions and clear
explanations of the major terms used by the medieval Muslim philosophers
in logic, metaphysics, psychology and other allied disciplines.

Among the many works consulted in the compilation of this dictionary are
the Ta‘rifat by ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Jurjani, Mafatih al-‘Ulum by
Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Khwarizmi, Lexique de la Langue philosophique d’
Ibn Sina by A. M. Goichon and Imam al-Ghazali’s Maqasid al-Falasifah.
For fuller explanation of certain terms the monumental Kashf ‘Istilahat
al-Funun has been resorted to, while quite a few terms have been culled
from Sayyid Ja‘far Sajjadi’s Mustalihat Falsafi Sadr al-Din Shirazi.
Nicholas Rescher’s Studies in the History of Arabic Logic has been
helpful in the selection and elucidation of a number of logical terms.

To the important terms selected have been added some variants of
Arabicised Greek names and titles which though commonly found in such
source books as Ibn al-Nadim’s al-Fihrist, alQifti’s Tarikh al-Hukama’,
Ibn abi ‘Usaibi‘ah’s ‘Uyun al-’Anba’ fi Tabaqat al-’Atibba’, are yet
likely to be unfamiliar to the modern reader.

All terms given in Arabic script with transliteration in English have
been arranged alphabetically except for the definite article "al" which
has been disregarded in the listing of both the single words and the
compounds. Where the technical meaning of a term differs widely from its
literal meaning, the latter has also been given.

I feel deeply indebted to a large number of learned authors, both
Oriental and Occidental, whose valuable works have been of great help to
me in compiling this dictionary; the present work, however, is not a
mere translation of what has been written on Muslim philosophy or its
terminology in Arabic, or Persian, or German, or French. An effort has
been made all along to strike a balance between the ipsessima verba of
the classical texts consulted and the diction and idiom of modern
philosophical thought to make the definitions and explanations of terms
as easily and clearly communicable to the Western and West-oriented
reader as is possible consistently with accuracy; this, however, could
be attempted only by making a free use of cross-references:

This dictionary, it is hoped, will be of use not only to the students of
Muslim philosophy, for whom it has been primarily designed, but will
also be of interest to scholars of Islamics and philosophy generally. It
is further expected to be of some help to the increasing number of
scholars who are engaged in forging a new philosophical vocabulary in
Arabic, Persian, or Urdu in alignment with the great Muslim intellectual
heritage.

I wish to place on record my deep sense of indebtedness to my teacher,
the late Professor M. M. Sharif, who urged me to work on this deplorably
neglected field, helped me to prepare the original plan and remained my

guide and constant source of inspiration, so long as he lived, in its
execution in detail. May his soul rest in peace !

To Dr S. M. Ikram, the present Director of the Institute of Islamic
Culture, Lahore, I owe a special debt of gratitude-without his personal
interest, encouragement and patience this work would not have seen the
light of the day.

I remember with gratefulness the help given me in understanding some
passages of highly technical Arabic texts by Maulana M. Hanif Nadawi, an
Arabist par excellence.

I am equally indebted to Mr. M. Ashraf Darr for the very special care
with which he went through the manuscript and the closest attention with
which he read the rather difficult proofs.

Needless to add that for imperfections and shortcomings which still
remain I alone am responsible. Suggestions for improvement will be
gratefully acknowledged.

**Lahore**

**M.S.S.**

**23 June 1970**

***Fine print: A Dictionary of Muslim Philosophy is copyright of the
Institute of Islamic Culture, 1970. First Impression, 1970: 1100 copies.
Printed by: Muhammad Zarreen Khan at Zarreen Art Press, 61 Railway Road,
Lahore. Published by: M. Munir Sheikh for the Institute of Islamic
Culture, Club Road, Lahore-3***

Postscript for the HTML version:
--------------------------------

I would like to state here for the record that this work is presented
here with the sole purpose of fair educational use policy. It is not
meant as a copyright infringement. I am not making any money on this
venture and merely placing it here for educational use only. If anyone
out there is making money on this and the blood, sweat and tears of
others shame on you. Stop it immediately, acknowledge your error, give
all the earning to charity, and seek forgiveness, and do not do it
again.

The nature of the dictionary is that it is extensively self referential
and it just lends it self so much more in a hypertext format. Further I
have added some terms that I think were lacking in published original.
Also there are mistakes that were corrected from the printed version. I
have pointed that out. There are terms referenced but not included. They
are logic terms which I could not find in other dictionaries that were
available to me at the time htmlizing.

That leaves the problem of transliteration and the Arabic script. I have
included an additional page which has all the terms in Arabic. Each term
has been cross-referenced to the definition. The original
transliteration scheme did not translate well into html. If I do solve
this problem I will update the website accordingly. If anyone knows how
to do this well do let me know as I am open to ideas.

I am considering placing the rtf/word 97 files and if anyone finds that
this idea is appealing let me know in order that it can be realized. Now
that the dictionary has grown I think this option is not one that is
useful as the

current word file is in need of a major update just to match what is on
the web.

With that said I hope you enjoy your foray into Islamic Philosophy.

**Muhammad Hozien**

**27 February 2001**

Post Postscript:
----------------

Now it has been 4 years since I have placed this dictionary online. A
lot of changes have been happened on the web side of things. New
versions of the Microsoft office have come on the scene and embraced the
www in a big way. At any rate the new programs allow the inclusion of
Arabic interlaced with the English. Also I have been alerted to the
existence of many fonts that do the full range of transliteration.
Currently for this project I am using Georgia Ref font. This comes with
some of Microsoft products and the font is available online for those
that do not have it. See here: (font) Actually you need to this font to
read the transliteration correctly. I have since added new entries to
the dictionary that were not part of the original print edition. Also I
found some minor errors that were corrected. I have retained many of the
British spellings for now. I have developed this knee jerk reaction to
spell checkers with their wiggly lines under the misspelled words and
since I work in a non-British environment most of the words are always
underlined.

At any rate the word files are now hopelessly outdated and I will not be
releasing them, they are lost in some dark recess of my hard drive. So
all the updating will be done live on the net. Currently, I am adding
the Arabic in the text as well as the transliteration. Next is to
re-organize the entries correctly according to the Arabic alphabet. Also
to include English language index. Also I will attempt to bring the
Latin and Greek of some of the terms as are available. The source of the
Latin is the Ibrahim Makdour's edition of Ibn Sina's  illhyat of the
Shifa. The Greek is from Max Meyerhof's article: An Arabic Compendium of
Medico-Philosophical Definitions, ISIS, vol. 10. No. 2 (June 1928),
340-349.

**25th February, 2005**


