Fah
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image020.gif)

Firfuriyus
----------

Porphyry (233-c. 304 C.E.), Neoplatonic philosopher, disciple,
biographer and editor of Plotinus (Fulutin, q.v., also called al-Shaikh
al-Yunani, q.v.). Brought up in Tyre, he studied at Athens and from 263
under Plotinus at Rome. He wrote commentaries on Aristotle and Plotinus
which seem to have reached the Muslim philosophers. Around a score of
his numerous works survive in whole or part, including Against the
Christians (fragments), Lives of Pythagoras and Plotinus, commentaries
on Homer, Plato's Timaeus (fragments), Aristotle's Categories, and
Ptolemy's Harmonica. His chief source of fame, however, comes from
Eisagage (Isaghuji, q.v.) which has been preserved in Arabic in its
complete form -that quickly became and long remained a standard
textbook-  and used for centuries both in the East and in the West as
the clearest and most practical manual of Aristotelian logic. The
so-called Tree of Porphyry traces a species (commonly man) from its
summum genus (substance) through differentiae (e.g. corporeal) that
yield successive subgenera (e.g. body). The Muslim tradition ascribes to
him a commentary on Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics, but the work seems
to have been lost now. He wrote a history of philosophy in four books
which was known to the Muslim philosophers, but of which only Life of
Pythagoras is extant. It is interesting to note that according to Ibn
Rushd’s estimation of him, Porphyry cannot be counted among the most
subtle of the philosophers.

farq
----

Lit. "difference" or "separation"; technically the difference or
separation between the corporeal and the incorporeal, for example
between body and soul or between the physical world and the world of
pure intelligences (‘alam al-mufariqat, q.v.); to be distinguished from
fasl (q.v.) which is difference in respect of the different attributes
possessed by the corporeal or bodily objects.

fasl
----

Differentia; i.e. one of the five predicables (al-alfaz al-khamsah). In
logic fasl signifies the attribute or attributes by which a thing is
essentially distinguished from other things. Fasl is to be distinguished
from farq (q.v.) which also signifies difference between things: whereas
the former denotes the essential differentia between the bodily or
corporeal things, the latter refers to complete separation between the
corporeal and the incorporeal, e.g. between body and soul or between the
physical world and the world of intelligences; hence the expression
al-‘uqul al-mufariqah for separated intelligences (see al-‘uqul
al-‘asharah).

al-fasl al-khass
----------------

Lit. "particular difference"; technically it is the difference
necessarily associated with the inseparable accident of a class, e.g.
blackness of crows.

fasl khass al-khass
-------------------

Lit. "difference which is particular of the particular" ; technically
differentia proper, i.e. the attribute or attributes which a species
(nau‘, q.v.) possesses in addition to the attributes of its genus (jins,
q.v.), e.g. the rationality of man in addition to his animality.

al-fasl al-‘amm
---------------

Lit. "common difference"; technically the separable accident which
allows some members of a class to differ from other members of that
class, e.g. the or fat dogs from the black or lean dogs; it equally
allows a thing to differ from itself at different times and as such is
true of everything which grows and decays.

fitrah
------

Nature. (AnAc) See the Qur'anic ayah Fitrat Allah al-Lati Fatrah an-Nasi
alyaha.(...Nature of Allah on which He created humanity...)(30:30)

fitri
-----

Innate. (AnAc)

fi‘l
----

Lit. "action"; in logic, sometimes also termed as yaf‘al (to act), it is
one of the ten Aristotelian categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.) as
opposed to infi‘al (q.v.) or yanfa‘il (q.v.) which is the category of
passion. "Action" in this particular sense means affecting a thing that
receives an effect, e.g. heating something while "passion" would be
being heated, or cutting something while "passion" would be being cut.

In metaphysics fi‘l is act or actuality and as such is not opposed to
infi‘al but to quwwah, i.e. to potentiality.

Fi‘l-a‘yan
----------

In the external world. See a‘yan. (AnAc)

Flatinus
--------

Plotin or Plotinus (c. 203-170 C.E.)-a variant of Fulutin (q.v.)-the
founder and greatest expositor of Neoplatonism. See also al-Shaikh
al-Yunani and al-Aflatuniyat al-Muhdathah.

al-falsafat al-ula
------------------

"First philosophy", a name used by Aristotle and, following him, by
Muslim Peripatetics for metaphysics, i.e. for the study of "Being as
such" or the first principles and essential attributes of Being. See
also Matatafusiqi.

falsafah-i Yamani
-----------------

“The Yamani philosophy”, an expression used more particularly by Mir
Baqir Damad (d. 1041/1631), one of the exponents of al-hikmat
al-ishraqiyah (q.v.). The “Yamani philosophy” signifies, in contrast to
the rationalistic philosophy of the Greeks (falsafah-i Yunani), the
wisdom revealed by God to man through the prophets and through
illumination. It may be noted that the Yaman (Yemen) symbolises the
right or the oriental side of the valley in which Moses is reported to
have received the message and light (tajalli) of God. The source of
falsafah-i Yamani is, therefore, the divine illumination and it stands
for light in contrast to the falsafah-i Yunani which being based merely
on ratiocination and cogitation symbolises darkness. See also al-hikmat
al-ishraqiyah and al-hikmat al-dhauqiyah.

falak (pl. aflak)
-----------------

The celestial sphere surrounding the world and revolving around the
earth as its centre. According to the cosmogony current with the Muslim
philosophers, there are in: all nine such spheres. surrounding each
other like the peels of an onion so that the concave side of the shell
of the surrounding sphere touches the convex surface of the one
surrounded by it. All these spheres being transparent, one can see
through them from the lowest to the highest. The nine spheres in the
descending order of their remoteness from the earth are: (1) the sphere
of the primum mobile (al-falak al-aqsa or falak al-aflak); (2) the
sphere of the fixed stars (al-kawakib al-thabitah); (3) the sphere of
Saturn (Zuhal); (4) the sphere of Jupiter (Mushtari); (6) the sphere of
Mars (Marikh); (6) the sphere of the Sun (Shams); (7) the sphere of
Venus (Zuhrah); (8) the sphere of Mercury (‘Utarid); and (9) the sphere
of the Moon (Qamar). See also al-kawakib al-sayyarah.

falak al-aflak
--------------

The first celestial sphere or the primum mobile, also called al-falak
al-aqsa, "the remotest sphere"; see falak.

al-falak al-awwal
-----------------

"The first heaven", i.e. the outermost celestial sphere in the
Aristotelian-Ptolemaic cosmology, i.e. the sphere of the fixed stars
(al-kawakib al-thabitah, q.v.).

falak al-tadwir
---------------

A smaller sphere revolving on the circumference of a larger sphere, i.e.
one making an epicycle.

Fulutarkhis
-----------

Plutarch (c. 50-c. 125 C.E.): Greek biographer, moralist and one of the
enthusiastic champions of Platonism. A valuable account of him is to be
found in al-Shahrastani's Kitab al-Milal wa'l-Nihal written in
625/1127-8.

Fulutin
-------

Plotin or Plotinus (c. 203-270 C.E.), the greatest expositor and founder
of Neoplatonism; see also al-Shaikh al-Yunani and al-Aflatuniyat
al-Muhdathah.

fantasiya
---------

"Phantasia", a term used by Aristotle for a faculty of mind, which has a
variety of functions but it was identified by the. Muslim philosophers
with the sensus communis or common sense. See also al-hiss al-mushtarik.

Futhaghuras
-----------

Pythagoras of Samos (c. 572-497 B.C.); see Fithaghuras.

Furun
-----

Pyrrhon of Elis (c. 365-c. 270 B.C.): Greek philosopher, the founder of
the school of scepticism often called after him Pyrrhonism. According to
him, our senses tell us only how things appear to us, not what they are
in themselves. If sensation is the source of all our knowledge, how can
we know whether objects agree with sensations or not, for we never, get
outside our sensations? Further, our thoughts and sensations sometimes
conflict, as in illusions in which case we have no criterion to judge
which are true and which are false. Knowledge in matters moral is also
uncertain and we can save ourselves from much unhappiness by suspending
our judgment and by giving up our efforts for the realisation of ideals.
The wise man, thus, seeks to attain undisturbed happiness by abstaining
from all intellectual curiosity and moral passion. The influence of
Furun and his baneful doctrine on Muslim philosophers was very slight
for he did not write anything himself.

Fulitus
-------

The title of the Arabic translation first made by Hunain ibn Ishaq (d.
264/877) of Plato's Dialogue the Politicus. Plato's other Dialogues on
political philosophy, viz. the Republic and the Laws were also well
known to the Muslim philosophers through their Arabic translation.

Fithaghuras
-----------

Pythagoras of Samos (c. 672-497 B.C.), the founder of Pythagoreanism, a
philosophical, mathematical, moral and religious school. One of the
basic principles of Pythagoras was that the substance of things is
"number" and that all phenomena can be understood in mathematical
ratios. The study of Pythagoras by Muslim philosophers, thus, led both
to number mysticism and to the quantitative method in science. A
valuable exposition of Pythagorean cosmology has been preserved by
al-Shahrastani (469-548/ 1070-1-1153) in his Kitab al-Milal wa'l-Nihal;
and by Abu Bakr al-Razi (250-c. 312/854-c. 920) who, wrote a treatise in
defence of Pythagoreanism. Two works: al-Risalat al-Dhahabiyah -(The
Treatise on Golden Words) and kitab al-Qur‘ah (a work on divination)
ascribed by Muslim philosophers to Pythagoras are now considered to be
apocryphal. It is indeed difficult to distinguish between the works and
theories of Pythagoras and those of his. followers.


