Kaaf
====

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image022.gif)

kubra
-----

The major premise in a syllogism (qiyas, q.v.); see al-muqaddamat
al-kubra.

Kitab al-Ustuqussat
-------------------

The Arabicised title of Euclid's geometrical work: the Elements in 13
books-first translated into Arabic in 214/829-30 by al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf
ibn Matar (fl. 170-218/786-833) and then commented on severally by
al-‘Abbas ibn Sa‘id al-Jauhari (fl. 198-218/813-33), al-Mahani (d.c.
261/874) and al-Nairizi (d.c. 310/922). See also Uqlidis.

Kitab al-Huruf
--------------

"Book of Letters", the title given by Muslim philosophers to Aristotle's
13 books (collectively) on metaphysics named as they are after the
letters of Greek alphabet; see Matatafusiqi.

Kitab al-Khair al-Mahd
----------------------

"The Book of Pure Good", one of the apocryphal works ascribed by Muslim
philosophers to Aristotle. The work is really based on Proclus’s
"Elements of Theology" ; more exactly it contains two parts : the first
is a summary of Proclus’s work and the second a short commentary on it.
This work was later translated into Latin (Liber de Causis) and
commented on by Albert the Great. It thus served one of the best
vehicles for the transmission of Neoplatonic thought first to the
Muslims and Jews and then to Christians.

Karusfus
--------

Chrysippus (280-209 B.C.): Greek Stoic philosopher. He was perhaps alone
among the Stoics not to accept the typically Stoic doctrine of the unity
of virtue. According to him, virtue is not natural to man, but is
acquired through instruction and by practice. He also combined the Stoic
principle of natural necessity or determinism with the doctrine of
Providence. See also Rawaqiyah.

Kisnufans
---------

Xenophanes (c. 570-c. 480 B.C.): Greek philosopher, a con temporary of
Pythagoras (Fithaghuras, q.v.). He defended theistic monism divested of
anthropomorphic conceptions of God current in his time. Well-known for
his saying: "The gods of the Ethiopians; are dark-skinned and
snub-nosed; the gods of the Thracians are fair and blue-eyed; if oxen
could paint, their gods would be oxen," An account of him in Arabic
religio-philosophical literature is to be found in al-Shahrastani’s
Kitab al-Milal wa'l-Nihal written in 625/1127-8.

Kalbiyah
--------

Cynicism: a Greek school of ethics founded by Antisthenes (c. 444-368
B.C.). The Cynics taught that a good man is one who is independent of
all external involvements such as family, wealth, happiness, etc. He
also keeps

his desires and appetites under they strict control of reason, so that
he reduces them only to such as are indispensable to life. Later Cynics
regarded all pleasures as evil. In extreme cases like that of Diogenes
(Dayujans al-Kalabi, q.v.) this philosophy expressed itself in a revolt
against all social conventions and courtesies and in a desire to live
the life of nature amidst a civilised community, The Stoics (Ashab
al-Mazallah, q.v.) are considered to be the followers of the Cynics, but
their doctrine is less severe and more humanitarian.

kalimah
-------

In logic any single utterance referring to a meaning or to the: definite
time of the occurrence of an event or action.

al-kulyat al-khamsah
--------------------

Literally the five predicables. It is also known as the al-mufradat
al-khamsah (the five definitions) or alfaz al-khamsah. The first is
genus (jins, q.v.) and nau', species is the second. The third is fasl
and the fourth is 'ard amm (general) and the fifth predicable is khas
(specific). Ikhwan al-Safa' also added a sixth predicable called shkash,
class membership. Note that this entry is missing from the printed text.

kamm
----

Lit. "How much?"; technically, the category of quantity as one of the
ten Aristotelian categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.). It denotes the
volume of a thing as well as the duration of an event and is of various
kinds: al-kamm al-muttasil (q.v.), al-kamm al-munfasil (q.v.), al-kamm
al-muttasil qarr al-dhat, and al-kamm al-muttasil ghair qarr al-dhat
(see below al-kamm al-mattasil).

al-kamm al-muttasil
-------------------

The continuous quantity, i. e. the quantity of the kind the parts of
which are so contiguous to one another that they form arts of which are
so contiguous to one another that they form a single continuum; it is
either a spatial continuum (makan) or a, temporal continuum, i.e. time
(zaman, q.v.). The spatial continuum is of three kinds, viz. (1)
one-dimensional, i.e. line (khatt); (2) two-dimensional, i.e. surface
(sath); and (3) three-dimensional, and 'i.e. volume (hajm). As all these
are static continua, they are classed under. the category of al-kamm
al-muttasil qarr al-dhat (the unchanging continuous quantity). The
temporal continuum, though .constituted of the series of past, present
and future, is uni-dimensional and, being in a perpetual flux, is named
as al-kamm al-muttasil ghair qarr al-dh-at (the ever-changing continuous
.quantity).

al-kamm al-munfasil
-------------------

The discrete quantity as represented by integral numbers (1, 2, 3, 4,
etc.); opposed to al-kamm al-muttasil (q.v.).

al-kawakib al-thabitah
----------------------

The fixed stars, i.e. the stars fixed in the first or the outermost
sphere (al-falak al-awwal, q.v.) in the Aristotelian-Ptolemaic
cosmology. In Ptolemy's Almagest (al-Majisti, q.v.) the number of stars
mentioned is 1025; this number was generally accepted by Muslim
philosophers and astronomers.

‘Abd al-Rahman ibn ‘Umar al-Sufi (291-376/903-986), one of the greatest
Muslim astronomers, in his work Kitab al-Kawakib al-Thabitah al-Musawwar
(Illustrated Book of the Fixed Stars), however, adds that there are many
more stars than 1025, but they are so faint that it is not possible to
count them.

al-kawakib al-sufliyah
----------------------

The lower planets, i.e. the planets below the sphere of the Sun in the
Ptolemaic astronomy, current with the Muslim philosophers and
scientists. They are three, viz. Venus (Zuhrah), Mercury (‘Utarid) and
the Moon (Qamar). See also below al-kawakib al-sayyarah.

al-kawakib al-sayyarah
----------------------

The planets as opposed to stars (al-kawakib al-thabitah), q.v. ;
according to the Ptolemaic cosmogony current with the Muslim
philosophers there are only seven planets which according to their
remoteness from earth were mentioned in the following order : Saturn
(Zuhal), Jupiter (Mushtari); Mars (Marikh), the Sun (Shams), Venus
(Zuhrah), Mercury (‘Utarid) and the Moon (Qamar). It may be noted that
according to modern astronomy with its heliocentric view, the order of
planets, nine in all, according to their increasing distance from the
Sun is: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune
and Pluto.; the Moon is not a separate planet but merely a satellite of
the earth. It is also to be noted that with the Muslim as with the Greek
philosophers of antiquity every planet is studded in a crystalline, i.e.
transparent, celestial sphere like a gem in a ring so that the movement
of a planet is really the rotation of its whole sphere.

al-kawakib al-‘ulwiyah
----------------------

"The high planets", i.e. the planets beyond the sphere of the Sun. These
are three, viz. Saturn (Zuhal), Jupiter (Mushtari); Mars (Marikh). See
al-kawakib al-sayyarah and also al-kawakib al-sufliyah.

kaif
----

Lit. "How?"; also termed as kaifiyah. It denotes quality as one of the
ten Aristotelian categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.); for everything
falls under the question: "How?" It is concerned with the sensuous
qualities of things such, as their colours, tastes, odours and hotness
and coldness or dryness and moisture, and also with the character traits
and emotional states of persons such as their boldness or state of
feeling shy. It has many forms or kinds for which see below the various
kids of kaifiyat.

al-kaifiyat al-isti‘dadiyah
---------------------------

Qualities of capacity, i.e. qualities of a thing on account-of power or
ability possessed by it to act in a certain manner or to suffer a
certain change. If this capacity is active and resistant to the outside
influence or pressure, it is named as quwwah (power); but if it is
passive and non-resistant and easily suffers change, it: is called du‘f
(weakness). See also ’isti‘dad.

al-kaifiyat al-uwal
-------------------

The first or primary qualities, i.e. the four qualities of hotness.
(hararah), coldness (burudah), moisture (rutubah) and dryness (yubusah);
so called because all other qualities such as of colours, smells,
tastes, touch, etc., were supposed to have originated from these four.

al-kaifiyat al-mahsusah
-----------------------

The sensible qualities: these are either firmly rooted in things like
sweetness in honey or salinity in brine in which case they are called
’infi‘aliyat (q.v.), or they are merely transitory states like the blush
on the face of man on account of embarrassment or pallidness on account
of fear; in this latter case they are called ’infi‘alat (q.v.), while
the sudden change of one state into another is known as ’istihalah
(q.v.).

kaifiyat mukhtassah bi’l-kammiyat
---------------------------------

Quantitative qualities or qualities specific to magnitudes and spatial
continua. These are of two kinds: (1) qualities of continuous-quantities
like the rectilinearity or curvature of a line, triangularity of a
triangle, or sphericity of a sphere ; (2) qualities of discrete
quantities like the evenness or oddness of numbers. See also al-kamm
al-muttasil and al-kamm al-munfasil.

al-kaifiyat al-nafsaniyah
-------------------------

The mental states or qualities both innate and acquired. A permanent
state of mind becoming a part of the structure of mind is called malakah
(q.v.), i.e. a disposition or habit like the orator's skill in speech,
while a transitory state which is a passing; mood of mind is called
halah (see ’infi‘alat ).


