Lam
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image023.gif)

la ’adriyah
-----------

Skepticism, the doctrine that no certain knowledge is possible, for
senses can deceive and reasoning may be false-a view, for example,
adopted by Imam Ghazali (450-505/1053-1111 -website-) at one stage of
his spiritual development. In-its extreme form, as with some of the
Greek philosophers, skepticism means that one does not know anything,
and not even that. See also Furun.

la yasduru shai’-un ‘an la shai’-in
-----------------------------------

The principle of ex nihilo nihil fit: out of nothing, nothing comes. The
fundamental assumption of the law of causation that nothing happens in
the universe without there being a cause for it. See also al-‘ilal
al-’arba‘ah.

lafz
----

Vocable [see S. Afnan, Avicenna: His Life and Works, 92]; term.  (AnAc)

al-alfaz al-khamsah
-------------------

Literally the five predicables. It is also known as the al-mufradat
al-khamsah (the five definitions) or al-kulyat al-khamsah. The first is
genus (jins, q.v.) and nau', species is the second. The third is fasl
and the fourth is 'ard amm (general) and the fifth predicable is khas
(specific). Ikhwan al-Safa' also added a sixth predicable called shkash,
class membership. Note that this entry is missing from the printed text.

al-lafz al-hasir
----------------

The word used as a quantifier of a determinate proposition [al-qadiyat
al-mahsurah, (q.v.); or al-qadiyat al-musawwarah (q.v.)], i.e. the
expressions like "all"; "some"; "not all", "not some", used to indicate
the definite quantity of the subject in a proposition. See also sur.

al-lafz al-mushtarak
--------------------

Homonym, a word that is spelt and pronounced in the same way as another,
but has an entirely distinct meaning like the word ‘ain in Arabic which
means "eye" as well as "spring" and the word "spring" itself in English
which means "springing motion" as well as the "place where water or oil
wells up". The use of such words. leads to a number of fallacies of
equivocation in logic (see mughalatah ishtirak al-lafzi).

lazim
-----

Concomitant.  (AnAc)

lima
----

"Why?": a form of question put in order to discuss the form and matter
of definitions and propositions with regard to problems that arise in
science. The interrogative pronoun lima is used in logic to ask two
kinds of things: (1) "Why a thing is or what it is?" or "Why has an
event occurred?", i.e.

"What is the cause of it?" (2) "What are the grounds of somebody's
making an assertion?", i.e. "How is the assertion to be verified?". See
further muta‘alliqat al-qiyas wa’l-burhan.

lams
----

The touch sensation: a power diffused in the skin and flesh of the
animal body. When anything comes in contact with the body the nerves are
stimulated and there occurs a change in the skin or flesh which leads to
the sensation of touch. This is not a single sensation but one
constituted of four pairs of sensations that we get from different
sense-organs in the skin or flesh. These four pairs of contrary
sensations are: heat and cold, dryness and wetness, roughness and
smoothness, hardness and softness (see al-hawas al-zahirah). Through
these sensations an animal is enabled to feel its way towards safe and
profitable places and avoid those which are dangerous and unprofitable.

lahu
----

Lit. "he has", but technically the category of possession as one of the
ten Aristotelian categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.) see milk.

lauh al-taqabul
---------------

Table or square of opposition representing four kinds of relations of
"opposition" among the four traditional propositions, i.e. (1)
subalternation (tahkim, q.v.), (2) contradiction (tanaqud, q.v.), (3)
contrariety (tadadd, q.v.). and (4) subcontrariety (al-tadadd
al-tahtani, q.v.). See also al-qadiyatan al-mutaqabilatan.


