Mim
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image024.gif)

ma
--

“What?”: a form of question put in order to discuss the form and matter
of definitions and propositions with regard to the problems that arise
in science. The interrogative pronoun ma is used in logic to ask two
kinds of things: (1) the essence or meaning of a thing denoted by a
term, i.e. its definition; (2) the intention of the speaker, i.e. the
meaning of a term as intended by one who uses that term. See also
muta‘alliqat al-qiyas wa’l-burhan.

al-maddat al-ula
----------------

Prime matter; see hayula.

mani‘at al-jam‘
---------------

"Mutually exclusive", i.e. the relation that exists between two
contraries (diddan, q.v.) like odd and even, or two contradictories
(naqidan, q.v.) like B and not-B or existence and non-existence; but
whereas the contradictories (naqidan) are mutually exclusive as well as
totally exhaustive (mani ‘at al-khuluww, q.v.) the contraries (diddan)
are only mutually exclusive. Two universal propositions have opposite
quality, i.e. one affirmative and the other negative like "All S is P"
and "No S is P" (see al-qadiyatan al-mutadaddatan) also mutually exclude
each other.

mani‘at al-khuluww
------------------

"Totally exhaustive", i.e. the relation that exists between two
contradictories (naqidan) like existence (wujud) and non-existence
(‘adm) or B and not-B; or between two contradictory propositions
(al-qadiyatan al-mutaqabilatan bi’l-tanaqud, q.v.) like "All S is P" and
"Some S is not P", or like "No S is P" and "Some S is P"; this, however,
does not hold true of two contraries (diddan, q.v.).

mahiyah
-------

The "whatness" of a thing, i.e. its essence or quiddity as opposed to
’anniyah (q.v.), the "thatness" of a thing, i.e. its existence. The
essence of a thing is the reason why it is or what it is; existence is
the actuality of essence. There is one Being alone whose essence is His
very existence and that is God, the Necessary Being (al-wajib al-wujud,
q.v.). In the case of all other things, which are possible or contingent
beings (al-mumkin al-wujud, q.v.), their essence does not necessarily
imply their existence for it is possible to think of the essence of a
(created) thing without knowing whether it exists or not. It is
noteworthy that Mulla Sadra (97901050/1571-1642), the greatest
philosopher in modern times in Iran, maintains, however, the
principality or priority of existence or being of a thing (’isalat
al-wujud, q.v.) to its essence, for, according to him, the latter is
merely a mental manifestation of the former.

al-mubadi al-Tabi‘iyah
----------------------

"The natural beginnings", a term used to denote the four causes: the
material cause, the formal cause, the efficient cause and the final
cause. See also al-‘ilal al-’arb‘ah.

al-mubadi al-‘aliyah
--------------------

"The supreme beginnings", an expression used with reference to the souls
and intelligences of the celestial spheres; see al-‘uqul al-’asharah.

mubasharah (pl. mubasharat)
---------------------------

The direct or primary action or movement as opposed to the transmitted
or secondary action or movement generated by it. like the movement of
the hand itself which causes the movement of a key in the keyhole; this
latter movement is called muwalladah (q.v.)

mutarakamah
-----------

An abridged form of syllogism, technically known as enthymeme; see
al-qiyas al-mujiz.

mutadhaddatan
-------------

Two contrary propositions, i.e. two universal propositions have opposite
quality, one affirmative and the other negative; see al-qadiyatan
mutadaddatan.

mutadhayifan
------------

Two correlative terms like father and son, teacher and pupil, or king
and subject; one term necessarily implies the other but the two cannot
obtain in the same individual at the same time in the same respect. See
also taqabul al-tadayuf.

muta‘alliqat al-qiyas wa’l-burhan
---------------------------------

Logical adjuncts, i.e. the various interrogative pronouns used with
regard to questions put in order to discuss the form and matter of
definitions and arguments such as hal (q.v.) to ask whether or not a
certain thing or state of affairs exists; ma (q.v.), i.e. "what a thing
is"; lima (q.v.), i.e. "why a thing is"; etc. All this is indeed the
application of the Aristotelian categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.)
to the problems of science.

mutaqabilan
-----------

Two terms in relation of "opposition" to each other so that they cannot
be applied to the same thing or person at the same time and in the same
respect. These are of four kinds: (1) contraries (diddan, q.v.), (2)
correlatives (mutadayifan, q.v.), (3) privative and non-privative
(al-mutaqabilan bi’l-‘adm wa’milkah,q.v.) and (4) contradictories
(al-mutaqabilan bi’l-’ijab wa’l-salb, q.v.). See also taqabul.

al-mutaqabilan bi’l-’ijab wa’l-salb
-----------------------------------

Two terms in relation of affirmation and negation like A and not-A or
existence and non-existence; see naqidan and also taqabul fi’l-salb
wa’l-’ijab.

al-mutaqabilan bi’l-‘adm wa’l-milkah
------------------------------------

Two terms; one positive and the privative, like motion and rest,
knowledge and ignorance, or vision and blindness -to be distinguished
from two contrary terms (diddan, q.v.) like bitter and sweet or black
and white. In the latter case it is necessary to presuppose the separate
existence of two things, i.e. bitterness and sweetness or blackness and
whiteness, but no such presupposition is necessary in the case of the
former, for rest is merely the non-existence of motion, ignorance that
of knowledge and blindness of vision. See also taqabul bain al-’adm
wa’l-milkah.

mutawatirat
-----------

Transmitted data or premises, i.e. the propositions to which the
continuous testimony of other people causes our assent.

mata
----

Lit. "When?", but technically the category of time as one of the ten
Aristotelian categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.). It refers to the
relation of a thing to time (zaman, q.v.), i.e. to past, present and
future or to yesterday, today and tomorrow.

al-muthul al-Aflatuniyah
------------------------

The Platonic Ideals or forms: the universals which according to Plato
(Aflatun, q.v.) are eternally real as opposed to the transitory and
relatively unreal objects of sense-perception. The Ideas are also ideals
as patterns of existence and as objects of human yearning (Eros) for
higher values. See also al-’a‘yan al-thabitah.

mujanasah
---------

Relation of similarity between two or more objects or individuals
belonging to the same genus (jins, q.v.), e.g. the relation between man
horse subsumed under the genus "animal". See also ’ittihad fi’l-jins.

mujarrabat
----------

The data or premises to which the sense-experience in association with
deductive reasoning causes our assent.

al-Majisti
----------

The title of the Arabic translation of Ptolemy’s (Batlamiyus, q.v.)
notable work on astronomy: Meagle Syntaxis (the Grand Composition), now
known as Almgest from al-Majisti. The first known Arabic translation was
made by al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf ibn Matar in 214/829-30, which followed by a
number of other translations. See also Batlamiyus (al-Qaludhi).

mahsusat
--------

Percepts, i.e. objects cognised through the outer senses (al-hawas
al-zahirah, q.v.). See also al-quwwat al-mudrikah.

Muhaalah
--------

The proposition in which both the subject and the predicate (as opposed
to ma‘dullah, q.v.) are in the affirmative like the statement, "All men
are mortal" or "some students are lazy". see also al-qadiyat
al-muhassalah.

Maurah
------

The determinate proposition which has a quantifier (al-lafz al-hasir,
q.v., or sur, q.v.), i.e. the one in which the quantity of the subject
is defintely indicated by the use of such expressions as "all", "some",
"not some", etc.; opposed to muhmalah for which see al-qadiyat
al-muhmalah.

Madlul
------

Literally "referent" and "meaning", "sense". It also means "proved",
"inferred".

al-Muhaqqiq
-----------

"The Investigator", the honorific title conferred on the illustrious
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (597-672/1201-74) -the Persian philosopher,
theologian, mathematician, astronomer, physician, etc. -for his having
made many original contributions to the various domains of human
knowledge.

muhkam bihi
-----------

Subalternate, i.e. the particular proposition in relation to the
universal proposition having the same subject and predicate and of the
same quality; also sometimes called mahkum. See also tahkim and
al-qadiyatan al-mutaqabilatan.

muhkum lahu
-----------

Subalternant, i.e. the universal proposition in relation to the
particular proposition having the same subject and predicate and of the
same quality. See also tahkim and al-qadiyatan al-mutaqabilatan.

mahkum
------

Subalternate, i.e. the particular proposition in relation to the
universal proposition having the same subject and predicate and of the
same quality; also called muhkam bihi (q.v.) See also tahkim and
al-qadiyatan al-mutaqabilatan.

mahkum bihi
-----------

That which is predicated of something, i.e. the predicate (mahmul, q.v.)
of a logical judgment or proposition, e.g. the term "mortal" in the
proposition: "Man is mortal".

mahkum ‘alaihi
--------------

That about which something is predicated, i.e. the subject (maudu‘,
q.v.) of a logical judgment or proposition, e.g. the term "man" in the
proposition: "Man is mortal".

mahmul
------

The logical predicate, i.e. the term (or terms) in a proposition which
predicates something about the subject (maudu‘, q.v.), e.g. the term
"mortal" in the proposition: "Man is mortal".

mukhalafah lili-hawadith
------------------------

The Ash‘arite principle of tanzih that nothing which is applied to
created beings should be ascribed to God in the same sense. More
explicitly, terms used to for human beings have altogether different
meanings when applied to God. God’s attributes do not differ from those
of humankind in degree

only-as God is wiser and more powerful than human beings-but in kind,
i.e. in the whole nature.

mukhayyalat
-----------

Imaginative data or premises, i.e. propositions which are stated not to
obtain assent of any kind but to force upon the mind to imagine
something to be the case. See also al-qiyas al-shi‘ri.

al-mudrikat al-batinah
----------------------

The internal senses which include common sense (al-hiss al-mushtarik,
q.v.), formative faculty (al-quwwat al-mutasawwirah, q.v.), memory
(al-quwwat al-mutadhakhirah, q.v.), imagination (al-quwwat
al-mutakhayyilah, q.v.), and estimative faculty (al-quwwat
al-mutawahhimah, q.v.). See also al-quwwat al-mudrikah.

al-Madkhal
----------

"Prelude" or "Introduction": a title sometimes given to Porphyry’s
Isagoge, an introduction to Aristotle’s logical treatise on categories.
See also al-Isaghuji.

Marqiyun
--------

Marcion, a Christian Gnostic of 2nd century C.E., known in Muslim
philosophy for his doctrine of the eternity of matter. In Christian
tradition he is known as a reformer who spent all his life in the
attempt to purify Christianity from all contact with Judaism; hence
Marcionism.

Marikh
------

The planet Mars or its sphere (falak, q.v.); see al-kawakib al-sayyarah.

musawah
-------

Relation of equality with reference to quantity (fi’l-kamm) of a thing,
e.g. the relation between two seers of cotton and two seers of gold. See
also ’ittihad fi’l-kamm.

mustathnah
----------

Lit. "the excluded", but technically the antecedent (muqaddam, q.v.)
which is affirmed or the consequent (tali, q.v.) which is denied in the
minor premise of the hypothetical syllogism (al-qiyas al-sharti
al-mttasil, q.v.). See also al-qiyas al-istihna’i.

musallamat
----------

Accepted data or premises, i.e. the statements accepted by one’s
adversary (khasm, q.v.) in a discussion. The difference between
mashhurat (q.v.) and musallamat is that whereas the former are accepted
by the lay man, the latter are accepted only by the expert and elite.
Both kind of premises are, however, used for dialectical purposes. See
also al-qiyas al-jadali.

musawwarah
----------

The determinate proposition which has a quantifier (sur, q.v.) or
(l-lafz al-hasir, q.v.), i.e. the one in which the quantity of the
subject (maudu‘) is

definitely indicated by such expression as "all", "some", "not all",
"not some", etc.; also called mahsurah (q.v.).

al-Mashsha’iyun
---------------

The Preipatetics (i.e. those who walk around), the name given to the
followers of Aristotle (Aristatalis, q.v.) for he is reported to have
lectured to his pupils while walking in the garden of Lyceum, near
Athens; hence also the term Peripateticism (mashsha’iyat). Though
Aristotle’s influence on Muslim philosophy was immense -all the major
Muslim philosophers: al-Farabi (d. 339/950), Ibn Sina (d. 428/1037), Ibn
Rushd (d. 595/1198), and others were primarily known as
Peripatetics -yet Peripateticism in the history of Muslim
religio-philosophical thought continued to stand in conflict with
various theologies and with Platonism and more particularly with
al-hikmat al-’ishraqiyah (q.v.). See Hujjat al-Islam.

mushabahah
----------

Lit. "resemblance" or "similarity"; technically the relation between
objects possessing the same quality, say, of colour, touch, taste, or
smell. See also ‘ittihad fi’l-kaif.

mushaghabah
-----------

An eiristic and contentious argument; see sufustah.

mushakalah
----------

The relation of similarity between objects having a common property
(proprium), e.g. the relation between triangles of different kinds in
respect of their common property that the sum of two of their sides in
each case is greater than the third side. See also ’ittihad
fi’l-khassah.

Mushtari
--------

The planet Jupiter or its sphere (falak, q.v.); see al-kawakib
al-sayyarah.

mashhurat
---------

The well-known data or premises which have gained currency among the
people in general, i.e. among the lay men and even the uneducated
masses. These are generally used for dialectical purposes. See also
musallamat and al-qiyas al-jadali.

musadarah
---------

An initial proposition or principle which is postulated to be true
whether one believes it to be so or not like the postulates of Euclidean
geometry.

al-musadarah ‘ala’l-matlub al-awwal
-----------------------------------

The fallacy of petitio principii or assumptio principii, i.e. the
fallacy of begging the question. It consists in asking one’s opponent to
grant overtly the very proposition or assumption originally propounded
for discussion; this may be done in one of the following five ways: (1)
by simply asking the opponent to grant the point which requires to be
proved; (2) by asking the opponent to grant some more general truth
which involves it; (3) by asking the opponent to grant the particular
truths which it involves; (4) by asking the opponent to grant the
component parts of it in detail; or (5) by asking the

opponent to grant a necessary consequence of it. It may be noted that
the fourth way is only a more prolix form of the first.

Matatafusiqi
------------

Metaphysics from Greek met ta Physika (that which comes after physics):
the title given by Aristotle’s editor Andronicus (c. 70 B.C.) to a
certain collection of his writings, i.e. those which come after the
writings on physics. The term has nowhere been used by Aristotle
himself -he has in fact called his metaphysical system "First
Philosophy" (al-Falsafat al-Ula, q.v.). It is also misplaced in so far
as Aristotle’s First Philosophy or the "Science of Being as such"
includes both his metaphysics and his physics: the two cannot be
separated from each other. The whole work (on metaphysics) consists of
fourteen books each named after a letter of Greek alphabet. Muslim
philosophers know only thirteen of them and called the whole collection
"The Book of Letters" (Kitab al-Huruf, q.v.). The first translation of a
part of this work into Arabic was attempted by Hunain ibn Ishaq (d.
264/877). See also Mabad al-Tabi'ah

maznunat
--------

Presumed data or premises, i.e. propositions which have no more evidence
in their support than the opinion or presumption of the one who states
these propositions. These are generally used for rhetorical purposes.
See also al-qiyas al-khitabi.

mu‘amalah
---------

"Commercial transaction", but as contrasted with mukashafah (q.v.), the
term means the "science" dealing with the moral and spiritual
purification and cultivation of the soul.

al-ma‘ani al-ula
----------------

First intentions (intentiones primae): the properties of and relations
between concrete individual things.

al-ma‘ani al-thani
------------------

Second intentions (intentiones secundae): properties of and relations
between first intentions (al-ma‘ani al-ula, q.v.) which practically are
the Aristotelian categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.).

ma‘dul
------

The proposition which is inferred from a given proposition without
changing the latter’s quality and without transposing its subject and
predicate but merely by changing its quantity which is done by
negativising the original predicate, e.g. the proposition "No triangles
are non-three-sided" may be derived from the proposition "All triangles
are three-sided". See also ‘adl.

ma‘dulah
--------

The proposition in which either the subject (ma‘dulat al-maudu‘, q.v.),
or the predicate (ma‘dulat al-mahmul, q.v.), or both the subject and the
predicate (ma‘dulat al-tarafain, q.v.) are in the negative. See also
al-qadiyat al-ma‘dulah and ‘adl.

ma‘dulat al-tarafain
--------------------

The proposition in which both the subject and the predicate are in the
negative form like the statement: "All non-S is non-P".

ma‘dulat al-mahmul
------------------

The proposition in which the predicate is in the negative form like the
statement: "All S is non-P".

ma‘dul minhu
------------

The orginal proposition form which another proposition is derived by
changing the former’s quantity through negativising its predicate. See
ma‘dul and also ‘adl.

ma‘dulat al-maudu‘
------------------

The proposition in which the subject is in the negative form like the
statement: "All non-S is P".

marhalah
--------

Stage. (AnAc)

martabah
--------

Level. (AnAc)

murajjih
--------

Preponderating reason. (AnAc)

maslak
------

Road (see Asfar 1: "First Safar, First Maslak, etc). (AnAc)

musawaqah
---------

Inherence (to inhere, see Asfar, 1: ch 8, p. 75). (AnAc)

mudaf
-----

Relational. (AnAc)

musabaqah
---------

Complete accord (S. Afnan, Avicenna: His Life and Works, 93);
correspondence. (AnAc)

mu‘iddat
--------

Preparatory conditions. (AnAc)

al-ma‘qulat al-ula
------------------

The primary intelligibles or the first principles which being a priori
and self-evident need no proof such as the axioms of mathematics and
fundamental laws of thought, e.g. a part is always less than the whole
or a thing cannot be both B and not-B at the same time. See also
awwaliyat and al-muqaddamat al-uwal.

maqam
-----

Station. (AnAc)

m‘akus
------

The converse, i.e. the proposition inferred from a given proposition by
transposing its subject and predicate, but without changing its quality,
e.g. the proposition "No circles are triangles" is the ma‘kus of the
proposition "No triangles are circles" or "Some Arabs are Jews" is the
ma‘kus of "Some Jews are Arabs"; more usually called mun‘akis (q.v.)

ma‘kus minhu
------------

The proposition from which another proposition is derived by transposing
its subject and predicate but without changing its quality; see ma‘kus
and ‘aks.

al-mu‘allim al-awwal
--------------------

"The first teacher", a title given by Muslim scholars to Aristotle
particularly because of their indebtedness to him logic. See also
Aristatalis .

al-mu‘allim al-thalith
----------------------

"The third teacher”, an honorific title given to Mir Muhammad Baqir
Damad (1037-1110/1628-99), the greatest of the safawid theologians and
scholars of Islam, the teacher of the celebrated Mulla Sadra
(979-1050/1571-1640) himself considered the greatest philosopher of
modern times in Iran. See also al-mu‘allim al-awwal and al-mu‘allim
al-thani.

al-mu‘allim al-thani
--------------------

“The second teacher”, an honorific title given to the celebrated Muslim
philosopher al-Farabi (c. 257-339/c.870-950) for his being the first
great expositor of Aristotle’s logic.

mughalatah (pl. mughalatat)
---------------------------

A logical "fallacy", i.e. a piece of reasoning which appears to
establish a conclusion without really doing so; the term applies equally
to the legitimate deduction of a conclusion from false premises and to
the illegitimate deduction of a conclusion from any premises. See below
the various kinds of mughalatah [ mughalatat]

mughalatat al-’ibham
--------------------

The fallacy of amphiboly, i.e. the fallacy arising from the grammatical
structure of a proposition or statement rather than from the terms of
which it is composed (as is the case with mughalatah ishtirak al-lafzi,
q.v.). The classical example of this fallacy is the oracle given to
Pyrrhus: "Pyrrhus the Romans shall, I say, subdue", which Pyrrhus, as
the story goes, interpreted to mean that he could conquer the Romans
whereas the oracle subsequently explained to that the real meaning was
that the Romans could conquer him.

mughalatat al-as’ilat al-muta’addadah
-------------------------------------

The fallacy of many questions, i.e. a deceptive form of interrogation in
which a single answer usually in the form of "Yes" or "No" is demanded
to what is really not a single question but a combination of many
questions which can be answered only variously, e.g. the question: "Have
you left beating your mother yet?" the simple answer to which in "Yes"
or "No", in either case, leads to an apparent admission of impiety; also
called jam‘ al-masa’il fi mas’alat-in.

mughalatah ishtirak al-hadd al-asghar
-------------------------------------

The fallacy of ambiguous minor. It consists in using the minor term
(al-hadd al-asghar, q.v.) in the minor premise (al-muqaddamat al-sughra,
q.v.) in a sense different from the sense it is used as a subject in the
conclusion as in the following syllogism:

Men are not made of paper.

Pages are men.

Therefore, pages are not made of paper.

mughalatah ishtirak al-hadd al-akbar
------------------------------------

The fallacy of ambiguous major. It consists in using the major term
(al-hadd al-akbar, q.v.) in the major premise (al-muqaddamat al-kubra,
q.v.) in a sense different from the sense it is used as a predicate in
the conclusion as in the following syllogism:

No courageous creature flies.

Eagle is a courageous creature.

Therefore, eagle does not fly.

mughalatah ishtirak al-hadd al-ausat
------------------------------------

The fallacy of ambiguous middle. It consists in using the middle term
(al-hadd al-ausat, q.v.) in the major premise (al-muqaddamat al-kubra,
q.v.) in a sense different from the sense it is used in the minor
premise (al-muqaddamat al-sughra, q.v.)as in the following syllogism:

Sound travels very fast.

His knowledge of law is sound.

Therefore, his knowledge of law travels very fast.

mughalatah ishtirak al-lafzi
----------------------------

The fallacy of equivocation. It consists in an ambiguous use of any of
the three terms (major, minor, or middle) of a syllogism (qiyas, q.v.).
It thus may assume any of the following three forms: (1) fallacy of
ambiguous major (mughalatah ishtirak al-hadd al-akbar, q.v.); (2)
fallacy of ambiguous minor (mughalatah ishtirak al-hadd al-asghar,
q.v.); (3) fallacy of ambiguous middle (mughalatah ishtirak al-hadd
al-ausat, q.v.).

mughalatat al-’atraf al-’arba‘ah
--------------------------------

The fallacy of four terms. It consists in using four terms in a
syllogism (qiyas, q.v.), while syllogism by definition has only three
terms for it is "thinking together" or comparison of two terms (al-hadd
al-akbar, q.v., and al-hadd al-asghar, q.v.) by means of the third term
(al-hadd al-ausat, q.v.) -the result is either no syllogism or a
combination of two syllogism (al-qiyas al-murakkab, q.v.). The
significance of this fallacy is to avoid all ambiguity in the case of
terms used in a syllogism. See also mughalatah ishtirak al-lafzi.

mughalatat al-takid
-------------------

The fallacy of accent, i.e. the fallacy arising from the emphasis or
stress laid upon the wrong part of a sentence, for example, the
statement: "Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour" may
be differently interpreted (rather misinterpreted) by laying an undue
stress on one of the words: "thou", "false", "witness", "against", "thy"
and "neighbour".

mughalatah tarkib al-mufaal
---------------------------

The fallacy of composition. It consists in taking words together which
ought to be taken separately as may be illustrated from the following
piece of (false) reasoning:

Is it possible for a man who is not writing to write?

Of course it is.

Then it is possible for a man to write without writing.

mughalatah tafsil al-murakkab
-----------------------------

The fallacy of division. It consists in taking words separately which
ought to be taken together as may be illustrated from the following
example:

All the angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles.

Therefore, each angle of the triangle is equal to two right angles.

mughalatah al-dalil al-murafa‘ah ila’l-shakhs
---------------------------------------------

The fallacy of argumentum ad hominem. It consists in diverting the
argument from the point or thesis under discussion to an irrelevant or
malicious observation about the personality of the opponent.

mughalatah raf‘ al-muqaddam
---------------------------

The fallacy of the denial of the antecedent. It consists in an abortive
attempt to deny or exclude the antecedent in the minor premise of a
hypothetical syllogism (al-qiyas al-sharti al-muttasil, q.v.) in order
to establish the consequent (tali, q.v.) in the conclusion which in fact
is logically unwarranted, e.g. from the major premise: "If he takes
poison, he will die", and the minor: "He has not taken poison", we
cannot conclude anything not even "He will not die", for death can be
caused by a number of causes other than that of taking poison.

mughalatah su ’i‘tibar al-haml
------------------------------

The fallacy of secundum quid. It consists in the use of a general
proposition or rule in a particular case without attention to its
special circumstances which would invalidate the use made of it. It is
as if one were to say that because it is always right to help a man in
distress, it is right to rescue a criminal form the custody of police.

mughalatah ‘adm al-luzum bi’l-tab‘
----------------------------------

The fallacy of non-sequitur, i.e. the one in which there is no logical
connection whatsoever between the premises advanced and the conclusion
drawn, for example, a speaker, in order to prove that a man is an
adulterer, may argue that he is a showy dresser and has often been seen
about at nights, which facts, however, do not establish the charge;
sometimes the expression ‘adm luzum bi’l-tab‘ is used to denote the
fallacy of the consequence which includes both the fallacy of the denial
of antecedent (raf‘ al-muqaddam, q.v.) and the fallacy of the
affirmation of the consequent (wad‘ al-tali, q.v.)

al-mughalatat al-lafziyah
-------------------------

The fallacy in dictione, i.e. the one arising from the misuse of
language. This has many kinds, viz. fallacy of equivocation (mughalatah
ishtirak al-lafzi, q.v.), fallacy of amphiboly (mughalatat al-’ibham,
q.v.), fallacy of composition (mughalatah tarkib al-mufassal, q.v.),
fallacy of division (mughalatah tafsil al-murakkab, q.v.), fallacy of
accent (mughalatat al-takid, q.v.), etc.

mughalatat al-natijah ghair al-muta‘alliqah
-------------------------------------------

The fallacy of ingoratio elenchi, i.e. the fallacy of irrelevance. It
arises when by reasoning, which though valid in itself, one establishes
a conclusion other than that required to refute the adversary’s thesis
or assertion.

mughalatah wad‘ al-tali
-----------------------

The fallacy of affirmation of the consequent. It consists in an abortive
attempt to affirm the consequent in the minor premise of a hypothetical
syllogism (al-qiyas al-sharti al-muttassil, q.v.) in order to establish
the antecedent (muqaddam, q.v.) in the conclusion, which in fact is
logically unwarranted; e.g. form the major premise: "If he takes poison,
he will die" and the minor: "He has died," we can not conclude anything,
not even "He has taken poison", for death can be caused by a number of
causes other than that of taking poison.

mughalatah wad‘ ma laisa bi‘illat-in ‘illat-an
----------------------------------------------

The fallacy of non causa pro causa (assuming a cause what is not the
cause). According to the Muslim Peripatetic philosophers, it consists in
assigning a reason for some conclusion, which reason in fact is
irrelevant to that conclusion. In other words, the fallacy lies in
connecting a conclusion with a certain premise which premise, so far as
that conclusion is concerned, could as well have been ignored.

al-Maghalih
-----------

The Arabic title given to Aristotle’s sixth book on logic, viz.
Sophistici Elenchi; See Sufistiqa.

mufariqat
---------

The separated beings, i.e. the purely spiritual beings separated from
all that is bodily. The term more specifically is used to denote the
souls and intelligences of the celestial spheres. See also al-‘uqul
al-‘asharah.

al-muqabil fi kull-i shai’-in la shai’-an
-----------------------------------------

Dictum de Omni et Nullo; the leading principle of syllogistic argument
(qiyas, q.v.) that whatever is affirmed or denied of an entire class or
kind may be affirmed or denied of any part.

muqati‘
-------

The conclusion in an argument which makes further discussion on a
problem impossible by bringing it to a logical absurdity such as
circularity (daur, q.v.) in proof, infinite regress (tasalsul, q.v.), or
bringing two contradictories together (’ijtima‘ al-naqidain, q.v.).

maqbulat
--------

The accepted data or premises, i.e. propositions to which the testimony
of the person in whom we have full confidence causes our assent; this
confidence may be because of a heavenly injunction in his favour or
because of his reputation for being an expert in a particular field.
Such premises are used generally for presuasive purposes. See al-qiyas
al-khitabi and al-qiyas al-’iqna‘i.

muqaddam
--------

The antecedent, i.e. that clause of a conjunctive conditional or
hypothetical proposition (al-qadiyat al-shartiyah al-muttasilah,q.v.)
which precedes the consequent (tali, q.v.) as its condition or cause,
e.g. the clause "If it rains," in the statement: "If it rains, the
ground shall be wet".

al-muqaddamat al-uwal
---------------------

The first premises, i.e. the propositions which are accepted by all as
basic truths, like the statement: "The whole is greater than the part"
or "Things equal to one and the same thing must be equal to each other".
See awwaliyat and al-ma‘qulat al-ula.

muqaddamah
----------

The premise, i.e. the given proposition which leads the way to an
inferred proposition; particularly one of the two premises in a
syllogism (qiyas, q.v.) which together lead to the inference of a
conclusion (natijah, q.v.).

al-muqaddamat al-hamliyah
-------------------------

An attributive or categorical premise; see al-qadiyat al-hamliyah.

al-muqaddamat al-shartiyah
--------------------------

A conditional or hypothetical premise in a (mixed) hypothetical
syllogism; see al-qadiyat al-shartiyah.

al-muqaddamat al-sughra
-----------------------

The minor premise, i.e. one of the two premises in a syllogism (qiyas,
q.v.) which contains the minor term (al-hadd al-asghar, q.v.) and this
is the one which occurs as subject (maudu‘, q.v.) in the conclusion
(natijah, q.v.).

al-muqaddamat al-kubra
----------------------

The major premise, i.e. one of the two premises in a syllogism (qiyas,
q.v.) which contains the major term (al-hadd al-akbar, q.v.) and this is
the one which occurs as a predicate (mahmul, q.v.) in the conclusion
(natijah, q.v.).

al-maqulat al-‘ashr
-------------------

The ten Aristotelian categories, viz. substance (jauhar, q.v.), quantity
(kamm, q.v.), quality (kaif, q.v.), relation (’idafah, q.v.), time
(mata, q.v.), place (aina, q.v.), situation or position (wad‘, q.v.),
possession (lahu, q.v.), or state (jiddah, q.v.), passion (See ’inf‘al
and yanf‘il) and action (see fi‘l, also called yaf‘al). This list of
categories given by Aristotle in the Categories (al-Qatighuriyas,
q.v.)and the Topics (Tubiqa, q.v.) is not exhaustive or final; yet it is
not a haphazard list devoid of all structural arrangement. Thus in order
that something may exist, substance must exist, as if it were the very
starting point of all individual things. But nothing can exist merely as
a substance; it must have accidental forms (a‘rad). For instance, a cat
cannot exist unless it has some colour, while it cannot have colour
unless it has quantity or some kind of magnitude. At once, then we have
the first three categories: substance, quality and quantity, which are
the intrinsic determinations of all objects. But the cat is equal or
unequal in size to other substances; in other words, it stands in some
relation to other objects. Moreover, the cat must exist at a certain
period of time and in a certain place; must have a certain position or
posture; and must possess (or be in) a state of comfort or discomfort.
Again, all material substances as belonging to a cosmic system both act
and are acted upon.

mukashafah
----------

A mode of intuitive or mystical apprehension which leads to the
disclosures of things divine. According to al-Ghazali, mukashafah is a
light which appears in the heart after it has been purified of all that
is dross and blamable. Through this light are revealed many matters of
which one had until then only heard names or had merely vague and
general ideas. As a result, the meanings of spiritual verities become
clear and one begins to have a true apprehension of the nature of Divine
Being, His attributes, His acts as well as understand the real meanings
of such terms as angels and devil, prophecy, prophet, revelation, etc.
Contrasted with mu‘amalah (q.v.).

milk
----

Lit. "possession", but technically one of the ten Aristotelian
categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.), often called jidah but more
correctly perhaps lahu (he has), i.e. to have, or dhu, i.e. ownership.
It denotes the relationship of a body to the covering it has over the
whole of its extension or over a part of it, e.g. the clothing, armour,
or shoes that man wears and which he carries wherever he goes, unlike
the house he lives in which even if possessed by him encloses him only
so long as he remains in the house.

malakah
-------

A permanent disposition or habit of mind which becomes a part of the
structure of mind like the orator’s skill in speech as contrasted with
halah which is merely transitory state or passing mood. See also
’al-kaifiyat al-nafsaniyah.

mumathalah
----------

Lit. "resemblance" or "similitude"; technically the relation between
objects or individuals belonging to the same species, e.g. the relation
between Zaid, Bakr, ‘Umar, etc., subsumed under the species "man". See
also ittihad fi’l-nau‘.

al-mumtani‘ al-wujud
--------------------

The being the existence of which it is impossible to think, e.g. a
square circle or a married bachelor and for that matter anything which
may be said to combine within it two contradictories (naqidan, q.v.) at
the same time. See also al-wajib al-wujud and al-mumkin al-wujud.

al-mumkin al-wujud
------------------

The possible being, i.e. that which receives its existence from another
and the non-existence of which is thinkable or possible like this world
of ours. See also al-mumtani‘ al-wujud and al-wajib al-wujud.

Manzil
------

Station. (AnAc)

munasabah
---------

The relation of "proportionateness" between two or more pairs of things
when the terms or parts of each pair have the same relation or ratio as
the terms or parts of the other pair, e.g. the relation individually of
two brothers to their father or the relation of ratio 2:4 to ratio 3:6.
See also ’ittihad fi’l-’dafah.

Manala’us
---------

Menelaos (fl. in 98 C.E.): Greek mathematician and astronomer, well
known to Muslim philosophers through the Arabic translation of his work
on Spherics (3 books) by al-Mahani (d. c. 261/874) and also by Hunain
ibn Ishaq (d. 264/877). The original text in Greek has been lost, and
the work is extant only in its Arabic translation or its Hebrew and
Latin versions.

muntij
------

A valid mode of reasoning which leads to a conclusion logically
warranted, e.g. the affirmation of an antecedent in a mixed hypothetical
syllogism (see wad‘ al-muqaddam); opposed to ‘aqim (q.v.).

mintaqat al-buruj
-----------------

Lit. “the belt or zone of towers,” but technically the belt of the
heavens outside which the sun and moon and major planets do not pass;
divided crosswise into twelve equal areas called signs of the Zodiac
(suwar al-buruj) each named after a zodiacal constellation. The twelve
signs of the Zodiac are as follows: (1) Hamal (Aries or Ram); (2) Thaur
(Taurus or bull); (3) Jauza’ (Gemini or Twins); (4) Sartan (Cancer or
crab); (5) Asad (Leo or Lion); (6) Sunbulah (lit. "an ear of corn";
Virgo or Virgin); (7) Mizan (Libra, Balance); (8) ‘Agrab (Scorpio or
Scorpian; (9) Qaus (Sagittarius or Archer); (10) Jadi (Capricorn or
Goat); (11) Dalw (Aquarius or Water-carrier) ; and (12)Hut (Pisces or
Fishes).

It is noteworthy that the term buruj has been used three times in the
Holy Qur’an: 15:16; 25:61; and 85:1.

mun‘akis
--------

The converse, i.e. the proposition inferred from a given proposition by
transposing its subject and the predicate but without changing its
quality, for example the proposition: "No circles are triangles" is the
mun‘akis of the proposition "No triangles are circles" or Some Arabs are
Jews" is the mun‘akis of "Some Jews are Arabs". The negative particular
proposition (al-salibat al-juz’iyah, q.v.), however, has no mun‘akis
form of it.

muhmalah
--------

Indesignate or indefinite proposition, i.e. a proposition without a
quantifier (sur, q.v.) like the statement "Men are brave" or "Students
are diligent". See al-qadiyat al-muhmalah.

muwazanah
---------

Lit. "equivalence" or "equilibrium"; technically, the relation of
equivalence or similitude between wholes having similar composition of
parts, e.g. the relation between the skeletal systems of two mammalians
or vertebrates. See also ’ittihad fi’l-wd‘.

al-Mawadi‘ al-Jadaliyah
-----------------------

The Arabic title given by al-Farabi to Aristotle’s fifth book on logic,
Topica; see Tubiqa.

al-mujibat al-juz’iyah
----------------------

The particular affirmative proposition; see al-qadiyat al-mujibah
al-juz’iyah.

al-mujibat al-kulliyah
----------------------

The universal affirmative proposition; see al-qadiyat al-mujibat
al-kulliyah.

maudu‘
------

Lit. "subject"; technically the term in a proposition about which
something is predicated, e.g. the term "woman" in the proposition:
"Woman is mortal".

muwalladah (pl. muwalladat)
---------------------------

"Generated" act, i.e. the secondary action or movement generated by the
primary action or movement like the movement of the key in the keyhole
by the movement of the hand; opposed to mubasharah (q.v.).


