Nun
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image025.gif)

natijah
-------

The conclusion in a syllogism (qiyas, q.v.) which necessarily follows
from the two given propositions taken together, i.e. the major premise
(kubra, q.v.) and the minor premise (sughra, q.v.) because of their
common link (qarinah) through a middle term (al-hadd al-ausat, q.v.).
The predicate (mahmul, q.v.) of the conclusion is called the major term
(al-hadd al-akbar, q.v.) and the subject (maudu‘, q.v.) the minor term
(al-hadd al-asghar, q.v.). The conclusion, because it necessarily
follows the two given propositions, is also sometimes called ridf, i.e.
the consequent.

al-natijah ghair al-muta‘alliqah
--------------------------------

The fallacy of ignoratio elenchi; see mughalatat al-natijah ghair
al-muta‘alliqah.

al-natijah ma yuram
-------------------

Petitio principii or begging the question; see al-musadarah
‘ala’l-matlub al-awwal.

nahw
----

mode. (AnAc)

al-nisbat al-hukmiyah
---------------------

The relation between the subject (mahkum ‘alaihi, q.v.) and the
predicate (mahkum bihi, q.v.), i.e. the copula of a logical proposition,
more ususally called ribatah.

nusbah
------

Lit. "situation", but technically the category of position or posture;
see wad‘.

nizam
-----

order. (AnAc)

al-nafs al-ammarah
------------------

“The commanding soul”, i.e. the soul which is wont to enjoin evil, an
expression used in the Holy Qur’an (12:53) for the lowest stage in the
spiritual growth of man, the stage when the low desires and animal
passions rule the mind of man and he succumbs to his carnal desires like
a brute. See also al-nafs al-lawwamah and al-nafs al-mutma’innah.

al-nafs al-insaniyah
--------------------

The human mind or soul. It possesses all the faculties and powers of the
vegetable mind (al-nafs al-nabatiyah, q.v.) as well as those of the
animal mind (al-nafs al-hayawaniyah, q.v.), but in addition hs the
rational faculty (al-quwwat al-‘aqliyah, q.v.) peculiar to itself which
has two forms: one theoretical or speculative (nazari) which enables man
to have abstract thinking and the other practical (‘amali) on which
morality depends.

al-nafs al-hayawaniyah
----------------------

The animal soul or mind; it possesses all the powers or faculties of the
vegetable mind (al-nafs al-nabatiyah, q.v.), viz. the nutritive power
(al-quwwat al-ghadhiyah, q.v.), the power of growth (al-quwwat
al-namiyah, q.v.) and the power of reproduction (al-quwwat
al-muwallidah, q.v.). In addition it, possesses two powers or faculties
peculiar to itself, i.e. motive faculty (al-quwwat al-muharrikah, q.v.)
and cognitive faculty (al-quwwat al-mudrikah, q.v.) each one of which
has many kinds of sub-classes.

al-nafs al-falakiyah
--------------------

The celestial or heavenly soul; the view that celestial spheres, i.e.
stars and planets, have souls and intelligences was subscribed to by
almost all the Muslim philosophers, for it had the overwhelming
authority of Aristotle behind it. See al-‘uqul al-‘asharah.

al-nafs al-kulliyah
-------------------

The universal soul inclusive of all the individual souls; corresponds to
the Psyche of Plotinus (Fulutin, q.v. or al-Shaikh al-Yunani, q.v.).

al-nafs al-lawwamah
-------------------

“The self-accusing soul”: an expression in the Holy Qur’an (75:2) for
the second stage in the spiritual and moral growth of man at which the
slightest departure from the path of rectitude at once brings the pricks
of conscience. See also al-nafs al-ammarah and al-nafs al-mutma’innah.

al-nafs al-mutma’innah
----------------------

“The soul at peace”, an expression used in the Holy Qur’an (89:27) in
connection with the three stages in the spiritual development of man:
(1) the animal stage of al-nafs al-ammarah (q.v.); (2) the human stage
of al-nafs al-lawwamah (q.v.) and (3) the heavenly or spiritual stage of
al-nafs al-mutma’innah. At this last stage, man because of a perfectly
righteous life, is rewarded by God with an unspeakable peace of mind,
almost a state of paradise on earth -hence the Qur’anic verses: “And
thou, O soul at peace (al-nafs al-mutma’innah)! return to thy Lord well
pleased with Him and He will pleased with thee. So enter thou among My
chosen servants and enter thou My Garden" (89:27-30).

al-nafs al-nabatiyah
--------------------

"The vegetable soul or mind" possessed of three powers or faculties: (1)
nutritive power (al-quwwat al-ghadhiyah, q.v.)by which it changes
another body into the form of the animal body into which it resides; (2)
the power of growth (al-quwwat al-namiyah, q.v.) by which the animal
body increases without changing its form till it attains full maturity;
and power of reproduction (al-quwwat al-muwallidah, q.v.) which draws
from the body a part similar to itself in potentiality capable of
producing other bodies similar to it in actuality.

nuqlah
------

Change or movement of a body from one place to another, technically
called harakah fi’l-ain (q.v.).

naqidan
-------

Two contradictories like existence and non-existence or Muslim and
non-Muslim; the two contradictories cannot both be true not can they
both be false, for they are mutually exclusive (mani‘at al-jam‘, q.v.)
as well as totally exhaustive (mani‘at al-khuluww, q.v.) as
distinguished from the contraries (diddan, q.v.) which are merely
mutually exclusive. The two contradictories like the two contrary states
or qualities cannot obtain in one and the same individual at the same
time. See also ’ijtima‘ al- naqidain.

naqid al-tali
-------------

The denial of consequent in the minor premise of a hypothetical
syllogism (al-sharti al-muttasil, q.v.) leading to the denial of the
antecedent in the conclusion, a valid mode of reasoning called the
negative mode (Modus Tollens) of hypothetical syllogism; opposed to ‘ain
al-tali (q.v.) which is a form of logical fallacy (see mughalatah wad‘
al-tali).

naqid al-muqaddam
-----------------

Denial of antecedent, an invalid (‘aqim, q.v.) mode of reasoning which
does not warrant any logical conclusion. See also mughalatah raf‘
al-muqaddam.

numuww
------

Growth of a body by assimilation of another body through the process of
nourishment (al-quwwat al-ghadhiyah, q.v.); one of the four kinds of
harakah fi’l-kamm (q.v.). See also al-nafs al-nabatiyah.

al-Nawamis
----------

The title of the Arabic translation by Hunain ibn Ishaq (d. 264/877) of
Plato’s Dialogue the Laws considered to be the earliest extant classic
of European jurisprudence.

nau‘ (pl. anwa‘)
----------------

Species. As one of the predicables (see Isaghuji), nau‘ is a relatively
smaller class which is included in a wider class called jins (q.v.),
i.e. genus; e.g. the smaller class: "man" is included in the wider
class: "animal". thus "man" is a species (nau‘) in relation to "animal"
and "animal" is a genus (jins) in relation to "man". See also jins.

nau‘ al-’anwa‘
--------------

Lit. "species of species"; technically infima species, the lowest
species of a classification which can no longer be divided into further
sub-classes but only into individuals. In Aristotelian logic the
individual himself is named as nau‘ al-’anwa‘; also called nau‘
al-safil.


