Waw
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image026.gif)

al-wajib al-wujud
-----------------

Necessary Being, i.e. that which exists by itself or that which cannot
but exist, for non-existence of it is unthinkable; an expression used by
philosophers for God. See also mahiyah and al-mumkin al-wujud. "Being
the most significant entity in the metaphysical system of ibn Sina"

al-wahid bi’l-ittisal
---------------------

Unity through contiguity like the unity of any material body which is
considered one thing: the parts therein are so closely conjoined with
one another that they together make one single body in actuality
(bi’l-fi’l) even though that body can be resolved into a multiplicity of
parts in potentiality (bi’l-quwwah).

al-wahid bi’l-irtibat
---------------------

Unity through conglomeration like a mechanical aggregate in which the
parts, though actually (bi’l-fi’l) separte from each other, are so
conjoined that they make one whole; also called al-wahid bi’l-tarkib.

al-wahid al-haqiqi
------------------

The real or pure unity, altogether divested of multiplicity (kathrah),
i.e. in potentiality as well as in actuality, like God or a point in
geometry; opposed to al-wahid al-majazi (see below).

al-wahid al-majazi
------------------

Conceptual or figurative unity which is composed of different parts or
items colligated or subsumed mentally under some kind of logical
relation or category such as genus (jins, q.v.), species (nau‘, q.v.),
accident (‘ard), etc. See also ’ittihad fi’l-jins and ’ittihad fi’l-nau‘
.

wa'id
-----

Mu'tazili doctrine of the unconditional punishment of the unrepentant
sinner in the hereafter.  (AnAc)

wahib al-suwar
--------------

The dispenser of forms or dator formarum, a name given to the active
intellect (al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al, q.v.). According to the Muslim
Peripatetics like al-Farabi and Ibn Sina, it is the active intellect
which gives to each individual thing its proper form and it also gives
to a body a soul, which in fact is its form (surah, q.v.) when that body
is read to receive it. Moreover, the human intellect comes to know of
the universal forms of the particulars only as activated by the active
intellect. See also al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al.

wajdaniyat
----------

The intuitive cognitions, i.e. the apprehension through the inner senses
(al-hawas al-batinah, q.v.) of the meanings or significations of things.
See also al-quwwat al-mudrikah.

wad‘
----

The category of "position" as one of the ten Aristotelian categories
(al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.), also called nusbah (situation). It denotes
the "posture" of a thing, e.g. when we say that a man or animal is
standing, or sitting, or lying down.

wad‘ al-tali
------------

The fallacy of the affirmation of the consequent; see mughalatah wad‘
al-tali.

wad‘ ma laisa bi ‘illat-in ‘illat-an
------------------------------------

The fallacy of non causa pro causa; it consists in assigning a reason
for some conclusion which reason in fact is irrelevant to that
conclusion; see mughalatah wad‘ ma laisa bi‘illat-in ‘illat-an.

wad‘ al-muqaddam
----------------

The affirmation of the antecedent in the minor premise of a mixed
hypothetical syllogism (al-qiyas al- sharti al-muttasil, q.v.) leading
to the affirmation of the consequent in the conclusion, a valid mode of
reasoning know as Modus Ponens, i.e. the positive mode of hypothetical
syllogism. It is opposed to raf ‘al-muqaddam (denial of antecedent)
which is a form of logical fallacy (see mughalatah raf‘ al-muqaddam).

wahm
----

Apprehension of the meanings of the sensible objects, a kind of
cognitive experience which is also available to the animals, and one on
the basis of which they are enabled to draw inferences for their
physical well-being and safety. See also tawahhum and al-quwwat
al-mutawahhimah.

Ibn Sina and Wahm: (from "The Metaphysics of Ibn Sina" by Prof. Parviz
Morewedge): ...the ability to have a mental experience of an even in
contrast to the actual happening of that event. Most references to wahm
indicate conceptual operations on bodies which clarify the nature of
bodily substances....

wahmiyat
--------

Imagined data or premises, i.e. propositions which though based on mere
opinion, are such that the faculty of imagination necessitates our
belief in them. See also maznunat.

wujud
-----

Existence, concretion, actuality. Wujud or 'existence', the masdar of
the Arabic verb wajada (literally 'to have found'), is maujud, meaning
an 'individual existent', or the property of an individual existent.
Wujud differs from both 'essence' and 'being'. The chief example of
maujud is an individual substance. Only the Necessary Existent is said
to have wujud as its essence. Other examples of entities having wujud
are accidents of an individual substance which has been realized, such
as the color pink in Parviz's skin, In any instance of wujud other than
the Necessary Existent, the essence of the wujud, i.e. 'what it is',
differs from its existence, i.e. from

the fact 'that it is'. [from "The Metaphysics of Ibn Sina" by Prof.
Parviz Morewedge, p. 325. with minor changes.]


