Hah
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image027.gif)

hubut
-----

The fall, i.e. the fall of the human soul from the world of spirit into
a material body in which it gets enclosed as if in a prison, yearning
all the time for its original abode.

hal
---

"Whether or not?" -a form of question put in order to discuss the form
and matter of definitions and propositions or different kinds of
problems that arise in science. The interrogative pronoun hal is used in
logic to ask two kinds of things: (1) Whether or not a thing exists, for
example, hal Allah maujud-un (Does God exist?); Whether or not a thing
possesses a certain quality or state, for example, hal al-‘alam
hadith-un (Is the world created?). See also muta‘alliqat al-qiyas
wa’l-burhan and ma.

al-halliyat al-basitah
----------------------

A simple form of putting a question in logic when one asks merely about
the existence of a thing, i.e. whether or not a particular thing exists.
See also hal.

al-halliyat al-murakkabah
-------------------------

A compound form of putting a question in logic when one wants to know
whether or not a thing exists and if it exists what are its attributes
or qualities. See also hal.

huwa huwa
---------

Lit. "he is he" or "it is it"; in logic it means that everything is
identical with itself or that everything is what it is and not anything
else: A is A and not B. In tasawwuf (Islamic mysticism) it represents
that spiritual state of the mystic which testifies to the presence of
God to everything and thus establishes the manifestation of divine unity
in the world.

hayula
------

The prime matter; the indeterminate substratum or mere potentiality
which in combination with form (surah, q.v.) constitutes a particular
thing. According to the Peripatetic philosophers, it is eternal; for
being a mere potentiality, it is the principle of all becoming and,
therefore, could not have become itself. See also surah.


