Alif
====

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image002.gif)

ibtihaj
-------

Frui or to enjoy God, i.e. to have the bliss and beatitude of the
experience of the Divine.

abad
----

Eternal a parte post, i.e. eternal without end as opposed to azal
(q.v.), eternal a parte ante, i.e. eternal without beginning. Sometimes
used synonymously with dahr (q.v.), i.e. time in the absolute sense.
According to the philosophers the two terms abad and azal imply each
other and the world is both pre-eternal and post-eternal, a view very
seriously challenged by the orthodox (notably by Imam Ghazali), for
according to them God alone is abadi and azali.

Ibda‘
-----

Creation from absolute nothingness; to be distinguished from the cognate
terms khalq, takwin, and ihdath, all of which presuppose the temporal
priority of cause to effect. In ibda‘ there is no priority of cause to
effect; there is only priority in essence so that effect comes to be
after not-being with a posteriority in essence. Ibda‘ again is of higher
order than ihdath or takwin in so far as it signifies granting existence
without an intermediary, be it time, or motion, or matter, one or the
other of which is necessarily presupposed in ihdath and takwin. Further,
ibda‘ is specific to the creation of intelligences, khalq to that of the
natural beings and takwin to that of the “corruptible” among them.

Abarkhus
--------

Hipparachus: Greek astronomer, mathematician, and geographer of the 2nd
century B.C.

Ibisqulas
---------

Hypsicles: Greek mathematician. Some of his books were translated into
Arabic by Qusta ibn Luqa and also perhaps by al-Kindi.

Ibtulamayus
-----------

Ptolemy: astronomer, mathematician, and geographer of 2nd century C.E.
See Batalmiyus and al-Majisti.

al-ab‘ad al-thalathah
---------------------

The three dimensions of a material body: length, width, and depth. These
dimensions do not enter into the definition of a thing; they are just
some of its accidents and not part of its existence, even though they
determine its state.

Ablus
-----

Apollonius; see Balinus.

Abuditqitiqa
------------

Analytica Posteriora or the Second Analytics. Aristotle's fourth book on
logic; see Analutiqa Thani.

Abidhqulis
----------

Empedocles (c. 490-c. 435 B.C.): Greek pre-Socratic philosopher; see
Anbadqulis.

Abiqurus
--------

Epicurus. (342? -270. B.C.): Greek philosopher; the school of
Epicureanism (Abiquriyah, q.v.) was named after him. He taught that the
pursuit of pleasure is the end-all and be-all of morality, but
emphasized that the genuine life of pleasure must be a life of prudence,
honor, and justice. In natural philosophy he adopted the atomistic
theory of Democritus (Dimiqratis, q.v.) and accepted the view that the
element of chance or deviation occurs in the otherwise straight motion
of atoms.

Abiquriyah
----------

Epicureanism, the school of thought, mainly ethical, as founded by by
Epicurus (Abiqurus, q.v.). It is noteworthy  that contrary to the usual
meaning of the word in English, Epicureanism on the whole inculcates
simplicity of life: the fewer the desires, the better it is; for a
greater number of desires is likely to bring greater dissatisfaction
which one ought to avoid at all costs. Though like Cyrenaics (Qaurniyah,
q.v.) Epicurus regarded pleasure or happiness as the end of life, unlike
them he preferred the lasting pleasures of the mind to the immediate
pleasures of the body. Prudence, honor, and justice for him were the
cardinal virtues. He also gave high place to friendship and taught that
one should not fear death for "death does not yet exist." He even
adopted Democritean atomism for moral reasons; it abolished, according
to him, all superstitious fears of death and punishment in hereafter.

ittihad fi’ l-idafah, also called ittihad fi’ l-nisbah
------------------------------------------------------

Union by relation, said of two or more pairs of things when the terms or
parts of each pair have the same relation or ratio as the terms or parts
of the other pair, e.g. the relation individually of two brothers to
their father or the relation of ratio 2 : 4 to the ration 3 : 6 ; the
relation between such pairs is technically called that of munasabah
(q.v.).

ittihad fi’ l-jins
------------------

Union by genus, said of two or more things when they belong to the same
genus, e.g. man and horse belonging to the genus animal; relation
between them is technically called to be that of mujanasah (q.v.).

ittihad fi’ l-khassah
---------------------

Union by property (proprium), said of two or more things when they have
a common property, e.g. triangles of all kinds have the sum of their two
sides greater than the third; this relation between them is technically
called that of mushakalah (q.v.).

ittihad fi’ l-kamm
------------------

Union by quantity, said of two or more things when they are of equal
quantity, e.g. two seers of cotton and two seers of gold with reference
to weight, or one yard of cloth and one yard of a tape or stick with
reference to length; the relation between such things is technically
called that of musawah (q.v.).

ittihad fi’ l-kaif
------------------

Union by quality, said of two or more things of the same quality: color,
taste, smell or any other quality; the relation between them is
technically called that of mushabahah (q.v.)

ittihad fi’ l-nau’
------------------

Union by species, said of two or more things or individuals belonging to
the same species, e.g. Zaid, Bakr, and ‘Umar subsumed under the species
"man"; the relation between them is technically called that of
mumathalah (q.v.).

ittihad fi’ l-maudu
-------------------

Union with reference to "subject," said to be of two or more predicates
when they pertain to the same subject in a proposition, for example when
it is said, "Honey is yellow and sweet and soft."

ittihad fi’ l-wad’
------------------

Union with reference to the composition of parts of constituents of two
or more bodies, for example the skeletal systems of two mammalians or
vertebrata; this similarity in the composition of parts of two or more
bodies is technically known as muwazanah (q.v.).

ittisal
-------

A term used in logic to denote the connection between the antecedent and
the consequent in a conditional or hypothetical proposition. Also means
continuous.  See al-qadiyat al-shartiyah.

al-athar al-‘ulwiyah
--------------------

"The things on high": an expression used by Muslim philosophers and
scientists for meteorological phenomena such as meteors, thunder,
lightning, seasons, rain, snow, hailstorm, dew, etc. Quite often it is
used as the title of works on the study of these phenomena and more
particularly for Aristotle’s work Meteorolgica containing four books.

ithbat al-Bari
--------------

Proving the existence of God. Muslim philosophers seem to be fully
conversant in their own way with the so-called traditional arguments for
the existence of God, viz. the cosmological argument, the teleological
argument, and the ontological argument; it is, however, the first which
they have emphasized most and of which they have given many more variant
forms than those of the others.

Uthulujiya Aristatalis
----------------------

The Theology of Aristotle, a pseudo-Aristotelian work which the Muslim
philosophers in all sincerity ascribed to Aristotle. It is really a
running

paraphrase of the eight sections of the last three books of Plotinus’s
Enneads (i.e. IV3, IV4, IV7, IV8; V1, V2, V8; and VI7).

ijitima al-naqidain
-------------------

Bringing two contradictories together, which is a logical impossibility;
for two contradictories cannot be predicated of the same subject at the
same time in the same respect, as contradictories in their very nature
exclude each other. This is, however, done to reduce the argument of an
adversary in a discussion to a logical absurdity. See also muqati’ and
naqidan.

al-ajsad al-saba‘ah
-------------------

"The seven bodies": an expression used by the philosophers to denote
seven kinds of minerals or metals: gold (dhahab), silver (fiddah), lead
(rasas), black lead (usrub), iron (hadid), copper (nahas) and a hard
glass substance (kharsin).


-

al-ajnas al-‘ashr
The ten genera, the name given sometimes to the ten Aristotelian
categories; see al-maqulat al-‘ashr.

ihtijaj
-------

To give a logical argument or proof; it has three major modes or kinds:
syllogistic argument (qiyas, q.v.), inductive argument (istiqra, q.v.)
and argument by analogy (tamthil, q.v.).

ihdath
------

Coming into temporal existence; see ibda‘.

Ihdath al-jaww
--------------

"The events of the firmament", i.e. the meteorological phenomena such as
meteors, thunder, lightning, seasons, rain, snow, hailstorm, dew,
formation of minerals etc. The term is often used for the science of
meteorology. See also al-athar al-‘ulwiyah.

Ihsar
-----

The quantification of a proposition through the use of one of the
quantity indicators (al-faz al-musawirah, q.v.); see al-qadiyat
al-mahsurah.

akhadha juz’ al-‘illah makan al-‘illah

The fallacy of taking a part of the cause or only one condition of the
cause as the whole cause.

akhadha mabi’ l-‘ard makan bi’l-dhat
------------------------------------

The fallacy of accident; it consists in confounding an essential with an
accidental difference as in the following example. " ‘Is Plato different
from Socrates?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Is Socrates a man?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Then Plato is
different from man.’" The fallacy lies in assuming that whatever is
different from a given subject must be different from it in all
respects, so that it is impossible for them to have a common predicate.

al-akhlat al-arba‘ah
--------------------

The four humours, i.e. the four chief fluids of the body, viz. blood,
phlegm, choler orbile and melancholy or black bile; the theory of four

humours, quite common with Muslim philosophers and physicians,
originated from Hippocrates (Burqat, q.v.).

Ikhwan al-Safa’
---------------

"the Brethren of Purity" a free scholarly association of scientists and
philosophers established at Basra in about 373/983 with a branch in
Baghdad. They authored fifty-one treatises know as Rasa’il Iknwan
al-Safa’ (Treatises of the Brethren of Purity) which form an Arabic
Encyclopedia of science, philosophy and religion, probably the first of
its kind in the world of literature.

idrak
-----

Perception or apprehension; the term is used, however to denote any kind
of cognitive experience of the particular objects whether it is due to
external sense-organs (i.e. idrak al-hiss) or on account of internal
senses such as formative faculty (al-quwwat al-mustasawwirah or khayal,
q.v.), estimative faculty (al-quwwaat al-mutawahhimah, q.v.),
imagination (al-quwwat al-mutakhayyilah, q.v.) or rational faculty
(al-quwwat al-‘aqliyyah, q.v.). Sometimes cognition, through the
external senses, is distinguished from that through the internal senses
by calling the former mahsusat and latter wajdaniyat.

adwar-o-akwar
-------------

The recurrent or cyclic periods in the history of cosmic evolution; a
term used mostly by the philosophers of illuminationism (ishraqiyun).

Iraqalitus
----------

Heraclitus (fl. in 5th century B.C.) Though generally called the
"Obscure," he was one of the most brilliant of the pre-Socratic
philosophers. He maintained that all things change and nothing is
permanent.

Irkhila’us
----------

Archelaus - Greek philosopher, the disciple of Anaxagoras (Anaksaghuras,
q.v.).

Aristatalis
-----------

Aristotle(384-322 B.C.) pupil of Plato and teacher of Alexander… almost
all of the works of Aristotle except his Dialogues (about 27) were
available to the Muslim philosophers in their Arabic translation. The
called Aristotle al-mu‘allim al-awwal, i.e. the “the first teacher”, and
keenly studies his works either directly or through his commentators
such as as Alexander of Aphrodisias (Iskandar Ifrudisi, q.v.),
Themistius (Thamistiyus, q.v.), Simplicus(Sinbliqiyus, q.v.) and others.
Muslim Philosophers are not to be blamed for being not altogether able
to distinguish between the genuine and apocryphal works of Aristotle.
More important of the later current among are: “The Theology of
Aristotle” (Uthulujiya Aristatalis, q.v.), Liber de Causis” (Kitab Khair
al-Mahd, q.v.) and Secreta Secretorum (Sirr al-Asrar, q.v.)

Arastarkhus
-----------

Aristarchus: Greek astronomer of 3rd century B.C.

Aristifus
---------

Aristippus of Cyrene (c. 435-366 B.C.) Greek philosopher, disciple of
Socrates and founder of the school of Cyrenaicism (Qaurniyah, q.v.). He
taught that seeking of pleasures is the true end of life and that
pleasures are to be judged by their intensity and duration alone.
Physical pleasure are the keenest, and present pleasures are sure and as
good as that of the future; so why not pluck pleasures as they pass?

Arshimidus
----------

Archimedes (C. 287-212 B.C.): Greek mathematician, physicist and
engineer known especially for his work in mechanics and hydrostatics.
Famous for the discovery of the principle that a body immersed in fluid
loses in weight by an amount equal to the weight of the fluid displaced.
Many of his works were well known to Muslim Philosophers through their
Arabic translation and commentaries on them by Hunain ibn Ishaq (d.
246/877), al-Mahani (d. c.261-71 /874-84) and Yusuf al-Khuri (fl.
290-6/902-8).

al-Arghanun
-----------

The Organon (the organ or instrument for acquiring knowledge): a name
given by the followers of Aristotle to the collection of logical
treatises. The Organon originally consisted of 6 treatises:  Categoriae
(Qatighuriyas, q.v.); De Interpretatione (Bari Irminiyas, q.v.);
Analytica Priora (Analutiqa, q.v.); Analytica Posteriora (Analutiqa
Thani, q.v.); Topica (Tubiqa, q.v.); and Sophistici Elenchi (Sufustiqa,
q.v.). The Muslim philosophers, however included 3 more treatises in
their Arabic version of the Oraganon, viz Isagoge (Isaghuji, q.v.), an
introduction written by Porphyry (Firfuriyus, q.v.); Rhetorica
(Rituriqa. q.v.), Aristotle’s treatise on the art of public speaking;
and Poetica (Buyutiq, q.v.), a work on the art of Poetry.

Al-arkan al-arba‘ah
-------------------

The four elements or roots: fire, air, water and earth of which all
bodies in the world, mineral, plant, or animal are composed; this notion
of the four elements was common to all Muslim Philosophers, but it
originated with the Greek philosopher Empedocles (Anbadqulis, q.v.) who
was first to postulate it; more often the term used is al-‘anasir
al-arba‘ah See also ustuqussat.

Aribasuyus
----------

Oribasius, Greek physician (c. 325-c. 400 C.E.).

azal
----

Eternal without beginning as opposed to abad, eternal without end. See
also abad.

Al-as’ilat al-muta‘addadah
--------------------------

The fallacy of many questions; see mughalatat al-as’ilat
al-muta‘addadah.

Asbusiyus
---------

Speusippus (fl. 348-339 B.C.): Greek philosopher, nephew and disciple of
Plato and after his death (348-347 B.C.) succeeded him as the head of
the Academy (Aqadhamiya, q.v.)

istithna’ al-raf‘i
------------------

Negation of the consequent (tali q.v.) in the minor premise of a
conditional conjunctive syllogism or negation of one of the alternatives
in the minor premise of conditional disjunctive syllogism. See also
al-shartiyat al-muttasilah and al-shartiyat al-munfasilah.

istithna’ al-wad‘i
------------------

Affirmation of the antecedent (muqaddam, q.v.) in the minor premise of a
conditional conjunctive syllogism or of one of the alternatives in the
minor premise of the conditional disjunctive syllogism. See also
al-shartiyat al-muttasilah and al-shartiyat al-munfasilah.

istihalah
---------

Qualitative change in a body from one state or condition into another,
e.g. water becoming hot after it was cold; also called harakah fi’l-kaif
(q.v.).

istidlal
--------

Reasoning in general but more specifically the mode of reasoning in
which we proceed from the given facts or effects to the inference of
their causes. Also Inference. See also al-burhan al-’inni.

isti‘dad
--------

Capacity, i.e. power, actual (bi’l-fi‘l) or potential (bi’l-quwwah)
possessed by a thing either to act in a certain manner or to suffer a
certain change; it may be innate or acquired. The term is used by the
Muslim Peripatetics more often in the metaphysical discussion of
potentiality and actuality. See also al-kaifiyat al-isti‘dadiyah.

istiqra’
--------

Induction, i.e. arriving at a general conclusion or a universal
proposition through the observation of particular instances, e.g. "All
crow are black" or "All ruminants are cloven footed".

al-istiqra’ al-naqis
--------------------

Imperfect induction, i.e. the induction which does not fulfill the
conditions of scientific induction, e.g. the statement: "All animals
move their lower jaw which chewing food," which is falsified by the fact
that the crocodiles in the chewing process move their upper jaw rather
than the lower one.

ustuqussat
----------

Roots: a term of Greek origin for elements, i.e. fire, air, water and
earth, more common them in Muslim philosophy for which is ‘anasir
(q.v.). A subtle distinction, however is sometimes made between the to
terms. ustuqussat is supposed to refer to the fact of composition or
generation (kaun) of every natural body which is composed of roots
whereas the term

‘anasir refers to the possibility of its being decomposed or corrupted
(fasad) again into separate elements. See also al-arkan al-arba‘ah.

Asqalibiyus
-----------

Asclepius of Tralles: Greek philosopher and mathematician of the 6th
Century C.E.; pupil of Ammonius (Amuniyus, q.v.), wrote a commentary on
Aristotle's metaphysics mentioned by al-Kindi.

Asqalifiyadis
-------------

Asclepidades of Bithynia: Greek physician of 1st century B.C. opposed
Hippocrates (Buqrat, q.v.) in his theory of disease.

Iskandar Ifrudisi
-----------------

Alexander of Aphrodisias: the peripatetic philosopher, head of the
Lyceum between 198 and 211 C.E. One of the greatest commentators on
Aristotle. Some of his commentaries are known now only through Arabic
translation of them. He had a considerable influence on the development
of Muslim Philosophers’ theory of intellect, though in the final form
their version of this theory is much more subtle and sophisticated than
Alexander of Aphrodisias and even Aristotle could possibly think of; see
various kinds of ‘aql.

al-asma’ al-ma ‘dulah
---------------------

words used to negativise the subject or the predicate or both of a
proposition. See also al-qadiyat al-ma‘dulah.

ishtibah
--------

Perplexity felt in deciding between truth and falsity of a statement.

ishtirak al-hadd al-asqhar
--------------------------

The fallacy of ambiguous minor; see mughalatah ishtirak al-hadd
al-asqhar.

ishtirak al-hadd al-akbar
-------------------------

The fallacy of ambiguous major; see mughalatah ishtirak al-hadd
al-akbar.

ishtirak al-hadd al-aust
------------------------

The fallacy of ambiguous middle; see mughalatah ishtirak al-hadd
al-aust.

ishtirak al-lafzi
-----------------

Equivocation, particularly the ambiguous use of any one of the three
terms of a syllogism (qiyas, ; q.v.); see mughalatah ishtirak al-lafzi.

isalat al-wujud
---------------

"The principiality of existence or being," i.e. the ontolgical priority
of the being or existence (anniyah, q.v.) of a thing to its quiddity or
essence (mahiyah, q.v.): a doctrine expounded by Mulla Sadrah
(979-1050/1571-1649) as against the opposite view held by the Muslim
Peripatetic philosophers. See also mahiyah.

ashab al-buddawah
-----------------

An expression used in Arabic religio-philosophical literature for the
followers of Buddah who is himself sometimes named as Buda Yusuf (q.v.).

ashab al-Mazallah
-----------------

"The People of the Shaded Place," i.e. the Stoics, so called because the
founder of the school of Stoicism, Zeno (fl. 308 B.C.), use to teach in
a stoa (a porch) in Athens. The Stoics inculcated a complete control of
one’s desires and appetites and indifference towards pleasure and pain,
for thus alone could one become master of one’s self and attain virtue
for virtue’s sake. All men, according to them are of one blood, of one
family; and so one should treat others as "sacred beings". As for their
view of the universe their doctrine is pantheistic. The teachings of the
Stoics had a considerable influence on Muslim philosophical thinking,
particularly in the field of logic. See also rawaqiyah.

aslah
-----

"Most fitting or best," a thesis of Muslim theodicy that God does what
is best for mankind.

al-usul al-muta‘arafah
----------------------

Self-evident first principles or axioms like a part is less than the
whole of which it is part, equals added to equals are equals, or two
contradictories cannot be true of the same thing at the same time and in
the same respect.

al-usul al-maudu‘ah
-------------------

Necessary presuppositions of a science which are accepted as initial
truths and which are the base of the entire superstructure of that
science like the principles that every event has a cause and that the
same cause has the same effect.

idafah
------

Relation, one of the ten Aristotelian categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr,
q.v.); it denotes the relationship between two things such as father and
son or master and apprentice or, more generally, the relation of a thing
to all other objects.

i‘tibar
-------

Consideration. (AnAc)

i‘tibari
--------

Relational, relative. (AnAc)

addad
-----

Contraries; for the logical nature of contraries, see diddan.

al-atraf al-arba‘ah
-------------------

The fallacy of four terms; see mughalatat al-atraf al-arba‘ah.

al-a‘dad al-tabi‘iyah
---------------------

"Natural numbers", i.e. cardinal numbers, one, two, etc.

‘Arif
-----

Enlightened knower. (AnAc)

‘ayn
----

External, objective. (AnAc)

a‘yan
-----

Objective reality. (AnAc)

al-a ‘yan al-thabitah
---------------------

The eternal essences of things which together form the world of Ideas or
the spiritual world which is intermediary between God and the material
world of sensible phenomena. {Permanent archetypes, fixed entities,
fixed essences [see Sadra, al-Asfar, “in the convention of some ahl
al-Kashf wa’l-Yaqin, mahiyyat are called ‘al-a‘yan al-thabitah’, 1: 49,
line 4]. updated by: (AnAc)}

Aghathadhimun
-------------

Agathodaemon (other Arabic variants are Aghathudhimun and Aghadhimun)
represented in the tradition of the philosophy of Illuminationism
(al-hikmat al-ishraqiyah) as one of the ancient Egyptian sages.
Sometimes he is considered the son of Hermes II, sometimes the associate
of Socrates (Suqratis, q.v.) and occasionally one of the pupils of
Ptolemy (Batlamiyus, q.v.). More generally he is considered an authority
in the occult sciences. It is said that he invented a clock that could
lure the snakes, scorpions and other reptiles out their holes. Ibn
al-Nadim lists him among the foremost alchemists. In short, it is
difficult to identify Aghathadhimun, and in all probability the name
stands merely for a mythical personality.

Aflatun
-------

Plato(428-7 -348-7 B.C.): one of the greatest of Greek philosophers;
disciple of Socrates (Suqratis, q.v.) on whose dialectic his whole
philosophy is mainly based. The central doctrine is his theory of Ideas
according to which Ideas, Forms, or Universals are eternally real as
opposed to the transitory and relatively unreal objects of
sense-perception (see al-muthul al-Aflatuniyah). Though some of Plato’s
dialogues, viz. the Republic, the Laws and the Timaeus were available to
the Muslim philosophers as early as Hunain ibn Ishaq
(195-264/809-10-877), it is interesting to note that most of the Muslim
philosophers did not recognize Plato to be a real representative of
Greek philosophy, or at least they subordinated him to Aristotle.
Nevertheless Plato’s influence on Muslim philosophy, particularly on
Muslim ethics and political philosophy, is quite visible, while it is
paramount on the philosophers of Illuminationism (Ishraqiyun) who being
critics of Aristotle and Muslim Aristotelians (Mash‘iyun,) regarded
Plato as the chief authority in philosophy and made the Platonic
mysticism as the keynote of their theosophical Illuminationism.

al-Aflatuniyat al-Muhdathah
---------------------------

Neoplatonism, a school of philosophy which wove all the strands of
existing systems (Platonism, Aristotelianism, Pythagoreanism, Stoicsim,
Gnosticism, etc.) into a single web of thought. Founded by Ammonius
Saccas (Amuniyus, q.v.) in the second century C.E. in Alexandria, ending

with Proclus (Buruqlus, q.v.) in the 5th century. Its greatest
interpreter however was Plotinus. See al-Shaikh al-Yunani and Uthulujiya
Aristatalis for the influence of this school on Muslim philosophical
thought.

Afudiqtiqi
----------

Analytica Posteriora or the Second Analytics, Aristotle’s fourth book on
logic; see Analutiqa Thani.

Aqadhamiya
----------

Academy: Plato’s school of philosophy in Athens, established by him in
387 B.C. The Academy lasted under various forms until closed by
Christian intolerance of the Roman Emperor Justinian I the Great in 529
C.E., whereupon the seven(?) philosophers (Neoplatonists) took refuge in
Persia at the court of Nushirwan the Great.

Uqlidis
-------

Euclid: Greek geometer; flourished in Alexandria about 300 B.C. He
systematized the geometrical knowledge of his time in the 13 books of
Elements, first translated into Arabic by al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf al-Matar
(fl. in 170/786). Many commentaries are written on this work by Muslim
scientists. The name of Uqlidis soon became synonymous with geometry
itself. Many of his other works were well known to to the Muslim
scholars but some writings on mechanics ascribed by them to Euclid, for
example, a book on the "Heavy and Light" dealing with the notion of
specific gravity mentioned in al-Fihrist and tow treatises on "Lever"
and "Balance" do not seem to be genuine.

Uqlidis (al-Magharah)
---------------------

Euclides of Megara(450-374B.C.): Greek Eleatic philosopher, contemporary
of Plato, and like him, disciple of Socrates; founder of the Megarian
school. Titles only of his works are know now. Often mistaken by
medieval Muslim writers for Euclid (Uqlidis) the geometer.

iqna‘
-----

Lit. "persuasion"; in logic it means a mode of reasoning by which the
mind of the listener is convinced by a statement even when it lacks the
required demonstration or proof.

iktisab
-------

Acquisition. (AnAc)

iltizam
-------

Concomitance [see S. Afnan, Avicenna: His Life and Works, 93];
entailment. See also lazim. (AnAc)

ilja'
-----

Coercion, constraint. (AnAc)

a’immat al-asma’
----------------

al-a’immat al-sab‘ah
--------------------

The term a’immat al-asma’ (lit. the leading names) refers to the seven
principal names of God, viz. al-hayy (the Living); al-‘alim (the
knower), al-Murid (the Willing, or the Purposer); al-Qadir (the
Powerful); al-Sami‘ (the Hearer); al-Basir (the seer); al-Mutakallim
(the speaker). The qualities or attributes denoted by these seven
principal names of God are named al-a’immat al-sab‘ah (lit. the seven
leaders).

Imtidad
-------

Extension. (AnAc)

al-imtidadat al-thalath
-----------------------

The three dimensions of a body: length, breadth and depth. See also
al-ab‘ad al-thalathah.

al-ummahat al-sufliyah
----------------------

“the lower mothers”: and expression used to denote the four elements:
fire, air, water, and earth. See also al-arkan al-arba‘ah.

al-ummahat al-‘ulwiyah
----------------------

“the higher mothers”: as opposed to al-ummahat al-sufliyah (the lower
mothers) the term denotes the intelligences and souls of the celestial
spheres. See also al-‘uqul al-‘asharah.

al-ummahat al-fada’il
---------------------

"The cardinal virtues ", e.g. Plato’s four cardinal virtues of wisdom,
courage, temperance and justice. Cardinal virtues are "the mothers of
virtues", i.e. Other virtues are regarded as merely derivative forms of
these virtues.

Amuniyus
--------

Ammonius Saccas (c. 175-c. 250 C.E.): teacher of Plotinus (Fulutin,
q.v.) and reputed founder of Neoplatonism. The surname Saccas (the
sack-bearers) was derived from the occupation by which he originally
earned his living.

an
--

The instant or present moment as an indivisible wedge between past and
future.

Analutiqa
---------

Analytica Priora or the First Analystics: Aristotle’s third book on
logic; other variants are Anulutiqa and Analutiqa Awwal- also entitled
as al-Qiyas in Arabic; it deals with the combination of propositions in
the different forms of syllogism(qiyas, q.v.)

Analutiqa Thani
---------------

Analytica Posteriora or the Second Analystics: Aristotle’s fourth book
on logic; other variants are Abuditiqta or Afudiqtiqi, also entitled as
al-Burhan in Arabic; it deals with the conditions to be fulfilled by the
premises of a valid demonstration and thus distinguishes a sound
syllogism from an unsound one.

Anbadqulis
----------

Empedocles (c. 490 -c. 435 B.C.), known to Muslim philosophers by other
Arabic variants of his name: Abidqulis, Abidhqulis, etc. A pre-Socratic
philosopher, physicist, physician and social reformer, Postulated the
existence of the four elements (al-‘anasir al-arba‘ah, q.v.) or roots
(ustuqussat, q.v.) out of the mixture of which all things came to be,
love and hate being the cause of motion and so of the mixing of these
elements. Held the view that sense-impressions are caused by effluxes
from the objects. All these views of Empedocles became current with
Muslim philosophers; but their knowledge of him was based mainly on what
reached them through the works of Aristotle and Plutarch, and they often
associated him with Neoplatonists.

intiza‘i
--------

Abstract [amr intiza‘i, see Asfar, 1: 48, line 6]. (AnAc)

al-an al-da’im
--------------

"The ever-abiding now", wherein tow eternities, i.e. azal (q.v.) and
abad (q.v.) perpetually meet; the present moment as an image of
eternity. Al-an al-da’im is usually considered to be the root of time
(asl al-zaman) or its very inner essence (batin al-zaman)

Indaruniqus
-----------

Andronicus (fl. 1st century B.C.): Greek Peripatetic philosopher, the
famous editor of Aristotle’s works; See Matatafusiqi.

al-insan al-kamil
-----------------

"The perfect man", i.e. the one in whom are combined all the various
attributes of divinity and humanity, or one who has realised in his
person all levels of being -a notion common to the Muslim philosophers
and mystics. Interesting to note is the highly eclectic conception of
"the perfect man" held by the Brethren of Purity (Ikhwan al-Safa, q.v.):
"The perfect man" is of East Persian origin, Arabian in faith,
Babylonian in education, Hebrew in astuteness, a disciple of Christ in
conduct, as pious as a Syrian monk, a Greek in natural sciences, an
Indian in the interpretation of mysteries and, above all a Sufi or a
mystic in his whole spiritual outlook".

an-i sayyal
-----------

The present moment in constant flux and so ever indivisible.

infi‘al
-------

Lit. "being acted on:, but technically the category of "passion" as one
of the ten Aristotelian categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.) also
called yanfa‘il (to be acted on). Infi‘al as opposed to fi‘l (q.v.) (the
category of action) is the reception of the effect of an affecting
agent.

infi‘alat
---------

Sensible qualities of things or persons such as are of transitory
nature, for example the blush on the face of man on account some
embarrassment or pallidness on account of fear; the sudden change of one
state into another is called istihalah (q.v.). Opposed to infi‘aliyat;
see below

infi‘aliyat
-----------

Sensible qualities of things such as are firmly rooted in them like
sweetness in honey or salinity in brine; opposed to infi‘alat (q.v.);
see also al-kaifiyat al-mahsusah.

Anaksaghuras

Anaxagoras (c. 499 -c.428 B.C.): the last philosopher of the Ionian
school of Greek philosophy. He taught that their are infinitesimally
small particles (or seeds) containing the mixture of all qualities.
These were distributed in the universe originally in a chaotic form, to
which nous, i.e. Mind gave an order and system by a movement of
rotation. All things come to be and cease to be through the coming
together and separation of the seeds. Nous, however, is simple, unmixed
and alone. It is the cause of original motion in the material elements
or "seeds"; without partaking of the nature of matter, it is itself a
spiritual essence. Since the universe displays harmony, order and
purposiveness, it is a teleological principle. Anaxagoras indeed was the
first to give a teleological explanation of the universe.

Anaksimans
----------

Anaximander of Miletus (c. 610 - c. 545 B.C.) a pupil of Thales (Thalis
al-Malti, q.v.). He wrote a book on natural philosophy considered to be
the first Greek work on philosophy. In this he expounded his notion of
the "boundless" or "infinite" which according to him, is the first
principle or primary substance, eternal and imperishable containing
within itself all contraries such as heat and cold and moist and dry.
The phenomenal universe has been evolved through the separation and
union of these contrary elements.

Ankimas
-------

Anaximenes of Miletus (d. c. 528 B.C.) According to him, air is the
primary substance from which all things are derived by varying degrees
of compression or rarefaction. Probably the first to teach that moon
receives its light from the sun.

inqi?a'
-------

Lapse, passing away. tajaddud wa inqida': renewal and lapse (AnAc)

al-anwar al-mudabbirah

"The regent lights", which according to the philosophers of
Illuminationism (Ishraqiyun), govern the affairs of the celestial
spheres.

Anulutiqa
---------

Analytica Priora or the First Analystics, Aristotle’s third book on
logic; see Analutiqa.

anniyah
-------

"Thatness" of a thing, i.e. its existence as opposed to quiddity. In God
alone, according to the Muslim philosophers, is His essence one with His
existence; in everything else it is possible to think of its essence
without knowing whether it exists or not. The term anniyah is used
sometimes in the sense of huwiyah ("itness") of a thing, i.e. its
self-identity. See also huwa huwa.

Ahrun al-Quss
-------------

Aaron of Alexandria (fl. between 610 and 641 C.E.). His Pandect, a Greek
medical encyclopedia divided into 30 sections, was the first book
translated from Syriac into Arabic by Masarjawaih of Basra in 64/683
under the title Qarabahin.

ahl al-khibrah
--------------

Persons possessing practical experience in a field of study; the experts
in a subject.

ahl al-‘ulwiyah
---------------

People possessed with heavenly visions.

ahl al-mazall
-------------

Lit. "the people of the shaded place", a name given to the Stoics: see
ashab al-mazallah and rawaqiyah.

ahl al-mizan
------------

Lit. "the people of the balance", but technically the term means simply
logicians because of their use of logic, which is sometimes called "the
science of balance" (‘ilm al- mizan) to weigh the truth and falsity of
statements and arguments.

ihmal
-----

Indetermination as to the quantity of a proposition (opposed to ihsar,
q.v.) ; see al-qadiyat al-muhmalah.

Udimas
------

Eudemus of Rhodes: Greek philosopher of 4th century B.C.; pupil and
friend of Aristotle whose work Eudemian Ethics (Udhimya, see below) is
supposed to have been edited by him.

Udhimya
-------

Eudemina Ethics, the title of one of the three books by Aristotle on
ethics; see Udimas.

Utuluqus
--------

Autolycus (fl. c. 310 B.C.): Greek astronomer and mathematician. His
work on "the revolving sphere" was known to Muslim scientists and
philosophers through its Arabic translation by Hunain ibn Ishaq (d.
264/877).

awwaliyat
---------

A priori data or premises which have the status of first principles,
i.e. the propositions which are inherent in the intellectual faculty of
man-the Laws of Thought, for example.

Iyamlikhus
----------

Iamblichus (d. c. 335 C.E.): a Neoplatonic philosopher, pupil of
Porphyry (Firfuriyus, q.v.). He developed more the mystical side of
Neoplatonism (al-Aflatuniyat al-Muhdathah, q.v.)

Irin al-Mijaniqi
----------------

Heron the Mechanic of Alexandria (fl. early 1st century B.C.); author of
numerous works on mathematics, physics and mechanics, some of which were
known to the Muslim philosophers and scientists through Arabic
translations by Thabit ibn Qurrah and Qusta ibn Luqa.

al-Isaghuji
-----------

Arabicised form of the Greek word Isagoge meaning "introduction",
sometimes translated as al-Madkhal. It is originally an Introduction to
Aristotle’s logical treatise on Categories (al-Qatighuriyas, q.v.)
composed by Porphyry (Firfuriyus, q.v.). It deals with the five
predicates (al-alfaz al-khamsah, q.v.) and also with the terms of speech
and their abstract meanings. This little treatise, first translated into
Arabic by Ibn al-Muqaffa‘ has been commented on a number of times.
Besides the adaptations and epitomes of this work, many independent
works on logic by Muslim philosophers have been entitled as al-Isaghuji,
the most famous of them being one by al-Abhari (c.597-664, c.1200-1265).

aina
----

Lit. "Where?", but technically the category of place as one of the ten
Aristotelian categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.); it denotes the
particular place where a thing is.

Ayudhukhus
----------

Eudoxus of Cnidos (c. 408 -c.355 B.C.): studied philosophy under Plato.
Known chiefly for his works on mathematics and astronomy, some of which
reached the Muslim philosophers and scientists.

ayyu
----

"Which one?" or "What?" -one of the interrogative pronouns used in order
to discuss the form and matter of definitions and propositions in
connection with the problems that arise in science. Ayyan denotes that
form of the question which is put to know the differential quality of a
thing in order to distinguish it from other things belonging to the same
class; see also muta‘alliqat al-qiyas wa‘l-burhan.


