Baa
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image003.gif)

bariqah
-------

A flash of illumination or inspiration from God in the soul of man,
which does not tarry long.

Bari Irminiyas
--------------

De Interpretatione (The Interpretation), the title of the second of
Aristotle’s book on logic, also named al-‘Ibarah or al-Tafsir; it deals
with the formation of different kinds of propositions through the
combination of simple ideas or terms.

Balinus
-------

Apollonius: many other Arabic variants of this name to be met with in
Muslim works on the history of philosophers and scientists are:
Abulluniyus, Abuluniyus, Ablinas and Ablus. Two persons named Apollonius
were known to the Muslim thinkers:

Apollonius of Perge (c. 200 B.C.), which name appears almost invariably
with epithet al-Najjar, i.e. "the Carpenter"; a Greek mathematician of
third century B.C., whose Conics (al-Makhrutat) and other works were
translated into Arabic and commented upon.

A sage whose personality is based on the Greek tradition about
Apollonius of Tyana, a neo-Pythagorean philosopher of 1st century C.E.
He is known as a hakim, i.e. a philosopher but often also called sahib
al-talismat, i.e. a magician and miracle-worker.

Babus
-----

Pappus: Greek geometer of late 3rd and early 4th century C.E. His chief
work: "Mathematical Collection", was known to the Muslim philosophers
and scientists; now extant only in incomplete form.

badihat
-------

Self-evident data or premisses, i.e. propositions the truth of which is
open to direct inspection and requires no appeal to other evidence, like
the statement that a part is les than the whole of which it is the part
or that two contradictories (naqidan, q.v.) cannot obtain in the same
individual at the same time.

badihi
------

That to which we give our assent without any question or investigation;
opposed to nazari.

barzakh
-------

Lit. "the intervening space", but technically the term denotes the
"world of Ideas" which is considered intermediary between the material
or phenomenal world and the world of pure spirits (mufariqat, q.v.) as
well as of God. In the philosophy of Illuminationism (al-hikmat
al-ishraqiyah, q.v.) barzakh means simply boy as opposed to light
(nur.). Barzakhs, thus are dark bodies which become illuminated through
the light received from the

spirit. The heavenly spheres being bodily are also barzakhs, but they
are living barzakhs as compared to the physical bodies of this world
which are dead barzakhs.

Buruqlus
--------

Proclus (410-485 B.C.): Neoplatonic philosopher and saint, regarded as
the last great teacher of (the Hegel) of Neoplatonism. He wrote
extensive commentaries on Plato’s and Aristotle’s works. His Elements of
Theology, a work on Platonic theology, partly translated into Arabic and
re-arranged under the title Kitab al-khair al-Mahd (q.v.) was ascribed
by the Muslim philosophers to Aristotle.

Barminidus
----------

Parmenides (6th -5th century B.C.): head of the Eleatic school of Greek
philosophy; classical exponent of monism. Reality for him is Being which
is a plenum filling all space and reaming constant. Empty space or void
cannot be. Non-Being, becoming, or creation is impossible. Multiplicity,
change and time are illusions. Zeno (Zainun al-Akbar, q.v.), his famous
pupil, offered a defence of this block-reality philosophy in terms of
his famous paradoxes.

burhan
------

The term is used in philosophy in various slightly different senses: (1)
mode of argumentation; (2) the argument itself; and (3) the manifest
evidence or proof of a convincing argument -in this last sense the term
is also used in the Qur’an (4:174; 12:24).

al-Burhan
---------

The Arabic title given to Aristotle’s fourth book on logic, viz.
Analytica Posteriora or the Second Analytics. See Analutiqa Thani.

al-burhan al-inni
-----------------

The mode of reasoning which proceeds from effect to cause; as "a proof
that a thing is", it starts from the particular fact which is given or
is perceived and infers the cause or reason of its existence; also
called technically istidlal (q.v.) as opposed to ta‘lil (q.v.)

al-burhan al-tatbiqi
--------------------

A mode of argument employed to disprove the possibility of the infinite
regress of causes as, for example, in the cosmological argument for the
existence of God; more generally the term denotes the impossibility of
the infinite series of any successive sequence of events in the past or
in the future.

al-burhan al-khatabi
--------------------

The rhetorical argument based on premisses of the kind of maqbulat
(q.v.) and maznunat (q.v.). See also al-qiyas al-khatabi.

al-burhan al-siddiqin
---------------------

"The argument of the truthful ones", i.e. a kind of teleological
argument employed by the prophets and saints, which much like al-burhan
al-inni

(q.v.), starts from the signs of God, manifest in the natural phenomena
and in men’s own selves, and thereby establish the existence of God.

al-burhan al-qati‘
------------------

Decisive proof or apodictic demonstration. See al-burhan al-mutlaq.

al-burhan al-limi
-----------------

The mode of reasoning which procees from a cause to its effect. As "a
proof why a thing is", it starts from the cause or the universal and
deduces the effect or the particular from it: the cause here is not
merely the efficient cause (al-‘illat al-fa‘iliyah, q.v.) but also the
formal cause (al-‘illat al-suriyah, q.v.), i.e. the reason why a thing
is; technically also called ta‘lil (q.v.) as opposed to istidlal (q.v.).

al-burhan al-mutlaq
-------------------

Absolute proof or apodictic demonstration of a conclusion in a logical
syllogism from propositions or premisses which are certain and
self-evident, i.e. such as belong to the category of yaqiniyat (q.v.)

al-basa’it al-ustuqussiyah
--------------------------

"The elemental simples" , i.e. the four elements: fire, air, water and
earth. See also al-arkan al-arb‘ah and ustuqussat.

al-basa’it al-mjarradah
-----------------------

"The abstract simples," an expression used by Mulla Sadra
(979-1050/1571-1640)[website - Biography] to denote the intelligences
and souls of the celestial spheres. See also al-‘uqul al-‘asharah.

al-basait al-‘aqli
------------------

"Conceptually simple", i.e. of which it is impossible to think that it
could be divided even mentally, for example a point in geometry.

basar
-----

"Sight": it is power placed in the two hollow nerves which meet each
other in the brain; thence they separate and go to the two eyeballs. By
this power are perceived rays of light, colours, shapes, sizes, motions,
the beautiful and the ugly and other things. There are, however, three
different theories of vision discussed by the Muslim philosophers.

According to the theory labeled as Platonic theory of vision; a ray of
light emanating from the eye falls on the surface of an object, and this
enables us to see it. Ibn Sina, however, considers this theory
untenable; for were it true we should be able to see things in the dark
as we see them in the light.

According to the second theory, it is the formative faculty (al-quwwat
al-mutasawwirah, q.v.) itself which, so to say, goes out to the object
to meet it, and hence we see it. This theory too is untenable; for were
it true we would not be able to distinguish the objects which are absent
from those which are present.

The third theory, which is called the Aristotelian theory of vision,
holds that whenever light falls on an object its shape transmitted
through the

various transparent media is imprinted on the vitreous humour of the
eye, and hence we see it.

Batlamiyus (al-Qaludhi)
-----------------------

Ptolemy(the son of Claudius): Astronomer, mathematician, geographer and
physicist of Alexandria of 2nd century C.E.; know to the Muslim
scientists and philosophers mostly for his notable astronomical work
Meagle Syntaxis (Grand Composition) generally called Almagest from the
title of its translation in Arabic. The first know Arabic translation
was made by al-hajjaj ibn Yusuf ibn Matar (fl. between 170/786 and
218/833), and it was followed by many other translations and also
commentaries. Muslim philosophers’ grandiose construction of
emanationistic cosmologies (nine celestial spheres with their souls and
intelligences -the lower emanating from the immediately higher) is
largely based on the Ptolemaic system of astronomy. According to this
system, stars, the sun and (other) six planets each studded in a
celestial sphere revolve around the earth, the centre of the universe.
Muslim scholars studied Ptolemy’s works on geography, optics and the
theory of music with great interest. Sarton considers his influence upon
later times, until the middle of 16th century, second only to Aristotle.

Buqrat
------

Hippocrates of Cos (fl. 5th century B.C.): "the Father of Medicine",
Greek physician, one of the greatest of all times. All his major works
were translated into Arabic as early as 2nd -3rd/8th -9th century and
keenly studied by Muslim physicians, most of whom also happened to be
philosophers.

Buthaghuras
-----------

Pythagoras of Samos (c. 572-497 B.C.), the head of Pythagoreanism. See
Fithaghuras.

Buda Yusuf
----------

A name sometimes given by Muslim philosophers to Gautama Buddha (563?-c.
483 B.C.), the Indian philosopher and founder of Buddhism.

Butiqa
------

The Arabicised title of Aristotle’s Poetica; see below.

Buyutiqa
--------

The Arabicised title of Aristotle’s Poetica or the Poetics, (the other
variant being Butiqa), in Arabic entitled also as al-Shi‘r; generally
considered by Muslim philosophers to be one of Aristotle’s books on
logic, i.e. the last part of the logical Organon (al-Arghanun, q.v.)
which deals with the fine art of stirring the imagination and soul of
the audience through the magic of words. (online text)


