Taa
===

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image004.gif)

al-Tasu‘at
----------

"The group of Nines", i.e. the Enneads, a work by Plotinus (al-Shaikh
al-Yunani, q.v.) in 54 books, arranged and edited by his pupil Porphyry
(Firfuriyus, q.v.) into 6 groups or sets of 9 (enna) on the ground that
according to the Pythagorean theory of number 9 is the perfect number.
The importance of the Enneads cannot be overestimated in Muslim
Philosophy, for the "Theology of Aristotle" (Uthulujiya Aristatalis,
q.v.) which was ascribed by the Muslim philosophers to Aristotle as his
genuine work was really the running paraphrases of the eight sections of
the last 3 "sets" of this work of Plotinus. Muslim philosophy, thus,
came to be much dominated by Neoplatonic doctrine and it took very long
before the purer Peripateticism, i.e. the philosophy of Aristotle came
to surface. See also Uthulujiya Aristatalis. (online text)

Taammun
-------

Implication (S. Afnan, Avicenna: His Life and Works, 93). (AnAc)

Ta'alluq
--------

Relation. (AnAc)

Tafdhil
-------

Detailed, detail (pl. tafdhilat). (AnAc)

Tafwi?
------

Seale translates as "delegation", but sees it as equivalent to 'free
will'. Normally used as opposite of jabr. Fawwa?a literally means
entrust, to give full power, authorize, delegate. Imam 'Ali uses the
term as saying: "man's freedom is between jabr and tafwid", Kanz
al-'Ummal, 1: 313; al-Ash'ari also uses, see his Maqalat, 1: 40-1. See
also Watt, Free Will ..., mufawwidah. (AnAc)

Tahaul
------

Actualization. (AnAc)

Tali
----

The consequent, i.e. that clause of a conjunctive conditional or
hypothetical proposition (al-qadiyat al-shartiyat [al-muttasilah], q.v.)
which follows the antecedent (muqaddam, q.v.), e.g. the clause "the
ground shall be wet" in the statement, "If it rains, the ground shall be
wet."

Talis
-----

Thales (c.640 -c. 546 B.C.), the first who made name as a philosopher in
Greek philosophy. See Thalis al-Malti.

Tajalli
-------

Manifestation, theophany (Ibn 'Arabi). (AnAc)

Tajalliyat
----------

Manifestations, theophanies (Ibn 'Arabi). (AnAc)

Tajrid
------

Catharsis, separation (from imperfections). (AnAc)

Tajsim al-a‘mal
---------------

"Corporealisation or embodiment of actions", the view in Muslim
eschatology that man’s god or bad deeds would appear in life after death
in bodily forms, beautiful or ugly, and bear witness for or against him.

tahkim
------

Subalternation, i.e. the relation between a universal proposition and a
particular proposition having the same subject and predicate and of the
same quality; the universal proposition in this pair is sometimes called
muhkam lahu and the particular proposition muhkam bihi or muhkam. See
also al-qadiyatan al-mutadakhilatan.

takhalkhul
----------

Expansion of a body, e.g. of water into steam; one of the four kinds of
(harakah fi’l-kamm, q.v.).

Tartib
------

Arrangement. (AnAc)

al-tarkib al-ittihadi
---------------------

The organic composition of parts into a whole so that the parts, apart
from the whole of which they are the parts, have no independent
existence of their own -like the composition of matter (maddah or
hayula, q.v.) and form (surah, q.v.) in a concrete particular thing or
that of differentia (fasl, q.v.) and genus (jins, q.v.) in the
definition of a thing (al-hadd al-tamm, q.v.); opposed to al-tarkib
al-indimami, see below.

al-tarkib al-in?imami
---------------------

The mechanical composition of parts into a whole so that the parts have
their own independent existence apart form the whole of which they are
the parts -like the conglomeration of bricks, mortar, wood, iron, etc.
into a house or into any other mechanical aggregate; opposed to
al-tarkib al-ittihadi (q.v.).

al-tarkib al-mufaal
-------------------

The fallacy of composition; see mughalatah tarkib al-mufaal.

tasalsul
--------

An infinite succession of events or an infinite regress of causes, both
of which, according to Muslim philosophers, are logically inadmissible.
Sometimes the term is used to denote the infinite succession or regress
in an argument which brings it to a logical impasse. See al-burhan
al-ta?biqi and muqati‘.

tadhadd
-------

Contrariety or the relation of contrary opposition between two universal
propositions having the same subject and predicate but differing in
quality. See al-qadhiyatan al-mutdhaddatan.

al-tadhadd al-tahtani
---------------------

Sub-contrariety or the relation of sub-contrary opposition between two
particular propositions having the same subject and predicate, but
differing in quality. See also al-qa?iyatan al-dakhilatan taht
al-ta?add.

al-ta‘rif al-haqiqi
-------------------

The real definition of a thing, i.e. the definition which gives us the
essence or the most essential characteristics of a thing like the
definition of man as a rational animal. See also al-hadd al-tamm.

ta‘rif al-majhul bi’l-majhul
----------------------------

Ignotum per ignotius, i.e. the definition of the unknown by the unknown,
which in fact is no definition. Every definition which makes uses of
obscure language so that it becomes necessary to define further the very
terms used in that definition is an example of ta‘rif al-majhul
bi’l-majhul.

ta‘lil
------

Taken generally, the term means causation; but, more specifically, it
denotes the mode of inference or reasoning in which we proceed from the
cause or the universal and deduce the effect or the particular from it.
See also al-burhan al-limi.

ta‘limi
-------

Quantitative, i.e. that which pertains to the size, figure, volume or
dimensions of a thing or to its number and countable parts.

al-Tafsir
---------

The Interpretation: The Arabic title given sometimes to the second of
Aristotle’s books on logic. See Bari Irminiyas.

tafil al-murakkab
-----------------

The fallacy of division; see mughalatah taf?l al-murakkab.

taqabul
-------

The relation of opposition between two concepts or states which cannot
be asserted of a thing or an individual at the same time and in the same
respect. This is of four kinds: (1) contradiction (taqabul fi’l-salb
wa’l-ijab, q.v.) (2) contrariety (taqabul al-diddain, q.v.) (3)
correlation (taqabul al-tadayuf, q.v.) and (4) the relation between
privation and possession (taqabul bain al-‘adm wa’l-milkah, q.v.) -all
considered by Aristotle to be different forms on contrariety.

taqabul bain al-‘adm wa’l-milkah
--------------------------------

The relation of opposition between privation and possession like that
between rest and motion. It is different from the opposition of between
two contraries (taqabul al-diddain, q.v.): in the case of two contraries
the existence of both is necessarily presupposed but no such
presupposition is necessary in the case of that which is privative -rest
is merely the non-existence of motion. Moreover the two contraries like
hot and cold have two separate causes: they are not the co-effects of
the same cause, whereas that

which is privative and that which is not so, like rest and motion, are
due to the working and not-working of the same cause.

taqabul al-ta?ayuf
------------------

The relation opposition between two correlatives, like that between the
father and the son or that between the teacher and the pupil; though the
one term necessarily implies the other, the two cannot obtain in the
same individual at the same time in the same respect.

taqabul al-?iddain
------------------

The relation of opposition between two contraries such between white and
black or between hotness and coldness, see also diddan.

taqabul fi’l-salb wa’l-ijab
---------------------------

The relation of opposition between affirmation, and negation i.e.
between two contradictories such as between A and not-A or between
existence and non-existence; see also naqidan.

taqaddum
--------

Antecedence or priority as opposed to consequence or posteriority
(ta’akhkhur). It is of various kinds: antecedence in time (taqaddum
bi’l-zaman, q .v.); antecedence in order (taqaddum bi’l-martabah, q.v.);
antecedence in status (taqaddum bi’l-sharf, q.v.); antecedence by nature
or constitution (taqaddum bil’l-tab‘, q.v.); and antecedence in
existence (taqaddum bi’l-dhat, q.v.).

taqaddum bi’l-dhat
------------------

Antecedence in existence so that the non-existence of the antecedent
necessarily leads to the non-existence of the consequent but no the
other way around, like the antecedence of the cause to effect or of
condition to the conditioned or of primary act to the secondary or
generated act (muwalladah, q.v.), e.g. the movement of a finger is
antecedent to the movement of the ring on the finger: the latter is
necessarily presupposed by the former but not vice versa.

taqaddum bi’l-zaman
-------------------

Antecedence in time, i.e. the condition of being earlier in a succession
of events, e.g. the antecedence of Socrates to Plato or of the Prophet
Moses to the Prophet Jesus. Considered from the point of view of the
series of past, present and future this antecedence in its very literal
sense.

taqaddum bi’l-sharf
-------------------

Antecedence in status or excellence, e.g. of the learned to the ignorant
or the believer to the non-believer; this kind of antecedence always
presupposes a value-judgement, i.e. the superiority of one thing or
individual to the other with reference to a norm or standard.

taqaddum bil’l-tab‘
-------------------

Antecedence as given in the very nature or constitution of things so
that the exclusion (irlifa‘) of the antecedent necessarily leads to the
exclusion of the consequent (mutaqaddam ‘alaih) but not vice versa, like
the antecedence

of number one to number two or that of lines to a geometrical figure,
say a triangle; the notion of number "two" or "a triangle" presupposes
respectively the notion of number "one" or that of "lines", but not the
other way round.

taqaddum bi’l-martabah
----------------------

Antecedence in order; it is of three kinds: first, the antecedence of
one thing to another with reference to its position in space, e.g. of
Baghdad to Kufah, but this is relative to the place form where one
starts one’s journey; secondly, the antecedence of one thing to another
with reference to a goal or destination when we say that Median is
nearer to Mecca than Baghdad; and thirdly, the antecedence of one thing
to the other in the order of nature, e.g. it may be said that in the
order of nature animality is antecedent to humanity not only with
reference to time but also with reference to extension or denotation,
but this notion of antecedence too is relative and not absolute for
humanity being a more specialised form of animality is antecedent to it
with reference to intension or connotation.

taqrib
------

Presentation of arguments in a controversy in a logical form so that
they necessarily leads to the desired conclusion.

taqsim bi’l-tanqi?
------------------

Division by dichotomy: a logical division of a class into two
contradictory sub-classes, then one of the sub-classes into tow
contradictory sub-classes and so on and so forth step by step;
considered in logic to be a flawless division of a "class" for at each
step of the division the two contradictory sub-classes are mutually
exclusive (mani‘at al jam‘, q.v.) as well as totally exhaustive (mani‘at
al-khuluww, q.v.).

takathuf
--------

Compression or condensation of a body, e.g. of steam vapours into water;
one of the four kinds of harakah fi’l-kamm (q.v.).

takwin
------

Creation of the natural beings which are liable to corruption (fasad)
and decay; it is an act of creation which is through the intermediary of
matter, time and motion and one which pre-supposes causal priority; see
also ibda‘.

tamthil
-------

Analogy, i.e. a mode of inference in which we reason from the
resemblance of two things in some respects to their resemblance in some
more respects.

tanaqudh
--------

Contradictory or the relation of contradictory opposition between two
propositions having the same subject and predicate but differing both in
quality and quantity; see also al-qa?iyatan al-mutaqabilatan
bi’l-tanaqud.

al-tanaqudh fi’l-mahsurat
-------------------------

Opposition by subalteration, i.e. the relation between two propositions
which have the same subject and predicate and the same quality but
differ in

quantity, like the relation between "No men are perfect" (al-salibat
al-kulliyah, q.v.) and "some men are not perfect" (al-salibat
al-juz’iyah, q.v.) see also al-qadiyatan al-mutadakhilatan.

taulid
------

The generation of secondary action or movement from a primary action or
movement, for example the movement of the key in the keyhole by the
movement of the hand; see also muwallidah and mubasharah.

tawahhum
--------

The apprehension of some particular object or situation at the animal
level so that there is no reference to the universal or conceptual in
this kind of cognitive experience; see also al-quwwat al-mutawahhimah.


