Jeem
====

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image006.gif)

Jalinus
-------

Galen (fl. 2nd Century C.E.), the celebrated Greek physician whose more
then 120 works on medicine were know to the Muslim scholars. But they
also recognized him as a philosopher as he was the author of a number of
philosophical works of an eclectic nature. His integration of philosophy
and science set a pattern for Muslim philosophers. Al-Qifti calls him a
natural philosopher acquainted with method of logical proof. His summary
of Plato’s Timaeus (Taima’us, q.v.) in particular became quite a popular
work. It is noteworthy that medical and philosophical works of Galen,
otherwise lost, have been recovered from their Arabic translations.

al-Jadal
--------

The Arabic title given to Aristotle’s fifth book on logic, viz. Topica;
see Tubiqa.

jiddah
------

The category of "state" or possession as one of the ten Aristotelian
categories (al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.). See also milk.

jirm (pl. ajram)
----------------

"Body"; a term used specifically for a heavenly body (falak) as opposed
to jism which denotes a "body" in the world of four elements.

al-juz’ alladhi la yatajazza’
-----------------------------

"A part that cannot be further divided", an expression used by the
Muslim scholastics and philosophers for atom (uncuttable). Some of the
theories with them may be listed as follows:

Atoms exist in fact (bi’l-fi‘l) and are determined-view of al-Baqillani.

Atoms exist in fact but are not determined-view of al-Nazzam.

Atoms are determined but they exist only in potentiality
(bi’l-quwwah)-view of al-Shahrastani.

Atoms are not determined and further exist only in potentiality-view
held by most of the philosophers.

juz' ikhtiyar
-------------

Freedom of choice.(AnAc)

jism
----

A body composed of the four elements (al-‘anasir al-arb‘ah, q.v.) in
various proportions; a body thus is composite and divisible. According
to the philosophers, a body is composed essentially of prime matter
(hayula, q.v.) and form (surah, q.v.) both of which in themselves are
imperceptible and indivisible. A distinction must be made between the
two cognate terms jism and jism (q.v.): the former refers to the earthly
bodies and the latter to the heavenly bodies. While the earthly bodies
are made of a single element -the celestial element; the heavenly bodies
are made of a single element -the celestial element; the heavenly bodies
thus are simpler (basit) than earthly

bodies. The term jism is used specifically to denote the minerals. See
also al-‘anasir [al-ajsad?] al-arab‘ah.

al-jism al-basit
----------------

The simple substance, i.e. a body composed of one and the same element
like that of a heavenly sphere.

al-jism al-ta‘limi
------------------

Mathematical body, i.e. a three-dimensional continuum or volume having
length, breadth and depth.

al-jism al-tabi’i
-----------------

The natural body composed of "matter" which is its substratum and the
"form" which is combined with it. Natural bodies make the subject-matter
of physics. What is common to them is their three-dimensional form,
while the matter in them is composed of the four elements (al-‘anasir
al-arb‘ah, q.v.) in various proportions.

ja'l
----

Causation (Fazlur Rahman, Mulla Sadra, 115) In Kalam it means
"creation". (AnAc)

ja'l basit
----------

Compound production (Fazlur Rahman, Sadra, 63); simple causation (Fazlur
Rahman, Ibid., 115). (AnAc)

ja'l murakkab
-------------

Compound production (Fazlur Rahman, Sadra, 63); compound causation
(Fazlur Rahman, Ibid., 115). (AnAc)

jam‘ al-masa’il fi mas’alat-in
------------------------------

The fallacy of many questions. See mughalatat al-as’ilat
al-muta‘addadah.

jins
----

Genus, first of the five predicables (al-alfaz al-khamsah, q.v.); a jins
is predicated of many things differing in species (nau‘), i.e. it is a
wider class which includes within it narrower sub-class called species.

jins al-ajnas
-------------

Lit. "genus of genera"; technically summum genus, i.e. the highest class
which no longer can be regarded as a species of a class higher or wider
than itself; opposed to nau‘ al-anwa‘ (q.v.).

al-jins al-tab‘i
----------------

Lit. "natural genus"; technically the form of genus as an idea or a
universal subsisting in the active intellect (al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al, q.v.).

al-jins al-‘aqli
----------------

Lit. "mental genus"; technically the form of genus as an idea or a
universal, as manifested in the concrete particular objects.

al-jins al-mantiqi
------------------

Lit. "logical genus"; technically the form of genus as an idea or a
universal existing in the human mind

jihah (pl. jihat)
-----------------

Modality of a proposition, i.e. the degree of certainty or probability
with which the predicate is affirmed or denied of a subject indicated by
such expressions as "necessary," "impossible," or "possible". See also
al-qadiyat al-dururiyah, al-qadiyat al-ihtimaliyah, al-qadiyat
al-mutlaqah.

al-jawahir al-awwal
-------------------

First substances, i.e. all the individual things in the visible world:
stars and the earth, plants and animals, etc.

al-jawahir al-thani
-------------------

Second substances, i.e. the species and genera of things as predicables
in logic in contrast with al-jawahir al-awwal (q.v.) which are the
concrete individual things in the visible world.

jauhar
------

Lit. "jewel"; technically substance, one of the fundamental terms with
the philosophers: the first of the ten Aristotelian categories
(al-maqulat al-‘ashr, q.v.). As a general term jauhar signifies
everything that exists in reality, all bodies and parts of bodies, the
sky and the stars and the earth, water and fire and air, plants and
animals, in short all things in the visible world. According to the
Mutakallimun, particularly the Ash‘arites, jauhar is merely a bearer of
accidents, and as a substratum of accidents it is constituted of atoms
which by their aggregate compose the body.

al-jauhar al-fard
-----------------

The single or indivisible substance, i.e. atom; also sometimes called
al-jauhar al-wahid; see also al-juz’ alladhi la yatajazza’.

jauhar qa’im-un bi-nafsihi

The name given by philosophers to the human soul which, according to
them, is "a substance subsistent by itself", i.e. is independent of the
body.


