Khaa
====

![](books/0747-dictionary_of_islamic_philosophical_terms/images/image008.gif)

khas
----

Lit. "particular". The fifth predicable of the alfaz al-khamsah as set
out by Porphyry (233-c. 304 C.E.) in his Isagoge(Isaghuji, q.v.) that
was the introduction to Aristotle's work titled "categories." This entry
is not the printed text..

kharq al-‘adah
--------------

"The splitting of nature"; that which is against the usual or customary
way of nature, i.e. any extraordinary or miraculous phenomenon.

al-Khatabah
-----------

The Arabic title given to Aristotle's seventh book on logic, viz.
Rhetorica; see also Rituriqa.

khasm
-----

Lit. "enemy", but technically the adversary in a discussion, i.e. each
one of the two controversialists who speaks either for or against an
issue.

khala’
------

"Void". According to most philosophers, particularly the Peripatetics,
void or vacuum as empty nothingness does not exist and that it is "only
a name" or better "an empty thought". Void is impossible, it is argued,
because all space can be increased, diminished or divided into parts and
so must contain something which is capable of being increased,
diminished, or divided.

khalf
-----

The antithesis of a thesis or a proposition which falsifies another
proposition; in general khalf means simply an objection.

khalq
-----

Creation of the world of nature, i.e. an act of creation which is
through the intermediaries of matter and time and which presupposes
causal priority; to be distinguished from ibda‘ (q.v.).

khawalif
--------

Lit. "surrogates", a term used by the logicians for demonstrative or
personal pronouns.

al-khayal al-muttasil
---------------------

The universal or Idea as embodied in and conjoined with the particulars
of which it is the universal-a thesis of Aristotle and the
Aristotelians.

al-khayal al-munfasil
---------------------

The universal or Idea separated from the particulars and subsisting in
the realm of (Platonic) Ideas-a view held by Plato and the Platonists.


