Hadith and Ayat of the Day
==========================

The Prophet(SAW) said: the gates of Paradise are not opened but on two
days, Monday and Thursday, and then every servant (of Allah) is granted
pardon who does not associate anything with Allah except the person in
whose (heart) there is rancour against his brother. and it would be
said: Look towards both of them until there is reconciliation; look
towards both of them until there is reconciliation; look towards both of
them until there is reconciliation. in the hadith of Suhayl the words
are: (Those would not be granted pardon) who boycott each other.
(Narrated By Abu Huraira (Ra) in Hadith Book by Imam Muslim)

O ye who believe! When the call is heard for the prayer of the day of
congregation, haste unto remembrance of Allah and leave your trading.
That is better for you if ye did but know. (QURAN:62:9)

And when the prayer is ended, then disperse in the land and seek of
Allah's bounty, and remember Allah much, that ye may be successful.
(62:10)

**Summary Of the Effect Of Sins**

ONE :

The Prevention of Knowledge: Knowledge is a light, which Allaah throws
into the heart, and disobedience extinguishes this light. Imaam
Shaafi'ee said: I complained to Wakee' about the weakness of my memory
So he ordered me to abandon disobedience and informed me that the
knowledge is light and that the light of Allah is not given to the
disobedient

TWO :

The Prevention of Sustenance: Just as Taqwaa brings about sustenance,
the abandonment of Taqwaa causes poverty. there is nothing, which can
bring about sustenance like the abandonment of disobedience.

THREE :

The prevention of obedience (to Allah). If there were no other
punishment for sin other than that it prevents one from obedience to
Allah then this would be sufficient.

FOUR :

Disobedience weakens the heart and the body. Its weakening the heart is
something which is clear. Disobedience does not stop weakening it until
the life of the heart ceases completely.

FIVE :

Disobedience reduces the lifespan and destroys any blessings. Just as
righteousness increases the lifespan, sinning reduces it.

SIX :

Disobedience sows its own seeds and gives birth to itself until
separating from it and coming out of it becomes difficult for the
servant.

SEVEN :

Sins weaken the hearts will and resolve so that the desire for
disobedience becomes strong and the desire to repent becomes weak bit by
bit until the desire to repent is removed from the heart completely.

EIGHT :

Every type of disobedience is a legacy of a nation from among the
nations which Allah Azzawajall destroyed. Sodomy is a legacy of the
People of Lot, taking more than one's due right and giving what is less
is a legacy of the People of Shu'ayb, seeking greatness in the land and
causing corruption is a legacy of the People of Pharaoh and
pride/arrogance and tyranny is a legacy of the People of Hud. So the
disobedient one is wearing the gown of some of these nations who were
the enemies of Allah.

NINE :

Disobedience is a cause of the servant being held in contempt by his
Lord. Al-Hasan al-Basree (rh) said: they became contemptible in (His
sight) so they disobeyed Him. If they were honourable (in His sight) He
would have protected them. Allah the Exalted said: and whomsoever Allah
lowers (humiliates) there is none to give honour. [Hajj 22:18]

TEN :

The ill effects of the sinner fall upon those besides him and also the
animals as a result of which they are touched by harm.

ELEVEN :

The servant continues to commit sins until they become very easy for
him and seem insignificant in his heart and this is a sign of
destruction. Every time a sin becomes insignificant in the sight of the
servant it becomes great in the sight of Allah. Ibn Mas'ood (ra) said:
indeed, the believer sees his sins as if he was standing at the foot of
a mountain fearing that it will fall upon him and the sinner sees his
sins like a fly which passes by his nose so he tries to remove it by
waving his hand around. [Bukhaaree]

TWELVE :

Disobedience inherits humiliation and lowliness. Honour, all of it,
lies in the obedience of Allah. Abdullaah ibn al-Mubaarak said: I have
seen sins kill the hearts. and humiliation is inherited by their
continuity the abandonment of sins gives life to the hearts and the
prevention of your soul is better for it.

THIRTEEN :

Disobedience corrupts the intellect. the intellect has light and
disobedience extinguishes this light. When the light of the intellect is
extinguished it becomes weak and deficient.

FOURTEEN :

When disobedience increases, the servant's heart becomes sealed so that
he becomes of those who are heedless. the Exalted said: But no! A stain
has been left on their hearts on account of what they used to earn (i.e.
their actions) [Mutaffifeen 83:14]

FIFTEEN :

Sins cause the various types of corruption to occur in the land.
Corruption of the waters, the air, the plants, the fruits and the
dwelling places. the Exalted said: Mischief has appeared on the land and
the sea on account of what the hands of men have earned; that He may
give them a taste of some of (the actions) they have done, in order that
they may return. [Rum 30:41]

SIXTEEN :

The disappearance of modesty which is the essence of the life of the
heart and is the basis of every good. Its disappearance is the
disappearance of all that is good. It is authentic from the Messenger
(sas) that he said: Modesty is goodness, all of it [Bukhaaree and
Muslim] A Poet said: and by Allah, there is no good in life or in the
world when modesty goes.

SEVENTEEN :

Sins weaken and reduce the magnification of Allah, the Mighty in the
heart of the servant.

EIGHTEEN :

Sins are the cause of Allah forgetting His servant, abandoning him and
leaving him to fend for himself with his soul and his shaytaan and in
this is the destruction from which no deliverance can be hoped for.

NINETEEN :

Sins remove the servant from the realm of Ihsaan (doing good) and he is
prevented from (obtaining) the reward of those who do good. When Ihsaan
fills the heart it prevents it from disobedience.

TWENTY :

Disobedience causes the favors (of Allah) to cease and make His revenge
lawful. No blessing ceases to reach a servant except due to a sin and no
retribution is made lawful upon him except due to a sin. Ali (ra) said:
No trial has descended except due to a sin and it (the trial) is not
repelled except by repentance. Allah the Exalted said: Whatever
misfortune afflicts you then it is due to what your hands have earned
and (yet) He pardons many [Shura 42:30]

And the Exalted also said: That is because never will Allah change the
favour He has bestowed on a people until they change what is with
themselves [Anfaal 8:53]


**Ninty Nine Names Of Allah**

1. Allah:

He who has the Godhood which is the power to create the entities.

2. Ar-Rahman:

The One who has plenty of mercy for the believers and the blasphemers
in this world and especially for the believers in the hereafter.

3. Ar-Rahim:

The One who has plenty of mercy for the believers.

4. Al-Malik:

He, the Exalted, His Existence is obvious by proofs and He is clear
from the delusions of attributes of bodies. the One with the complete
Dominion, the One Whose Dominion is clear from imperfection.

5. Al-Quddus:

The One who is pure from any imperfection and clear from children and
adversaries.

6. As-Salam:

The One who is free from every imperfection.

7. Al-Mu'min:

The One who witnessed for Himself that no one is God but Him. and He
witnessed for His believers that they are truthful in their belief that
no one is God but Him.

8. Al-Muhaymin:

The One who witnesses the saying and deeds of His creatures.

9. Al-Aziz:

The Defeater who is not defeated.

10. Al-Jabbar:

The One that nothing happens in His Dominion except that which He
willed.

11. Al-Mutakabbir:

The One who is clear from the attributes of the creatures and from
resembling them.

12. Al-Khaliq:

The One who brings everything from non-existence to existence.

13. Al-Bari':

The Creator who has the Power to turn the entities.

14. Al-Musawwir:

The One who forms His creatures in different pictures.

15. Al-Ghaffar:

The One who forgives the sins of His slaves time and time again.

16. Al-Qahhar:

The Subduer who has the perfect Power and is not unable over
anything.

17. Al-Wahhab:

The One who is Generous in giving plenty without any return. He is
everything that benefits whether Halal or Haram.

19. Al-Fattah:

The One who opens for His slaves the closed worldy and religious
matters.

20. Al-'Alim:

The Knowledgeable; the One nothing is absent from His knowledge.

21. Al-Qabid and 22. Al-Basit:

The One who constricts the sustenance by His wisdomand expands and
widens it with His Generosity and Mercy.

23. Al-Khafid and 24. Ar-Rafi':

The One who lowers whoever He willed by His Destruction and raises
whoever He willed by His Endowment.

25. Al-Mu^iz and 26. Al-Muthil:

He gives esteem to whoever He willed, hence there is no one to degrade
Him; and He degrades whoever He willed, hence there is no one to give
Him esteem.

27. As-Sami':

The One who Hears all things that are heard by His Eternal Hearing
without an ear, instrument or organ.

28. Al-Basir:

The One who Sees all things that are seen by His Eternal Seeing without
a pupil or any other instrument.

29. Al-Hakam:

He is the Ruler and His judgment is His Word.

30. Al-Adl:

The One who is entitled to do what He does.

31. Al-Latif:

The One who is kind to His slaves and endows upon them.

32. Al-Khabir:

The One who knows the truth of things.

33. Al-Halim:

The One who delays the punishment for those who deserve it and then He
might forgive them.

34. Al-'Azim:

The One deserving the attributes of Exaltment, Glory, Extolement,and
Purity from all imperfection.

35. Al-Ghafur:

The One who forgives a lot.

36. Ash-Shakur:

The One who gives a lot of reward for a little obedience.

37. Al-^Aliyy:

The One who is clear from the attributes of the creatures.

38. Al-Kabir:

The One who is greater than everything in status.

39. Al-Hafiz:

The One who protects whatever and whoever He willed to protect.

40. Al-Muqit:

The One who has the Power.

41. Al-Hasib:

The One who gives the satisfaction.

42. Aj-Jalil:

The One who is attributed with greatness of Power and Glory of
status.

43. Al-Karim:

The One who is clear from abjectness.

44. Ar-Raqib:

The One that nothing is absent from Him. Hence it's meaning is related
to the attribute of Knowledge.

45. Al-Mujib:

The One who answers the one in need if he asks Him and rescues the
yearner if he calls upon Him.

46. Al-Wasi^:

The Knowledgeable.

47. Al-Hakim:

The One who is correct in His doings.

48. Al-Wadud:

The One who loves His believing slaves and His believing slaves love
Him. His love to His slaves is His Will to be merciful to them and
praise them: Hence it's meaning is related to the attributes of the Will
and Kalam (His attribute with which He orders and forbids and spoke to
Muhammad and Musa -peace be upon them- . It is not a sound nor a
language nor a letter.).

49. Al-Majid:

The One who is with perfect Power, High Status, Compassion, Generosity
and Kindness.

50. Al-Ba^ith:

The One who resurrects His slaves after death for reward and/or
punishment.

51. Ash-Shahid:

The One who nothing is absent from Him.

52. Al-Haqq:

The One who truly exists.

53. Al-Wakil:

The One who gives the satisfaction and is relied upon.

55. Al-Matin:

The One with extreme Power which is un-interrupted and He does not get
tired.

56. Al-Waliyy:

The Supporter.

57. Al-Hamid:

The praised One who deserves to be praised.

58. Al-Muhsi:

The One who the count of things are known to him.

59. Al-Mubdi':

The One who started the human being. That is, He created him.

60. Al-Mu^id:

The One who brings back the creatures after death.

61. Al-Muhyi:

The One who took out a living human from semen that does not have a
soul. He gives life by giving the souls back to the worn out bodies on
the resurrection day and He makes the hearts alive by the light of
knowledge.

62. Al-Mumit:

The One who renders the living dead.

63. Al-Hayy:

The One attributed with a life that is unlike our life and is not that
of a combination of soul, flesh or blood.

64. Al-Qayyum:

The One who remains and does not end.

65. Al-Wajid:

The Rich who is never poor. Al-Wajd is Richness.

66. Al-Majid:

The One who is Majid.

67. Al-Wahid:

The One without a partner.

68. As-Samad:

The Master who is relied upon in matters and reverted to in ones
needs.

69. Al-Qadir:

The One attributed with Power.

70. Al-Muqtadir:

The One with the perfect Power that nothing is withheld rom Him.

71. Al-Muqaddim and 72. Al-Mu'akhkhir:

The One who puts things in their right places. He makes ahead what He
wills and delays what He wills.

73. Al-'Awwal:

The One whose Existence is without a beginning.

74. Al-'Akhir:

The One whose Existence is without an end.

75. Az-Zahir:

The One that nothing is above Him and nothing is underneath Him, hence
He exists without a place.

76. Al-Batin:

He, the Exalted, His Existence is obvious by proofs and He is clear
from the delusions of attributes of bodies.

77. Al-Wali:

The One who owns things and manages them.

78. Al-Muta^ali:

The One who is clear from the attributes of the creation.

79. Al-Barr:

The One who is kind to His creatures, who covered them with His
sustenance and specified whoever He willed among them by His support,
protection, and special mercy.

80. At-Tawwab:

The One who grants repentance to whoever He willed among His creatures
and accepts his repentance.

81. Al-Muntaqim:

The One who victoriously prevails over His enemies and punishes them
for their sins. It may mean the One who destroys them.

82. Al-^Afuww:

The One with wide forgiveness.

83. Ar-Ra'uf:

The One with extreme Mercy. the Mercy of Allah is His will to endow
upon whoever He willed among His creatures.

84. Malik Al-Mulk:

The One who controls the Dominion and gives dominion to whoever He
willed.

85. Thul-Jalal wal-Ikram:

The One who deserves to be Exalted and not denied.

86. Al-Muqsit:

The One who is Just in His judgment.

87. Aj-Jami:

The One who gathers the creatures on a day that there is no doubt
about, that is the Day of Judgment.

88. Al-Ghaniyy:

The One who does not need the creation.

89. Al-Mughni:

The One who satisfies the necessities of the creatures.

90. Al-Mani^:

The Supporter who protects and gives victory to His pious believers.
Al-Mu'tiy the Withholder.

91. Ad-Darr and 92. An-Nafi^

The One who makes harm reach to whoever He willed and benefit to
whoever He willed.

93. An-Nur:

The One who guides.

94. Al-Hadi:

The One whom with His Guidance His belivers were guided, and with His
Guidance the living beings have been guided to what is beneficial for
them and protected from what is harmful to them.

95. Al-Badi^:

The One who created the creation and formed it without any preceding
example.

96. Al-Baqi:

The One that the state of non-existence is impossible for Him.

97. Al-Warith:

The One whose Existence remains.

98. Ar-Rashid:

The One who guides.

99. As-Sabur:

The One who does not quickly punish the sinners. "... Naught is as His
likeness; and He is the Hearer, the Seer ..." Qur'an [42:11] (Arabic
transliteration: Huwa Allathi Laysa Ka Mithlihi Shay'un Wa Huwa As-Sami^
Al-Basir)


**Salaat is better than Sleep**

The importance of Salaat in Islam can never be over-emphasised. We have
learnt from the Hadith of Rasulullah (Sallallaahu A'layhi Wasallam) that
the similitude of Salaat in the life of a Muslim is like that of the
head in the human body. Just as there is no life without the head, there
is no Islam without Salaat.

O Muslim Brothers and Sisters: Consider these virtues of Fajr in the
Masjid.!! Performing Fajr on its time with Jamaat is a quality of a
Mumin.

Performing Fajr on its time with Jamaat and Esha as well equals the
Ibadat (worship) of the whole night. He who performs his Fajr with
Jamaat is in the protection of Allah.

There are glad tidings of perfect and complete Nur (celestial light)for
him on the day of Qiyamah. He who awakens from his sleep and makes the
Zikr of Allah, performs wudhu and performs his Fajr Salaat with Jamaat
in the Masjid awakens fresh and healthy and if not, he awakens evil and
lazy.

If he performs his Fajr with Jamaat he acquires multiple rewards, his
rank is elevated and sins forgiven. To perform Fajr on its time with
Jamaat in the Masjid is a cause of entry into jannah and protection from
the fire. The malaa-eekah are present in the salaat of Fajr and Asr with
mercy and blessings.

He who performs Fajr and Asr on time with Jamaat, will enter Jannah.

He who performs his Salaat before the rising of the sun (Fajr) and
before its setting (Asr) will never enter the fire. The angels of the
night and day that are appointed over a person alternate. they gather
during the Fajr and Asr Salaat. thereafter those angels that spent their
night with a person ascend (the skies) and their Rabb asks them
(although He is most knowledgeable). "How did you leave My servants?"
they will reply: "We left them while they were performing Salaat and we
came to them while they were performing Salaat."

The harms of not performing Fajr in the Masjid with Jamaat :

It is a reported quality of a hypocrite (munafiq).

A loss of rewards and thawaabs result by not performing Fajr with
Jamaat in the Masjid.

A person who sleeps until sunrise and did not perform his Fajr in the
Masjid awakes evil and lazy. A person is deprived of the benefits of
good health which are acquired when awakening and performing Fajr with
Jamaat in the Masjid. A person is deprived of the obedience to Allah.

Rasulullah (Sallallaahu A'layhi Wasallam) said with regard to a man who
slept until the sun rose, "He is a person in whose ears Shaytaan has
urinated."

Factors that will assist in performing Fajr :

Realise the greatness of Allah and His commandments and fear His
punishment in the hereafter and in this world if He has to take one to
task. It is a great sign of Islam and a pillar from among the pillars of
Islam.

Fight the nafs (carnal self) and train it to perform this fardh with
eagerness, contentment and solely for the pleasure of Allah. Always
meditate about the fact that Fajr is difficult for the
munafiqeen(hypocrites).

Sleep early. To stay awake for a permissible act but which causes one
to miss Fajr is Haraam. then what about staying awake for a haraam act
and missing Fajr?

Make a firm resolution and intention to perform Fajr with Jamaat in the
Masjid, for a sleeping person is like a dead person who does not know
whether he will awaken in the morning or be dead. If he did not make the
intention of Fajr he will have a bad death.

The moment you awaken for this salaat do not procrastinate; hasten
immediately to perform wudhu and give up procrastination and laxity.

Realise that if you perform your salaat with Jamaat in the Masjid you
will acquire rewards that cannot be measured in monetary terms and if
you did not perform your Salaat you are vulnerable to the punishment of
Allah.

Make sure you set your alarm and make suitable and reliable
arrangements to be awakened for Salaat like asking a friend to telephone
you or knock on your door or take you along for Fajr.

Fix some punishment for yourself whenever you miss your Fajr with
Jamaat like performing a certain number of Nafl Salaats, giving charity
etc. so that the pinch is felt.

Perform your Salaat before yours is performed - remember death is
inevitable.

All want the sun of Islam to rise but how can that be when the sons of
Islam are fast asleep when the sun rises?


**A Tradition from Imam Husayn (as)**

A man once came to him asking for advice since he could not stop
committing sin. the Imam (as) asked him to do any of the following five
things and then he could sin as he wished:

1. Do not eat from the sustenance of Allah, and then sin as you like.

2. Go out of the kingdom of Allah, and then sin as you like.

3. Find a place where Allah does not see you and then sin as you
like.

4. When the Angel of Death approaches you to take you soul, stop him
from doing so.

5. When you are dragged into the hell fire at the command of Allah,
refuse to enter.


