Introduction
============

In the Name of Allah

Peace and blessings of Allah be upon His Beloved Chosen Messenger
Muhammad (s.a.w.), his pure progeny and the righteous among his
companions.

Islam has began to force its way through our contemporary world both on
the plane of thought extending over an area which, until recently, was
under the influence of the objective movements, and on the plane of
practical situations here and there, in a number of positions. This
renewed vigour is exhibited through political, economic, social and
educational applications.

Thus, mankind is having a rendezvous with a new experience that
forcefully presents itself on the international scene despite all
efforts to hinder and contain it. There is the hope that this new
pioneer will blossom and take root so that it can contribute in rescuing
the international community from the yoke of the strangling oppression
that encircles it from all quarters.

However, a number of questions and doubts are raised in regard to the
ability and the extent to which Islam can go in solving the current
problems of life, with the complexities and challenges associated with
contemporary conditions. Can Islam furnish us with beneficial
prescriptions at a time when other ideologies have retreated, failing to
cure the ills of contemporary man? These ideologies have indeed failed
to solve even partially the woes and incurable diseases threatening the
human civilization; in truth even contributing in perpetrating these
evils.

Despite these potent realities, doubts on the ability and
appropriateness of the rising Islamic project are raised especially from
the vestiges of westernization and secularization which are clinging to
their last stronghold in Islamic countries, let alone some neo-colonial
circles harping on this biased claim whenever they feel the increase of
the Islamic "threat". It is unfortunate that some Muslims are involved
in creating this confusion.

Sometimes they present it innocently, not knowing the implications, and
some other times under the guise of scientific investigation or
objective research or even in the name of Islamic enthusiasm! These
presentations are issued in apparently neutral language and methods
although, in essence, they are only repeating the words of vengeful
orientalists. A keen eye would never miss this fact.

These poisoned views aside, any objective scientific investigation will
definitely conclude that the immortality of Islam confirms its greatness
which, in turn, is derived from the fact that it is a Divine Message
sent as a mercy for the whole of humanity: "And We did not send you (O
Muhammad) except as a mercy for the worlds", suitable for all times,
"This day have I complet-ed your religion for you, completed my favour
upon you and have chosen for you Islam as your religion."

The deluge of the fall of materialistic ideologies ushered in a period
of decline in western civilization. This is no longer a secret since
hardly a day will pass without hearing some leaders, of thoughts from
the West, sounding a warning on the consequences of a headlong fall to
which this civilization is hastening.

Thus, there is no choice left for mankind after being tortured and
threatened with imminent disaster except to resort to the only means of
salvation, Islam, which possesses the key solution and the way out of
this dangerous strait. This is so, because Islam has a distinction not
seen in other ideologies; a dynamic feature amenable to renewal and
openness and capable of combining established truths and renewed
legisla-tions opened to the facts of life. Therefore, Islam will never
lack the ability to care for the spiritual needs of man, on the one
hand, and fully grasp the civilizational changes that take place in the
course of human development, on the other.

Because of our having a strong belief in the necessity of spreading
this clear understanding of the nature of Islamic legislation, Al-Balagh
Foundation has decided to publish this book, which is small in size, but
rich in content. All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.


Al-Balagh Foundation


**Islam and the Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance \`Jahiliyya'**

Since the descending of heavenly Messages, mankind has been divided
into two parties that contradict each other in matters pertaining to
belief, understanding and views towards life and what it contains of
wealth, pleasure, enjoyment, social relationships and the connections
between the soul and other things in existence. The Holy Qur'an recorded
this phenomenon, saying:

"Mankind is a single nation. So Allah raised prophets as bearers of
good news ans as warners, and He revealed with them the Book with truth,
that it might judge between people concerning that in which they
differed…" Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2: 213)

Primitive life embarked on development as a result of the evolution of
man's faculty of thought, the power of his intellect and the improvement
in scientific experiments. Human society, thus, took a more complex
form; power and state came into existence, law and order emerged, then,
followed the birth of philosophy, thought and theoretical concepts.

Ever since the descent of revelation to this earth, mankind had two
parties; one following the course of the Prophets and the other that of
the tyrants. The latter built their civilization upon apostasy and
materialistic understanding. This course and chart sometimes rises and
at other times falls, reaching its peak with Greek thought and Roman
rule. By this time, it had definite philosophical, canonical and social
forms. It was under this Greco-Roman civilization that \`Jahiliyya'
thought took its theory and assumed more complex forms.

At the same time, divine thought pursued its work of reform, inviting
mankind to believe in Allah and building man's life on the foundations
of knowledge, faith and moral values. For all the period of human
existence, there were Messengers and Prophets with their messages.

"…and there is not a people but a warner has gone among them." Holy
Qur'an (Fatir 35: 24)

The struggle between materialistic and Divine thoughts continued
throughout the ages and reached its peak on the advent of Islam and the
Prophethood of the saviour of mankind, Muhammad (s.a.w.). The Islamic
message triumphed on the plane of thought, as well as, in the arena of
force and battle. Consequently, a society, a state and a civilization
were brought into existence based on the principles of Islam, the power
of which depended on the course of guidance and man's wholesome
achievements.

This Divine Message provided humanity with a complete ideological
project for the leadership of human society. This project was able to
vanquish all the theories, ideologies and philosophies of atheistic
materialism which are opposed to the call to belief and moral values.
Islamic culture and civilization had, in a day, flourished , while
different branches of natural and social sciences thrived over many
centuries. Faith was guiding, fostering and directing the path of
science while the latter served faith by establishing its principles in
the souls. Thus, science and faith were but twins whose fruits
compliment each other and they helped one another in constructing the
society and human welfare.

The history of human thought had witnessed a gigantic scientific
revolution at the hands of Muslim scholars in the fields of philosophy,
ethics, thought and investigations on the intellect, literature, art,
historical, political and social sciences and studies in legislation and
law, etc. Similarly, the Muslims enriched human thought in the natural
and biological sciences by establishing methods of scientific research
and investigated on and discovered scientific theories in the fields of
physics, medicine, pharmacy, astronomy, mathematics, engineering,
chemistry and other physical sciences.

A famous writer on the history of science, Gorge Serton, had this to
say:

"The Muslims are the geniuses, of the east, in the Middle Ages. That
they had the greatest influence on mankind, can be realized considering
the fact that they undertook the writing of the most valuable works and
studies surpassing all others in originality and depth. They wrote in
their language, Arabic, which was without doubt, mankind's scientific
language during the period from the middle of the eighth to the end of
the eleventh century. The importance of Arabic in the sciences was such
that any scholar who wanted to acquaint himself with the culture of his
time and the most current issues in the sciences had to learn Arabic."

Knowledge, science and systematic methods of scientific research
reached Europe through Muslims in Andalusia (Spain) and Sicily. These
scientific foundations formed the basis of a modern scientific
renaissance in Europe, at a time when the Muslims retrogressed after
they stripped themselves of their Islamic values; differences and the
struggle for power was rife. Their empire divided into small kingdoms
and their rulers reveled in pleasures and worldly desires.

The result of these internal weaknesses was that the Muslim empire
became politically torn apart. Their lofty position in science
collapsed, and a very dreadful relapse occurred to the Muslim world with
the loss of Andalusia and the continuity of the crusades. European
advancement in science and knowledge started, while the crusades was
busy destroying and occupying Islamic lands for two centuries.

This situation subjected the Muslims to the worst stages in history;
relegating them to a life of darkness, backwardness and the abominable
colonial oppression, especially after the Second World War. The Muslims,
who had been liberators and conquerers now turned into a colonized
people under the yoke of servitude to foreign powers, and from being
exporters of thought, science and culture to receivers of the same.

The worst phenomenon witnessed by the declining Muslim position is the
emergence of Zionism, Socialism and European Capitalist civilizations as
allied powers working for the annihilation of Islam. The socialist camp,
whose political and cultural existence was based on the Marxist theory,
has imploded because of internal contradictions, leaving the arena open
for the alliance of the Jews and the European Crusaders who are allied
against Islamic existence.

In the closing decades of this century (20th century), the Islamic
world has witnessed the herald of an ideological renaissance as a result
of which Islamic awareness has increased, Islamic tendency has grown,
in-roads have been made and widespread developments in the Islamic
community have occurred. These positive changes, in the Islamic camp,
are an indication of a return of Islam as a civilizational enterprise
and a political existence, which would play its natural role in leading
the world at a time when the Marxist civilization has collapsed and
European civilization is passing through an ideological vacuum. The
death knell of Judaism and Christianity has been sounded and today we
witness the increase of propaganda and political, ideological and armed
attacks on Islam and Islamic awareness.

The Holy Qur'an has prepared our minds with complete awareness of the
present world events by furnishing us with its analysis of the existing
contest between Islam and its opponents. In the light of Qur'anic
language, it is a contest between Islam and a new form of Jahiliyya, the
likes of which Islam has faced since its revelation to the Prophet of
Mercy, Muhammad (s.a.w.), who identified the nature of Jahiliyya and its
foundations.

The materialistic civilization, spearheaded by Europe and America in
alliance with Zionism, is passing through economic and moral crises
eating into its very fabric and leading it into an abyss. At this same
time, the graph of the Islamic course is registering a notable rise
exhibiting the signs of victory, by Allah's permission. Morad Forman,
the German Ambassador to Morocco, had this to say: "The twenty-first
century is that in which Islam shall spring forth in Europe."

This assertion confirms the statement of Bernard Shaw in which he
predicted as follows: "I predict that in the future, Europeans will turn
to the religion of Muhammad. It is already gaining acceptance in today's
Europe".

The Holy Qur'an, in the course of its revelation to the Messenger of
Allah, Muhammad (s.a.w.), has clearly identified the reality of
Jahiliyya and what miseries and catastrophes it visited on mankind. In a
number of Qur'anic declarations, the ideological, political, economical
and behavioural foundations of the Jahiliyya system have been exposed.
It is clearly pointed out that the basis of this system is disbelief in
Allah, His Messenger and His Prophets; turning away from the divine
legislation, shari'a and holding the call to guidance in contempt and
attacking the principles of faith- exactly what modern Jahiliyya
subscribes to.

Many verses of the Holy Qur'an deal with this topic, viz:

"And those who have no knowledge say: \`Why does not Allah speak to us
or a sign come to us?' Even thus said those before them, the like of
what they say. Their hearts are all alike. Indeed We have made the
messages clear for a people who are sure." Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2: 118)

"Like those before you - they were stronger than you in power and had
more wealth and children. So they enjoyed their portion; thus have you
enjoyed your portion as those before you enjoyed their portion, and you
induldge in idle talk as they did. These are they whose works are null
in this world and the Hereafter, and these are they who are the losers."
Holy Qur'an (Tawba 9: 69)

"Have they charged each other with this? Nay, they are an inordinate
people." Holy Qur'an (Dariyat 51: 53)

An analysis of these verses will reveal what the Jahiliyya of different
peoples and nations throughout history have in common in ideology and
behaviour, their possessions and attainments in science and civilization
not withstanding. In Qur'anic terminology, Jahiliyya does not only refer
to an epoch passed in history, nor exclusively to the Arabs before the
advent of Islam, as some people think. Rather Jahiliyya means the
continuation of a system of thought and civilization founded on
disbelief in Allah, His Messengers and His legislation. To depict this,
Allah, the Most High said:

"Their hearts are all alike", "Have they charged each other with
this?", "and you have induldged in idle talk as they did.", "Even thus
said those before them."

This characteristic of the ideological and social milieu of Jahiliyya
with its conceited mentally as a result of its science, knowledge, power
and wealth, is further highlighted; Allah said:

"Do they not travel in the land and see what was the end of those
before them? They were more numerous than these and greater in strength
and in fortifications in the land, but what they earned availed them
not. Then when their messengers came to them with clear arguments, they
exulted in what they had with them of knowledge and that at which they
used to mock befell them." Holy Qur'an ( Ghafir 40: 82-83)

Thus, Jahiliyya's thought, throughout the ages, has been arrogant duee
to power, wealth and scientific attainments. At no stage in history is
this conceit worse than it is in contemporary Jahiliyya thought - which
considers these attainments as yardstick for judging Islam and attacking
its eternal values. In this way, the propagators of this materialistic
ideology try to convince others on the veracity of their thoughts and
theories.

Contemporary materialistic ideology is founded on principles and
philosophies propounded in order to serve as the basis of thought for
building a civilization with its culture, law and order and modes of
human behavior. This world view takes refuge in those philosophies in
the war with the Islamic camp and its formation. The foundations of this
Jahiliyya civilization can be summarized in the following principles:

1- The materialistic method believes only in sensory perception as a
means of acquiring knowledge, science and extorting human intellect in
discovering scientific facts.

2- In harmony with the materialistic method, science, knowledge,
civilization and materialistic culture flourished in a manner
unconnected with faith in Allah, His messages and Messengers. Therefore,
the culture of this Jahiliyya rejected the existence of Allah and belied
the unseen. Its thinkers and philosophers assumed this atheistic outlook
in their methods and began attacking the divine method of thought by
stripping it of all scientific features. They only acted in this way
after establishing in their minds the firm belief that science and
scientific thinking is peculiar to the materialistic method of
investigation.

3- On those ideological premises, they founded the call to secularism
which means divorcing religion from practical life and erecting it on
the basis of what they discovered in knowledge and science, devoid of
belief in Allah and ethical principles. This led mankind to nothing but
misery and suffering. Secularism became a tool for enthroning tyrants
and extending hegemony over the weak, a glaring fact in the contemporary
political experiments where the dominating powers subject the weak to
killings, massacres, starvation, torture and all out tyranny in all
nooks and corners of the world.

4- Studies and investigations in psychology and behavioural sciences
are, likewise, based on the foundations of materialistic thinking and
methods of research. In this way, they ended up calling for
licentiousness and complete freedom in behavioral thinking that belief
in the values of permission, prohibition and ethics is a shackle
preventing man from gratifying his inner tendencies and mental desires.
And that Islamic laws and ethical values cause suppression of natural
urges and self-deprivation resulting in mental stress and the killing of
man's inclinations and internal desires.

We shall observe, by way of statistical data, how licentiousness and
moral depravity was not only unable to deliver man from misery and
mental torture, but, also caused multiple mental tribulations, thereby
increasing the rate of crime, drug addiction, anxiety, homeless-ness,
political scandals and economic crises. Perhaps what exposes the reality
of secular, materialistic civilization or Jahiliyya, as the Qur'an calls
it, is the statistics which portray the different sides of the
individual, economic and political behavioural picture of life.

Based on three figures we can judge the claim of the secular,
materialistic approach and the truth of how it regards Islamic thought
as retrogressive, not on a par with the contemporary world and incapable
of encompassing the scientific movement or the ever-progressing
civilization.

Let us now consider the Qur'anic declaration and analyses on a
Jahiliyya society, and the confirmation of this description, by reports
and statistics that portray those deteriorating conditions.


