Man and Materialistic Civilization
==================================

Allah, the Most High said:

"But followed after them a succession who negl-ected prayers and they
followed lust,…" Holy Qur'an (Maryam 19: 59)

"…and hinder (others) from the path of Allah and seek it to be crooked;
these are in errors far away (from the right path)." Holy Qur'an
(Ibrahim 14 : 3)

"And when it is said unto them, \`make you not mischief in the earth'
say they, \`Verily we are only the well-doers.' Beware! Verily, they are
the mischief-mongers but they perceive (it) not." Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2:
11)

"O you who believe! Respond you to Allah and to His Apostle (Muhammad)
when He calls you to that which gives you life; …" Holy Qur'an (Anfal 8:
24)

"He it is Who sends down unto His Servants signs manifest, so that He
may bring you out of the darkness (of infidelity) into the light (of
faith):…" Holy Qur'an (Hdid 57: 9)

"…I desire naught but reform what I am able to (do)…" Holy Qur'an (Hud
11: 88)

In these verses, the Holy Qur'an discusses about man's ideological and
mental frame under the Jahiliyya society, the society of materialistic
civilization. The Qur'an warns him of falling into that abyss,
exhorting:

"…O mankind! Your rebellion is against your own selves…" Holy Qur'an
(Yunus 10: 23)

The Qur'an warns man that he will definitely reap the fruits of his
evil deeds and straying from the right path and sends a word of caution
that man should not meakly obey his base desires nor deviate from the
straight way, the way of divine guidance.

A number of passages reiterate this signal:

"who neglected prayers", "they followed lust", "and hinder (others)
from the path of Allah", "and seek it to be crooked", "when it is said
unto them, make you not mischief in the earth", "say they: \`Verily we
are only the well-doers'", "Beware! Verily, they are the
mischief-mongers", " but they perceive (it) not."

Studies and analysis on contemporary materialis-tic societies reveal
those facts clearly, exposing this deep seated disease. This is a
disease of base desires, deviation and abnormal behaviour whose
manifesta-tions have appeared on the formation of modern materialistic
civilization to an extent that serves as a warning of imminent collapse.
The followers of the same sick civilization work day and night to sell
it to the Islamic world as a substitute for the noble Islamic project.

To attain this sinister objective, they depend on informational
misguidance and the backward condition suffered by the Muslims in
economic, industrial and service sectors, the latter being a result of
colonial hegemony over Muslim lands. The war of misinforma-tion is
especially aimed at the Islamic enterprise whose purpose is to salvage
mankind from all forms of misguidance and corruption both in the
political and ethical fields.

The agents of Jahiliyya know full well that Islamic victory will thwart
their selfish interests and oppressive domination over the Islamic
world, and that the light of Islam will creep over the dark life in
whose labyrinths they wallow. That is why they employ a great number of
rulers, parties and information founda-tions that are subservient to
their will, to conduct their plans in the war of civilizations. In some
cases, they resort to force and military occupation when their interests
dictate so.

The ideological and psychological war they launch on the Islamic
project, and its true followers tries its very best to show Islam as a
retrogressive system which hinders man's development and progress. They
do this so as to impose on the Islamic principle the responsibility of
the backward condition and suffering of the Muslims; a situation they,
themselves, created.

The condition of emptiness and ruin embedded in the materialistic
system and the educational and behavioural system, run by modern
European civiliza-tions with roots in pagan Rome, will be unexpectedly
swept away just as socialism amazingly fell, despite its possession of
awesome stockpiles of arms, gigantic and sophisticated industrial
capability and an ideological theory, the Marxist Socialist Theory.
Their stubborn subservience to this artificial, antihuman doctrine
resulted in rivers of blood and three generations being forced to endure
suffering, bitterness and torture in the name of depending socialism and
spreading its ideas. Thus, the world was divided into two opposing camps
each threatening the other with destruction and complete annihilation.

The European civilization reigning in Europe, America, Japan and
Russia, as a matter of primary concern, put forth exhaustive efforts in
leading the world for the abdication of Islam, being its only
ideological and political rival. However, the studies, statistics and
analyses, conducted in this field, point to the opposite; the decline of
this European culture and its imminent collapse, while Islam shows all
the signs of victory, even thought, it might take a long time. This is
the norm prescribed by Allah to which the Qur'an alludes when discussing
the Jahiliyya civilization. The verses impart to us the lessons of the
dynamics of history and civilizations. Allah declares:

"…but when came unto them a warner it increased not in them but their
aversion. (In) priding in the earth, and planning evil; and the evil
plans (of theirs) shall beset not but the devisers themselves; then wait
they for aught save the course of the people gone before? For never
shall you find any change in the course of Allah; and never shall you
find in the course of Allah any alterna-tion.

Have they travelled not in the earth and seen was the end of those
before them though they were stronger than them in strength? And Allah
is not such to frustrate Him aught in the heavens or in the eath; Verily
He is the All-Knowing, All-Powerful." Holy Qur'an (Fatir 35: 42-44)

"But when He deliveres them, behold! they rebel in the earth unjustly;
O mankind! your rebellion is against your own selves, a provision for
the life of (only) this world, then unto Us shall be your return, then
will We inform you of what you were doing." Holy Qur'an (Yunus 10: 23)

If these Qur'anic statements, through scientific analysis on the causes
of the fall of civilizations, prove that material power, in the form of
armies, wealth, riches and industrialization, cannot prevent
civiliza-tions, nations and societies following the evil path of
oppression, injustice, deviation, arrogance and anomal-ous behaviour
from falling, then we can conclude that the fundamental causes of the
destruction are ideological and ethical in nature. The fact that the
Qur'an explains these causes in its discussion on the histories and
experiments of nations and that we are living witnesses, to the plunge
of socialism, is enough to discern from the signs of ethical and
behavioural breakdown a warning on the total collapse in spite of
efforts for restoration and improvement.

Statistics released by special institutions and circles in Europe,
America, Japan, China and other countries in the materialistic camp
(modern Jahiliyya) express the presence of these signs. These figures
prove that materialistic civilization is incapable of solving man's
problems; it even multiplies them.

They also indicate that this ideology is the cause of the miseries and
suffering in this life. Likewise, they are the cause of man's loss of
the hereafter and the pleasure of Allah, the Glorious. These proofs show
that man has no other refuge than to return to Islam and a life under
the shade of the Qur'an.


**A Glance at Islamic Legislation**

"And We have revealed to you the Book with the truth, verifying that
which is before it of the Book and a guardian over it, so judge between
them by what Allah has revealed, and follow not their low desires
(turning away) from the truth that has come to you. For every one of you
We appointed a law and a way…" Holy Qur'an (Ma'ida (5: 48)

"Then We made you follow a course in the Affair, so follow it, and
follow not the low desires of those who know not.." Holy Qur'an
(Jathiyah 45: 18)

The Noble Qur'an and Pure Sunna (Prophetic tradition) have discussed
about law and legislation (Shar\`'a and Tashri') and this terminology
was used by the Qur'an in its technical sense. Before, this term was
applied only to the literal meaning derived from the Arab's environment.
Arabic lexicologists have defined this term as follows:

Ragib Isfahani said: "Shar\`a means to take a wide road. It is said " I
have made for him a path". Ashshar'u is a verbal noun, then it was taken
to mean a path, a road. Shir\`un, shar\`un and shari'atun mean a way.
These terms are used metaphorically to mean the divine path." Then he
quoted the tafsir (Qur'anic exegesis) of Ibn Abbas saying: Ibn Abbas
said: "Ash-shir'atu refers to what is brought by the Qur'an and
al-Minhaj refers to what the sunna contains."

Thus the meaning of Shari\`a, as it occurres in the Qur'an, is the
divine path along which it is incumbent on mankind to walk in life. In
other words, the term shari'a refers to the collection of laws and rules
brought by the Qur'an and by the sunna. The Holy Qur'an has named the
process of enacting Shari\`a rules, by Allah the Most High, legislation
\`shar'u' or 'assigning' (ja'al) as the scholars of Principles of
Islamic Jurisprudence (Usul al-Fiqh) call it. This shari'a is enacted to
reform mankind, rectify their behaviour and order their lives.

It is confirmed by the Qur'an that the power of legislation is Allah's
while the role of the Messenger is to convey this legislation. Whatever
legislative competency the Prophet (s.a.w.) enjoys revolves round the
divine enactments and assessing human conditions: "…Say: I follow only
that which is revealed to me from my Lord…." Holy Qur'an (A'raf 7:
203)

"…Say: It is not for me to change it of my own accord. I follow naught
but what is revealed to me…" Holy Qur'an (Yunus 10: 15)

What issues from the sunna on the authority of the Prophet (s.a.w.) is
nothing but elucidation and explanation of what is revealed to him. The
Prophet (s.a.w.) neither errs nor does he commit mistakes in what
emanates from him because of the knowledge, infallibility and divine
guidance bestowed on him. More light has been shed on this fact by Imam
Ja'far bin Muhammad al-Sadiq (a.s..) in what he was reported to have
said:

"Surely the Messenger of Allah was guided and supported by the Holy
Spirit. He neither slips nor errs pertaining to anything with which he
governs the creation." The issue of 'assigning' (ja\`al) and enacting
rules or legislation has been investigated thoroughly by the Islamic
jurists, just as Islamic theologians treated this topic by way of
exegesis. The question at stake is this: Is Islamic legislation based on
facts, interests and scientific assessment and calculations related to
the very essence of the acts about which it legislates or is it just the
Legislator's consideration (I'itibar) without regard to the those
elements? This issue is treated under the name 'beauty' and abomination
(al-Husun wal Qubh).

In accordance with the theological method and technicalities, the topic
is worded in this way: Are 'beauty and abomination' comprehensible by
way of the intellect or through legislative pronouncements? In other
words, is 'beauty' or 'abomination' an essential quality of a given act
or a subjective one regarded by the Legislator to be associated with the
act.

Islamic theologians have two opinions concerning this issue. Scholars
from the Ahl-ul-Bait school regard the natures of beauty and abomination
as intellectually comprehensible, that is, they are never legislative.
For example, the prohibition of alcoholic drinks and adultery is based
on their essential ugliness, and it is not possible for the Legislator
to consider this abomination as a beauty so that the act will
accordingly become a good one. Scholars from the Ash'ari sect take the
opposite view.

The jurists of prescribed law treated this topic under the title
"Constitution of the Legal Principles". It is discussed, here, also
considering the legal principle as a value-assigning principle. This
means that it aims at ordering and reforming human behaviour and
relationships.

The results of the studies undertaken by the jurist is that the legal
principle consist of the following points:

1- Substance or Content: This is what the legal principle comprises. It
is derived from different factors; economic, social and established
scientific findings. However, positive law does not commit itself to the
result of scientific investigations and practical experience. Science
has confirmed that wine, adultery, sodomy and hoarding are harmful, but,
objective laws still allow it and even regard these acts as part of
individual rights and freedom. The term substance or content (al-Madda
aw al-Madhmun) is known in Islamic jurisprudence as a basis or (mal?k).
Jurists and experts in Islamic legislation regard mal?k as the essence
and spirit of the substance of law.

2- Form or Formation: "What is meant by form is to define the substance
or subject matter precisely, delimiting the content through technical
formulation acceptable to the authority granting the legal principle to
the force of law."

This element (form) is known in Islamic jurisprudence as I'itibar
(consideration). I'itibar means "a verbal expression" with which the
Legislator manifest His will which indicates the criterion (mil?k) of
legislation.

Studies in positive jurisprudence divides the elements of content into
two categories:

1- The element of reality derived from experience and witnessed in the
community. Such elements include social, economic, political, ethical,
religious and human nature.

2- The element of example that is regarded as a model for justice, the
course of which it is incumbent to tread in all positive laws.

However, in reality, objective law is proved incapable of treading the
path of justice with respect to the element of reality and that of
example. Researches and studies in positive law are late in defining the
fundamentals which constitute the legal principle, while Islamic
legislation and shari'a rules have those facts as their essential
constituents. Islamic legislation, by its very nature, is based on
knowledge and justice, because it takes into consideration the
psychological and social nature of man, his material needs and ethical
values. These issues will be ellucidated in the subsequent topics.

Islamic legislation takes as its fundamental precepts around which the
law revolves, the principles of truth, justice, and the doing of good.
Both the law and society march toward these goals. Allah, the Most High
said:

"Surely Allah enjoins justice and the doing good (to others) and the
giving to the kindred, and He forbids indecency and evil and rebellion…"
Holy Qur'an (Nahl 16: 90)

And He also said:

"And with truth have We revealed it, and with truth did it come…" Holy
Qur'an (Isra' 17: 105)

In Islam, the legal principle or law (Hukm) derives its force from the
fact that it is a Divine law, the commitment to which is obligatory as a
duty to Allah, the Glorious. No authority or power has any hand in
giving it the force of law. The exception is in what Islamic legislation
bestows on the Islamic authority legislative competence in issuing some
laws for the purpose of achieving the common interests, or stopping
corruption. And they have the power to enact laws to enable the
application of the Islamic laws, according to existing social
conditions. These types of enactment derive their force of law from the
enacting authorities.

And since these authorities derive their legislative competence from
the Divine law, their role of granting legal force to these enactments
is only a secondary one.


