Legislation and Legal Formulation
=================================

We now know that the rule or the legal principle is comprised of a
subject matter and form, and we know the meanings of these terms. We
also know that to legislate is to 'assign' (ja'al) or enact rules. The
jurists define legislation as a declaration, by a specific authority, of
legal principles, through the means of specific expressions.

It is also an established fact of Islamic ideology that legislation
belongs exclusively to Allah, the Glorious. And to Him belong the
creation, the command, the kingdom, power and authority.

We also understand that the government, in whose hands are the affairs
of the community, Ummah, enjoys a degree of legislative competence
derived from the divine law which takes knowledge, justice, the doing of
good and wisdom as its fundamental principles. Indeed, the All-Knowing,
All-Wise Legislat-or has taken into consideration the nature and
conditions of mankind as regards to his creation, psychological,
intellectual, material and social life in designing a code of living for
him.

It is pertinent, here, to explain that the method of formulating the
legislative content of rules and the Islamic legal principle has passed
through two main stages. They are: The Qur'anic formulation, which the
divine expression of rules via Qur'anic verses and the Prophetic
formulation is encountered in the traditions (hadith) and sayings. The
Imams of the Prophet's household followed the latter method in
ellucidating the rules. The acts and confirmations (taqrir) of the
Messenger (s.a.w.) and the Imams of the Prophet's household, just like
their sayings, represent another way of expressing the rules and legal
principles in Islam.

Thus, the early methods of expressing the Islamic rules and legal
principles are as follows:

1- Verbal expression emanating from Allah, the Most High, or from the
Messenger (s.a.w.) and the Imams (a.s.) via the two known methods of
formulation used in the Qur'an and the pure Sunna (tradition of the
Prophet or Imams).

2- Acts and confirmations by the Prophet (s.a.w.) and the Imams
(a.s.).

Thereafter, studies on legislation evolved producing the science of
jurisprudence and its technical terms, the result of which is the
emergence of a new method of formulating Islamic laws and rules by
Islamic jurists and theoreticians. This method of formulation is the one
usually encountered in books of fiqh, and epistles of Islamic rules,
written by the jurists. This method, because it carries jurisprudential
jargon, differs from that used by the Qur'an and the sunna. It is
beneficial to point out that the Islamic jurists have divided the
shari'a rules, according to the language of fiqh, into four
categories:

a- The rules of worship (ibadah): These are rules for acts that require
the one who practices the acts of worship to have the intention of
attaining nearness to Allah, the Most High. Such acts include prayer,
fasting, pilgrimage, vows.

b- The laws of contracts: These are rules governing acts, the existence
and validity of which depends on the consent of the two parties. Here,
there is no need to intend attaining nearness to Allah. Such laws govern
marriage, business transactions, companies, etc. However, concluding a
contract for the sake of Allah is recommended.

c- The laws of Iqa'at (one party transactions): These are rules for
acts requiring neither the intention to attain proximity to Allah nor a
second party, for they can be discharged by a single party. Example of
such acts include divorce (the husband can divorce his wife with or
without her consent) and a testament containing a responsibility to be
discharged by the survivors.

d- Rules: These laws are termed simply as rules without any
qualification. They include the laws of inheritance, suckling,
punishments, etc.

From the foregoing, it will be clear that the issue of categorzing fiqh
and the formulation of rules is not a determined and finalized one. The
fact is that the jurists were responsible for originating ways and
methods for formulating arrangement and categorization, suitable for the
needs and requirements of the various stages in the history of Islamic
jurisprudence.

Studies in jurisprudence revolved around those four central points.
From another angle, investigations and studies, from the point of view
of the individual, had their stamp on the method, treatment, issues
covered and categorization of fiqh, in spite of the fact, concerning
government and power, there existed special jurisprudential studies;
such as, books on the rules of government and guardianship and those
partaining to collective activity.

This individualistic approach was subscribed to because the methodology
of fiqh was not based on a societal view of Muslim life within an
Islamic state with a government running an Islamic society, in which
case, jurisprudential studies would have revolved around the individual,
the society and the state. It could be said that the individualistic
method was imposed by the realities of the Muslim's situation throughout
history.

While the scholars of Islamic legislation divide its studies into four,
the jurists of the conventional law studied law through its division
into:

1- General Law
2- Individual Law.

The jurist define public law as "the law that regulates legal
relationships in which the state, in its capacity as the sovereign, is a
party." They define Individual law as: "The law that regulates
relationships between individuals or between them and the state not in
its capacity as the sovereign."

The factor responsible for the difference between these two legal
precepts and these two categories of rules is for the state, in its
capacity as the sovereign, to act as a party in a contract. However, in
a case whereby the state, not in its state as the sovereign, enters into
a contract, say, renting a house or the sale of an estate, it will act
as an individual devoid of any prerogatives, as is the case of a
company, society or party. Therefore, the individual law is the one to
regulate such contracts between the two parties.

It is pertinent, at this junction, to suggest that Islamic
jurisprudence stands in need of new studies and categorization in which
the laws would be classif-ied into general and individual laws, even in
cases related to worship, if they carry a legal colouring. The issue of
zakat, for instance, is a financial legislation and the state receives
zakat in its capacity as the sovereign. Islamic legislation makes it
obligatory to submit zakat to the legal ruler (Hakim al-Shar'i) and
anyone who fails to do so is considered a rebel and is compelled to
submit it.

The present conditions as well as the nature of Islamic law, call for a
review of the classification of laws. It should be noted that Islamic
law is comprehensive and covers all issues big and small, individual and
collective, which affect the individual, society or state. This need for
a new study of Islamic jurisprudence, its classification and
rearrangement, on the basis of categorizing laws as general and
individual, is even rendered more urgent by the emergence of an Islamic
state and the call for the Islamic enterprises as an alternative to the
laws and systems of secularism; such as, capitalism and the likes of it.
We are in a situation whereby the Islamists are requested to present the
Islamic alternative as a project capable of theorizing and law making.

For the benefit of the reader, we will mention the division of general
and individual laws, indicating whether the state, in the relations
regulated by these legal sub-divisions, acts as a sovereign or not,
while dealing with individuals and other states.

Division of General Law:

General law can be divided into many sections, some of which are
mentioned below:

1- International General Law: "is a set of legal principles governing
the relationships between nations, both in the condition of peace and
war."
2- Constitutional Law: "is a set of legal principles that govern the
foundations of a nation and defines how it is constituted."
3- Administrative Law: "is the principles that governs the activities
of the executive power and the method of discharging its administrative
responsibilit-ies."
4- Fiscal Law: "Is the law that guides state finances, its income
expenditure".
5- Criminal Law: "This law defines the different crimes and stipulates
their punishments."
6- Criminal Procedures Law: "Is the law that regulates the procedures
for investigating crimes and what might be required of detention,
releasing or prosecuting a suspect. These laws determine the court of
competent jurisdiction, explain prosecution proced-ures, how to deliver
judgement, how to appeal against it and the execution of the judgement
and how it is done."


**Division of Individual Law:**

From among the main divisions of individual law we will mention the
following:

1- Civil Law: This law regulates matters pertaining to the family
(personal status) such as marriage, divorce, inheritance and expenditure
on the family. It also regulates a person's property rights, the way
through which he acquires these rights, their terminations, etc.

2- Commercial Law: This is a set of principles governing commercial
activities.

3- Maritime Law: This is a set of principles that regulate navigation.
It deals with the purchase of ships, their hiring, insuring ship and
cargo and maritime loans.

4- Aviation Law: This is a set of principles governing aviation
activities. These consist of the ownership, type and registration of
aircrafts and contracts on air transportation and responsibility, in
case of any harm that might befall passengers or other persons on
land.

5- Labour Law: This regulates the relationship between employers and
employees.

6- Civil Procedures Law: This is a set of principles that govern the
setting-up of courts and their jurisdiction, method of litigation, and
giving evidence, delivering judgement and ways of appeal and
imple-menting the judgement on the issue in contention, the properties
of a debtor…etc.

7- Private International Law: This is a set of rules that chart out the
mandatory solution in issues where conflicts between parties, each of
which is affiliated to a different state, is subject to a given set of
laws.

**Legislative Heirarchy:**

One of the important aspects of legislation, its formulation and
contemporary categorization that pertains to regulating state and
society, of which the Islamic Republic of Iran has applied and in fact
which any Islamic state is in need of, is the legislative structure
which should consist of the following three levels, viz: 1-
Constitution: "This is the document that presents the system of
government of a given state."

2- The Law: "It is a set of general principles for the regulation of
individual behaviour in the society and whose respect is guaranteed by
the government through the use of force, where necessary, by meting out
punishment for disobedience."

3- Bills of Law: "These are rules enacted by the executive powers to
enable the execution of normal laws or for regulating general good and
organization or for the maintenance of security, health, managing
affairs, etc."

As previously stated, the formulations of laws is a technical affair,
flexible in nature; not in the garb of fixed terms. Let us look at the
way Islamic jurisprudence acts to phrase the legislative constituent
according to the above mentioned hierarchy.

We are going to give a brief account of how the Islamic constitution
consists of two types of constit-uents:

1- Rules and legislations derived from shari'a rules that denote
responsibility \`taklif' and those that affect conditions \`wad'i'. Such
legislations include constitutional laws, like competence and attributes
of the president, and relationships between the nation and the
government; others are rules regulating individual economic, social and
behavioural life…etc.

This part of the constitution can be divided into two groups, also:

a. A clear stipulation about which there is no room for the exercising
of independent judgement (ijtihad). For example, acknowledging private
ownership and considering justice as a condition for a competent judge,
etc. These rules are fixed and not liable to change.

b. The second group is that of rules deduced by way of ijtihad
practiced by the Islamic jurists, fuqaha. Such laws are liable to
changes and other ijtihad enactments, that are more appropriate in
regard to new conditions or occasioned by higher juristic competence,
can replace the earlier rules.

2- Rules pertaining to the form and structural frame of the state
involving organizational and technical matters. Such laws include
legislations for electing the president or parliament or city councils.
These laws can be changed and improved continuously as the situations
change, with the condition that these sections of the constitution
should never be inconsistent with the Islamic rules and values. It is
worthwhile to note that those laws which are clear stipulations are
binding on all sections of the society, because they represent
unequivocal divine legislation. They carry this weight irrespective of
whether they are codified within the constitution or not.

But as for the Ijtihad laws, such rules derive their legal force from
the necessity of uniting the community in general matters by conforming
to a uniting opinion capable of safeguarding the good of the community,
warding off corruption and safeguarding general order. A second
justification for furnishing such rules, with legal force, is the theory
of permissibility of the division of imitation (taqlid). This view
allows the Mukallaf (a person deemed by the Shari\`a as responsible and
answerable before the law) to imitate one mujtahid, in part, and another
in other matters. Thirdly, such rules can obtain legal force by way of a
supreme authority governing the ummah.

In the case of legal constituents regulating the organization and
structure of the nation, legal force is derived from the necessity of
safeguarding the common good and ensuring the best conditions for the
community. It is also derived from the fact that the supreme authority,
to which the citizens have invested with legitimacy, sanctions those
legal constituents and makes them legally binding.


**The Fixed and the Variable**

The rules of Islamic legislation at our disposal, as a result of the
evolution in jurisprudence and ijtihad, can be classified into two:

1. Nass (Stipulation): This is a clear rule about which no ijtihad is
exercised. For example, the obligation of prayers, fasting, zakat,
catering for the wife, forbidding of alcoholic drinks, adultery and
interest and permissibility of business transactions, marriage,
acquiring property, partaking of the flesh of some livestocks…etc.

2. Ijtihad Rules: This class can be further divided into two
sections:

a. Ijtihad rules deduced by the jurists, from the Qur'an and the pure
sunna, because of the existence of proofs covering such rules in a
general sense or proofs indicating such rules, directly, in a way that
makes deduction possible while they are not direct stipula-tions.

b. Vacant zones or where the rules are allowed legislative competence:
These are areas left for the rules to fill by specifying the appropriate
rules in the light of the Book or the Pure Sunna. Some of these areas
include disallowing the hoarding of goods, services and utilities about
which neither a clear stipulation or a general rule is available. Others
include the imposition of additional taxes for the purpose of redeeming
bad economic situations of the Muslims and controlling the prices of
goods, considered by the rules as experiencing imbalance, in which the
consumer, seller or producer is cheated.

While discussing on fixed and changing aspects of Islamic rules it is
desirable to differentiate between change in the understanding of the
jurist deriving the rules i.e., the legal ruler (Hakim al-Shar\`i), from
whom the change in the rules emanates, on the one hand, and the
conditions in which a clear stipulation (nass) or ijtihad ruling would
accept change or remain constant, on the other.

**Scope of the Fixed and the Variable Rules:**

While treating the issue of fixed and changing rules, it is pertinent
to define the elements of the Islamic message, susceptible to change,
and those that do not admit any variation:

1- Belief: Precepts like the belief in Allah, the Glorious, and the
belief in His Messengers. These fundamentals are immune to changes and
abrogation throughout the period of divine messages, not only in the
Islamic message. However, we can find differences among the Muslims as
regards the details of ideological principles, like the issue of
explaining the nature of man's actions and his relationship with His
Lord, understanding of the attributes of Allah, etc. This difference in
understanding does not mean that these ideological issues are variable,
but it exposes the fact that there exists two conflicting opinions in
understand-ing the precepts, or the obstinacy and overstepping the
bounds by some groups who refuse to accept the fact.

2- Ethics: This is among the fixed fundamentals in Islam and all other
divine legislations. Ethical issues include truthfulness, justice,
mercy, etc. These principles are not liable to change or substitution,
being of similar nature to the precepts of belief.

3- Declarations and expositions of many questions of thought,
knowledge, life, et.c: A lot of statements, in the Holy Qur'an and
sunna, discuss and explain the norms and laws governing history,
society, bodily and spiritual nature of man, etc. These are but fixed
scientific laws neither changing nor admitting substitutes, since they
portray established facts that govern the formation of man and nature.

4. Legislation: This comprises of rules and laws enacted to regulate
man's relationship with Allah, with himself and with others. The portion
which guarantees the regulation of man's relationship with Allah, the
Glorious, i.e., rules on worship, such as prayer, fasting and pilgrimage
are fixed and do not accept any substitute. As for the section on social
organization, it can be seen that it consists of two parts; one fixed
and unchangeable while the other is variable. We shall take up each part
and discuss it later.


