Sources of Islamic Legislation
==============================

It is unanimously accepted that the Holy Qur'an and the pure sunna are
the sources of legislation and the custodians of Islamic thought and
knowledge.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), the master and authority of the jurists and
one of the Imams of the Prophet's household from whom Allah removed all
filth and purified with the utmost purification, summarized this belief
in the following words:

"Surely Allah, Blessed and Exalted, is He Who did not leave out any
matter of which the community stands in need, but He revealed it in His
Book and explained it to His Apostle (s.a.w.). And He assigned a limit
to everything and a proof indicating it. And He specified a punishment
for whoever transgresses the limit."

The Imams of Ahl-lul-Bait (a.s.) have, indeed, enriched Islamic
legislation with their expositions and elaborations of the Book and the
Prophetic tradition. This exposition was a real continuation of Shari\`a
laws, so it is part of the sunna. The great jurist Shahid Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir Sadr described this fact in these words: "Thus it becomes
clear that changing the rules of the Shari\`a, through abrogation, is
also one of the factors that bring about conflict originating from this
factor, and only affects the stipulation emanating from the Prophet
(s.a.w.) not those from the Imams (a.s.).

This is so because the period of legislation ended with the close of
the Prophetic era and the narrations that emanated from the Infallible
Imams (a.s.) were only an elaboration on the Prophet's legislations."

Since the Book and the sunna together are the sources of Islamic
legislation, the two other sources i.e., intellect and consensus (ijma')
are secondary sources serving as ways to discover the legislation and
not, themselves, legislators. The intellect, as a source of legislation,
is defined as "an issue perceptible to the intellect while it is able to
deduce a Shari\`a rule from it. An example of these issues is the
intellectual proposition that enjoining a thing entails enjoining its
prerequisities (muqaddimat).

Consensus (ijma) has been defined by the Shi'a Imamiyya School as: "The
consensus of scholars with legal opinions from among the preceding
jurists of the period of occultation, on a certain ruling, while the
verbal source specifying the ruling remains unknown. These jurists have
met a situation that evokes a state of conviction and a settled belief
which detects the existence of a legislative proof possessed by the
jurists and those who preceded them."

In addition to these secondary sources mentioned above, some Islamic
schools recognized sources, such as, analogy \`qiyas', discretion
\`istihsan', public good \`masalih mursalah', teaching of the companions
\`madhhab al-Sahbi'….etc. A lot of debate has taken place on the weight
of evidence \`hujjiya' and the nature of these sources.

Both the Imamiyya school and the other Islamic schools, which subscribe
to the idea that all forms of analogy are evidence, regarded the analogy
in which the basis or cause \`illa' is expressed in the clear law
\`Mansu al-Illa' and analogy in which the deduced law holds a prior
position to that of the clear stipulation on which the analogy is based
\`Qiyas al-Awlawiyya' as evidence. The only point of conflict between
the two views is analogy of comparison \`qiyas al-Tamsili'; that is, to
compare a part of a question to a part of another and the analogy in
which the basis or cause is deduced rather than expressed in the clear
stipulation.

The Holy Qur'an and the Pure Sunna contain rich and adequate
legislative material. In the Qur'an alone there are hundreds of verses
directly enacting laws and rules or conveying thoughts, and legislative
concepts from which laws can be formulated. Thousands of Prophetic
traditions serve as illucidation to those verses and legislative roles.
Hundreds of these texts form the general legislative fundamentals that
contribute in enriching legislation and expanding its horizons.

To illustrate, we shall review some of these verses, traditions and
narrations to observe the special feature of the constituent of Islamic
legislation. Allah, the Most High says:

"Surely Allah enjoins justice and the doing good (to others) and the
giving to the kindred, and He forbids indecency and evil and rebellion…"
Holy Qur'an (Nahl 16: 90)

"…and has not laid upon you any hardship in religion…" Holy Qur'an
(Hajj (22: 788)

"…Allah desires ease for you, and He desires not hardship for you,…"
Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2: 77)

"Take alms out of their property - you would clean them and purify them
thereby…" Holy Qur'an (Tawba 9: 103)

"…(all) good things are made lawful for you…" Holy Qur'an (Ma'ida
5:5)

"Say: My Lord forbids only indecencies, such of them as are apparent
and such as are concealed,…" Holy Qur'an (A'raf 7: 33)

"O David, surely We have made you a ruler in the land; so judge between
men justly and follow not desire,…" Holy Qur'an (Sad 38: 26)

"O you who believe, fulful the obligations…" Holy Qur'an (Ma'ida 5:
1)

"...and Allah has allowed trading and forbidden usury…" Holy Qur'an
(Baqara 2: 275)

"…and women have rights similar to those against them in a just
manner,…" Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2: 228)

"And surely We have honoured the children of Adam, and We carry them in
the land and the sea, and We provide them with good things, and We have
made them to excel highly most of those whom We have created." Holy
Qur'an (Isra' 17: 70)

These verses of the Qur'an carrying ample legislative principles have
their counterparts in the pure sunna. A large number of legislative
traditions present the bases for legislative principles from which many
laws can be formulated. Other traditions and Prophetic statements
provide us with legislations and rules that govern individual relations,
situations and positions while carrying a general sense suitable for
application in identical cases.

Here, we shall mention some traditions that take the form of
legislative principles:

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) says:

"No one shall harm nor be harmed."

"Obligation has been suspended in my ummah in respect to nine
cases:Mistake, forgetfulness, what they do under duress, what they do
not know, what they cannot do, what they are forced to do by
circumstances, envy, evil omen, and thought over a devilish insinuation
concerning creation, as long as nothing isgiven as evidence." It has
been reported from him (s.a.w.) that:

"A Muslim is a brother to a Muslim, he shall not cheat him nor act
treacherously towards him nor backbite him. His blood is prohibited, so
is his property except by his permission…"

"In Islam, men are equal…"

"Men from their origin in Adam are alike and equal."

"Men are equal like the teeth of a comb."

"Allah has enjoined on the rich (to spend) what will suffice the poor,
so if the poor suffer starvation Allah reserves the right to hold the
rich responsible…" "Every loan to which a profit accrues is interest
(riba)."

"I was not sent to amass wealth, but to spend it."

"Believers shall conduct their affairs according to their terms."

"Everything is lawful to you until you know that it is unlawful."

"There is no obedience to a creature where disobedience to Allah is
involved." "The ruler is a shepherd and he is responsible for his
flock." "Religion is nothing but love."

"Desire for your brother what you desire for yourself. Dislike for him
what you dislike for yourself."

"Surely, your body has a right over you."

Just as the Qur'an and the Prophet's sayings constitute a source for
legislation and regulating social life, his confirmation of actions he
regards to be in conformity with Qur'anic legislation and his practical
life and behaviour provide a wide horizon for legislative material.

These sources deal with such matters as the fitness of the legal rules,
his relationship with the governors, army commanders and the community
at large, his legal responsibilities, etc. This field of legislation
forms the constitutional subject matter in modern legal jargon.

The narrations reaching us from the Imams of the Prophet's household,
like the Qur'an and the Prophet's sayings, present copious materials for
legislation. These narrations elucidate and serve as a commentary on the
Qur'an and Prophetic tradition, sunna. This source material serves as
foundations for legislation, addressing social problems and regulating
human life with its various spheres. Islamic jurists rely on these
fundamentals to deduce rules for novel conditions.

A careful study of the samples of these verses and traditions that run
into hundreds of ideological and legislative texts with a fundamental
and general nature, not limited by time or space, will reveal the secret
behind the eternal aspect of Islamic legislation, its universality and
ability to cover social evolution and development and play a leadership
role in overall human existence. The law in its capacity as the source
of order in human life contributes immensely in man's progress or
backwardness according to the nature of the law and its world view.


**Law, Ijtihad and Human Evolution**

Among the most widespread terms in human existence is "The Law". All
people understand the meaning of law and perceive its impact in daily
life as a result of their encounter with the laws governing
relationships and functions of human activity. The machinery of
government and its various activities, the market, societies, parties,
trade unions, courts of law, commerce, banks and financial institutions,
companies, land tenure, traffic regulations in the cities, etc.; all of
these issues are subject to the law which regulates them.

Thus, the law is defined as: "A set of rules which regulates individual
behaviour in the society and the respect of which is guaranteed by the
supreme authority even by force where necessary. This is the general
meaning of the word law."

According to some scholars, the word Qanun (law) is an arabicized word
borrowed from Latin. The use of the word spread in Arabic language and
Islamic culture after the period of translation, when many works were
translated into Arabic from Latin, Greek, Hindu, and other languages.
The word "Qanun" is applied to any rule that orders the relationship
between two or more things in a permanent, decisive or general way,
whether it pertains to nature, thought or the society. Thus, "Qanun" is
used in the fields of medicine, physics, logic and chemistry; in
regulating social relationships such as international relations where we
have international law, commercial enterprises where it is called
commercial law and in family relations, the term law of personal status
is used.

While the law guarantees an ordered society in civil matters, it also
contributes, in no small measure, to development and the evolution of
human life if it is based on scientific foundations, and takes into
consideration the reality of human existence. On the other hand, if a
law is not built on a scientific basis and disregards the social reality
it leads mankind to backwardness and retardation.

The Holy Qur'an has employed the terms \`shir'ah', \`shar'',
\`shari'ah', \`minhaj' and \`hadd'; all of these mean way or path which
regulates different social relationships. It states:

"He has made plain to you the religion which He enjoined upon Nouh and
which We have revealed to you…" Holy Qur'an (Shura 42: 13)

"…For every one of you We appointed a law and a law…" Holy Qur'an
(Ma'da 5: 48)

"Then We made you follow a course in the Affair, so follow it…" Holy
Qur'an (Jathiya 45: 18)

"…These are the limits of Allah, so go not near them…" Holy Qur'an
(Baqara 2: 188)

"…and whoever goes beyond the limits of Allah, he indeed wrongs his own
soul…" Holy Qur'an (Talaq 65: 1)

The investigation of the sources and rules of Islamic legislation and
legislative thought reveals a comprehensive programme and an
encompassing organization for human life, covering all the incidents and
situations, at the time of revelation, the new developments that result
from changes and improve-ments in ways of living and the evolution of
science and knowledge. The sources of this all-encompassing feature is
the Legislator, Himself. The Omniscient, All-Powerful Lord invested
Islamic legislation, via its texts and concepts, with a miraculous power
of grasping the needs of mankind. The texts and concepts of the Shari\`a
covers the changes in ways of living through two main principles: The
general, \`amm' and the absolute, \`mutlaq'.

To be able to appreciate the scientific nature, the precision and the
ability of Islamic legislation to cover both the fixed and changing
aspects of life, we shall introduce two legislative fundamentals:

1- Cases where a rule exists in the Book and the Sunna.
2- Permissibility of exercising independent judgement, \`ijtihad', and
the method of deducting rules, \`istinbat'.

1- Cases where a rule exists in the Book and the Sunna:

By exploring the primary legislative sources, i.e., the Book and the
Sunna, we learn that numerous forms of expression are used for the laws
in these sources. This calls for a scientific method by which the laws
can be comprehended and the ground for istinbat is prepared.

The most prominent forms of expressing the laws are the following:

a- A clear and unambiguous stipulation \`nass' which carries no
generalization and for which no conflicting counterpart exists. Examples
of this rule include the forbidding of wine and the obligation of prayer
and fasting.

b- A generalized rule which needs explanation.

c- A rule liable to conflict or contradiction with another, like a
situation of permissiveness and the forbidding of a single matter or
enjoining a thing and forbidding it. These type of conflicts are, in
reality, only outward in nature for contradiction does not exist in
Islamic legislation.

For this reason, scholars of Islamic jurisprudence have prepared
scientific bases for combining the import of those seemingly
contradictory narrations. For instance, they explained that enjoining a
thing as well as proscribing it at the same time means disliking it
\`Karahah', considering the prohibition in such case as disliking not
forbidding \`Hurma', being that another statement carries permissibility
in its import.

d- General and absolute rules that act as general legislative
principles applicable to limitless areas coming under their domain.

e- The existence of statements specifying the general rule or limiting
the absolute. For example, the permissibility of selling, expressed in
the words of Allah, the Glorious: "...and Allah has allowed trading and
forbidden usury…"Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2: 275), is limited by a number of
conditions among which is the permissibility of items for sale. The
general rule forbidding interest is specified by narrations, such as the
saying of the noble Prophet (s.a.w.): "There is no (prohibition) of
interest between us and those with whom we are at war; we can collect
interest from them but we will not give it to them."

f- The justified legislation and a unity of criteria for some rules and
enactments making their rules to affect other similar issues in human
life, like the prohibition of wine, affects all substances producing the
same effect as wine i.e., intoxication.

g- Laws which prohibit things that are less abominable, atrocious or
harmful than those things that these laws control, which are more
harmful and abominable, for instance, the saying of the Almighty Lord:
"Say not \`Fie' to them (parents)…"Holy Qur'an (Isra\` 17: 23). This
prohibition includes that which is worse than saying a word of contempt,
as well as, enjoins the practicing of good and kindness to parents.

h- The existence of texts confirming exemption from obligation in cases
in which we are in doubt concerning the existence of any obligation. The
scholars of principles of jurisprudence term these statements as the
principle of innocence (asl-ul-bara'a).

From the foregoing, we have seen all the cases in which the rule exists
or probably exists in the Book or Sunna, expressing that it is not
possible to apply the Shari\`a law except in the first case, but in all
the other cases we cannot know the law except by way of ijtihad and
exerting scientific efforts.

2. Permissibility of Ijtihad and Istinbat:

We shall start by defining the term \`Ijtihad' as a concept and a
technical term so that its meaning and value in enriching jurisprudence
and Islamic law and treating new issues and problems accompanying the
realities of life can be understood.

**Definition of Ijtihad:**

Literal Meaning: Al-Jawhari states in Qamus al-Sihah that: "Jahd and
Juhd mean ability. Aljahd: Difficulty. The verb jahada is used to
describe an utmost effort in something. And Ijtihad and Taj?hud means to
exert one's efforts and take pains."

And Ragib al-Isfahani said: "Jahd and Juhd mean ability and difficulty.
And Ijtihad means: Exerting one's ability and bearing troubles and
difficulties…" Technical Meaning: The term Ijtihad is a technical
expression common among jurists and scholars of principles of
jurisprudence, \`usul al-fiqh'. It has a definition, limits of its
permissibility, its method and proofs of its legal acceptability. The
specialists define Ijtihad as: "The exertion of effort in deriving
Shari\`a rules. In this sense, to deduce or derive rules from the
Shari\`a sources is called Ijtihad."

Al-Akhund reported a scientific definition of Ijtihad from other
scholars that Ijtihad is: "An aptitude that enables (its possessor) to
deduce a secondary legal rule from the source, wether that ability to
deduce is actually exerted or a practicable potentiality."

The permissibility of ijtihad and the extent of its legality has been a
subject of academic debate for many centuries. The view held by the
proponents of ijtihad held sway and the Muslims depend on it in deriving
legal rules (Islamic laws) for various cases for which no clear rule
occurs in the Shari\`a. We can understand from the definition of Ijtihad
that it is the ability, occasioned by knowledge, to deduce or derive the
law, the derivation of which needs learned effort. It also alludes to
the act of actual deduction of a rule from its Shari\`a (legal)
proofs.

Therefore, Ijtihad is:

1- A scientific practice.
2- Derivation of a rule from the legal sources.
3- The scope of ijtihad is limited to the issues about which no clear
and defined rule occurs. As a corollary, it is not permissible to
attempt ijtihad in the case of a clear rule \`nass'.

In view of this, a principle regulating and controlling the process of
ijtihad and delimiting its scope is established by the following
stipulation: "There is no ijtihad where there is a stipulation
\`nass'.

Thus, nass is defined as: "A legal proof whose import is specific to a
defined matter and no other import is probable in respect to this
proof." 4- From the definition we can realize that the rule issuing from
independent judgement is the one susceptible to change. Another ijtihad,
based on a different understanding of the same proof or dropping this
proof for a more appropriate one, can change the first. The new ijtihad
reaches a different conclusion and rule on the same issue.

Ijtihad plays its greatest role in deducing Islamic law with regard to
new issues that daily arise in the human society, by deducing new rules
from the principles and proofs, which renders the Islamic legislation
capable of embracing human evolution in various fields. This capacity to
cover new areas is occasioned by the existence of a number of elements
constituting the backbone of Islamic legislation. Some of this elements
are:

1- The Principle of Innocence \`asl-ul-bara'a': The absolution from
obligation as long as no categorical proof is established to confirm
it.
2- Bestowing on the legal ruler \`hakim al-Shar'i the competence to
enact laws, in the light of the Book and the Sunna, suitable for
existing situations and conditions in areas where no obligatory rules
(enjoining or prohibiting) are found.
3- The generality of the text and its embracing of the new occurrences,
as the law comprises what governs.
4- The absoluteness of the text and its embracing of the new
occurences, which broaden the scope of the absolute aspect of
legislation thereby including limitless items.

In this way, the process of ijtihad becomes active, within the
boundaries of these wider principles, deducing laws and rules for new
situations in the areas of worship, politics, economics, social
relations, health, food and drinks, etc. These new issues are thus
declared as lawful or forbidden or obligatory, and / or make it valid or
invalid, etc., as the case may be.

When a mujtahid encounters a new subject or issue, he starts the
process of ijtihad by studying the substance of the individual laws to
ascertain whether a clear ruling can be obtained for the matter at hand.
Where such a rule is easily obtained, like the prohibition of wine or
the obligation of prayers, he confirms the ruling for the new question.
But if the rule is not obtained, then he turns to the general and
absolute rulings which comprise the limitless matters of the laws,
like:

"Anything which its effect is similar to the effect of wine, is
unlawful" or "any act without which an obligatory act cannot be
fulfilled is, itself, obligatory" or "no one shall harm nor be harmed"
or "and never Allah will make for the infidels a way (to triumph)
against the believers."Holy Qur'an (Nisa' 4: 141) and "fulful the
contracts"Holy Qur'an (Ma'ida 5: 1) and "and those who fulfil their
promise when they make a promise" Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2:177) and
"everything is (allowed) absolute except where a prohibition is
declared" , and "what leads to an unlawful act is itself unlawful", or
"every loan that attracts a benefit is usury".

If the question at hand does not come under individual rulings or the
general and the absolute, then, the mujtahid resorts to the principle of
innocence and deduces that we are free from any obligation. In this way,
all the new areas are grasped by the Islamic legislation. It is worthy
to mention that the said principle also is confirmed by proofs from the
Book and the Prophet's Sunna.

With this explanation, the process of ijtihad and the steps necessary
for deducing laws become clear. Islamic scholars have founded the field
of principles of jurisprudence and laid down its general laws in a
scientific method that caters to the work of deduction \`istinbat'. They
defined this field as "the study of the common constituents encountered
in deducing legal rulings."

Similarly, these scholars developed rules in Islamic jurisprudence
\`Qawa'id al-Fiqhiyya' such as the rule of obligation \`Qa'idatul
Ilzam', the rule of "no harm" \`Qa'idatu al-Dharar', the rule of actual
control over or possession of a thing \`Qa'idat al-Yad', the rule of
validity of a Muslim's deeds \`Qa'idat Sihat Amal al-Muslim', and the
rule of liability \`Qa'idat al-Dhaman', etc.

The two rules \`Qawa'id al-Usuliyya wal Fiqhihiyya' represent the legal
principles that prepare the ground for deducing legal rulings. These
principles serve the purpose of enriching Islamic legislation in a
permanent way by supplying the prerequisites of istinbat.

The aspect of ijtihad, that is relayed to the issue of the fixed and
variable among the laws of ijtihad is that of understanding; i.e., to
understand the content of the texts, its import and aim. This is true
both in the cases of specified individual situations or comprehen-sive
general or absolute formulations. It should be noted that the scientific
methodology in natural and social sciences is based on two fundamental
issues:

1- Identifying the individual happening.
2- Identifying the general law applicable to individual issues,
irrespective of time and space.

In fact, a science studying any aspect of human life is nothing other
than a set of general principles and laws that are applicable to
individual cases sharing similar conditions and situations, although not
specified by time or space.

This definition of science is not only applicable to fields like
medicine, physics, chemistry, psychology, and sociology, but, also to
Islamic jurisprudence and legislation. The fact that some questions in
Islamic jurisprudence are not covered by individual proofs and not by
proofs of general or absolute meaning, signifies that concerning such
questions, Islamic legislation does not prescribe hard and fast
obligations and man shall be free to act as he wishes. The ruling will,
therefore, be innocence and exemption from any responsibility.

Primarily, innocence \`bara'a' is upheld as long as no proof of
obligation is established, just as permissibility of all things is held
sway until proof of prohibition is confirmed. By considering what
Islamic legislation declared lawful through individual and general
enactments, what is permissible according to the principle of
lawfulness, and that about which man is exempted and his possible slip
overlooked through the principle of innocence, we would conclude that
large fields of man's existence are left for him to act according to his
discretion.

Here, he can specify his course of action whether in collective
organization and legislating for the good of the state, or issues
affecting individual life. These areas are susceptible to variation and
change subject to the bases of the rules and benefits in regard. We
shall discuss these bases and acquiring benefits later on in, among
other topics, the section on secondary laws.

It is important to note that unlawful matters are a limited few in
Islamic legislation, and the purpose of prohibiting them is to protect
humanity. They include prohibition of adultery, sodomy, wine, murder,
theft, interest, hoarding, injustice, environmental pollution,
backbiting, fraud, deceit, carrion, blood, etc. Thus, Allah, the
Glorious states:

"Say: (O Our Apsotle Muhammad) Come you! I will recite (unto) you what
your Lord has forbidden to you…" Holy Qur'an (An'am 6: 151)


