Presentation
============

"...Allah desires only to keep away uncleanness from you O people of
the House (Ahlul-Bait) and make you as pure as can be."
Holy Qur'an (33:33)

Whoever studies the lives of the Ahlul-Bait (peace be upon them all)
will at Once recognize the pivotal role they played and the great task
they shouldered in shaping the destiny of Islam. Their glorious lives
have always been a source of inspiration to the Muslims in every era and
place, interacting with their consciousness, enriching their progress
and upholding their Islamic heritage.

The Ahlul-Bait - (the Prophet's holy family) have formed a historical
movement and impulsive force in the history of Islam and caused great
social changes.

This is worth mentioning to understand the right path of the Imams of
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) and to comprehend the features of their school which
contains the spirit of originality and motives. The Holy Qur'an singles
out this term 'Ahlul-Bait' whereas the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
specifies its confirmation. On one side, this entity is diagnosed after
the disappearance of the period of prophethood which was led to grow
ideological and political allegiance for the family members of the Holy
Prophet and on the other side, some confrontations and conflicts from
different fronts and coalitions, in the arena of political life of the
Muslim society, started to appear against them. Consequently,
ideological, political and bloody war was waged against them. Therefore,
the Imams: Ali, Hasan and Husein and their grandsons became victims by
such tragedies in which the Muslim nation lost the enlightened pioneers
of its straight path and were forbidden from the gifts of truth and
awareness.

Al-Balagh Foundation; a part of its mission, hopes, to present to its
dear readers the holy family of the Prophet, to remove fiction from
luminous facts in the history of our Muslim nation, to acquaint the
ummah with their straight path and to make them choose the true guidance
with its many features and principles.

We beseech Allah, the Most High, to aid and grant us success to
accomplish this blessed duty. He is the best of helpers.


Al-Balagh Foundation


