The Ahlul-bait's Method in the Political Field
==============================================

Political action and thought forms a principal base among the pillars
of Islam; Islam is a creed, system and legislation and its application
in its social field needs a political authority, state and legitimate
leadership. Therefore, this political action and thought takes, in the
method of Ahlul-Bait, (a.s.) a high, important position which is based
on foundations and principles; among them are: 1. The necessity of
establishing an Islamic state and applying its laws.

2. The Muslim leader (Imam) is responsible for safeguarding Islamic
laws, applying them and inviting others towards them. He is the
political leader and guardian of the ideological line of the ummah
(Islamic communities).

3. The Muslim leader (Imam) should be qualified with piety, behavioural
righteousness, and be familiar with Islamic laws.

4. It is forbidden to obey or befriend the unjust ruler.

First, it is obligatory for the Muslims to advise him; if he does not
respond, it becomes obligatory for the Muslims to boycott him, and if he
does not respond, it becomes obligatory to depose him and revolt against
him and pledge allegiance to a just ruler who acts according to the
principles of the Book of Allah and the traditions of His Noble Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.)

These are the clear facts in the practical life of Ahlul-Bait and their
struggle against the tyrannical rulers; their guiding and educating the
masses of the ummah; preparing them to be conscious vanguards and their
support for the movements and revolutions which adopted reform and
change.

Among the prominant state of refusing oppression and corruption is the
state of Imam Husein bin Ali (a.s.) against the government of Yazid bin
Mu'awiyah and his declaration for an armed revolution against him; the
support of Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) for the revolution of Zayid bin Ali bin
Husein in the year 121 A.H. against Husham bin Abdul-Malik; and the
support of Imam Musa bin Ja'far for the revolution of Husein bin Ali in
Madinah in the year 169 A.H. against the Abbasid caliph al-Mahdi.

The life of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) is a continuation of the way in which the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) took and, also, a confirmation for it. Imam
Husein, the martyr (a.s.) narrates from his grandfather, the Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.), that he said: "Whoever witnesses an unjust ruler
considering the prohibitions of Allah, the Almighty as permissible,
breaking the covenant of Allah, opposing the practices of the Apostle of
Allah (s.a.w.), treating his servants sinfully and cruelly and had seen
all these misdeeds, but, did not oppose him by words or actions, Allah
surely will punish him as he wills..."(54)

The life of the (Ahlul-Bait) (a.s.) and their words are a correction
for the deviated way and falsified line which was founded by some unjust
rulers and their preachers who supported and bowed down to them. They
depended on some forged hadiths which were narrated by Muslim in his
Sihah; for example, the following narration is mentioned in the
above-mentioned book, in the chapter on the order for the necessity of
performing prayer, collectively that the Messenger of Allah Muhammad,
(s.a.w.) said:

"'After me there will be rulers who would not be guided aright nor
follow my traditions and among them there will appear men whose hearts
look like the hearts of Satans but in the body of human beings."

He asked: I said: O, Messenger of Allah, What shall I do, if I became
aware of this? He (s.a.w.) said: 'You should listen and obey such rulers
even if they beat your back or take your wealth, then you should listen
and obey them '"(55)

All these forged sayings (hadiths) written by the tyrants, and their
agents, forms a base for misunderstanding to the extent that some even
built their political views on them. Nawawi in his explanation of Sahih
Muslim said:

"The jurists and the narrators of Ahlul-Sunnah say: The ruler should
not be deposed because of doing corrupt, oppressive, and wronging
other's rights. (Such a ruler) should not be deposed nor revolted
against, but it is obligatory to advise, and frighten him with the
narrations concerning that."(56)

The Imams of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) had a special position against such
unjust rulers and they stood against such deviated political lines,
therefore, these rulers began to use different kinds of tactics against
them. Their (Ahlul-Bait) life is filled of illuminated images of
sacrifice for the sake of faith and their history is the highest
examplary of struggle for the sake of truth and who spent their best
days between either being killed, poisoned, pursued on the earth or
being punished in the darkness of prisons.


