The Ahlul-bait's Method in Educating Their Companions
=====================================================

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to have said:

"I dislike for a man to die while there is still a habit of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) which he has not yet practised."(57) The
Ahlul-Bait took great care to educate the Muslims in accordance with the
Book of Allah and the traditions of the Prophet, with the objective of
building sound Islamic personalities that would hold aloft the torch of
guidance. Imam Al-Baqir (a.s.) tried to efface the doubts instigated by
some of his contemporaries who, had some mischievous intentions behind
their effort. They used to say that it sufficed a Muslim to love the
Ahlul-Bait and to regard them as leaders, and, in such a case, there was
no need to keep up the other obligatory duties of what had commanded.
The Imam explained that the path of the Ahlul-Bait meant putting into
practice all that had been brought by the Qur'an, and shown by the
Prophet (s.a.w.).

"...by Allah, we have no absolution from Allah, nor are we relatives of
Allah, nor have we any argument against Allah. You cannot be nearer to
Allah except through obedience. So, whoever is obedient (to Allah) will
be benefitted by our friendship, and whoever is disobedient (to Him),
our friendship will benefit him naught "(55)

Amru bin Sa'id bin Hilal narrates:

"I said to Abu Ja'far (a.s.): May I be your ransom, I only see you very
rarely, after years. Please give me a piece of advice which I may
follow.' Imam AI-Baqir replied: 'I advise you to fear Allah, to be pious
and diligent. Do know that there can be no piety without
diligent..."'(59) He also advised one of his followers, named Abu Usama,
and told him to convey it to his friends. Here is an extract of the said
advice: "...fear Allah and be good, and do not be bad, direct towards us
every affection, and ward off from us every abomination, for we are not
as they say. We have our rights in the Book of Allah, which were related
to the Messenger of Allah and had been purified by Allah Our birth is so
noble that anyone other than us claiming the like, is a liar.\* Increase
your remembrance of Allah, of death, of reciting the Qur'an and of
sending blessings upon the Prophet (s.a.w.) as sending blessings on him
is rewarded ten fold."(60)

\*- This refers to their noble relations to the Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.) through their mother, Fatima al-Zahra' (a.s.), the Prophet's
daughter. Imam al-Sadiq instructed one of his companions, Ismail bin
Ammar, as follows:

"I advise you to fear Allah, to be pious, to be truthful, to pay your
trusts, to be good to your neighbours and to be frequent in your
prostration (prayers). Such were the orders of Muhammad (s.a.w.) to
us."(61) Hisham bin Salim says that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) tell a
man called Hamran this:

"Look at the one who is lower than you (in position) and do not look at
the one who is higher than you, as in this way you will be more
satisfied with what is your lot, and more deserving of Allah's bounty.
Do know that (good) routine deeds even if few are worthier than a
regular deed lacking certainty. Do know that no piety is more beneficial
than avoiding the prohibitions of Allah and refraining from wronging the
people. Nothing is more pleasing than a good temper. No wealth is better
than being content with the little which suffices. No ignorance is more
bitter than conceit."(62)

Imam Al-Sadiq (a.s.) also cites the Messenger of Allah as describing
the believers: "Whoever is displeased with his evil deed while being
pleased with his good deed, is a faithful man."(63) These are the true
attributes of a good Muslim on the bases of Ahlul-Bait who strived hard
to educate and establish them. This is their true method in building and
educating the Muslim society and ummah. This is their true call through
which they addressed the followers of the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.)
which was to follow the Book of Allah (the Qur'an) and the traditions of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) and to build life on their principles.
How beautiful it is when a Muslim is guided aright through their
guidance and follows their will and listens to the remembrance of
them.


