Ahlul-bait (a.s.) in the Qur'an and the Prophet's Traditions (sunnah)
=====================================================================

The Qur'an emphasizes the lofty position and significance of the
Ahlul-Bait so as to make mankind follow their right path, consult them
when their opinion differs or their faith, situation and concepts
contradict. Investigating the verse of Revelation, we will find that the
Qur'an sometimes addresses them as 'Ahlul-Bait', like the Almighty's
saying: "..Allah desires only to keep away uncleanness from you O people
of the House (Ahlul-Bait) and make you as pure as can be."
Holy Qur'an (33:33)

Sometimes as 'relative' (Qurba) like His saying:

"...Say (O' Muhammad unto mankind): I do not ask of you any reward for
it (preaching the message)' but love for my relatives (Ahlul-Bait)..."
Holy Qur'an (42:23)

The Holy Qur'an, also, focuses on their merits and their virtues
through various verses without using these two terms for indicating them
like its address concerning Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husein in Chapter
(Dahr) and the Mubahala verse or its description of Ali in many verses
like the Wilaya and Tabligh verses and other verses. It describes them
as being the best among mankind, the pious and...etc. The commentators
and narrators single out the causes for the revelation of these verses
and acknowledge what is meant by them, then it will be cleared for us
through some samples of the interpretation of the Almighty's verses and
explain the causes for their revelation:

**1. The Verse of Purity (Tathir):
**
"..Allah desires only to keep away uncleanness from you O people of the
House (Ahlul-Bait) and make you as pure as can be." Holy Qur'an
(33:33)

All exegists of the Holy Qur'an and narrators of the Prophet's
traditions, unanimously agree that the word Ahlul-Bait, or the Household
of the Prophet (s.a.w.) as used by Almighty Allah in the Qur'an, refers
only to the following persons: The Prophet's daughter Fatima, her
husband Ali and their two children Hasan and Husein (peace be upon them
all). The famous exegist Suyuti in his renowned commentary 'Dur
al-Manthur' cites Tabarani's narration from Umm Salama that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) once told his beloved daughter, Fatima, to
call her husband Ali and two of their sons; Hasan and Husein. When they
came, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) covered them with a Fadak (a place
near Madina) cloak and put his hand on them, and said:

"O Allah! these are the Ahl Muhammad (another version says aal (family)
Muhammad, so, shower your blessings and favours on aal Muhammad as you
showered them on aal Abraham; You are the Praiseworthy, the Glorious."

Umm Salama said that she raised the cloak to join them, but the Prophet
pulled it out of her hand and said: "You are (also) on the right."(1) On
many occasions Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) explained the meaning of this
verse (of purity) to the Muslims and drew their attention to its
significance in order to be enlightened with them (Ahlul-Bait) by
following their straight path. Once, it happened that the Prophet while
passing his daughter Fatima's (a.s.) house on his way to the mosque for
the (lawn prayers, used to call: "To prayer, O Ahlul-Bait, to prayer;
Allah desires to keep away uncleanness from you, people of the House and
make you pure as pure as can be."(2) Anas bin Malik narrated that the
Prophet (s.a.w.) used to go to Fatima's house for six months whenever he
went out for prayer. He used to say: "To prayer, O Ahlul-Bait, to
prayer; Allah desires to keep a way uncleanness from you, people of the
House and make you pure as pure as can be."(3)

**2. The Verse of Affection (Mawadah):**

"...Say (O' Muhammad unto mankind): I do not ask of you any reward for
it (preaching the message), but love for my relatives (Ahlul-Bait)..."
Holy Qur'an (42:23) The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) explicitly told the
Muslims that this blessed verse refers to his Ahlul-Bait, that is; Ali,
Fatima, Hasan and Husein and urged them to obey and follow these
illustrious personalities after him. All commentators, traditionists and
biographers said that the word 'near relatives of the Prophet' as used,
here, refers exclusively to his Ahlul-Bait that is Ali, Fatima, Hasan
and Husein.

Fakhruddin Razi, while explaining this verse, says: "...and without
doubt no one was so near to the Prophet than Fatima, Ali, Hasan and
Husein. This is a well-known fact of all chains of narrations, and these
are they who are his 'aal'".

Thus, it is an undisputed fact that the words Ahlul-Bait or aal
Muhammad (s.a.w.) refer only to the immediate family of the Prophet; his
daughter Fatima, son-in-law Ali and his two sons Hasan and Husein and no
one else. First: We have already cited some instances of the Prophet's
love for his family. Second: No doubt being his only surviving child,
Fatima was intensely loved by her father. The Prophet's famous words are
a testimony to this fact. "Fatima is a part of me and whoever makes her
angry, makes me angry."

The traditions also confirm this and also his natural inclination
towards Ali and his grandchildren, Hasan and Husein. Therefore, it
becomes a duty for the Prophet's nation to follow the Prophet's
traditions in respect to his Ahlul-Bait. The Almighty says: "...Say (O
Muhammad say unto mankind) if you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will
love you..." Holy Qur'an (3:31)

**3. The Verse of Malediction (Mubahala):**

"But whoever disputes with you (O' Muhammad) in this matter after what
has come to you of knowledge then say: Come, let us call our sons and
your sons and our women and your women and our selves and your selves,
then let us beseech Allah and invoke His curse upon the liars." Holy
Qur'an (3:61)

This verse points towards an epoch-making event, narrated by all
historians and commentators; an event which revealed to the Muslims the
status of the family of the Prophet (Ahlul-Bait) (a.s.) (Ali, Fatima,
Hasan and Husein), and how near and dear they are to Allah, the Exalted.
It is narrated that a deputation\* from the Christians of Najran came to
the Prophet of Islam to argue the merits of their faith and also to
discuss with him concerning his prophethood. The Holy Prophet advanced
to them arguments showing that Jesus, the son Mary, was a human being
and a Prophet, and it was blasphemy to regard him as a son of Allah,
because Allah, the Exalted, is high above all such human
characteristics. It was when the Prophet, having argued the point fully
and convincingly, found them still deliberately persisting in their
false belief in the deity of Prophet Jesus, that Allah revealed this
verse. It was a challenge to the Christians, to pray and invoke Allah
that the curse may overtake the party that insisted upon falsehood.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\*-The deputation was comprised of three prominant Christian leaders of
Arabia, Abdul-Masih, the political leader; al-Ayham in-charge of their
Agro-Pastoral affairs; and Abu Hatam ibn Alqama, who was a Bishop or
Pontiff.

Early the next morning on the 24th of the lunar month of Dhilhijja, the
Prophet, in accordance with Allah's command, came out to the meeting
grounds, carrying Husein in his arms and leading Hasan "our sons" by his
hand, followed by his beloved daughter Fatima "our women", behind whom
came Ali "our selves" carrying the banner of Islam. Seeing the Prophet
was accompanied by his immediate family and convinced that Muhammad
(s.a.w.) was truthful, otherwise he would not have dared to bring his
dearest of kin along, the Christians backed away from the maledictory
confrontation and agreed to pay Jizya instead.

**Zamakhshari says in his book 'al-Kashshaf':**

That (when this verse was revealed) the Prophet asked the Christians to
a Mubahala (malediction) to invoke the curse of Allah on the liars. The
Christians held a discourse among themselves that night, in which their
leader Abdul Massih stated his views as follows. "By God, O Christians,
you know that Muhammad is a God-sent Prophet, who has brought to you the
final message from your Lord. By God, no nation ever dared to challenge
a Prophet with malediction, but that woe befell them. Not only will they
perish, but, their children will also be afflicted with the curse."
Saying this, that it is better to reach a compromise with the Prophet,
rather than challenge his truth and perish Abdul Massih advised his
party to stop hostilities and retain their religion by submitting to the
Prophet's terms. "So, if you persist (for a confrontation), we will all
perish. But, if you, to keep your faith, should refuse (to have a
showdown) and remain as you are, then, make peace with the man (the
Prophet) and return to your land."

Zamakhshari continues: "The next day the Prophet, carrying Husein in
his arms, leading Hasan by the hand; followed by his daughter Fatima,
behind whom came Ali, entered the appointed place and was heard saying
(to his Ahlul-Bait): "When I invoke Allah, you all say: Amen."

The pontiff of Najran on seeing the Prophet and his Ahlul-Bait,
addressed the Christians: "O' Christians, I am beholding such faces that
if God wishes (for their sake), He would move mountains from their
places. Do not accept their challenge for Mubahala for if you do you
would all perish and there would remain no Christian on the face of the
earth till the Day of Resurrection." Heeding his advice the Christians
said to the Prophet: "O Abdul Qasim, we decided not to hold Mubahala
with you. You keep your religion and we will keep ours."

The Prophet told them:

"If you refuse to hold (Mubahala), then submit, (accept Islam) and you
will receive what the Muslims receive, and contribute what the Muslims
contribute."

The Christians saying they had no desire to fight the Arabs, proposed a
treaty asking for peace, and freed from forced compulsion to make them
forsake their religion. In return they agreed to pay the Muslims an
annual tribute of two thousands suits; one thousand of which to be paid
in the month of Safar and the remaining one thousand in Rajab, besides
thirty coats of iron mail. Accepting the proposal the Prophet remarked:
"By the One Who has my soul in His hand death was looming large over the
people of Najran. (Had they dared to accept the challenge of
'Mubahala'). They would have been transformed into apes and swines, and
the valley would have been set ablaze. Allah would have destroyed Najran
with its people, sparing not even the birds on the treetops, and before
the passing of the year the Christians would have all been dead."

Continuing his comments on the Mubahala verse, Zamakhshari lays
emphasis on the position of the Ahlul-Bait by quoting the following
narration from the Prophet's wife Aa'isha: "He mentioned them,
Ahlul-Bait, before mentioning the word 'selves' in order to highlight
their position and their proximity (to Allah), and to stress their
preference to 'selves' which could be sacrificed for them. There is no
stronger evidence than this regarding the merits of the Ahl-Kisa\*. It
is the proof of the truthfulness of the Prophet's mission, because no
one however biased, has narrated that they (the Christians) dared to
accept that (challenge for Mubahala)"(4).

Surely this status of the Ahlul-Bait indicates the appearance of the
camp of belief (represented by the Prophet (s.a.w.) and his holy family
(Ahlul-Bait)) against the camp of idolatory and disbelief, because

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\*-Ahl al-Kasa is a term denoting those who gathered with the Prophet
under the Kisa (cloak) whereupon the verse of purity was revealed. They
are All, Fatima, Hasan, Husein, as has been already discussed,
earlier.

those who came out to the meeting grounds were the best examples of
guidance and the leaders of the nation and the purist among the selves
whom Allah kept uncleanness away from them and made them pure as pure as
can be. Therefore, we understand that whatever we receive from the
Household of the Prophet (Ahlul-Bait) (a.s.) of their thoughts, laws,
narrations, jurisprudence, interpretations, and guidance comes from this
course and that they are truthful in their utterances, biography and
path. The Qur'an challenges the enemies of Islam by them and calls their
enemies liars and says that they should be faced with curse and
punishment. The Almighty says:

"...then let us beseech Allah and in yoke His curse upon ,he liars."
Holy Qur'an (3:61) Without their (Ahlul-Bait) truthfulness and
righteousness, Allah would not give them such status and position nor
would the Qur'an have uttered anything concerning them. Fakhruddin Razi,
in his 'al-Tafsiral-Kabir', gives an identical narration and after
having stated what Zamakhshari has said; adds: 'Mind you, that all
interpreters (of the Qur'an) and narrators (of the Prophet's traditions)
are unanimous about the authenticity of this narration." But by taking
along only these four and no one else besides, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) was showing the Muslims, that the best example for women is
Fatima and the best example for boys are Hasan and Husein, according to
the Qur'an's wordings, which, also, delicately used the word 'our
selves' for Ali, thereby pointing to his close proximity with the
Prophet, and solving the question of succession once and for all.

**4. The Verse of Prayer (Salat):**

"Surely Allah and His angels bless the Prophet; O you who believe! Call
for (divine) blessings on him and salute him with a (becoming)
salutation."

Holy Qur'an (33:56) The previous verses, of the Holy Qur'an, revealed
to us as to who are the Prophet's Ahlul-Bait, their purity of character
and the command for Muslims to love and obey them. This verse refers to
the salutation salawat, which a Muslim is obliged to send on the Prophet
and his progeny during the five daily prayers.

In this verse, the Muslims are ordered here to send blessings on the
Prophet and his "aal" (progeny), a term exclusively reserved for Ali,
Fatima, Hasan and Husein and their righteous descendants. The emphasis
on the Prophet's "aal", in salutation, is yet another indication of
their pivotal position after the Prophet. By asking the Muslims to exalt
them, Allah, the Exalted, was reminding the Muslim communities that He
had chosen the Ahlul-Bait, for the role of leading the Muslim nation.

In his 'Tafsir al-Kabir', Fakhruddin Razi, commenting on the above
verse, narrates the following quotation from the Prophet, who was asked
by some of his companions on how to send blessings upon him. The Prophet
replied:

"Say: 'O Allah, send blessings on Muhammad and on Muhammad's progeny as
You sent blessings on Abraham and on Abraham's progeny; and send grace
on Muhammad and on Muhammad's progeny, as You sent grace on Abraham and
on Abraham's progeny, You are the Praiseworthy, the Glorious."' Before
giving this narration, Razi interprets the verse and comments: 'This is
a proof of the Shafi'i school, because order means an obligation\*; so,
to send blessings on the Prophet (s.a.w.) is obligatory, at least in the
Tashahhud (testimony during the prayers) if not elsewhere."'(5)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\*-Famous jurists had concluded that when there is an 'order' in the
Qur'an or the Traditions, then carrying it out is obligatory; unless the
Razi further argues: 'If Allah and His angels send their blessings on
him (the Prophet), then what need is there for our blessings?" He,
himself, provides the answer: 'When we send blessings on him, it is not
because he is in need of them, but, because of already having Allah's
blessings, he does not even require the blessings of the angels. When we
send, we send to glorify Allah, and, also, it (sending blessings)
reveals our gratitude towards Allah, so that He may have compassion on
us and reward us. That is why the Prophet said; "Whoever sends blessings
on me once, Allah will send blessings on him ten times."

It will not be out of context, here, to cite Imam Shafi'i's famous
quatrain on this subject:

"O' Household of the Messenger of Allah, love for you
Is an obligation from Allah, revealed in the Qur'an. It suffices as the
greatest honour bestowed on you That his prayer comes of nothing who
does not salute you."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
context tells clearly that it is a recommendation.

Suyuti, in his , Dur al-Manthur', citing Abdul-Razzaq, Ibn Abi Shaiba,
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Abd ibn Hamid, Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi,
Nisa'i, ibn Maja, ibn Mardawaya, who have all narrated from Ka'b ibn
Ujra, says: a man once said to the Prophet that greeting him is clear to
everyone, but, how does one send blessings on him. The Prophet
replied:

"O Allah, send blessings on Muhammad and on Muhammad's progeny as You
sent blessings on Abraham and on Abraham's progeny, You are the
Praiseworthy, the Glorious."' Suyuti has cited eighteen different
narrations other than this, with slight variations, stressing that the
blessings on the Prophet should include his progeny, also. The same has
been narrated by compilers of all "Sunan" and "Jawami", books quoting a
number of the Prophet's companions, such as; Abdulla ibn Abbas, Talha,
Abu Sa'id Khidri, Abu Huraira, Abu Mas'ud Ansari, Buraida, ibn Mas'ud,
Ka'b ibn Amra, and last, but not the least, Ali ibn Abi Talib, himself.
Similarly, it has been narrated byAhmad ibn Hanbal and Tirmidhi who have
quoted Imam Hasan ibn Ali from the Prophet as follows:

"He is a miser who, on the mention of my name to him, does not send
blessings on me."(6) Thus, all jurisprudents agree that it is obligatory
for Muslims to send blessings on Muhammad (s.a.w.) and his progeny
during the Tashahud (Testimony) in the five daily prayers.(7)

By analyzing this verse we easily discover the real objective behind
this obligatory command; which is to revere Muhammad's (s.a.w.) pure
progeny, from whom Allah has kept away all uncleanness and error, and
made them pure as pure can be. The emphasis on his "aal" by the Prophet,
is yet another indication to the Muslims of their pivotal position after
him. By commanding Muslims, to send their blessings on them, Allah, the
Exalted, was reminding Muslims of the Ahlul-Bait's eventual leadership.
In other words, by taking them as exemplars and accepting their
leadership, the Muslims would be spared from trials and controversies.

So, it is clear that Allah has not mentioned them in the prayers for
nought. Had it not been for their probity that was proved time and again
and for their magnanimity of character, as well as, their deep
knowledge, Allah would not have ordered the Muslims to adhere to their
straight course and seek blessings for them in every prayer. The very
fact that this blessing should be invoked every day in each prayer a
Muslim performs was but to draw the attention of the Muslim communities
towards the significance of the Ahlul-Bait; which should serve as a
constant reminder that it is they who are Muhammad's (s.a.w.) rightful
heirs. Or to put it more clearly, anyone ignoring their status
deliberately or otherwise, has no excuses, whatsover, and is deceiving
his own self to be astray from Allah's command.

**5. The Verse of Feeding:**

"The righteous truly drink of a cup tempered with camphor - A fountain
from which the servants of Allah drink, making it flow in abundance.
They fulfil vows and fear a day, the evil of which is widespread. And
they give food, out of love for Him, to the poor and the orphan and the
captive. We feed you, for Allah's pleasure only - We desire from you
neither reward nor thanks. Surely we fear from our Lord a stem,
distressful day. So Allah will ward off from them the evil of that day,
and cause them to meet with splendour and happiness; And reward them,
for their steadfastness, with a Garden and with silk." Holy Qur'an
(76:5-13)

These verses of the Holy Qur'an speak of the Ahlul-Bait, and places
them at the top of preference and piety and shows them as examplars and
models for mankind so that the generations are rightly guided through
them and follow their right way. The historical occasion to which these
blessed verses refer is the great status of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.). When Ali,
Fatima and their two sons Hasan and Husein (peace be upon them all)
fasted for three consecutive days, and each day at the time of breaking
the fast some needy person, as verse number eight indicates, appeared
and the Ahlul-Bait gladly fed him, and themselves passed the nights
without food. Allah was so pleased by the generosity of the Prophet's
Household that He converted their actions into verses of the Glorious
Qur'an to serve as guidance for the Muslims. These verses not only
portray the Ahlul-Bait's total submission to Allah's Will, but, also,
reveal them as pure and spotless personalities; promised esteem and
admiration among the dwellers of Paradise. They are shown as immaculate
models of emulation so that whoever, among the Muslim communities,
follows their glowing path will achieve salvation and will be assembled
in their illustrious company on the Resurrection Day.

Zamakhshari, in his 'Kashshaf' commenting on this verse, narrates from
Abdullah bin Abbas - that once Hasan and Husein fell sick and the
Prophet, together with some of his companions, visited his sick
grandsons. He suggested that Ali should make a vow to Allah for his
sons' health. Heeding the Prophet's suggestion Ali, Fatima along with
their maid, Fidha, took a vow that if the boys recovered, they would
fast for three consecutive days. Eventually, Hasan and Husein recovered
and to fulfill the vow they also fasted along with their parents and
maid. Since there was nothing in the house to eat, Ali borrowed from
Sham'un, a Khaibarian Jew, three measures of barely.

Fatima grounded one measure into flour and baked it into five loaves
(of bread) equal to their number, and placed these before them for
breaking the fast. Just then a beggar stopped at their door and said:
"al-Salaam Alaikum (peace be upon you), O Ahlul-Bait of Muhammad
(s.a.w.), (I am) one of the poorest of Muslims (so), feed me, may Allah
feed you of the food of Paradise!" So they gladly gave him all the food
and slept that night, tasting nothing but water." They fasted again the
next day and at sunset as they placed the bread before them to break the
fast, an orphan knocked on the door asking for food and they cheerfully
fed him, themselves going without food for yet another day. On the third
day of the fast, as the breaking time approached, and the food was
spread, a prisoner (of war) suddenly appeared at their door and the same
scenario was repeated, with the Prophet's Ahlul-Bait passing the third
successive night without tasting a morsel of food. Zamakhshari continues
that when dawn broke Ali holding the hands of Hasan and Husein came to
the Prophet's house. The Prophet seeing their pale countenances and
noting that they were trembling from hunger, expressed dismay and at
once accompanied them to their house. On entering the house, he was
shocked to see the sight of his daughter Fatima, sitting hollow-eyed on
her prayer mat, her stomach sunk into her back. It was, then, that the
angel Gabriel came down with this verse, saying:

"O Muhammad, Allah congratulates you for (the sacrifice of) your
household. Then he recited the (verse)."(8)

**6. The Verse of Guardianship (Wilaya):**

"Only Allah is your Guardian and His Apostle and those who believe,
those who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while in (Ruku'). And
whoever takes Allah and His Apostle and those who believe as his
guardian, then surely the party of Allah are they that shall be
triumphant" Holy Qur'an (5:55-5)

There are other numerous verses which extoll Imam Ali's (a.s.) virtue,
generosity, bravery, patience, piety, his sacrificing in Allah's way and
supporting Allah's Apostle (s.a.w.) and his being the most righteous
among the believers and the best among His creatures...etc. The
above-mentioned verses from the Book of Allah are as examples:

Zamakhshari, in his 'al-Kashshaf', says the following about this verse:
"It was revealed in favour of Ali (May Allah enlighten his face) when a
beggar asked him (for alms) while he was in the position of Ruku' during
prayer, and he gave away his ring (in the same position). It seems it
was loose on his little finger, for he did not exert any effort in
taking it off, which would have nullified his prayer. If you ask: 'How
could it be in favour of Ali (may Allah be pleased with him), when the
wordings are in the collective form?' I say. The form is collective,
though its instigator is a single man, because this is to encourage
people to follow his example and earn a similar reward, and, also, to
draw attention to the fact that the believers must be extremely mindful
and benevolent, towards the poor, in as much as, if a situation could
not be postponed until after the prayer, it may not he delayed till
having finished it."(9)

Wahidi, in 'Asbab al-Nuzul', citing Kalbi's narration concerning the
cause for the revelation of this verse says: "Surely Allah is your
Guardian and His Apostle and those who believe, those who keep up
prayers and pay the poor-rate while in prostration (Ruku')." "The latter
part of this verse is in favour of Ali bin Abi Talib (may Allah be
gracious to him) because he gave a ring to a beggar while in Ruku'
during prayer."(10)

**7 . The Verse of Proclamation (Tabligh):**

"O Prophet proclaim what has been revealed to you from your Lord, for
if you do it not you have not conveyed His message, and Allah will
protect you from the (evil designs of) people..."(11) Holy Qur'an
(5:67)

Perhaps the most clear portent of Imam Ali's excellence over the
Muslims after the Prophet, is the above verse, which makes a decisive
phase in the history of divine revelation. After creating this wide and
wonderful world, the Almighty had sent an unbroken chain of prophets to
guide mankind towards divine bliss. The last and the greatest link in
this eternal chain was Muhammad al-Mustafa (s.a.w.), who was entrusted
with the most comprehensive code of laws, capable of solving mankind's
needs till doomsday. Now, there no longer was need of any new messenger.
But nonetheless, the Wise Creator cannot leave mankind's struggle of
thousands of years to the whims and fancies of fallible Arabs, who had
spent the greater part of their lives in idolatary and sin. Therefore,
to ensure the safety of Islam and Muslims, Allah sent down this verse,
appointing Imam Ali as the Prophet's vicegerent. Narrators and
historians have testified to that great event.

When the Messenger of Allah left Mecca after the Hajj ceremonies all
the Muslims followed him, with the intention of leaving him at a place
near Juhfa which was at the crossroads for the caravans of Madinah,
Egypt and Syria. On the 18th Dhilhijja,(12) a little before noon, when
they reached Ghadir Khum near Juhfa, he stopped and ordered all the
people ahead to come near and wait for those following(13)...When all
the caravan had gathered, he called for a congregational prayer(14),
and, then, he offered midday prayers in the midday heat(15), then he
stood up addressing the people, and started his speech by praising and
giving thanks to Him. Then he said:

"O people! I am about to be called to Allah, and depart to Him. I am
responsible and so are you. What do you say?"

"We bear witness that you have delivered the Divine Message, and tried
your best to guide us on the right path, and always gave us good
counsel. May Allah bless you with a good reward," they replied. The
Prophet proceeded: 'Don't you,' he said, 'bear witness that there is no
god but Allah, Muhammad is His servant and Messenger, His paradise is
true, His hell is true?' "O Yes! We bear witness to all this," they
said, "O Allah! Bear witness," he said. Then he said: "Do not you
hear?"

They replied, "Yes." Then he went on saying:

'O people! I will precede you and you shall arrive at the pool
(Kawther): the pool wider than the distance between Basrah and San'a and
which has two goblets of silver as large as the space in which the stars
are swimming. When you shall reach me I shall interrogate you about your
behaviour towards the two weighty things after my death. Then a caller
called: 'mat are the two weighty things, O Allah's Messenger?' He
(s.a.w.) said: The weightier one is the Book of Allah, the Mighty and
Glorified, which has two bonds, one is in the hands of Allah, the Most
High, and the other in your hands. So hold tight to it, don't go astray
and don't change your faith. The other mighty thing is my progeny, my
household. The Knower of subtleties, the Aware has told me that they
will join me at the pool as soon as their life on earth expires."(16)

Then, he (s.a.w.) said:

"Don't you know that I am more appropriate for authority over the
believers than themselves?" "Yes, O the Messenger of Allah"(17) they
answered. He (s.a.w.) said: "Don't you know or witness that I am more
appropriate for authority over every believer than himself?" "Yes, O
Messenger of Allah"(18), they replied.

Then, he (s.a.w.) bent down and lifting up Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) in
his hands, showed him to the vast crowd who looked on his armpits's
whiteness(19) and proclaimed those famous words, which guaranteed the
continuation of divine leadership: "O people! Allah is my Master and I
am your master(20). for whomseover I am master, this, Ali, is his master
O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him and be hostile to whoever is
hostile to him(21). help him who helps him, forsake him who forsakes
him, and love him who loves him and hate him who hates him."

Then, he (s.a.w.) said:

"O Allah! Bear witness." Then, they (the Messenger of Allah and Ali)
did not separate until the following verses were revealed: "...today
have I perfected unto you your religion and completed upon you My
blessings and approved for you Islam as your religion..." Holy Qur'an
(5:3)

There are numerous other verses in the book of Allah, which elucidate
the position, dignity and honour of Imam Ali; his high status among the
Muslims and he (a.s.) is the best after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).
The following verse certifies this more: "(As for) those who believe and
do good, surely they are the best of people." Holy Qur'an (98:7)

All the interpreters and narrators have testified that the
above-mentioned verse was revealed in favour of Ali bin Abi Talib and
Allah, the Almighty, Himself, described him as the best of people. On
the revelation of this verse, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said:

"O Ali, these are you and your followers."(22) Whoever goes through the
traditions of the Prophet, his daily behaviour, and his relation with
his Ahlul-Bait, whose purity the Holy Qur'an, itself, has testified to,
one realizes that Ahlul-Bait (Ali, Fatima, and their two sons, Hasan and
Husein) had a unique role and a great responsibility in the history of
the Muslim Nation. So, the Prophet's frequent stress on these four
luminaries was not without meaning, nor was it mere emotional behaviour
towards his family. In fact, he was only obeying Allah's commands to
prepare and guide the Muslims towards acceptance of their leadership,
after his eventual departure. Only Suyuti collected about sixty
Prophetic traditions (hadiths) stressing the love towards the Ahlul-Bait
(a.s.); acknowledge their leadership so as to make the Muslim Nation
follow their perfect example and illuminated path; look for guidance
towards them and not in blind obedience, but, by a way of discerning
comparison with others.

The first step which the Prophet took towards the formal building of
this blessed family was the marriage of his daughter, Fatima, (a.s.) to
his beloved cousin Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) at the Almighty's command.
Thus, became implemented this blessed 'tree' which would eventually
extend its shady branches over the Muslims and its historical progress.
It is narrated that the Prophet (s.a.w.) said: "Allah has ordered me to
marry Fatima to you."(23)

When this marriage had occured, the blessed family was formed and the
two sons (Hasan and Husein) were born, the Prophet used to caress them,
saying:

"All sons are their fathers' as their agnation returns to their
fathers, except the sons of Fatima, as I am their father and agnation."
(Narrated by Ahmad bin Hanbal in 'al-Manaqib').(24)


