The Prophetic Traditions (sunnah) in the School of the Ahlul-bait
=================================================================

It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said:

"May Allah prosper the person who heard my saying, memorized it,
comprehended it and retold it (to others) as he had heard it, since a
carrier of knowledge may not be a scholar and perhaps one may transport
knowledge to a more learned one."(38) The Prophetic tradition means the
specific actions, sayings and the declarations (confirmations)\* of the
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.). Allah, the Almighty ordered us to follow the
Prophet (s.a.w.) and practise his traditions (sunnah) by saying:

" ...whatever the Apostle gives you accept it, and whatever he forbids
you abstain (from it)." Holy Qur'an (59:7)

"Certainly you have in the Apostle of Allah an excellent examplar for
him who hopes in Allah and the Last Day..." Holy Qur'an (33:21)

"...and If you have a dispute concerning any matter refer it to Allah
and the Apostle." Holy Qur'an (4:59)

\*- Taqrir in Arabic means "confirmation". it is a declaration,
approval and signature and means that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.),
himself had a witness for the actions practised by the Muslims but, did
not forbid them. These divine instructions were strictly adhered to by
the Ahlul-Bait and those who followed their radiant path and advocated
sincere adherence to the Book of Allah and the Prophetic sunnah in
interpretation, narration, jurisprudence, legislation and ideology and
other Islamic knowledge and sciences.

Thus, the Prophetic sunnah is the second source among the sources of
thought and legislation on which the Muslims depended for judgement,
laws and values.

Most of the Shari'ah laws, and their concepts were not clearly detailed
in the Book of Allah like the laws concerning the paying of poor-rate
(zakat), prayer, wealth, holy struggle (jihad), family, and
international relations and others. Therefore, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) started explaining them and clarifying their rules to the
Muslims through his sayings and actions. He (s.a.ws) told the Imams of
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) to return to the Qur'an and the Prophetic traditions
as two main sources for explaining Islamic laws and rules and to refuse
analogy, opinion, approval and other sources upon which some jurists of
Islamic sects depended in their inductions and inferences.

It is narrated that Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

"Never is there anything but that is mentioned either in the Book of
Allah or in the Prophetic tradition."(39)

Sama'ah asked Imam Musa bin Ja'far: "I said to him: 'Is everything
found in the Book of Allah and the tradition of His Prophet (s.a.w.); or
do you comment on them?' He (a.s.) replied: 'Yes, all things are found
in the Book of Allah and the sunnah of His Prophet '".(40)

Narrated Imam Ali bin Musa al-Ridha (a.s.) said:

"Do not accept any saying (relating them to us) which disagrees with
the Qur'an; surely our sayings should agree with the Qur'an and the
Prophetic traditions; we speak either quoting them from Allah or His
Messenger."(41)

It is narrated that Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

"Do not accept any narrative related to us unless they agree with the
Qur'an and the sunnah."(42) Indeed the Imams of Ahlul-Bait memorized the
Prophetic traditions quoting them from their fathers who quote them from
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) and called people to write them down
from the period (of rule) of Ali and his son Hasan (a.s.) while the
caliphs forbid the writing down of the sunnah and they continued so till
the period of Umar bin Abdul-Aziz(43) who ordered, again, to write down
the Prophetic traditions in the year of 99 A.H.(44)

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

"My narration is my father's, and my father's is my grandfather's, and
my grandfather's is his father's, and his; father's is the narrative of
Ali bin Abi Talib, and the narrative of Ali is the narrative of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), and the narrative of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.), is the words of Allah. the Exalted."(45) The Imams of
Ahlul-Bait were those who comprehended and understood the sunnah of the
Messenger of Allah, memorized, narrated them to others, and explained
their contents to the Muslim nation.

Scholarly Methods for Proving the true Sunnah: In order to distinguish
the true narratives (sunnah) from the interpolated and false ones, the
scholars of the school of Ahlul-Bait placed some scholarly and
ideological bases and measures for proving true sunnah. The most
prominant of them are:

1. Any hadith (the Prophet's sayings) should be checked with the Book
of Allah to see whether it is correct or not. If it conforms with the
Qur'an, then, it is of true hadith, but, if it contradicts the divine
text, then it is a false one. 2. All hadiths mentioned in the books of
hadith, disregarding the reliability of their narrators, should be
checked and investigated by the scholars in order to be sure of the
reliability of the narrator and his truthfulness.

3. The scholars should not accept any narration unless their narrators
are described by piety and truthfulness, disregarding the sect or the
group to which the narrator belonged. Therefore, the method of the
jurists of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) is not to view a book of hadith as
completely correct or as completely false.


