Monotheism According To the School of Ahlul-bait
================================================

Imam Ali (a.s.) in Nahjul-Balagha says:

"The foremost in religion is the knowing of Him, the perfection of
knowing Him is to believe in His Oneness, and the perfection of
believing in His Oneness is to be sincere to Him."(46) Belief in Allah,
the One, and the Only, to Whom all the attributes of perfectness are
ascribed and Who is above all the attributes of imperfection, is the
main origin and base of the Islamic faith, thought, legislation and
conduct...etc. Therefore, the Imams of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) gave more
importance to form a pure concept of monotheism free from doubts,
perversions, and disbelief of pre-Islamic ignorance and the remnants of
pagan thought and strived hard towards correcting such thought by
explaining the true meanings and faith of monotheism as proved by the
Qur'an.

For more details, we cite some narrations of Ahlul-Bait (ass.)
concerning the true meanings of monotheism and its concepts. Imam Musa
bin Ja'far (a.s.) wrote to one of his companions and said:

"Verily, Allah is High, and Mighty (Sublime) and Great and far above
that the reality of His attributes should be comprehensible. Assign to
Him only those attributes that He ha s assigned to Himself and refrain
from qualifying Allah with anything besides those attributes."(47)
Regarding the Almighty's integrity and the purity of Islamic thought
from polytheism and paganism, the Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) narrated: "Whoever
likens Allah with His creatures is a polytheist; surely Allah is the
Almighty and High. Nothing resembles Him and nothing is like Him, and He
is totally the reverse of whatever is imagined."(48)

One of the companions of Imam Ja'far bin Muhammad al-Sadiq (a.s.) asked
him about the correct sect in monotheism, He (a.s.) said:

"You - may Allah be merciful to you - asked me about monotheism and
what that group of people believe in. Exalted is Allah, the like of whom
there is naught, and He is All-Hearing and All-Seeing: Allah is above
what is attributed to Him by those describers who liken Allah to His
creatures, those who are slanderous to Allah. Know you - may Allah be
merciful to you that in respect to monotheism, the true doctrine is what
is revealed in the Qur'an about the attributes of Allah, the Almighty,
the Exalted. Attributed not to Allah, the Sublime, any ideas of nihilism
and similitude. Neither should His existence be negated nor should He be
likened (to anything). He is Allah, the Established the Existent.
Exalted is He far above what the false interpreters attribute to Him.
Exceed not the Qur'an or you will go astray after the clear exposition
of truth."(49)

Thus, the Imams of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) explain that the true monotheism
is the one called upon by the Qur'an which unified Allah in His Self,
His attributes, His deeds and His worships.


