Ahlul-bait and the Perverted Groups
===================================

The opponents of Islam realized that the Imam of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) were
the very embodiment of originality and purity and acted as a refuge for
Muslims in time of distress and calamities. They have a special status
and respect in the self of every Muslim who loves the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.). History tells us that diverse, deviated groups appeared, such
as; the Zindiks, Exaggerators, Mazdakis, Jews, hypocrites, and even
those who are affected with pagan thoughts which came either from the
Magis, or from the philosophies of India, China, and Greece, and the
like have used their different destructive attempts to deviate Islam and
defame its illuminated face.

Some of these deviated groups have even slipped into the ranks of the
school of Ahlul-Bait and claimed attachment to them in order to defame
Islam and to pollute the right cause of Ahlul-Bait and its purity; like
the Exaggerators and the Mazdakis who described the Imams of Ahlul-Bait
through the attributes of Divinity and pretended that Allah, the Most
Glorified, had transmigrated into the bodies of the Imams of the
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) and authorized the affair of the creation to them.
But, the Imams of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) stood firmly against such
destructive and deviated beliefs and disclosed them to the people;
strongly repudiated, cursed, dismissed and renounced them.

Among these deviated groups were: 'The Mughira Group', the followers of
Mughira bin Sa'id and 'The Kattabiyah', the followers of Abi Khattab
Muhammad bin Abi Zainab al-Assadi.

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, son of Imam al-Baqir (a.s.), is quoted to have
said:

"May Allah curse Mughira bin Sa'id as he used to tell lies against my
father, may Allah make him taste the heat of burning iron, may Allah
curse those who say a bout us, what we do not say ourselves, may Allah
curse those who try to take us away from the servitude of Allah, Who
created us, and to Him is our return and in His hand is our
control."(51)

He (a.s.) also said:

"Don't accept any saying (hadith) relating them to us except that which
agrees with the Qur'an and the Prophetic traditions (sunnah) unless you
see an evidence of our previous sayings with it; indeed Mughira bin
Sa'id, may Allah curse him, has interpolated sayings (hadiths) in the
books of the companions of my father of which he (my father) did not
narrate them, so, fear Allah and don't accept any saying related to us,
which disagrees with the statement of Our Lord, the Exalted, and the
traditions of our Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) - because we, if we narrate
any hadith, we always say: The Almighty Allah or the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) said so and so."(52)

He (a.s.) further said:

"Mughira bin Sa'id was intentionally belying my father; he used to take
the books of his companions, who disguised themselves to be of the
companions of my father, and then, they gave them to Mughira who
interpolated in them perverted beliefs of unbelief and infidelity and,
then, attributed them to my father and therefore, returned them to his
companions and ordered them to distribute them among the Shi'a; whenever
there is any exaggeration in the books of the companions of my father,
be sure that it is the act of Mughira bin Sa'id who interpolated them in
his books."

Regarding the exaggeration and the interpolation of Abi Al-Khattab and
his lie against the Imams of Ahlul-Bait, Imam Ali bin Musa al-Rida
(a.s.) said:

"Indeed Abi Khattab used to tell lies against Abi Abdullah (Imam
al-Sadiq) (a.s.), may Allah curse Abi Khattab, whereas his companions
used to interpolate these sayings (hadiths) up until today in the books
of Abi Abdullah (a.s.); therefore, don't accept any saying (hadith)
related by them to us if they disagree with the Qur'an, because, all our
sayings should agree with both the Qur'an and the Prophetic
traditions."(53)

Thus, the Imams of Ahlul-Bait fought the Exaggerators and deviated
groups. They called on the Muslims to hold fast to the Book of Allah
(the Qur'an) and the pure Prophetic traditions so that they can
differentiate between the illuminated path of Ahlul-Bait to which the
followers of the school of the Imamiya Shi'a firmly adhered and the
misguidance of the Exaggerators and their strayed beliefs.


