8. At Badr
==========

The Battle of Badr was the most important among the Islamic Battles of
Destiny. For the first time the followers of the new faith were put into
a serious test. Had victory been the lot of the pagan army while the
Islamic forces were still at the beginning of their developments the
faith of Islam could have come to an end.

No one was as aware of the importance of the outcome of the Battle as
the Holy Prophet. We might read the depth of his anxiety in his prayer
before the beginning of the Battle when he stood up supplicating his
Lord: "God this is Quraish. It has come with all its arrogance and
boastfulness trying to discredit Thy Apostle. God I ask Thee to
humiliate them tomorrow. God if this Muslim band will perish today Thou
shall not be worshiped!"[^1]

At this battle in which the pagan army consisted of 950 fighters and the
Muslims did not exceed 314 (including the Messenger) the Islamic defense
was a combination of three elements resembling three defensive lines:

1. The personality of the Messenger his leadership and his unequalled
firmness. He was to the Muslims the final refuge at Badr and at every
battle he attended.

2. The Hashimites (the clan of the Prophet) led by ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib
who entered this Battle relatively obsecure and came out of it with
unequaled military fame.

His military performances became the popular subject of the Arab
caravans' conversations throughout the Arabic Peninsula.

3. The hundreds of companions of the Messenger whose hearts were filled
with faith and readiness for sacrifice. Many of them viewed martyrdom to
be a gain equal to life and victory. These good companions were the army
of Islam its first line of defense and the thick wall behind which the
Messenger used to stand. They were defenders and they were attackers.

As to the clan of the Messenger they were the ones whom he used to call
before any one else to offer the heavy sacrifice. They used to stand in
the first line of defense opening for the army the way through their
thrusts in the lines of the enemies. When the general offensives began
and every companion present participated the clan of the Messenger were
the most damaging to the enemies. They were so at Badr and at the
following battles.

The battle began when Utbah Ibn Rabi-ah his son Al-Walid and his brother
Sheibah (all from Umayyad) stood in front of their pagan army and asked
the Prophet to send to them their equals for a duel. Hundreds of
companions were around him and many of them were expecting to be called
upon by the Prophet but he chose to start with his own family.

The load was heavy and the heavy load could be carried only by the
people to whom it belonged. He called upon ‘Ali Al-Hamzah and Obeidah
Ibn Al-Harith (all from the clan of the Prophet) to face the three
warriors.

‘Ali destroyed Al-Walid and Al-Hamzah killed Utbah; then they both
assisted Obeidah against his opponent Sheibah. Sheibah died immediately
and Obeidah was the first martyr at this battle. He died after he lost
his leg.

When the general offensive began hundreds of companions participated in
the battle. They offered sacrifices and pleased their Lord. But the
members of the House of the Messenger distinguished themselves. ‘Ali's
endeavor was unique at this battle.

When Hanthala Ibn Abu Sufyan faced him ‘Ali liquified his eyes with one
blow from his sword. He annihilated Al-Aws Ibn Sa-eed and met Tuaima Ibn
Uday and transfixed him with his spear saying: "You shall not dispute
with us in God after today.”

The Messenger took a handful of gravel when the battle was extremely
heated. He threw it at the faces of the pagans saying: "May your faces
be disfigured. God terrify their hearts and invalidate their feet." The
pagans ran away turning their faces to no one. The Muslims went on
killing them and taking prisoners.

Seventy pagans met their death and the Muslims took from them seventy
prisoners. History preserved in its records only fifty of the names out
of the seventy pagan losses. Twenty[^2] or twenty-two[^3] of them died
at ‘Ali's hands.

This battle laid the foundation of the Islamic State and made out of the
Muslims a force to be reckoned with by the dwellers of the Arabic
Peninsula.

However we should not overlook the fact that it took three hundred and
twelve companions to achieve sixty percent of the outcome of the battle
while ‘Ali alone achieved at least forty percent of it. It is not an
exaggeration to say that his endeavor was a very substantial factor in
bringing the battle to its victorious conclusion. Should we subtract his
forty percent the outcome of the battle might have changed. On the other
hand if we subtract any other single companion in that battle the
outcome of the battle would not have changed.

[^1]: Ibn Hisham Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p. 621.

[^2]: Ibn Hisham Biography of the Prophet pp. 708-713.

[^3]: Al-Waqidi Al-Maghazi (Oxford printing) Part 1 p. 152.


