21. Uthman’s Reign
==================

The Electoral Convention produced its expected conclusion. Uthman became
the Third Caliph. As a companion Uthman was not less than his two
predecessors: Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. He was a member of the fourth ten of
the early Muslims (among the first 40 muslims).

His Islam was earlier than that of ‘Umar and before his conversion he
was not as violent as ‘Umar in opposing Islam. He had a distinction
which neither of his two predecessors had: being the son-in-law of the
Messenger twice.

He married Ruqayah one of the daughters of the Prophet. The fruit of
this marriage was a son named Abdullah who died at the age of six after
the death of his mother. After Ruqayah Uthman married her sister Om
Kulthoom. She also did not live long with him. She died during the life
of her Holy father.

Non-Combatant
-------------

Uthman did not attend the Battle of Badr. He was in Medinah helping his
sick wife Ruqayah who died before the return of her Holy father from the
battlefield. Uthman attended the Battle of Uhud and other battles.

History does not record any physical participation on his part in a
fight at any battle. Like the majority of the companions he deserted the
Prophet during the Battle of Uhud. He returned to the Prophet after the
battle ended and he was one of the companions who were forgiven by the
Almighty according to the Holy Qur'an.

***"Those who turned their back on the day the two hosts met it was
Satan who caused them to fall because of some evil they have done. But
God has*** ***blotted out their sin. For God is Most-Forgiving Most
Forbearing." The Holy Quran Chapter 3 verse 155.***

Uthman was not a warrior but he was charitable. He participated
effectively in funding the army of Tabuk. It is reported that he brought
to the Messenger a thousand dinars (equivalent to ten thousand dollars)
to be spent in financing the military mission. He did other charities.

Uthman came to power at the end of the twenty-third year after the
Hijrah (644 A.D.). His reign started after he passed seventy and
continued for twelve years.

During the first six years of his reign the affairs of his
administration went well. The Muslims achieved many victories during
this period. They were still in a state of war with the two prominent
Empires of that time: The Persian and Byzantine Empires. What was left
of the Persian Empire during the reign of ‘Umar came into the Islamic
Dominion. North Africa was also detached from the Roman Empire to become
a part of the Muslim State. The Third Caliph lifted the ban against
military use of the seaways. An important Islamic fleet was built in the
Mediterranean.

The last six years of the reign of the Third Caliph were full of ugly
events. The class struggle between the over-paid and the under-paid
started to grow rapidly until it exploded with a revolution whose first
victim was the Third Caliph. The events which took place during the last
six years were germinated before this period. The seeds of these events
were born at the beginning of his reign ot during the reigns of his
predecessors.

A Bridging Personality
----------------------

Uthman possessed neither the wisdom nor the determination of his
predecessors. Nor did he have their non-materialistic attitude. In fact
his personality had two sides opposed to each other. On the one hand he
was an early Muslim. He accompanied the Messenger for a long time
acquired the honor of marrying two daughters of the Messenger and was
charitable for the cause of Islam.

On the other hand he was a member of the Umayyad clan. His love to them
was unbounded in spite of their dark past towards the faith of Islam and
its Prophet. These two sides of his personality made the outstanding
companions foresee the Third Caliph's potential as a bridge over which
the caliphate might pass from the righteous reign of the early
companions of Muhammad to the despotic and unjust reign of the members
of the clan of Umayyad.

The reader may remember that when ‘Umar issued his instructions
concerning the selection of his successor ‘Ali said to his uncle
Al-Abbas: "I know that they will select Uthman and if he is killed or
dies the members of the Umayyad clan will make the caliphate rotate
among themselves and if I am alive they will find me where they
dislike.".

It is amazing that Quraish refused to give the leadership to the Imam
‘Ali fearing that the leadership might rest in the House of the Prophet
because of their unequaled religious honor yet Quraish chose to make the
caliphate rest in the House of Umayyad which was noted for its hostility
towards the Messenger and his religion.

Early Opposition
----------------

This was probably one of the reasons which made two outstanding
companions Ammar Ibn Yasir and Al-Maqdad Ibn Al-Aswad start their
opposition to Uthman at the very beginning of his reign. They loudly
objected to his coming to power in spite of what they knew of his
righteousness.

History recorded that Ammar came out shouting after Uthman’s election:
"Announcer of death come forward and announce the death of Islam.
Justice has died and evil emerged. By God if I find supporters I will
fight the Qureshites. By God if I find one person ready to fight them I
will be his second."[^1]

He came to the Imam ‘Ali and called upon him to start war against the
Qureshites. But the Imam reminded him of the lack of support. He said to
him and others: "I do not like to endanger you or burden you with what
is beyond your ability."

Al-Miqdad came out on the day following Uthman’s elction. While he was
walking he met Abdul Rahman Ibn Ouf the king-maker who was responsible
for Uthman’s selection. A confrontation between the two companions took
place and went as follows: Al-Miqdad: "Abdul-Rahman may God reward you
in this world and the Hereafter if you have sought to please God by what
you did. May He increase your wealth if you have sought by what you did
a worldly gain."

Abdul-Rahman: "May God have mercy upon you; listen to me.".

Al-Miqdad: "By God I will not listen." He pulled his hand from
Abdul-Rahman's hand and left.

The two companions had another confrontation at another occasion:

Al-Miqdad: By God I have never seen anything similar to what was done to
the members of this House (of the Prophet)

Abdul-Rahman: Miqdad why are you concerned with this?

Al-Miqdad: By God I love them for the love of the Messenger of God. I am
amazed by the Qureshites who claim superiority over other people because
of their relationship to the Prophet then allow themselves to take the
authority of the Prophet away from the members of his House.

Abdul-Rahman: By God I have tried to do what is best for the interest of
the people.

Al-Miqdad: By God you have left a man who is capable of leading the
nation to the right road and maintaining truth and executing justice. By
God if I have supporters against the Qureshites I will fight them as I
fought them at Badr and Uhud.".

Abdul-Rahman: May your mother be bereaved by your death. Let no one hear
those words from you. I am afraid that you may have become revisionist
and devisive.

Al-Miqdad: A person that invites people to follow the truth and right
leadership is not revisionist. But the one who drives people to the
falsehood and prefers his own interest above the truth is the man of
revision and division..."[^2]

Neither Ammar nor Al-Maqdad had any political ambitions and neither of
them was seeking through his endeavor any material gain. These
companions were highly commended by the Messenger.

Ibn Majah reported in his Sunan that the Messenger said: "God has
commanded me to love four persons and informed me that He loves them."
When he was asked who they were he said "‘Ali is of them (repeating that
three times) Abu Dharr Salman and Al-Miqdad."[^3]

Al-Tirmidhi reported in his Sunan that the Messenger said: "Every
Prophet was given distinguished companions but I was given fourteen."
Then he counted Ammar and Al-Miqdad among the fourteen.[^4]

Al-Tirmidhi also reported that the Prophet said when Ammar Ibn Yasir
asked permission to enter the house of the Prophet: "Admit him. Welcome
the good the purified."[^5]

He also recorded that Ayshah reported that the Messenger said: "Whenever
Ammar is given the choice between two alternatives he chooses the more
righteous of the two."[^6]

Al-Tirmidhi reported also that the Messenger said to Ammar: "Ammar be
cheerful the aggressor party will kill you."[^7]

Implementation Of The Umayyad's Plan
------------------------------------

What these good companions had seen through their intuition was becoming
true. The signs of the future started to emerge quickly.

The members of the Umayyad clan met at the house of Uthman after he was
elected. Abu Sufyan their old man who had lost his sight through aging
asked them: "Are there any outsiders among you?"

When they assured him that there were none he said: "Children of Umayyad
rotate it (the caliphate) among you as boys rotate a football. By the
one in whose name Abu Sufyan swears there shall be neither a punishment
nor requirement of account. Nor will there be a paradise or a hell or
resurrection or a Day of Judgement."[^8]

The Caliph of course chided him but this did not change the attitude of
Abu Sufyan. He asked a man to lead him to the grave of Al-Hamzah uncle
of the Prophet Muhammad and the prince of the martyrs.

When he stood on the grave he said addressing Al-Hamzah: "Abu Imarah (a
code name of Al-Hamzah) the matter for which we gladiated with each
other has become a play in the hands of our youth." Then he kicked the
grave with his foot.[^9]

He meant that the Umayyads and the Prophet Muhammad and his family
fought each other for authority. Now the authority had come into the
hands of Umayyads and the members of the House of the Prophet were
deprived of it.

It did not take long before these words were translated into a reality.
The members of the Umayyad clan exploited the simplicity of the Third
Caliph and his extreme love for them. Within the first few years of his
reign they put their hands on the two sources of power: The authority of
the important provinces of the Islamic state and their treasuries.

The main power and wealth of the Islamic state were in three provinces:
Syria Iraq and Egypt. During the first few years of the reign of Uthman
these vast areas became Umayyad princedoms.

Muawiya and Syria
-----------------

We have mentioned (Chapter 19) that ‘Umar appointed Muawiya governor of
Damascus then he added Jordan to his authority after the death of Yazeed
(Muawiya's brother). ‘Umar also appointed Omair Ibn Saad (a Medinite)
the governor of Homs and Quinnisrine and Abdul- Rahman Ibn Alqamah the
governor of Palestine. When ‘Umar died these two men were still in their
posts. But Abdul-Rahman Ibn Alqamah died at the beginning of the reign
of Uthman and Omair resigned because of ailment.

Uthman added Palestine Homs and Qinnisrine to the authority of
Muawiya.[^10] Thus within two years from the beginning of the reign of
Uthman Muawiya became the governor of what is called today the Greater
Syria.

Muawiya's influence started to grow during the days of ‘Umar. Yet it
remained relatively limited in size and heavily supervised by ‘Umar. The
size of his area was more than doubled during the reign of Uthman and
his influence became almost absolute and free of any supervision.

Within a few years Syria became an autonomous state within the Islamic
state and Muawiya became the strong man of the Muslim world. Within a
few years he was able to put in the battlefield a huge army containing
one hundred thousand soldiers. It is worthy to note that Muawiya was no
more righteous than his father Abu Sufyan.

Ibn Abu Sarh In Egypt
---------------------

‘Umar died while Amr Ibn Al-Aws was the governor of Egypt. Uthman
dismissed him during the first two years of his reign. He replaced him
with his foster brother Abdullah Ibn Saad Ibn Abu Sarh who remained in
his position until the end of Uthman’s reign.

Ibn Abu Sarh was one of the enemies of the Holy Prophet. He professed
Islam during the time of the Messenger then deserted the faith. He used
to ridicule the Holy Qur'an saying: "I shall reveal equal to what God
has revealed to Muhammad."

Ibn Hisham reported that Ibn Abu Sarh embraced Islam and became a
recorder of the revelation for the Prophet. Then he deserted the faith
and went back to Quraish. When the Messenger entered Mecca he ordered
his execution. Ibn Abu Sarh took refuge at Uthman’s house who was his
foster brother and Uthman hid him. When the situation calmed down Uthman
brought him to the Messenger asking clemency for Abdullah.

The Messenger kept silent for a good while then said: yes. When Uthman
and his foster brother left the Messenger said to the companions around
him: "I kept silent for a while hoping that one of you would kill him."
A Medinite companion asked: "Prophet of God why did you not give me a
signal?" The Messenger replied: "A Prophet does not kill by
signal."[^11]

Iraq there were two important cities in Iraq: Kufah and Basra. ‘Umar
appointed Saad Ibn Abu Waqass to be governor of Kufah. Then he dismissed
him and replaced him by Al-Mughirah Ibn Shubah.

When Uthman came to power he dismissed Al-Mughirah and replaced him by
Saad Ibn Abu Waqass in response to a recommendation by ‘Umar before his
death.

Saad was a highly respected companion and gained a prominent position
when ‘Umar made him a member of the Electoral Convention. In spite of
this Uthman kept him in the gubernatorial post for only one year. He
replaced him with Walid Ibn Aqabah a cousin and a half-brother of the
Third Caliph.

Walid was a transgressor by the testimony of the Holy Qur'an. He
embraced Islam after the year of the Hudeibeyah truce. The Messenger
sent him to the tribe of Banu Al-Mustaliq to collect their Zakat.

Expecting his arrival Banu Al-Mustaliq rode their horses to receive him.
Beholding their coming toward him he was frightened and went back to the
Prophet before meeting them. He told the Prophet that Banu Al-Mustaliq
wanted to kill him. Relying upon his information the Muslims considered
a punitive action against the Mustaliqites.

But the Mustaliqites came to the Prophet and informed him that their
intention was to receive and honor Walid rather than to kill him. A
revelation concerning Walid and the Mustaliqites came down prohibiting
the believers from reliance on information of unrighteous persons such
as Walid because a transgressor is unworthy of reliance. Thus we read in
the Chapter of Al-Hujorat the following:

"O you who believe if a transgressor comes to you with news try to
verify it lest you harm people unwittingly and afterward you would
regret what you have done. And know that among you is God's Apostle:

Were he in many matters to follow your opinions you would have certainly
got into misfortune; but God has endeared the faith to you and made it
beautiful in your hearts and He has made hateful to you the unbelief
wickedness and rebellion. Such indeed are those who walk in
righteousness."[^12]

It is evident that Walid had kept his pre-Islamic mentality for the rest
of his life. He remained in the governorship of Kufah for five years
until witnesses from the people of Kufah testified that he took
intoxicants.

He was given the prescribed punishment and the Caliph was required to
dismiss him. The situation of Walid was not unknown to Uthman and to the
good Muslims especially after the Holy Qur'an called him a transgressor.

It is reported that when Walid came to replace Saad Saad asked him:
"Have you become wise or have we become fools?" Walid replied: "Abu
Is-Haq (the code name of Saad) neither of this is the case. It is the
royal authority which some people take as lunch and then others take it
as supper." Saad replied: "You (Umayyad) evidently have made the
caliphate a kingdom." Abdullah Ibn Masud also said to Walid: "I do not
know whether you have become good or people have became bad."[^13]

As the Caliph was required to dismiss his foster brother after he was
scandalized by his own deeds the Caliph was expected to replace him by a
companion such as Saad Ibn Abu Waqass or Ammar Ibn Yasir or Abdullah Ibn
Masud. But the Caliph did not do any of these. He replaced him by Sa-eed
Ibn Al-Aws another Umayyad.

Although Sa-eed did not have a record as bad as that of Walid he was
only one of the Umayyad youths whose governorship did not inspire people
of Kufah with confidence nor rectify what needed to be rectified. We
shall see later that the events took a turn from bad to worse during the
days of Sa-eed.

In Basra When ‘Umar died Abu Musa Al-Ashari was the governor of Basra.
He remained in his post for three or five years during the reign of
Uthman. A delegation from Basra came to the Caliph complaining of Abu
Musa's misuse of public funds.

Abu Musa was not from the good companions. He once was accused by ‘Umar
of enriching himself at the expense of the Muslims and ‘Umar took from
him the surplus of his wealth and put it back in the Islamic treasury.
Yet he kept him in his post because of his extreme loyalty to the Second
Caliph.

The Third Caliph was expected to investigate the complaint of the
Basra's delegation and replace Abu Musa (if proven guilty) by a better
companion. But Uthman did not do that. Instead he took the word of the
complainers dismissed him and replaced him with Abdullah Ibn Amir
another Umayyad youth.

Thus within a few years of Uthman’s reign the three important provinces
of the Muslim state became Umayyad princedoms. The majority of their
rulers were enemies of the Prophet and condemned by him or by the Holy
Qur'an.

The ugly impact of their appointment to such high offices could have
been minimized by a firm supervision on the part of the Caliph. It was
easy for the Caliph to surround himself with righteous and intelligent
advisors from among the companions. He could delegate to such advisors
the authority of investigating and supervising the administrations of
these provinces.

Unfortunately supervision was completely absent. The chief advisor of
the Caliph was his cousin Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam another unscrupulous
Umayyad. The power which was given to this Umayyad youth is not
available to any prime minister of our time. As a matter of fact Marwan
was the actual caliph and Uthman was only a figurehead.

Thus the caliphate was transformed actually into an Umayyad kingdom. To
prepare the Muslim world psychologically for the Umayyad rule the
Umayyad officials advocated the superiority of the Qureshites over the
rest of the Arabs and the superiority of their clan over the rest of the
Qureshites. They imposed a complete silence on the distinctions of the
members of the House of the Prophet in general and ‘Ali in particular.
They informed their subjects of the close relationship of the Umayyad to
the Messenger.

Their historical hostility to him and to the members of his House was
not to be mentioned to these subjects who were new Muslims unaware of
the history of Islam.

Muawiya one time met Ammar Ibn Yasir in Medina. In a heated argument he
told Ammar: "There are in Damascus one hundred thousands plus an equal
number of their sons and servants. They receive their annual salaries
and they do not know ‘Ali and his kinship (to the Prophet) or Ammar and
his early Islam nor Al-Zubayr and his companionship."[^14]

Jundub Ibn Abdullah Al-Azdi once tried to inform the people of Kufah
about the distinctions of the Imam ‘Ali.

When he was reported to Walid Ibn Aqabah governor of Kufah he jailed him
and did not free him until some important people mediated for his
freedom.[^15]

The Third Caliph And His Two Predecessors
-----------------------------------------

You may remember that Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf offered ‘Ali and Uthman the
caliphate stipulating that the third caliph had to follow the path of
the first two Caliphs.

‘Ali lost the caliphate because he rejected the stipulation. Uthman won
the caliphate because he accepted it.

Let us see if he fulfilled his pledge to Abdul-Rahman and to the rest of
the Muslims.

Neither of the two Caliphs appointed any of their relatives for any post
in the Islamic provinces or cities. Uthman on the contrary put his
relatives in the gubernatorial posts of all the key provinces. Was he by
doing this in accord with the way of the two Caliphs?

The Third Caliph did not appear to believe that this was inconsistent
with the way of his two predecessors. He vindicated the appointment of
his relatives by the fact that ‘Umar appointed Muawiya and men like
Muawiya such as Amr Ibn Al-Aws and Mughirah Ibn Shubah for the
governorship of Damascus Egypt and Kufah. ‘Umar did not choose for these
posts the best companions of the Prophet.

The Third Caliph could have said also that ‘Umar commissioned Walid Ibn
Aqabah as a collector of the Zakat in the land of Jazirah. Probably
‘Umar also appointed Abdullah Ibn Abu Sarh for a minor position. The
Third Caliph was right in saying this. But the fact remained that ‘Umar
did not appoint any of his relatives to any high or minor post. Uthman
appointed his relatives to high offices and gave them authorities
without any appreciable supervision.

It is justifiable to say that Uthman was not out of tune with his two
predecessors by choosing his relatives to high offices for the Umayyad
influence began and grew to a noticeable degree during the time of
‘Umar.

It was only natural for that influence to be escalated during the reign
of Uthman by the factor of time and the membership of Uthman to the
Umayyad clan. Had ‘Umar been unwilling to see the Umayyad influence grow
to that height he should have kept the Umayyads away from his regime.

He should not have formed the Electoral Convention or at least should
have excluded Uthman from the Convention. ‘Umar was well aware of
Uthman’s extreme love for the members of his clan.

Therefore we cannot say positively that Uthman by promoting his
relatives was inconsistent with the policy of ‘Umar for ‘Umar is the one
who started the Umayyads on the road to authority and enhanced their
influence by indirectly putting their relative Uthman in the highest
office.

Loose Fiscal Policy the aspect in which the Third Caliph was clearly
inconsistent with his predecessors was his loose fiscal policy. It is a
well-known fact that the first two Caliphs had led a very simple and
rugged life for themselves and their families.

Whenever ‘Umar ordered people to do something he expected his relatives
to be the example to the rest of the Muslims in following the order. The
Third Caliph on the contrary led a very luxurious life and he was
constantly showering his relatives with gifts from the public funds. He
privileged his relatives with huge grants while they were less adherent
to the Islamic teaching than the rest of the Muslims.

Honoring Exile of the Prophet Al-Baladhuri reported that Uthman gave his
uncle Al- Hakam Ibn Abu Al-Aws three hundred thousand dirhams
(equivalent to 300 000 dollars) after he brought him to Medina.[^16]

This man was one of the worst enemies of the Messenger before he became
a Muslim. After the Messenger conquered Mecca Al-Hakam came to Medina
declaring Islam hypocritically and only for saving his life. Yet he
continued harassing the Messenger.

He used to ridicule him by imitating his motions. The Messenger one time
saw him peeping into his room from a slit in a door. The Messenger came
out angrily and when he recognized him he said: "Should anyone blame me
for punishing this cursed insect?" Then he exiled him and his family to
Ta-if forbidding him and his children from dwelling in Medina.

By permitting Al-Hakam and his children to come back to Medina Uthman
was in clear discord with the Messenger and the first two Caliphs who
did not allow Al-Hakam to come back to Medina in spite of Uthman’s
mediation for him.

Uthman granted his foster brother Abdullah Ibn Saad Ibn Abu Sarh the
fifth of the spoils from the first expedition which Abdullah led in
North Africa. Marwan Ibn Al- Hakam purchased the fifth of the spoils of
the second expedition in North Africa for five hundred thousand dinars
(equivalent to five million dollars). Then the Caliph allowed him the
whole amount.[^17]

Khalid Ibn Abdullah Ibn Oseid (another Umayyad) received from the
treasury three hundred thousand dirhams when he visited the Caliph while
accompanying the delegation. The Caliph also ordered one hundred
thousand for each member of the delegation.

When the treasurer Abdullah Ibn Arqam refused to pay these huge sums the
Caliph proudly asked him: "Who are you to interfere with my order? You
are only my treasurer." But Abdullah retorted saying: "I did not believe
that I was your treasurer. Your treasurer is one of your servants. I am
the treasurer of the Muslims." Then he came with the keys of the
treasury and hung them on the pulpit of the Prophet at the Mosque
resigning from his post.

The Caliph ordered three hundred thousand dirhams for Abdullah Ibn Arqam
after he resigned; but out of pity Abdullah did not accept the
grant.[^18]

Uthman also gave Sa-eed Ibn Al-Aws one hundred thousand dirhams. And
when he married three or four of his daughters to men from Quraish he
gave each one of them one hundred thousand dinars. He gave his cousin
Al- Harith Ibn Al-Hakam (exile of the Prophet) three hundred thousand
dirhams. He appointed him as a collector of the Zakat of Qud-ah. When he
brought the Zakat the Caliph allowed him what he collected.[^19]

We ought not to forget that Abu Sufyan the old man of Umayyad also
received from the Caliph two hundred thousand dirhams yet the old man
fought the Prophet for twenty-one years and professed Islam only to save
his neck after he and the rest of the Meccans were completely defeated.

He rejoiced on the defeat of the Muslims by the pagans of Hawazin in
Hunain saying: "Their retreat will not end before they reach the
sea."[^20]

The Third Caliph did not only shower his relatives with public funds but
he also granted them vast pieces of lands from the public properties.

Fadak a land of orchards (which came to the ownership of the Holy
Prophet because it was acquired by the Muslims without war) also was
granted by Uthman to some of his relatives. Fadak was supposed to be
inherited totally or partly by Fatimah daughter of the Prophet but was
nationalized by Abu Bakr because of a Hadith in which he reported that
the Prophet said that what is left by the Prophets would be charity.
However Uthman granted Fadak to Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam the exile of the
Prophet![^21]

Uthman did not follow the policy of his two predecessors concerning the
public funds. He used to think that he had the right to spend out of the
Muslims' funds as he liked.

He was the Imam of the Muslims and he had the right to do with their
funds as he pleased. This is opposite of the precise and strict policy
of the Second Caliph who used to exact from his appointees a full
account concerning the public funds and ask whoever acquired a wealth
among them: "How did you get this?" And he used to return the surplus of
their wealth to the Islamic treasury.

‘Umar and Abu Hurairah
----------------------

‘Umar appointed Abu Hurairah to collect the taxes of Al-Bahrain. When he
knew that Abu Hurairah had prospered he said to him: "I sent you to
Al-Bahrain while you were barefooted unable to acquire shoes for your
feet. I have been informed that you have sold horses for sixteen hundred
dinars.".

Abu Hurairah: "I had horses which multiplied by reproduction.".

‘Umar: "I shall withhold your salary and what you used to receive of
food allotment or you will bring me the surplus of your wealth.".

Abu Hurairah: "You have no right to do that." ‘Umar: "Yes by God and I
will hurt your back." Then he hit him with his rod until his back bled
and ordered him to bring him the surplus fund.

When Abu Rurairah brought the demanded amount he said: "I hope that God
will compensate me for this." ‘Umar said: "That would be true if you had
earned it legitimately and paid it willingly. By God your mother did not
beget you to reach the position of collector of tax revenues from Hajar
Al-Yamamah and the remote area of Al-Bahrain and to collect all that for
yourself and not for God or for the Muslims. She begot you only to be a
shepherd of donkeys." Then he dismissed him.[^22]

There is a world of difference between this strict policy and that of
Uthman who used to give his relatives hundreds of thousands and
sometimes millions of dirhams seeing no wrong in doing that.

Other Grants to Other People The generosity of the Caliph was not
limited to his relatives. It was extended to others whom he used to pay
heavily either as a reward for their loyalty or as an appeasement to
some potential opponents. He gave Zaid Ibn Thabit one hundred thousand
dirhams. He gave Al-Zubayr six hundred thousand dirhams and Talhah Ibn
Ubaydullah two hundred thousand dirhams.[^23]

These two companions were members of the Electoral Convention which
brought Uthman to power.Neither of these two companions was in need of
financial assistance. Both were wealthy with big holdings and big
business. They had a great deal of real estate and of liquid funds.

It is worthy to note that history does not mention that the generosity
of the Caliph was extended to the members of the House of the Prophet to
whom the Holy Qur'an allotted at the least the sixth of the fifth of the
spoils.

The Provincial Governors' Policy The governors of the provinces did what
they were expected by adopting a policy similar to that of the Caliph in
handling the Muslims' funds. It is reported that Walid Ibn Aqabah took a
loan from the treasury of Kufah while he was the governor of the city.
When the loan matured the treasurer Adbullah Ibn Masud asked him to pay
it back but Walid did not pay it.

When the treasurer demanded the payment the governor wrote to the Caliph
complaining about the treasurer. The Caliph wrote to the treasurer
ordering him to leave Walid alone with the loan and telling him that he
was only the treasurer of the Caliph.Upon this Ibn Masud angrily
resigned.[^24]

The Muslims of Kufah were lucky enough to find a man like Abdullah Ibn
Masud who had the courage to stand up to Walid and require him to pay a
loan. The Muslims of Syria were not so fortunate. Muawiya was an
absolute ruler of Syria with no limit to his power.

He was living like a king handling the public funds of Syria as he was
handling his own funds free of supervision. He used the public funds for
purchasing loyalty and support of the chiefs of the Syrian tribes and
men of influence. He was preparing himself to succeed Uthman and he had
sufficient time for such a preparation.

As a matter of fact Muawiya started his preparation for his goal during
the days of ‘Umar. His extravagancy was evident to ‘Umar himself. When
the Second Caliph went to the Syrian front he was angered by the high
standard of Muawiya's luxurious life. But Muawiya convinced the Caliph
of the soundness of his policy using his proximity to the Roman Empire
as an excuse for his extravagance.

It is amazing that the Caliph required Abu Hurairah to give a serious
account for sixteen hundred dinars but he failed to ask Muawiya how he
could maintain his lavish way of life.

Muawiya was not the only governor who used the public funds for his own
interest. The rest of Uthman’s appointed officials followed the same
method in proportion to their authority and lack of supervision. All
were working for the goal of transforming the caliphate into a despotic
rule and the Muslim World into an Umayyad kingdom.

This unscrupulous policy had many consequences:

(1) The growth of the wealth of the wealthy class in the Islamic society
Many of the lucky individuals who received generous gifts from the
Caliph and his appointed officials invested what they received of funds
or portions of it in real estate and business. This yielded them
enormous profits.

Many of the companions who were highly paid during the days of ‘Umar
became considerably wealthy through investing the surplus of their
salaries in real estate and trades. The wealth of these companions was
expected to grow by the passage of time. When Uthman allowed the
companions to live outside Medina (ending the ban which was imposed by
‘Umar on the companions) many of the prosperous companions found new
avenues for multiplying their fortunes. They purchased buildings
orchards and lands in Iraq and other provinces. The Third Caliph also
gave vast public lands in Hijaz to many of his relatives friends and
supporters.

Transactions and exchanges of real estates between wealthy owners living
in Iraq and their counterparts in Hijaz and Yemen continued and the
Caliph encouraged these transactions.[^25] Thus many deals were made and
the fortunes of these enterprisers were increased rapidly.

Many of the companions and others became multi-millionaires. The fortune
of Al-Zubayr amounted to forty million dirhams[^26] and that of Talhah
to thirty millions[^27] and that of Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf to about three
millions.[^28]

(2) The other result of the Third Caliph's handling of public funds was
the increase of the pressure on the tax payers of the conquered
countries. The generosity of the Caliph and his appointed officials in
handling the public funds and their gifts to the individuals required
liquid funds which could not come but through overtaxation of the
conquered nations. This aspect is not mentioned clearly in our history
because the conquered nations did not have political power or voice.

A dialogue between the Caliph and Amr Ibn Al-Aws (who was once the
governor of Egypt and was replaced by Abdullah Ibo Abu Sarh) reveals the
mounting pressure on the conquered nations. The Caliph said to Amr: "The
camels are giving much more milk after you left." (He meant that more
funds were coming from Egypt after his dismissal.)

And Amr replied: "yes but their babies have perished!" (He meant that by
exacting more taxes from the Egyptians the Egyptians were being
impoverished.)[^29]

The Growth Of Opposition
------------------------

Early opposition to the Third Caliph had started at the beginning of his
reign by Ammar Ibn Yasir and Al- Miqdad Ibn Al-Aswad who were
outstanding companions and free of any political or material ambitions.
That opposition was calmed during the first few years of the Third
Caliph's reign due to the lack of support by the public and because what
they expected to happen did not happen during the early period of his
reign.

However the events which took place later contributed to the rapid
growth of the opposition. The motive behind the oppositions was either
religious or political and sometimes it was both.

Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf the one who selected Uthman and brought him to
power was one of the early critics of the Caliph. He was displeased to
see his selected Caliph following a policy opposed to that of the first
two Caliphs in spite of his pledge at the time of his selection to
follow their policy.

No doubt many companions blamed Abdul- Rahman for selecting Uthman and
depriving ‘Ali of the caliphate. They held him responsible for the
Caliph's policy in handling the public funds and imposing the authority
of the Umayyads on the Muslims.

Abdul-Rahman changed his heart towards his man and turned 180 degrees
from the Caliph's extreme supporter to the Caliph's hostile critic.

The road which Uthman took probably showed Abdul- Rahman that the
caliphate would continue in the Umayyads after the death of Uthman. The
relatives of the Caliph had become very powerful and capable of keeping
the caliphate in their clan.

With their unlimited influence on the Caliph's mind they were in a
position to convince him to make one of them his successor. Thus
Abdul-Rahman belatedly discovered that he was maintaining a false hope
of becoming Uthman’s successor.

We may remember that ‘Ali told Abdul-Rahman after he selected Uthman:
"By God you gave him the leadership only to return it to you. May God
plight you and him with a reciprocal and constant animosity!!!".

If Abdul-Rahman had a good memory he could recall the warning which he
received in his dream during the days of the Electoral Convention. He
dreamt of a green prairie into which a beautiful camel entered and
passed through without touching it. It was followed by two camels one
after another and they followed its behavior.

Then a fourth camel came and ate all he could from the grass of the
prairie. Abdul-Rahman interpreted his dream by thinking that the fourth
camel would be the third caliph who would not follow the precepts of the
Prophet and the first two caliphs in handling the public funds.

Because of this dream Abdul-Rahman did not want to be the third caliph
lest he would be the fourth camel. Had Abdul-Rahman remembered that
vision he would have realized that he did not heed the warning which it
contained. He would have realized that he had chosen the man whom he
should have left out and left out the man whom he should have cbosen.
Had he selected ‘Ali he would have avoided the nation all the tragic
events that took place later.

You may recall that ‘Umar also saw in his dream that a man entered a
garden and picked every fresh and ripe fruit taking them to himself and
putting them under him. The two visions resembled each other and so did
the responses of the two dreamers. Both chose the picker and the
gluttonous eater.

Two Other Members of the Convention Talhah and Al-Zubayr who were also
members of the Electoral Convention joined the opposition. Al-Zubayr was
less violent in his opposition than Talhah.

It is difficult to believe that the two companions opposed Uthman
because of his mishandling of the public funds. Of course the Caliph
granted his relatives huge sums of money but the two companions also had
their big shares of his generosity. The share of Al-Zubayr was six
hundred thousand dirhams and Talhah received two hundred thousand
dirhams. They could not disallow the Caliph's grant to his relatives
while legalizing it for themselves.

It seems that both men were aspirants to succeed Uthman. When ‘Umar
granted them candidacy to the high office in the Electoral Convention he
actually qualified them for leadership. The enormous wealth of the two
companions enhanced their importance in their own eyes and in the eyes
of many Muslims. Tallah gained numerous supporters in Basra and so did
Al-Zubayr in Kufah.

Like Abdul-Rahman the two companions were frightened by the rapid growth
of the Umayyads' power which made them capable of competing with any
companion for the leadership. It was disturbing to them to think that
Uthman might appoint Muawiya or another Umayyad as a successor.

The turn of events indicated that the Umayyads would keep the caliphate
in their clan blocking the road of other Qureshites to the high office.
The two companions realized that silence would contribute to the
Umayyads' success in achieving their goal. For this they decided to
oppose the Caliph and try to end his reign before he chose an Umayyad
successor. This would enable one of the two companions to succeed the
Caliph.

Ayeshah Ayeshah wife of the Prophet also joined the opposition. She
became an open critic of Uthman accusing him of taking a direction
opposite to that of the Prophet. She occasionally displayed a garment of
the Prophet saying that the garment of the Prophet had not yet
deteriorated but Uthman had brought the precepts of the Prophet into
deterioration. She used to call him Naathal (a heavily bearded Jew). The
historians recorded that she used to say: "Kill Naathal because he
deserted the faith."[^30]

It seems that her motive was merely political rather than religious. She
could not be angered by Uthman’s violation of the Islamic Law because
she allowed herself to commit a much bigger violation of God's
commandments.

She opposed ‘Ali who was the most adherent to the Book of God and the
precepts of the Prophet. She was more violent in her opposition to the
brother of the Messenger than in her opposition to Uthman.

She criticized Uthman because he injured some of the companions and
mishandled the Muslims' funds yet she waged a war in which thousands of
Muslims lost their lives. Killing the Muslims is a much bigger sin than
injuring them or usurping some of their funds.

Her motive in opposing Uthman was identical to that of Talhah and
Al-Zubayr. She wanted her cousin Talhah or her brother-in-law Al-Zubayr
to succeed Uthman. The growth of Talhah's influence in his opposition to
the Caliph was extremely pleasing to her.

Al-Tabari reported that Ayeshah said to Ibn Abbas: "You are a man of
understanding wisdom and expression.

I ask you by God not to detract people from Talhah. The situation of
Uthman has become obvious. People from various cities have gathered for
a great event which is about to take place. I am informed that Talhah is
already in control of the houses of the public funds and possesses their
keys. I think that he God willing will follow the path of his cousin Abu
Bakr." Ibn Abbas retorted saying:

"Mother if anything happens to Uthman people will resort to our man
(‘Ali)." Ayeshah of course did not agree with him but she said to him:
"Ibn Abbas I do not want to antagonize you or argue with you."[^31]

She was looking at the events with the eyes of Talhah and Al-Zubayr. Her
hope that one of the two men would reach the caliphate through
co-operation with Uthman was withering gradually by the rapid growth of
the Umayyads' power and the continuation of Uthman in his office.

It became evident to her and the two companions that the Caliph would
follow only the advice of people such as Marwan and Muawiya and that
these advisers would counsel him to choose an Umayyad successor.

Ayeshah and the two companions thought that their silence would render
assistance to the Umayyads in fulfilling their goal. For this the two
companions raised their voices against the Caliph and Ayeshah called
upon the Muslims to kill him.

Amr Ibn Al-Aws
--------------

Amr Ibn Al-Aws joined the opposition. This politician did not have the
ambition to become a caliph. He was not from the early companions or a
member of the Electoral Convention nor did he have the needed influence
to make him ambitious to reach the high office. His opposition was
motivated by the desire to avenge himself.

He was the governor of Egypt during the days of ‘Umar. He wanted to stay
in his post but Uthman dismissed him and replaced him by Adbullah Ibn
Saad Ibn Abu Sarh. He came back to Medina waiting for the opportunity to
jump the Caliph.

When Ayeshah and others started their campaign against Uthman Amr became
a noted agitator. He used his intelligence and wiliness in instigating
people against the Caliph.[^32]

When Uthman was killed Amr joined the seekers of the revenge for
Uthman’s blood because Muawiya promised him the governorship of Egypt.

Opposition From Non-Qureshite Companions
----------------------------------------

The Qureshite companions were mostly politically motivated in their
opposition to Uthman. The opposition that was religiously motivated came
from outstanding non-Qureshite companions. Most noted among these in the
history of that period was:

### Abu Dharr

When the third Caliph granted his cousin Marwan five million dirhams and
Zayd Ibn Thabit one hundred thousand dirhams and Harith Marwan's brother
three hundred thousand dirhams Abu Dharr raised his voice repeatedly
reciting the following Qur'anic verse: "Give the news of a painful
punishment to those who treasure gold and silver and do not spend them
in the way of God." Uthman sent his messengers to Abu Dharr prohibiting
him from such a recital.

Abu Dharr protested saying: "Does Uthman want to prevent me from
reciting the Book of God and denouncing those who disobey the
commandment of God? By God it is more desirable to me and better for me
to please God by displeasing Uthman rather than displeasing God by
pleasing Uthman."[^33] This attitude angered Uthman.

It was not difficult for Uthman to solve the problem of Abu Dharr and
all other critics and Abu Dharr himself prescribed to Uthman the
solution of the problem. He told him one day: "Follow the path of your
two predecessors and no one will criticize you."

But the Caliph was not of this opinion. He wanted to solve the problem
by punishing whomever he could. Evidently he did not know that
medicating the problem of sincere criticism by violence is bound to
bring him bigger problems.

Abu Dharr in Exile It was difficult for the Caliph to punish the
Qureshite critics. They were too powerful for him to punish. Abu Dharr
and others like him in spite of their brilliant Islamic record were
neither powerful nor wealthy.

The Caliph chose for these good companions a kind of punishment which
was inappropriate and inapplicable to them. He chose for Abu Dharr
punishment by exile which is prescribed by the Holy Qur'an for those who
are at war with God and His Messenger and the makers of mischief in the
land. Abu Dharr was not one of these. He was rather a righteous
companion whose motives were prohibiting evil and enjoining good. He did
not challenge the authority of the Caliph nor did he call for a revolt
against him.

The Messenger of God was criticized by a hypocrite who told him: "You
ought to be just in distributing the spoils among Muslims." The Prophet
did not exile him nor did he punish him. He only said to him: "Woe to
you. If I do not execute justice who will?"

Abu Bakr said to his electors: "Obey me as long as I obey God. If I do
not obey Him you owe me no obedience."

‘Umar used to say: "When you see a crookedness in me try to straighten
me."

Abu Dharr and Muawiya Uthman did not take the attitude of his
predecessors.

He exiled Abu Dharr to Syria placing him under the authority of Muawiya
who was actually a government within the government. Seeing the
extravagancy of Muawiya and his mishandling of the public funds Abu
Dharr raised his voice against him.

When Muawiya built his famous palace called Al-Khadra Abu Dharr said to
him: "If this is from the Muslims' fund it is a theft. If it is from
your own fund it is an extravagancy." Abu Dharr used to shout at the
door of Muawiya saying: "God may Thou curse those who enjoin good and do
not do it. May Thou curse those who prohibit evil and do it.".

Permanent Exile This irritated Muawiya. He complained about Abu Dharr to
the Caliph. The Caliph recalled Abu Dharr to Medina and he was returned
to it in a very unmerciful way. [^34]When he arrived in Medina the
Caliph found him persisting in his critical attitude towards his regime.
For this he ordered him to leave Medina. Abu Dharr asked his permission
to go back to Damascus or to go to Iraq or Egypt or to Mecca according
to some reports. The Caliph did not permit him to do so. He ordered him
to go to the desert of Najd saying to him: "Go in this direction and do
not go beyond Al-Rabathah.".

The Caliph ordered people not to speak to Abu Dharr nor give him a send
off. When Abu Dharr was departing Marwan went with him to prevent people
from talking to him. No one dared to be with Abu Dharr at his departure
except the Imam ‘Ali his two sons Al-Hassan and Al- Hussein his brother
Aqeel and Ammar Ibn Yasir. By doing this they actually defied the order
of the Caliph. This added to the deterioration of the relation between
the Imam and the Caliph. Of the Imam's valedictory words to Abu Dharr
were the following:

"Abu Dharr you opposed the rulers because they disobeyed God. Put your
hope in Him. The rulers feared you for personal interest and you feared
they would compromise your religion. Leave in their hands what they want
to protect and run away with what you want to protect. These rulers are
in a great need for the things you tried to deprive them of and you are
in no need for the things they deprived you of. You will know who has
the happy fate and who is more enviable.

Should the heavens and the earth close in on a righteous servant of God
He will grant him an exit. Let the truth be your only friend and
falsehood be your only enemy.

Had you approved their way they would have loved you; and had you shared
the spoils with them they would have trusted you."[^35]

Some historians say that Abu Dharr left Medina to Rabathah willingly but
it seems improbable that Abu Dharr had chosen to become bedouin living
in the desert rather than being in the city of the Prophet. However it
is certain that he was exiled to Damascus before he left to Rabathah
then he was brought back to Medina. He was not consulted in his exile
nor in his return.

Abu Dharr settled in Rabathah living constantly there in difficulty and
intolerable poverty until he died. When he died there were not enough
people to bury him. Had not Abdullah Ibn Masud with a few others
(including Malik Al-Ashtar) passed by Abu Dharr would not have been
buried.

The exile of Abu Dharr to Rabathah was a big political mistake on the
part of the Caliph. The good Muslims were shocked by the exile of this
outstanding companion for he was of an indomitable spirit in his
endeavors for the truth.

He was a beloved of the Messenger and the Messenger said about him:
"There is no one under Heaven and above the earth that is truer than Abu
Dharr." The righteous Muslims felt toward what happened to Abu Dharr as
they felt towards the great martyrs of the truth whose souls were filled
with dedication to high ideals for which they lived and died.

### Abdullah Ibn Masud

Abdullah Ibn Masud another non-Qureshite outstanding companion also
joined the opposition. Like Abu Dharr Abdullah had no political or
material ambition. He was the treasurer of Kufah province and he
resigned angrily when the Caliph wrote to him: "... You are only our
treasurer leave Walid (the Umayyad governor of Kufah) alone with what he
borrowed from the treasury."

It is reported that Abdullah Ibn Masud used to deliver a weekly sermon
in which he included the following words: "Certainly the truest is the
Book of God and the best guidance is the guidance of Muhammad. And the
worst deed is that which does not conform with the teaching of God and
His Messenger. For every such deed is an innovation and every innovation
is a heresy and every heresy leads to Hell."[^36]

Walid informed the Caliph of Ibn Masud's insinuating speeches and the
Caliph summoned him. When Ibn Masud entered the Mosque of the Prophet
Uthman said to the congregation: "The one that entered the Mosque is an
evil insect which causes a person to vomit and secrete when it walks on
its food." Ibn Masud said: "I am not so but I was a companion of the
Prophet at Badr Uhud Hudeibeyah the Moat and Hunain."

Uthman ordered one of his servants to throw Abdullah out of the Mosque.
The servant carried him on his shoulders and violently threw him outside
the Mosque.[^37]

Some of his ribs were broken. Then the Caliph withheld his salary.
Abdullah lived two or three years after that continuing his opposition
to Uthman. When he died he willed that Uthman should not pray over him
and Ammar Ibn Yasir was his executor. Ammar buried Abdullah without
informing the Caliph of Abdullah's death.

### Ammar Ibn Yasir

Ammar was a man of the earliest opposition to Uthman. He called upon the
Muslims to fight the community of Quraish because it chose Uthman for
leadership and left ‘Ali out. Like ‘Ali Ammar saw in the personality of
Uthman a potential bridge over which the caliphate would pass from the
good companions of Muhammad to the Umayyads.

The sequence of the events was destined only to confirm to Ammar and
others what they expected. What happened to Abu Dharr and Abdullah Ibn
Masud made Ammar more serious in his opposition to Uthman. Ibn Yasir was
not the kind of man who keeps silent when he sees what is in conflict
with the Book of God and the teachings of the Prophet.

Such opposition was expected to put Ammar in danger of severe punishment
from the Caliph. Uthman wanted to exile him as he had Abu Dharr but ‘Ali
and other companions raised strong objections which made him threaten to
exile ‘Ali himself. But ‘Ali dared him to do that.

There were some gems of great value in the treasury and Uthman gave
those gems to his ladies. People talked about that and Uthman was
angered by their talk. He said while he was giving a sermon: "We shall
take what we need from the treasury even if some people would be
displeased." ‘Ali replied: "Then you shall be prevented and stopped."
And Ammar said: "I make God my witness that I am one of the first people
who are displeased." Uthman retorted angrily: "Do you dare say that to
me? Take him."

He was taken and Uthman went to the place where Ammar was confined. He
beat him up until Ammar fainted and he stayed in swoon until he missed
the noon afternoon and sunset prayers. When he came back from his swoon
he made his ablution made up his prayers and said:

"Praise be to God. This is not the first time I was tortured for my
endeavors in the way of God."[^38]

It is reported that a group of companions (among them Talhah Al-Zubayr
Al-Miqdad and Ammar) wrote to Uthman a letter in which they criticized a
number of Uthman’s deeds accused him of betraying his religion and
warned him that they would fight him.

Ammar delivered the letter to Uthman. When Uthman read a portion of the
letter he asked Ammar: "Are you the only audacious among them to
confront me with this?" Ammar answered: "I am your best advisor among
them." Uthman said to him: "Son of Sumayah (Ammar's mother) you have
lied. Ammar retorted "I am by God son of Summayah and son of Yasir.”

Uthman ordered his servants to lay Ammar on the floor and hold his hands
and his legs. Then Uthman kicked him with his foot in the stomach. This
caused him to have a hernia. Ammar was old and weak and he fainted.
Ammar was the most outspoken and the highest voice against Uthman. His
opposition to Uthman counted heavily because of his brilliant past and
because of what the Holy Prophet said about him.

Opposition Outside Medina
-------------------------

The Qureshite Aristocracy in the Islamic society began at the beginning
of the reign of the First Caliph. In his argument for the Qureshite
leadership at the "Saqifat" conference Abu Bakr said to the natives of
Medinah that the Arabs would not accept a non-Qureshite leadership. For
Quraish was the highest community among the Arabs and the community of
the most honorable city.

Upon this the Medinites conceded the leadership to the Qureshites. Thus
the majority of the Meccan and Medinite companions conceived it as
tribal superiority. By this the Qureshite supremacy was established
though the Faith of Islam the religion of equality denies any form of
aristocracy.

This aristocracy grew during the reign of the Second Caliph and peaked
during the reign of the Third Caliph.

The notion of Qureshite superiority evolved during Uthman’s reign and
went far enough to view the Muslim world as a Qureshite Kingdom. This
was destined to have a negative reaction on the part of the enlightened
men who knew that Islam is a religion of equality and brotherhood. The
Message of Islam aims at elevating every Muslim and dignifying all
believers in God rather than dignifying a minority at the expense of
millions.The notion of Qureshite superiority evolved during Uthman’s
reign and went far enough to view the Muslim world as a Qureshite
Kingdom. This was destined to have a negative reaction on the part of
the enlightened men who knew that Islam is a religion of equality and
brotherhood. The Message of Islam aims at elevating every Muslim and
dignifying all believers in God rather than dignifying a minority at the
expense of millions.

The righteous Muslims were disturbed by Quraish's claim of superiority
in the name of religion while the Umayyads who became the leaders of the
Qureshites were of the least righteous among the Muslims.

The spark of opposition outside Medina started in Kufah. Most of its
people were Yemenites. It is reported that the beginning of this
opposition took place during the time of Sa-eed Ibn Al-Aws who succeeded
Walid Ibn Aqabah in the gubernatorial office of Kufa. Historians
disagree on the details of this event.

It is reported that some of the leaders of the city while they were
visiting the governor spoke of the orchards of Kufa. A dialogue between
them and the city Chief of Police Abdul-Rahman Ibn Khumeis took place
and went as follows: Ibn Khumeis: "I wish all these orchards were owned
by the governor and you the people of Kufah owned better than these
orchards."

Malik Al-Ashtar: "Wish the governor better than these orchards but do
not wish him to own our properties." Ibn Khumeis: "How did my wish harm
you to make you so frown on me? By God if the governor wishes he would
have these orchards."

Al Ashtar: "By God if he wants that he will not have it."

Sa-eed (angrily): "All these orchards are actually Quraish's garden."
Al-Ashtar: "Do you make what we won through our spears and what God has
given us a garden for you and your people?"

And others spoke supporting Al-Ashtar.

Al-Ashtar: "Is anybody here? Don't let this man get away with what he
said."

They jumped Ibn Khumeis treading on him severely until he fainted. Then
they dragged him by his feet. Finally his face was sprayed with water
until he woke up.

Ibn Khumeis said to Sa-eed: "The people whom you selected have killed
me.".Ibn Khumeis said to Sa-eed: "The people whom you selected have
killed me.".

Sa-eed: "No one shall spend the evening with me after this.".

Other historians recorded that some people spoke in the presence of
Sa-eed of the generosity of Talhah Ibn Ubaydullah and that comments by
the governor and his visitors went as follows:

Sa-eed: "A man that has the wealth of Talhah and his holdings ought to
be generous. Should I possess what Talhah possesses I would make you
live in prosperity."

A young man from the Asad Tribe: "I wish that you owned all the orchards
that are on the two sides of the Euphrates.".

This irritated some of the men who were present and made them speak
harshly to the youth.

The father of the youth: "He is too young. Do not punish him for what he
said." The irritated men: "He is wishing Sa-eed our own properties."
They jumped the youth. His father wanted to defend him. They beat the
father and the son until they fainted. The members of the tribe of Asad
learned about the event and came encircling the palace. Sa-eed persuaded
them to leave and they left.[^39]

Both versions of the event agree that Al-Ashtar and others with him
stayed away from the governor and spoke loudly against Sa-eed and the
Caliph. This was the occasion which made the opposition surface in
Kufah. Whether the first or second report was the truth the occasion
indicates that people during that time were fed up with Quraish its
leaders their big claims and their over-reaching hands.

The event was actually the straw that broke the camel's back. The
sequence of events was inevitably leading to some political explosion.

Abdullah Ibn Masud's sermons in which he criticized the policy of Uthman
and his officers helped to open the eyes of the people of Kufah on the
corruption in the government.

Abu Dharr's exile was also a factor in fermenting the opposition. We
have advanced that Al-Ashtar and others from Kufah were with Ibn Masud
at the time of the oppressed companion's burial.

What happened afterwards to Abdullah Ibn Masud was also another factor.
People of Kufah had a great esteem for this outstanding companion who
was violently thrown out of the Holy Mosque by order of the Caliph.

People of Kufah knew Ammar Ibn Yasir and his brilliant record in Islam.
He was the governor of their city during the reign of ‘Umar. They had a
great respect towards this outstanding companion. What happened to him
at the hand of the Third Caliph was also an additional factor which made
the explosion of the opposition from the righteous people of Kufah an
expected event. The fire was about to start and it found its spark at
Sa-eed's occasion.

The opposition of Kufah received the same kind of punishment Abu Dharr
received. Exile became the regular punishment for the criticism of the
government; and Damascus became the destination of the exiled critics.
There they received their discipline at the hands of Muawiya the strong
man of the Islamic state.

The exiled Kufans were kept at the church of Mariam.

Muawiya met them spoke to them and lectured them. The topic of his
lecture was the distinction of Quraish in the Islamic and pre-Islamic
history. He tried to substantiate the superiority of Quraish by the fact
that all communities were invaded except the Qureshites whom God
protected. He mentioned also that God made the caliphate in the
Qureshite companions of the Prophet. Thus they are the qualified ones
for leadership. Then he told them that God protected Quraish while they
were unbelievers. "Do you think that He will not protect them while they
are following His religion."[^40]

He told them also that Abu Sufyan (his father) was the most honorable
and the son of the most honorable among the Qureshites except the
Prophet then he added: "I think that if Abu Sufyan were the father of
all people all people would have been wise."[^41]

Sa-sa-ah Ibn Souhan belied him saying: "Adam was better than Abu Sufyan.
God created him by His own hand breathed in him from His spirit and
ordered the angels to bow to him. He was the father of mankind. Yet we
see among them the good and the weak the foolish and the wise.".

The logic of Muawiya was full of distortion of facts.

Re said that his father Abu Sufyan was the best man after the Messenger
(including Abu Bakr and ‘Umar)

He forgot that the Divine protection to the Qureshite was not for the
sake of Abu Sufyan his children and their likes from the Qureshites. It
was rather for the sake of the Sacred House and for the sake of the
Messenger the best of the descendants of Abraham. It was also in
response to the prayer of Abraham the Prophet of God of which the Holy
Qur'an informs us:

"And when Abraham said: 'My Lord make this a safe town and give its
settlers of fruits to those of them who believe in God and the
Hereafter.' The Almighty said: 'And whoever of them disbelieves I will
give them a respite. Then I will drive them to the chastisement of Fire;
terrible is the fate.' "[^42]

Muawiya did not know that the caliphate in the offspring of Abraham
including the Qureshites was made by appointment from God. That
appointment did not reach the unjust among them. We read in the Book of
God:

"And remember when God tested Abraham by commandments and he fulfilled
them. The Almighty said:

***'I am making you Imam of the people.' Abraham said: 'And make imams
from my offsprings.' The Almighty said: 'My covenant will not include
the unjust.' The Holy Quran Chapter 2 verse 125.***

History tells us that Muawiya freed the exiles and when they went back
to Kufah they resumed their opposition. Consequently they were exiled to
Homs. They were placed under the authority of Abdul-Rahman Ibn Khalid
Ibn Al-Walid.

This was harsher on them and more violent than Muawiya. They showed him
repentance and he released them. Al-Ashtar went back to the Caliph and
the Caliph permitted him to go wherever he chose. He went back to Homs.
When opposition grew stronger in Kufah Al-Ashtar went back to it. He and
Yazeed Ibn Qais led a multitude to a place called Al-Jarah to prevent
Sa-eed Ibn Al-Aws from re-entering Kufah. Sa-eed went back to Medina and
the Kufans demanded from Uthman to replace Sa-eed with Abu Musa.

We may realize the bitterness which exiled men used to feel when we read
a message from Malik Al-Ashtar to Uthman as an answer to the Caliph's
letter to the people of Kufah reprimanding the opposition:

"From Malik Ibn Al-Harth to the tested and sinful Caliph who is
deviating from the precepts of his Prophet and turning his back on the
rule of the Holy Qur'an.

"We have read your message. You ought to prohibit yourself and your
officers from injustice aggression and exiling our righteous men. This
will make us content to obey you. You alleged that we have wronged
ourselves.

This is your conjecture which caused you to perish (spiritually) and
made you consider inequity a justice and the wrong right. As to what we
desire we want you to change and repent and to ask God His forgiveness
for incriminating our righteous men exiling our good people driving us
out of our homes and ruling us by our youth. We desire that you appoint
Abdullah Ibn Qais Abu Musa governor of our city. We ask you to keep your
Walid and Sa-eed away from us. "[^43]

The Caliph responded to this by appointing Abu Musa governor of Kufah.

The opposition to the Caliph's policy was not confined to Kufah. It was
extended to Basra in Iraq and also to Egypt. Historians inform us that
Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr and Muhammad Ibn Abu Hutheifah went to Egypt and
instigated the people against Uthman.

With the presence of Abdullah Ibn Saad Ibn Abu Sarh in Egypt as its
governor the two Muhammad s did not need to bring to the Egyptians any
additional evidence of the corruption in the government. It is reported
that an Egyptian went to Medina complaining of the governor to the
Caliph. When the complainer came back to Egypt the governor killed him.

It is reported also that a group of companions in Medina wrote to other
companions at different provinces saying:

"If you want to make Jihad come to us. The religion of Muhammad is
corrupted by our Caliph. By this people were turned against him."[^44]

Now People Remembered ‘Ali
--------------------------

The regressing developments of the political events made the
non-Qureshite Muslims realize the gravity of the erroneous attitude of
the Qureshites toward ‘Ali. Now they could clearly see the magnitude of
the mistake which the members of the Electoral Convention had committed
when they diverted the caliphate from him to Uthman.

By doing that they drove the nation into a crisis which it had never
experienced before. It became obvious to the people of wisdom that the
nation would not have had to be confronted with such a crisis if ‘Ali
were the Caliph. Thus they began to think that ‘Ali's leadership was the
solution to the problems of the nation.

People spoke of ‘Ali loudly and Uthman started to see that ‘Ali's
existence and his presence in Medina added to his difficulties. He asked
him to leave Medina for his land in Yunbu that people might forget him;
but when the crisis grew in dimension he asked him to come back to
Medina that he might shield him against danger. Then Ibn Abbas came to
him with a message from Uthman asking him to leave for Yunbu hoping that
people would stop circulating his name. The Imam said:

"Ibn Abbas Uthman wants to treat me like a camel going back and forth to
fill the buckets with water. He told me to go to Yunbu then he asked me
to come back.Now he is asking me to go to Yunbu again. By God I have
defended him until I feared that I am committing a sin." [^45]

‘Ali faced in Uthman a problem bigger than the problem which Uthman was
facing. It was in the hands of Uthman to solve all his problems by
changing his policy in handling the public funds dismissing his relative
officials and keeping Marwan away from him. This could have regained him
the confidence of the people and their satisfaction.

‘Ali on the other hand did not possess the means to solve his problem
and the problem of the nation in Uthman.

He was seeing through the light of God that the future and the fate of
the nation would be decided to a great extent by what would happen to
Uthman. Uthman had embarked on a policy which would enable the Umayyads
to rule the Muslim world for generations to come. Yet the Umayyads were
noted for their lack of sincerity toward Islam. They embraced Islam only
after they were completely defeated.

‘Ali knew them very well as men and as children. He is the one who broke
their back and humiliated them until they adopted the faith of Islam
reluctantly. He knew that if they had the authority they would devour
the public fund enslave the servants of God and corrupt His religion.

Uthman had three alternatives: (1) Resign; (2) persist in his policy and
refuse to resign or (3) change his policy drastically. The first two
alternatives were evil and the third was not expected. If he were to
persist in his policy he would be killed. His murder would be a terrible
and ugly event. He would be the first imam to be killed by the Muslims.
The Umayyads the relatives of the Caliph already possessed enough power
to enable them to challenge the good Muslims by waging war avenging his
death using it for seizing authority.

Should Uthman be forced to resign and people elect a man to succeed him
the Umayyads having so much power would not surrender. They would be
able to claim that Uthman was the legitimate Caliph and that forcing him
out of office would not remove the legality of his leadership. By this
they would arrive at what they want. And it would become easier for them
to reach their goal than if he were killed.

The third alternative was not expected. There was nothing in the
behavior of Uthman to indicate the possibility of the needed change.
Even if he wanted to change his financial policy and dismiss his wicked
relatives Marwan would dissuade him from doing that and he did not
possess the will-power which would make him immune from his influence.

‘Ali knew all that. Yet he tried his best to reach the third alternative
in order to avoid the evil of the other two alternatives. Historians
inform us that a group of the companions of the Messenger who were
living in Medina wrote to the companions who were settling on the
borders of the Muslim state saying: "Come back to Medina. The "Jihad" is
here." People spoke ill of Uthman and none of the companions defended
him except Zied Ibn Thabit Abu Osaid Al-Sa-idy Kaab Ibn Malik and Hassan
Ibn Thabit. These were loyal to the Caliph because they had received his
generous gifts.

The Imam Mediates the companions met together and spoke to ‘Ali to
mediate between them and Uthman. He met the Caliph and spoke to him
saying:

"The people behind me asked me to mediate between you and them. By God I
don't know what to tell you.

Nor do I know something which you don't know. Nor can I point to matters
of which you are ignorant. You have seen heard and accompanied the
Messenger of God and acquired the honor of being his son-in-law.You are
not less expected to do good than Ibn Abu Quhafah (Abu Bakr) and Ibn
Al-Khattab (‘Umar)

You are closer than both of them to the Messenger of God and you have
acquired through marriage what they did not acquire. Nor were they ahead
of you in anything. I ask you in the name of God to be merciful to
yourself. You are not suffering blindness nor ignorance.The right road
is clear and obvious and the demarcation of religion is standing.

"Uthman remember that the best of the servants of God in the eyes of God
is a just imam who is led to the truth and leads to the truth. Thus he
establishes a well-known precept and abolishes an abandoned innovation.
The worst of all is an unjust Imam who is erroneous leading to error.
Thus he abolishes a well-known precept and revives an abandoned
innovation.

"I have heard the Messenger of God saying: 'An unjust Imam will be
brought on the Day of Judgement while he has no helper nor a vindicator.
He will be thrown into hell.... I warn you of the wrath of God and His
smite and chastisement. Certainly His chastisement is painful and
severe. I warn you not to be the murdered imam of this nation. It is
said that an imam will be killed and his death will open on the nation
the door of killing and wars until the Day of Judgement. He will confuse
the affairs of the nation and throw the Muslims into divisions that they
will not be able to see the truth because of the height of the
falsehood....'"[^46]

The words of the Imam did not please the Caliph. A dialogue between the
two men took place as follows: Uthman: "‘Umar appointed and kept in
office people like those whom I appointed and kept in office."

‘Ali: "‘Umar appointed such people but he used to tread on their heads.
When he knew of any minor violation by any of them he used to summon him
and punish him severely. You are weakened because you are too lenient on
your relatives.".

Uthman: "They are your relatives also." ‘Ali: "Yes they are but virtue
is not in them."

Uthman: "Do you not know that ‘Umar appointed Muawiya and kept him in
office for the duration of his reign?"

‘Ali: "I ask you in the name of God. Do you not know that Muawiya was
afraid of ‘Umar more than Yarfah ‘Umar's servant?".

Uthman: "Yes." ‘Ali: "Muawiya makes his decisions without consulting you
then he tells people: 'This is the order of Uthman.' You know it and you
do not change anything. Nor do you stop him from doing what he is
doing."[^47]

Thus ‘Ali unlike any other person did not take advantage of the
difficulties of a Caliph whom he considered to be usurper of his right
in leadership. He rose above that and was most protective of him
endeavoring to correct the situation of his adversary because his fate
had a bearing on the fate of the whole nation.

But Uthman considered his advice provocative. He went to the pulpit and
delivered a fiery speech threatening the opposition with punishment. He
was expected to do only that so long as Marwan was his chief advisor.
Thus the fire of opposition became more inflamed.

The Caliph Is Besieged
----------------------

The messages which were sent by the companions residing in Medinah to
people of various provinces brought its expected results. Groups from
Egypt Kufah and Basra came to Medinah asking the Caliph to dismiss his
ruling relatives or resign. Otherwise they were ready to kill him.

When the Caliph realized the seriousness of the situation he came to
‘Ali and asked him to mediate between him and his adversaries.

‘Ali asked him: "What are your terms for reconciliation?" The Caliph
replied: "You are fully authorized to pledge to them whatever you
choose. I shall do whatever you propose." ‘Ali reminded him that he
spoke to him re peatedly about certain corrective measures and that the
Caliph time after time promised to take those measures.

Then the promises remained unfulfilled by the Caliph who was influenced
by Marwan Muawiya Ibn Amir and Abdullah Ibn Saad Ibn Abu Sarh. Uthman
replied: "I will disobey them and obey you."

Accompanied by thirty men from the Qureshites and the Medinites the Imam
went to meet the Egyptian group.

He convinced them not to resort to violence and promised them on behalf
of the Caliph to fulfill their demands of dismissing his relatives and
changing his policy in handling the public fund. When he went back to
the Caliph he advised him to go to the Mosque and pledge publicly to
make the reform.

Repentance and retreat The Caliph responded positively to the good
advice. He went to the pulpit and addressed the congregation saying:

"I am the first one that should obey God. I ask God to forgive me for
what I did. I shall repent to him. A man like me is expected to change
and repent. When I come down let your leaders come and make a decision
about me. By God if justice reduces me to a slave I shall do what a
slave does and I shall be as humble as a slave. There is no escape from
the anger of God but through Him. By God I shall give you the
satisfaction and I will keep Marwan and my relatives away from me. I
shall not seclude myself from you."[^48]

These words moved the audience. They wept until tears moistened their
beards and the Caliph wept and people hoped for the good.

Marwan was waiting. As soon as Uthman came back to his home Marwan
dissuaded him and brought him back to his old hard line. Marwan went out
facing the multitude which were waiting for the reform. He reprimanded
them and told them"... You have come to rob us of the authority which is
in our hands. Go away. By God if you challenge us you will see what will
displease you...".

When ‘Ali knew what happened he said: "Servants of God if I sit home he
says: 'You let me down in spite of my relationship to you and what I am
entitled to of your respect. If I try to help him and a good comes out
of my effort Marwan dissuades him and deceives him. He has become an
obedient tool in the hands of Marwan after having been the companion of
the Prophet." He went to Uthman and spoke to him angrily saying:

"You couldn't satisfy Marwan but by your deviation from your religion
and wisdom. You have become like a ridden camel led by his rider to
wherever he pleases.

By God I forsee that he will bring you to danger but he will not be able
to take you out of it. I will not come back to you after this. You have
ruined your honor and lost the power of judgement."[^49]

‘Ali ceased to mediate between Uthman and the rebels.

When Uthman was besieged he came to him and told him: "I have the right
of brotherhood of Islam relationship to you and of being a son-in-law of
the Prophet. If none of these things existed and we were in pre-Islamic
days it would be shameful to the children of Abd Munaf (the great
grandfather of the Hashimites and the Umayyads) to let a man from Tyme
(Talhah Ibn Ubaydullah) rob us of our authority.".

Talhah was strongly supporting the rebels. He helped them and approved
their siege of Uthman. Probably their invasion of Medina was the result
of his communication and instigation.

‘Ali went to Talhah and found people gathering around him. He asked
Talhah: "What are you involving yourself in?" Talhah replied: "It is too
late." (He meant that Uthman is coming to his end.) ‘Ali went to the
treasury and asked that it be opened. When the keys were not found he
broke the door and distributed some of what was in the treasury among
people who were gathering around Talhah.

They left him and Uthman was pleased with that. Talhah came to Uthman
and said: "Amir Al-Muminine (Commander of the Believers) I wanted
something and God barred me from it." Uthman replied: "By Cod you did
not come repenting; you are only defeated. May God hold you accountable
for what you did."[^50]

Ibn Al-Athir reported that Ibn Abbas said: "I came to Uthman when he was
besieged. (This was before Uthman sent Ibn Abbas as a leader of the
pilgrims during that year.) He (Uthman) held my hand and led me to the
door ordering me to listen to the words of the besiegers. Some of them
were saying: 'What are we waiting for?'

Others said: 'Let us wait. Probably he will change.' While we were
standing. Talhah came and asked about Ibn Odais (One of the leaders of
the Egyptian rebels) Ibn Odais went to Talhah confiding in him. When Ibn
Odais returned he ordered his followers not to let anyone go into or
come out of Uthman’s house.

Uthman said to Ibn Abbas: "This is the order of Talhah. God take care of
Talhah. He instigated these people against me. By God I hope that his
share of the caliphate will be zero and that his blood will be shed."
Ibn Abbas said: "When I wanted to leave the house they prevented me
until Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr interceded for me."[^51]

As to Al-Zubayr it is said that he left Medina before Uthman was killed.
Some historians reported that he was present in Medina when Uthman died.
Ayeshah went on pilgrimage and while in her devotional duty she was
urging people to repudiate Uthman.

When Uthman was besieged the rebels cut off his water supply. ‘Ali came
with a skin of water and spoke to Talhah saying: "This water has to be
allowed to Uthman " then it was allowed. He attempted another time to
bring him water and spoke to the rebels saying: "What you are doing does
not resemble the deed of the believers or unbelievers! Cut not this man
from his water supply. The Romans and the Persians feed and give water
to their prisoners." But the rebels refused to allow the water in.

The siege of the Caliph continued for forty days. The rebels were trying
to force him to change his policy or resign. He refused to resign
saying: "I Will not take off a shirt which God put on me.".

Probably Uthman was right in his refusal to resign. But he was wrong in
saying that the caliphate was a shirt which God had put on him for his
leadership was not by an appointment from God or His Messenger. The one
who put the shirt on him was Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf and behind him the
Qureshites; or we may say that the Second Caliph was the one who put the
shirt on Uthman.

It seems that the rebels were not determined to force the Caliph to
resign nor were they willing to kill him. All they wanted from him was
to change his policy in handling the public funds dismiss his relative
governors and keep Marwan away from him.

He promised to do that but he never fulfilled his promise. Thus they
asked him to resign and he refused. Now some of the rebels resorted to
violence.

Muawiya Let the Caliph Down It is amazing that Muawiya and the rest of
the Umayyad governors did not seriously attempt to rescue their relative
Caliph. They did not send armies to break the siege around him or to
prevent the invaders from killing him.

Yet the Caliph asked their help. lt is reported that Muawiya sent an
army which came near Medina but did not enter it while the Caliph was
besieged. Muawiya ordered the commander of the army not to do anything
until he received his order. He told him: "Say not that the present sees
what the absent does not see. You are the absent and I am the present.".

And So the Medinites
--------------------

The other thing which can be easily noticed in the recorded events of
those days is the absence of any resistance on the part of the
Medinites. They neither challenged the invading rebels nor did they
prevent them from killing the Caliph. It seems that the Qureshites from
the inhabitants of Medina (with the exception of Umayyads) were not in
sympathy with Uthman.

They were fed up with the Umayyads and the extreme growth of their
influence in the Muslim world. The majority of the Qureshites in Medina
were sharing with Ayeshah Talhah and Al-Zubier their feelings towards
the Caliph.

The majority of the Medinites were displeased with Uthman’s policy of
glorifying the Qureshites and putting the Umayyads the least religious
clan among the Qureshites on the necks of the Muslims. The natives of
Medina evidently did not feel that they owed the Caliph a serious
support because they did not receive what the Qureshites received of his
generosity. By their nature the natives of Medina were more religious
than the Qureshites.

Thus the majority of the inhabitants of Medina let Uthman down and did
not defend him though they were much more numerous than the invading
rebels.

The Imam ‘Ali was the companion most opposed to the murder of Uthman and
the most sincere in trying to correct the Caliph's policy. He did not
only show his sympathy toward him by word; he tried to defend him by
arm. He endangered the lives of his two sons Al-Hassan and Al- Hussein
who were to him more valuable than his two eyes.

He sent the two young men to protect Uthman and ordered them to stand in
arm at his door to prevent the rebels from entering his house.Finally
the rebels were informed that armies from various cities were on their
way to Medina to rescue Uthman.

Some of the rebels felt that the only solution was to kill the Caliph.
Since they could not enter the door they climbed up to the house from
over the wall and killed him while the guards at the door did not know
what took place.

Thus what ‘Ali tried fervently to prevent occurred and all his efforts
to prevent it from happening failed. The murder of the Caliph was an
ugly event whose consequences were dangerous to the future of Islam and
Muslims. This was not necessary to happen had the Caliph listened to
‘Ali's advice by purging his regime from the wicked officials and
purifying the state from corruptions.

Had he listened to ‘Ali's advice by following the policy of his two
predecessors Abu Bakr and ‘Umar Uthman would not have been killed. But
Uthman was not in control of the affairs. Marwan son of the exile of the
Prophet was the actual ruler of the Muslim world and the chief advisor
of the Caliph. He was able to steer him in any direction he chose.

However I doubt that Uthman was able even if he wanted to dismiss
Muawiya who had become stronger than the Caliph. Suppose that Uthman
told Muawiya to leave his post and he refused to do that. Would Uthman
attempt to force him out of office? And had he enough power to do that?

[^1]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balagah Vol. 2 pp.
411-412.

[^2]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid in his Commentary on Nahjul-Balagha Vol.2 pp.
411-412.

[^3]: Ibn Majah his Sunan Part 1 p. 53 (hadith No. 149)

[^4]: Al-Tirmidhi his Sunan Part 5 p. 329 (hadith No. 149)

[^5]: Al-Tirmidhi his Sunan Part 5 p. 332.

[^6]: Al-Tirmidhi his Sunan Part 5 pp. 332-333.

[^7]: Al-Tirmidhi his Sunan Part 5 pp. 332-333.

[^8]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid in his Commentaries of Nahjul-Balaghah Vol.2 p.
411.

[^9]: Obd Al-Fattah Abd Al-Masqood Al-Imam ‘Ali Part 1 p. 287.

[^10]: Ibn Al-Athir in Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 57.

[^11]: Ibn Hisham Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p. 409.

[^12]: Chapter 49 verse 6-7 Ibn Hisham recorded the event in his
Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p. 296.

[^13]: Ibn Al-Athir in Al-Kamil Part 3. p. 40.

[^14]: Abdul-Fattah Abd Al-Maqsud in Al-Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib Part 2
p. 120.

[^15]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid in his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol.2 p.
412.

[^16]: Al-BaladhuriAnsab Al-Ashraf Part 4 p. 28.

[^17]: Ibn Al-Athir in Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 49.

[^18]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 p. 193.

[^19]: Dr. Taha Hussein in his Al-Fitna tul-Kubra Part 2 p. 193.

[^20]: Ibn Hisham recorded this in his Biography of the Prophet Part 2
p. 443.

[^21]: Abu Dawood Sunan Abu Dawood Part 2 p. 127.

[^22]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid in his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol.3 p.
104.

[^23]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 p. 77.

[^24]: Al-Baladhuriin Ansab Al-Ashraf Part 4 p. 31.

[^25]: Ibn Al-Athir in Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 52.

[^26]: Ibn Sa’d in his Al-Tabaqat Part 3 p. 110.

[^27]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat Part 3 p. 222.

[^28]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat Part 3 p. 126.

[^29]: Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1.

[^30]: Al-Tabari History of Messengers and Kings about the events of the
year 36 p. 3112 and Ibn Al-Athir in Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 102.

[^31]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol.2 p. 506.

[^32]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 82.

[^33]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol. 1 p. 240.

[^34]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 56.

[^35]: Nahjul-Balaghah Part 2 pp.12-13.

[^36]: Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 p. 160.

[^37]: Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 pp. 160-161.

[^38]: Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 p. 167.

[^39]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil Vol.3 pp. 71-72.

[^40]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil Vol 3 p. 70.

[^41]: Ibn Al-Athir Vol.3 p. 71.

[^42]: Chapter 2 verse 127.

[^43]: Al-BaladhuriAnsabul-Ashraf Part 4 p. 46.

[^44]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil. Vol.3 pp. 73 and 83.

[^45]: Nahjul-Balaghah Part 2 p. 233.

[^46]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 76.

[^47]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 76.

[^48]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil Parr 3 p. 82.

[^49]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 82.

[^50]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 84.

[^51]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 87.


