22. The Election of the Imam ‘Ali
=================================

Had Quraish (Meccan Community) remained in control of the political
affairs during the first few days after the death of Uthman it would
have prevented the Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib from coming to power. Had
Tallah Al-Zubayr and their supporters expected ‘Ali to come to power
they would not have opposed Uthman or called for his assassination.

Each of the two companions was hopeful that he rather than ‘Ali would be
the fourth caliph and Quraish was determined to use all its power to
keep ‘Ali away from the caliphate. You may remember that the Imam said
to the Hashimites when the Second Caliph issued his instructions
concerning the Electoral Convention: "Should your people (the
Qureshites) be obeyed in matters pertaining to you you will never be
given the leadership."[^1]

Fortunately Quraish lost the political initiative for a few days after
Uthman’s assassination. The Qureshites were astonished and numbed and
they did not know what to do. It is true that the non-Umayyad Qureshite
leaders instigated the uprising against Uthman and called for his
assassination. Yet the people who made the revolution were from outside
Mecca and Medina.

They were Egyptians Bassrites and Kufites. These revolutionary elements
were in control of the political affairs having what the Qureshites did
not have of influence during that short period.

The reign of the Third Caliph exhibited to the Muslims that Quraish had
committed a classical error when it diverted the caliphate from ‘Ali to
Uthman. The natives of Medina found in the few days following his death
a breathing time and an opportunity to liberate themselves from the
Qureshite influence and its despotic role in directing the caliphate and
giving it to whomever it chose.

Thus Quraish for the first time was not obeyed in a matter pertaining to
the House of the Prophet. Therefore the House of the Prophet was given
the leadership and ‘Ali who was the head of the House was elected.

It was ironic concerning the caliphate that ‘Ali desired to be the
elected caliph when Abu Bakr was elected when ‘Umar was appointed and
when Uthman was selected.

And at each time Quraish used to stand in his way and divert the
caliphate from him to others. Yet his desire and the Qureshite desire
did not clash when he was offered the caliphate after the death of
Uthman.

The Qureshite leaders were wishing out of jealousy that ‘Ali would not
be given the leadership. ‘Ali on the other hand wished that the
caliphate would be diverted from him because he expected to face
tremendous difficulties which could not be surmounted by a man of
principle such as ‘Ali.

A Drafted Caliph
----------------

Al-Tabari reported that the Meccan and the Medinite companions including
Talhah and Al-Zubayr met with the Imam ‘Ali and told him: "We have to
have an Imam." He said: "I have no desire for your leadership. I would
be satisfied with whomever you choose." They said: "We shall choose none
but you."

They came to him time after time saying: "We know of no one who has more
right or precedence in Islam or closer relation to the Prophet than
you." He said: "Do not do it. I would like to be an assistant rather
than a leader." They said: "By God we shall not desist until we elect
you."[^2]

Al-Tabari reported also that the people remained five days after the
death of Uthman without an lmam. The revolutionary people gathered the
people of Medina and told them: You are the people of the counsel.

You are the makers of the caliphate and your decision would be honored
by the nation. Look for anyone whom you choose and we will follow you.
The majority said: We choose ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib. We will be satisfied
with him. The revolutionaries gave the people of Medina two days to
choose a leader. People came to ‘Ali saying to him: "We want to elect
you; you are witnessing what happened to Islam and what we are
exclusively (from among the rest of the people) facing of difficulties."

A Gloomy Expectation
--------------------

‘Ali said: "Leave me out and seek other than I. Certainly we are facing
a crisis with many faces and colors. The hearts will not stand for it
and the minds will not rest on it." They said: We ask you in the name of
God. Can't you see what we are facing? Can't you see what happened to
Islam? Can't you see the crisis? Do you not fear God?

He said: "I accept and you should know that if I accept I will follow
only my knowledge in administering your affairs. If you leave me out I
would be only one of you yet I would be of the most obedient to whomever
you elect."[^3]

They left him after they made an appointment with him for the following
day..

The following day (Friday) people came to the Mosque and ‘Ali mounted
the pulpit and said: "O people upon mutual counsel and permission this
affair is yours.

No one has the right to lead you except the one you choose. We parted
yesterday on an agreement. If you choose I will sit for you; otherwise I
will not have any ill feelings against anyone (if you change your
opinion)." They said: "We are still on the same principle as
yesterday."[^4]

People elected him. It is said that Talhah was the first one who gave
him his allegiance.[^5] The people of Kufa said that Malik Al-Ashtar was
the first one who gave ‘Ali his allegiance.

Unachievable Goals
------------------

The Imam reluctantly accepted the election although he wished that the
caliphate had been diverted from him to another person. The caliphate in
his view was not an end.

He viewed it only as a means of spreading justice among people realizing
brotherhood among the followers of the Islamic message and leading the
nation to a life ruled by principles of the Holy Qur'an and the
instructions of the Holy Prophet. All evidence was pointing to the fact
that the achievements of these goals had become impossible.

The unity of the nation had come to an end during the reign of the Third
Caliph. His saddening death was expected only to increase the division
of the nation and magnify the flame of dissention.

‘Ali's program called for implementation of equality in distribution of
public funds executing justice removal of corruption and elimination of
discrimination. This was expected only to meet the strongest opposition
from elements of strong influence who were not willing to relinquish
their acquired privileges.

Quraish's Hostility
-------------------

Quraish the community that blocked ‘Ali's way to the caliphate for
twenty-five years (thinking that if he comes to power the caliphate will
remain in his house) will do all it can to destroy his caliphate.

The Privileged Companions
-------------------------

The class of companions who were preferred in salary by the Second and
Third Caliphs and acquired wealth through investment of the surplus fund
which they received will oppose ‘Ali because he believes in distributing
the public funds equally among the Muslims.

Those who enriched themselves by accepting huge sums of money and vast
pieces of land from the Third Caliph and his appointed governors will
also oppose the Imam because he intends to recover what they received
illegally and put it back in the Islamic treasury.

The Promoted Companions
-----------------------

Talhah and Al-Zubayr members of the Electoral Convention were
representing a new class of companions and endeavored to bring the reign
of Uthman to an end (hoping that one of them will replace him). They
were expected to try to fight ‘Ali with all their power.

The two companions were extremely powerful. The fortune of each had
amounted to tens of millions of dirhams.[^6] They had the support of the
Qureshite clans and a great number of the people of Basra and Kufa. And
above all they were supported by Ayeshah Mother of the Believers who
enjoyed a great influence and a high prestige.

In fact this important lady was one of the tremendous obstacles which
the Imam had to face because she was extremely hostile to the Imam. She
was effective and influential because of her high position. She was the
one who fermented a revolution against Uthman in order to replace him by
her cousin Talhah or her brother-in-law Al- Zubayr.

The Umayyads
------------

More dangerous than all these elements were the Umayyads members of the
clan of the assassinated Caliph whose influence was escalated during his
reign and one of them Muawiya became the strongest man in the Muslim
World.

Tribalism
---------

What made the Umayyads extremely dangerous was their exploitation of the
tribal spirit in the Arab society which compelled the members of any
tribe regardless of their number to obey their chief under any
condition. Such a spirit produces evil when the chief of the tribe is
greedy putting his worldly interest ahead of his religion.

It is very easy for a ruler who controls a national or state treasury to
purchase the loyalty of a tribe by purchasing the loyalty of its chief.
There is nothing that corrupts man's conscience like money. The Umayyads
were masters in the art of purchasing people's loyalty and corrupting
their conscience. They were the rulers of the important Islamic
provinces and this enabled them to have a great number of proteges and
purchase the loyalty of many tribes by pleasing their chiefs.

The Absence of the Military Draft System
----------------------------------------

The aforementioned difficulties would be accentuated when compulsory
military service is absent. The Faith of Islam makes it mandatory to the
Muslims to defend the nation and the sacred principles of Islam. Yet the
performance of this duty was left during the time of the Prophet and the
first three Caliphs to the conscience of the Muslims. The Islamic Army
was composed of volunteers.The aforementioned difficulties would be
accentuated when compulsory military service is absent. The Faith of
Islam makes it mandatory to the Muslims to defend the nation and the
sacred principles of Islam. Yet the performance of this duty was left
during the time of the Prophet and the first three Caliphs to the
conscience of the Muslims. The Islamic Army was composed of volunteers.

When the nation is united and people are conscious of their religious
duties it would be easy for the government to gather task forces in
order to meet any threatening danger. But when the nation is divided and
people are confused by the slogans of various parties it would be most
difficult to meet arising dangers and subduing subversive elements.

This is much harder when subversive elements already exist and military
forces acquired through purchasing the loyalty of chiefs of tribes
through public funds. This was the situation when the Imam was elected.
There was no national military establishment.

People were divided and confused and Muawiya the governor of Syria had
established in that province during the eighteen years of his
governorship a viable military power by gathering the tribes of Syria
around him and putting all their forces under his command.

The caliphate was diverted from the "Brother of the Messenger" when the
nation was healthy and united and religion was its main concern. Then
the caliphate was forced upon him when the nation was divided and the
caliphate became bloody.

‘Ali was not the man who runs away from his responsibilities even in a
desperate situation where the elements of evil and anarchy which shall
stand in his way are much stronger than the good elements which support
him.

The Imam was fully aware that the Umayyads were to acquire the authority
of the Muslim World and transform the caliphate into a despotic Kingdom.
The Imam was aware of this because he was aware of the prevalent
corruption in the nation and because of the information which he
received from the Prophet about the future of the nation.

His awareness of this future would not justify in his eyes a passive
attitude. As a matter of fact his expectation of the future success of
the Umayyads made him more determined to fulfill his duty after he found
some good elements determined to assist him and desirous to combat
injustice in the Islamic society and purify it of corruption.

The Imam expected the Umayyads to control the Muslim World but this
expected control was not inevitable or predestined from Heaven where man
has no choice. On the contrary what was expected to happen was to be a
result of failure of the Muslims to combat injustice and stand for the
truth.

Had the Imam refused to lead the nation after the righteous companions
and their good followers offered him assistance he would have assisted
the Umayyads in reaching their evil goals.

It was his duty to stand up and to do all he could to prevent them from
coming to power. If the nation supports him justice will prevail and he
would avoid the Muslims a great danger that threatened their religion
and future as a nation of a great mission. If the nation let him down he
would have fulfilled his duty and pleased his Lord and his conscience.
He would be following the examples of the prophets who entered into
struggles which they did not hope to win.

Blood and Tears
---------------

As the Muslims put the Imam face to face with his responsibility and
forced the caliphate upon him he tried also to make them face their
responsibility. He warned his electors that they will face very insane
crises which will demand heavy sacrifices and that they should not
expect but blood and tears. He told them that they are about to face a
crisis of manifold faces and colors with which neither hearts stand nor
minds rest with certainty.

He told the people of the acquired privileges who enjoyed self
enrichment at the expense of others that he will re-direct the nation
and will not listen to criticism by people who are opposed to justice.
"If I respond to your call I will follow only my own knowledge."

The good companions of the Prophet and their followers gave the Imam
their allegiance (while they had a clear idea about what they will face)
with an unequaled zeal. His election was truly an election by the people
whose hearts were filled with faith without being corrupted by politics
and quest of prestige. These people believed that they were electing the
Brother of the Prophet the most knowledgeable of his message and the
Prophet's choice from his nation.

As to the people of political ambition and material greed from the
members of the preferred classes they were unable to resist the tide of
enthusiasm of the masses of the people. They had lost political control
during that short period. The death of Uthman stunned them and they
could not gather themselves to resist the Imam. They gave him their
allegiance as other people did.

Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam one of the most hostile persons to the Imam was
among those who elected him. Talhah and Al-Zubayr elected the Imam
though each of them was hopeful to become the caliph after Uthman.

An Early Opposition
-------------------

A Qureshite woman of great influence and high voice was not stunned by
the sequel of the events. Ayeshah wife of the Prophet and a Mother of
the Believers was completely present-minded capable of thinking planning
and working for her political goal. She declared her opposition to the
Imam the moment she received the news of his election.

Ayeshah was the most outspoken person against Uthman. Her propaganda
against him was one of the main factors in bringing the rebels to Medina
and besieging the Caliph. When he was besieged she was calling for his
assassination.

Al-Balatheri in his history recorded that when the situation became
serious for Uthman he ordered Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam and Abdul Rahman Ibn
Attab Ibn Oseid to meet with Ayeshah. They came to her and she was
preparing herself for pilgrimage. They requested her to stay in Medina
that God may protect the man (Uthman) through her.

She said: "I shall not do what you are requesting." The two men stood up
and Marwan recited a verse of poetry indicating that Ayeshah started the
fire and when the fire grew she was leaving! At this point she told him:
"Marwan I wish that Uthman were in one of my sacks and I could carry him
so I may throw him in the sea."[^7]

Abdullah Ibn Abbas while on his way to Mecca (after Uthman appointed him
"Ameer" (leader) of the pilgrimage) met Ayeshah on the road and she said
to him: "Ibn Abass God has given you wisdom intelligence and eloquence.
Beware do not try to dissuade the rebels to save that tyrant."[^8]

Sudden Reversal
---------------

Her hostile attitude towards Uthman was immediately changed when she
received the news of ‘Ali's election after Uthman’s death. While at
"Saraf" coming back from her pilgrimage Ayeshah met Obeid Ibn Abu Selema
(who was related to her through her mother). The following dialogue took
place:

Ayeshah: What do you know?

Obeid: Uthman was killed and the people remained eight days without a
caliph.

Ayeshah: Then what did they do? Obeid: They elected ‘Ali.

Ayeshah: May Heaven fall on earth if your man succeeds. Return me to
Mecca.

She turned her face towards Mecca saying "By God Uthman was killed
unjustly. By God I shall avenge for his blood.”

Obeid: By God you are the first one who discredited him. You used to say
about him: Kill Naathal (likening Uthman to a heavily bearded Arab Jew
named Naathal) because he deserted the faith.

Ayeshah: They made him repent then they killed him. They said and I said
and my last saying is better than my first saying.[^9]

Thus the Mother of the Believers turned in one hour from an enemy of
Uthman urging people to kill him to an avenger of his blood and she did
not lack the argument for her opinion in both situations for both
attitudes.

Campaigning for War at the Sacred Mosque
----------------------------------------

She went to Mecca and when she arrived at the Sacred Mosque of Mecca she
delivered a fiery speech urging people to avenge the blood of
Uthman.[^10] She forgot and through her influence as a wife of the
Prophet and daughter of the First Caliph she made her audience forget
that she was the holder of the biggest share of the responsibility of
his death.

She forgot and made people forget that Islam had forbidden and abolished
the pre-Islamic traditions which allowed people to wage bloody wars for
revenge and that the punishment of a killer is not in jurisdiction of
any one but a true Islamic government.

She forgot and made people forget that God had commanded her and all the
wives of the Messenger to stay at their houses and that she should not
display herself as women used to do during the pre-Islamic days.[^11]

Her audience in Mecca were the Qureshites who shared with her the hatred
of ‘Ali since the days of the Prophethood. These people made continuous
efforts to keep ‘Ali away from leadership for twenty-five years. He was
elected caliph only when the Qureshites lost the political control after
the death of Uthman. Now Mother of Believers was trying to gather the
Qureshite anew in order to destroy his leadership after the believers
elected him.

Mecca is the Sacred City whose sanctity ‘Ali would not violate.
Therefore it was a safe place for the conspirators. They gathered there
from various places after Ayeshah preceded them raising the banner of
rebellion towards "Ameer Al-Mumineen" (the Leader of the Believers)

A Preparation for War Under Way
-------------------------------

The first one to respond to her call was Abdullah Ibn Amir Al-Hadrami
who was Uthman’s appointed governor of Mecca.[^12] He said: "I am the
first one to seek revenge for the blood of Uthman." When the Umayyads
knew about the attitude of Ayeshah they left Medina secretly to
Mecca.[^13]

Talhah and Al-Zubayr stayed in Medina for a while then decided to go to
Mecca to join the Mother of Believers.[^14] They left Medina pretending
that they were going for Omrah (a brief visit to the ancient House of
God in Mecca)

The Two Companions Joined
-------------------------

Talhah and Al-Zubayr were most expected to join the camp of Ayeshah
because her goal was to cancel the caliphate of ‘Ali in order to replace
him with one of the two companions.

She instigated people against Uthman and ordered them to kill him for
the same purpose.[^15] She wanted to replace him with her cousin Talhah
as her prime choice or with her brother-in-law Al-Zubayr as a second
choice.[^16]

The Umayyads Were Still to Be Reckoned with
-------------------------------------------

The meeting of the conspirators and their dialogue in Mecca indicate
that the Umayyads after Uthman were still something to take into
account. People of Mecca were with them; the former governor Abdullah
Al-Hadrami was in the front line and they did not encounter any
opposition from the Meccans.

Yaala Ibn Omayah (he is Ibn Munyah) Uthman’s former appointed governor
of Yemen pillaged what was under his control of the Islamic treasury in
Yemen before the arrival of Obeidullah Ibn Al- Abbas the Imam's
appointed governor of Yemen. Ibn Omayah brought for the conspirators six
hundred thousand dirhams and six hundred camels.[^17] This enabled them
to implement a portion of their unholy project.

Abdullah Ibn Amir who was Uthman’s appointed governor in Basra brought a
great amount of funds.[^18] He informed them that they had many proteges
in Basra. In fact everyone of Uthman’s appointed governors had many
proteges. The purchase of the Arab tribes' loyalty was the Umayyad art.
They excelled in that art and bought many chiefs and tribes in order to
erect the pillars of the Umayyad Kingdom.

Rassrah the Chosen Target
-------------------------

When the conspirators tried to decide to which city they should go in
order to begin the revenge for the blood of Uthman they realized that
all of Syria was under the control of an Umayyad governor Muawiya who
was more hostile to the new Caliph than they were.

Finally they decided to go to Basra in spite of the presence of the
Imam's appointed governor. They chose Basra because it had many Umayyad
proteges.[^19] They hoped that the words of Mother of the Believers will
influence the majority of the people of its population to repudiate the
Imam.

United Only Against the Imam
----------------------------

The Umayyads and their previous enemies: Ayeshah Talhah and Al-Zubayr
had agreed to stand against the Imam who was their common enemy. The
destruction of his leadership was their first goal. They were divided on
their ultimate goal namely: Who is to rule after the destruction of the
Imam's caliphate?

The Umayyads were working for returning the caliphate to them while
Ayeshah and Talhah and Al-Zubayr were opposed to that. The Umayyads were
wiser than Talhah Al-Zubayr and Ayeshah. The Umayyads were hopeful to
eliminate them after using them.

To them the three leaders were partners in shedding the blood of Uthman
and dangerous to the Umayyads. The following story shows the extent of
their difference in goals.

Sa-eed Ibn A-Aws Uthman’s former appointed governor of Kufa came to
Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam and his group while the caravan was at the beginning
of its journey to Basra. He asked them: "Where are you going and leaving
alive the people from whom you should seek revenge? (He meant Ayeshah
Talhah and Al-Zubayr)

Kill them and go back to your homes. They retorted: We hope that we will
be able to kill all the killers of Uthman.

Sa-eed met Talhah and Al-Zubayr privately and asked them the following
question: If you prevail against ‘Ali whom are you going to make a
caliph? Tell me the truth! They told him that the caliphate will be for
one of them.

Either of them that would be chosen by the people shall be the caliph.
Sa-eed suggested to them that they should give the caliphate to one of
the children of Uthman because they were going to avenge his blood.

They said: We are not going to pass over the elders of the Meccan
companions and give the leadership to the orphans. Sa-eed said: "I would
not endeavor to take the leadership away from the children of Abd-Munaf"
(whose descendants are the Hashimites and the Umayyads). He went back
and so did Abdullah Ibn Khalid Ibn Useid.[^20]

Sa-eed was hasty. Marwan and his group were trickier than Sa-eed. They
were trying to weaken or destroy the caliphate of the Imam and then
eliminate the three leaders.

The Umayyads were much more intelligent than the three leaders Ayeshah
Talhah and Al-Zubayr. They wanted to use these leaders in order to reach
their goal and then sacrifice them. But the three leaders were not aware
of what was planned for them.

History informs us that Marwan killed Talhah in the Battle of
Basra.[^21] Had Al- Zubayr remained alive he would not have escaped the
avenge of the Umayyads.

Talhah and Al-Zubayr did not have any legitimate excuse in their
rebellion against the Imam. Talhah was the first one who gave allegiance
to the Imam and Al-Zubayr was one of the electors. Yet when they started
their unsuccessful venture both claimed that they were forced to give
their allegiance to the Imam.

Were Talhah and al-Zubayr forced to elect the imam?
---------------------------------------------------

The Imam was most aware of the human and Islamic rights and he was too
righteous to deprive people of their rights. Every Muslim is entitled to
exercise his political freedom and authorize or refuse to authorize
another person to govern in his name. Every human has the right to
refuse to pledge his allegiance to any candidate even if he is elected
by the majority.

However such an abstainer should not try to prevent such an elected
person from exercising his right to administer the affairs of the people
as long as he governs according to the Islamic laws. A ruler who is
elected by the majority is not permitted to force a person to change his
vote from "no" to "yes.".

The Imam Did Not Force Any Companion to Elect Him
-------------------------------------------------

The Imam himself faced difficulties and was subjected to injustice when
companions tried to force him to elect Abu Bakr.[^22] Other companions
warned him after they selected Uthman that he should not incur harm to
himself by refusing to vote for Uthman.[^23] The Imam believed that such
attempts are violations of his natural rights. The Imam is not expected
to do what he used to criticize.

He believed that the Messenger of God had chosen him to lead the nation
and that the duty of the nation is to follow the choice of the
Messenger. Yet he refused to use violence as a means of acquiring
leadership when Abu Sufyan offered him to fill Medina with horses and
men against Abu Bakr.[^24]

Saad Ibn Abu Waqass who was a member of the Electoral Convention refused
to elect the Imam and said to him: By God you will see no harm from me.
The Imam did not force him to pledge his allegiance to him.[^25]

He did not force Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar to elect him and he was not less
important than Talhah and Al-Zubayr. The Imam asked from him to bring a
surety and when he refused to do that the Imam said to the people: Leave
him I am his surety. Then he said to him; "You are as far as I have
known you a man of ill manner in your youth and adulthood.[^26]

When he asked him to bring a surety he wanted only to be sure that the
one who refuses to elect him will not try to revolt against him. Osamah
Ibn Zayd Ibn Harithah refused to elect the Imam and the Imam did not try
to force him.

Individuals from the natives of Medina also refused to elect the Imam.
Among these were Zayd Ibn Thabit Hassan Ibn Thabit Muslimah Ibn Mukhlid
Muhammad Ibn Muslima Naaman Ibn Basheer (who became a supporter of
Muawiya later) Kaab Ibn Ujrah and Kaab Ibn Malik (who was sent by Uthman
to collect the Zakat of Muzainah then he granted him what he
collected).[^27]

All these were loyal to Uthman and opposed to the Imam. Yet the Imam did
not force any of them to elect him. The Imam would not have given an
exceptional treatment to Talhah and Al-Zubayr if they had refused to
elect him. The most he could do to them was to ask them to offer a
guarantee that they would refrain from any subversive activity.

I do not rule out that the rebels or their leaders had exercised some
pressure against the two companions and made them elect the Imam. But
such pressure would not have prevented the two companions from saying to
the Imam:

We are forced to elect you. Had they said that to him he would not have
accepted their election. He was the most knowledgeable of the fact that
their election cannot be sound when it is done by force.

The Imam Could Not Force His First Elector
------------------------------------------

Furthermore to expect an Imam to force people to elect him he had to
have certain elements: A strong desire to come to power and a military
power through which he could force people to elect him or tremendous
wealth with which he may try to purchase the loyalty of the people.

Our Imam was not desirous to come to power and he did not make himself a
candidate. He seriously tried to divert the leadership from himself. He
did not accept the caliphate except when it was forced upon him. He did
not have a military power or a material wealth through which he could
exercise any pressure against individuals or masses of people.

In addition to this it may be possible for a caliph who has already been
elected by the majority to try to force an opponent to vote for him. But
it is not conceivable that a candidate tries before he is elected by a
majority or a minority to force the first voter to elect him.

The story which tells us that Talhah and Al-Zubayr were forced to elect
the Imam mentions that Talhah was the first one to pledge his allegiance
to the Imam. It tells also that a man called Habib Ibn Thu-aib who was
present at that time interpreted the incident to be ominous saying that
the Imam will not succeed because the first hand to give him allegiance
was paralyzed (Talhah had a paralyzed finger since the Battle of
Uhud).[^28]

The Imam Refuted the Allegation
-------------------------------

The Imam refuted the allegations of the two companions in a message he
sent to both of them after they left Mecca to Basra. In that message he
left no excuse for the two companions. "Certainly you have known.”

He said "Though you have concealed the fact that I did not seek the
people until they sought me; nor did I solicit their election but they
elected me. You were from the people who sought me and elected me.

The masses of the people did not elect me for a prevailing authority nor
for any material wealth. If you had elected me voluntarily you ought to
reverse your attitude and repent to God quickly. If you had elected me
unwillingly you have given me the right to demand your obedience when
you exhibited your free election and concealed your intention."[^29]

If the two companions had elected the Imam under pressure from the
rebels or other people they should have at least informed the Imam at
the time of election or at least before they left Medina that they had
elected him unwillingly.

They stayed in Medina months after the election and never claimed any
coercion. Their silence for the duration of that period is evidence that
they elected him voluntarily. They did not refrain from mentioning that
because of fear of punishment.

It is one of the known facts in history that Saad Ibn Abu Waqass who was
their colleague in the membership of the Electoral Convention and
Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar did refuse to elect the Imam and neither of them was
punished or threatened by the Imam. Talhah and Al-Zubayr were wealthier
and more powerful than Saad and Abdullah.

Therefore the Imam said in his message to the two companions: "Certainly
you were not the most entitled from among the 'Migrants' (the Meccan
companions) to keep silent out of fear. Your refusal to enter into my
election could have been easier for you than to exit out of it after
acknowledging it..."[^30]

The Guilty Accused the Innocent
-------------------------------

However the two companions did not only claim that they were forced to
elect the Imam but also accused the Imam of the murder of Uthman. Yet
they and Ayeshah Mother of the Believers were the ones who urged people
to besiege and kill Uthman and the Imam was the defender of Uthman among
the Migrant companions. Since people of Medina were aware of this the
Imam concluded his message by the following words: "And you have alleged
that I had killed Uthman.

Those who stayed in Medina and did not join you or me ought to be
questioned about this matter. Then everyone of us will be burdened with
his own action. You the two old men ought to reverse your attitude. The
most you may suffer now is shame; but if you continue your way you will
add to the shame the Divine punishment."[^31]

The story of the coercion of Talhah and Al-Zubayr to elect the Imam was
obviously untrue. ‘Ali was not the man who would try to force any voter
to elect him while he was not yet an elected caliph. The two companions
invented the story of coercion to justify their rebellion against the
Imam.

The two companions who allowed themselves to fight ‘Ali and to kill
thousands of Muslims for their own interests would not be expected to
refrain from telling untruth deliberately.

[^1]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 33 Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.
239.

[^2]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 427 Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3
p. 98.

[^3]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 434 Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3
p. 99.

[^4]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 435 Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3
p. 99.

[^5]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 435 Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3
p. 99.

[^6]: Ibn Sa’d mentioned in his al-Tabaqat part 3. p110 that al Zubayrs
wealth announced to forty million dirhams and in p. 222 that Talhah’s
wealth amounted to thirty million dirhams

[^7]: Al-Balatheri Ansabul-Ashraf part 4 p. 45.

[^8]: Ibn Abu-Al-Hadid his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah part 2 p. 506.

[^9]: Abn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 106.

[^10]: Abd Al-Fattah Abdul-Maqsud Al-Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib part 2 p.
297.

[^11]: The Holy Qur'an chapter 33 verse 33.

[^12]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 pp. 449-450.

[^13]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 pp. 448-450.

[^14]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 452.

[^15]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 459.

[^16]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah part 2 p. 506.

[^17]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 106.

[^18]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 106.

[^19]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 106.

[^20]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 107.

[^21]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 124.

[^22]: Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsud Al-Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib part 1 p.
190.

[^23]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 37.

[^24]: Abdul Fattah Abdul-Maqsud Al-Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib part 1 p.
185 Al-Tabari in his History part 4 p. 428.

[^25]: Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 22 Al-Tabari his
History part 4 p. 428.

[^26]: Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 22 Al-Tabari his
History part 4 p. 428.

[^27]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 pp. 429-430.

[^28]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 428.

[^29]: Al-Imam ‘Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 3 p. 111-112.

[^30]: Al-Imam ‘Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 3 p. 111-112.

[^31]: Al-Imam ‘Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 3 111-112.


