About The Author
================

Imam Mohamad Jawad Chirri is a native of Lebanon and a graduate of the
distinguished religious institute of Najaf in Iraq. He is an Islamic
theologian lecturer historian and author. He is the host of a weekly
radio program called "Islam In Focus" broadcast by WNIC. From his
published books are:

• Muslim Practice.

• Islamic Teaching.

Imam Hussein Leader of the Martyrs Inquiries About Islam (Thousands of
American libraries acquired this book.) "Al-Khilafatu Fi Al-Dustour
Al-Islami" (The Caliphate in The Islamic Constitution-Arabic.) "Ameer
Al-Munineen" (The Leader of Believers-Arabic.)

Imam Chirri was invited by the Detroit Muslim Community to be their
spiritual leader. He was instrumental in constructing the Islamic Center
of Detroit one of the largest Islamic institutes in North America. He is
currently the Director of this Center.

Imam Chirri's work was extended to West Africa. While on a lecture tour
in 1958 he was able to induce the Lebanese community in Sierra Leone to
build a children's hospital as a present to the natives of that country.

During a visit to the Middle East in 1959 the author dealt with an old
Islamic problem and succeeded in finding its solution. For over a
thousand years the Muslims were divided into Sunnites and Shi’ites
(neither of the two sides was recognizing the soundness of the teachings
of the other) in spite of the agreement of both Schools on all the
teaching of the Holy Qur'an and the authentically reported hadiths of
the Holy Prophet Muhammad.

The author met the late Sheikh Al-Azhar Sheikh Mahmood Shaltut on July 1
1959. He discussed with him the important issue. At the conclusion of
the discussion Sheikh Shaltut acknowledged the soundness of the Islamic
Shi’ite Jaafari School. The author requested him to declare equality
between the Shi’ite Jaafari and Sunnite Schools. The Declaration was
broadcast and published on July 7 1979. This Declaration was historical
and the first of its kind since the separation of the two Schools.

The spirit of true Islamic brotherhood can prevail only by mutual
understanding among the various Islamic Schools. It is with this in mind
that the author presents this book The Brother of the Prophet Muhammad.
Needless to say that the arguments among various Islamic Schools revolve
mainly around the history of this great Imam. A true understanding of
his position in Islam is bound to lead the Muslims to a more genuine
brotherhood.


