24. The Alleged Conspiracy
==========================

Al-Tabari recorded through a channel including Saif Ibn ‘Umar that
Muhammad (Ibn Oun) and Talhah (two reporters) reported that ‘Ali sent
Al-Qaaqaa Ibn Amr (a Kufite leader) to Ayeshah Talhah and Al-Zubayr
after they occupied Basra.

Al-Qaaqaa spoke to them and convinced them to make peace with the Imam
and that the two parties should try to seek the killers of Uthman and
punish them after the situation calms down and peace prevails.

The report says that the Imam agreed to the proposal and that he left
Thee Qar area after he delivered a sermon in which he mentioned the
grace of God that was bestowed on the nation by unity after the
Messenger of God through the First Caliph then the one who followed him
then the one who followed the Second Caliph.[^1]

The Imam according to the report said also: "Then this event (the
assassination of Uthman) took place. It was brought on this nation by
groups who sought the material of this world envying those who obtained
it by their own merit and they wanted to turn the affairs regressively.

God will fulfill His will and He will punish whom He wants to punish. I
would like to inform you that I shall be leaving tomorrow and none from
those who assisted in anyway against Uthman should accompany us. Let the
fools stay away from me..."[^2]

The report continues to say that individuals from those who participated
in the siege of Uthman including Al-Ashtar Alba Ibn Haitham Uday Ibn
Hatam Salim Ibn Thaalabah Al-Absi and Shuraih Ibn Dubai-ah held a secret
meeting and Abdullah Ibn Saba (titled Ibn Al- Souda) was with them.
(This man is said to have been a Yemenite from Sana-a born from a Jewish
father and an Abyssinian mother adopted Islam during the days of Uthman
and instigated people against him.)

The conferees realized that they will pay the price of peace with their
lives and that ‘Ali shall be harsher with them than Talhah Al-Zubayr and
Ayeshah because he knows more about the Book of God than the three
leaders and he was much more adherent to the Divine law especially the
laws which deal with criminals.[^3]

The report continues reminding us (as Dr. Taha Hussein said) of the
conference of the Qureshite pagans when they conspired against the
Messenger of God and Satan attended their conference disguised as an old
man from Najd. There was only one difference: The Devil in this report
was Abdullah Ibn Saba.

The conferees made several proposals but finally "Ibn Al-Souda"
(Abdullah Ibn Saba) advised them to make the two camps lose the
opportunity of agreement by starting a fight at night. By this each of
the two camps would accuse the other of starting the fight. The report
says that the conferees implemented their strategy with precision and
succeeded in inflaming the Battle of Basra.[^4]

Many historians after Al-Tabari gave this report great importance and
chose it over other reports in spite of the fact that Al-Tabari himself
mentioned a number of reports which contradict this report.

Contradicted by Better Reports
------------------------------

He reported that Ammar Al-Duhani reported that ‘Ali took a copy of the
Holy Qur'an on the day of the Battle of Basra and went through his camp
saying: Who shall hold this Qur'an and invite the Bassrite camp to agree
that both camps should comply with the contents of the Qur'an?

Then he said: The one who makes this invitation should know that he will
be killed by the Bassrites. A young Kufite man said to him: "I shall do
it " and the Imam ignored him. Then he repeated his call and the same
man repeated the same answer.

The Imam gave him the Qur'an and the Kufite youth extended the
invitation and the Bassrites shot him to death with a hail of arrows.
The Imam said: "Now it has become legitimate to fight them."[^5]

Al-Tabari reported also that Al-Zuhri said that when ‘Ali received the
news of the death of the seventy men from Abdul-Qais (a branch from the
tribe of Rabee-ah) he set out hurriedly until he came to Basra saying:
"I am saddened by the tragedy of Rabee-ah the listener the obedient who
was attacked before my arrival."

When the two camps faced each other Al-Zubayr came on his horse and ‘Ali
called upon Al-Zubayr. They faced each other and ‘Ali asked Al-Zubayr:
What brought you here? Al-Zubayr said: "You. And I do not believe that
you are qualified for the caliphate; nor do I believe that you have more
right to it than we and you killed Uthman." ‘Ali said to Al-Zubayr:

Do you ask me for the blood of Uthman while you were his killer? May God
make our harshest to Uthman meet today what he dislikes. He reminded
Al-Zubayr of the word of the Messenger of God: That he will fight ‘Ali
while he is unfair to him. Al-Zubayr left the scene and promised the
Imam that he will not fight him.[^6]

Al-Tabari reported that the Imam said to Talhah: You have brought the
wife of the Messenger of God trying to fight with her while you have
hidden your wife at your house (in Medina). Did you not pledge your
allegiance to me? Talhah said: I pledged my allegiance to you while the
sword was over my neck.

‘Ali said to his camp: Who shall display this Holy Qur'an and invite the
opposite camp to agree with us to abide by its contents and the one who
does that should know that he will be killed? A Kufite youth said I. The
Imam said to him: Offer them this (the Qur'an) and say to them it is
between you and us from its beginning to its end and fear God by
refraining from shedding our blood and your blood.

The Kufite youth did what the Imam told him to do and he was killed.
‘Ali at that time said: Now the fight is legitimate.

They started fighting and seventy men died and each one of them was
holding the rein of the camel.[^7] This report like the report that
preceded it is evidence that the fight did not begin until the Imam
offered the other camp peace and surrender of the matter to the Book of
God.

This was after the Imam and his two opponents Talhah and Al-Zubayr faced
each other and after he debated with them. All this was in front of
people and the two camps were witnessing it. This was of course in the
daytime. Thus there was no secret conspiracy and no battle that the
conspirators started during the night.

Al-Tabari reported also that Al-Shi-abi reported that the battle of
Basra started during the height of the day till the afternoon.[^8] Ammar
Al-Duhani and Al-Zuhri and Al-Shi-abi narrated witnessable events and
consistent with the logic of the events.

Yet these reports were not chosen by the historians who came after
Al-Tabari because these reports seem to convict the three leaders and
place the responsibility of the Battle of Basra upon their shoulders.
The historians chose Saif's report of the conspiracy though it reports
something that was not witnessable and at the same time was not
consistent with the logic of the events.

The three leaders did not come to Basra for a picnic or for spreading
peace. They came to start a war against the Imam and they started the
battle before his arrival to Basra. They killed scores of people and
occupied the city before the arrival of the Imam to the city.[^9]

Saif reported a conspiracy that was made in a secret conference attended
by Abdullah Ibn Saba and that conspiracy resulted by starting the battle
at night according to the plan of the conspirators. The historians chose
this report and gave it high importance though Muhammad (Ibn Oun) and
Talhah (whom Saif claimed to be the source of his report) did not claim
that they witnessed the conference. These historians did not even ask
how Muhammad and Talhah knew about this conspiracy.

History mentions that the Meccan pagans had a secret conference at the
"Nadwa" (club in Mecca) in which they conspired to kill the Messenger.
The Prophet knew about it through a Divine Revelation. Saif Ibn ‘Umar
and Muhammad and Talhah on the other hand did not receive a Revelation
from God.

It is evident that these historians chose this report because they
wished that the contents of this report were real. The reason is that
report vindicates the three leaders.

Since this report was given so much importance it is necessary to try to
investigate it and see whether it is worth all that credence which it
was given by the historians. Therefore I would like to record the
following observations:

(1) This report presupposes that Ayeshah Mother of Believers Talhah and
Al-Zubayr were serious in seeking the avenge for the blood of Uthman.

Yet the instigation made by the three leaders against Uthman and their
admission of making it is a well known fact in history. The three
leaders urged the Muslims to kill Uthman and when he died and ‘Ali was
elected they used his blood only as a means of combating the Imam. Since
this was their intention they would not be ready to change their
attitude if he agrees with them to punish the killers of Uthman because
their target was ‘Ali rather than the killers of Uthman.

(2) Saif's report mentioned that the Imam said before his departure from
Thee Qar: "I will be leaving tomorrow and you should leave with me. None
of the people who assisted in the crisis of Uthman should accompany me
and let the fools stay away from me."

If the Imam had uttered these words it would be evident that he did not
mean by assistance in the crisis of Uthman a direct participation in his
assassination because none of the direct participants in Uthman’s murder
were in the Imam's army.

The ones whom he meant by these alleged words are those who agitated
against Uthman and started the march against him and particularly those
who urged people to kill him or participated in his siege. Some of these
people were in the Imam's army. If the Imam had issued this order he
should have prevented those instigators and participants in his siege
from accompanying him (the Imam) to Basra but this was not the case.

Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr
---------------------

The Imam did not prevent Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr from accompanying him
though he knew that Muhammad was one of the leaders of the agitators
against Uthman and of the participants in his siege. He was also one of
those who climbed the wall and entered his mansion to kill him though he
did not participate in his killing.

Historians agree that he held the beard of Uthman and insulted him and
called him "Naathal" and that he said to him: "What did Muawiya and Ibn
Abu Sarh and others from your relatives avail you?[^10] The Imam knew
all that yet he kept Ibn Abu Bakr in his company.

Muhammad attended the Battle of Basra with the Imam. He is the one who
removed the canopy of his sister Ayeshah from the back of her camel when
the camel fell down.[^11] Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr was so close to the Imam
that the Iman used to consider him as one of his children. Muhammad lbn
Abu Bakr was killed while he was the Imam's appointed governor of Egypt.

### Al-Ashtar

It was clear to the Imam that Malik Al-Ashtar was an outstanding
agitator against Uthman. He participated in his siege but he was not a
participant in his murder.

Uthman exiled him from Iraq to Syria twice. Al-Ashtar led after that a
group of Kufites to prevent Sa-eed Ibn Al-Aus (Uthman’s appointed
governor) from coming back to Kufa.

Al-Ashtar was the first revolutionary leader who called for ‘Ali's
election after the death of Uthman. He remained with the Imam and
accompanied him to Thee Qar then he went to Kufa and came back with the
Kufan army to meet the Imam in Thee Qar. Then he departed with the Imam
to Basra and he was the top general in the Imam's army.

It is from the well known facts of history that Al-Ashtar was extremely
close to the Imam for the duration of his reign until Al-Ashtar died. He
was the Imam's right hand in both battles of Basra and Siffin. Al-Ashtar
died by poison plotted by Muawiya while Al-Ashtar was on his way to
Egypt. It was the Imam who sent him as his appointed governor of Egypt.
[^12]

### Uday Ibn Hatam

Uday Ibn Hatam who was mentioned in Saif's report as a conspirator and a
part of the conference which was attended by Ibn Saba was also close to
the Imam and an outstanding supporter. He attended the battles which the
Imam faced during his caliphate.

Uday accompanied the Imam from Thee Qar to Basra and the Imam did not
prevent him from going with him even after the alleged order that the
participants against Uthman cannot accompany him.[^13]

### Ammar Ibn Yasir

We ought to mention particularly Ammar Ibn Yasir who was an outstanding
companion. He was from the leaders of the opposition to Uthman. He
called for his removal. His voice was the loudest in criticizing his
policy.

He shared with Ayeshah Talhah and Al-Zubayr their opinion which called
for Uthman’s assassination. In spite of all that Ammar was one of the
outstanding leaders in the Imam's army. Those who attended the Battles
of Basra and Siffin used to follow Ammar as if he were an Islamic
banner.[^14]

It is well known in history that the presence of Ammar at the Battle of
Basra on the side of the Imam was one of the main factors which
contributed to the departure of Al-Zubayr from the battlefield.[^15]

Al-Zubayr knew that the Messenger of God said to Ammar: "Ammar the
aggressor party shall kill you."[^16] Had the Imam ordered those who
assisted with anything against Uthman not to accompany him to Basra he
would have prevented Ammar from going with him.

Thus as the report of Saif is opposed to the reports of Ammar Al-Duhani
Al-Zuhri and Al-Shi-abi it is also opposed to the well known facts of
history that the Imam was accompanied to Basra by Ammar Ibn Yasir
Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr Malik Al-Ashtar and Uday Ibn Hatem. These
distinguished individuals were with him and they were extremely close to
him. When a report is opposed to well known facts in history it should
be disregarded.

(3) In addition to the aforementioned the Imam was not in need of anyone
to ask him to punish anyone who killed a believer unjustly. Had the Imam
known the killer (or killers) of Uthman he would have punished him
immediately without waiting for any agreement with Talhah Al-Zubier and
Ayeshah as a price for his peace with the three leaders.

It is well known in history that the Imam was most observant of criminal
punishment. He was the one who counseled Uthman to kill Obeidullah Ibn
‘Umar when he killed Al-Hirmizan without any evidence that substantiates
his involvement in the murder of his father ‘Umar.[^17] The Imam
threatened Obeidullah with punishment because of this while still out of
power.

His strong adherence to the Islamic principles forced him to enter into
the war of Siffin the bloodiest in the history of Islam until that time.
It was possible for him to avoid himself that costly war by keeping
Muawiya as governor of Syria. But he said: "I would not compromise in my
religion." He chose that rather than to deviate from his principles in
the least.

Such a leader does not need an agreement with Talhah and Al-Zubayr in
order to enforce the Islamic law by punishing killers of a prominent
Muslim. Had he viewed that Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr Al-Ashtar and those who
instigated people against Uthman deserved punishment he would have done
that without delay.

The caliphate in his view was only a means for executing justice and
enforcing the Islamic laws. The least of what the Imam would have done
to them is to keep them away from him and not make them a part of his
army. Since he did not do that and did the opposite by making them his
closest associates we infer that they did not deserve any punishment for
their attitude towards the Third Caliph and their agitation against him.

The Three Leaders
-----------------

If he had believed that they were criminals deserving punishment it
would not be conceivable that he would agree with Talhah and Al-Zubayr
to punish them and leave Talhah Al-Zubayr and "Om Al-Mumineen" (Mother
of Believers) unpunished while they were the outstanding agitators
against Uthman. They were the first to do that and they continued their
way until Uthman died. The Imam would not give different treatments to
people of equal crimes.

It seems that the Imam used to believe that only the ones who
participated directly in the assassination of Uthman were punishable. We
have already mentioned that three of those who participated in his
murder were killed at the same hour he was killed. The three were
Qutairah Soudan Ibn Hamran and Kinanah Ibn Basheer Al-Tajeebi.

If there were other participants the Imam did not know.

He said in a letter to Muawiya: "I do not know specifically any killer
of Uthman. I thought deeply about this matter and I did not see it
permitted for me to hand you anyone you accuse from among those who are
around me."[^18]

(4) The sermon of the Imam which Saif's report mentioned speaks clearly
that the Imam believes in the soundness of Uthman’s policy and his
administration of public funds and that he approved Uthman’s appointment
of his relatives. The report mentioned that the Imam said in his sermon:
"God has bestowed His grace on the nation by the unity through the three
Caliphs one after another.

Then this event (assassination of Uthman) took place. It was brought on
this nation by people who sought the material of this world. They were
envious of those who were given it by God meritoriously for their
virtues. These material seekers were trying to turn the affairs of the
nation regressively."

Thus the Imam according to this report was speaking of the soundness of
the policy of Uthman and accusing those who opposed him of trying to
turn the national affairs regressively. They did what they did just for
the sake of the worldly material and out of jealousy of Uthman and his
appointed officials to whom God had given the materials of the World
meritoriously and for their virtues.

There is no doubt that this is in conflict with what was known in
history with utmost certainty that the Imam did not approve Uthman’s
policy in handling the public funds; nor did the Imam approve Uthman’s
appointments of his relatives. The Imam mediated many times between
Uthman and his opponents asking him to dismiss his relatives and change
his policy and many times Uthman promised to change and reform in
response to his mediation then Marwan would prevent Uthman from
fulfilling his promise.[^19]

Had the Imam believed in the soundness of Uthman’s policy and the policy
of his appointed governors the Imam would not have insisted on the
dismissal of Muawiya and waged for his dismissal the Battle of Siffin
which had no equal in the history of Islam before that time.

All these aspects substantiate clearly that the report of Saif Ibn ‘Umar
was a fabrication made up for covering the reality and acquitting the
three leaders of the responsibility of the Battle of Basra. It aimed
also at ruining the reputation of the supporters of the Imam such as Al-
Ashtar and others by accusing them of starting the war for their selfish
purposes and upon the counsel of a hypocrite who was alien to the
Islamic nation.

Any serious student of the Islamic history knows that Al-Ashtar and the
rest of the revolutionar leaders were among the most noble Muslims in
their intention and adherence to the ideals of Islam and who gave their
souls for the pleasure of God.

Did Abdullah ibn Saba exist?
----------------------------

However there are reasons to doubt the very existence of Abdullah Ibn
Saba. I do not think that this man was but a fairy-tale and was admitted
into the history of Islam for covering undesirable informations. The
defenders of Uthman and his policy wanted to attribute the revolution
which was made against him to a Jew who is alien to Islam.

They alleged that he organized through secret conspiracies elaborate
cells in Basra Kufah Egypt and Damascus for a revolution against the
Caliph.[^20] They said that this alleged man claimed that the Prophet
Muhammad will come back and that he tried to substantiate the return of
the Holy Prophet to this world by comparing it to the return of Jesus to
this world in the future. Since Muhammad is more important than Jesus he
would be more entitled than Jesus to return. They said that Ibn Saba
supported the idea of the return of the Prophet by the following verse:

***"Certainly the One Who commanded you to convey the Qur'an (to
mankind) shall return you to a new coming..." The Holy Quram Chapter 28
verse 85***[^21]

Who Was the First to Speak of the Prophet's Return?
---------------------------------------------------

I would like to state clearly that attributing the idea of the Prophet's
return to the imaginary Ibn Saba is an obvious distortion of the truth.
Was not ‘Umar the first one who proclaimed the doctrine of the Prophet's
return?

History testifies and no historian or hadith-reporter would deny that
‘Umar stood at the Mosque of the Prophet when the Prophet died and said:

"Some hypocrites allege that the Messenger of God died. The Messenger
did not die. He only went to his Lord as Moses son of Imran went to his
Lord. He left his people for forty nights then he returned to them after
it was said that he died. By God the Messenger of God will return as
Moses returned. He will sever the hands and legs of the men who alleged
that he died." (The Brother of the Prophet Muhammad vol.1 p. 161 (and
Ibn Hisham in his Biography of the Prophet part 2 p. 655)

Would any Muslim accuse ‘Umar of learning this doctrine from Abdullah
Ibn Saba?

If anyone after ‘Umar believed in the return of the Prophet we should
assume that he learned that from ‘Umar rather than from Ibn Saba.

They also mentioned that this imaginary Jew was the one who spread the
doctrine of ‘Ali's executorship and successorship to the Messenger.[^22]
They said also that he taught Abu Dharr while in Damascus the theory
that prohibits treasuring gold and silver and that what is collected
from Zakat and other Islamic taxes are Muslims' fund rather than God's
fund.[^23] They also said that Ammar Ibn Yasir went to Egypt and met Ibn
Saba and that Ibn Saba turned him against Uthman. [^24]

These allegations contradict well known historical facts and very
substantiated truths. From these facts is that Uthman did not follow the
policy of the Two Caliphs before him though he pledged to Abdul-Rahman
Ibn Ouf and the nation at the time of his selection that he will follow
their policy.

It is well known in history that the Messenger exiled Al-Hakam Ibn Abu
Al-Aws and his family and said: Al- Hakam shall not live with me in
Medina forever. Uthman brought back the exiled of the Prophet and his
children.

He gave them large amounts from the public funds.[^25] He gave them
hundreds of thousands of dirhams. He made Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam his main
advisor and actually he was the real caliph.

It is a well known fact of history that Abdullah Ibn Abu Sarh deserted
the Faith after he declared his Islam and that the Messenger of God
ordered his execution.[^26] It is also known in history that Walid Ibn
Aqabah Ibn Abu Mo-eet was a transgressor and used to drink
intoxicants.[^27] The Holy Qur'an testifies to his transgression.[^28]

Yet Uthman appointed Ibn Abu Sarh as governor of Egypt. He gave him the
fifth of the spoils of North Africa.[^29] Uthman also appointed Walid
governor of Kufa. He did not dismiss him until the Muslims testified
that he was found drunk while he was leading the congregational prayer
at the main Mosque of Kufa.[^30]

It is also known that Uthman exiled Abu Dharr[^31] and beat up Ammar Ibn
Yasir until Ammar fainted.[^32] He also ordered Abdullah Ibn Masud to be
thrown out of the Mosque and his ribs were broken.[^33] He penalized
these three outstanding companions only because they were critical of
his policy.

Uthman also exiled a number of good people from Kufa to Syria because
they criticized his policy and that of his appointed officials from the
Umayyads.[^34] There are no prescribed punishments in Islam for critics
who demand reform from a ruler.

The masses of the people resented punishment of these people by exile.
Exile according to the Holy Qur'an is a punishment for those who are at
war with God and His Messenger and those who spread corruption in the
land.

These exiled Muslims were neither at war with God and His Messenger nor
were they from the corruptors of the land. They were only critics of the
Caliph because he used to give any member of his clan tens or hundreds
of thousands of dirhams from the public funds and grant them vast pieces
of land from the public property.[^35]

It was only expected that the companions and the rest of the Muslims
would frown at these arbitrary actions after they witnessed the way of
the Messenger and the two Caliphs after him. It was only a matter of
course that resentment would grow and that people would demand from the
Caliph to change his policy and dismiss his appointed officials who were
his relatives. It was also expected that the resentment would be
transformed into a revolution after he refused to change.

The companions and other outstanding Muslims were not in need of an
alleged Jew to call for a revolution. The existence of such a Jew in
relation to the causes of the revolution was of no effect and similar to
the existence of a fifth leg of a chair.

To say that Uthman adopted the policy that was approved by the
companions and the rest of the Muslims and that Abdullah Ibn Saba is the
one who instigated people against him is an invitation to the denial of
well established facts of history.

The attribution of the revolution against Uthman to Abdullah Ibn Saba
cannot be true unless we say that Abdullah Ibn Saba is the one who
counselled the Caliph to commit the numerous violations which he
committed and which brought about the revolution. Thus we ought to ask
the following questions: Did Ibn Saba advise the Caliph?

Did he persuade the Caliph to give his relatives the public funds and
make Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam his prime minister? Did he convince him to
exile companions such as Abu Dharr and other prominent Muslims such as
Malik Al-Ashtar? Did Ibn Saba counsel him to beat up outstanding
companions?

These and other illegal actions are the true causes of the revolution.
Unless Ibn Saba is the one who convinced Uthman to commit all these
mistakes and refuse to change them he could not be a cause of
revolution. Of course the historians who adopted the report of Saif Ibn
‘Umar (which created the tale of Ibn Saba) would not accept any
relationship between Uthman and Ibn Saba.

Was Ibn Saba in Medina?
-----------------------

The people who accepted the report of Saif Ibn ‘Umar have forgotten that
the agitation against Uthman did not start in Basra or Kufa or Egypt. It
rather started in Medina and that Ayeshah and Talhah and Al-Zubayr were
the most outstanding agitators against Uthman. Was Ibn Saba the
motivator of these people to oppose Uthman and to call for his murder?

The report of the conspiracy of Ibn Saba says that Ibn Saba met Abu
Dharr in Damascus and urged him to oppose Uthman and Muawiya. But Abu
Dharr started his critical campaign while in Medina before he went to
Damascus. He was exiled to Damascus because of his critical campaign
against the Caliph.[^36]

Saif's report says also that Ibn Saba is the one who taught Abu Dharr to
say that the revenues of Zakat and other Islamic taxations are the
revenues of the Muslims rather than the revenues of God. Yet history
tells us that when Abu Dharr was brought back to Medina from Damascus he
was still saying that these revenues are revenues of God.

It is reported that when Abu Dharr came to Medina he faced the Caliph
and he reported in the presence of other companions that he heard the
Messenger of God saying:

"When the men from the children of Abu Al-Aws become thirty they will
make the revenue of God rotate among them the servants of God their
slaves and the religion of God interpolated."[^37]

However saying that Abu Dharr learned some religious doctrines from an
alien hypocrite seems to be extremely ugly and obviously fabricated. Abu
Dharr was an outstanding companion of the Prophet. He embraced Islam
before all the Medinite and most of the Meccan companions.[^38]

He accompanied the Holy Prophet and his companionship was long. He
memorized the Holy Qur'an and he heard from the Messenger and understood
what he heard. He reported the statements of the Messenger and his deeds
accurately. He was well aware of what he was reporting. He was extremely
true and devoted and the Holy Prophet loved him very much.

Al-Tirmidhi reported that the Messenger said: "Neither did the Heaven
shade nor did the earth carry truer than Abu Dharr."[^39] He reported
also that the Holy Prophet said: "Neither did the Heaven shade nor did
the earth carry truer and more loyal than Abu Dharr. He walks on earth
with the immaterialistic attitude of Jesus son of Mary''[^40]

It is reported by Ibn Majah that the Messenger said:"God commanded me to
love four persons and He informed me that He loves them. When he was
asked: Who are they? The Prophet said; ‘Ali is from them (repeating that
three times) and Abu Dharr Salman and Al-Miqdad."[^41]

Abu Dharr was so concerned with the purity of the Islamic teaching to a
degree that he did not allow Kaab Al- Ahbar to give a verdict in Islamic
law though Kaab Al- Ahbar was highly respected by ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab
and Uthman. Many times the two Caliphs asked him about things in
religion and they used to listen to what he said.

It is reported that Abu Dharr said to Uthman after he came back from
Damascus to Medina: "It is not sufficient for a man to pay only Zakat.
He should add to that by helping the needy and feeding the hungry and
spending in the way of God." When Kaab Al-Ahbar commented that "Whoever
fulfills his prescribed duty does not have to add anything to it " Abu
Dharr became angry and said to Kaab: Son of the Jewish lady who are you
to say this? Do you want to teach us our religion? Then he hit him with
his rod on his neck.[^42]

A man that does not allow Kaab (who was highly regarded by ‘Umar) to
give a verdict in religion is not expected to follow the opinion of a
Jew who adopted Islam during the time of Uthman and did not see the
companions of the Messenger nor did he know the Islamic instructions.

If Abu Dharr and Ammar agreed with Ibn Saba Ibn Saba must be right. The
Holy Prophet testified for the truth of these two companions.

It is reported that Ayeshah said that the messenger of Cod said:
"Whenever Ammar is given the choice between two alternatives he always
chooses the most righteous of the two alternatives."[^43] Abdullah lbn
Masud was consulted: Whom should we follow when the Muslims are divided?
He said: "Follow Ammar. He will never part with the truth..."[^44] The
Prophet told Ammar: "Ammar be cheerful the aggressor party will kill
you.''[^45] He also said: "Paradise longs for three persons: ‘Ali Ammar
and Salman."[^46]

When the Messenger of God testified for the distinction of a companion
of this kind such companion must have been right. And if these two
companions had agreed with any person about a religious matter the one
with whom they had agreed must have been right. If the two companions
agreed with a person who was a new convert he and not they must be the
learner. He would be learning from the two companions.

If Ibn Saba were in existence and if he had met Abu Dharr and Ammar (as
Saif's report alleged) it would be logical to assume that he did not
teach the two companions anything and that he learned from them.

If he had spoken of ‘Ali's executorship and his succession to the
Messenger he would be only following the two companions. Ibn Saba did
not hear the Messenger but Abu Dharr and Ammar heard him saying at
Ghadir Khum: "Whoever I am his "Mawla" (leader) ‘Ali is his Mawla."[^47]
The two companions heard the Messenger saying: "I am leaving for you
that which if you uphold you will never go astray: The Book of God and
the members of my House.

Beware how you shall treat them after me.[^48] These two companions no
doubt understood from the statement of the prophet that the Messenger
was appointing ‘Ali his successor.

To Discredit Abu Dharr and Ammar Is To Discredit The Prophet
------------------------------------------------------------

As we conclude our discussion and analysis of Saif Ibn ‘Umar
Al-Tameemi's report we come to the following conclusions:

1) The subscribers to Saif Ibn ‘Umar's report who are trying to smear
the Shi’ite Muslims are actually smearing Abu Dharr and Ammar Ibn Yasir
before they smear the contemporary Shi’ites.

2) The two companions were following the line of the Prophet because he
testified to their righteousness truth and rightfulness. The Shi’ites
follow the same line.

3) This means that he who discredits the two companions actually
discredits the Prophet himself.

I do not believe that Ibn Saba ever existed. I believe that he was only
a fabricated story to ruin the reputation of the "Shi’ites" (the
followers of the members of the House of the Holy Prophet)

Dr. Taha Hussein observed that what was reported about "Ibn Al-Souda"
(Abdullah Ibn Saba) was obviously made up and fabricated. It was
invented when the debate between the Shi’ites and other Islamic schools
was in progress.

The enemies of the Shi’ites wanted to admit into the teaching of this
school a Jewish element for the sake of destroying their reputation.
Taha Hussein said: Ibn Al- Souda was nothing but an imagination.

And if he had truly existed he was not that important as the historians
try to portray him and describe his activity during the days of Uthman
and in the first year of the caliphate of ‘Ali. He is an imaginary
person treasured by the enemies of the Shi’ites in order to harm the
Shi’ites.[^49]

The Source Of The Legend
------------------------

The source of the story of Abdullah Ibn Saba or Ibn Al-Souda was Saif
Ibn ‘Umar Al-Tameemi who lived in the second century after the Hijra.
Al-Tabari Ibn Asakir and Ibn Abu Bakr took the story of Ibn Saba from
Saif Ibn ‘Umar. The rest of the historians such as Ibn Al-Athir Ibn
Kutheyer Ibn Khaldoon and Abu Al-Fida took the story from Al-Tabari.

This Saif Ibn ‘Umar was one of the forgers of the hadiths and the
reports of the events of history. The Muslim scholars who are
specialized in Hadith have expressed their opinion about Saif: Ibn
Mu-een (died in 277) said: Saif is a weak reporter.

Al-Nisa-i (died in 303) said: Saif is a weak reporter.

Abu Dawud (died in 317) said: Saif is nothing.

Al-Hakim (died in 405) said: Saif is abandoned and accused of being
heretic.

Ibn Hayyan said: Saif reportedly forged stories and attributed them to
reliable reporters and he was accused of being heretic.

Al-Dar Qutni (died in 385) said: Saif is a weak reporter and was
abandoned.

Ibn Hajar (died 850) said: Saif is a weak reporter.[^50]

This Saif reported many Hadiths which are opposed to the well known
facts of history and to the facts which are reported by numerous
reliable reporters. He also reported events which are inconceivable.

The resentment of ‘Ali towards the election of Abu Bakr was reported by
outstanding hadith-reporters and this is known to the students of
history. What Al-Tabari reported through Saif Ibn ‘Umar about ‘Ali's
election of Abu Bakr is the following:

"‘Ali was at his house when he was informed that Abu Bakr is receiving
the pledge of allegiance. ‘Ali hurriedly left his home without having
his cloak on him because he did not like to lose time. He came to the
mosque and pledged his allegiance to Abu Bakr then sat with him and sent
after his cloak. When it was brought to him he put it on and remained
with Abu Bakr."[^51]

It is a well known fact of history which was reported by numerous
reliable sources that ‘Ali did not accept the caliphate of Abu Bakr at
the beginning and refused to give him the pledge of allegiance and he
continued to do so until his wife Fatima Al-Zahra died. Al-Bukhari and
Muslim through their channels to Ayeshah reported the following:

"... Fatima daughter of the Messenger of God sent to Abu Bakr asking him
for her inheritance from her father out of what God has given him in
Medina Fadak and what remained from the "fifth of Kheibar"... ; Abu Bakr
said: The Messenger of God said: "We (the Prophets) are not to be
inherited (materially); what we have left is (or as) charity."

Abu Bakr refused to give Fatima anything. She was outraged by what he
did and she refused to speak to him until she died. She lived six months
after the Messenger of God. When she died ‘Ali buried her at night and
did not inform Abu Bakr of her death. ‘Ali prayed on her.

People were warm towards ‘Ali when Fatima was still living. When she
died ‘Ali lost that warmness. Thus he sought to make peace with Abu Bakr
and he pledged his allegiance to him."[^52]

Of Saif's reports of events which are inconceivable are the following:
Al-Tabari reported that Saif said that Abu Bakr sent Al-Ala Ibn
Al-Hadrami to fight the deserters of the faith in Al-Bahrain and that he
and his army went through Al- Dahna and that their camels ran away from
them in the desert during the night and that they became thirsty. Then
water appeared to them. They drank from it and washed then their camels
came back.

Abu Huraira filled a container of his with water but he left it near the
water. When they departed from that place they came back to it. They did
not find the water but Abu Hurairah found his container.

Saif also reported that Al-Ala and his army went to Dareen traveling by
sea on their camels for twenty-four hours and the water of the sea did
not cover the hooves of the camels. He mentioned also that after the
army passed through the sea it was able to obtain victory against the
people of Dareen.[^53]

But Al-Baladhuri on the other hand reported the invasion of Al-Bahrain
through a source other than Saif and mentioned that Al-Ala invaded Zarah
and Dareen during the reign of ‘Umar (rather than the reign of Abu
Bakr).

He reported that the inhabitants of Zarah made a peace treaty with
Al-Ala and that they agreed to give him a third of the city and a third
of what was in it of gold and silver; that he would take half of what
belongs to them outside the city and that Al-Akhnas Ibn Al-Amiri said to
him that they did not include in the peace treaty what they had in
Dareen.

Thus he advised him of a shallow passage between Zarah and Dareen in the
sea and that Al-Ala and his army went through that shallow passage and
invaded Dareen.[^54] Al-Tabari reported through Saif that when Saad Ibn
Abu Waqass and his army arrived to a place called Othaib Al-Hijanat he
sent Assim Ibn Amr to the lower part of the Euphrates.

Assim came to Maisan seeking sheep or cows but he did not find any. The
cows fortified themselves by going into a wooded area. Assim went and
looked until he found a man near the area. He asked him about the cows
and the sheep and the man swore to him that he did not know anything
about their location.

But the man was the shepherd of those animals. Upon this a bull spoke
clearly in Arabic saying what means: "By God he lied to you; We are
here." Assim went in and drove the cows out and brought them to the
camp.[^55]

Thus we find that Saif reports in the two stories what is unbelievable.
A water appears and the whole army drinks from it. Then it disappears
shortly after they leave it; an army goes throngh the sea for
twenty-four hours and the water of the sea does not cover the hooves of
the camels and a cow speaks the grammatical Arabic language.

This is only some of Saif's fabricated lies. It is amazing that
Al-Tabari who was an outstanding Muslim historian relied upon Saif's
reports while his own reports testify to Saif's incredibility.

Ibn Saba was nothing but one of his fabricated lies. He tried to cover
up the truth by alleging that the revolution against Uthman was not
caused by Uthman’s mishandling the public funds and giving it to his
relatives and friends and appointing his transgressor relatives as
governors of the Muslims.

He tried to say that the cause of that revolution was the conspiracies
of Abdullah Ibn Saba who never was mentioned by any reliable historians
before Saif Ibn ‘Umar.

Saif wanted to acquit Ayeshah Mother of Believers Talhah and Al-Zubayr
from the responsibility of the Battle of Basra. Thus he invented the
story of a conspiracy by Ibn Saba and his followers for starting the
Battle.

Al-Tabari and the historians who followed him in recording the story of
Saif Ibn ‘Umar should have asked themselves the two following questions:
1. If Ibn Saba had existed and had such revolutionary and destructive
activity why did not Ayeshah mention him and his activities when she
went to Basra trying to turn people against ‘Ali and his followers?

Why did she not mention that those who made the revolution against
Uthman and those who killed him were followers of a Jewish Arab that was
conspiring against Islam and that these conspirators were the followers
of ‘Ali and the callers for his election?

She did not mention that though she came to Basra for the sole purpose
of turning its inhabitants against ‘Ali. Had the story of Abdullah Ibn
Saba been truthful Ayeshah would have mzde it the main theme of her
speeches. Had she mentioned that she would have hurt ‘Ali and his
followers a great deal.

It could be said that Mother of the Believers was not aware of the
intrigues and conspiracies of Ibn Saba because he used to work secretly.
But the report which speaks of Ibn Saba says also that he came to Basra
and formed a revolutionary cell in it and that Abdullah Ibn Amir who was
the Umayyad governor of Basra expelled him from Basra when he discovered
his subversive activities.[^56]

Abdullah Ibn Amir was with Ayeshah when she departed from Mecca and he
was with her when she came to Basra. Why did he notgive her that
information about Ibn Saba if Ibn Saba had really existed? Tens of
Umayyads were with Mother of the Believers and these people were fully
aware of the situation of the Islamic cities and communities and what
was taking place in them.

These Umayyads were the rulers of the cities during the time of Uthman
and they were not simple people.

Ayeshah did not mention Abdullah Ibn Saba and his activity before the
Battle of Basra nor on the day of the Battle. Nor did she mention
anything about Ibn Saba and his activities after the Battle though she
lived a good number of years afterwards.

None of the Umayyads who accompanied her (such as Abdullah Ibn Amir and
Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam who were arch enemies of the Imam) ever mentioned
anything about Ibn Saba and his activities. Had the story of Ibn Saba
been true the voices of these people would have filled the Muslim World.

Granted that Ayeshah did not mention Ibn Saba because she did not know
about his intrigues and conspiracies but why did Muawiya refrain from
mentioning that? The report which speaks of Ibn Saba mentioned that he
went to Damascus and that he turned Abu Dharr against Muawiya and Uthman
and that Ibn Saba spoke of his destructive opinions to two other
companions of the Prophet: Abu Al-Darda and Abadah Ibn Al-Samit.

The report added that Abadah resented the statements of Ibn Saba and
took him to Muawiya and informed Muawiya that Ibn Saba is the one who
turned Abu Dharr against him... and with this information Muawiya drove
Ibn Saba out of Damascus.[^57] Ibn Saba later went to Egypt and Abdullah
Ibn Abu Sarh (the governor of Egypt) also knew about Ibn Saba.[^58]

Muawiya used to give large amounts of money to people in order to defame
the Imam by inventing stories that would damage his reputation and the
reputation of his followers. Muawiya was the one who decreed that the
Imam ‘Ali should be cursed every Friday at every Islamic Mosque.

This order was issued after the death of the Imam. Had the story of Ibn
Saba been true Muawiya would have considered it most important and would
have held it by his two hands and he would not have failed to mention it
every day.

Yet history does not mention that Muawiya or anyone of his appointed
governors ever spoke one word concerning Ibn Saba.

History has preserved numerous messages from Muawiya in which he
directed whatever he could of false accusations towards the Imam. His
main goal in those messages was to smear the Imam by saying that he
protected the killers of Uthman and those who participated in the
revolution against him.

Yet he did not mention in any of those messages that the killers of
Uthman or the participants in that revolution had any relation with a
man named Ibn Saba. Had the legend of Ibn Saba had any truth to it the
pen of Muawiya would have flown with it and it would have come on his
tongue and the tongues of his followers during the days of his reign and
the reign of the rest of the Umayyads.

The truth is that Ibn Saba was not dangerous to the unity of the Muslims
or a cause in dividing the Muslims because Ibn Saba did not exist. The
fact is that one of the main reasons for dividing the Muslims and
spreading animosity among them was Saif Ibn ‘Umar who invented the story
of Abdullah Ibn Saba.

Saif elaborately fabricated the story and Al-Tabari accepted it. Thus it
was spread and became popular among the Muslim masses. This fabrication
brought a mutual hatred among the Muslims and divided them into two
parties separated by considerable distance.

Only God knows how many innocent Muslims lost their lives as a result of
the poison with which Saif Ibn ‘Umar sprayed the Islamic atmosphere
through his fabrications.

[^1]: Al-Tabari, his History, part 4, p. 493.

[^2]: Al-Tabari, his History, part 4, p. 493.

[^3]: Al-Tabari, his History, part 4, pp. 493-494.

[^4]: Al-Tabari, his History, part 4, pp. 493-494.

[^5]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 Events of 36 H. p. 509.

[^6]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 Events of 36 H.

[^7]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 Fvents of 36 H. p. 509.

[^8]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 512.

[^9]: Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 pp. 36-37.

[^10]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 89-90.

[^11]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 533 and he mentioned that Ammar
Ibn Yasir aided Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr in the removal of the canopy.

[^12]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 178.

[^13]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 4 p. 119 Al-Tabari his History part 4
p. 525 mentioned that Oday Ibn Hatam and Al-Ashtar were the ones who
reached the camel of ‘Aisha in order to end the Battle of Bassrah.

[^14]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 157.

[^15]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 107.

[^16]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 5 pp. 323-333.

[^17]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 239.

[^18]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 68.

[^19]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 81-82.

[^20]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 (Events of the 36th year H.) pp.
340-341.

[^21]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 (Events of the 36th year H.) pp.
340-341.

[^22]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 340.

[^23]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 283.

[^24]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 341.

[^25]: Al-BaladhuriAnsab Al-Ashraf part 4 p. 28.

[^26]: Ibn Hisham Biography of the Prophet part 2 p. 409.

[^27]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 53-69.

[^28]: Ibn Hisham Biography of the Prophet part 2 p. 296.

[^29]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 46.

[^30]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 53.

[^31]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 56 and Al-Tabari his History part
4.

[^32]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 1 p. 161.

[^33]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra part 1 p. 161.

[^34]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 70-71.

[^35]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 49.

[^36]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.1 p. 240.

[^37]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol. 1 p. 241.

[^38]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra part 1 p. 133.

[^39]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 4 p. 334 (hadith no. 3889)

[^40]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 5 p. 334 (hadith no. 3890)

[^41]: Ibn Majah his authentic Sunan part 1 p. 53 (hadith no. 129)

[^42]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 284.

[^43]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 5 pp. 332-333.

[^44]: Yousof Ibn Abdul-Barr Al-Istea-Ab part 3 p. 1139.

[^45]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 5 p. 332-333.

[^46]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 4 p. 332 (Hadith no. 3884)

[^47]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 110.

[^48]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 109.

[^49]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra part 1 pp. 98-99.

[^50]: Sayed Murtadha Al-Askari in his book Abdullah Ibn Saba p. 26.

[^51]: Al-Tabari his History part 3 (Event in the 11th year A. H.) p.
201 (conveyed by Sayed Al-Askari Abdullah Ibn Saba)

[^52]: Al-Bukhari his Sahih part 5 p. 177 (chapter of Battle of
Khaibar). Muslim also reported it in his Sahih part 12 p. 77.

[^53]: Al-Tabari his History part 3 conveyed by Al-Askari Abdullah Ibn
Saba.

[^54]: Al-BaladhuriFutooh Al-Buldan pp. 92-93 (conveyed by Al-Askari
Abdullah Ibn Saba p. 117)

[^55]: Al-Tabari his History part 3 p. 12.

[^56]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 72.

[^57]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 283.

[^58]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 341 (Events of 35th year A.H.).


