25. The Battle of Siffin
========================

The Imam came to Kufa after the end of the Battle of Basra and he made
Kufa his capital. The people of Kufa were the builders of his army whose
support was indispensable in defeating his opponents in Basra. There
were no other people upon whom he could rely.

The majority of the people of Basra were against him and they were not
expected to become sincere towards him after the war of Basra had
eliminated many of their loved ones.

People of Hijaz were not reliable because they were few compared to the
people of the rest of the Islamic provinces. People of Syria were
followers of his enemy Muawiya. The Muslims of Egypt were incapable of
offering what he needed of an army for subduing the secessionists.

The Imam stayed about four months in his new capital preparing what he
needed to meet Muawiya the most dangerous among his opponents to the
unity of the nation.

He was the most capable among them to challenge the authority of the
Imam and their least scrupulous in religion. Muawiya had declared before
the Battle of Basra his refusal to join the electors of the Imam and his
challenge to his authority.

By this he actually separated Syria from the body of the Islamic State
and declared its secession. He added to this his hostility to the
central authority and that he was at war with that authority using
revenge for the blood of Uthman as an excuse. His secessional movement
started before the movement of the three leaders.

The Imam sent after he was elected a message to Muawiya which was
carried by his messenger Subrah Al- Juhani informing him of his election
by the companions and asking him along with his followers to join his
electors. Muawiya after a long silence sent Qubaisah Al- Absi and gave
him a sealed letter addressed from Muawiya to ‘Ali. He ordered him to
enter Medina raising the letter and holding its lower part and told him
what to say.

When Qubaisah entered Medina people knew that Muawiya was defiant. He
gave what was in his hand to the Imam. The Imam opened it and did not
find anything in it and the following dialogue took place: The Imam:
What did you leave behind you (in Damascus)?

Qubaisah: (after he asked for and was given immunity): I left behind me
angry people who would not be satisfied but with a death punishment for
Uthman’s blood.

The Imam: Whose death? Qubaisah: Yours! I left also sixty thousand old
men crying under the shirt of Uthman which is hung on the pulpit in
Damascus.

The Imam: Do they want me to pay for the blood of Uthman? Am I not
bereaved by the death of Uthman? God I declare to Thee my innocence of
the blood of Uthman. By this the killers of Uthman have been spared
unless God wants the opposite. For if He wants something He would
necessarily have it.[^1]

The answer of the Imam to this obvious challenge was to start
mobilization of soldiers for subduing this dangerous defiant. He gave
the banner to his son Muhammad Ibn "Al-Hanafeyah" (the mother of
Muhammad)

He gave the leadership of a portion of his army to Abdullah Ibn Abbass.
He gave ‘Umar Ibn Abu Selemah the leadership of another portion of his
army. He appointed Abu Leila Al-Jarrah the commander of his advancing
division.

He appointed Qutham Ibn Abbass his successor in Medina. He wrote to Qais
Ibn Saad his appointed governor of Egypt Uthman Ibn Hunaif his appointed
governor of Basra and Abu Musa Al-Ashari his appointed governor of Kufa
to try to mobilize people for a march on Syria.[^2] He called upon the
people of Medina to participate in that Holy mission. He spoke to them
saying:

"Certainly our safety would be secured within the authority of God. Give
Him your obedience truthfully and willingly. By God you either do that
or God will remove from you the authority of Islam; then He will not
bring it back to you until the authority of Islam shrinks and recoils in
Medina.

Stand up to these people who want to divide your nation. May God reform
through you what people of other areas had corrupted and by this you
would be paying only what is due from you." [^3]

The Imam went on preparing for the march on Syria trying to mobilize all
that which was within his reach for the confrontation with this
aggressor party. But the news of the departure of Ayeshah Talhah and
Al-Zubayr to Basra came to the Imam. Thus he was forced to delay his
march on Syria until after the conclusion of the emerging crisis.[^4]

The Imam did not delay his march on Syria because the three leaders were
more dangerous to the caliphate than Muawiya. He did that because the
departure of the three leaders to Iraq added to the danger of Muawiya a
dealt with soon the Imam would be deprived of all military and financial
assistance which he needed to subdue the main enemy Muawiya.

The three leaders with all their forces would not represent a great
danger against the unity of the nation if they were alone challenging
the authority of the Imam. The Imam would be able to subdue their forces
easily if they were alone without Muawiya. Their rebellion was
extemporaneous.

They did not have what Muawiya had of resourcefulness strong army and
wide popularity in a large Islamic province. As a matter of fact people
of Basra were divided in their loyalty towards them and a party from the
people of Basra fought them as soon as they entered and before the Imam
came to confront them.

Muawiya on the contrary was dangerous by himself even if the three
leaders were not with him. He was wily and resourceful. His movement was
not extemporaneous. He prepared for it for two decades.

He was in a province whose inhabitants were obedient to his order. He
had a huge and well organized army ready to comply with his command. He
was capable of challenging the authority of the Imam even if he did not
have any helpers from outside Syria.

Therefore the biggest concern of the Imam after he finished the Battle
of Basra was to prepare for facing this enemy who was dangerous to the
unity of the nation and its future.

To leave no excuse for Muawiya the Imam sent him a message with Jareer
Ibn Abdullah Al-Bajali inviting him to join the majority of the Muslims
who elected him.

He mentioned in that message that those who elected him were those who
elected Abu Bakr ‘Umar and Uthman and that the right of the decision
about the caliphate was only for the migrant and the Medinite
companions. If they elected a man their election would be binding to the
rest of the Muslims.

If anyone tries to break away by accusation or innovation they would
bring him back. If such a person persists in his secessional way they
have to fight him for taking a road other than the road of the
believers. The Imam also said to Muawiya in this message the following:

"Talhah and Al-Zubayr elected me then they broke their covenant with me.
Their breach of covenant is like their faith desertion. I fought them
after I left no excuse for them until the truth came and the cause of
God prevailed while they were averse.

"I invite you to join the Muslims by pledging your allegiance to the new
administration. I prefer peace but if you persist in your opposition I
will fight you seeking the help of God against you..."

The excuse which Muawiya used in his deceptive movement for reaching the
caliphate was the blood of Uthman and that the Imam did not punish the
killers of Uthman though they were around him. The Imam therefore
included in his message what refutes his argument.

"And you have spoken repeatedly about the killers of Uthman. Join the
rest of the Muslims who elected me then ask me to try the ones whom you
accused. I will judge between you and them according to the Book of
God..

"Muawiya if you look at the matter through your mind rather than your
selfishness you will find me the most innocent in relation to the blood
of Uthman and that I was completely isolated of his affairs unless you
deliberately make false accusations. You may do that if you want to. You
ought to know that you are from the ones who were freed by the Prophet
at the conquest of Mecca who are forbidden from reaching the caliphate.
They cannot be a factor in deciding the leadership. Nor would they be
consulted in the Islamic affairs or elected by the Muslim electors. I
have sent to you Jareer Ibn Abdullah Al-Bajali. He is faithful and a
migrant with a good past.

Pledge your allegiance to me through him and there is no power but by
God."[^5] Jareer carried the message to Muawiya and added his own power
of persuasion. Muawiya however refused to answer him positively or
negatively trying to gain time in preparation for the future. Finally
his expected answer came.

It was not expected that any mediation or means of convincing would
succeed in bringing Muawiya to the right road. Re believed that he is in
a strong position to challenge the Imam and he would not do anything
else.

He had under his leadership about one hundred thousand fighters and he
was still with all his financial and manpower. He did not enter any
battle and he did not suffer any loss of property funds or men. The Imam
on the other hand was forced to enter the bloody Battle of Basra in
which his supporters had to pay a great deal of their blood and wealth.

The enemies of the Imam were on the increase and the supporters of
Muawiya were in a continuous increase.

The Syrian treasury was in Muawiya's hands and he used it as he used his
own funds purchasing with it the conscience of the seekers of selfish
interests and they were numerous.

The Opportunist Amr
-------------------

The wily Amr Ibn Al-Aws was most outstanding among those who sold their
principles and conscience. The co-operation between Amr and Muawiya was
a very distinguished event in the history of opportunism. History knew
(and Muawiya who was seeking to avenge the blood of Uthman also knew)
that Amr Ibn Al-Aws was from the outstanding agitators against
Uthman.[^6]

This did not prevent Muawiya from covenanting the wily Amr for an
alliance against the Imam with the pretext of seeking the avenge for the
blood of Uthman of which Amr was guilty.[^7] The price Muawiya had to
pay to Amr for his alliance with him was the governorship and the tax
revenues of Egypt as long as Amr lived if Muawiya wins the struggle
against the Imam.[^8]

The Imam was determined to try to subdue Muawiya and his followers and
bring them back to the bulk of the nation and thwart their secessional
movement. He led his army to Syria and when he came to the land of
Siffin he found Muawiya and his army had already occupied the bank of
the Euphrates. The Imam was forced to camp away from the water.

Idealist Versus Opportunist
---------------------------

Muawiya would not hesitate to use for his end any means even if it is
extremely criminal. He occupied the bank of the Euphrates and thought he
could prevail against ‘Ali and his army through the terrible weapon of
thirst. He decided to prevent his opponents from reaching the water.[^9]
Thus ‘Ali and his army had to surrender or die of thirst. Thirst would
make them easy victims and Muawiya's army in possession of supplies food
and water would be able to destroy ‘Ali and his army. Muawiya thought
victory was within his reach. Destroying scores of thousands of Muslims
through this method would not shake the conscience of Muawiya because
his conscience was dead.

It would not shake his conscience to kill ‘Ali and his two sons
Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein members of the House of the Prophet. Nor would
it shake his conscience to kill them by thirst though it meant killing
by thirst the majority of the companions of the Messenger who were
"Badrians" and "Uhudians."

Why should the conscience of Muawiya be shaken for committing such an
ugly crime? Is not his aim to defeat the truth and the people of the
truth? What is the difference between one death and another death? There
is not any difference in the eyes of Muawiya between reaching victory
through the sword or through annihilation by the weapon of thirst.

The annihilation of ‘Ali and his camp through thirst was preferable to
Muawiya over killing them by sword.

Fighting ‘Ali and his camp by conventional weapons does not secure
Muawiya's victory but annihilation through thirst would definitely
secure it.

However Amr Ibn Al-Aws his chief advisor counselled him not to try such
a terrible weapon yet Amr was not more righteous than Muawiya. Amr
thought that this method in spite of its ugliness would not secure
victory. It may bring him only failure and curse. ‘Ali the man of
unusual bravery would not die from thirst while he is in command of a
huge army. But Muawiya refused the advice of his ally.[^10]

The Imam told Muawiya in a message that he did not come to fight for
water. He came to uphold the truth and defeat falsehood. He came to
bring the Muslims together after the leaders of falsehood put them in
two separate camps. Muawiya did not take the Imam's message seriously
and he did not leave the Imam any open avenue but to fight for
water.[^11]

The Imam waged a battle for the water and this was his first Holy Battle
against Muawiya and his camp. He succeeded in occupying the bank of the
Euphrates and driving the Umayyad army away from the river. By this the
situation was reversed. Now it became possible for the Imam and his army
to do to their opponents what their opponents were trying to do to them.
It became possible for the Imam to annihilate his opponents by their own
weapons. Would the Imam do that?

Here the history of war kneels to glorify ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib. Here ‘Ali
stands among the leaders of nations towering like a mountain as he gives
generations of humanity his impressive lesson. The religion of Islam
stands against all kinds of wars of genocide and annihilation. The
leaders of the nations of the twentieth century have legalized the
annihilation of civilians through atomic bombs and so far have failed to
prohibit the use of such weapons.

The faith of Islam (over fourteen centuries ago) had prohibited what was
much less than a nuclear war. It prohibited killing children women
elderly people and blind enemies. It prohibits the demolishing of houses
of the enemies and destruction of their orchards.[^12]

I cannot conceive that anyone after the Messenger could take the
attitude of the Imam ‘Ali towards his enemy after his enemy had given
him every justification to annihilate him and his army by his own
weapon.

The leaders of the Imam's army and their soldiers shouted: Prevent them
from water as they prevented us from water. The Imam replied: "God has
given you victory against them because of their injustice and
aggression. Certainly the issue is more important than depriving them of
water."[^13]

Then he sent to Muawiya this message: "We shall not treat you as you
treated us. Come to the water we are equal."[^14]cdxxxi

New Efforts for Peace
---------------------

The Imam tried again to bring about peace. His aim was to avoid shedding
blood and to bring the Muslims back to unity. His ambassadors went to
Muawiya but mediations and negotiations failed to bring any result.

Muawiya was hoping to be the ruler of the Muslim World and nothing would
stop him from trying to reach that end.

Skirmishes between the two camps were started and remained limited. A
regiment from one side and a regiment from the other side faced each
other on one day. On the following day another two regiments faced each
other.

The situation continued this way until the month of Muharram began. All
hostilities ceased in observation of the sanctity of the month. The Imam
went back to his peaceful efforts during the month of Muharram and the
result was not better than in his previous efforts.[^15]

As the month of Muharam ended the two camps went back to their
skirmishes and limited battles. The Imam wanted to prevent both camps
the expected heavy losses if the two armies faced each other in a
decisive battle.

These battles did not prevent men from the two camps to meet and debate
each other. Most of the tribes were living in both provinces: Iraq and
Syria. Thus they had their special blood relationship. Muawiya contacted
a number of leaders of the Iraqi army. He sent them his messengers and
spoke to some of them directly trying to persuade them by promising them
important rewards if they leave the camp of the Imam and join him.[^16]

The followers of the Imam also tried to persuade their relatives in
Syria to join the camp of the truth. The Imam however did not allow
himself to try to buy his opponents with public funds or to promise
their ambitious leaders important positions.

There were many people looking for their interests among the followers
of the Imam. It would be sufficient to mention men such as Ashaath Ibn
Qais about whom Abu Bakr said: Whenever Ashaath sees an evil he assists
it.'' History records that Muawiya sent his brother Utbah to Ashaath
trying to attract him. He offered him proposals and Ashaath was not
unreceptive.

Finally the Imam decided to meet Muawiya in a decisive battle. The two
huge armies met and the most important battle the Muslims had ever waged
until that time began. The two armies fought each other all day and a
big portion of the night.

They resumed the battle on the following day and the right wing of the
Imam's army was defeated and ran away. By this the core of his army was
weakened. Thus the Imam had to move from the heart of the army to its
left side where the fighters were from the tribe of Rabi-aah.[^17]

When the Rabi-ites witnessed the Imam among them they realized the
magnitude of their responsibility towards the protection of the Imam.
They fought bravely fearing that the Imam might be killed while he is
among them and that this will put them in an eternal shame. Therefore
they decided to prevent that at any cost.[^18]

Malik Al-Ashtar went on trying to bring the retreaters back. They heard
his voice and came back. The army was back again in action and the war
went on with its utmost cruelty and ugliness for the whole day and
night.[^19]

Martyrdom of Ammar Ibn Yasir
----------------------------

On that day when the right of the Imam's army retreated an outstanding
companion of the Holy Prophet Ammar Ibn Yasir who was 93 years old stood
between the two camps. He spoke loudly saying: By God if they hit us
until they drive us from here to the orchards of Hejar we will continue
to believe that we are the people of truth and that they are people of
falsehood.[^20]

Then he said pointing to the banner of Muawiya: "By God under the banner
of the Messenger I fought the man of this banner three times and the man
of the banner is not more righteous now than before."[^21]

Ammar had an appointment with his martyrdom at the hands of the
aggressor party. The Messenger of God said to him in the presence of
many companions. "Son of Sumayah (Sumayah was Ammar's mother) the
aggressor party shall kill you."[^22]

This statement was well known to the companions. Amr Ibn Al-Aws was one
of the reporters of this hadith and people of Damascus heard that from
him. His narration of this hadith caused a deep disturbance in the camp
of Muawiya days before the decisive battle began.[^23]

Muawiya blamed Amr for reporting this hadith. He expected Ammar to be
with the Imam and through his presence Muawiya's followers will discover
that they belong to the aggressor party.

Ammar asked for a drink before he entered the decisive battle of Siffin
during which he obtained his martyrdom. A lady brought him milk mixed
with water.

When he saw the drink he exclaimed "Allahu Akbar" (God is The Great).
This is what my beloved the Messenger of God promised me when he said:
Ammar the aggressor party shall kill you and your last drink in this
world will be milk.[^24]

He took his drink then he rushed on saying: Who wants to go to Paradise?
Paradise is under the shades of the spears. He who is thirsty comes to
the water and the water will be drunk today. TUday I will meet my
beloved ones: Muhammad and his party."[^25]

Ammar went on fighting and urging Hashim Ibn Utba Ibn Abu Waqass to
advance (Hashim was the bearer of the banner of Ammar's regiment. He was
of the best of the Qureshite warriors and very beloved by the Imam. He
lost one of his eyes at one of the battles.) Ammar sometimes joked with
him saying: One-eyed advance.

Then he tells him: Advance I redeem you with my father and mother. And
Hashim calms Ammar down saying: Take it easy "Abu Yaqthan" (Ammar's code
name). The war makes you move too fast.[^26] But neither the words of
Hashim nor the ninety three years could minimize the speed of Abu
Yaqthan. He wanted to hurry to Paradise.

He had an appointment with his beloved the great Messenger. He wanted to
meet him and he did.

Khuzaimah Ibn Thabit the man of two testimonies (The Prophet had made
his testimony equal to the testimony of two men) was with the Imam in
Siffin but he did not fight. When Ammar was killed Khuzaimah realized
that the aggressor party is the camp of Muawiya. He entered his tent. He
took a bath and put his armor on then he went fighting until he
died.[^27]

The Big Conspiracy
------------------

The war continued with all its violence and intensity during the third
day and weakness became obvious in the camp of Muawiya. The Imam's army
almost reached the tent of Muawiya. He wanted to run away but he felt
ashamed and so he stayed.[^28]

Before noon while the battle was progressing in its intensity victory
became within the reach of the Imam's camp. While his army was about to
defeat the aggressor party copies of the Holy Qur'an were hoisted in
Muawiya's camp and voices were heard saying:

This is the Book of God. It is between you and us from its beginning to
end. Remember God. Remember God for the future of the Arabs. Remember
God for the future of Islam. Who shall protect the borders of Syria if
the Syrian people perish? Who shall protect the borders of Iraq if the
Iraqi people perish? [^29]

Muawiya had already despaired from obtaining a military victory. He was
facing a decisive defeat on the battlefield. Now he resorted to the Holy
Qur'an. The invitation to accept the rule of the Holy Qur'an was not an
invention of Muawiya and Ibn Al-Aws.

You may recall that the Imam called upon the camp of Ayeshah Talhah and
Al-Zubier at Basra before the beginning of its battle to surrender to
the Holy Qur'an. A youth from Kufa volunteered to carry the Holy Qur'an
face the people of Basra and invite them to accept the rules of the Holy
Qur'an. His invitation was rejected and the youth was killed.[^30]

Muawiya and Ibn Al-Aws had decided to resort to the invitation of the
rule of the Holy Qur'an when they realized that their military defeat
was inevitable.

Muawiya evidently had prepared the atmosphere for such an invitation
through his secret contact with some of the leaders of the Imam's army
particularly Ashaath Ibn Qais the head of the tribe of Kindah whose
members were numerous in Kufa.

Muawiya was almost certain that hoisting the copies of the Holy Qur'an
would lead to a division in the Imam's camp whether the Imam would
accept or refuse the invitation. What Muawiya expected happened. Voices
from the Imam's camp were raised asking to stop the fight and accept the
rule of the Holy Qur'an.

Those who wanted to stop hostilities were three categories. Each of them
had a motive that differed from that of the other two categories. The
scrupulous category was made up of religious fanatics. They thought that
rejecting the invitation to the rule of the Book and continuing the
battle would be a major sin which Muslims are not supposed to commit.
They forgot that their Imam is the most knowledgeable of the Holy Qur'an
and the Islamic law and that he is the most adherent to the Islamic
principles.

This category included a great number of readers of the Holy Qur'an who
thought that they knew all the Islamic law and appointed themselves as
the protectors of Islam. This kind of religious people are numerous in
every generation.

There was another category of people who were anxious to stop the fight
led by conspirators who were collaborating with the enemy believing
their co-operation with the enemy will bring them some material wealth
or high positions.

The third category believed that their obedience to the Imam in the two
battles of Basra and Siffin had cost them dearly because they paid with
the blood of their children brothers and relatives. Their main concern
was to save their lives. They could not care less for what happened to
Islam and the Muslims.

The Imam stood up trying to show them the right road saying to them: The
resort to the Holy Qur'an is only a conspiracy planned by Muawiya and
his advisors. I know them as young and old. They never were people of
the Qur'an or religion. All they wanted was to avoid the catastrophe of
defeat.[^31]

There was within the camp of the Imam some people who had both sincerity
and wisdom (these were a minority compared to the others.) These people
agreed with the Imam and urged him to continue the war and to ignore the
many voices which were calling for cessation of hostility.

These people were led by Malik Al-Ashtar. But their voices were drowned
by the voice of the majority who wanted to end the battle.

Al-Ashtar was still pushing hard towards Muawiya seeing that victory was
within his reach but those who wanted to end the war surrounded the
Imam. They threatened to desert him and to fight him and even to take
him as a captive and hand him to Muawiya.[^32]

They asked him to order Al-Ashtar to discontinue his march. The Imam
found himself between two alternatives. If he continued the war he would
be forced to fight his enemy and the biggest portion of his own camp
with only a minority that was still obedient to him.

Otherwise he could discontinue the war and victory would slip from his
hand. He chose to discontinue the war feeling that his obedient
followers may be annihilated without reaching a result which would
improve the just side.

The Imam found himself facing a coup by which his authority came to an
end. Al-Ashtar came back from the front and urged him to fight those who
disobey him with those who obey him. The Imam said: "Malik I was a
leader but now I have become a follower."[^33] However the conspiracy
was twofold: Discontinuation of war and the acceptance of the invitation
to the rule of the Holy Qur'an through two arbiters.

The arbiters from the Iraqi camp had to be Abu Musa Al-Ashari who was
the governor of Kufa before the beginning of the Battle of Basra. The
reader may remember the efforts which this man made to prevent the
people of Kufa from joining the Imam in his confrontation with the army
of the three leaders at Basra.

Muawiya achieved all that through the stupidity of the religious
fanatics along with some traitors in the Imam's army. The collaborators
and the fanatic readers acted and sounded as if they were burdening the
Imam instead of Muawiya with the responsibility of the war.

Their efforts were directed at challenging the authority of the Imam and
preventing him from choosing any arbiter that inclined to his opinion or
thought of resuming the fight.

Muawiya chose Amr Ibn Al-Aws to be his representative and none of the
people of his camp argued with him. The Imam chose Abdullah Ibn Abbas
but Al- Ashaath and his followers said: No two men from Mudhar (the Arab
tribes who are neither Rabi-ites nor Yemenites) shall rule us (meaning
that Amr Ibn Al-Aws and Abdullah Ibn Abbas both are Qureshites
non-Yemenites and non-Rabi-ites). The fact is that they did not refuse
Ibn Abbas for being a Mudharite. His being a Mudharite was taken by
Ashaath as a pretext to cover up his intentions. Had Ibn Abbas been
against the Imam Ashaath would have accepted him.

This became obvious when the Imam nominated Malik Al-Ashtar who was a
Yeminite. Ashaath rejected him and so did his tribe saying: Did anyone
burn the earth other than Al-Ashtar? They meant that Al-Ashtar was in
agreement with the Imam and wants to go back to war in order to defeat
the aggressor party. Ashaath and his tribe were actually assistants and
collaborators with the aggressor party.

They joined the Imam reluctantly. They did not like his reign or his
victory or everything he stood for. In fact these people were more
harmful to the Imam and more dangerous to his cause than his own enemy
Muawiya.

The Imam was forced to accept the arbitration. He was forced also to
accept Abu Musa as the representative of his camp and the documents of
arbitration were written and signed by the two sides. Ashaath was
extremely pleased with obtaining such a document and he went from one
division to another of the Iraqi army reading it to them.[^34]

The Two Arbiters
----------------

The important points of the document of arbitration were the following:

1. The two arbiters will validate what the Holy Qur'an validates and
invalidate what the Holy Qur'an invalidates and that they will follow
what they find in it.

2. They should follow the instructions of the Holy Prophet which unite
the Muslims and do not separate them.

3. The two arbiters promise God and covenant Him that they will try to
bring peace to the nation and will not turn the nation back to division
and war.

4. The deadline for their deliberation will be the month of Ramadan (and
if they choose to make the decision before that date or choose to delay
it for the interest of the nation they could do that.)

5. The place of their meeting will be equal in distance between Kufa and
Damascus and Hijaz.[^35]

The Holy Qur'an and the hadiths which bring unity to the nation validate
the right of ‘Ali who was elected by the companions of the Prophet and
who was "brothered" by the Messenger and declared to be the leader of
every believer. They invalidate the untruth of Muawiya who divided the
nation and shed the blood of the Muslims for his own interest.

Yet the two arbiters were not expected to validate a truth or to
invalidate a falsehood. Neither of the two companions was neutral in the
dispute about which they came to issue a fair decision. Ibn Al-Aws was
the second in command of the camp which was fighting the Imam. Al-Ashari
was one of five people who were opposed to the Imam and his policy
before the beginning of the Battle of Basra.

During that period Muawiya was preventing the extension of the Imam's
authority to his province and declaring his armed disobedience. The
Mother of Believers Talhah and Al-Zubayr were occupying Basra and hoping
to extend their influence to Kufa.

While Muawiya and the three leaders were doing that Abu Musa was
preventing people of Kufa from assisting the Imam in retrieving what the
three leaders had usurped from the area of his authority.[^36]

Abu Musa was taking this stand while the Imam was sending to him and to
the people of Kufa his messages and messengers asking people of Kufa to
come to his assistance in retrieving his right. Abu Musa was satisfied
to keep Basra under the authority of the three leaders because he was
collaborating with them. He actually was in open defiance of the Imam
covering his intention with his deceptive methods of calling upon people
to avoid fighting.

Yet the Holy Qur'an clearly invites the believers to fight any Muslim
community that commits aggression against another Muslim community.[^37]
Had Abu Musa had his way during that period he would have prevented the
people of Kufa from joining the Imam and the Imam's reign would have
ended in the first year after his election.

Trusting Abu Musa and Amr Ibn Al-Aws on the right of the Imam was in
fact trusting an enemy on the right of his enemy.

What was expected finally took place. The two arbiters continued in
their deliberation for a long time. The result of their deliberation was
that they agreed to invalidate the leadership of the Imam and Muaweyeh.

Abu Musa was the first to declare his decision of invalidating the
leadership of the two men. Ibn Al-Aws stood after him to declare the
invalidation of the leadership of the Imam and the establishment of the
leadership of Muawiya. Abu Musa accused Amr of being treacherous
breaching an agreement with him.

Had Ibn Al-Aws not been treacherous and agreed with Abu Musa to
invalidate the leadership of the Imam and Muawiya their invalidation
would have had an adverse effect on the Imam rather than Muawiya.

The Imam was the Caliph and Muawiya was only the governor of Syria. Thus
invalidating Muawiya's caliphate would be meaningless. What does it mean
to overthrow a man from an office he does not occupy?

Had the decision of the two arbiters been in accordance with the
stipulation of the document of arbitration the deceptive act of Ibn
Al-Aws against Abu Musa would have been considered an assistance to the
Imam rather than to Muawiya.

Had not Ibn Al-Aws done that the harm to the Imam from the legal point
of view would have been greater because their decision would be binding
on the Imam and unharmful to Muawiya. For invalidating Muawiya as a
caliph does not deprive him of any position he had.

Had their decision been in agreement with the Holy Qur'an and the
instructions of the Holy Prophet the deception of Ibn Al-Aws would have
been the only barrier from making their decision binding because it
proved that they were in disagreement in their ruling.

But the decision of the two arbiters was opposed to the Holy Qur'an and
the instructions of the Holy Prophet even if they had agreed. The Holy
Qur'an declares the following:

***"If two parties among the believers fall into a quarrel make ye peace
between them. But if one of them transgresses beyond the bounds against
the other then fight ye (all) against the one that transgresses until it
complies with the command of God. If it complies then make peace between
them with justice and be fair. For God loves those who are fair and
just.’’ The Holy Qur'an chapter 49 verse 10.***

The party of Muawiya was the aggressor party which refused to obey the
command of God. ‘Ali was the legal Caliph by the appointment of the Holy
Prophet according to the followers of the members of the House of the
Holy Prophet.

He was also the Caliph by a general election which he received from the
overwhelming majority of the companions and the inhabitants of Medina
Mecca Iraq Egypt Yemen and the rest of the Islamic provinces with the
exception of the inhabitants of Syria who were ruled by Muawiya. Since
he was the legal Caliph it was the duty of the Muslims to obey him. The
Holy Qur'an commands the Muslims to obey the leaders from among them:

***"O you who believe (in Islam) obey God the messenger and the people
of authority from among you..." The Holy Qur'an chapter 4 verse 58.***

The Holy Prophet declared that ‘Ali is the leader of every believer and
prayed to the Almighty that He love whoever loves ‘Ali and to be hostile
to whoever is hostile to ‘Ali.[^38] Muawiya was hostile to the Imam. He
fought him and he legalized shedding his blood. And if God responds to
the prayer of His Prophet (and no doubt He does) then Muawiya is an
enemy of God by being the enemy of ‘Ali.

Muslim in his Sahih reported that the Holy Prophet said "Whoever comes
in an open rebellion and parts with the community then he dies he will
die a pre-Islamic death."[^39] Muawiya no doubt was out of obedience to
the legal Caliph.

If anyone has hesitated in judging that Muawiya was the leader of the
aggressor party he should remember the authentic hadith (whose
authenticity is well established) which reported that the Messenger said
to Ammar Ibn Yasir while many companions were listening: "Ibn Sumayah
the aggressor party shall kill you."[^40] The party of Muawiya is the
party that killed that outstanding companion who was a beloved of the
Prophet.

This hadith was so well known that Al-Zubayr had a tremor with which the
arms he was carrying started to shake at the Battle of Basra when he
knew that Ammar was in the Imam's camp. He feared that Ammar will be
killed at that battle then Al-Zubayr will be from the aggressor
party.[^41]

When Amr Ibn Al-Aws at the Battle of Siffin was informed that Ammar was
killed he refused to believe it and when he witnessed the body of the
martyr the color of Amr's face was changed. Then he said: Are we the
ones who killed him? The one who killed him is the one who brought
him[^42] and so Muawiya said.

When the Imam heard of that he ridiculed it saying: "Then the Messenger
of God is the one who killed his uncle Hamzah because he is the one who
brought him to the Battle of Uhud." There is no doubt that Abu Musa
heard the hadith.

He knew that Ammar was killed and he knew that Muawiya and his party
were the aggressor party and that ‘Ali is the well guided Imam but all
that did not prevent him from deciding to invalidate the leadership of
the Imam and overthrow him. This was only because he was an enemy of the
Imam. I do not want to say that he did not value what he knew of the
Book of God and the words of the Messenger but I would say that his
hatred of the Imam blinded him.

[^1]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 104.

[^2]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 104-105.

[^3]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 105.

[^4]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 5

[^5]: Abdul Fattah Abdul-Maqsud ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib part 4 pp. 31-32.

[^6]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 141 Al-Tabari his History part 4
p. 560.

[^7]: Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsud ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib part 4 pp. 44-45 And
Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra part 2 pp. 62-63 (8th edition) Al-Tabari
his History part 4 pp. 460-461.

[^8]: Al-Tabari his History part 5 p. 39.

[^9]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 145 Al-Tabari his History part 21
pp. 571-572 Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra part 2 p. 71.

[^10]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 145 Al-Tabari his History part 4
p. 542.

[^11]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 145.

[^12]: Al-Hurr Al-Amili Wasa-il-al-Shi’ah part 11 pp. 43-44.

[^13]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 145-146 Al-Tabari his History
part 4 p. 572.

[^14]: Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsud Al-Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib part 4 p.
190.

[^15]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 149.

[^16]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 148.

[^17]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 152.

[^18]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 152.

[^19]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 152.

[^20]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 257.

[^21]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 257.

[^22]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 259.

[^23]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 259 Ibn-Al-Athir also reported this
in his Al-Kamil part 3 p. 158.

[^24]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 258 Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra
part 2 p. 78.

[^25]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 258 Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra
part 2 p. 78.

[^26]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 161.

[^27]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 259.

[^28]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 154.

[^29]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 160-161.

[^30]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 509.

[^31]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 161.

[^32]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 161.

[^33]: lbn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 163.

[^34]: Al-Tabari in History part 5 p. 55.

[^35]: Al-Baladhuri Ansab Al-Ashraf (conveyed by Taha Hussein Al-Fitna
tul-Kubra part 2 pp. 83-84. Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 162-163.

[^36]: See chapter 23 of this book section 3.

[^37]: The Holy Qur'an chapter 49 verse 10.

[^38]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 110. The Hadith was reported by
more than one hundred companions.

[^39]: Muslim his Sahih part 12 p. 241.

[^40]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 5 p. 233.

[^41]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 pp. 510-511.

[^42]: Ibn Sa’d Al- Tabaqat part 3 pp. 253-254.


