27.  Martyrdom
==============

When the Seceders were annihilated one of the companions of the Imam
said to him: "Ameer Al-Mumineen the Seceders have perished completely."
The Imam said: "No by God they are still sperms in the bodies of men and
wombs of women. Whenever a "horn" of them appears it will be cut off
until their last generation becomes thieves and robbers."[^1]

The Imam was not deceived by his victory against the Seceders. He did
not believe that their death meant the death of their doctrines or that
it represented a drastic solution to their problem. He was fully aware
that doctrines and principles do not die by the death of their
innovators. His combat of the Seceders was nothing but a temporary
measure the purpose of which was to slow their speedy movement and to
lighten their growing danger. His combat of the Seceders was only a
mission with which the Messenger commissioned him and made clear to him
its details descriptions and marks more than two decades before its
time.

The Messenger commissioned the Imam â€˜Ali with that mission only because
it is a sacred duty which represents the defense of the freedom of
belief and the defense of the innocent lives and blood which the
Seceders went on shedding for no reason except that their victims did
not believe in their falsehood.

The Imam himself with all of what the Holy Messenger said about him of
being the ally of the truth did not believe that he should force the
Muslims to share with him his opinions or to follow the right road.

On the contrary he used to excuse his opponents and acknowledge their
righ in the freedom of thinking. He is the one who said: "Kill not the
Seceders after me; the one who sought the truth and missed it is not
like the one who sought the falsehood and acquired it."[^2]

Had the Seceders believed in their wrong doctrines without attempting to
impose it by force on the rest of the Muslims the Imam would have left
them alone and this was his wish. But they prohibited the Muslims to
speak the truth or to believe in it. They forced them to believe in the
falsehood and to take it as a religion. They went on killing people
because they did not believe in their innovation.

The Battle of Nahrawan succeeded in stopping the speed of the movement
and its growing danger against the Muslims. But as the Imam expected it
did not succeed in eliminating that danger. Nor did it succeed in
restoring the determination of the Imam's army to fight the unjust
Umayyad party.

The Imam tried after the Battle of Nahrawan to go directly to the land
of Syria to face Muawiya in a decisive battle. But the army and its
leaders expressed their desire to camp at Nukhailah near Kufa for a
short rest through which they could regain their strength and renew
their weapons and rest their animals of transportation.

As they camped at Al-Nukhailah they started to desert their camp
gradually and secretly entering into Kufa as groups and individuals and
they never came back. The Imam was finally forced to enter Kufa urging
them day after day to go and face their enemies but they hated to go and
they remained at their homes.[^3]

It is not difficult to know the causes of the failures of these people
to poerform their duties. The righteous men who were the brains of the
revolution such as Ammar Ibn Yasir Malik Al-Ashtar Khuzaimah Ibn Thabit
(the man of two testimonies) Abdullah Ibn Badeel and Hashim Al-Mirqal
had already died at the battle of Siffin or outside that battle.

These righteous men were highly enlightened. They were concerned with
the future of Islam and ready to sacrifice for the sake of the truth
their wealth and their lives. They were the links which used to tie the
masses of the people with the Imam and inform them of his right and urge
them to obey him and show them by their own action the living examples
of obedience and sincerity towards his principles.

They were always the first to respond to his call seeing in him the true
representative of the Holy Prophet in word and deed. These righteous
people had already met their Lord. They were replaced by people such as
Ashaath whose hearts were not occupied by faith or by men such as Hijr
Ibn Uday and Uday Ibn Hatam who did not lack faith or sincerity but
lacked the wide influence and the power of attracting the masses.

The masses of people who fought with the Imam in three wars had already
paid with the blood of their sons and brothers. They became tired of
fighting and inclined to an easier and peaceful life without having
foresight which makes them concerned with the future and worried about
Islam.

The crisis of the Seceders brought about division in the camp of the
Imam and destroyed the unity of his followers. The Seceders were
annihilated at the Battle of Nahrawan but their death was not expected
to raise the morale of the army which annihilated them.

They were the sons the brothers and the friends who recently had been
the comrades of the soldiers of the Imam and his supporters against his
enemy. For a Kufite or a Bassrite to kill another Kufite or Bassrite was
not expected to generate in his mind a feeling of victory. It would
rather generate only sadness and a feeling of loss.

The Battle of Nahrawan did not bring an end to the propaganda activity
of the Seceders; nor did it bring their bloody action to a complete
stop. They spread their propaganda among people turning them against the
Imam.

Whenever a group of them felt strong enough to challenge the Imam's
authority they came out carrying their swords on their shoulders
spreading panic horror and death among innocent people.

Ashras Ibn Ouf Al-Shaibani along with a group parted with the Imam. Then
he was followed by Hilal Ibn Alqamah then Ash-hab Ibn Bishr then Sa-eed
Ibn Nufail Al-Taimi.3 After these Khirreet Ibn Rashid from Bani Najeyah
and others followed the same method.[^4] Whenever a group of these
people defied the Imam he was forced to send a regiment or regiments to
fight them.

All that destroyed the morale of the Imam's camp and its unity as it
destroyed its determination to fight. By this the military and political
initiative moved from the hand of the Imam to the hand of Muawiya.

As Muawiya knew of the destruction of the unity in the camp of the Imam
he decided to invade Egypt and occupy it knowing that people of Iraq
will not respond to the Imam's call if he calls upon them to send an
army for its defense.

Muawiya accomplished what he wanted and the people of Iraq received the
news of the invasion of Egypt the death of its governor Muhammad Ibn Abu
Bakr and the burning of his body as if the matter did not concern them
at all.[^5]

Success brings success and failure brings failure. Success made Muawiya
more ambitious. He tried to usurp Basra from the Imam because he knew
that the majority of its people were still holding grudges against him
for what they lost in the Battle of Basra. Muawiya sent Abdullah
Al-Hadrami to Basra to try to turn its people against the Imam. He did
not succeed in his mission and was killed but only after he generated
division among the people of Basra.[^6]

Muawiya sent Naaman Ibn Bashir (a companion of the Prophet) with a
thousand soldiers then Sufyan Ibn Ouf with six thousand then Al-Dhahak
Ibn Quais with three thousand to various areas of Iraq for invasions by
which they spread destruction and death. Most of the time these invaders
went back without meeting from the people of Iraq more than token
resistance. Muawiya sent regiments to Yemen and Hijaz. They did to the
Muslims there what non-Muslims would hesitate to do. The invading
regiments went back successfully without being hurt.[^7]

The Imam used to gather people time after time urging them to defend
themselves. Sometimes he spoke to them harshly but the Iraqis had been
weakened and lost their will to fight. One time he spoke to them in the
following manner: "Which country after your country shall you defend and
with which Imam after me shall you fight?

The deceived one is the one you have deceived. And whoever had you in
his party certainly had the losing party. I lost my hope in your help
and I would not believe your words.

May God separate between me and you..." "You shall meet after me a
general humiliation and an annihilating sword along with a
discrimination against you which the unjust ruler will make a rule. He
will divide your community... and bring poverty to your homes and you
will wish soon that you had seen me and helped me.

You shall know the truth of what I say. May God put the unrighteous out
of His Mercy." It would not do any good to blame Muawiya for corrupting
and dividing people and committing incalculable crimes by killing people
and destroying their properties or purchasing their conscience. The Imam
knew that Muawiya and his relatives were and continued to be the enemies
of truth and its message. Muawiya was a seeker of worldly affairs and a
man of falsehood. The Imam did not expect him to do but what he was
doing.

Only the followers of the Imam were to be blamed.They were expected to
be the means for straightening the crookedness of the nation and
re-directing it towards a future in which the light of Islam goes high
and spreads throughout the world and leads all nations.

Instead of being the Imam's solution to the problems of the nation the
Kufites became an additional problem to him and to the nation. In one of
his addresses the Imam told them the following words: "My aim was to
medicate the problem of the nation through you but you have become my
main problem.

God the fighters of this disease have gotten tired..." [^8] The
falsehood certainly acquired victory through the failure of the Kufites
their disobedience and divisions.

The Kufites did not only lose their spiritual values but the value of
their worldly life and honorable future on the face of this earth as
well. Their enemy whom they fought violently at the beginning and wanted
to strangulate and worked for his annihilation was not expected to be
merciful with them after they cowardly turned their back to him in their
retreat.

The Imam told them: "You shall experience after me a comprehensive
humiliation a destructive sword and a constant discrimination against
you. Your enemy shall be your ruler. He shall divide you bereave you and
impoverish you." These words which may arouse a coward and awaken a
comatose did not move the Kufites nor did it succeed in awakening them.

He told them again: "How amazing your attitude is. It paralyzes the
heart puzzles the mind and defies the human understanding to see the
determination of Muawiya's party supporting their falsehood and your
failure to support your right. Thus you have become a target constantly
being hit and never hitting and invaded but never invading. God is
disobeyed and you are satisfied. If I tell you to invade them in the
winter you say: The weather is too cold! If I tell you to invade them in
the summer you say: This is the heat of the summer; give us respite
until the heat ends. If you are afraid of hot and cold weather you will
be more afraid of the sword.

"O you who look like men but never truly are... by God you have ruined
my strategies through your disobedience. You have filled my heart with
anger." Thus the Qureshites said: "Ibn Abu Talib is a brave man but he
does not have the know-how to run a war... Who knows about war more than
I? Who had experienced war more than I did? By God I entered war before
I was twenty years old. And now I have passed sixty. But a disobeyed man
cannot substantiate the wisdom of his opinion."[^9]

With all the setbacks and problems accumulated in his path the Imam did
not lose his determination. His camp caused him to lose the military
initiative and imposed upon him an unsuccessful defensive position.

Yet he continued to believe in the possibility of regaining the military
initiative and destroying all his enemy's gains by dealing with him
decisively. Should the Imam's camp regain its unity Muawiya will not
benefit from the occupation of Egypt or winning several skirmishes prior
to that decisive battle.

Finally the Imam decided to force those evasive followers of his to take
a firm attitude after he despaired of their voluntary co-operation. He
tried to put them on the spot and put all of what they had of honor and
religion at stake. They either defend all that or they will have a shame
which will never be washed.

The Imam wanted to open their eyes to the fact that he has already made
a very dangerous decision which he has the power to fulfill because it
belongs to his own person. They knew certainly that when he says
something he will do it. He is the hero who was never afraid of any
sacrifice regardless of its magnitude. He gathered them and told them
the following:

"O people you have called upon me by your election to serve and I did
not turn you down. You pledged your allegiance to me and I did not ask
you to do that. Some challengers confronted me and God took care of
them.

They fell on the battlefield in humiliation. There is still a community
which is disobedient to God following their selfish interest deviating
from truth. They claim what they are not qualified for. If they are told
to advance they advance and when they advance they do not know the truth
as they know the falsehood. Nor do they fight the wrong as they fight
the right."

"I have become tired of talking to you and blaming you. I would like you
to make your intention clear to me.

If you are determined to go to our enemy this is what I ask and love. If
you are reluctant to do that be frank with me. Let me know your
intention so I will form my opinion.

"By God if you do not go with me to your enemy in order to fight them
until God judges between us and them (and He is the Best of the Judges)
I shall pray God to punish you then I will go to our enemy even if I am
not accompanied with more than ten men. Do the riffraff of Damascus and
its ignorants have more patience and stronger co-operation for helping
the falsehood and assisting the wrong than you have for your truth and
right? What happened to you? What is your medicine? Your enemies are
like you. If they are killed they will not be resurrected before the Day
of Judgment."[^10]

By this important declaration the Imam put them face to face with their
responsibilities. They believed that he was going to fulfill his
decision and he will go to his enemy even if he does not have more than
ten persons and they know that he will find more than ten.

They know that if he does that he will meet his death and they will have
a shame which they were not ready to accept. Probably some of them
feared if the Imam prays to God to punish them God will answer his
prayer.

The listeners stood up and spoke well and left him after they showed him
that they have decided to help him.

They went to their tribes urging them to fight their enemies. They
gained some unity and seemed to be ready to leave ready to confront
their enemy after they prepared manpower and supplies to face the forces
of heresy anarchy and evil in a decisive battle.[^11]

Was that task force really as healthy as it appeared? Did the hearts of
the leaders of the army rally behind the truth? Were Ashaath and others
like him cured of the disease of hypocrisy? Would some of the leaders of
the newly mobilized army conspire with the enemy to deliberately defeat
themselves at the battle for bribes necessitating the Imam to enter into
a desperate battle in which he will meet his death? Did the Imam believe
in their sincerity? History does not give us any clear answer for these
questions because the army did not go through that trial.

The Imam met his Lord before the newly mobilized army moved from its
camp. History however accuses Ashaath who was among the leaders of that
army with being an accomplice in the Imam's assassination.

I am inclined to believe that the events which took place before the
mobilization of this army had made the Imam lose his confidence in his
followers. He told them on one occasion: "By God I visualize that when
the future battle takes place and the fight progresses you will leave
Ibn Abu Talib alone and run away"...[^12] The Imam was not a man who
threw his words vainly.

His words always conveyed realities which he used to foresee through the
light of God. The Imam would not be deceived by the new mobilization. He
knew that the gathering included men who subscribe to the Seceders'
opinion and others believed for their short-sightedness that victory
against Muawiya had become impossible and that the regime of the Imam
was coming to its end. People of this kind were always ready to
co-operate with the enemies of the Imam.

Of course there were men who were truly sincere but these people were
few and their presence would not make the Imam reach his goal and
prevent the defeatists from bringing his army to a catastrophe.

the trial of the Imam and his tragedy in this nation were great. He was
looking at the truth and seeing it clearly in front of him. He knew that
the election which he received reluctantly had put on his shoulders the
huge responsibility of trying to bring the Muslim World back to the road
of righteousness validating what the Holy Qur'an validates and
invalidating what the Holy Qur'an invalidates.

He believed and he was right in what he believed that he was the most
entitled to be obeyed after the Holy Prophet. He was to him as Aaron to
Moses.

On the other hand he knew the tragic fact: The nation had ignored his
right and was divided while it walked in unity and obedience under the
banner of men below him in endeavoring for the religion of God and in
knowledge and relation to the Holy Prophet.

Then he looked around and found that a portion of those who went along
with him have turned against him fighting him and offering all of what
they had of power to thwart his efforts. The other portion who stayed
with him did not give him obedience except untrue promises and cheap
excuses.

The enemy who was about to be defeated and whose falsehood was nearing
its end until he resorted to hoisting the Qur'an in order to avoid the
danger of annihilation became the man of the hour. He became capable of
attacking without being attacked and usurping provinces which were under
the Imam's authority.

The enemy does all that not because his followers are more numerous or
powerful but because the numerous followers of the Imam had lost their
determination and their unity had been destroyed.

The Imam was right when he considered his followers worse to him than
his enemies because they were the ones who enabled his enemy by their
defeatist attitude to have the upper hand and to become the victorious
party.

Thus it was not surprising to see the Imam wishing to part with his
followers by death or assassination. On more than one occasion he asked
God to separate him from them and make him join people better than them
knowing that God will not make him join better than them while he was
living on this earth. He knew that this wish would never be realized
unless he departed from this world to join his beloved the Messenger of
God and his party.

It is amazing that he asked God to do that for him when he saw the
Messenger of God in his dream shortly before he was assassinated and
after the newly mobilized army was formed for the decisive battle. This
was evidence that the Imam believed that his new army will not be able
to fulfill its mission because a portion of that army does not have good
intentions and that they were with his enemy and not with him.

Ibn Saad in his Tabaqat[^13] Ibn Abdul Barr in his Istee-ab[^14] lbn
Al-Athir in Osd Al-Ghab[^15] recorded that Al- Hassan and Al-Hussein
reported that Ameer Al-Mumineen (the Imam) told them that he complained
to the Messenger of God in his dream saying to him: "O Messenger of God
the crookedness and hostility which I have experienced from your nation
are amazingly terrible.

The Messenger said to him: Pray to God to punish them." The Imam prayed
saying: "My Lord make me join better than these people and give them a
leader worse than I."And the prayer of the Imam was answered.

The Fulfilled Promise
---------------------

Had the Imam expected any good out of the newly mobilized army confident
of its reliability and the intention of its leaders he would not have
asked the Almighty to make him join better people by expediting his
departure from this world.

There was nothing more desirable to the Imam than to reform what was
corrupt of the affairs of the Muslims and to avoid the Muslim World what
was threatening it at the hands of the future tyrant rulers in order to
illuminate the road to the future generations.

Had the Imam been confident of what had been available of force he would
have found in it his wish and he would have prayed to the Almighty to
prolong his life in order to realize his goal.

Evidently he believed that those who were around him had lost their
determination and will for sacrifice. It seems that he felt that a
number of the leaders of his army were ready to let him down at the
decisive hour and leave him on the battlefield facing thousands of
Muawiya's soldiers alone to be killed while his army deserted him.

They had done what is uglier than that at the war of Siffin when they
were in a better situation and a bigger determination.

Had this happened the life of the Imam would have ended in a battle in
which he would be defeated and deserted. But the Almighty wanted for His
beloved servant â€˜Ali Ibn Abu Talib not to taste the bitterness of defeat
and humility.

He is the sword of God who never was defeated in any battle before. God
wanted to move His servant from this world while he is in a dignified
state apparently with a powerful state. Thus a huge army was gathered at
his command before he met his martyrdom so that he would depart from
this world while in power and dignity.

It became clear to the Imam after he went through the most cruel
experience that those who wanted evil for the nation were serious in
their work and dedicated for reaching their ends while those who used to
seek good justice prevalence of truth and the heavenly law were weakened
and deteriorated.

The Imam lost all hope in achieving his goals. Seeing all evidence
indicating that falsehood is on the rise and that the truth will meet
its death the Imam wished that he himself will meet his death before
witnessing the death of the truth.

The Imam longed for a long time to meet his martyrdom. It was his
greatest wish in life. He was saddened when he did not receive his
martyrdom at the Battle of Uhud. He informed the Prophet of his sadness
because he was deprived of martyrdom.

The Holy Prophet said to him: "Be cheerful; martyrdom is coming to you."
When the following verse was revealed:

***"Do people think that they will be left to say that we have believed
and they will not be tested? We have tested those who were before them
and God surely knows those who were true and those who were liars " The
Holy Quran, 29:2-3***

The Imam reminded the Prophet of his prophecy concerning his martyrdom.
The Prophet re-affirmed his prophecy saying: "It shall be so. How shall
your patience be?" The Imam replied: "Messenger of God that is not a
place of patience! It is rather a place for cheerfulness and
thanks."[^16]

The Holy Prophet told him once: "The nation will betray you after me.
You shall live according to my precept. Whoever loves you loves me and
whoever hates you hates me and this (pointing to the beard of the Imam)
shall be reddened from this (pointing to the head of the Imam)."[^17]

He told him also along with Ammar Ibn Yasir: "Shall I inform you of the
most wicked among mankind?" â€˜Ali and Ammar said: "Yes Messenger of God."
The Prophet said: "The Red of Thamoud who hamstrung the female camel (of
the Prophet Saleh) and the one who hits you on this (pointing to the
head of â€˜Ali) and makes this (pointing to the beard of â€˜Ali) moistened
by its blood."[^18]

The prophecy was realized on a morning of a day from the month of
Ramadan forty years after the Hijrah. The wickedness which does not
recognize any boundary motivated a Seceder (called Abdul-Rahman Ibn
Muljam an obscure person from a lowly family) to assassinate the Imam
â€˜Ali the brother minister and successor of the Prophet Muhammad while
praying to his Lord in a house of God. Yet the assassin testified by his
tongue that there is no God but the Almighty and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of God.

A man with a spark of faith in his heart cannot pass this point from the
history without shedding a tear on a martyr who obtained from every
virtue its highest degree.

That is the martyr who offered for the sake of his religion and his
nation what no other man after the Holy Prophet ever offered of
sacrifice. Then the nation for which he offered so much formed an
attitude towards him which it may feel ashamed to take towards its worst
enemy.

It is difficult for any Muslim that is concerned with the future of the
faith of Islam to pass this point of our history without shedding a
tear. It is impossible to measure the losses which beset the Muslims and
the faith of Islam through the death of this unique leader before he was
able to fulfill his goal and his message to a world which was and is
still in a great need of that message.

The loss which the Muslims suffered when they missed the Brother and
Successor of their Prophet was great and unique in its magnitude. The
Muslims never experienced similar to it after the death of the Holy
Prophet.

Unequalled Loss
---------------

The Muslims who were living at the time of the death of the Imam were
unable to measure its magnitude and dimensions and its great
consequences. It is worthy to mention two important consequences that
took place immediately after the death of the Imam:

Firstly, by the death of the Imam the Muslims lost the clear and pure
source of religious information from which they used to obtain the true
interpretation of the Holy Qur'an and the authentically reported
instructions of the Holy Prophet.

The Holy Prophet was the city of knowledge and â€˜Ali was the gate of that
city. When the Prophet departed from this world â€˜Ali remained the gate
of his knowledge and the treasure of his secrets and the heir of his
wisdom. Through him the Muslims were able to hear the voice of the
Messenger informing them of the genuine Islamic rules in the areas of
their disputes.

It is true that a number of the Imam's children and grandchildren had
acquired his knowledge and they were capable of providing the Muslims
with the interpretation of the Book of God and conveying to them the
actual instructions of the Holy Prophet. However the Muslims who refused
to follow the Imam himself with all his acknowledged superiority in
knowledge were not expected to follow the Imam's offspring.

The Muslims did not try to acquire from the Imam's knowledge what could
spare them the problems of difference and divisions; nor did they give
him the time or the true opportunity to provide them with what they
needed of knowledge.

Therefore the Muslim World was not expected to enable the Imams from his
descendants to realize what the Imam himself could not realize. On the
contrary these Imams from â€˜Ali's children and grandchildren were killed
and exiled.

Thus the Muslim World with the lack of clear source of knowledge was
forced to adopt various schools in the details of the Islamic Law. Had
the Imam been given sufficient time to write and publicize what the
Muslim generations needed of knowledge in the Book of God and the
instructions of the Holy Prophet the Muslims would not have adopted
various schools of jurisprudence.

The End of the Righteous Caliphate
----------------------------------

The other immediate consequence which inflicted the Muslims by the death
of the Imam was the end of the period of the Righteous Caliphate
forever.

Abu Bakr died and â€˜Umar was assassinated; then Uthman was assassinated
and the righteous caliphate did not end by the death of any of these
three Caliphs. But the death of the Imam â€˜Ali immediately transferred
the Muslim World from a rule led by the Book of God and the precepts of
the Holy Prophet to a despotic rule which did not respect the sacred
rights and founded itself on shedding the sacred blood spreading
falsehood and silencing the voice of truth.

The presence of the Imam was the only barrier between the Umayyads and
the establishment of their despotic rule over the provinces of the
Muslim World. When he was assassinated their rule became inevitable.

Had the Muslim World given the Imam the opportunity to erect the pillars
of his regime for a sufficient time the Righteous Caliphate could have
lasted generation after generation. The Muslim generations could have
lived under the protection of its enlightened just and generous rule
which the human generations so far could not reach.

The Imam among the followers of the Messenger was their most
knowledgeable in the Book of Cod and the teachings of the Holy Prophet.
He was the wisest among them their closest to the Holy Prophet the most
similar to him and most adherent to the Law of God and the instructions
of the Holy Prophet. He was also the highest magistrate in the nation
the greatest endeavorer in the Way of God and the most determined in
enforcing the Divine Law.

Yet the nation in spite of all of the Imam's magnanimity did not obey
him. Thus he could not establish the pillars of his regime nor could he
fulfill his goals. People were and are still looking at the outcome
regardless of the circumstances which may have led to those results. The
absence of these achievements was a source of a continuous controversy
around his policy.

Most of the students of history believed that the Imam adopted an
idealistic policy which could not succeed in a non-ideal society. Had he
been less idealistic and more realistic he could have achieved his goal.

Some scholars blame the Imam for his policy in administering the public
funds. He insisted on taking the Muslims back to the days of the Holy
Prophet when the public funds were distributed among the Muslims
equally.

But people at the time he came to power had already been accustomed to
the policy of unequal distribution which â€˜Umar and Uthman had adopted.

Some scholars blame the Imam for his insistence on dismissing Muawiya.
They believe that he could have gained the support of Muawiya if he did
not try to dismiss him. Had he done that the war of Siffin would not
have taken place and Muawiya would not have challenged his authority.

Others blame him for being too lenient with his opponents. He did not
punish them when they declared their opposition to him. Some of these
critics accuse the Imam of attempting to rule the nation as a preacher
rather than a ruler.

Therefore it would be appropriate to discuss these aspects then list the
true factors which led to the absence of what the Imam endeavored
for.Therefore it would be appropriate to discuss these aspects then list
the true factors which led to the absence of what the Imam endeavored
for.

[^1]: Imam â€˜Ali Nahjul-Balaghah (collection of the Imam â€˜Ali's Sermons
and Words) part 1 p. 107.

[^2]: Imam â€˜Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 p. 108.

[^3]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra part 2 p. 107.

[^4]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 187-188 Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part
3 p. 183.

[^5]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 180-181.

[^6]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra part 2 pp. 130-131.

[^7]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 188-189.

[^8]: The Imam â€˜Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 p. 234.

[^9]: The Imam â€˜Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 pp. 69-70.

[^10]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra part 2 pp. 142-143 (quoting
Al-Baladhuriin his book: Ansab Al-Ashraf)

[^11]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitna tul-Kubra part 2 p. 143.

[^12]: The Imam â€˜Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 p. 83.

[^13]: Ibn Saâ€™d Al-Tabaqaat part3 p. 36.

[^14]: Ibn Abd Al-Barr Al-Istee-ab part 3 p.1127.

[^15]: lbn Al-Athir Usd al-Ghabah part 4 p.36 (quoted by Al-Fairouzabadi
Fadha-il Al-Khamsah part 3 p.56)

[^16]: The Imam â€˜Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 2 p.50.

[^17]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p.142.

[^18]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p.141.


