29. Was the War of Siffin Inevitable?
=====================================

"And I am to the Messenger of God like a tree to another tree coming
from one trunk and I am to him like a lower arm to the upper arm. By God
if all the Arabs combine their efforts in combating me I would not turn
my back to them... And I shall endeavor to purify the earth from this
inverted person until the soil is separated from the grain."[^1]

"By God if I confront them while they are filling the land I would not
be concerned; nor would I feel lonely. I am with assurance from myself
and certainty from my Lord through which I see the falsehoods to which
my opponents adhere and the guidance which I follow. I am expecting to
meet my Lord and hoping for His reward. I am saddened to expect the
affairs of this nation to be administered by its wicked foes. They shall
distribute the revenue of God among themselves and enslave His servants.
They shall oppress the righteous and befriend the transgressors."[^2]

Had ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib been a politician whose main concern was to come
to power and enjoy authority unconcerned with what will happen to the
future generations he could have easily gained Muawiya's support by
keeping him as governor of Syria and promising him to be his successor.
This would have relieved the Imam from combating him and would have
secured his loyalty and assistance.

Men who are in love with authority are always ready to pay the price
regardless of its magnitude because authority to them is more valuable
than any price they pay. Our Imam was not from these Authority by itself
did not have in his view any value.

Therefore he was not ready to pay for the authority a price which he
considered more valuable than the authority. History witnessed the Imam
‘Ali losing the caliphate when it was offered to him at the conclusion
of the Electoral Convention because he refused to pay its price.

The price which he refused to pay was not more than one word by which he
promises Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf to follow the first two Caliphs in matters
where he finds no instruction from the Holy Qur'an or the precepts of
the Holy Prophet.[^3]

He refused to pay for the caliphate that small price because he believed
that he was more knowledgeable in the Islamic Law than the two
outstanding companions.

He believed also that their precepts were marred by errors which he did
not legalize for himself to follow.

As he refused to offer for the leadership a promise to follow the ways
of two brilliant companions he would not be expected to grant Muawiya
the man of a terrible past what he seeks in order to enjoy a peaceful
leadership.

The Imam was not a conventional politician whose main concern is to come
to power. He was rather a unique statesman. Had not ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib
existed the Islamic ideals after the Messenger would have remained
subjective without being embodied completely in a human being.

Security for all Muslim generations against religious deviation was the
goal which the Imam was trying to accomplish through leadership. That
goal could be summarized as follows: 1. To make justice prevalent in
society regardless of the religious elements from which it may be
composed and retrieving for the nation and individuals what was acquired
by the elites through exploitations.

To enforce Islamic law so that the adherence to the Islamic principles
becomes second nature to the Muslims individually and collectively.

To facilitate understanding of the Holy Qur'an and instructions of the
Prophet for the followers of the Faith of Islam.

To try to spread Islam throughout the world by making the true Islamic
teaching known to all nations.

In other words the Imam wanted to realize what the Holy Prophet wanted
when he tried to dictate a document for his nation that his nation will
never stray after it. The political circumstances of the nation had led
the nation to deviate from the safe road in the past.

Finally the Imam who represented in the eyes of the Messenger the
security for the nation against deviation has come to power. His duty is
to realize that security for the nation and this was within his reach if
the nation obeys him. He is the most knowledgeable in the Book of God
and the teachings of the Holy Prophet.

He was the most concerned person with spreading the teaching of the
Faith of Islam and the spirit of adherence to that teaching. He by the
testimony of the Messenger and the outstanding companions is the most
qualified to direct the nation to the right and clear road after the
Messenger. He was after the Prophet the bravest and firmest person who
ever walked on earth.

The Imam believed that retaining Muawiya within his regime contradicts
what he was trying to accomplish.

Muawiya by his nature was opportunist exploiter materialistic and
unprincipled. With his wiliness and power Muawiya was the most dangerous
among the opportunists. The Imam was right when he thought that
retaining Muawiya in the rule of Syria will enable him to rule the
Muslim world. And this was not all the danger.

The bigger danger was the expected continuity of the leadership in the
house of Umayyad and rotation of the caliphate in their dynasty.The
bigger danger was the expected continuity of the leadership in the house
of Umayyad and rotation of the caliphate in their dynasty.

The Umayyad period proved later that the Imam was right in his thinking.
The rule of Muawiya and the rest of the Umayyads was the antithesis of
the Imam's goal. It represented the usurpation of the people's right
their exploitation shedding the blood of the innocent and the defiance
of the Islamic Laws. This resulted with the weaken ing of the Islamic
Spirit in the successive generations.

The war of Siffin the assassination of Hijr Ibn Uday and his righteous
companions for their refusal to repudiate the religion of ‘Ali the
massacre of Karbala and the defamation of the Imam on the pulpits of the
Muslim World for eighty-three years were some of the traits of the
Umayyad anti-Islam rule.

Mughirah And Ibn Abbas
----------------------

History recorded that Mughirah Ibn Shu-abah Al- Thaqafi came to the Imam
after he was elected and advised him to keep Muawiya in his office at
least temporarily. The Imam refused his advice. On the following day
Mughirah came to the Imam admitting that he was mistaken and advised the
Imam to dismiss Muawiya.

Ibn Abbas witnessed Mughirah coming out of the house of the Imam while
he himself was about to enter the house of the Imam. When Ibn Abbas met
the Imam he asked him about Mughirah's visit. The Imam informed him of
Mughirah's two contradictory opinions. Ibn Abbas commented that Mughirah
was genuine in his first advice deceptive in his second advice. He
affirmed that the wise policy is to keep Muawiya in his post at least
temporarily and it would be easy for the Imam to dismiss him after he
joins his electors. The Imam refused to retain Muawiya in his post
because he did not want to deviate from his principles which do not
permit him to keep Muawiya in his post for two days.[^4]

It appeared to many past and present historians that what Ibn Abbas and
Mughirah counseled the Imam to do was right. Had the Imam accepted their
advice he would not have had to wage the war of Siffin and he could have
dismissed Muawiya later and the reign of the Imam could have been
peaceful instead of being filled with civil wars.

Naive Opinion
-------------

I believe that those who hold this opinion were not able to estimate the
fore-sightedness of the Imam and his awareness of Muawiya's intention.
At the same time they underestimated the wiliness of Muawiya and his
alertness. Ibn Abbas and Mughirah both were mistaken.

The Imam had seen through the light of God and his super mental
capability years before he was elected that the Umayyads will come to
power and that they will rotate the leadership among them. He spoke of
that during the days of the Electoral Convention before Uthman was
elected. At that time he said to his uncle Abbas. "I know that they will
elect Uthman and if he is assassinated or dies the children of Umayyad
will rotate the caliphate among them; and if I am alive they will find
me where they dislike."[^5]

The Progress of the events indicated to the people of wisdom and
understanding that the Umayyads were going to come to power. ‘Umar
appointed Muawiya as governor of Damascus then he widened his authority
by adding Jordan to Damascus. He kept him in that post for the duration
of his reign.

This made Muawiya so strong that the Caliph after he was stabbed warned
the members of the Electoral Convention not to dispute with each other;
otherwise Muawiya may prevail against them and take the leadership away
from them. Should such a word reach Muawiya it would inflame his
ambition towards the caliphate and make him expect the day when he
becomes able to snatch the leadership from the hands of the outstanding
companions.

Al-Tabari also reported this in his History part 4 p.230.

Muawiya's Long Preparation
--------------------------

Muawiya realized that he could not come to power through a natural
course. The caliphate in the eyes of the Muslims was only for the
outstanding companions who adopted the faith of Islam at the early stage
and offered many sacrifices during the days of the Prophethood when the
faith of Islam was at its primary stage of spreading.

Muawiya was not one of those people. As a matter of fact Muawiya and Abu
Sufyan the father of Muawiya and the majority of the Umayyads except
Uthman Abu Huthifa and Khalid Ibn Al-Aws were the front line of the
enemies of the Messenger. They were waging against him and his religion
war after war trying to eliminate Islam and its Messenger. They refused
to adopt Islam until the Messenger conquered Meccab and Islam became
their only means for saving their lives.[^6]

For the Muslims to move the caliphate from the early companions of the
Holy Prophet to the enemy of the prophet they had to reverse themselves
insanely or the enemies of the Messenger would reach the caliphate by
force. Muawiya was not nearer to the caliphate than his father Abu
Sufyan.

However time was not ungenerous to the son of Abu Sufyan with
opportunities. Uthman came to power and his caliphate revived the hopes
of the Umayyads and made them nearer to their dreams. Uthman as we
mentioned (in chapter 21) through the two sides of his personality
represented a potential bridge through which the caliphate may cross
from the early righteous companions of the Holy Prophet to the Umayyads
the people of the dark past.

Uthman was from the early companions. At the same time he was an Umayyad
and he loved his cousins a great deal. His love for them would cause him
to move the caliphate to one of his opportunist cousins and they would
use him for reaching their goals.

The wily Abu Sufyan realized that as soon as Uthman was elected. He said
to the members of the Umayyad clan while they were meeting at the house
of the new Caliph:

"Make the caliphate alternate among you. By the one in whose name Abu
Sufyan swears there is no Paradise and no Hell..."[^7]

It is possible that the new Caliph was not present when Abu Sufyan
uttered that profane statement or that the Caliph admonished and chided
him but these words actually expressed the thinking of the Umayyads and
what they were trying to reach.

The caliphate of Uthman added to the power of Muawiya a much greater
power than he had during the time of the Second Caliph. The area of his
rule and influence was greatly widened to include Palestine Hums and
Qinnisreen.[^8]

Thus he became the governor of what may be called "The Greater Syria."
It is true that the authority of Muawiya was growing during the days of
‘Umar but it was under strong supervision of the Second Caliph. When
Uthman took over the authority of Muawiya was freed of all supervision
and by widening the area of his influence Muawiya emerged as the most
powerful ruler in the Muslim World. He became stronger than the Caliph.

The Caliph began to resort to him in punishing his opponents in Hijaz
and Iraq by sending them to Syria and putting them under the supervision
of the strong man of the Muslim State.[^9]

Muawiya was not the man who neglects opportunities. He was the kind of
person who seizes every opportunity and gets out of it the utmost
benefits. He started to establish his rule and lay the foundation of his
future since the days of ‘Umar. He went on attracting the chiefs of the
tribes through his generous gifts and mobilizing whomever he was able to
mobilize until he possessed the strongest striking force in the Muslim
World. One hundred thousand supported by an equal number from their sons
and servants were paid annually from the Islamic treasury in Syria.[^10]

Muawiya found in Uthman his means to the caliphate. He was his cousin
and his beloved. It was very likely that Uthman would appoint him as his
successor if peace continued during the reign of Uthman.

When the situation changed and the political atmosphere became grim
showing that the signs of violence evil and tragedy were creeping near
the Caliph Muawiya wanted to make out of the difficulties of the Caliph
a means which would bring him quickly to his goal.

Muawiya Refused to Protect Uthman
---------------------------------

Muawiya invited Uthman when the danger surrounded him to move to
Damascus ostensibly for the purpose of shielding the Caliph against
danger.[^11] His actual motive was to put the Caliph under his
protection. Thus Uthman would keep the name of the caliphate and Muawiya
would be the actual caliph and at the end Uthman will appoint Muawiya
his successor.

The Caliph did hot respond to the invitation. Muawiya however was
capable of preventing the tragedy from reaching the Caliph by sending an
army to Medina in order to defend the Caliph. He did not do that though
the Caliph asked for his military assistance.[^12] Muawiya chose to hand
his cousin to the knife of the revolution. He refused to assist him
militarily.[^13]

He thought rightly that Uthman’s death would give him a pretext to seek
avenge for the blood of the victim Caliph. By this he would excite the
masses of the people and take them out of their sound thinking and
transfer the Muslim World to an insane situation which brings Muawiya to
what he wanted.

Forecast Rule
-------------

In addition to the helpful opportunities and the continuous preparations
which made Muawiya close to his goal he heard many prophecies supporting
his thinking and made his wish to reach the caliphate strong and full of
life.

Ibn Al-Athir recorded that while Uthman was coming back from pilgrimage
accompanying Muawiya who was riding a blond mule a man uttered some
poetry indicating that the successor of Uthman would be ‘Ali then Al-
Zubayr.

But Kaab Al-Ahbar (a Rabbi who adopted Islam) said to the poet: You have
lied. The one who will succeed the Caliph is the rider of the blond
mule.[^14] Muawiya became ambitious since that time. The fact is that
his ambition did not start at that time.

Muawiya heard similar to this from the person who was much truer than
Kaab Al-Ahbar. I do not believe that Kaab Al-Ahbar found the caliphate
of Muawiya in the Jewish books as he tried to pretend. He actually found
that through statements of some companions who heard from the Holy
Prophet (one of them was Abu Dharr) who was known for his truth and to
this the Holy Prophet had testified.[^15]

Abu Uthman Al-Jahith in his book Al-Safyaneyah recorded that Jallam Ibn
Jandal Al-Ghifari attended a dialogue between Muawiya and Abu Dharr
after Uthman exiled Abu Dharr to Damascus.

Muawiya said to Abu Dharr: "Enemy of God and enemy of His Messenger you
come every day and do what you are doing. If I were to kill a man from
the companions of Muhammad without the permission of the Caliph Uthman I
would have killed you.".

Abu Dharr retorted saying to Muawayah: "I am not the enemy of God and
His Messenger. You and your father are the enemies of God and His
Messenger. You showed Islam and concealed disbelief. The Holy Messenger
cursed you and prayed to God that you will never be cured of hunger. I
heard the Messenger of God saying:

"When the big eyed with the broad throat the one who eats and never gets
full becomes the ruler of this nation the nation should be alarmed."
Muawiya said: "I am not that man." Abu Dharr said: "Yes you are that
man.

The Messenger of God informed me of that and I heard him saying while
you were passing: God curse him and make him not feel full except by
soil..."[^16]

Abu Dharr reported in the presence of Uthman that the Messenger of God
said: "When the children of Abu Al- Aws (the clan of Marwan from the
Umayyads) become thirty men they will distribute the revenue of God
among themselves and enslave the servants of God and interpolate the
religion of God.[^17]

‘Umar said to Mughirah Ibn Shu-abah (and this man was one eyed): "By God
the Umayyads will make Islam one eyed as you are one eyed and they will
blind it until Islam is unable to know where to go and where to
come.[^18]

‘Umar also reported that he heard from the Messenger of God the
following: "The children of Umayyad will ascend to my pulpit. I was
shown them in my dream jumping on it like monkeys. About them the
revelation came 'And We did not make the vision which you have seen but
a trial to people and the cursed tree in the Holy Qur'an...'"[^19]

Fakhr Al-Deen Al-Razi in his commentary on this verse recorded that
Sa-eed Ibn Al-Musayab said: "The Messenger of God saw in his dream the
children of Umayyad jumping on his pulpit like monkeys and that saddened
him."

Al-Razi said: "This is the opinion of Ibn Abbas according to the hadith
of Ata."[^20] He reported also that Ibn Abbas said that the cursed tree
is Banu Umayyad meaning Al-Hakam Ibn Abu Al-Aws. Ibn Abbas said: "The
Messenger of God saw in his dream that the children of Marwan were
alternating on his pulpit and he informed Abu Bakr and ‘Umar of his
dream while they were with him at his house. When they left the
Messenger of God heard Al-Hakam speaking of the dream of the Messenger.

The Holy Prophet became angry and suspected that ‘Umar betrayed his
secret. Then it appeared later that Al-Hakam was spying on them. The
Prophet exiled him... "[^21]

Al-Hakim reported that Imam Al-Hassan Ibn ‘Ali said to a man from his
companions: "Blame me not (for abdicating the caliphate); may God have
His Mercy upon you. The Messenger of God saw in his dream the children
of Umayyad speaking on his pulpit one after the other. This saddened him
and it was revealed to him in the chapter of Glory:

"We have revealed it (The Qur'an) during the Night of Glory and what did
make you know the Night of Glory. The Night of Glory is better than a
thousand months (in which the children of Umayyads rule the
nation."[^22]

From all this we may understand the meaning of the word of the Imam to
his uncle during the days of the Electoral Convention: "I know that they
will elect Uthman...if he is killed or he dies the children of Umayyad
will alternate it among them..."[^23]

No doubt the Imam heard from the Messenger concerning Uthman and the
Umayyads in general and Muawiya in particular more than ‘Umar Abu Dharr
and others heard from the Prophet about them.

The Imam said after the Battle of Basra when Marwan was brought to him
to renew his pledge of allegiance to the Imam: "What shall I do with his
pledge? Did he not pledge in Medina? If he pledges his loyalty to me by
his hand he will betray it by his back."

When Marwan left the Imam said: "He will have a rule as short as a dog's
licking its nose. He is the father of the four Rams. The nation will
have through him and his children a bloody day."[^24]

Thus Muawiya had prepared himself eighteen years for his goal. He seized
every opportunity and acquired out of it its utmost benefits and heard
what was conveyed to him of the prophecies of the Holy Prophet
concerning the Umayyads and concerning him. It was only naive on the
part of Ibn Abbas or others to think that keeping Muawiya in his post
temporarily would give the Imam the opportunity to dismiss him easily
without a bloody war.

‘Ali would not have attempted to deceive Muawiya and if he wanted to do
that he would not have succeeded.

Muawiya was too wily to be disuaded of his goal. Had the Imam ‘Ali
followed the advice of Ibn Abbas and Mughirah the Imam would have
deceived only himself.

I believe that the two advisors with all their intelligence and wiliness
had underestimated the knowledge of the Imam about Muawiya and the
Imam's wisdom and his farsightedness as they underestimated the wiliness
of Muawiya and his determination. Historians who shared Ibn Abbas and
Mughirah's opinion committed the same mistake.

The Imam could have earned peace with Muawiya by keeping him in his
position for the duration of his life and appointing him his successor.
But if the Imam had done that he would have acquired a personal gain at
the expense of everything he had stood for.

He was fully aware that Muawiya could not be trusted with the religion
of God and the Islamic nation. The Imam said one time. "I have thought
about alternatives concerning Muawiya. I found only two of them: either
to fight him or to reject what was revealed to Muhammad."[^25]

Was Umayyad's rule inevitable?
------------------------------

It may be said that if the Holy Prophet had informed his nation that the
Umayyads will come to power why did the Imam fight Muawiya while he knew
that Muawiya would prevail? What is the benefit of shedding blood if the
consequence which the Imam wanted to avoid was the same consequence
which God had predetermined for him?

The fact is that the Prophet did not inform ‘Ali or the rest of the
companions that the rule of the Umayyads was inevitable and predestined
from Heaven and that the will of man has no value in that affair.
Actually the opposite is true. The Holy Messenger wanted to inform his
nation that its failure to protect Islam against the Umayyads'
conspiracy shall bring the Umayyads to power and make them rule the
nation. This was a warning from the Messenger to his nation aimed at
advising the nation to take the necessary measures to prevent this from
happening.

The Holy Prophet prescribed to the nation the measures which shield the
nation against this danger and all dangers of deviations.

The prescribed measures were the adherence to the Holy Qur'an and the
leadership of the members of the House of the Prophet. He said to the
nation that this represents the security against deviation. Had the
nation followed the prescription of the Prophet the Umayyads could not
have come to power and the nation would have been secured against any
faith-testing crises.

It was unfortunate that the nation did not heed the Messenger's warnings
and did not take the steps which he prescribed. The nation actually
disregarded the second part of the advice completely. It took the
opposite road which led the nation into what the Messenger warned
against.

The Imam was the only leader who wanted to shield the nation against the
danger of the Umayyads. Had ‘Umar done the least in this field he could
have prevented that danger. The Imam ‘Ali was required to wage a bloody
war against Muawiya in order to protect the nation against his danger.

The Second Caliph could have shielded the nation against Muawiya's
danger by avoiding his appointment or dismissing him after he appointed
him or selecting ‘Ali instead of Uthman who came to power through the
arrangement of the Electoral Convention. This is what brought the
Umayyads to power.

I would like to add that all these events did not constitute a
determining factor in preventing the Imam from subduing Muawiya and
reaching a peaceful reign. Even after all these events took place it was
possible for the Imam to rid the nation of Muawiya and to subdue him or
dismiss him. Had "Om Al-Mu'mineen" (Ayeshah) and the two outstanding
companions Talhah and Al-Zubayr co-operated with the Imam and urged the
Muslims to help him instead of revolting against him Muawiya would have
surrendered to the Imam with humility.

Had the three leaders done that instead of starting the fire of
rebellion the rule of the Imam would have been stabilized and the
Muslims would have been spared all the civil wars which were inflamed
during the first century after the death of the Prophet. Unfortunately
the three leaders took the opposite road and led the nation into what
the Messenger warned against.

The Battle of Basra made peace with Muawiya unavailable to the Imam as
it made the war with Muawiya inevitable unless the Imam denies all his
principles. The Battle of Basra made it clear to Muawiya that he was not
the only one who was opposed to the Imam and that people outside Syria
shared with him his opinion and legalized war against ‘Ali and that they
did not see it wrong to shed blood for the sake of his opposition.

The Battle itself created to the Imam enemies who were silenced
temporarily by his victory but they were ready to rejoin his enemies as
soon as the opportunity permitted. This opportunity came after that and
they rushed into it.

The Battle of Siffin was truly inevitable. Yet it was not Heavenly
predestined because man's will had played a very important role. Had the
Iraqi people listened to the Imam and followed him to the end of the
road it would not have been necessary for the nation to surrender to the
authority of the Umayyads and they would have spared the future
generations many terrible evils.

Thus the authority of the Umayyads in spite of being predicted by the
Holy Prophet was not a Heavenly predestined event. It was only a result
of the refusal of the nation to take the right medicine which was
prescribed by the Holy Prophet. Certainly the nation continued to refuse
it until the end.

I would like to add that the Imam was duty-bound to take the road which
he chose even if the Umayyad authority were predestined. The position of
the Imam was like the position of many prophets who endeavored in the
way of God and died in their endeavor without reaching their aim of
making the word of God triumphant.

I do not believe that the Prophet Muhammad would have discontinued his
endeavor if he had known that he would not win his struggle against his
pagan enemies. Had he known that he would have entered and continued the
battle of truth to its end. This is what he declared to his uncle Abu
Talib:

"Uncle by God if they put the Sun in my right hand and the Moon in my
left hand to abandon this mission I will not abandon it until God makes
it triumphant or I perish in it.".

The war which the Imam waged was a preventive measure against the
Umayyad danger. It was an imperative duty rested upon his shoulders
after he found supporters for his message and mission ready to
sacrifice. Had he not done that he would have been negligent in
discharging the trust and he would have been an accomplice in the
injustice deviation and sins of the Umayyads.for his message and mission
ready to sacrifice. Had he not done that he would have been negligent in
discharging the trust and he would have been an accomplice in the
injustice deviation and sins of the Umayyads.

[^1]: The Imam ‘Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 3 p.73.

[^2]: The Imam ‘Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 3 p.120.

[^3]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p.37.

[^4]: Ibn Al-Athir, Al-Kamil, part 3, p.101.

[^5]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p.36.

[^6]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 14.

[^7]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol 2 p. 411.

[^8]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p. 57.

[^9]: Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 pp. 118-119.

[^10]: Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsud Al-Imam ‘Ali Abu Talib part 2 p. 120.

[^11]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 57.

[^12]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 59.

[^13]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 59.

[^14]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p.73.

[^15]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 5 p.334.

[^16]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.2 p.376.

[^17]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.2 p.377.

[^18]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.2 p.115.

[^19]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.2 p.115.

[^20]: Imam Fakhr Al-Razi his Detailed Commentary on The Holy Qur'an
part 5 pp.413-414.

[^21]: Imam Fakhr Al-Razi his Detailed Commentary on The Holy Qur'an
part 5 pp.413-414.

[^22]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p.171.

[^23]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.230.

[^24]: Al-Imam ‘Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 p.124.

[^25]: Al-Imam ‘Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 p.94.


