31. Why did the reign of the Imam not last long?
================================================

Many historians and writers criticized the policy of the Imam and
considered it extremely idealistic and unrealistic. At the same time
these critics appeared to be so impressed with the intelligence of
Muawiya and his wiliness that they considered him a statesman of the
highest rank.

Critics of this kind usually look at consequences instead of looking at
the circumstances which brought about those consequences.

The best way to reach an objective judgement in comparing the two men is
to suppose that they had exchanged their circumstances places and times
as well as their posts and their qualities except wisdom intelligence
and bravery. Let us suppose:

1. ‘Ali was a non -Hashimite Qureshite and he was not responsible for
the death of many Qureshites at the Islamic defensive battles during the
prophethood era.

2. That he was the governor of Syria since the early portion of ‘Umar's
caliphate.

3. That he remained in his post for about eighteen years. Thus the roots
of his authority and policy were spread and deepened in Syria.

4. That the people of Syria were the same people at that time in their
obedience and unity.

5. That he was an opportunist unconcerned with ideal principles and that
he was concerned only with his selfish materialistic benefits allowing
himself to acquire those benefits through any means including purchasing
people's conscience with public funds assassination betrayals lies and
killing righteous and innocent people.

6. That the Qureshites who represented the influential aristocracy in
the Muslim World loved and supported him.

On the other hand let us also suppose:

1. That Muawiya was a Hashimite responsible for many Qureshite deaths.

2. That he became caliph after the death of Uthman when the unity of the
Muslims was broken.

3. That Quraish hated him because he was responsible for the death of
many Qureshites.

4. That Ayeshah Talhah and Al-Zubayr accused him of the assassination of
Uthman and turned a great number of Iraqi people against him and waged
against him a costly war in which thousands died.

5. That he stayed in Kufa only a short period after that bloody war.

6. That the people of Iraq were the same people at that time in
arguments disputes extremism and disobedience.

7. That Muawiya was a man of principle concerned with the Hereafter as
much as with the present life or more so he would not compromise his
principles for his selfish interests. Nor would he allow himself to use
any means which are not in accord with the Islamic Law.

Then let us suppose that the two men met at a battle such as the battle
of Siffin and each one had what he had of intelligence wisdom and
bravery; ‘Ali with his unusual bravery and Muawiya with his weakness and
cowardice.

What would be the outcome? The answer is not difficult. ‘Ali is the
triumphant and Muawiya is the loser politically and militarily.

Even if we delete the 7th condition for Muawiya and suppose that the two
men were equally opportunistic unbound by any principles Muawiya would
be the loser politically and militarily. This is because the roots of
his authority would not have been spread and deepened in the land of
Iraq due to the shortage of his time in Iraq and to the fact that the
Iraqi people were not united and inclined by their nature towards
arguments dispute and disobedience.

This would be clear when we remember that Muawiya was about to meet a
crushing defeat at the Battle of Siffin while he Was leading the
obedient people of Syria. What would have been the situation if he had
had to lead the argumentative and disobedient people of Iraq against the
obedient people of Syria?

In fact we find that Muawiya after the Imam was assassinated and after
he became the ruler of Iraq was not able to control Iraq except through
the Syrian army. Had he not possessed that populous base along with its
obedient army he would not have been able to continue ruling Iraq in
spite of his lack of principles and abundance of opportunities. What
would be his fate if he were a man of principle scrupulous in his
religion and deprived of a firm populous base and an obedient army?

The historical events during the Umayyad period have proven that the
ruler of Iraq during that period regardless of his opportunism and lack
of all principles would not be able to continue ruling Iraq except
through a non-Iraqi task force to which he resorts when a crisis erupts.
Al- Hajjaj Ibn Yousef Al-Thaqafi with all his harshness tyranny and
extravagance in blood shedding was not able to retain his authority
except through the Syrian army.

Had he not had the Syrian military recruits he would have fallen under
the blows of the Seceder Shabeeb and his army.

From this we come to the following conclusion: For a ruler to be able to
retain his authority he has to possess two important elements:

1. A firm and well-established populous base.

2. An obedient military force capable of supporting him; otherwise his
authority would be unstable.

If we know this we would be able to put our hands on the factors which
contributed to the turbulence which persisted in the Imam's era and
hastened its end. The two above mentioned elements: The firm populous
base and the obedient military force were unavailable to the Imam.

The sequel of events which took place during the period between the
death of the Messenger and the Imam's election made the two elements
beyond his reach.

Ali did not have the two elements
---------------------------------

‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib was logically expected to be the closest person after
the Messenger to the hearts of the followers of the Messenger. He is his
cousin his son-in- law and the one whom he "brothered." He was after the
Prophet the most faithful and the most knowledgeable among the Prophet's
companions and the most adherent to the Prophet's teaching.

Thus the Muslims who were the followers of the Messenger were and are
expected to be genuinely loyal to ‘Ali responsive to his call and
obedient to his order more than they were obedient to others. It would
have been only natural for ‘Ali to have the two necessary elements for
retaining and expanding his authority.

The events of history however did not take their logical sequel. They
were rather directed through emotional motives partisan and tribal
bigotry and went on through a road opposite of the logical expectation.

The Jealousy of Quraish
-----------------------

The Qureshites refused while Muhammad was in Mecca to respond to his
invitation or to acknowledge his prophethood. They knew Muhammad very
well. They knew his trustworthiness and truthfulness. The main factor
which made Qureshites take such a negative attitude was their jealousy
of Hashim the clan of the Messenger.

They thought that recognition of his prophethood meant recognition of
the superiority of the Hashimites above the rest of the Qureshite clans
the rest of the Arab tribes and the rest of the nations.

The Qureshites refused to acknowledge the prophethood of Muhammad
besieged him and his clan and used against him their means of pressure
and threat then plotted to assassinate him. They forced him to leave his
hometown to Medina. When their scheme of assassination failed they
resorted to military confrontation.

The Messenger the members of his House and his companions stood up
defending their freedom and sacred principles against the numerous pagan
forces and Qureshite tribes were his main pagan enemy. Motivated by
their jealousy they continued their attempts to annihilate the Messenger
and his followers.

‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib was the right hand of the Prophet in all those
battles. He was the leader of the defenders and the most efficient in
facing the enemy. His strong defense in the battles of destiny cost the
Qureshites many lives.

Thus the Qureshite clans held him responsible for the blood of their
sons’ brothers and relatives. By this the Qureshites added a new rancor
to their glowing jealousy against the Hashimites in general and inflamed
grudges against ‘Ali in particular.

Quraish Retains its Influence and Grudges
-----------------------------------------

Mecca was conquered during the eighth year after the Hijra. Thus the
Qureshites declared their Islam after they lost all hopes of obtaining
victory against the Prophet. By this the bloody struggle of Quraish
against the Messenger and his message came to an end; yet the grudge of
the Qureshites against ‘Ali did not come to an end, nor did the
influence of Quraish in the Arab society diminish.

The Messenger attempted to secure for the nation a future in which the
nation enjoys security against deviation. That security was a
combination of two elements: The Holy Qur'an and a righteous wise and
thoroughly knowledgeable leadership that walks through the Prophet's
path. The Messenger saw that ‘Ali and the rest of the members of his
House were the ones who possessed the needed qualifications.

Therefore he declared to the Muslims that ‘Ali to him is like Aaron to
Moses[^1] and that he is the Mawla (guardian) of every believer.[^2] He
informed them also that he is leaving in them that which if they uphold
they will never go astray the Book of God and the members of his House.
He told them that God informed him that the Holy Qur'an and the members
of his House will not part with each other until the Day of Judgment.

Beware he said to the nation how you treat them after me.[^3] By this
declaration the Prophet wanted to establish ‘Ali's leadership and to
purify the Qureshites' hearts from the pre-Islamic grudges and replace
these grudges with the Islamic brotherhood.

Feeling that he was about to depart from this world and that grudges and
jealousy may prevent ‘Ali from reaching the leadership of the nation
after him the Prophet wanted to take a precautionary measure against
what he feared. He decided to send an army headed by Osamah Ibn Zayd Ibn
Harithah to Palestine. There was no immediate danger that motivated the
Holy Prophet to send that army.

Yet he urged outstanding companions such as Abu Bakr ‘Umar Abu Obeidah
and Saad Ibn Abu Waqaas to be in the expedition. He evidently intended
to send the ambitious companions away from Medina so that ‘Ali would
take over without difficulty.

The outstanding migrant companions disliked leaving Medina when they
knew that the Prophet had fallen ill and had a high fever. The Holy
Prophet attempted several times to send them away saying time after time
"implement the expedition of Osama." But the companions refused to leave
and waited.[^4]

Unwritten Will
--------------

The Prophet witnessed the reluctance of his companions to leave Medina.
Therefore he wanted to decide in the matter and leave no excuse for
them. Thus he wanted to dictate while he was in his ailment a document
through which his nation will be secured against straying after him.

Those who were present in his room from his companions felt that he
wanted to record in writing what he declared concerning ‘Ali verbally.
Therefore the influentials among them resisted the will of the Holy
Prophet and cast a doubt on his consciousness. They refused to provide
him with an inkwell and a sheet for writing saying: The Book is
sufficient for us.[^5]

The Alternation of the Caliphate
--------------------------------

It seems to us that the migrant Meccan companions were influenced by the
psychological attitudes of the Qureshites. They felt that the
continuation of the rule in the House of the Prophet after his death
will prevent the rest of the Qureshites from reaching the caliphate.
These companions felt that ‘Ali's succession to the Prophet would make
the Arab society accustomed to the rule of the members of the House of
the Prophet. Their relationship to the Prophet had already cast on those
members a halo of holiness.

Furthermore their merit was affirmed by what they had of high quality.
Thus it would become impossible for any companions to take the place of
these distinguished relatives of the Prophet in the hearts of the
Muslims.

‘Ali in addition to his close relationship to the Prophet and his
special position had the most brilliant record in the defense of Islam
along with a profound knowledge and a righteousness of the highest
degree. His two sons Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein were declared by the
Messenger of God to be the two leaders of the youth of Paradise[^6] and
they would not be so unless they resembled their grandfather and their
father.

Should the leadership after the Messenger be transferred to ‘Ali no one
from the Qureshites or other people could compete with him for the
hearts of the Muslims by offering a relationship to the Prophet equal to
his or a record equal to his record. Nor would anybody be able to
compete with his two sons by offering a grandfather a father or a mother
equal to theirs.

Even without considering the prospects of his sons ‘Ali's succession to
the Messenger would be sufficient to prevent the ambitious companions
from reaching the leadership because of his youth and their old age. Had
‘Ali succeeded the Prophet and lived after the Messenger only thirty
years none of the caliphs could have reached the caliphate. They would
have died before the end of his rule.

The succession of a non-Hashimite Qureshite to the Prophet therefore was
conceived by ambitious companions to be the only means that makes the
caliphate accessible to them. By this the non-Hashimite Qureshite clans
would be able to alternate the caliphate because they are equal to each
other. Thus the honor of the caliphate would compensate those clans for
what they missed of the honor of prophethood.

During the days of his caliphate ‘Umar said to Ibn Abbass: "Quraish
disliked to see you having both honors of the prophethood and caliphate
then you would be unfair to your people (The Qureshites). Qureshites
have chosen for themselves and they were right and successful."[^7]

If there had been nothing of all this the grudges of Quraish against
‘Ali and the continuation of its influence in the Arab society would
have been sufficient to keep ‘Ali away from the caliphate after the
Messenger.

The Holy Prophet saw through the light of God what will happen after
him. This saddened him and so he on an occasion embraced ‘Ali and wept.
When ‘Ali asked him: Messenger of God why do you weep? The Holy Prophet
said: "Because of the grudges in the hearts of men which they will show
you only after me." [^8]

The Attitude of the Two Caliphs Towards ‘Ali
--------------------------------------------

When the Messenger departed from this world the Meccan Migrants and the
Medinite companions competed for the caliphate but the Migrants had the
edge. They won the race. Their argument against the Medinites was that
the Messenger of God is from them and that the caliphate is in them. The
majority of the companions elected Abu Bakr without mentioning ‘Ali and
without consulting him.

When ‘Ali refused to join the electors they attempted to force him to do
so but the daughter of the Messenger stood in their way. ‘Ali did not
join the electors of Abu Bakr until the daughter of the Holy Prophet
(Fatima) met her Lord.

It was only natural for Abu Bakr to find in his heart towards ‘Ali what
every human finds towards his only competitor and to find in himself
towards ‘Umar what any human can feel towards his dear friend and strong
supporter. It was only natural that Abu Bakr rewards ‘Umar by returning
the favor and appointing him his successor.

The Growth Of The Qureshite Influence And The Obscurity Of The Imam
-------------------------------------------------------------------

The leadership of the first Two Caliphs was expected only to make the
non-Hashimite Qureshite influence increase and grow stronger and
stronger and this was expected to put ‘Ali in more isolation.

The Obscurity of the Imam
-------------------------

The period of the Two Caliphs was full of important events and many
conquests. This kept people occupied.

The position of the Two Caliphs went high enough to reach the degree of
holiness. The names of the military leaders of the conquests and
especially the Qureshites among them became well known. People forgot
‘Ali his brilliant record in defending the faith of Islam and his great
participation in establishing the foundation of the Muslim State along
with what the Messenger of God said about him. People of many
nafionalities entered into the domain of the faith of Islam. These
people knew the names of the Two Caliphs and the military leaders who
subdued those nationalities and the rulers who administered their
countries. They did not know anything about ‘Ali and his past.

‘Ali remained in Medina for the duration of the rule of the three
caliphs and he was living in an actual state of isolation from the
events and the authority. The Two Caliphs did not appoint him to any
post; nor did they appoint any member of his house to any military
leadership or civil administration in any part of the Muslim World.

Thus people did not know him. The opportunity was not given to any
member of his house to be put in a position that would enable him to
inform the Muslims about the members of the House of the Holy Prophet
and their leader.

The Muslims during the days of the Two Caliphs knew Saad Ibn Abu Waqaas
the conqueror of Iraq Amr Ibn Al-Aws conqueror of Egypt and its governor
and Muawiya Ibn Abu Sufyan governor of Damascus. They knew Mughirah Ibn
Shu-abah governor of Basra Abu Musa Al-Ashari its subsequent governor
Ammar Ibn Yasir governor of Kufa for a short time and Abdullah Ibn Masud
the treasurer of Kufa.

These individuals became better known to the conquered nationalities
than ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib. I do not believe that any of these leaders and
rulers except Ammar Ibn Yasir and (maybe) Abdullah Ibn Masud was anxious
to inform people about ‘Ali and his position in Islam.

I do not say that the Two Caliphs were denying the position of ‘Ali and
that they did not recognize any of his distinctions. They were too
righteous to do that. It is recorded that ‘Umar said: "No one should
give a verdict at the Mosque of the Prophet while ‘Ali is present."[^9]
He also said more than once: "Had ‘Ali not been present ‘Umar would have
perished (spiritually)."[^10] And ‘Umar said about ‘Ali: "By God no
pillar of Islam could have been erected without the sword of ‘Ali."[^11]

Yes ‘Umar used to say that and more than that but these words used to be
said occasionally and never took the form of a general introduction; nor
did they pass the walls of Medina. It was easy for the Second Caliph who
had an unlimited influence in the Muslim World to introduce to the
Muslims the Imam ‘Ali.

He could have informed them about what he knew of ‘Ali's distinctions
and brilliant record in order to prepare the Muslims in general and the
Qureshites in particular to accept ‘Ali's leadership of the nation after
him. But ‘Umar did not do that.

The Umayyads Infiltrated the Regime
-----------------------------------

This by itself was not to prevent the Imam from reaching a peaceful
reign. The growth of the Qureshites in the Islamic society was not in
favor of the Hashimites in general and ‘Ali in particular. Yet it did
not represent an insurmountable difficulty to ‘Ali. Had the Umayyads
remained outside the Islamic Regime ‘Ali could have surmounted that
difficulty.

Unfortunately the Umayyad clan which was the most hostile to the Prophet
with the worst grudge against ‘Ali had infiltrated ‘Umar's regime and
its influence developed rapidly and it became the strongest Qureshite
clan among Muslims.

The Continuity of Muawiya and His Governorship
----------------------------------------------

The Umayyad influence in the Islamic State was born when ‘Umar Ibn
Al-Khattab appointed Yazid Ibn Abu Sufyan as the governor of Damascus
shortly after it was conquered. Yazid did not live long. The Second
Caliph called upon Muawiya to succeed him. Shortly afterwards he added
Jordan to Muawiya's authority.[^12] Muawiya continued in his post for
the duration of ‘Umar's caliphate.

‘Umar did not dismiss him though he used to dismiss his official
appointees and replace them. He dismissed Saad Ibn Abu Waqaas from the
governorship of Kufa in spite of his brilliant past and endeavor.[^13]

He dismissed Ammar Ibn Yasir though he wrote to the people of Kufa when
he appointed him their governor informing them that Ammar is from the
distinguished men among the companions of Muhammad. But ‘Umar retained
Muawiya in his post.[^14] It seems that the Caliph was impressed by
Muawiya's intelligence his administrative ability and he was confident
of his obedience to him.

Muawiya remained in his post until the Second Caliph departed from this
world. He retained him in that post though he witnessed his extravagance
and his high standard of living. Muawiya by his continuation in the
governorship of that important province was able to purchase the loyalty
of many chiefs of Arab tribes in Syria.

He became powerful enough to make the Second Caliph shortly before he
died warn the members of the Electoral Convention not to dispute with
each other; otherwise Muawiya may prevail against them and snatch the
caliphate from their hands.

Needless to say the continuity of the rule of Muawiya in Damascus and
Jordan for that long period was expected to prevent ‘Ali from having any
populous base in that province. Muawiya was expected to close all
channels through which some information may reach the masses of the
people of his region about the past of the Imam and his present.

The Electoral Convention Put The Caliphate In The Hands Of The Umayyads
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

However the infiltration of the regime by the Umayyads was not a
difficulty insurmountable to ‘Ali if ‘Umar had appointed him his
successor.

Had ‘Umar appointed him his successor ‘Ali would have been able to
uproot the Umayyad plantation from the soil of Damascus without much
difficulty because that plantation did not reach its ultimate strength
during ‘Umar's time.

The Second Caliph with good intentions pushed the caliphate in a
direction whose immediate consequences were two developments that made
the arrival of the Imam to a peaceful rule impossible.

The first of the two developments was the sudden escalation of the
Umayyad's power.

When the Second Caliph was stabbed he refused to appoint ‘Ali as his
successor[^15] though he repeatedly declared that ‘Ali was the only one
qualified among the companions to make the Muslims walk on the clear and
straight road.[^16]

He refused to appoint him because he did not want to shoulder the
responsibility of the caliphate after his death. Thus he invented the
idea of the Electoral Convention. He put the caliphate in the hands of
six Qureshite companions; ‘Ali was one of them; the others were: Uthman
Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf Al-Zubayr Ibn Awam Talhah Ibn Ubaydullah and Saad
Ibn Abu Waqass. The selected caliph shall be from these alone and these
alone shall select him.

Since the passing Caliph knew that ‘Ali was the most qualified among the
six members to lead the nation to the right road he was expected to tip
the scale in his favor by commanding the Muslims to follow ‘Ali's party
if there were two parties among the members of the Electoral Convention.
The passing Caliph did what was not expected. He commanded the Muslims
to follow the party of Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf.

Yet this man was expected to choose Uthman who was his brother-in-law
and this is what he did. Thus the passing Caliph with good intention
brought the Umayyads to a reality that was beyond their dreams before
‘Umar's era. He indirectly chose for the caliphate Uthman the righteous
member of his Umayyad clan.

Yet his righteousness and excessive love of the members of his clan made
him a potential bridge through which the caliphate would cross from the
early migrant companions to the rest of the Umayyads the traditional
enemy of the Messenger.

Uthman’s reign insured for Muawiya the continuity of his rule with a
broader authority and fame. The new Caliph added to the area of
Muawiya's authority Palestine and the rest of the Syrian
sub-provinces.[^17]

As Muawiya became the ruler of that vast and rich area his rule became
free of higher supervisions. As a result he became the strongest man in
the Muslim World. It became possible for him before the Third Caliph met
his Lord to put at battlefield a respectable army of a hundred thousand
fighters. These were salaried by the Islamic treasury in Syria.[^18]

Muawiya was not the only Umayyad who ruled an important province and
purchased the loyalty of Arab chiefs with what was under his authority
of public funds. The Third Caliph appointed another Umayyad Walid Ibn
Aqaba governor of Kufa who ruled that city for years.[^19]

When he was dismissed he was succeeded by another Umayyad Sa-eed Ibn
Al-Aws.[^20] He appointed Abdullah Ibn Amir Governor of Basra[^21] and
he also was an Umayyad. He also appointed his foster brother Abdullah
Ibn Saad Ibn Abu Sarh governor of Egypt.[^22] Marwan cousin of the
Caliph and a son of Hakam Ibn Abu Al- Aws who was exiled by the Holy
Prophet became the strong minister of the Caliph.[^23] In fact he became
the actual caliph.

Marwan was able through his strong influence to hide from the eyes and
ears of this righteous Caliph all evil doings of these appointed
officals and convince him of their righteousness and the necessity of
their continuation in their offices. Thus the Muslim World became an
Umayyad kingdom ruled by individuals of little religion along with
opportunism and hatred to the members of the House of the Messenger.

The Iron Curtain
----------------

These individuals became the orators of the Islamic pulpits and the
teachers of the Muslims. One may imagine the iron curtain which these
rulers erected to deprive the various nationalities which they ruled of
all means of acquaintance with ‘Ali and the rest of the members of the
House of the Holy Prophet and their position in Islam.

Thus the communities of Syria were not acquainted in the least with the
members of the House of the Holy Prophet.

This is what Muawiya stated during the days of the caliphate of Uthman
when he said to Ammar: "There are a hundred thousand soldiers and a
similar number of their sons and their servants who do not know ‘Ali and
his relationship."[^24]

The inhabitants of Basra were next to the Syrians in lack of knowledge
about the members of the House of the Holy Prophet. These people did not
have any ruler during the days of ‘Umar and Uthman that was sympathetic
to the members of the House of the Prophet. People of Kufa seemed to
know little about ‘Ali and his House.

Evidently the presence of Ammar Ibn Yasir for a short time and Abdullah
Ibn Masud for a longer time had contributed to the acquaintance of the
Kufites with the members of the House of the Holy Prophet. But that
knowledge remained very limited.

To know the effect of the iron curtain which the Umayyads erected to
insulate the provinces which they ruled against any knowledge about
‘Ali's history and that of the members of his house one needs only to
remember the following:

The Muslims who were hostile to the Imam after he was elected were
afraid of the presence of Ammar in the camp of the Imam. This was
because they heard directly or indirectly that the Messenger said to
Ammar "The aggressor party will kill you."[^25]

But they were not afraid to fight the Imam though the Messenger said
more about him than he said about Ammar and all the companions combined.
They did not even remember what the Holy Prophet said about ‘Ali in
front of the thousands of Muslims on the day of Ghadir Khum when he
declared that ‘Ali is their Mawla then he said: "God love whoever loves
him and be hostile to whoever is hostile to him."[^26]

This statement meant that whoever was hostile to ‘Ali was hostile to God
let alone those who fought ‘Ali.

When the Imam wanted to inform people of Kufa about what the Holy
Prophet said about him on the day of Ghadir Khum he noticed the signs of
doubt on the faces of his audience. Therefore he was forced to ask
whoever was present of the companions of the Holy Prophet to testify to
that. Twelve Badrians from among them stood up and attested to his
statement.[^27]

Most of the Bassrites during the days of Uthman were for Talhah and
Al-Zubayr was popular among the Kufites. This means that the Imam did
not have a majority even in Kufa.

People of Egypt seemed to have some knowledge about the Imam before the
death of Uthman. Evidently this was a result of the presence of Muhammad
Ibn Abu Bakr and Muhammad Ibn Abu Hutheifah in Egypt about the end of
the period of Uthman when they were tyring to prepare the public opinion
for a revolution against the Caliph. From this we can see clearly that
the Umayyads during the period of Uthman had accomplished three of their
goals.

1. They were able to block all the informational avenues about ‘Ali in
most of the Muslim provinces.

2. They acquired a populous base in Syria and a great influence in the
rest of the Muslim provinces through what they bought of loyalty of
tribes and influential individuals in every province they ruled.

This was the method which they followed wherever they found people ready
to sell their religion for material gain and these were numerous in
every province. The public funds were under the authority of these
Umayyads and they were handling those funds according to their whims.

3. What was more important than all that was that the Umayyads were no
longer in need of reaching the authority and the caliphate. The
caliphate and its authority were now in their hands. Anyone seeking the
caliphate would have to use a tremendous military force in order to
break their grip on the caliphate.

These Umayyads had possessed the manpower and the money which made them
able to retain that authority. They were the opportunists of the Arabs
who would not hesitate to use any means regardless of its ugliness if it
served their purpose.

Tribalism
---------

I should not fail to mention the chronical tribal system of the Arab
society which rendered to the Umayyads great assistance in developing
their power politically and militarily. At a time when mass media was
missing it would have been difficult for any politician to win
popularity of the masses of people.

Such popularity could be gained only when the masses of people are tied
up with some leaders through blood relationship which makes them follow
those leaders blindly. An individual without this kind of leadership
becomes independent. He would do what he could to serve his own
particular interest or he follows his logical thinking.

When there are tribal leaderships the loyalty of the thousands becomes
easily acquirable by opportunists such as the Umayyads especially when
the tribal leaders are materialistic-minded. The period during which the
Third Caliph ruled increased the number of this kind of leadership
because the worldly interests of most of the leaders during that period
were put ahead of their religion.

New Competitors
---------------

The second development which was brought on by the Electoral Convention
was the emergence of new rivals who suddenly became powerful enough to
compete with ‘Ali for the caliphate. Neither Abdul-Rahman Talhah or
Al-Zubayr seriously hoped to become caliph.

By granting these companions membership to the Electoral Convention the
Second Caliph promoted them and placed them above the rest of the
companions. This inflamed their ambitions and made them feel that they
are ‘Ali's equals and that each of them is qualified to lead the nation.

This superiority complex was stronger in the minds of Talhah and
Al-Zubayr than it was in the minds of the two other companions
Abdul-Rahman and Saad. What Talhah and Al-Zubayr acquired of enormous
fortunes[^28] inflamed in them a spirit of competition for the Islamic
leadership. Wealth was and is still a power which renders a tremendous
assistance for reaching goals.

Their membership in the Electoral Convention opened the eyes of Mother
of Believers Ayeshah to the possibility of making one of the two
companions the next caliph. The caliphate for either of the two
companions was highly desirable to Mother of the Believers because
Talhah was a member of her clan Tyme and Al-Zubayr was her
brother-in-law.

He was the husband of her sister Asma.[^29]

Thus the two companions and Ayeshah had shared one line of thinking.
This made them start a vicious smear campaign against Uthman which did
not end until his death. When the Imam was elected after the death of
Uthman the disappointment and the inflamation of ambition motivated the
two companions and Ayeshah to oppose the Imam in a violent way which had
no precedent in the history of Islam.

The two companions would not have started such a violent campaign if the
Second Caliph had not granted them the membership to the Electoral
Convention which made each of them feel that he is equal to the Imam.

The Last Opportunity
--------------------

The Imam after the death of the Holy Prophet had constantly showed his
serious interest in acquiring the leadership while the Muslims were
still merciful to each other and united against the enemies of Islam.
The Imam made serious efforts during the days of the Electoral
Convention to persuade its members to grant him the leadership.

He had foreseen through the light of God that the three days of the
Electoral Convention were the last opportunity which could enable him to
lead the nation to its great goals and destiny while retaining its unity
and internal peace. He was fully aware that if the caliphate was
diverted away from him the unity of the nation will come to an end. One
may remember that the Imam said to the rest of the members of the
Convention during that period the following:

"Listen to my words and understand my logic. You may see the leadership
after this Convention contested so violently that swords will be drawn
and covenants will be breached until you are no longer one community.
Thus some of you will be leaders of the camp of deviation and followers
of people of ignorance..."[^30]

The members heard his words but they did not understand his logic. They
were the elders of Quraish whose hearts were filled with grudges against
‘Ali. They were doing their best to keep the caliphate away from him.

Uthman was elected and the interest of the Imam in the caliphate came to
an end. The sequel of the events during the time of the Third Caliph and
the revolution which concluded his period had ended the life of the
Caliph as it ended the period of unity.

The Caliphate Was Imposed Upon Him
----------------------------------

After the death of Uthman the Qureshites lost for a few days the
political initiative and control of the political affairs of the nation.
Thus they could not divert the caliphate from ‘Ali this time. The rebels
and the majority of the companions of Medina gathered around the Imam
requesting him repeatedly to accept the leadership.

He refused it because he was able to foresee that the nation was going
to face some insane crisis in which it would be difficult for the masses
of the people to see the light and know the right road. Therefore he
said to them:

"Leave me out and seek other than me. We are facing a multicolor
situation with numerous faces on which the hearts cannot stand and the
minds cannot rest."[^31] But they asked him in the name of God to accept
the leadership. They promised him help and obedience.

They put him on the spot as they put him face to face with his
responsibility. Thus he could not resist them. He accepted their
election knowing that they placed on his strong shoulders a burden which
a mountain could not carry. He is ‘Ali who never fled from duties
regardless of their magnitude.

Qureshite Hostile or Deserter?
------------------------------

The Imam was elected and the Qureshite woke up with all their grudges
and rancors and with the exception of a few all their leaders rose in
arms against the Imam.

The non-ambitious from the righteous Qureshite leaders took a neutral
attitude towards the Imam. They refused to help him and many of them
refused to elect him though they knew his high distinctions and
qualifications.

Saad Ibn Abu Waqass one of the members of the Electoral Convention
refused to assist the Imam or to elect him though he reported that the
Messenger of God said to ‘Ali: "Are you not satisfied to be to me like
Aaron to Moses but there shall be no Prophet after me?"[^32]

Thus assistance of ‘Ali and his obedience according to this hadith would
be assistance and obedience to the Messenger of God as the obedience of
Aaron and his assistance were obedience and assistance to Moses.

Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar well known and righteous refused to assist ‘Ali or to
elect him though he reported that the Messenger said: "... Whoever dies
while he does not owe any allegiance to a caliph he would die a
pre-Islamic death."[^33] He afterwards pledged allegiance to Muawiya
because Abdullah feared that he may die a pre-Islamic death if he did
not owe Muawiya an allegiance. For the same reasons he pledged also his
allegiance to Yazid Ibn Muawiya later. Yet he refused for five years to
pledge his allegiance to the Imam and he was not afraid to die a
pre-Islamic death.

The Qureshite Aggressors
------------------------

Righteous and wicked leaders from Quraish competed with each other in
combating the Imam. They offered sacrifices in combating him more than
they offered of sacrifices in combating the pagans.

The Umayyads headed by Muawiya found in the death of Uthman a golden
opportunity. The death of Uthman was not less beneficial to the Umayyads
than his life. It is true that his caliphate gave Muawiya enough power
to make him the strongest man in the Muslim State but his assassination
gave Muawiya the means to use that power to achieve the goal for which
he was preparing himself since his arrival in Damascus.

While Uthman was besieged he asked Muawiya to relieve him but he did not
relieve him.[^34] He did not respond to his call because he wanted him
to be assassinated. He sent an army to Hijaz pretending that he was
trying to defend him. But he commanded the leader of the army to camp
outside Medina and warned him not to enter Medina regardless of the
developments of the crisis until he received his order from Damascus.

To deprive the commander of that army from all freedom of action he told
him: "Do not say to yourself that the present sees what the absent
cannot see. You are the absent and I am the present." Muawiya had
acquired all the benefits that he could acquire from the life of Uthman.
The death of Uthman now had become more beneficial than his life.

Defending the Caliph may prolong his life until he dies a natural death.
The righteousness of the Caliph may motivate him if he passes the crisis
safely to appoint an outstanding companion as his successor. Thus
Muawiya would be deprived of the opportunity as he would be deprived of
any justification to impose his leadership on the nation.

But a violent death of the Caliph would give him the opportunity and the
justification.

From this we know that the Third Caliph did not possess as much
political and military power as Muawiya. He was unable to defend himself
while Muawiya possessed the power to attack his enemies and to protect
the life of the Caliph. This means that Uthman was the caliph in name
only and Muawiya had the real authority.

When the Third Caliph was assassinated the Umayyads lost the caliphate
in name only and for a short period.

Muawiya did not need to acquire the name but to use what he had of power
in the way of avenging the death of the assassinated Caliph. He did that
and waged against the Imam a war which the Muslims had never witnessed
before.

The Righteous Ambitious Qureshites
----------------------------------

As the violent death of the Caliph gave Muawiya a tribal justification
to avenge his blood it added to his power a new power. Talhah Al-Zubayr
and Mother of the Believers (Ayeshah) who were the arch enemies of the
assassinated Caliph joined Muawiya and became his allies in seeking
revenge for the blood which they called on the Muslims to shed. Now they
added all their strength to the strength of Muawiya and preceded him in
combating the Imam.

The Battle of Basra proved that the three leaders had a tremendous
capability. They were able to mobilize against the Imam at that battle
an army exceeding thirty thousands while the Imam came from Medina with
a few hundred soldiers.

He was forced while on his way to Basra to stay at Thee Qar for a period
of time during which he made monumental efforts and gathered a
task-force which did not exceed twelve thousand volunteers from Kufa.
Finally but not until he entered Basra the Imam's army numbered twenty
thousand.

The three leaders with all their righteousness and brilliant past
allowed themselves to divide the Muslims and to draw swords against the
Imam and put the followers of the Messenger for the first time in the
Islamic history in two camps.

The three leaders along with their army were defeated but they opened by
their actions a door on the nation which the Imam could not close in
spite of his decisive victory against them. The Islamic division grew
after their defeat. The distance between the Imam and the Qureshites
increased and so did their grudge against him after seventy of their
leaders were destroyed at the Battle of Basra.

The people of Basra were not to forget the thousands of their sons and
brothers who fell in the battlefield. The people of Kufa were also
expected to feel the magnitude of the loss of their sons and brothers in
battle.

The death of many of his enlightened supporters in this battle deprived
the Imam of a great deal of assistance which they had provided. No doubt
the Battle of Basra with its decisive victory against the three leaders
did not increase the Imam's power. It rather decreased it by decreasing
the number of his supporters.

Those who were in sympathy with his enemies yet hesitant to combat him
found in the attitude of the two companions and "Mother of the
Believers" what encouraged them to join his enemy in combating him. If
these three righteous leaders found it legal to fight ‘Ali why should
people with less righteousness hesitate to fight him? From this we know
that the three leaders offered to Muawiya and his party great services
which added a new power to his growing power.

The three leaders no doubt were able to realize the opposite of these
results and preserve the unity of the nation if they had been consistent
with themselves and their past. They were calling for reform and
criticizing the Third Caliph for his illegal conducts. They urged people
to bring his reign to an end through any means because of the corruption
of the relatives of the Third Caliph.

As the Imam ‘Ali came to power trying to realize what they were calling
for the three leaders were duty-bound to follow the Imam and assist him
in realizing his goals. Muawiya and his party had malicious intentions
towards the nation and they were trying to usurp the authority from the
one who was the most qualified to lead the nation.

It was the duty of the three leaders to go to Iraq Egypt and the rest of
the sources of the Islamic power and wage an educational campaign
informing the nation of the malicious intention of Muawiya and his party
towards the nation.

They could have urged the Muslims to assist the Imam in combating the
evil elements. Had they done that Muawiya would have realized that what
he was aiming for was beyond his reach and he would have surrendered
humbly to the Imam. Had this happened the nation would have preserved
its unity and remained as God wanted it led by the best leader after the
Messenger.

The three leaders should have at least convicted themselves for causing
the death of the Third Caliph rather than fighting the Imam pretending
to avenge a blood which they had shed.

The insulin which the membership of the Electoral Convention injected in
the veins of the two companions and the chronical hatred of Mother of
the Believers towards the Imam coupled with her hope to bring one of her
two relatives to the leadership were bound to blind the three leaders.
Thus they waged their vicious campaign which led to the assassination of
the Third Caliph and tried to kill the Fourth Caliph in order to reach
the caliphate unconcerned with the future of Islam.

Conclusions
-----------

As we summarize the circumstances and important events which preceded
the election of the Imam or accompanied his reign we come to the
following conclusions:

These events and circumstances which deprived the Imam ‘Ali of an
established populous base and a sufficient and obedient military force
were not of his own making and he was unable to eliminate them or
control them.

It was not within the power of the Imam to purify the hearts of the
Qureshites of jealousy towards the Hashimites because of the
Prophethood. It was not in the hands of the Imam to avoid the grudges of
the Qureshites against him because of what they lost of relatives
through his defense of Islam unless he had avoided the defense of the
Messenger and his religion.

It was not within his power to change the determination of the
Qureshites to alternate the caliphate among them nor was he able to
remove their fear of resting the caliphate in the House of the Prophet
if ‘Ali comes to power.

It was not within his power to make the first Two Caliphs look at him as
a non-rival; nor was it possible for him to stop the growth of the
Qureshite influence during the reign of the two Caliphs.

It was not within the power of the Imam to prevent the Second Caliph
from admitting the Umayyads into his regime; nor was it within the power
of the Imam to prevent the Second Caliph from keeping Muawiya in the
post which made his power grow.

It was not within the power of ‘Ali to make ‘Umar appoint him as his
successor; nor was it possible for the Imam to prevent the Second Caliph
from forming the Electoral Convention; nor was the Imam able to prevent
‘Umar from planning the Electoral Convention the way he did and by which
Uthman won the caliphate and ‘Ali lost it.

It was not possible for the Imam to prevent the Second Caliph from
admitting Talhah and Al-Zubayr into the Electoral Convention; nor was it
possible for the Imam to gain the love of Ayeshah arid her loyalty and
to prevent her from working to put her two relatives and companions of
the Prophet in the leadership.

It was not within the power of the Imam to separate Uthman from his
opportunist relatives or to prevent him from making them governors of
the important provinces of the Muslim State and giving Muawiya enough
power to make him a state within the State.

It was not possible for the Imam to prevent these Umayyad officials from
blocking all channels of information about him and preventing the
nationalities which they ruled from knowing about ‘Ali's distinctions
and high qualifications.

It was not within the power of the Imam to prevent the revolution which
destroyed the caliphate of Uthman and ended his life. It was not
possible for the Imam to prevent Talhah Al-Zubayr and Mother of the
Believers from pretending to seek avenge for the blood of Uthman in
order to usurp the authority from him. It was not possible for him to
prevent them from inflaming the war of Basra.

It was not possible for the Imam to change the tribal ways of the Arab
society or to prevent corruption of the conscience of many chiefs of the
tribes and their readiness to sell their religion for their worldly
materials.

It was not possible for the Imam to prevent Muawiya from exploiting the
death of the Third Caliph nor was it possible for him to prevent the
Syrian people from obeying Muawiya.

The Imam was not to be blamed for any of these things; and he was not to
be blamed because he did not make the people of Iraq as obedient as the
people of Syria.

It was not possible for the Imam to change the structure of the Iraqi
people who were composed of some righteous individuals and a class of
ignorant and extremist readers of the Holy Qur'an and ignorant fanatics
along with tribes who were ready to obey their chiefs right or wrong.

Muawiya should not be given credit because of the lack of the Readers
class in his society and the rarity of righteous people and the numerous
ignorants among the people of Syria during that period.Muawiya should
not be given credit because of the lack of the Readers class in his
society and the rarity of righteous people and the numerous ignorants
among the people of Syria during that period.

Remarkable Achievements
-----------------------

As we look at the circumstances of the Imam and the difficulties
accumulated in his way before his election and afterwards we find that
he realized the impossible. In order to appreciate that we need not do
more than to remember that he came out of Medina with only a few hundred
volunteers to face the three leaders who mobilized more than thirty
thousand to combat him at Basra.

This took place at a time when Muawiya had an army that was three times
larger than the army of the three leaders with which he was able to
threaten any of the provinces which were under the Imam's authority.

In the meantime Abu Musa Al-Ashari governor of Kufa was urging the
Kufites to let the Imam down leading them to what we call now a civil
disobedience. The Imam after all his efforts was not able to mobilize
from the Kufites and others except a limited number of volunteers
through whom his army numbered twenty thousand.

With all the difficulties which beset him the Imam was able to hand the
three leaders along with their huge army a resounding defeat. He turned
to his bigger enemy and he was able to strangulate him and hand him a
military defeat which Muawiya could not avoid except through the
conspiracy of lifting the copies of the Holy Qur'an and the readiness of
the volatile Iraqi people to be deceived.

Due to his unusual efficiency the reign of the Imam continued for 5
years in spite of all the difficulties and limitations imposed on him by
his unwavering principles.

Muawiya's Inefficiency
----------------------

Muawiya did not excel in using his military power. Had he been at the
efficient level which his admirers think he was he would have used his
military superiority at the beginning of the caliphate of the Imam. The
three leaders occupied the city of Basra and mobilized their forces
while the Imam did not have but a few hundred soldiers.

Had Muawiya been that intelligent and brave as a leader he would have
exploited the opportunity of military weaknesses of the Imam by sending
an army to occupy Kufa when his allies occupied Basra.

By this he could have deprived the Imam from the Kufan assistance and he
would have brought the reign of the Imam during that period to an end.
As a matter of fact Muawiya was able to send a division of his army to
Medina and occupy it while the Imam was on his way to Basra.

Had the Imam had a situation like that of Muawiya and Muawiya was in the
position of the Imam (as we tried to hypothesize at the beginning of
this chapter) the Imam would have done that and brought the reign of
Muawiya to its end within weeks.

Yet we find Muawiya with all his military potential lacking the courage
and intelligence and staying in Damascus waiting until Talhah and
Al-Zubayr and their army fell under the blows of the Imam. Thus the Imam
after wards was able to mobilize a striking force which he led in
combating Muawiya in his own province where he pushed him nearly to the
end.

In spite of all the difficulties which accumulated in front of him since
the death of the Holy Prophet and multiplied after his election the Imam
appeared as a mountain that was unshakable by all storms that were
surrounding him. Had the people of Kufa alone gone with him to the end
of the road he could have eliminated the evil forces from the Muslim
World and led the nation to a future full of good and illuminated from
every side.

Had the Imam been obeyed by the Kufites to eliminate the menace of
Muawiya he could have purified the Muslim society and driven it to the
right road. Thus the faith of Islam could have been spread enough to
convert Europe and subsequently America whose people had mostly come
from Europe.

Unfortunately people of Kufa experienced what other Muslim communities
experienced. They lost their determination and their power was
neutralized. They let the Imam down at the decisive hour and the whole
nation lost its final opportunity.Unfortunately people of Kufa
experienced what other Muslim communities experienced. They lost their
determination and their power was neutralized. They let the Imam down at
the decisive hour and the whole nation lost its final opportunity.

Responsibility of the Non-Iraqi Muslims
---------------------------------------

The Iraqis were not the only people who were to blame for what happened.
The responsibility was that of the whole nation which refused to assist
the truth and took towards the Imam and his right either a hostile or
neutral attitude; and those who were hostile were more numerous than
those who were neutral.

The students of history of that Islamic period ought to be amazed by
what happened to the Muslims when they lost their mental capabilities
and deviated from the right road. The Almighty was disobeyed while
righteous people were idly looking on and some of them went on assisting
the devious camp while they were separated from the Messenger by only
twenty-five years.

The two groups went on competing in combating the Brother of the
Messenger with a fervor which they did not demonstrate even in their
combating the pagan forces. The two allied groups pushed the masses of
the people to batties in which the nation swam in blood.

The nation and its subsequent generations paid and are still paying the
price of the insanity of that generation.

The price they paid was the best that Islam had given: justice freedom
and dignity. The nation brought the reign of the Imam to an end and by
that it ended the Righteous Caliphate forever.

Why Did the Caliphate Not Live Long?
------------------------------------

What happened should make us ask: Was the purpose of the faith of Islam
to make the Righteous Caliphate last only thirty years? Or was the
purpose to provide the nation and its future generations with unity
brotherhood and justice? Was the purpose to make the faith of Islam a
way of life for the Muslims for only three decades? If the purpose was
to continue life according to the Heavenly Message for a long time why
did the Righteous Caliphate live so shortly? And why did it have such a
fast and sudden death?

The end of life for the true caliphate within such a short time should
make us ask the following questions: Was this sudden death a natural
result of the adherence of the Muslims to a program that was planned by
the Messenger (because according to a prominent School of Thought he
left it to his companions to elect a successor after him)?

Was the sudden death of the caliphate a natural result of the Muslims'
negligence of a program planned by the Messenger who according to
another prominent Islamic School of Thought chose a successor to lead
the nation after him but his companions did not accept the leadership of
the Prophet's choice?

Since we have to discuss this it would be appropriate to raise the two
following questions:

I. Should the first succession have been by inheritance election or by
appointment from the Prophet?

2. If it were supposed to be by appointment from the Prophet did the
Prophet appoint anyone? We shall attempt in the following pages to
answer these two important questions.

Observation
-----------

As we conclude our brief presentation of the events of the days of
Uthman and his sad end we ought to remember the following:

The caliphate of Uthman and its events have proven that leadership of
the Muslim world after the Prophet should have been by selection from
the Messenger rather than by election of the companions. He was the only
one who was supported by revelation and Divine inspiration. He knew the
best qualified for leadership among the members of his house and
companions.

The leadership should not have been left to the chances of elections by
the Muslims in general or by the companions of the Messenger or by an
aristocracy such as that of the Quraish community in particular. Nor
should it have been left to the chance of selection by a direcly or
indirectly elected caliph. Nor should it have been left to the election
by members of the Electoral Convention.

An election or selection such as this might bring the best or the second
best or the worst to power. This is dangerous for the future of a nation
which carries a message to itself and to the world especially when the
nation is still at the beginning of its progress and growth.

Such an election is bound to bring some time to power a weak leadership
which is unable to carry the message. It may bring at another time a
strong leadership that deliberately or inadvertently detours the nation
and the message from their right road which was prescribed by the man of
the message.

The incidental success of the first election by companions and first
selection by an elected Caliph which brought Abu Bakr and ‘Umar to power
made the Muslims the historians and the scholars overlook the
destructive failure which was caused by the election of the Third
Caliph.

The accomplishments of the first two Caliphs have dazzled the eyes of
the Muslims. They could not see that the events of Uthman’s caliphate
had given clear evidence that the election is not a safe road for a
nation of a reformatory message.

The Muslims have forgotten the obvious fact that the purpose of the
Islamic message was not to establish a righteous government for only
twelve or thirty years. The purpose of the Heavenly message was rather
much higher and longer.

When the Prophet at Ghadir Khum declared the leadership of ‘Ali and the
rest of the purified members of his House he was following only a
natural course. This is what is supposed to be done by any head of state
when he is about to leave his office.

This would be obviously true when the head of the state is a carrier of
an extremely important message upon which the state is founded and his
government is supposed to carry that message to the nations of the world
as well as to its own people.

Any deviation that happens to the message by ignorance weakness or
impiety of the leadership may put the whole message in jeopardy. The
Holy Prophet was looking at the future through the light of God when he
proposed while on his deathbed to have for the nation a written
directive after which the nation would not go astray.

He foresaw that the Muslims would face after him many faith-testing
crises. Therefore it was highly imperative to select for the nation a
truly qualified leader in order to keep that nation on the right road.

It was most unfortunate that ‘Umar supported by other companions
objected to the Prophet's proposal accusing him of hallucinations and
saying the Book of God sufficed.

The events of the Electoral Convention which brought Uthman to power and
the events which took place during his caliphate and their consequences
have revealed the gravity of ‘Umar's error. The Book of God did not
prevent him from forming his prejudiced Electoral Convention which
deprived ‘Ali of leadership and brought Uthman to power.

The Book of God did not prevent Uthman from committing his classical
mistakes nor did it prevent the Muslims from their violent reaction
toward his mismanagement and waging several bloody civil wars after his
violent death.

For the Book of God to function and prevent people from taking erroneous
direction it has to be coupled with an efficient and firm leadership
equipped with a profound knowledge of the interpretation of the Book as
well as the teaching of the Holy Prophet. Such a leadership makes the
Book of God operative and drives people to the Qur'anic path.

This leadership is what the Messenger of God wanted to secure for the
nation through his proposed written directive.

This is what the Prophet meant in his declaration on the day of Ghadir
Khum when he told the Muslims that he was leaving to them the two
elements which would secure them against deviation from the right road
the Book of God and the members of his House and that the two will never
part with each other.

The objection to the Prophet's proposed written directive cost the
nation its political and spiritual unity and inflicted on the nation
irreparable damage.

When the companions ignored the Prophet's declaration at Ghadir Khum and
rejected his proposed document they were motivated by their
self-interest.

They were unwilling to give ‘Ali the leadership after the death of the
Prophet because they did not want to concede the caliphate to the
Hashimites. To allow ‘Ali to succeed the Prophet was to admit at least
implicitly that his leadership was decreed by God and His Messenger who
testified that the members of the House of the Prophet will never part
with the Holy Qur'an. This would keep the leadership in this most
honored group. The Meccan companions of various clans were unwilling to
give up their ambitions.

They wanted to keep the caliphate competitive by giving it to a
non-Hashimite Meccan. This should secure its competitiveness and allow
companions from various clans to enter the race for leadership because
they are not better than each other.

This theory worked for them for a while. Three companions (Abu Bakr
‘Umar and Uthman) from three Meccan clans alternated on the leadership
within thirteen years. The ambitious companions however lately woke up
during the reign of Uthman discovering to their dismay that their hopes
of reaching the High Office was fading out.

They faced what they were trying to avoid.The Umayyads were about to
render the caliphate non-competitive because they had already dominated
the Muslim world during the first six years of Uthman’s reign.

They were about to establish a royal dynasty based not on Holiness and
brilliant Islamic record as that of the members of the House of the
Prophet but rather based on power obtained by corruption usurpation and
domination. Its first expected outcome was to bar any ambitious
companions from reaching the High Office. The first casualties of this
development would be the dreams of Talhah Al- Zubayr Abdul-Rahman and
Ayeshah.

Motivated by the fear of Umayyads' domination these ambitious people
started their campaign against the Third Caliph. They tried to thwart
the dream of establishing a royal dynasty and re-open to the members of
the Electoral Convention the Avenue of Leadership.

These ambitious companions were not afraid of ‘Ali for they believed
they could block his way to the caliphate if Uthman died. Quraish was
against him and the Qureshites were the king-makers. No one knew this
more than ‘Ali who told the Hashimites at the time of the Electoral
Convention: "As long as your people (the Qureshites) are obeyed (in what
is to be done to you) you will never be given the leadership.".

However the ambitious companions' expectation did not come true. They
did not take in their calculation the fact that Quraish would lose the
political control for a short time after the death of Uthman when people
other than the Qureshites would be the king-makers.However the ambitious
companions' expectation did not come true. They did not take in their
calculation the fact that Quraish would lose the political control for a
short time after the death of Uthman when people other than the
Qureshites would be the king-makers.

[^1]: Al-Bukhari his Sahih part 5 p.24. And Muslim in his Sahih part 15
p.176.

[^2]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p.109.

[^3]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p.169.

[^4]: Ibn Sa’d Al- Tabaqat part 2 p.249.

[^5]: Al-Bukhari his Sahih part 1 p.39.

[^6]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p.287 Al-Tabari his History part 5
p.425.

[^7]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.223 and Ibn Al-Athir in his Kamil
part 3 p.34.

[^8]: Al-Muttaqui Al-Hindi Kanzul-Ummal Part 6; Kitab Al-Fadha-il (Book
of the Virtues) p.408.

[^9]: Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsud Al-Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib part 1 p.226.

[^10]: Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsud Al-Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib part 1
p.226.

[^11]: Ibn Abu Al-Hadid his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.3 p.179.

[^12]: Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 1 p.118.

[^13]: Ibn Sa’d Al-Tabaqat part3 p. 229.

[^14]: Ibn Sa’d Al- Tabaqat part 3 pp.255-256.

[^15]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.228.

[^16]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.228.

[^17]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p.57.

[^18]: Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsud Al-lmam ‘Ali part 2 p. 1120.

[^19]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 252.

[^20]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.279.

[^21]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.265.

[^22]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p.45.

[^23]: lbn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 pp.82-83.

[^24]: Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsud Al-Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib part2 p.
120.

[^25]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.511.

[^26]: Imam Ahmad his Musnad part 4 p.281.

[^27]: Imam Ahmad his Musnad part 4 p.281.

[^28]: Ibn Sa’d mentioned in his Al- Tabaqat part 3 p. 110 that
Al-Zubeir's fortune amounted to 40 million dirhams and on p.222 that
Talhah's fortune amounted to 30 million dirhams.

[^29]: See the first vol. of this book pp.262-264.

[^30]: Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part 3 p.37.

[^31]: AI-Tabari his History part 4 p.434 and Ibn Al-Athir Al-Kamil part
3 p.99.

[^32]: Al-Bukhari his Sahih part 5 p. 24 and Muslim also recorded in his
Sahih part 15 p.176 that Sa’d Ibn Abu Waqass reported in this Hadith.

[^33]: Muslim his Sahih part 12 p. 240.

[^34]: Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.368.


