34. The Home Conference
=======================

Three years after the commencement of his proph- ethood the Holy Prophet
declared that ‘Ali is his brother his executor and successor. This was
in accordance with the logical and natural course. The Prophet needed a
strong and truly helpful minister to support him and to aid him in
spreading the message and building the State which is expected to be
built on the foundation of the principles of the Heavenly Message. This
was not unprecedented in the history of prophethood. Moses asked his
Lord to support him with a minister from the members of his family Aaron
his brother.

A minister who is strong enough to face the dangers which the Holy
Prophet was expected to face ought to become his deputy and caliph who
replaces him when anything happens to him. By this the Holy Prophet
would have taken whatever he could take of precaution in order to secure
the continuity of the Message and its defusion when he departs from this
world instead of leaving its future to chances.

The reader may recall that we have discussed in the fifth chapter (vol.
1) what the Messenger did when his Lord commanded him after three years
from the commencement of the Message to warn his closest relatives when
the following verses were revealed:

***"And warn thy nearest kinsmen. And lower thy wing to the believers
who*** ***follow thee. Then if they disobey thee say: I am free (of
responsibility) for what ye do..." The Holy Qur'an chapter 26 verses
214-216.***

The Holy Prophet at that time invited the children of Abdul-Muttalib who
were the closest of his kinsmen. They were at that time thirty or forty
men. He invited them for a banquet which contained a small amount of
food and milk. They ate and drank from the little food and milk until
they were satisfied. When the opportunity came the Holy Prophet spoke to
them saying (and the Imam ‘Ali reported it):

"O children of Abdul-Muttalib by God I know of no young man from among
the Arabs ever brought his people better than I brought to you. I have
brought to you the best for you in this world and in the Hereafter.
Certainly God has commanded me to invite you to it. Who is among you
that will be my minister in this mission and he will become my brother
my executor and my successor among you?"

The audience kept silent. ‘Ali said "Prophet of God I will be your
minister in this mission." He held my neck and said: "This is my brother
my executor and my successor among you. Listen to him and obey him." The
group laughed saying to Abu Talib: "He commanded you to listen to your
son and to obey him!".

Al-Tabari recorded this hadith in his history (part 2 page 216) Ibn
Al-Athir in his history Al-Kamil (part 2 page 41) recorded this hadith
and so did Abu Al-Fida in his history (part 1 page 116) Al-Khazin
Ala-o-Deen AI-Baghdadi in his commentary on the Holy Qur'an (page 390)
and Al-Suyuti in his book Jami-Al-Jawami-a (part 7 page 392) where he
mentioned it in reliance on Al-Tabari. In the same part (page 397) he
reported that all the six reliable recorders of the hadith (Ibn Is-Haq
Ibn Jareer Ibn Abu Hashim Ibn Mardawaih Abu Na-eem and Al-Baihaqi)
reported this hadith in their books. Ibn Abu Al-Hadid in his commentary
on Nahiul-Balagha (volume 3 page 254) also recorded this hadith and
Muhammad Hussein Haikal also recorded it in his book Hayaat Muhammad
first edition (page 104). [^1]

I have already discussed in the fifth chapter the significance of this
declaration. What I want to mention now is that this declaration
indicates that the Messenger was looking through the light of God at the
future which was stored for the blessed Message of Islam of diffusion
throughout the world.

He was also expecting the birth of a state built on its principles and
that the carrier of this message who would be the leader of a nation
will need a deputy that represents him and succeeds him and that that
deputy ought to be obeyed as the man of Message ought to be obeyed.
Therefore he said to the group: "Listen to him and obey him." Thus the
deputy has an authority similar to the authority of his leader.

Some scholars say that this hadith indicates only that ‘Ali is the
successor of the Holy Prophet among the children of Abdul-Muttalib. It
does not indicate that he is the successor of the Prophet for all the
Muslims.

This argument is unsound. The caliphate cannot be partitioned so the
Messenger would have two caliphs: One for the Hashimites and one for the
rest of the Muslims. The caliph has to be for all the Muslims because
the Messenger is the head of all the Muslims and so is his caliph.

The Muslims in regard to the caliphate are two factions: One says that
the Messenger did not appoint a successor; the other says that he
appointed ‘Ali lbn Abu Talib. There is no third faction that says that
the Messenger appointed a caliph for the Hashimites and left the rest of
the Muslims without a caliph.

The Holy Prophet would not make a clannish discrimination by appointing
a caliph for his clan and leaving the rest of the Muslims without
leadership. The Prophet by the nature of his message is supposed to be
more concerned with the future of his nation than with the future of his
clan. Therefore it would be inconceivable that he appoints for his clan
a religious authority that represents him and replaces him then leaves
the millions of his followers without authority and leadership.

Before I end my deliberation about this declaration I would like to
dwell a little while upon the significance of the contents of this
declaration.

The Final of the Prophets of God "brothered" a child of thirteen years
and appointed him a "caliph" (successor) of his after that child gave
the Prophet a promise that he will be his minister in his important
mission.

Let us first ask: What is the value of a promise of a child at this age
to assist in such a tremendous mission which is concerned with the
future of Islam and frought with great consequences of this kind?

Suppose a child of this age promises to assist you in realizing a
considerably important project for the future.

How can you rely on his promise? And what is the value of a promise of
such a child whose opinion may change and his attitude could be reversed
within days or hours?

Again how could the Holy Prophet know the righteousness of ‘Ali and his
capability of leadership in his future life while he is still thirteen
years old? The life of a child who seems to be good and righteous could
change during his youth and manhood and his nature could become corrupt.

It is also possible for a child who seems to be corrupt to change and
become one of the best people during the days of his manhood. It is
impossible for any human to know with certainty the future of a child.
The knowledge of this belongs only to God who knows the future of
everything.

The Holy Prophet's acceptance of ‘Ali's promised assistance in making
the mission a success and the Prophet's taking that promise with such a
high consideration shows that the Prophet had foreseen the bright future
of ‘Ali with utmost certainty.

Giving that child the high ranks of brotherhood executorship and
successorship implies a clear prophecy concerning ‘Ali and his future
superiority in knowledge righteousness bravery and wisdom. It was
impossible for the Messenger as a human being to foresee the future. He
only saw that future through a revelation from God.

The high ranks which were bestowed upon him were only by the order of
God and as a reward from God to ‘Ali for his promise of assistance which
the Almighty knew that it will be implemented with unparalleled
sincerity.

All that indicates that ‘Ali while he was in his childhood was above the
rest of men and his brilliant future made him the candidate whom the
Almighty chose to succeed His Messenger.

The authenticity of this hadith and the magnanimity of its content is
supported by its accordance with the Hadith of the Analogy of ‘Ali to
Aaron which we shall deal with in the following pages and which is
considered of the most authentic hadiths in the eyes of the Muslim
scholars.

[^1]: I relied in recording the above sources on Sheikh Al-Amini in his
book Al-Ghadir part 2 pp. 279-280.


