37. Hadith Al-Thaqalain (The Two Valuables)
===========================================

Many of the Hadiths of Al-Thaqalain (the Two Valuables) have been
already put in front of the reader (in the second chapter and other
places in this book)

To make it easy for the reader it would be proper to repeat what I have
recorded of these hadiths before and add to them others of their kind.

Imam Abu Easa Ibn Easa Al-Thermathi in his authentic Sunan recorded that
Jabir Ibn Abdullah (Al-Ansari) reported: "I witnessed the Messenger of
God in his pilgrimage (in the tenth year after the Hijrah) speaking
while he was riding his camel called: Al-Qaswa. I heard him saying: 'O
people I have left in you that which if you adhere to you will never go
astray: The Book of God and the members of my House.'"[^1]

Ibn Jareer Ibn Asim Al-Mahamili in his Amali and Ibn Rahawaih recorded
that ‘Ali reported that the Messenger of God said: "Whoever God and His
Messenger are his "Mawla" (Guardian) this ‘Ali is his Mawla. I have left
in you what if you adhere to you will never go astray: the Book of God
His robe in His hand and in your hands and the members of my House."[^2]

Al-Tirmidhi recorded that Zayd Ibn Arqam reported that the Messenger of
God said: "I am leaving in you what if you follow you will never stray
after me. One of them is bigger than the other. The Book of God a robe
extended from Heaven to earth and the members of my House.

They will never part with each other until they join me at the basin (on
the Day of Judgment). Beware how you shall treat them after me."[^3]

Al-Tirmidhi said: "There are hadiths on this subject by Abu Dharr Abu
Sa-eed Zayd Ibn Arqam and Huthaifah Ibn Oseid..."[^4] Al-Hakim recorded
that Zayd Ibn Arqam reported:

"When the Messenger of God was coming from the Valedictory Pilgrimage he
stood at Ghadir Khum... and said: I am about to be summoned (by God) and
I will respond (to His call). I am leaving in you the Two Valuables: One
of them is bigger than the other: the Book of God and the members of my
House. Beware how you shall treat them after me for they shall not part
from each other until they join me at the basin (on the Day of
Judgment)..."[^5]

Al-Hakim recorded also that Zayd Ibn Arqam said that the Prophet said on
that day: "O people I am leaving in you two elements if you follow you
shall not go astray. They are the Book of God and the members of my
House."[^6]

Muslim in his Sahih reported that Zayd Ibn Arqam said: "The Messenger of
God stood at Ghadir Khum (between Mecca and Medina) delivering to us a
sermon.

He praised the Almighty and preached and reminded us. Then he said: 'O
people I am only human the Messenger of my Lord is about to come to me
and I shall respond. I am leaving in you "Al-Thaqalain" (The Two
Valuables) The first of the two is the Book of God. The guidance and the
light are in it. Follow it and adhere to it. He urged people to follow
the Book of God and induced them to do so.

Then he said: "And members of my House. Remember God in dealing with the
members of my House. (Repeating this three times.)"[^7]

Imam Ahmad in his Musnad reported that Zayd Ibn Thabit reported that the
Messenger of God said: "I am leaving in you two caliphs: The Book of God
and the members of my House. Beware how you shall treat them after me
for they will never part with each other until they join me at the Basin
(on the Day of Judgment)."[^8]

Al-Samhudi Al-Shafi-i in his book Jawahir Al-Iqdain (according to
Yanabee-a Al-Mawaddah page 40) reported that Om Selemah (wife of the
Messenger) said: "The Messenger of God held the hand of ‘Ali at Ghadir
Khum and lifted it... Then he said: 'Whoever I am his "Mawla" ‘Ali is
his "Mawla" '. Then he said: 'O people I am leaving in you the Two
Valuables: The Book of God and the members of my House. They will never
part with each other until they join me at the Basin (on the Day of
Judgment).'"[^9]

Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Sa-eed Al-Khidri reported that the
Messenger of God said: "I am about to be summoned by God and I shall
respond. I am leaving in you the Two Valuables: The Book of God and the
members of my House. The Almighty informed me that they will never part
with each other until they join me at the Basin (on the Day of
Judgment). Beware how you shall treat them after me."[^10]

Ibn Kuthayer in his book "Al-Bidayah and Al- Nihayah" (part 5 page 209
and part 7 page 348) recorded that Huthaifah Ibn Osaid reported that the
Messenger of God said: "And I shall question you when you join me on the
Day of Judgment about The Two Valuables. Beware how you shall treat them
after me: The bigger Valuable is the Book of God a robe whose end is in
the hand of God and the other end is in your hands. Hold it firmly. Do
not go astray and do not deviate. The smaller Valuable is the members of
my House. The Almighty informed me that they will not part with each
other until they join me at the Basin (on the Day of Judgment)." Ibn
Asakir reported this hadith through Huthaifa Ibn Ossaid.

We have mentioned that Al-Tirmidhi said in his Sahih that Hutheifah Ibn
Ossaid is one of the reporters of this hadith.

The hadith of Al-Thaqalain (The Two Valuables) was reported by many
companions. Therefore it is considered by many scholars to be of the
"Mutawatir" (a hadith conveyed by numerous reporters) kind or at least
from the well known hadiths.

Of the Two Valuables' hadiths is the hadith of the safety. Al-Hakim
recorded that Abu Dharr said while he was holding the door of the Kaaba:
"Whoever knows me I am the one whom he knows and whoever does not know
me I am Abu Dharr. I heard the Prophet saying: The position of the
members of my House among you is the position of Noah's ark and his
people. Whoever embarked on it was saved and whoever failed to embark on
it was drowned."[^11]

Al-Khateeb in his history part 12 page 91 reported similar to this
hadith through Anas Ibn Malik. Al-Bazzaz also reported it through Ibn
Abbas and Ibn Al-Zubayr reported similar to it. Ibn Jareer through Abu
Dharr and Abu Sa-eed Al-Khidri also reported similar to it. Abu Naeem
Ibn Abdul-Barr Muhibb Al-Deen Al-Tabari and many others reported this
hadith.[^12]

This hadith tells us what the hadiths of "Al-Thaqalain" (The Two
Valuables) told us. The two hadiths actually are declaring to the nation
that security against straying cannot be obtained but through the
adherence to the teaching of the Holy Qur'an and leadership of the
members of the House of the Holy Prophet Muhammad.

Prophetic Hadith
----------------

The Hadiths of the Two Valuables and of the Safety tell us clearly that
the Messenger did not leave this nation without leadership after him. He
declared to the Muslims that the leadership of the nation is in the
members of his House and that the adherence to the Holy Qur'an and to
their teaching is a security against straying.

There is no doubt that the adherence to the Holy Qur'an is the
imperative duty of every Muslim. And so is the adherence to the teaching
of the members of the House of the Prophet and walking in their path.

The most important duty of the nation is to secure itself against
straying. And when the adherence to the leadership of the members of the
House of the Prophet is a security against straying it would be the duty
of the nation to follow them. These hadiths declare clearly that when
the Holy Prophet chose the members of his House for the leadership of
the nation he did not do it by a human motive but through the revelation
of God who chose these members for the leadership of the nation.

The Messenger says that the Book and the members of his House will never
part with each other and that the Almighty informed him that the Qur'an
and they will never part with each other until they join him at the
Basin (on the Day of Judgment)

It is worthy to mention that these hadiths contain a clear Prophecy. The
Holy Prophet was not able humanly to know that the members of his House
will never part with the Holy Qur'an particularly when two of the
members of the House Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein were still small children.
No one could foretell the way the two children would develop later on.

The hadiths actually include all the members of the "Itrah" (the chosen
relatives of the Prophet) who were born after the death of the Prophet
such as the Imams: ‘Ali son of Al-Hussein Muhammad Al-Baqir Jaafar
Al-Sadiq and the Imams from the progeny of Al-Sadiq.

This prophecy was fulfilled completely. Each one of these Imams was an
example of purity knowledge and righteousness. None of them departed
from the Holy Qur'an for one day.

It appeared to many scholars that the hadiths of the Two Valuables
contradict the hadith which advises the Muslims to follow the Book of
God and the "Sunnah" (the instructions of His Prophet) which we have
already discussed (in chapter 33).

There we have mentioned that Ibn Hisham reported in his book Biography
of the Prophet and Malik reported in his Muwatta that the Messenger said
in his sermon at the Valedictory Pilgrimage: "... O people understand my
word for I have delivered the Message. I have left for you what if you
fortify yourselves with you will never go astray a clear instruction:
The Book of God and 'Sunnah' of His Prophet..."

It is worthy to note that this hadith was attributed to the Holy Prophet
without mentioning the names of the reporters through whom Ibn Hisham
and Malik received the hadith.

The hadith was reported by Al-Bukhari and Muslim without mentioning the
word "Sunnah." They mentioned only the word "Kitabullah" (the Book of
God). (See Sahih of Muslim in the Book of Pilgrimage part 8 in the
Valedictory Pilgrimage page 184 and also the Sahih of Al- Bukhari part 5
page 224.)

However let us assume that this hadith is authentic and let us try to
understand its meaning. To facilitate the discussion let us call hadith
"Al-Thaqalain " "The Two Valuables" (which speaks of the Book of God and
the members of the House of the Prophet) Hadith no. 1 and call the
Hadith of Fortification (which speaks of the Book of God and the
"Sunnah" of the Prophet) hadith no. 2.

It appeared to many scholars that the Messenger's order to his followers
in hadith no. 2 to fortify themselves by the Book and the "Sunnah"
against deviation contradicts hadith no. 1 which orders the Muslims to
follow the Book and the members of the House of the Holy Prophet as a
security against deviation and straying. The fact is that the two
hadiths are not contradictory to each other. They are rather
complementary to each other.

I have mentioned in chapter 3 that the word "Sunnah" in hadith no. 2
meant what is known to be the instructions of the Holy Prophet with
certainty. The hadith also tells us that the Prophet wanted us to follow
the known meaning of the Holy Qur'an rather than its surmised meaning
without certainty. This is because the adherence to the uncertain
meaning of the Book or the unknown instructions does not represent
security against deviation and straying.

Many of the recorded hadiths contradict each other. When each group of
scholars takes what it thinks to be authentic and the opinions of the
groups differ about the authenticity and the indications of the
contradictory hadiths it would become impossible for all those groups to
be right. Some of them or all of them have to be wrong.

Thus there would be no security against straying. Even when there are no
contradictions (as when we have only one hadith but that hadith is not
certain because it is not reported by a sufficient number of reporters)
the hadith would not represent security against straying. That is
because it may not have been said by the Holy Prophet and it is a well
known fact that most of the hadiths are from this kind.

The Qur'anic verses are not alike. Some of them can be understood
clearly and certainly and some of them are not so clear. Therefore the
Qur'anic commentators offered various interpretations to such verses but
none of those interpretations are certain.

Thus we find that the advocates of pre-destination cite for their
opinion some of the Qur'anic verses and the ad- vocates of man's freedom
also cite verses from the Holy Qur'an. The various Islamic Schools of
thought argue with each other disagree with each other and each one of
them cites for its opinion what appears to agree with it of Qur'anic
verses or hadiths of the Prophet.

All these schools seem to be sincere in what they advocate; but with all
their sincerity they differed from each other and the truth became
unknown. They cannot all be right. Many of them must be wrong. Yet the
Holy Prophet tells us that if we follow the Book of God and his "Sunnah
" we would be immuned of error and deviation. But the security is still
missing.

All these problems arise if the Messenger had commanded us to follow
what we guess to be his "Sunnah" and what we guess to be the meaning of
the Book.

If the Messenger had commanded us to follow what is certain to be his
"Sunnah" and what is certain to be the meaning of the Holy Qur'an (and
this is actually what constitutes a security against deviation and
error) he would have commanded us to do what is beyond our ability. The
reason: He did not leave us written or sufficient number of known
"Sunnahs." What are known to be truly the "Sunnah" of the Prophet are
very few.

Yet we know that the Messenger does not command us to do what is
impossible. Therefore we infer that the Messenger had left his nation a
clear way for knowing the real instructions of the Holy Prophet and the
meanings of the Book of God.

This way is the members of his House who are one of the Two Valuables
whom he left to the nation. This is what hadith no. 1 speaks of. Should
this be the case then hadith no. 2 would not be in conflict with hadith
no. 1 This hadith would be rather supplementing and explaining hadith
no. 2 and hadith no. 2 would be commanding us to do what is within our
power.

For hadith no. 1 declared to the nation that the members of the House of
the Prophet are sources of the certain knowledge concerning the actual
instructions of the Holy Prophet and the meaning of the Holy Book. The
nation through the members of the House of the Holy Prophet can acquire
what it needs of knowledge concerning the Islamic principles and laws if
it desires that and this is what secures it against straying.

This is actually what the Holy Prophet declared when he said: "I am the
city of knowledge and ‘Ali is its gate.

Whoever wants to enter the city should come to the gate." Thus the words
of the Holy Messenger on this subject agree with each other and points
to one road and aim namely: The duty of the nation is to follow the
members of the House of the Holy Prophet who were the treasurers of the
Prophet's knowledge.

Thus the Muslim generations who were living during the first three
Islamic centuries with members of the House of the Prophet were able to
learn from them the exact meaning of the Qur'an and the genuine "Sunnah"
of the Prophet.

Sheikh Muhammad Abu Zuhrah in his book "Al-Imam Al-Sadiq " after
mentioning hadith no. 1 and hadith no. 2 said the following: "But we say
that the Sunni books which reported the hadiths and recorded the word
"Sunnati" (my instructions) are more reliable than the Sunni books which
recorded the word: "Itrati" (members of my House).[^13]

Abu Zuhrah's argument against hadith no. 1
------------------------------------------

Sheikh Abu Zuhrah said that though hadith no. 2 is recorded without
naming the reporters who attributed it to the Messenger. On the other
hand hadith no. 1 was reported by numerous companions of the Prophet. It
is considered "Mutawater" and for this it is certainly authentic.

I have mentioned before that Muslim reported in the eighth part of his
Sahih that the Messenger said in the Valedictory Pilgrimage: "And I have
left for you what you will not go astray if you fortify yourselves with:
The book of God and you shall be questioned about it."[^14] He did not
mention the word "Sunnati." Al-Bukhari also mentioned the Book of God
but he did not mention the word "Sunnati."[^15]

Sheikh Abu Zuhra is a sample of other scholars who find it difficult to
accept hadith no. 1 in spite of being reported through numerous channels
which made it certainly authentic. The fear of these scholars which
prevents them from accepting hadith no. 1 is due to two reasons:

1. This hadith indicates clearly that the Messenger wanted the caliphate
to be in the members of his House and this is what these scholars do not
like to believe.

2. These scholars thought that there is a conflict between hadith no. 1
and hadith no. 2 and this was their great error.

They did not pay attention to the fact that when the Messenger commands
the Muslims to follow the "Sunnah" (his instructions) while the "Sunnah"
is not recorded he would be commanding the Muslims to do the impossible
if he wanted them to follow with certainty. Under this condition our
adherence to the known and unrecorded "Sunnah" would be possible only if
the Prophet had appointed an Imam after him to inform people about what
they do not know. And this is what hadith no. 1 is about.

The Prophet however would not tell the Muslims that if they follow what
they guessed to be his instructions they would be secured against
deviation because guessing does not secure the truth. The Holy Qur'an
declares:

***"Certainly conjecture never substitutes the truth." (Chapter 53
v.28)***

Sheikh Abu Zuhrah was actually unconscious of his own doing when he was
writing about the subject. He viewed that hadith no. 2 is more authentic
than hadith no. 1 because the books which recorded the word "Wa Sunnati"
are more reliable than the books that recorded the word "Wa Itrati."

Abu Zuhrah's claim is untrue because hadith no. 1 was reported by
numerous companions and recorded in highly authentic books such as the
authentic Sunnan of Al- Tirmidhi and Al-Mustadrak by Al-Hakim (who along
with Al-Thahabi stated that the hadith is authentic.) However I should
not fail to draw the attention of the reader to a contradiction in which
Abu Zuhrah fell inadvertently.

Hadith no. 2 states clearly that the adherence to the book and the
"Sunnah" of the Prophet is a security against straying. If Abu Zuhrah
understands from the word "Sunnati" (my Sunnah) the instructions which
were attributed by the hadiths to the Holy Prophet without certainty
these instructions would not be a security against straying in the
subject of his argument. For he fights one hadith by another hadith.

Each of the two hadiths which he views as contradictory to each other
can be taken by a Muslim School as evidence on what the followers of
that School believe. One of the two Schools would be necessarily
erroneous if the two hadiths are contradictory to each other and both
hadiths are "Sunnah." Thus the security which hadith no. 2 promised is
clearly missing.

Abu Zuhrah was erroneous when he like the rest of the scholars of his
School did not view in hadith no. 1 a necessary supplement of hadith no.
2 if hadith no. 2 is authentic. This is because hadith no. 2 can be
logical only if the Holy Prophet had appointed for the nation an Imam as
a reliable authority for teaching the "Sunnah" of the Holy Prophet and
this is what hadith no. 1 is saying.

Through this hadith the Holy Prophet informed the Muslims of the means
through which they can acquire true knowledge of the meanings of the
Book and the actual instructions of the Holy Prophet.

Abu Zuhrah added to his argument against hadith no. 1 other arguments:
He said: "Granted that the hadith is authentic. But we say that this
hadith does not stop argument. It does not identify the Imams whom the
Shi’ites consider to be the caliphs after the Holy Prophet. The hadith
does not specify that the Imams are to be from the children of
Al-Hussein rather than the children of Al-Hassan. The hadith also does
not indicate that the leadership would be by inheritance.

"The hadith does not indicate that the Prophet meant political
leadership. It actually speaks of the leadership in jurisprudence and
knowledge rather than administrating the affairs of the States.. There
is not any correlation between the two leaderships.

"The Holy Prophet used to grant leadership to men who were less
knowledgeable than some of the men whom they led only because the
appointed leaders had better administrative ability. The Holy Prophet
used to appoint some non-jurisprudent individuals for the leadership of
Medina during the times of his absence. If leadership requires high
knowledge in jurisprudence this would have to be extended to the
commandment of the armies. Yet we know that the Holy Prophet made Osamah
Ibn Zayd the commander of an army in which Abu Bakr and ‘Umar were
included though Osamah did not have the knowledge of the two men."[^16]

What Abu Zuhrah offers of arguments can be summarized in three things:

1. Hadith no. 1 does not speak specifically about the individual Imams
from the members of the House; nor does it indicate the sequel in their
leadership.

This is wrong because many of the channels of hadith no. 1 spoke
specifically of the Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib and declared him to be the
authority after the Messenger and that adherence to his teaching is a
security against straying. As he was chosen by the Holy Prophet he would
have the jurisdiction to select his own successor and his successor can
select another successor who would be the most qualified to lead the
nation and so on.

Furthermore the Holy Prophet announced the names of the members of the
House who lived with him. We have mentioned in the second chapter that
Saad Ibn Abu Waqass reported that the Holy Prophet on the day of
Mubahalah (contesting prayer) said: "God these (‘Ali Fatimah Al-Hassan
and Al-Hussein) are the members of my house."[^17] It is also reported
that Om Selemah said that the Messenger made a statement similar to
this.[^18]

The second argument by Abu Zuhrah against hadith no. 1 is that it does not indicate that the caliphate is by inheritance
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Shi’ites Do Not Relieve In The Inheritance Of The Caliphate

I agree with Abu Zuhrah that the hadith does not indicate the
inheritance of leadership. But the Shi’ite School does not subscribe to
the theory of inheritance of leadership. The evidence of this is that
the law of inheritance in Islam makes the child rather than the brother
the heir.

Yet the Shi’ites believe that the Imam after Al-Hassan was his brother
Al-Hussein rather than any of his sons. The Shi- ites say that the
Islamic leadership is in the members of the House of the Holy Prophet
not because of inheritance but because the Prophet selected ‘Ali and his
two sons for being the most qualified people for leadership. The fourth
Imam who was born after the Prophet was to be selected by his father
Al-Hussein on the basis of his qualifications rather than the basis of
being his child or his first child.

It seems that it was too difficult for Abu Zuhrah and many other
scholars of his School to think that the members of the House of the
Holy Prophet were more qualified for leadership than the rest of the
Muslims. Therefore they thought that the Shi’ites believe in their
leadership because of inheritance.

Abu Zuhrah's rejection of hadith no. 1 in spite of its numerous
reporters is probably due to this error. He could not believe that the
members of that righteous family were more qualified than others;
therefore he thought that the hadith meant inheritance of leadership.

He failed to pay attention to the reason which the Holy Prophet clearly
declared stating that the Almighty informed him that the members of his
House will not part with the Holy Qur'an until they join him at the
Basin (on the Day of Judgment)

Had Abu Zuhrah paid attention to a number of verses from the third
chapter of the Holy Qur'an he could have been able to understand the
distinctions and high qualifications of the members of the House of the
Holy Prophet. In that chapter we read the following verses:

***"Certainly God has chosen Adam and Noah the family of Abraham and the
family of Imran above all people. Offsprings one is from the other. And
God hears and knows all things." The Holy Qur'an chapter 3 verses:
33-34.***

In the same chapter we read the following:

***"There did Zakariya pray to his Lord saying:O my Lord grant unto me
from Thee a progeny that is pure; for Thou art He that hears prayer.
While he was standing in prayer in the chamber the angels called unto
him: God does give thee glad tidings of Yehya witnessing the truth of a
word from God and he will be (besides) noble chaste and a Prophet of the
goodly (company of the righteous)." The Holy Qur'an chapter 3 verses:
38-39.***

And so many other verses in this chapter and other chapters indicate
that the Almighty created from the progenies of Prophets and their
relatives individuals who were of the highest among people in knowledge
and obedience to God.

Therefore He chose them above others. This was a reward to those
Prophets for their efforts in leading people or it was in response to
the prayers of those prophets as the above verses indicate because they
contain the phrase "For Thou art the Hearer and the Knower of all things
" or "Thou art He that hears prayer."

Muhammad is the final of the prophets and most outstanding among them.
He is also most deserving of the Divine reward for his unique efforts in
leading mankind to the right road and he is the most deserving to have
his prayer answered.

The Holy Prophet repeatedly prayed to the Almighty to purify the members
of his House. Om Selemah wife of the Messenger reported that when the
following verse: "Certainly God wants only to remove all abominations
from you ye members of the House and to make you pure and spotless" was
revealed and ‘Ali Fatima Hassan and Hussein were with him he took the
surplus of his cloak and covered them with it. Then he stuck his hand
out and turned it towards the sky and said: "God these are the members
of my House and the closest to me. I ask Thee to remove all abomination
from them and to make them pure and spotless..."[^19]

He also prayed for the members of his House in his daily prayers and he
taught the Muslims to say when they pray for him: "God I ask Thee to
honor Muhammad and the members of his House as Thou have honored the
members of the House of Abraham. Certainly Thou art The Praised the
Glorious." [^20]

Al-Hakim recorded that Abdullah Ibn Jaafar Ibn Abu Talib reported that
his father said: "When the Messenger of God witnessed the mercy of God
coming down he said: 'Call for me call for me.' Safiyah said: 'Whom
should we call for you Messenger of God?' He said: 'Members of my House:
‘Ali Fatima Hassan and Hussein.'

They were brought to him. He then covered them with his garment then
raised his two hands and said: 'God these are the members of my House. I
ask Thee to honor Muhammad and the members of the House of Muhammad.'
God revealed the following verse: 'Certainly God wants to remove the
abomination from you members of the House and to purify you and make you
spotless." [^21] Al-Hakim said: "This is an authentic hadith."[^22]

### The Sunnis Are Closer Than The Shi’ites To The Opinion Of Leadership By Inheritance

What the aforementioned substantiates is that the followers of the House
of the Prophet do not believe in the leadership of its members because
of inheritance as Abu Zuhrah and other scholars from his school thought.
They rather believe in their leadership because the Prophet chose them.
He did that because of what they had of distinctions in righteousness
knowledge purity and wisdom and because they do not part with the Holy
Qur'an in deed or word.

I have mentioned in the sixteenth chapter that the Sunnite School
advocates though inadvertently the idea of caliphate by inheritance.
They reported many authentic hadiths which indicate that the caliphs are
only Qureshites aud that the caliphs are only twelve and that the
caliphate shall stay in Quraish as long as two persons live on this
earth.

When the Messenger made Qureshiteness a requirement in caliphate he did
that by a commandment from God. If this requirement were made only
because the Qureshites were related closely or remotely to the Messenger
(because the Messenger and all the Qureshites are descendants of one
great-grandfather: Fihr Ibn Malik) this would be an advocation of the
idea of caliphate by inheritance. Such an extremely extended inheritance
cannot be supported by the Islamic Law of inheritance which makes the
close relatives bar the remote ones.

Should Qureshiteness be made a requirement by God not because of
relation to the Holy Prophet but only because being from Quraish is a
distinction by itself this would be an invitation to a belief in a
tribal superiority and aristocracy alien to the teachings of the Faith
of Islam. The Faith of Islam invites us to believe in equality among the
Muslims regardless of family nationality race or regional relationship
and declares that the noblest in the eyes of God is the most righteous.

Since the two interpretations are not logical it would be necessary to
understand the hadiths as follows: The Almighty made the caliphate in
Quraish because He knew that there were or shall be among the Qureshites
twelve men superior in knowledge righteousness and other qualifications
for leadership.

He made these twelve men caliphs whether they come to power or people
prevent them from coming to power. The twelve men are caliphs not
because they are related to the Messenger closely; nor because they are
Qureshites though it happened that they were from Quraish and close
relatives to the Messenger.

The Holy Prophet himself was chosen by God not because he was from
Quraish or from the Hashimites though it happened that he was from
Quraish and a Hashimite. He was chosen because of his personal
qualifications and he was the Prophet even if people did not believe in
his prophethood.

If this is what was meant by the hadiths which made Qureshiteness a
requirement in the caliphate this would not be an advocation of
leadership by inheritance. This logical interpretation agrees only with
the Shi’ite School The Sunnite scholars do not agree with this
interpretation They are rather inclined to agree with the first or the
second interpretation.

Yet the first interpretation means caliphate by inheritance which the
Sunnites deny and attribute it to the Shi’ites though the Shi’ites are
clear of it. The second interpretation as you have already seen is
opposed to the Islamic principles.

Political And Jurisprudential Leadership
----------------------------------------

Abu Zuhrah raised a third argument against hadith no. 1. His argument
was that the hadith does not indicate that the Prophet meant political
leadership of his House.

He may have meant only their leadership in jurisprudence and religion.
This is invalid for the following reasons: The intention of the
Messenger which he stated in hadith no. 1 was to make the leadership of
the members of his House a security against straying.

The leadership in jurisprudence does not constitute a security against
straying when the power is in other hands. The leadership in
jurisprudence cannot usually communicate its instructions and
information to all Muslims.

Communication of this kind of instruction requires a positive atmosphere
which enables the Imam to announce to the nation his instructions as it
requires the power which directs the nation to follow his instructions
and believe in their soundness. As long as the power is in the hands of
other than the Imam that positive atmosphere and the facility of
directing the nation would be missing.

When the caliphs are other than the Imams whom the Messenger wanted the
nation to follow those caliphs would be inclined by their human nature
to keep the Imams in obscurity. They do not like to publicize their
instructions. They may attempt to publicize the opinions and the
verdicts of others from their own followers whom they do not consider
potential competitors for the authority.

They would try to publicize the opinions of individuals of this kind
though they are inferior to the true Imams in knowledge. Al-Abbasi
Al-Mansour asked Imam Malik to write a book about the "Sunnahs" of the
Prophet and he promised to publicize that book and make it the main
source in the hadiths among the Muslims. He did not ask the Imam Jaafar
Al-Sadiq to do that though Malik was a student of Al-Sadiq.[^23]

The majority of the Muslims took from Abdullah Ibn Masud Zayd Ibn Thabit
Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar and Ibn Abbas much more than they took from the Imam
‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib in spite of the great difference between ‘Ali and
these companions in knowledge.

Abu Zuhrah himself recorded in his book Al-Imam Al-Sadiq the following:
"It would be necessary to say that the jurisprudence of the Imam ‘Ali
his verdicts and his rules as the highest magistrate of the nation were
not reported in the books of the Sunnites in proportion with the times
of his caliphate and the time in which he was engaged in the study of
the Faith and issuing verdicts during the time of the Three Caliphs
before him.

"The life of Imam ‘Ali was dedicated entirely to jurisprudence and the
knowledge of religion. He was the closest to the Messenger from among
the companions. He accompanied the Messenger while he was a boy before
the Messenger was commissioned by God and he continued with him until
God summoned His Messenger to Himself.

Therefore it was expected that the books of the Sunnites contain much
more than it contained of ‘Ali's teaching.

"If we want to know the reason for which the instructions and the
reports of the Imam ‘Ali disappeared and remained unknown to most of the
Muslims we say that the Umayyad authority was behind the disappearance
of ‘Ali's jurisprudence and rules. It would be improbable that the
Umayyads would curse the Imam ‘Ali on the pulpits of the Muslims then
allow the scholars to report his knowledge his verdicts and his
instructions to the people especially in matters which deal with the
basis of the Islamic rule."[^24]

Any reader of the books of the hadiths of the Sunnites can see clearly
that what those books contained of the reports of Abu Hurairah and
others like him is incomparably more numerous than what is reported or
recorded for ‘Ali and the rest of the members of the House of the Holy
Prophet. Yet Abu Hurairah embraced Islam in the 6th year after the
Hijrah while ‘Ali was with the Messenger before the Messenger was
commissioned by God until the hour of his death.

In spite of all that and in spite of the fact that the Messenger said
that he is the city of knowledge and that ‘Ali is the gate of that city
and that whoever wants to enter the city should come to the gate we find
the majority of the Muslims did not come to the gate very often. They
took other sources of information about the Islamic teaching and left
the gate of the city of knowledge out.

Thus Abu Zuhrah acknowledged the rarity of what was recorded in the
books of the Sunnites from the knowledge of ‘Ali and that the reason for
that was political. As he acknowledged this he should have inferred from
hadith no. 1 that it indicates that the Messenger wanted his nation to
follow the members of his House not only academically in jurisprudence
but also in political rule.

The Holy Prophet declared to the nation that its adherence to the Holy
Qur'an and the members of his House is a security against straying. If
he limited the function of the members of his House to the academic
function and allows the nation to elect others for the caliphate he
would have destroyed the purpose for which he was speaking in hadith no.
1 namely: The security against straying.

When people elect a caliph from outside the members of the House they
would see in that caliph their religious and secular ruler whom they
should obey even if his opinion in religion were in disagreement with
the way of the members of the House of the Prophet. The elected caliph
himself would see that people are duty-bound to obey him.

He may think that the Holy Qur'an supports that:

***"O you who believe obey God and obey the Messenger and the people of
authority from among you..." The Holy Qur'an chapter 4 verse 59.***

The elected caliphs and the Muslims also may see that the duty of the
Imam from the members of the House of the Prophet is to obey that
caliph.

Thus the Messenger would have pushed people to confusion instead of
securing them against straying by telling them to follow the members of
his House aid allowing them to elect and obey a caliph whose words and
deeds do not agree with their words and deeds.

The Islamic history witnessed a good caliph following the opinion of
Marwan Ibn Al- Hakam the exiled of the Prophet and kaab Al- Ahbaar (an
Arab Jew who adopted Islam) and he did not follow opinions and advices
of the Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib.

The fact is that the interpretation which Abu Zuhrah offered disagrees
with the clear and logical meaning of hadith no. 1. The Messenger in
this hadith declared clearly that his purpose is the unity of the
leadership when he said that the Book of God and the members of his
House do not part with each other. He did not want the Muslims to follow
the members of his House because they were his relatives but because
they will not part with the Holy Qur'an.

The meaning of this is that the leadership of the Holy Qur'an and the
members of the House is one and that they do not disagree with each
other. One of them the members of the House explains the other (the Holy
Qur'an) and informs the Muslims about its actual meaning.

For this the adherence to both of them was the security against
straying. Had the members of the House been in disagreement with the
Holy Qur'an occasionally their obedience would not be a security against
straying. But the Almighty informed the Messenger that the Holy Qur'an
and the members of his House would never part with each other.

Thus the security of the nation against straying according to the
Messenger is in the unity of the leadership without dualism. Should the
Messenger allow the Muslims to elect a leadership which does not agree
with the House of the Prophet the unity of the leadership and the
security against straying would not exist because dualism would have
replaced the unity.

Before I end the refutation of Abu Zuhrah's arguments I would like to
discuss matters he mentioned of which are the following:

(1) The Holy Prophet chose to appoint for high positions some
individuals who were less knowledgeable than others in jurisprudence. He
appointed them because they had administrative capabilities.

(2) He appointed for the leadership of Medina during his absence some
individuals who were not known to be jurisprudent.

(3) Should the appointment by the Holy Prophet of some individuals for
high positions require a profound knowledge in jurisprudence it should
be extended to the military leadership. Yet we know that the Holy
Prophet appointed Osamah commander of the army that included Abu Bakr
and ‘Umar while Osamah did not have what they had of religious
knowledge.

What made Abu Zuhrah say all that is that he forgot that the purpose
which the Holy Prophet declared in hadith no. 1 is the security of the
Muslims against straying. Had Abu Zuhrah paid attention to this he would
have differentiated between a limited authority such as succeeding the
Prophet in ruling Medina during his absence or appointing a man to lead
an army and the leadership of the whole nation.

To give the command of an army to a man with a limited knowledge in
religion and to appoint a companion to rule Medina during the absence of
the Messenger would not damage the security of the nation against
straying as long as the Prophet is the highest authority in the nation
and the army. The Prophet can and would correct the errors of his
appointee and bring him back to the right road.

The leadership of the whole nation which the Prophet wanted to be a
substantial means of security against straying does not realize his
purpose if it is given to a man with a limited knowledge in
interpretation of the Holy Qur'an and the instructions of the Holy
Prophet. Should such a leader stray there would be no authority above
him to supervise him and bring him back to the right road because he is
the highest authority.

If he goes wrong in his opinion the whole nation goes wrong with him.
Should a religious leader advise him to retreat and go back to the right
road and he refuses to take his advice the religious leader regardless
of his extensive knowledge would have no authority over that caliph.

It happened during the caliphate of Uthman that ‘Ali and good companions
tried to bring him back to the right road and the caliph chose not to
listen to their advice.

They did not succeed and the nation fell into insane crises whose effect
has continued until today.

It would have been expected from Abu Zuhrah to be more prudent than he
was. The Messenger informed us that the Almighty informed him that the
members of his House would never part with the Holy Qur'an and that the
Holy Qur'an and they represent an indispensible means of security
against straying.

Bestowing such a high honor on them testifies that they were more gifted
than others in knowledge wisdom and understanding. If they were so they
would have high administrative capability; otherwise the Prophet would
not have recommended them.

It may be said that the outcome is the same and that it would not be any
different whether the Prophet had appointed members of his House to lead
the nation only in jurisprudence or appointed them to lead the nation in
administration and jurisprudence. For the Muslims did not allow them to
come to power and did not follow them as the Holy Prophet wanted.

Our answer to this is that the duty of the Messenger is to leave no
excuse for the nation. Had he made the members of his House leaders in
jurisprudence only and allowed the nation to elect others as religious
and secular leaders the nation would have a good excuse for not taking
its religious information from the House of the Prophet. The confusion
and bewilderment would have been caused by the Messenger's permission to
the nation to have dual leadership.

On the other hand if he declares to the nation the leadership of his
House the nation will be responsible for its own error. This would be
like the refusal of a community to believe in a Messenger sent by God
with clear evidence. God would have done what He is expected to do and
the community would have no excuse.

The indication of hadith no. 1 that the leadership of the House of the
Prophet in all religious and worldly affairs does not need much
explanation. What Abu Zuhrah offered of interpretation is an obvious
attempt to give the hadith other than its meaning and purpose.

What the Holy Prophet meant is that the obedience of the nation to the
Book of God and the House of the Prophet is commanded by God and that
the Revelation had informed the Prophet that the two important elements
will not part with each other. This means that the leadership of his
House is like his own leadership in being general extensive and clear of
any dualism because the members of the House of the Prophet like the
Prophet never part with the Book of God.

The Faith of Islam does not separate religion from the State. The
leadership of the Messenger was not only religious it was both religious
and secular. He was the Prophet and the head of the State and he had the
right to administer the affairs of the Muslims more than they had of
right to administer their own affairs.

The Holy Prophet declared that the nation should live under the
leadership of the Holy Qur'an and the members of his House. As the
nation has to obey the Qur'an in its religious and worldly affairs it
has to give equal obedience to the members of the House of Prophet.

This concludes the discussion of the Two Valuables.

Let us turn our attention to the second part of the Prophet's
declaration at Ghadir Khum the Hadith of the Wilayah (Authority).

[^1]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 5 p. 328.

[^2]: Al-Muttaqi recorded this in Kanz Al- Ummal part 5 p. 23 (hadith
no.356)

[^3]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 5 p. 329 (hadith no. 387b)

[^4]: Al-Tirmidhi his authentic Sunan part 5 p. 329 (hadith no. 387b)

[^5]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 109.

[^6]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 109.

[^7]: Muslim his Sahih part 15 p. 180. Imam Ahmad also reported it in
his Musnad part 4 p. 367.

[^8]: Imam Ahmad Al-Musnad part 5 p. 181.

[^9]: Al-Amini conveyed it in his book Al-Ghadir part 2 p. 17.

[^10]: Imam Ahmad Al-Musnad part 3 p. 17.

[^11]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 151.

[^12]: Al-Khateeb History of Baghdad part 12 p. 91 (conveyed by Al-Amini
Al-Ghadir part 2 p. 301)

[^13]: Sheikh Muhammad Abu Zuhrah Al-Imam Al-Sadiq pp. 199-200.

[^14]: Muslim his Sahih part 8 Book of Pilgrimage (Valedictory
Pilgrimage) p. 184.

[^15]: Al-Bukhari his Sahih part 5 p. 224.

[^16]: Sheikh Muhammad Abu Zuhrah Al-Imam Al-Sadiq pp. 199-200.

[^17]: Muslim his Sahih part 15 p. 176.

[^18]: Imam Ahmad Al-Musnad part 6 p. 292.

[^19]: Al-Hakim-Mustadrak part3 p. 128.

[^20]: Al-Bukhari his Sahih part 6 p. 101 and Muslim in his Sahih part4
p. 136.

[^21]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 128.

[^22]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 128.

[^23]: Abu Zuhrah Al-Imam Al-Sadiq p. 27.

[^24]: Abu Zuhrah Al-Imam Al-Sadiq p. 162


