1. The House of the Prophet Muhammad
====================================

All Muslims glorify the Members of the House of the Holy Prophet
Muhammad who are called Aal Muhammad or Ahlul Bayt Muhammad. This
attitude is in accord with the instructions of the Holy Prophet who
commanded Muslims to pray simultaneously for the members of his House
whenever they pray for him. By so commanding them he actually required
the Muslims to reserve a place for them next to his. The Holy Qur'an
made it mandatory to offer prayers for Muhammad and to greet him:

***"Certainly God and His Angels honor the Prophet (Muhammad) O
believers pray (God to honor) him and greet him repeatedly." The Holy
Qur'an Chapter 33 Verse 57.***

Many companions asked the Prophet to teach them how to comply with this
command. Many highly respected hadith recorders (including Al-Bukhari
and Muslim) reported in their "Sahihs" (authentics) that Kaab Ibn Ujrah
stated that the Prophet said:

"Say: God bestow honor on Muhammad and the members of the House of
Muhammad as Thou bestowed honor on the members of the House of Abraham
Thou Art praised and Glorious. God bless Muhammad and the members of the
House of Muhammad as Thou had blessed the members of the House of
Abraham. Certainly Thou Art Praised and Glorious."[^1]

When instructing his followers on a religious matter the Messenger of
God did not speak out of his human desire.

The Qur'an testifies that he only said what was revealed to him.:

***"Nor does he (Muhammad) say (aught about religion) of (his own)
desire. It is not but a revelation sent to him." The Holy Quran, Chapter
53, verse 4-5.***

Is the Honor Due to the relationship?
-------------------------------------

It may appear that inclusion of the members of the House of Muhammad in
prayers for him is due to their blood-relationship. If so it would not
be in accord with the spirit of the Islamic teachings. To bestow on them
such a unique honor because of their relationship to Muhammad is to
advocate a family supremacy and is in conflict with the following
principles:

1. All people in the eyes of God are equal for the Holy Qur'an declared:

***"Surely the noblest among you in the sight of God is the most
righteous of you."***
***The Holy Qur'an, Chapter 49 verse 13.***

2. God does not penalize or reward a servant of His for the sins or good
deeds of his parents or his close or distant relatives. From the Holy
Qur'an:

***"And beware a day on which no parent avails his child; nor will a
child avail his parent." The Qur'an Chapter 31 verse 33.***

3. God does not penalize nor reward a human being for what is beyond his
ability and without his choice.

Being related or unrelated to the Prophet is not a matter of personal
choice. None of us chose before our birth to be related or unrelated to
a particular family nationality or race.

Therefore it would be very difficult for Muslims to believe that they
should include Muhammad 's relatives in their prayers simply because
they are his relatives.

It Is Due to Their Merits Not Their Inheritance
-----------------------------------------------

To dispel this apparent conflict it is important to know that the word
"Aal Muhammad" which is repeatedly mentioned in the daily prayers does
not include all his relatives.

Only a very small number of them are included. Had they all been
included it would be a clannish or a tribal discrimination because many
of them did not walk in the path of Muhammad and to place them above
others is to advocate a clannish supremacy.

Kinship to the Prophet Muhammad does not mean acceptance by God; nor
does it secure for his relatives a place in Paradise or insure them
against Divine punishment. God according to Islamic teachings has
created Paradise for whoever obeys Him and the place of punishment for
whoever disobeys Him regardless of family affiliation nationality or
race. The Holy Qur'an even contains a chapter defaming Abu Lahab who was
an uncle of the Prophet Muhammad.

***"Perish the two hands of the Father of Flame and perished he. His
wealth and whatever he gained did not avail him.... " The Holy Qur'an
Sura Lahab Chapter 111.***

The truth is that the word Aal Muhammad means only the "chosen"
relatives of Muhammad. These chosen individuals are not chosen nor
honored because of their relationship to Muhammad but because of their
virtues. They lived the true Islamic life followed the instructions of
the Holy Qur'an and the Messenger and never parted with them in word or
deed.

When God informs us in His Book that the noblest among His human
creatures are the most righteous and His Messenger commands us to honor
the members of his house when we honor him we infer that they are the
most righteous after the Prophet.

Had they not been so they would not deserve such a unique honor and the
Prophet would not have instructed us to honor them whenever we honor his
name. To do otherwise would not be in accord with the Holy Qur'an. Thus
by commanding us to pray for them whenever we pray for him the Prophet
was actually informing us of their high merit being the most obedient to
God and His Messenger.

The Record Attests to their merit
---------------------------------

All Muslims agree that ‘Ali the Prophet's cousin whom the Prophet
"brothered" and his wife Fatimah (the Lady of Light) the dearest child
of the Messenger and their two children Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein are
from the chosen members of the House of Muhammad and that they are
included in our prayers for him. The high qualifications of the chosen
relatives of Muhammad are the main reason for the very unique honor
bestowed upon them.

Imam ‘Ali stood above all others after the Prophet. He was the strongest
supporter of the Messenger of God. He never hesitated to give his life
for the promotion of Islam.

The readers of history can easily know that Imam ‘Ali was the top
defender of Islam and the most adherent to its rules.

Imam ‘Ali's attitude towards personal power and prestige was unique.
Whenever he had to choose between adherence to his ideals and the
pleasures of the earthly life he unhesitatingly chose the former.
History testifies that he preferred to lose the leadership of the Muslim
World rather than to accept a condition in which he did not believe.

He was offered this leadership contingent on his pledge to follow the
Book of God the instructions of the Messenger and the traditions of the
first two Caliphs in the absence of the Quranic and the Messenger's
instructions. He replied:

"(I shall follow the Book of God and the instructions of His Messenger;
and in the absence of specific teachings of the two sources) I shall
endeavor to the best of my knowledge and ability."[^2]

His knowledge was amazing in its depth and extensiveness.

His sermons lectures and the words contained in Nahjul-Balaghah (Path of
Eloquence) testify to the authenticity of the reported statement of the
Messenger:

"I am the city of knowledge and ‘Ali is its gate; so whoever wants to
enter the city should come through the gate."[^3]

The record of the other three distinguished members of the House of
Muhammad Fatimah and her two children Al- Hassan and Al-Hussein shows
that they were the most sincere servants of Islam.

The authentic hadiths spoke of their distinctions and qualifications as
permanent allies of justice and truth. Zayd Ibn Arqam reported that the
Messenger of God said to ‘Ali Fatimah Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein:

"I am at peace with whomever you are at peace; and I am at war with
whomever you are at war."[^4]

Abu Huraira reported that the Messenger of God said:

"Whoever loves Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein loves me; and whoever hates them
hates me."[^5]

Hubshi Ibn Janadah said that he heard the Messenger saying:

"‘Ali is from me and I am from ‘Ali and no one represents me but
‘Ali."[^6]

The Messenger did not intend to distinguish ‘Ali simply because he was
related to him. Al-Abbas (his uncle) and the rest of the Hashimites
including Jaafar (the brother of ‘Ali) are all related to the Messenger.
All of them would have been qualifed to represent him. But he said "No
one represents me but ‘Ali.".

At one time Muawiya was criticizing ‘Ali in the presence of Saad Ibn Abu
Waqass. Saad said to him: "I heard the Messenger of God saying to ‘Ali:
'You are to me like Aaron to Moses. But there shall be no Prophet (of
God) after me.' "[^7]

Thus the Messenger gave ‘Ali a position next to his own for the position
of Aaron was next to that of Moses.

Al-Bukhari recorded in his Sahih that the Messenger said: "Fatimah is
the leader of the women of Paradise."[^8]

No one enters Paradise but through righteousness and whoever enters
Paradise is noble in the sight of God. If Fatimah is the leader of the
women of Paradise she must be the most righteous and the noblest woman
in God's view.

Al-Hakim recorded in his Mustadrak that Abu Dharr (a famous companion of
Muhammad whose truthfulness is known to the Muslims) said that the
Messenger said: "The example of the members of my House is like that of
Noah's ark. Whoever embarked on it was safe and whoever failed to embark
was drowned.... "[^9]

The Messenger of God commanded the Muslims to follow his chosen
relatives. Therefore the relatives of Muhammad are considered to be the
party of truth distinguished because of their merit and work as they
rank among the most righteous servants of God.

Why were they so meritorious?
-----------------------------

Why did the members of the House of Muhammad surpass other Arabs or
non-Arabs in righteousness?

### Precedents in History

To understand the reason we ought to remember that what took place in
the House of Muhammad was not unprecedented in the history of
Prophethood. There are many similar precedents. The Almighty God made
Aaron a partner to his brother Moses in his heavenly mission. He did not
bestow this honor on any other person from the Israelites. This was due
to the high qualification of Aaron and in response to the prayer of
Moses as mentioned in the Holy Qur'an:

***"He (Moses) said: My Lord Open my mind and loosen a knot from my
tongue; that they may understand my word. Appoint for me a minister from
my folk Aaron my brother. Confirm my strength by him and let him share
my task..." Holy Qur'an Chapter 20 verses 25-32.***

The Prophet Abraham prayed to the Lord to make some of his offsprings
imams of the people. God responded to his prayer and promised to make
imams from his good offsprings without allowing any of their wrong doers
reach that high rank. From the Holy Qur'an:

***"And We gave (Abraham) Isaac and Jacob and We made recipients of
Prophethood and revelation from among his progeny and We granted him his
reward in this life and he was in the Hereafter of the company of the
righteous." The Holy Qur'an Chapter 29 verse 27.***

God also has chosen along with the relatives of Abraham the relatives of
Imran and preferred them above others.

***"God chose Adam and Noah the family of Abraham and the family of
Imran above all people. Offsprings related to each other and God hears
and knows all things." The Qur'an Chapter 3 verses 33 and 34.***

Zakaria prayed to the Almighty to grant him a righteous child. God
answered his prayer and the angels gave him good tidings:

"There did Zakaria pray to his Lord saying: O my Lord grant unto me from
Thee a progeny that is pure; for Thou Art He that hears prayer."

***"While he was standing in prayer in chamber the angels called unto
him: God doth give thee glad tidings of Yahya (John) witnessing the
truth of a word from God and (besides) noble chaste and a Prophet of the
(goodly) company of the righteous." The Qur'an Chapter 3 verses 38 and
39.***

According to these verses the Prophethood which preceded that of
Muhammad took the same course. From among the offspring and kinsmen of
these Messengers there were chosen persons who reached the highest
degree of piety and therefore deserved to be commissioned by God.

### Why Did God Give Those Prophets Such Distinguished Children and Relatives?

The Almighty God created persons among the kinsmen and offspring of
these Messengers in response to their prayers or as a reward to them for
their endeavors in spreading the Message of God.

Like other prophets Muhammad was given unusual relatives and offspring
as a reward for his endeavor in the service of God and in response to
his prayers.

He commanded us to say: "God honor Muhammad and the members of his House
" and he prayed for the purity of these members on various occasions.

Al-Hakim reported that the Prophet covered ‘Ali Fatimah Al-Hassan and
Al-Hussein with a garment and prayed saying:

"God these are my family. I ask Thee to honor Mohommad and the family of
Muhammad." In response to his prayer the following revelation came: "God
wants only to keep abomination away from you and make you members of the
family of Muhammad spotless."[^10]

Thus it was not unusual to have in the kinsmen and offspring of Muhammad
distinguished men and women of the highest degree of righteousness. On
the contrary if such persons did not exist among the relatives of the
Prophet it would have been very unusual.

God honored Abraham Moses Zakaria and other Prophets by creating in
their progeny and relatives distinguished persons preferring them above
other people. Why should He not honor His final and most important
Prophet by creating in his offspring and relatives some people with
highest distinction?

The Prophet's Reward
--------------------

The Holy Qur'an makes it explicity clear that the love of relatives of
Muhammad is an Islamic duty. God commanded Muhammad to ask the Muslims
to reward him for his fulfillment of the heavenly mission by loving his
close kins.

***"That is (the bounty) whereof God gives glad tidings to His servants
who believe and do righteous deeds. Say: No reward do I ask of you for
this except the love of (my) near kins. And if any one earns good deeds
We shall give him an increase of good in respect thereof God is
Oft-Forgiving. Most ready to appreciate (service)." The Holy Qur'an
Chapter 42 verse 23.***

God is telling Muhammad to inform all Muslims that the only reward he
wants for fulfilling his Heavenly mission is that the Muslims love his
relatives.

This is only because those members are the most obedient to God and his
most beloved servants among the Muslims.

By commanding His Messenger to do so He actually commanded the Muslims
to glorify the chosen relatives of Muhammad place their confidence in
them and walk in their path.

In compliance with this heavenly command the Holy Prophet asked all his
followers to love them. He stated that he is at peace with whomever they
are at peace and that he is at war with whomever they are at war. He
considered them to be similar to the ark of Noah. Whoever embarked on it
was safe and whoever failed to be on it was drowned.

The House of Muhammad can be a means of unity to the Muslims. This unity
can be realized when Muslims take the attitude which God and His
Messenger wanted them to take toward these people. It would be erroneous
for the Muslims to separate Muhammad from the Members of his House while
he himself wanted to be united with them. This is clearly evident by his
instruction that his followers couple his name with his chosen relatives
whenever they pray for him whether within or outside their daily
prayers.

[^1]: Of these hadith-recorders are the following: A. Al-Bukhari, "Sahih
Al-Bukhari" (Authentic of Al-Bukhari) Part 6 p. 101 (in the Book of the
interpretation of the Holy Qur'an) B. Muslim Sahih Muslim Part 4 (in the
Prayer on the Prophet after the declaration of the Faith p. 136. C.
Muhammad Ibn Majah Sunan Ibn Majah, Vol. 1, hadith No.904. D.
Al-Tirmidhi, hadith No. 483, Part No. 1. Other hadiths are reported by
Abu-Sa-eed Abu Masud Talhah and Ibn Masud. All Acoord with the
above-mentioned hadith of Kaab Ibn Ujrah.

[^2]: Ibn-Athir, Al-Kamil (the complete history Part 3 p. 35.

[^3]: Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak Part 3 p.26.

[^4]: Ibn Majah, Sunan Ibn Majah hadith No.145.

[^5]: Ibid. hadith No.143.

[^6]: Ibid. hadith No.119.

[^7]: Ibn Majah hadith No.121.

[^8]: Al-Bukhari Sahih Al-Bukhari Part 5 (Chapter of distinction of
relatives of the Messenger) p. 25.

[^9]: Al-Hakim Sahih Al-Musradrak Part 3 p.151.

[^10]: Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 3 p. 148.


