Part 11: Awareness of the Philosophical and Scientific Theories
===============================================================

Having an awareness of the philosophical and scientific theories is a
valuable source for the mind which would permit the intellect to expand
and would lead to valuable interpretations of the Qur\`an. By this we
mean that although one must keep away from any form of explanation of
the Qur\`an according to one’s own personal opinion and must not seek to
interpret the Qur\`an in order to justify and validate one’s
preconceived beliefs and thoughts.

However, at the same time, possessing an awareness of the thoughts and
theories of the great philosophers of Islam in regards to monotheism
(Tawhid), the characteristics and actions of Allah (awj) and other
issues in relation to the beginning of creation and resurrection, in
addition to having knowledge and understanding of the physical
properties and makeup of the world and of mankind, will all lead one to
having a better insight. In the end, this awareness and knowledge would
actually allow a person to gain more benefit from the Qur\`an.

Today, humanity has made great progress in attaining knowledge of the
Earth, universe, and animal kingdom. Humankind has arrived at new
horizons of understanding in regards to the sciences of psychology and
sociology. Although it is correct to assert that not all of the
knowledge that has been gained up until today is completely correct,
however having a better understanding of the scientific breakthroughs
and discoveries can lead a person’s philosophical and scientific
awareness to become stronger. This acts as a source of blossoming of the
mind of the commentator of the Qur\`an, and grants him a special ability
through which he would be able to make use of the Qur\`an in the most
complete way.

We narrate the following example in this regard to better understand
this point.

The six verses mentioned in the beginning of Suratul Hadid (57) are the
most clear proofs and words which we have in our possession to better
understand this point. In this example of ours, we shall refer to and
quote only two verses along with their translation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الأَوَّلُ وَالآخِـرُ وَالظَّاهِرُ وَالْبَاطِـنُ وَهُـوَ بِكُلِّ
شَــيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ ٭ هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْـتَوَى عَلى الْعَرْشِ يَعْلَمُ مَا يَلِجُ
فِي الأَرْضِ وَمَا يَخْرُجُ مِنْهَا وَمَا يَنْزِلُ مِنَ السَّمَآءِ
وَمَا يَعْرُجُ فِـيهَا وَهُوَ مَعَكُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنْـتُمْ وَاللٌّهُ
بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is the First and the Last and the Apparent and the Hidden and He
has knowledge of all things. He it is Who created the Heavens and the
Earth in six days; then settled on the Throne. He knows that which goes
deep down into the Earth and that which comes forth out of it, and that
which comes down from the sky and that which goes up into it, and He is
with you wherever you are. And Allah sees what you do.”***[^1]

The philosophical and theological points mentioned in these two verses
of the Qur\`an (and indeed in the other four verses which follow) are so
great that Imam ’Ali b. Husayn as-Sajjad (‘a) has stated the following
in regards to these verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُزِلَتْ لِلْمُتَعَمِّقِينَ فِي آخِرِ الزَّمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“(These verses and indeed this chapter of the Qur\`an) were revealed
for those people who would come at the end of time who would go forth in
deep thinking and pondering*.”

There is not a single person who could objectively state that with mere
knowledge of the Arabic language, he would be able to elucidate upon
these verses of the Qur\`an. When we (for example) go forth to translate
these verses into Farsi, we would still remain in a state of ambiguity
and uncertainty in regards to the actual purport of these verses.

However, the knowledge which we have gained through what the researchers
of Islam have stated in regards to the encompassing nature of an entity
and the science of the beginning of creation, act as a tool which
permits the blossoming of the mind, which in turn leads us to having a
better understanding of the substance of these verses of the Qur\`an.

Is it possible for a person who has never studied anything and never
seen a teacher to reach to the depths of the sentence which reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ مَعَكُمْ أَيْـنَمَا كُنْـتُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He is with you wherever you may be.”***

Can anyone who does not possess deeply grounded knowledge in the
teachings of the Divine understand the reality of the part of the verse
that reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الأَوَّلُ وَالآخِرُ وَالظَّاهِرُ وَالبَّاطِـنُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He (Allah) is the First and the Last, the Apparent and the
Hidden…”***

**We must repeat this point that:** Our purpose in stating this issue is
not that we go forth and interpret the Qur\`an through the use of Greek
or Islamic philosophy or through employing the new sciences and that we
compare the Qur\`an with these fallible theories. If this was the case,
then surely this would be nothing other than commentary of the Qur\`an
through our own opinion which is, as we know and as was previously
mentioned, prohibited both through employing the logical understanding
and the Islamic legislations!

Rather, our aim here is that this form of awareness and knowledge (of
other sciences and theories) would actually give our intellect the power
and strength to better understand the verses of the Qur\`an with a much
more careful precision and in which we would be in a better position to
appreciate the aims and goals intended by this Heavenly Book.

Today, the discussions of the psychologists and sociologists in regards
to mankind and the studies of the scholars of the natural sciences in
regards to the Earth and Universe have opened up new horizons in
understanding the Qur\`an and have given people in this day and age, the
power to look at the Qur\`an in a new light.

At this point, the greatness contained in the words of the eighth Imam,
’Ali b. Musa al-Rida (‘a) are made manifest. Once, a person asked the
Imam (‘a) the following question:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا بَالُ الْقُرَآنِ لاَ يَزْدَادُ عِنْدَ النَّشْرِ وَالدَّرْسِ إِلاَّ
غَضَاضَةً؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Why does the publication and study of the Qur’an, increase its
freshness and newness?”

The Imam (‘a) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لأَنَّ اللٌّهَ تَبَارَكَ وَ تَعَالَـى لَمْ يَجْعَلْهُ لِزَمَانٍ دُوْنَ
زَمَانٍ، وَ لاَ لِنَاسٍ دُوْنَ نَاسٍ، فَهُوَ فِي كُلِّ زَمَانٍ
جَدِيدٌ، وَ عِنْدَ كُلِّ قَوْمٍ غَضٌّ إِلـى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“This is because Allah, the Blessed and the High, did not make it (the
Qur\`an) for a particular time period nor for a specific group of
people. Therefore it is new for every* *time and fresh for every nation
until the Day of Resurrection.”*[^2]

Perhaps it is due to this very reason that Ibne Abbas has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلقُرْآنُ يُفَسِّرُهُ الزَّمَانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Time interprets the Qur’an.”

The meaning of time is the different thoughts and sciences that appear
in the human society, which bestow a new vision to the exegete of the
Qur’an, as a result of which he derives such information from the Qur’an
that the minds of his predecessors never contained.

[^1]: Suratul Hadid (57), Verses 3 & 4

[^2]: Tafsirul Burhan, vol. 1, pg. 28


