Closure
=======

At this point, we bring our discussion to a close and end our discourse
by quoting the words of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali b. Abi Talib
(‘a). In one particular event, the Commander of the Faithful Ali b. Abi
Talib (‘a) sent Ibne Abbas towards the Khawarij (a group of individuals
who had in fact, left the faith of Islam due to their deviant beliefs)
to debate with them, however offered him the following advice:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُخَاصِمْهُمْ بِالْقُرْآنِ فَإِنَّ الْقُرْآنَ حَمَّالٌ ذُو وُجُوهٍ
تَقُولُ وَ يَقُولُونَ... وَ لٌكِنْ حَاجِجْهُمْ بِالسُّـنَّةِ
فَإِنَّهُمْ لَنْ يَجِدُوا عَنْهَا مَحِيصاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“(O’ Ibne Abbas!) In your debates and discussions with them (the
Khawarij), never resort to replying to them with the Qur\`an, since
surely the Qur\`an contains verses which have various probabilities and
possibilities to them (in their meaning and understanding). You shall
speak to them (with the Qur\`an), and they shall reply to you (with the
Qur\`an) and thus, your discussion with them will be prolonged. Rather,
debate them using the sunnah since surely in that there is the
straightforward and unequivocal reply and they will find no way to
misrepresent the truth.”[^1]

This very valuable sentence clearly tells us that there are some verses
of the Qur\`an which have various possibilities in their meaning and it
is not possible to specify one meaning to a verse without first going
through the introductory steps (of understanding the verse). By merely
possessing knowledge of the rules of the Arabic language, the section of
ambiguities will never be removed. Thus, the only way the ambiguities
are removed is through the fourteen ways mentioned in this work.

This hadith also relates to us the fact that all of the verses of the
Qur\`an are not straightforward proofs (which can be picked up and used
without discretion) and thus in determining the true meaning where there
is multiple possibilities of a particular verse, we must refer to other
ways and means.

Ja’far Subhani

Writing completed on the

27th of Muharram al-Haram, 1404 ah

[ 2nd November, 1983 ce ]

[^1]: Nahjul Balagha, Letter 77


