Part 1: A Correct Approach to the Exegesis of the Qur’an
========================================================

The Twentieth Century of the common era, corresponding to the fourteenth
century of the Islamic calendar, started off with an awakening of the
Eastern world, especially the Muslims. In this century, the magical
spell of colonialism was, to an extent, broken. Countries that had been
under colonization emerged as independent or at least partially
independent countries. The Muslims and their intellectual leaders began
to contemplate upon a series of fundamental issues, and the reasons for
the subjection and backwardness of their societies was studied and
thereby, they sought to find reasons for their abject state.

Amongst the issues that drew their greater attention was the propagation
of the teachings, truths, and sciences of the Qur\`an, since in the
previous centuries, it was only the scholars who were benefiting from
the truths of this Heavenly Book while the rest of the people were
limited to the mere recitation of the scripture.

The lay people expended all of their energy in the correct recitation of
the Qur\`an and in learning the rules of proper pronunciation, while the
books of exegesis of the Qur\`an written during those centuries were
only of benefit to the scholars.

Very rarely could it be seen that a scholar would sit down and write a
commentary of the Qur\`an which would be for the guidance of the common
people in understanding the meaning of the Qur\`an and very rarely could
it be seen that they would hold classes in which the Qur\`an would be
expounded upon.

It can be said that pondering and thinking upon the verses of the
Qur\`an was something limited to the scholars, while the rest of the
people were only to benefit from the recitation of the Qur\`an!

In addition to this frame of thought being very detrimental which is
something that the scholars found out later, this belief went directly
against the clear verses of the Qur\`an as the Qur\`an has invited all
of humanity to think and ponder deeply on its verses and to take it as
their radiant lamp (giving off Divine Celestial light) and as the best
guide and leader of the Allah-conscious (those with Taqwa).

The Qur\`an introduces itself as a “Reminder” (تَذْكِرَةٌ) and a way
through which we can be informed (of previous nations, scriptures and
events that have transpired). In addition, we see that those who refrain
from hearing the Qur\`an and pondering upon the meaning of its verses
have been severely reprimanded, as the Noble Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا لَـــهُمْ عَنِ التَّذْكِرَةِ مُعْرِضِـينَ ٭ كَـأَنَّهُمْ حُمُرٌ
مُّسْـتَـنْفِرَةٌ ٭ فَرَّتْ مِنْ قَسْوَرَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What is the matter with them that they evade the Reminder as if they
were terrified donkeys fleeing from a lion?”***[^1]

The verses of the Qur\`an which call upon those with consciousness of
Allah (Taqwa), scholars, thinkers and intellectuals to listen and to
contemplate upon the concepts presented in this Book are in such a great
number that we shall refrain from quoting them or translating them or
even giving their chapter and verse numbers (in this short treatise).
Rather, we shall only present one such verse, suffice ourselves with it,
and then go on to another discussion:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرَآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُّدَّكِرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have indeed made the Qur\`an easy to understand for
remembrance, then is there any that will receive admonition?”***[^2]

This verse and other such verses of the Qur\`an tell us that
understanding and making use of the Qur\`an is not limited to a select
or specific group of people!

**In Summary:** Sidelining the masses of people (from the Qur\`an) and
preventing them from benefiting from the verses of the Qur\`an which was
done in the previous centuries, is something that goes directly against
the words of this Heavenly Book!

Due to the aforesaid, one of the greatest changes seen at the beginning
of the fourteenth Islamic century is the opening up of the gatherings of
the commentary of the Qur\`an to everyone with the masses of people
becoming acquainted with this Heavenly Book. In this regards,
commentaries aimed at enlightening the general public have been written
in the various Islamic countries (Egypt, Syria, Iraq, Pakistan and Iran)
and gatherings are held – all with the purpose of acquainting the people
with the Qur\`an.

At this point, it is necessary for us to exhibit the correct way and
method of pursuing a commentary of the Qur\`an so that those who have an
ardent desire to understand the meanings and teachings of the Qur\`an
may be able to make the best use of this Book.

The commentary of the Qur\`an, in the true meaning and way in which the
commentator struggles to understand the meanings of the verses of the
Qur\`an – and not merely in which they simply follow those who have come
before them in explaining the verses of the Qur\`an, must be carried out
through employing a series of rules, realizing various conditions, and
following certain issues which will be alluded to in the following
pages.

[^1]: Suratul Muddathir (74), Verses 49 to 51

[^2]: Suratul Qamar (54), Verse 17


