Part 3: An Awareness of the Meaning of the Words in the Qur`an
==============================================================

Knowledge of the meaning of the individual words of the Qur\`an is one
of the fundamental prerequisites for the commentary of the Qur\`an,
since understanding compounded word is only possible after comprehending
its original components.

At this point, it is imperative to note that we must never rely upon the
common meaning that we perceive of a word, which is in our minds, and
explain the verse according to that interpretation. How often have we
seen that with the passing of time, the meaning of a word completely
changes and the common definition (of a particular word) which was well
known during the time of the revelation may later undergo a change.

Therefore, we must go forth and study the root meaning of the word and
seek to acquire its original denotation, and only then can we proceed to
explain a verse of the Qur\`an.

For example the words “عصـــى” and “غــــــوى”, in the common
understanding of today means ‘he sinned’ and ‘he deviated’, whereas the
original meaning of these two words (during the time of revelation of
the Qur\`an) was different from the meanings that we commonly perceive
today.

We observe a group of people who prove the fallibility of the prophets
by the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَصَــــى آدَمُ رَبَّـهُ فَغَوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Thus did Adam distance himself from his Lord, and perform an action
which had no benefit to it.”***[^1]

They assume that the words “عصـــى” and “غــــــوى” mean the same today
as they did during the time of the revelation. However if the original
meaning of these two words was searched out, people would definitely see
that they have different (original) meanings than what is in the minds
of the people today, which have been derived from the original meaning
of these two words. However, the original meaning of these two words was
never associated with the technical meaning of sinning!

The best book available which is able to guide us in finding the
original meaning of the words contained in the Qur\`an is the work
*al-Maqayis*, written by Ahmad b. Faris b. Zakariyya (d. 395 ah). This
work has been printed in six volumes in Egypt and the author’s entire
endeavor in compiling this work was to bring forth the original meaning
of the words of the Qur\`an and to make them available to us. Then he
shows to us how the meanings of the words have changed with the passing
of time and have appeared in the form of an independent meaning (with a
loose affiliation to the original meaning), in addition to possessing
its own original meaning.

Today, in the various Arabic dictionaries, we see that there are some
words which have ten meanings to them and a person may actually think
that a particular word has actually been formed to mean all ten things
and actually has ten meanings to it! However, when a person refers to
the work *al-Maqayis*, it would then be made clear to him that the word
he is studying does not have more than one meaning associated with it
and all other meanings are simply different facets of the original
meaning, which, due to the passage f time, have been attributed to that
word and taken as independent meanings.

In addition to the book *al-Maqayis*, the true commentator of the
Qur\`an must also refer to books such as, *al-Mufradat fi Gharib
al-Qur\`an*, written by Abul Qasim Husayn b. Muhammad, popularly known
as Raghib al-Isfahani (d. 502 ah) and the work, *an-Nihayah fi Gharib
al-Hadith wal Athar*, written by Majd ad-Din Abul Saf’dat Mubarak b.
Muhammad Jazri, better known as Ibne Athir (d. 606 ah) if he wants to be
able to differentiate the various meanings of the words in the Qur\`an.

This last book mentioned has been printed in Egypt in six volumes and
even though this work looks at the words contained in the ahadith,
however we are able to use this work in the commentary of the Qur\`an as
well.

In addition, the work *Majma’ al-Bahrain*, written by Turayhi al-Najafi
(d. 1086 ah) is also a very beneficial work on the commentary of the
words (contained in the Qur\`an).

[^1]: Surat Taha (20), Verse 121


