Part 6: Examining the Authentic Ahadith
=======================================

Some of the verses of the Qur\`an pertain to Islamic law and
jurisprudence. They talk about the acts and deeds of those obligated to
observe the Islamic laws and explain their rulings.

The number of such verses in the Qur\`an are not few and some scholars
enumerate such verses as being around five hundred! Although the actual
number of such verses is fewer than this, however benefiting from them,
without referring to the relevant authentic Islamic traditions is
incorrect.

This is because a majority of these are either general guidelines whose
conditions and restrictions have been mentioned in the traditions of the
Noble Prophet (‘s) and his Infallible Successors (‘a) or are universal
laws whose exceptions were later explained by the sunnah of the Noble
Prophet (‘s). It goes without saying that establishing a law by the
absoluteness of the absolute form or the universality of the universal
without referring to the limitations and exceptions is incorrect.

In order for this issue to be clear in the minds of the readers, we
present the following examples.

1. There are issues in the Noble Qur\`an, for which there can be found
no explanation save in the Islamic ahadith and the conduct of the early
Muslims. For example, the Qur\`an has made salat, sawm, zakat, khums,
and hajj obligatory, while it has given no details about them. Thus, we
have no choice but to seek the details of these general acts from the
Islamic ahadith and the conduct of the early Muslims. Hence without
referring to these sources, any other kind of commentary and explanation
about them would be equal to aspiring for the impossible. In explaining
such verses, the method adopted by all the Muslims of the world from the
early days of Islam until today has been the same [i.e. referring to the
relevant authentic ahadith and the way of life of the Muslims].

2. In the Noble Qur\`an there are general and absolute laws whose
exceptions and limitations appear only in the sunnah of the Prophet (‘s)
and the traditions of the Infallible Imams (‘a).

This custom of not incorporating notes alongside laws is not restricted
to the Qur\`an. Rather, even legislative bodies of the world follow the
same method: over a period of time in implementing the laws of a
country, points of enlightenment and exceptions are incorporated into
the laws. The difference however between the Qur\`an and man made laws
is that whereas the reason in separating the points of enlightenment
from the original law in the case of the latter is the limitation of
human awareness which requires annotations, exceptions and additions
over time. In the Divine legal system, such limitation does not arise,
and all the details of a law - whether those which are to be outdated or
added in the future - are clear for a Law Maker like Allah (awj).
Nevertheless sometimes social interests necessitate that the specifics
of the laws be expounded gradually, and not all at one place.

For example, the Qur\`an has prohibited the taking of interest and has
stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.وَ حَرَّمَ الرِّبٌوا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He (Allah) has prohibited interest.”***[^1]

However, in the ahadith, we observe that in some circumstances, interest
is permissible. For example: interest between a father and son or a
husband and wife, and the benefits of such exceptions are completely
clear, for in these examples, due to the uniformity of the kitty and the
close relationship of both parties, interest does not bear an oppressive
color and has thus been designated as lawful.

According to the verse of the Qur\`an which reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ
فَانْـتَهُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…whatever the Prophet gives to you, take it; and whatever he forbids
you from, stay away from it…”***[^2]

we Muslims must adopt all the commandments which have come from the
Messenger of Allah (‘s) and distance ourselves from all the things which
he has forbidden us from doing.

Thus, if a commentator of the Qur\`an wants to explain such verses of
the Qur\`an – whose number is not small – and was to rely solely on the
verses of the Qur\`an, and was to abstain from referring to the ahadith,
then he would have acted against the verse of the Qur\`an quoted above
and in essence, would have neglected this verse of the Qur\`an!

The need to explain and elucidate some of the verses of the Qur\`an
which deal with the practical laws of Islam (whether the general import
of their meanings such as salat, zakat, etc. or exceptions and
limitations, i.e. the points of enlightenment and exceptions in law) by
way of the sunnah and ahadith, led the Fuqaha (Jurisprudents) to expound
such verses separately, and write books that specifically concern such
kind of verses. The best works and exegeses of this nature on the *ayat
al-ahkam* are of al-Jassas, Fadil al-Miqdad, Muhaqqiq Ardibili and
al-Jazairi.

In order for the esteemed reader to develop a greater understanding of
this kind of exegesis, we present two other examples:

3. The Qur\`an unconditionally permits any form of transaction and
respects all forms of contracts, promises and pacts and considers it
mandatory to act according to them. However, the sunnah of the Prophet
(‘s) and the ahadith – which are respected by all Muslims – proclaim
some kinds of transactions as incorrect. For example, the buying and
selling of instruments of gambling and intoxicant liquids, sales in
transactions of munabadhah[^3] and the like, of which, all their details
have been mentioned in the ahadith.

Therefore, expounding the verse of the Qur\`an which reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَحَلَّ اللٌّهُ الْبَــيْعَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And Allah has made business transactions permissible...”***[^4]

Without referring to these traditions would be incorrect and baseless.

Likewise is the case with the verse that reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.أَوْفُوا بِالْعُقُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Be truthful to all of your promises.”***[^5]

Without referring to the ahadith which proclaim some conditions and
pacts as futile and invalid, it would be incorrect to explain the verse.

For example the phrase of the ahadith which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ شَرْطاً أَحَلَّ حَرَاماً وَحَرَّمَ حَلاَلاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“(Respect all conditions) except a condition which makes a forbidden
act lawful and a lawful act impermissible.”*

No longer allows us to adhere to the absolute meaning of the verse.

Testimonies of the Qur\`an
--------------------------

The issue which has just been mentioned is a tangible reality which
every exegete of the Qur\`an is able to appreciate from up close. In
addition, it satisfies every realistic person as well. Besides, the
Qur\`an clearly bears witness that it requires the exposition of the
Noble Prophet (‘s), who apart from reading it to the people, is also
obliged to expound its meanings.

At this point, we bring forth some examples from the Qur\`an, but will
not go into detail in explaining them:

1. The first example is seen in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْـزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الذِّكْرَ لِتُبَيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ مَا نُزِّلَ
إِلَيْهِمْ وَلَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have sent down to you (Muhammad) The Reminder so that you may
explain to mankind that which has been sent to them so that perhaps they
may ponder and think upon it.”***[^6]

This verse can only imply what we are trying to establish when we
understand that the Prophet’s (‘s) duty has been expounded by the words
“لِتُبَيِّنَ” (so that you may expound) which is different from the
phrase “لِتَقْرَأَ” (so that you may recite).

In other words the Prophet (‘s) was commissioned to undertake two
responsibilities:

a. Recitation of the verses of the Qur\`an;

b. Explaining the verses of the Qur\`an and elucidating its meanings. It
should be known that this verse and its likes do not pertain to all the
verses of the Qur\`an, but verses whose meaning and details are
impossible to know without an exposition from the Noble Prophet (‘s) and
his successors. Examples of these are the ambiguous verses of Islamic
law or verses that require enlightenment and exceptions.

2. The second example is seen in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُـــحَرِّكْ بِهِ لِسَانَـكَ لِتَعْجَلَ بِهِ ٭ إِنَّ عَلَيْنَا
جَمْعَهُ وَقُرْأَنَهُ ٭ فَإِذَا قَرَأْنَاهُ فَاتَّبِعْ قُرْأَنَهُ ٭
ثُمَّ إِنَّ عَلَيْنَا بَيَانَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not move your tongue (Muhammad) to make haste with it (the
recitation of the Qur\`an). Surely upon Us lies the responsibility of
collecting it and the reciting of it (the Qur\`an). Therefore, when We
have recited it, follow its recitation. Again on Us (devolves) the
explaining of it (the Qur\`an).”***[^7]

In this verse of the Qur\`an, we see that Allah (awj) has taken three
responsibilities upon Himself:

a. Recitation of the Qur\`an;

b. Collection of the verses of the Qur\`an;

c. Explanation of the meaning of the verses of the Qur\`an. It goes
without saying that expounding the meaning of the Qur\`an to the Prophet
(‘s) is only possible through Divine Revelation (Wahi) whereas the
people are never directly addressed by Divine Revelation. The Divine
Revelation on the Prophet (‘s) is either depicted in the Qur\`an or the
sunnah of the Noble Prophet (‘s).

Therefore, in explaining the meanings of the verses of the Qur\`an, one
must refer to both of these sources (the Qur\`an and the ahadith of the
Prophet (‘s) and his successors (‘a)) and we must never suffice with
just one of them.

**In other words:** In this verse, Allah (awj) prohibits the Prophet
(‘s) from hasty recitation; thereafter He takes the responsibility from
the Prophet (‘s) for the acts of collecting and reciting the verses and
orders the Prophet (‘s) to follow the Angel in recitation. Finally He
(also) takes the responsibility of expounding and elucidating the
contents, as the following phrase of the verse clearly reveals:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ عَلَيْنَا بَيَانَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Again on Us (devolves) the explaining of it (the Qur\`an).”

Here, what is the actual meaning of the exposition that Allah (awj)
takes responsibility of? We should not conjecture that it refers to the
exposition of defining the words of the verses, for this has already
been mentioned previously in the phrase:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ عَلَيْنَا جَمْعَهُ وَقُرْأَنَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely upon Us is the responsibility of collecting it and the reciting
of it (the Qur\`an).”

Hence, there is no need for repetition of the same. Certainly, it refers
to the exposition of those verses that require exposition from Allah
(awj), and His Messenger (‘s) and his true successors, after having
received the same through Revelation (Wahi) which they then hand over to
the nation.

It should be known however that the aim is not that every verse of the
Noble Qur\`an needs exposition so that someone should say that the
following verse too needs exposition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللٌّهَ عَلَــى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely Allah has power over all things.”

Rather, the purpose is that in order to be generally acquainted with the
meaning of the Qur\`an, we need an exposition of the Revelation. However
at the moment, our discussion does not concern the quantitative
dimension of such necessity.

Obviously, just as we had mentioned in regards to referring to the
occasion of the revelation of the verses, one must not undertake to
explain the Qur\`an with any report or hadith. Rather, each tradition
must be carefully reviewed from the point of view of its chain of
narrators and contents, and (only) after ascertaining that it contains
all the necessary conditions of reliability, can one seek assistance
from it.

[^1]: Suratul Baqarah (2), Verse 275

[^2]: Suratul Hashr (59), Verse 7

[^3]: The following is an example of a munabadhah transaction: The buyer
agrees with the seller: (in nabadhtahu ilayya, faqad ishtaraytuhu bikdha
(If you throw the commodity to me, it means that I have already bought
it for such and such amount.) (al-’Allamah al-Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam,
v.2, p. 256). We must realize that according to some experts in Islamic
law, not all kinds of transactions which taken place in this form are
invalid. There are some specific extensions, which come under the valid
transactions. (Ed.)

[^4]: Suratul Baqarah (2), Verse 275

[^5]: Suratul Ma\`idah (5), Verse 1

[^6]: Suratul Nahl (16), Verse 44

[^7]: Suratul Qiyamat (75), Verses 16 to 19


