At Ohod
=======

**( 88 )**

##### 9.

The Qureshites came out from the Battle of Badr with an astonishing
result which tney did not expect. They were confident of their
capability to annihilate the Muslims easily. For the Qureshites were
more numerous and with a bigger reserve and more logistics. Yet they
suddenly found themselves losing seventy of their warriors and leaders
along with seventy captives in a one-day battle. And above all the
resounding defeat which they received was at the hand of a group whom
they used to belittle.

The Qureshites were unwilling to admit a final defeat.

They lost a battle but they believed that they would never lose the war.
All they needed was to mobilize forces to which the Muslims would not be
able to stand. The burning hatred in the hearts of Qureshites and their
desire to wash away the shame of the defeat at Badr and their eagerness
to avenge their lost leaders added to their physical superiority a
tremendous psychological strength.

The Qureshites mobilized for the battle of avenge three thousand
fighters compared to nine hundred and fifty fighters at the Battle of
Badr. This army was financed and its logistics were secured through the
gross income of the commercial caravan which was allotted to the battle
of avenge. Thus the community of Quraish one year after the Battle of
Badr marched towards Medina to annihilate the Muslims their religion and
their Prophet. The Meccan army arrived at the area of Ohod which is five
miles away from Medina. There the expected battle took place.

The Holy Prophet went on deploying his forces placing them in strategic
positions. He placed fifty marksmen at  

**( 89 )**

the slope of the Mount of Ohod directing them to protect the back of the
Muslims against the pagan cavalry (which was led by Khalid Ibn
Al-Waleed). He commanded them not to leave their position whether the
Muslims defeated the pagans or the pagans defeated the Muslims.

### The Elements of the Islamic Defense

In this second battle of destiny for the Muslims the Islamic defense
consisted of the same three important elements which played their roles
at the Battle of Badr:

1. The ideal leadership of the Messenger and his firmness.

2. The members of the House of the Holy Prophet and their heroism.

3. An Islamic army consisting of seven hundred companions the hearts of
many of them were filled with faith and readiness for sacrifice.

The start of the Battle of Ohod followed the method of the beginning of
the Battle of Badr. Talhah Ibn Abu Talhah (from Banu Abdul-Dar clan) the
bearer of the banner of the pagans challenged the Muslims saying:

"Are there any duelers?" The respondent to his call was the same
respondent of the Battle of Badr. Ali came to him and when they faced
each other between the two hosts Ali swiftly dealt him a blow by his
sword through which his head was split. The Holy Prophet was pleased.

He exclaimed: "Allahu Akbar" (God Is Great) and so did the Muslims for
the biggest hero of the pagan army had died.

Abu Saad Ibn Abu Talhah (brother of Talhah) carried the banner and
challenged the Muslims saying: "Companions of Mohammad you allege that
your dead go to Paradise and our dead go to Hell. By 'Al-Lat ' you lie.
If you were so confident some of you could have faced me. Let one of you
come to fight me." (Dr. M. Haykal Life of Mohammad p. 289)

Ali came to him and Abu Saad was not luckier than his brother Talhah.
The men of Abdul-Dar continued replacing the bearers of their banner
with their men and the  

**( 90 )**

Muslims continued annihilating them. Ali destroyed Artat Ibn Sharhabeel
Shureih Ibn Qaridh and their servant Sawab .

Historians reported that Al-Hamzah killed Othman Ibn Abu Talhah. Assim
Ibn Thabit shot by his arrows Musafi and Al-Harith two sons of Talhah
Al-Zubeir killed their brother Kilab and Talhah Ibn Obeidullah killed
their other brother Al-Jallas .

### Ali and the Banner Bearers

However Ibn Al-Atheer reported that Ali alone destroyed all the standard
bearers at the Battle of Ohod and said that Abu Rafi reported that. ( 1
) And so did Al-Tabari.

The death of the bearers of the banner heightened the morale of the
Muslims and shook the hearts of the pagans.

Following the death of the banner bearers the Muslims undertook a
general offensive led by Ali Al-Hamzah Abu Dujanh and others. The
Islamic offensive terrified the pagan army but the Muslims lost during
this operation a giant hero Al-Hamzah Lion of God and uncle of the
Messenger of God. Wahshi an Abbysinian transfixed him with his dart
while he was fighting. However the pagans were forced to flee and leave
their camps. The Muslims entered the pagan camps and went on collecting
what they found of equipment and material without meeting any resistance
from the pagans.

### Defeat After Victory

This scene watered the mouths of the fifty marksmen whom the Prophet
placed at the slope of the Mount of  
 Ohod to protect the back of the Muslims against the pagan  
 cavalry. The majority of these marksmen left their place  
 and joined the collectors of the spoils. They did not heed  
 the word of their leader Abdullah Ibn Jubeir who reminded them of the
instructions of the Messenger which made it  
 mandatory for them not to leave their place. Not more than  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Ibn Al-Atheer. Al-Kamil. Part 3 p. 107.

**( 91 )**

ten of them heeded his words. Noticing the small number of the marksmen
Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed and his horsemen killed them then started a general
offensive .

The fleeing pagans beheld their horsemen fighting and attacking. They
came back to the battle while the Muslims were preoccupied collecting
the spoils.

The Muslims were astonished and confused. They started to fight but they
did not know whom they were fighting .

Many Muslims were killed by the Muslims themselves then they fled
turning their backs and refusing to look behind while the Messenger was
calling upon them to come back to the battle. The Holy Qur'an informs us
of the situation of the Muslims in this terrifying hour:

"God certainly made good His promise unto you when you routed them by
His leave until the moment when your courage failed you and ye disobeyed
after He had showed that for which ye long. Among you are some that
hanker after this world and some that desire the Hereafter. Then did he
divert you from your foes in order to test you. But He forgave you: For
God is full of grace to those who believe. Behold ye were climbing up
(the high ground) without casting a side glance at anyone and the
Apostle was calling you back. There did God give you one distress after
another by way of requital to teach you not to grieve for what ye miss
or for (the ill) that had befallen you. For God is well aware of all
that ye do." ( 2 )

WHO REMAINED WITH THE PROPHET?
------------------------------

The companions fled away being concerned with their own safety. History
recorded seven exceptional Meccans  
 (Ali Abu Bakr Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf Saad Ibn Abu  
 Waqass Talhah Ibn Obeidah Al-Zubeir Ibn Al-Awam Abu Obeidah Ibn
Al-Jarrah); And Seven exceptional Medinites (Al-Hubab Ibn Al-Munthir Abu
Dujanah Sahl Ibn  
 Huneif Assim Ibn Thabit Saad Ibn Mu-ath As-ad Ibn  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 2 ) Chapter 3 verses 151-152.

**( 92 )**

Hudheir or Saad Ibn Abadah and Mohammad Ibn Muslimah). These men
according to some historians remained with the Prophet when the other
companions deserted him. ( 3 ) From what we read in Al-Mustadrak by
Al-Hakim we understand that Ali Ibn Abu Talib was the only defender who
stayed with the Prophet for the duration of the battle. The other
companions who were mentioned to be among those who remained with the
Prophet were actually the first ones to come back to the Messenger of
God after they left him. Al-Hakim recorded that Ibn Abbas said:

"Ali has four distinctions no one shares with him: He was the first male
who prayed with the Messenger of God. He was the bearer of his banner in
every battle and he was the one who stayed with him at the Battle on the
day of Al-Mihras (the Battle of Ohod where there is gathered water
called Al-Mihras) and he is the one who washed his blessed body and laid
him in his tomb."( 4 )

Al-Hakim reported also that Saad Ibn Abu Waqass said: When people left
the Messenger on the day of Ohod I went aside and said to myself I shall
defend myself .

then Al-Miqdad told him: "Saad this is the Messenger." ( 5 )

Al-Hakim reported also that Al-Zubeir said about the Battle of Ohod "And
they exposed our back to the horsemen so we were attacked from behind
and a man shouted:

Mohammad has been killed. We retreated and the enemies pursued us." ( 6
)

He also reported that Abu Bakr said: When people left the Messenger of
God on the day of Ohod I was the first one to come back to the Messenger
of God . . . then he mentioned in the hadith that Abu Obeidah Ibn
Al-Jarrah followed him." (Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 3 p.78)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 3 ) Al-Waqidi Al-Maghazi (conveyed by Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed in his
Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol. 3 p. 388) ( 4 ) Al-Hakim in his
Al-Mustadrak, Part 3, p.111. ( 5 ) Al-Hakim recorded it in Al-Mustadrak,
Part 3, pp. 26-28. ( 6 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak, Part 3, pp.27-28.

**( 93 )**

### The Prophet Participated

The Messenger stayed at the battlefield with full determination and
firmness after the pagans came up to him. He himself fought vigorously.
Saad Ibn Abu Waqaas reported that he witnessed a man whose face was
covered and he did not know who he was. The pagans came towards him and
Saad thought that they were going to overpower him.

But that man took a handful of gravel and threw it at their faces and
they retreated. . . Finally Saad discovered that that man was the
Prophet. ( 7 ) He used his bow and expended all his arrow until his bow
could not be used any longer.

When the Prophet was exposed to the enemies by the retreat of his army
Obay Ibn Khalaf tried to attack him .

Some of his companions tried to bar Obay from reaching the Prophet but
the. Prophet prevented them from doing that. He faced Obay with a blow
which did not seem to be effective. But Obay said: "By God Mohammad has
killed me. . . ." He told me in Mecca: "I shall kill you. By God if he
spits on me he kills me." Obay died in "Saraf" while returning to Mecca
.

### Ali's Endeavor

Al-Tabari reported that Abu Rafi said: The Messenger of God witnessed a
group of pagans coming to him. He said to Ali: Charge them. Ali charged
them and forced them to retreat and killed Amr Ibn Abdullah Al-Jumahi .

The Prophet beheld another group coming and told Ali to charge them and
he did. He scattered them and killed Sheibah Ibn Malik one of the
children of Amir Ibn Lu-ay .

Amazed by Ali's sacrifice Gabriel said: "Messenger of God what a
redeemer Ali is!" The Prophet replied: "He is from me and I am from
him." Gabriel said: "And I am from both of you." ( 8 ) They heard at
that time a voice saying:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 7 ) This is reported also by Ibn Husham in his Biography of the
Prophet Part 2 p.78. ( 8 ) Sayed Muhsin Al-Ameen in his Aayan Al-Shi-ah
Part 2 p. 195. Al-Fairoozbadi recorded this in his book: Fada-il Al-
Khamsah Part 2 p.317 (conveying from Al-Tabari). And Ibn Al-Atheer in
his History Al-Kamil Part 2 p. 1O7 reported similar to this.  

**( 94 )**

"There is no youth (full of manhood) but Ali and no sword comparable to
Zulfiqar (Ali's sword)

A regiment arrived from Kinanah in which four of the children of Sufyan
Ibn Oweif were present: Khalid Abu AI-Sha-atha Abu Al-Hamra and Ghurab.
The Messenger of God said to Ali: "Take care of this regiment." Ali
charged the regiment and it was about fifty horsemen. He fought them
while he was on foot until he scattered them.

They gathered again and he charged them again. This was repeated several
times until he killed the four children of Sufyan and added to them six
more. . . . ( 9 ) Ibn Husham reported that the Messenger fell into one
of the pits which were excavated and covered up by Abu Amir who expected
the Muslims to fall in them. The knee of the Messenger was cut. Ali held
the hand of the Messenger and pulled him up and Talhah Ibn Obeidullah
helped him until the Prophet stood up. ( 10)

Muslim in his "Sahih" (Authentic) reported that Sahl Ibn Saad said the
following: "The face of the Messenger was cut and one of his teeth was
broken and the protective dress of his head was broken. Fatima daughter
of the Messenger was washing the blood and Ali was pouring water he
brought by his shield from Al-Mihras. Beholding that the water increased
the flow of blood she burned a mat put some of its ashes on the wound
and the blood stopped." ( 11 )

THE CONCLUSION
--------------

It would not be difficult for the reader to infer the following:

1. The Battle of Ohod was one of the battles on which the future of
Islam depended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 9 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed in his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol. A
p.372. ( 10 ) Ibn Husham Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p.80. ( 11 )
Muslim in his Sahih Part 12 p. 148.

**( 95 )**

2. The death of the bearers of the banners of the pagan army at the
beginning of the battle had its important effect in raising the morale
of the Muslims and breaking the morale of the pagans who were four times
more numerous than the Muslims. The bearers of the banners in the eyes
of the warriors in those days were the leaders of the army. Their death
had a great effect on the morale of the army. History recorded that Abu
Sufyan said to Banu Abdul-Dar: "O Banu Abdul-Dar we recognize that you
have more right than any other Meccan clan to carry the banner (because
the Meccan tradition gives the clan of Abdul-Dar the right to carry the
banner at war). We were defeated in Badr because of the banner. Hold
your banner firmly and protect it or hand it to us." This infuriated the
clan of Abdul-Dar. As they refused to surrender their right of carrying
the banner Abu Sufyan said: "Let another banner be added to it." They
said: "Yes but the additional banner will be carried also by a man from
Banu Abdul-Dar and nothing other than this will be accepted." The Meccan
pagans witnessed at the beginning of the battle their banner fallen ten
times and their hearts fell with the banner ten times. They found to
their astonishment that they are facing a tremendous power. Ali was the
one who destroyed the banner bearers or most of them.

This signalled the defeat of the Meccan army in the first round.

3. When the Muslims were defeated in the second round no one remained
with the Prophet except Ali and thirteen others of the companions of the
Messenger. These thirteen were the first to come back to the Messenger
after their flight. It is clear that Ali's defense in that decisive hour
was much more valuable than the defense of the thirteen companions put
together.

The Messenger of God became the target of the pagan's attacks. Whenever
a regiment aimed at the Prophet Ali charged the regiment and forced it
to retreat .

Thus we would not be erroneous if we say that Ali in  

**( 96 )**

this decisive battle had the exclusive honor of being the main defender
of the Messenger and his Message against the forces which no one other
than Ali could face successfully. The Battle of Badr laid the foundation
of the Islamic state but the Battle of Ohod was about to destroy the
foundation had not a small number of heroes headed by Ali been present .

The pagans found that the Battle of Ohod ended in their favor. They
defeated the army of the Prophet and the Muslims lost seventy companions
among them the giant hero: Al-Hamzah uncle of the Messenger and Lion of
God. But the pagan victory was not decisive. Their target was Mohammad
and Mohammad was still alive. He was the biggest danger to them.
Therefore it was necessary for them to have another decisive battle in
which they would realize the goal that they could not realize at the
Battle of Ohod .

The Battle of Ohod took place during the third year after the Hijrah.
Two years later the third decisive battle in which the pagans gathered
their biggest task force took place.
