the Moat
========

**( 97 )**

##### 10.

The Qureshite community had one important dream: The destruction of
Mohammad and his religion. Pagan tribes outside Mecca were sharing with
them the same dream. Like the Meccans these tribes considered Mohammad a
serious menace to their religion. This belief brought these tribes and
the Muslims into military confrontations in which the Muslims had the
upper hand. These tribes therefore were like the Meccan community full
of resentment and rancour towards Mohammad and his religion.

### Non-Pagan Tribes

There were clashes between the Muslims and some of the people of
scripture who were neighboring Medina caused by their breaching of
covenants with the Holy Prophet. Tribes from among them such as Banu
Al-Natheer and others were exiled by the Prophet.

A delegation from these people went to Mecca and other Arab communities
during the fifth year after the Hijrah propogating war against the
Prophet and attempting to mobilize the Arab forces for the proposed war.
They did not need much effort to persuade the Meccans to a military
undertaking against the Prophet. Their response to the invitation was
prompt and without hesitation they mobilized four thousand fighters.
This army was supplemented with six thousands from Ghatafan Saleem and
other tribes. Thus ten thousands strong marched towards Medina.

The Holy Prophet received the news of the imminent invasion a few days
before their arrival at Medina. He  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Chapter 33 verses 1O-13.

**( 98 )**

consulted his companions and Salman Al-Farisi (the Persian) advised the
Prophet to dig a moat around Medina to prevent the invaders from
entering it. The Messenger commanded the Muslims (who were about three
thousands) to implement the plan. The moat was dug within six days.

Witnessing the moat the invaders were surprised and realized that it had
become difficult for them to enter Medina. Thus they found it necessary
to besiege Medina instead of invading it directly. Banu Quraidhah a
community from the followers of the Scripture joined the pagan army
after its arrival. This community had a covenant of peace with the
Prophet. Their treacherous action was a frightening surprise to the
Muslims. By breaching the covenant this community gave the pagan army
additional forces and equipment. It became the duty of the Muslims to
add to their defensive lines another line .

### The Muslims In Horror

There were many hypocrites among the Muslims who circulated frightening
rumors which added to the fear of the Muslims. The Holy Qur'an tells us
of the psychological crisis with which the Muslims lived during that
period: "Behold! They came upon you from above you and from below you
and when the eyes grew wild and the hearts gaped up to the throats and
ye imagined various (vain) thoughts about God! In that situation the
believers were tried: They were shaken with a mighty shock. And behold!
The hypocrites and those in whose hearts there is a disease (even) say:
God and His Apostle promised us nothing but delusion! Behold! A party
among them said: O people of Yathrib (Medina) you cannot stand (the
attack) therefore turn back! And a band of them ask for leave of the
Prophet saying: Truly our houses are bare and exposed though they were
not exposed; they intended nothing but to flee." ( 1 )

The pagan army on the contrary was enjoying an ex-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 2 ) Holy Qur'an. Chapter 33 verse 23.

**( 99 )**

tremely high morale. Victory to them was certain. Medina was under their
siege and its inhabitants did not possess the courage to come out of it.
Their confidence in victory and morale went higher when Banu Quraidhah
joined them .

This made them change their strategy from the siege of Medina to a
direct invasion .

### Amr's Venture

Amr Ibn Abd Wodd accompanied by Dhirar Ibn Al-Khattab Akramah Ibn Abu
Jahl and others sought and found a narrow place in the moat. Their
horses leaped above the moat to the other side. Had this adventure
succeeded many pagan fighters were expected to follow them and make it
feasible for the whole army to pass through that narrow place for they
could have spanned the two sides of the ditch by filling that narrow gap
with soil .

The Muslims were in a state of shock and horror before the passage of
these pagan soldiers to their side. The new danger which was presented
by their passage made the morale of the Muslims much lower than before.

### Men of Strong Faith

Though the hearts of most of the Muslims were filled with fear some of
them were unshaken by the new danger .

It rather made their faith stronger in God His Messenger and the
promised victory. These individuals were ready to sacrifice themselves
and one of them certainly was determined to try to confine the danger
then to remove it. The Holy Qur'an tells us of the morale of these
believers.

"When the believers saw the confederate forces they said: This is what
God and His Apostle had promised us. And God and His Apostle told us
what is true. And it only added to their faith and their zeal in
obedience.

"Among the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with
God: Of them some have completed their vow (to the extreme) and some
(still) wait; but they have never changed (their determination) in the
least." ( 2)

**( 100 )**

The Holy Qur'an does not inform us of the number of those believers
whose faith was increased by the increase of the danger. These believers
may have been scores or just a few. However faith sometimes remains only
as a state of mind without being transformed into action. Some of the
faith is active flowing with vitality and moving the faithful to face
the danger and to rise to its level and above its level .

The number of these distinguished believers remained unknown.

##### \* \* \*

ALI'S RESPONSE
--------------

However history informed us of one of them because of his outstanding
achievements at this battle in confining and removing the danger which
shook the very foundation of the Islamic state. That man was no other
than Ali Ibn Abu Talib .

Amr Ibn Wodd who crossed the moat was well known among the Arabs. He
attended the battle boastfully making his place known to people. His
very passage from one side to the other side of the moat accompanied
only by a small number of fighters indicates that the man was extremely
courageous. He was the only one from among the ten thousand fighters who
tried to invade the Muslims directly and challenge them totally while he
was with them on one side .

The passage of Amr and his companions presented to  
 the Muslims a new and serious danger and a frightening surprise which
they never expected. The door was about to be opened widely and hundreds
and thousands were expected to follow. The surprise however did not
frighten or astonish Ali. History informs us of Ali's present-mindedness
and fast response for he immediately moved to confine the danger then to
remove it. Leading a small number of believers he went immediately  
 to the point where the Islamic defense line was broken  
 by the passage of Amr. He had his companions  
 stand there preventing others from attempting  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 3 ) Ibn Husham Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p. 224.

**( 101 )**

to follow Amr. ( 3 ) And after be confined the new danger he managed to
remove it completely . .

While mounting his horse Amr went around the area of Sal'a facing the
Muslims and challenging them: "Is there any dueler?" He repeated this
call but there was no response on the part of the companions. This
compelled Ali to leave his place where he was deterring the pagan forces
from following Amr by crossing the Moat. Responding to Amr's challenge
he left that place temporarily to be defended by the few who were with
him.

He neared Amr and asked him to face him in a duel.

Amr arrogantly replied: "Why son of my brother (Amr was a friend of Abu
Talib father of Ali)? By God I would not like to kill you." Ali replied:
"But by God I would love to kill you." A short but extremely violent
duel between the two heroes took place. Ali killed Amr immediately and
Amr's companions ran away trying to re-cross the moat from the Islamic
side to the pagan side.

Ali exclaimed: "Allahu Akbar " (God is Great) and so did the Muslims.
The death of Amr was the end of the new danger. Those who were with him
ran away trying to save their skin; but most of them were killed before
they could cross to the other side .

Ali made a great contribution in the defense of Islam at this battle
during which the danger against the new Faith reached its peak.

At this battle the Muslims faced a greater danger than ever before. The
elements of the Islamic defense were the same three elements which
played their roles during the two battles of Badr and Ohod: The firmness
of the Messenger and his ideal leadership: the heroism of Ali; and the
determination of the Islamic army .

A fourth element was added at this battle: The role of Salman Al-Farisi
(the Persian) who counseled the Prophet to dig the moat around Medina .

The role of the Islamic army during the Battle of Ohod was smaller than
its role during the Battle of Badr. And it  

**( 102 )**

was less important at the Battle of the Moat than it was at the Battle
of Ohod for the Muslims during the Battle of the Moat did not even dare
face the enemy. They only dug the moat around the city before the
arrival of the pagan army then stood behind the moat until the end of
the battle.

The roles of the first two defensive elements were similar to their
roles at Badr and Ohod and probably bigger .

The firmness of the Messenger his leadership his war strategy and his
speed in digging the moat were most essential in making the Muslims pass
the crisis safely .

Ali's role at this battle was outstanding in the history of the Islamic
defense.

##### \* \* \*

THE MAGNlTUDE OF ALI'S CONTRIBUTiON
-----------------------------------

It would not be logical to say that the Muslims were unable collectively
to kill Amr who could not by himself prevail against thousands of
Muslims. But this was not the cas. Amr was calling for a duel. A duel
could only be between two persons. It was considered to be shameful for
two men or more to have a duel with one man. Amr challenged all the
Muslims to send one of them to have a duel with him. None of them was
willing to face him except Ali .

Nor would it be logical to say that Amr was the entire power of the
pagan forces and that his death was a defeat for the whole confederate
army. But it would be logical to affirm two important matters:

1. Ali's initiative to block the passage point and prevent others from
following Amr had stopped the danger and confined it. Had the passage
point remained open a great number of the pagan soldiers would have
followed Amr and their passage could have resulted in establishing a
bridge between the two sides of the moat. Such a bridge would enable the
whole army to cross.

One hour of negligence could have led to a decisive defeat of the
Islamic army. This did not happen because Ali was fast in his response
to the new danger present minded calm and collective and ready to deal
with the serious crisis .

**( 103 )**

2. The death of Amr proved to the pagan army that they were unable to
pass the moat again and that what Amr could not accomplish could not be
accomplished by others.

By this the pagan army had to face one of two alternatives: Withdrawal
or continuation of the siege until the Muslims surrender or were forced
to cross the moat and fight the pagans. The continuity of the siege of
Medina was beyond the ability of the pagan army. It did not have the
food supplies for ten thousand fighters and their horses and camels
which could enable them to continue the siege for several months or
weeks. In addition a hurricane-like wind went on causing the pagan army
many damages and making its life miserable. The hurricane was preceded
by an argument between the pagans and their Jewish allies which made
their co-operation in the battle highly difficult.

Thus there was only one alternative for the pagan army to take after the
failure of Amr and his death: The withdrawal and that is what they did.

We ought not to forget an important matter! The death of Amr and most of
his companions raised the morale of the Muslims. Their hope in
continuity of life and in victory was revived. All this was a result of
Ali's endeavor and by this we can understand the meaning of the
declaration of the Prophet. "The duel of Ali Ibn Abu Talib against Amr
Ibn Abd Wodd at the Battle of the Moat outweighs the good deeds of my
whole nation until the Day of Judgement." ( 4)

The Confederate Army withdrew and the Muslims passed the crisis safely.
They regained their confidence concerning the future because of failure
of the Confederate forces after their biggest mobilization. The
Messenger said after their withdrawal: "After today we shall invade them
and they will not invade us." ( 5 )

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 4 ) Al-Mustadrak, Part 3, p. 32. ( 5 ) Ibn Husham in his Biography of
the Prophet, Part 2, p. 254.
