Ali's Place From the Prophet in the Qur'an
==========================================

**( 123 )**

##### 13.

During the ninth year after the Hijrah a Christian delegation from
Nijran Yemen came to Medina to inquire about Islam and debate with the
Prophet about religion.

There was a dialogue between the Messenger and the delegation in which
the Messenger stated the positive position of Islam towards the
teachings of the Messiah. The delegation chose to stay on their negative
position towards Islam. A revelation came to the Prophet commanding him
to invite the delegation to a prayer to be offered by both sides asking
the Almighty to bring down His punishment on the wrong side of the two
parties. From the Holy Qur'an: "And whoso disputes with thee concerning
him (Jesus) after the knowledge which has come unto thee say (unto
them): Come! We will summon our sons and your sons and our women and
your women and ourselves and yourselves. Then we will pray humbly (to
our Lord) invoking the curse from God upon those who lie." ( 1 )

The Messenger in compliance with the revealed command invited the
Christian delegation for the prayer. Al-Nisaboori in his commentary on
the Holy Qur'an entitled: "Ghara-ib Bul-Qur'an and Aja-Ibul-Furqan "
recorded the following:

"The Messenger told the Christian delegation:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Chapter 3 verse 62.

**( 124 )**

God has commanded me to call upon you to share with me a prayer for
punishment. They said "Abu Al-Qasim" (the Prophet's code name) we shall
think of the matter then we will come to you." They had a conference
headed by their counselor Al-Aquib. When they asked him his advice he
said: "By God you have known that Mohammad is a Messenger of God. He
told you the exact truth about your man the Messiah. By God whenever
people challenge a prophet and share with him a prayer for punishment
their grown-ups will not last and their small ones will not grow. It
will be your annihilation if you accept his challenge. If you insist on
keeping your religion make peace between you and the man and go back to
your country.

"When the Christian delegation came back to the Messenger they found him
on his way to the proposed prayer wearing a garment made of black hair
carrying Al-Hussein on his arm and leading Al-Hassan by his hand with
Fatima walking behind him and Ali walking behind her.

The Prophet said to the four members of his family: "When I pray say:
'Amen.'" Looking at the Prophet and his family the priest of the
delegation said to his group: "Christians I see faces whose prayer will
be answered even for removal of a mountain.

Accept not their challenge. If you do you will perish and the Christians
will not live on this earth." The delegation heeded the warning of their
priest and said to the Prophet: "Abu Al-Qasim." we have decided not to
make prayer of "Mubahalah" with you. ( 2 )

Al-Tabari in his commentary on the Holy Qur'an reported many hadiths
through various channels that the Messenger accompanied Ali Fatima
Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein in the event of "Mubahalah" ( 3 )

Muslim in his Sahih recorded that Saad Ibn Abu Wa-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 2 ) You find it in Al-Nisaboori's Commentaries on the Qur'an printed
on the margin of Al-Tabari's Commentaries Part 2 pp. 192-193. ( 3 )
Al-Tabari in his Commentaries on the Qur'an Part 2 pp. 192- 193.

**( 125 )**

qass reported that after the revelation of the following verse: "And
whoso disputes with thee concerning him (Jesus) after the knowledge
which had come to thee say (unto them): Come! We will summon our sons
and your sons and our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves.
. . ." The Messenger of God invited Ali Fatima Hassan and Hussein then
he said: "God these are the members of my family." ( 4 )

##### \* \* \*

WHY WAS ALl INCLUDED?.
----------------------

The Almighty commanded His Messenger to say to the delegation of Najran:
"Come! We will summon our sons and your sons our women and your women;
and ourselves and yourselves. . . ." In compliance with this command the
Prophet brought with him Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein because they were the
sons of his daughter Fatima and for this they are his sons. He brought
Fatima with him because she represents the women from the members of his
House. But why did he bring with him Ali who was neither from the sons
nor from the women? Ali has no place in the verse unless he is included
in the word "ourselves." Bringing Ali with him indicates that the
Messenger of God considered Ali an extension of his personality. By
considering him so he elevated him above all the Muslims.

The Messenger said on many occasions: "Ali is from me and I am from
him." Hubshi Ibn Janadah reported that he heard the Messenger of God
saying:

"Ali is from me and I am from him and no one repre-  
 sents me but Ali." ( 5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 4 ) Muslim in his Sahih Part 15 p. 176. ( 5 ) Ibn Majah in his Sahih
(hadith No. 143)  

**( 126 )**

A dialogue between the Imam Ali Al-Ridha and Al-Ma-Moon (a prominent
Abbaside caliph) went as follows: Al-Ma-Moon: "What is the evidence on
the caliphate of your grandfather (Ali)?".

The Imam Al-Ridha: The evidence is the word of God "and ourselves and
yourselves." The Imam meant that by bringing the Imam with him in the
event of "Mubahalah " the Messenger made him an extension of himself;
and whoever is an extension of the personality of the Messenger would be
the Imam of the Muslims.

Al-Ma-Moon: This would be true if there is not "our women and your
women.".

Al-Ma-Moon meant that it is possible that there were among the Muslims
other men who were like Ali in being an extension of the personality of
the Holy Prophet but he did not want to bring all of them. He chose to
bring one of them Ali as a representative of his equals. The evidence of
this is the word "Our women " since this word includes all women who are
related to the Holy Prophet by birth or marriage. But the Messenger
brought only one of them Fatima who is related to him by birth as a
representative of the women who are related to him.

The Imam Al-Ridah: This would be true if there were not the words: "And
our sons and your sons." He meant that Fatima was brought as the
unequaled woman rather than a representative of her equals in the family
of the Prophet. Had other women been equal to Fatima the Holy Prophet
would have brought them with her. For he brought Al-Hassan and
Al-Hussein together because they were equal to each other and did not
bring one of them as a representative of his sons. Therefore presenting
Ali on this occasion is an evidence that Ali is the only one whom the
Prophet considered to be an extension of his personality.

It is reported that Amr Ibn Al-Auss asked the Prophet: "Who is the most
beloved to you from men?" The Messen ger said: Abu Bakr. Then he asked
him: "Who is next?"  
 And the Messenger said: Omar. Ibn Al-Auss said: "Then where is the
place of Ali?" The Prophet turned his face to  

**( 127 )**

the people around him saying: "This man is asking about the self." ( 6 )

I have mentioned in the last chapter that the Messenger's declaration
after the Hijrah was not a fulfillment of a promise he made to Ali
before the Hijrah for he fulfilled his promise to Ali by "brothering"
him on the day of the conference which took place at his house.
Furthermore he did not promise Ali with such a declaration to be made in
the future.

The Holy Prophet announced that to the Muslims voluntarily because Ali
deserved the unique honor and because its announcement might prepare the
Muslims psychologically for the leadership of Ali in the future. He
wanted to show the nation the guiding Minaret which the nation would
need after the Prophet.

As the Messenger announced to the Muslims the unique honor which he
bestowed upon Ali by "brothering" him he was expected to announce
publicly the other two high honors which he conferred on him: of being
his executor and successor. For what the nation needed more than
anything else was the good leadership to which it might resort after the
Messenger. Such a leadership is what could secure the continuity of the
Islamic Message in its purity.

It could also secure the nation against deviation from the right road in
its long future.

The Messenger chose to announce this leadership during the tenth year
after the Hijrah when he was performing his valedictory pilgrimage. He
declared to the thousands of pilgrims that Ali had the right to
administer the affairs of the Muslims as much as the Prophet had. This
meant that the Prophet had declared that Ali was to be his successor.

It also implied executorship for whomever the Prophet appointed to
administer the affairs of the Muslims would be his executor also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 6 ) Almuttaqi Al-Hindi, Kanzul-Ummal, Part 15 (virtues of Ali), p. 125
(hadith No. 361)
