Unfulfilled Will of the Prophet
===============================

**( 134 )**

##### 15.

The Prophet did not leave a written will though the Holy Qur'an commands
every Muslim to make a will: "It is prescribed when death approaches any
of you if he leaves any valuables that he makes a bequest to parents and
closest kins in the legitimate way. This is a duty of every righteous;
If anyone changes the bequest after hearing it the guilt shall be on
those who make the change. For God hears and knows (all things)." ( 1 )

Although the verse speaks of the imperativeness of willing without
specifying a method the Prophet commanded the Muslims to make their
wills in writing. Muslim in his Sahih recorded the following: "Abu Salim
reported that the Messenger said: 'A person who has something which he
may will has no right to stay three nights without his written will.'"
Abdullah Ibn Omar reported that the Prophet said: "A person that has
something to will has no right to stay two nights without his written
will." Muslim reported also that Abdullah Ibn Omar said: "Since I heard
this from the Messenger of God. I never stayed one night without my
written will." ( 2 )

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) The Holy Qur'an Chapter 2 verses 180-181. ( 2 ) These three
hadiths are recorded by Muslim in his Sahih Part 11 (The Book of Will)
pp. 74-75. The second of them is also recorded by Al-Bukhari in his
Sahih Part 4 p. 3.

**( 135 )**

The Prophet had the right to delay his will for days months and years
because he exceptionally was on an appointment with his Lord. It is
highly probable that he was Heavenly informed that he would not die
until the religion of Islam was completed. However during the tenth year
after the Hijrah at the completion of his Valedictory Pilgrimage the
following verse was revealed: "Today I have completed your religion for
you and perfected my favor upon you and chosen Islam as a religion for
you." ( 3)

By this revelation the Prophet felt the nearness of his death and that
it was about time to make his will.

Thus on his way back to Medina from his pilgrimage he stopped at Ghadeer
Khum to make an important declaration in which he said: "I am only a
mortal human. The Messenger of my Lord is about to come to me and I
shall respond (to His invitation by departing from this world)." Then he
declared that Ali like the Prophet has more right to the believers than
the believers have to themselves and that Ali is the Guardian of every
believer (See Chapter 14)

A Written Will Is Necessary In Important Matters Although a verbal will
is valuable a written will is indispensable particularly in an important
matter such as appointing a successor to lead a nation. A verbal
statement can be forgotten increased decreased or inaccurately conveyed.
But a written will sealed by the Prophet is difficult to change. The
Prophet therefore was expected to make such a will but he did not.

It is said that he verbally told the Muslims to follow the Book of God
and the precepts of His Prophet and this was a sufficient will. I
disagree for the following reason:

A will by the Prophet is expected to give the Muslims  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 3 ) The Holy Qur'an Chapter 5 verse 4.

**( 136 )**

some fresh instructions dealing with the future of the nation after his
death. Adherence to the teaching of the Holy Qur'an and the Prophet is
not of this kind because its imperativeness is self-evident to the
Muslims and because obedience to God and His Messenger is repeatedly
recorded in the Holy Qur'an: "O you who believe obey God and obey the
Messenger. . ." ( 4 ) "Take whatever the Messenger brought to you. And
avoid whatever he prohibited for you. . ." ( 5 ) An unwritten statement
by the Prophet cannot be as effective as a Divine word repeatedly
recorded in the Book of God. Therefore such a statement dealing with
such a self-evident subject cannot be the expected will of the Prophet .

The Prophet is expected more than anyone in the nation to comply with
the command of God as stated in His Book and to do what he himself
ordered his followers to do. If Ibn Omar or any other Muslim has to
write a will because he has a little wealth to will and a small family
to take care of the Prophet had the final Heavenly message to secure and
a whole nation to protect and direct .

Expected Crises Required Written Will The faith of Islam was still a new
plantation the roots of which were not yet deepened in the soil of the
Arab Society and the dangers against the faith were numerous. We all
know that a civil war took place after the death of the Prophet because
of the apostasy of the majority of the inhabitants of Arabia .

The Prophet was fully aware of those dangers. Al- Hakim in his Sahih
Al-Mustadrak reported that Abu Muwaihibah a companion of the Messenger
said:

"The Messenger of God has told me: 'I have been ordered (by God) to pray
for the people of Al-Baqee (a cemetery of Medina) for forgiveness.'
'Come with  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 4 ) Chapter 4 verse 59. ( 5 ) Chapter 59 verse 7.

**( 137 )**

me.' I went with him. When he stood in the midst of the garves he said:
"Peace be upon you people of cemeteries. Congratulations to you for what
you are in .You do not know what God has saved you from. The
faithtesting trials are coming as pieces of a dark night one follows
another. . . ." ( 6)

Abu Bakr Left a Written Will We cannot conceive that the Prophet was
less concerned with the future of the nation than his companion Abu Bakr
who did not depart from this world before he appointed his successor
(Omar). He did that in spite of the fact that the nation by the time of
his death had passed the crisis of the civil war and reached an internal
peace. He did that because he knew that leaving the Muslims without
appointing a leader would be a negligence of their interest and a peril
to their future.

A Dialogue Between Omar and His Son It is worthy to note the wisdom of
Abdullah Ibn Omar in his dialogue with his father as the latter was
dying: Abdullah: "You should appoint a successor." Omar: "Whom should I
appoint?" Abdullah: "You try your best. You are not their Lord.

Suppose you temporarily recall the caretaker of a land of yours. Would
you not like him to have a successor during his absence until he goes
back to the land?" Omar: "Yes.".

Abdullah: "Suppose you recall the shepherd of your sheep. Would you not
like him to have a successor until he goes back to the sheep?" ( 7 )

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 6 ) Al-Hakim in his Al-Mustadrak Part 3 pp. 5-6. Ibn Husham also
reported this hadith in his Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p. 642. Ibn
Saad also reported in his Al-Tabaqat Part 2 p. 204. ( 7 ) Ibn Saad
Al-Tabaqat Part 3 p. 343. Muslim in his Sahih also reported what is
similar to this Part 12 p. 206.

**( 138 )**

Although Omar refused to appoint a successor he did the equivalent. He
chose six companions of the Prophet. He gave them the right to choose a
caliph from among themselves. He ordered them to follow their majority
if there were a majority. He ordered them to follow the party of
Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf when the six were equally divided.

Thus he did not leave the Muslim nation without a directive. He defined
a method by which a caliph would be selected .

The Prophet Regularly Left Successors In His Absence And the most
amazing thing in this matter is that the Prophet used to appoint a
successor whenever he left Medina for a few days or weeks: When he left
for Badr be appointed Abu Lubabah .

When he left for Doumat Al-Jendal he appointed Ibn Arfatah .

When he left for Banu Quraidhah he appointed Ibn Om Maktoom. He
appointed him also when he left for Thee Qirad .

When he left for Banul-Mustalaq he appointed Abu Tharr .

When he left for Kheibar he appointed Numailah.

When he left for Omrat Al-Qadha he appointed Ibn Al-Adhbat.

When he left for Mecca he appointed Abu Raham.

When he left for Tabuk he appointed Ali.

When he left for the Valedictory Pilgrimage he appointed Abu Dujanah. (
8 )

Thus he constantly appointed successors whenever he planned to leave
Medina. Yet when he left his nation forever he did not leave a document
of succession!!!.

THE PROPHET WAS PREVENTED FROM WRITING A WILL
---------------------------------------------

The absence of a written will by the Prophet is aston-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 8 ) Ibn Husham Biography of the Prophet.

**( 139 )**

ishing indeed. There must have been an unusual cause that prevented the
Prophet from writing a will! However when we review the records of the
events of the final days of the Prophet we find that the Messenger
wanted to write a will but he could not make it. Al-Bukhari recorded in
his Sahih that Ibn Abbas reported: "When the ailment of the Prophet
became serious he said: 'Bring me a writing sheet I will write to you a
directive after which you will not go astray.' Omar said: 'The Messenger
is overwhelmed by his ailment (does not know what he is saying). We have
the Book of God .

It is sufficient to us." They (those who were present) disputed with
each other vehemently. He (the Messenger) said: 'Go away and no dispute
should take place in my presence.' Ibn Abbas went out saying: 'The
tragedy the whole tragedy is what barred the Messenger of God from
writing his document."( 9 )

Muslim in his Sahih recorded that Sa-eed Ibn Jubeir reported that Ibn
Abbas said: "The day of Thursday and what a day of Thursday." Then he
wept until he moistened the ground with his tears. I said: 'Ibn Abbas
what is the day of Thursday?' He said: "The Messenger became seriously
ill and said: 'Bring me a writing sheet to write to you a directive so
you will not go astray after me.' They disputed and disputes should not
take place in the presence of the Prophet. And they said: "What happened
to him? Did he hallucinate? Ask him." He said: 'Go away what I am in is
better (than what you think of). I enjoin on you to do three things:
Drive the pagans out of the Arabian Peninsula give the delegations (of
various tribes who will visit Medina) as much as I used to give them.'
Sa-eed said: "He (Ibn Abbas) kept silent on the third one or he said it
and I forgot it."( 10 )

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 9 ) Al-Bukhari Sahih Al-Bukhari Part 1 p. 39. ( 10 ) Muslim in his
Sahih Part 11 (at the end of the Book of Will) p. 89. Ibn Saad also
recorded it in his Al-Tabaqat Part 2 p. 242 And so did Imam Ahmad in his
Musnad Part 1 p. 222.

**( 140 )**

Obeidullah Ibn Abdullah Ibn Utabahsaid that Ibn Abbas reported: "When
the Messengerof God was about to die Omar Ibn Al-Khattab was among the
men were present at his bedside. The Messenger said: 'Bring me a writing
sheet. I will write to you a directive after which you will not go
astray.' Omar said: 'The Messenger of God was overwhelmed by ailment.
You have the Holy Qur'an. The Book of God is sufficient for us.' Those
who were present disagreed with each other and disputed. Some of them
said: 'Bring the Messenger what he needs. He will write to you a
directive after which you will not go astray.' Some of them said what
Omar said. When they shouted excessively and disputed in the presence of
the Messenger he said: 'Go away.' Ibn Abbas used to say: 'The tragedy
the whole tragedy was their argument and dispute which barred the
Messenger of God from writing to them that directive."( 11 )

Ibn Saad in his Al-Tabaqat recorded that Jabir Ibn Abdullah Al-Ansari
reported: "When the Messenger was in his sickness by which he died he
called for a sheet to write on it to his nation a directive (after
which) they will not go astray nor will they be misled. There was at the
house arguments and excessive talk. Omar Ibn Al-Khattab spoke and the
Prophet refused it." ( 12)

It is also recorded in Al-Tabaqat that Omar Ibn Al- Khattab reported:

"We were with the Prophet and there was a screen between us and the
women. The Messenger of God said:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 11 ) Muslim in his Sahih Part 11 p. 95. Similar to this is recorded by
Ibn saad in his Al-Tabaqat Part 2 p. 244. Imam Ohmad also rcorded it in
his Musnad Part 1 p. 336. ( 12 ) Ibn Saad recorded it in his Al-Tabaqat
Part 2 p. 242. Similar report by Jabir is recorded in the same Part 2 p.
244. In this report Jabir said: "They excessively talked at the presence
of the Prophet until he refused it.".

**( 141 )**

'Bring me seven skins filled with water (to pour them on his body in
order to cool his fever) and bring me a sheet and an inkwell. I will
Write to you a directive after which you will not go astray.' The women
said: 'Bring the Messenger what he needs.' Omar said: "I said to them:
Be silent. You are his female companions. If he becomes ill you squeeze
your eyes; if he is cured you hug his neck.' The Messenger of God said:
They are better than you.' " ( 13)

It is also recorded in Al-Tabaqat that Zeinab the wife of the Messenger
said to them: "Do you not hear the Prophet trying to write a directive
for you?" They argued and the Prophet said: "Go away." ( 14 )

THIS UNUSUAL EVENT RAISES MANY QUESTIONS
----------------------------------------

1. Why did Omar oppose the Messenger and lead the opposition against
writing his will?

2. What was the Prophet trying to write in his will?

3. Why did the Prophet not write his will in spite of Omar's opposition?

4. How can his directive become a security to the nation against
straying? Some scholars say that Omar opposed the Prophet's will out of
compassion. The Prophet was dying and he was extremely tired. Writing a
directive at such a time increases his tiredness. Omar did not want the
Prophet to over-burden himself at such a time .

It is evident that this explanation is erroneous. When was it
permissible for a Muslim to prevent another Muslim commoner or great
from writing his will while he is about to die? Writing a will is one of
the religious duties which every Muslim is supposed to fulfill before he
(she) dies .

You have already read that Abdullah Ibn Omar reported that the Messenger
said: "A person that has some-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 13 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat Part 2 pp. 243-244. ( 14 ) Ibn Saad
Al-Tabaqat Part 2 p.244.

**( 142 )**

thing to will has no right to stay two nights unless his will is
written.".

The duty of every Muslim especially a prominent one such as Omar is to
assist his Muslim brother in fulfilling his religious duty rather than
to prevent him from achieving it. Omar and all those who were present at
that hour had a manifold duty towards the attempted will of the
Messenger .

The Messenger was not only a Muslim he is the Prophet of the Muslims and
the founder of the faith. It was the duty of Omar to offer him all
assistance to fulfill his duty .

It was also the duty of Omar to assist the Prophet in writing his will
because the Messenger stated that his will represents a security to the
nation against straying. The Messenger was always truthful. When his
will represented such a security it would be the most imperative duty of
Omar as an outstanding Muslim and sincere towards the nation to welcome
what the Messenger wanted. With his great position in Islam Omar is
expected to be the happiest one to obtain such a securing directive
which was necessary for the future of the Muslims. What could be more
important to the nation while the Messenger was about to leave it and
the revelation of God was about to cease than to obtain a directive
which would illuminate the road of the nation and secure its long
future? Furthermore the duty of all companions who were present on that
occasion was to obey the command of the Messenger. He ordered them to
bring him a sheet to write his will. The order of the Messenger must be
and should have been obeyed .

It is erroneous to say that Omar opposed his Prophet out of compassion
and that he did not want him to increase his tiredness by dictating a
directive. Indeed his opposition caused the Prophet a much bigger pain .

The Messenger was in his last days on this earth. When the Messenger was
in the days of his strength and activity he used to command the Muslims
and they used to rush to fulfill his desire even at the expense of their
wealth and blood. Now in his final days in this world he asked them

**( 143 )**

the cheapest thing (just a writing sheet and an inkwell) and his order
was not obeyed .

The Prophet no doubt was greatly disturbed and deeply saddened by their
attitude. Nothing would indicate his displeasure than his saying to
them: "Go away " and his answer to Omar: "They (the women) are better
than you." Had they brought the Messenger what he wanted they would have
lightened his pain. Nothing at that time could be more pleasing to the
Prophet than the fulfillment of his religious duty by securing his
nation against straying .

Abu Bakr wrote his will in which he appointed Omar his successor. He did
that while in his death agony fainting while dictating to Othman the
contents of the will. Omar did not blame Othman for assisting the Caliph
in his will .

And how cruel would it have been to prevent Abu Bakr at such a time from
writing his will. . . . Omar himself was stabbed and fatally wounded. He
did not prevent himself from willing to the Muslims what he wanted in
spite of his severe pains loss of blood and fainting time after time.
While in that saddening condition he ordered six companions of the
Prophet to select from among themselves a caliph to follow the majority
if there were a majority and to side with Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf when the
six are equally divided. The Muslims obeyed his order and fulfilled his
will in details though his will did not represent a security for the
nation against straying. It rather led them to choose a good-hearted and
weak-willed Caliph whose weakness led to his murder and his murder
brought to Muslims incalculable tragedies .

It is very hard indeed to believe that Omar opposed the Prophet's
proposed will out of concern for his health .

There is another possible explanation: It could be that Omar knew what
would be the content of the proposed will as he admitted later on and
thought that it would not be in the best interest of the nation. Thus we
may find the answer when we attempt to answer the second question .

**( 144 )**

WHAT DID THE PROPHET WANT TO WRITE?
-----------------------------------

It is not logical to think that the Messenger was trying at that
difficult hour to write a book containing his teachings and the details
of the Islamic laws. Nor was he trying to write to the Muslims the
outlines of the Islamic teaching .

For the Messenger was well aware of his extremely short time on this
earth .

Furthermore should the Messenger have written the outlines of the
Islamic teachings at that moment he would not have secured the Muslims
against straying. The outlines of the Islamic teachings are contained in
the Book of God and in spite of this the Muslims are still in
disagreement arguing about the details of those general outlines. And
because of this many of them went astray .

The Messenger of God lived 23 years after the commencement of his
Prophethood. He never wrote his teachings nor the outlines of the
Islamic teachings nor did he order any Muslim to do that. Yet he was at
the peak of his health and activity and the years were the years of
teaching and delivery of revelation. For some wisdom he chose not to do
that. It is inconceivable that he was attempting at that difficult and
short time to do what he did not do during 23 years of his Prophethood .

Nor was the Prophet trying to command the Muslims to follow the Book of
God and his own instructions. The Holy Qur'an as I have advanced does
command the Muslims to obey God and His Messenger. Yet that does not
secure the nation against straying. People are still in disagreement on
the interpretation of the Holy Qur'an and the authenticity of hundreds
of hadiths. Again how could the teachings of the Prophet secure the
nation against that when they are not recorded by him and according to
the opinion of great many Muslims he did not appoint any authority to
inform the Muslims of the details of his teachings .

The purpose of the Prophet's attempted directive could not be the two
items which Sa-eed Ibn Jubier remembered  
 from Ibn Abbas' words namely: Driving the pagans out of the Arabian
Peninsula and giving the delegations amounts  

**( 145 )**

similar to what he used to give. Both items do not secure the nation
against straying. The purpose of the attempted directive could be the
item about which Ibn Abbas kept silent or was forgotten by Sa-eed .

### The Prophet Wanted to Name a Successor

It is logical to think that the Messenger wanted to appoint a leader
whom he considered most knowledgeable in the Islamic teaching the
sincerest to God and His religion and who would be an extension of the
Prophet's personality .

That leader would be the highest authority for the nation and through
his leadership the nation would walk on the clear road.

Evidently the intended leader was not Omar or Abu Bakr. Had he been one
of them Omar would have been the happiest to see the Prophet's directive
written. For we find Omar after the death of the Prophet trying to
justify the leadership of Abu Bakr by his being the companion of the
Prophet at the Cave during the Hijrah or by his leading the
congregational prayer at the time of the ailment of the Prophet. Had the
Prophet appointed Abu Bakr through his proposed directive Omar would not
have needed such a justification. Nor would he have needed to argue with
the natives of Medina for the merit of Abu Bakr .

The words of the Messenger on the day of Ghadeer Khum when he declared
Ali to be the Moula (Guardian) of the Muslims were still fresh in Omar's
memory. When the Messenger spoke while on his deathbed of a written
directive after which the Muslims will not go astray Omar immediately
remembered the Declaration of Chadeer Khum and many other statements.
The words are almost the same words contained in his statements about
his "Itrah" (members of his House) in general and Ali in particular. The
Messenger of Cod said and Zeid Ibn Arqam reported:

"I have left for you that which if you hold fast you shall never go
astray after me. The Book of God a rope extended between Heaven and
earth and my "Itrah." Both the Book and the Itrah will not part with
each  

**( 146 )**

other until they join me on the Day of Judgement Beware how you treat
them after me." ( 15 )

The Imam Ali reported that the Prophet declared on the day of Ghadeer
Khum: "Whoever God and His Messenger are his "Moula " This (Ali) is his
Moula. I have left for you what if you hold fast you will never go
astray. The Book of God is His rope being held by His hand and your
hands and the members of my House." ( 16)

Zeid Ibn Thabit reported that the Messenger of God said: "I am leaving
in you two caliphs. The Book of God and my Itrah. Beware how you treat
them after me. They will not part with each other until they join me on
the Day of Judgement." ( 17)

Al-Termathi in his Sahih reported through his channel to Jabir Ibn
Abdullah Al-Ansari that he said: "I have seen the Messenger of God in
his pilgrimage on the day of Arafat while he was riding his female camel
(Al-Qusswa) delivering a sermon and I heard him saying: 'O people I have
left among you that which if you uphold you will never go astray: The
Book of God and the members of my house.' "( 18 )

These statements and many other similar statements were still ringing in
Omar's ears. When the Prophet spoke of a directive after which they will
not go astray Omar by his intelligence immediately understood his
intention: The Prophet is trying to record Ali's name in his directive.
He immediately started his opposition .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 15 ) Al-Termathi Part 5 p.328. ( 16 ) Recorded by Ibn Rahawaih Ibn
Jareer Ibn Abu Assim and Al- Mahamili in his Amali (Kansul-Ummal Part 15
hadith 356) ( 17 ) Imam Ahmad in his Musnad Part 5 p. 181. ( 18 )
Al-Termathi in his Sunan Part 5 p.328. Al-Termathi said also that Abu
Tharr Abu Sa-eed (Al-Khidri) Zeid Ibn Arqam and Hutheifa lbn Oseid
reported what agrees with this.

**( 147 )**

Why Was Omar Opposed to the Will Omar during the days of his reign gave
the answer in a reported dialogue between him and Ibn Abbas: Omar: "How
did you leave your cousin behind you?" Ibn Abbas: "I left him playing
with youths of his age (thinking that Omar meant Abdullah Ibn Jaafar)."
Omar: "I did not mean that. I meant your great man (Ali) member of the
House of the Prophet." Ibn Abbas: "I left him drawing water from a well
through a bucket for palm trees. . . while reciting the Holy Qur'an.".

Omar: "The sacrifice of camels shall be your atonement if you conceal it
from me. Is he still holding in his heart something concerning the
caliphate?" Ibn Abbas: "Yes.".

Omar: "Does he allege that the Messenger of God appointed him?" Ibn
Abbas: "Yes and I add to this that I asked my father about his (Ali's)
claim (of his appointment by the Messenger as his successor) and my
father said Ali told the truth." Omar: "There were high words from the
Messenger (about Ali) which do not constitute a clear evidence nor
remove an excuse. For some time he was testing his strength to see if he
would be able to appoint him. He wanted during his ailment to name him
and I prevented him from it out of concern with (the future of) Islam.
By the Lord of the Kaaba Quraish will not unite behind him and had he
become a caliph the Arabs throughout the country would have revolted
against him." ( 19)

Omar was concerned with the future of Islam. His sincerity is not
questioned but why would Ali's leadership be disadvantageous to Islam if
the Arabs revolted against him? The Arabs revolted against Abu Bakr.
Thousands and thousands deserted the faith during his reign. Yet Omar
did not  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 19 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed in his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol.3
p.278. And Ahmad Ibn Tahir in his History of Baghdad (Sharaful-Ddeen
Al-Murajaat)

**( 148 )**

think that he was wrong in supporting the leadership of Abu Bakr.

Again how did he know that the Arabs would revolt against Ali? Was it
not probable that Ali would be the most acceptable to them because of
his close relationship to the Prophet and his unequaled fame as a hero
his righteousness and his knowledge in Islam? Then how did he expect all
the Arabs to revolt against Ali? The Medinites were from the Arabs and
they were the main portion of the Islamic force in that period and they
were totally sympathetic with Ali. As a matter of fact they were about
to shift to him even after the election of Abu Bakr.

Even when Ali belatedly came to power the Medinites were solidly behind
him. The rest of the Arabs in all the Islamic provinces with the
exception of Syria willingly gave him the pledge of fealty. It is true
that a portion of the people of Basrah Iraq revolted against him and
that the Syrians refused to pledge their fealty to him. But this
happened only through incitements by leaders from Quraish.

The millions throughout the Muslim state accepted his leadership at a
time when most of the Muslims had already forgotten his high
distinctions. Had he been given the leadership at the time of the death
of the Prophet and upon a written will by the Prophet the Arabs no doubt
would have been more responsive to his leadership.

Omar said that Quraish will never unite behind Ali.

This might be true. However we should not forget that Quraish united
against the Prophet and fought him for twenty-one years. Should the
Prophethood of Mohammad have been cancelled because of Quraish's
opposition? Knowing Quraish's dark past Omar should not have taken its
opposition to a direction as a mark of unsoundness. He should have
rather viewed it as evidence of the soundness of that direction.

Again who were the powerful leaders of Quraish at the time of the death
of the Prophet? Abu Sufyan and the rest of the Pre-Islamic leaders were
already conquered and lost their influence. The influential leaders at
that time were  

**( 149 )**

Ali Al-Abbas Abu Bakr Omar Abu Obeidah Othman Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf
Talhah Al-Zubeir and the rest of righteous companions from Mecca. These
leaders were expected to obey the Prophet's direction and to sway the
rest of the Meccans to do so.

Furthermore history testifies that Abu Sufyan with all his grudges
against Ali (who killed his two sons Hanthalah Al-Waleed and three of
his close relatives in the Islamic defense) was willing to support Ali
rather than Abu Bakr.

Whether Quraish was willing or unwilling to support Ali Omar should have
remembered that the Prophet had much more knowledge about the Meccans
and the rest of the Arabs than he had. The Prophet and not Omar was
fought by them and he knew about them and all companions more than they
knew about themselves. Omar should have also remembered that the Prophet
was concerned with the future of Islam much more than he was.

With all his concern with the future of Islam and his awareness of the
Arab psychology the Prophet wanted to record Ali's name in his will. The
leadership of Ali must have been the answer to the Muslims' problems.

### HOW COULD HE DEFY THE PROPHET?

Of course we are confronted with the big question; Suppose that Omar was
certain of the soundness of his opinion. How did he allow himself to
oppose the Prophet in spite of what is known about him of being
righteous and obedient to God and His Messenger? To answer this question
we ought to know that the companions used to disagree with the Prophet
occasionally in matters that belonged to worldly affairs. They used to
allow themselves to do so because they believed that Islam granted them
the right to disagree with him in such matters .

They wrongly believed also that the leadership of the Muslims was one of
their worldly affairs. Omar himself disagreed with the Prophet more than
once .

**( 150 )**

The Disagreement With the Prophet At Al-Hudeibeyah It is a well-known
fact in history that Omar disagreed with the Prophet about the terms on
which the Prophet agreed concerning the truce between the Muslims and
the pagans of Mecca on the day of Al-Hudeibeyah. It was one of the terms
that any Muslim from Mecca who came to the Prophet without the
permission of the Meccans had to be returned to the Meccans. But if a
Muslim chose to leave the Muslims and rejoin the Meccan camp the Meccans
do not have to return him to the Muslims. This appeared to Omar and many
other companions to be unfair to the Muslims.

The Messenger however knew better. A person that leaves Islam to a pagan
camp will not benefit the Muslims if he is returned to them by force and
Islam does not need such a person .

Ibn Husham reported in his Biography of the Prophet the following: "When
agreement was reached and nothing was left except writing the pact Omar
jumped. . . then he came to the Prophet and said: 'Messenger of God are
you not the Messenger of God?'" The Prophet: "Yes I am.".

Omar: "Are we not the Muslims?" The Prophet: "Yes you are.".

Omar: "Are they (the Meccans) not the pagans?" The Prophet: "Yes they
are.".

Omar: "Why should we accept this humiliation to our religion?".

The Prophet: "I am a servant of God and His Messenger. I shall not
disobey Him and He will not forsake me." (20 )

Omar used to say after that: "I am still paying charity fasting praying
and freeing slaves as an atonement for what I did." .

Disagreed With the Prophet On Osamah There was another occasion in which
prominent companions disagreed with the Prophet .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 20 ) Ibn Husham Biography of the Prophet Part 2 pp. 216-217 Similar to
this is recorded by Muslim in Sahih Muslim.

**( 151 )**

Shortly before his death the Prophet appointed Osamah Ibn Zeid Ibn
Harithah commander of the Muslim army which he ordered to leave for
Jordan and Palestine. Abu Bakr Omar Abu Obeidah and the rest of the
Prominent companions except Ali were in that army. Many of the
companions criticized his appointment thinking that he was too young to
lead them. When this was brought to the Prophet's attention he came to
the Mosque while he was sick. He went to the pulpit and said in his
address: "O people execute the expedition of Osamah. If you are
criticizing his appointment you have criticized the appointment of his
father before him. He is qualified for leadership and his father was
qualified." ( 21 ) They dragged their feet until the Messenger of God
came out again while he was seriously sick and holding his head. He
said: "O people execute the mission of Osamah.

Execute the mission of Osamah." But the companions did not move. Osamah
and the rest of the people stayed near Medina waiting for what God would
do to His Messenger. ( 22)

After the death of the Prophet many of his companions attempted to
dismiss Osamah though the Messenger appointed him and by his own blessed
hand he delivered the banner to him. Omar came speaking for the
companions from Medina requesting Abu Bakr to dismiss Osamah and replace
him. Abu Bakr jumped and pulled Omar's beard saying: "May your mother be
bereaved by your death and may I lose you son of Al-Khattab. The
Messenger of God appointed him and you ask me to dismiss him!" ( 23 )
The companions from Quraish thought that if the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 21 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat Part 2 p. 249. ( 22 ) Ibid p. 249. ( 23 )
Al-Halabi in his Biography of the Prophet Part 3 p. 336 and Addahlani in
his Biography of the Prophet and Ibn Jareer in his history book where he
recorded the event of the year 12 after the Hijrah (Al-Murajaat by Sayed
Sharaful-deen p. 225)

**( 152 )**

Prophet names Ali in his will the leadership would stay in his House and
would not be accessible to others from the rest of Quraish. Should Ali
be the successor Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein sons of Ali and the leaders of
the youth of Paradise by the testimony of the Prophet would be his
successors. There would be no chance for Meccan or non-Meccan companions
regardless of their high positions to reach the leadership of the
Muslims.

The companions were human beings like the rest of the people. They had
their ambitions and love of fame and they did not want to see the door
of leadership slammed entirely in their faces. They wanted that door to
stay open.

So it would be easy for them to reach the leadership. The rest of the
clans of Mecca will support them rather than Ali.

Those clans of Mecca were ready to accept any non-Hashimite companion
rather than Ali. They had the unholy grudge against him and they used to
envy him for his brilliant record of endeavor for Islam his knowledge in
religion his relationship to the Prophet and his heroism.

Should the first successor of the Prophet be a companion other than a
"Hashimite" (member of the clan of the Prophet) the rest of the Meccan
clans could attain the leadership because the non-Hashimite clans are
equal. None of them is inferior or superior to others. Tyme (the clan of
Abu Bakr) is not better than Oday (the clan of Omar) and Oday is not
better than Omayad or Zuhrah or any other Meccan clan.

Ibn Al-Atheer recorded a dialogue between Omar and Ibn Abbas which
indicates that Omar and the rest of the Qureshites were of this idea:
Omar: "Ibn Abbas do you know what prevented your people (Quraish) from
giving you (the Hashimites) the leadership after Mohammad?" Ibn Abbas:
"If I do not know the Commander of the Believers (Omar) can inform me."
Omar: "They disliked letting you have both the Prophethood and the
caliphate lest you dominate your people.

Quraish (the Meccan community) had chosen for itself. It did the right
thing and succeeded.".

**( 153 )**

Ibn Abbas: If the Commander of the Believers permits me to speak and
holds away his anger I will speak." Omar: "Speak.".

lbn Abbas: "You said that Quraish has chosen for itself and did the
right thing and succeeded. Should Quraish have chosen for itself what
God had chosen for it the right would have been on its side without
being refused or envied. As to the statement that they disliked to let
us have the Prophethood and the caliphate certainly God has described
some people with such an attitude and said: 'That is because they
disliked what God has revealed so he nullified their deeds.'".

Omar: "lbn Abbas by God I heard things about you which I did not like to
believe lest I lose your respect." Ibn Abbas: "Commander of the
Believers what are the things you heard about me? if they are true they
should not make you lose my respect; if they are false a person like me
should be able to clear himself of falsehood." Omar: "I heard that you
say: 'They (the community of Mecca) diverted it (the caliphate) from us
out of jealousy aggression and injustice.'".

Ibn Abbas: "Commander of the Believers as to the injustice it has become
obvious to the ignorant and the wise; as to the jealousy Adam was envied
and we are his envied children.".

Omar: "It is too far. Children of Hashim by God your hearts refuse to
harbor but a permanent jealousy." Ibn Abbas: "Commander of the Believers
be not hasty .

Do not describe this way the hearts of people whom God made spotless and
purified them of jealousy and bad faith.

The heart of the Messenger of God is from the hearts of the children of
Hashim." Omar: "Ibn Abbas be away from me." Ibn Abbas: "I will." (Ibn
Abbas said): "When I was attempting to stand up he (Omar) felt
embarrassed and said: 'Ibn Abbas stay where you are. By God I am
observing your right and loving what pleases you.'" Ibn Abbas:
"Commander of the Believers I am entitled to a right which is due from
you and from every Muslim.

**( 154 )**

Whoever observes it avails himself and whoever does not is the loser." (
24)

Omar and other companions thought that since the Meccan clans do not
support Ali out of jealousy and grudge it would be more advisable to
have a leader other than him though the Messenger chose Ali .

Quraish is the community which fought Islam and the Prophethood for
twenty-one years then embraced Islam reluctantly after a crushing
defeat. The same community had become the decider of the future of the
Muslim nation.

The Meccan community's support became a decisive factor that tipped the
scale in favor of any contender for the Islamic leadership. This is
astonishing. But this was the logic of the events .

WHY DID THE PROPHET NOT INSIST ON WRITING HIS DIRECTIVE?
--------------------------------------------------------

This brings us to the third question: Why did the Messenger not write
his directive in spite of Omar's opposition?

The answer is obvious: The purpose of the intended directive is to
secure the nation against straying. This can be realized only if the
writer of the directive were conscious alert knowing what he said and
meaning what he said .

But the method of the opposition was clearly casting the doubt on the
consciousness of the Messenger and the soundness of his mind at that
hour. They said: "The Messenger is being overwhelmed by his ailment " or
"What happened to him?" or "Did he hallucinate? Ask him.".

All these words portrayed the Messenger as unconscious of what he was
saying or at least seeding the doubt in the  
 minds of others about the consciousness of the Prophet and  
 the soundness of his thinking. Other companions at that  
 meeting shared Omar's opposition. When soundness of the words of the
Prophet are doubted the directive is rendered ineffective. If such a
doubt could be expressed while he was alive it would be much easier to
express after his death. By  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 24 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 31.

**( 155 )**

this the intended directive had lost its significance and would not
serve its purpose.

Sa-eed Ibn Jubier said that Ibn Abbas reported: "When the ailment of the
Prophet grew he said: 'Bring me an ink-well and a sheet. I will write to
you a directive after which you will never go astray.' Some of those who
were present with him said 'The Prophet is hallucinating.' Then the
Prophet was asked if he still wants to write a directive. He said:
'After what?' (What is its benefit after what has been said?) ( 25)

And finally we come to the fourth and final question of the subject:

HOW COULD THE DIRECTIVE. OF THE MESSENGER BE A SECURITY. TO THE NATION AGAINST STRAYING?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No one has the right to claim that he knows what the Prophet knew about
the method by which he can secure his nation against straying. However
what appears clearly is the following:

### Security Against Sectarianism

1. Had the Messenger named a person specifically in a written document
while his consciousness and soundness of thinking were not doubted he
would have avoided the nation a serious division. Had he named Ali or
Abu Bakr or any other one in such a directive the Muslims would have
surrendered to his leadership and the division of the Muslims into Sunni
and Shi-i would not have taken place. This division was born out of the
dispute about who was the legitimate successor of the Prophet: Is he Abu
Bakr or Ali? Should the Messenger have named either of the two men or
another one such a division could not have arisen.

The Prophet made many verbal statements about Ali but a written
statement is much more effective. A verbal statement as we advanced can
be denied added to curtailed or forgotten. A recorded statement is much
more difficult to be tampered with .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 25 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat Part 2 p. 242.

**( 156 )**

Abu Bakr named Omar in writing. And all the followers of Abu Bakr
followed his directive. A directive by the Prophet could have been much
more effective and more adhered to by the Muslims than that of Abu Bakr.

Naming a successor by such a directive could have prevented the birth of
"Kharijis" (seceders) doctrine which repudiates Ali and Othman and calls
for a Muslim state without a government. The war of Siffeen which
produced this doctrine could not have happened.

The civil war of Siffeen between the Imam Ali and Muaweyah and prior to
that the war of Basrah Iraq between the Imam on one side and Ayeshah
Talhah and Al-Zubeir on the other side were the result of the murder of
Othman the Third Caliph. Should Ali have been named a caliph in a
written directive Othman would have died before coming to power because
Ali outlived him. Had Ali become the caliph upon a written directive
from the Prophet Muaweyah could not have come to power nor could his
transgressor son Yazeed have been able to massacre the children of the
Messenger at Karbala. Nor could the war between the son of Al-Zubeir and
the Omayads and many other tragedies and wars have happened.

All these events were the result of the absence of a Prophet's written
directive. Had such a directive been in existence the history of Islam
would have changed and we would be reading an Islamic history dissimilar
to what we read today.

I would like to rush to say that I do not consider the Second Caliph
(Omar) by his opposition to the proposed directive responsible for the
division between the Muslims and all what followed. Omar was a human
being unable to foresee the future of the Muslim nation .

All what Omar was thinking of is that the leadership of the Muslims
after the death of the Messenger is one of the  
 worldly affairs which the Meccan companions have the right  
 to decide in it according to what their interest dictated to  
 them. He did not want the Prophet to write a final word in  
 this matter in order to keep the door open for the companions. Should
the Messenger have written his directive his  

**( 157 )**

word becomes final. The Holy Qur'an declares: "And it is not permissible
to a believing man or a believing woman when God and His Messenger have
decided an affair (for them) that they should (after that) claim any say
in their affairs: And whoever is rebellious to God and His Messenger he
verily goes astray in error manifest." ( 26 ) (It is worthy to note that
when a Divine decision is stated verbally it would be as final as a
written one. Otherwise all the Prophet's decisions and statements would
not be binding because they were not written during his time.) The only
one who was able to foresee the future and not through his own power but
through the revelation was the Prophet himself. He had seen by the light
of God the future of his nation and that if it would remain without a
written directive the faith-testing trials will close on it as pieces of
a dark night (and this is what his companion Abu Muwaihibah reported).
Thus he wanted to spare the nation those foreseen trials which would
destroy its unity.

And for this he said: "Bring me an inkwell and a sheet to write to you a
directive after which you will not go astray." Security Against School
Division 2. A written directive by the Prophet in which he names his
successor would not only be a security to the nation against sectarian
divisions but also against the multiplicity of the Islamic School of
Law. The Prophet declared that the Qur'an and his "Itrah" (members of
his House) are the security against straying and that the Holy Qur'an
and the "Itrah" will not part with each other until the Day of
Judgement.

Were Ali (the head of the members of the House of the Prophet) the
highest Muslim authority after the Prophet he would have been that
security. He was undisputedly the most knowledgeable in the Holy Qur'an
and the teaching of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 26 ) chapter 33 verse 36.

**( 158 )**

the Prophet. The first two Caliphs (Abu Bakr and Omar) with all their
profound knowledge in Islam used to resort to him in what they did not
know.

Omar repeatedly said: "Had not the counsel of Ali been available Omar
would have perished (religiously)." And he said: "May God not keep me to
a problem for which Abu Hassan (Ali) is not available." Ibn Saad
reported that Ali said: "By God there isn't a revealed verse which I do
not know about what and where and about whom it was revealed. My Lord
has granted me a comprehending mind and a fluent and inquiring tongue."
( 27)

Ali was asked why was he among the companions of the Prophet the biggest
reporter of his statements? He replied: "He used to inform me when I
asked him and to initiate (his teaching) when I was silent." ( 28 )
Sa-eed Ibn Al-Musavab said: "No one other than Ali ever said: 'Ask me
before you miss me.' " ( 29 ) Ali is the one about whom the Messenger of
God said: "I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its gate. Whoever wants
to enter the city should come through the gate."( 30 )

Omm Salemah (wife of the Prophet) reported that she heard the Prophet
saying: "Ali is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with Ali.

They will not part with each other until the Day of Judgement." ( 31)

Had Ali been the immediate successor of the Prophet through his written
directive the instructions of the Prophet would have been known and the
Muslims would have agreed upon them in the various branches of the
islamic laws.

Thus the Prophet wanted to use Ali as the uniting force for all muslims
in all generations and this could have prevented them from going astray.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 27 ) Muttaqi Hindi in his Kanzul-Ummal Part 15 p. 113. ( 28 ) Ibid p.
113. ( 29 ) Ibid p. 113. ( 30 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 3 p. 124. (
31 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 3 p. 127.
