The Imam During the Era of the Three Caliphs
============================================

**( 159 )**

##### PART II

  

**( 161 )**

##### 16.

Abu Bakr Succeeds
=================

Finally the inevitable came to pass. The Prophet Mohammad died and his
death was the greatest loss mankind ever suffered. The Heavenly
revelation to the people of the earth came to an end. He was the Final
of the Prophets and no prophet will come after him .

The Muslims were so overwhelmed by the death of the Prophet that it was
difficult for an outstanding companion to conceive it.

### Omar Denied the Prophet's Death

Omar stood at the Mosque saying: "Some hypocrites allege that the
Messenger of God died. The Messenger did not die. He only went to his
Lord as Moses son of Imran went to his Lord. He left his people for
forty nights then he returned to them after it was said that he died. By
God the Messenger of God will return as Moses returned. He will sever
the hands and legs of men alleging that he died." ( 1 )

### Abu Bakr's Speech

Abu Bakr was more realistic and present-minded than Omar. He stood up
and said:

"O people whoever was worshipping Mohammad should know that Mohammad has
died. Whoever was worshipping God should know that God is living and
never dies." Then he recited the following verses:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Ibn Husham in his Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p.655.

**( 162 )**

"And Mohammad is but a Messenger. The Messengers before him passed away.
Should you turn on your heels if he will die or be killed? And whoever
turns on his heels will not harm God in the least. And God will reward
the thankful." ( 2)

Hearing these words Omar realized that the Prophet was dead and fell to
the ground.

### Preoccupied With Holy Funeral

The crushing weight of the tragedy was felt by no one as it was felt by
Ali and the rest of the members of the House of the Prophet. The death
of the Prophet made them unconscious of other things in the world. The
sadness of this bereaved family was indescribable. They wished to depart
from this world when he departed .

The Prophet confided in his daughter Fatima Al-Zahra twice during his
ailment. He once informed her of his death and she cried. Then he
informed her that she will be the first member of his family to follow
him and she laughed .

She was joyful to know that she would not be separated from him for long
.

Her husband Ali spent twenty-three years with the Prophet offering his
life for the protection of the Prophet against danger. Suddenly he
beheld that that precious life had ended while he was unable to redeem
it. The death of the Prophet was more painful to Ali than if he himself
had met his own death .

### Political Conference

The tragedy however did not prevent the rest of the companions Meccans
and Medinites from political thinking and doing while the Prophet was
not yet buried .

As previously mentioned the Messenger attempted but could not write a
will in which he was expected to name a successor. He tried to name a
man whose leadership represented a security to the nation against
straying. A group  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 2 ) Ibn Husham Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p.656.

**( 163 )**

of companions led by Omar objected to recording such a document and the
method of their objection rendered the Prophet's proposed document
useless.

The Declaration of Ghadeer Khum and the rest of the statements of the
Prophet on various occasions concerning Ali were ignored. The best that
can be said about the attitude of the companions towards these
statements is that they did not see in them compelling evidence for
Ali's appointment. The Meccans and the Medinites started and ended their
competition for leadership before the Prophet was buried .

### Omar Spoke of the Conference

Omar during the last year of his reign spoke of what took place after
the death of the Prophet. He informed his audience that when the Prophet
died the Medinites led by Saad Ibn Abadah separated themselves from the
Meccans and their prominent men conferred at Saqifat Banu-Saidah trying
to select a caliph from among themselves. Ali Ibn Abu Talib Al-Zubeir
Ibn Al-Awam and others with them shied away and the Meccans went with
Abu Bakr .

Abu Bakr Omar and Abu Obediah Ibn Al-Jarrah went to the conference of
the Medinites to thwart their attempt .

Abu Bakr said to the Medinites that the Arabs would not accept a leader
from other than the clans of Quraish (people of Mecca) who were the most
prominent among the Arabs and from the most honorable city. It is
reported that Abu Bakr told them that the Holy Prophet one time declared
that the Imams are from Quraish. ( 3 )

"I am satisfied he told them with the leadership of any of these two men
(Omar and Abu Obediah). Give your allegiance to whomever you choose of
the two." Some of the Medinites suggested having a leader from them and
another from the Meccans. The argument was heated and Omar said to Abu
Bakr: "Extend your hand." Abu Bakr did and Omar shook his  
 hand and pledged to him his allegiance. The attending  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 3 ) Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnatul-Kubra Part 1 p. 35.

**( 164 )**

Meccans followed him and the conferring Medinites with the exception of
Saad Ibn Abadah and his strong supporters accorded .

On the following day people gathered at the Mosque.

Omar stood up and told the audience: "God has enabled you to agree on
your best the companion of the Prophet who accompanied him at the Cave
(of Thour at the time of the Hijrah). Rise up and give your allegiance
to him." And they did.( 4 )

### LEGAL AND HISTORICAL QUESTIONS

The succession of Abu Bakr raises these questions:

1. Did Abu Bakr ever claim that the Messenger of God made him his
successor?

2. If the Prophet did not appoint him did he desire to appoint him?

3. Was the election of Abu Bakr legal from the Islamic point of view?

4. Did the Messenger say: "The Imams are from Quraish?" and what did he
mean by that?

History answers the first question in the negative for Abu Bakr never
claimed that the Messenger made him his successor. Nor did any of the
companions who worked diligently for the establishment of his caliphate
ever claim that the Messenger made Abu Bakr his successor. The reader
may remember that the argument of Abu Bakr which he introduced at the
Medinite's conference did not contain any hint to any appointment by the
Prophet. He only told the conferees that Arabs would not recognize any
leadership that was not a Qureshite. For Quraish he said are the most
respected people among the Arabs and they are from the most honorable
city. Had the Prophet expressed his desire to make him his successor Abu
Bakr would have made the Prophet's statement his sole argument without
resorting to the distinction of Quraish. Omar also would have quoted
such a statement to support his argument for Abu Bakr's election .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 4 ) Ibn Husham in his Biography of the Prophet Part 2 pp. 659-660.

**( 165 )**

The Sunni scholars unanimously agree that the Holy Prophet never
appointed a successor. This means that they agree that he did not make
Abu Bakr his successor .

However it is reported that a contemporary Medinite scholar from the
Wahabis claimed that the Messenger of God appointed Abu Bakr as his
successor. ( 5 )

He supported his claim by a hadith which reported that the Messenger
said: "And God and the believers reject (any leadership) except that of
Abu Bakr." He also claimed that this hadith is "Mutawatir" (reported
through numerous channels which makes it certain)

This hadith is what Muslim in his Sahih recorded through his channel to
Urwah who reported that Ayeshah said: "The Messenger said to me: Call
for me your father Abu Bakr and your brother so that I can write a
directive.

I fear that a wisher may wish and a sayer may say: I have more right (to
the leadership than Abu Bakr) and God and the believers reject (any
leadership) except that of Abu Bakr." ( 6)

Al-Bukhari recorded it in a similar way but it contained the word: "I
almost attempted to call Abu Bakr and his son and write a directive. . .
." ( 7)

It is worthy to note that this hadith is not mutawatir as this Wahabi
scholar claimed for it was not reported by numerous companions. As a
matter of fact it was reported only by Ayeshah.

However introducing this hadith as evidence for the appointment of Abu
Bakr as a successor is evidence of the lack of profound knowledge of the
hadiths for this hadith is opposed by three authentic hadiths which are
reported by Ayeshah herself:

### Ayeshah Reported the Opposite

Muslim recorded through his channel to Masrooq that Ayeshah said: "The
Messenger of God did not leave behind  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 5 ) Sheikh Mohammad Jawad Mugneyah recorded this in his book Hathi
Hiya Al- Wahabiyah (This Is the Wahabism) ( 6 ) Muslim Sahih Muslim Part
15 p. 155. ( 7 ) Al-Nawawi in his commentary on Sahih Muslim conveyed
this.

**( 166 )**

him a dinar or a dirham or a sheep or a camel nor did he will anything."
( 8)

Had the Prophet appointed Abu Bakr as his successor Ayeshah would not
have said: "Nor did he (the Prophet) will anything." For if he had
appointed Abu Bakr he would have willed a very important thing.

Muslim also recorded through his channel to Al-Aswad Ibn Yazeed that he
reported that people mentioned in the presence of Ayeshah that Ali was
the executor (of the Holy Prophet). She said: "When did he (the Prophet)
make him his executor? I was supporting the back of the Messenger by my
chest or she said by my lap. He called for a basin then he collapsed on
my lap and I did not think that he died. When did he make him his
executor?" ( 9 ) This hadith explains the previous hadith in which
Ayeshah said: "Nor did he will anything." In both hadiths she was trying
to disprove that the Messenger made Ali his executor. This by itself
indicates that the idea of the executorship of Abu Bakr was not in
circulation among people.

What was in circulation is that the Messenger made Ali his executor.
Therefore she was trying actively to disprove it.

Had she known that the Messenger appointed Abu Bakr she would have said
to those who mentioned Ali's executorship that her father rather than
Ali was the executor.

Muslim also recorded through his channel to Abu Maleekah that he
reported the following: "I heard Ayeshah and she was questioned: Had the
Prophet wanted to appoint a successor whom would he have appointed? She
said Abu Bakr. They said to her: Then whom would he have appointed after
Abu Bakr? She said: Omar. Then she was asked: Whom would he have
appointed after Omar? She said: Abu Obeidah Ibn Al-Jar- rah. Then she
stopped there." ( 10)

Had the Messenger said: "and God and the believers reject (any
leadership) except that of Abu Bakr she would  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 8 ) Muslim Sahih Muslim Part 11 (Book of Will) p.89. ( 9 ) Ibid. ( 10
) Ibid Part 11 p. 154.

**( 167 )**

have rejected the hypothetical question concerning the Prophet's
appointment of a successor. For the appointment would be a fact rather
than a hypothesis and Abu Bakr would be the actual appointee. But
Ayeshah treated the matter hypothetically because the Prophet made no
such statement concerning Abu Bakr.

### Obvious Prejudice

The prejudice of Ayeshah against Ali is clear in the last three hadiths.
In Abu Maleekah's hadith she tried to tell us that Abu Obeidah was more
beloved to the Prophet and was more deserving to be caliph than Ali. No
one subscribes to this for the Muslims unanimously agree that Ali was
higher and more beloved to the Messenger of God tban Abu Obeidah .

In Al-Aswad Ibn Yazeed's hadith the mother of believers tried to
disprove the executorship of Ali through no proof. Granting that the
Messenger died while he was reclining on her chest and that he did not
make Ali his executor at that hour this does not disprove Ali's
executorship .

The Holy Prophet spoke publicly at Ghadeer Khum in Ali's behalf saying
to thousands of Pilgrims that Ali was the "Moula" (Guardian) of the
believers and that he is like the Prophet in having more right to them
than they have to themselves .

Furthermore Omm Salemah reported what contradicts  
 the claim of Ayeshah. Al-Hakim through a channel which  
 he and Al-Thahabi considered to be authentic reported that  
 Omm Salemah (wife of the Prophet) said: "By the One in Whose Name I
swear Ali was the last one in contact with  
 the Messenger of God. We visited the Prophet before noon  
 and he was saying repeatedly: "Did Ali come?" Fatima  
 said: "It seems that you have sent him for a mission." She  
 (Omm Salemah) said: "Ali came and I thought that the  
 Prophet had something to tell him confidentially. We left  
 the room-and sat at the door and I was the nearest to the  
 door. The Messenger leaned upon Ali confiding in him and  
 speaking to him secretly. Then the Messenger of God died  

**( 168 )**

on that day. Thus Ali was the last one who was with the Prophet." ( 11)

### The Story of Maghafeer

Ayeshah used to allow herself to report some events which never took
place if the report would serve the interest which she favored. The
story of Maghafeer (a thick secretion which comes out of some particular
trees) is well known in the Islamic history and mentioned in the Holy
Qur'an in Chapter 66 of "Al-Tahreem." She and Hafssah (daughter of the
Second Caliph) conspired that each one of them individually was to say
to the Prophet: "I smell on you the odor of Al-Maghafeer " while both of
them knew that this was untrue .

Al-Bukhari recorded in his Sahih that Obeid Ibn Omeir reported that
Ayeshah said: "The Messenger of God used to drink honey at the house of
Zeinab daughter of Juhsh (another wife of the Prophet) and stay with
her. Hafssah and I conspired to tell the Prophet when he comes to either
one of us: "You have eaten Maghafeer. I smell the odor of Maghafeer." He
said: "No but I was drinking honey at Zeinab's house and I will not do
it again. And I swear that you shall not inform anyone about this." ( 12
) Ayeshah betrayed the trust of the Prophet by revealing what he
commanded her not to reveal. God informed him of that and this made the
Prophet angry. The chapter of Al-Tahreem was revealed for this event. It
contains the following:

"When the Prophet disclosed a matter in confidence to one of his wives
and she then divulged it to (another) and God made it known to him he
(the Prophet) told (her) a portion of it and mentioned not another
portion. When he told her thereof she said: Who told thee this? He said:

The One who knows and is well acquainted (with all things). If ye (both)
were to turn in repentance to the Al-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 11 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 3 p.139. ( 12 ) Al-Bukhari Sahih
Al-Bukhari Part 6 Book of Commentary on the Holy Qur'an. It is in the
comment on the chapter of Al- Tahreem p. 194.

**( 169 )**

mighty your hearts would be indeed so inclined. But (if ye collaborate)
with each other against him (the Prophet) truly God is his protector;
and Gabriel and the righteous believers and furthemore the angels will
assist him." ( 13 )

Al-Bukhari reported also through his channel to Obeid Ibn Hunein that he
said: I heard Ibn Abbas saying: I stayed a whole year trying to ask Omar
Ibn Al-Khattab about a Qur'anic verse and I could not ask out of
apprehension until he set out for pilgrimage and I was with him .

While we were on the road coming back to Medina he deviated to some
trees to relieve himself. Ibn Abbas said: I waited for him until he
finished then I walked with him .

I said: Amir Al-Mumineen (Commander of Believers) who are the two of the
wives of the Holy Prophet that collaborated against the Prophet? Omar
said: They are Hafssah and Ayeshah. ( 14 )

### Omar Considered the Election as "Faltah"

If any one asks for more evidence on the fact that the Holy Prophet did
not make Abu Bakr his successor the following statement of Omar
concerning the election of Abu Bakr is sufficient to clear the matter
completely: Al-Bukhari in his Sahih ( 15 ) Ibn Husham in his Biography
of the Prophet ( 16 ) and Imam Ahmad in his Musnad ( 17 ) reported that
Omar said in a sermon he delivered during the last year of his
caliphate: ". . .I am informed that a man from among you says: By God if
Omar dies I will elect "Fulan" (an x person whose name Omar did not want
to mention). No man should be deceived by saying to himself that the
election of Abu Bakr was "Faltah " and it passed. Certainly the election
of Abu Bakr was a "Faltah" (a hasty action without due deliberation). .
. .".

This indicates that the Holy Prophet never expressed  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 13 ) Holy Qur'an Chapter 66 pp. 1-4. ( 14 ) Sahih Al-Bukhari Part 6 p.
195. ( 15 ) Al-Bukhari in his Sahih Part 8 p. 210. ( 16 ) Ibn Husham in
his Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p.658. ( 17 ) Imam Ahmad in his
Musnad Part 1 p.55.

**( 170 )**

his desire to make Abu Bakr his caliph. Had the Prophet expressed such a
desire or said what was reported through Ayeshah the election of Abu
Bakr would not have been a hasty action and without due deliberation. It
would have been rather of the best planned action for it would have been
planned by God and His Messenger.

### Omar's Last Statement

However the Second Caliph made this completely clear after he was
stabbed. Muslim in his Sahih ( 18 ) and Ibn Saad in Al-Tabaqat ( 19 )
and Ibn Husham in his Biography of the Prophet ( 20 ) reported that
Abdullah Ibn Omar said that he advised his father to name a successor
and Omar said: "If I do not name a successor the Messenger of God did
not name a successor; and if I name a successor Abu Bakr named a
successor.".

Al-Bukhari in his Sahih reported that Abdullah Ibn Omar said: "It was
said to his father: Why do you not name a successor?" He said: "If I
name a successor one better than myself Abu Bakr did name a successor.
And if I do not name a successor one better than myself the Messenger of
God did not name a successor." ( 21 )

DID THE MESSENGER OF GOD DESIRE TO. APPOINT ABU BAKR AS HIS SUCCESSOR?
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The events of the last days of the life of the Holy Prophet clearly
indicate that the succession of Abu Bakr was not on the mind of the
Messenger. Nothing substantiates that like the expedition of Osamah. The
Messenger of God made Osamah Ibn Zeid Ibn Harithah a commander in chief
of an army and issued a directive in which he commanded him to overrun
the borders of Al-Balqa and Al-Daroom in the land of Palestine. People
prepared themselves and the early migrants from Mecca joined the army of
Osamah.( 22 )

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 18 ) Muslim in his Sahih Part 12 p.206. ( 19 ) Ibn Saad in his Tahaqat
Part 3 p.342. ( 20 ) Ibn Husham in his Biography of the Prophet Part 2
p.653. ( 21 ) Al-Bukhari in his Sahih Part 9 p. 100. ( 22 ) Ibn Husham
Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p.642.

**( 171 )**

From the well-known events of history in Osamah's expedition are the
following:

1. Abu Bakr Omar and others from the early migrants were in Osamah's
army. ( 23)

2. Ali Ibn Abu Talib was not in that army .

It seems that the Messenger did not want Ali to participate in more
battles after the Islamic state was established in the Arab Peninsula as
a result of the defensive battles in which Ali was the outstanding hero.
He did not allow (or at least did not order) him to attend the Battle of
Mutah where he sent a Muslim army under the leadership of Zeid Ibn
Harithah (father of Osamah) to the borders of Syria where Zeid Jaafar
Ibn Abu Talib and Abdullah Ibn Rawahah were killed. Nor did he allow Ali
to join him in the campaign of Tabuk. He chose to keep him in Medina to
succeed him in his absence .

The foundations of the Islamic state were already established and it
became unnecessary to expose Ali's life to more dangers. Therefore he
did not send him with the army of Osamah. Had Ali been in that
expedition the expedition would have been under his leadership rather
than the leadership of Osamah. The Prophet never put Ali under any
leadership in any battle. He was the bearer of the banner of the Holy
Prophet in all the battles which were led by the Prophet. ( 24 ) And he
was the Commander in Chief of every expedition in which the Holy Prophet
sent Ali .

The readers of the history of Islam knew that the Prophet gave Abu Bakr
and Omar the command of the army at the Battle of Kheibar on two
consecutive days. Ali was at that time suffering from inflammation of
his eyes which prevented him from participating in the battle. When his
eyes were miraculously cured on the third day Ali became  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 23 ) This is recorded by Ibn Al-Atheer in Al-Kamil and by Ibn Saad
Al-Tabaqat Part 2 p.190; and by Al-Dahlani and Al- Tabari in his history
and Al-Halabi in his Biography of the Prophet (all this was conveyed by
Sharaful-deen in Al-Mur- ajaat) ( 24 ) Ibn Saad in his Al-Tabaqat Part 3
p. 25 and Al-Hakim in his Al-Mustadrak Part 3 p.111.

**( 172 )**

the Commander in Chief and the two sheikhs Abu Bakr and Omar and the
rest of the companions were under his leadership .

Ibn Saad reported that the Messenger of God made Osama commander of the
army. When Wednesday came the ailment of the Messenger began; he had
fever and a headache. On Thursday morning he gave the banner to Osamah:
Osamah carried the banner then delivered it to Buraidah Al-Aslami and
camped at Al-Jurf. All distinguished companions from the Meccans and
Medinites including Abu Bakr Omar Ibn Al-Khattab Abu Obeidah Ibn Al-Jar-
rah and Saad Ibn Abu Waqass joined Osamah's army."( 25 )

3. The Messenger fell ill after he gave the banner to Osamah. The army
was still near Medina and did not begin its journey yet. The Messenger
was alarmed by the slowness of the army's motion and reluctance of the
soldiers to leave Medina. Therefore he went to the Mosque twice while he
was ill commanding them to begin their journey and to move quickly. He
repeated his order three times in one sermon. (26)

He did all this while he was aware of the nearness of his death. His
awareness of his death is reported in the following hadiths:

A. Ibn Husham recorded that Abu Muwaihibah reported that the Prophet
accompanied him to Al-Baqee cemetery at night before the beginning of
his illness. The Prophet stood in the graveyard and congratulated its
dwellers for being spared future faith-testing crises. Abu Muwaihibah
reported that the Messenger said to him:

"Abu Muwaihibah I have been given the keys of the  
 treasures of this world and the eternal life in it along with  
 Paradise (in the Hereafter). I was given the choice between  
 that and meeting my Lord and Paradise. Abu Muwaihibah  
 said: May my father and mother be your redemp tion.  
 Take the keys of the treasures of this world and the  
 eternal life in it along with Paradise. He said: "No Abu  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 25 ) lbn Saad Al-Tabaqat Part 2 p. 249. ( 26 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat
Part 2 p. 249.

**( 173 )**

Muwaihibah I have chosen to meet my Lord and Paradise." ( 27)

B. And when he sat on his pulpit delivering a sermon while he was sick
he according to Ibn Husham concluded the sermon by saying: "Certainly
God has given a choice to one of His servants (the Prophet was referring
to himself) between this world along with the Hereafter and what the
Lord has. The servant chose what the Lord has (he chose to meet his
Lord). ( 28 ) Thus he was informing his audience that he was about to
depart from this world .

C. Muslim recorded in his Sahih that the Holy Prophet said to his
daughter Fatima while he was suffering from his ailment by which he
died: "Gabriel used to review the Holy Qur'an with me once or twice a
year and now he has reviewed it with me twice." Then he said to her: "I
sense that my death is drawing nigh. Be obedient to God and patient I am
a good ancestor of yours.... " ( 29 )

D. Al-Bukhari through his channel to Ayeshah recorded that she said:
"The Prophet called upon Fatimah (peace be upon her) in his ailment in
which he died and confided in her on a matter and she cried: Then he
confided in her on another matter and she laughed. When we asked her
about that she said: 'He informed me that he will die in his present
ailment and I cried. Then he informed me that I shall be the first among
the members of his House to follow him and I laughed." ( 30)

All these hadiths testify that he was fully aware of the nearness of his
death.

Had the Messenger been desirous to appoint Abu Bakr as his successor
while he knew the nearness of his death he would not have ordered him to
leave Medina quickly.

Instead of urging Abu Bakr along with the others to leave Medina the
Prophet should have prevented Abu Bakr from joining the expedition.

For the expedition of Osamah to reach the land of Pale-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 27 ) Ibn Husham Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p. 642. ( 28 ) Ibn
Husham in his Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p. 649. ( 29 ) Muslim in
his Sahih Part 17 p. 7. ( 30 ) Al-Bukhari in his Sahih Part 7 p. 12.

**( 174 )**

stine fight and return to Medina it would take two months or more. The
Prophet on the other hand might have died a few days after the departure
of the army and he himself was expecting to die soon. He did not appoint
Abo Bakr before the departure of the army. He could not appoint him
after his return with the army from Palestine because Abu Bakr would not
be able to see the Prophet alive. He would not appoint him while he was
absent from Medina for it would be inconceivable that the Messenger
would allow the capital to be without a caliph after his death for two
months or more while he knew the dangers which were threatening Medina
and the Faith of Islam.

Furthermore Abu Bakr could have been killed while he was in the
expedition. The death of a caliph at a battle during that serious period
would lead to the worst consequences for the Muslims and Islam.

Had the Messenger been desirous to appoint Abu Bakr as a successor he
would not have allowed him to be in that army. But the fact is that the
delay of Abu Bakr and other companions in Medina was against the will of
the Prophet which he made clearly known. He emphatically urged them to
execute the mission of Osamah repeating that several times while he was
on the pulpit and on his deathbed.

Thus Abu Bakr in spite of his high position and the love of the Prophet
to him was not meant by the Prophet to be his successor.

##### \* \* \*

WAS THE ELECTION OF ABU BAKR LEGAL?
-----------------------------------

The Muslims had the right to elect Abu Bakr if the  
 Messenger did not choose another person to succeed him .  
 And Abu Bakr had the right to accept the election. Such  
 an election constitutes a contract which exacts from both  
 sides its fulfillment according to the conditions on which  
 the election was based. When the conditions of the election  
 demand from the elected to follow the Book of God and the  
 teaching of the Prophet and that the elector should obey  
 his elect in what is considered to be an obedience to God  

**( 175 )**

and His Messenger the election would be sound and binding to both sides
.

However such an election in spite of its legality had two negative
sides:

1. The right to disagree with the majority. Since the succession of Abu
Bakr came by a popular election rather than by the Prophet's selection a
good Muslim could have refused to join his electors without sinning.
Every Muslim is entitled to political freedom and no one has the right
to force any one to do what he does not want or to impose on him a
restriction that did not come from God. He should not be forced to elect
a person whom he does not want to authorize .

It is equally true that the minority has no right to stand in the way of
the majority and to prevent it from administering the affairs of the
country as long as there is an explicit or implicit agreement that the
majority rules the country. Even in the absence of such an agreement the
majority has the right to run the country. This is because the minority
has no right to administer the affairs of the majority and if the
majority is to be obstructed the country would be ruined .

Since every individual has the right to disagree with the majority it
would be an injustice on the part of the majority to force a minority to
agree with it. For this we think it was an injustice to force Al-Zubeir
Ibn Al-Awam to elect Abu Bakr though he was qualified for leadership.
Abu Bakr was not appointed by God and His Messenger and Al- Zubeir's
refusal to elect him did not constitute a violation of any Divine
commandment. Abu Bakr and the majority of the companions entered into a
pact and Al-Zubeir had the right not to be a part of that pact. Forcing
him to enter into such a pact was an encroachment on his rights.

It was more than unfair to try to force Ali to join the electors after
the Prophet declared him the "Moula" (Guardian) of every Muslim
including Abu Bakr. The right of an individual or a minority to disagree
with the majority is sacred and observed in all democratic elections .

When more than one nominee compete for a high office  

**( 176 )**

and one of the nominees wins the majority's votes the majority does not
attempt to force the electors of the loser to join them in electing the
winner. Even in a nation with one political party where the government
asks people to cast their votes by saying yes or no; when the result
becomes known the government never forces those who said "no" to say
"yes." This is the attitude of Islam the religion of justice.

Forcing people to do what they do not have to do is an aggression and
God does not love the aggressors.

When the Imam Ali was elected after the death of Othman Abdullah Ibn
Omar Saad Ibn Abu Waqass Osamah Ibn Zeid and other companions refused to
elect him. The Imam did not force them to join the majority nor did he
consider them trangressors He only demanded from them not to hinder his
administration.

The companions who lived at the time of Abu Bakr's election had the
right to elect or refuse to elect him and they had the right to believe
or disbelieve in his qualification. If so the Muslim generations who
were born after that election had the same right. They would not be
sinning by taking a positive or a negative attitude towards the
caliphate of Abu Bakr.

From this it becomes evident that the mutual incrimination by the
Muslims of today for their positive or negative attitude toward the
caliphate of Abu Bakr is erroneous and represents an extremism.

2. The second negative aspect of this kind of legitimate leadership is
that it does not make the word or the deed of the caliph a sacred law.
Before his election he was like any other companion unimmuned of error;
and he would remain so after the election. The election does not change
his personality nor does it increase his knowledge. It does not elevate
him in the eyes of God above other good believers nor does it make all
his words or deeds right. At best he would be a righteous "mujtahid" (a
scholar who is capable of forming an independent opinion about the
Islamic law)

Other scholars have the right to disagree with him and the  

**( 177 )**

non-scholars from among the Muslims have the right to follow scholars
other than him .

When another mujtahid believes that such a capilh is erroneous in word
or deed he should not follow him. To demand from the Muslims to follow a
wrong verdict is to demand from people what God did not demand and to
add to the religion what is not from the religion.

### The Prophet's Appointee

These two negative sides of an elective leadership would not exist in a
leadership based on an appointment by the Prophet. If the Prophet chose
a leader his decision would be binding on every Muslim and according to
the Holy Qur'an no one would have the right to defy it:

"And it is not permitted for believing man or believing woman to make a
choice after God and His Messenger have decided in an affair. And
whoever disobeys God and His Messenger would be in manifest error."( 31
)

When the people pledge allegiance to the Prophet's appointee they would
be in fact pledging the same to the Messenger. And whoever pledges to
the Messenger would be pledging to God. The Holy Qur'an declares:
"Certainly those who pledge allegiance to thee in fact they do that to
God. The hand of God is above their hands. And whoever breaches a
covenant he breaches against himself and whoever fulfills what he
promises God God will grant him a great reward." ( 32 )

A caliph appointed by the Messenger possesses a holiness that issues
from the holiness of the Messenger. His  
 contemporary Muslims have to follow his order and rules  
 and so do the generations after them. To a certain degree  
 he has jurisdictions that resemble those of the Prophet except that he
is not a Prophet. He is not expected to add to nor substract from the
Islamic rules. There shall be no  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 31 ) Chapter 33 verse 36. ( 32 ) Chapter 48 verse 10.

**( 178 )**

Prophet after Mohammad and the rules of Mohammad are eternal and will
continue until the Day of Judgment. A caliph appointed by the Prophet
represents him and because of that he is supposed to be the most
knowledgeable of the Holy Qur'an and the teaching of the Prophet.
Whatever he declares legal is legal and whatever he declares illegal is
forbidden. No Muslim has the right to disagree with him. He is the most
knowledgeable and his obedience is as that of the Messenger.

##### \* \* \*

QURAISH AND THE CALIPHATE
-------------------------

Did the Prophet say that the Imams are from Quraish? And if he did say
that did he mean that the caliphate is by election or by inheritance or
by appointment from the Prophet?

Many hadiths on this subject are recorded in the Sahihs and other books
of which are the following: Muslim recorded that Abu Hurairah reported
that the Messenger of God said: "People are followers of Quraish.

Their Muslim follows their Muslim and their Kafir (unbeliever) follows
their Kafir." ( 33 )

He recorded also that Jaber Ibn Abdullah reported that the Prophet said:
"People are followers of Quraish in good and in evil."

Muslim also recorded that Abdullah reported that the Messenger said:
"The Islamic authority (Caliphate) will stay in Quraish as long as two
men exist in this world."

He reported also that Jaber Ibn Samorah reported that the Messenger of
God said: "This religion will continue until the Day of Judgement comes
or 12 caliphs from Quraish rule you."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 33 ) This hadith and the following three hadiths are recorded by
Muslim in his Sahih Part 12 Book of Al-Imarah pp. 200-202.

**( 179 )**

Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn Omar reported that the Messenger of God
said: This Islamic authority will stay in Quraish as long as two persons
from Quraish remain alive." ( 37 )

He recorded through his channel to Jaber Ibn Samorah that he said: "I
heard the Prophet saying: 'There shall be twelve rulers.' Then he said a
word I did not hear and my father said that the Prophet said: 'All of
them are from Quraish.' " Al-Termathi recorded the same except that he
said that the Prophet said: "There will be twelve rulers after me " and
that the father of Jaber said: "The Messenger said: 'All of them are
from Quraish.'" ( 38 ) Al-Hakim through his channel to Masrouq recorded
that he said: "While we were sitting with Abdullah (Ibn Omar) a man
asked him: 'Abu Abdul-Rahman did you and other companions ask the
Messenger of God how many caliphs will rule this nation?' Abdullah
replied: 'No one before you asked me about this since I came to Iraq.'
Then he said: 'We asked the Messenger of God and he said: Twelve the
same number as the representatives of the children of Israel with
Moses." ( 39 )

Imam Ahmad reported that Abu Bakr said: (to Saad Ibn Abadah) "And you
Saad knew that the Messenger of God said while you were sitting:
'Quarish are the people of this authority. The righteous of the people
are followers of their righteous and the wicked of the people are
followers of their wicked." ( 40)

It is clear that the first hadith does not speak about the caliphate.
For Quraish at the time of the caliphate was not divided into Muslims
and non-Muslims. All the Qureshites were confessing Islam at that time.
It seems that the hadith came at a time when the majority of the
Qureshites were pagans. The hadith speaks of the influence of Quraish
over  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 37 ) Al-Bukhari Sahih Al-Bukhari (in the book of Al-Ahkam) Part 9 p.
78. ( 38 ) Al-Termathi in his Sunan Part 2 p. 35. (Al-Fairuzbadi in his
book Fadha-il Al-Khamsah Virtue of the Five) Part 2 p. 23. ( 39 )
Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 4 p. 501. ( 40 ) Imam Ahmad in his Al-Musnad
Part 1 p. 5.

**( 180 )**

the Arab tribes. For they were opposed to Islam when Quraish was
fighting it. When Quraish entered the new faith the rest of the Arabs
rushed into the faith. The Prophet in this hadith was not trying to
announce an Islamic law or issue an order to the Muslims. He was
speaking of a matter of fact: That is the influence of Quraish and its
effect on the rest of the Arab tribes .

The second hadith like the first one does not speak about the caliphate
nor about who should be the caliph. It is an information of a situation
that existed at the time of the hadith .

As to the last six hadiths they clearly speak of the caliphate. These
hadiths vary in their contents without contradiction. Some of them state
that the caliphate is in Quraish .

Some of them add that the caliphate shall continue in Quraish until the
end of the world. And some of them add that the caliphs are 12 and some
of them mention that the number of the caliphs is 12 but do not mention
that they are from Quraish .

To understand these hadiths we have to put together the two hadiths of
Abdullah Ibn Omar in one of which he reported that the caliphate shall
continue in Quraish to the end of the world and in the other in which he
reported that the number of caliphs is 12 like the representatives of
the children of Israel. The two hadiths explain each other and agree
with the hadith of Jaber Ibn Samorah which is the most specific among
all these hadiths and capable of explaining the non-specific of them .

Thus these hadiths inform us that the non-Qureshites shall not be
caliphs and that the caliphs are only twelve and that the caliphate will
stay in Quraish as long as two people remain in this world .

These statements could be interpreted in one of the following ways:

### Was the Prophet Predicting?

1. The Prophet was not trying to instruct the Muslims  
 and inform them of what they ought to do after him concerning the
caliphate. He was rather speaking to them  

**( 181 )**

about the future forecasting that the caliphate shall stay in Quraish
forever until the Day of Judgement. Thus he informs us that the
caliphate will never be interrupted as long as the people are living on
the face of this earth and that every caliph shall be a Qureshite and
that the caliphs are to be twelve .

Of course this would not be true because the caliphate was interrupted
and discontinued and because many of the caliphs such as the Osmanites
were neither Qureshites nor Arabs .

In addition to this stating that the caliphs are twelve cannot be true
whether it meant only the righteous caliphs or all of the caliphs
including the non-righteous. For the number of righteous caliphs did not
reach twelve and if we add to them the number of non-righteous their
number is much higher than twelve .

### Is the Qureshite Rule Hereditary?

2. The second way of interpreting the above hadiths is that the Prophet
was trying to issue instructions and communicate to the Muslims a
religious command so he told his nation that the caliphs after him have
to be from Quraish and no one deserves to be a caliph except the
Qureshites. This is because the Qureshites are related to the Messenger
closely or remotely for they join the Holy Prophet through their
great-grandfather "Fihr Ibn Malik." By this a Qureshite Muslim would be
qualified to be a caliph and a non-Qureshite would not qualify .

If we adopt this interpretation we would be admitting that the Islamic
authority is by inheritance and that the right of inheritance would not
be exclusive to the close relatives of the Holy Prophet. It is rather
broad enough to include all the Qureshite clans who are descendants of
"Fihr Ibn Malik.".

To believe that the Qureshite Muslims are qualified for  
 the caliphate for being close or remote relatives of the  
 Prophet is to subscribe to a theory of inheritance with  
 which the Islamic law of inheritance does not agree. If the  
 Islamic authority can be inherited through blood relation-  

**( 182 )**

ship the close relatives bar the remote relative from inheritance
according to the Islamic law .

Furthermore the restriction of the number of caliphs to twelve becomes
unjustifiable for the righteous among the Qureshite caliphs did not
reach the number of twelve and non-righteous among them were many more
than twelve.

### Are the Qureshites Superior?

3. The third interpretation of the hadiths is that the Prophet through
these statements was announcing a religious law which makes the
caliphate an exclusive right of the Qureshites. This is not because they
are related to him but because God preferred them to the non-Qureshites
.

If we take this interpretation we have to accept two contradictory
concepts: (a) The caliphate is not to be by the choice of the Muslims.
It is rather by appointment from God because He is the One Who decreed
that the caliphs are to be Qureshites whether people accept or reject .

(b) The faith of Islam invites its followers to believe in a tribal
superiority and a Qureshite aristocracy whose members regardless of the
extent of their faith are preferred by God to others even if the others
were more religious wiser and more knowledgeable.

We say these two ideas are contradictory because if the caliphate is by
a Divine decree the Almighty is expected to choose for the leadership of
the believers their wisest and most knowledgeable and righteous. It
would be illogical to say that God prefers Abu Sufyan to Ammar Ibn Yasir
because Abu Sufyan fought Islam and the Prophet for twenty-one years and
Ammar fought with the Prophet for more than twenty-one years .

History remembers that the Holy Prophet stood on the day of conquest of
Mecca and declared the following:

"O people of Quraish certainly God has done away  
 with the boastfulness of the pre-Islamic mentality and its  
 pride of ancestors. People are from Adam and Adam was  

**( 183 )**

from soil." Then he recited the following verse:'O mankind certainly We
have created you from a male and female and made you people and tribes
that you may recognize each other. The noblest among you in the eyes of
God is the most righteous of you." Thus placing the Qureshites above
others not for anything except being Qureshites is opposed to the Book
of God and the teaching of the Holy Prophet in words and deeds .

Again the restriction of the number of the caliphs to twelve would be
unjustifiable for the same reason we mentioned before .

### Were the Men Chosen Only for their Righteousness?

4. The fourth way of interpreting the hadiths is to say the Holy Prophet
was trying to inform the Muslims that God had chosen men from Quraish to
become caliphs. He did not choose these men because they were related to
the Holy Prophet nor because they were Qureshites. He chose them because
they were the best among the Muslims. These men are the legitimate
caliphs whether people elect them or reject them.

The six hadiths of the Qureshite caliphate clearly indicate that God did
not leave to the Muslims a complete choice in selecting their caliphs.
He rather decreed that their caliphs have to come from Quraish. It would
be illogical to believe that He did that because the Qureshites are
relatives of the Messenger or because the Qureshites are better than the
rest of the Muslims. This would be an invitation to the belief in an
aristocracy alien to the faith of Islam which calls for equality
glorifies the righteous and despises the transgressor. The history of
Islam attests that the majority of the Qureshites were the most hostile
to the Messenger and his religion before they adopted Islam and less
religious than others after they adopted Islam.

It would be only logical to say that the Qureshiteness of the caliphs is
like the Qureshiteness of the Prophet himself.

God did not choose Mohammad because he was from Quraish or because he
was a Hashimite or from. the children of Abdul-Muttalib or from Mecca.
He chose him because he  

**( 184 )**

was the best among the people of the earth and it happened that the best
of the people of the earth was a Qureshite from the children of
Abdul-Muttalib. And so the caliphs about whom the Holy Prophet spoke
were chosen by God because they were the best of the people of the earth
and it happened that they were from Quraish. This logical interpretation
agrees with the Shi-ite Islamic School. When God chooses a man to become
Imam of the people he would be the Imam whether the muslims accept him
or reject him just as when God chooses a Prophet he would be the Prophet
even if people do not believe in his Prophethood.

### Qureshites and Election Are Irreconcilable

It is irreconcilable to say that God has decreed that the caliphs are to
be from Quraish and that He left to the Muslims the matter of the
selection of the caliphs from among the Qureshites .

God has decreed that the caliphs are to be from the Quraish in order to
lead the Muslims to what is best for them. If he left the selection of
the caliph from Quraish to the choice of the Muslims He would leave the
future of the caliphate to chance. Election by people does not secure
the best leadership for people do not know what is hidden in the hearts
of individuals. God is the only One who knows that .

Since God did not leave the caliphate entirely to the choice of the
people and decreed that their caliphs are to be only from a particular
group (the Qureshites) the entire choice must be His. He would not
divide the choice between Himself and the Muslims leaving the selection
of the tribe to Himself and the selection of the man from the tribe to
the Muslims .

God is expected to choose the tribe for the sake of the  
 individual and not to choose the individual for the sake of  
 the tribe. God has chosen Hashim and Quraish because of  
 Mohammad and He did not choose Mohammad because  
 he was a Hashimite or Qureshite Choosing the man rather  
 than the clan is what secures the right leadership. Thus  
 when God and His Messenger informed us that the caliphs  

**( 185 )**

are from Quraish they were actually informing us that there are
particular individuals who happened to be from Quraish and were chosen
by God to be caliphs. They were chosen because of their high
qualifications and not because of their being Qureshites.
