Ali Views the Succession
========================

**( 186 )**

##### 17.

There is a theory that claims that the civil war which took place during
the reign of Abu Bakr could have been avoided if Ali had succeeded the
Prophet. This interesting theory (which I neither confirm nor deny) is
based upon the following reasons:

1. The declaration of the Prophet at Ghadeer Khum while returning from
his valedictory pilgrimage made thousands of pilgrims believe that he
had chosen Ali to succeed him.

What they understood from the declaration seemed to be consistent with
their tradition which gives the authority to the closest relative of the
leader. When they realized that the leadership had been handed to Abu
Bakr after the death of the Prophet some of them opposed the new
government and refused to pay to it the "Zakat"(the Islamic tax)

Others went further and deserted Islam thinking that the companions have
disobeyed the declaration of the Prophet .

They thought that the companions were not serious in their adoption of
Islam. And so the Arab tribes thought that they have the right to desert
Islam and go back to paganism .

2. Had Ali been the ruler after the Prophet his military reputation
could have deterred anyone from challenging his leadership. The stories
of his heroism were on every Arab's lips. The beduins as well as the
settlers of villages and cities had experienced and witnessed his
military actions during the last ten years of the life of the Prophet.
Why should they take a risk of confronting him in a losing war?

Whether this theory is right or wrong the civil war was  

**( 187 )**

decisive concerning Ali. It obliged him to stop his opposition to Abu
Bakr and pledge his support lest the Muslim government be weakened in
its struggle against the deserters of the faith. Ali was too pious to
continue his opposition when dangers were threatening the foundation of
Islam.

For several months the Imam Ali refused to join the electors of Abu Bakr
and he was expected to continue to do so. The civil war however made it
mandatory for him to reverse his position .

The view of the Imam can be presented as follows:

1. He believed that the leadership is his exclusive right .

He was the treasurer of the knowledge of the Prophet his choice and his
closest relative. It is reported that when Abu Bakr demanded from Ali to
join his electors Ali replied:

"I have the right of leadership. I will not follow you when you ought to
follow me." When Abu Bakr asked him: "Was not my election by the will of
the people?" he replied: "But you told the Qureshites and the Medinites
that you are entitled to the leadership because you are related to
Mohammad and they conceded to you. I have the same argument against
you." Then he said: "We have more right in the Messenger of God alive
and dead. We are the members of his House the place of his confidence
the treasure of his knowledge and wisdom. No one from this nation can
come close to the positions of the members of the House of Mohammad. And
those who were indebted to their favor should not be equalized with
them."( 1 ) He said also:

"I am the executor of the Prophet his minister and the trustee of his
secrets and knowledge. . . I am the first one who believed in him the
most effective defender of Islam among you in combatting the pagans the
most knowledgeable in the Book of God and the teaching of the Prophet
and most foreseer of the consequences of the events. For how long do you
deny us the leadership? Give us justice and acknowledge our rights as
the Medinites did for you." ( 2 )

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Abdul Fattah Abdul Maksoud Al-Imam Ali Ibn Abu Talib Part 1 p.
179. ( 2 ) Al-Tabersi Al-Ihtijaj Part 1 p. 95.

**( 188 )**

Ali does not lack evidence on his executorship or ministerial posts. The
Messenger conferred on him the post of executorship when he gathered his
close relatives ten years before the Hijrah. At that conference the
Prophet said to the members of his clan while his hand on Ali's neck:
"This is my brother executor and successor in you. Listen to him and
obey him." To his ministerial post the authentically reported statement
of the Prophet attests: "Ali would you not be pleased to be to me like
Aaron to Moses but there shall be no Prophet after me?".

Aaron was the minister of Moses according to the Holy Qur'an: "And grant
me a minister from the members of my house Aaron my brother. Strengthen
me by him and make him a sharer in my mission." ( 3 )

As to his trustworthiness on the secrets of the Messenger and his
knowledge it suffices to remember that the Messenger said: "I am the
city of knowledge and Ali is its gate.

Whoever wishes to enter the city should come through the gate.".

### He Believed That Abu Bakr's Election Was Unbinding .

2. The Imam viewed the election of Abu Bakr to be unbinding to his
electors. Evidently he believed that the Messenger had chosen him to
lead the nation and administer its affairs after him and that the choice
of the Prophet is binding to the nation. Thus the nation does not have
the right to choose another leader. Had not the Imam believed in this he
would not have allowed himself to ask the Medinites to reverse their
position after they elected Abu Bakr.

A sound election is a covenant to be fulfilled and Ali was too righteous
to call upon people to break a legitimate covenant.

He and his wife Fatimah "Al-Zahra" (the Lady of Light) daughter of the
Prophet visited the Medinite companions seeking their support and asking
them to reverse their position towards Abu Bakr.

Muaweyah in one of his letters to the Imam said:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 3 ) Holy Qur'an Chapter 20 verses 28-31.

**( 189 )**

... "And I remember when you used to carry your wife at night on a
donkey while your hands in the hands of your sons Al-Hassan and
Al-Hussein after Abu Bakr was elected. You called upon every Badrian and
early Muslim to support you and went with your wife to them offering to
them your two sons and asking them their help against the companion of
the Messenger of God...."( 4 )

### He Did not Want to Reach His Goal by Force.

3. In spite of his belief that his right was usurped he did not try to
regain it by force nor did he want to damage the unity of the Muslims
The Imam realized that he does not have a strong support. The absolute
majority of the Meccans were deadly against him. To them he was the man
who was responsible for the death of many of their fathers brothers sons
and relatives in his defensive campaign for Islam. The Medinites were
closer to him than the Qureshites but they did not have the will to
sacrifice for his leadership. They had already entered into a pact with
Abu Bakr and they thought that this exacts from them their loyalty.

Ali had some support from some outstanding companions such as Salman the
Persian Abu Tharr Al-Bursa Ibn Azib Ammar Ibn Yasir Al-Miqdad Ibn
Al-Aswad and Al-Zubeir Ibn Al-Awam. But these companions did not have
the following. Thus the Imam found that patience was the only open
avenue for him.

### He Reversed His Position for the Sake of Unity

He could have continued his opposition to Abu Bakr as  
 long as Abu Bakr lived. Saad Ibn Abadah continued his op position until
Abu Bakr died. However the movement of  
 desertion of the faith by the Arab tribes was to him a  
 decisive factor that made him reverse his attitude. His op position to
Abu Bakr was not motivated by a personal  
 ambition. It was rather motivated by his desire to set the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 4 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed his Commentraries on Nahjul-Balagha Vol. 1 p.
131.

**( 190 )**

Muslims on the true path of the Prophet. When Islam was threatened by
the movement of desertion Ali found it unwise to be concerned with the
method of leading the Muslims when the very existence of Islam became
endangered.

Al-Balathori recorded that when the Arabs deserted the faith of Islam
Othman came to Ali saying: "Cousin no one will fight the enemy while you
refuse to reconcile with Abu Bakr." ( 5 ) He convinced the Imam to go
with him to Abu Bakr; when Abu Bakr saw the Imam they hugged each other
and cried. The Muslims were pleased with that and determined to fight
the deserters of the faith .

Al-Bukhari in his Sahih reported that the Imam said to Abu Bakr when
they met: We recognize your position and what God has given you but you
have taken over the leadership without our consultation. We believe that
we have our share and right in the leadership because of our
relationship to the Messenger of God. Abu Bakr cried they promised each
other to meet at the Mosque at night.

Ali went to the Mosque and he told the people that he was not motivated
in his opposition by a jealousy toward Abu Bakr nor by a denial of his
position; but we believe he said that we have a right in this leadership
and he took it without consulting us. Thus we felt uneasy." ( 6 )

The Imam spoke of what took place in that period in a message he sent to
the people of Egypt when he sent to them Malik Al-Ashtar as a governor:

"... And I withheld my hand until I found the deserters of the faith of
Islam calling for the destruction of the religion of Mohammad. (As this
danger emerged I reversed my position) and decided to aid Islam and its
followers lest I witness a total or partial destruction in Islam then
the tragedy to me becomes greater than losing your leadership which is
only transitory."( 7 )

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 5 ) Sayed Murtadha Al-Asakari conveyed this in his book: Abdullah Ibn
Saha p. 73. ( 6 ) Al-Bukhari his Sahih Part 5 p. 108. ( 7 )
Nahjul-Balaghah Part 3 pp. 198-199.
