Abu Bakr Names a Successor
==========================

**( 191 )**

##### 18.

Abu Bakr died and a life filled with important achievements came to an
end.

1. He subdued the deserters of the faith and the withholders of the
Zakat. He brought the Arab tribes back to Islam and made them soldiers
of Islam after they became its adversaries.

2. Upon his order the verses and chapters of the revelations were
gathered in the Book of Islam the Holy Qur'an .

3. He pushed the faith of Islam beyond the borders of the Arabic
Peninsula. He died while the Muslim forces were facing the Persian
armies in Iraq and the Roman armies in Syria .

As Abu Bakr's death was drawing nigh he chose to appoint a successor and
this was his right. He decided not to leave to chance the leadership of
the state .

Had the history been logical Ali would have succeeded Abu Bakr. He was
by-passed after the death of the Prophet because the election was held
hastily without planning and consultation. It is said that the emergency
which was brought about by the conference of the Medinites at Saqifat
Ranu Sa-idah and the absence of Ali who was preoccupied with the Holy
Funeral made the companions overlook Ali and his qualifications .

If this were the fact Ali should not have been overlooked at this time.
There was no emergency and the Caliph was able to appoint whomever he
chose. Yet Ali was not chosen by the Caliph .

Quraish stood against him for many reasons and his  

**( 192 )**

high distinctions along with his close relationship to the Prophet were
the main reason.

The Meccan clans went into costly wars against the Messenger of God
because they did not want the Hashimites to have the exclusive honor of
having the Prophet from among them. Having this attitude they were not
expected to let the Hashimites possess another exclusive honor by
allowing Ali to succeed the Prophet.

The Qureshite influence grew rapidly during the reign of Abu Bakr. The
rapid growth of the Qureshite influence was expected to increase the
distance between Ali and the High Office.

One might say that Abu Bakr should not have followed the unfair attitude
of Quraish toward Ali after he heard so many statements by the Prophet
which indicated that Ali was his choice. But Abu Bakr seemingly did not
believe that the statements of the Prophet concerning Ali made it
mandatory for the Muslims to follow him. Had he believed that he would
not have allowed himself to be the First Caliph. Being of this opinion
he thought he had the option to choose Ali or any one from the
outstanding companions.

He did not choose Ali because he was his main opponent .

He chose Omar Ibn Al-Khattab his strongest supporter the planner of his
election and his right hand in all affairs .

The reader may remember that when Ali reconciled with Abu Bakr he
complained of Abu Bakr's failure to consult him when he was elected and
that he took from Ali what he was entitled to have. Abu Bakr listened to
his complaint and wept. Abu Bakr's tears gave the impression that he
would not repeat it. He was expected to consult Ali and the rest of the
Hashimites along with companions who were inclined towards him. Nothing
of this took place .

It is worth noting that Fatimah Al-Zahra daughter of  
 the Prophet was not on speaking terms with Abu Bakr  
 and she was urging the Medinites to shift from Abu Bakr  
 to Ali. She was angry with Abu Bakr because of the caliphate and
because he nationalized "Fadak." (a group of orchards) which she had
received from her father and was supposed to keep for herself as a gift
or a legacy. But Abu  

**( 193 )**

Bakr reported that the Messenger said: We the Prophets do not leave
inheritance.

Fatimah denied that her father said that because this is opposed to the
Holy Qur'an which declares that Suleiman (Solomon) received an
inheritance from his father David. Both Solomon and his father were
prophets .

Abu Bakr made efforts to normalize relations with her without reversing
his position on Fadak but she refused to speak to him and when she died
he was not informed of her death lest he attend her funeral.( 1 ) Abu
Bakr was very concerned with Fatimah's anger because the Prophet said:
"Fatimah is a portion of me .

Whoever displeases her displeases me." He also said: "Fatimah is the
leader of the women of Paradise." (Both hadiths were reported by
Al-Bukhari in his Sahih section of virtues of Fatimah).".

With all this the righteous Caliph would be expected to name Ali his
successor for this would please the Prophet because it pleased Fatimah
though belatedly.

Abu Bakr did not do that nor did he consult Ali or any of the Hashimites
including Al-Abbas uncle of the Holy Prophet .

Indeed Abu Bakr did not consult any companion about whom he should
choose to succeed him. He did not give them a choice between two or more
candidates. He consulted a few companions about Omar and Omar only. The
consultants were Abdul-Rahaman Ibn Ouf Othman Ibn Affan and Osseid Ibn
Hudheir. These were Omar's admirers and all of them were positive
towards him. Talhah Abu Bakr's cousin was not consulted and when he
criticized Omar Abu Bakr exploded in anger .

Why shouldn't we call the events by their names? Abu Bakr was iiidebted
to Omar in his election and establishing his leadership. He was his
right hand during the time of his caliphate. Abu Bakr wanted to return
to his good friend  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Al-Bukhari reported it in his Sahih Part 5 p. 178. Muslim also
reported it in his Sahih Part 12 "Hukm of Al-Fei" (The wealth which is
acquired from enemies of Islam) p.77.

**( 194 )**

his favor. We say this not trying to minimize the sincerity of the First
Caliph .

While he was dying Abu Bakr commanded Othman to write his will. When he
reached the following words: "I have appointed as a successor " he
fainted before mentioning the name of his appointee. When he woke up he
asked Othman to read what he wrote and to the surprise of Abu Bakr
Othman had added the name of Omar. Abu Bakr was very pleased with that .

Of course the new Caliph was more pleased with Othman. He remembered
this favor for Othman. He rewarded him by a similar favor at the end of
his reign.
