Omar Succeeds
=============

**( 195 )**

##### 19.

Omar came to power as the Second Caliph 14 years after the Hijrah (635
AD). He proved to be the most effective among the caliphs in directing
the policy of the Muslim World and its events.

The period of his leadership was full of spectacular accomplishments and
conspicuous events. If the policy of a head of state has domestic and
foreign aspects Omar's policy had all that plus past and future aspects
for its influence went beyond the boundaries of his own reign with
far-reaching consequences.

The success of his external policy was dazzling to the eyes of the
historians Muslim and non-Muslim alike. He inherited from his
predecessor Abu Bakr a World-War against the two great empires of his
time: The Persian and the Roman empires.

The Muslim forces during his reign faced the Persian armies and were
able to place Iraq and Persia including Al-Ahwaz and Azarbaijan under
the dominion of Islam.

The Muslim forces on the North Western front were able to defeat the
Romans and bring Syria and Egypt into the Islamic Jurisdiction.

Thus under his leadership Muslim armies were able  
 to disintegrate the two prominent empires of his time. The  
 spiritual conquest which accompanied the military conquest  
 was the greater of the two. His policy towards the non-Muslim
inhabitants of the conquered lands was fair. He  
 levied taxation on the conquered land plus a personal  
 taxation on the adult males. None of the followers of other  
 religions were oppressed during his reign. He recognized  
 their natural rights and freedoms. History recorded his word  
 as directed to Amr Ibn Al-Aus who was his appointed  

**( 196 )**

governor of Egypt whose son hit a Coptic Christian: "Amr when did you
enslave people after they were born free?" His domestic policy was
mostly successful. It may be summed up as follows: In relation to his
family; in relation to Muslims in general; in relation to his colleagues
of the companions of the Prophet; and in relation to the members of the
House of the Prophet.

In relation to himself and his family his policy was ideal. Hundreds of
millions of dirhams (a dirham of his time is equivalent to a dollar of
our time) were pouring into the treasury of the Islamic State. Though he
had unlimited authority he and his family lived in poverty. It is
reported that he said: "I deal with the Muslims' treasury as I deal with
a fund of an orphan. If I am in no need I will not touch it; and if I am
in need I only satisfy my necessity." ( 1)

In relation to the Muslims in general his policy was characterized as
just firm and helpful. He sufficiently provided for the soldiers their
families and the inhabitants of Medina plus many others.

As to his relation to the companions he alloted to them according to the
record of their participation in the defense of Islam. Trying to prevent
the companions temptation of wealth or fearing the use of their
brilliant record for advancing their influence he prevented the
companions from residing in any city other than Medina. "I am standing
at the mouth of Al-Harrah (the entrance of Medina) he said holding the
Qureshites' throats and belts lest they fall into the fire."( 2 Thus he
kept the ambitious companions of the Prophet under his watchful eyes.

In relation to the members of the House of the Prophet  
 his policy was mixed with admiration and caution. He did  
 not grant any governmental post to any of them. However  
 the tension between him and Ali which started after the  
 death of the Prophet and continued during the period of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat Part 3 p 276. ( 2 ) Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsoud
Al-Imam Ali Ibn Abu Talib Part 1 p. 223.

**( 197 )**

Abu Bakr abated and gradually was replaced by a friendship which grew by
the passage of time. Omar used to resort to Ali's counsel in important
events seeking solutions of serious problems.

When he was informed that the Persian government had mobilized an
extremely huge army to fight the Muslims he wanted to attend the battle
in order to strengthen the morale of the Islamic army. When he consulted
the Imam Ali and other companions the Imam told him: "The Islamic cause
did not triumph or retreat by a great or small number. It is the
religion of God Who made it prevalent and His host which He prepared and
extended until it reached what it reached and appeared as it appeared.

We are promised by God and He will fulfill His promise and help His
Host. The place of the leader is the place of the string in the beads.
It collects them and makes them join each other. If the string breaks
the beads will scatter and never rejoin each other completely. Though
the Arabs today are few compared to others they are numerous through
Islam and strong by their unity. Be like an axis of a mill let the mill
go around and let the Arabs participate in the war without your
presence. If you leave you will leave behind you dangers which will be
of more concern to you than what you will face.

"If the Persians see you on the battlefield they will say: 'This is the
source of the danger. If you destroy him you will triumph.' Their war
will be more intensive and their hope in defeating the Muslims will grow
higher.

"As to what you mentioned of the Persian march to fight the Muslims God
the Almighty hates their march more than you do and He is more capable
of changing what He dislikes. As to what you have mentioned of their
great number we never fought by quantity. We fought only by the help of
God and His assistance." ( 3)

### Omar and Ali's Knowledge

Omar was deeply impressed with Ali's profound knowledge. It is reported
that he said: "No one should give any  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 3 ) Al-Sayed Al-Radhi Nahjul-Balaghah Part 2 pp. 29-30.

**( 198 )**

verdict at the Mosque (of the Prophet) when Ali is present." When he
made wrong decisions in Islamic rules Ali used to correct him. He
repeatedly said: "Had Ali not been present Omar would have perished
(spiritually) ." ( 4 ) He expressed his serious need to Ali's knowledge
by saying: "May God not keep me to a problem when Abu Hassan (Ali) is
not available.".

A lady was accused of adultery because she gave birth to a child six
months after she married. Omar decided to stone her. Ali said to him:
"Leader of the Believers if she appeals to the Book of God contesting
your decision she will prevail against you." God says: "Pregnancy and
nursing periods are thirty months." Again He says: "Mothers nurse their
children two complete years for whoever wants a complete nursing." If we
subtract twenty four months from thirty the balance would be six months.
Omar reversed his position and let the lady go free.

Ali at one time was with Omar while others were present. When he left
one of them criticized Ali and accused him of pride and conceit. Omar
said: "A man like Ali is entitled to be proud. By God without his sword
the pillar of Islam could not have been erected. He is the highest
magistrate in the nation its earliest Muslim and its most honorable."( 5
) When the critic asked what prevented him from giving him the
leadership after the death of the Prophet Omar replied: "We did not like
his young age and his love to his clan.".

However this does not mean that Omar used to consult  
 Ali in all affairs or follow all his opinions in religion. Omar  
 was extremely independent. Sometimes he appeared as if  
 he were in disagreement with the Prophet. The Messenger  
 made the duty of any pilgrim who did not accompany animals of sacrifice
to perform a pilgrimage of "Tamattu" (in  
 which the pilgrim takes leave of restrictions which are im-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 4 ) Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsoud Al-Imam Ali Ibn Abu Talib Part 1 p.
226. ( 5 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol. 3
p. 179.

**( 199 )**

posed at the start of the Pilgrimage). The Prophet commanded such a
person to make the seven circuits around the Kaaba and the seven walks
between Al-Safa and Al- Marwah; then it would be legal for him to
approach his wife before he resumed his pilgrimage again before leaving
for Arafat.

The Prophet also legalized the temporary marriage.

Omar chose to prohibit both and to punish severely whoever married a
woman for a limited period. Muslim in his Sahih reported that Abu Nudrah
said the following: "Ibn Abbass (a cousin of the Prophet) used to
legalize "Muta" (temporary marriage) and Ibn Al-Zubeir used to prohibit
it. When I mentioned that to Jabir Ibn Adbullah (a prominent companion
of the Prophet) he said: In my presence the following took place":

We practiced the temporary marriage during the days of the Prophet. . .
. When Omar came to power he said: God used to legalize to His Messenger
whatever He chose through whatever He chose. The Qur'an was revealed to
regulate our life. You have to complete your pilgrimage and the Omrah
(which precedes the pilgrimage) as God commanded you to do (without
terminating the regular restrictions before going to Arafat). Desist
from marrying women for a limited time. If a man married a woman for a
limited time and is brought to me I shall stone him (to death)."( 6 )

This opinion of the Second Caliph concerning pilgrimage seems to be in a
clear conflict with the Holy Qur'an: "And when you are in safety any
pilgrim who at the "Omrah" (the devotional part that precedes going to
Arafat) satisfies his carnal desires (after terminating the state of
restriction) until the resumption of pilgrimage he should offer what is
easily available of sacrificial animal. If he can not he should fast
three days during the pilgrimage and seven when you have returned; that
is ten in all. That is for the one whose family is not residing at the
Inviolable place of worship." Chapter 2 verse 196.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 6 ) Muslim in his Sahih Part 8 p. 169.

**( 200 )**

The hadith however clearly indicates that temporary marriage was legal
during the time of the Prophet and that he did not Prohibit it after
legalizing it. Had the Messenger prohibited such a marriage the Second
Caliph would have reminded the companions of that prohibition. His
saying:

"Desist from marrying a woman for a limited time" tells us that the
companions were still practicing the temporary marriage during his time.
Otherwise he would not have commanded them to stop that practice. Had
the Messenger prohibited such a practice after he legalized it the
companions would not have continued to practice it and the Second Caliph
would not have had to admonish them and threaten to stone those who
practiced such a marriage.

As to the pilgrimage of "Tamattu " the Messenger in his valedictory
pilgrimage said while he was in Mecca:

"Had I been at the beginning of my pilgrimage I would not have
accompanied the sacrificial animals and I would have made it Omrah
(separate from the pilgrimage by termination of the restrictions of the
Ihram). Whoever did not accompany sacrificial animals should terminate
his Ihram and make it Omrah." Suraqah lb Malik Ibn Jaasham stood up and
said to the Messenger: Is it for our present year exclusively or
forever? The Messenger put the fingers of his two hands between each
other and said: "The Omrah entered into the pilgrimage (repeating that
twice)

It is not for this year. It is forever." ( 7 ) Thus the extreme
independence of the Second Caliph had made him prohibit the pilgrimage
of Al-Tamattu and legalize killing the practicer of temporary marriage.
Yet the Messenger commanded the Muslims to make the pilgrimage of
Al-Tamattu and legalized temporary marriage.

A man so extremely independent in his opinion would not be expected to
consult the Imam Ali in every problem or follow all his opinions.
However he considered Ali to be the most knowledgeable among the
companions and the highest authority on religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 7 ) Muslim. Sahih Muslim Part 8 pp. 172-179.

**( 201 )**

DIALOGUES ABOUT THE CALIPHATE
-----------------------------

The relationship between the Caliph and the Imam continued to improve
and finally Omar married Om Kulthoum daughter of the Imam. In spite of
these improvements history as far as I know does not record any dialogue
between the Caliph and the Imam concerning the caliphate. But the Caliph
had several dialogues with Abdullah Ibn Abbass (a cousin of the Prophet
and the Imam) concerning the disagreement between the Imam and himself.
In most of these dialogues Omar appeared to be satisfied with what took
place. One of the dialogues went as follows:

Omar: ". . . The Qureshite community was unwilling to let you (the
Hashimites) have the honor of both the caliphate and the Prophethood
lest you compromise the right of your community. Quraish chose for
itself. It succeeded and made the right decision." Ibn Abbass: ". . .
You said that the Qureshites were unwilling to let us have the honor of
both the caliphate and the Prophethood. But the Almighty described some
people as "resentful" when he said: 'Because they resented what God had
revealed God nullified their deeds.' You said that the Qureshite
community chose for itself and that it succeeded and made the right
decision. Had they chosen for themselves what God chose for them the
right would have been on their side neither objected to nor envied. . .
." ( 8 )

In another dialogue Omar told Ibn Abbas the following: "There were high
words from the Messenger of God  
 (concerning Ali). But those words did not constitute a  
 clear evidence for his leadership nor did they eliminate all  
 excuses (for those who did not side with him). The Messen ger was
trying to give Ali the leadership. He wanted to  
 record his name when he was in his ailment but I prevented  
 him from doing that for the interest of Islam. By the Lord  
 of the Ka-abah Quraish will never rally around him. Had  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 8 ) Ibn Al-Atheer in his hook Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 31.

**( 202 )**

he come to power after the death of the Prophet the Arabs would have
revolted against him. " ( 9)

In another dialogue the following conversation took place: Omar: "Son of
Abbass this man has exerted himself in worship until he had become lean
trying to show his piety.".

Ibn Abbass: "Who is that man?" Omar: "That is your cousin (Ali).".

Ibn Abbass: "What does he gain by showing his piety?" Omar: "He wants to
present himself for the caliphate." Ibn Abbass: "The Prophet nominated
him for the caliphate and he did not attain it.".

Omar: "He was in his youth and the Arabs thought that he was too young.
But now he has reached the age of maturity. Did you not know that God
never sent a Prophet before the age of forty?".

lbn Abbass: "People of wisdom and good judgement regard him perfect and
mature since God heightened the light of Islam. But they consider him
deprived and unlucky.".

Omar: "He will reach it after difficulties then his foot will slip and
he will not reach his aim. Abdullah you will witness that. Then the dawn
will appear to anyone who has two eyes. Then you will know the soundness
of the opinion of the early migrant companions who diverted the
leadership away from him." ( 10)

In another dialogue Omar appeared to have remorse for the way in which
Ali was treated. He said to Ibn Abbass while they were walking on one of
the streets of Medina holding hands: Omar: "I think that your man (Ali)
was treated unjustly.".

Ibn Abbass: "Amir Al-Mu'mineen (leader of the Believers) give him back
his right.".

Omar took his hand away from the hand of Ibn Ab-  

**( 203 )**

bass and left while talking to himself angrily. Then he stood and called
Ibn Abbass. When Ibn Abbass came to him Omar said:

"What prevented the Qureshites from giving him the leadership was his
age. They thought he was too young." Ibn Abbass replied: "By God neither
God nor His Messenger considered him too young when they commanded him
to take the chapter of "Bara-ah" from your man (Abu Bakr) when he was
setting out taking with him Bara-ah to announce it in the pilgrimage.".

Upon this the Caliph turned away from Ibn Abbass and left hurriedly.
(11)

In another conversation with Ibn Abbass Omar appeared to be milder than
usual. He said to Ibn Abbass: ". . . You may think that Abu Bakr was the
first one who pushed you (the Hashimites) back. He did not mean that.
Something emerged and there was no wiser way for him to take than the
path he took. Had he not had his opinion about me he would have given
you your share of the leadership. Had he done that your people (the
Qureshites) would not make you enjoy the leadership. . . . They look at
you as a bull looking at his butcher."(12)

THE DIMENSIONS OF OMAR'S POLICY
-------------------------------

The attitude of the Second Caliph towards Quraish and its line of
thinking was far-reaching in its consequences.

We can see its effects in the events that took place before and after
his reign where it directed the future policies of the Muslim World to a
great extent.

His influence was visible during the days of Abu Bakr.

He was the man behind his election and his strongest supporter and the
most effective person in establishing his leadership.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 9 ) and (10) and (11) are recorded by Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed Commentaries
on Nahjul-Balagha Part 3 pp. 97 105 and 155. ( 12 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed
recorded this dialogue in his Commen- taries on Nahjul-Balagha Vol.3
p.94.

**( 204 )**

The following anecdote shows the extent of his influence during the days
of Abu Bakr: Oyeinah Ibn Hissn and Al-Aqra Ibn Habis came to Abu Bakr
and said: "Caliph of the Mesenger of God: There is a piece of
unproductive land void of herb and useless. We request that you give it
to us so we may till it and plant in it. God may benefit us through it
in the future." Abu Bakr consulted the companions around him.

As they counseled him positively on the matter he wrote a document
signed it and the witnessing companions also signed it. Then he handed
it to the two men.

Since Omar was not present among the companions the two men went to him
to have his signature on the document. As they found him busy applying
tar on a camel they informed him that the Caliph had given them a
document and that they came to have his signature. They asked him if he
would like to read it or they should read it to him.

He told them to read it to him. As he heard it he took the document spat
on it and erased the writing. The two men exploded in anger and made
uncomplimentary remarks.

He told them that the Messenger of God used to appease them when the
faith of Islam was not in strength. God had strengthened Islam. "Go away
" he said to them "and do whatever is in your power." They went back to
Abu Bakr complaining and said to him: "We do not know who is the ruler.
Is it you or Omar?" Abu Bakr replied: "He is if he wants to be." When
Omar came the following dialogue between him and Abu Bakr took place:
Omar: "Tell me of this land which you gave to the two men. Is it yours
or does it belong to all Muslims?" Abu Bakr: "It belongs to all
Muslims." Omar: "What made you give this land to these two men excluding
the rest of the Muslims?" Abu Bakr: "I consulted the companions around
me and they agreed.".

Omar: "Have you consulted all the Muslims and acquired their consent?".

Abu Bakr: "I had told you that you are more capable-  

**( 205 )**

than I in handling the nation's affairs but you prevailed against me
(and made me the Caliph)." ( 13 ) It is difficult to understand how Omar
expected Abu Bakr to consult all the Muslims in giving a piece of
unproductive land while he did not consult all the Muslims in giving Abu
Bakr the leadership. The leadership was more important to the Muslims
than a piece of land. However the event tells us of the magnitude of his
influence during the time of Abu Bakr.

His influence extended not only to the time of Abu Bakr. It was also
visible at the ailment of the Messenger himself. The readers of the
Sahihs know that the Prophet wanted during his ailment to write a
document to assure that the nation would not go astray. Omar opposed
writing such a document and said that the Prophet was overpowered with
his ailment or that he was hallucinating. By his objection the Muslims
were deprived of the Prophet's document which was expected to illuminate
for the nation the path of its future and provide it with security
against straying.

PRE-ARRANGED THE FUTURE OF THE MUSLIMS
--------------------------------------

The influence of his policy in directing the future of the Muslim world
can be clearly seen in many decisions which he took while thinking that
they were in the interest of the nation. But they were fraught with
grave consequences.

The following are only a few of those decisions: 1. He did away with the
method of the Prophet (which Abu Bakr followed) of distributing the
public funds among the Muslims equally. When Omar was questioned about
his uneven distribution he said "I will not equalize the ones who fought
the Messenger with the one who fought with the Messenger.".

He allocated to every companion who attended the  
 Battle of Badr an annual salary of five thousand dirhams;  
 and to every participant in the Battle of Ohod four thou-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 13 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol.3 pp.
108-109.

**( 206 )**

sands. He gave the child of a Badrian two thosuands except Al-Hassan and
Al-Hussein. He equalized them with their father Ali because of their
relation to the Prophet. He alloted twelve thousand Dirhams for each one
of the wives of the Prophet.

To those who migrated before the surrender of Mecca he alloted three
thousand dirhams and to those who adopted Islam at the time of the
surrender of Mecca two thousands each. Then he made the rest of the
Muslims one category giving them 25 dinars a year or according to their
religious positions their reading of the Holy Qur'an and their endeavor
in the defense of Islam.

He allotted to the Yemenites and the Qaisites who were in military
service in Iraq and Syria salaries ranging between two and three
thousands. He made the minimum of their salaries three hundred dirhams.
( 14)

The Caliph was motivated by good intentions when he preferred the early
Muslims and the defenders of Islam. He had a very justifying reason in
preferring the relatives of the Messenger and he should have given them
more than he did because they were entitled at least to the sixth of the
fifth of the spoils of war according to the Holy Qur'an: "And know that
whatever you may gain a fifth of it belongs to God His Messenger the
relatives the orphans the needy and the wayfarer if you do believe in
God and what We revealed to Our servant on the day of decisive event
when the two forces confronted each other And God has power over
everything."( 15 )

However it is very difficult to justify religiously his  
 preference of the Badrians over the Ohdians and the  
 Ohdians over those who embraced Islam before the surrender of Mecca and
those who embraced Islam on the  
 days of its surrender over those who adopted Islam later.

We cannot justify such preferences after the Messenger of God
distributed the Islamic funds equally among the Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 14 ) Ibn Saad in his Al-Tabaqat Part 3 pp.296-297. ( 15 ) Chapter 8
verse 41.

**( 207 )**

It was a beautiful poetic statement on the part of the Caliph when he
said: "I will not equalize the ones who fought the Messenger with those
who fought with him " and it would have been very sound if he preferred
the early Muslims by glorifying them and placing them spiritually above
others.

Preference in fund-distribution could also be permitted if the funds
belonged to the Caliph personally. But it was an injustice to give to
one category more than others from a fund owned by all Muslims equally.
The allowance with which he preferred the early Muslims was owned by the
rest of the Muslims and he took it away from them without their
permission.

Had the allowance been deserved by the preferred categories the
Messenger would have given it to them rather than to the rest of the
Muslims. Otherwise he would be distributing among all Muslims what
belonged to the earlier Muslims.

Thus we should either say that the Messenger had deprived the early
Muslims from what they deserved of allowance or that Omar deprived the
majority of the Muslims from their right in the allowance with which he
privileged the early Muslims. Which theory should we choose?

Undesirable Consequences
------------------------

Whether inequality in distribution was legal or illegal it certainly led
to the creation of a new wealthy class among the Muslims. The minority
which benefited from the preference acquired much more than it needed
for spending.

Thus the members of such a minority were able to invest their surplus
money in purchasing and selling properties and in trade.

As a result the Muslim Society was divided into an extremely wealthy
class and another class that could satisfy its needs without prosperity
and a third class deprived and unable to acquire the necessary food and
clothes. However the consequences of this division in the society did
not appear violent during the reign of Omar.

In fact the Second Caliph witnessed the signs of the  

**( 208 )**

evils of this division at the end of his reign when he said with an
obvious remorse: "Should I be given the opportunity to do it again I
would take the surplus fund of the wealthy and return it to the poor."
But time was not on his side. He died before he could rectify the
situation.

It is worthy to note that the preferred classes enjoyed what they had
acquired and believed that they were religiously entitled to what they
acquired. When the Imam came to power and wanted to go back to the
method of the Prophet and to return to the deprived people what belonged
to them the privileged minority revolted against him. They used all the
means at their disposal in combatting him to preserve their privilege.
Why not? They had enjoyed those prerogatives for over twenty years and
to them they became natural rights.

SUBVERSIVE ELEMENTS IN THE CALIPH'S REGIME
------------------------------------------

Overlooking the obvious risks the Second Caliph placed in high positions
politically ambitious and religiously unscrupulous men from Quraish.
This led to many grave consequences after his death.

Ibn Al-Auss
-----------

He appointed Amr Ibn Al-Auss governor of Egypt Before he professed Islam
Amr was extremely hostile and harassing to the Prophet. He lambasted the
Holy Prophet with seventy verses of poetry.

Belatedly Amr chose to become a Muslim after he foresaw through his
wiliness and intelligence that the Prophet and his followers would have
the upper hand.

The conspiracy of Amr appeared later when he became a leading agitator
against Othman after Othman dismissed  
 him and replaced him with Abdullah Ibn Sarh. He continued his malicious
campaign until Othman was assassinated. Then he used Othman's
assassination for his own  
 unholy goal. He became the second man in the aggressor  
 party which fought Ali the Imam of the truth with the  

**( 209 )**

pretext of avenging the blood of Othman whose death was brought about by
the agitation of Amr and others like him.

### The Omayads In

The Second Caliph appointed Muaweyah son of Abu Sufyan as the governor
of Damascus. He appointed his brother Yazeed Ibn Abu Sufyan the governor
of Jordan.

When Yazeed died the Second Caliph added Jordan to the area of
Muaweyah's rule. ( 16)

By this the power of Muaweyah began to grow politically and militarily.
During the reign of Omar Muaweyah became important enough to be feared
and reckoned with.

When Omar was stabbed he said to the members of the Electoral Convention
according to what Ibn Abbas reported: ". . . And if you exchange
jealousy and hatred and refuse to co-operate with each other Muaweyah
will snatch the authority from your hands." ( 17 )

### The Hashimites Out

The Second Caliph did not put any of the Hashimites in any position of
power though they had efficient men such as Ibn Abbas. Omar was asked
why he did not give him a governorship of a province in spite of his
knowledge and capability. The Caliph expressed his apprehension that Ibn
Abbas might make his own interpretation of the Islamic rule.

Evidently the Second Caliph thought that Ibn Abbas might legalize for
himself or his relatives to take some of what God allotted for relatives
of the Prophet in the Holy Qur'an of the fifth of the spoils.

The Caliph seemingly kept the Hashimites away from high offices of any
Islamic provinces lest they gain some popularity in those areas. He
thought that people of those provinces might glorify them because they
were from the clan of the Holy Prophet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 16 ) Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 p.118. ( 17 ) Ibn Abu
Al-Hadeed in his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol.1 p.62.

**( 210 )**

With his love for God and His Messenger the Caliph was expected to keep
the Omayads out of his regime because of their opposition towards the
Prophet. He was also expected to give the Hashimites substantial
positions in his regime for the sake of the Prophet. Contrary to all
expectations the Second Caliph kept the Hashimites out and brought the
Omayads in and kept them there.

The Caliph kept Muaweyah in his position in spite of what he knew of his
ambition and of what he witnessed of growth of his power. He kept him
for the duration of his reign contrary to his method of dismissing his
appointed governors and replacing them with others.

The Caliph seemingly was impressed with Muaweyah's administrative
ability and his efficiency in policing his borders which neighbored the
Roman Empire. Yet Omar used to believe that the victory of the Muslims
and their success did not depend on a person or persons regardless of
their ability for God aids the Muslims by the power of Islam rather than
the power of persons. He dismissed Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed from the command
of the Syrian front after he became extremely popular. He replaced him
by Abu Obeidah Ibn Al-Jarrah who was relatively unknown to make the
Muslims realize that God would help them without need for the leadership
of Ibn Al-Waleed.

The Caliph might have been lulled by the obedience of Muaweyah to him.
Thus he wanted to benefit from his intelligence and administrative
ability and Muaweyah did not represent a threat to him. The Second
Caliph had a very strong personality and none of the Muslims could dare
challenge him.

The obedience of Muaweyah to him however should not have made him forget
what he knew of the danger of the Omayads to the future of Islam. For
Omar heard from the Messenger what should have alienated him from them.

He said to Ibn Abbas that he heard the Messenger of God saying:

"The children of Omayad will ascend to my pulpit and I saw them in my
dream jumping on my pulpit like monkeys." And about them the following
verse was revealed:

**( 211 )**

"And We made the vision which We have shown thee only a faith-testing
trial for the people and (the men you were shown are) the tree which is
cursed in the Holy Qur'an." ( 18)

Omar said also to Al-Mugheerah Ibn Shubah (who was one-eyed): "Mugheerah
have you ever seen anything through your eye after you lost it?" When
Mugheerah answered in the negative Omar said to him: "By God the
children of Omayad will make Islam lose its eye as your eye was lost:
Then they will blind Islam until it will not be able to know where to go
or where to come." ( 19 )

### The Omayad's Reign Was Not Inevitable

Probably what the Caliph heard from the Messenger concerning the
children of Omayad made him believe that their coming to power was
pre-destined and inevitable.

Therefore he allowed himself to walk in this path which placed the
Omayads readily in power. Thus he did that while submitting to what he
thought to be a pre-destined future.

Probably his belief that the arrival of the Omayads to the high office
was inevitable made him say to Ibn Abbas that Ali shall arrive to the
caliphate after a serious confusion then his foot will slip and he will
not accomplish his aim. Then he said to Ibn Abbas: "Abdullah you will be
a witness and the morning will be clear to anyone who has two eyes then
you will know the soundness of the opinion of the early migrants who
diverted the caliphate from him.".

Of course the arrival of the children of Omayad to power became
conceivable and expected after they became an important part of the
Islamic regime and after their most intelligent became the governor of a
highly important part  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 18 ) Ibn Abdul-Hadeed his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol. 2 p.
376. There are more hadiths recorded by the Imatn Al- Razi in his
"Commentaries on the Holy Qur'an " Chapter 17 Part 5 pp. 413-414. ( 19 )
Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol. 2 p.277.

**( 212 )**

of the Muslim State. The presence of Muaweyah and his like in positions
of power was expected to be an important obstacle which Ali would face
if he were to come to power.

As a matter of fact the difficulties and obstacles were steadily
increasing and accumulating during Omar's reign and continued to
increase after his death until it became impossible for Ali to rule
peacefully.

This was not due to a weakness in Ali but it was due to the events which
took place before his arrival to power.

These events were not inevitable for those events were made by man and
his will and were not pre-destined by God. Had Omar not placed Muaweyah
in a position of power or had he not kept him in power Muaweyah would
not have become an obstacle in Ali's path for without the governorship
of Syria Muaweyah would have been an ordinary man.

### What the Prophetic Word Meant

What the Holy Messenger said about his vision in which he saw the
children of Omayad reaching the pulpit of the Holy Prophet was a warning
to the nation to take a road that will not lead to this consequence. But
the nation took the road which brought the Omayads to that pulpit.

The Holy Messenger informed the nation that his grandson Al-Hussein
would be killed and that Ali would fight those who breached the covenant
the aggressor party and the Kharijites (seceders). He also informed Ali
that the nation would betray him. He informed Al-Zubeir that he would
fight Ali unjustly. He informed the mother of believers Ayeshah that she
would be barked at by the dogs of Al-Hou-ab while she is deviating from
the right road.

He also informed the Muslims that the aggressor party would kill Ammar
Ibn Yasir.

The Holy Prophet did not inform the Muslims of all these events to tell
them that they were pre-destined from God. He did not mean to tell the
Muslims that the predicted events were inevitable and that the will of
man would not be a factor in bringing them or preventing them.

Had he meant that then the disobedients the sinners  

**( 213 )**

the murderers the breachers of the covenants and the aggressors would
not be blamable. What the Messenger wanted to say was that these
expected events which saddened him would take place as a result of wrong
choices by the nation or by some of its leaders.

The attitude of the Prophet in forecasting these events is like the
attitude of a physician who warns a physically weak person of what will
happen to him if he does not take preventive measures which he
prescribes to him.

If the patient refuses to take the preventive medicine then he becomes
ill his illness would not be a result of predestination nor would it be
inevitable. His illness would be the result of his own failure and
mis-choice.

The Messenger forecast these ugly events which he expected and
prescribed to the nation the right measure to prevent their occurrence
namely the adherence to the Book of God and the teachings of the members
of his House. He told the Muslims that the adherence to these two
elements represented a security for the nation against the ugly events
and all deviations of any kind. The nation however did not heed the
warning of the Holy Prophet nor could it appreciate the seriousness of
his statements and its dimensions.

It took a different road which led to those evil events.

For this I believe that the Second Caliph was wrong when he said to Ibn
Abbas that morning would appear to anyone who has two eyes and that Ibn
Abbas himself would be a witness and discover the soundness of the
opinion of the early migrants who diverted the caliphate from Ali.

The fact is that what happened to Ali did not prove the soundness of the
opinion of the early migrants. Rather it proved that they had committed
a costly and terrible mistake. Had they not diverted the caliphate from
Ali after the death of the Holy Prophet the clouds would not have
accumulated in his horizon nor could those obstacles and difficulties
have accumulated in his road.

Ali could have arrived to a peaceful reign even after the caliphate was
diverted from him twice. Had the Second Caliph used his tremendous
influence in taming the Qure-  

**( 214 )**

shites and directing them towards Ali Ali would have achieved his goal.
Had he kept the Omayads out of his regime and avoided the creation of
the preferred class of early companions through his inequal distribution
of public funds Ali would not have had serious problems.

Even after all these events took place Ali could have had a peaceful
rule if Omar had named him as a successor or formed the Electoral
Convention of members with a positive attitude towards Ali rather than
Othman. Had Ali succeeded in coming to power peacefully the Muslims
would have been avoided all the faith-testing crises to which the death
of Othman led.
