Othman's Reign
==============

**( 242 )**

##### 21.

The Electoral Convention produced its expected conclusion. Othman became
the Third Caliph. As a companion Othman was not less than his two
predecessors: Abu Bakr and Omar. He was a member of the fourth ten of
the early Muslims (among the first 40 muslims). His Islam was earlier
than that of Omar and before his conversion he was not as violent as
Omar in opposing Islam. He had a distinction which neither of his two
predecessors had: being the son-in-law of the Messenger twice. He
married Ruqayah one of the daughters of the Prophet. The fruit of this
marriage was a son named Abdullah who died at the age of six after the
death of his mother. After Ruqayah Othman married her sister Om
Kulthoom. She also did not live long with him. She died during the life
of her Holy father.

### Non-Combatant

Othman did not attend the Battle of Badr. He was in Medinah helping his
sick wife Ruqayah who died before the return of her Holy father from the
battlefield. Othman attended the Battle of Ohod and other battles.
History does not record any physical participation on his part in a
fight at any battle. Like the majority of the companions he deserted the
Prophet during the Battle of Ohod. He returned to the Prophet after the
battle ended and he was one of the companions who were forgiven by the
Almighty according to the Holy Qur'an. "Those who turned their back on
the day the two hosts met it was Satan who caused them to fall because
of some evil they have done. But God has  

**( 243 )**

blotted out their sin. For God is Oft-Forgiving Most Forbearing." ( 1)

Othman was not a warrior but he was charitable. He participated
effectively in funding the army of Tabuk. It is reported that he brought
to the Messenger a thousand dinars (equivalent to ten thousand dollars)
to be spent in financing the military mission. He did other charities.

Othman came to power at the end of the twenty-third year after the
Hijrah (644 A.D.). His reign started after he passed seventy and
continued for twelve years.

During the first six years of his reign the affairs of his
administration went well. The Muslims achieved many victories during
this period. They were still in a state of war with the two prominent
Empires of that time: The Persian and Byzantine Empires. What was left
of the Persian Empire during the reign of Omar came into the Islamic
Dominion. North Africa was also detached from the Roman Empire to become
a part of the Muslim State. The Third Caliph lifted the ban against
military use of the seaways. An important Islamic fleet was built in the
Mediterranean.

The last six years of the reign of the Third Caliph were full of ugly
events. The class struggle between the over-paid and the under-paid
started to grow rapidly until it exploded with a revolution whose first
victim was the Third Caliph. The events which took place during the last
six years were germinated before this period. The seeds of these events
were born at the beginning of his reign ot during the reigns of his
predecessors.

### A Bridging Personality

Othman possessed neither the wisdom nor the determination of his
predecessors. Nor did he have their non-materialistic attitude. In fact
his personality had two sides  
 opposed to each other. On the one hand he was an early  
 Muslim. He accompanied the Messenger for a long time  
 acquired the honor of marrying two daughters of the Messenger and was
charitable for the cause of Islam. On the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Chapter 3 verse 155.

**( 244 )**

other hand he was a member of the Omayad clan. His love to them was
unbounded in spite of their dark past towards the faith of Islam and its
Prophet. These two sides of his personality made the outstanding
companions foresee the Third Caliph's potential as a bridge over which
the caliphate might pass from the righteous reign of the early
companions of Mohammad to the despotic and unjust reign of the members
of the clan of Omayad.

The reader may remember that when Omar issued his instructions
concerning the selection of his successor Ali said to his uncle
Al-Abbas: "I know that they will select Othman and if he is killed or
dies the members of the Omayad clan will make the caliphate rotate among
themselves and if I am alive they will find me where they dislike.".

It is amazing that Quraish refused to give the leadership to the Imam
Ali fearing that the leadership might rest in the House of the Prophet
because of their unequaled religious honor yet Quraish chose to make the
caliphate rest in the House of Omayad which was noted for its hostility
towards the Messenger and his religion.

EARLY OPPOSITION
----------------

This was probably one of the reasons which made two outstanding
companions Ammar Ibn Yasir and Al-Maqdad Ibn Al-Aswad start their
opposition to Othman at the very beginning of his reign. They loudly
objected to his coming to power in spite of what they knew of his
righteousness.

History recorded that Ammar came out shouting after Othman's election:
"Announcer of death come forward and announce the death of Islam.
Justice has died and evil emerged. By God if I find supporters I will
fight the Qureshites. By God if I find one person ready to fight them I
will be his second." ( 2)

He came to the Imam Ali and called upon him to start war against the
Qureshites. But the Imam reminded him  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 2 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balagah Vol. 2 pp.
411-412.

**( 245 )**

of the lack of support. He said to him and others: "I do not like to
endanger you or burden you with what is beyond your ability." Al-Miqdad
came out on the day following Othman's elction. While he was walking he
met Abdul Rahman Ibn Ouf the king-maker who was responsible for Othman's
selection. A confrontation between the two companions took place and
went as follows: Al-Miqdad: "Abdul-Rahman may God reward you in this
world and the Hereafter if you have sought to please God by what you
did. May He increase your wealth if you have sought by what you did a
worldly gain."

Abdul-Rahman: "May God have mercy upon you; listen to me.".

Al-Miqdad: "By God I will not listen." He pulled his hand from
Abdul-Rahman's hand and left.

The two companions had another confrontation at another occasion:

Al-Miqdad: By God I have never seen anything similar to what was done to
the members of this House (of the Prophet)

Abdul-Rahman: Miqdad why are you concerned with this?

Al-Miqdad: By God I love them for the love of the Messenger of God. I am
amazed by the Qureshites who claim superiority over other people because
of their relationship to the Prophet then allow themselves to take the
authority of the Prophet away from the members of his House.

Abdul-Rahman: By God I have tried to do what is best for the interest of
the people.

Al-Miqdad: By God you have left a man who is capable of leading the
nation to the right road and maintaining truth and executing justice. By
God if I have supporters against the Qureshites I will fight them as I
fought them at Badr and Ohod.".

Abdul-Rahman: May your mother be bereaved by your death. Let no one hear
those words from you. I am afraid that you may have become revisionist
and devisive.

Al-Miqdad: A person that invites people to follow the  

**( 246 )**

truth and right leadership is not revisionist. But the one who drives
people to the falsehood and prefers his own interest above the truth is
the man of revision and division..." ( 3)

Neither Ammar nor Al-Maqdad had any political ambitions and neither of
them was seeking through his endeavor any material gain. These
companions were highly commended by the Messenger.

Ibn Majah reported in his Sunan that the Messenger said: "God has
commanded me to love four persons and informed me that He loves them."
When he was asked who they were he said "Ali is of them (repeating that
three times) Abu Tharr Salman and Al-Miqdad."( 4 )

Al-Termathi reported in his Sunan that the Messenger said: "Every
Prophet was given distinguished companions but I was given fourteen."
Then he counted Ammar and Al-Miqdad among the fourteen. ( 5)

Al-Termathi also reported that the Prophet said when Ammar Ibn Yasir
asked permission to enter the house of the Prophet: "Admit him. Welcome
the good the purified."( 6 )

He also recorded that Ayshah reported that the Messenger said: "Whenever
Ammar is given the choice between two alternatives he chooses the more
righteous of the two."( 7 )

Al-Termathi reported also that the Messenger said to Ammar: "Ammar be
cheerful the aggressor party will kill you." ( 8 )

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE OMAYAD'S PLAN
-----------------------------------

What these good companions had seen through their intuition was becoming
true. The signs of the future started to emerge quickly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 3 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed in his Commentary on Nahjul-Balagha Vol.2 pp.
411-412. ( 4 ) Ibn Majah his Sunan Part 1 p. 53 (hadith No. 149) ( 5 )
Al-Termathi his Sunan Part 5 p. 329 (hadith No. 149) ( 6 ) Al-Termathi
his Sunan Part 5 p. 332. ( 7 ) Al-Termathi his Sunan Part 5 pp. 332-333.
( 8 ) Al-Termathi his Sunan Part 5 pp. 332-333.

**( 247 )**

The members of the Omayad clan met at the house of Othman after he was
elected. Abu Sufyan their old man who had lost his sight through aging
asked them: "Are there any outsiders among you?" When they assured him
that there were none he said: "Children of Omayad rotate it (the
caliphate) among you as boys rotate a football. By the one in whose name
Abu Sufyan swears there shall be neither a punishment nor requirement of
account. Nor will there be a paradise or a hell or resurrection or a Day
of Judgement." ( 9 )

The Caliph of course chided him but this did not change the attitude of
Abu Sufyan. He asked a man to lead him to the grave of Al-Hamzah uncle
of the Prophet Mohammad and the prince of the martyrs. When he stood on
the grave he said addressing Al-Hamzah: "Abu Imarah (a code name of
Al-Hamzah) the matter for which we gladiated with each other has become
a play in the hands of our youth." Then he kicked the grave with his
foot. (10)

He meant that the Omayads and the Prophet Mohammad and his family fought
each other for authority. Now the authority had come into the hands of
Omayads and the members of the House of the Prophet were deprived of it.

It did not take long before these words were translated into a reality.
The members of the Omayad clan exploited the simplicity of the Third
Caliph and his extreme love for them. Within the first few years of his
reign they put their hands on the two sources of power: The authority of
the important provinces of the Islamic state and their treasuries.

The main power and wealth of the Islamic state were in three provinces:
Syria Iraq and Egypt. During the first few years of the reign of Othman
these vast areas became Omayad princedoms.

### Muaweyah and Syria

We have mentioned (Chapter 19) that Omar appointed  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 9 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed in his Commentaries of Nahjul-Balaghah Vol.2 p.
411. ( 10 ) Obd Al-Fattah Abd Al-Masqood Al-Imam Ali Part 1 p. 287.

**( 248 )**

Muaweyah governor of Damascus then he added Jordan to his authority
after the death of Yazeed (Muaweyah's brother). Omar also appointed
Omair Ibn Saad (a Medinite) the governor of Homs and Quinnisrine and
Abdul- Rahman Ibn Alqamah the governor of Palestine. When Omar died
these two men were still in their posts. But Abdul-Rahman Ibn Alqamah
died at the beginning of the reign of Othman and Omair resigned because
of ailment.

Othman added Palestine Homs and Qinnisrine to the authority of Muaweyah.
(11) Thus within two years from the beginning of the reign of Othman
Muaweyah became the governor of what is called today the Greater Syria.

Muaweyah's influence started to grow during the days of Omar. Yet it
remained relatively limited in size and heavily supervised by Omar. The
size of his area was more than doubled during the reign of Othman and
his influence became almost absolute and free of any supervision. Within
a few years Syria became an autonomous state within the Islamic state
and Muaweyah became the strong man of the Muslim world. Within a few
years he was able to put in the battlefield a huge army containing one
hundred thousand soldiers. It is worthy to note that Muaweyah was no
more righteous than his father Abu Sufyan.

### Ibn Abu Sarh In Egypt

Omar died while Amr Ibn Al-Auss was the governor of Egypt. Othman
dismissed him during the first two years of his reign. He replaced him
with his foster brother Abdullah Ibn Saad Ibn Abu Sarh who remained in
his position until the end of Othman's reign. Ibn Abu Sarh was one of
the enemies of the Holy Prophet. He professed Islam during the time of
the Messenger then deserted the faith. He used to ridicule the Holy
Qur'an saying: "I shall reveal equal to what God has revealed to
Mohammad." Ibn Husham reported that Ibn Abu Sarh embraced Islam and
became a recorder of the revelation for the Prophet. Then he deserted
the faith and went back to Qur-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 11 ) Ibn Al-Atheer in Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 57.

**( 249 )**

aish. When the Messenger entered Mecca he ordered his execution. Ibn Abu
Sarh took refuge at Othman's house who was his foster brother and Othman
hid him. When the situation calmed down Othman brought him to the
Messenger asking clemency for Abdullah. The Messenger kept silent for a
good while then said: yes. When Othman and his foster brother left the
Messenger said to the companions around him: "I kept silent for a while
hoping that one of you would kill him." A Medinite companion asked:
"Prophet of God why did you not give me a signal?" The Messenger
replied: "A Prophet does not kill by signal." (12)

Iraq There were two important cities in Iraq: Kufah and Bassrah. Omar
appointed Saad Ibn Abu Waqass to be governor of Kufah. Then he dismissed
him and replaced him by Al-Mugheerah Ibn Shubah.

When Othman came to power he dismissed Al-Mugheerah and replaced him by
Saad Ibn Abu Waqass in response to a recommendation by Omar before his
death.

Saad was a highly respected companion and gained a prominent position
when Omar made him a member of the Electoral Convention. In spite of
this Othman kept him in the gubernatorial post for only one year. He
replaced him with Waleed Ibn Aqabah a cousin and a half-brother of the
Third Caliph.

Waleed was a transgressor by the testimony of the Holy  
 Qur'an. He embraced Islam after the year of the Hudeibeyah  
 truce. The Messenger sent him to the tribe of Banu Al-  
 Mustaliq to collect their Zakat. Expecting his arrival  
 Banu Al-Mustaliq rode their horses to receive him. Beholding  
 their coming toward him he was frightened and went back  
 to the Prophet before meeting them. He told the Prophet  
 that Banu Al-Mustaliq wanted to kill him. Relying upon  
 his information the Muslims considered a punitive action  
 against the Mustaliqites. But the Mustaliqites came to the  
 Prophet and informed him that their intention was to re-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 12 ) Ibn Husham Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p. 409.

**( 250 )**

ceive and honor Waleed rather than to kill him. A revelation concerning
Waleed and the Mustaliqites came down prohibiting the believers from
reliance on information of unrighteous persons such as Waleed because a
transgressor is unworthy of reliance. Thus we read in the Chapter of
Al-Hujorat the following:

"O you who believe if a transgressor comes to you with news try to
verify it lest you harm people unwittingly and afterward you would
regret what you have done. And know that among you is God's Apostle:

Were he in many matters to follow your opinions you would have certainly
got into misfortune; but God has endeared the faith to you and made it
beautiful in your hearts and He has made hateful to you the unbelief
wickedness and rebellion. Such indeed are those who walk in
righteousness." (13)

It is evident that Waleed had kept his pre-Islamic mentality for the
rest of his life. He remained in the governorship of Kufah for five
years until witnesses from the people of Kufah testified that he took
intoxicants. He was given the prescribed punishment and the Caliph was
required to dismiss him. The situation of Waleed was not unknown to
Othman and to the good Muslims especially after the Holy Qur'an called
him a transgressor.

It is reported that when Waleed came to replace Saad Saad asked him:
"Have you become wise or have we become fools?" Waleed replied: "Abu
Is-Haq (the code name of Saad) neither of this is the case. It is the
royal authority which some people take as lunch and then others take it
as supper." Saad replied: "You (Omayad) evidently have made the
caliphate a kingdom." Abdullah Ibn Mas-ood also said to Waleed: "I do
not know whether you have become good or people have became bad." ( 14 )

As the Caliph was required to dismiss his foster brother  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 13 ) Chapter 49 verse 6-7 Ibn Husham recorded the event in his
Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p. 296. ( 14 ) Ibn Al-Atheer in Al-Kamil
Part 3. p. 40.

**( 251 )**

after he was scandalized by his own deeds the Caliph was expected to
replace him by a companion such as Saad Ibn Abu Waqass or Ammar Ibn
Yasir or Abdullah Ibn Mas-ood. But the Caliph did not do any of these.
He replaced him by Sa-eed Ibn Al-Auss another Omayad. Although Sa-eed
did not have a record as bad as that of Waleed he was only one of the
Omayad youths whose governorship did not inspire people of Kufah with
confidence nor rectify what needed to be rectified. We shall see later
that the events took a turn from bad to worse during the days of Sa-eed.

In Bassrah When Omar died Abu Musa Al-Ashari was the governor of
Bassrah. He remained in his post for three or five years during the
reign of Othman. A delegation from Bassrah came to the Caliph
complaining of Abu Musa's misuse of public funds. Abu Musa was not from
the good companions. He once was accused by Omar of enriching himself at
the expense of the Muslims and Omar took from him the surplus of his
wealth and put it back in the Islamic treasury.

Yet he kept him in his post because of his extreme loyalty to the Second
Caliph.

The Third Caliph was expected to investigate the complaint of the
Bassrah's delegation and replace Abu Musa (if proven guilty) by a better
companion. But Othman did not do that. Instead he took the word of the
complainers dismissed him and replaced him with Abdullah Ibn Amir
another Omayad youth. Thus within a few years of Othman's reign the
three important provinces of the Muslim state became Omayad princedoms.
The majority of their rulers were enemies of the Prophet and condemned
by him or by the Holy Qur'an.

The ugly impact of their appointment to such high  
 offices could have been minimized by a firm supervision on  
 the part of the Caliph. It was easy for the Caliph to surround  
 himself with righteous and intelligent advisors from among  
 the companions. He could delegate to such advisors the  

**( 252 )**

authority of investigating and supervising the administrations of these
provinces. Unfortunately supervision was completely absent. The chief
advisor of the Caliph was his cousin Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam another
unscrupulous Omayad. The power which was given to this Omayad youth is
not available to any prime minister of our time. As a matter of fact
Marwan was the actual caliph and Othman was only a figurehead.

Thus the caliphate was transformed actually into an Omayad kingdom. To
prepare the Muslim world Psychologically for the Omayad rule the Omayad
officials advocated the superiority of the Qureshites over the rest of
the Arabs and the superiority of their clan over the rest of the
Qureshites. They imposed a complete silence on the distinctions of the
members of the House of the Prophet in general and Ali in particular.
They informed their subjects of the close relationship of the Omayad to
the Messenger.

Their historical hostility to him and to the members of his House was
not to be mentioned to these subjects who were new Muslims unaware of
the history of Islam.

Muaweyah one time met Ammar Ibn Yassir in Medina.

In a heated argument he told Ammar: "There are in Damascus one hundred
thousands plus an equal number of their sons and servants. They receive
their annual salaries and they do not know Ali and his kinship (to the
Prophet) or Ammar and his early Islam nor Al-Zubeir and his
companionship." ( 15)

Jundub Ibn Abdullah Al-Azdi once tried to inform the people of Kufah
about the distinctions of the Imam Ali.

When he was reported to Waleed Ibn Aqabah governor of Kufah he jailed
him and did not free him until some important people mediated for his
freedom. ( 16 )

### THE THIRD CALIPH AND HIS TWO PREDECESSORS

You may remember that Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf offer-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 15 ) Abdul-Fattah Abd Al-Maqsoud in Al-Imam Ali Ibn Abu Tilab Part 2
p. 120. ( 16 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed in his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah
Vol.2 p. 412.

**( 253 )**

ed Ali and Othman the caliphate stipulating that the third caliph had to
follow the path of the first two Caliphs.

Ali lost the caliphate because he rejected the stipulation. Othman won
the caliphate because he accepted it.

Let us see if he fulfilled his pledge to Abdul-Rahman and to the rest of
the Muslims.

Neither of the two Caliphs appointed any of their relatives for any post
in the Islamic provinces or cities. Othman on the contrary put his
relatives in the gubernatorial posts of all the key provinces. Was he by
doing this in accord with the way of the two Caliphs? The Third Caliph
did not appear to believe that this was inconsistent with the way of his
two predecessors. He vindicated the appointment of his relatives by the
fact that Omar appointed Muaweyah and men like Muaweyah such as Amr Ibn
Al-Auss and Mugheerah Ibn Shubah for the governorship of Damascus Egypt
and Kufah. Omar did not choose for these posts the best companions of
the Prophet. The Third Caliph could have said also that Omar
commissioned Waleed Ibn Aqabah as a collector of the Zakat in the land
of Jazirah. Probably Omar also appointed Abdullah Ibn Abu Sarh for a
minor position. The Third Caliph was right in saying this. But the fact
remained that Omar did not appoint any of his relatives to any high or
minor post. Othman appointed his relatives to high offices and gave them
authorities without any appreciable supervision.

It is justifiable to say that Othman was not out of tune  
 with his two predecessors by choosing his relatives to high  
 offices for the Omayad influence began and grew to a  
 noticeable degree during the time of Omar. It was only  
 natural for that influence to be escalated during the reign  
 of Othman by the factor of time and the membership of  
 Othman to the Omayad clan. Had Omar been unwilling to  
 see the Omayad influence grow to that height he should  
 have kept the Omayads away from his regime. He should  
 not have formed the Electoral Convention or at least should  
 have excluded Othman from the Convention. Omar was  
 well aware of Othman's extreme love for the members of  
 his clan. Therefore we cannot say positively that Othman  

**( 254 )**

by promoting his relatives was inconsistent with the policy of Omar for
Omar is the one who started the Omayads on the road to authority and
enhanced their influence by indirectly putting their relative Othman in
the highest office.

Loose Fiscal Policy The aspect in which the Third Caliph was clearly
inconsistent with his predecessors was his loose fiscal policy.

It is a well-known fact that the first two Caliphs had led a very simple
and rugged life for themselves and their families.

Whenever Omar ordered people to do something he expected his relatives
to be the example to the rest of the Muslims in following the order. The
Third Caliph on the contrary led a very luxurious life and he was
constantly showering his relatives with gifts from the public funds. He
privileged his relatives with huge grants while they were less adherent
to the Islamic teaching than the rest of the Muslims.

Honoring Exile of the Prophet Al-Balathori reported that Othman gave his
uncle Al- Hakam Ibn Abu Al-Auss three hundred thousand dirhams
(equivalent to 300 000 dollars) after he brought him to Medina. ( 17)

This man was one of the worst enemies of the Messenger before he became
a Muslim. After the Messenger conquered Mecca Al-Hakam came to Medina
declaring Islam hypocritically and only for saving his life. Yet he
continued harassing the Messenger. He used to ridicule him by imitating
his motions. The Messenger one time saw him peeping into his room from a
slit in a door. The Messenger came out angrily and when he recognized
him he said: "Should anyone blame me for punishing this cursed insect?"
Then he exiled him and his family to Ta-if forbidding him and his
children from dwelling in Medina.

By permitting Al-Hakam and his children to come back  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 17 ) Al-Balathori Ansab Al-Ashraf Part 4 p. 28.

**( 255 )**

to Medina Othman was in clear discord with the Messenger and the first
two Caliphs who did not allow Al-Hakam to come back to Medina in spite
of Othman's mediation for him.

Othman granted his foster brother Abdullah Ibn Saad Ibn Abu Sarh the
fifth of the spoils from the first expedition which Abdullah led in
North Africa. Marwan Ibn Al- Hakam purchased the fifth of the spoils of
the second expedition in North Africa for five hundred thousand dinars
(equivalent to five million dollars). Then the Caliph al- lowed him the
whole amount. ( 18)

Khalid Ibn Abdullah Ibn Oseid (another Omayad) received from the
treasury three hundred thousand dirhams when he visited the Caliph while
accompanying the delegation. The Caliph also ordered one hundred
thousand for each member of the delegation.

When the treasurer Abdullah Ibn Arqam refused to pay these huge sums the
Caliph proudly asked him: "Who are you to interfere with my order? You
are only my treasurer." But Abdullah retorted saying: "I did not believe
that I was your treasurer. Your treasurer is one of your servants. I am
the treasurer of the Muslims." Then he came with the keys of the
treasury and hung them on the pulpit of the Prophet at the Mosque
resigning from his post.

The Caliph ordered three hundred thousand dirhams for Abdullah Ibn Arqam
after he resigned; but out of pity Abdullah did not accept the grant. (
19)

Othman also gave Sa-eed Ibn Al-Auss one hundred thousand dirhams. And
when he married three or four of his daughters to men from Quraish he
gave each one of them one hundred thousand dinars. He gave his cousin
Al- Harith Ibn Al-Hakam (exile of the Prophet) three hundred thousand
dirhams. He appointed him as a collector of the Zakat of Qud-ah. When he
brought the Zakat the Caliph allowed him what he collected.(20)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 18 ) Ibn Al-Atheer in Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 49. ( 19 ) Taha Hussein
Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 p. 193. ( 20 ) Dr. Taha Hussein in his
Al-Fitnatul-Kubra Part 2 p. 193.

**( 256 )**

We ought not to forget that Abu Sufyan the old man of Omayad also
received from the Caliph two hundred thousand dirhams yet the old man
fought the Prophet for twenty-one years and professed Islam only to save
his neck after he and the rest of the Meccans were completely defeated.
He rejoiced on the defeat of the Muslims by the pagans of Hawazin in
Hunain saying: "Their retreat will not end before they reach the sea."
(Ibn Husham recorded this in his Biography of the Prophet Part 2 p.
443.)

The Third Caliph did not only shower his relatives with public funds but
he also granted them vast pieces of lands from the public properties.

Fadak a land of orchards (which came to the ownership of the Holy
Prophet because it was acquired by the Muslims without war) also was
granted by Othman to some of his relatives. Fadak was supposed to be
inherited totally or partly by Fatimah daughter of the Prophet but was
nationalized by Abu Bakr because of a Hadith in which he reported that
the Prophet said that what is left by the Prophets would be charity.
However Othman granted Fadak to Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam the exile of the
Prophet! (Abu Dawood Sunan Abu Dawood Part 2 p. 127.)

Othman did not follow the policy of his two predecessors concerning the
public funds. He used to think that he had the right to spend out of the
Muslims' funds as he liked.

He was the Imam of the Muslims and he had the right to do with their
funds as he pleased. This is opposite of the precise and strict policy
of the Second Caliph who used to exact from his appointees a full
account concerning the public funds and ask whoever acquired a wealth
among them: "How did you get this?" And he used to return the surplus of
their wealth to the Islamic treasury.

### Omar and Abu Hurairah

Omar appointed Abu Hurairah to collect the taxes of Al-Bahrain. When he
knew that Abu Hurairah had prospered he said to him: "I sent you to
Al-Bahrain while you were barefooted unable to acquire shoes for your
feet. I  

**( 257 )**

have been informed that you have sold horses for sixteen hundred
dinars.".

Abu Hurairah: "I had horses which multiplied by reproduction.".

Omar: "I shall withhold your salary and what you used to receive of food
allotment or you will bring me the surplus of your wealth.".

Abu Hurairah: "You have no right to do that." Omar: "Yes by God and I
will hurt your back." Then he hit him with his rod until his back bled
and ordered him to bring him the surplus fund.

When Abu Rurairah brought the demanded amount he said: "I hope that God
will compensate me for this." Omar said: "That would be true if you had
earned it legitimately and paid it willingly. By God your mother did not
beget you to reach the position of collector of tax revenues from Hajar
Al-Yamamah and the remote area of Al-Bahrain and to collect all that for
yourself and not for God or for the Muslims. She begot you only to be a
shepherd of donkeys." Then he dismissed him.( 21 )

There is a world of difference between this strict policy and that of
Othman who used to give his relatives hundreds of thousands and
sometimes millions of dirhams seeing no wrong in doing that.

Other Grants to Other People The generosity of the Caliph was not
limited to his relatives. It was extended to others whom he used to pay
heavily either as a reward for their loyalty or as an appeasement to
some potential opponents. He gave Zaid Ibn Thabit one hundred thousand
dirhams. He gave Al-Zubeir six hundred thousand dirhams and Talhah Ibn
Obeidullah two hundred thousand dirhams. ( 22)

These two companions were members of the Electoral Convention which
brought Othman to power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 21 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed in his Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol.3 p.
104. ( 22 ) Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 p. 77.

**( 258 )**

Neither of these two companions was in need of financial assistance.
Both were wealthy with big holdings and big business. They had a great
deal of real estate and of liquid funds.

It is worthy to note that history does not mention that the generosity
of the Caliph was extended to the members of the House of the Prophet to
whom the Holy Qur'an allotted at the least the sixth of the fifth of the
spoils.

The Provincial Governors' Policy The governors of the provinces did what
they were expected by adopting a policy similar to that of the Caliph in
handling the Muslims' funds. It is reported that Waleed Ibn Aqabah took
a loan from the treasury of Kufah while he was the governor of the city.
When the loan matured the treasurer Adbullah Ibn Mas-ood asked him to
pay it back but Waleed did not pay it. When the treasurer demanded the
payment the governor wrote to the Caliph complaining about the
treasurer. The Caliph wrote to the treasurer ordering him to leave
Waleed alone with the loan and telling him that he was only the
treasurer of the Caliph.

Upon this Ibn Mas-ood angrily resigned. ( 23)

The Muslims of Kufah were lucky enough to find a man like Abdullah Ibn
Mas-ood who had the courage to stand up to Waleed and require him to pay
a loan. The Muslims of Syria were not so fortunate. Muaweyah was an
absolute ruler of Syria with no limit to his power. He was living like a
king handling the public funds of Syria as he was handling his own funds
free of supervision. He used the public funds for purchasing loyalty and
support of the chiefs of the Syrian tribes and men of influence. He was
preparing himself to succeed Othman and he had sufficient time for such
a preparation.

As a matter of fact Muaweyah started his preparation  
 for his goal during the days of Omar. His extravagancy was  
 evident to Omar himself. When the Second Caliph went  
 to the Syrian front he was angered by the high standard of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 23 ) Al-Balathori in Ansab Al-Ashraf Part 4 p. 31.

**( 259 )**

Muaweyah's luxurious life. But Muaweyah convinced the Caliph of the
soundness of his policy using his proximity to the Roman Empire as an
excuse for his extravagance.

It is amazing that the Caliph required Abu Hurairah to give a serious
account for sixteen hundred dinars but he failed to ask Muaweyah how he
could maintain his lavish way of life.

Muaweyah was not the only governor who used the public funds for his own
interest. The rest of Othman's appointed officials followed the same
method in proportion to their authority and lack of supervision. All
were working for the goal of transforming the caliphate into a despotic
rule and the Muslim World into an Omayad kingdom.

This unscrupulous policy had many consequences: (1) The growth of the
wealth of the wealthy class in the Islamic society Many of the lucky
individuals who received generous gifts from the Caliph and his
appointed officials invested what they received of funds or portions of
it in real estate and business. This yielded them enormous profits. Many
of the companions who were highly paid during the days of Omar became
considerably wealthy through investing the surplus of their salaries in
real estate and trades. The wealth of these companions was expected to
grow by the passage of time. When Othman allowed the companions to live
outside Medina (ending the ban which was imposed by Omar on the
companions) many of the prosperous companions found new avenues for
multiplying their fortunes. They purchased buildings orchards and lands
in Iraq and other provinces. The Third Caliph also gave vast public
lands in Hijaz to many of his relatives friends and supporters.

Transactions and exchanges of real estates between wealthy owners living
in Iraq and their counterparts in Hijaz and Yemen continued and the
Caliph encouraged these transactions. (24) Thus many deals were made and
the fortunes of these enterprisers were increased rapidly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 24 ) Ibn Al-Atheer in Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 52.

**( 260 )**

Many of the companions and others became multi-millionaires. The fortune
of Al-Zubeir amounted to forty million dirhams (25) and that of Talhah
to thirty millions (26 ) and that of Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf to about three
millions.(27)

(2) The other result of the Third Caliph's handling of public funds was
the increase of the pressure on the tax payers of the conquered
countries. The generosity of the Caliph and his appointed officials in
handling the public funds and their gifts to the individuals required
liquid funds which could not come but through overtaxation of the
conquered nations. This aspect is not mentioned clearly in our history
because the conquered nations did not have political power or voice.

A dialogue between the Caliph and Amr Ibn Al-Auss (who was once the
governor of Egypt and was replaced by Abdullah Ibo Abu Sarh) reveals the
mounting pressure on the conquered nations. The Caliph said to Amr: "The
camels are giving much more milk after you left." (He meant that more
funds were coming from Egypt after his dismissal.) And Amr replied: "yes
but their babies have perished!" (He meant that by exacting more taxes
from the Egyptians the Egyptians were being impoverished.)(28)

THE GROWTH OF OPPOSITION
------------------------

Early opposition to the Third Caliph had started at the beginning of his
reign by Ammar Ibn Yassir and Al- Miqdad Ibn Al-Aswad who were
outstanding companions and free of any political or material ambitions.
That opposition was calmed during the first few years of the Third
Caliph's reign due to the lack of support by the public and because what
they expected to happen did not happen during the early period of his
reign.

However the events which took place later contributed to the rapid
growth of the opposition. The motive behind  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 25 ) Ibn Saad in his Al-Tabaqat Part 3 p. 110. ( 26 ) Ibn Saad
Al-Tabaqat Part 3 p. 222. ( 27 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat Part 3 p. 126. ( 28
) Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1.

**( 261 )**

the oppositions was either religious or political and sometimes it was
both.

Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf the one who selected Othman and brought him to
power was one of the early critics of the Caliph. He was displeased to
see his selected Caliph following a policy opposed to that of the first
two Caliphs in spite of his pledge at the time of his selection to
follow their policy. No doubt many companions blamed Abdul- Rahman for
selecting Othman and depriving Ali of the caliphate. They held him
responsible for the Caliph's policy in handling the public funds and
imposing the authority of the Omayads on the Muslims.

Abdul-Rahman changed his heart towards his man and turned 180 degrees
from the Caliph's extreme supporter to the Caliph's hostile critic.

The road which Othman took probably showed Abdul- Rahman that the
caliphate would continue in the Omayads after the death of Othman. The
relatives of the Caliph had become very powerful and capable of keeping
the caliphate in their clan. With their unlimited influence on the
Caliph's mind they were in a position to convince him to make one of
them his successor. Thus Abdul-Rahman belatedly discovered that he was
maintaining a false hope of becoming Othman's successor.

We may remember that Ali told Abdul-Rahman after he selected Othman: "By
God you gave him the leadership only to return it to you. May God plight
you and him with a reciprocal and constant animosity!!!".

If Abdul-Rahman had a good memory he could recall the warning which he
received in his dream during the days of the Electoral Convention. He
dreamt of a green prairie into which a beautiful camel entered and
passed through without touching it. It was followed by two camels one
after another and they followed its behavior. Then a fourth camel came
and ate all he could from the grass of the prairie. Abdul-Rahman
interpreted his dream by thinking that the fourth camel would be the
third caliph who would not follow the precepts of the Prophet and the
first two caliphs in handling the public funds.

**( 262 )**

Because of this dream Abdul-Rahman did not want to be the third caliph
lest he would be the fourth camel. Had Abdul-Rahman remembered that
vision he would have realized that he did not heed the warning which it
contained. He would have realized that he had chosen the man whom he
should have left out and left out the man whom he should have cbosen.
Had he selected Ali he would have avoided the nation all the tragic
events that took place later.

You may recall that Omar also saw in his dream that a man entered a
garden and picked every fresh and ripe fruit taking them to himself and
putting them under him. The two visions resembled each other and so did
the responses of the two dreamers. Both chose the picker and the
gluttonous eater.

Two Other Members of the Convention Talhah and Al-Zubeir who were also
members of the Electoral Convention joined the opposition. Al-Zubeir was
less violent in his opposition than Talhah.

It is difficult to believe that the two companions opposed Othman
because of his mishandling of the public funds. Of course the Caliph
granted his relatives huge sums of money but the two companions also had
their big shares of his generosity. The share of Al-Zubeir was six
hundred thousand dirhams and Talhah received two hundred thousand
dirhams. They could not disallow the Caliph's grant to his relatives
while legalizing it for themselves.

It seems that both men were aspirants to succeed Othman. When Omar
granted them candidacy to the high office in the Electoral Convention he
actually qualified them for leadership. The enormous wealth of the two
companions enhanced their importance in their own eyes and in the eyes
of many Muslims. Tallah gained numerous supporters in Bassrah and so did
Al-Zubeir in Kufah. Like Abdul-Rahman the two companions were frightened
by the rapid growth of the Omayads' power which made them capable of
competing with any companion for the leadership.

It was disturbing to them to think that Othman might  

**( 263 )**

appoint Muaweyah or another Omayad as a successor.

The turn of events indicated that the Omayads would keep the caliphate
in their clan blocking the road of other Qureshites to the high office.
The two companions realized that silence would contribute to the
Omayads' success in achieving their goal. For this they decided to
oppose the Caliph and try to end his reign before he chose an Omayad
successor. This would enable one of the two companions to succeed the
Caliph.

Ayeshah Ayeshah wife of the Prophet also joined the opposition. She
became an open critic of Othman accusing him of taking a direction
opposite to that of the Prophet. She occasionally displayed a garment of
the Prophet saying that the garment of the Prophet had not yet
deteriorated but Othman had brought the precepts of the Prophet into
deterioration. She used to call him Naathal (a heavily bearded Jew). The
historians recorded that she used to say: "Kill Naathal because he
deserted the faith."(29)

It seems that her motive was merely political rather than religious. She
could not be angered by Othman's violation of the Islamic Law because
she allowed herself to commit a much bigger violation of God's
commandments.

She opposed Ali who was the most adherent to the Book of God and the
precepts of the Prophet. She was more violent in her opposition to the
brother of the Messenger than in her opposition to Othman. She
criticized Othman because he injured some of the companions and
mishandled the Muslims' funds yet she waged a war in which thousands of
Muslims lost their lives. Killing the Muslims is a much bigger sin than
injuring them or usurping some of their funds.

Her motive in opposing Othman was identical to that of Talhah and
Al-Zubeir. She wanted her cousin Talhah  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 29 ) Al-Tabari History of Messengers and Kings about the events of the
year 36 p. 3112 and Ibn Al-Atheer in Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 102.

**( 264 )**

or her brother-in-law Al-Zubeir to succeed Othman. The growth of
Talhah's influence in his opposition to the Caliph was extremely
pleasing to her.

Al-Tabari reported that Ayeshah said to Ibn Abbas: "You are a man of
understanding wisdom and expression.

I ask you by God not to detract people from Talhah. The situation of
Othman has become obvious. People from various cities have gathered for
a great event which is about to take place. I am informed that Talhah is
already in control of the houses of the public funds and possesses their
keys. I think that he God willing will follow the path of his cousin Abu
Bakr." Ibn Abbas retorted saying:

"Mother if anything happens to Othman people will resort to our man
(Ali)." Ayeshah of course did not agree with him but she said to him:
"Ibn Abbas I do not want to antagonize you or argue with you." ( 30 )

She was looking at the events with the eyes of Talhah and Al-Zubeir. Her
hope that one of the two men would reach the caliphate through
co-operation with Othman was withering gradually by the rapid growth of
the Omayads' power and the continuation of Othman in his office. It
became evident to her and the two companions that the Caliph would
follow only the advice of people such as Marwan and Muaweyah and that
these advisers would counsel him to choose an Omayad successor.

Ayeshah and the two companions thought that their silence would render
an assistance to the Omayads in fulfilling their goal. For this the two
companions raised their voices against the Caliph and Ayeshah called
upon the Muslims to kill him.

### Amr Ibn Al-Auss

Amr Ibn Al-Auss joined the opposition. This politician  
 did not have the ambition to become a caliph. He was not  
 from the early companions or a member of the Electoral  
 Convention nor did he have the needed influence to make  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 30 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol.2 p. 506.

**( 265 )**

him ambitious to reach the high office. His opposition was motivated by
the desire to avenge himself. He was the governor of Egypt during the
days of Omar. He wanted to stay in his post but Othman dismissed him and
replaced him by Adbullah Ibn Saad Ibn Abu Sarh. He came back to Medina
waiting for the opportunity to jump the Caliph.

When Ayeshah and others started their campaign against Othman Amr became
a noted agitator. He used his intelligence and wiliness in instigating
people against the Caliph. ( 31)

When Othman was killed Amr joined the seekers of the revenge for
Othman's blood because Muaweyah promised him the governorship of Egypt.

### OPPOSITION FROM NON-QURESHITE COMPANIONS

The Qureshite companions were mostly politically motivated in their
opposition to Othman. The opposition that was religiously motivated came
from outstanding non-Qureshite companions. Most noted among these in the
history of that period was:

### Abu Tharr

When the third Caliph granted his cousin Marwan five  
 million dirhams and Zeid Ibn Thabit one hundred thousand  
 dirhams and Harith Marwan's brother three hundred  
 thousand dirhams Abu Tharr raised his voice repeatedly  
 reciting the following Qur'anic verse: "Give the news of a  
 painful punishment to those who treasure gold and silver  
 and do not spend them in the way of God." Othman sent  
 his messengers to Abu Tharr prohibiting him from such a  
 recital. Abu Tharr protested saying: "Does Othman want  
 to prevent me from reciting the Book of God and denouncing those who
disobey the commandment of God? By God  
 it is more desirable to me and better for me to please God  
 by displeasing Othman rather than displeasing God by  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 31 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 82.

**( 266 )**

pleasing Othman." (32) This attitude angered Othman.

It was not difficult for Othman to solve the problem of Abu Tharr and
all other critics and Abu Tharr himself prescribed to Othman the
solution of the problem. He told him one day: "Follow the path of your
two predecessors and no one will criticize you." But the Caliph was not
of this opinion. He wanted to solve the problem by punishing whomever he
could. Evidently he did not know that medicating the problem of sincere
criticism by violence is bound to bring him bigger problems.

Abu Tharr in Exile It was difficult for the Caliph to punish the
Qureshite critics. They were too powerful for him to punish. Abu Tharr
and others like him in spite of their brilliant Islamic record were
neither powerful nor wealthy. The Caliph chose for these good companions
a kind of punishment which was inappropriate and inapplicable to them.
He chose for Abu Tharr punishment by exile which is prescribed by the
Holy Qur'an for those who are at war with God and His Messenger and the
makers of mischief in the land. Abu Tharr was not one of these. He was
rather a righteous companion whose motives were prohibiting evil and
enjoining good. He did not challenge the authority of the Caliph nor did
he call for a revolt against him.

The Messenger of God was criticized by a hypocrite who told him: "You
ought to be just in distributing the spoils among Muslims." The Prophet
did not exile him nor did he punish him. He only said to him: "Woe to
you. If I do not execute justice who will?"

Abu Bakr said to his electors: "Obey me as long as I obey God. If I do
not obey Him you owe me no obedience."

Omar used to say: "When you see a crookedness in me try to straighten
me."

Abu Tharr and Muaweyah Othman did not take the attitude of his
predecessors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 32 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed Commentaries on Nahjul-Balaghah Vol. 1 p. 240.

**( 267 )**

He exiled Abu Tharr to Syria placing him under the authority of Muaweyah
who was actually a government within the government. Seeing the
extravagancy of Muaweyah and his mishandling of the public funds Abu
Tharr raised his voice against him. When Muaweyah built his famous
palace called Al-Khadra Abu Tharr said to him: "If this is from the
Muslims' fund it is a theft. If it is from your own fund it is an
extravagancy." Abu Tharr used to shout at the door of Muaweyah saying:
"God may Thou curse those who enjoin good and do not do it. May Thou
curse those who prohibit evil and do it.".

Permanent Exile This irritated Muaweyah. He complained about Abu Tharr
to the Caliph. The Caliph recalled Abu Tharr to Medina and he was
returned to it in a very unmerciful way.  (33) When he arrived in Medina
the Caliph found him persisting in his critical attitude towards his
regime. For this he ordered him to leave Medina. Abu Tharr asked his
permission to go back to Damascus or to go to Iraq or Egypt or to Mecca
according to some reports. The Caliph did not permit him to do so. He
ordered him to go to the desert of Najd saying to him: "Go in this
direction and do not go beyond Al-Rabathah.".

The Caliph ordered people not to speak to Abu Tharr nor give him a send
off. When Abu Tharr was departing Marwan went with him to prevent people
from talking to him. No one dared to be with Abu Tharr at his departure
except the Imam Ali his two sons Al-Hassan and Al- Hussein his brother
Aqeel and Ammar Ibn Yasir. By doing this they actually defied the order
of the Caliph. This added to the deterioration of the relation between
the Imam and the Caliph. Of the Imam's valedictory words to Abu Tharr
were the following:

"Abu Tharr you opposed the rulers because they disobeyed God. Put your
hope in Him. The rulers feared  
 you for personal interest and you feared they would  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 33 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 56.

**( 268 )**

compromise your religion. Leave in their hands what they want to protect
and run away with what you want to protect. These rulers are in a great
need for the things you tried to deprive them of and you are in no need
for the things they deprived you of. You will know who has the happy
fate and who is more enviable.

Should the heavens and the earth close in on a righteous servant of God
He will grant him an exit. Let the truth be your only friend and
falsehood be your only enemy.

Had you approved their way they would have loved you; and had you shared
the spoils with them they would have trusted you."(34)

Some historians say that Abu Tharr left Medina to Rabathah willingly but
it seems improbable that Abu Tharr had chosen to become bedouin living
in the desert rather than being in the city of the Prophet. However it
is certain that he was exiled to Damascus before he left to Rabathah
then he was brought back to Medina. He was not consulted in his exile
nor in his return.

Abu Tharr settled in Rabathah living constantly there in difficulty and
intolerable poverty until he died.

When he died there were not enough people to bury him.

Had not Abdullah Ibn Mas-ood with a few others (including Malik
Al-Ashtar) passed by Abu Tharr would not have been buried.

The exile of Abu Tharr to Rabathah was a big political mistake on the
part of the Caliph. The good Muslims were shocked by the exile of this
outstanding companion for he was of an indomitable spirit in his
endeavors for the truth.

He was a beloved of the Messenger and the Messenger said about him:
"There is no one under Heaven and above the earth that is truer than Abu
Tharr." The righteous Muslims felt toward what happened to Abu Tharr as
they felt towards the great martyrs of the truth whose souls were filled
with dedication to high ideals for which they lived and died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 34 ) Nahjul-Balaghah Part 2 pp.12-13.

**( 269 )**

### Abdullah Ibn Mas-ood

Abdullah Ibn Mas-ood another non-Qureshite outstanding companion also
joined the opposition. Like Abu Tharr Abdullah had no political or
material ambition. He was the treasurer of Kufah province and he
resigned angrily when the Caliph wrote to him: ". . . You are only our
treasurer leave Waleed (the Omayad governor of Kufah) alone with what he
borrowed from the treasury." It is reported that Abdullah Ibn Mas-ood
used to deliver a weekly sermon in which he included the following
words: "Certainly the truest is the Book of God and the best guidance is
the guidance of Mohammad. And the worst deed is that which does not
conform with the teaching of God and His Messenger. For every such deed
is an innovation and every innovation is a heresy and every heresy leads
to Hell."(35)

Waleed informed the Caliph of Ibn Mas-ood's insinuating speeches and the
Caliph summoned him. When Ibn Mas-ood entered the Mosque of the Prophet
Othman said to the congregation: "The one that entered the Mosque is an
evil insect which causes a person to vomit and secrete when it walks on
its food." Ibn Mas-ood said: "I am not so but I was a companion of the
Prophet at Badr Ohod Hudeibeyah the Moat and Hunain." Othman ordered one
of his servants to throw Abdullah out of the Mosque. The servant carried
him on his shoulders and violently threw him outside the Mosque.(36)
Some of his ribs were broken. Then the Caliph withheld his salary.
Abdullah lived two or three years after that continuing his opposition
to Othman. When he died he willed that Othman should not pray over him
and Ammar Ibn Yassir was his executor. Ammar buried Abdullah without
informing the Caliph of Abdullah's death.

### And Ammar Ibn Yasir

Ammar was a man of the earliest opposition to Oth-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 35 ) Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 p. 160. ( 36 ) Dr.
Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 pp. 160-161.

**( 270 )**

man. He called upon the Muslims to fight the community of Quraish
because it chose Othman for leadership and left Ali out. Like Ali Ammar
saw in the personality of Othman a potential bridge over which the
caliphate would pass from the good companions of Mohammad to the
Omayads. The sequence of the events was destined only to confirm to
Ammar and others what they expected. What happened to Abu Tharr and
Abdullah Ibn Mas-ood made Ammar more serious in his opposition to
Othman. Ibn Yasir was not the kind of man who keeps silent when he sees
what is in conflict with the Book of God and the teachings of the
Prophet.

Such opposition was expected to put Ammar in danger of severe punishment
from the Caliph. Othman wanted to exile him as he had Abu Tharr but Ali
and other companions raised strong objections which made him threaten to
exile Ali himself. But Ali dared him to do that.

There were some gems of great value in the treasury and Othman gave
those gems to his ladies. People talked about that and Othman was
angered by their talk. He said while he was giving a sermon: "We shall
take what we need from the treasury even if some people would be
displeased." Ali replied: "Then you shall be prevented and stopped." And
Ammar said: "I make God my witness that I am one of the first people who
are displeased." Othman retorted angrily:

"Do you dare say that to me? Take him."

He was taken and Othman went to the place where Ammar was confined. He
beat him up until Ammar fainted and he stayed in swoon until he missed
the noon afternoon and sunset prayers. When he came back from his swoon
he made his ablution made up his prayers and said:

"Praise be to God. This is not the first time I was tortured for my
endeavors in the way of God."(37)

It is reported that a group of companions (among them Talhah Al-Zubeir
Al-Miqdad and Ammar) wrote to Othman a letter in which they criticized a
number of Othman's  
 deeds accused him of betraying his religion and warned  
 him that they would fight him. Ammar delivered the letter  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 37 ) Dr. Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra Part 1 p. 167.

**( 271 )**

to Othman. When Othman read a portion of the letter he asked Ammar: "Are
you the only audacious among them to confront me with this?" Ammar
answered: "I am your best advisor among them." Othman said to him: "Son
of Sumayah (Ammar's mother) you have lied. Ammar retorted "I am by God
son of Summayah and son of Yasir.".

Othman ordered his servants to lay Ammar on the floor and hold his hands
and his legs. Then Othman kicked him with his foot in the stomach. This
caused him to have a hernia.

Ammar was old and weak and he fainted.

Ammar was the most outspoken and the highest voice against Othman. His
opposition to Othman counted heavily because of his brilliant past and
because of what the Holy Prophet said about him.

### OPPOSITION OUTSIDE MEDINA

The Qureshite Aristocracy in the Islamic society began at the beginning
of the reign of the First Caliph. In his argument for the Qureshite
leadership at the "Saqifat"

conference Abu Bakr said to the natives of Medinah that the Arabs would
not accept a non-Qureshite leadership. For Quraish was the highest
community among the Arabs and the community of the most honorable city.

Upon this the Medinites conceded the leadership to the Qureshites. Thus
the majority of the Meccan and Medinite companions conceived it as
tribal superiority. By this the Qureshite supremacy was established
though the Faith of Islam the religion of equality denies any form of
aristocracy.

This aristocracy grew during the reign of the Second Caliph and peaked
during the reign of the Third Caliph.

The notion of Qureshite superiority evolved during Othman's reign and
went far enough to view the Muslim world as a Qureshite Kingdom. This
was destined to have a negative reaction on the part of the enlightened
men who knew that Islam is a religion of equality and brotherhood. The
Message of Islam aims at elevating every Muslim and dignifying all
believers in God rather than dignifying a minority at the expense of
millions.

**( 272 )**

The righteous Muslims were disturbed by Quraish's claim of superiority
in the name of religion while the Omayads who became the leaders of the
Qureshites were of the least righteous among the Muslims.

The spark of opposition outside Medina started in Kufah. Most of its
people were Yemenites. It is reported that the beginning of this
opposition took place during the time of Sa-eed Ibn Al-Auss who
succeeded Waleed Ibn Aqabah in the gubernatorial office of Kufa.
Historians disagree on the details of this event.

It is reported that some of the leaders of the city while they were
visiting the governor spoke of the orchards of Kufa. A dialogue between
them and the city Chief of Police Abdul-Rahman Ibn Khumeis took place
and went as follows: Ibn Khumeis: "I wish all these orchards were owned
by the governor and you the people of Kufah owned better than these
orchards."

Malik Al-Ashtar: "Wish the governor better than these orchards but do
not wish him to own our properties." Ibn Khumeis: "How did my wish harm
you to make you so frown on me? By God if the governor wishes he would
have these orchards."

Al Ashtar: "By God if he wants that he will not have it."

Sa-eed (angrily): "All these orchards are actually Quraish's garden."
Al-Ashtar: "Do you make what we won through our spears and what God has
given us a garden for you and your people?"

And others spoke supporting Al-Ashtar.

Al-Ashtar: "Is anybody here? Don't let this man get away with what he
said."

They jumped Ibn Khumeis treading on him severely until he fainted. Then
they dragged him by his feet. Finally his face was sprayed with water
until he woke up.

Ibn Khumeis said to Sa-eed: "The people whom you selected have killed
me.".

**( 273 )**

Sa-eed: "No one shall spend the evening with me after this.".

Other historians recorded that some people spoke in the presence of
Sa-eed of the generosity of Talhah Ibn Obeidullah and that comments by
the governor and his visitors went as follows:

Sa-eed: "A man that has the wealth of Talhah and his holdings ought to
be generous. Should I possess what Talhah possesses I would make you
live in prosperity."

A young man from the Asad Tribe: "I wish that you owned all the orchards
that are on the two sides of the Euphrates.".

This irritated some of the men who were present and made them speak
harshly to the youth.

The father of the youth: "He is too young. Do not punish him for what he
said." The irritated men: "He is wishing Sa-eed our own properties."
They jumped the youth. His father wanted to defend him. They beat the
father and the son until they fainted. The members of the tribe of Asad
learned about the event and came encircling the palace. Sa-eed persuaded
them to leave and they left. ( 38)

Both versions of the event agree that Al-Ashtar and others with him
stayed away from the governor and spoke loudly against Sa-eed and the
Caliph. This was the occasion which made the opposition surface in
Kufah. Whether the first or second report was the truth the occasion
indicates that people during that time were fed up with Quraish its
leaders their big claims and their over-reaching hands.

The event was actually the straw that broke the camel's back. The
sequence of events was inevitably leading to some political explosion.

Abdullah Ibn Mas-ood's sermons in which he criticized the policy of
Othman and his officers helped to open the eyes of the people of Kufah
on the corruption in the government.

Abu Tharr's exile was also a factor in fermenting the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 38 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil Vol.3 pp. 71-72.

**( 274 )**

opposition. We have advanced that Al-Ashtar and others from Kufah were
with Ibn Mas-ood at the time of the oppressed companion's burial.

What happened afterwards to Abdullah Ibn Mas-ood was also another
factor. People of Kufah had a great esteem for this outstanding
companion who was violently thrown out of the Holy Mosque by order of
the Caliph.

People of Kufah knew Ammar Ibn Yasir and his brilliant record in Islam.
He was the governor of their city during the reign of Omar. They had a
great respect towards this outstanding companion. What happened to him
at the hand of the Third Caliph was also an additional factor which made
the explosion of the opposition from the righteous people of Kufah an
expected event. The fire was about to start and it found its spark at
Sa-eed's occasion.

The opposition of Kufah received the same kind of punishment Abu Tharr
received. Exile became the regular punishment for the criticism of the
government; and Damascus became the destination of the exiled critics.
There they received their discipline at the hands of Muaweyah the strong
man of the Islamic state.

The exiled Kufans were kept at the church of Mariam.

Muaweyah met them spoke to them and lectured them. The topic of his
lecture was the distinction of Quraish in the Islamic and pre-Islamic
history. He tried to substantiate the superiority of Quraish by the fact
that all communities were invaded except the Qureshites whom God
protected. He mentioned also that God made the caliphate in the
Qureshite companions of the Prophet. Thus they are the qualified ones
for leadership. Then he told them that God protected Quraish while they
were unbelievers. "Do you think that He will not protect them while they
are following His religion."(39)

He told them also that Abu Sufyan (his father) was the most honorable
and the son of the most honorable among the Qureshites except the
Prophet then he added: "I think  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 39 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil Vol 3 p. 70.

**( 275 )**

that if Abu Sufyan were the father of all people all people would have
been wise."(40)

Sa-sa-ah Ibn Souhan belied him saying: "Adam was better than Abu Sufyan.
God created him by His own hand breathed in him from His spirit and
ordered the angels to bow to him. He was the father of mankind. Yet we
see among them the good and the weak the foolish and the wise.".

The logic of Muaweyah was full of distortion of facts.

Re said that his father Abu Sufyan was the best man after the Messenger
(including Abu Bakr and Omar)

He forgot that the Divine protection to the Qureshite was not for the
sake of Abu Sufyan his children and their likes from the Qureshites. It
was rather for the sake of the Sacred House and for the sake of the
Messenger the best of the descendants of Abraham. It was also in
response to the prayer of Abraham the Prophet of God of which the Holy
Qur'an informs us:

"And when Abraham said: 'My Lord make this a safe town and give its
settlers of fruits to those of them who believe in God and the
Hereafter.' The Almighty said: 'And whoever of them disbelieves I will
give them a respite. Then I will drive them to the chastisement of Fire;
terrible is the fate.' " ( 41)

Muaweyah did not know that the caliphate in the offspring of Abraham
including the Qureshites was made by appointment from God. That
appointment did not reach the unjust among them. We read in the Book of
God:

"And remember when God tested Abraham by commandments and he fulfilled
them. The Almighty said:

'I am making you Imam of the people.' Abraham said: 'And make imams from
my offsprings.' The Almighty said: 'My covenant will not include the
unjust.' "(42)

History tells us that Muaweyah freed the exiles and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 40 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Vol.3 p. 71. ( 41 ) Chapter 2 verse 127. ( 42 )
Chapter 2 verse 125.

**( 276 )**

when they went back to Kufah they resumed their opposition. Consequently
they were exiled to Homs. They were placed under the authority of
Abdul-Rahman Ibn Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed. This was harsher on them and more
violent than Muaweyah. They showed him repentance and he released them.
Al-Ashtar went back to the Caliph and the Caliph permitted him to go
wherever he chose. He went back to Homs. When opposition grew stronger
in Kufah Al-Ashtar went back to it. He and Yazeed Ibn Qais led a
multitude to a place called Al-Jarah to prevent Sa-eed Ibn Al-Auss from
re-entering Kufah. Sa-eed went back to Medina and the Kufans demanded
from Othman to replace Sa-eed with Abu Musa.

We may realize the bitterness which exiled men used to feel when we read
a message from Malik Al-Ashtar to Othman as an answer to the Caliph's
letter to the people of Kufah reprimanding the opposition:

"From Malik Ibn Al-Harth to the tested and sinful Caliph who is
deviating from the precepts of his Prophet and turning his back on the
rule of the Holy Qur'an.

"We have read your message. You ought to prohibit yourself and your
officers from injustice aggression and exiling our righteous men. This
will make us content to obey you. You alleged that we have wronged
ourselves.

This is your conjecture which caused you to perish (spiritually) and
made you consider inequity a justice and the wrong right. As to what we
desire we want you to change and repent and to ask God His forgiveness
for incriminating our righteous men exiling our good people driving us
out of our homes and ruling us by our youth. We desire that you appoint
Abdullah Ibn Qais Abu Musa governor of our city. We ask you to keep your
Waleed and Sa-eed away from us. "(43)

The Caliph responded to this by appointing Abu Musa governor of Kufah.

The opposition to the Caliph's policy was not confined to Kufah. It was
extended to Bassrah in Iraq and also to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 43 ) Al-Balathori Ansabul-Ashraf Part 4 p. 46.

**( 277 )**

Egypt. Historians inform us that Mohammad Ibn Abu Bakr and Mohammad Ibn
Abu Hutheifah went to Egypt and instigated the people against Othman.
With the presence of Abdullah Ibn Saad Ibn Abu Sarh in Egypt as its
governor the two Mohammads did not need to bring to the Egyptians any
additional evidence of the corruption in the government. It is reported
that an Egyptian went to Medina complaining of the governor to the
Caliph. When the complainer came back to Egypt the governor killed him.

It is reported also that a group of companions in Medina wrote to other
companions at different provinces saying:

"If you want to make Jihad come to us. The religion of Mohammad is
corrupted by our Caliph. By this people were turned against him."(44)

### NOW PEOPLE REMEMBERED ALI

The regressing developments of the political events made the
non-Qureshite Muslims realize the gravity of the erroneous attitude of
the Qureshites toward Ali. Now they could clearly see the magnitude of
the mistake which the members of the Electoral Convention had committed
when they diverted the caliphate from him to Othman. By doing that they
drove the nation into a crisis which it had never experienced before. It
became obvious to the people of wisdom that the nation would not have
had to be confronted with such a crisis if Ali were the Caliph. Thus
they began to think that Ali's leadership was the solution to the
problems of the nation.

People spoke of Ali loudly and Othman started to see that Ali's
existence and his presence in Medina added to his difficulties. He asked
him to leave Medina for his land in Yunbu that people might forget him;
but when the crisis grew in dimension he asked him to come back to
Medina that he might shield him against danger. Then Ibn Abbas came to
him with a message from Othman asking him to leave for Yunbu hoping that
people would stop circulating his name. The Imam said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 44 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil. Vol.3 pp. 73 and 83.

**( 278 )**

"Ibn Abbas Othman wants to treat me like a camel going back and forth to
fill the buckets with water. He told me to go to Yunbu then he asked me
to come back.

Now he is asking me to go to Yunbu again. By God I have defended him
until I feared that I am committing a sin." ( 45)

Ali faced in Othman a problem bigger than the problem which Othman was
facing. It was in the hands of Othman to solve all his problems by
changing his policy in handling the public funds dismissing his relative
officials and keeping Marwan away from him. This could have regained him
the confidence of the people and their satisfaction.

Ali on the other hand did not possess the means to solve his problem and
the problem of the nation in Othman.

He was seeing through the light of God that the future and the fate of
the nation would be decided to a great extent by what would happen to
Othman. Othman had embarked on a policy which would enable the Omayads
to rule the Muslim world for generations to come. Yet the Omayads were
noted for their lack of sincerity toward Islam. They embraced Islam only
after they were completely defeated.

Ali knew them very well as men and as children. He is the one who broke
their back and humiliated them until they adopted the faith of Islam
reluctantly. He knew that if they had the authority they would devour
the public fund enslave the servants of God and corrupt His religion.

Othman had three alternatives: (1) Resign; (2) persist in his policy and
refuse to resign or (3) change his policy drastically. The first two
alternatives were evil and the third was not expected. If he were to
persist in his policy he would be killed. His murder would be a terrible
and ugly event. He would be the first imam to be killed by the Muslims.
The Omayads the relatives of the Caliph already possessed enough power
to enable them to challenge the good Muslims by waging war avenging his
death using it for seizing authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 45 ) Nahjul-Balaghah Part 2 p. 233.

**( 279 )**

Should Othman be forced to resign and people elect a man to succeed him
the Omayads having so much power would not surrender. They would be able
to claim that Othman was the legitimate Caliph and that forcing him out
of office would not remove the legality of his leadership. By this they
would arrive at what they want. And it would become easier for them to
reach their goal than if he were killed.

The third alternative was not expected. There was nothing in the
behavior of Othman to indicate the possibility of the needed change.
Even if he wanted to change his financial policy and dismiss his wicked
relatives Marwan would dissuade him from doing that and he did not
possess the will-power which would make him immune from his influence.

Ali knew all that. Yet he tried his best to reach the third alternative
in order to avoid the evil of the other two alternatives. Historians
inform us that a group of the companions of the Messenger who were
living in Medina wrote to the companions who were settling on the
borders of the Muslim state saying: "Come back to Medina. The "Jihad" is
here." People spoke ill of Othman and none of the companions defended
him except Zied Ibn Thabit Abu Osaid Al-Sa-idy Kaab Ibn Malik and Hassan
Ibn Thabit. These were loyal to the Caliph because they had received his
generous gifts.

The Imam Mediates The companions met together and spoke to Ali to
mediate between them and Othman. He met the Caliph and spoke to him
saying:

"The people behind me asked me to mediate between you and them. By God I
don't know what to tell you.

Nor do I know something which you don't know. Nor can I point to matters
of which you are ignorant. You have seen heard and accompanied the
Messenger of God and acquired the honor of being his son-in-law.

You are not less expected to do good than Ibn Abu Quhafah (Abu Bakr) and
Ibn Al-Khattab (Omar)

**( 280 )**

You are closer than both of them to the Messenger of God and you have
acquired through marriage what they did not acquire. Nor were they ahead
of you in anything. I ask you in the name of God to be merciful to
yourself. You are not suffering blindness nor ignorance.

The right road is clear and obvious and the demarcation of religion is
standing.

"Othman remember that the best of the servants of God in the eyes of God
is a just imam who is led to the truth and leads to the truth. Thus he
establishes a well-known precept and abolishes an abandoned innovation.
The worst of all is an unjust Imam who is erroneous leading to error.
Thus he abolishes a well-known precept and revives an abandoned
innovation.

"I have heard the Messenger of God saying: 'An unjust Imam will be
brought on the Day of Judgement while he has no helper nor a vindicator.
He will be thrown into hell. . . . I warn you of the wrath of God and
His smite and chastisement. Certainly His chastisement is painful and
severe. I warn you not to be the murdered imam of this nation. It is
said that an imam will be killed and his death will open on the nation
the door of killing and wars until the Day of Judgement. He will confuse
the affairs of the nation and throw the Muslims into divisions that they
will not be able to see the truth because of the height of the
falsehood. . . .'" ( 46)

The words of the Imam did not please the Caliph. A dialogue between the
two men took place as follows: Othman: "Omar appointed and kept in
office people like those whom I appointed and kept in office."

Ali: "Omar appointed such people but he used to tread on their heads.
When he knew of any minor violation by any of them he used to summon him
and punish him severely. You are weakened because you are too lenient on
your relatives.".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 46 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 76.

**( 281 )**

Othman: "They are your relatives also." Ali: "Yes they are but virtue is
not in them."

Othman: "Do you not know that Omar appointed Muaweyah and kept him in
office for the duration of his reign?"

Ali: "I ask you in the name of God. Do you not know that Muaweyah was
afraid of Omar more than Yarfah Omar's servant?".

Othman: "Yes." Ali: "Muaweyah makes his decisions without consulting you
then he tells people: 'This is the order of Othman.' You know it and you
do not change anything. Nor do you stop him from doing what he is
doing."(47)

Thus Ali unlike any other person did not take advantage of the
difficulties of a Caliph whom he considered to be usurper of his right
in leadership. He rose above that and was most protective of him
endeavoring to correct the situation of his adversary because his fate
had a bearing on the fate of the whole nation. But Othman considered his
advice provocative. He went to the pulpit and delivered a fiery speech
threatening the opposition with punishment. He was expected to do only
that so long as Marwan was his chief advisor. Thus the fire of
opposition became more inflamed.

### THE CALIPH IS BESIEGED

The messages which were sent by the companions residing in Medinah to
people of various provinces brought its expected results. Groups from
Egypt Kufah and Bassrah came to Medinah asking the Caliph to dismiss his
ruling relatives or resign. Otherwise they were ready to kill him.

When the Caliph realized the seriousness of the situation he came to Ali
and asked him to mediate between him and his adversaries.

Ali asked him: "What are your terms for reconciliation?" The Caliph
replied: "You are fully authorized to  
 pledge to them whatever you choose. I shall do whatever  
 you propose." Ali reminded him that he spoke to him re peatedly about
certain corrective measures and that the Ca-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 47 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 76.

**( 282 )**

liph time after time promised to take those measures. Then the promises
remained unfulfilled by the Caliph who was influenced by Marwan Muaweyah
Ibn Amir and Abdullah Ibn Saad Ibn Abu Sarh. Othman replied: "I will
disobey them and obey you."

Accompanied by thirty men from the Qureshites and the Medinites the Imam
went to meet the Egyptian group.

He convinced them not to resort to violence and promised them on behalf
of the Caliph to fulfill their demands of dismissing his relatives and
changing his policy in handling the public fund. When he went back to
the Caliph he advised him to go to the Mosque and pledge publicly to
make the reform.

Repentance and Retreat The Caliph responded positively to the good
advice. He went to the pulpit and addressed the congregation saying:

"I am the first one that should obey God. I ask God to forgive me for
what I did. I shall repent to him. A man like me is expected to change
and repent. When I come down let your leaders come and make a decision
about me. By God if justice reduces me to a slave I shall do what a
slave does and I shall be as humble as a slave. There is no escape from
the anger of God but through Him. By God I shall give you the
satisfaction and I will keep Marwan and my relatives away from me. I
shall not seclude myself from you." (48)

These words moved the audience. They wept until tears moistened their
beards and the Caliph wept and people hoped for the good.

Marwan was waiting. As soon as Othman came back to his home Marwan
dissuaded him and brought him back to his old hard line. Marwan went out
facing the multitude which were waiting for the reform. He reprimanded
them and told them". . . You have come to rob us of the authority which
is in our hands. Go away. By God if you challenge us you will see what
will displease you ...".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 48 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil Parr 3 p. 82.

**( 283 )**

When Ali knew what happened he said: "Servants of God if I sit home he
says: 'You let me down in spite of my relationship to you and what I am
entitled to of your respect. If I try to help him and a good comes out
of my effort Marwan dissuades him and deceives him. He has become an
obedient tool in the hands of Marwan after having been the companion of
the Prophet." He went to Othman and spoke to him angrily saying:

"You couldn't satisfy Marwan but by your deviation from your religion
and wisdom. You have become like a ridden camel led by his rider to
wherever he pleases.

By God I forsee that he will bring you to danger but he will not be able
to take you out of it. I will not come back to you after this. You have
ruined your honor and lost the power of judgement." (49)

Ali ceased to mediate between Othman and the rebels.

When Othman was besieged he came to him and told him: "I have the right
of brotherhood of Islam relationship to you and of being a son-in-law of
the Prophet. If none of these things existed and we were in pre-Islamic
days it would be shameful to the children of Abd Munaf (the great
grandfather of the Hashimites and the Omayads) to let a man from Tyme
(Talhah Ibn Obeidullah) rob us of our authority.".

Talhah was strongly supporting the rebels. He helped them and approved
their siege of Othman. Probably their invasion of Medina was the result
of his communication and instigation.

Ali went to Talhah and found people gathering around him. He asked
Talhah: "What are you involving yourself in?" Talhah replied: "It is too
late." (He meant that Othman is coming to his end.) Ali went to the
treasury and asked that it be opened. When the keys were not found he
broke the door and distributed some of what was in the treasury among
people who were gathering around Talhah.

They left him and Othman was pleased with that. Talhah came to Othman
and said: "Amir Al-Muminine (Com-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 49 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 82.

**( 284 )**

mander of the Believers) I wanted something and God barred me from it."
Othman replied: "By Cod you did not come repenting; you are only
defeated. May God hold you accountable for what you did." (50)

Ibn Al-Atheer reported that Ibn Abbas said: "I came to Othman when he
was besieged. (This was before Othman sent Ibn Abbas as a leader of the
pilgrims during that year.) He (Othman) held my hand and led me to the
door ordering me to listen to the words of the besiegers. Some of them
were saying: 'What are we waiting for?' Others said: 'Let us wait.
Probably he will change.' While we were standing. Talhah came and asked
about Ibn Odais (One of the leaders of the Egyptian rebels) Ibn Odais
went to Talhah confiding in him. When Ibn Odais returned he ordered his
followers not to let anyone go into or come out of Othman's house.

Othman said to Ibn Abbas: "This is the order of Talhah. God take care of
Talhah. He instigated these people against me. By God I hope that his
share of the caliphate will be zero and that his blood will be shed."
Ibn Abbas said: "When I wanted to leave the house they prevented me
until Mohammad Ibn Abu Bakr interceded for me."(51)

As to Al-Zubeir it is said that he left Medina before Othman was killed.
Some historians reported that he was present in Medina when Othman died.
Ayeshah went on pilgrimage and while in her devotional duty she was
urging people to repudiate Othman.

When Othman was besieged the rebels cut off his water supply. Ali came
with a skin of water and spoke to Talhah saying: "This water has to be
allowed to Othman " then it was allowed. He attempted another time to
bring him water and spoke to the rebels saying: "What you are doing does
not resemble the deed of the believers or unbelievers! Cut not this man
from his water supply. The Romans and the Persians feed and give water
to their prisoners." But the rebels refused to allow the water in.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 50 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 84. ( 51 ) Ibn Al-Atheer
Al-Kamil Part 3 p. 87.

**( 285 )**

The siege of the Caliph continued for forty days. The rebels were trying
to force him to change his policy or resign. He refused to resign
saying: "I Will not take off a shirt which God put on me.".

Probably Othman was right in his refusal to resign. But he was wrong in
saying that the caliphate was a shirt which God had put on him for his
leadership was not by an appointment from God or His Messenger. The one
who put the shirt on him was Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf and behind him the
Qureshites; or we may say that the Second Caliph was the one who put the
shirt on Othman.

It seems that the rebels were not determined to force the Caliph to
resign nor were they willing to kill him. All they wanted from him was
to change his policy in handling the public funds dismiss his relative
governors and keep Marwan away from him. He promised to do that but he
never fulfilled his promise. Thus they asked him to resign and he
refused. Now some of the rebels resorted to violence.

Muaweyah Let the Caliph Down It is amazing that Muaweyah and the rest of
the Omayad governors did not seriously attempt to rescue their relative
Caliph. They did not send armies to break the siege around him or to
prevent the invaders from killing him. Yet the Caliph asked their help.
lt is reported that Muaweyah sent an army which came near Medina but did
not enter it while the Caliph was besieged. Muaweyah ordered the
commander of the army not to do anything until he received his order. He
told him: "Say not that the present sees what the absent does not see.
You are the absent and I am the present.".

### And So the Medinites

The other thing which can be easily noticed in the  
 recorded events of those days is the absence of any resistance  
 on the part of the Medinites. They neither challenged the  
 invading rebels nor did they prevent them from killing the  
 Caliph. It seems that the Qureshites from the inhabitants of  
 Medina (with the exception of Omayads) were not in  

**( 286 )**

sympathy with Othman. They were fed up with the Omayads and the extreme
growth of their influence in the Muslim world. The majority of the
Qureshites in Medina were sharing with Ayeshah Talhah and Al-Zubier
their feelings towards the Caliph.

The majority of the Medinites were displeased with Othman's policy of
glorifying the Qureshites and putting the Omayads the least religious
clan among the Qureshites on the necks of the Muslims. The natives of
Medina evidently did not feel that they owed the Caliph a serious
support because they did not receive what the Qureshites received of his
generosity. By their nature the natives of Medina were more religious
than the Qureshites.

Thus the majority of the inhabitants of Medina let Othman down and did
not defend him though they were much more numerous than the invading
rebels.

The Imam Ali was the companion most opposed to the murder of Othman and
the most sincere in trying to correct the Caliph's policy. He did not
only show his sympathy toward him by word; he tried to defend him by
arm. He endangered the lives of his two sons Al-Hassan and Al- Hussein
who were to him more valuable than his two eyes.

He sent the two young men to protect Othman and ordered them to stand in
arm at his door to prevent the rebels from entering his house.

Finally the rebels were informed that armies from various cities were on
their way to Medina to rescue Othman.

Some of the rebels felt that the only solution was to kill the Caliph.
Since they could not enter the door they climbed up to the house from
over the wall and killed him while the guards at the door did not know
what took place.

Thus what Ali tried fervently to prevent occurred and all his efforts to
prevent it from happening failed. The murder of the Caliph was an ugly
event whose consequences were dangerous to the future of Islam and
Muslims. This was not necessary to happen had the Caliph listened to
Ali's advice by purging his regime from the wicked officials and
purifying the state from corruptions.

Had he listened to Ali's advice by following the policy  

**( 287 )**

of his two predecessors Abu Bakr and Omar Othman would not have been
killed. But Othman was not in control of the affairs. Marwan son of the
exile of the Prophet was the actual ruler of the Muslim world and the
chief advisor of the Caliph. He was able to steer him in any direction
he chose.

However I doubt that Othman was able even if he wanted to dismiss
Muaweyah who had become stronger than the Caliph. Suppose that Othman
told Muaweyah to leave his post and he refused to do that. Would Othman
attempt to force him out of office? And had he enough power to do that?

OBSERVATION
-----------

As we conclude our brief presentation of the events of the days of
Othman and his sad end we ought to remember the following:

The caliphate of Othman and its events have proven that leadership of
the Muslim world after the Prophet should have been by selection from
the Messenger rather than by election of the companions. He was the only
one who was supported by revelation and Divine inspiration. He knew the
best qualified for leadership among the members of his house and
companions.

The leadership should not have been left to the chances  
 of elections by the Muslims in general or by the companions  
 of the Messenger or by an aristocracy such as that of the  
 Quraish community in particular. Nor should it have been  
 left to the chance of selection by a direcly or indirectly  
 elected caliph. Nor should it have been left to the election  
 by members of the Electoral Convention. An election or  
 selection such as this might bring the best or the second  
 best or the worst to power. This is dangerous for the future  
 of a nation which carries a message to itself and to the  
 world especially when the nation is still at the beginning  
 of its progress and growth. Such an election is bound to  
 bring some time to power a weak leadership which is unable to carry the
message. It may bring at another time a  
 strong leadership that deliberately or inadvertently detours  

**( 288 )**

the nation and the message from their right road which was prescribed by
the man of the message.

The incidental success of the first election by companions and first
selection by an elected Caliph which brought Abu Bakr and Omar to power
made the Muslims the historians and the scholars overlook the
destructive failure which was caused by the election of the Third
Caliph. The accomplishments of the first two Caliphs have dazzled the
eyes of the Muslims. They could not see that the events of Othman's
caliphate had given clear evidence that the election is not a safe road
for a nation of a reformatory message.

The Muslims have forgotten the obvious fact that the purpose of the
Islamic message was not to establish a righteous government for only
twelve or thirty years. The purpose of the Heavenly message was rather
much higher and longer.

When the Prophet at Chadeer Khum declared the leadership of Ali and the
rest of the purified members of his House he was following only a
natural course. This is what is supposed to be done by any head of state
when he is about to leave his office.

This would be obviously true when the head of the state is a carrier of
an extremely important message upon which the state is founded and his
government is supposed to carry that message to the nations of the world
as well as to its own people.

Any deviation that happens to the message by ignorance weakness or
impiety of the leadership may put the whole message in jeopardy. The
Holy Prophet was looking at the future through the light of God when he
proposed while on his deathbed to have for the nation a written
directive after which the nation would not go astray.

He foresaw that the Muslims would face after him many faith-testing
crises. Therefore it was highly imperative to select for the nation a
truly qualified leader in order to keep that nation on the right road.

It was most unfortunate that Omar supported by other companions objected
to the Prophet's proposal accusing  

**( 289 )**

him of hallucinations and saying the Book of God sufficed.

The events of the Electoral Convention which brought Othman to power and
the events which took place during his caliphate and their consequences
have revealed the gravity of Omar's error. The Book of God did not
prevent him from forming his prejudiced Electoral Convention which
deprived Ali of leadership and brought Othman to power. The Book of God
did not prevent Othman from committing his classical mistakes nor did it
prevent the Muslims from their violent reaction toward his mismanagement
and waging several bloody civil wars after his violent death.

For the Book of God to function and prevent people from taking erroneous
direction it has to be coupled with an efficient and firm leadership
equipped with a profound knowledge of the interpretation of the Book as
well as the teaching of the Holy Prophet. Such a leadership makes the
Book of God operative and drives people to the Qur'anic path.

This leadership is what the Messenger of God wanted to secure for the
nation through his proposed written directive.

This is what the Prophet meant in his declaration on the day of Ghadeer
Khum when he told the Muslims that he was leaving to them the two
elements which would secure them against deviation from the right road
the Book of God and the members of his House and that the two will never
part with each other.

The objection to the Prophet's proposed written directive cost the
nation its political and spiritual unity and inflicted on the nation
irreparable damage.

When the companions ignored the Prophet's declaration at Ghadeer Khum
and rejected his proposed document they were motivated by their
self-interest.

They were unwilling to give Ali the leadership after the  
 death of the Prophet because they did not want to concede  
 the caliphate to the Hashimites. To allow Ali to succeed  
 the Prophet was to admit at least implicitly that his leadership was
decreed by God and His Messenger who testified  
 that the members of the House of the Prophet will never  

**( 290 )**

part with the Holy Qur'an. This would keep the leadership in this most
honored group. The Meccan companions of various clans were unwilling to
give up their ambitions.

They wanted to keep the caliphate competitive by giving it to a
non-Hashimite Meccan. This should secure its competitiveness and allow
companions from various clans to enter the race for leadership because
they are not better than each other.

This theory worked for them for a while. Three companions (Abu Bakr Omar
and Othman) from three Meccan clans alternated on the leadership within
thirteen years. The ambitious companions however lately woke up during
the reign of Othman discovering to their dismay that their hopes of
reaching the High Office was fading out.

They faced what they were trying to avoid.

The Omayads were about to render the caliphate non-competitive because
they had already dominated the Muslim world during the first six years
of Othman's reign.

They were about to establish a royal dynasty based not on Holiness and
brilliant Islamic record as that of the members of the House of the
Prophet but rather based on power obtained by corruption usurpation and
domination. Its first expected outcome was to bar any ambitious
companions from reaching the High Office. The first casualties of this
development would be the dreams of Talhah Al- Zubeir Abdul-Rahman and
Ayeshah.

Motivated by the fear of Omayads' domination these ambitious people
started their campaign against the Third Caliph. They tried to thwart
the dream of establishing a royal dynasty and re-open to the members of
the Electoral Convention the Avenue of Leadership.

These ambitious companions were not afraid of Ali for they believed they
could block his way to the caliphate if Othman died. Quraish was against
him and the Qureshites were the king-makers. No one knew this more than
Ali who told the Hashimites at the time of the Electoral Convention: "As
long as your people (the Qureshites) are obeyed (in what is to be done
to you) you will never be given the leadership.".

**( 291 )**

However the ambitious companions' expectation did not come true. They
did not take in their calculation the fact that Quraish would lose the
political control for a short time after the death of Othman when people
other than the Qureshites would be the king-makers.
