the Battle of Bassrah
=====================

**( 321 )**

##### 23.

The period at which the Qureshite community was overwhelmed and lost the
political control had elapsed.

Quraish woke up after the Brother of the Messenger was elected. Now this
community went on gathering its forces determined not to let Ali enjoy
his leadership and to demolish that leadership regardless of what it may
cost the Muslims in blood unity and religion.

The Qureshite parties (though neither of them had good intentions
towards the other) agreed to wage war against Ali the Imam of the truth.
One of the two parties was led by three leaders who had a high religious
position: Ayeshah the politically-minded wife of the Holy Prophet Talhah
and Al-Zubeir who were among the early Muslims with a brilliant record
in their endeavor during the days of the prophethood along with a long
companionship of the Holy Prophet.

The other party was the Omayads led by Muaweyah  
 (governor of Syria). The Omayads were known (with the  
 exception of a few) to be less religious than other Muslims  
 as they were known for their long and strong hostility  
 towards the Prophet. That hositility continued for most of  
 the years of the prophethood and the signs of it did not  
 disappear except during the last two years of the life of the  
 Messenger.(1) In spite of that this party had a tremendous  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 2 pp. 165-166.

**( 322 )**

material power which made it the more dangerous of the two parties.

A Third Party Governor of Kufa Both parties declared their open defiance
to the Caliph. Both parties made out ot the revenge for the death of
Othman a slogan with which they were trying to deceive millions of
ignorant Muslims. The two parties were joined by Abu Musa Al-Ashaari in
a covered and camouflaged way. As the Imam's appointed governor of Kufa
Abu Musa was able through his malicious method to offer to the two
parties tremendous assistance.

However the three leaders of the first Qureshite party were faster than
the second party in their violent hostility.

They took the strategy of offense while Muaweyah took the strategy of
disobedience and defiance.

The three leaders took the law in their hands and appointed themselves
as the high magistrates of the nation and the administrators of its
affairs. They went on shedding the blood of the Muslims ( 2 ) though
they were neither heirs nor relatives of the assassinated Caliph. Nor
were they elected by the nation.

History recorded the names of the killers of Othman and their number did
not exceed five: Soudan Ibn Hamran Al-Ghafiqi Qutairah Kinanah Ibn Bishr
Al- Tajeebi and Amr Ibn Al-Hamiq.( 3 ) History records that three of
them: Kinanah Ibn Bish Al-Tajeebi Soudan Ibn Hamran and Qutairah were
killed at the same time Othman was murdered.( 4 ) Thus only two of them
survived Othman. But the three leaders did not go after these two.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 2 ) Dr. Taha Hissein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 39 Ibn Al-Atheer
Al-Kamil part 3 p. 111. ( 3 ) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 391-and
pp. 393-394. ( 4 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 89-90 Al-Tabari in
his History part 4 p. 431 Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 102 Ibn
Abu-Al-Radeed Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.2 p. 506.

**( 323 )**

They considered all who attended the besiegement of the Third Caliph
from Bassrah Kufa and Egypt to be of his killers. Yet most of these came
asking the Caliph to make changes and did not come to kill him. They
came only to pressure him to change his policy towards handling the
public funds and towards his relatives. The few who killed him made
their attack on him while the majority of the rebels were unaware of
what the few did. His death probably was a shocking surprise to most of
those who besieged him.

The three leaders considered all who attended the besiegement partners
in his assassination because their presence was an assistance to the
murderers. If this logic is sound then it would have been the duty of
the three leaders to go to the Imam and ask him to give them what they
deserved of punishment because they were among the biggest agitators
against the Caliph.( 5 )

### A Sweeping Condemnation

The three leaders were not satisfied to kill only the ones who besieged
Othman whose number did not exceed twelve hundred from Egypt Kufa and
Bassrah. Evidently the three leaders considered every loyal person to
the Imam a partner in the murder of Othman. They went to Bassrah and
turned thousands of its inhabitants against the Imam then used them to
fight whomever they could reach of the Imam's followers in Bassrah or
Kufa. The participants in the siege of Othman from the people of Bassrah
did not exceed two hundred persons and none of them participated
directly in killing the Caliph.

The Qureshite war followed a pre-Islamic method. Its purpose was not to
kill the killers of Othman but to destroy the caliphate of the Imam. How
would they avenge the blood of Othman when they were the ones who urged
people to kill him?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 5 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 506 Al-Tabari his History part 4
p. 431.

**( 324 )**

A Warning Prophecy Not Heeded
-----------------------------

The three leaders went to Bassrah accompanying three thousand persons
including a thousand Meccans. Othman's former appointed governors
supplied them with funds and means of transportation through what they
stole from the public funds before they left their posts.

Their procession arrived to a water where dogs at that water barked at
them. Mother of the Believers Ayeshah asked about the name of the place.
When they told her it was the water of Al-Hou-ab she realized that she
was deviating from the right road and the prophecy of the great
Messenger had been fulfilled. She said "Return me return me (to
Mecca)."( 6 ) Al-Zubeir and his oldest son Abdullah confused her by
bringing witnesses testifying falsely that the water is not the water of
Al-Hou-ab.

It is also reported that she was told that Ali is about to overtake them
and they ought to hurry out. Thus she continued her journey to Bassrah.
( 7 ) Yet she knew that the Imam does not fight anyone that does not
fight him. She was too intelligent to believe in the testimony of
witnesses who were brought to her by people who justified every means
for reaching their end. The voice of the Messenger was still ringing in
her ears: "I wish I knew which one of you will be the rider of the huge
camel to be barked at by the dogs of Al-Hou-ab and she would be
deviating from the right road." (He was addressing Ayeshah and Om
Selema) and he turned to Ayeshah saying: "Humairah I have warned you." (
8 )

Dividing Killing and Truce
--------------------------

Finally the procession arrived in Bassrah and the wife  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 6 ) Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 34 Al-Tabari his History
part 4 p. 407 Al-Hakim in his Al-Mustadrak part 3 pp. 119-120 Ibn
Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 39. ( 7 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p.
107. ( 8 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 120.

**( 325 )**

of the Messenger was able (through her position with the Messenger of
God and her father being the First Caliph) to divide the people of
Bassrah after they had given their allegiance to the Imam. The three
leaders' party and the party of the governor of Bassrah Othman Ibn
Huneif fought each other then agreed on a temporary truce. This truce
was violated by the three leaders when they attacked the followers of
Ibn Huneif then forced him out of the leadership of the prayer at the
Mosque and slaughtered many of his guards then occupied the governor's
office and massacred their opponents.( 9 ) Their opponents were not the
killers of the Caliph Othman but they were loyal to the Imam.

The Contents of the Truce Agreement
-----------------------------------

Al-Tabari in his History reported that the truce pact which was made
between Ibn Huneif on one hand and Talhah and Al-Zubeir on the other
hand contained the agreement to send a messenger from Bassrah to Medina
seeking information from its inhabitants whether Talhah and Al-Zubeir
elected Ali voluntarily or by force. If people of Medina testified that
the two companions were forced to elect Ali the city of Bassrah shall be
under control of the two companions and Ibn Huneif should leave his
post. If people of Medina testify that the two companions elected the
Imam voluntarily the governor Ibn Huneif would stay in his post and
Talhah and Al-Zubeir could stay in Bassrah under the control of the Imam
if they want and if they choose to leave Bassrah they could. (10)

The messenger of the two parties to Medina was Kaab Ibn Soor a former
judge of Bassrah. When he asked people of Medina about the two
companions' election of the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 9 ) Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 39 Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.
468 Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 111. ( 10) Al-Tabari his History
part 4 p. 467.

**( 326 )**

Imam people did not answer his question except Osamah Ibn Zeid Ibn
Harithah. He stated that they elected Ali unwillingly and under
coercion. Sahl Ibn Huneif (brother of Othman Ibn Huneif governor of
Bassrah) and others attacked Osamah Ibn Zeid but Osamah was defended by
a few people who were from the opposition of the Imam and Osamah was
taken to his home without being hurt.( 11 )

Al-Tabari recorded that when the Imam knew about what took place in
Medina he sent to Othman Ibn Huneif a message in which he blamed him for
his inefficiency and told him in the message: "By God they were not
forced for a division. They were forced for unity and good. If they want
to declare their disobedience they have no excuse; and if they want
something else we may consider the matter.'' ( 12)

When the message of the Imam came to Othman Ibn Huneif and Ibn Soor came
with his news from Medina Talhah and Al-Zubeir sent to Othman Ibn Huneif
to leave his post and his office. Othman refused to do so saying that
what the Imam brought up is different from what they had agreed upon.
Upon this Talhah and Al-Zubeir and their supporters made their attack at
the Mosque then they attacked the governor and prevailed against him.

They occupied his office and the city of Bassrah then took over the
treasury. This was followed by a massacre.(13) The three leaders aimed
at liquidating their opponents. Ibn Huneif was taken prisoner. They
tortured him and pulled the hair off his beard and wanted to kill him.

Al-Tabari in reporting these events relied on the narration of Seif Ibn
Omar who alleged to have taken his information from Mohammad (Ibn Oun)
and Talhah.

Knowing the Imam's method of conducting himself we ought to discredit
this report. The Imam was not a man who would take a pledge of loyalty
from a person who was forced to give it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 11) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 468. ( 12) Al-Tabari his History
part 4 pp. 468-69. ( 13) Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra part 2 p. 36.

**( 327 )**

We have already substantiated that the claim of coercion by Talhah and
Al-Zubeir was unfounded. The reporter of this story was Seif Ibn Omar
who was discredited by many historians and hadith recorders and some of
them declared him as one of the forgers of the history and some of them
accused him of being a heretic.(14) We shall deal with this in the
following chapter.

Forcing Two Persons Does Not Nullify the Election
-------------------------------------------------

Assuming that the two companions were forced to elect the Imam this
would allow them only to withhold from the Imam their assistance if he
seeks it. It would not allow them to hinder the Imam from exercising his
rule as the administrator of the affairs of the nation after he was
elected by the overwhelming majority from the companions of the Prophet.

Forcing two persons to elect an Imam does not cancel the whole election
or the legitimacy of his caliphate. Al- Zubeir was forced to give his
allegiance to Abu Bakr when Abu Bakr was elected. Historians reported
that Al-Zubeir came out from the house of Ali drawing his sword in the
faces of the attackers saying. "Ali has the right more than anyone to
the caliphate." The attackers took the sword from his hand and led him
to Abu Bakr and made him give his allegiance to him by force. (15)
Forcing Al-Zubeir at that time did not cancel the legitimacy of Abu
Bakr's election in spite of the fact that his election was a "Faltah"
(an incident that came without preparation or planning) according to the
testimony of Omar Ibn Al-Khattab.( 16 )

Would it have been legitimate at that time for Al-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 14) Sayed Murtadah AI-Askari Abdullah Ibn Saba second edition p. 26. (
15) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah part 6 p. 11
(printed in 1965 by the House of Resurrection of the Arabic Books. ( 16)
Al-Bukhari his Sahih part 6 p. 195 Imam Ahmad his Musnad part 1 p. 17.

**( 328 )**

Zubeir to go to Mecca for example and occupy it and drive Abu Bakr's
appointed governor from Mecca by force? I do not believe that Al-Zubeir
could claim that this was legal for him to do. I do not think that
anyone from the companions would agree with him if he had claimed the
right to do that. Had he done this he would have been fought and
considered to be a divider of the Muslim community. Why should it be
legitimate for him and Talhah to fight the Imam and drive his appointed
governor out of Bassrah and occupy a city whose people pledged their
allegiance to him?

I llegal Agreement
------------------

If Ibn Huneif had agreed with the two companions voluntarily on the
contents of the alleged pact of the temporary truce he would have
committed a grave mistake.

This is because his agreement with the two companions represents a
negligence of the trust which the Imam put in the hand of Ibn Huneif and
because it is an agreement on dividing the nation. This is abhorable to
God and His Messenger.

Granted that Ibn Huneif agreed on that. This could not make it
legitimate for the two companions and for the Mother of the Believers to
implement the contents of the agreement because it contained a pledge to
commit a major sin. If Ibn Huneif had breached the pact between him and
the two companions after the Imam reprimanded him he would have only
fulfilled his duty. This is because the contents of the pact are
unjustifiable in Islam.

If the two companions wanted out of their occupation  
 of Bassrah to make one of them a caliph the Faith of  
 Islam does not allow them to do so. Muslim reported in  
 his Sahih that Abu Sa-eed Al-Khidri said that the Messenger of God
said: "If two caliphs are elected kill the latter of the two."(17)
Muslim reported also that the Messenger said: "Whoever stood in open
disobedience and parted  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 17) Muslim his Sahih part 6 p. 195.

**( 329 )**

with the bulk of the community then dies he would die d pre-Islamic
death."(18)

THE IMAM'S JOURNEY
------------------

Muaweyah declared his open defiance to the Imam and the Imam found his
confrontation with Muaweyah inevitable. Therefore he went on trying to
mobilize an army in order to subdue this dangerous rebellion. While he
was dealing with this crisis he received the news of the journey of the
three leaders to Iraq. He changed his plan. The Imam found it necessary
to give priority to the crisis of the three leaders. The providence of
Iraq was the most important among the Islamic provinces for the
caliphate. Should the three leaders occupy Iraq while the Syrian
province is controlled by Muaweyah the Imam would have lost most of the
moral material and military forces in the Muslim World.

The Imam facing this crisis was fifty-eight years old.

His relatively old age did not diminish his determination bravery and
his fast response to the big problems and facing them with proper
solutions. During the days of the Messenger he was his right arm the one
who solved his probelms and subdued his enemies. Now after twenty-five
years during which he was in actual retirement he returns with his
well-known capabilities to face crises but on a larger scale. The forces
he had to face at this period were uncomparably greater than what he
used to face in the days of the Prophet.

### Unprecedented Test

The struggle between right and wrong was and still is difficult for the
followers of the truth. People of the right  
 camp are usually in the minority. The wrong side has its  
 own attraction as it has fruits which the people of its camp  
 can pick quickly. The truth is not tempting and the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(18) Muslim his Sahih part 6 p. 195.

**( 330 )**

strength of its followers springs from their belief in God the Day of
Judgment and their determination to sacrifice.

The difficulties which the camp of truth faces increase greatly when
people are confounded unable to distinguish between right and wrong.
Under such circumstances the truth loses the assistance of people with
good intention who would be helpful if the right road were clear to
them.

On the other hand the wrong camp wins certain forces which could have
been antagonistic to it if they had known that it is the wrong camp.
People of good intention may stay neutral because they do not know which
side is right.

Their neutrality decreases the number of the supporters of truth and the
wrong party would be relieved of the burden of combating these good
people due to their neutrality.

This is what happened to the camp of truth which the Imam was leading.
It was the first time it took place in the Islamic history. It never
happened during the days of the Prophethood nor did it happen during the
days of the Three Caliphs who preceded the Imam.

The Holy Prophet faced many enemies but the separation between him and
his enemies was as clear as the separation between day and night. He is
the Messenger and his followers are the believers in his message and his
enemies are the pagans and the rest of the unbelievers who declared
their disbelief in his message. There was no possibility to lose the
distinction between right and wrong.

Abu Bakr faced at the beginning of his reign forces that declared their
desertion of the Faith of Islam. Thus there was no room for any
confusion between right and wrong. When the war of desertion ended the
First Caliph had to face forces that did not believe in Islam and
declared their animosity towards its message. And so was the situation
during the days of Omar and Othman. Right and wrong distinguished from
each other like day and night.

The Imam Ali on the contrary had to face hostile forces which belonged
to the Faith of Islam and declared their belief in its Book and offered
the five prayers and paid Zakat. Furthermore one of the camps of those
forces  

**( 331 )**

was led by three people whom tne Muslims highly respected because of
their companionship to the Prophet or for being related to him by
marriage.

Thus it became difficult for the masses of the people and even for some
of the knowledgeable people to distinguish between the camp of the truth
and that of falsehood. The history of the three leaders attracted tens
of thousands of people and made them side with them against the
well-guided Imam while they were thinking that they were right and that
he was wrong.

Had Ali come to power immediately after the death of the Holy Prophet
his confrontation with Talhah Al- Zubeir and Ayeshah could have been
easier than his confrontation with them twenty-five years later. During
the early years after the Prophet people still remembered the
distinctions of Ali his great endeavor in the way of God and his
position with the Holy Prophet and the Prophet's declarations about him.
By the passage of more than two decades after the death of the Prophet
people had forgotten Ali's distinctions. He was away from the political
arena and in actual retirement.

People of Bassrah and Kufa probably knew about Talhah and Al-Zubeir more
than they did about the Imam Ali. Talhah and Al-Zubeir had many
properties and big investments in both cities. Even Al-Zubeir forgot
that the Holy Prophet had told him that he will fight Ali while unjust
to him. This explains the word of the Imam which he uttered before he
was elected: ". . . For we are facing a crisis with many faces and
colors. The hearts do not stand to it and the minds do not rest with
it." As the crisis which was precipitated by the movement of the three
leaders had such great dimensions it was the duty of the Imam to face it
with all his forces. Therefore he left Medina with a few hundred
volunteers hoping that he will overtake the leaders and their followers
before reaching Iraq and prevent them from implementing their plan.

When he arrived to Rabatha he realized that they had already passed it
and gone towards Bassrah. However he  

**( 332 )**

believed that their invasion of Bassrah was less harmful than invading
Kufa where the most important Arab forces were settled.

He went on until he arrived to Thee Qar. He sojourned there after he
sent a message to the people of Kufa urging them to join him for the
sake of bringing peace preventing evil and supporting truth.

The three leaders were already in control of Bassrah.

They drove Othman Ibn Huneif out of his office. Othman came to Thee Qar.
When he met the Imam he told him:

"Ameer Al-Mumineen when you sent me to Bassrah I was bearded but I
returned to you without a beard." The Imam said to him:

"May God reward you for what you have suffered.

Two persons before me ruled the people and both followed the Book; then
the third one followed them. People spoke about him and dealt with him
the way they did.

Then they elected me. Talhah and Al-Zubeir elected me then they breached
their covenant with me and instigated people against me. It is one of
the wonders that they obeyed Abu Bakr and Omar and now they antagonize
me.

By God they know that I am not less than any of those who passed away.
God I ask Thee to untie what they knotted and abort what they plotted
and make them meet the evil consequences of what they have done."(19)

ABU MUSA AL-ASHAARI
-------------------

After the three leaders' party occupied the City of Bassrah Ayeshah
Mother of believers took a further step. She wrote to the leaders of
Kufa informing them that her party had already occupied Bassrah urging
them to avenge the blood of Othman and discouraging them from supporting
the Imam.(20) Of course she wrote to Abu Musa (the Imam's appointed
governor of the city) and asked him to use his influence in preventing
the Kufites from sending any recruits to the army of the Imam. Abu  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(19) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.480. (20) Al-Tabari his History part
4 p.480.

**( 333 )**

Musa did not need anyone to urge him to do that. He was not loyal to the
Imam; nor was he a believer in his right.

The messages of the Mother of Believers to the Kufites had their
effects. It divided them. Some of them called for the support of the
Imam and some of them called for staying out of the dispute or for
supporting the three leaders. Abu Musa spoke to the people repeatedly
warning them and advising them not to enter into any battle for the
support of the Imam. He reported to them that he heard the Messenger of
God saying: "There shall be a faith-testing crisis in which the less
participation the better." Then he told them: "Sheath the swords give
refuge to the oppressed until people are united and the cloud of crisis
clears up." ( 21)

Had the Kufites obeyed Abu Musa the Imam could not have faced the crisis
with any considerable strength.

He had only a small army when he arrived to the area of Thee-Qar. It is
amazing that history did not record that Abu Musa ever criticized the
three leaders for invading and occupying Bassrah and pushing people to
the Faithtesting crisis which he used to mention so often. Evidently .
Abu Musa shared with the three leaders their opinion and he wanted the
Muslims to approve their usurping the authority from the Imam and
breaching their covenant with him after they pledged their allegiance to
him.

Abu Musa used to report the hadith of the crisis as if he had a special
knowledge of it. Yet the Holy Qur'an declared the following:

"Do the people think that they will be left alone when they say: 'We
have believed' without being tested? Certainly We have tested
generations before them. Thus God would know the people of truth and the
untrue ones."(22)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(21) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p.116. (22) The Holy Qur'an chapter
29 verses 2-3.

**( 334 )**

Abu Musa Misinterpreted His Own Report
--------------------------------------

It seems that Abu Musa reported a statement he attributed to the Prophet
but he did not understand what it meant. If the Messenger had uttered
the words which Abu Musa reported the Prophet had meant that there will
be a devious and confusing movement in the Muslim society and that the
duty of the Muslims will be to discourage its people and to let the
people of that innovation down by denying them any support.

The Messenger did not mean that the good believers should not resist the
people of innovation when their movement becomes dangerous to the unity
of the nation and when they shed the blood of the Muslims. Otherwise the
Prophet would be calling upon the nation to approve the devious movement
and let them succeed in reaching their goal and usurping the power and
administering the affairs of the Muslims after they acquire what they
seek of power.

### Abu Musa Disagreed with the Qur'an

Had Abu Musa understood the words of the Messenger he would have known
that those who entered Bassrah and usurped from the Imam his authority
and drove his appointed governor out of Bassrah are the people of the
devious movement who should be denied all support. He should have known
that when those people divided the Muslims the duty of the Muslims was
to fight them because they are people of invitation to an un-Islamic
movement and to a rebellion against the legitimate Imam in whose name
Abu Musa was ruling Kufa. Abu Musa reported the hadith which he claimed
to have heard from the Prophet and forgot what the Holy Qur'an clearly
declared that the nation is dutybound to fight a Muslim party that
commits an aggression against another Islamic party:

"If two parties among the believers fall into a quarrel make ye peace
between them; but if one of them trans-  

**( 335 )**

gresses beyond bounds against the other then fight the one that
transgresses until it complies with the command of God. But if it
complies then make peace between them with justice and be fair. For God
loves those who are fair and just." (23)

Abu Musa also forgot another verse which makes it mandatory to obey the
Imam and support him:

"O ye who believe obey God and obey His Apostle and the people of
authority among you. If ye differ in anything among yourselves refer it
to God and His Apostle if ye do believe in God and the last Day. That is
best and most suitable for finer determination."(24)

This verse makes it mandatory for Abu Musa and every Muslim to obey the
Imam.

Obedience of the leader of the believers is mandatory to every Muslim
unless the leader calls upon people to disobey God. The verse also
commands that a matter of dispute should be referred to the Book of God
and the instruction of the Messenger. The Imam Ali was the leader of the
Muslim nation and he did not invite people to disobey God. He rather
called upon them to obey Him.

His aim was to unite the Muslims and the aim of his opponents was to
turn people against him and to divide the nation.

which Faith-testing Crisis?
---------------------------

However there were many confounding crises that took place in the
history of Islam before the election of the Imam and after his departure
from this world. The Prophet in the statement which Abu Musa attributed
to him did not name that crisis. How did Abu Musa know that the crisis
which the Prophet meant was the crisis which took place during the days
of the Imam's reign?

It is not reported that the Prophet ordered Ali to be in-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(23) The Holy Qur'an chapter 49 verse 9. (24) The Holy Qur'an chapter 4
verse 58.

**( 336 )**

active in the face of confounding crises which were to take place during
the days of his reign. On the contrary he commanded him to fight and
commanded the believers to follow him. Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak (part 3
page 139) recorded that Abu Ayyoub Al-Ansari reported during the days of
Omar that the Messenger ordered Ali to fight the breachers (of the pact
of allegiance) the Unjust party and the Seceders' party; and that Abu
Ayyoub asked the Messenger saying: "With whom shall we fight these
parties?" The Messenger replied: "With Ali Ibn Abu Talib." Al-Hakim
recorded also that Abu Sa-eed Al-Khidri reported that the Messenger of
God said that Ali shall fight for the interpretation of the Holy Qur'an
as I fought for its revelation.

Abu Musa Appointed Himself a Counselor to the Nation and the Imam
-----------------------------------------------------------------

His words indicate clearly that he accused the Imam of being a partner
in the confounding crisis about which he spoke. His words indicate also
that he accused the Imam with either the lack of knowledge of the
instructions of the Messenger or disobedience of the Prophet's
instructions or with both lack of knowledge and disobedience. Yet the
Messenger said: "I am the city of knowledge and Ali is the gate of that
city; whoever wishes to enter the city should come through its
gate."(25)

Abu Musa Persisted in His Error
-------------------------------

It may be said that Abu Musa was following Abdullah Ibn Omar whom he
used to love and whom he recommended for leadership. Abdullah Ibn Omar
stood neutral in the dispute between Ali and his opponents. He did not
support the truth. Nor did he fight the untruth. But then he found
himself failing to follow the Book of God.

Therefore he repented and changed his attitude towards  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(25) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p.127.

**( 337 )**

Ali. Al-Hakim recorded in his Al-Mustadrak through his channel to
Al-Zuhri who reported that Hamzah said the following:

"While he (Hamzah) was sitting with Abdullah Ibn Omar a man from Iraq
came to Ibn Omar. He said: Abu Abdul-Rahman (a code name of Ibn Omar) by
God I have been seriously trying to follow you and take an attitude
similar to yours towards the division of the nation and be neutral as
far as I could. Yet I have read a verse from the Holy Qur'an which
occupied my mind and I would like you to inform me about it. I mean the
Word of God: 'If two parties among the believers fall into a quarrel
make ye peace between them; if one of them transgresses beyond bounds
against the other then fight ye (all) against the one that transgresses
until it complies with the command of God. But if it complies then make
peace between them with justice and be fair. For God loves those who are
fair and just.'

"Please inform me how to comply with this verse. Abdullah said: 'You
have nothing to do with this. Go away.' The man left and when he
disappeared Abdullah turned to us saying: 'I never found in my heart
something as I felt about this verse that I did not fight the aggressor
party as God commanded me to do.' "(26)

Al-Hakim commented on this report saying: "This is an important hadith
reported by many outstanding tabi-is (good religious scholars who did
not witness the Prophet and took their knowledge from his companions). I
have chosen the channel of Shu-aib Ibn Abu Hamzah to Al- Zuhri because
the two Sheikhs (Al Bukhari and Muslim) used this channel which
indicated that this is truly authentic.".

Thus Abdullah Ibn Omar repented for his wrong stand in the quarrel
between Ali and his opponents but Abu Musa did not repent.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(26) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p.115.

**( 338 )**

### Abu Musa Did Not Distinguish Between Hadith and Qur'an

However I am not confident that Abu Musa conveyed the statement of the
Messenger as the Messenger pronounced it. And we find that Abu Musa
reported to the people of Bassrah when he was their governor something
contrary to the truth and denied by all Muslims. Muslim in his Sahih
reported the following:

"Abu Musa Al-Ashaari summoned the readers of Bassrah. Three hundred
readers of the Holy Qur'an came to him. He said to them: "You are the
righteous men of Bassrah and the readers of the Qur'an. Let not the
passage of time make you forget the truth. Thus your hearts will be
hardened. We used to read a chapter similar to the chapter of Bara-ah in
length and seriousness and I have forgotten it. However I remember of
that chapter only the following verse:

'Should Ibn Adam acquire two valleys full of money he would seek a third
valley. And the abdomen of Ibn Adam would not be filled but by soil.'
"And we used to read a chapter which was similar to the chapters which
are begun with the word: "Sabbaha " and I have forgotten it. I remember
of it only the following: 'O you who believe why do you say what you do
not do? Testimony will be written on your necks then you would be
questioned about it on the Day of Judgement."(27)

The words which Abu Musa reported are certainly not from the Holy
Qur'an; nor do they resemble the Qur'anic words in the least. The best
guess is that Abu Musa was disturbed in his thinking unable sometimes to
distinguish between the Qur'an and the hadith. And when he reported a
hadith he was not accurate nor could he understand it.

I believe that Abu Musa was a part of the conspiracy  
 of Talhah Al-Zubeir Ayeshah and Muaweyah Ibn Abu  
 Sufyan. He was trying his best to destroy the caliphate

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(27) Muslim Sahih Muslim part7 (Book of Zakat) p.139-140.

**( 339 )**

of the Imam. Had he succeeded in convincing the Kufites to sit and
refrain from supporting the Imam the reign of the Imam would have ended
in the first year after his election. It is obvious that the Imam did
not trust Abu Musa and that he knew his negative attitude towards the
members of the House of the Prophet in general and towards him in
particular.

When the Imam was elected he sent Imarah Ibn Shihab one of the
companions as a governor of Kufa to replace Abu Musa. But Imarah came
back to Medina after Tulaihah Ibn Khuwailid threatened him before his
arrival to Kufa . . . (28) (During the short period that took place
after the death of Othman there was no security for people.) The Imam
then kept Abu Musa upon the request of Al-Ashtar. Abu Musa was a
Yemenite and most of the Kufites were Yemenites.

The Imam sent Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr and Muhammad Ibn Jaafar to the
Kufites asking them to join him in his journey to Bassrah and to be
supporters and helpers to the religion of God. He told them also that he
wanted to bring peace and reunite the nation. The two messengers did not
succeed and the attitude of Abu Musa was the biggest obstacle in the way
of their mission.

When they challenged him he spoke his mind saying: By God your man and I
still owe allegiance to Othman. If fighting is inevitable then we should
not fight anyone until we finish the killers of Othman wherever they may
be. (29)

Thus Abu Musa believed that he owed allegiance to  
 Othman even after Othman died but he did not believe  
 that he owed any loyalty or obedience to the living Imam  
 and that he did not have to respond to his call. He believed  
 that if the fight is necessary they had to fight the killers of  
 Othman. But the three leaders who were the first to call for the murder
of Othman should not be fought even if  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(28) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p.103. (29) Al-Tabari his History
part 4 p.482.

**( 340 )**

they usurp the authority of the Imam in Bassrah and people should not
challenge them.

Abu Musa spoke his mind also on another occasion when Abd Kheir
Al-Haiwani said to him: "Did Talhah and Al-Zubeir not give Ali a pledge
of Allegiance?" When Abu Musa replied in the affirmative Abd Kheir asked
him: "Did Ali commit any wrong-doing which allows the two companions to
breach their covenant with him?" Abu Musa replied: "I do not know." Abd
Kheir said: "We leave you until you know."(30) He took this attitude in
order to preserve for the three leaders their gains against the Imam.
Had he spoken the truth he would have admitted that the two companions
had breached their covenant with the Imam without any justification. But
this would damage his interest and their interest. It is also reported
that the two messengers sent Hashim Ibn Utbah Ibn Abu Waqass to the Imam
to inform him of what took place. The messenger returned to Thee Qar
where the Imam was and informed him of what had taken place.

The Key to the Solution
-----------------------

It became clear to the Imam that Abu Musa was the  
 biggest obstacle and that his dismissal is the key to the  
 solution of the problem. The Imam could not lead a  
 respectable army as long as the Kufites listened to Abu  
 Musa. Therefore he sent to him a letter with Hashim Ibn  
 Utbah saying to him: "Send people to me. I did not appoint you governor
except to have you as my assistant for  
 establishing the truth." Abu Musa refused to do so and  
 Hashim wrote to the Imam the following: "I have come to  
 a man who is a radical disputer open in hatred." The Imam sent
Al-Hassan and Ammar Ibn Yasir to urge people  
 to join the Imam. He wrote to Abu Musa: "I have sent  
 Qurthah Ibn Kaab as governor of Kufa. Leave your post  
 blamed and defeated. If you defy him and he prevails  
 against you I commanded him to execute you. Abu Musa  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(30) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.486.

**( 341 )**

left his post and Al-Hassan and Ammar went on in their mission and
people of Kufa responded to their call.(31)

It is reported also that Abu Musa did not leave his post and persisted
in his defiance until Al-Ashtar joined Al- Hassan and Ammar because he
felt that he was responsible for keeping Abu Musa in his post when he
requested the Imam to keep him in that post. When Abu Musa unveiled his
malicious intentions Al-Ashtar said to the Imam: "Ameer Al-Mumineen may
God honor you With your permission I would like to join them (Al-Hassan
and Ammar); I believe that the Kufites are very obedient to me. If I go
there I hope that none of them will disagree with me." The Imam honored
his request. He went there and called upon everyone he met to join him
in his march on the mansion of the governor. He entered the mansion with
a large group while Abu Musa was standing at the main mosque speaking to
his audience discouraging them from supporting the Imam and reporting to
them what he claimed to have heard from the Prophet concerning the
confounding crisis and that the one who does not participate is better
than the one who does. Ammar Ibn Yasir was responding to him by saying:
The Messenger of God told only you that not taking part in it is better
than your participation. Then Ammar said: God prevails against those who
try to fight Him.

The servants of Abu Musa came running to the mosque saying: Abu Musa
Al-Ashtar entered the mansion beat us up and drove us out. When Abu Musa
came down and entered the mansion Al-Ashtar shouted: "Get out of our
mansion. May God get your soul out of your body. By God you are of the
early hypocrites." Abu Musa said: Give me a respite only this evening.
Al-Ashtar granted him that saying: You will not stay tonight at the
mansion. People entered into the mansion trying to loot Abu Musa's
belongings but Al-Ashtar prevented them saying: I granted him my
protection.(32)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(31) Al-Tabari his History part 4 pp.499-500. (32) Al-Tabari his History
part 4 pp.486-487.

**( 342 )**

Thus the Imam needed to use force in order to remove Abu Musa from his
post because Abu Musa was not like the rest of the appointed officials.
He was a conspirator against the Imam disguised as his appointed
governor.

Had he been really scrupulous about war and blood shedding he should
have sided with the Imam because the Imam was still far from entering a
battle. He was seeking peace and unity while the three leaders had
already shed a great deal of blood. Abu Musa approved what the three
leaders did and tried anxiously to preserve for them their bloody gains
by urging people of Kufa not to join the Imam. Yet the Imam was asking
people to come to him in order to assist him if he is right and to
correct him if he is wrong.

Thus we can easily conclude that Abu Musa was not a man of peace or
against war. He was rather against the Imam collaborating with his
enemies. The Imam was trying to prevent war while the three whom Abu
Musa was trying to protect had already started their bloody battle
before the Imam's arrival to Thee Qar. Of the words which the Imam said
to the people of Kufa when they met him at Thee Qar are the following:

"I have invited you to witness with us the behavior of our brothers in
Bassrah. If they change their attitude this is what we want. If they
persist in their wrong way we shall not agree with them but we shall try
peaceful avenues prefering them to the avenue of war (unless they force
it upon us). There is no power but that of God."(33)

I have given Abu Musa this lengthy discussion because his hostile stand
toward the Imam was a factor in shaping the events of that period. He
performed a very dangerous role whose consequences were detrimental to
the Muslim World.

Finally a group of Kufites (numbering twelve thousand) came to join the
Imam. Al-Tabari Ibn Al-Atheer  
 and other historians along with a number of hadith  
 recorders reported that the Imam said before the arrival of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(33) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p.118.

**( 343 )**

the Kufites:" Twelve thousand and one men will come to you from Kufa."
Abu Al-Tufail a companion who reported this hadity said: "I stood at
Thee Qar counting those men. I found them to be twelve thousand and one
men.(34)

Kufa was able to send to the Imam tens of thousands of its men if it
were not for the stand of Abu Musa and the messages of Ayeshah. Her
religious place and the place of Talhah and Al-Zubeir in the minds of
the Muslims were factors in discouraging the Kufites from joining the
camp of the Imam. When the Imam neared Bassrah a group from Abdul Qeise
joined him. (35) And after all that the Imam's army did not exceed
twenty thousand while the three leaders' army according to estimates was
a minimum of thirty thousand. (36)

THE IMAM'S EFFORT FOR PEACE
---------------------------

As expected the Imam did not start a battle against his opponents in
Bassrah. All legitimate avenues of peace must be explored although his
opponents had shed enough blood to justify fighting them. He wanted to
confine the crisis and bring it to an end. Thousands of Muslims were
confounded and confused because of the religious position of his
opponents; therefore he wanted to leave no excuse for his opponents and
to make the right path clear to the masses of the Muslims.

Historians recorded that the Imam sent Al-Qaaqaa Ibn  
 Amr as his special envoy to the three leaders to speak to  
 them and offer them peace. Al-Qaaqaa was a man of wis-  
 dom and prestige and he was not accused of anything  
 concerning Othman. He went on his mission and it ap-  
 peared to him that he convinced the three leaders to accept  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(34) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.500 and p.501 and p.505 in sequel.
(35) Al-Tabari his History part 4 pp.500-501 and p.505 in sequel. (36)
Al-Tabari his History part 4 pp.500-501 and p.505 in sequel.

**( 344 )**

peace and give the Imam a pledge of allegiance and reunite the Muslims
after the death of Othman and the events of Bassrah had divided them. As
for what the three leaders spoke of concerning the killers of Othman the
Imam was supposed to consider it at a later stage.(37)

The ambassador came back to the Imam and informed him of the result of
his negotiations with the three leaders and the Imam hoped that some
good will come out of the negotiations. Thus he went to Bassrah. To his
disappointment he found his opponents closer to war than to peace and
that their military preparation was bigger than his.

They had already gathered an army of thirty thousand fighters. (38)

Al-Zubeir Lost Determination
----------------------------

The determination of Al-Zubeir to fight was shaken up when he learned
that Ammar Ibn Yasir was with the Imam's army. When a man informed him
that he saw Ammar Ibn Yasir with the Imam's army and that he spoke to
him Al- Zubeir refused to believe that. But the man assured him time
after time that Ammar was there. Al- Zubeir sent a member of his family
to see whether this was true. When his messenger came back confirming
the truth of the information Al-Zubeir said: "This broke my back." He
lost his nerve and a tremor violently shook his body. Even the weapons
which he was carrying started to shake. It was well known to Al-Zubeir
and the rest of the companions that the Prophet said to Ammar: "Ammar be
cheerful. The aggressor party will kill you and your last drink from
this world is a drink of milk." Realizing that Ammar was with the army
of the Imam Al-Zubeir became frightened.(39)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(37) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 pp.119-120 Al-Tabari his History part
4 pp.488-489. (38) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.501. (39) Al-Tabari
his History part 4 pp.510-511.

**( 345 )**

The Imam in Dialogue with His Opponents
---------------------------------------

In spite of this Al-Zubeir stayed with his party. The Imam wanted to
make it clear to him and to his colleague Talhah that they were wrong.
He met them between the two camps while each of them was riding his
horse and people were looking at them. The Imam was completely unarmed
and Al-Zubeir was fully armed. The Imam wanted to show people that his
goal is peace rather than war. His opponents declared their rebellion
against him under the pretext of avenge for Othman for the sake of God.
The Imam tried to remind them of God and the following dialogue
occurred:

The Imam: "Certainly you have prepared arms horses and men " he said to
the two companions while he and they were on their horses. "I do not
know whether you have prepared an excuse when you meet your Lord on the
Day of Judgment. Fear God and be not like a woman who unspun her strands
after she had strongly spun it.

Was I not your brother and you used to believe in the sanctity of my
blood and I believed in the sanctity of your blood? Did I do anything
that makes it legitimate for you to shed my blood?" ( 40)

Then he said to Al-Zubeir: What brought you here? Al-Zubeir: You have
brought me here and I do not believe that you are qualified to be
caliph. You have no more right than we have to be caliphs. And you
killed Othman.

### Reminiscence of a Prophecy

The Imam: "You believe that Othman was more  
 qualified than I? We used to count you from the children  
 of Abdul-Muttalib (Al-Zubeir was the son of Safeyah  
 daughter of Abdul Muttalib) until your son Abdullah  
 the evil son separated you from us. Zubeir do you hold  
 me responsible for the blood of Othman while you were  
 his killer? May God punish today our harshest to Oth-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(40) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.501.

**( 346 )**

man." Then the Imam said to him: "Do you remember the day when you were
with the Messenger of God passing through the area of Banu Ghunam and he
smiled at me and I smiled at him then you said to him: 'Ibn Abu Talib is
always conceited.' The Messenger of God said: 'He is not conceited and
you shall fight him unjustly.'"(41)

Al-Zubeir: By God yes I remember that now and had I remembered that
before I would not have come here. By God I will never fight you.

Talhah was expected to take the same attitude as Al- Zubeir. The
Messenger foretold Al-Zubeir that he will fight Ali while he is unjust
and that certainly goes to Talhah whose stand towards the Imam was like
that of Al- Zubeir but more violent and unjust. But Talhah was not
affected by all that. He stuck to his hard line.(42)

The Bassrah camp began to shoot and kill men from Ali's camp. The
followers of the Imam began to ask and beg him to permit them to fight
and the Imam refused time after time.

The Imam Offered the Arbitration of the Qur'an
----------------------------------------------

Finally the Imam held a copy of the Holy Qur'an and asked: Who is
willing to hold this Qur'an and invite the other camp to follow what is
in it and he should know that he will be killed? A young man from Kufa
volunteered to take the mission and the Imam turned his back to him. He
repeated his question and no one was willing to take that mission except
the young man. The Imam gave him the Qur'an and commanded him to tell
the opposite camp:

This is the Book of God between us and you from its  
 beginning to its end. Fear God for our blood and your  
 blood. The Kufan youth did what the Imam told him to do  
 and the Bassrites shot and killed him. With this flagrant  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(41) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.511. (42) Al-Tabari his History part
4 p.509.

**( 347 )**

aggression the Imam declared: "Now it is legal for us to fight
them."(43)

THE BEGINNING OF THE BATTLE
---------------------------

"By God I did not commit any sin for which they could criticize me; nor
did they put between them and me a fair judge. They are seeking a right
which they have neglected and trying to avenge a blood which they have
shed. Certainly they are the aggressor party which was predicted by the
Prophet to include a man and woman who are related to each other through
marriage.

"By God I shall prepare for them a basin which I will fill. They will
drink out of it without quenching their thirst and it will be their last
drink. God the two men (Talhah and Al-Zubeir) have faced me with open
hostility dealt with me unjustly breached their pledge of allegiance to
me and instigated people against me. God I ask Thee to untie what they
knotted and invalidate what they plotted and make them meet
disappointment in their expectation and action. I have tried to secure
their repentance to prevent hostility and gave them a respite before the
battle began. They ignored the gracious overture and rejected peace."
(The Imam Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 2 page 19)

The Imam was not a man to be intimidated by war  
 nor frightened by the quantity of enemies. Talhah and Al-  
 Zubeir and their thirty thousand soldiers would not terrify  
 him. He was still the same hero who brought the Arabs to  
 their knees during the days of the Holy Prophet and the  
 years did not increase in him but bravery and determination. He had
known through information from the Messenger that this battle was coming
and that his enemies  
 were the aggressor party which the Prophet described to  
 include the man and the woman who are related to each  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(43) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 511.

**( 348 )**

other through marriage rather than birth (Al-Zubeir was married to Asma
sister of Ayeshah)

### The Imam Knew His Killer's Description

When he faced Al-Zubeir unarmed the Imam was asked: How did you face
Al-Zubeir unarmed and he was well armed knowing his bravery? "Al-Zubeir
is not my killer " he replied. "My killer is obscure from a low family.

He will kill me but not on a battlefield. Woe to his mother.

He will wish that his mother had been bereaved by his death. Certainly
he is as wicked as the killer of the Female Camel of the Prophet Salih."
(The Camel of Salih was created miraculously and was killed by one of
the most wicked men in history.)

Although he knew that his opponents shall fight him he offered them
peace and called upon them to change their attitude. He was determined
to use all means available to him in order to prevent bloodshed.

Should they refuse his peaceful proposal and persist in their hostile
way he was determined to prepare for them a deadly basin which he will
fill. He would be the one to fill it and they would come out of it
without quenching their thirst. Then he asked the Almighty to untie what
they knotted and to show them the evil consequences of their deed and
the disappointment in what they expected; and God responded to his
prayer.

Historians disagree about the duration of the Battle of Bassrah whether
it was one day or more. Whatever the time of its duration it was one of
the ugliest and most violent battles. It was unique in its effect in
dividing the Muslims. For the first time history witnessed the Muslims
standing in two camps fighting each other and thousands of them fell by
the swords of each other.

The battle started and appeared to be short and the  
 losses seemed to be light. The general offense which the  
 army of the Imam started was stormy. It shook the Bass-  
 rite camp and compelled the thousands of the soldiers of  

**( 349 )**

the three leaders to run away before the middle of the day.

Talhah was shot by a deadly arrow which made him bleed to death. It is
reported that Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam killed him. ( 44)

Talhah's Death
--------------

Jundab Ibn Abdullah Al-Azdi reported that he witnessed Talhah
accompanied by a band of fighters and many of them were wounded and they
were overwhelmed by people. Talhah himself was wounded. He was holding a
sword and his followers were leaving him one after another and he was
saying. "Servants of God patience there is only victory and reward after
patience."

I told him: "May your mother be bereaved by your death.

Go away to safety. By God you would not be victorious nor would you have
any reward. You have only sinned and lost." Then I shouted at his
followers and they were surprised and left him. Then I told him: By God
if I want to I can kill you here. He replied: By God if you do that you
would perish in this world and in the Hereafter. I said: By God your
blood has become legal to us and you are of the regretters. Then he left
accompanied only by three people and I do not know what happened to him
after that except that I know he perished. ( 45)

Al-Qaaqaa Ibn Amr witnessed Talhah urging people to fight even though he
was bleeding from a wound. He told him: Abu Mohammad you are wounded and
you are too sick to continue your way. Enter these houses.(46)

The Killer of Talhah
--------------------

Historians reported that Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam is the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(44) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 509 Abdul Fatah Abdul-Maqsoud
Al-Imam Ali Ibn Abu Talib part 3 p. 222. (45) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed
Commentary on Nahjul Balaghah part2 p. 431. (46) Al-Tabari his History
part 4 p. 513.

**( 350 )**

one who shot him with a deadly arrow. Yet Talhah was his commander.
Marwan and the rest of the Omayads believed that Talhah and Al-Zubeir
were two of the main agitators against Othman but they were delaying
their avenge of the two men until they obtain victory against the Imam.
When Marwan witnessed that the battle was lost he did not want Talhah to
escape death because he was to the Omayads the actual killer of Othman.
Thus the Omayad strategy was to use the three leaders as a means to
retrieve the authority which they lost by the death of Othman. They were
ready to sacrifice the three leaders as easily as one would spend a
dirham. But the three leaders did not know what they were doing. Had
Al-Zubeir not been killed after his departure from Bassrah he would not
have escaped the avenge of the Omayads.

### Al-Zubeir Left the Battlefield

The Imam as we mentioned above reminded Al- Zubeir of the word of the
Messenger when he told him that he will fight Ali while he is unjust to
him. Upon that Al- Zubeir promised not to fight the Imam.

His determination to fight was already weakened when he knew that Ammar
Ibn Yasir is within the army of the Imam. In spite of this he remained
at the camp and participated in the battle for a short time. He did so
because his son Abdullah accused him of being a coward filled with fear
when he witnessed the flags of Ali carried by brave men. When Al-Zubeir
informed his son that he took an oath not to fight Ali his son counseled
him to break his oath and make an atonement for that by liberating one
of his servants. He did that and fought.(47)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(47) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 509 Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra
part 2 pp. 48-49.

**( 351 )**

Al-Zubeir Freed a Slave in Order to Fight the Imam's Camp
---------------------------------------------------------

It is amazing that Al-Zubeir was too scrupulous to break his oath
without an atonement but he was not too scrupulous after the atonement
to participate in a battle in which he may kill whomever he faces of the
Muslims. Yet he knew that killing a believer deliberately would bring
eternity in Hell. (48)

Finally Al-Zubeir left the battlefield and he did not leave until Ammar
Ibn Yasir met him and started driving him out of the battlefield by his
spear. Afraid to kill Ammar or to be killed by him Al-Zubeir asked him
repeatedly: "Abu Al-Yaqthan (Ammar's code name) do you want to kill me?"
Ammar repeatedly answered him: "No Abu Abdullah (Al-Zubeir's code name)
but you have to leave. (49) It was known to the companions that the
Messenger said that the aggressor party shall kill Ammar.

Al-Zubeir was expected to fear a fight against the Imam more than a
fight against Ammar. For fighting Ali according to the testimony of the
Messenger is like fighting the Messenger himself. The Prophet said to
Ali Fatima Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein: "I am at peace with whomever you
are at peace and I am at war with whomever you are at war." (50)

Al-Zubeir met his death after leaving Bassrah. Amr Ibn Jurmooz killed
him while he was on his way to Medina. (51)

Under the Leadership of Ayeshah
-------------------------------

The camp of the three leaders was shaken up. Talhah died and Al-Zubeir
left the battlefield; but Mother of the Believers took over after the
two and proved that she was  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(48) The Holy Qur'an chapter 4 verse 94. (49) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil
part 3 p. 124. (50) Ibn Majah his authentic Sunan part 1 p. 143. (51)
Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 510-511.

**( 352 )**

a braver leader and more capable of commanding the masses. She was more
hostile than the two companions to the Imam. She had through her
relationship to the Messenger and to her father Abu Bakr a halo of
holiness in the eyes of the masses of the Muslims. She was placed in an
armored canopy on the back of her camel (Askar). She called upon the
people to come and fight and they came back to her with great zeal. They
probably felt that to let the wife of the Messenger down is to let the
Messenger himself down. They decided to offer their sacrifices for her.
They attacked the right and left wings of the Imam's army and forced the
two wings to retreat. The two wings joined the heart of the army where
the Imam was standing. At that moment the Imam showed a bravery
unparalleled in the history of wars. (52)

### The Unique Courage

The Imam personally moved towards the camel leading what was called the
"Green Division" which consisted of the Migrant and Medinite companions.
He was surrounded by his children Al-Hassan Al-Hussein and Mohammad. He
gave the banner to Mohammad and Mohammad told his soldiers to slow down
until the rain of the arrows stopped. The Imam sent word to Mohammad
urging him to advance and commanding him to start the decisive battle.
When Mohammad hesitated the Imam came from behind and put his left hand
on the right shoulder of his son. He reprimanded him and commanded him
to advance. (53)

The Imam then compassionately took the banner  
 from him and carried it in his left hand while his sword  
 was drawn in his right hand. Then he charged the opposite  
 camp hitting them with his sword then came back when  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(52) Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsoud Al-Imam Ali Ibn Abu Talib part 3 pp.
214-216. (53) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah 1 p. 86.

**( 353 )**

his sword was twisted. He straightened it with his knee.

His children and companions including Ammar and Al- Ashtar surrounded
him and tried to prevent him from repeating his action but he kept
looking at the opposite camp. Then he returned the banner to his son
Mohammad and charged again entering into the midst of the hostile camp
hitting them with his sword. Witnessing people falling by his sword men
started to run away from him to the right and to the left. He returned
after he moistened the soil with their blood and his sword was twisted;
so he again had to straighten it with his knee.(54)

His companions surrounded him and asked him in the name of God not to
continue reminding him that it was their duty to protect him and do what
he was doing. He said: By God I do not want out of what you are
witnessing (of his action) anything except to please God. Then he said
to Mohammad: "Son of Al-Hanafeyah (his mother): This is the way you
should fight."

### Ta-if's Honey

A man brought him honey. When he tasted it he said to the man who
brought it: "Certainly your honey is from Al-Ta-if " (a city in Hijaz)
and the man said: Yes it is.

But "Ameer Al-Mumineen " by God I am amazed how could you distinguish
the honey of Al-Ta-if from others today when the hearts are jumping to
the throats?" The Imam replied: "Son of my brother by God no fear
touched the heart of your uncle nor is he concerned with anything (but
the truth). ( 55)

The Imam's Thrust Changed the Battle
------------------------------------

The two charges of the Imam had their expected effect.

They represented a thrust in the camp of the enemy and raised the morale
of the Imam's army. He ordered Al-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(54) Abdul Fattah Abdul-Maqsoud Al-Imam Ali Ibn Abu Talib part 3 p. 219.
(55) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 127.

**( 354 )**

Ashtar to attack with his division the left wing of the Bassrite army
and he did and killed Hilal Ibn Wakee-a who was the commander of the
left wing. The fight was fierce and Al-Ashtar forced the left wing to
retreat towards Ayeshah. They formed a circle around her and most of
them were from Banu Dhubbah Banu Oday Banu Asad Banu Najiah and Banu
Bahilah. All these surrounded the camel and started to compete with each
other by holding the rein of the camel one after another.

The camel became the banner of the Bassrites and Mother of the Believers
was urging her sons to fight and her hope of victory did not diminish.

Abdullah Ibn Khalaf Al-Khuza-i chief of the people of Bassrah and their
wealthiest came and asked for a duel saying that no one should meet him
but Ali and the Imam came to him and immediately hit him with his sword
and split his head. Abdullah Ibn Abza held the rein of the camel then
attacked the army of the Imam saying: "I hit them but I do not see Abu
Hassan (Ali). This certainly is saddening." The Imam met him and struck
him with his spear and left the spear in him saying: "You have seen Abu
Hassan. How did you see him?"

About seventy warriors from Quraish were killed while they were holding
the rein of the camel and many non-Qureshites also died. (56)
Abdul-Rahman Ibn Attab Ibn Oseid from Omayad was from the top of the
Qureshites.

Al-Ashtar attacked him and killed him. Al-Ashtar also attacked and
killed Khabbar Ibn Amr Al-Rasibi when he heard him challenging the Imam.

### Ammar the Ninety- Year-Old

Ammar Ibn Yasir who was ninety years old fought like a lion. It is
reported that he had a duel with Amr Ibn Yathri who was the bravest one
among the Bassrites. Amr Ibn Yathri killed a number of companions of the
Imam.

Ammar challenged him saying: Certainly you have taken  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(56) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 126-127.

**( 355 )**

refuge in a safe place. Leave your place and come to me.

People worried about Ammar because of his old age and because of the
reputation of Amr as a warrior. But Am- mar prevailed against him and
dragged him by his feet to the camp of the Imam. ( 57)

A man said to the Imam: "Ameer Al-Mumineen " what a great "Fitnah"
(faith-testing trial)!! The Badrians (companions who attended the Battle
of Badr with the Holy Prophet) are attacking each other with swords. The
Imam replied: "Woe to you; Would this be a "Fitnah" when I am its
leader? By the One Who sent Muhammad with the truth and honored his face
I never lied; nor was I devious from the right road and no one ever was
deviated from the right road through me. I am on a clear evidence from
my Lord who made it clear to His Messenger and His Messenger made it
clear to me. I shall be summoned on the Day of Judgment and I will be
guiltless. And if I had sinned what I am doing now would be an atonement
for my sin."(58)

Hamstringing the Camel
----------------------

Beholding that death is around the camel and realizing that the war will
not come to an end as long as that camel was standing the Imam drew his
sword and advanced towards the camel while the rein of the camel was in
the hands of the Dhubbites. The killing continued and many of them fell
down. The Imam reached the camel with a group from Nukhaa and Hamdan. He
said to one of his companions (named Bujair): Hit the camel. Bujair hit
the back of the camel with his sword. The camel fell down on his side
and roared terribly. As soon as the animal fell the army of Bassrah ran
away as if they were locusts in a strong wind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(57) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 519. (58) Taha Hussein Al Fitnatul
Kubra part 2 p. 53.

**( 356 )**

The Imam Spoke
--------------

Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr and Ammar Ibn Yasir carried the canopy of Ayeshah
and put her aside. The Imam came towards her while he was angry but
holding himself.

He hit the canopy with his spear and said to her: Sister of Aram
(likening her to a woman that ruled the country of Yemen before Islam).
"You have brought people back to fight after they ran away and
instigated them and made them kill each other . . . " She said: Ibn Abu
Talib you have won be forebearant . . . Then she was taken to the
mansion of Abdullah Ibn Khalaf Al-Khuza-i. She stayed days there then
the Imam sent her back to Medina in a very dignified way accompanied by
women and men. ( 59 ) Ammar came to her when she was about to leave. He
asked her: "Mother where does this journey fit with what God had
commanded you to do?" She said: "I testify that you were always telling
the truth." He said: "Praise be to God the One Who put for me these
words on your tongue." ( 60)

The Imam remained three days in his camp then he entered Bassrah. He
followed the "Sunnah" of the Prophet in his treatment of the people of
Mecca. He forgave their guilty and prevented his followers from taking
anything from the properties of the Bassrites. He divided what he found
in the treasury of Bassrah among the winners and the vanquished equally.
He prayed over the dead of the two parties. People of Bassrah re-elected
him and re-pledged to him allegiance. He received that pledge from them
while they were under their banners. He received it from the healthy and
the wounded.

He addressed his vanquished opponents saying: "You  
 were the army of the woman and the followers of the  
 animal. When it roared you responded and when it was  
 hamstrung you ran away . . . Whoever lives with you  
 would be bound by his sin and the one who leaves you  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(59) Al-Tabari his History part 4 pp. 547-548. (60) The Imam Ali
Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 p. 44-45.

**( 357 )**

receives the mercy of his Lord! By God your city shall be drowned and I
visualize its mosque looking like a front of a ship or a sitting
giraffe." (61) His prophecy was fulfilled years later when Bassrah was
drowned and covered by water and nothing of its buildings remained
visible except its mosque. (62)

One of his companions told him after God gave him the victory: I wish my
brother was present here to see how God gave you victory over your
enemies. The Imam replied: "Is the sympathy of your brother with us?" He
said: Yes. The Imam said: "Then he was present with us and others were
present who have not been conceived yet whom time shall bring
infrequently and through whom the faith will be strengthened."(63)

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE THREE LEADERS
---------------------------------------

As we look back at this war retrospectively we find that thousands from
the Bassrites met their death believing that they were on the right
side. They were confounded and it was difficult for them to believe that
a wife of the Messenger and two of his outstanding companions had parted
with the truth. People were and still are trying to know the truth
through their Leaders rather than to try to know the Leaders through the
truth. I do not believe that the people of Bassrah were aware of the
brilliant history of the Imam Ali and the declarations of the Messenger
concerning him.

The three leaders who led the Bassrites were fully aware of Ali's
history and the testimonies of the Prophet for him but they concealed
what they knew about him.

They did not want the Bassrites to know it. They tried with  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(61) The Imam Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 pp. 44-45. (62) Sheikh Mohammad
Abdoh his Commentary on Nahjul- Balaghah part 1 p. 45. (63) The Imam Ali
Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 p. 45.

**( 358 )**

all their power to minimize his right and merit and accused him of what
they themselves committed the murder of Othman knowing that Ali was
innocent of their accusation. They added to what they had done to Othman
the blood of thousands of victims who died in that battle from both
sides. ( 64)

### The Omayads Were Less Blamable than the Three Leaders

The responsibility of the three leaders in fighting the Imam and
accusing him of the murder of Othman was bigger than the
responsibilities of Muaweyah and the rest of the Omayads.

The attempt of the Omayads to avenge the blood of Othman by killing his
killers did not have an Islamic justification but it had a pre-Islamic
tribal-justification.

They were from the members of the clan of the assassinated Caliph. They
did not play a big part in turning people against him. The three leaders
of the Bassrite party did not have any justification in avenging the
blood of Othman because they were the first to seek his blood. In
addition to this they were not from his relatives and they knew that Ali
was the most protective of Othman and opposed to his assassination. He
offered Othman his help and Othman rejected his offer (65) ; and in
spite of this he sent his two sons to do their share in his protection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(64) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 539 mentioned that ten thousand
Muslims died at the battle of Bassrah Taha Hussein in his
Al-Fitnatul-Kubra part 2 p. 51 men- tioned this estimate and other
estimates came to twenty thousand. (65) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p.
82 reported that the Imam mediated between Othman and his opponents and
both sides agreed that Othman removed his bad relatives from their
offices and stopped giving them and others the public funds. Then Marwan
disuaded Othman from fulfilling his promise.

**( 359 )**

Talhah's Responsibility
-----------------------

Al-Balatheri reported that Talhah blamed Ali when he hit Al-Hassan and
Al-Hussein for their unintended failure in protecting Othman and that
Ali cursed Talhah because he insisted to do what Ali disliked
(conspiring against Othman). Talhah replied saying: Had Othman handed
Marwan to the rebels he would not have been killed." Ali disagreed with
Talhah saying: "If Othman were to deliver Marwan to you Marwan would
have been killed before he was tried.'' (66)

Al-Tabari reported in his History about the events of the year 36 after
the Hijrah that Ali said to Al-Zubeir at Bassrah "Do you want to avenge
from me the blood of Othman while you were his killer? May God make our
harshest to Othman meet what he dislikes today."(67)

Muaweyah the head of the Omayad party was not from those who pledged
allegiance to the Imam. On the contrary he refused to give such a
pledge. It is true that the election of the Imam by the people of Medina
and the majority of the Muslim nation made it mandatory for Muaweyah to
follow the Imam and obey him but he technically is not a breacher of
covenant with the Imam as Al- Zubeir and Talhah. The two companions
Pledged their allegiance to the Imam then led a devastating war against
him. They were duty-bound to obey him as long as he followed the Book of
God and the instructions of His Prophet. Ali was the most adherent to
the Book of God and the teaching of the Holy Prophet. God ordered the
believers to fulfill their covenant in which they give allegiance to a
righteous ruler. The Holy Qur'an declared:

"And whoever breaches he breaches against himself and whoever fulfills
what he pledges to God God will give him a great reward."(68)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(66) Al-Balathori Ansab Al-Ashraf part 4 p. 70. (67) Al-Tabari his
History part 4 p. 509. (68) The Holy Qur'an Chapter 48 verse 10.

**( 360 )**

The Messenger of God ordered the nation to kill the breachers of the
pledge of allegiance. Muslim reported in his Sahih that the Holy Prophet
said: "There shall be events and events. Whoever tries to divide this
nation while it is united hit his head with the sword whoever he may be.
(69) It is reported also that the Holy Prophet said: "Whoever takes a
rebellious stand (against a righteous Imam) and parts with the united
community then he dies he would die a pre-Islamic death. And whoever
fights blindly under a banner unknown to be a banner of truth siding
with a wrong party selfishly then he is killed he dies a pre-Islamic
death. And whoever parts with my nation and carries a sword
indiscriminately hitting its righteous and transgressor ... and refusing
to fulfill a covenant he made he is not from me and I am not from him."
(70)

Much more was expected from Ayeshah Talhah and Al-Zubeir than from
Muaweyah who never had a brilliant past in religion; nor was he counted
from among the righteous. The three leaders heard from the Messenger of
God about Ali what Muaweyah did not hear. Even if the Omayad Muaweyah
had heard what the three leaders heard from the Messenger about Ali it
would have been expected from them rather than Muaweyah the opportunist
to listen to the words of the Messenger and obey him.

Ayeshah Al-Zubeir and Talhah knew that the Messenger said on the day of
Ghadeer Khum about Ali: "God love whoever loves him and be hostile to
whoever is hostile to him.'' ( 71)

And the Messenger also said to Ali Fatima Al-Hassan  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(69) Muslim his Sahih part 12 p. 241. (70) Muslim his Sahih part 12 p.
239. (71) Ibn Majah his Authentic Sunan part 1 hadith no. 145.

**( 361 )**

and Al-Hussein "I am at peace with whomever you are at peace and I am at
war with whomever you are at war."(72)

These statements indicate clearly that whoever fights Ali fights the
Messenger of God and that the enemy of Ali is the enemy of God and His
Messenger. Thus the stand of the three nghteous leaders with their
hostilities towards Ali was an amazing event for which there is no
justification.

Al-Zubeir's Responsibility
--------------------------

Al-Zubeir should be particularly blamed. He is the one who stood up when
Abu Bakr was elected drawing his sword and saying "I shall not sheathe
my sword until Ali is elected." Omar said to companions who were with
him:

Take his sword and hit the rock with it. ( 73 ) Had Ali wanted to fight
for the caliphate on that day Al-Zubeir was ready to fight and be killed
for the sake of Ali's leadership. How did he after 25 years fight the
Imam after the Imam was elected by the companions and he was one of the
electors?

Al-Zubeir particularly was to be blamed also because he heard from the
Messenger of God that he shall fight Ali unjustly. This was reported by
Ibn Al-Atheer in his Al- Kamil and Al-Tabari in his History and a number
of historians. Al-Hakim reported in his Mustadrak through four channels
that Ali reminded Al-Zubeir on the day of the Battle of Bassrah that the
Prophet said to Al-Zubeir that he shall fight Ali while he is unjust to
him. And Al- Zubeir acknowledged that and said he had forgotten it.(74)

Ayeshah's Responsibility
------------------------

Ayeshah particularly was to be blamed much more than the others because
she was one of the wives of the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(72) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 2 p. 220. (73) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil
part 3 p. 120. (74) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah part
2 p. 78.

**( 362 )**

Prophet and she knew the extent of the love of the Messenger for Ali.
She received from the Messenger warning and reprimand when she displayed
resentment towards the presence of Ali with the Messenger.

### Dialogue of Om Selemah and Ayeshah

Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed in his commentary on Nahjul- Balaghah recorded that
Abu Makhnaf reported a dialogue between Om Selemah (another wife of the
Messenger) and Ayeshah when the latter decided to go to Bassrah and
invited Om Selemah to accompany her. Om Selemah reminded her of things
which Ayeshah did not deny: She reminded her of what took place when
both of them were with the Messenger of God and Ali sat privately with
the Prophet and his session with him was long.

Ayeshah wanted to enter and Om Selemah advised her not to do that and
she did not listen to Om Selemah. Then she came back crying. Ayeshah at
that time informed Om Selemah that she said to Ali Ibn Abu Talib: "I
have only one out of every nine days with the Messenger; why don't you
leave me alone with my day?" The Messenger turned to her angrily and his
face was reddened saying to her: "Go away! By God whoever hates Ali from
the members of my family or from other families would be out of the
Faith." ( 75)

### The Lady of Al-Hau-ab

She reminded her also that they both were with the Messenger of God on a
journey and Ayeshah was washing the head of the Messenger and Om Selemah
was preparing food for him. Suddenly he raised his head saying:

"I wish I knew which one of you will be the rider of the huge camel. The
dogs of Al-Hau-ab will bark at her while she is deviating from the right
road." Om Selemah said:

**( 363 )**

"I freed my hand from the food and said 'I seek refuge in God and His
Messenger from this.' Then he slapped your back and said: 'Beware not to
be that lady.' Then he said to me: 'Daughter of Abu Omayah be not that
lady.' Then he turned to Ayeshah saying: 'Humaira (red faced) I have
already warned you.' " (76)

The Patcher of the Sole
-----------------------

And the third item of which Om Selemah reminded Ayeshah was that they
were with the Messenger on a journey. Ali used to mend the shoes of the
Holy Prophet and wash his garments. The shoes of the Holy Prophet during
that journey needed to be mended. He took them and started to patch them
and sat in the shade of a tree.

Abu Bakr and Omar asked permission to see the Prophet.

Om Selemah said: Ayeshah and I left and sat behind the curtain. The two
men entered and chatted with the Prophet for a while. Then they said:
Messenger of God we do not know how long you will be with us. We wish
that you would inform us of a person whom you want as your successor. He
said to the two men: "I see his place. And if I inform you of him you
shall part with him as the children of Israel parted with Aaron son of
Imran." When the two men heard these words they left without comment.

When we came out to the Messenger you said to him (and you were our most
courageous to ask him): Whom would you choose as your successor to lead
them? He said: "The patcher of the sole." Then you and I went to see who
was the patcher of the sole and we found Ali patching the sole of the
Prophet. You said to the Messenger of God: I do not see but Ali and he
said: "He is the one." Ayeshah acknowledged all of what Om Selemah
reminded her of. Then Om Selemah told her: I am Om Selemah. Yesterday
you were agitating against Othman and saying about him the worst words.
You named him  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(75), (76), (77) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed Commentary on Nahjul- Balaghah part 2
p. 78.

**( 364 )**

Naathal (a name of a heavily bearded Arab Jew). And you know the place
of Ali Ibn Abu Talib from the Messenger of God. ( 77)

A number of historians including Ibn Al-Atheer and Al-Tabari reported
the warning of the Messenger to Ayeshah and his prediction that she
would be barked at by the dogs of Al-Hau-ab. ( 78)

A number of the recorders of the hadith including Al- Hakim also
reported that. Al-Hakim reported in his Mustadrak the following:

When Ayeshah reached the area of Banu Amir dogs barked at her. She
asked: Which water is this? They said: Al-Hau-ab. She said: I think I am
going back. Al-Zubeir said: No you should continue your journey and let
people see you and you will bring about peace. She said: I guess that I
am returning. I heard the Messenger of God saying: What would one of you
do when the dogs of Al-Hau-ab bark at her? ( 79)

Al-Hakim also reported that Om Selemah said: The Prophet one time
mentioned the travels of some of the mothers of the believers and
Ayeshah laughed and he looked at her and said: Humaira you should not be
that lady. Then he turned to Ali saying: "If you have to deal with her
be kind to her." ( 80)

Om Selemah portrayed to Ayeshah her deeds and she  
 excelled in her presentation. She said: . . . "What would  
 you say if the Messenger of God faces you while you are in  
 these deserts riding the camel from one water to another  
 water? Certainly God witnesses your travel and you shall  
 meet His Messenger (on the Day of Judgment)." If I were  
 in your place and I am told: Enter Paradise I would be  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(78) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 pp. 119-120. (79) Al-Hakim
Al-Mustadrak part 3 pp. 119-120. (80) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed his Commentary
on Nahjul-Balaghah part 2 p. 79.

**( 365 )**

ashamed to meet Mohammad after I tore up the screen with which he had
hidden me. Make your house your fortress and the screen (of your room)
your grave until you meet him while you are in your best obedience to
God and help to religion. . ." ( 81)

This sound advice was lost on Ayeshah. She said: "I accept your
preaching. The matter is not what you think.

It is a good journey which is requested by two parties fighting each
other. If I stay I would not be sinning and if I leave it would be for
something I have to escalate."(82) It is amazing that Ayeshah claimed
that she was taking the journey because two parties fighting each other
resorted to her. Yet one of the two parties (the party of the Imam) not
only did not request her to take it but vehemently opposed it. On the
other hand the other party would not have stood up to the Imam without
Ayeshah's help and instigation. This shows us that when a person
determines to do something he would not lack an excuse with which to
justify his action.

Ayeshah did all that while she knew that the Holy Qur'an commands the
wives of the Messenger to stay in their houses: "And stay in your houses
and bedizen not yourselves with the bedizenment of the pre-Islamic
State. . . " (Chapter 33 verse 34) All this shows that the three leaders
were more responsilbe than Muaweyah in destroying the unity of the
Muslims by what they did under the pretext of avenging the blood of
Othman while their aim was the destruction of the Imam's caliphate.

**( 366 )**

CONCLUSION
----------

In spite of all this we are not allowed to say about the three leaders
but good and ask God to forgive them and say: "Our Lord forgive us and
our brethren who preceded us in Faith." What they had done is for God to
judge.

But there are certain conclusions which we may draw from these events:

### Should We Accept Their Hadiths?

1. Since these three distinguished leaders had legalized for themselves
to shed so much blood in order to achieve their ends it would not be
logical to take what they had reported of statements and deeds of the
Prophet to be authentic. When a person breaches a legitimate covenant
divides the Muslims into two camps leads one of the two camps to start a
bloody war he would not be righteous and reliable reporter. When a
Muslim has the courage to shed the blood of thousands of innocent
Muslims in order to serve his own interest he would not lack the courage
to tell the untruth.

### Criticism is Much Smaller Sin Than Fighting

2. If the Muslims are not allowed to say but good about Ayeshah Talhah
and Al-Zubeir in spite of their war against "Ameer Al-Mumineen" (the
Leader of the believers) and the Brother of the Messenger it would not
be permissible to say but good about the Muslims who take a critical or
an unfriendly attitude towards some outstanding companions. For fighting
an outstanding companion is much more abhorable to God than an
unfriendly attitude towards him.

The Islamic law does not discriminate among Muslims.

What would be applicable to the three leaders should be applicable to
the rest of the Muslims.

The criticism of any companion was never forbidden to people. The
Muslims who criticize some of the caliphs  

**( 367 )**

do not do that because they deliberately want to defame them. They do
that because they have a negative opinion of them. They sincerely
believe in what they say.

The three leaders on the other hand had fought the Imam while they knew
that they were wrong. If we have to respect these leaders and say only
good about them it would not be right for us to be hostile to the
millions of Muslims for what is much less than killing and fighting.

Critics of the companions are not necessarily devious or transgressors.
It is neither logical nor fair for the Muslims to condemn each other
because of their opinions pertaining to the events and personalities of
the Islamic history as long as those opinions do not contradict the Holy
Qur'an or the well known instructions of the Holy Prophet. Nor is there
anything in the known instructions of the Holy Prophet that prevents the
Muslims from criticizing companions whose deeds or words disagree with
the Qur'an or the Prophet in word or deed.

### The Three Leaders Open the Door of Wars Among Muslims

3. The three leaders are the ones who opened on the Muslim society the
doors of the civil wars. They started the first bloody battle in which
thousands from both sides fell and through which the unity of the
Muslims was destroyed and never restored. It is difficult for our minds
to understand how these righteous leaders have the courage to shed so
much blood while the Holy Qur'an declares that killing one believer
would bring an eternal Divine punishment to the killer:

"And whosoever slays a believer deliberately his reward is Hell forever.
God's wrath is against him. He has cursed him and prepared for him an
awful doom." (Chapter 4 verse 93)

4. The Battle of Siffeen with all its violence and ugliness was only a
consequence of the Battle of Bassrah. Had  

**( 368 )**

Mother of Believers Ayeshah Talhah and Al-Zubeir assisted the Imam and
gone throughout the Islamic provinces urging people to obey the Imam and
to walk under his banner Muaweyah would not have dared to fight him.

Had these leaders done that Muaweyah would have realized that if he
fights the Imam he would be waging a losing battle that will end with
his destruction and the destruction of his camp and he would have humbly
surrendered to the Imam. But when he witnessed a portion of the people
of Iraq sharing with him his opinion and taking an attitude similar to
his and that leaders from the outstanding companions preceded him in
combating the Imam his hope of a victory against the Imam was
heightened.

The Battle of Bassrah was in fact a main factor in Muaweyah's continued
defiance of the Imam and his victory at the end. It is true that the
Imam obtained a clear victory against his opponents at the Battle of
Bassrah but the losses which both camps suffered had weakened the Imam's
camp a great deal. The tribes of the defeated camp remained unfriendly
to the Imam carrying grudges against him because of the thousands of men
whom they lost in that battle. The tribes of the Imam's camp also were
weakened and lost a great deal of determination to wage a decisive
campaign against Muaweyah because of their losses in the battle of
Bassrah. Muaweyah remained outside the battle waiting and increasing in
material and manpower.

Probably the Qureshites had forgotten through the passage of time what
they had suffered of losses at the hand of the Imam in the battles of
Badr Ohod and Moat.

However the Battle of Bassrah in which the Qureshites lost seventy of
their chiefs had not only revived but also increased their rancor and
hatred.

It is an understatement to say that the action of the three rebellious
leaders had led to the transformation of the Righteous Caliphate into
the despotic rule of the Omayad dynasty.

Had these three leaders not waged that sinister war the  

**( 369 )**

Imam could have uprooted the Omayad plantation from the Syrian land and
the Righteous Caliphate could have continued for generations. Having
internal peace the Imam could have faced the external adversaries of the
Muslim World with his unusual bravery.

The three leaders waged their campaign against Othman because they
feared that the caliphate would be transferred from him to one of his
relatives and that would mean the caliphate will rest with the Omayads.
By this a rule of dynasty would be established and Talhah and Al-Zubeir
would be deprived of the caliphate. To prevent this they managed to kill
Othman. But the death of Othman did not make them closer to their goal.
So they waged their bloody campaign to destroy the Imam's caliphate.
This also brought them no closer to their goal. They destroyed
themselves and the caliphate of the Imam and transformed the caliphate
to a rule of Omayad dynasty the least religious tribe rather than the
close relatives of Mohammad whom God purified of all sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(81) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah part 2 p. 79.
(82) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah part 2 p. 79.
