The Battle of Siffeen
=====================

**( 399 )**

##### 25.

The Imam came to Kufa after the end of the Battle of Bassrah and he made
Kufa his capital. The people of Kufa were the builders of his army whose
support was indispensable in defeating his opponents in Bassrah. There
were no other people upon whom he could rely. The majority of the people
of Bassrah were against him and they were not expected to become sincere
towards him after the war of Bassrah had eliminated many of their loved
ones.

People of Hijaz were not reliable because they were few compared to the
people of the rest of the Islamic provinces. People of Syria were
followers of his enemy Muaweyah. The Muslims of Egypt were incapable of
offering what he needed of an army for subduing the secessionists.

The Imam stayed about four months in his new capital preparing what he
needed to meet Muaweyah the most dangerous among his opponents to the
unity of the nation.

He was the most capable among them to challenge the authority of the
Imam and their least scrupulous in religion. Muaweyah had declared
before the Battle of Bassrah his refusal to join the electors of the
Imam and his challenge to his authority. By this he actually separated
Syria from the  
 body of the Islamic State and declared its secession.  
 He added to this his hostility to the central authority  
 and that he was at war with that authority using  

**( 400 )**

revenge for the blood of Othman as an excuse. His secessional movement
started before the movement of the three leaders.

The Imam sent after he was elected a message to Muaweyah which was
carried by his messenger Subrah Al- Juhani informing him of his election
by the companions and asking him along with his followers to join his
electors. Muaweyah after a long silence sent Qubaisah Al- Absi and gave
him a sealed letter addressed from Muaweyah to Ali. He ordered him to
enter Medina raising the letter and holding its lower part and told him
what to say.

When Qubaisah entered Medina people knew that Muaweyah was defiant. He
gave what was in his hand to the Imam. The Imam opened it and did not
find anything in it and the following dialogue took place: The Imam:
What did you leave behind you (in Damascus)?

Qubaisah: (after he asked for and was given immunity): I left behind me
angry people who would not be satisfied but with a death punishment for
Othman's blood.

The Imam: Whose death? Qubaisah: Yours! I left also sixty thousand old
men crying under the shirt of Othman which is hung on the pulpit in
Damascus.

The Imam: Do they want me to pay for the blood of Othman? Am I not
bereaved by the death of Othman? God I declare to Thee my innocence of
the blood of Othman. By this the killers of Othman have been spared
unless God wants the opposite. For if He wants something He would
necessarily have it.( 1 )

The answer of the Imam to this obvious challenge was  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 104.

**( 401 )**

to start mobilization of soldiers for subduing this dangerous defiant.
He gave the banner to his son Mohammad Ibn "Al-Hanafeyah" (the mother of
Mohammad)

He gave the leadership of a portion of his army to Abdullah Ibn Abbass.
He gave Omar Ibn Abu Selemah the leadership of another portion of his
army. He appointed Abu Leila Al-Jarrah the commander of his advancing
division. He appointed Qutham Ibn Abbass his successor in Medina. He
wrote to Qais Ibn Saad his appointed governor of Egypt Othman Ibn Hunaif
his appointed governor of Bassrah and Abu Musa Al-Ashaari his appointed
governor of Kufa to try to mobilize people for a march on Syria. ( 2 )
He called upon the people of Medina to participate in that Holy mission.
He spoke to them saying:

"Certainly our safety would be secured within the authority of God. Give
Him your obedience truthfully and willingly. By God you either do that
or God will remove from you the authority of Islam; then He will not
bring it back to you until the authority of Islam shrinks and recoils in
Medina. Stand up to these people who want to divide your nation. May God
reform through you what people of other areas had corrupted and by this
you would be paying only what is due from you." ( 3 )

The Imam went on preparing for the march on Syria trying to mobilize all
that which was within his reach for the confrontation with this
aggressor party. But the news of the departure of Ayeshah Talhah and
Al-Zubeir to Bassrah came to the Imam. Thus he was forced to delay his
march on Syria until after the conclusion of the emerging crisis. ( 4 )

The Imam did not delay his march on Syria because the three leaders were
more dangerous to the caliphate than Muaweyah. He did that because the
departure of the three leaders to Iraq added to the danger of Muaweyah
a  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 2 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 104-105. ( 3 ) Ibn Al-Atheer
Al-Kamil part 3 p. 105. ( 4 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 5.

**( 402 )**

new danger. If this could not be dealt with soon the Imam would be
deprived of all military and financial assistance which he needed to
subdue the main enemy Muaweyah.

The three leaders with all their forces would not represent a great
danger against the unity of the nation if they were alone challenging
the authority of the Imam. The Imam would be able to subdue their forces
easily if they were alone without Muaweyah. Their rebellion was
extemporaneous. They did not have what Muaweyah had of resourcefulness
strong army and wide popularity in a large Islamic province. As a matter
of fact people of Bassrah were divided in their loyalty towards them and
a party from the people of Bassrah fought them as soon as they entered
and before the Imam came to confront them.

Muaweyah on the contrary was dangerous by himself even if the three
leaders were not with him. He was wily and resourceful. His movement was
not extemporaneous. He prepared for it for two decades. He was in a
province whose inhabitants were obedient to his order. He had a huge and
well organized army ready to comply with his command. He was capable of
challenging the authority of the Imam even if he did not have any
helpers from outside Syria.

Therefore the biggest concern of the Imam after he finished the Battle
of Bassrah was to prepare for facing this enemy who was dangerous to the
unity of the nation and its future.

To leave no excuse for Muaweyah the Imam sent him a message with Jareer
Ibn Abdullah Al-Bajali inviting him to join the majority of the Muslims
who elected him.

He mentioned in that message that those who elected him were those who
elected Abu Bakr Omar and Othman and that the right of the decision
about the caliphate was only for the migrant and the Medinite
companions. If they elected a man their election would be binding to the
rest of the Muslims. If anyone tries to break away by accusation or
innovation they would bring him back. If such a person persists  
 in his secessional way they have to fight him  
 for taking a road other than the road of the  

**( 403 )**

believers. The Imam also said to Muaweyah in this message the following:

"Talhah and Al-Zubeir elected me then they broke their covenant with me.
Their breach of covenant is like their faith desertion. I fought them
after I left no excuse for them until the truth came and the cause of
God prevailed while they were averse.

"I invite you to join the Muslims by pledging your allegiance to the new
administration. I prefer peace but if you persist in your opposition I
will fight you seeking the help of God against you..."

The excuse which Muaweyah used in his deceptive movement for reaching
the caliphate was the blood of Othman and that the Imam did not punish
the killers of Othman though they were around him. The Imam therefore
included in his message what refutes his argument.

"And you have spoken repeatedly about the killers of Othman. Join the
rest of the Muslims who elected me then ask me to try the ones whom you
accused. I will judge between you and them according to the Book of
God..

"Muaweyah if you look at the matter through your mind rather than your
selfishness you will find me the most innocent in relation to the blood
of Othman and that I was completely isolated of his affairs unless you
deliberately make false accusations. You may do that if you want to. You
ought to know that you are from the ones who were freed by the Prophet
at the conquest of Mecca who are forbidden from reaching the caliphate.
They cannot be a factor in deciding the leadership. Nor would they be
consulted in the Islamic affairs or elected by the Muslim electors. I
have sent to you Jareer Ibn Abdullah Al-Bajali. He is faithful and a
migrant with a good past.

Pledge your allegiance to me through him and there is no power but by
God." ( 5 )

Jareer carried the message to Muaweyah and added his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 5 ) Abdul Fattah Abdul-Maqsoud Ali Ibn Abi Talib part 4 pp. 31-32.

**( 404 )**

own power of persuasion. Muaweyah however refused to answer him
positively or negatively trying to gain time in preparation for the
future. Finally his expected answer came.

It was not expected that any mediation or means of convincing would
succeed in bringing Muaweyah to the right road. Re believed that he is
in a strong position to challenge the Imam and he would not do anything
else.

He had under his leadership about one hundred thousand fighters and he
was still with all his financial and manpower. He did not enter any
battle and he did not suffer any loss of property funds or men. The Imam
on the other hand was forced to enter the bloody Battle of Bassrah in
which his supporters had to pay a great deal of their blood and wealth.

The enemies of the Imam were on the increase and the supporters of
Muaweyah were in a continuous increase.

The Syrian treasury was in Muaweyah's hands and he used it as he used
his own funds purchasing with it the conscience of the seekers of
selfish interests and they were numerous.

### The Opportunist Amr

The wily Amr Ibn Al-Auss was most outstanding  
 among those who sold their principles and conscience. The  
 co-operation between Amr and Muaweyah was a very  
 distinguished event in the history of opportunism. History  
 knew (and Muaweyah who was seeking to avenge the blood  
 of Othman also knew) that Amr Ibn Al-Auss was from the  
 outstanding agitators against Othman. ( 6 ) This did  
 not prevent Muaweyah from covenanting the wily Amr for an  
 alliance against the Imam with the pretext of seeking the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 6 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 141 Al-Tabari his History part 4
p. 560.

**( 405 )**

avenge for the blood of Othman of which Amr was guilty. ( 7 ) The price
Muaweyah had to pay to Amr for his alliance with him was the
governorship and the tax revenues of Egypt as long as Amr lived if
Muaweyah wins the struggle against the Imam. ( 7a)

The Imam was determined to try to subdue Muaweyah and his followers and
bring them back to the bulk of the nation and thwart their secessional
movement. He led his army to Syria and when he came to the land of
Siffeen he found Muaweyah and his army had already occupied the bank of
the Euphrates. The Imam was forced to camp away from the water.

IDEALIST VERSUS OPPORTUNIST
---------------------------

Muaweyah would not hesitate to use for his end any means even if it is
extremely criminal. He occupied the bank of the Euphrates and thought he
could prevail against Ali and his army through the terrible weapon of
thirst. He decided to prevent his opponents from reaching the water. ( 8
) Thus Ali and his army had to surrender or die of thirst. Thirst would
make them easy victims and Muaweyah's army in possession of supplies
food and water would be able to destroy Ali and his army. Muaweyah
thought victory was within his reach. Destroying scores of thousands of
Muslims through this method would not shake the conscience of Muaweyah
because his conscience was dead.

It would not shake his conscience to kill Ali and his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 7 ) Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsoud Ali Ibn Abi Talib part 4 pp. 44-45 And
Taha Hussein Al-Fitnatul-Kubra part 2 pp. 62-63 (8th edition) Al-Tabari
his History part 4 pp. 460-461. ( 7a ) Al-Tabari his History part 5 p.
39. ( 8 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 145 Al-Tabari his History
part 21 pp. 571-572 Taha Hussein Al-Fitnatul-Kubra part 2 p. 71.

**( 406 )**

two sons Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein members of the House of the Prophet.
Nor would it shake his conscience to kill them by thirst though it meant
killing by thirst the majority of the companions of the Messenger who
were "Badrians" and "Ohodians." Why should the conscience of Muaweyah be
shaken for committing such an ugly crime? Is not his aim to defeat the
truth and the people of the truth? What is the difference between one
death and another death? There is not any difference in the eyes of
Muaweyah between reaching victory through the sword or through
annihilation by the weapon of thirst.

The annihilation of Ali and his camp through thirst was preferable to
Muaweyah over killing them by sword.

Fighting Ali and his camp by conventional weapons does not secure
Muaweyah's victory but annihilation through thirst would definitely
secure it.

However Amr Ibn Al-Auss his chief advisor counselled him not to try such
a terrible weapon yet Amr was not more righteous than Muaweyah. Amr
thought that this method in spite of its ugliness would not secure
victory. It may bring him only failure and curse. Ali the man of unusual
bravery would not die from thirst while he is in command of a huge army.
But Muaweyah refused the advice of his ally.( 9 )

The Imam told Muaweyah in a message that he did not come to fight for
water. He came to uphold the truth and defeat falsehood. He came to
bring the Muslims together after the leaders of falsehood put them in
two separate camps. Muaweyah did not take the Imam's message seriously
and he did not leave the Imam any open avenue but to fight for water.
(10)

The Imam waged a battle for the water and this was his first Holy Battle
against Muaweyah and his camp. He  
 succeeded in occupying the bank of the Euphrates and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 9 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 145 Al-Tabari his History part 4
p. 542. ( 10 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 145.

**( 407 )**

driving the Omayad army away from the river. By this the situation was
reversed. Now it became possible for the Imam and his army to do to
their opponents what their opponents were trying to do to them. It
became possible for the Imam to annihilate his opponents by their own
weapons. Would the Imam do that? Here the history of war kneels to
glorify Ali Ibn Abu Talib. Here Ali stands among the leaders of nations
towering like a mountain as he gives generations of humanity his
impressive lesson. The religion of Islam stands against all kinds of
wars of genocide and annihilation. The leaders of the nations of the
twentieth century have legalized the annihilation of civilians through
atomic bombs and so far have failed to prohibit the use of such weapons.
The faith of Islam (over fourteen centuries ago) had prohibited what was
much less than a nuclear war. It prohibited killing children women
elderly people and blind enemies. It prohibits the demolishing of houses
of the enemies and destruction of their orchards.(11)

I cannot conceive that anyone after the Messenger could take the
attitude of the Imam Ali towards his enemy after his enemy had given him
every justification to annihilate him and his army by his own weapon.
The leaders of the Imam's army and their soldiers shouted: Prevent them
from water as they prevented us from water. The Imam replied: "God has
given you victory against them because of their injustice and
aggression. Certainly the issue is more important than depriving them of
water."(12)

Then he sent to Muaweyah this message: "We shall not treat you as you
treated us. Come to the water we are equal." (13)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 11 ) Al-Hurr Al-Amili Wasa-il-al-Shiah part 11 pp. 43-44 . ( 12 ) Ibn
Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 145-146 Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.
572. ( 13 ) Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsoud Al-Imam Ali Ibn Abu Talib part 4
p. 190.

**( 408 )**

NEW EFFORTS FOR PEACE
---------------------

The Imam tried again to bring about peace. His aim was to avoid shedding
blood and to bring the Muslims back to unity. His ambassadors went to
Muaweyah but mediations and negotiations failed to bring any result.

Muaweyah was hoping to be the ruler of the Muslim World and nothing
would stop him from trying to reach that end.

Skirmishes between the two camps were started and remained limited. A
regiment from one side and a regiment from the other side faced each
other on one day. On the following day another two regiments faced each
other.

The situation continued this way until the month of Muharram began. All
hostilities ceased in observation of the sanctity of the month. The Imam
went back to his peaceful efforts during the month of Muharram and the
result was not better than in his previous efforts.(14)

As the month of Muharam ended the two camps went back to their
skirmishes and limited battles. The Imam wanted to prevent both camps
the expected heavy losses if the two armies faced each other in a
decisive battle.

These battles did not prevent men from the two camps to meet and debate
each other. Most of the tribes were living in both provinces: Iraq and
Syria. Thus they had their special blood relationship. Muaweyah
contacted a number of leaders of the Iraqi army. He sent them his
messengers and spoke to some of them directly trying to persuade them by
promising them important rewards if they leave the camp of the Imam and
join him.(15) The followers of the Imam also tried to persuade their
relatives in Syria to join the camp of the truth. The Imam however did
not allow himself to try to buy his opponents with public funds or to
promise their ambitious leaders important positions.

There were many people looking for their interests  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 14 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 149. ( 15 ) Ibn Al-Atheer
Al-Kamil part 3 p. 148.

**( 409 )**

among the followers of the Imam. It would be sufficient to mention men
such as Ashaath Ibn Qais about whom Abu Bakr said: Whenever Ashaath sees
an evil he assists it.'' History records that Muaweyah sent his brother
Utbah to Ashaath trying to attract him. He offered him proposals and
Ashaath was not unreceptive.

Finally the Imam decided to meet Muaweyah in a decisive battle. The two
huge armies met and the most important battle the Muslims had ever waged
until that time began. The two armies fought each other all day and a
big portion of the night. They resumed the battle on the following day
and the right wing of the Imam's army was defeated and ran away. By this
the core of his army was weakened. Thus the Imam had to move from the
heart of the army to its left side where the fighters were from the
tribe of Rabi-aah. (16) When the Rabi-ites witnessed the Imam among them
they realized the magnitude of their responsibility towards the
protection of the Imam. They fought bravely fearing that the Imam might
be killed while he is among them and that this will put them in an
eternal shame. Therefore they decided to prevent that at any cost. (17)

Malik Al-Ashtar went on trying to bring the retreaters back. They heard
his voice and came back. The army was back again in action and the war
went on with its utmost cruelty and ugliness for the whole day and
night. (18)

MARTYRDOM OF AMMAR IBN YASIR
----------------------------

On that day when the right of the Imam's army retreated an outstanding
companion of the Holy Prophet Ammar  
 Ibn Yasir who was 93 years old stood between the two  
 camps. He spoke loudly saying: By God if they hit  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 16 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 152. ( 17 ) Ibn Al-Atheer
Al-Kamil part 3 p. 152. ( 18 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 152.

**( 410 )**

us until they drive us from here to the orchards of Hejar we will
continue to believe that we are the people of truth and that they are
people of falsehood. ( 19 ) Then he said pointing to the banner of
Muaweyah: "By God under the banner of the Messenger I fought the man of
this banner three times and the man of the banner is not more righteous
now than before." ( 20)

Ammar had an appointment with his martyrdom at the hands of the
aggressor party. The Messenger of God said to him in the presence of
many companions. "Son of Sumayah (Sumayah was Ammar's mother) the
aggressor party shall kill you."( 21 ) This statement was well known to
the companions. Amr Ibn Al-Auss was one of the reporters of this hadith
and people of Damascus heard that from him. His narration of this hadith
caused a deep disturbance in the camp of Muaweyah days before the
decisive battle began. ( 22 ) Muaweyah blamed Amr for reporting this
hadith. He expected Ammar to be with the Imam and through his presence
Muaweyah's followers will discover that they belong to the aggressor
party.

Ammar asked for a drink before he entered the decisive battle of Siffeen
during which he obtained his martyrdom. A lady brought him milk mixed
with water.

When he saw the drink he exclaimed "Allahu Akbar" (God is The Great).
This is what my beloved the Messenger of God promised me when he said:
Ammar the aggressor party shall kill you and your last drink in this
world will be milk.(23) He took his drink then he rushed on saying: Who
wants  
 to go to Paradise? Paradise is under the shades  
 of the spears. He who is thirsty comes to the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 19 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 257. ( 20 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat
part 3 p. 257. ( 21 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 259. ( 22 ) Ibn Saad
Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 259 Ibn-Al-Atheer also reported this in his
Al-Kamil part 3 p. 158. ( 23 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 258 Taha
Hussein Al-Fitnatul-Kubra part 2 p. 78.

**( 411 )**

water and the water will be drunk today. Today I will meet my beloved
ones: Mohammad and his party." ( 24 )

Ammar went on fighting and urging Hashim Ibn Utba Ibn Abu Waqass to
advance (Hashim was the bearer of the banner of Ammar's regiment. He was
of the best of the Qureshite warriors and very beloved by the Imam. He
lost one of his eyes at one of the battles.) Ammar sometimes joked with
him saying: One-eyed advance.

Then he tells him: Advance I redeem you with my father and mother. And
Hashim calms Ammar down saying: Take it easy "Abu Yaqthan" (Ammar's code
name). The war makes you move too fast. ( 25 ) But neither the words of
Hashim nor the ninety three years could minimize the speed of Abu
Yaqthan. He wanted to hurry to Paradise.

He had an appointment with his beloved the great Messenger. He wanted to
meet him and he did.

Khuzaimah Ibn Thabit the man of two testimonies (The Prophet had made
his testimony equal to the testimony of two men) was with the Imam in
Siffeen but he did not fight. When Ammar was killed Khuzaimah realized
that the aggressor party is the camp of Muaweyah. He entered his tent.
He took a bath and put his armor on then he went fighting until he died.
( 26 )

THE BIG CONSPIRACY
------------------

The war continued with all its violence and intensity during the third
day and weakness became obvious in the camp of Muaweyah. The Imam's army
almost reached the tent of Muaweyah. He wanted to run away but he felt
ashamed and so he stayed. (27)

Before noon while the battle was progressing in its intensity victory
became within the reach of the Imam's  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 24 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 258 Taha Hussein Al-Fitnatul-Kubra
part 2 p. 78. ( 25 ) Ibn Saad Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 161. ( 26 ) Ibn Saad
Al-Tabaqat part 3 p. 259. ( 27 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 154.

**( 412 )**

camp. While his army was about to defeat the aggressor party copies of
the Holy Qur'an were hoisted in Muaweyah's camp and voices were heard
saying: This is the Book of God. It is between you and us from its
beginning to end. Remember God. Remember God for the future of the
Arabs. Remember God for the future of Islam. Who shall protect the
borders of Syria if the Syrian people perish? Who shall protect the
borders of Iraq if the Iraqi people perish? ( 28)

Muaweyah had already despaired from obtaining a military victory. He was
facing a decisive defeat on the battlefield. Now he resorted to the Holy
Qur'an. The invitation to accept the rule of the Holy Qur'an was not an
invention of Muaweyah and Ibn Al-Auss. You may recall that the Imam
called upon the camp of Ayeshah Talhah and Al-Zubier at Bassrah before
the beginning of its battle to surrender to the Holy Qur'an. A youth
from Kufa volunteered to carry the Holy Qur'an face the people of
Bassrah and invite them to accept the rules of the Holy Qur'an. His
invitation was rejected and the youth was killed. ( 29)

Muaweyah and Ibn Al-Auss had decided to resort to the invitation of the
rule of the Holy Qur'an when they realized that their military defeat
was inevitable.

Muaweyah evidently had prepared the atmosphere for such an invitation
through his secret contact with some of the leaders of the Imam's army
particularly Ashaath Ibn Qais the head of the tribe of Kindah whose
members were numerous in Kufa.

Muaweyah was almost certain that hoisting the copies of the Holy Qur'an
would lead to a division in the Imam's camp whether the Imam would
accept or refuse the invitation. What Muaweyah expected happened. Voices
from the Imam's camp were raised asking to stop the fight and accept the
rule of the Holy Qur'an.

Those who wanted to stop hostilities were three cate-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 28 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 pp. 160-161. ( 29 ) Al-Tabari his
History part 4 p. 509.

**( 413 )**

gories. Each of them had a motive that differed from that of the other
two categories. The scrupulous category was made up of religious
fanatics. They thought that rejecting the invitation to the rule of the
Book and continuing the battle would be a major sin which Muslims are
not supposed to commit. They forgot that their Imam is the most
knowledgeable of the Holy Qur'an and the Islamic law and that he is the
most adherent to the Islamic principles.

This category included a great number of readers of the Holy Qur'an who
thought that they knew all the Islamic law and appointed themselves as
the protectors of Islam. This kind of religious people are numerous in
every generation.

There was another category of people who were anxious to stop the fight
led by conspirators who were collaborating with the enemy believing
their co-operation with the enemy will bring them some material wealth
or high positions.

The third category believed that their obedience to the Imam in the two
battles of Bassrah and Siffeen had cost them dearly because they paid
with the blood of their children brothers and relatives. Their main
concern was to save their lives. They could not care less for what
happened to Islam and the Muslims.

The Imam stood up trying to show them the right road saying to them: The
resort to the Holy Qur'an is only a conspiracy planned by Muaweyah and
his advisors. I know them as young and old. They never were people of
the Qur'an or religion. All they wanted was to avoid the catastrophe of
defeat. ( 30)

There was within the camp of the Imam some people who had both sincerity
and wisdom (these were a minority compared to the others.) These people
agreed with the Imam and urged him to continue the war and to ignore the
many voices which were calling for cessation of hostility.

These people were led by Malik Al-Ashtar. But their  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 30 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 161.

**( 414 )**

voices were drowned by the voice of the majority who wanted to end the
battle.

Al-Ashtar was still pushing hard towards Muaweyah seeing that victory
was within his reach but those who wanted to end the war surrounded the
Imam. They threatened to desert him and to fight him and even to take
him as a captive and hand him to Muaweyah. ( 31 ) They asked him to
order Al-Ashtar to discontinue his march. The Imam found himself between
two alternatives. If he continued the war he would be forced to fight
his enemy and the biggest portion of his own camp with only a minority
that was still obedient to him. Otherwise he could discontinue the war
and victory would slip from his hand. He chose to discontinue the war
feeling that his obedient followers may be annihilated without reaching
a result which would improve the just side.

The Imam found himself facing a coup by which his authority came to an
end. Al-Ashtar came back from the front and urged him to fight those who
disobey him with those who obey him. The Imam said: "Malik I was a
leader but now I have become a follower." However the conspiracy was
twofold: 1. Discontinuation of war and the acceptance of the invitation
to the rule of the Holy Qur'an through two arbiters.

2. The arbiters from the Iraqi camp had to be Abu Musa Al-Ashaari who
was the governor of Kufa before the beginning of the Battle of Bassrah.
The reader may remember the efforts which this man made to prevent the
people of Kufa from joining the Imam in his confrontation with the army
of the three leaders at Bassrah.

Muaweyah achieved all that through the stupidity of the religious
fanatics along with some traitors in the Imam's army. The collaborators
and the fanatic readers acted and sounded as if they were burdening the
Imam instead of Muaweyah with the responsibility of the war.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 31 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 161. ( 32 ) lbn Al-Atheer
Al-Kamil part 3 p. 163.

**( 415 )**

Their efforts were directed at challenging the authority of the Imam and
preventing him from choosing any arbiter that inclined to his opinion or
thought of resuming the fight.

Muaweyah chose Amr Ibn Al-Auss to be his representative and none of the
people of his camp argued with him. The Imam chose Abdullah Ibn Abbas
but Al- Ashaath and his followers said: No two men from Mudhar (the Arab
tribes who are neither Rabi-ites nor Yemenites) shall rule us (meaning
that Amr Ibn Al-Auss and Abdullah Ibn Abbas both are Qureshites
non-Yemenites and non-Rabi-ites). The fact is that they did not refuse
Ibn Abbas for being a Mudharite. His being a Mudharite was taken by
Ashaath as a pretext to cover up his intentions.

Had Ibn Abbas been against the Imam Ashaath would have accepted him.

This became obvious when the Imam nominated Malik Al-Ashtar who was a
Yeminite. Ashaath rejected him and so did his tribe saying: Did anyone
burn the earth other than Al-Ashtar? They meant that Al-Ashtar was in
agreement with the Imam and wants to go back to war in order to defeat
the aggressor party. Ashaath and his tribe were actually assistants and
collaborators with the aggressor party.

They joined the Imam reluctantly. They did not like his reign or his
victory or everything he stood for. In fact these people were more
harmful to the Imam and more dangerous to his cause than his own enemy
Muaweyah.

The Imam was forced to accept the arbitration. He was forced also to
accept Abu Musa as the representative of his camp and the documents of
arbitration were written and signed by the two sides. Ashaath was
extremely pleased with obtaining such a document and he went from one
division to another of the Iraqi army reading it to them. (33)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 33 ) Al-Tabari in History part 5 p. 55.

**( 416 )**

THE TWO ARBITERS
----------------

The important points of the document of arbitration were the following:

1. The two arbiters will validate what the Holy Qur'an validates and
invalidate what the Holy Qur'an invalidates and that they will follow
what they find in it.

2. They should follow the instructions of the Holy Prophet which unite
the Muslims and do not separate them.

3. The two arbiters promise God and covenant Him that they will try to
bring peace to the nation and will not turn the nation back to division
and war.

4. The deadline for their deliberation will be the month of Ramadan (and
if they choose to make the decision before that date or choose to delay
it for the interest of the nation they could do that.)

5. The place of their meeting will be equal in distance between Kufa and
Damascus and Hijaz. ( 34)

The Holy Qur'an and the hadiths which bring unity to the nation validate
the right of Ali who was elected by the companions of the Prophet and
who was "brothered" by the Messenger and declared to be the leader of
every believer. They invalidate the untruth of Muaweyah who divided the
nation and shed the blood of the Muslims for his own interest. Yet the
two arbiters were not expected to validate a truth or to invalidate a
falsehood. Neither of the two companions was neutral in the dispute
about which they came to issue a fair decision. Ibn Al-Auss was the
second in command of the camp which was fighting the Imam. Al-Ashaari
was one of five people who were opposed to the Imam and his policy
before the beginning of the Battle of Bassrah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 34 ) Al-Balathori Ansab Al-Ashraaf (conveyed by Taha Hussein
Al-Fitnatul-Kubra part 2 pp. 83-84 Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 pp.
162-163.

**( 417 )**

During that period Muaweyah was preventing the extension of the Imam's
authority to his province and declaring his armed disobedience. The
Mother of Believers Talhah and Al-Zubeir were occupying Bassrah and
hoping to extend their influence to Kufa. While Muaweyah and the three
leaders were doing that Abu Musa was preventing people of Kufa from
assisting the Imam in retrieving what the three leaders had usurped from
the area of his authority. ( 35)

Abu Musa was taking this stand while the Imam was sending to him and to
the people of Kufa his messages and messengers asking people of Kufa to
come to his assistance in retrieving his right. Abu Musa was satisfied
to keep Bassrah under the authority of the three leaders because he was
collaborating with them. He actually was in open defiance of the Imam
covering his intention with his deceptive methods of calling upon people
to avoid fighting. Yet the Holy Qur'an clearly invites the believers to
fight any Muslim community that commits aggression against another
Muslim community. (36) Had Abu Musa had his way during that period he
would have prevented the people of Kufa from joining the Imam and the
Imam's reign would have ended in the first year after his election.

Trusting Abu Musa and Amr Ibn Al-Auss on the right of the Imam was in
fact trusting an enemy on the right of his enemy.

What was expected finally took place. The two arbiters continued in
their deliberation for a long time. The result of their deliberation was
that they agreed to invalidate the leadership of the Imam and Muaweyeh.
Abu Musa was the first to declare his decision of invalidating the
leadership of the two men. Ibn Al-Auss stood after him to declare the
invalidation of the leadership of the Imam and the establishment of the
leadership of Muaweyah. Abu Musa accused Amr of being treacherous
breaching an agreement with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 35 ) See chapter 23 of this book section 3. ( 36 ) The Holy Qur'an
chapter 49 verse 10.

**( 418 )**

Had Ibn Al-Auss not been treacherous and agreed with Abu Musa to
invalidate the leadership of the Imam and Muaweyah their invalidation
would have had an adverse effect on the Imam rather than Muaweyah. The
Imam was the Caliph and Muaweyah was only the governor of Syria. Thus
invalidating Muaweyah's caliphate would be meaningless. What does it
mean to overthrow a man from an office he does not occupy?

Had the decision of the two arbiters been in accordance with the
stipulation of the document of arbitration the deceptive act of Ibn
Al-Auss against Abu Musa would have been considered an assistance to the
Imam rather than to Muaweyah. Had not Ibn Al-Auss done that the harm to
the Imam from the legal point of view would have been greater because
their decision would be binding on the Imam and unharmful to Muaweyah.
For invalidating Muaweyah as a caliph does not deprive him of any
position he had.

Had their decision been in agreement with the Holy Qur'an and the
instructions of the Holy Prophet the deception of Ibn Al-Auss would have
been the only barrier from making their decision binding because it
proved that they were in disagreement in their ruling.

But the decision of the two arbiters was opposed to the Holy Qur'an and
the instructions of the Holy Prophet even if they had agreed. The Holy
Qur'an declares the following: "If two parties among the believers fall
into a quarrel make ye peace between them. But if one of them
transgresses beyond the bounds against the other then fight ye (all)
against the one that transgresses until it complies with the command of
God. If it complies then make peace between them with justice and be
fair. For God loves those who are fair and just.(37)

The party of Muaweyah was the aggressor party which refused to obey the
command of God. Ali was the legal  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 37 ) The Holy Qur'an chapter 49 verse 10.

**( 419 )**

Caliph by the appointment of the Holy Prophet according to the followers
of the members of the House of the Holy Prophet. He was also the Caliph
by a general election which he received from the overwhelming majority
of the companions and the inhabitants of Medina Mecca Iraq Egypt Yemen
and the rest of the Islamic provinces with the exception of the
inhabitants of Syria who were ruled by Muaweyah. Since he was the legal
Caliph it was the duty of the Muslims to obey him. The Holy Qur'an
commands the Muslims to obey the leaders from among them: "O you who
believe (in Islam) obey God the messenger and the people of authority
from among you..."(38)

The Holy Prophet declared that Ali is the leader of every believer and
prayed to the Almighty that He love whoever loves Ali and to be hostile
to whoever is hostile to Ali. ( 39 ) Muaweyah was hostile to the Imam.
He fought him and he legalized shedding his blood. And if God responds
to the prayer of His Prophet (and no doubt He does) then Muaweyah is an
enemy of God by being the enemy of Ali.

Muslim in his Sahih reported that the Holy Prophet said "Whoever comes
in an open rebellion and parts with the community then he dies he will
die a pre-Islamic death." (40) Muaweyah no doubt was out of obedience to
the legal Caliph.

If anyone has hesitated in judging that Muaweyah was the leader of the
aggressor party he should remember the authentic hadith (whose
authenticity is well established) which reported that the Messenger said
to Ammar Ibn Yasir while many companions were listening: "Ibn Sumayah
the aggressor party shall kill you." ( 41 ) The party of Muaweyah is the
party that killed that outstanding companion who was a beloved of the
Prophet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 38 ) The Holy Qur'an chapter 4 verse 58. ( 39 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak
part 3 p. 110. The Hadith was reported by more than one hundred
companions. ( 40 ) Muslim his Sahih part 12 p. 241. ( 41 ) Al-Termathi
his authentic Sunan part 5 p. 233.

**( 420 )**

This hadith was so well known that Al-Zubeir had a tremor with which the
arms he was carrying started to shake at the Battle of Bassrah when he
knew that Ammar was in the Imam's camp. He feared that Ammar will be
killed at that battle then Al-Zubeir will be from the aggressor party. (
42)

When Amr Ibn Al-Auss at the Battle of Siffeen was informed that Ammar
was killed he refused to believe it and when he witnessed the body of
the martyr the color of Amr's face was changed. Then he said: Are we the
ones who killed him? The one who killed him is the one who brought him
(43) and so Muaweyah said. When the Imam heard of that he ridiculed it
saying: "Then the Messenger of God is the one who killed his uncle
Hamzah because he is the one who brought him to the Battle of Ohod."
There is no doubt that Abu Musa heard the hadith. He knew that Ammar was
killed and he knew that Muaweyah and his party were the aggressor party
and that Ali is the well guided Imam but all that did not prevent him
from deciding to invalidate the leadership of the Imam and overthrow
him. This was only because he was an enemy of the Imam. I do not want to
say that he did not value what he knew of the Book of God and the words
of the Messenger but I would say that his hatred of the Imam blinded
him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 42 ) Al-Tabari his History part 4 pp. 510-511. ( 43 ) Ibn Saad Al-
Tabaqat part 3 pp. 253-254.
