Was the War of Siffeen Inevitable?
==================================

**( 461 )**

##### 29.

"And I am to the Messenger of God like a tree to another tree coming
from one trunk and I am to him like a lower arm to the upper arm. By God
if all the Arabs combine their efforts in combating me I would not turn
my back to them . . . And I shall endeavor to purify the earth from this
inverted person until the soil is separated from the grain."( 1 )

"By God if I confront them while they are filling the land I would not
be concerned; nor would I feel lonely. I am with assurance from myself
and certainty from my Lord through which I see the falsehoods to which
my opponents adhere and the guidance which I follow. I am expecting to
meet my Lord and hoping for His reward. I am saddened to expect the
affairs of this nation to be administered by its wicked foes. They shall
distribute the revenue of God among themselves and enslave His servants.
They shall oppress the righteous and befriend the transgressors." (the
Imam Ali) ( 2)

Had Ali Ibn Abu Talib been a politician whose main  
 concern was to come to power and enjoy authority un-  
 concerned with what will happen to the future genera-  
 tions he could have easily gained Muaweyah's support by  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) The Imam Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 3 p.73. ( 2 ) The Imam Ali
Nahjul-Balaghah part 3 p.120.

**( 462 )**

keeping him as governor of Syria and promising him to be his successor.
This would have relieved the Imam from combating him and would have
secured his loyalty and assistance.

Men who are in love with authority are always ready to pay the price
regardless of its magnitude because authority to them is more valuable
than any price they pay. Our Imam was not from these Authority by itself
did not have in his view any value.

Therefore he was not ready to pay for the authority a price which he
considered more valuable than the authority. History witnessed the Imam
Ali losing the caliphate when it was offered to him at the conclusion of
the Electoral Convention because he refused to pay its price. The price
which he refused to pay was not more than one word by which he promises
Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf to follow the first two Caliphs in matters where he
finds no instruction from the Holy Qur'an or the precepts of the Holy
Prophet. ( 3 He refused to pay for the caliphate that small price
because he believed that he was more knowledgeable in the Islamic Law
than the two outstanding companions.

He believed also that their precepts were marred by errors which he did
not legalize for himself to follow.

As he refused to offer for the leadership a promise to follow the ways
of two brilliant companions he would not be expected to grant Muaweyah
the man of a terrible past what he seeks in order to enjoy a peaceful
leadership.

The Imam was not a conventional politician whose main concern is to come
to power. He was rather a unique statesman. Had not Ali Ibn Abu Talib
existed the Islamic ideals after the Messenger would have remained
subjective without being embodied completely in a human being.

Security for all Muslim generations against religious deviation was the
goal which the Imam was trying to accomplish through leadership. That
goal could be summarized as follows: 1. To make justice prevalent in
society regardless of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 3 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p.37.

**( 463 )**

the religious elements from which it may be composed and retrieving for
the nation and individuals what was acquired by the elites through
exploitations.

2. To enforce Islamic law so that the adherence to the Islamic
principles becomes second nature to the Muslims individually and
collectively.

3. To facilitate understanding of the Holy Qur'an and instructions of
the Prophet for the followers of the Faith of Islam.

4. To try to spread Islam throughout the world by making the true
Islamic teaching known to all nations.

In other words the Imam wanted to realize what the Holy Prophet wanted
when he tried to dictate a document for his nation that his nation will
never stray after it. The political circumstances of the nation had led
the nation to deviate from the safe road in the past. Finally the Imam
who represented in the eyes of the Messenger the security for the nation
against deviation has come to power. His duty is to realize that
security for the nation and this was within his reach if the nation
obeys him. He is the most knowledgeable in the Book of God and the
teachings of the Holy Prophet. He was the most concerned person with
spreading the teaching of the Faith of Islam and the spirit of adherence
to that teaching. He by the testimony of the Messenger and the
outstanding companions is the most qualified to direct the nation to the
right and clear road after the Messenger. He was after the Prophet the
bravest and firmest person who ever walked on earth.

The Imam believed that retaining Muaweyah within his regime contradicts
what he was trying to accomplish.

Muaweyah by his nature was opportunist exploiter materialistic and
unprincipled. With his wiliness and power Muaweyah was the most
dangerous among the opportunists. The Imam was right when he thought
that retaining Muaweyah in the rule of Syria will enable him to rule the
Muslim world. And this was not all the danger.

The bigger danger was the expected continuity of the leadership in the
house of Omayad and rotation of the caliphate in their dynasty.

**( 464 )**

The Omayad period proved later that the Imam was right in his thinking.
The rule of Muaweyah and the rest of the Omayads was the antithesis of
the Imam's goal. It represented the usurpation of the people's right
their exploitation shedding the blood of the innocent and the defiance
of the Islamic Laws. This resulted with the weaken ing of the Islamic
Spirit in the successive generations.

The war of Siffeen the assassination of Hijr Ibn Oday and his righteous
companions for their refusal to repudiate the religion of Ali the
massacre of Karbala and the defamation of the Imam on the pulpits of the
Muslim World for eighty-three years were some of the traits of the
Omayad anti-Islam rule.

MUGHEERAH AND IBN ABBAS
-----------------------

History recorded that Mugheerah Ibn Shu-abah Al- Thaqafi came to the
Imam after he was elected and advised him to keep Muaweyah in his office
at least temporarily. The Imam refused his advice. On the following day
Mugheerah came to the Imam admitting that he was mistaken and advised
the Imam to dismiss Muaweyah. Ibn Abbas witnessed Mugheerah coming out
of the house of the Imam while he himself was about to enter the house
of the Imam. When Ibn Abbas met the Imam he asked him about Mugheerah's
visit. The Imam informed him of Mugheerah's two contradictory opinions.
Ibn Abbas commented that Mugheerah was genuine in his first advice
deceptive in his second advice. He affirmed that the wise policy is to
keep Muaweyah in his post at least temporarily and it would be easy for
the Imam to dismiss him after he joins his electors. The Imam refused to
retain Muaweyah in his post because he did not want to deviate from his
principles which do not permit him to keep Muaweyah in his post for two
days. ( 4)

It appeared to many past and present historians that what Ibn Abbas and
Mugheerah counseled the Imam to do  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 4 ) Ibn Al-Atheer, Al-Kamil, part 3, p.101.

**( 465 )**

4. IBn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p.101.

was right. Had the Imam accepted their advice he would not have had to
wage the war of Siffeen and he could have dismissed Muaweyah later and
the reign of the Imam could have been peaceful instead of being filled
with civil wars.

### Naive Opinion

I believe that those who hold this opinion were not able to estimate the
fore-sightedness of the Imam and his awareness of Muaweyah's intention.
At the same time they underestimated the wiliness of Muaweyah and his
alertness. Ibn Abbas and Mugheerah both were mistaken.

The Imam had seen through the light of God and his super mental
capability years before he was elected that the Omayads will come to
power and that they will rotate the leadership among them. He spoke of
that during the days of the Electoral Convention before Othman was
elected. At that time he said to his uncle Abbas. "I know that they will
elect Othman and if he is assassinated or dies the children of Omayad
will rotate the caliphate among them; and if I am alive they will find
me where they dislike." ( 5)

The Progress of the events indicated to the people of  
 wisdom and understanding that the Omayads were going  
 to come to power. Omar appointed Muaweyah as gover-  
 nor of Damascus then he widened his authority by adding  
 Jordan to Damascus. He kept him in that post for the  
 duration of his reign. This made Muaweyah so strong that  
 the Caliph after he was stabbed warned the members of  
 the Electoral Convention not to dispute with each other;  
 otherwise Muaweyah may prevail against them and take  
 the leadership away from them. Should such a word reach  
 Muaweyah it would inflame his ambition towards the  
 caliphate and make him expect the day when he becomes  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 5 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p.36.

**( 466 )**

Al-Tabari also reported this in his History part 4 p.230.

able to snatch the leadership from the hands of the outstanding
companions.

### Muaweyah's Long Preparation

Muaweyah realized that he could not come to power through a natural
course. The caliphate in the eyes of the Muslims was only for the
outstanding companions who adopted the faith of Islam at the early stage
and offered many sacrifices during the days of the Prophethood when the
faith of Islam was at its primary stage of spreading.

Muaweyah was not one of those people. As a matter of fact Muaweyah and
Abu Sufyan the father of Muaweyah and the majority of the Omayads except
Othman Abu Huthifa and Khalid Ibn Al-Auss were the front line of the
enemies of the Messenger. They were waging against him and his religion
war after war trying to eliminate Islam and its Messenger. They refused
to adopt Islam until the Messenger conquered Meccab and Islam became
their only means for saving their lives.( 6 )

For the Muslims to move the caliphate from the early  
 companions of the Holy Prophet to the enemy of the  
 prophet they had to reverse themselves insanely  
 or the enemies of the Messenger would reach the caliphate by  
 force. Muaweyah was not nearer to the caliphate than his  
 father Abu Sufyan. However time was not ungenerous to  
 the son of Abu Sufyan with opportunities. Othman came  
 to power and his caliphate revived the hopes of the  
 Omayads and made them nearer to their dreams. Othman  
 as we mentioned (in chapter 21) through the two sides of  
 his personality represented a potential bridge through  
 which the caliphate may cross from the early righteous  
 companions of the Holy Prophet to the Omayads the  
 people of the dark past. Othman was from the early  
 companions. At the same time he was an Omayad and he  
 loved his cousins a great deal. His love for them would  
 cause him to move the caliphate to one of his op-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 6 ) Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubrah part 2 p. 14.

**( 467 )**

portunist cousins and they would use him for reaching their goals.

The wily Abu Sufyan realized that as soon as Othman was elected. He said
to the members of the Omayad clan while they were meeting at the house
of the new Caliph:

"Make the caliphate alternate among you. By the one in whose name Abu
Sufyan swears there is no Paradise and no Hell. . ." ( 7 )

It is possible that the new Caliph was not present when Abu Sufyan
uttered that profane statement or that the Caliph admonished and chided
him but these words actually expressed the thinking of the Omayads and
what they were trying to reach.

The caliphate of Othman added to the power of Muaweyah a much greater
power than he had during the time of the Second Caliph. The area of his
rule and influence was greatly widened to include Palestine Hums and
Qinnisreen. ( 8 ) Thus he became the governor of what may be called "The
Greater Syria." It is true that the authority of Muaweyah was growing
during the days of Omar but it was under strong supervision of the
Second Caliph. When Othman took over the authority of Muaweyah was freed
of all supervision and by widening the area of his influence Muaweyah
emerged as the most powerful ruler in the Muslim World. He became
stronger than the Caliph.

The Caliph began to resort to him in punishing his opponents in Hijaz
and Iraq by sending them to Syria and putting them under the supervision
of the strong man of the Muslim State. ( 8a)

Muaweyah was not the man who neglects opportuni-  
 ties. He was the kind of person who seizes every op-  
 portunity and gets out of it the utmost benefits. He started  
 to establish his rule and lay the foundation of his future  
 since the days of Omar. He went on attracting the chiefs  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 7 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol 2 p. 411.
( 8 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p. 57. ( 8a ) Dr. Taha Hussein
Al-Fitnat Al-Kubrah part 2 pp. 118-119 .

**( 468 )**

of the tribes through his generous gifts and mobilizing whomever he was
able to mobilize until he possessed the strongest striking force in the
Muslim World. One hundred thousand supported by an equal number from
their sons and servants were paid annually from the Islamic treasury in
Syria. ( 9 )

Muaweyah found in Othman his means to the caliphate. He was his cousin
and his beloved. It was very likely that Othman would appoint him as his
successor if peace continued during the reign of Othman. When the
situation changed and the political atmosphere became grim showing that
the signs of violence evil and tragedy were creeping near the Caliph
Muaweyah wanted to make out of the difficulties of the Caliph a means
which would bring him quickly to his goal.

### Muaweyah Refused to Protect Othman

Muaweyah invited Othman when the danger surrounded him to move to
Damascus ostensibly for the purpose of shielding the Caliph against
danger. (10) His actual motive was to put the Caliph under his
protection. Thus Othman would keep the name of the caliphate and
Muaweyah would be the actual caliph and at the end Othman will appoint
Muaweyah his successor.

The Caliph did hot respond to the invitation. Mua-  
 weyah however was capable of preventing the tragedy  
 from reaching the Caliph by sending an army to Medina in  
 order to defend the Caliph. He did not do that though the  
 Caliph asked for his military assistance.(11) Muaweyah  
 chose to hand his cousin to the knife of the revolution. He  
 refused to assist him militarily. (12) He thought rightly  
 that Othman's death would give him a pretext to seek avenge  
 for the blood of the victim Caliph. By this he would excite  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 9 ) Abdul-Fattah Abdul-Maqsoud Al-Imam Ali Abu Talib part 2 p. 120.
(10) Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubrah part 2 p. 57. (11) Taha Hussein
Al-Fitnat Al-Kubrah part 2 p. 59. (12) Taha Hussein Al-Fitnat Al-Kubrah
part 2 p. 59.

**( 469 )**

the masses of the people and take them out of their sound thinking and
transfer the Muslim World to an insane situation which brings Muaweyah
to what he wanted.

### Forecast Rule

In addition to the helpful opportunities and the continuous preparations
which made Muaweyah close to his goal he heard many prophecies
supporting his thinking and made his wish to reach the caliphate strong
and full of life.

Ibn Al-Atheer recorded that while Othman was coming back from pilgrimage
accompanying Muaweyah who was riding a blond mule a man uttered some
poetry indicating that the successor of Othman would be Ali then Al-
Zubeir. But Kaab Al-Ahbar (a Rabbi who adopted Islam) said to the poet:
You have lied. The one who will succeed the Caliph is the rider of the
blond mule. (13) Muaweyah became ambitious since that time.

The fact is that his ambition did not start at that time.

Muaweyah heard similar to this from the person who was much truer than
Kaab Al-Ahbar. I do not believe that Kaab Al-Ahbar found the caliphate
of Muaweyah in the Jewish books as he tried to pretend. He actually
found that through statements of some companions who heard from the Holy
Prophet (one of them was Abu Tharr) who was known for his truth and to
this the Holy Prophet had testified. ( 14 Abu Othman Al-Jahith in his
book Al-Safyaneyah recorded that Jallam Ibn Jandal Al-Ghifari attended a
dialogue between Muaweyah and Abu Tharr after Othman exiled Abu Tharr to
Damascus. Muaweyah said to Abu Tharr: "Enemy of God and enemy of His
Messenger you come every day and do what you are doing. If I were to
kill a man from the companions of Mohammad without the permission of the
Caliph Othman I would have killed you.".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(13) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p.73. (14) Al-Termathi his authentic
Sunan part 5 p.334.

**( 470 )**

Abu Tharr retorted saying to Muawayah: "I am not the enemy of God and
His Messenger. You and your father are the enemies of God and His
Messenger. You showed Islam and concealed disbelief. The Holy Messenger
cursed you and prayed to God that you will never be cured of hunger. I
heard the Messenger of God saying:

"When the big eyed with the broad throat the one who eats and never gets
full becomes the ruler of this nation the nation should be alarmed."
Muaweyah said: "I am not that man." Abu Tharr said: "Yes you are that
man.

The Messenger of God informed me of that and I heard him saying while
you were passing: God curse him and make him not feel full except by
soil . . ." ( 15 )

Abu Tharr reported in the presence of Othman that the Messenger of God
said: "When the children of Abu Al- Auss (the clan of Marwan from the
Omayads) become thirty men they will distribute the revenue of God among
themselves and enslave the servants of God and interpolate the religion
of God. ( 16)

Omar said to Mugheerah Ibn Shu-abah (and this man was one eyed): "By God
the Omayads will make Islam one eyed as you are one eyed and they will
blind it until Islam is unable to know where to go and where to
come.(17)

Omar also reported that he heard from the Messenger of God the
following: "The children of Omayad will ascend to my pulpit. I was shown
them in my dream jumping on it like monkeys. About them the revelation
came 'And We did not make the vision which you have seen but a trial to
people and the cursed tree in the Holy Qur'an . . .'"(18)

Fakhr Al-Deen Al-Razi in his commentary on this  
 verse recorded that Sa-eed Ibn Al-Musayab said: "The  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(15) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed his Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.2 p.376.
(16) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.2 p.377. (17)
Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.2 p.115. (18) Ibn
Abu Al-Hadeed Commentary on Nahjul-Balaghah vol.2 p.115.

**( 471 )**

Messenger of God saw in his dream the children of Omayad jumping on his
pulpit like monkeys and that saddened him." Al-Razi said: "This is the
opinion of Ibn Abbas according to the hadith of Ata." ( 19 ) He reported
also that Ibn Abbas said that the cursed tree is Banu Omayad meaning
Al-Hakam Ibn Abu Al-Auss. Ibn Abbas said: "The Messenger of God saw in
his dream that the children of Marwan were alternating on his pulpit and
he informed Abu Bakr and Omar of his dream while they were with him at
his house. When they left the Messenger of God heard Al-Hakam speaking
of the dream of the Messenger.

The Holy Prophet became angry and suspected that Omar betrayed his
secret. Then it appeared later that Al-Hakam was spying on them. The
Prophet exiled him... "(20)

Al-Hakim reported that Imam Al-Hassan Ibn Ali said to a man from his
companions: "Blame me not (for abdicating the caliphate); may God have
His Mercy upon you. The Messenger of God saw in his dream the children
of Omayad speaking on his pulpit one after the other. This saddened him
and it was revealed to him in the chapter of Glory:

"We have revealed it (The Qur'an) during the Night of Glory and what did
make you know the Night of Glory. The Night of Glory is better than a
thousand months (in which the children of Omayads rule the nation." (
21)

From all this we may understand the meaning of the word of the Imam to
his uncle during the days of the Electoral Convention: "I know that they
will elect Othman. . .

if he is killed or he dies the children of Omayad will alternate it
among them . . ." (22) No doubt the Imam heard from the Messenger
concerning Othman and the Omayads  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(19) Imam Fakhr Al-Razi his Detailed Commentary on The Holy Qur'an part
5 pp.413-414. (20) Imam Fakhr Al-Razi his Detailed Commentary on The
Holy Qur'an part 5 pp.413-414. (21) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p.171.
(22) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.230.

**( 472 )**

in general and Muaweyah in particular more than Omar Abu Tharr and
others heard from the Prophet about them.

The Imam said after the Battle of Bassrah when Marwan was brought to him
to renew his pledge of allegiance to the Imam: "What shall I do with his
pledge? Did he not pledge in Medina? If he pledges his loyalty to me by
his hand he will betray it by his back." When Marwan left the Imam said:
"He will have a rule as short as a dog's licking its nose. He is the
father of the four Rams. The nation will have through him and his
children a bloody day." (23)

Thus Muaweyah had prepared himself eighteen years for his goal. He
seized every opportunity and acquired out of it its utmost benefits and
heard what was conveyed to him of the prophecies of the Holy Prophet
concerning the Omayads and concerning him. It was only naive on the part
of Ibn Abbas or others to think that keeping Muaweyah in his post
temporarily would give the Imam the opportunity to dismiss him easily
without a bloody war.

Ali would not have attempted to deceive Muaweyah and if he wanted to do
that he would not have succeeded.

Muaweyah was too wily to be disuaded of his goal. Had the Imam Ali
followed the advice of Ibn Abbas and Mugheerah the Imam would have
deceived only himself.

I believe that the two advisors with all their intelligence and wiliness
had underestimated the knowledge of the Imam about Muaweyah and the
Imam's wisdom and his farsightedness as they underestimated the wiliness
of Muaweyah and his determination. Historians who shared Ibn Abbas and
Mugheerah's opinion committed the same mistake.

The Imam could have earned peace with Muaweyah by keeping him in his
position for the duration of his life and appointing him his successor.
But if the Imam had done that he would have acquired a personal gain at
the expense of everything he had stood for. He was fully aware  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(23) Al-Imam Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 p.124.

**( 473 )**

that Muaweyah could not be trusted with the religion of God and the
Islamic nation. The Imam said one time. "I have thought about
alternatives concerning Muaweyah. I found only two of them: either to
fight him or to reject what was revealed to Mohammad." ( 24)

WAS OMAYAD'S RULE INEVITABLE?
-----------------------------

It may be said that if the Holy Prophet had informed his nation that the
Omayads will come to power why did the Imam fight Muaweyah while he knew
that Muaweyah would prevail? What is the benefit of shedding blood if
the consequence which the Imam wanted to avoid was the same consequence
which God had predetermined for him?

The fact is that the Prophet did not inform Ali or the rest of the
companions that the rule of the Omayads was inevitable and predestined
from Heaven and that the will of man has no value in that affair.
Actually the opposite is true. The Holy Messenger wanted to inform his
nation that its failure to protect Islam against the Omayads' conspiracy
shall bring the Omayads to power and make them rule the nation. This was
a warning from the Messenger to his nation aimed at advising the nation
to take the necessary measures to prevent this from happening.

The Holy Prophet prescribed to the nation the measures which shield the
nation against this danger and all dangers of deviations.

The prescribed measures were the adherence to the Holy Qur'an and the
leadership of the members of the House of the Prophet. He said to the
nation that this represents the security against deviation. Had the
nation followed the prescription of the Prophet the Omayads could not
have come to power and the nation would have been secured against any
faith-testing crises.

It was unfortunate that the nation did not heed the Messenger's warnings
and did not take the steps which he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(24) Al-Imam Ali Nahjul-Balaghah part 1 p.94.

**( 474 )**

prescribed. The nation actually disregarded the second part of the
advice completely. It took the opposite road which led the nation into
what the Messenger warned against.

The Imam was the only leader who wanted to shield the nation against the
danger of the Omayads. Had Omar done the least in this field he could
have prevented that danger. The Imam Ali was required to wage a bloody
war against Muaweyah in order to protect the nation against his danger.
The Second Caliph could have shielded the nation against Muaweyah's
danger by avoiding his appointment or dismissing him after he appointed
him or selecting Ali instead of Othman who came to power through the
arrangement of the Electoral Convention. This is what brought the
Omayads to power.

I would like to add that all these events did not constitute a
determining factor in preventing the Imam from subduing Muaweyah and
reaching a peaceful reign. Even after all these events took place it was
possible for the Imam to rid the nation of Muaweyah and to subdue him or
dismiss him. Had "Om Al-Mu'mineen" (Ayeshah) and the two outstanding
companions Talhah and Al-Zubeir co-operated with the Imam and urged the
Muslims to help him instead of revolting against him Muaweyah would have
surrendered to the Imam with humility. Had the three leaders done that
instead of starting the fire of rebellion the rule of the Imam would
have been stabilized and the Muslims would have been spared all the
civil wars which were inflamed during the first century after the death
of the Prophet. Unfortunately the three leaders took the opposite road
and led the nation into what the Messenger warned against.

The Battle of Bassrah made peace with Muaweyah un-  
 available to the Imam as it made the war with Muaweyah  
 inevitable unless the Imam denies all his principles. The  
 Battle of Bassrah made it clear to Muaweyah that he was  
 not the only one who was opposed to the Imam and that  
 people outside Syria shared with him his opinion and  

**( 475 )**

legalized war against Ali and that they did not see it wrong to shed
blood for the sake of his opposition.

The Battle itself created to the Imam enemies who were silenced
temporarily by his victory but they were ready to rejoin his enemies as
soon as the opportunity permitted.

This opportunity came after that and they rushed into it.

The Battle of Siffeen was truly inevitable. Yet it was not Heavenly
predestined because man's will had played a very important role. Had the
Iraqi people listened to the Imam and followed him to the end of the
road it would not have been necessary for the nation to surrender to the
authority of the Omayads and they would have spared the future
generations many terrible evils.

Thus the authority of the Omayads in spite of being predicted by the
Holy Prophet was not a Heavenly predestined event. It was only a result
of the refusal of the nation to take the right medicine which was
prescribed by the Holy Prophet. Certainly the nation continued to refuse
it until the end.

I would like to add that the Imam was duty-bound to take the road which
he chose even if the Omayad authority were predestined. The position of
the Imam was like the position of many prophets who endeavored in the
way of God and died in their endeavor without reaching their aim of
making the word of God triumphant. I do not believe that the Prophet
Mohammad would have discontinued his endeavor if he had known that he
would not win his struggle against his pagan enemies. Had he known that
he would have entered and continued the battle of truth to its end. This
is what he declared to his uncle Abu Talib:

"Uncle by God if they put the Sun in my right hand and the Moon in my
left hand to abandon this mission I will not abandon it until God makes
it triumphant or I perish in it.".

The war which the Imam waged was a preventive  
 measure against the Omayad danger. It was an imperative  
 duty rested upon his shoulders after he found supporters  

**( 476 )**

for his message and mission ready to sacrifice. Had he not done that he
would have been negligent in discharging the trust and he would have
been an accomplice in the injustice deviation and sins of the Omayads.
