Did the Imam Exercise His Rule As a Preacher?
=============================================

**( 477 )**

##### 30.

Some of the students of history think that one of the main reasons for
the difficulties which the Imam encountered in his caliphate is that he
did not exercise his rule as a ruler. He rather exercised his rule as a
preacher. He was not firm with his opponents. He allowed them to oppose
him and he was so lenient with them that they felt safe to confront him
and disobey him.

Abdullah Ibn Omar and Saad Ibn Abu Waqass and others from the companions
in Medina refused to elect him and he did not force them to change their
vote as the Caliphs before him did. None of the three Caliphs allowed
any companions to refrain from giving their allegiance to the Caliph.
Al-Zubeir was forced to give his allegiance to Abu Bakr and Abu Bakr and
his minister Omar applied a tremendous pressure on Ali himself to give
his allegiance to Abu Bakr.

When Al-Zubeir and Talhah left Medina to Mecca pre-  
 tending that they were going for Omrah (a mini pilgrim-  
 age) to visit the House of God the Imam knew that they  
 were going to join the rebellious group in Mecca. ( 1 ) In spite  
 of knowing that he did not prevent the two companions  
 from leaving Medina. It would have been wise on his part  
 to jail the two companions until the situation became  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p.491 and p.444.

**( 478 )**

clear. Had he done that he would have spared himself and the Muslims
many difficulties and sacrifices.

When he came back to Kufa after the battle of Siffeen he should have
punished Ashaath after he witnessed a great deal of evidence indicating
the insincerity of Ashaath and his co-operation with his enemies. He did
not do that and surrendered to Ashaath's pressure time after time. He
postponed the return to the Battle of Siffeen and entered into the
Battle of Nahrawan under Ashaath's pressure.

It would have been wise to keep Ashaath outside the battlefield from the
beginning. When the Imam was elected Ashaath was still in his post in
Persia as one of Othman's appointees. When the Imam was about to leave
to Siffeen he dismissed Ashaath from his post. He according to some
reports required Ashaath to pay some of the funds which he took from the
public treasury then he accompanied him after he reformed him. Had
Ashaath been left in his post the fanatic readers (of the Holy Qur'an)
who called for acceptance of the arbitration would not have been able to
impose arbitration.

### A Winner of Three Wars Is Not Unfirm

It is absurd to say that the Imam did not exercise his rule as a ruler
or that he exercised his rule as a preacher and that he did not
seriously attempt to keep his authority after he obtained it. It is
absurd to say that when we know that the Imam waged three wars against
his opponents and defeated them completely at Bassrah annihilated his
opponents at Nahrawan and confronted and almost crushed Muaweyah and his
army at the biggest battle the history of Islam ever witnessed until
that day. A ruler who treated his enemies with such firmness should not
be accused of practicing his rule as a preacher.

### Why Did He Not Force Some Companions to Elect Him?

It is true that the Imam did not force Ibn Omar Saad Ibn Abu Waqaas and
a number of companions to pledge their allegiance to him and allowed
them to take a neutral  

**( 479 )**

position. But this is what the Islamic justice demands. It is not
permissible for any elective government to force individuals to elect
it. Election means authorization by choice. Thus pledging loyalty by
force is the opposite of election. Therefore Islam declares that
allegiance taken by force is forbidden and unbinding. It is one of the
natural rights which the faith of Islam sanctifies that every human
being has the right to exercise his political freedom and this is what
the most advanced governments in this century sanctify.

When Al-Zubeir was forced to pledge allegiance to Abu Bakr Ali
considered such a coercion contrary to the principle of justice.
Individuals and minorities have the right to disagree with the majority
and the majority does not have the right to pressure the minority unless
the minority attempts to prevent the majority from exercising its
administration. Should a minority try to prevent the majority from
administering the affairs of the nation the majority would be duty-bound
to subdue the minority when the election is sound. Saad and Ibn Omar and
others did not try to prevent the Imam from exercising his rule as a
caliph.

### Why Did the Imam Not Prevent Talhah and Al-Zubeir from Leaving Medina?

The Imam did not prevent the two companions from leaving Medina though
he knew that they were going to declare an armed rebellion against him
and he was right in doing that. It was not in the interest of the Imam
to be accused of preventing two outstanding companions from offering a
devotional visit to the House of God or to jail them for attempting to
do that.

Ayeshah was ready to tell that to the Muslim World and to use such an
action on the part of the Imam as an additional excuse for revolting
against him.

Furthermore keeping the two companions in Medina would not prevent the
Mother of Believers from starting a revolt against the Imam. Ayeshah was
ready to start that  

**( 480 )**

revolt with or without the two companions. She started her rebellion as
soon as she received the news of the Imam's election and without knowing
the attitude of the two companions toward him.( 2 ) She had a large
amount of funds and a good number of men to do that. The Omayads and
their followers were at her disposal and anxious to cooperate with her.
( 3 )

Why Did He Not Continue the War in Siffeen?
-------------------------------------------

It is not fair to criticize the Imam for the discontinuation of the
battle after the copies of the Holy Qur'an were hoisted. Had the
majority of his army remained healthy and obedient to him such a
criticism would have been justifiable. He could have been blamed if he
had been among those who were deceived by the hoisting of the copies of
the Holy Qur'an. But the Imam was the first to tell his army: "Go on
with all your determination to fight your enemy." He declared to them
that hoisting the Holy Qur'an is only a deception and conspiracy.
Muaweyah and his supporters wanted to avoid a crushing defeat. He told
them that he knew the leaders of the opposite camp as men and as
children and they were the worst children and the worst men. They were
not people of religion or Qur'an. ( 4 )

He told them all that but they were already deceived and they were
unable to see the truth. They defied him and threatened to do to him
what they did to Othman or to take him as a captive and deliver him to
Muaweyah. When they did that no voice in the army with which he was
surrounded was raised against them. Thus the Imam was forced to withdraw
Al-Ashtar and his division. ( 5 )

Had the Imam continued the war a battle among elements  
 of his army would have started instead of a battle  
 between them and the enemy. As a matter of fact that  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 2 ) Al-Tabari his History part 4 p. 459. ( 3 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil
part 3 p. 106. ( 4 ), ( 5 ), ( 6 ) Al-Tabari his History part 5 pp.
48-49.

**( 481 )**

battle was about to start between Al-Ashtar and the people of anti-war
movement. He cursed them and they cursed him and they hit with their
rods the face of his horse and he hit with his rod the faces of their
horses but the lmam stopped their arguments. ( 6)

Had such a battle started among the elements of the Imam's army it would
have ended with a hastened catastrophe in which thousands of them would
have perished. The hostility among the survivors of the expected battle
would have been inflamed leaving no room for reuniting them to fight the
enemy again.

Had the Imam insisted on continuing the war and refused to withdraw
Al-Ashtar and his division from the battle all evidence indicated that
the fanatics who surrounded the Imam were ready to assassinate him or
hand him to Muaweyah. This could have happened without the knowledge of
Al-Ashtar and his division. Had the Imam been killed at that time or at
a battle that would have started afterwards between the two elements of
his companions the catastrophe would have been much greater than we
could imagine.

### Why Did He Not Punish Ashaath?

I do not see any logical justification for criticizing the Imam because
he accompanied Ashaath to Siffeen or because he did not punish him when
his insincerity and collaboration with the enemy became evident. The
Imam is a human being. He cannot know the future nor would he be able to
foresee that Ashaath would conspire against him if he were in the army.
To keep Ashaath away from the battlefield would not prevent the crisis
of the arbitration. The Seceders who were the main factor in the crisis
were not from the followers of Ashaath. Thousands and thousands of
fighters shared with the readers of the Qur'an their opinion believing
that turning down the invitation of the arbitration was a major sin.
Ashaath was not the only hypocrite among the followers of the Imam.

**( 482 )**

The Imam did not punish Ashaath after his insincerity became evident for
two reasons: 1. Ashaath was an intelligent hypocrite. He was able to
cover up his hypocrisy showing no evidence that would prove his
conspiracy. There was at the time of the Messenger many hypocrites who
declared Islam prayed and fasted and heard from the Messenger. (There is
in the chapters of Al-Ahzab and Bara-ah the clearest evidence on that).
The Messenger knew a number of them. He did not punish the ones whom he
knew because he did not find evidence that convicts them or because he
hoped that they will reform and become good Muslims. Had he punished
them a dispute among his followers might have erupted.

Therefore he preferred to leave them alone for the sake of unity among
his companions.

Ashaath was not the only hypocrite in the Imam's camp. Probably there
were hundreds and thousands of hypocrites who were feigning loyalty to
the Imam and at the same time concealing hostilities towards him. Ziyad
Ibn Abeeh Shibth Ibn Rib-i and the hundreds from those who fought with
the Imam then participated after that in fighting his son Al-Hussein
represent physical evidence of the existence of a great number of
hypocrites in the camp of the Imam.

2. The authority of the Imam after the Battle of Siffeen was shrunk to a
great degree. The rebellion of the majority against him after Muaweyah's
camp hoisted the copies of the Holy Qur'an represented a military coup
which left him authority in name only. Had the Imam tried to punish
Ashaath for his opposition to the continuation of the battle a large
portion of the inhabitants of Kufa (who for one reason or another had
attitudes similar to that of Ashaath) would have opposed the Imam. Had
the Imam punished Ashaath he would have offended thousands from the
tribe of Kindah who used to consider Ashaath their leader. As a matter
of fact Ashaath's punishment was expected to alienate the majority of
the  
 Kufites because they were of the Yemenites and so was  

**( 483 )**

Ashaath. The Imam after Siffeen was not in need of more enemies and
difficulties.

WHY DID THE IMAM BIND HIMSELF WITH A DOCUMENT WHICH WAS FORCED UPON HIM?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are two important questions which demand answers:

1. All evidence indicates that the Imam did not stop the war and sign
the document of arbitration willingly. He was forced to do that and it
is known in the religion of Islam that a forced action is nil. A divorce
or marriage or election by force would not be sound. And the rule is the
same concerning the Pact of Arbitration. This means that the document of
arbitration was not binding to the Imam and that he had the right to
disregard it. Furthermore his duty was to cancel it when its
cancellation was expected to benefit the camp of truth. Since the
Seceders reversed their attitude and tried to return to the battlefield
the Imam should have returned to the war without waiting for the
decision of the two arbiters.

As to the validity or invalidity of a pact I would like to say that a
pact signed by a coerced person is nil if the signer signed it as an
individual. When the coerced signer is a head of state and he signs a
pact on behalf of Muslims he represents the pact would not be unsound
unless the people whom he represented were coerced to accept the pact.
When they are the seeker of the pact the pact would be binding as soon
as it is signed. The pact has to be honored even if a portion of the
representees reverse their attitude towards the pact.

It is well known that the majority of the Imam's camp  
 including the Seceders were not coerced to discontinue the  
 fight and accept the arbitration. On the contrary they  
 were the advocates of both. Repudiation of the pact by the  
 Seceders after it was signed does not relieve the Imam of  

**( 484 )**

his responsibility. Furthermore reversal of the Seceders' attitude
towards the contents of the pact does not necessarily make its breaching
in the interest of the Imam or his camp.

The majority of the advocates of the pact continued their attitude
thinking that obeying it is a duty and that they had to wait for the
outcome of the arbitration. Had the Irnam breached the pact which he
signed he would have faced from the supporters of the c!ocument an
opposition more violent than that of the Seceders and his posi tion
would have become more difficult than it was before signing the
document. For the Imam to go back on a document he signed would only add
to the Muslims' confusion.

It would have given Muaweyah an argument against the Imam which the Imam
would not be able to defeat. The history which today judges
categorically in favor of the Imam would have hesitated or strayed in
its judgment if the Imam had done that.

### Why Did the Imarn Prolong the Period ofArbitration?

2. The other question which seriously demands an answer is the
following: We believe that the Imam was forced to accept the invitation
for discontinuing the war and accepting the arbitration and accepting
Abu Musa Al-Ashaari and Ibn Al- Auss as arbiters. We know all that but
what made the Imam prolong the period of arbitration for several months?
It was possible for the two arbiters to meet and to issue their judgment
within a week or one month. It was possible for the Imam to stay with
his army in Siffeen until the two arbiters issued their decision. Had
the Imam done that he would have prevented the development of the
dispute and the difference bctween him and the Seceders who repented for
their discontinuation of the war. Had he shortened the period of
arbitration he would have been  
 able to return to the battle while accompanying the Se-  
 ceders as soon as the two arbiters issued their decision. We  

**( 485 )**

should add to this the fact that the Imam was certain that their verdict
would not be in his interest because the two arbiters were hostile to
him.

The Seceders asked the Imam: Why did you prolong the period of
arbitration? He answered: "We wanted to give the ignorant time so that
he may know the facts. We wanted to give the one who knows the facts
time so that he may become firmer in his belief. And we hoped that God
may rectify the affairs of this nation (then the nation would not need
to go back to war)."

Nevertheless it was possible for the affairs of the nation to be
rectified and the nation would not have needed to go back to war if the
two arbiters were expected to validate what the Holy Qur'an validates
and to invalidate what the Holy Qur'an invalidates and if Muaweyah were
of those who surrender to the rule of the Holy Qur'an. But Muaweyah
fought the Imam knowing that his fight was a fight against the Holy
Qur'an and against the prophet to whom the Holy Qur'an was revealed. Yet
one of the two arbiters was as hostile to the Imam as Muaweyah was. The
other one (Abu Musa) was very ignorant and unfriendly towards the Imam.
Neither of them was expected to say the truth.

Prolonging the time of the armistice could have added to the firmness of
the faithful and enlightened the ignorant. For it gave people a longer
time to think without being under the pressure of the events and the
influence of emotion. But prolonging the armistice would also prolong
the arguments among people escalate differences of the disputing
elements in the Imam's camp relieve the enemy for a longer time and
enable him to make a new mobilization for a new battle.

The question seems to assume that the Imam at the  
 time of signing the armistice was aware of the future  
 repentance of the Seceders for the guilt of discontinuation  
 of the war and that he knew that they will change their at-  
 titude and call for the return to the war against Mua-  
 weyah. Had the matter been so the Imam would not have  
 needed to accept the invitation for arbitration and the  

**( 486 )**

whole event of arbitration would not have taken place.

This was not the case. The Seceders were very serious in demanding the
cessation of hostility and acceptance of arbitration and they continued
this way until the document was executed. They and others from the bigot
readers were the power which forced the Imam to stop the war. They did
not change their attitude until the document was signed by the two
parties and became a pact in full.

The Seceders were not expected to change their attitude with such speed
and move within three days from the extreme left to the extreme right.
In the first two days they believed that continuation of war and
rejection of arbitration represented a disbelief in the religion of God.
Then they reversed themselves on the third day and believed that
discontinuation of war and acceptance of arbitration represented a
disbelief in the religion of God. The Imam responded to their first
demand which seemed to be the position of the majority of his camp. He
executed the document and he was right in giving them and the rest of
the nation a respite that continued a few months with which the matter
could become clear to them after they were deceived and confused.

It was logical to expect that the situation would become clear to the
Seceders and to others during the months of the armistice and
particularly after the two arbiters issued their unjust and
contradictory verdict. The Seceders however were not logical neither at
the beginning nor at the end. It was impossible for any human mind to
predict their extreme and fast changes of thinking. The Imam was not to
be blamed because he could not predict the unseen future.

Suppose the Imam had shortened the period of the armistice for one month
and stayed with his army in Siffeen until the two arbiters issued their
verdict then he called upon his army to return to war. Would that have
satisfied the Seceders and reunited the Imam's camp?

The subsequent events make us expect the Seceders to  
 refuse to return to war and that their attitude if they had  
 stayed in Siffeen would be similar to the attitude which  

**( 487 )**

they took in Iraq. The Imam actually called upon them to rejoin him in
resumption of war after the two arbiters issued their verdicts. They
refused to rejoin him accusing him of wanting to return to the war in
order to avenge for himself because the verdict of the two arbiters did
not come in his favor. ( 7 )

Had the Imam shortened the time of armistice and remained in Siffeen
then tried to go back to war after the end of the arbitration the
Seceders could have returned to Iraq waging a campaign of terror cutting
the supplies of his army and killing whoever disagreed with them. This
was what they did after coming back from Siffeen. ( 8 ) No doubt the
danger to the inhabitants of Iraq during his absence would have been
greater than it was in his presence.

Thus prolonging the time of armistice and the return to Iraq was less
dangerous than shortening it and staying in Siffeen and returning to war
without security forces to protect the innocent civilians of Iraq and
the roads of supplies against the Seceders' attacks.

It was only rational on the part of the Imam to expect those who
demanded cessation of hostility and the acceptance of arbitration to
continue with their opinion and wait until the two arbiters issued their
verdicts. Had they done that the screen of deception would have been
removed when the two arbiters strayed from the right road and
invalidated what the Holy Qur'an validated. This would have motivated
them to renew the war with a stronger determination clearer sight and
bigger preparation. Had they done that it would not have been difficult
for them while they were under the bravest leadership to defeat Muaweyah
and liberate Syria from his rule. Had they done that they could have
secured for themselves the nation and its future generations the
brightest future in which justice would be prevalent and the truth would
be triumphant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 7 ) Ibn Al-Atheer Al-Kamil part 3 p.171. ( 8 ) Al-Tabari his History
part 5 pp.81-82.
