The Hadith of Performance and Delivery
======================================

**( 575 )**

##### 36.

NO ONE SHALL DELIVER FOR ME EXCEPT I OR A MAN FROM MY HOUSE.
------------------------------------------------------------

Imam Ahmad in his Musnad recorded that Abu Bakr said: The Prophet sent
me with the chapter of Bara-ah to the people of Mecca:

"No pagan should make a pilgrimage after this year.

No naked shall circumnavigate around the Ancient House.

No one shall enter Paradise except a Muslim soul. Any Pagan community
that has between them and the Messenger of God a peace accord the accord
will end by the end of the specified period (without extention) and God
and His Messenger are clear of the pagans."

Abu Bakr traveled on for three days then the Prophet said to Ali:
"Follow him and send Abu Bakr back to me and go on to deliver the
message yourself." Ali did that and Abu Bakr came back to the Prophet.
He wept and said: Messenger of God did anything happen concerning me?
The Prophet said that nothing happened but good.

"But I am commanded that no one should deliver it except myself or a man
from me." ( 1 )

Al-Hakim in his Sahih Al-Mustadrak recorded through his channel to
Jumai-a Ibn Omair Al-Laithi that Abdullah Ibn Omar said to him:

"The Messenger of God sent Abu Bakr and Omar with  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 1 ) Imam Ahmad Al-Musnad part 1 p. 3.

**( 576 )**

the chapter of Bara-ah to the people of Mecca. The two men went on and
suddenly a man overtook them. They asked: Who is this? He said: I am
Ali. Abu Bakr give me the written message which you have. Abu Bakr said:
What happened concerning me? Ali said: By God I did not know but good.
Ali took the written message and went on and Abu Bakr and Omar went back
to Medina and said:

Messenger of God what happened to us? He said nothing but good but I am
told: No one should deliver for you but you or a man from you." ( 2 )

Al-Nisa-i in his book "Al-Khasa-is Al-Alaweyah" (Distinctions of Ali)
reported that the Messenger of God sent the chapter of Bara-ah to Mecca
with Abu Bakr. Then he ordered Ali to follow him. He told him: Take the
written message from Abu Bakr and go to the people of Mecca. Ali reached
Abu Bakr and took the message from him.

Abu Bakr sadly went back and said to the Messenger: Did any Revelation
come down concerning me? The Prophet said: No but I am commanded that
either I should deliver it or a man from the members of my House.( 3 )

Al-Termathi recorded through his channel to Anas Ibn Malik that Anas
reported: The Prophet sent Bara-ah with Abu Bakr then he called him and
said: No one ought to deliver this except a man from the members of my
House He called Ali and gave him the chapter."( 4 )

Ibn Husham in his Biography of the Prophet recorded that Mohammad
Al-Baqir reported the following:

"When Bara-ah was revealed to the Messenger he sent Abu Bakr to lead the
people in pilgrimage. The Prophet  
 was told: Messenger of God it would be good if you send  
 Bara-ah with Abu Bakr so that he will announce it. The  
 Prophet said: No one should deliver for me but a man  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 2 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 51. ( 3 ) Al-Nisa-i Al-Khassa-iss
Al-Alaweyah (The Distinctions of Ali) p. 20. ( 4 ) Al-Termathi his
authentic Sunan part 2 p. 183. (Al-Fairuzabadi Fadha-il Al-Khamsah part
2 p. 343 conveyed it.)

**( 577 )**

from the members of my House. Then he called upon Ali Ibn Abu Talib and
said to him: Take the verses at the beginning of Bara-ah . . . Ali went
on riding the camel of the Messenger "Al-Adba " until he reached Abu
Bakr on the road. Abu Bakr said: Are you a commander or commanded? Ali
said: I am commanded and they went on and Abu Bakr led the people in the
Hajj Pilgrimage.

When the Day of Arafat came Ali stood up and announced to the people
what the Messenger ordered him to announce..." ( 5)

It seems that this event was well known. Omar did not deny it when Ibn
Abbas reminded him of it. Ibn Abbas reported the following:

"... Omar said to me: Ibn Abbas I see your man (Ali) is treated unjustly
. . . I said: Ameer Al-Mumineen give him his right. He pulled his hand
from my hand and went on speaking to himself then he stood waiting for
me.

When I came to him; he said: Ibn Abbas I think they (the Qureshites) did
not give him the leadership only because they thought he was too young
for that... I said: By God neither God nor His Messenger considered him
too young when they ordered him to take the chapter of Bara-ah from your
man. He (Omar) turned his face away from me and sped up and I went
back." ( 6)

Al-Hafith Al-Kanji Al-Shafi-i in his book Kifayat Al- Talib page 151
recorded that Al-Harith Ibn Malik reported the following:

"I came to Mecca and met Saad Ibn Abu Waqas I  
 asked him: "Did you hear any recommendation for Ali?"

He said: I witnessed four for him if one of them were for me  
 I would prefer it to having the whole world living in it  
 as long as Noah lived. The Messenger sent Abu Bakr with  
 Bara-ah to the pagans of Quraish. He traveled a day and  
 night then the Prophet said to Ali: Follow Abu Bakr take  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 5 ) Ibn Husham Al-Seerah Al-Nabaweyah (Biography of the Prophet) part
2 p. 547. ( 6 ) Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed in his Commentary on Nahjul-Balagha
part 3 p. 105.

**( 578 )**

Bara-ah from him and deliver it and send Abu Bakr back to me. Abu Bakr
came back crying. He said: Messenger of God did any revelation come down
concerning me? The Prophet said: None but good. No one should deliver
for me except myself or a man from me or he said: from the members of my
House..." ( 7)

Whether the Messenger sent Abu Bakr with the chapter of Bara-ah or the
chapter came down after he left for the pilgrimage; and whether Abu Bakr
went back to the Prophet or he continued in his leadership of the
pilgrimage these hadiths unanimously agree that the Messenger declared
that no one should deliver for him (or perform for him) but a man from
him or a man from the members of his House (and the first two hadiths
and the hadith of Ibn Abbas stated that this was by order from God.)
That man was Ali Ibn Abu Talib.

Let us try to understand what the Messenger meant by his saying "No one
should deliver for me except a man from me (or from the members of my
House).".

The Holy Prophet did not mean that no one should report his word or deed
except a man from the members of his House; otherwise it would be
forbidden for people from outside his House to report what he said or
did and this is untrue. The Messenger used to say: "Let the present
inform the absent.".

Nor did the Messenger mean that he should not send a messenger to people
except a man from his House because he sent many messengers to kings and
princes and tribes and individuals and none of them were from the
members of his House.

The rest of the people can report the words and the  
 deeds of the Holy Prophet. But what they report would  
 not be securely free of error. Many times the reporters  
 themselves became confused and they contradicted each  
 other in their reports. Therefore none of them would be  
 an authority to the Muslims in representing the Messenger  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 7 ) Al-Hafith Al-Kanji Kifayat Al- Talib p. 151 (conveyed by Al-Ameeni
Al-Ghadeer part 1 p. 40.)

**( 579 )**

and in replacing him as the communicator of the Islamic instructions.
The one who represents the Holy Prophet is a man from the members of his
House.

The one who delivers for the Messenger and represents him should be the
treasurer of the Knowledge of the Mes- senger knowing all of what was
revealed to the Messenger and what the Messenger gave of instructions.

This is exactly what the Messenger meant when he said: "I am the city of
knowledge and Ali is the gate of that city. Whoever wants to enter that
city should come through the gate.".

The Messenger informed us that the members of his House during his
lifetime were only four: Ali Fatima and their two children (Al-Hassan
and Al-Hussein). We have mentioned in the second chapter vol. 1 of this
book several hadiths which indicate this. Of those hadiths is what
Muslim reported through Saad Ibn Waqas: When this verse 'Let us invite
our sons and your sons . . . ' the Messenger called Ali Fatima and
Hassan and Hussein and said: God these are the members of my House."( 8
)

No man was among these four during the time of the Holy Prophet except
one person: That is Ali Ibn Abu Talib. Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein were
still children and Fatima was a grown lady. Thus when the Messenger
said:

"No one performs for me except a man from the members of my House " he
had meant only Ali. Therefore he sent him with the chapter of Bara-ah.

The Messenger did not mean to bestow on Ali this of-  
 fice of his representation because he was from his rela-  
 tives. The Prophet would not elevate his relatives above  
 other people because they are his relatives. He is the one  
 who called upon people to erase all tribal prejudices and  
 declared the human equality and that there is no superiori-  
 ty but through righteousness. And so the hadith of Ibn  
 Abbas speaks clearly that what the Prophet did was by  
 order from God and not through a human desire. The Al-  
 mighty of course would prefer Ali to the rest of the peo-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 8 ) Muslim in his Sahih part 15 p. 176.

**( 580 )**

ple only because He purified him and the rest of the members of the
House completely.

The quoted hadiths indicate that Ali was the only deputy of the
Messenger and no one from the Muslims represents the Messenger except
he. It is reported that Hubshi Ibn Janadah reported the following:

"I heard the Messenger of God saying: Ali is from me and I am from him
and no one represents me except Ali.".

Al-Termathi in his authentic Sunan reported this hadith and said this is
good unusual and authentic. ( 9 ) Ibn Majah reported it also in his
authentic Sunan ( 10 ) and so did Imam Ahmad in his Musnad. ( 11)

Ali's general representation of the Holy Prophet stands clearly in the
hadiths which declared that obedience of Ali is an obedience of God and
His Messenger; disobedience of Ali is a disobedience of God and His
Messenger; to slander him is to slander God and His Messenger; to love
him is to love God and His Messenger and to be hostile to him is to be
hostile to God and His Messenger. Al- Hakim in his Mustadrak recorded
that Abu Tharr reported the following:

"The Messenger of God said: 'Whoever obeys me obeys God and whoever
disobeys me disobeys God; and whoever obeys Ali obeys me; and whoever
disobeys Ali disobeys me.'" Al-Hakim said: "This is an authentic hadith.
( 12 But the two sheikhs Al-Bukhari and Muslim did not report it."
Al-Thahabi in his comment on Al-Mustadrak considered this hadith
authentic.

Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak also reported on the same page many hadiths
which indicate that to slander Ali is to slander the Messenger and to
love him is to love the Messenger and to be hostile to him is to be
hostile to the Messenger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

( 9 ) Al-Termathi part 5 his authentic Sunan p. 300. ( 10 ) Ibn Majah
his authentic Sunan part 1 hadith no. 145. ( 11 ) Imam Ahmad Al-Munad
part 4 pp. 164-165. ( 12 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak part 3 p. 121.

**( 581 )**

It could be argued that the hadiths of representation and delivery
substantiate that Ali is the Imam of the Muslims in jurisprudence rather
than worldly affairs. It does not substantiate his leadership in rule
and administration. Therefore they do not prove that he is the first
caliph of the Messenger.

The weakness of this argument is easy to discover when we remember that
the hadiths which indicate the imperativeness of his obedience and the
prohibition of his disobedience actually announce his leadership in
jurisprudence and worldly affairs. In addition to this the separation
between religion and worldly affairs has no place in Islam.

### Summary of the Previous Four Chapters

It has become clear by now that what was supposed to happen had
happened. The Messenger had done what was dictated by the nature of his
mission and the principles of his religion along with the grave
circumstances under which his nation and state was living. He responded
to all that and to the need of the Muslims for a genuine authority in
the Islamic teaching by appointing a genuine Imam for the nation to lead
it after him. This is what was expected and this is what took place. The
Holy Prophet informed the Muslims in many ways that he chose for them a
man to lead them after him.

We have mentioned until now four kinds of statements by the Holy Prophet
through which he informed the Muslims that Ali is their Imam. He made
him their authority when he made him the gate of the city of knowledge
and told them whoever wants to enter into that city has to come through
the gate. He informed them also on the day of the Home Conference that
Ali is his brother his minister his executor and his successor.

He also informed them on many occasions that Ali to  
 him is like Aaron to Moses in everything except the proph-  
 ethood. He informed them that God commanded him that no one should
represent him but Ali. He informed them  

**( 582 )**

that their obedience to Ali is an obedience to God and His Messenger and
that their disobedience to Ali is a disobedience to God and His
Messenger.

### The Hadith Is a Prophecy

The Prophet uttered these important statements in reliance on the Divine
revelation. Otherwise he could not declare that obedience to Ali is an
obedience to God and his disobedience is a disobedience to God. He could
declare that only if God informed him through a clear revelation that
Ali will never in his future life disagree with the command of God and
the teachings of His Prophet. The declaration itself implies a very
clear prophecy and it is clear that that prophecy had been realized. The
Imam lived after the Messenger about thirty years in which he was a
miniature copy of the great Messenger. He followed his way one hundred
per cent and never parted with the order of God and the Prophet's
instructions.

The event of the chapter of Bara-ah took place during the days of
pilgrimage the ninth year after the Hijra. We shall see that the
Messenger during the tenth year after the Hijrah and at the time of his
valedictory pilgrimage issued statements which took the shape of general
declaration in the presence of thousands of pilgrims. Those statements
were directed to the Muslims of every generation. This was on and before
the Day of Ghadeer Khum.

To try to understand what the Messenger meant in those statements I
shall divide these statements into two sections though the two sections
were very often put together in one statement. These two sections are
the Hadith Al-Thaqalain and Hadith Al-Wilayah.
