Bibliography
============

**( 675 )**

CLARIFICATION
-------------

The dates which are mentioned in this bibliography are based on the
Islamic Calendar which started by the departure of the Prophet Mohammad
from Mecca to Medina. That departure is called "Hijrah" of the Prophet
which took place in the year 622 A.D.

If the reader wants to convert the dating from Islamic to the Western
Calendar he should take into account the difference of the 622 years
before the Hijrah. Furthermore the lunar year on which the Islamic
Calendar is based is only 354 days. Thus it is 11 days less than a solar
year.

Each one hundred solar years would be 103 lunar years. A thousand solar
years is 1030 lunar years.

THE HOLY QUR'AN
---------------

AMEENI (Sheikh Hussein Ahmad Al-Ameeni) Al-Ghadeer (The reported
Declaration of the Prophet concerning the Imam Ali at Ghadeer Khum)
second printing by Ali-Haidari Printing Tehran 1372 Hijri. Al-Ameeni is
a well-known contemporary historian.

ASKARI (Sayed Murtadha Al-Askari) Abdullah lbn Saba second printing by
Matabi-a Al-Kitab Al-Arabi in Cairo 1381 H. Al-Askari is a contemporary
historian and theologian.

ATHEER (Ali Ibn Mohammad Al-Shaibani known as Ibn Al-Atheer)

Al-Kamil (The Complete) a well-known book of Islamic  

**( 676 )**

history published by Al-Azhari Printings 1301 H. It is also printed by
Dar Al-Kitab Al-Lubnani (The Lebanese House of Books) 1973 A.D. Most of
the quotations here are from the latter. Ibn Al-Atheer died 750 H.

BALATHORI (Al-Balathori) Ansabul-Asharaf (The Genealogy of the Nobles).
A well- known book of Islamic history published in Jerusalem. Al-
Balathori is a well-known historian died in 279 H.

BIRR (Yousuf Ibn Abdul-Birr) Al-Istee-ab Fi Maarifat Al-Ass-hab (The
Comprehensive knowledge about the companions of the Prophet). A known
book of Islamic history published by Al-Fajjala Printing Cairo 1970 A.D.
Ibn Abdul-Birr is a known historian died in the year 463 H.

BUKHARI (Mohammad Ibn Isma-eel Al-Bukhari) Sahih Al-Bukhari (The
Authentic of Al-Bukhari) one of the Six Authentic Books of the recorded
hadith (a hadith is a reported statement or action or silent approval of
the Prophet Mohammad). The book was published by Mohammad Ali Subh in
Al-Azhar Cairo. Al-Bukhari is a famous hadith selector and recorder died
in the year 256 H.

DAWOOD (Suleiman Ibn Al-Ash-ath Ibn Shaddad known as Abu-Dawood) Sunan
Abu Dawood (Recorded hadiths of the Prophet)

one of the Six Authentic Books of the recorded hadiths published by
Mustafa Al-Babi Al-Halabi in Egypt 1952 A.D. Abu-Dawood is a well-known
hadith selector and recorder died in the year 275 H.

FAIRUZABADI (Sayed Murtadha Al-Fairuzabadi) Fadha-il Al-Khamsah Min
Al-Ssihah Al-Sittah (Virtues of the Five recorded in the Six Authentics)
third printing by Al-Alami Institute of Printing Beirut 1973 A.D.
Al-Fairu- zabadi is a contemporary theologian hadith selector and
recorder.

HADEED (Izzul-Deen known as Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed) Sharh Nahiul-Balaghah
(Commentaries on the Path of  

**( 677 )**

Eloquence of the collected words of the Imam Ali a widely read book.
Printed by Dar Al-Kutub Al-Arabiyah Al-Kubrah (The Big House of the
Arabic Books) of Mustafa Al-Babi Cairo. Ibn Abu Al-Hadeed is a well
known theologian and historian died 655 H.

HAIKAL (Dr. Mohammad Hussein Haikal) Hayat Mohammad (The Life of
Mohammad) third printing by Dar Al-Kutub Al-Misriah (The Egyptian House
of Books) Cairo 1358 H. Dr. Haikal is a contemporary historian.

HAKEEM (Sayed Mohammad Taqi Al-Hakeem) Al-Madkhal Ila Derasat Al-Fiqh
Al-Muqaran (Entry for study of the Comparative Jurisprudence) published
by Dar Al-Andulus Beirut 1963 A.D. Al-Hakeem is a contemporary
theologian.

HAKIM (Mohammad Ibn Abdullah Al-Nissaboori known as Al-Hakim)
Al-Mustadrak Ala Al-Ssahihain (What the two Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and
Muslim overlooked of hadiths). The had iths contained in this book are
considered by Muslim scholars to be authentic unless they are rejected
by Al-Thahabi whose comments are printed on the margin of Al-Mustadrak
published by Al-Nasr Printing Riyadh Saudi Arabia 1335 H. Al-Hakim is a
well-known scholar hadith selector and recorder died in 405 H.

HALABI (Ali Ibn Burhanul-Deen Al-Halabi) Al-Seerah Al-Halabeyah
(Biography of the Prophet by Al- Halabi) published by Al-Maktaba
Al-Kubra of Mustafa Mohammad Cairo. Al-Halabi is a known historian died
in 1044 H.

HUNBUL (Ahmad Ibn Hunbul) Musnad Ahmad published by Ssader Printing
Beirut 1969 A.D. Ibn Hunbul is one of the Imams of the Islamic Schools
died in 241 H.

HUSHAM (Abdul-Malik Ibn Husham) Al-Seerah Al-Nabaweyah (Biography of the
Prophet) pub-  

**( 678 )**

lished by Mustafa Al-Babi Al-Halabi Egypt 1955 A.D. Ibn Husham is a
well-known Islamic historian died in 218 H.

HUSSEIN (Dr. Taha Hussein) Al-Fitnat Al-Kubra (The Big Faith-Testing
Crisis) published by Dar Al-Maarif Egypt 1953 A.D. Taha Hussein is a
contemporary scholar and historian.

JALALAIN (Jalalul-Deen Mohammad Al-Halabi and Jalalul-Deen Al-Sayooti)
Tafseerul-Jalalain (Commentaries of the two Jalals on the Holy Qur'an)
KHALID (Mohammad Khalid) Fi Rihab Ali (At the Guesthouse of Ali). Khalid
is a contemporary Egyptian writer and historian.

MAJAH (Mohammad Ibn Majah) Sunnan Ibn Majah (hadith collections by Ibn
Majah) One of the Six Authentic Books of hadith published by Dar Ihya
Al-Kutub Al-Arabeyah (The House of the Resurrection of the Arabic Books)
of Isa Al-Babi Cairo 1952 A.D. Ibn Majah is a well known hadith selector
and recorder died 275 H.

MAQSOOD (Abdul Fattah Abdul-Maqsood) Al-Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (A book
of history of the Imam Ali) published by Al-Irfan Printing Beirut.
Abdul- Maqsood is a contemporary Egyptian writer and historian.

MUGHNEYAH (Sheikh Mohammad Jawad Mughneyah) Hathi Hiya Al-Wahhabeyah
(This is Wahabism). Sheikh Mughneyah is a well-known contemporary
theologian.

MUHSIN (Sayed Muhsin Al-Ameen) Aayan Al-Shiah an extensive book in an
alphabetical order. Sayed Muhsin is a well-known contemporary theologian
and historian.

MUSLIM (Ibn Al-Hajjaj Al Qusheiri)

Sahih Muslim (The Authentic of Muslim). It is one of the Six Authentic
Books of hadith published by Mohammad  

**( 679 )**

Ali Subh Printing Egypt 1349 H. Muslim is highly known hadith selector
and recorder died 365 H.

MUTTAQI (Ali Ibn Hussamul-Deen Al-Hindi Al-Muttaqi) Kanzul-Ummal (The
Treasure of the Workers of God) an extensive collection of hadiths. The
hadiths contained in this book are serialized MUTTAQI (Ali Ibn
Hussamul-Deen Al-Hindi Al-Muttaqi) Muntakhab Kanzul-Ummal (Selected
hadiths from Kanzul- Ummal) printed on the margin of Musnad Ibn Hunbul
by Ssader Printing Beirut. Al-Muttaqi is a well-known hadith collector
and recorder lived in the Eleventh Century H.

NISABOORI (Al-Hassan Ibn Ahmad Al-Nisaboori) Ghara-ibul Quran
(Commentaries on the Holy Qur'an) printed on the margin of Jami-ul-Bayan
by Al-Tabari (another commentaries by Al-Tabari) by Al-Matba-ab Al-
Meimaneyah Egypt 1321 H. Al-Nisaboori is a known commentator on the Holy
Qur'an died during the eighth Hijri Century.

NISA-I (Ahmad Ibn Shu-eib Al-Nisa-i) Sunnan Al-Nisa-i (a collection of
hadiths by Al-Nisa-i) from the Six Authentic Books of hadith printed by
Al- Matba-ah Al-Meimaneyah Egypt 1321 H. Al-Nisa-i is a well-known
hadith selector and collector died 303 H.

RAYYAH (Mahmood Abu Rayyah) Adhwa-a Ala Al-Sunnah Al-Mohammadeyah (Rays
on the reported hadiths of the Prophet Mohammad) third printing by Dar
Al-Maarif (The House of Maarif) Egypt. 1957 A.D. Abu Rayyah is a known
contemporary writer.

RAZZI (Fakhrul Deen Mohammad Al-Razzi) Al-Tafseer Al-Kabeer (The
Extensive Commentaries on the Holy Qur'an) second printing by
Al-Matba-ah Al-Sara- feyah 1304 H. Al-Razi is a highly known theologian
and commentator on the Holy Qur'an died 606 H.

**( 680 )**

SAAD (Mohammad Ibn Saad Al-Zuhri known as Ibn Saad) Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra
(A well-known book of the history of the companions of the Prophet and
their students) printed by Dar Ssader Beirut 1960 A.D. Ibn Saad is a
well-known Islamic historian was born 168 H.

SHALTUTE (Sheikh Mahmood Shaltute) Tafseen Al-Qur'an (Commentaries on
the Holy Qur'an) published by Dar Al-Qalam Printing 1960 A.D. Sheikh
Shaltute is a contemporary outstanding among the Sheikhs of Al-Azhar.

SHARAFUL-DEEN (Sayed Abdul-Hussein Sharaful- Deen) Al-Murajah (The
Dialogues) printed by Al-Irfan Saida Lebanon 1936 A.D. Sayed
Sharaful-Deen is a well-known contemporary theologian and historian.

SHIBLENJI (Mumin Ibn Hussam Al-Shiblenji) Noorul-Absar (The Light of the
Eyes) eighth printing by Atif 1973 A.D. Egypt. Al-Shiblenji is a known
hadith collector born in 1251 H.

TABARI (Mohammad Ibn Jareer Al-Tabari) History of Messengers and Kings.
Al-Tabari is a well-known historian theologian and commentator on the
Holy Qur'an died in 310 H. All quotations in Volume 2 which were taken
from Al-Tabari's History were taken from Volume 4 4th printing and
Volume 5 2nd printing published by Dar Al- Ma-arif of Egypt.

TABARI (Mohammad Ibn Jareer Al-Tabari) Jami-ul-Bayan (A Comprehensive
Clarification) Commentaries on the Holy Qur'an published by Maimaneyah
Printing Egypt 1321 H.

TABARSI (Ahmad Ibn Ali Ibn Abu Talib Al-Tabarsi) Al-Ihtijai (The
Dialogue) published by Al-Naaman Printing Al Najaf Iraq 1966 A.D.
Al-Tabarsi is a known theologian lived during the Sixth Century H.

**( 681 )**

TERMATHI (Mohammad Ibn Isa Al-Termathi) Sunnan Al-Termathi one of the
Six Authentic Books of hadith. The fifth part was published by
Al-Fajjalah printing Cairo 1967 A.D. Al-Termathi is a well-known hadith
selector and recorder died in the year 279 H.

WAQIDI (Mohammad Al-Waqidi) Al-Maghazi (The Invasions) published by
Oxford Printing. Al-Waqadi is a well-known Muslim historian died in 207
H.

ZUHRAH (Sheikh Mohammad Abu Zuhrah) Al-Imam Al-Ssadiq published by Dar
Al-Fikr Al-Arabi (House of Published Arabic Thoughts) Egypt. Sheikh Abu
Zuhrah is a contemporary theologian and historian.
