Part I
======

**( 19 )**

THE IMAM DURING THE ERA OF THE PROPHETHOOD
------------------------------------------

  

**( 21 )**

##### 1.

The House of the Prophet Mohammad
=================================

All Muslims glorify the Members of the House of the Holy Prophet
Mohammad who are called Aal Mohammad or Ahl Beit Mohammad. This attitude
is in accord with the instructions of the Holy Prophet who commanded
Muslims to pray simultaneously for the members of his House whenever
they pray for him. By so commanding them he actually required the
Muslims to reserve a place for them next to his. The Holy Qur'an made it
mandatory to offer prayers for Mohammad and to greet him:

"Certainly God and His Angels honor the Prophet (Mohammad)

O believers pray (God to honor) him and greet him repeatedly." (1)

Many companions asked the Prophet to teach them how to comply with this
command. Many highly respected hadith recorders (including Al-Bukhari
and Muslim) reported in their "Sahihs" (authentics) that Kaab Ibn Ujrah
stated that the Prophet said:

"Say: God bestow honor on Mohammad and the  
 members of the House of Mohammad as Thou bestowed  
 honor on the members of the House of Abraham Thou  
 Art praised and Glorious. God bless Mohammad and  
 the members of the House of Mohammad as Thou had  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**(1)** The Holy Qur'an. Chapters 33 57.

**( 22 )**

blessed the members of the House of Abraham. Certainly Thou Art Praised
and Glorious." (2)

When instructing his followers on a religious matter the Messenger of
God did not speak out of his human desire.

The Qur'an testifies that he only said what was revealed to him.:

"Nor does he (Mohammad) say (aught about religion) of (his own) desire.
It is not but a revelation sent to him." (3)

IS THE HONOR. DUE TO THE RELATIONSHIP?
--------------------------------------

It may appear that inclusion of the members of the House of Mohammad in
prayers for him is due to their blood-relationship. If so it would not
be in accord with the spirit of the Islamic teachings. To bestow on them
such a unique honor because of their relationship to Mohammad is to
advocate a family supremacy and is in conflict with the following
principles:

1. All people in the eyes of God are equal for the Holy Qur'an declared:

"Surely the noblest among you in the sight of God is the most righteous
of you." (4)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**(2)**Of these hadith-recorders are the following: A. Al-Bukhari,
"Sahih Al-Bukhari" (Authentic of Al-Bukhari) Part 6 p. 101 (in the Book
of the interpretation of the Holy Qur'an) B. Muslim Sahih Muslim Part 4
(in the Prayer on the Prophet after the declaration of the Faith p. 136.
C. Mohammad Ibn Majah Sunan Ibn Majah, Vol. 1, hadith No.904. D.
Al-Termathi, hadith No. 483, Part No. 1. Other hadiths are reported by
Abu-Sa-eed Abu Mas-ood Talhah and Ibn Mas-ood. All Acoord with the
above-mentioned hadith of Kaab Ibn Ujrah. **(3)**Chapter 53, verse 4-5.
**(4)**The Holy Qur'an, Chapter 49 verse 13.

**( 23 )**

2. God does not penalize or reward a servant of His for the sins or good
deeds of his parents or his close or distant relatives. From the Holy
Qur'an:

"And beware a day on which no parent avails his child; nor will a child
avail his parent."(5)

3. God does not penalize nor reward a human being for what is beyond his
ability and without his choice.

Being related or unrelated to the Prophet is not a matter of personal
choice. None of us chose before our birth to be related or unrelated to
a particular family nationality or race.

Therefore it would be very difficult for Muslims to believe that they
should include Mohammad's relatives in their prayers simply because they
are his relatives.

### It Is Due to Their Merits Not Their Inheritance

To dispel this apparent conflict it is important to know that the word
"Aal Mohammad " which is repeatedly mentioned in the daily prayers does
not include all his relatives.

Only a very small number of them are included. Had they all been
included it would be a clannish or a tribal discrimination because many
of them did not walk in the path of Mohammad and to place them above
others is to advocate a clannish supremacy.

Kinship to the Prophet Mohammad does not mean acceptance by God; nor
does it secure for his relatives a place in Paradise or insure them
against Divine punishment. God according to Islamic teachings has
created Paradise for whoever obeys Him and the place of punishment for
whoever disobeys Him regardless of family affiliation nationality or
race. The Holy Qur'an even contains a chapter defaming Abu Lahab who was
an uncle of the Prophet Mohammad.

"Perish the two hands of the Father of Flame and per-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**(5)**The Qur'an Chapter 31 verse 33.

**( 24 )**

ished he. His wealth and whatever he gained did not avail him.... "(6)

The truth is that the word Aal Mohammad means only the "chosen"
relatives of Mohammad. These chosen individuals are not chosen nor
honored because of their relationship to Mohammad but because of their
virtues. They lived the true Islamic life followed the instructions of
the Holy Qur'an and the Messenger and never parted with them in word or
deed. When God informs us in His Book that the noblest among His human
creatures are the most righteous and His Messenger commands us to honor
the members of his house when we honor him we infer that they are the
most righteous after the Prophet.

Had they not been so they would not deserve such a unique honor and the
Prophet would not have instructed us to honor them whenever we honor his
name. To do otherwise would not be in accord with the Holy Qur'an. Thus
by commanding us to pray for them whenever we pray for him the Prophet
was actually informing us of their high merit being the most obedient to
God and His Messenger.

THE RECORD. ATTESTS TO THEIR MERIT
----------------------------------

All Muslims agree that Ali the Prophet's cousin whom the Prophet
"brothered" and his wife Fatimah (the Lady of Light) the dearest child
of the Messenger and their two children Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein are
from the chosen members of the House of Mohammad and that they are
included in our prayers for him. The high qualifications of the chosen
relatives of Mohammad is the main reason for the very unique honor
bestowed upon them.

Imam Ali stood above all others after the Prophet. He was the strongest
supporter of the Messenger of God. He never hesitated to give his life
for the promotion of Islam.

The readers of history can easily know that Imam Ali was the top
defender of Islam and the most adherent to its rules.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**(6)**The Holy Qur'an Chapter 111.

**( 25 )**

Imam Ali's attitude towards personal power and prestige was unique.
Whenever he had to choose between adherence to his ideals and the
pleasures of the earthly life he unhesitatingly chose the former.
History testifies that he preferred to lose the leadership of the Muslim
World rather than to accept a condition in which he did not believe. He
was offered this leadership contingent on his pledge to follow the Book
of God the instructions of the Messenger and the traditions of the first
two Caliphs in the absence of the Quranic and the Messenger's
instructions. He replied:

"(I shall follow the Book of God and the instructions of His Messenger;
and in the absence of specific teachings of the two sources) I shall
endeavor to the best of my knowledge and ability." (7)

His knowledge was amazing in its depth and extensiveness.

His sermons lectures and the words contained in Nahjul-Balaghah (Path of
Eloquence) testify to the authenticity of the reported statement of the
Messenger:

"I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its gate; so whoever wants to
enter the city should come through the gate." (8)

The record of the other three distinguished members of the House of
Mohammad Fatimah and her two children Al- Hassan and Al-Hussein shows
that they were the most sincere servants of Islam.

The authentic hadiths spoke of their distinctions and qualifications as
permanent allies of justice and truth. Zeid Ibn Arqam reported that the
Messenger of God said to Ali Fatimah Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein:

"I am at peace with whomever you are at peace; and I am at war with
whomever you are at war." (9)

Abu Huraira reported that the Messenger of God said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**(7)**Ibn-Atheer Al-Kamil (the complete history Part 3 p. 35.
**(8)**Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 3 p.26. **(9)**Ibn Majah Sunan Ibn
Majah hadith No.145.

**( 26 )**

"Whoever loves Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein loves me; and whoever hates them
hates me." (10)

Hubshi Ibn Janadah said that he heard the Messenger saying:

"Ali is from me and I am from Ali and no one represents me but Ali."(11)

The Messenger did not intend to distinguish Ali simply because he was
related to him. Al-Abbas (his uncle) and the rest of the Hashimites
including Jaafar (the brother of Ali) are all related to the Messenger.
All of them would have been qualifed to represent him. But he said "No
one represents me but Ali.".

At one time Muaweyah was criticizing Ali in the presence of Saad Ibn Abu
Waqass. Saad said to him: "I heard the Messenger of God saying to Ali:
'You are to me like Aaron to Moses. But there shall be no Prophet (of
God) after me.' " (12)

Thus the Messenger gave Ali a position next to his own for the position
of Aaron was next to that of Moses.

Al-Bukhari recorded in his Sahih that the Messenger said: "Fatimah is
the leader of the women of Paradise."(13)

No one enters Paradise but through righteousness and whoever enters
Paradise is noble in the sight of God. If Fatimah is the leader of the
women of Paradise she must be the most righteous and the noblest woman
in God's view.

Al-Hakim recorded in his Mustadrak that Abu Tharr (a famous companion of
Mohammad whose truthfulness is known to the Muslims) said that the
Messenger said: "The example of the members of my House is like that of
Noah's ark. Whoever embarked on it was safe and whoever failed to embark
was drowned.... "(14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**(10)**Ibid. hadith No.143. **(11)**Ibid. hadith No.119. **(12)**Ibn
Majah hadith No.121. **(13)**Al-Bukhari Sahih Al-Bukhari Part 5 (Chapter
of distinction of relatives of the Messenger) p. 25. **(14)**Al-Hakim
Sahih Al-Musradrak Part 3 p.151.

**( 27 )**

The Messenger of God commanded the Muslims to follow his chosen
relatives. Therefore the relatives of Mohammad are considered to be the
party of truth distinguished because of their merit and work as they
rank among the most righteous servants of God.

WHY WERE THEY SO MERITORIOUS?
-----------------------------

Why did the members of the House of Mohammad surpass other Arabs or
non-Arabs in righteousness?

Precedents in History
---------------------

To understand the reason we ought to remember that what took place in
the House of Mohammad was not unprecedented in the history of
Prophethood. There are many similar precedents. The Almighty God made
Aaron a partner to his brother Moses in his heavenly mission. He did not
bestow this honor on any other person from the Israelites. This was due
to the high qualification of Aaron and in response to the prayer of
Moses as mentioned in the Holy Qur'an:

"He (Moses) said: My Lord Open my mind and loosen a knot from my tongue;
that they may understand my word. Appoint for me a minister from my folk
Aaron my brother. Confirm my strength by him and let him share my
task..." (15)

The Prophet Abraham prayed to the Lord to make some of his offsprings
imams of the people. God responded to his prayer and promised to make
imams from his good offsprings without allowing any of their wrong doers
reach that high rank. From the Holy Qur'an:

"And We gave (Abraham) Isaac and Jacob and We made recipients of
Prophethood and revelation from among his progeny and We granted him his
reward  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**(15)**The Holy Qur'an Chapter 20 verses 25-32.

**( 28 )**

in this life and he was in the Hereafter of the company of the
righteous."(16)

God also has chosen along with the relatives of Abraham the relatives of
Imran and preferred them above others.

"God chose Adam and Noah the family of Abraham and the family of Imran
above all people. Offsprings related to each other and God hears and
knows all things." (17)

Zakaria prayed to the Almighty to grant him a righteous child. God
answered his prayer and the angels gave him good tidings:

"There did Zakaria pray to his Lord saying: O my Lord grant unto me from
Thee a progeny that is pure; for Thou Art He that hears prayer."

"While he was standing in prayer in chamber the angels called unto him:
God doth give thee glad tidings of Yahya (John) witnessing the truth of
a word from God and (besides) noble chaste and a Prophet of the (goodly)
company of the righteous."(18)

According to these verses the Prophethood which preceded that of
Mohammad took the same course. From among the offspring and kinsmen of
these Messengers there were chosen persons who reached the highest
degree of piety and therefore deserved to be commissioned by God.

### Why Did God Give Those Prophets. Such Distinguished Children and Relatives?

The Almighty God created persons among the kinsmen and offspring of
these Messengers in response to their prayers or as a reward to them for
their endeavors in spreading the Message of God.

Like other prophets Mohammad was given unusual rel-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**(16)**The Holy Qur'an Chapter 29 verse 27. **(17)**The Qur'an Chapter
3 verses 33 and 34. **(18)**The Qur'an Chapter 3 verses 38 and 39.

**( 29 )**

atives and offspring as a reward for his endeavor in the service of God
and in response to his prayers.

He commanded us to say: "God honor Mohammad and the members of his House
" and he prayed for the purity of these members on various occasions.

Al-Hakim reported that the Prophet covered Ali Fatimah Al-Hassan and
Al-Hussein with a garment and prayed saying:

"God these are my family. I ask Thee to honor Mohommad and the family of
Mohammad." In response to his prayer the following revelation came: "God
wants only to keep abomination away from you and make you members of the
family of Mohammad spotless." (19)

Thus it was not unusual to have in the kinsmen and offspring of Mohammad
distinguished men and women of the highest degree of righteousness. On
the contrary if such persons did not exist among the relatives of the
Prophet it would have been very unusual. God honored Abraham Moses
Zakaria and other Prophets by creating in their progeny and relatives
distinguished persons preferring them above other people. Why should He
not honor His final and most important Prophet by creating in his
offspring and relatives some people with highest distinction?

### The Prophet's Reward

The Holy Qur'an makes it explicity clear that the love of relatives of
Mohammad is an Islamic duty. God commanded Mohammad to ask the Muslims
to reward him for his fulfillment of the heavenly mission by loving his
close kins.

"That is (the bounty) whereof God gives glad tidings to His servants who
believe and do righteous deeds. Say: No reward do I ask of you for this
except the love  
 of (my) near kins. And if any one earns good deeds We  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**(19)**Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 3 p. 148.

**( 30 )**

shall give him an increase of good in respect thereof God is
Oft-Forgiving. Most ready to appreciate (service). " (20)

God is telling Mohammad to inform all Muslims that the only reward he
wants for fulfilling his Heavenly mission is that the Muslims love his
relatives.

This is only because those members are the most obedient to God and his
most beloved servants among the Muslims.

By commanding His Messenger to do so He actually commanded the Muslims
to glorify the chosen relatives of Mohammad place their confidence in
them and walk in their path.

In compliance with this heavenly command the Holy Prophet asked all his
followers to love them. He stated that he is at peace with whomever they
are at peace and that he is at war with whomever they are at war. He
considered them to be similar to the ark of Noah. Whoever embarked on it
was safe and whoever failed to be on it was drowned.

The House of Mohammad can be a means of unity to the Muslims. This unity
can be realized when Muslims take the attitude which God and His
Messenger wanted them to take toward these people. It would be erroneous
for the Muslims to separate Mohammad from the Members of his House while
he himself wanted to be united with them. This is clearly evident by his
instruction that his followers couple his name with his chosen relatives
whenever they pray for him whether within or outside their daily
prayers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**(20)** The Holy Qur'an Chapter 42 verse 23.
