Translator's Notes
==================

About the Author of the Letter
------------------------------

In the World such persons are rarely found in whom besides one or two
virtuous qualities other qualities might also attain prominence, much
less the convergence of all contradictory qualities, because every
temperament is not suited for the development of every quality, each
quality has a peculiar tempo and each virtue needs a particular climate,
and they are appropriate only for such qualities or virtues with which
they accord, but where there is contradiction instead of harmony the
natural tendencies act as obstacles and do not allow any other quality
to grow.

For example, generosity and bountifulness demand that a person should
possess the feeling of pity and God-fearing so that on seeing anyone in
poverty or want his heart would rend, and his feelings would be
disturbed at others' tribulations while the dictates of bravery and
fighting require that instead of pity and compassion there should be the
passion of blood-shed and killing, prompting the person at every moment
to enter into scuffle, ready to kill or be killed.

These two qualities differ so widely that it is not possible to fuse the
delicacies of generosity into the stiff manifestations of bravery just
as bravery cannot be expected from Hatim nor generosity from Rustam But
the personality of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (p.b.u.b.) showed full accord with
every greatness and complete harmony with every accomplishment, and
there was no good attribute or accomplishment which he lacked, nor any
robe of greatness or beauty which did not fit his body.

Thus the contradictory qualities of generosity and bravery were found in
him side by side. If he rained like the cloud in generosity, he also
fought bravely standing firm as a mountain.

Thus his generosity and liberty of nature was of a degree that even
during, days of want and starvation whatever he earned as the wage of
his day's toil its major part was distributed among the poor and the
starving, and he would never allow a beggar to return disappointed from
his door, so much so that even when in the battle field the enemy asked
him his sword he threw it before him being confident of the prowess of
his naked arm.

An Urdu couplet says:

*The unbeliever depends on his sword but the believer fights even
without it.*

And his bravery and courage was such that the onslaught of armies could
not shake the firmness of his foot with the result that he achieved
success in every encounter and even the bravest fighter could not save
his life in an encounter with him. Thus Ibn Qutaybah writes in
al-Ma’arif, “Whomever he encountered was prostrated."

The heartless nature of the brave is not wont to thinking or pondering
nor do they have anything to do with foresight or fore-judging but 'Ali
(p.b.u.b.) bad the quality of thinking of the highest degree. Thus,
ash-Shafi'i said as follows:

What can I say about a man in whom three qualities existed with three
other qualities that were never found together in any other man--
Generosity with want, Bravery with sagacity and Knowledge with practical
achievements.

It was the result of this proper thinking and correct judgment that when
after the death of the Prophet some people advised him to fight and
promised to enlist warriors for him he rejected this advice, although on
such occasions even a slight support is enough to encourage the
heartless brave, yet 'Ali (a.s.) far-sighted mind at once foresaw that
if battle was raged at that moment the voice of Islam would be submerged
under the clutter of swords.

And then even if success was achieved it would be said that the position
was gained by dint of sword and that there was no right for it. Thus, by
withholding his sword on the one hand he provided protection to Islam
and on the other saved his own fight from the imputation of bloodshed.

When the veins are full of daring blood and the bosom full of flames of
anger and wrath it is extremely difficult to curb the passion of
vengeance by adopting the course of forgiving and, despite authority and
power, to pardon and overlook. But 'Ali's (a.s.) metal used to shine on
such occasions when his forgiving nature would accommodate even his
bloodthirsty foes.

Thus, at the end of the Battle of Jamal he made a general proclamation
that no one who flees away from the field or seeks our protection would
be molested and he let go without any punishment even such enemies as
Marwan ibn Hakam and 'Abdullah ibn Zubayr. And the treatment that he
meted out to 'A'ishah matchless manifestation of his nobility and high
character --is that in spite of her open enmity and rebellion he sent
with her women in men's garb to escort her to Medina.

By giving his own personal malice the garb of fundamental differences
man not only deceives others hut also tries to keep himself under
deception, and in these conditions such a delicate situation arises that
a man fails to distinguish and separate his personal malice from a
fundamental difference but easily mixing them together considers that he
has followed the Command of Allah, and in this way he satisfies his
passion for vengeance as well. But Amir al-mu'minin's discerning eyes
never got deceived nor did they willingly deceive themselves.

Thus, on an occasion when after prostrating the opponent he placed
himself on his bosom the vanquished opponent spat on his face. As man
his rage should have risen and his hand should have moved quicker but
instead of being enraged he got off from the man's bosom lest his action
would be tarnished by personal feeling, and slayed him only after the
anger had subsided.

There is nothing in common between combat and encounter and reclusion
and God-fearing because one shows valor and courage while the other
supplication and submission. But Amir aI-mu'minin was a unique
combination of both these qualities as his hands that were bound in
devotion were equally active in the battle-field, and side by side with
relaxing in seclusion for devotion he was a common visitor of the field
of action.

The scene of the Night of Harir puts human wit in astonishment and
wonder when closing his eyes to the bloody action around the spread his
prayer cloth and engaged himself in prayer with full peace of mind and
heart while arrows were darting off sometimes over his head and
sometimes from his right or left. But he remained engaged in Allah's
remembrance without any fear or apprehension.

After finishing he again cast his hand on the sword's handle and the
fierce battle that then followed is unparalleled in history. The
position was that on all sides there was such hue and cry and fleeing
activity that even voices falling en the ears could not be discerned. Of
course, after every moment or so his own call of *Allahu Akbar* rose in
tho atmosphere and resounded in the ears, and every such call meant
death of a foe.

Those who counted these calls of *takbir* recorded their number as five
hundred and twenty three.

The taste for learning and God-knowing does not combine with material
activity but Arnir a.1-mu'minin adorned the meetings of learning and
scholarship along with war-like pursuits, and he watered the field of
Islam with springs of learning and truth along with shedding streams of
blood (in battles).

Where there is perfection of learning, then, even if there is no
complete absence of action, there must no doubt exist shortness of
action, but Amir al-mu'minin treated the field of knowledge and action
equally, as has been already shown in ash-Shafi'i's verse.

Examples of harmony in utterance and action are quite rare but Amir
al-mu'minin's action preceded his utterance, as he himself says:

O’ people I do not exhort you to any action but that I myself first
proceeded towards it before you and do not desist you from any matter
but that I first desist from it myself.

As soon as we think of a recluse and a pious man we visualize a face
full of frowns because for piety severity of temper and hardness of face
are inseparable so much so that the thought of a smile on the lips of a
pious man is regarded as a sin. But despite extreme piety and self
denial Amir al-mu'minin always had such appearance that his light temper
and brightness of face was apparent from his looks and his lips always
bore a playful smile.

He never showed frowns on his fore-head like the dry recluse, so much so
that when people could not find any defect in him this very lightness of
temper was taken to be his fault, while hard temper and bitter face was
held to be a virtue.

If a man possesses a cheerful heart and joyous temper he cannot command
authority over others; but Arnir al-mu'minin's cheerful face was so full
of awe and dignity that no eye could face it. Once Mu'awiyah tauntingly
said "May Allah bless 'Ali. He was a man of cheerful taste:' then Qays
ibn Sa'd retorted.

"By Allah despite cheerful disposition and entertaining countenance he
was more awe-inspiring than a hungry lion and this awe was due to his
piety not like your awe over the non-descripts of Syria.”

Where there is rule and authority there is also a crowd of servants and
workers, checks of grandeur and eminence with equipment of pageantry but
Arnir al-rnu'minin's period of rule was an example of the highest
simplicity. In him people saw only a tattered turban in place of a Royal
Crown, patched apparel in place of the regal robes and the floor of
earth in place of the ruler's throne.

He never liked grandeur and pageantry nor allowed show of external
grandiosity. Once he was passing on a horse back when Harb ibn Shurahbil
started walking with him and began talking. Then Arnie al-mu'minin said
to him, "Get back because walking on foot with me by one like you is
mischievous for the ruler (me) and an insult to the believer (you).”

In short he was such a versatile personality in whom numerous
contradictory qualities had joined together and all the good attributes
were centered in their full brightness as though his oneself was a
collection of several selves and each self was an astounding portrait of
achievement which showed forth the delineation of distinction in its
untainted form, and on whose accomplishment one wonders with
bewilderment.

About the Addressee, Malik Al-Ashtar
------------------------------------

Amir al-mu'minin wrote this instrument for Malik ibn al-Harith
al-Ashtar, when he was appointed the Governor of Egypt in 38 AH. Malik
al-Ashtar was one of the chief companions of Amir al-mu'minin. He had
shown great endurance and steadfastness and perfect confidence and trust
in Amir al-mu'minin.

He had attained the utmost nearness and attachment to him by molding his
conduct and character after the conduct and character of Amir
al-mu’minin. This can be gauged by Arnir al-mu'minins words: “Malik was
to me as I was to the Messenger of Allah." (Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol. 15, p.
98; al-A'lam, vol. 6, p. 131).

Malik al-Ashtar too, actuated by selfless feelings of service, took a
very active part in military encounters and proved himself to be Amir
al-mu'minin's arm in all battles and encounters. He showed such feats of
courage and daring that his bravery was acknowledged throughout Arabia.
Along with this bravery be was also conspicuous in endurance and
forbearing.

In this connection, Warram ibn Abi Firas an-Nakha'i has written that
once Malik was passing through the market of Kufah with the dress and
turban made of gunny-cloth when a shopkeeper finding him in this
condition and clothing, he threw some rotten leaves upon him, but he did
not at all mind this dirty behavior, nor did he even look at him.
Rather, he quietly stepped forward.

Then someone said to this shopkeeper, "Do you know to whom you have been
so insolent?" He replied that he did not know who he was, whereupon he
said that it was Malik al-Ashtar, the companion of Amir al-mu'minin.
Hearing this, he lost his senses and at once ran behind him to seek
pardon for this insolence and humiliating treatment. While in his search
be reached a mosque where Malik was offering prayers.

When he finished the prayers this man went forward and fell on his feet
and begged pardon with great pertinacity and weeping. Malik raised the
man's beard up and said, "By Allah, I have come to the mosque to pray to
Allah to forgive you. I myself had pardoned you that very moment, and I
hope Allah too will pardon you." (*Tanbihu l’khawatir wa nuzhatu
'n-nawazir, vol. 1, p.2; al-Bihar, vol. 42, p. 157*).

This is the forgiveness and tolerance of a warrior at whose name courage
trembled, and whose swordsmanship was acknowledged by the brave men of
Arabia. And this is the real sign of bravery that a man should exercise
self control during bitterness of anger and rage and endure hardships
with patience and calmness. In this connection, Amir al-mu'minin' saying
is that, "The bravest of men is he who over-powers his passions."

However, besides these characteristics and qualities, he had a perfect
aptitude for organization and administration. Thus, when the 'Uthmani
(aI-'Uthmaniyyah) party began to spread the germs of destruction in
Egypt and tried to upset the law and order of the country by mischief
and revolt then Amir al-mu'minin removed Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr from the
governorship and decided to appoint Malik al-Ashtar in his place,
although at that time he was posted as the Governor of Nasibin.

However, Amir al-mu'minin sent him word that he should name someone as
his deputy and come to Ami al-mu'minin. On receipt of this order Malik
al-Ashtar appointed Shabib ibn 'Amir al-Azid in his place and himself
came to Amir al-mu'minin. Amir al-mu'minin gave him a warrant of
appointment and sent him off to Egypt, and also sent a written order to
Egyptians to obey him.

When Mu'awiyah got the news of Malik al-Ashtar's appointment through his
spies he was perplexed because he had promised 'Amir ibn al-'As that he
would give him the governorship of Egypt in reward of his services and
he had hoped that 'Amir ibn al-'As would easily defeat Muharnmad ibn Abi
Bakr and wrest the power from him, but could not imagine conquering
Egypt by defeating Malik al-Ashtar, He therefore decided to do away with
him before he took over the charge.

For this he arranged with a landlord of the city of al-'Arish (or
al-Qulzum) that when Malik passed through al-' Arish on his way to Egypt
he should kill him by some device or other and in reward for this the
revenue of his estate would be written off. So, when Malik al-Ashtar
reached al-'Arish with retinue and force the chief of al-'Arish gave him
a good ovation and insisted on having Malik as his guest.

Malik agreed and stayed at his place. When he finished the meal the host
gave him some syrup of honey to drink in which he had mixed poison. Soon
after drinking it the poison began to show its effect and before the
eyes of everyone this great warrior known for his swordsmanship and for
putting the rows of the enemy to flight calmly went into the embrace of
death.

When Mu'awiyah got news of his success of this device he was overjoyed
and shouted in merriment, "Oh, honey is also an army of Allah”, and then
said during a speech:

“Ali ibn Ahi Talib had two right hand men. One was chopped off on the
day of Siffin and he was 'Ammar ibn Yasir, and the second has been
severed now and he is Malik al-Ashtar.”

But when the news of Malik's assassination reached Amir al-mu'minin, he
was highly grieved and sorrowful, and then he said:

“Malik! Who is Malik? If Malik was a stone, he was hard and solid; if he
was a rock, he was a great rock which had no parallel. It seems his
death has made me also lifeless. I swear by Allah that his death made
the Syrians joyous and insulted the Iraqis.

Then he continued:

“Women have become barren to give birth to such as Malik.” (at-Tabari,
vol. 1, pp. 3392-3395; Ibn al-Athir, vol.3, pp. 352-353; al-Ya'qubi,
vol. 2, p. 194; al-Isti'ab, vol. 3, p. 1366; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol. 6,
pp. 74-77; Ibn Kathir, vol. 7, pp. 313-314; Abu 'I-Fida', vol. I, p.
179).


