Endnotes
========

**( 81 )**

A. ENGLISH
----------

1. slaves

2. by freeing you from slavery

3. by the fact that you free him

4. The pleasures of this world and the life to come

5. In the other version we read: and refrain from any meddling in which
there is nothing to be gained, express kindness to the people, and speak
well concerning them. And then the rest follows.

6. The tongue

7. His tongue and good speech are like an ornament for his intellect

8. In the other version it is followed by: The right of your hearing is
to keep it pure from listening to backbiting and listening to that to
which it is unlawful to listen

9. In the other version it is followed by: You have no escape from
standing upon the narrow bridge (al-sirat [over Hell]), so you should
see to it that your legs do not slip and cause you to fall into the
Fire.

10. The hands

11. If the hands are not opened to engage in what is forbidden.

12. by over-eating and over-drinking

13. In the other version it is followed by: The right of your private
part is that you protect it from fornication and guard it against being
looked upon.

14. And fix your eyes looking down to the ground. In the other version
it is followed by: You will approach the prayer with humbleness, deep
from your heart and you will perform it according to its bounds and its
rights. Then it continues.

**( 82 )**

15. Being humble

16. of Hell

17. from the Fire of Hell

18. If you abandon the fast, you will have torn God's protective
covering away from yourself.

19. This right has not been mentioned in the version transmitted in
Tuhaf al-Uqoul

20. In the other version it is followed by: You should know that it
repels calamities and illnesses in this world and it will repel the Fire
from you in the Hereafter.

21. That your donations in charity will be returned to you

22. The animal sacrificed during the holy pilgrimage

23. In the other version it continues: you desire God and you do not
desire His creation; through it you desire only the exposure of your
soul to God's mercy and the deliverance of your spirit on the day you
encounter Him.

24. In the other version it is followed by: Through it you desire only
the exposure of your soul to the Exalted, and the High- God's Mercy, and
the deliverance of your spirit on the Day you encounter Him.

25. In the other version it is followed by: You should not raise your
voice toward him. You should never answer anyone who asks him about
something, in order that he may be the one who answers. You should not
speak to anyone in his session nor speak ill of anyone with him. If
anyone ever speaks ill of him in your presence, you should defend him.
You should conceal his faults and make manifest his virtues. You should
not sit with him in enmity or show hostility toward him in friendship.
If you do all of this, God's angels will give witness for you that you
went straight to him and learned his knowledge for God's sake, not for
the sake of the people.

26. In the other version it is followed by: property is that you should
obey him and not disobey him, unless obeying him would displease God,
for there

**( 83 )**

can be no obedience to a creature when it is disobedience to God.

27. you are his slave

28. In the other version it continues: they have been made subjects
through their weakness and your strength. Hence it is incumbent upon you
to act with justice toward them and to be like a compassionate father
toward them. You should forgive them their ignorance and not hurry them
to punishment and you should thank God for the power over them which He
has given to you.

29. that they do not have

30. In the other version it continues: in teaching the people, not
treating them roughly or annoying them, then God will increase His
bounty toward you. But if you withhold your knowledge from people or
treat them roughly when they seek knowledge from you, then it will be
God's right to deprive you of the knowledge and its splendor and to make
you fall from your place in people's heart.

31. your wife

32. In the other version it is followed by: you must treat her with
compassion, since she is your prisoner whom you feed and clothe. If she
is ignorant, you should pardon her.

33. as you are

34. God created him

35. in your shelter

36. if you fail

37. in the other version it continues with: And there is no power but in
God.

38. by freeing you from slavery

39. by freeing him

40. In the other version it is followed by: God has made your freeing
him a means of access to Him and a veil against the Fire. Your immediate
reward is to inherit from him- if he does not have any relatives-as a
compensation for the property you have spent for him, and your ultimate
reward is the Garden.

41. of Hell

**( 84 )**

42. In the other version it continues: reminding you of your Lord,
calling you to your good fortune, and helping you to accomplish what God
has made obligatory upon you. So thank him for that just as you thank
one who does good to you.

43. In the other version it is followed by: You should forget his slips
and remember his good qualities, and you should tell nothing about him
but good.

44. in guarding these secrets

45. In the other version it continues: a debt is that, if you have the
means, you pay him back, and if you are in straitened circumstances, you
satisfy him with good words and you send him away with gentleness.

46. for more time

47. In the other version it continues: you give witness to it against
yourself. You do not wrong him and you give him his full due. If what he
claims against you is false, you act with kindness toward him and you
show nothing in his affair other than kindness; you do not displease
your Lord in his affair. And there is no strength save in God.

48. In the other version it continues: you maintain polite moderation in
speaking to him and you do not deny him his right. If your claim is
false, you fear God, repent to Him, and abandon your claim.

49. his advice

50. Islam

51. In the other version it continues: is that you give to him in the
measure of his need.

52. his dishonesty

53. In the other version it continues: is that you accept from him with
gratitude and recognition of his bounty if he gives, and you accept his
excuse if he withholds.

54. In the other version it continues: you first praise God, then you
thank that person.

55. In the other version it continues: is that you pardon him. But if
you know that your pardon will harm him, you should defend yourself. God
says:

**( 85 )**

Whosoever defends himself after he has been wronged- against them there
is no way. [The Holy Quran, Shura 42:41]

56. The Holy Quran, Shura 42:41-43 A. Yusuf Ali's translation

57. The Holy Quran, Nahl 16:126 A. Yusuf Ali's translation

58. In the other version it continues: And keeping harm away from them.
You should love for them what you love for yourself and dislike for them
what you dislike for yourself. Their old men stand in the place of your
father, their youth in the place of your brothers, their old women in
the place of your mother, and their young ones in the place of your
children.

59. protecting them

60. The Prophet Muhammad (may God bless him and his household)
