Translators' Forward
====================

**( 13 )**

We thank God the Almighty for the opportunity granted to us to undertake
the preparation of THE COMPLETE EDITION OF THE TREATISE ON RIGHTS by the
fourth religious leader in the line of the Prophet of God, Ali ibn
al-Hussein known as Imam Sajjad (a) for his extended prostrations to
God. THE TREATISE ON RIGHTS has already been translated by William C.
Chittick and published. Mr. Chittick has provided a good translation.
However, he has not translated the complete version of the Treatise. As
he has stated in his introduction, there exist two transmitted versions.
One is in Al-Khisal and Al-Amali, both compiled by Shaykh As-Saduq, and
the other one is in Tuhaf al-Uqoul compiled by Ibn Shu'ba. Both versions
are provided in Bihar al-Anwar. Mr. Chittick has provided a translation
of the earlier edition that is shorter. In this COMPLETE EDITION OF THE
TREATISE ON RIGHTS, we have attempted to provide the translation of the
second version. However, we have also included what is stated in the
other version in appropriate places in the endnotes- mostly according to
Mr. Chittick's translation with some minor corrections. Thereby we hope
that the reader can get a good view of both editions. We have presented
this book in a bilingual form with the English side by side with the
Arabic.

**( 14 )**

This we hope will enable those who are able to read the original Arabic
text to compare the two. We did our best to try to understand the words
of the Immaculate Imam (a), and translate them into English in a form we
feel most closely represents the original meaning. We have vastly
benefited from existing translations from Arabic into both Farsi and
English. However, since there were many errors in the existing
translations, we tried to do our best to reflect the results of a direct
translation from Arabic into English. We kept in line with Mr.
Chittick's translation as much as possible to maintain uniformity with
previous works. We must also acknowledge that his translation is the
best existing translation of the first version as far as we know. So may
God reward him for his sincere efforts and the many others who tried to
translate this outstanding document on rights to enable all the people
of the world to benefit from it. We also hope God to forgive our
mistakes and shortcomings in such an important effort. We are partly
indebted to our daughter Maryam Peiravi for her assistance in the
translation from Arabic, and her sister Talat June Peiravi for her
poetic contribution to this book.
