About The Author 14 16
======================

**( 14 )**

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
----------------

This book is authored by the fourth Imam who is Ali ibn al-Hussein (a).
He is the son of Imam Hussein (a) and Shah Banu. According to some
narrations, he was born on Sha'ban 5, 38 AH and became martyred on
Muharram 12, 95 AH by Walid Ibn-e Abdol Malik. When he was born, his
grandfather Imam Ali (a) was controlling the affairs. He experienced
three years of

**( 15 )**

Alavi caliphate and a short period of Imam Hasan's government, which
lasted for only several months. He witnessed the saga of Karbala that
took place in 61 AH and survived the day of Ashura, which took place in
61 AH. In accordance with the Divine decree, Imam Hussein (a) appointed
him the people's next leader when Imam Hussein (a) was martyred at
Karbala. Imam Sajjad (a) who was also present there was ill and unable
to join the fight against the forces of Yazid. Thus he was not martyred.
During his journey from Karbala, he delivered speeches in the towns of
Kufa and Damascus, and he informed the people of his father's holy
intentions. In this way he disgraced Yazid. Imam Sajjad (a) liked
orphans, the poor, and the handicapped to come to his house and be his
guests. He used to give food and clothing to many families who were poor
and needy. Imam Sajjad (a) was so earnest in worshipping God that he was
called "Zayn al-'Abidin", which means "the adornment of the
worshippers", while his title "al-Sajjad" means "one who prostrates long
and often". He lived for fifty-seven years, and devoted most of his
efforts to revive the spiritual aspects of the society. Hence, Imam
Sajjad's life and statements were entirely devoted to asceticism and
religious teachings. His religious teachings are in the form of
invocations and supplications. Having witnessed the unpleasant social
situation of that era during which religious values were deviated and
changed, Imam Sajjad (a) attempted to establish a divine relationship
between the people and God. Consequently, he was able to touch the

hearts of the people and the people were deeply

influenced by his words and his life style. His

**( 16 )**

famous supplications are well known as Sahifeye Sajjadieh. About three
decades of the Imam's life were devoted to the revival of spiritualism
in the society. This book is one of his most outstanding teachings. It
is a master document on Islamic human rights, which not only cover human
rights, but they also include the rights of God, our parts, and our
deeds. To any intelligent reader who ponders deeply about the contents
of this valuable document on rights, it immediately becomes clear that
Islam has already established the first document on rights nearly
fourteen centuries ago. But unfortunately in our modern world there are
those who claim to respect human rights but they do so only
superficially.
