Preface
=======

This book, whose original title is *Jadhibah wa dafi\`ah-e Ali
\`alayhi's-salam* (lit. "The Attraction and Repulsion of 'Ali [as]", or
"The Power of Attraction and the Power of Repulsion of \`Ali [as]") is
one of the important works of the late, great scholar ash-Shaykh
Murtadha Mutahhari, the Iranian writer, May Allah have mercy upon him.
The writer has himself given his explanation of this title in his
introduction and in various places in the book, so there is no need for
us to explain it any further.

We should not, however, overlook the fact that some one's power of
attraction for those who love and help him, and even those who give
themselves for him, and, on the other hand; his power of repulsion which
create for that person opponents, enemies and even people who wish to
kill him (we use the terms attraction and repulsion just as the author
has), are for the primary factors in that person, but are two terms
which summarize the multiple factors and effects which manifest
themselves in him.

One set of these factors is the "essential" or "inward" ones which are
found in that person and which are responsible for bringing people to
love and help him, or to oppose and hate him. At the same time, there
are essential factors which exist in the helpers or enemies themselves,
which act together with the first set of factors to produce that love or
enmity. There are also external factors which strengthen the effects of
these "essential" ones, or constitute obstacles to their fulfillment.

Now, if we consider the personality under discussion free from the
context of his times, but rather as a man of all ages and times, we
shall necessarily find some factors in addition to those related to his
own time, which will be connected with his historical existence in its
fully human sense. Either these additional factors will augment the
original ones, or else they will weaken them. The most important of
these historical factors is the list of those who have loved, and have
given themselves, for him, and their personalities, and the list of his
opponents and enemies, and their personalities; and these lists are
continually being added to as time proceeds and as centuries and
generations succeed one another.

This becomes even more important when we consider a personality of the
stature of Amiru ' l-mu'minin (as), where we find in his pure person the
noblest human characteristics combined with the greatest Divine gifts,
and in his Shi\`ahs and enemies the strongest faith in the Divine
Message combined with faith in mankind and its supreme mission, on the
one hand and, on the other, hostility to the Divine Message combined
with disbelief in mankind and a rising up against them.

If we take note of the above points, we can gain a clear idea of the
great amount of energy that needs to be expended, the extent of the
research and the depth of study which must be undertaken before it is
possible for someone to do justice to the subject, so that a worthy
result may be obtained from all the various aspects of his preliminary
investigations.

**II**

This book, as the scholarly author, may Allah have mercy on him, points
out himself, developed out of four lectures originally given in
connections with the commemoration of the martyrdom of al-Imam Amiru
'l-mu'minin (as) . They were collected together and published in the
form of this book. The author, may Allah have mercy on him, was only
doing justice to himself and to his work when he admitted, in his
introduction, that his book is only a sample from his immense subject
whose dimensions are broad and multi-faceted. It is our misfortune that
the author found himself unable to expound any further on this great
subject than these four lectures, which were circumscribed within the
framework of the particular limited temporal and circumstantial events
in which he found himself, except to the extent that the pressures of
his responsibilities allowed him to review the material for publication.

**III**

Praise be to Allah Who has caused the author, may Allah have mercy on
him, to succeed to the extent that he did in proceeding with his
discussion, which relates to the powers of attraction and repulsion of
Amiru 'l-mu'minin (as). He was fortunately able in this work to reach
the same high level which he sustained in his other works. When we saw
the great Islamic thinking, the clear historical presentation, the
originality and novel exposition which are present in this book and
about which the generality of readers are in agreement with us, and
which exist despite the limitations imposed upon him, we decided to have
the book translated into English. We gave it to an expert translator,
whom, we thank Allah, was able to translate it into English with similar
originality and skill to that which the scholar Mutahhari manifested in
the original text.

We praise Allah that we have succeeded in publishing this book in an
English version. We ask Allah, and supplicate Him, that He may cause our
work to be only in pure devotion to Him, and that He may cause us to
succeed in the best thing in which He causes His virtuous slaves to
succeed, for He is the best Guide and the best Artisan.

**World Organization For Islamic Services**

***(Board of Writing, Translation and Publication).***

15/8/1401  
 18/6/1981  
 Tehran - Iran.


