Love And Devotion To Those Close To God
=======================================

We have said that love is not restricted only to an animal love of a
sexual or parental kind. Rather, there is another kind of love and
attraction which is situated in a more rarefied atmosphere, and is
completely beyond the confines of matter or materiality.

It originates from an instinct far above that of the preservation of
generations, and is in fact something which separates the universe of
man from the universe of animals. This is spiritual, or human, love,
falling in love with excellence and goodness, becoming enamoured of the
virtues of man and the beauty of reality.

*Those loves which are for the sake of a colour*

*Are not love: in the end they are a disgrace;*

*Since love of the dead is not enduring,*

*Because the dead one never comes back to us.*

(But) *love of the living is every moment*

*Fresher than a bud in the spirit and the sight*

*Choose the love of that Living One Who is everlasting,*

*Who gives thee to drink of the wine that increases life.*

*Choose the love of Him from Whose love*

*All the prophets gained power and glory.*[^1]

And it is love which is mentioned in many of the verses of the Qur'an,
especially by the word *"mahabbah",* These verses can be placed in
several groups:

1. Verses which describe the believers, and speak of the deep devotion
and love they have for God or the other believers,

***But those that believe love Allah more ardently. (al Baqarah, 2 :165
)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ تَبَوَّءُوا الدَّارَ وَالْإِيمَانَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ
يُحِبُّونَ مَنْ هَاجَرَ إِلَيْهِمْ وَلَا يَجِدُونَ فِي صُدُورِهِمْ
حَاجَةً مِمَّا أُوتُوا وَيُؤْثِرُونَ عَلَىٰ أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَلَوْ كَانَ
بِهِمْ خَصَاصَةٌ وَمَنْ يُوقَ شُحَّ نَفْسِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who made their dwelling in the abode, and in belief, before
them, love whosoever has emigrated to them not finding in their breasts
any need for what they have been given, and preferring others above
themselves, even though poverty be their portion. (Al-Hashr, 59:9)***

2. Verses which speak of the love of God for believers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ التَّوَّابِينَ وَيُحِبُّ الْمُتَطَهِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Truly Allah loves those who repent, and He loves those who cleanse
themselves. (Al-Baqarah, 2:222)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يُحِبُّ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Allah loves the good doers. (Al \`Imran, 3 :148 and al-Ma'idah, 5
:13 )***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah loves those who guard themselves. (At-Tawbah, 9 : 4 and
7 )***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يُحِبُّ الْمُطَّهِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Allah loves those who cleanse themselves. (At-Tawbah, 9 :108 )***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah loves the just. (Al-Hujurat, 49:9 and al-Mumtahinah,
60:8 )***

3. Verses which include two-way affections and reciprocal love: the love
of God for the believers, the love of the believers for God; and the
love of the believers for each other:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ
اللَّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say "if you love Allah, follow me, and-Allah will love you, and
forgive you your sins." (Al \`Imran, 3 : 31)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِي اللَّهُ بِقَوْمٍ يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah will assuredly bring a people He loves, and who love Him.
(al-Ma' idah, 5: 54)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ سَيَجْعَلُ لَهُمُ
الرَّحْمَٰنُ وُدًّا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who believe and do deeds of righteousness - unto them
the All-merciful shall assign love. (Maryam,19:96)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُمْ مَوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He has sent between you love and compassion. (Ar-Rum, 30: 21)***

And it is love which Ibrahim wanted for his offspring,[^2] and which the
last Prophet also sought by the order of God for his kinsmen.[^3]

From what we have been told from *hadith,* the spirit and essence of
religion is nothing but love. Burayd al-\`Ijli said: "I was in the
presence of Imam al-Baqir (as), and there was a traveller from Khurasan
who had traversed that long journey on foot. He had the honour of
meeting the Imam. His feet, which were showing through his shoes, were
cut, and he had taken his shoes off. He said: "By God, the only thing
that brought me from whence I have come is love of you, the Household
(of the Prophet)." The Imam said: "By God, if a stone loved us, God
would unite it with us, and join it to us. Is the religion other than
love?" [^4]

A man said to Imam as-Sadiq (as): "We have named our children after you
and your fathers; will this action be of any benefit to us?" He said:
"Yes, by God; is the religion other than love?" Then he gave the verse
If you love *Allah, follow me, and Allah will love you* as evidence.[^5]

Basically, it is love which brings obedience: the lover does not have
the power to refuse the wishes of the one he loves. We have seen this
with our own eyes when a youth who was in love left everything when
faced with his loved one, his beloved, and sacrificed everything for
her.

The obedience and worship of God is in proportion to the love which man
has for God, as Imam as-Sadiq (as) said: "Disobey God and show that you
love Him; by my life, that is something amazing. If your love were true,
you would have obeyed Him, for the lover is submissive before the one
whom he loves."

[^1]: . Adapted from Nicholson's translation of Rumi, Mathnavi, bk. 1

[^2]: . Ibrahim, 14:37

[^3]: . ash-Shura, 42:23

[^4]: Safinatu 'l-bihar, vol.l, p.102 (under Hubb).

[^5]: . ibid, p.662 (under Sama)


