The Power Of Love In Society
============================

The power of love is a great and effective force in relation to society;
the best societies are those which are administered by the power of
love: both the love of the leader and the ruler for the people, and the
love and devotion of the people for the leader and ruler.

The feeling and love of the ruler is an important factor in the
stability and longevity of a government, and until that factor exists
the leader cannot, or finds it very difficult to, lead the society,
train people to be law-abiding individuals, and even establish justice
and egality in that society. But once he does so, people will be so
lawfully minded that they will see the affection of their ruler and it
is this affection which will attract them to obedience and dutifulness.

The Qur'an addresses the Prophet and says to him that he has a great
power in his hands to influence people and to administer society

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِمَا رَحْمَةٍ مِنَ اللَّهِ لِنْتَ لَهُمْ وَلَوْ كُنْتَ فَظًّا
غَلِيظَ الْقَلْبِ لَانْفَضُّوا مِنْ حَوْلِكَ فَاعْفُ عَنْهُمْ
وَاسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ وَشَاوِرْهُمْ فِي الْأَمْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is by some mercy of Allah that thou art gentle to them; hadst thou
been harsh and hard of heart, they would have scattered from about thee.
So pardon them, and pray forgiveness for them, and take counsel with
them in the affair. (A1 \`Imran, 3: 159)***

Here it is made clear that the cause of the people's coming to the
Prophet is the affection and love which he has bestowed on them. Then it
orders him to forgive them and to ask for forgiveness for them and to
consult with them. These are all among the effects of love and
friendship, just as tolerance, patience and forbearance are also among
the degrees of love and kindness.

*By the sword of clemency he (Ali) redeemed so many throats*

*Of such a multitude from the sword.*

*The sword of clemency is sharper than the sword of iron;*

*Nay, it is more productive of victory than a hundred armies.*[^1]

The Qur'an also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَسْتَوِي الْحَسَنَةُ وَلَا السَّيِّئَةُ ادْفَعْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ
أَحْسَنُ فَإِذَا الَّذِي بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَهُ عَدَاوَةٌ كَأَنَّهُ
وَلِيٌّ حَمِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Not equal are the good deed and the evil deed. Repel with that which
is fairer and behold, he between whom and thee there is enmity shall be
as if he were a loyal friend. (Fussilat, 41:34 )***

*Forgive, o son, that man can trap*

*By goodness and do savage deeds with fetters,*

*Chain the neck of the enemy with mercy,*

*Which noose no blade can cut.*

In his firman to Malik al-Ashtar, when he appointed him to the
governorship of Egypt, Amir al-mu'minin also explained how his behaviour
with the people should be:  
   

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَشْعِرْ قَلْبَكَ الرَّحْمَةَ لِلرَّعِيَّةِ، وَالْـمَحَبَّةَ لَهُمْ،
وَاللُّطْفَ بِهِمْ  …….
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَعْطِهِمْ مِنْ عَفْوِكَ وَصَفْحِكَ مِثْلَ الَّذِي تُحِبُّ أَنْ
يُعْطِيَكَ اللهُ مِنْ عَفْوِهِ وَصَفْحِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Awaken in your heart mercy for (your) subjects and love for them, and
kindness towards them…. So give them of your forgiveness and your
pardon, just as you would like Allah to give you of his forgiveness and
pardon.[^2]

The heart of the ruler must be a focus of affection and love towards the
nation; power and force are not enough. People can be driven like sheep
by power and force, but their inner strengths cannot be awakened and put
to use. Not only is power and force not sufficient; even justice, if it
is lifelessly enforced, is not enough.

Rather the ruler must love the people from his heart like a loving
father, show his affection towards them and also have an attractive
personality which fosters devotion, so that he may make use of their
wills, their ambitions and their great human strengths in furthering his
own divine aim.

[^1]: . Rumi, bk.l

[^2]: . Nahju 'l-balaghah, Letter no. 53


