Love for `Ali in the Qur'an and Sunnah
======================================

What we have said so far has shed light on the value and influence of
love and it has incidentally become clear that love for the pure ones is
a means for the reform and refinement of the soul, not that it is an end
in itself. Now we must see whether Islam and the Qur' an have chosen
someone we should love or not. When the Qur' an relates what the
previous prophets have said, it points out that they have all said: "we
do not ask a wage from people, our only reward is from God." However it
addresses the Seal of the Prophets thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: "I do not ask of you a wage for this, except love for (my)
relatives." (ash-Shura, 42:23)***

Here there is a need to ask why the rest of the prophets looked for no
wage but the most noble Prophet asked for one for his message; why did
he want friendship for his near relatives as a requital for his message?

The Qur'an itself provides an answer to this question:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَا سَأَلْتُكُمْ مِنْ أَجْرٍ فَهُوَ لَكُمْ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا
عَلَى اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: "I have asked no wage of you; that shall be yours. My wage falls
only upon God. “(Saba', 34:47)***

That is to say, that which I ask for as a wage accrues to you, not to
me; this friendship is a halter for your own perfection and reformation,
and it is called a wage. Otherwise it is in fact another good which I
recommend to you from the point of view that the Household and relatives
of the Prophet are people who do not gather round defilement, and whose
hems are clean and pure.

Love and devotion to these people brings no other result apart from
obedience to the truth and adherence to virtues, and it is friendship
for them which transmutes and perfects like the elixir.

Whatever the meaning of "relatives" may be, it is certain that the most
obvious person to whom it is applicable is 'Ali. Imam Fakhru'd-Din
ar-Razi says:

"Zamakhshari relates in his (Qur'anic exegesis) *al-Kashshaf:* \`when
this verse was sent down they said: "O Messenger of Allah! Who are the
relatives to whom our love is due?" He said: “\`Ali and Fatimah and
their sons." '

"It is thus established from this tradition that these four persons are
"relatives" of the Prophet, and that they should enjoy the respect and
love of the people, and this matter can be reasoned out in a number of
ways:

“1 - The verse: *except love for my relatives.*

“2 - There is no doubt that the Prophet dearly loved Fatimah, and he
said: \`Fatimah is a part of my body; what harms her harms me.' he also
loved 'Ali and the Hasanayn (Hasan and Husayn), since a great number of
*mutawatir* traditions (those which are narrated by so many as to make
doubt impossible) have reached us on this subject. Thus friendship of
them is obligatory on all the community,[^1] because the Qur'an
commands:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّبِعُوهُ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And follow him (the Prophet), haply you will be guided. (al-A'raf,
7:158)***

"It also commands:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ فِي رَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You have a good example in Allah's Messenger. (al-Ahzab, 33:21)***

"These (considerations) prove that love for the Family of Muhammad - who
are \`Ali, Fatimah and the Hasanayn -is obligatory on all Muslims. "[^2]

There are also many traditions from the Prophet concerning love and
friendship for \`Ali:

1: Ibn al-Athir narrates that the Prophet spoke to \`Ali and said: "O
\`Ali, God has embellished you with things, no dearer embellishment than
which exists before his slaves: resignation from the world has been;
appointed for you in such a way that neither do you profit from the
world, nor it from you. On you has been bestowed the love of the
wretched; they are proud of your leadership, and you also of their
following you. Content is he who loves you, and is a true friend to you.
And woe betide he who shows enmity towards you, and lies about you."[^3]

2: as-Suyuti relates that the Prophet said: "Love of \`Ali is faith, and
enmity towards him is sedition."[^4]

3: Abu Na'im narrates that the Prophet addressed the Ansar and said:
"Shall I guide you to something which, if you grasp it after me, you
will never go astray?" They said: "Yes, O Messenger of Allah!” He said:
"It is 'Ali: love him with the love (you have) for me, and respect him
with the respect (you have) for me. For God has ordered me through
Gabriel to tell you this."[^5]

The Sunnis have also narrated traditions from the Prophet in which
observing \`Ali's face and talking of his virtues is counted as a form
of worship.

1: Muhibb at-Tabari narrates from \`A'ishah that she said: "I saw my
father (Abu Bakr) gazing often at 'Ali's face. I said: \`O my father! I
see you gazing often at 'Ali's face.' He said: \`O my daughter! I heard
the Prophet say: "Looking at the face of \`Ali is worship."'[^6]

2: Ibn Hajar narrates from \`A'ishah that the Prophet said: "The best of
my brothers is \`Ali, the best of my paternal uncles is Hamzah and
remembrance of 'Ali and speaking about him is worship."[^7]

'Ali was the most loved person before God and the Prophet, and thus
naturally the best of those who are loved. Anas Ibn Malik says: "Every
day, one of the children of the Ansar would do some task for the
Prophet. One day my turn came. Umm Ayman brought a chicken dish before
the Prophet and said: \`Messenger of Allah! I have caught this chicken
myself and cooked it for you.' He said: \`O God! Send the best of (Thy)
slaves that he may share with me in eating this chicken.' At that very
moment someone knocked on the door and the Prophet said to me: \`Anas!
Open the door.'

I said: \`May God make it a man of the Ansar!' But I found 'Ali in front
of the door, and I said: \`The Prophet is busy.' Then I returned to
stand in my place. Again there was a knock at the door, and the Prophet
said: \`Open the door.' Again I prayed that it would be someone from the
Ansar. I opened the door and again it was 'Ali. I said: \`The Prophet is
busy.' Then I returned to stand in my place. Yet again there was a knock
at the door, and the Prophet said: \`Anas, go and open the door, and
bring him in. You are not the first person to love your own people; that
are not one of the Ansar.' I went and brought 'Ali in, and he ate the
chicken dish with the Prophet."[^8]

[^1]: . The love of the Prophet towards them had no personal aspect,
that is, it was not only because, for example, they were his children
and grandchildren and if someone else had been in their place he would
have loved them. The Prophet loved them because they were exemplary
persons and God loved them, for the Prophet had other children whom he
did not love to this extent and to whom his community had no such
obligation.

[^2]: . at- Tafsiru 'l-kabir, vo1.27, p.166 (Egyptian ed.).

[^3]: . Usdu 'l-ghabah, vo1.4, p.23

[^4]: . Kanzu 'l-\`ummal. In as-Suyuti, Jam\`u 'l-jawami \`, vol.6,
p.156.

[^5]: . Hilyatu 'l-awliya', vol.1, p.63. There are many traditions on
this subject, and we have come across more than ninety in authoritative
Sunni texts, all of which concerns love for Amir al-mu'minin. There also
exist many traditions in Shi'ah texts, and the respected scholar
al-Majlisi has gathered them together in vol.39 (of the new edition) of
Biharu 'l-anwar in the chapter on love and hatred for Amir al-mu'minin;
he related 123 traditions in this chapter.

[^6]: . ar-Riyadu'n-nadirah, vo1.2, p.219; and about another twenty
traditions, as far as we are aware, have been related in Sunni texts on
this subject.

[^7]: . as-Sawa'iqu 'l-muhriqah, p.74; and five more traditions have
been related in Sunni texts on this subject.

[^8]: . al-Mustadrak \`ala as-Sahihayn, vo1.3, p.131. This story is
related in various ways in more than eighty narrations in authoritative
Sunni texts.


