How `Ali Made Enemies
=====================

**We** shall restrict our discussion to the period of his somewhat more
than four-year caliphate. 'Ali was all the time a two-powered
personality; 'Ali always had the powers both of attraction and
repulsion. In fact, we see right from the beginning of the Islamic age
one group who gravitated more round 'Ali, and another group who did not
have such a good connection with him and who were occasionally pained by
his existence.

But the period of 'Ali's caliphate, and similarly the times after his
death, that is to say the period of the appearance of the "history" of
'Ali, were the age of the greater manifestation of attraction to, and
repulsion from, him; to the same extent as before the caliphate his
links with the society were fewer, and also his attraction and repulsion
less.

'Ali was a man who made enemies and gave people displeasure, and this,
too, is another one of his great glories. Every principled man who has
an aim and struggles towards it, particularly the revolutionary who
pursues the putting into practice of his sacred goals and who is
referred to by the words of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُجَاهِدُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلَا يَخَافُونَ لَوْمَةَ لَائِمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Who struggle in the way of Allah, not fearing the reproach of any
reproacher. (5:54)***

Makes enemies and leaves dissatisfied people. So if his enemies did not
number more than his friends, especially in his own times, they were no
fewer and nor are they now.

If \`Ali's personality were not distorted today, but were presented just
as it was, many of those who pretend to be his friends would take a
stand alongside his enemies.

The Prophet sent \`Ali as a commander of an army to the Yemen. On his
return he set out for Mecca to meet the Prophet, and, on reaching the
environs of Mecca, he appointed one of the soldiers in his place and
himself hurried on to present the account of his expedition to the
Messenger of Allah. That person divided up the garments which \`Ali had
brought along with them among the soldiers, so that they could enter
Mecca in new clothes.

When \`Ali returned, he objected to this action, and reproved that man
for lack of discipline, because no decision should have been taken about
the garments before orders had been received from the Prophet about what
to do with them. In the eyes of \`Ali, such an action was in fact a kind
of expropriation from the *baytu 'l-mal* (the Treasury of the Muslims)
without giving notification to, and obtaining permission from, the
leader of the Muslims.

For this reason \`Ali gave the order that they should take off the
garments and put them in a particular place, until they could be
delivered to the Prophet and he himself could make a decision about
them. Because of this, \`Ali's soldiers became disgruntled, and, as soon
as they had gone in to see the Prophet, they complained about \`Ali's
harshness over the garments. The Prophet addressed them, and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يأَاَيُّهَا الناَسُ لاَ َتشْكُوا عَلِيّاً فَوَ اللَّهِ اِنَّهُ
لَأَخْشَنُ فِي ذَاتِ اللَّهِ مِنْ أنْ يُشْكَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Oh men, do not grumble about 'Ali. I swear by Allah that he is more
intensely in the way of God than that anyone should complain about
him.[^1]

Ali had no concern for anyone in the way of God. Rather, if he showed
interest in someone or was concerned about him, it was because of God.
Naturally, such an attitude makes enemies, and it causes offence to
souls full of greed and craving and brings them pain.

None of the companions of the Prophet had devoted friends like 'Ali did,
just as no-one had such bold and dangerous enemies as he did. He was
someone who, even after his death, had his corpse attacked by enemies.
He was himself aware of this and foresaw these things, and so he left as
his will that his grave should be hidden and unknown to all but his
sons, until after about a century had passed and the Umayyids had been
overthrown, the Khawarij overthrown too, or made all but impotent, and
vendettas and avengers had become few, and Imam as-Sadiq indicated the
sacred soil of his resting place.

In the period of his caliphate, \`Ali expelled three groups from beside
him and rose up to do battle with them: the people of (the battle of)
Jamal, whom he himself named the Nakithun (those who break their
allegiance); the people of (the battle of) Siffin, whom he called
Qasitun (those who deviate); and the people of (the battle of) Nahrawan,
the Khawarij, whom he called the Mariqun (those who miss the truth of
the religion).[^2]

\`Ali said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
، وَمَرَقَتْ أُخْرَى ، وَفَسَقَ [وقسط ]آخَرُونَ. فَلَمَّا نَهَضْتُ
بِالأمْرِ نَكَثَتْ طَائِفَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

When I took up the reins of government one party broke their allegiance
*(nakathah),* another missed the truth of the religion *(maraqah),* and
another deviated *(qasatah).*[^3]

The Nakithun were of a money-worshipping mentality, people of
covetousness and displayers of prejudice. \`Ali's speeches about justice
and equality were more for the attention of this group.

However the mind of the Qasitun belonged to politics, deception and
sedition; they killed so as to take the reins of government into their
own hands, and to topple the basis of 'Ali's government and his
governorship. Some people advised him to come to a compromise with them
and to give them, to a certain extent, what they were after, but he did
not accept because he was not a person to do this kind of thing. He was
ready to fight injustice, not to give his signature to it. On the one
hand, Mu'awiyah and his clique were against the basis of 'Ali's
government, and then the Qasitun wanted to occupy the seat of the
caliphate of Islam themselves. In reality 'Ali's war with them was a war
with sedition and double-dealing.

The third group, which was the Mariqun, had a spirit of inadmissible
fanaticism, sanctimoniousness and dangerous ignorance. In relation to
all these people, 'Ali was a powerful repeller and they lived in a state
of non-conciliation.

One of the manifestations of 'Ali's completeness and his being a perfect
individual was that, when it was called for, he faced the various
factions and deviations and fought against all of them. Sometimes we see
him on the scene, fighting with those who were devoted to money or to
this world, and sometimes too on the scene fighting with professional
politicians of the most hypocritical type, and sometimes with ignorant
and deviationist men of false piety.

Our discussion is oriented towards the last group, the Khawarij.
Although they have been overthrown and are no more, they present an
instructive and admonitory little history. Their thinking has taken root
among the Muslims, and consequently their spirit has always existed, and
still does, in the shape of sanctimonious persons, all the way down
these fourteen centuries, even though the individual Khawarij and even
their name have disappeared, and they can be counted as a grave
hindrance to the advancement of Islam and the Muslims.

[^1]: Ibn Ishaq, The Life of Muhammad (transl., A. Guillaume) p. 650.

[^2]: Before \`Ali, the Prophet called these people by these names when
he said to him: "After me, you will fight with the nakithun, the qasitun
and the mariqun." This tradition is narrated by Ibn Abi'l Hadid in his
commentary on Nahju 'l-balaghah (vol. 1, p.201), where he says that it
is one of the proofs of the prophethood of Muhammad since the tradition
is quite explicit about the future and the unknown (ghayb), and there is
no kind of hidden interpretation or ellipsis in it.

[^3]: Nahju 'l-balaghah - Sermon 3 "ash-Shiqshiqiyah".


