How The Khawarij Came Into Existence
====================================

The word *"khawarij ",* that is, "rebels", comes from *"khuruj* "[^1]
which means "revolt" and "insurrection". This group came into being
during the process of arbitration.

The battle of Siffin, in its last day of fighting, was turning out in
'Ali's favour; Mu'awiyah, in consultation with \`Amr ibn al-\`As,
conceived a skilful stratagem. He had seen that all his pains had
produced no result, and that he was only one step away from defeat. He
saw that there was no way to save himself except by having recourse to
the creation of confusion, so he ordered that Qur'ans should be raised
up on the points of spears to show that they were people of prayer and
the Qur'an, and that the Book should be used to arbitrate between the
two sides. It was not the first time that this had been done, for it was
the same thing that 'Ali had done before but which had not been
accepted. Even now they had not accepted it; it was a subterfuge for
them to find a way to save themselves and rescue themselves from a sure
defeat.

\`Ali cried out: "Strike at them! They are using the pages and the paper
of the Qur'an as a ruse, they want to protect themselves behind the
words and writing of the Qur'an and afterwards carry on in their same
old anti Qur'anic way. When opposed to its truth, the paper and binding
of the Qur'an is of no value and worthy of no respect; it is I who am
the reality and the true manifestation of the Qur'an. They are using the
paper and the writing of the Qur'an as an excuse to destroy its truth
and meaning! "

A group of undiscriminating, unknowing and sanctimonious persons, who
formed a sizeable proportion, gesticulate to each other. What does 'Ali
mean? They called out: "Should we fight against the Qur'an?" Our battle
is to reestablish the Qur'an, and now they have submitted to the Qur'an,
so what are we fighting for?"

"I also say I am fighting for the Qur'an," said 'Ali. "But they have no
connection with the Qur'an. They have put up the words and writing of
the Qur'an as a means to save their own souls."

There is a question in Islamic law, in the section on *jihad,*
concerning the situation of unbelievers shielding themselves behind
Muslims. The problem is that if the enemies of Islam put a group of
Muslim prisoners of war at the front of their ranks as a shield, and
they themselves are busy with their activities, making headway behind
this front, so that if the Islamic forces try to defend themselves, or
attack them and halt their advance, there is no alternative but to also
eliminate, through necessity, their Muslims brothers who have become a
shield; that is, if there is no possibility of access to the combating
and attacking enemy apart from through the killing of Muslims, then in
this situation the killing of a Muslim for the vital interests of Islam,
and so as to save the lives of the rest of the Muslims, becomes
permissible in Islamic law..

In fact, they too are soldiers of Islam and will have become martyrs in
the way of God. However, blood money must be paid for them from the
Islamic treasury to their surviving relatives. This is, of course, not
only a particularity of Islamic law, but there is a quite definite law
among the international rules and regulations of war and military action
that if the enemy wishes to use your own forces, you can eliminate those
forces so as to reach the enemy and force them back.' "If, when there
are real, live Muslims," continued 'Ali, "and Islam says 'Attack!' so as
to ensure a Muslim victory, then there can be no objection made to the
paper and bindings of books. Respect for pages and writing is because of
their meaning and contents. Today the fighting is for the contents of
the Qur'an, but these people have set up the pages as a means for the
destruction of the meaning and contents of the Qur'an."

However, the ignorant and uninformed drew down a black curtain in front
of their minds and kept out the truth. "In addition to the fact that we
will not fight with the Qur'an," they said, "we know that fighting with
it is itself a sin, and we must kill so as prevent this. We will fight
with those who fight against the Qur'an." Only an hour was needed to
secure a victory; Malik al-Ashtar, who was a brave, devoted and
unselfish officer, had thus gone out to destroy the pavilion of
Mu'awiyah's command and to clear the path of Islam of obstacles. At this
very moment, this group pressured \`Ali by saying they would attack from
behind. \`Ali urged them not to, but they increased their protest, and,
what is more, showed that they would be completely obstinate.

'Ali sent a message to Malik to stop the fighting and to return from the
place where the fighting was.

He sent an answer back to \`Ali that if he were to give his permission
for a few moments more the battle would be finished and the enemy
destroyed. But the Khawarij drew their swords and threatened to hack
'Ali to pieces unless he called him back.

Then again word was sent to him that if he wanted to see \`Ali alive, he
should stop the battle and come back. He returned, and the enemies were
jubilant that their stratagem had proved efficacious.

The fighting stopped so that they could leave arbitration to the Qur'an.
An arbitration committee was set up, and arbitrators selected from the
two sides to rule on the basis of what was agreed on by both sides in
the Qur'an and *sunnah* and to bring an end to hostilities; or else they
would add another difference to the already existing differences and
cause the situation to deteriorate.

'Ali said that they should choose their arbitrator, and then he would
detail his own. Without the slightest dispute, they unanimously chose
\`Amr ibn al-\`As, the deviser of the stratagem. 'Ali proposed
\`Abdullah ibn al-\`Abbas, who was versed in politics, or Malik
al-Ashtar, a self-sacrificing, clear sighted man of faith, or else
someone like them. But those fools were looking for someone of their own
kind, and they chose a man of the like of Abu Musa al-Ash'ari, a man of
no perspicacity who was not on good terms with 'Ali. However much 'Ali
and his friends sought to enlighten these people that Abu Musa was not
the man for the job and that such an appointment was not suitable for
him, they said that they would not agree to anyone else. Then he said
that since things had got to that point, they should do whatever they
wanted. So, in the end, they chose this Abu Musa as the arbitrator from
the side of 'Ali and his companions.

After months of consultation, \`Amr ibn al-\`As said to Abu Musa that it
would be better for the interests of the Muslims if neither 'Ali nor
Mu'awiyah were caliph, that they should choose a third one, and that
there was no one else they could choose but \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, Abu
Musa's son-in-law. Abu Musa said that that was right and asked what they
should do. \`Amr ibn al-\`As said: "You should remove 'Ali from the
caliphate, and I will do the same with Mu'awiyah. Then the Muslims will
go and elect a worthy person who will surely be \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar.
Thus the roots of sedition will be destroyed."

They terminated on this matter and announced that the people should
gather together to listen to their conclusions.

The people assembled. Abu Musa turned towards \`Amr ibn al-\`As to stand
up and announce his opinion. \`Amr ibn al-\`As said: "Me? You are the
respected, white-bearded man, a companion of the Prophet. Never would I
presume such a thing as to speak before you!"

Abu Musa moved from his place to rise and speak. Now everyone's heart
was beating fast, Ali eyes were staring, each person held his breath,
waiting to see what the result had been. He started to speak: "After due
deliberation on what was in the interests of the community, we saw that
neither 'Ali nor Mu'awiyah should be caliph. More than this it is not
for us to say, for the Muslims themselves know what they wish." The he
took his ring from the finger of his right hand and said:. "I have
removed 'Ali from the caliphate, just as I remove this ring from my
finger."

When he had finished he stepped down. Then \`Amr ibn al-\`As got up and
said: "You have Ali heard the speech of Abu Musa saying that he has
removed 'Ali from the caliphate. I too remove him from the caliphate,
just as Abu Musa has done." Then he took his ring off his right hand and
then put it onto his left hand, and said: "I set up Mu'awiyah in the
caliphate, just as I put this ring on my finger." When he had said this
he stepped down.

The meeting lapsed into commotion. The people began to attack Abu Musa,
and some beat him with their whips. He fled to Mecca, and \`Amr ibn
al-\`As went to Damascus.

The Khawarij, who had brought about this sequence of events, saw the
scandal of this arbitration with their own eyes, and realized their
mistake. But they could not understand where exactly their error lay.
They did not say that their mistake lay in falling for Mu'awiyah .and
\`Amr ibn al-\`As' scheme and bringing the war to a halt; nor did they
say that after the setting up of the arbitration they had blundered in
choosing their "referee", in putting up Abu Musa as \`Amr ibn al-\`As'
counterpart. No; instead they said that in putting up two human beings
to arbitrate and be "referees" in the matters of the religion of God
they had gone against the divine law and had done an act of unbelief,
for the judge is only God, not man.

Then came to 'Ali and said: "We did not understand. We chose a man as an
arbitrator. You have become an unbeliever, and so have we. But we
repent; you too should repent. Otherwise, the tragedy will be repeated."

"In any situation," said 'Ali, "repentance is good. We are always
repenting for our sins." But they said this was not enough, and that he
had to confess that arbitration was a sin, and that he repented of that
sin. But he said that it had not been he that had brought about the
affair of arbitration, it had been them, and that they had seen the
result themselves. What was more, how could he declare as a sin
something that Islam had made lawful, or confess to a sin which he had
not perpetrated.

From this point on, they set to work as a religious sect. At the
beginning they were a rebellious and mutinous group, and it was for that
reason that they were called "Khawarij", but they gradually drew up
basic beliefs for themselves and created a "party" that only had a
political coloring to begin with but which step by step assumed the form
of a religious group, taking on a religious coloring. Afterwards the
Khawarij moved into action as a vehemently propagandist group as
supporters of a religious sect. They eventually got the idea that they
had discovered a worldly, corrupt root in Islam, and they came to the
conclusion that \`Uthman, 'Ali and Mu'awiyah were all in error and sin.
They decided that they had to struggle against this corruption that had
come into existence, and they gave it the name of "bidding to good and
forbidding evil." Thus the Khawarij sect came into existence under this
banner.

Now, "bidding to good and forbidding evil" has, before anything else,
two fundamental principles: one is a profound and knowledgeable insight
into the religion, and the other is a profound insight into how to act.
If there is no profound knowledge of religion, as we learn from
*ahadith* (traditions), the loss that will be incurred in doing this
will be greater than its benefit. And a profound insight into the
correct way to act depends on two conditions which are called, in
Islamic jurisprudence, *ihtimalu't-ta'thir,* that is, the possibility of
effective action, and *\`adamu tarattub-i 'l-maf'sadatin alayh.* That
is, the absence of any resulting cause of evil, and this can only come
about by the exercising of reason in these two duties.

The Khawarij had neither a profound knowledge of religion, nor a
profound insight into prudent action; they were people of ignorance,
lacking in any profound knowledge. In fact, they rejected any kind of
profound knowledge of how to act, because they understood this duty to
be a matter of obedience and they claimed that it should be performed
blindly.

Moreover, the purpose in the legal (in Islamic terms) basis of this
activity is that what is of advantage should be carried out. Thus it
must obviously take place in a situation where there will not result any
greater disadvantage. The requisite for these two conditions, then, is a
thorough understanding of how to act correctly. A man who is lacking in
this knowledge cannot foresee whether the desired result of this action
will follow or not, or whether some greater evil will be produced or
not. This is why the corruption resulting from ignorant inciting to good
will be greater than its benefit, just as has been related in *hadith.*

In the context of other duties, it has not been laid down as a condition
that there must exist the possibility of their producing a useful
result, and that if there is that possibility they become obligatory,
otherwise not. Although something useful and of benefit manifests itself
in every duty, the recognition of that benefit is not the responsibility
of people. It has not been said about prayer, for example, that if you
see that it is useful then pray, and if you do not, then do not pray.

Neither is it said about fasting that if it contains the possibility of
producing something beneficial then fast, and if it does not have that
possibility then do not fast (only in fasting it is said that if you see
there is harm in it, then do not fast), and likewise in *hajj* or
*zakat* or *jihad* there is no such restriction. But such a restriction
does exist in the matter of bidding to good and forbidding evil, that
one must look to see what kind of result, and what kind of reaction will
be produced, and whether the action is in the interests of Islam and
Muslims or not. That means that the discernment of the benefit is the
responsibility of the very people who carry out this duty.

Everyone has a share in this duty, but it is necessary that he
introduces reason, intelligence, knowledge of how to act correctly and
attention to its benefit, and these latter things are not merely a
matter of religious obligation.

This condition that it is necessary to exercise knowledge of effective
action in bidding to good and forbidding evil is unanimously agreed upon
by all the sects of Islam except the Khawarij. Because of their
particular inflexibility, rigidity and fanaticism, they said that
bidding to good and forbidding evil is an absolute religious obligation;
it has no condition of the possibility of a useful result or the absence
of any corrupting influence; one must not sit down and think about it.
It was in accordance with this belief that they rose up and terrorized
the lands knowing that they would be killed and their blood would be
wasted, and knowing that no useful result would come out of their
uprising.This condition that it is necessary to exercise knowledge of
effective action in bidding to good and forbidding evil is unanimously
agreed upon by all the sects of Islam except the Khawarij. Because of
their particular inflexibility, rigidity and fanaticism, they said that
bidding to good and forbidding evil is an absolute religious obligation;
it has no condition of the possibility of a useful result or the absence
of any corrupting influence; one must not sit down and think about it.
It was in accordance with this belief that they rose up and terrorized
the lands knowing that they would be killed and their blood would be
wasted, and knowing that no useful result would come out of their
uprising.This condition that it is necessary to exercise knowledge of
effective action in bidding to good and forbidding evil is unanimously
agreed upon by all the sects of Islam except the Khawarij. Because of
their particular inflexibility, rigidity and fanaticism, they said that
bidding to good and forbidding evil is an absolute religious obligation;
it has no condition of the possibility of a useful result or the absence
of any corrupting influence; one must not sit down and think about it.
It was in accordance with this belief that they rose up and terrorized
the lands knowing that they would be killed and their blood would be
wasted, and knowing that no useful result would come out of their
uprising.This condition that it is necessary to exercise knowledge of
effective action in bidding to good and forbidding evil is unanimously
agreed upon by all the sects of Islam except the Khawarij. Because of
their particular inflexibility, rigidity and fanaticism, they said that
bidding to good and forbidding evil is an absolute religious obligation;
it has no condition of the possibility of a useful result or the absence
of any corrupting influence; one must not sit down and think about it.
It was in accordance with this belief that they rose up and terrorized
the lands knowing that they would be killed and their blood would be
wasted, and knowing that no useful result would come out of their
uprising.This condition that it is necessary to exercise knowledge of
effective action in bidding to good and forbidding evil is unanimously
agreed upon by all the sects of Islam except the Khawarij. Because of
their particular inflexibility, rigidity and fanaticism, they said that
bidding to good and forbidding evil is an absolute religious obligation;
it has no condition of the possibility of a useful result or the absence
of any corrupting influence; one must not sit down and think about it.
It was in accordance with this belief that they rose up and terrorized
the lands knowing that they would be killed and their blood would be
wasted, and knowing that no useful result would come out of their
uprising.This condition that it is necessary to exercise knowledge of
effective action in bidding to good and forbidding evil is unanimously
agreed upon by all the sects of Islam except the Khawarij. Because of
their particular inflexibility, rigidity and fanaticism, they said that
bidding to good and forbidding evil is an absolute religious obligation;
it has no condition of the possibility of a useful result or the absence
of any corrupting influence; one must not sit down and think about it.
It was in accordance with this belief that they rose up and terrorized
the lands knowing that they would be killed and their blood would be
wasted, and knowing that no useful result would come out of their
uprising.This condition that it is necessary to exercise knowledge of
effective action in bidding to good and forbidding evil is unanimously
agreed upon by all the sects of Islam except the Khawarij. Because of
their particular inflexibility, rigidity and fanaticism, they said that
bidding to good and forbidding evil is an absolute religious obligation;
it has no condition of the possibility of a useful result or the absence
of any corrupting influence; one must not sit down and think about it.
It was in accordance with this belief that they rose up and terrorized
the lands knowing that they would be killed and their blood would be
wasted, and knowing that no useful result would come out of their
uprising.

[^1]: . If the word "khuruj" is used with an indirect object introduced
by \`ala, it has two meanings which are near to one another. One is to
stand up in a position for battle or war, and the other is disobedience,
insubordination and revolt. The Arabic dictionary al-Munjid says that
"kharaja" with an indirect object introduced by \`ala means to come
forward to fight someone, or it can be used for subjects rebelling
against the king: insurrection. The word "khawarij ", meaning revolt,
comes from "khuruj " in the second sense. That group which evidence the
command of \`Ali and rebelled against him is called the Khawarij. Since
they based their disobedience on a belief and on a religious ideology,
they became a sect, and the name came to be used especially for them;
and so it was not used for any other people who rose up after them and
rebelled against the ruler of their times. If they had not had a
particular creed and belief, they would have been like other rebels of
the periods after them, but they did have a belief and later on this
very belief found some kind of independent existence. Although they
never managed to form a government, they did manage to create a school
of law and a literature of their own. There were individuals who never
got around to actual rebellion, although they believed in it, as it is
said of \`Amr ibn \`Ubayd and other Mu'tazilah. It was said of some of
the Mu'tazilah who had beliefs similar to the Khawarij about "bidding to
good and forbidding evil", or about the matter of those Muslims who are
guilty of moral sin still finding a place in paradise, that "they
thought like the Khawarij". Thus there is a degree of commonality
between the lexical meaning of the word and its particular reference.


