What They Believed About The Caliphate
======================================

The only idea of the Khawarij's that could be interpreted favorably by
the modern thinkers of today is their theory about the caliphate. They
had a quasi-democratic concept of it, and said that the caliph must be
chosen by free election, and that the worthiest person was he who had
merit as far as faith and piety were concerned. He could be from the
Quraysh or not, from a distinguished and famous tribe, or from an
insignificant and backward one, Arab or non-Arab.

If, after his election and after everyone had sworn allegiance to him,
he took steps in a direction against the interests of the community of
Islam, he should be removed from the caliphate, and if he refused, he
should be fought with until killed.

In the matter of the caliphate they took a position opposite to that of
the Shi\`ah, who say that it is a divine office and that the caliph can
only be someone who is nominated by God. They were also in opposition to
the Sunni, who say the caliphate belongs to the Quraysh and who hold
firmly to the principle *"innama 'l-a'immatu min* *qurayshin" - "but*
the leaders are from the Quraysh:"

Apparently their opinion about the caliphate was not something they had
arrived at when they first came into existence. For, according to what
their famous slogan "*la hukma illa li 'llah" - "no* authority except
Allah's" -tells us, and also according to what we glean from *Nahju 'l
balaghah*[^1] , they believed, in the beginning, that the people and the
society did not need a leader or a government, and that the people
should put the Book of God into practice on their own.

However, afterwards, they turned back on this belief and firmly swore
allegiance to \`Abdullah ibn al-Wahab.[^2]

They recognized the caliphates of Abu Bakr and \`Umar to be rightful,
because they believed that these two persons had been rightfully elected
and that they had not deviated from the way of the best interest, nor
perpetrated anything against this best interest. They also recognized
the election of \`Uthman and \`Ali to be rightful; however they said
that towards the end of the sixth year of his caliphate, \`Uthman
changed his direction and ignored the best interest of the Muslims.

So he should have been deposed from the caliphate, but since he
continued in office he was killed as an unbeliever and his killing was a
religious duty. As for 'Ali, since he accepted the arbitration, but did
not subsequently repent, he was killed as an unbeliever and his killing
was a religious duty. Thus they denounced the caliphate of \`Uthman
after its seventh year, and that of 'Ali after the arbitration.[^3]

They also abhorred the rest of the caliphs, and were always at war with
them.

[^1]: . See sermon no.40, and also the commentary of Ibn Abi ' l-Hadid,
vol.2, p.308

[^2]: . See Ibn Kathir, al-Kamil fi 't-tarikh.

[^3]: . See ash-Shahrastani, al-Milal wa 'n-nihal, Cairo, 1961


