The Decline Of The Khawarij
===========================

This group came into existence towards the end of the fourth decade of
the first century of the Hijrah as the result of a dangerous piece of
misrepresentation, and before one and half centuries were over, as the
result of hysterical temerity and recklessness, they became the object
of pursuance by the caliphs, which ended up with their own, and their
sect's, annihilation and extermination, and at the beginning of the
\`Abbasid rule they had become totally non-existent.

It was their relentless and spiritless logic, the severity and harshness
of their behavior, the incompatibility of their ways with real life,
and, ultimately, their impetuosity (which even did away *taqiyah*
[dissimulation][^1] in its true and reasonable sense) which caused their
ruin and destruction. The Khawarij sect was not one which could in any
real sense survive, but its after-effect has remained; the thinking and
beliefs of Khawarij have had an effect on the rest of the sects of
Islam. Even today, "Nahrawanis" are to be found in abundance, and, just
as in the age and time of 'Ali, these are the most dangerous of Islam's
internal enemies. Just as there always have been and always will be
Mu'awiyahs and \`Amr ibn al-\`As's, who will use the existence of the
"Nahrawanis" when the time is opportune, even if they are counted as
their enemies.

[^1]: . On this doctrine, see \`Allamah S. M. H. Tabataba'i: Shi'ite
Islam (transl. S. H. Nasr) pp. 223 - 225. (tr. )


