Constructive Or Destructive?
============================

When affection for an individual or a thing reaches the summit of
intensity so that it conquers man's existence and becomes the absolute
ruler over his being, it is called love. Love is the peak of affection
and the sentiments.

But it should not be imagined that what is called by this name is of
only one kind; it is of two completely opposite kinds. Those things
which are called its good effects are connected with one of its kinds,
but its other kind has completely destructive and opposite effects.

The sentiments *of* man are *of* various kinds and degrees; some *of*
them are in the category *of* the passions, especially the sexual
passions, and are of those aspects which are shared by man and the other
animals, with the difference that in man, for a particular reason the
explanation of which cannot be appropriately undertaken now, it reaches
its peak and takes on an indescribable intensity; and for this reason it
is called love.

It never takes on this form among animals, but, in any case, in its
reality and essence, it is nothing but a torrent, a bursting forth, a
tempest of the passions. It originates from the source of sexuality, and
reaches its end there too. Its rise and fall are, too a large degree,
connected to the physiological activity of the genital organs and
naturally to the years of youth; it diminishes and eventually ceases
altogether with an increase in age, on the one hand, and, on the other,
with satiation and separation.

A youth who feels himself a-quiver at the sight of a beautiful face or a
tress of hair, or who feels a frisson when touched by a tender hand,
should know that there is nothing more operating here than a material,
animal process.

This kind of love comes quickly and goes quickly. It cannot be depended
on, nor recommended, it has dangers and it kills virtue. It is only by
the help of modesty and piety and not becoming abandoned to it that it
may profit a human being; that is, in itself, it is a power which leads
man towards no virtue. But it gives a strength and a perfection to the
spirit, if it penetrates into a man's being, is met with the power of
modesty and piety, and if the spirit tolerates the pressure of it -
provided it does not succumb to it.

Humans have another variety of sentiments which, in their reality and
essence, differ from the passions; it is better to call these noble
sentiments, or in the language of the Qur'an, "love and mercy"
*(**muwaddah wa rahmah*** ).[^1]

As long as man is under the control of his passions, he has not gone out
from his self, he seeks a person or a thing whom he is attracted to for
himself, and he wants it dearly. If he thinks about a love-object, it is
with the idea of how he might profit from being united with it, or at
the most how he can derive enjoyment from it. It is obvious that such a
state cannot be the perfecter or the educator of man's spirit, or refine
it.

However, man occasionally comes under the effect of his higher human
sentiments; his loved-one receives respect and eminence in his eyes, he
seeks that person's happiness. He is prepared to sacrifice himself for
that person's desires. This kind of sentiment brings purity, sincerity,
tenderness, compassion and altruism into existence, as opposed to the
first kind which creates crudeness, savagery and criminality. The
kindness and affection of a mother for her child is of this second kind.
Devotion to, and love of, the pure ones and the men of God, as also
patriotism and the love of principles, are also from the same category.

It is this kind of sentiment from which, if it reaches its summit and
perfection, all the aforementioned good effects result; and it is this
kind which gives dignity, distinction and greatness to the spirit, in
contrast to the first kind which brings wretchedness. Similarly it is
this kind of love which is durable, and which becomes stronger and
warmer with union, as opposed to the first kind which is not permanent
and whose graveyard union is reckoned to be.

In the Qur'an, the relationship between a man and wife is described as
"love and compassion"[^2], and this is a very great point. It is an
indication of the human and higher than-animal aspect of married life.
It is an indication that the factors of the passions are not the only
natural link in married life. The fundamental link is purity, sincerity
and the union of two spirits; or, in other words, the thing which joins
the married couple one to the other, and unites them, is compassion,
mercy, purity and sincerity, not the passions, which also exist between
animals.

In his own subtle way, Rumi distinguishes between the passions and true
love; he calls the former animal and the latter human. He says:

*Wrath and passion are the attributes of beasts,*

*Love and compassion the attributes of man.*

*Thus Love is the characteristic of*

*Adam, missing in animals, a deficiency.*

Materialist philosophers too have not been able to deny this spiritual
state which, from several standpoints, has a non-material aspect, and
which would not be in conformity with man and what is beyond him being
material.

In *Marriage and Morals,* Bertrand Russell writes:

Work of which the motive is solely pecuniary cannot have this value, but
only work which embodies some kind of devotion, whether to persons, to
things, or merely to a vision. And love itself is worthless when it is
merely possessive; it is then on a level with work which is purely
pecuniary. In order to have the kind of value which we are speaking,
love must feel the ego of the beloved person as important as one's own
ego, **and must realize** the other's feelings and wishes as though they
were one's own. [^3]

Another point which should be mentioned and carefully attended to is
that we said that even loves of the passions may possibly become
beneficial, and that occurs when they become linked to piety and
modesty. That is to say, in connection with, on the one hand, separation
and inaccessibility, and, on the other hand, purity and modesty, the
pains and anguishes, pressures and difficulties to which the spirit is
subjected bear good and beneficial results.

It is in this connection that the mystics say that allegorical love is
turned in real love, i.e., love of the Essence of the One; and it is
also in connection with this that the following tradition is narrated:

He who becomes a lover, who conceals (his love), who is chaste (in his
love) and dies (in that state) has died as a martyr.

However the point must not be forgotten that this kind of love, with all
the advantages that may, under particular conditions, possibly be
brought about, is not to be recommended - it is a dangerous valley to
enter. It is in this respect like an affliction, which, if it troubles
someone and he opposes it with the force of his patience and will,
becomes a perfecter and purifier of his soul; it cooks what is raw in it
and clarifies what is turbid in it. But one cannot recommend an
affliction. No-one can create an affliction for himself so as to profit
from these factors which prepare and train the soul; neither should he
bring about an affliction for someone else on this pretext.

Here, also, Russell has something valuable to say:

Suffering fills people with energy, like an invaluable counterweight.
Someone who deems himself to be entirely contented will not exert
himself any further for happiness. But I do not advocate that this be
made a pretext for causing others suffering so that they may tread a
profitable path, because it often gives the opposite result and destroys
man. Rather, it is better in this case to submit our own selves to
chance events that fall in our way.[^4]

As far as we know, the effects and advantages of afflictions and
misfortunes have been much emphasized in Islamic teachings, and they are
well-known as signs of God, but this in no way permits anyone to create
afflictions for himself or for others on this pretext.

Moreover, there is a difference between love an affliction; and that is
that love, more than any other factor, is against reason. Wherever it
sets foot, it ousts reason from its governing position. This is why love
and reason are well-known in mystic literature as two rivals. The
antagonism between the philosophers and the mystics originates from
here, the former depending on, and confiding in, the power of reason,
the latter in the power of love. In Sufi literature, reason is always
condemned and defeated in this field of competition. Sa'di says:

*My well-wishers advise me*

*It is useless to make bricks on the sea.*

*But the power of yearning prevails over patience:*

*The pretension of the intellect over love is futile.*

Another poet has said:

*I drew a comparison for the counsel of reason in the path of love:*

*It is like a fall of dew trying to trace a pattern on the sea.*

How can a force which is as powerful as this, which snatches the reins
of the will out of our hands, and which, in the words of Rumi "blows a
man here and there like a blade of straw in the hands of a fierce wind",
and in the words of Russell "is something with propensity for anarchy",
be recommendable?

At any rate, it is one thing to happen to have useful results, but it is
another to be advisable or recommendable.

From this it will be seen that the objection and complaint which some
Islamic jurists have levelled against some of the Islamic philosophers'
who have set forth this matter in their metaphysics and have explained
its results and advantages, is invalid. For the former imagined that the
opinion of the latter group of philosophers was that this matter is both
advisable and recommendable, whereas they only considered the useful
effects of this kind of love which appear under conditions of piety and
chastity, without recommending or advising it, just as they would have
done with afflictions or misfortunes.

[^1]: see 30:21

[^2]: . And of His signs is that He created for you, of yourselves,
spouses, that you might repose in them, and He has set between you love
and compassion. (ar-Rum, 30:21 ) وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ مَنَامُكُمْ بِاللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ وَابْتِغَاؤُكُمْ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ
لِقَوْمٍ يَسْمَعُونَ

[^3]: . B. Russell: Marriage and Morals, London, 1976, p.86

[^4]: . ibid. Translated from the Persian, original untraced.


