Abstract
========

Forests throughout the world continue to be in danger as a result of
human activity. Although the average rate of deforestation has recently
slowed, in some countries the rate of forest degradation remains high.
Currently, numerous management efforts are underway to address this
environmental crisis. In some cases the achievement of forest
preservation has been related to ethical choices. One moral posture,
anthropocentrism, which views human beings as central and the most
significant species on the planet, is believed to be a primary cause of
environmental degradation includes deforestation.

This paper aims to address deforestation with the reconfiguration of an
ethic of environmental stewardship. Environmental stewardship is
outlined as the sustainable and accountable consumption of natural
resources that takes a full and balanced account of the interests of
society, future generations, and other species. A religious
interpretation would require the phrase “and ultimately to God” to be
added. Environmental stewardship is, as a rule, based on an ecocentric
model of morality (with the environment as the focal point); however it
can also be based upon a theocentric model (God is at the center).
Theo-centric ethics include the idea of accountability to God and are
driven by religious faith, where God the creator and sustainer of the
Earth.

As indicated by the teachings of Islam, the individual has a critical
role in the protection of natural resources and the assets of the
environment, which can also be described as fulfilling the role of God’s
vice-regent, trustee or steward on Earth. Such perspective can provide a
functional guide to the preservation of natural resources, wildlife and
forests. The idea that the concept of stewardship can be found in
diverse philosophies and religions does not diminish its significance or
its critical importance to all like on the planet. In fact, it can
encourage Muslims and non-Muslims alike to safeguard the natural world
that has been entrusted to everyone. This is a universal notion of
protecting t the ecosystem with which almost everyone can concur.

**Key words: Deforestation, forest degradation, environment,
environmentalism, nature, ethic, moral, philosophy, stewardship,
anthropocentrism, eco-centrism, theo-centrism, God, Islam, Islamic,
khlifa, caliph.**


