1. Introduction
===============

1.1. The Logjam of Deforestation
--------------------------------

Forests cover around 31% of the Earth’s land.1 Each year, forest loss
reaches 13 million hectares, according to an estimate by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).2 Forty percent of
the remaining forests are in danger because of human action. Forests are
also being damaged by natural disasters like volcanic eruptions or
intense mud slides.

In many cases, these forests cannot be naturally regenerated.3 While
this paper will not discuss the natural loss of forests, it will explore
the man-made activities that lead to reduction of forest cover, as well
as the actual ethical efforts that can be taken to combat deforestation.

It is important to understand that forests are the home of many species
of plants and animals, and they provide a home to around 1.6 billion
people, who are relying on forest’s benefits to live. Forests are
providing food, clothing, fresh water, medicine, and shelter, and are
they are a natural source of oxygen for livings in general. In fact,
many species are in danger due to deforestation.4 In order to control
deforestation, it is important to know the main causes of the cutting
down of forests and to follow successful examples of forest management.

The rate of deforestation has been elevated in many places around the
world because of people’s activities, especially in European lands that
have been cleared over the last 8,000 years, in order to accommodate for
farming and building.5 Even though across the globe, the average speed
of deforestation has been slowing down recently, in some countries, like
Brazil and  Indonesia, the rate of forest loss is still high.6 Many
management models are seen nowadays to manage this kind of environmental
crisis. In some cases, the real accomplishment of preserving forests can
be attributed to ethical choices.7 Going deep to the root causes of
deforestation, then understanding how to solve the causes ethically can
be the key to combat the issue of excessively cutting down trees.8

Some people believe that the separation between the earthly living world
and religion can be a reason for many environmental crises. They also
believe religion is the key root of the existence of earth and its
resources come from God. Religions help us to shape our attitude toward
the environment. They also help us to understand how, through our
control over the earth’s resources, we ought to treat other humans, and
in what way we should communicate with the nature.9

In this way, religions modify the views and beliefs of the world, which
motivate basic approaches and values of diverse cultures and societies.
Religious morals and ethical values form activities toward others, along
with our relationship with all the surrounding living creatures like
plant and animal life.10 According to Abedi-Sarvestani and Shahvali:

*Since environmental ethics is [are] essentially based on intrinsic
value and beliefs, religions have been getting more recognized to define
proper environmental ethics mainly because they try to illuminate what
possessed*

*intrinsic value and also what is the criterion for evaluating a
behavior toward nature as [a] moral one.* 11

Religion has received considerable attention with respect to
environmental protection due to the critical examination of science and
technology by Sarvestani and Shahvali.12 As with Christianity and
Judaism, in Islam, taking care of the environment is an important matter
of concern.13 But few believe that these religions are mainly
anthropocentric and consider nature as a secondarily important thing.14
Supporters of these religions could say that the specific attributes of
humans do certainly place them on a separate plane from other creatures;
however, the Islamic religion requires humans to have a special concern
toward the natural environment through accountability to God. Such
accountability will not overlook probable consequences to other living
organisms when making decisions for the wellbeing of the environment.
Before exploring the Muslim ethics that are possibly related to the
problem of forest loss, it is essential to first identify the main
causes that bring people to cut down trees.15


