2. Causes of Forest Loss
========================

It is possible to develop approaches to deal with the difficult task of
deforestation and forest degradation and to promote forest conservation
and restoration by examining and understanding the real elementarily
causes of forest loss. These include the demand for wood and the
conversion to agricultural land. The weakness of supporting cultural
values, indigenous rights of responsibility to land, and
community-conserved areas also contribute to the cause of forest loss.16
Deforestation is not the blame of a single country, but is an issue
shared by many countries. At the beginning of the 21st Century, the top
10 countries with the highest rate of deforestation are shown in Figure
1. According to the figure, forest loss is happening quickly in Brazil,
double the rate of forest loss in Indonesia, the second-place country
with the highest rate of forestation.17

![](http://alhassanain.org/english/books/0750-deforestation_and_islamic_stewarship_ethic/images/image001.jpg)

Figure 1. Top 10 Countries with Forest Loss.18

### 2.1. Demand for Wood

###

The high need for wood is the main cause of deforestation. This occurs
by the consumers of forests; such as, industrialized countries, as well
by the domestic community who use forests as an easily accessed resource
of fuel.19 It is believed that around one half of illegal timber logging
is due to fuel wood demand. Wood is used for cooking and heating all
over the world.20 Also, wood is used for house building, paper
manufacturing, and furniture construction. Burning wood to make
charcoal, which can be used as fuel, is another reason for wood
consumption in various countries. These countries, have almost a daily
electricity outage, especially the poor countries, such as Ethiopia,
Kenya, Nepal, and Georgia, where people store wood and buy it as an
emergency fuel supply. In other countries, like Cameroon, the need for
cutting down forests is for processing outfits that require the regular
request of raw materials in the form of wood.21

### 2.2. Conversion to Agriculture

###

Because of the ongoing growth of the human population, there is clearly
a need for nutrition. The need of nutrition stimulates the conversion of
forests to farm and pasture land.22 It can be seen that in many
countries, such as Bangladesh, Cameroon, Colombia, El Salvador, Ecuador,
Indonesia, Kenya, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, and the
Philippines, the main drivers of deforestation are industrial tree
plantations, industrial agriculture, cattle ranching, and planting of
oil palm.23 For instance, cattle ranching is the major driver of 73% of
Amazon forest loss in Brazil.24 In some countries, the planting of
exotic species or the converting of forest to agricultural land in order
to generate personal wealth or for export to industrialized countries
can cause forest degradation, and this negatively affects the livelihood
of forest dwellers.25 Sadly, the moment that a forest is lost to
agriculture, the land mass typically is accompanied by of the loss of
the flora and animals that once lived there.26

### 2.3. Conflict Over Land Tenure

###

A major factor that causes deforestation and conflict in Ghana,
Cameroon, Bangladesh, Tajikistan, and the Philippines is a constant
uncertainty over land rights. Indeterminate land tenancy and rights of
the original forest inhabitants is the most important issue. The
indigenous people have taken care of the forests for centuries. Despite
this, the same people who protected the forests are not given any
consideration by the governments, and they are sometimes displaced
violently.27

As the forests have increased in value, with investors having vested
interests, this has led to the setting up of protected areas of the
forests. The use of protected areas as a conservation measure of forests
was highly condemned in Colombia. They claimed that this has never
worked for the last two decades. On the other hand, in Philippines, it
has been claimed that the issue of protected areas was just a pretense
in the name of forest conservation, whereas it went against the rights
and privileges of the indigenous people to occupy and move freely in the
forest.

Consequently, these forest restrictions have led to a reduction in the
traditional learning of how to protect forests.28

Some countries have arising issues in the laws concerning ownership and
the right to live in forests as what has been constitutionalized. For
example, in Ethiopia, the terra nullius principle considers unoccupied
lands not to be owned and can be given to anyone.

“Unoccupied,” in this case, is undefined and can, as well, mean
community forests, and the case is the same in the Philippines where
indigenous forests are regarded as government property or public land
under Presidential Declaration 705.29

In this case, indigenous people are deprived of their traditional duty
to develop, protect, and foster forests and this can also lead to land
grabbing by the government. This results in a loss of cultural practices
among young people, as they move to urban areas where the character of
their traditional agricultural life is eroded by urban life. In
Columbia, issues of mining exploitation and hydrocarbon extraction have
been discussed as other ways that have displaced indigenous people from
their traditional boundaries.

This is regarded as an excessive violation of these people’s rights and
privileges.30

The laxity seen from the indigenous people and also from local
authorities to come up with strategies and bodies of protecting and
conserving forests is somehow not surprising. This has been a common
problem, even after the development of the reducing emissions from
deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) pilot project, which was
thought to be of benefit to indigenous people.31

The REDD in developing countries is a climate change (CC) alleviation
technique that manages the present crisis of the environment via
promoting the forests’ value. By all means, forests are the home of
millions of indigenous peoples who overwhelmingly believe, themselves,
in a non-commended status. International and national laws and rules
have been put into place to ensure that the indigenous people’s rights
are provided for to assure a good relationship between these people and
the natural environment.32

### 2.4. Illegal Logging and Corruption

###

Corruption is a vice that causes a lot of evil both in developing and
developed economies.

Illegal logging and corruption is noted to be one of the factors that
has caused deforestation. The lack of alternative livelihoods, economic
and fuel poverty, together with corruption, has led to the clearance of
forests for purposes of economic interests. Bribery of officials, as a
form of corruption, is very prevalent in many parts of the world, and it
is a major obstacle in the realization of forest conservation through
various measures.33

Laws have been formulated in Bulgaria, El Salvador, Ghana, Kenya,
Panama, Indonesia and Papua New Guinea but, due to lack of financial
resources and lack of political commitment, their implementation has
been a challenge.34 There are national legislations worldwide for
controlling the timber production and trade process from the harvesting
to the processing to the sales of wood. At any moment, these
legislations can be violated. It is possible to harvest more wood than
is permitted or to remove trees from protected areas.35 Corruption has
been widespread as licenses to cut down trees have been improperly
issued in defiance of both national and international laws that aim to
protect ecosystems and certain species. Local leaders are also bribed to
accept this move.36

### 2.5. Industrialization, Urbanization, and Infrastructure

###

There are other factors that have been noted to cause global
deforestation. These include: industrialization, urbanization, and the
development of modern infrastructure. Economic development is seen as a
good move across the globe, but these developments do not seem to shift
toward care for the environment—despite alerts raised by communities and
the civil society.37

In some countries, economic developments are seen as some of the reasons
that obstruct community initiatives aimed at protecting forests. Take
for example a country like India, whereby the initiatives by the local
communities to protect forests is hampered by the government, which

allows the private and public sector to set up roads, mines, and other
development projects in any location. The government has not put into
consideration the benefits that the community derives from the forests;
rather, it has worked to promote these organizations in setting up
development projects. The Indian government has even relaxed its look
out for the violations of environmental laws and guidelines by these
companies.38

Mining, oil, and gas exploration in Colombia, Cameroon, India,
Bangladesh, and the Philippines were some of the notable industrial
processes causing threats to forests. Oil exploration in the Sylhet
region in Bangladesh was one of the examples cited. Forests are being
cleared to pave the way for industrial projects like the building of
roads, dams, houses, dams, and other large construction projects. The
Karnaphuli hydro-electric project and Kaptai dam are some examples of
these development projects in the Chittagong Hill Tracts in Bangladesh
that cause hill deforestation. Bangladesh has also noted the issue of
clearance of forests for purposes of military use, while urbanization
was identified to cause deforestation in countries such as Kenya,
Bulgaria, and El Salvador. There is a notable population increase in
most parts of the world and, therefore, there is a higher demand for
farm land, construction of houses, and the building of roads, and this
has led to the clearance of forests. High demand for timber in Cameroon,
Kenya, Nepal, Ethiopia, and Panama was also noted to cause deforestation
in these countries.39

In Colombia, Panama, and the Philippines, it was noted that ecotourism
has also led to deforestation, but this was a contentious factor because
the type of tourism within the ecotourism subsector should be indicated.
This was because ecotourism was thought to promote reforestation.40

The enforcement of laws that govern deforestation, logging, and charcoal
trade should be achievable if there is a good road network within the
forest. This was one of the main obstacles identified in Kenya. The road
network that borders Maasai-Mau in Narok South is impassable during the
rainy seasons and this gives an avenue to loggers, who donkeys, to ferry
logs to locations where they can easily sell them to customers.41

### 2.6. Economic Poverty; No Alternative Livelihoods

###

Poverty is one of the major issues that has created problems at both
national and international levels. People need money to support their
families and bring up their children but without economic alternatives,
they resort to the forests. This is the case in the Amazonian area of
Ecuador. Timber is sold at low prices to get money to provide for
families because there is no other source of employment. Globally,
jobless youth prefer to look for money from forests through the selling
of timber or through farming practices. Illiteracy has played another
significant role in deforestation. This is because illiterate people
have less opportunity to find alternative livelihoods so as to reduce
their reliance on forest resources.42

Deforestation has also been triggered by economic crisis, especially in
the third-world countries. Take for example, Cameroon, where many
workers were laid off by agro-industrial companies hence resulting in

unlawful exploitation of the forests to meet their economic and
financial needs.43

The population of Georgia has been on the rise, and this has led to
increased dependence on the forests. Forest resources have been
exploited due to the population increase with no notable change in the
economic status of the country. Many poor people living near the forest
have benefited from forest products, which are in high demand. This
notwithstanding, facts have shown that these poor communities living
near the forests have lost their control to other influential interests,
such as companies involved in logging and migrant workers who benefit
more from the forests.44

### 2.7. Lack of Political Will, Poor Central Planning, and Inadequate Capacity

###

The major challenges facing forest conservation include: absence of
upright governance and effective central organization. Problems related
to inadequate capacity and the lack of governmental concerns are among
the major factors contributing to the high rise in forest degradation
and deforestation. These factors were a little dissimilar in various
countries. In the case of Georgia, a small number of government leaders
had basic knowledge in sustainable forest management. There was a weak
administration dealing with forest management organization, and the
state had taken control of all the forest assets and the organization.
The sector was not given enough money to maintain the forest and to
ensure sustainability. In addition, Georgia had an insufficient and weak
lawful background.45

The Panamanian workshop pointed fingers at the government for its
failure to set clear policies regarding various issues that affect
forest conservation. These issues include: tactical development in
societies and areas, economic evolution of the Kuna regions, watching of
events that take place in forests, and preservation of ancestral
home-grown territories.46

A workshop in India highlighted issues to deal with weak control
mechanisms, lack of proper planning from the government, and limited
financial allocations. These issues resulted in the lack of capacity to
deal with forest destructions, forest mafia, and industrialization
processes, showing some laxities from the Ministry of Environment and
Forestry, and State Forest Departments.47

There are no municipal regulations that govern forest activities in El
Salvador. The state policy and the legislation for environmental care
still allow for the construction of projects that result in
deforestation. There is another concern in Panama on the policymaking
organizations.

The private and the public sector have both failed in their duty to
restore forests.48

The political class also can be to blame for global deforestation. This
could be due to several factors, which include inadequate equipment,
poor management of forests, and use of out-of-date husbandry.49

Some governments are not ready or do not have the capacity to enforce
some of the regulations governing forests and other national laws that
deal with environmental protection.

This is more so true when big national projects are in question or when
there is a competition between the palm oil and forestry sectors, as in
a case in Ecuador, the society wanted to take care of the forests while
the Environment Ministry still allowed exploitation—even in areas that
had been protected.50

This negligence, together with corruption, may result in a lack of trust
of authorities by the local communities, thus, making the management of
forests and other related discussions very hard to undertake. Since the
local communities are not consulted, they do not have relevant
information about the management of forests and the policies that govern
the same. Therefore, if the global forests have to be reinstated, some
of these impediments have to be overcome.51

The scope of stewardship is especially pertinent in connection with
international environmental law. This happens due to the gradual
emergence of a new ethical approach toward environmental regulations,
and it can be recognized in some trends in international and national
legislation. Actually, most of the analysts see the ethic of stewardship
as a useful way to solve various challenges facing the environment.52

This study examines the development of a societal attitude toward
stewardship to potentially address and combat the problem of
deforestation. This study examines the application of the Islamic ethic
for stewardship in both Muslim and non-Muslim regions.

Deforestation occurs due to many factors, including conversion to
agriculture, conflict over land tenure, illegal logging, and corruption.
Industrialization, urbanization and infrastructure, economic poverty, no
alternative livelihoods, and the lack of political will also contribute
to the overharvesting of trees. Poor central planning and inadequate
capacity make this an even greater issue, which needs an ethical
response.


