3. Analysis
===========

3.1. Environmental Ethics
-------------------------

Ethics is a discipline that deals with the finding of approval and
disapproval. Ethics, as a study, has attracted a lot of attention in the
academic field, especially in philosophy. The judgments made in ethics
include distinguishing the following: a right and wrong deed, bad or
good actions, desirable or undesirable qualities, desirability and good
judgment of deeds, and the states of dealings, nature, ends, and
items.53

Environmental ethics deals with ways in which human behavior affects the
natural environment surrounding the humans. In normal life, human beings
interact with the environment as they undertake their day-to-day
activities. Environmental ethics can also be defined as various ways of
maintaining a good relationship between the environment and the human
beings.54 In this sense, forest ethics also deal with ways in which
human behavior affects natural forest surrounding the human beings.55
This is an appropriate definition that suits this study. One of the ways
of maintaining a good relationship between the environment and human
beings is by making people understand that it is their religious duty to
protect and take good care of the environment. There should be rules and
regulations that govern the interaction between the natural environment
and such rules can be found in religious scripture.56

3.2. Examples of Forest Management
----------------------------------

Ethics Forests are an important portion of life for people who live in
and around them. Forests provide many of our material needs, and they
are useful for many various reasons, not the least of which is
enjoyment. Given that forests provide so many services, they have “a
number of passive and active use values: economic, ecological, social,
symbolic, spiritual, and scientific values.”57

For more than 25 years, there have been a number of concerns relating to
forests, forest management, and forestry that have emerged and attracted
much attention all over the world. The development of these concerns
indicates recently that forestry should not only be economically,
ecologically, environmentally, and socially reasonable, but it should
also be ethically acceptable.58

Ethical apprehensions are affected by people’s beliefs concerning
nature, the value of nature to human life, and the role of human beings
in our use of the environment. People’s recognition of the different
goals and approaches in forest management is interrelated with the
related values that individuals embrace.59

### 3.2.1. Brazil

###

The Brazilian government introduced laws through the Brazilian Institute
for the Environmental and Renewable Natural Resources (IBAMA). The rules
and laws implemented were to help prevent illegal cutting of trees by
the citizens. Failure to adhere to such rules could lead to severe
punishment of the law breakers.60

The immense changes in the Brazilian policies played a very crucial role
in reducing the level of deforestation in the country. This is one of
the most efficient ways of conserving the environment. This is according
to the research conducted by CPI/PUC-Rio, which presented the issue of
policy change impact on environmental conservation as empirical
evidence.61

The Real-Time System for Detection of Deforestation (DETER) is a
satellite-based technology that helped in the identification of
deforestation actions in Brazil. This monitoring technique played a key
role in ensuring that the environment was conserved and protected from
harmful human actions. The IBAMA, with the assistance of DETER was able
to easily locate deforestation activities taking place in Brazil.
Punishment to the people cutting trees illegally was done in a more
effective way than before DETER was introduced.62

Studies show that the introduction of DETER played a crucial role in
environmental conservation in various ways. It allowed for the easy
locating of areas where deforestation activities were taking place. With
easy location, monitoring and target ability was greatly improved and,
hence, the government officials could efficiently control deforestation
without having to put more effort into discovery.63 In 2004, the Action
Plan for Prevention and Control of Deforestation in the Legal Amazon
(PPCDAm) was passed.

The main goal of this plan was to control and put off deforestation
actions in the country.

One of its strategies was the adoption of DETER. The enlarged ability of
the IBAMA was to aim its rule enforcement assets in the Amazon areas via
DETER to attain amazing outcomes.

Between 2007 and 2011, there was 75% less deforestation compared to the
time when there where there is no fines imposed lawbreakers.64

New policies being put into place really played a great role in
preventing deforestation in Brazil. The various strategies used in
controlling deforestation included: frequent land checking, strict
control of prohibited logging, and construction of conservation spots.
In order for any individual to cut trees in the Amazon, he or she should
have to have a license. Licensing is one of the best ways to control
deforestation because it allows for the cutting of trees only in
specified areas.65

Brazil has seen agricultural development reduce the rate of poverty and
hunger in their country. Indigenous peoples in Brazil are greatly
benefiting because they have power (20%) over some reasonable parts of
the Amazon. The government has offered enough support to these people
through various ways, such as issuing them with official titles. The
government has also protected them from unlawful intrusion by farmers,
ranchers, and miners who are not indigenous.

The logging rules and regulations have been strongly enforced. Examples
of such laws include:

closing of illegal sawmills, seizure of illegal timber, and punishing of
individuals who act against the law. Even the top corrupt officials who
engaged themselves in illegal logging were jailed.

This confirms that the government is committed in its decision to stop
deforestation.66

There is a current climate-change mitigation mechanism used to handle
issues of environmental crisis in Brazil. The mechanism in question is
the “Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in
developing countries” (REDD). Forests act as homes for indigenous
people, who “often find themselves in a marginalized position.” Laws and
rules have been put into place to ensure that the indigenous people’s
rights are provided for. The global and state laws emphasize having good
relationships between these people and the natural environment. The
relationship can be taken in a stewardship worldview where the
indigenous people should be given their moral rights. This framework is
only applicable to global environmental rulings. The reason for this
shift is the new moral approach toward environmental law guidelines.
This approach can be noticed in some trends in global and state laws.67

Most analysts see it as a useful way to solve various challenges facing
the environment.

Stewardship has played a crucial role in reconciling conflicts between
environmental policies and the rights of the indigenous people.
Stewardship is considered to be the best tool for bringing into line the
international human rights laws and international environmental laws in
relation to the rights of the indigenous people.68

REDD tries to unite the environmental policies with indigenous people’s
rights. The two may harmonize or may fail to unite in the long run. In
addition, REDD provides for an opportunity for the environmental
policies and the indigenous people’s rights to be protected as a result
of allowing a stewardship ethical worldview to take place.69

Even though Brazil has had very strong laws for forest protection since
2006, recently the legislation is losing strength. “Instead of
strengthening forest protection in light of their critical role in
climate change protection, the Brazilian forests came under even graver
danger with a 2012 revision of the 1965 Forest Code, which greatly
reduced protections in place for over 70 years.” Despite presidential
vetoes of the most egregious provisions in the 2012 revisions, the
nearly wholesale dismantling of the forest and ecosystem protections
still stand as current Brazilian law.”70 It now looks like they are in
the process of strengthening the laws again.71

In summation, the main reasons to control deforestation in Brazil are to
combat illegal cutting of trees as a natural resource, to protect the
region as a forest area, and to protect the rights of indigenous people
who live there. Additionally, Brazil is trying to control forest
destruction in response to climate change.

### 3.2.2. Nepal and New Zealand

###

Nepal is focusing on controlling deforestation for a different reason:
Nepal’s issues seem to revolve around the question of who should be
responsible for the land. Nepal has some part of its forests being
managed by local communities via Community Forest User Groups (CFUGs).
It has been shown that the management of the forests by local
communities yields better results because the rate of illegal tree
cutting is lower than in the forests managed by the government.

The question of who owns the land in the government’s hands is still
unanswered in Nepal. The communities are provided with some of basic
needs and resources. In such a country, local governance needs to be
reinforced so as to perk up the likelihood of fair forest stewardship.
The table below explains how Nepal can improve their forest conservation
process.72 Clarifying land tenure and strengthening local governance
will the improve chances of equitable forest stewardship (See table
1).73

Table 1. Management, Harvesting, Sale, and Land Tenure Rights Under
Forest Governance Regimes in Nepal

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="16%" />
<col width="16%" />
<col width="16%" />
<col width="16%" />
<col width="16%" />
<col width="16%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>Management regime</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Approximate area</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Forest management</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Harvesting of forest products</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Sale of forest products</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Land tenure</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>Community forestry</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>1,219,272 hectares (25% of the forest area)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>CFUGs</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>CFUGs</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>CFUGs w/government permission</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Governmen</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

In relation to rights, stewardship can be viewed as the principled
imperative of such rights. Examples of the rights of the indigenous
people include giving support to them in relation to environmental
matters and the climate-change perspectives. Indigenous people’s
stewardship role can be seen in their daily behaviors, welfare,
customary environmental understanding, and cultural distinctiveness as
an element of their identity. Arguing for indigenous people’s rights
and, at the same time, giving a substitute way for the security of some
human rights can be seen as an overarching notion. This can be explained
using an example of a land tenure system and the inappropriateness among
land rights and possession of local people and the standard communal law
approach to various possessions.74

Maoris, the indigenous Polynesian people of New Zealand, trust that the
people belong to the land and not the vice-versa. According to them,
possession of land should not be through the legal system. There are
proposals for the introduction of a stewardship claim as compensation
for damages that were caused to indigenous societies due to effects of
climate change.75 Often times, indigenous peoples have a stewardship
approach toward the environment, and their attitude to land is as
“guardians.”76 This view of people belonging to the land shows the real
value of the environment for the environment’s sake.

### 3.2.3. USA and other English-speaking countries

###

The view above-people belonging to the land shows the real value of the
environment for the environment’s sake-also can be seen in the USA and

other speaking-English countries where they protect the forest because
it is a part of the environment. The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) is
a non-profit, non-governmental program that establishes standards to
promote the responsible management of forests globally. Many people
believe that the only way to preserve forests is by banning the use of
its products, but the daily consumption of forest products cannot be
ignored.77 For example, on average, Americans use close to six trees
worth of paper each year. The FSC, therefore, being the standard measure
in certification of forests, is trying to control the market to consider
policies that represent a preference for FSC-certified products.
Consumers and governments look for these certified products, as well,
and the US Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) program provides incentives to encourage the
use of FSC-certified materials.78

Forests are protected according to strict ecological and social norms
under FSC certification, and forest fiber is tracked the distance to the
shopper through the certification system with products having the FSC
“check-tree” logo.79 (See Figure 2.)

![](books/0750-deforestation_and_islamic_stewarship_ethic/images/image002.jpg)

Figure 2. FSC Logo.80

Additionally, since the FSC is the gold standard in forest
certification, it is the only program that is supported by groups such
as the World Wildlife Federation (WWF), the Sierra Club, Greenpeace, the
Natural Resources Defense Council, and the National Wildlife Federation.

Wide areas nowadays, especially in the US and Canada, have become
certified under the FSC’s system.

During the same period of time the FSC was being established, many
non-governmental organizations were also being established. For
instance, by the end of the 20th century, different organizations of
conservation recognized the stewardship concept as a way to preserve the
environment. To illustrate:

**At the beginning of the 1990s, non-profit “stewardship” organizations
aimed to protect different areas and species across North America and
most English-speaking areas. The organizations protect rivers, gardens,
coastlines, and species located locally, nationally, and regionally in
these areas.**

**In addition, other stewardship programs were implemented around the
Englishspeaking world:**

United States Forest Stewardship Program (1990)

United Kingdom’s Countryside Stewardship Scheme (1991)

Canadian Province of Ontario’s Stewardship Program (1995)

Canadian Habitat Stewardship Programme (2000)

Australia’s Environmental Stewardship Programme (2007)81

Consequently, there has been an increase in the use of the terms
“environmental stewardship” and “forest stewardship.” The term
“stewardship” is increasingly replacing the term “management” when it
comes to environmental conservation (Table 2).82

Table 2. Examples of the Wide Use of the Term Stewardship in Land Use
and Conservation Literature83

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>Term</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Use</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>Stewardship</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>In various aspects of land management and conservation</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>Land Stewardship</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Especially in the USA and Canada in relation to both agricultural land</p>
<p>and forests</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3.2.4. Countries with significant Muslim influence

###

### 3.2.4.1. The Philippines

###

Ten percent of the inhabitants of Mindanao, which is the second-biggest
southern-most main island in the Philippines are Muslims.84 The Act for
the Autonomous Region in Muslim

Mindanao (ARMM) was the first law dealing with management of forests in
the Philippines.

This law has been in place since October 2007.85 ARMM is composed of all
the Philippines’

dominant Muslim provinces, that is to say, Basilan, Lanao del Sur,
Shariff Kabunsuan, Maguindanao, Sulu and Tawi-Tawi, and the Islamic City
of Marawi.86 ARMM has played a crucial role in reducing deforestation in
the Philippines. ARMM is highly treasured as the correlative element of
the Philippines terrain. This Act was formulated and implemented through
the assistance of various groups, such as the Muslim ethics and law
leaders, social scientists, government units, and leaders of the
society.87

For instance, Republic Act No.9054, or RA No.9054, is an act to augment
and support the Organic Act for ARMM, adjusting for the purpose Republic
Act No.6734, named “An Act Providing for the Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao” as adjusted.88 This law, when released and enforced, forbid
the cutting down of trees in many areas of the country.89

The proclamations issued by the National Government declaring old growth
or natural forests and all water sheds within the autonomous region as
forest reserves are reiterated in RA 9054. The forest reserves shall not
be subjected to logging operations of any kind or nature. (Art. X, Sec.
5).90

Many activities toward forests were either stopped or changed when RA
9054 was approved. To illustrate, the National Government or the
Regional Government that had granted forest concessions, timber
licenses, contracts, or agreements of any kind or nature, over forest
reserves in the autonomous region were “cancelled, nullified and voided
and shall not be renewed until 30 years after the date of approval of RA
9054. (Art. X, Sec. 5)”91

RA 9054 encourages reforestation. This occurs by requiring the setting
aside of funds to be devoted to reforestation projects and other
environmental activities. According to the law, ten percent of the
shares of the internal revenue taxes of the Regional Government, the
provinces, cities, municipalities and barangays of the autonomous region
as well as all allocations for the development of the region by the
National Government shall be devoted to reforestation projects and other
environmental activities to enhance the protection and development of
the region’s environment. (Art. X, Sec. 5)”92

The major policies highlighted in this Act include trust and stewardship
as keys for forest preservation. This Act is based on particular Islamic
principles and approaches of communitybased management. This Act gives
priority to the community when it comes to administration and the use of
forest property. Importantly, the Act’s principal strategies are
community forest management and community-based forest management.93

### 3.2.4.2. Indonesia

###

Perhaps a similar act could be implemented in Indonesia, where the high
rate of tropical forest loss is regrettable, especially in Sumatra.94 It
has been shown that Indonesia has the highest number of Muslim believers
in the world, approximately 88% of the population. Islamic religion, in
the context of Sumatra, has the ability to incorporate customary ways of
environmental management practices, which are being managed by the local
government  organizations called Nagari. The Nagari contain many natural
resources, such as forests, farm land, and lakes. Furthermore, the
Islamic religion explains in detail the relationship that exists between
God, nature, and human beings. Stewardship has been stressed by the
doctrine of Khalifa whereby Muslims are encouraged to conserve natural
resources.95 This religion acknowledges that everything was created by
God.96

Unfortunately, the people of Sumatra appear unfamiliar with many
management principles within Islam and they are not followed all through
Sumatra at the local or state level.

Therefore, the main focus of the Nagari project was to educate home
teachers, religious leaders, and society members to effectively spread
and apply Islamic knowledge and laws regarding environmental
conservation. Lastly, the project was prepared in a way as to perform
the proper monitoring and proceedings needed to assess how well the
project’s objectives were being achieved at the local level.97

3.3. Environmental Stewardship Philosophies
-------------------------------------------

The term stewardship is originated from sty-ward, the one that keeps an
eye on animal fields, as well it has a relation to the word “warden” (in
nature conservation). Other terms, such as custodian, trustee, and
guardian,

have the same definition as steward, are they are also used at times in
relation to land used.98

A survey conducted recently about the preservation of, and literature
about, land use applies a new explanation of stewardship. The new
explanation is adjusted by relying on natural resources management. It
defines stewardship as:

The responsible use (including conservation) of natural resources in a
way that takes [a] full and balanced account of the interests of
society, future generations, and other species, as well as private
needs, and accepts significant answerability to society. A religious
interpretation would require the phrase “and ultimately to God” to be
added.99

The stewardship word has a culture in philosophy, especially in ethics,
where it is mainly applied to represent answerable consumption of
resources. Additionally, it’s been designed as a meaning of articulating
“environmental ethics” or “land ethics.”100 The main idea of stewardship
is the caring of particular things “in trust” for another being: for
God, a god, nature, society, or future generations.101

This principle of stewardship can be found in an eco-centric philosophy.
Such philosophy focuses mainly on the role of human beings as the
responsible party for the environment as stewards.102 According to the
eco-centric view, nature dictates the way people should behave as
guardians of the ecosystem. See Figure 3.

![](books/0750-deforestation_and_islamic_stewarship_ethic/images/image003.jpg)

Figure 3. The Eco-Centric Model.

There exists another option for environmentalism. This option is the
ability to reach further than the religion and political debates on
eco-centrism and anthropocentrism. It is theocentric, and it is not
anthropocentric or eco-centric environmentalism.103 Environmental ethics
and stewardship mostly comes from theo-centrism, because in this view,
humans are the guardians of the earth as entrusted by God,104 which
raises the question about the morality of deforestation.105 To
illustrate, O’Riordans (see Figure 4) illustrates the relationship
between God, human beings, and nature. It requires that human beings
should act according to a required code of conduct and morals. In
addition, it explains why people should behave in those given ways.106

![](books/0750-deforestation_and_islamic_stewarship_ethic/images/image004.jpg)

Figure 4. O’Riordan’s View to Show the Theo-Centric Model.

Even though the stewardship principal is approximately encouraged by
religious concerns, this fact might enhance the way that the managers of
earthly resources see the stewardship principal. The term stewardship is
in worldwide used, indicating that either the religious concept is not
known well or that it is not an obstruction.107

Stewardship is a connection of beliefs and worth relating to nature that
derives a sustainable relation with the ecosystem. This term is possibly
used worldwide as a way of respecting the values and responsibilities
toward the environment. Interestingly, this sustainable relation to the
environment is perfectly cited in different areas and may be preferred
as the current common situation.108

3.4. Environmental Ethical Philosophies (moving beyond anthropocentrism toward ecocentrism and theo-centrism)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is a widespread opinion concerning anthropocentrism in today’s
world. Most people think that anthropocentrism is playing a key part in
causing environmental destruction such as deforestation. The
anthropocentric view gives various reasons as to why people cut down
trees: to get money, to build homes, and ignoring the innate value of
trees. By doing this, the environment is destroyed and other global
challenges will eventually emerge.109

The anthropocentric view has been considered as the main cause of
ecological challenges. People are acting in ways that compromise
ecological conservation.110 Many philosophies related to environmental
conservation rise to help conserve the environment rather than allowing
the anthropocentric view to take control. Such philosophies focus more
on the role of human beings to take care of the environment as stewards,
which comes under the heading of “eco-centrism.”111

Many of the ethical approaches use the word eco-centrism as the heading
in many cases.

A society’s change of attitude in the direction of the eco-centric
philosophies is not in any way opposed by researchers or a call to think
according to the eco-centric view, which is based on feelings.112 Forest
administrators should take the responsibility of educating people on
their role as environmental stewards.113 By doing so, people’s
perception will change positively, and they will start appreciating the
need to take part in

environmental conservation. They will also change their attitude toward
the perception of forest managers, in general, as they learn to
appreciate them.114 Forest managers have a great responsibility of
educating people on issues of stewardship so as to create awareness
about what people are expected to do. In this way, the environment will
be conserved.115

Stewardship is often connected to theo-centrism,116 which is a godly
approach to the world. It also develops from the type of religious faith
where only God is the earth’s creator and sustainer, including
Christianity, Islam, and Judaism.117 This is an environmentalism that is
theocentric not an anthropocentric or eco-centric.118 Through its
recognition for the completeness of the creations of God, theo-centrism
leads to fresh inquiries about the morals related to persistent issues
like the destruction of forestland.119 (See Table 3.)

Stewardship focuses on the care and concern of all the inhabitants of an
environment without favoring human beings. Human beings are considered
stewards and, hence, they should take good care of the environment.
Stewardship, therefore, gives human beings special roles to perform,
compared to other inhabitants in the environment. Human beings have the
ability to take care of nature and also the ability to destruct it,
because they are over the control of other things in nature. This does
not in any way make them superior than other inhabitants of nature.

Stewardship should not make people think that they can exercise
authority over everything in nature. They should interact positively
with the nature so as to ensure a good relationship among the
inhabitants of the environment.120

It has been mentioned previously that the term stewardship has been
widely used recently. This popular use assumes that, even though the
stewardship terminology is an ethic derived from religious context, it
approves that religion might not be a barrier or an issue of application
of this ethic.121 This study aims to not argue philosophy; rather, it
aims to find a universal societal attitude toward stewardship in both
Muslim and non-Muslim regions, in order to manage and combat the issue
of deforestation.

A new call has been approached worldwide by The United Nations
Millennium Declaration, which introduces a new ethic of preservation and
stewardship. It states, “We resolve therefore to adopt in all our
environmental actions a new ethic of conservation and stewardship.”

This call is duplicated in the Secretary General’s Millennium Report.122

Table 3. Comparing Centers of Value in Relation to Their Utility in
Environmental Conservation and Example of Ethic Implication

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="16%" />
<col width="16%" />
<col width="16%" />
<col width="16%" />
<col width="16%" />
<col width="16%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>The value center</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Harmony in relation between humans and nature</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Responsibility toward nature</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Conduct Guarantee</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Comprehensiveness</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Example of ethic implication</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>Anthropocentric</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Humans and nature are two different existences</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Comes from the liability toward humans.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>In as much as human interests are not to be at risk.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Close to humans.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Deforestation and environmental crisis</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>Eco-centric</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Humans are related to the ecosystem.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Humans are solely in charge fully toward the ecosystem.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>In as much as the ecosystem’s balance is not to be at risk.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Close to the ecosystem’s units.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Brazil, Nepal, New Zealand, USA, and Englishspeaking countries</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>Theocentric</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Humans are related to all God’s creations.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Humans are in charge toward God and His creation.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>In as much as God’s creations are not to be at risk.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Endless.</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Philippines (ARMM) and Indonesia (Nagari)</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

3.5. The Islamic Ethic of Stewardship
-------------------------------------

### 3.5.1. Muslim Stewardship

###

Ethical authority may be derived from various religions.123 Religions
have been considered to be effective in solving problems related to
environmental destruction. There is a need to further examine the extent
to which various religions have tackled the problem of environmental
destruction. Religions are trying to solve this issue through the
formulation of ethics and a code of conduct related to environment.124

Ethics with regard to the environment and stewardship is often
associated with theocentrism.

It is believed that humans must be the world’s guardians as God prefers
it to be done.

Humankind must, therefore, be considerate to all objects with life,
including humans. It maintains that humans exist here for a short time,
and they are supposed to be taking care of the world for the generations
in the future. Regarding Islam, this principle’s equivalent knowledge is

represented by the vicegrerency concept. According to the Islamic view
of the world, the human is regarded as Allah’s vicegerent
(khalifa/caliph).125 The Holy Qur’an illustrates this in the following
terms, “Just think when your Lord said to the angels: “Lo! I am about to
place a vicegerent on earth.” (Al-Baqarah 2:30)126

According to the teachings of Islam ethics based on the khalifah
(stewardship) ethic, people have a role to play in preserving the
natural environment’s resources. It is, therefore, the responsibility of
the people to ensure natural resource sustainability by only using the
resources when necessary.127 Consequently, the order, harmony, and
balance in nature should be maintained.128 The Islamic religion
acknowledges order and calls for conservation and discourages damage to
the environment. Furthermore, the Islamic religion explains in details
the relationship that exists between God, nature, and human beings.
Consequently, stewardship has been stressed by the teaching of Khalifa,
so Muslims are encouraged to safeguard natural resources.129

According to the global view of the Islamic religion, it is argued that
the religion cannot allow human beings to destroy the environment or
ruin the ecological stability and the order of systems of environment.
People are, therefore, entrusted by God to act as His supporters in
taking care of nature. Human beings should not break this trust because
they will be considered  undependable deputies.130 In accordance to
Amanah (trustworthiness and custodianship), there are some specific
principles of the earth and for the creation of the universe. We
strongly need to recognize our responsibility and our Creator, and we
should try to make the appropriate decisions so that we can make this
land a perfect place to live in.131 The order, harmony, and balance in
nature should be maintained since God created it that way.132 And
whenever it is not maintained, environmental destruction, like
deforestation, can be recognized.

### 3.5.2. Resources management decisions and Islamic ethics

###

Often times, the decisions of resources management are affected mostly
by environment services being abused for business sectors; subsequently,
the non-business profits are regularly lost or debased. These
non-business profits are frequently high and, in some cases, more
significant than the business ones.133 As trustees and custodians, there
is a need to recognize our responsibility toward the environment to make
appropriate decisions so that the land will be well preserved.134

God says in the Quran, “...And (remember) when your Lord said to the
angels: Verily, I am going to place (mankind) generations after
generations on Earth.” (Al-Baqarah:30)

The aggregate economic worth connected with sustainably managing the
environment is frequently higher than the value connected with the
changes of the environment through cultivating, clear-cut logging, or
other serious utilization.135 A person who believes there needs to be
average in all factors of his lifestyle, such as the way he uses the
characteristics. Indeed, the whole globe is depending on purchase and
stability.136 Exceeding boundaries in using characteristics or organic
sources is considered deluxe, which is regarded as a significantly bad
act in the Muslim religion.137 So the

massive loss of forests is due to the extraction of trees without
sufficient efforts of reforestation to replace the one that has been
cut.138 Middleness in Islam has come with the meanings of perfection,
fine quality, and goodness of the things.139

The Quran says, “...But waste not by excess, for God loves not the
wasters...” (Al-A’raf: 31).

One should not forget that over use of anything is bad, so if we over
use environmental resources, we soon will be losing them. Nature has
made a proper balance in everything around us, so we strongly need to
save and care for these natural gifts, such as water, air, earth, and
natural resources.140

The economic and public health costs related to the environment
destructions can be serious.141 Evidence is mounting, although
inconclusive, that our ecosystem is undergoing a great change and the
possibility of this change is high, and the change would impact man’s
well-being adversely. These changes are all now rapid and instant. They
are accelerating so fast that they may soon become irreversible.142
Amongst the risks for individual community and the surroundings is
luxury. The roots of such an act are avarice and carelessness. This
personality is managed by spiritual lessons. In the sources of Muslim
religion, two bad acts are recognized.

One is inefficient intake. Another bad act is said to be wasting. These
two ideas are introduced into perform to modify individual behavior.143

Deforestation and decreasing forest coverage causes the loss of the
earth’s natural habitat, species extinction, flooding, GHGs emissions,
and loss of forest products.144 The carbon dioxide atmospheric
concentration has increased by about 32% since 1750.145 Misuse of godly
blessings or causing harm to them are signs of ungratefulness, which is
severely forbidden in Islam, like deforestation that is absolutely
condemned in Islam.146 The Muslim religion is contrary to trouble and
crime of all types. Any act of trouble is criticized, whether it is in
regard to humans or residing people or even non-living people.147

“Corruption doth appear on land and sea because of (the evil) which
men’s hands have done, that He may make them taste a part of that which
they have done, in order that they may return.” (30:41)

“Do no mischief on the earth, after it hath been set in order.” (7:56)

Corruption is a significant driver to forest degradation. Different
factors, together with corruption, have led to deforestation, such as
lack of alternative livelihoods, and economy and poverty for economic
interests’ reasons. Bribery of officials is an example of corruption
that is widely spread and is a main obstacle in the realization of
forest preservation through various measures.148

Alterations in the environment can enhance the risk of disease
prevalence, like cholera, as well as the risk of its vectors like
mosquitoes.149 According to a well-established concept in Islam, nobody
can cause damage or reduction to others. And there is no place in the
Muslim religion for inflicting any harm on one’s self or on others.150
The loss of particular ecosystem attributes (sacred species or sacred
forests) can weaken the spiritual benefits people obtain from the
ecosystems. Today’s environmental

crisis may have begun with the loss of “modern man’s” understanding of
nature to be a sacred trust from God.151

So, we will be reusing the natural resources and will try to not waste
the gifts of nature.

Not only this, but we can also play a positive role in preserving the
forests. We should be familiar with the fact that deforestation can lead
us to serious problems, so we should try to pay extra attention to our
acts.152

### 3.5.3. Significance of trees in Islam

###

Islam covers much of what life entails. Biodiversity is highly regarded
as of great importance according to their teachings. The Creator chose
man as His vicegerent to take care of both plants and animals on earth.
Man has been guided to dominate nature at all times including war
time.153 In addition, the Qur’an has a set of plentiful illustrations
that direct its followers to take care and maintain nature, encouraging
them to make a substantial, positive stance by successfully instilling
their daily routine with practices that include biodiversity.154
Moreover, the trees have been cited on different verses in the Holy
Quran and also in the golden sayings of the Holy Prophet (PBUH).155

Islamic-based environmental ethics, therefore, emboldens such behavior
toward the environment in which the following accomplishments are
encouraged:

1) Rebuffing any unreliable control over the universe because a human is
both God’s steward (caliph) on earth and takes care of all the creations
on earth (Qur’an, 2: 30).156

2) Refrains man from the poor usage of nature since he is being directed
to evade damages from the living creatures (Qur’an, 2: 205). People
should be accountable to nature because a human is God’s superlative and
is responsible for the freedom of the creation. The assurance of the
human to thrashing the universe reveals the human obligation toward the
characteristic environment. Further, man is not only responsible for
conserving God’s creation but also improving the condition of the
natural environment. It is, therefore, the general responsibility of the
human beings to care for the earth.157

In addition, the ideas of tawhid (unity) and khalifah (stewardship) have
been put into practical commandments in the Islamic law, famously known
as the Shari’ah law. Islamic law institutions, such as forbidden zones,
leave intact the sections in which development is restricted to protect
the natural resources. Reserves were purely articulated to take care of
the wildlife and the forests, customs which are essential to the
environmental legislation of Islam.158 According to the Islamic
religion, people have a role to play in preserving the natural
environment, according to God’s will.159
