4. Conclusion
=============

Most people believe that strict anthropocentrism is the significant
cause of environmental destruction like deforestation. Many models are
seen these days that attempt to deal with this problem, and in some
cases, concern about saving the forests is seen as an ethical issue.
Environmental stewardship can be defined as using natural resources
ethically so as to equally improve the welfare of society, other living
organisms, and future generations.

Environmental stewardship is oftentimes founded upon an eco-centric
model of ethics, but it can also be built upon a theo-centric model.
Theocentric ethics include the idea of accountability to God.

Environmental stewardship is related to theo-centrism as an approach of
God to the world. It is driven by religious faith, where God is Earth’s
creator and sustainer. According to the teachings of Islam, people have
an important role to play in preserving the natural environmental
resources, the role of God’s vice-regent, trustee, or steward on Earth.
The Islamic ideas of tawhid (unity) and khalifah (stewardship) exist as
commandments in the Islamic Shari’ah law, and if followed, provide a
practical guide to protect natural resources, wildlife, and forests. As
with Christianity and Judaism, in Islam, the principle of taking care of
the environment is an important mission. Religions can modify the views
and beliefs of people in the world, which in turn motivates the basic
approaches and values of diverse cultures and societies in protecting
and preserving the environment.

Environmental stewardship can be found in both theo-centric and
eco-centric philosophies, which means that this effect is not only
related to Islam or religions in general, but it is a solution for
solving environmental issues like deforestation. The fact that
stewardship can be found in different philosophies and religions does
not diminish its importance or effectiveness. In fact, it can motivate
Muslims and non-Muslims, alike, to preserve the nature entrusted to
everybody. This is a universal concept toward the environment that
almost everyone can agree upon.


