Supplement 4
============

100- إنَّ الإِيمَانَ أَفضَلُ مِنَ الإِسلَامِ بِدَرَجَةٍ، وَالتَّقوَ?
أَفضَلُ مِنَ الإِيمَانِ بِدَرَجَةٍ، وَاليَقِينُ أَفضَلُ مِنَ الإِيمَانِ
بِدَرَجَةٍ، وَلَم يُعطَ بَنُو آدَمَ أَفضَلَ مِنَ اليَقِينِ.

100.Faith is one degree superior to islam, Piety is superior by one
degree to Faith, and cirtitude (conviction) is a station superior to
faith. Nothing better has been bestowed upon human beings than
certitude.

<p dir="rtl">
زيارة اَمِينَ الله
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم؛ اَلسَّلامُ عَلَيکَ يَا اَمينَ الله في أرضِهِ
وَحُجَّتَهُ عَل? عِبادِهِ اَلسَّلامُ عَلَيکَ يَا اَمِيرَالمُؤمِنِينَ
اَشهَدُ اَنَّکَ جاهَدتَ فيِ الله حَقَّ جِهادِهِ وَعَمِلتَ بِکِتابِهِ
وَاتَّبَعتَ سُنَنَ نَبِيَّهِ صَلَّ? الله عَلَيهِ وَالِهِ حَتَّ? دَعاکَ
الله اِلَ? جِوارِهِ فَقَبَضَکَ اِلَيهِ بِاختِيارِهِ وَالزَمَ اَعدائَکَ
الحُجَّةَ مَعَ ما لَکَ مِنَ الحُجَجِ البَالِغَةِ عَل? جَميعِ خَلقِهِ
اَللَّهُمَّ فَاجعَل نَفسِي مُطمَئِنَّةً بِقَدَرِکَ راضِيَةً بِقَضآئِکَ
مُولَعَةً بِذِکرِکَ وَدُعآئِکَ مُحِبَّةً لِصَفوَةِ اَولِيائِکَ
مَحبُوبَةً فيِ اَرضِکَ وَسَمآئِکَ صابِرَةً عَل? نُزُولِ بَلآئِکَ
شاکِرََةً لِفَواضِلِ نَعمَائِکَ ذَاکِرَةً لِسَوَابِغِ الآئِکَ مُشتاقَةً
اِل? فَرحَةِ لِقَآئِکَ مِتَزَوَّدَةً التَّقو? لِيَومِ جَزآئِکَ
مُستَنَّةً بِسُنَنِ اَولِيآئِکَ مُفارَقَةً لَِأخلاقِ اَعدائِکَ
مَشغُولَةَ عِنَ الدُّنيا بِحَمدِکَ وَ ثَنآئِکَ.اَللَّهُمَّ اِنّ قُلُوبَ
المُخبِتِينَ اِلَيکَ والِهَةٌ وَسُبُلَ الرَّاغِبِينَ اِلَيکَ شارِعَةٌ
وَاَعلامَ القاصِدِينَ اِلَيکَ وَاضِحَةٌ وَافئِدَةَ العارِفِينَ مِنکَ
فَازِعَةٌ وَاصواتَ الدَّاعِينَ اِلَيکَ صاعِدَةٌ وَاَبوابَ الإِجَابَةِ
لَهُم مُفَتَّحَةٌ وَدَعوَةَ مَن ناجاکَ مُستَجابَةٌ وَ تَوبَةَ مَن اَنابَ
اِلَيکَ مَقبُولَةٌ وَعَبرَةَ مَن بَک? مِن خَوفِکَ مَرحُومَةٌ
وَالإِغاثَةَ لِمَن استَغاثَ بِکَ مَوجُودَةٌ وَالإِعانََةَ لَمِنِ
استَعانَ بِکَ مبذُولَةٌ وَعِداتِکَ لِعِبادِکَ مُنجَزَةٌ وَزَلَلَ مَنِ
استَقالَکَ مُقالَةٌ وَ اعَمالَ العامِلِينَ لَدَيکَ مَحفُوظَةٌ
وَاَرزاقََکَ اِلَ? الخَلائِقِ مِن لَدُنکَ نازِلَةٌ وَ عَوائِدَ
المَزِيِدِ اِلَيهِم واصِلَةٌ وَذُنُوبَ المُستَغفِرِينَ مَغفُورَةٌ
وَحَوائِجَ خَلقِکَ عِندَکَ مَقضِيَّةٌ وَجَوائِزَ السّائِلِينَ عِندَکَ
مُوَفَّرَةٌ وَعَوائِدَ المَزِيدِ مُتَواتِرَةٌ وَمَوائِدَ المُستَطعَمِينَ
مُعَدَّةٌ وَمَناهِلَ الظَّمآءِ مُترَعَةٌ اَللَّهُمَّ فَاستَجِب دُعآئِي
وَاقبَل ثَنائِي وَاجمَع بَيني وَ بَينَ اَولِيائِي بِحَقَّ مُحَمَّدٍ
وَعَلِيٍّ وَفاطِمَةَ وَالحَسَنِ وَالحُسَينِ اِنَّکَ وَليُّ نَعمائِي
وَمُنتَه? مُنايَ وَغَايَةُ رَجائِي فِي مُنقَلَبِي وَ مَثوايَ. اَنتَ
اِلهِي وَسَيَّدِ? وَ مُولايَ اَغفِر لَإِولِيائِنا وَکُفَّ عَنّا
اَعدَائَنا وَاشغَلهُم عَن اَذانا وَاَظهِر کَلِمَةَ الحَقَّ وَالجعَلنَا
العُليا وَاَدحِض کَلِمَةَ الباطِلِ وَاجعَلهَا السُّفل? اِنَّکَ عَل?
کُلَّ شَيءٍ قَدِيرٌ.
</p>

ZIYAARAT AMEENALLAAH

In the Name of Allah, The All-compassionate, The All-merciful Peace be
on you,

0 trusted guardian, appointed by Allah, to administer His earth, and to
convince the mankind to accept H is plan.

Peace be on you, 0 Ameer ul Moomineen;

I testify that you made utmost efforts, as it should be, in the cause
of Allah, acted upon His Book, followed the way of life of His
Prophet,

[blessings of Allah be on him and on his children] , to the last moment
of your life, until Allah invited you to come unto Him, and used His
discretion to take you away,

and sealed your enemies' doom with the allegation that the arguments
had been made known to one and all through you. O' Allah let me be happy
and I satisfied with that which Thou considers good for me, (let me
agree with that which Thou decides for me, Let me passionately remember
Thee, and invoke Thee,

let me be in love with Thy pure and sincere friends,

let me be well-liked and respected on the earth, and in the heavens,
let me be unruffled and well- composed in the midst of misfortunes, let
me be gratefully thankful in prosperity,

let me be mindful of much and more bounties,

let me ardently desire for the heart warming meeting with Thee;
well-equipped with piety to gain my end on the Day of Requital, let me
follow into the footsteps of Thy representatives,

let me disassociate myself from the mannerism of Thy enemies, let me
pass my time, in this world, by praising and glorifying Thee.

0 Allah, verily, the hearts of those who surrender to Thee, are full of
passionate love, the path of those, who long for Thee, is the straight
(true) road, the instructions given by those, who lean on Thee, are
distinct and precise, the minds of those, who are aware of Thy reality,
are filled with awe and reverence,

the call of those, who invite unto Thee, is loud and clear, and the
doors of approval are kept open for them; whoso submits his supplication
to Thee receives a favorable answer, whoso turns repentant unto Thee
gets acceptance (amnesty),

whoso bursts into tears in fear of Thy punishment obtains mercy, whoso
seeks redress from Thee finds the required assistance at his disposal,
whoso asks for Thy help procures the aid as a gift.

Thy promise made with Thy servants is fulfilled; whoso asks for pardon
of his errors finds them reduced to nothing,

whoso does everything for Thy sake discovers that each and every deed
has been preserved. The means of livelihood available to the created
beings come from Thee like a rainfall, and in addition many recurring
favors and bounties reach them in regular successions, the sins of
those, who ask for forgiveness, are overlooked,

the wants and needs of all that which has been created by Thee are
properly satisfied, those who put forward genuine demands get more than
they ask for,

one after the other, again and again;

for the hungry wholesome food is arranged, for the thirsty clean water
is available in abundance.

0 Allah give favorable answer to my prayer, acknowledge the praise I
sing in worship,

let there be peace and harmony between me and my friends, for the sake
of Mohammad,

Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn; Verily, Thou art my Benefactor who
provides with bounties, the aim of my desires, the ultimate destination
of my hopes,

in my future life, and during this short life.

Thou art my God, my Master and my Lord; welcome my friends,

keep our enemies away from us; to save us from the evil mischief divert
their attention,

let the "true Word" come out in the open, supreme and dominant, refute
and condemn the "foul lie", rendered contemptible, Verily, Thou art able
to do all things.


