Supplement 1
============

21- طُوبَ? لِمَن ذَکَرَ المَعَادَ، وَعَمِلَ لِلحِسَابِ وَقَنِعَ
بِالکَفَافِ وَرَضِيَ عَن الله.

21- Happy is the man who always kept the life afterdeath in his view,
who remembered the Day of Reckoning through all his deeds, who led a
contented life and who was happy with the lot that God hath destined for
him.

22- سَيَّئَةٌَ تَسُوءُکَ خَيٌر عِندَ الله مِن حَسَنَةٍ تَعجُبِکَ.

22- The sin which makes you sad and repentant is liked better by the
Lord than the good deed which turns you vain and conceited.

23- فِ? تَقَلُّبِ الَأحوَالِ عِلمُ جَواهِرِ الرَّجالِ.

23- Adversities often bring your good, qualities to the front.

24- الظَّفَرُ بِالحَزمِ، وَالحَزمُ بِإجالَةِ الرَّأيِ، وَالرَّأ?ِ
بِتَحصِينِ الَأسرَار.

24- Success is the result of foresight and resolution, foresight
depends upon deep thinking and planning, and the most important factor
of planning is to keep your secrets to yourself.

25- قُلُوبُ الرَّجَالِ وَحشِيَّةٌ فَمَن تَأَلَّفَهَا أَقبَلَت
عَلَيهِ.

25- Hearts of people are like wild birds, they attach themselves to
those who love and train them.

26- أَولَ? النَّاسِ بِالعَفوِ اقدَرهُم عَلَ? العُقُوبَةِ.

26- Only he can forgive who has power to punish.

27- السَّخَاءُ مَا کَانَ ابتِدَاءً، فَأَمَا مَا کَانَ عَن مَسأَلَةِ
فَحَيَاءُ وَتَذَمُّمٌ.

27- If you help a deserving person without his request then it is
generosity and if you help him after his request then mostly it is due
to shyness to your refuse or fear of reproach.

28- لَا غِنَ? کَالعَقلِ وَلَا فَقرَ کَالجَهلِ، وَ لَا مِيرَاثَ
کَالَأدَبِ وَلَا ظَهِيرَ کَالمُشَاوَرَةِ.

28- There is no greater wealth than wisdom, no greater poverty than
ignorance, no greater heritage than culture ana no greater friend and
helpmate than consultation.

29- الغِنَ? فِي الغُربَةِ وَطَنٌ، وَالفَقرُ فِي الوَطَنِ غُربَةُ.

29- Wealth converts every foreign country into your native place and
poverty turns your native place into a strange land.

30- القَنَاعَةُ مَال لَا يَنفَدُ.

30- Contentment is the capital which will never come to an end.

31- المَالُ مَادَّةُ الشَّهَوَاتِ.

31-Wealth is the fountain-head of inordinate cravings.

32- مَن حَذَرَکَ کَمَن بَشَّرَکَ.

32- Whoever warns you against sins and vices is like the one who is
carrying news of salvation to you.

33- اَللَّسَانُ سَبُعٌ إن خُلَّيَ عَنهُ عَقَرَ.

33- The tongue is such a ferocious beast that if let loose it will act
ravenously.

34- أَهلُ الدُّنيَا کَرَکبٍ يُسَارُ بِهِم وَهُم نِيَامٌ.

34- People in this world are like travellers whose journey is going on
though they. are asleep. (Life'sjourney is going on though men may not
feel it).

35- فَقدُ الَأحِبَّةِ غُربَةٌ.

35- To lose friends is to become a stranger in one's own country.

36- فَوتُ الحَاجةِ أَهوَنُ مِن طَلَبِهَا إلَ? غَيرِ أَهلِهَا .

36- Not to have a thing is less humiliating than to beg it of others.

37- لَا تَستَحِ مِن إعطَاءِ القَلِيلِ فَانَّ الحِرمَانَ أَقلُّ مِنهُ.

37- Do not be ashamed if the amount of charity is small because to
return the needy empty-handed is an act of greater shame.

38- إذَا لَم يَکُن مَا تُرِيدُ فَلَا تُبَل مَا کُنتَ.

38-If you cannot get things as much as you desire then be contented
with what you have.

39- لَا تَرَ? الجَاهِلَ إلَّا مُفرِطاً أَو مُفَرَّطاً.

39- An uneducated man or a savage will always overdo a thing or neglect
to do it properly.

40- إذَا تَمَّ العَقلُ نَقَصَ الکَلَامُ.

40- The wiser a man is, the less talkative he will be.

41- نَفَسُ الَمرءِ خُطَاهُ إلَ? أَجَلِهِ.

41- Every breath that you take is a step forward towards death.

42- کُلُّ مَعدُودٍ مُنقَضٍ وَ کُلُّ مُتَوَقَّعٍ آتٍ.

42- Anything which can be counted or reckoned is finite and will come
to an end.

43- إنَّ الُامُورَ إذَا اشتَبَهَتِ اعتُبَرِ آخِرُهَا بِأَوَّلِهَا.

43- If you are confused about the good or bad effects of a~ction, then
study carefully the cause and yOU! will know what the effects will be.

44- الحِکمَةُ ضَلَّةُ الُمومِنِ، فَخُذِ الحِکمَةَ وَلَو مِن أَهلِ
النَّفَاقِ.

44- Knowledge and wisdom are really properties of a faithful Muslim,
even when lost to him; get them back though you may have to get them
from apostates.

45- قِيمَةُ کُلَّ امرِ?ءٍ مَا يُحسِنُهُ.

45- The value of each man depends upon the art and skill which he has
attained.

46- رَأي الشَّيخِ أَحَبَّ إلَيَّ مِن جَلَدِ الغُلَامِ (ورُوي) مِن
مَشهَدِ الغُلَامِ.

46- I appreciate an old man's cautious opinion more than the valour of
young man.

47- عَجِبتُ لِمَن يَقنَطُ وَمَعَهُ الإِستِغفَارُ.

47- How I wonder at a man who loses hope of salvation when the door of
repentance is open for him.

48- الفَقِيهُ کُلُّ الفَقِيهِ مَن لَم يُقَنَّطِ النَّاسَ مِن رَحمَةِ
الله، وَلَم يُؤيِسهُم مِن رَوحِ الله، وَلَم يُؤمِنهُم مِن مَکرِ الله.

48- He is the wisest and the most knowing man who advises people not to
lose hope and confidence in the Mercy of God and not to be too sure and
over-confident of immunity from His Wrath and Punishment.

49- إنَّ هذِهِ القُلُوبَ تَمَلُّ کَمَا تَمَلُّ الَأبدَانُ، فَابتَغُوا
لَهَا طَرَائِفَ الحِکَمِ.

49- Like your body your mind also gets tired and fagged, in such case
find educational diversions for it.


