Supplement 2
============

50- أَوضَعُ العِلمِ مَا وَقَفَ عَلَ? اللَّنسَانِ وَأَرفَعُهُ مَا ظَهَرَ
فيِ الَجَوَارِحِ وَالَأرکَانَ .

50- That knowledge is very superficial which remains only on your
tongue; the intrinsic merit and value of knowledge is that you act upon
it.

51- إعقِلُوا الخَبَرَ إذَا سَمِعتُمُوهُ عَقلَ رَعَايَةٍ لَا عَقلَ
رِوَايَةٍ، فَإنَّ رُوَاةَ العِلمِ کَثِيرٌ وَرُعَاتَةٌ قَلِيلٌ.

51- Whenever a tradition of the Holy Prophet (A.S.) is related to you
examine it carefully and think over it deeply, do not be satisfied with
mere verbatim repetion of the same, because."there are many people who
repeat the words containing knowledge but there are few who ponder over
them and try to fully grasp the meaning they convey.

52- لَا يَستَقِيمُ قَضَاءُ الحَوَائجِ إلَّا بِثَلَاثٍ: بِاستِصغَارِهَا
لِتَعظُمَ، وَبِاستِکتَامِها لِتَظهَرَ، وبِتَعجِيِلهَا لِتَهنُؤَ.

52- To secureforyourselffame, credit as well as blessings the help that
you give to men in need should possess following attributes: (a)
whatever its extent it should be considered by you as trifling so that
it may be granted a high status; (b) it should be given secretly, then
the Lord will he.\\'tow upon it fame and celebrity and (c) it must be
given immedately, so that it may bring pleasure and utility to the
receiver.

53- لَا يَترُکُ النَّاسُ شَيئاً مِن أَمرِ دِينِهِم لِاستِصلَاحِ
دُنيَاهُم إلَّا فَتَحَ الله عَلَيهِم مَا هُوَ أضَرُّ مِنهُ.

53- Those who give up religion to better their circumstances in life
seldom succeed. The Wrath of God makes them go through more calamities
and losses than the gains they gather for themselves.

54- رُبَّ عَالِمٍ قَد قَتَلَهُ جَهلُهُ، وَ عِلمُهُ مَعَهُ لَا
يَنفَعُهُ.

54- There are many educatedpeople who have ruined their future on
account of their ignorance of religion. Their knowledge did not prove of
any avail to them.

55- لَا يُقِيمُ أَمرَ الله سُبحانَهُ إلَا مَن لَا يُصَانع، وَلَا
يُضَارِعُ وَلَا يَتَّبعُ الَمطَامِعَ.

55- Only such a person can establish the Divine Rule, who, where
justice and equity are required, will neither feel deficient nor weak
and who is not greedy and avaricious.

56- إذَا استَولَ? الصَّلاحُ عَلَ? الزَّمَانِ وَأَهلِهِ ثُمَّ أَسَاءَ
رَجُلٌ الظَّنَّ بِرَجُلٍ لَم تَظهَر مِنهُ حَوبَةٌ فَقَد ظَلَمَ، وَإذَا
استَول?َ الفَسَادَ عَلَ? الزَّمَانِ وَ أَهلِهِ فَأَحسَنَ رَجُلٌ الظَّنَّ
بِرَجُلٍ فَقَد غَرَّرَ.

56- When a community is composed of really honest, sober and virtuous
people then your forming a bead opinion about anyone of its members when
nothing wicked has been seen of him is a great injustice to him; on the
contrary in a corrupt society, to from a good opinion of anyone out of
those people and to trust him is doing harm to yourself .

57- وَقِيلَ لَهُ عَلَيهِ السَّلَامُ: کَيفَ نَجِدُکَ يَا
أَمِيرَالمُؤمِنِينَ؟. فَقَالَ عَلَيهِ السَّلَامُ: کَيفَ يَکُونُ مَن
يَفنَ? بِبَقَائِهِ، وَيَسقَمُ بِصِحَّتِهِ، وَيُؤتَ? مِن مَأمَنِهِ.

57- When Somebody asked Hazard as to how he was getting on. He replied:
"What do you want to know about a person whose life is leading him
towards ultimate death, whose health is the first stage towards illness
and whom society has forced out of his retreat".

58- إضَاعَةُ الفُرصَةِ غُصَّةٌ.

58- To lose or to waste an opportunity will result in grief and
sorrow.

59- مَثَلُ الدُّنيَا کَمَثَلِ الحَيَّةِ لَيَّنٌ مَسُّهَا وَالسَّمُّ
النَّاقِعُ فِي جَوفِهَا، يَهوِد? إلَيهَا الغِرَّ الجَاهِلُ وَ يَخذَرُهَا
ذُو اللَّبَّ العَاقِلُ.

59- The world, which offers your vicious pleasures is like a snake, so
soft to the touch, but so full of lethal poison. Unwise people are
allured by it and drawn towards it and wise men avoid it and keep away
from its poisonous effects.

60- شَتَّانَ مَا بَينَ عَمَلَين: عَمَلٍ تَذهَبُ لَذَّتُهُ وَ تَبقَ?
تَبِعَتُهُ، وَ عَمَلٍ تَذهَبُ مَؤُؤنَتُهُ وَ يَبقَ? أَجرُهُ.

60- What difference is there between a deed whose pleasure passes away
leaving behind it the pangs of pain and punishment and the deed whose
cruel severity or oppressive harshness comes to an end leaving behind it
heavenly rewards and blessings.

61- طُوبَ? لِمَن ذَلَّ فيِ نَفسِهِ وَ طَابَ کَسبُهُ وَ صَلَحَت
سَرِيرَتُهُ وَ حَسُنَت خَلِيقَتُهُ، وَ أَنفَقَ الفَضلَ مِن مَالِهِ، وَ
أَمسَکَ الفَضلَ مِن لِسَانِهِ وَ عَزَلَ عَن النَّاسِ شَّرهُ، وَوَسِعَتهُ
السُّنَّةُ، وَلَم يُنسَب إلَ? البِدعَةِ.

61- Blessings are for the man who humbles himself before God, Whose
sources of income are honest, whose intentions are always honourable,
whose character is noble, whose habits are sober, who gives away in the
name and in the cause of God the wealth which is lying surplus with him
who controls his torgue from vicious and useless talk, who abstains from
oppression and tyranny, who cheerfully and faithfully follows the
traditions of the Holy Prophet (A.S.)and who keeps himself away from
innovation in religion.

62- عَجِبتُ لِلبَخِيلِ يَستَعجِلُ الفَقرَ الَّذِي مِنهُ هَرَبَ،
وَيَفُوتُهُ الغِنَ? الَّذِي إيَّاهُ طَلَبَ فَيَعِيشُ فِي الدُّنيَا عَيشَ
الفَقَرَاءِ، وَ يُحَاسَبُ فِ? الآخِرَةِ حَسَابَ ألَأغنِيَاءِ.

62- How I wonder at the mentality of a miser; fearing poverty he takes
to stinginess and thus hastily pushes himself head-long into a state of
want and destitution; be madly desires plenty and ease but throws it
away without understanding. In this world he, of his own free will,
leads the life of a bagger and in the next world he will have to submit
an account like a millionaire.

63- مَن قَصَّرَ في العَمَلِ ابتُلِ?َ بِاَلَهَّم وَلَا حَاجَةَ لله
فِيمَن لَيسَ لله فِي مَالِهِ وَنَفسِهِ نَصِيبٌ.

63- Whoever is not diligent in his work will suffer sorrow and loss;
whoever has no share of God in his wealth and in his life then there is
no place for him in the Realm of God.

64- عِظَمُ الخَالِقِ عِندَکَ يُصَغَّرُ المَخلُوقَ فِي عَينِکَ.

64- If you understand the Majesty of the Lord then you Will not attach
any importance to the universe and its marvels.

65- إنَّ الله مَلَکاً يُنَادِي في کُلَّ يَومٍ : لِدُوا لِلمَوتِ،
وَاجمَعُوا لِلفَنَاءِ، وَابنُوا لِلخَرَابِ.

65- An Angel announces daily "The birth of more human beings means so
many more will die; the collection of more wealth means so much more
will be destroyed; the erection of more buildings means so many more
ruins in time to come.

66- لَا يَکُونُ الصَّدِيقُ صَدِيقاً حَتَّ? يَحفَظَ أَخَاهُ فيِ ثَلَاثٍ:
فيِ نَکبَتِهِ، وَغَيبَتِهِ، وَوَفَاتِهِ.

66- A friend cannot be considered as a friend unless be is tested on
three occasions: in time of need; behind your back and after your
death.

67- الدَّنيَا دَارُ مَمّرٍ إلَ? دَارِ مَقّرٍ، وَالنَّاسُ فِيهَا
رَجُلَان: رَجُلٌ بَاعَ فِيهَا نَفسَهُ فَأَوبَقَهَا ، وَرَجُلٌ ابتَاعَ
نَفَسَهُ فَأَعتَقَهَا.

67- This world is not a place of permanent settlement, it is a passage,
a road on which you are passing; there are two kinds of people here, one
is the kind who have sold their souls for Eternal Damnation. the other
is of those who have purchased thir souls and freed them from
damnation.

68- الصَّلَاةُ قُربَانُ کُلَّ تَقّيٍ ، وَالحَجُّ جِهَادُ کُلَّ ضَعِيفٍ
، وَلِکُلَّ شَيءٍ زَکاةٌ، وَزَکَاةُ البَدَنِ الصَّيَامُ، وَجِهَادُ
المَرأَةِ حُسنُ التَّبَعُّلِ .

68- Daily prayers are the best medium to advance oneself in favour of
the Lord. Haj is a lehad (holy War) for every weak person. For everthing
that you own there is Zakaat, a ta.x paid to the Lord, and the ta.x of
your health is that you keep fast. The best lehad ofa woman against man
is to render his home -life pleasing and congenial.

69- استَنزِلُوا الرَّزقَ بِالصَّدَقَةِ.

69- If you want to pray to the Lord for better means of subsistence
then first give something in charity.

70- الَهُّم نِصفُ الهَرَمِ .

70- Sorrow will make you half as decrepit as old age.


