Supplement 4
============

90- اللَّجَاجَةُ تَسُلَّ الرَّأيَ.

90- Obstinacy and stubborness will not allow you to arrive at a correct
decision.

91- ثَمَرَةُ التَّفرِيطِ النَّدَامَةُ، وَثَمَرَةُ الحَزمِ
السَّلَامَةُ.

91- Deficiency will result in shame and sorrow, but caution and
foresight will bring peace and security.

92-لَا خَيرَ فيِ الصَّمتِ عَنِ الحُکمِ کَمَا أَنَّهُ لَا خَيرَ فيِ
القَولِ بِالجَهلِ.

92- To keep silent when you can say something wise and useful is as bad
as to keep on propagating foolish and unwise thoughts.

93- مَا اختَلَفَت دَعوَتَانِ إلَّا کَانَت إحدَاهُمَا ضَلَالَةً.

93- If two opposite theories are propagated one will be wrong.

94- يَا ابنَ آدَمَ مَا کَسَبتَ فَوقَ قُوتِکَ فَأَنتَ فِيهِ خَازِنٌ
لِغَيرِکَ.

94- 0 son of Adam! whatever thou hath collected more than thy actual
need, thou art not going to use, thou wilt act only as trustee for
someone else.

95-مَن أَبدَ? صَفحَتَهُ لِلحَقَّ هَلَکَ.

95- One who starts tyranny will repent soon.

96- مَن لَم يُنَجَّهِ الصَّبرُ أَهلَکَهُ الجَزَعُ .

96- One who cannot benefit by patience will die of grief and
excitement.

97- وَکَانَ عَلَيهِ السَّلَامُ يَقُولُ: مَتَ? أَشِفي غَيظِي إذَا
غَضِبتُ، أَحِينَ أَعجِزُ عَنِ الإِنتِقَامِ فَيُقَالُ لِي لَو صَبَرتَ،
أَم حِينَ أَقدِرُ عَليهِ فَيُقَالُ لي لَوعَفَوتَ.

97- When I feel angry with a person how and when should I satisfy my
anger, whether at a time when I am not. in a position to retaliate and
people may advise me to bear patiently, or when I have power to punish
and I forgive.

98- لَا يُزَهَّدَنَّکَ في المَعرُوفِ مَن لَا يَشکُرُلَکَ، فَقَد
يَشکُرُکَ عَلَيهِ مَن لَا يَستَمتِعُ مِنهُ، وَقَد تُدرِکَ مِن شُکرِ
الشَّاکِرِ أَکثَرَ مِمَّا أَضَاعَ الکَافِرُ وَالله يُحِبُّ المُحسِنِينَ
.

98- If you find that somebody is not grateful for all that you have
done for him then do not get disappointed because often you will fina
that someone else feels under your obligation though you have done
nothing for him and thus your good deeds will be compensated, and God
will reward you for your goodness.

99- إنَّ هذِهِ القُلُوبَ تَمَلُّ کَمَا تَمَلُّ الَأبدَانُ، فَابتَغُوا
لَهَا طَرَائِفَ الحِکمَةِ.

99- Hearts (minds) have the tendencies of likes and dislikes, and are
liable to be energetic and lethargic, therefore, make them work when
they are energetic and on subjects which they like.

100- إنَّ المِسِکينَ رَسُولُ الله فَمَن مَنَعَهُ فَقَد مَنَعَ الله،
وَمَن أَعطَاهُ فَقَد أَعطَ? الله.

100. The destitute is the messenger of Allah. whoever denies him denies
Allah and whoever gives him gives Allah.


