[Introduction]
==============

For much of the first fifty years of its existence, analytic philosophy
shunned discussions of normativity and ethics. Ethical statements were
considered as pseudo-propositions, or as expressions of pro- or
con-attitudes of minor theoretical significance.[^1] Nowadays, in
contrast, there are prominent analytic philosophers who pay close
attention to normative problems and important books written by such
philosophers on topics in law and social justice and on social and
institutional ontology. Here we focus our attention on the work of
Searle, at the same time drawing out an important connection between
Searle’s work and that of two other seminal figures in this development:
H. L. A. Hart, John Rawls.

Hart was, within the context of recent analytic philosophy, the most
important philosopher of law and Rawls was the most important political
philosopher. Still a child of the twentieth century, as we shall see,
Searle tends to assume that there is but one type of normativity within
the realm of social institutions. Like Hart and Rawls, he thereby
neglects features which are of crucial significance for an adequate
understanding of social reality.[^2] Our main goals are twofold. On the
one hand we wish to expose how this neglect constitutes a shortcoming of
Searle’s ontology of social reality.[^3] On the other hand, our
attention to the ways in which this neglect plays out in the normative
philosophy of other luminaries of twentieth century analytic philosophy
should help us to identify an entrenched trend, and also thereby
contribute also to its reversal.


