I. Hart and Soft Positivism
===========================

We first set the stage for our more detailed treatment of Searle’s views
on normativity with a discussion of Hart and Rawls. The work of Hart,
especially, forms part of a famous debate between natural law theorists
and legal positivists, a debate which reveals that the question of the
ontological status of laws has historically been linked to normative
issues of moral philosophy. Natural law theorists affirm that immoral
law is not law; that is, they believe that the ontological status of
laws is determined by their relation to morality, in accordance with the
famous motto: “*Non videtur esse lex quae justa non fuerit* ”. Legal
positivists, on the other hand, insist that law is law independently of
whether or not it is moral. According to the classical legal positivism
of John Austin, for example, the issue of the legal status of law is an
entirely empirical affair, to be established primarily through the
determination of pedigree and enforceability. Was the entity or
institution created and maintained in existence in accordance with the
right sorts of rules? Is the entity such that the state can coerce
people into complying with it?

According to Austin, we are to understand the nature of a legal system
by starting out from the case of someone forcing someone else at
gunpoint to hand over his wallet. The normativity of the law differs
from the normativity of the highway-man only in this: that the law
normally functions on the basis of threats alone; only in extreme
circumstances is it necessary to bring guns into play.

In*The Concept of Law* , Hart deploys a sustained attack on traditional
legal positivism. His criticism of Austin is both elegant and
persuasive.[^4] Hart himself still defends a positivistic conception of
the ontological status of the law, but he rejects traditional
positivism, above all because of its superficial treatment of rules. The
rules the gunman imposes upon his victim - “Hand over your wallet”,
“Don’t do anything stupid” - are all of the same type: they demand
certain sorts of conduct. The law, however, operates on the basis of two
types of rules, which Hart calls primary and secondary. Primary rules
are duty-imposing; they demand conduct in just the way in which the
gunman’s actions do. Secondary rules are power-conferring; they make
certain sorts of situations possible - they are rules about rules. A
rule that states that a judge is entitled to decide how to interpret a
primary rule is a secondary rule; it gives the judge the power to settle
disputes by establishing what the correct interpretation of a law is.

It is possible, perhaps, to imagine an entire society in which there
existed only primary rules. But such a society would be profoundly inept
when it comes to resolving controversies about the laws themselves or
about their interpretation. A situation, on the other hand, in which
secondary rules would arise in relation to highway-men robbing
stagecoaches belongs, at best, to the world of Monty Python.

With only one kind of rule in its conceptual armoury, Hart argues,
traditional positivism is unable to distinguish between two crucially
distinct phenomena: (1) being*de facto* obliged and (2) having a
genuinely normative obligation. If a gunman puts a gun to your head, you
might indeed be, as a matter of empirical fact, obliged to hand over the
money. For you to have a normative obligation, in contrast, it is
necessary that you accept not only the empirical fact of your being
obliged but also the rightness of the*system* which makes this so (even
if you do not accept specific rules in this system). You accept that to
do this or that is your*duty* ; that it is*the right thing to do* This
notion finds no purchase in the realm of actions performed in response
to gunmen’s threats.

Hart refers to this dimension of acceptance as the “internal aspect” of
obligations, to which he opposes an “external aspect” - the only one
that traditional positivism is capable of explaining. He asks us to
imagine someone describing the functioning of a street light in a busy
intersection in the following way: when the street light becomes red in
the direction of the cars, the likelihood that cars will stop, and that
pedestrians will cross the street is very high; when the street light
becomes green in the direction of the cars, the likelihood that cars
will move forward and pedestrians will stay put increases. Obviously,
Hart points out, such a description fails to mention a fundamental
element of what is really going on. The red light is not merely a*sign*
that allows us to predict that drivers and pedestrians will behave in
this or that way; rather it is a*reason* which gives rise to this or
that behavior. The red light indicates not simply*that* I stop, but that
I*ought* to stop. This notion of a*reason* is not available to
traditional legal positivism.

Since Hart is himself a positivist, it might look as if by introducing
normative elements into his determination of the ontological status of
laws he concedes too much to natural law theory. After all, for Hart as
for natural law theorists, whether a given entity is or is not law
depends on normative factors. He insists, however, that he has carved
out an intermediate theoretical space between natural law and
traditional positivism, which he calls “soft positivism”.[^5]

Hart’s strategy - though he does not himself admit it - is to
distinguish between two types of normativity. On the one hand is the
robust normativity of the natural law theorist, illustrated for example
by the Ten Commandments On the other hand is Hart’s own brand of
normativity - what we might call soft normativity - which is what is
necessary, in his view, for the existence of laws. Soft normativity is
the sort of normativity that flows logically from the very nature of
secondary rules. Secondary rules create institutions, and these
institutions in turn create the very possibility of certain sorts of
acts. Hart himself appeals to the example of games in order to
illustrate this point.[^6] A group of people can play football without
requiring the presence of a referee of any sort. But when a referee is
present and disputes arise, then the referee will have the last word in
resolving such disputes. His appointment is however possible only
insofar as the players accept the secondary rules that make the
institution of refereeing possible. That the referee has the last word
is part of the content of the corresponding secondary rule, and it is
this same rule which gives rise to the normative component in the
referee’s decisions. When a referee declares “penalty kick”, for
example, he is not merely providing an indication of what is likely to
happen next (any more than a traffic light is providing an indication of
likely traffic flows). Rather, his declaration is the very reason
which*explains* what happens next, because it explains what*ought* to be
done.

But there is a problem with Hart’s approach. The sense of ‘ought’
as expressing soft normativity, the sense of ought that is involved in
rules of games like chess or football, is radically different from the
sense of ought that is involved, for example, when someone says that we
ought to treat other human beings with respect, or that we ought not to
gratuitously harm them. We believe that any ontology of legal
institutions that does not do justice to the distinction between these
types of normativity is doomed to fail.


