II. Rawls and Rule-Utilitarianism
=================================

In 1955, at the beginning of his career, Rawls published an important
article called “ Two Concepts of Rules”,[^7] a work which was
unfortunately overshadowed by his later*A Theory of Justice,* [^8] but
which has nonetheless exerted some considerable influence along the way.
It has been translated into numerous languages and it is a mainstay in
anthologies dealing with moral philosophy. It consists of an attempt to
defend utilitarianism against certain traditional objections relating to
the alleged incapacity of utilitarians to deal with the institutions of
the promise and of punishment, and to the widespread supposition that
utilitarians must perforce allow on felicific grounds the occasional
breaking of promises and the punishing of innocents.

Rawls’ defense of utilitarianism, which has become a commonplace in many
philosophical circles, goes roughly as follows: utilitarianism should
not be seen as a theory that seeks to maximize general welfare in every
instance. Rather, it is a theory that seeks to devise general rules of
behavior of a sort that would*tend* to maximize welfare. The idea is
that, once the rules have been established, then they must be followed,
even if violating rules on this or that occasion yielded a net increase
in general welfare. It is then unlikely that human beings would ever
endorse on felicific grounds*rules* that would authorize the breaking of
promises or the punishment of innocents.

In this way Rawls draws the nowadays familiar distinction between act-
and rule-utilitarianism, and this constitutes the first half of his
article. It is however the somewhat neglected second half which is
important for our purposes. Indeed, the distinction which occupies him
in the first half Rawls himself considers to be rather obvious.[^9] What
he considers not obvious is the existence of a certain ambiguity
regarding the notion of a rule, as between what he calls summary rules
and practice rules.

A summary rule is simply a guide for action, formulated on the basis of
experience. For example, if upon encountering caustic persons in the
past one has established that the best course of action has been to keep
a low profile, one might decide on encountering a caustic person now
that it is best to do the same. Summary rules are inductive. The
decisions they are based upon are logically prior to the rules
themselves.

Rawls’ practice rules, in contrast, are not inductive; they are not the
result of such recollection of past events, and they are logically prior
to the cases in which they are applied. An example of a practice rule
would be the rules involved in games like baseball. Here the rules
precede the game. What counts as a ‘run’ in baseball is not the result
of looking back at what things have counted as ‘runs’ in past baseball
games and then concluding: “well, this must also be a ‘run’”. Practice
rules, rather, give rise to the very possibility that the cases in which
they are applied can indeed occur. Thus they are not mere
generalizations from past behavior. Practice rules define the very
behavior which they at the same time permit. In chess, bishops move
diagonally; the issue as to whether or not to move a bishop diagonally
is not a genuine dilemma within the context of playing chess. If someone
were to insist on moving his bishop non-diagonally, then he would*eo
ipso* no longer be playing chess.

According to Rawls the rules of rule-utilitarianism are precisely
practice rules. They are rules which define the very institutions they
regulate. The normativity of rule utilitarianism, as Rawls conceives it,
is the logical normativity of the system of propositions which describe
institutions that rule-utilitarianism itself creates, such as promising
and punishment. The State, for example, does not really have the option
of whether or not to punish an innocent person, for punishing the
innocent is logically forbidden by the very practice rule which sets up
the institution of punishment itself.[^10] Deciding to punish an
innocent person is analogous to deciding to move a bishop non-diagonally
in chess. As Rawls would have it: “To engage in a practice, to perform
those actions specified by a practice, means to follow the appropriate
rules”.[^11]

On Rawls’ interpretation, then, the main difference between act- and
rule-utilitarianism is not merely related to the issue of where to apply
the welfare-maximizing measure (namely, to rules concerned with
act-types rather than with act-tokens). Rather, rule-utilitarianism
differs from act-utilitarianism in that it is a*logical* theory. In
defending himself against charges that his view might be too
conservative (insofar as he may be taken to blindly endorse the status
quo of existing social institutions), Rawls states: “The point I have
been making is rather a logical point”, and then he continues: “where a
form of action is specified by a practice there is no justification
possible of the particular action of a particular person save by
reference to the practice”.[^12] Utilitarianism in the hands of Bentham
and Mill is a moral theory concerned with the same substantial normative
issues as are addressed by natural law theorists; Rawls transforms it
into a logical doctrine.

Where in “Two Concepts of Rules” Rawls seeks to defend utilitarianism,
in*A Theory of Justice* and other later works he seeks to develop a
neo-Kantian theory of the justice of social institutions that is opposed
to utilitarianism. Yet there is nonetheless a certain connecting thread
between the two works, which is the importance Rawls gives to the
logical structure of institutions. The emphasis on procedural and formal
justice in*A Theory of Justice* [^13] can be seen as a reflection of the
logicist leanings found in his early defense of utilitarianism. Focusing
on Rawls’ concern with the logic of institutions allows us to see the
two works within a single context, and it allows us also to see the
challenge which Rawls faces: in transforming normativity as
traditionally conceived into a matter of the logical consequences of
rules of a certain type, rules which we adopt when we choose to engage
in certain practices, Rawls (like Hart) makes questions like: “Why
should we keep promises?” or “Why should we endorse a social order based
on these or those principles?” of a piece with the question “Why should
we play the game of chess rather than some other, slightly different
game?” Let us turn now to Searle, and see how he seems to face a similar
fate.


