III. Searle and Obligations
===========================

In one of his earliest articles, “How to Derive ‘Ought’ From ‘Is’”,[^14]
Searle claims that he has found a way of showing that from purely
descriptive premises we can derive normative conclusions. In other
words, he has shown how to bridge the gap between “is” and “ought”,
between matters of fact and judgments of value.

The best place to begin our discussion is Searle’s analysis in*Speech
Acts* of what he calls “The Naturalistic Fallacy Fallacy”: “the fallacy
of supposing that it is logically impossible for any set of statements
of the kind usually called descriptive to entail a statement of the kind
usually called evaluative”.[^15] The thesis that Searle wishes to defend
is, in his own words, that:

the view that descriptive statements cannot entail evaluative
statements, though relevant to ethics, is not a specifically ethical
theory; it is a general theory about the illocutionary force of
utterances of which ethical utterances are only a special case.[^16]

How can I become obliged by merely uttering certain words, say, “I
promise to mow your lawn”? Searle’s gambit, in embryo, is as follows. He
wants us to see the traditional problem of the naturalistic fallacy as a
particular case of a putatively more general problem in speech act
theory. It is then this latter problem, of the normativity associated
with speech acts, which Searle sets out to solve - not, as many authors
have too quickly assumed, the traditional problem of moral normativity.

Searle himself is emphatic about the fact that whatever relevance his
views might have regarding moral normativity would be a mere side-effect
of his concern with a*logical* problem about the illocutionary force of
certain utterances. As a propaedeutic warning, he tells us that we must
avoid “lapsing into talk about ethics or morals. We are concerned with
‘ought’ not ‘morally ought’”.[^17] And again: “Let us remind ourselves
at the outset that ‘ought’ is a humble English auxiliary, ‘is’ an
English copula; and the question whether ‘ought’ can be derived from
‘is’ is as humble as the words themselves”.[^18] The humble sense of
‘ought’ with which Searle is concerned is the same sense as that in
which, when playing chess, you*ought* to move your bishop diagonally. We
note in passing that this sense of ‘ought’, interesting as it might be,
is at best of indirect significance for moral philosophy.

Searle’s treatment of the humble sense of ‘ought’ is reminiscent of
another treatment of these matters in the writings of A. N. Prior, who
noted that, from the premise that “Tea drinking is common in England”,
one could validly infer that “either tea drinking is common in England
or all New Zealanders ought to be shot”.[^19] Of course, this inference
constitutes no contribution whatsoever to the solution of the
meta-ethical problem regarding the nature of moral propositions.

To be sure, Searle’s derivation of an ‘ought’ from an ‘is’ is not as
vacuous as Prior’s*reductio* But it is similarly irrelevant to ethics.
For it merely tells us something about the*meaning* of the word
‘promise’. Promising*means* undertaking an obligation, and undertaking
an obligation*means* that one ought to do whatever one has obliged
oneself to do. The problem is that this sense of obligation falls short
of the sort of obligation that involves moral normativity. As Searle
admits, “whether the entire institution of promising is good or evil,
and whether the obligations undertaken in promising are overridden by
other outside considerations are questions which are external to the
institution itself”.[^20] Such external considerations are very often
precisely of a*moral* nature.

There is something odd, then, about Searle’s attempt to examine what he
describes as the*general* problem of the naturalistic fallacy, for the
classical interest of philosophers in this fallacy has been focused
precisely on its properly ethical dimension. So it was for Hume,[^21]
for Moore,[^22] and for Popper.[^23] These authors leave no doubt that
they are dealing with an ethical problem.

The problem with Searle’s treatment of the naturalistic fallacy is
brought out nicely by D. D. Raphael writing on the justification of
political obligations. Why does the citizen have a duty to obey the laws
of the State? Raphael points out that there is an answer to this
question which is “simple and obvious”: “It follows logically that*if
the State is authoritative* , i.e. has the right to issue orders to its
citizens and the right to receive obedience from them, the citizens are
obliged to obey those orders”.[^24] Raphael rubs home the downright
platitudinous character of this sort of answer: “the citizen is legally
obliged to obey the law because the law*is* that which imposes legal
obligations”.[^25] And then he compares this sort of answer with the
passage in which Hamlet is asked by Polonius, “What do you read my
lord?” and Hamlet replies, “Words, words, words”. Though both answers
are “formally correct”, as Raphael puts it, they tell us “virtually
nothing”.[^26] Something similar happens with Searle’s derivation of
‘ought’ from ‘is’. The very meaning of promising is that one ought to do
what one has promised to do. But this sense of ought is indeed humble,
and it is dramatically different from the sense of ‘ought’ that has
preoccupied moral philosophers throughout the ages.

In spite of his reminding us of the humble nature of the problem he
seeks to solve, toward the end of his derivation of ‘ought’ from ‘is’,
Searle asks: “what bearing does all this have on moral philosophy?” His
answer deserves to be quoted in full, with emphasis added:

At least this much: It is often claimed that no ethical statement can
ever follow from a set of statements of fact. The reason for this, it is
alleged, is that ethical statements are a sub-class of evaluative
statements, and no evaluative statements can ever follow from a set of
statements of fact. The naturalistic fallacy as applied to ethics is
just a special case of the general naturalistic fallacy. I have argued
that the general claim that one cannot derive evaluative from
descriptive statements is false.*I have not argued, or even considered,
that specifically ethical or moral statements cannot be derived from
statements of fact* .[^27]

Clever as Searle’s manoeuvre is, it nonetheless misrepresents the case
that has traditionally been made by those who believe that there is an
is/ought gap. Classical moral philosophers have not subsumed the ethical
problem under the general speech act problem in order then to show that,
since there is a gap concerning that general problem, the gap must
extend to the particular ethical version of the problem. It has been
enough to point out that there is no way to bridge the gap in the
particular case of morality. Searle is rather alone in his interest in
the*general* naturalistic fallacy.

In his famous article Searle states that he is going to show that the
venerable view to the effect that ‘ought’ cannot be derived from ‘is’ is
flawed by presenting a counterexample to this view. He then says:

It is not of course to be supposed that a single counter-example can
refute a philosophical thesis, but in the present instance if we can
present a plausible counter-example and can in addition give some
account or explanation of how and why it is a counter-example, and if we
can further offer a theory to back up our counter-example - a theory
which will generate an indefinite number of counter-examples - we may at
least cast considerable light on the original thesis.[^28]

The needed theory has been long in the making.*Speech Acts* , in which
“How to Derive ‘Ought’ From ‘Is’” was reprinted with minor
modifications, was indeed the first step; but it is only with the
publication of his two most recent major works -*The Construction of
Social Reality* (1995) and*Rationality in Action* (2001) - that we have
Searle’s views on the ways in which speech acts contribute to the
construction of social institutions. Indeed, Searle’s philosophy has
gained in depth and in comprehensiveness with these recent works - but
then for this very reason the neglect of morality within his total
system is all the more striking.

The world Searle investigates in these two books includes “the world of
Supreme Court decisions and of the collapse of communism”;[^29] it
includes marriages, money, government and property rights, and
discussions about altruism and egoism. And Searle expressly claims to be
interested in the “basic ontology of social institutions” - of*all*
social institutions. Yet still he avoids tackling head on the problem of
the normativity of social institutions. In these recent works he has
emphasized above all the importance of promising. Promises, he tells us
are present in “all” or “virtually all” speech acts.[^30] Marriages,
money, property rights and contracts all contain promises. And promises
create obligations. But how?

Searle’s answer is elegant and complex. As in Hart and Rawls, it
revolves around a distinction between two types of rules, which in terms
coined by Searle already in*Speech Acts* , are called ‘regulative’ and
‘constitutive’. Regulative rules regulate forms of behavior that exist
independently and antecedently.[^31] Constitutive rules - like Hart’s
secondary rules and Rawls’ practice rules - create or define new forms
of behavior.[^32] Thus when someone violates a constitutive rule, he*eo
ipso* places himself outside of the institution to which the form of
behavior defined by the rule belongs. Violating a regulative rule, in
contrast, may give the violator a reputation for bad manners or reckless
driving, but does not*ipso facto* place him outside of any institutions.

Rules of etiquette are regulative. It is perfectly intelligible to say
that someone acted in ways that satisfy such rules even if that someone
is unaware of the fact that he was satisfying such rules. Contrast this
case with a community in which a group of 22 people gather together and
move about while kicking a ball in more or less the same way as would a
group of people playing football; but they would not really be*playing
football* unless a set of rules defining football was already in
existence, and unless they knew about these rules. The latter constitute
the very possibility of the activity of playing football.


