IV. On Soft Normativity
=======================

We wish to refer back to the notion of ‘soft’ normativity we introduced
above, and suggest that it is an accurate corollary to Searle’s (and
Hart’s and Rawls’) views that they characterize the normativity of
social institutions as*soft* - of a piece with the normativity we find
in games.[^33] The constitutive-rules-based ‘oughts’ of games are,
however, defeasible to a very high degree. Certainly when playing
baseball one*ought* to go to first base after four bad pitches are
thrown, but no one*ought* (in any interesting sense) to play baseball in
the first place: any baseball player can walk off the field, can abandon
the game, any time he wishes - though of course if a professional
baseball player were to do this, he would probably lose his job.

This last remark reminds us that there are other types of oughts in
games, in addition to those based in constitutive rules. For example:
one ought to remain in the baseball field even after humiliating oneself
by missing an easy catch. Players in a game of basketball can ‘foul’
their opponents several times in order to prevent them from scoring, but
they ought not to stab or shoot their opponents. One might try to
explain the latter sorts of normativity by appealing to the fact that,
for example, by embarking on a game of baseball one has in a sense
promised not to leave the playing field after making silly mistakes, or
that all human beings have in a sense promised not to kill in general
and this promise covers also one’s behavior when playing basketball.
This strategy, however, robs terms like ‘promise’ and ‘contract’ of
their customary meanings. Moreover, at least some of the mentioned
obligations seem not to be obligations of the osrt which one could
acquire by means of promises or contracts.

Legal and sociopolitical institutions, similarly, give rise to
obligations not only of the constitutive-rule-based sort but also of
other sorts. According to Hart, for example, Nazi laws are genuine laws
in the constitutive-rule-based sense - but they are at the same time
laws that one*should not follow* . Famously, Hart charged that Gustav
Radbruch’s abandonment of positivism in the post-Nazi era was the result
of his “half-digested” understanding of “the spiritual message of
liberalism”,[^34] whereby Radbruch had failed to see that even the
staunchest positivists share the “conviction that if laws reached a
certain degree of iniquity then there would be a plain moral obligation
to resist them and withhold obedience”.[^35] Presumably, Hart would
agree that this “plain moral obligation” is not a game-related
obligation. Significantly however he does not discuss what type of
obligation it might in fact be, and this is the sort of discussion that
Searle avoids as well.

To see that something is wrong with the identification of all
normativity with the normativity of games, we can appeal to
Wittgenstein’s remarks on the nature of games in the context of his
treatment of the notion of family resemblance in the*Philosophical
Investigations* .[^36] According to Wittgenstein, no definition
formulated in terms of necessary and sufficient conditions can apply to
all games. In light of Searle’s views on what we have called
soft-normativity, however, it is tempting to suggest that*being created
by a set of constitutive rules* would amount, precisely, to the
sought-for definition. Whenever you are in the presence of an entity
which exists in virtue of constitutive rules, you are*eo ipso* in the
presence of a game, and*vice versa* .

This resolution of Wittgenstein’s puzzle comes at a price, however - for
it forces an over-large scope upon the notion of game, which now turns
out to include socio-political institutions like promising, punishment,
marriage, and government. Note that if Searle and our authors are
correct, then this would in no way count against it. For whenever
Searle, Hart, and Rawls wish to explain the normativity of such
institutions they do indeed invariably end up talking about the way in
which swinging at the third strike entails that you ought to leave the
baseball field. This move, if we are right, is not a matter of
happenstance. Rather, it reveals that Searle and our other authors have
maneuvered themselves into a position where they do not have the tools
to draw the distinction between games and socio-political institutions.

Part of the compelling force of the “why should I play this game
anyway?” objection to the thesis that all normativity is soft
normativity turns on the*conventional* character of games. For even if
there existed something like a game of life,[^37] the skeptic could
still ask a reformulated question: “Why should we not alter its rules?”
Constitutive rules, are after all not merely to a high degree
defeasible, they are also easy to change: at some point in their history
virtually all games had rules different from those they have today.

Hospitals are, by definition, places where physicians and nurses ought
to care for patients. If there were a hospital in which nurses and
physicians systematically harmed their patients, then we would not be
content simply to claim that this institution is, by definition, no
longer a hospital and leaving it at that. Obviously, we would claim that
the physicians and nurses*ought* to care for their patients, and that
this obligation is not merely the result of the constitutive rules
governing hospitals and medical professions.

Other sorts of normative claims: that murder is wrong, or that it is
appropriate for wrongdoers to apologize, that purely accidental
(non-negligent) wrongdoing is not blameworthy, etc., are not only not
easily defeated, they are also - and even more conspicuously -
not*easily changed* . Whereas the number of fouls a basketball player
can ‘legally’ make in the course of a game can at any time be changed,
the prohibition against stabbing his opponents is not likely to change
at all.


