V. On Robust Normativity
========================

In spite of the fact that Hart cares about legal institutions, that
Rawls cares about political institutions, and that Searle cares about
social institutions, they, and the legions who have followed in their
footsteps, have all avoided addressing the challenge encapsulated in
Raphael’s charge of triviality - the challenge that their respective
logical analyses tell us “virtually nothing” about the normativity that
is interwoven in the fabric of institutions of the various
non-game-related types referred to in the foregoing. For aside from the
sorts of normative demands to which secondary rules, practice rules, and
constitutive rules give rise, there exist in law, politics and society
other types of demands which are similarly non-conventional. Each of us
believes that he has an obligation to respect other human beings; each
of us believes that he has an obligation to apologize to those we might
have wronged. These beliefs do not depend for their existence on any
promises we have made, and neither do the associated obligations. Each
of us believes, similarly, that intentional wrongdoing ought to be
blamed more severely than unintentional wrongdoing; each of us believes
that wrongdoers ought to be blamed. These views, again, are clearly
normative, and they do not depend for their existence on any promises or
contracts.

We believe (with Searle) that a minimum dose of realism is necessary for
any sane philosophy.[^38] Moreover, (also with Searle) we understand
realism as an ontological thesis: “realism … is not a theory of truth,
it is not a theory of knowledge, and it is not a theory of language”,
and Searle himself has recently admitted, that “if one insists on a
pigeonhole, one could say that realism is an ontological theory: it says
that there exists a reality totally independent of our
representations”.[^39] Yet Searle avoids the discussion of realism as
pertains to the dimension of moral normativity. Indeed at crucial
junctures Searle shuns ontology entirely. Thus, in the introduction
to*Intentionality* , Searle praises the methodological advantages of
approaching the analysis of mental phenomena from the perspective of
intentionality in the following terms: “one advantage to this approach,
by no means a minor one, is that it enables us to distinguish clearly
between the logical properties of Intentional states and their
ontological status; indeed, on this account, the question concerning the
logical nature of Intentionality is not an ontological problem at
all.”[^40] Searle believes that a logical approach to intentional
phenomena can allow him to repeat the success of his logical analyses of
obligation in “How to Derive ‘Ought’ From ‘Is’”. In*Rationality in
Action* , still more recently, Searle has suggested that we can enjoy
some of these same benefits by providing a logical account of notions
such as self, freedom, and responsibility; that is, that we can talk
about these notions without having to deal with the embarrassing
ontological questions that had affected their treatment in earlier
times.

In tandem with the shunning of realism as it pertains to ethics, of
course, goes the shunning of precisely those types of normativity which
are not soft. We can morally criticize Nazi institutions; we can accept
that promises do not obligate if what is promised is itself immoral, we
can expect - and some times accept - apologies when we are wronged. But
to tackle theoretically these genuinely moral dimensions of social
institutions we need to go beyond merely tracing the*logical* paths
connecting speech acts, institutions and consequent obligations.

To see what more is needed , let us pay closer attention to the
normativity that is associated with our intentional states. This is, we
suggest, more fundamental than the normativity associated with speech
acts. Paradoxically, perhaps, we find some support for this thesis in
Searle’s own philosophy, above all at the outset of*Intentionality* ,
where he writes:

A basic assumption behind my approach to problems of language is that
the philosophy of language is a branch of the philosophy of mind. The
capacity of speech acts to represent objects and states of affairs in
the world is an extension of the more biologically fundamental
capacities of the mind (or brain) to relate the organism to the world by
way of such mental states as belief and desire, and especially through
action and perception.[^41]

We fully agree with Searle’s assumption regarding the priority,
biological and otherwise, of intentional states over speech acts, though
we wish he had done more to exploit this insight in his recent work on
social reality. We say this not because we deny the general value of
speech act theory. Our claim is, precisely, that its value should not be
over-estimated, and that in particular the concern with practice,
secondary or constitutive rules which we find in Hart, Rawls, and Searle
has already yielded all the fruits that it is worth collecting.
Constitutive rules do give rise to claims which exhibit some sort of
normative force, but they are not nearly the end of the story of
normativity.

A no less vital chapter in this story deals with a different sort of
normative force - that which derives from intentional states. What
happens if we focus not on speech acts in giving an account of legal and
socio-political institutions, but rather on the intentional states which
underlie them? Speech acts are in their entirety contingent, first in
the sense that one can choose to perform them or not, and secondly in
the sense that they need not have existed at all. It is indeed hard to
imagine a society in which something resembling promising did not exist,
but given Searle’s analysis of speech acts as products of constitutive
rules such a society is not impossible. Some intentional states are not
contingent in either of these two senses.

By Searle’s own admission, the intentional state of intending is
crucially important for promising: if you promise to X then you must
intend to X. But where the skeptic can raise the concern as to why he
should play the “promising game”, there is no parallel concern in
relation to the phenomenon of intending. This is because what happens
when one intends is not the result of applying human conventions. And
while it is hard to imagine a society which did not develop a practice
more or less identical to promising as we know it, it is downright
impossible to think of human beings who do not intend.


