VII. Conclusion
===============

The normative principle to the effect that*to bring about an evil
outcome intentionally is never less blameworthy than to bring it about
unintentionally* is in no sense analogous to the principle that in chess
bishops moves diagonally. For in the rules of chess are open to
deliberation. One could choose or invite others not to play chess; one
could propose that chess be played differently; and thus one could
affect the way in which the soft normativity of chess plays itself out
in reality. One cannot, in contrast, refuse to accept or propose
adjustments in the normativity of intending.

There is, then, normativity in intentional states themselves, before
they give rise to speech acts. But this is still not the end of the
story as concerns the manifold varieties of normativity. Thus we still
cannot explain why murder is wrong. And we still do not yet have the
means to do justice to those features of normativity turning on virtue,
character traits and like phenomena, which are the fare of
neo-Aristotelian ethics. Our discussion of intentions is meant simply to
establish that there are provinces in the kingdom of normativity that
have nothing to do with conventional rules. Surely some of these
provinces affect the structure of social ontology: it is rather hard to
accept that all social reality is a matter of soft normativity, yet it
is a view of this sort with which Searleâ€™s otherwise groundbreaking work
on social ontology is still stuck.


