Chapter 7: Philosophical Teachings of the Qur’an
================================================

*Philosophical Teachings of the Qur’an by M.M Sharif*

The Qur'an
----------

Although the Scriptures revealed to the earlier prophets, especially
those of the Christians and the Jews, are regarded by the Muslims as
holy, yet the Book (al‑Qur'an) revealed to the last Prophet, Muhammad,
is their chief sacred Book. The doctrine propounded by the Qur'an is not
a new doctrine, for it is similar to the Scriptures of the earlier
apostles.[^1] It lays down the same way of faith as was enjoined on Noah
and Abraham.[^2]

It con­firms in the Arabic tongue what went before it, the Book of Moses
and the Gospel of Jesus‑in being a guide to mankind, admonishing the
unjust and giving glad tidings to the righteous.[^3] God never abrogates
or causes to be for­gotten any of His revelations, but according to the
needs and exigencies of the times, He confirms them or substitutes for
them something similar or better. [^4]

The Qur'an is a book essentially religious, not philosophical, but it
deals with all those problems which religion and philosophy have in
common. Both have to say something about problems related to the
significance of such ex­pressions as God, the world, the individual
soul, and the inter‑relations of these; good and evil, free‑will, and
life after death.  
 While dealing with these problems it also throws light on such
conceptions as appearance and reality, existence and attributes, human
origin and destiny, truth and error, space and time, permanence and
change, eternity and immortality.

The Qur'an claims to give an exposition of universal truths with regard
to these problems ­an exposition couched in a language (and a
terminology) which the people immediately addressed, the Arabs, with the
intellectual background they had at the time of its revelation, could
easily understand, and which the people of other lands, and other times,
speaking other languages, with their own intel­lectual background could
easily interpret. It makes free use of similitude to give a workable
idea of what is incomprehensible in its essence.

It is a book of wisdom,[^5] parts of which relate to its basic
principles, (umm al‑kitab) and explain and illustrate them in detail,
others relate to matters explained alle­gorically. It would be a folly
to ignore the fundamentals and wrangle about the allegorical, for none
knows their hidden meanings, except God.[^6] In what follows, a brief
account is given of the Qur'anic teaching with regard to the
religio‑philosophical problems mentioned above.

Ultimate Beauty: God and His Attributes
---------------------------------------

The Ultimate Being or Reality is God.[^7] God, as described by the
Qur'an for the understanding of man, is the sole self‑subsisting,
all‑pervading, eternal, and Absolute Reality.[^8] He is the first and
the last, the seen and the unseen.[^9] He is transcendent in the sense
that He in His full glory cannot be known or experienced by us finite
beings‑­beings that can know only what can be experienced through the
senses or otherwise and what is inherent in the nature of thought or is
implied by it. No vision can grasp Him. He is above all
comprehension.[^10]

He is transcendent also because He is beyond the limitations of time,
space, and sense‑content. He was before time, space, and the world of
sense came into existence. He is also immanent both in the souls (anfus)
and the spatio‑temporal order (afaq). Of the exact nature of God we can
know nothing. But, in order that we may apprehend what we cannot
comprehend, He uses similitudes from our expe­rience.[^11]

He “is the light of the heavens and the earth. The parable of His light
is as if there were a niche and within it a lamp, the lamp enclosed in
glass; the glass as if it were a brilliant star lit from a blessed tree,
an olive, neither of the east nor of the west, whose oil is well‑nigh
luminous, though fire scarce touched it: light upon light !”[^12].

Likewise for our understanding, He describes through revelation His
attributes by similitude from what is loft­iest in the heavens and the
earth[^13] and in our own experience[^14] (our highest ideals).

This He does in a language and an idiom which the people addressed to
may easily understand.[^15] These attributes are many and are connoted
by His names,[^16] but they can all be summarized under a few essential
heads: Life,[^17] Eternity,[^18] Unity,[^19] Power,[^20] Truth,[^21]
Beauty,[^22] Justice,[^23] Love,[^24] and Goodness.[^25]

As compared to the essence of God, these attributes are only finite
approaches, symbols or pointers to Reality and serve as the ultimate
human ideals, but though signs and symbols, they are not arbitrary
symbols. God has Himself implanted them in our being. For that reason
they must, in some sense, be faithful representations of the divine
essence. They must at least be in tune with it, so that in pursuing them
we human beings are truly in pursuit of what is at least in harmony with
the essence of God, for they are grounded in that essence.

God is, thus; a living, self‑subsisting,[^26] eternal, and absolutely
free creative reality which is one, all‑powerful, a11‑knowing,
all‑beauty, most just, most loving, and all good.

As a living reality God desires intercourse with His creatures and makes
it possible for them to enter into fellowship with Him through prayer,
contemplation, and mystic gnosis, and lights with His light the houses
of those who do not divert from His remembrance, nor from prayer nor
from the prac­tice of regular charity.[^27]

His life expresses itself also through His eternal activity and
creativeness. God is one and there is no god but He.[^28] He is the only
one[^29] and there is none like Him.[^30] He is too high to have any
partners.[^31] If there were other gods besides Him, some of them would
have lorded over others.[^32]

He is the One and not one in a trinity
--------------------------------------

Those who attribute sons and daughters to Him and those who say Christ
is the son of God and is himself God only blaspheme God.[^33] He has
begotten neither sons nor daughters[^34] nor is He Himself
be­gotten.[^35] And how could He be said to have sons and daughters when
He has no consort?[^36] And yet the unbelievers have taken besides Him
gods that create nothing, but are themselves created, who have no power
to hurt or do good to themselves and can control neither death, nor
life, nor resurrection.[^37]

Therefore no god should be associated with God.[^38] Setting up of gods
is nothing but anthropomorphism. The gods that people set up are nothing
but names of conjectures and what their own souls desire.[^39] They do
blaspheme who say, “God is Christ the son of Mary”; for said Christ, “O
children of Israel, wor­ship God my Lord and your Lord.”[^40] They
regard the angels as females, as if they had witnessed their
creation.[^41]

God and the World ‑ God is omnipotent
-------------------------------------

To Him is due the primal origin of everything.[^42] It is He, the
Creator,[^43] who began the process of creation[^44] and adds to
creation as He pleases.[^45] To begin with He created the heavens and
the earth, joined them together as one unit of smoky or nebulous
substance,[^46] and then clove them asunder.[^47]

The heavens and the earth, as separate existents with ail their produce;
were created by Him in six days[^48] (six great epochs of evolution).
Serially considered, a divine day signifies a very long period, say, one
thousand years of our reckoning[^49] or even fifty thousand years.[^50]

Non‑serially considered, His decisions are executed in the twinkling of
an eye[^51] or even quicker,[^52] for there is nothing to oppose His
will. When he says, “Be,” behold' it is.[^53] His decree is
absolute;[^54] no one can change it.[^55] He draws the night as a veil
over the day, each seeking the other in rapid succession. He created the
sun, the moon, and the stars, all governed by the laws ordained by
Him[^56] and under His command.[^57] Every creature in the heavens and
the earth willingly submits to His laws.[^58]

The sun runs its course for a determined period; so does the moon.[^59]
The growth of a seed into a plant bearing flowers and fruit, the
constellations in the sky, the succession of day and night‑these and all
other things show proportion, measure, order, and law.[^60] He it is who
is the creator, evolver, and restorer of all forms.[^61] He it is who
sends down water from the sky in due measure, causes it to soak in the
soil, raises to life the land that is dead,[^62] and then drains it off
with ease.[^63]

God is the Lord of all the worlds,[^64] and of all mysteries.[^65] He
has power over all things,[^66] and to Him belong all forces of the
heavens and the earth.[^67] He is the Lord of the Throne of Honour[^68]
and the Throne of Glory Supreme, the Lord of the dawn[^69] and all the
ways of ascent.[^70]

It is He who spreads out the earth[^71] like a carpet,[^72] sends down
water from the sky in due measure[^73] to revive it[^74] with fruit,
corn, and plants,[^75] and has created pairs of plants, each separate
from the others,[^76] and pairs of all other things.[^77]

He gives the heavens' canopy its order and perfection[^78] and night its
darkness and splendour,[^79] the expanse of the earth its moisture,
pastures, and mountains;[^80] springs,[^81] streams,[^82] and seas[^83]
ships[^84] and cattle;[^85] pearls and coral;[^86] sun and shadow;[^87]
wind and rain;[^88] night and day;[^89] and things we humans do not
know. It is He who gives life to dead land and slakes the thirst of His
creatures[^90] and causes the trees to grow into orchards full of beauty
and delight.[^91]

To God belong the dominions of the heavens and the earth and everything
between them.[^92] To Him belong the east and the west. Withers ever you
turn, there is His presence, for He is all‑pervading.[^93] Neither
slumber can seize Him, nor sleep.

His Throne extends over the heavens and the earth, and He feels no
fatigue in guarding and preserving His creatures, for He is the most
high and supreme in glory,[^94] exalted in might; and wise.[^95] It is
He who gives life and death and has power over all things.

God is not only the creator, but also the cherisher,[^96]
sustainer,[^97] protector,[^98] helper,[^99] guide,[^100] and reliever
of distress and suffering[^101] of all His creatures, and is most
merciful, most kind, and most forgiving.

God has not created the world for idle sport.[^102] It is created with a
purpose, for an appointed term,[^103] and according to a plan, however
hidden these may be from us humans. “God is the best of planners.”[^104]
He it is who ordains laws and grants guidance,[^105] creates everything
and ordains for it a proportion and measure,[^106] and gives it
guidance.[^107]

There is not a thing but with Him are the treasures of it, but He sends
them down in a known measure.[^108]

The world is not without a purpose or a goal; it is throughout
teleological and to this universal teleology human beings are no
exception. To every one of them there is a goal[^109] and that goal is
God Himself.[^110]

God is all knowledge. He is the Truth.[^111] With Him are the keys of
the un­seen, the treasures that none knows but He.[^112] He witnesses
all things,[^113] for every single thing is before His sight in due
proportion.[^114] Verily, nothing on the earth or in the heavens is
hidden from Him, not even as much as the weight of an atom. Neither the
smallest nor the greatest of things are but recorded in a clear
record.[^115]

On the earth and in the sea not even a leaf does fall without His
knowledge.[^116] Should not He that created everything know His own
handiwork? He is full of wisdom.[^117] He understands the finest of
mysteries.[^118] He knows what enters the earth and what comes forth out
of it; what comes down from heaven and all that ascends to it.[^119] He
knows every word spoken.[^120]

No secrets of the heart are hidden from Him,[^121] for He has full
knowledge of all things, open or secret.[^122] He knows and would call
us to account for what is in our minds, whether we reveal it or conceal
it.[^123] Two other attributes of God and our basic values are always
mentioned together in the Qur'an. These are justice and love, the latter
including among other attributes the attributes of munificence, mercy,
and forgiveness.

God is the best to judge[^124] and is never unjust,[^125] He does not
deal unjustly with man; it is man that wrongs his own soul.[^126] On the
Day of Judgment, He will set up the scales of justice and even the
smallest action will be taken into account.[^127] He is swift in taking
account,[^128] and punishes with exemplary punish­ment.[^129] He
commands people to be just[^130] and loves those who are just.[^131]

For those who refrain from wrong and do what is right there is great
re­ward,[^132] and God suffers no reward to be lost.[^133] People's good
deeds are in­scribed to their credit so that they may be requited with
the best possible award.[^134]

Divine punishment is equal to the evil done. It may be less, for,
besides being most just, God is most loving, most merciful, and forgiver
of all sins,[^135] but it is never more.[^136] Such is not, however, the
case with His reward. He is most munificent and bountiful and,
therefore, multiplies rewards for good deeds manifold.[^137] These
rewards are both of this life and the life hereafter.[^138]

Islam, no less than Christianity, lays emphasis on the basic value of
love. Whenever the Qur'an speaks of good Christians, it recalls their
love and mercy.[^139] God is loving,[^140] and He exercises His love in
creating, sustaining, nourishing, sheltering, helping, and guiding His
creatures; in attending to their needs, in showing them grace, kindness,
compassion, mercy, and forgive­ness, when having done some wrong, they
turn to Him for that; and in ex­tending the benefits of His unlimited
bounty to the sinners no less than to the virtuous.[^141]

It is, therefore, befitting for man to be overflowing in his love for
God[^142] and be thankful to Him for His loving care.[^143]

God is all good, free from all evil (quddus).[^144] He is also the
source of all good[^145] and worthy of all praise.[^146]

The Qur'an uses synonymous words for beauty and goodness (husn wa
khair).The word radiance or light (Nur) is also used to signify beauty.
God is the beauty (Nur) of the heavens and the earth[^147] and His names
(attributes) are also most beautiful (asma al‑husna).[^148] He is the
creator possessed of the highest excellence.[^149] He creates all forms
and evolves them stage by stage (al‑bari al‑musawwir).[^150]

Everything created by Him is harmonious and of great beauty.[^151]
Notice the beauty of trees and fields and the starry, heaven.[^152] He
is the best bestower of divine colour to man[^153] who has been made in
the best of moulds[^154] and has been given the most beautiful
shape.[^155] How lovable is the beauty of animals whom you take out for
grazing at dawn and bring home at eventime.[^156]

Throughout history God has sent messages of great excellence,[^157] and
given the best of explanations in His revealed books.[^158] Therefore,
people must follow the best revealed book (ahsan al‑kitab).[^159] How
beautiful is the story of Joseph given in the Scripture.[^160]

God's judgment is of the highest excellence,[^161] and belief in the Day
of Judgment of extreme beauty. Of great excellence is the speech of the
righteous that call to God,[^162] for they invite people to Him by
beautiful preaching[^163] and say only those things which are of supreme
excellence.[^164]

The Qur'an lays the greatest stress on the beauty of action. It exhorts
mankind to do the deeds of high value,[^165] for God loves those who do
excellent deeds. It wants men to return greetings with greetings of
great excellence[^166] and repel evil with what is best,[^167] for in so
doing they enhance the excellence of their own souls.[^168]

Patience is graceful (sabr‑i jamil)[^169] and so is forgiveness.[^170]
Excellence of conduct shall not be wasted.[^171] Those whose deeds are
beautiful shall be given the highest reward[^172] in this world and
better still in the next.[^173] They shall be given in paradise the most
beautiful abodes and places for repose[^174], and excellent provisions
shall be made for them.[^175]

God's Relation to Man
---------------------

God created man's spirit out of nothing[^176] and created mankind from
this single spirit. He created his mate of the same kind and from the
twain produced men and women in large numbers.[^177]

From the point of view of personal history and perhaps also from the
point of view of the evolutionary process, man is created for an
appointed term[^178] as a being growing gradually from the earth,[^179]
from an extract of certain elements of the earth,[^180] then by
receiving nourishment from the objects of sustenance,[^181] and being
endowed with life.

Like all other living beings,[^182] taking the form of water[^183] or
watery clay or adhesive mud[^184] moulded into shape in due
proportions[^185] as a life‑germ, a leech‑like Clot[^186] of congealed
blood,[^187] growing into a lump of flesh, further developing into bones
clothed with flesh, and finally emerging as a new creation,[^188] a
human being in two sexes,[^189] gifted with hearing and sight,
intelligence, and‑affection,[^190] destined to become God's vicegerent
on earth,[^191] decreed to die one day,[^192] and destined to be raised
again on the Day of Resurrection.[^193]

The form in which he will be raised again he does not know.[^194] The
whole of mankind is one family, because it is the progeny of a single
pair.[^195]

In reality, man is the highest of all that is created, for God has
created him in the most beautiful of moulds.[^196] He is born with the
divine spirit breathed into him,[^197] even as for the Hindu, Greek, and
Christian sages he is made in the image of God.

Human perfection, therefore, consists in being dyed in divine
colour[^198] ‑ in the fullest achievement and assimilation of divine
attributes, for God desires nothing but the perfection of His
light,[^199] the perfection of these attributes in man.

The sole aim of man, therefore, is a progressive achievement of all
divine attributes‑all intrinsic values. God encompasses[^200] and
cherishes[^201] mankind. He is always near man[^202] nearer than his
jugular vein.[^203] He is with him wheresoever he may be and sees all
that he does.[^204] Whithersoever he turns, there is the presence of
God, for He is all‑pervading.[^205] He listens to the prayer of every
suppliant when he calls on Him.[^206]

Soul
----

The soul of man is of divine origin, for God has breathed a bit of His
own spirit into him.[^207] It is an unfathomable mystery, a command of
God, of the knowledge of which only a little has been communicated to
man.[^208] The conscious self or mind is of three degrees.

In the first degree it is the impulsive mind (nafs ammarah) which man
shares with animals; in the second degree it is the conscientious or
morally conscious mind (nafs lawwamah) struggling between good and evil
and repenting for the evil done; in the third degree it is the mind
perfectly in tune with the divine will, the mind in peace (nafs
mutma'innah).[^209]

Theory of Knowledge
-------------------

Man alone has been given the capacity to use names for things[^210] and
so has been given the knowledge which even the angels do not
possess.[^211] Among men those who are granted wisdom are indeed granted
great good.[^212]

Understanding raises a man's dignity.[^213] Those who do not use the
intellect are like a herd of goats, deaf, dumb, and blind[^214] no
better than the lowest of beasts.[^215] The ideal of the intellect is to
know truth from error. As an ideal or basic value for man wisdom means
the knowledge of facts, ideals, and values.

There are three degrees of knowledge in the ascending scale of certitude
(i) knowledge by inference (\`ilm al‑yaqin),[^216] (ii)knowledge by
perception and reported perception or observation (\`ain
al‑yaqin),[^217] and (iii) knowledge by personal experience or intuition
(haqq al‑yaqan)[^218] ‑a distinction which may be exemplified by my
certitude of (1) fire always burns, (2) it has burnt John's fingers, and
(3) it has burnt my fingers. Likewise, there are three types of errors:
(i) the errors of reasoning, (ii) the errors of observation, and (iii)
the errors of intuition.

The first type of knowledge depends either on the truth of its
presupposi­tion as in deduction, or it is only probable as in induction.
There is greater certitude about our knowledge based on actual
experience (observation or experiment) of phenomena.

The second type of knowledge is either scientific knowledge based on
ex­perience (observation and experiment) or historical knowledge based
on reports and descriptions of actual experiences. Not all reports are
trustworthy. There­fore, special attention should be paid to the
character of the reporter. If he is a man of shady character, his report
should be carefully checked.[^219]

Scientific knowledge comes from the study of natural phenomena. These
natural phenomena are the signs of God[^220] symbols of the Ultimate
Reality or expressions of the Truth, as human behaviour is the
expression of the human mind.

Natural laws are the set ways of God in which there is no change.[^221]
The study of nature, of the heavens and the earth, is enlightening for
the men of understanding.[^222] The alternation of day and night enables
them to measure serial time.[^223]

They can know the ways of God, the laws of nature, by observing all
things of varying colours‑mountains, rivers, fields of corn, or other
forms of vegetation, gardens of olives, date‑palms, grapes, and fruit of
all kinds, though watered with the same water, yet varying in
quahty;[^224] by studying the birds poised under the sky and thinking
how they are so held up[^225] and likewise by observing the clouds and
wondering how they are made.[^226]

Those who think can know God and can conquer all that is in the heavens
and the earth[^227] night and day, and the sun the moon, and the
stars.[^228] Knowledge of the phenomenal world which the senses yield is
not an illusion, but a blessing for which we must be thankful.[^229]

No less important for individuals and nations is the study of history.
There is a measure and law in human society as much as in the whole
cosmos.[^230] The life of every nation as a collective body moves in
time and passes through rises and falls, successes and reverses,[^231]
till its appointed period comes to an end.[^232] For every living nation
there are lessons in the history of the peoples that have lived in the
past.

It should, therefore, study the “days of God,” the momentous periods of
history, the periods of divine favour and punish­ment, the periods of
nations glory and decline.[^233] People should traverse the earth to see
what had been the end of those who neglected the laws of nature, the
signs of God.[^234] Those who do not guide others with truth and so do
not act rightly, even though their days are lengthened, are gradually
brought down by such means as they do not know.[^235]

God never changes the condition of a people until they change it
themselves, but once He wills it, there can be no turning it back.[^236]
Therefore, it is all the more important to take lessons from the past.
In the stories about the past there are instructions for men of
understanding.[^237] Even the bare outlines of the rise and fall of
nations, of great events of history, and their consequences provide
object lessons for their guidance and warning.

Let them remember momentous events of the lives of such peoples and
societies as the Israelites,[^238] the Magians,[^239] the Sabians,[^240]
the Romans,[^241] the Christians,[^242] the people of Saba,[^243] the
people of Madyan,[^244] of \`Ad,[^245] of Thamud,[^246] of Lot,[^247]
Companions of the Cave, the Seven Sleepers,[^248] the Companions of
al‑Rass,[^249] the Companions of the Rocky Tract,[^250] and those of the
Inscription,[^251] and Gog and Magog;[^252] prophets like Noah,[^253]
Abraham,[^254] Isma\`il,[^255] Isaac,[^256] Jacob,[^257] David,[^258]
Solomon,[^259] Joseph,[^260] Moses,[^261] Aaron,[^262] Elisha,[^263]
Jonah,[^264] Jesus;[^265] and other personages great for their piety,
power or wisdom, e.g., Mary,[^266] the Queen of Saba,[^267] Dhu
al‑Qarnain[^268] (probably Cyrus of Iran), and the Pharaoh[^269]
(Thothmes I of Egypt), and Aesop.[^270]

So much importance has been given to history that fifteen chapters of
the Qur'an have been given the titles bearing historical
significance.[^271] Nor indeed has the study of contemporary history
been ignored. The Qur'an refers to contemporaneous events such as the
battle of Badr,[^272] the battle of Tabuk,[^273] the trade and commerce
of the Quraish,[^274] the hypocrisy of those who were enemies pretending
to have embraced Islam, and the animosity of persons like abu Lahab and
his wife.[^275]

God reveals His signs not only in the experience of the outer world
(afaq) and its historical vistas, but also through the inner experience
of minds (anfus). Thus, the inner or personal experience is the third
source of know­ledge. Experience from this source gives the highest
degree of certitude. Divine guidance[^276] comes to His creatures in the
first instance from this source. The forms of knowledge that come
through this source are:

(1) divinely‑determined movement‑movement determined by natural causes,
as in the earth,[^277] and the heavens,[^278]

(2) instinct, e.g., in the bee to build its cell,[^279]

(3) intuition or knowledge by the heart,[^280]

(4) inspiration as in the case of Moses mother when she cast her
tenderly suckled child into the river,[^281] and

(5) revelation as in the case of all true prophets,[^282] God's
messengers.

Man's Power
-----------

God has subjected for the use of man, His vicegerent on the earth,[^283]
everything in the heavens and the earth, the sun and the moon; day and
night; winds and rain; the rivers and the seas and the ships that sail;
pearls and corals; springs and streams, mountains, moisture, and
pastures; and animals to ride and grain and fruit to eat.[^284]

Free Will
---------

God has given man the will to choose, decide, and resolve to do good or
evil. He has endowed him with reason and various impulses so that by his
own efforts he may strive and explore possibilities. He has also given
him a just bias, a natural bias towards good.[^285] Besides this He has
given him guidance through revelation and inspiration, and has advised
him to return evil with good,[^286] to repel it with what is best
(ahsan).[^287] Hence if a man chooses to do good, it is because in
giving him these benefits God has willed him to do so.

He never changes the gracious benefits which He has bestowed on a people
until they change themselves.[^288] Therefore, whatever good come from
man or to man is ultimately from God.[^289] On the other hand, his
nature has a bias against evil, his reason is opposed to it, and he has
been given a warning against it through the revealed books; therefore,
whatever evil comes from him or to him is from his own soul.[^290]

If God had willed He would have destroyed evil or would not have allowed
it to exist, and if it were His will, the whole of mankind would have
had faith, but that is not His plan?[^291] His plan envisages man's free
use of the divine attribute of power or freedom to choose[^292] and take
all judicious and precautionary measures to suit different
situations.[^293]

In the providential scheme man's role is not that of a blind, deaf, dumb
and driven herd of goats.[^294] So even his free choice of evil is a
part of the scheme of things and no one will choose a way unto God,
unless it fits into that scheme or is willed by God.[^295]

There is no compulsion in faith. God's guidance is open to all who have
the will to profit by it.[^296] Whosoever wills, let him take the
straight path to his Lord.[^297] Truth is from God, then whosoever
wills, let him believe it; and whosoever wills, let him reject it.[^298]
The prophets are sent to every nation[^299] for guiding the whole of
mankind. Their duty is to preach, guide, and inspire by persuasion and
not to drive or force people to anything, nor to watch over their doings
or dispose of their affairs.[^300] They cannot compel mankind against
their will to believe.[^301]

Death
-----

Death of the body has been decreed by God to be the common lot of
mankind.[^302] Wherever a man is, death will overtake him even if he is
in a tower strong and high.[^303] No soul can die except by God's leave,
the term being fixed as if by writing,[^304] but every soul shall be
given a taste of death[^305] and in the end brought back to God[^306]
and duly judged on the Day of Judgment, and only he who is saved from
fire will be admitted to paradise; it is then that he will have attained
the goal of his life. As compared to that life, the life of this world
is only a life of vainglory.[^307]

Life after Death
----------------

There are some who think revival after death is far from their
understanding[^308] and ask how they shall be raised up after they have
been reduced to bones and dust.[^309]

Let them recall to mind that they were created out of nothing; first as
dust, then a sperm, then a leech‑like clot, then a piece of flesh,
partly formed and partly unformed, kept in a womb for an appointed term,
then brought out as babes and then fostered so that they reached an age
of full strength; and further, let them ponder over the fact that the
earth is first barren and lifeless but when God pours down rain, it is
stirred to life, it swells, and puts forth every kind of beautiful
growth in pairs.[^310]

Let them understand that He who created the heavens and the earth is
able to give life to the dead, for He has power over all things.[^311]

God created man from the earth, into it shall he return and from it
shall he be brought out again.[^312] For everyone after death there
shall be an interval (Barzakh)lasting till the Day of
Resurrection.[^313] On that day all the dead shall be raised up
again.[^314] Even as God produced the first creation, so shall He
produce this new one.[^315] We do not know in what form we shall be
raised,[^316] but as a parable[^317] the Qur'an describes the Day of
Resurrection as follows

On that day there shall be a dreadful commotion.[^318] The heaven shall
be rent asunder[^319] and melted like molten brass.[^320] The sun folded
up and the moon darkened shall be joined together,[^321] and the stars
shall fall, losing their lustre.[^322] In terrible repeated
convulsions,[^323] the earth shall be shaken to its depths and pounded
into powder.[^324] The mountains shall crumble to atoms flying hither
and thither[^325] like wool,[^326] the oceans shall boil over, there
shall be a deafening noise, and the graves shall be turned upside
down.[^327]

A trumpet shall be blown,[^328] no more than a single mighty
blast,[^329] and there shall come forth every individual soul[^330] and
rush forth to the Lord[^331] ‑ the sinners as blackened,[^332]
blinded,[^333] terror‑smitten[^334] with eyes cast down[^335] and hearts
come right up to their throats to choke;[^336] and the virtuous, happy
and rejoicing.[^337]

Then all except such as it will please God to exempt shall fall into a
swoon.[^338] Then a second trumpet shall be sounded, when, behold! they
will all be standing and looking on. The earth will shine with the
glory, of the Lord and the record of deeds shall be opened.[^339]

All shall fully remember their past deeds.[^340] Anyone who will have
done an atom of good shall see it and anyone who will have done an atom
of evil shall see it.[^341] They shall also recognize one another,[^342]
though each will have too much concern of his own to be able to be of
help to others.[^343] They will have neither a protector, nor an
intercessor except God[^344] or those whom permission is granted by Him
and whose word is acceptable to Him.[^345]

They shall all now meet their Lord.[^346] The scale of justice shall be
set up, and not a soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least; and if
there be no more than the weight of a mustard seed, it will be brought
to account,[^347] and all shall be repaid for their past deeds.[^348]
There will be a sorting out of the sinners and the righteous.[^349] The
sinners will meet a grievous penalty but it shall not be more than the
retribution of the evil they will have wrought.[^350]

All in proportion to their respective deeds and for a period longer and
shorter shall go through a state of pain and remorse,[^351] designated
in the Qur'an as hell, and the righteous saved from hell shall enter a
state of perpetual peace, designated as paradise.

Paradise has been described in the Qur'an by similitude[^352] in terms
of what average human beings value most: dignity, honour, virtue,
beauty, luxury, sensuous pleasures, and social discourse‑and hell in
terms of what they all detest. People shall be sorted out into three
classes.[^353]

(1) Those who will be fore­most and nearest to God, with whom God is
well‑pleased and who are well­ pleased with God. They shall have no
fear, no grief, no toil, no fatigue, no sense of injury,[^354] no
vanity, and no untruth.[^355]They shall enjoy honour and dignity, and,
dressed in fine silks and brocade and adorned with bracelets of gold and
pearls,[^356] shall live forever in carpeted places. They will recline
on thrones encrusted with gold and jewels facing one another for
discourse.

They will be served by youths of perpetual freshness, handsome as
pearls,[^357] with goblets, beakers, and cups filled out of clear
fountains of crystal white and delicious drinks free from intoxication
and after‑aches, which they will ex­change with one another free of
frivolity and evil taint.[^358] They shall be given fruit and flesh of
their own choice in dishes of gold to eat, and shall get more than all
they desire.[^359]

Their faces shall be beaming with the brightness of bliss.[^360] They
shall have as companions chaste women, their wives,[^361] beautiful like
pearls and corals.[^362] Those who believe and whose families follow
them in faith, to them God shall join their families, their ancestors,
their spouses, and their offspring.[^363] Rest, satisfaction, and peace
will reign all round. This will be their great salvation;[^364] but
their greatest reward, their supreme feli­city, will consist in being in
the presence of God.[^365]

(2) Companions of the right hand who shall have their abode in another
garden. They will sit on thrones on high in the midst of trees, having
flowers, pile upon pile, in cool, long‑extending shades by the side of
constantly flowing water. They will recline on rich cushions and carpets
of beauty,[^366] and so will their pretty and chaste companions,[^367]
belonging to a special creation, pure and undefiled. They will greet one
another with peace. They will also have all kinds of fruits, the supply
of which will not be limited to seasons.[^368] These are parables of
what the righteous shall receive.[^369]

(3) Companions of the left hand who shall be in the midst of a fierce
blast of fire with distorted faces and roasted skin, neither alive nor
dead,[^370] under the shadows of black smoke. They shall have only
boiling and fetid water to drink[^371] and distasteful plants (zaqqum)to
eat.[^372] Nothing shall be there to refresh or to please.

The fire of hell shall, however, touch nobody except those most
unfortunate ones who give the lie to truth.[^373]

But for these similitudes, we cannot conceive the eternal, bliss and
per­petual peace that awaits the righteous in the life hereafter,[^374]
nor can we conceive the agony which the unrighteous will go through.
They will, however, remain in their respective states only so long as it
is the will of God and is in accordance with His plans.[^375]

Neither is the bliss of paradise the final stage for the righteous, nor
is the agony of hell the final stage for the unrighteous. Just as we
experience the glowing sunset, then evening, and then the full moon at
night one after another, even so shall everyone progress whether in
paradise or in hell stage by stage towards his Lord, and thus shall be
redeemed in the end.[^376]

[^1]: Abdullah Yusuf Ali's translation of the Qur'an has been mainly
used for the purposes of this chapter. For references the same work may
be consulted. - Qur'an, X1VI, 9‑10.

[^2]: Ibid., X1II, 13.

[^3]: Ibid., V, 49; XLVI, 12.

[^4]: Ibid., II, 106; XIII, 39; XVI, 101.

[^5]: Ibid., X, 1.

[^6]: Ibid., III, 7.

[^7]: Ibid., II, 186; XXXI, 30

[^8]: Ibid., II, 115; VI,.62; XX, 111; XXXI, 30; XXXII, 2; LV, 27; CXII,
2

[^9]: Ibid., LVII, 3.

[^10]: Ibid., VI, 103.

[^11]: Ibid., XXX,. 28.

[^12]: Ibid., XXIV, 35.

[^13]: Ibid., XXX, 27.

[^14]: Ibid., XXX, 28.

[^15]: Ibid.. XIV, 4; XLIII, 3.

[^16]: Ibid., LIX, 24

[^17]: Ibid., II, 255; XL, 65.

[^18]: Ibid., 1VII, 3.

[^19]: Ibid., II, 163; V, 75; VI, 19; XVI, 22, 51; XXIII, 91; XXXVII,
1‑5; XXXVIII, 65‑68; LVII, 3; CXII, 1‑4.

[^20]: Ibid., II, 29, 117, 284: III, 29; VI, 12‑13, 65, 73; VII, 54; X,
55; XI, 6‑7; .XIII, 16‑17; XVI, 72‑81; XXI, 30‑33; XXV, 61‑62; XXIX,
60‑62; XXXII, 5; XLVIII, 7; LI, 58; LIII, 42‑54; LXVII, 2‑3; LXXXV,
12‑16.

[^21]: Ibid., II, 284; III, 5‑29; IV, 26; VI, 3, 18, 115; X, 61; XIII,
8‑10; XVI, 23; XX, 114; XXI, 4; XXXI, 34; XXXIV, 2; LXIV, 4; LXVII, 14;
XCV, 8.

[^22]: Ibid., VII, 180; XVII, 110; XX, 8.

[^23]: Ibid., IV, 40; V, 45; VII, 29, 167; X, 109; XIII, 6; XVI, 90;
XXI, 47; XXIV, 39; LVII, 25.

[^24]: Ibid., III, 150, 174; IV, 26‑28; 45; V, 77; VI 12, 17, 54, 63‑64,
88, 133, 162; VII, 151, 153; IX, 117‑18; X, 21, 32, 57; XII, 64, 92;
XIV, 32‑34; XV, 49; XVI, 119; XVII, 20‑21; XIX, 96; XXI, 83; XXIII, 109,
118; XXIX, 60‑62; XXXV, 2‑3; XXXIX, 53;‑XL, 51; LII, 28; LV,. 27; LXXXV,
14; LXXXVII, 3; XCII, 12; XCIII, 6‑8; XCVI, 3.

[^25]: Ibid., XVI, 53; XXXI, 26; LIX, 23.

[^26]: Ibid., II, 255; XX, 111.

[^27]: Ibid., XXIV, 36.

[^28]: Ibid., II, 163; III, 18; VI, 19; XVI, 22, 51; XXIII, 91; XXXVII,
4; XL, 2; CXII, 2.

[^29]: Ibid., CXII, 1.

[^30]: Ibid., XVI, 51; CXII, 4.

[^31]: Ibid., VI, 22‑24, 136‑37; XXIII, 92; LIX, 23.

[^32]: Ibid., XXIII, 91‑92.

[^33]: Ibid., V, 75‑76.

[^34]: Ibid., II, 116; VI, 100; X, 68; XIX, 35; XXIII. 91; XXXVII, 151,
15'7.

[^35]: Ibid., CXII, 3.

[^36]: Ibid., VI, 100‑01.

[^37]: Ibid., XXV, 3.

[^38]: Ibid., XVII, 22, 39; XXI, 22; XXIII, 117; XXV, 68; XXVI, 213;
XXXVII, 35‑36; LI, 51; LII, 43.

[^39]: Ibid., LIII, 23.

[^40]: Ibid., V, 75.

[^41]: Ibid., XLIII, 19.

[^42]: Ibid., X, 4; XXX, 11.

[^43]: Ibid., XCVI, 1.

[^44]: Ibid., XXX, 27.

[^45]: Ibid., XXXV, 1.

[^46]: Ibid., XLI, 11.

[^47]: Ibid., XXI, 30.

[^48]: Ibid., VII, 54; X, 3; XXXI, 10; XXXII, 4; LVII, 4.

[^49]: Ibid., XXII, 47.

[^50]: Ibid., LXX, 4.

[^51]: Ibid., LIV, 50.

[^52]: Ibid., XVI, 77.

[^53]: Ibid., VI, 73; XIX, 35.

[^54]: Ibid., VI, 34.

[^55]: Ibid., VI, 115.

[^56]: Ibid., VII, 54; LXXXVII, 2‑3.

[^57]: Ibid., VII, 54; XVI, 12.

[^58]: Ibid., III, 83; XIII, 15.

[^59]: Ibid., XXXVI, 38‑39.

[^60]: Ibid., X, 5; XXV, 2; XXXVI, 37‑40; LIV, 49; LXVII, 3; LXXX, 19.

[^61]: Ibid., LIX, 24.

[^62]: Ibid., XLIII, 11.

[^63]: Ibid., XXIII, 18.

[^64]: Ibid., I, 2.

[^65]: Ibid., XVI, 77.

[^66]: Ibid., LVII, 2.

[^67]: Ibid., XLVIII, 4, 7.

[^68]: Ibid., XXIII, 116; XXXVII, 180; XLIII, 82.

[^69]: Ibid., CXIII, I.

[^70]: Ibid., LXX, 3.

[^71]: Ibid:, XIII, 3.

[^72]: Ibid., XX, 53.

[^73]: Ibid., XLIII, 11.

[^74]: Ibid., XXIX, 63.

[^75]: Ibid., XVI, 10‑11; LV, 10‑13.

[^76]: Ibid., XX, 53.

[^77]: Ibid., XLIII, 12.

[^78]: Ibid., LXXIX, 28.

[^79]: Ibid., 1XXIX, 29.

[^80]: Ibid., LXXIX, 30‑33.

[^81]: Ibid., XXXVI, 34.

[^82]: Ibid., LXVII, 30.

[^83]: Ibid., XVI, 14; XXV, 53; LV, 24.

[^84]: Ibid., XVI, 14; LV, 24.

[^85]: Ibid., XVI, 5 ; XXV, 49 ; XLIII, 12.

[^86]: Ibid., LV, 22.

[^87]: Ibid., XXV, 45‑46.

[^88]: Ibid., XXV, 48‑50.

[^89]: Ibid., XXV, 47.

[^90]: Ibid., XXV, 49.

[^91]: Ibid., XXVII, 60.

[^92]: Ibid., II, 255; III, 2; XL, 65; XLIII, 85.

[^93]: Ibid., II, 115; LV, 17; LXXIII,

[^94]: Ibid., II, 255.

[^95]: Ibid., III,

[^96]: Ibid, I, 2; VI, 164; X, 32.

[^97]: Ibid., VII, 54; XI, 6; XXVII, 64; XXIX, 60; LI, 58

[^98]: Ibid., II, 257; III, 150; LXVI, 2; XCIII, 6.

[^99]: Ibid., III, 150; IV, 45; XL, 51.

[^100]: Ibid., VI, 71, 88; XXVI, 63; XCII, 12; XCIII, 7.

[^101]: Ibid., XXVII, 62

[^102]: Ibid., XXI, 16.

[^103]: Ibid., XLVI, 3.

[^104]: Ibid., III, 54.

[^105]: Ibid., 1XXXVII, 3.

[^106]: Ibid., XXV, 2; LIV, 49.

[^107]: Ibid., XX, 50.

[^108]: Ibid., XV, 21.

[^109]: Ibid., II, 148.

[^110]: Ibid., LIII, 42.

[^111]: Ibid., X, 32; XXII, 6; XXIV, 25; XLIII, 84.

[^112]: Ibid., VI, 59.

[^113]: Ibid., X, 61.

[^114]: Ibid., XIII, 8.

[^115]: Ibid., III, 5; VI, 59; X, 61.

[^116]: Ibid., VI, 59.

[^117]: Ibid., XLIII, 84.

[^118]: Ibid., LXVII, 14.

[^119]: Ibid., XXXIV, 2; LVII, 4,

[^120]: Ibid., XXI, 4.

[^121]: Ibid., IVII, 6; LXIV, 4.

[^122]: Ibid.. LIX, 22.

[^123]: Ibid., II, 284; III, 29; VI, 3; XVI, 23.

[^124]: Ibid., VI, 57; X, 109.

[^125]: Ibid., IV, 40.

[^126]: Ibid., X, 44.

[^127]: Ibid., XXI, 47.

[^128]: Ibid., VII, 167; XXIV, 39.

[^129]: Ibid., XLI, 43.; LIX, 4.

[^130]: Ibid., XVI, 90; LVII, 25.

[^131]: Ibid.. V, 45.

[^132]: Ibid., III, 172.

[^133]: Ibid., IX, 120.

[^134]: Ibid., IX, 121.

[^135]: Ibid., XXXIX, 53.

[^136]: Ibid., VI, 160; XXXVII, 39.

[^137]: Ibid.,VI, 160.

[^138]: Ibid., IV, 134.

[^139]: Ibid., V, 85; LVII, 27.

[^140]: Ibid., IV, 28, 45; VI, 17, 64, 77, 88, 122; X, 57; XVLI, 20, 21;
XIX, 96; LXXXVII, 3; XCII, 12; XCIII, 7; XCVI, 3.

[^141]: Ibid., III, 150, 174; IV, 26‑27, 45; V, 77 ; VI, 12, 17, 54,
63‑64, 133, 165; VII, 151; IX, 117‑18 ; X, 21, 32, 57 ; XII, 64, 92 ;
XIV, 34, 36 ; XV, 49 ; XVI, 119 ; XVII, 20, 21; XXI, 83; XXIII, 109,
118; III, 28; IV, 27; XCVI, 3.

[^142]: Ibid., II, 165.

[^143]: Ibid., XVI, 114.

[^144]: Ibid., LIX, 23.

[^145]: Ibid., XVI, 53.

[^146]: Ibid., XXXI, 26.

[^147]: Ibid., XXIV, 35.

[^148]: Ibid.,VII, 180; XVII, 110; XX. 8.

[^149]: Ibid., XXXVII, 125.

[^150]: Ibid., LIX, 24.

[^151]: Ibid., XXXII, 7.

[^152]: Ibid.,. XXXVII, 6.

[^153]: Ibid., II, 138.

[^154]: Ibid., XCV, 4.

[^155]: Ibid., XL, 64.

[^156]: Ibid., XVI, 5‑6.

[^157]: Ibid., XXXIX, 23.

[^158]: Ibid., XXV, 33.

[^159]: Ibid., XXXIX, 55.

[^160]: Ibid., XII, 3.

[^161]: Ibid., V, 53.

[^162]: Ibid., XLI, 33.

[^163]: Ibid., XVI, 125.

[^164]: Ibid., XVII, 53.

[^165]: Ibid., II, 195; V, 96.

[^166]: Ibid., IV, 86.

[^167]: Ibid., XXIII, 96.

[^168]: Ibid., XVII, 7.

[^169]: Ibid., XII, 18; LXXIII, 10.

[^170]: Ibid., XV, 85.

[^171]: Ibid., XVIII, 30.

[^172]: Ibid., XVI, 30.

[^173]: Ibid., XXV, 24.

[^174]: Ibid., III, 172; IX, 121; V, 26; VI, 96‑97; XIV, :3,I: XXIX, 7;
XXXIX, 35,.70; XLVI, 16; LIII, 31.

[^175]: Ibid., XVI, 96‑97; XXV, 75‑76.

[^176]: Ibid., XIX, 67.

[^177]: Ibid., IV, 1.

[^178]: Ibid., VI, 2.

[^179]: Ibid., XXXII, 7; LV, 14.

[^180]: Ibid., VI, 2; XXII, 5.

[^181]: Ibid., XVII, 70; LXXV, 36‑39,

[^182]: Ibid., XXI, 30.

[^183]: Ibid., XV, 26.

[^184]: Ibid., XXXVII, 11.

[^185]: Ibid., XV, 26.

[^186]: Ibid., XCVI, 2.

[^187]: Ibid.

[^188]: Ibid., XXIII, 14.

[^189]: Ibid., XXXVI, 36; XLIII, 12; LI, 49.

[^190]: Ibid., XVL, 78.

[^191]: Ibid., II, 30.

[^192]: Ibid., XXIII15.

[^193]: Ibid., XXIII, 16, 115; XXXVI. 79.

[^194]: Ibid., LVI, 61

[^195]: Ibid., IV, 1; XXXIX, 6; XLIX. 13

[^196]: Ibid., XCV, 4.

[^197]: Ibid., XXXVIII, 72.

[^198]: Ibid., II, 138.

[^199]: Ibid., IX, 32.

[^200]: Ibid., XLI, 54.

[^201]: Ibid., XCVI, 1.

[^202]: Ibid., II, 186.

[^203]: Ibid., L, 16.

[^204]: Ibid., LVII, 4.

[^205]: Ibid., II, 115.

[^206]: Ibid., II, 186.

[^207]: Ibid., XV, 29; XXXII, 9; XXXVIII, 72.

[^208]: Ibid., XVII, 85.

[^209]: Ibid., XII, 53; LXXV, 2; LXXXIX, 27.

[^210]: Ibid., II, 31.

[^211]: Ibid., II, 32.

[^212]: Ibid., II, 269.

[^213]: Ibid., XXXIX, 9.

[^214]: Ibid., II, 171.

[^215]: Ibid., VIII, 22.

[^216]: Ibid., CII, 5.

[^217]: Ibid., CII, 7.

[^218]: Ibid., LXIX, 51.

[^219]: Ibid., XLIX, 6.

[^220]: Ibid., II, 164, 219; III, 190; VI, 95‑99; X, 3‑6; XIII, 2‑4;
XVII, 12; XXX, 20‑27; XLV, 3‑6.

[^221]: Ibid., XVII, 77.

[^222]: Ibid., III, 190.

[^223]: Ibid., III, 190; XVII, 12.

[^224]: Ibid., XV I, 11, 13‑16.

[^225]: Ibid., XZIV, 41; LXVII, 19.

[^226]: Ibid., XXIV, 43.

[^227]: Ibid., XVI, 14; XLV. 13.

[^228]: Ibid., XVI, 12.

[^229]: Ibid., XVI 78; XXXII. 9.

[^230]: Ibid., XXV, 2; LIV, 49.

[^231]: Ibid., III, 137‑39.

[^232]: Ibid., VII, 34.

[^233]: Ibid., XIV, 5.

[^234]: Ibid., III, 137.

[^235]: Ibid., VII, 182‑83.

[^236]: Ibid., XIII, 11.

[^237]: Ibid., XII, 111; XIV, 5, 15; XXX, 9; XXXIII, 62; XXXV, 44.

[^238]: Ibid., II, 40‑86, 93, 100, 122, 246‑51; V, 13‑14, 73‑74; VII,
138‑41, 161‑71; XX, 80‑82; XXIX, 27; XXXII, 23‑25; XL, 53‑54; XLV,
16‑17.

[^239]: Ibid., XXII, 17.

[^240]: Ibid., II, 62; V, 72; XXII, 17.

[^241]: Ibid., XXX, 2.

[^242]: Ibid., II, 138; V, 15, 85‑88.

[^243]: Ibid., XXVII, 22; XXXIV, 15‑21.

[^244]: Ibid., VII, 85‑93; XI, 84‑95; XXIX, 36‑37.

[^245]: Ibid., VII, 65‑72; XI, 50‑60; XXV, 38; XXVI, 123‑40; XXIX, 38;
XLI, 15‑16; XLVI, 21‑26; LI, 41‑42; LIV, 18‑21; IXIX, 4‑8; LXXXIX, 6‑8.

[^246]: Ibid., VII, 73‑79; XI, 61‑68; XXV, 38; XXVI, 141‑159; XXVII,
45‑53; XXIX, 38; XLI, 17; LI, 43‑‑45; LIV, 23‑31; LXIX, 4‑5; LXXXV,
17‑20; L=IX, 9‑14; XCI, 11‑15.

[^247]: Ibid., VII, 80‑84; XI, 77‑83; XV, 57‑77; XXI, 74‑75; XXVI,
160‑75; XXVII, 54‑58; XXIX, 26, 28‑35; XXXVII, 133‑38; LI, 31‑37; LIV,
33‑39.

[^248]: Ibid., XVIII, 9‑22.

[^249]: Ibid., XXV, 38; 1, 12.

[^250]: Ibid., XV, 80‑84.

[^251]: Ibid., XVIII, 9.

[^252]: Ibid., XVIII, 94.

[^253]: Ibid., VI, 84; VII, 59‑64; X, 71‑73; XI, 25‑49; XXI, 76‑77;
XXIII, 23‑30; XXV, 37 ; XXVI, 105‑22 ; XXIX, 14‑15 ; XXXVII, 7 5‑82 ;
LI, 46 ; LIV, 9‑15 ; LXIX, 11‑12 ; LXXI, 1‑28.

[^254]: Ibid., II, 124‑27, 130, 258, 260; III, 67, 95‑97; VI, 74‑83; XI,
69‑76; XIV, 35‑‑41; XV, 51‑56 ; XVI, 120‑23 ; XIX, 41‑50 ; XXI, 51‑71;
XXVI, 70‑87 ; XXIX, 16‑18, 23‑25; XXXVII, 83‑111; LI, 24‑30; IIII, 37;
LX, 4‑6; IXXXVII, 19.

[^255]: Ibid., II, 125‑29; VI, 86; XIX, 54‑55; XXI, 85.

[^256]: Ibid., VI, 84; XXI, 72; XXXVII, 112‑13.

[^257]: Ibid., II, 132‑33; VI, 84; XIX, 49; XXI, 72.

[^258]: Ibid., VI, 84; XXI, 78‑80; XXXIV, 10‑11; XXXVIII, 17‑26

[^259]: Ibid., II, 102; VI, 84; XXI, 79, 81‑82; XXVII, 15‑44.

[^260]: Ibid., VI, 84; XII, 4‑101.

[^261]: Ibid., II, 51‑61; V, 22‑‑29; VI, 84; VII, 103‑62; X, 75‑92; XI,
96‑99, 110; XIV, 5‑8; XVII, 101‑03; XVIII, 60‑82; XIX, 51‑53; XX,9‑56,
70‑73, 86‑98; XXIII, 45‑49; XXV, 35‑36; XXVI, 10‑69; XXVII, 7‑14;
XXVIII, 7‑42; XXXVII, 114‑22; XL, 23‑46; XLIII, 46‑56; LI, 38‑40; LIII,
36; IXI, 5; LXXIX, 15‑26; LXXXVII, 19.

[^262]: Ibid., VI, 84; XX, 29‑‑36, 90‑94.

[^263]: Ibid., VI, 86; XXXVIII. 48.

[^264]: Ibid., IV, 163; VI, 86; X, 98; XXXVII, 139‑48.

[^265]: Ibid., II, 136; III, 45‑47, 49‑59; IV, 157‑59, 171; V, 19, 20,
49, 75‑78, 113‑21; VI, 85; IX, 30; XIX, 22‑36; XLIII, 59‑61, 63‑64;
LVII, 27; LXI, 6, 14.

[^266]: Ibid., III, 35‑37, 42‑51; IV, 156; XIX, 16‑21; 23‑33; XXI, 91;
LXVI, 12.

[^267]: Ibid., XXVII, 22‑44; XXXIV, 15‑21.

[^268]: Ibid., XVIII, 83‑98.

[^269]: Ibid., II, 49, 50; VII, 103‑37; X, 75‑92; XL, 23‑37; IXVI. 11;
LXIX, 9; LXXIII. 15‑16; LXXIX, 17‑26; IXXXV, 17‑20; IXXXIX, I0‑14.

[^270]: Ibid., XXXI, 12‑19.

[^271]: Ibid., III, X, XII, XIV, XV II, XVIII, XIX, XXI, XXX, XXXI,
XXXIII, XXXIV, XLVIII, LXXI, EVI.

[^272]: Ibid., III, 13.

[^273]: Ibid., IX, 40‑42; 43‑59. 81‑99 120‑22.

[^274]: Ibid., LXXXIII, 1‑3; CVI, 1‑4

[^275]: Ibid., CXL, 1‑5.

[^276]: Ibid., II, 38.

[^277]: Ibid., 1, 7‑8; LI, 20.

[^278]: Ibid., XLI, 12.

[^279]: Ibid., XVI, 68.

[^280]: Ibid., II, 97; XXVI, 193‑95; XLI, 30‑31; LIII, 10‑11.

[^281]: Ibid., XXVIII, 7.

[^282]: Ibid., IV, 163‑64; X1II, 15, ETC.

[^283]: Ibid., XXXI, 20.

[^284]: Ibid., XIV, 32‑33; XVI, 12‑13; XXI, 81; XXV, 45‑53; XXXL, 20;
XXXVI, 33‑35 71‑73; XLV, 12‑13; IV, 22; LXVIII, 34; LXXIX, 30‑33

[^285]: Ibid., LXXXII, 7.

[^286]: Ibid., XIII, 22.

[^287]: Ibid., XXIII, 96; X1I, 34.

[^288]: Ibid., VIII, 53; XIII, 11.

[^289]: Ibid., IV, 79.

[^290]: Ibid.

[^291]: Ibid., VI, 107.

[^292]: Ibid., VI, 104; XVIII, 29; LXXVI, 29.

[^293]: Ibid., IV, 71.

[^294]: Ibid., II, 171; VII, 179.

[^295]: Ibid.. LXXVI, 30; LXXXI, 29

[^296]: Ibid., LXXXI, 28.

[^297]: Ibid., LXXVI, 29.

[^298]: Ibid., XVIII, 29.

[^299]: Ibid., X, 47; XLII, 13

[^300]: Ibid., VI, 107.

[^301]: Ibid., X, 99.

[^302]: Ibid., LVI, 60.

[^303]: Ibid., IV, 7 8.

[^304]: Ibid., III, 145.

[^305]: Ibid., III, 145; XXI, 35

[^306]: Ibid., XXIX, 57.

[^307]: Ibid., III 185

[^308]: Ibid., 1, 3.

[^309]: Ibid., XVI, 38; XVII, 49; XIX, 66‑72; XXLI. :1: XLVI. 33; 1.
20‑22, 41‑44; LXXV, 1‑15; LXXIX, 6‑12; LXXXVI. 5‑8.

[^310]: Ibid., XXII, 5.

[^311]: Ibid., X1VI, 33.

[^312]: Ibid., XX, 55.

[^313]: Ibid., XXIII, 100.

[^314]: Ibid., XVI, 38‑39.

[^315]: Ibid., XXI, 104.

[^316]: Ibid., LVI, 61.

[^317]: Ibid., XXX, 27, 58.

[^318]: Ibid., LXXIX, 6‑9.

[^319]: Ibid., XXV, 25, LXXIII, 18.

[^320]: Ibid., LXX, 8.

[^321]: Ibid., LXXV, 7‑9; IXXXI, 1.

[^322]: Ibid., LXXXI, 2.

[^323]: Ibid., XCIX, 1.

[^324]: Ibid;, LXXXIX; 21.

[^325]: Ibid., XGVII 88; III, 9‑10; LVI, 4‑6; LXXVII 10.

[^326]: Ibid., LXX, 9.

[^327]: Ibid., LXXXII, 4; XCIX, 2.

[^328]: Ibid., XX, 102; XXVII, 87; 1, 20.

[^329]: Ibid., XXXVI, 29

[^330]: Ibid., XXXI, 28.

[^331]: Ibid., XXXVI, . ,

[^332]: Ibid., LXXX, 40‑41.

[^333]: Ibid., XX, 102, 124.

[^334]: Ibid., XXI, 97; XXVII, 87.

[^335]: Ibid., LXXIX, 9.

[^336]: Ibid., XL, 18.

[^337]: Ibid., LXXX, 38‑39.

[^338]: Ibid., XXXIX, 68.

[^339]: Ibid., XXXIX, 69.

[^340]: Ibid., VI, 28; LXXXIX, 23.

[^341]: Ibid., XCIX, 6‑8.

[^342]: Ibid., X, 45.

[^343]: Ibid., LXXX, 37.

[^344]: Ibid., VI, 51.

[^345]: Ibid., XX, 109.

[^346]: Ibid., XIX, 95.

[^347]: Ibid., XXI, 47.

[^348]: Ibid., XXXVI, 54.

[^349]: Ibid., XXXVII, 21; LXXVII, 13‑14.

[^350]: Ibid., XXXVII, 38‑39.

[^351]: Ibid., XIX, 71‑72.

[^352]: Ibid., XIII, 35; XLVII, 15.

[^353]: Ibid., IVI, 7‑56.

[^354]: Ibid., VII, 43; XXXV, 33‑35; LXV, 46‑48.

[^355]: Ibid., LXXVIII, 35.

[^356]: Ibid., XVIII, 31; XXII, 23.

[^357]: Ibid., III, 24.

[^358]: Ibid., XIX, 61‑63; LII, 23.

[^359]: Ibid., XLII, 22; 1, 35.

[^360]: Ibid., LXXXIII, 24.

[^361]: Ibid., XLIII, 70.

[^362]: Ibid., LV, 56‑58.

[^363]: Ibid., XIII, 23.

[^364]: Ibid., V, 122.

[^365]: Ibid., 1, 35; LIV, 55.

[^366]: Ibid., LV, 54.

[^367]: Ibid., LV, 70‑77.

[^368]: Ibid., V, 122; IX, 20‑21, 7‑2; XV, 45‑48; XXXVII, 40‑49; XXXIX,
20; LII, 17‑24; LV, 6‑78; LVI, 10‑39, 88‑91.

[^369]: Ibid., XLVII, 15.

[^370]: Ibid., XX, 74.

[^371]: Ibid., XIV, 16‑17.

[^372]: Ibid., XLIV, 43.

[^373]: Ibid., XCII, 15‑16.

[^374]: Ibid., XXXII, 17.

[^375]: Ibid., XIX, 71.

[^376]: Ibid., LXXXIV, 6, 16‑19.


