Chapter 8: Ethical Teachings of the Qur’an
==========================================

Ethical Teachings of the Qur’an by B.A Dar, M.A, Fellow Institute of
Islamic Culture, Lahore (Pakistan)

Values
------

As it has been explained in the preceding chapter, the real goal of man,
according to the Qur'an, is the assimilation of divine attributes. These
attri­butes, as also shown in the same chapter, can be summarized as
life, eternity, unity, power, truth, beauty, justice, love, and
goodness.

### Life

God is the living one Himself[^1] and gives life to others.[^2] The
moral laws enunciated in the Qur'an are life‑giving and
life‑enriching[^3] and, therefore, by living in this world in accordance
with these laws man is able to realize one of God's attributes. If
anyone saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of the whole
people.[^4] On the social plane, the importance of life on this earth is
duly emphasized.

The ideal of the Qur'an is to develop a healthy social organization
which traverses the middle path of rectitude avoiding all forms of
extreme.[^5] People are to partake of the good things of the world[^6]
and wear beautiful apparel, to eat and drink without going to
excess,[^7] and for this reason monasticism which implies denial of life
on this earth is condemned as being incompatible with human nature.[^8]
Man is advised not to forget his portion in the life of this world.[^9]
Wealth and property are good things to be enjoyed and appreciated and
are blessings of God[^10] which make life smooth and comfortable.[^11]

The life of the present world is no doubt significant and
purposive,[^12] but it’s purposes are directed towards the good of
future life, for the real abode of life is in the hereafter.[^13] God
created life and death to test which of the people are best in point of
deed.[^14] The present world is a place of sojourn and a place of
departure;[^15] its enjoyments are short[^16] and comforts are few,[^17]
while as compared with these the life in the hereafter is better and
more enduring.[^18]

It is best for the righteous[^19] and will last forever.[^20] The
present life and the future life, however, are to be viewed as a unity,
for man's creation here and his resurrection later on are events related
to an individual soul.[^21] In fact, life on this earth is a preparation
for the life hereafter.[^22] The good works that we do here in this life
will run before us to illumine our path in the here­after[^23] where we
shall have full opportunity to develop our spiritual light to ever
greater perfection.[^24]

### Eternity

This attribute in its fullness is exclusively God's and man is created
within time for a stated term;[^25] yet he has within himself a deep
craving for eternity and for a kingdom that never fails or ends.[^26]
Though finite and temporal, man does not and cannot rest content with
that. The way is open for the finite and temporal man to attain life
everlasting.[^27]

### Unity

The greatest emphasis in the Qur'an is on the unity of God which implies
belief in the divine causality and the presence of moral order in the
universe where people are judged according to the merit of their
deeds[^28] and not arbitrarily.[^29] This moral order works without any
favour not only in the case of individuals but also in the case of
societies and peoples.[^30] God has entered into covenant with men
within the limits of this moral order with men as such and not with
particular nations or races.[^31]

Unity, as one of the ideals of man, implies unity in the internal life
of man, a co‑ordination of reason, will, and action. It requires
complete control of one's passions and lust. It also stands for the
unity of profession and practice. Faith in God is the necessary
prerequisite of moral life, but it should not be mere verbal
acceptance;[^32] it must be accompanied by good deeds,[^33] implying an
attitude of mind which is motivated by a complete submission to God's
will.[^34] Poets generally say what they do not practise,[^35] and
hypocrites say with their tongues what is not in their hearts,[^36] but
all believing men and women are truthful in their words and deeds.[^37]

Externally, the ideal of unity demands that men should develop a healthy
social organization which traverses the middle path of rectitude
avoiding all forms of extreme.[^38] The righteous are advised to get
together and strive, so that tumult, oppression, and mischief are
removed from the face of the earth.[^39]

This ideal of unity also implies peace and harmony among members of a
family. A woman is a mate for man so that both may dwell in tranquillity
with an attitude of mutual love and kindness;[^40] each is like a
garment for the other[^41] for mutual support, mutual comfort, and
mutual protection. It is the duty of man to live with woman on a footing
of kindness and equity.[^42] Unity also implies that members of a
national or ideological group should develop ties of intimate
relationship among themselves so that the ideal of an organic whole may
be realized in a broader context.

The Qur'an says that all Muslims are brothers[^43] and have great love
and affection among themselves.[^44] No excuse should be allowed to
stand in the way of doing good or making peace between different
persons.[^45] Every effort should be made to bring about con­ciliation
between men,[^46] yet we should co‑operate in righteousness and piety,
not in sin and rancour.[^47] We should be kind to those in need, to
neighbours, and to the wayfarers.[^48]

This attitude, of kindness and fairness is to be maintained and upheld
even in the case of enemies and opponents.[^49] We should try to forgive
those who plot against us and overlook their deeds,[^50] cover evil with
pardon,[^51] and turn off evil with good.[^52]

This attitude of toleration is to be cultivated in our relation to
people of other faiths. The Qur'an aims at establishing a peaceful
social atmosphere where people belonging to other faiths can enjoy
freedom of conscience and worship[^53] for which purpose the believers
are urged to rise and fight against the oppressors so that monasteries,
churches, synagogues, and mosques in which the name of God is
commemorated in abundant measure may not be pulled down.[^54] It
unreservedly praises some of the people of the Book for their
faith.[^55]

It is as a consequence of this attitude of tolerance that according to
the Qur'an all those who believe in God and the Last Day and practice
right­eousness, whether they are Muslims, Jews, Christians, or Sabaeans,
shall get their reward from their Lord.[^56] The Qur'an gives an open
invitation to the people of the Book to come together and work
conjointly for the establishment of peace and social harmony based on
the idea of the unity of God.[^57]

Above all, this ideal of unity leads to the conception of unity of the
whole of humanity. Mankind was created from a single pair of a male and
a female[^58] and from a single breath of life.[^59] All people are
equal members of the human community;[^60] the only distinction
recognized by the Qur'an is based on the degree of righteousness
possessed by people.[^61]

### Power

Power as a human ideal implies that man has the potentiality of assuming
responsibility undertaken by him of his own accord.[^62] God breathed
His Spirit into him[^63] and, therefore, made him His vicegerent on the
earth.[^64] Everything in the universe was created subservient to
him[^65] ‑ even the angels were ordered to bow down to him.[^66] He was
given a position of great honour in the universe and was elevated far
above most of God's creations.[^67]

He has all the faculties that are necessary for his physical and
spiritual development and can pass beyond the limits of the heavens and
the earth with the power given to him by God.[^68] He is given the power
to distinguish between good and evi1[^69] and, therefore, he alone is
responsible for what he does.[^70] He is endowed with freedom of action,
but his freedom is limited by the free causality of God.[^71] His
responsibility is proportionate to his powers;[^72] he has been shown
the path of righteousness and it is up to him to accept its lead or
reject it.[^73]

Being created after the pattern of God's nature[^74] man is capable of
develop­ing from one stage to the next higher stage.[^75] But this
development involves struggle against the immoral forces of the external
world which he is able to meet successfully with the co‑operation and
help of God.[^76]

This effort of man is, however, viewed not in any exclusive spirit of
otherworldliness.[^77] It is the primary duty of the believers to
participate actively in the struggle for the establishment of asocial
order based on peace, harmony, and justice[^78] in which everybody is
equal beforre the law, and people in authority work out their policies
after ascertaining the views of the people.[^79]

In this endeavour to realize the moral law in his individual and social
life, man has often to contend against evil forces represented in the
person of Satan.[^80] But it is within his power to resist and overcome
them.[^81] Though man is always prone to weakness and susceptible to
seduction by the forces of evil, yet his weakness is rectifiable under
the guidance of revelation,[^82] and such men as follow the law of
righteousness shall be immune from these lapses.[^83] They shall never
be afraid of anything[^84] or be cowardly in their behaviour.[^85]

The ideal of power demands that in order to establish a State on the
basis of peace, freedom of thought, worship, belief, and expression, the
morally ­orientated individuals will have to strive hard. Jihad or
utmost striving[^86] with might and main[^87] with wealth and their
person,[^88] as they ought to strive,[^89] becomes their foremost duty
so that tumult, oppression, and mischief should be totally eliminated
from the world[^90] and there should be left no possibility for the
aggressors to kindle the fire of war,[^91] to hinder men from the path
of God,[^92] and to oppress people for professing a faith different from
their own.[^93]

This struggle against the forces of evil and oppression demands that its
participants must be characterized by perseverance, courage,
fearlessness, and trust in God‑the moral qualities which are described
by the Qur'an as characteristic of the righteous in the social
context.[^94] Those who patiently per­severe in the path of
righteousness will be in possession of a determining factor in all the
affairs of this life[^95] and will be above trivial weaknesses.[^96]

Those who are firm and steadfast will never lose heart, nor weaken in
will, nor give in before the enemy.[^97] A small band of steadfastly
persevering people often vanquish a big force.[^98] Similarly, trust in
God is the moral quality of all believers.[^99] This quality does not
involve any negation of planning in advance as is evident from the
attitude of Jacob while advising his sons who were going to Egypt.[^100]
After you have taken all possibilities into consideration and taken a
decision, put your trust in God.[^101]

### Truth or Wisdom

Wisdom as a human ideal stands for man's search for knowledge or truth.
It is something which is distinguished from conjecture or imperfect
knowledge[^102] and mere fancy.[^103] Different stories are related in
the Qur'an,[^104] several similitudes[^105] and signs pointing to
reality are detailed[^106] and explained,[^107] so that people may
reflect and ponder over things.

It is the characteristic of the righteous that they not only celebrate
the praises of God, standing, sitting, and lying down on their sides,
but also contemplate and ponder over the different phenomena of
nature.[^108] The people are, therefore, advised repeatedly to look at
and observe the phenomena of nature, pondering over everything in
creation to arrive at the truth.[^109]

None can grasp the message of revelation except men of understanding and
those firmly grounded in knowledge.[^110] Lack of true knowledge leads
people to revile the true God,[^111] invent lies against Him, and
worship other gods besides Him.[^112] The only safety lies in following
the revelation which is replete with the knowledge of God.[^113]
Whosoever has been given knowledge has indeed been given abundant
good.[^114]

Those who dispute wrongly about God are the ones who are without
knowledge, without guidance, and without a book of enlightenment.[^115]
Only those people will be promoted to suitable ranks and degrees who
have faith and are possessed of knowledge,[^116] and only those who have
knowledge really fear God and tread the path of righteousness.[^117]

When Solomon asked the people of his Court who would be able to bring
the throne of the Queen of Sheba, it was only the one possessed of
knowledge who offered himself to bring it and later actually did baring
it.[^118]

The Qur'an advises the Holy Prophet to pray for advance in
knowledge.[^119] The mysterious teacher of Moses who tried to help him
have a glimpse of the working of the unseen had knowledge proceeding
from God, i.e., \`ilm al ­ladunni.[^120] Saul (Jalut) was appointed king
of the Israelities because he was gifted by God abundantly with
knowledge and bodily prowess.[^121] Noah, David, and Solomon possessed
knowledge[^122] and judgment.[^123] Jacob had a lot of knowledge and
experience;[^124] Joseph possessed abundant power and know­ledge,[^125]
and so also was Moses given wisdom and knowledge.[^126]

It was through knowledge and reflection on the phenomena of nature, the
heaven and the earth, that Abraham was able to arrive at the ultimate
truth.[^127] It was through his personal experience and knowledge that
Joseph refused to follow the path of the unbelievers and adopted the
path of Abraham.[^128]

### Justice

Justice is a divine attribute and the Qur'an emphasizes that we should
adopt it as a moral ideal. God commands people to be just towards one
another[^129] and, in judging between man and man, to judge
justly,[^130] for He loves those who judge equitably.[^131] All
believers stand firmly for justice even if it goes against themselves,
their parents, their kith and kin, without any distinction of rich and
poor.[^132]

God's Revelation itself is an embodiment of truth and justice;[^133] it
is revealed with the Balance (of right and wrong) so that people may
stand forth for justice.[^134] The value of justice is absolute and
morally binding and the believers are, therefore, warned that they
should not let the hatred of some people lead them to transgress the
limits of justice[^135] or make them depart from the ideal of justice,
for justice is very near to piety and righteousness.[^136]

Justice demands that people should be true in word and deed,[^137]
faithfully observe the contracts which they have made[^138] and fulfil
all obligations.[^139] When Muslims enter into treaties with people of
other faiths, they must fulfil their engagements to the end and be true
to them, for that is the demand of righteousness.[^140] They are also
advised to establish the system of weights with justice and not to skimp
in the balance[^141] and cause thereby a loss to others by fraud, and
unjustly withhold from others what is due to them,[^142] for that would
lead to the spread of evil and mischief on the earth.[^143]

### Love

Love as a human ideal demands that man should love God as the complete
embodiment of all moral values above everything else.[^144] It demands
that man should be kind and loving to parents,[^145] especially to the
mother who bore him in pain and gave birth to him in travail.[^146] This
obligation of loving kindness is further broadened to include kindred,
orphans, those in need, neighbours who are near and neighbours who are
strangers, and the wayfarers.[^147]

Righteousness is to spend a part of our substance out of love for God,
for kin, for orphans, for the needy, for the wayfarer,[^148] and for the
indigent.[^149] The Holy Prophet who is a mercy to believers[^150] and
mercy to all creatures[^151] always dealt gently with people.[^152]
Moses was advised by God to speak to Pharaoh mildly and gently.[^153]

It is one of the characteristics of the believers that they are
compassionate and loving to one another;[^154] they walk on the earth in
humility, and hold to forgiveness;[^155] they are friendly to
others,[^156] and forgive and overlook their faults,[^157] even though
they are in anger.[^158]

### Goodness

Goodness is an attribute of God[^159] and, therefore, it becomes the
duty of every person to obey his own impulse to good.[^160] He should do
good as God has been good to all[^161] and love those who do good.[^162]
Believers hasten in every good work.[^163]

As all prophets were quick in emulating good works,[^164] so all people
are advised to strive together (as in a race) towards all that is
good[^165] and virtuous.[^166] Truly did Solomon love the love of good
with a view to glorifying the Lord.[^167]

All good things are for the believers;[^168] goodly reward in the
hereafter[^169] and highest grace of God awaits those who are foremost
in good deeds.[^170] Believers are advised to repel evil with what is
better, for thereby enmity will change into warm friendship.[^171]

### Beauty

God possesses most beautiful names[^172] and highest excellence,[^173]
and creates everything of great beauty.[^174] Man is created in the best
of moulds[^175] and is given a most beautiful shape.[^176]

God has revealed the most beautiful message in the form of a book[^177]
and given the best of explanations in the revealed books.[^178] We are,
therefore, advised to follow the best of revelations from God.[^179] The
Qur'an relates most beautiful stories.[^180] The association of
believers, prophets, sincere lovers of truth, witnesses (to the truths
of religion in word and deed), and the righteous is a beautiful
fellowship.[^181]

Who is better in speech than those who invite people to the ways of the
good with wisdom and beautiful preaching and argue with them in ways
that are best and most gracious[^182] and say only those things that are
of supreme excellence ?[^183] The Qur'an exhorts people to adopt ways of
the highest value, for God loves those who perform deeds of
excellence,[^184] good‑will, and con­ciliation.[^185]

It advises people to return greetings with greetings of greater
excellence[^186] and repel evil with that which is best,[^187] for
thereby they will be adding to the beauty of their own souls.[^188]
Patience is gracefu1[^189] and so are forgiveness and overlooking others
faults.[^190] Those who perform beautiful deeds shall have the highest
rewards in this world[^191] and their reward in the hereafter shall be
still better[^192] when they shall enjoy the fairest of places for­
repose[^193] and be provided with excellent provisions.[^194]

Disvalues
---------

Corresponding to these values there are some disvalues which are
symbolized in the Qur'an as Satan or Iblis. He is described as a
persistent rebe[^195] who is constantly engaged in deceiving[^196]
people and misleading them from the path of righteousness.[^197] He sows
the seeds of enmity and hatred,[^198] creates false desires,[^199]
commands what is shameful and wrong,[^200] and defaces the fair nature
created by God.[^201] He is in short an enemy of mankind;[^202] and
believers are, therefore, advised that they should beware of his
machinations.

### Destruction of Life

Opposed to the value of life is weakness of man to make mischief in the
earth and shed blood[^203] ‑ symbolized by the first unlawful and
unjustified murder in the history of mankind by the first issue of
Adam.[^204] All life being sacred,[^205] it is forbidden to commit
suicide or to kill anybody without a just cause.[^206]

It is equally sinful to murder one's children for fear of want or
poverty.[^207] Killing a person without reason, in the view of the
Qur'an, is tantamount to slaying the human race.[^208] Fight for the
cause of righteousness is permitted only because tumult and oppression,
which neces­sitate resort to armed resistance, are worse than killing.

All those tendencies which weaken a man's hold on life are condemned in
the Qur'an. People are warned of falling into fear, grief, and
despair[^209] or of being unmindful of the ultimate mercy of God.[^210]
But any unjust clinging to life which involves sacrifice of other values
is to be avoided at all cost. It does not become a man to be cowardly in
the face of difficulties[^211] or to turn back and run away for life
from the battle‑field.[^212]

Similarly, covetous­ness,[^213] niggardiiness,[^214] and the hoarding of
wealth[^215] are condemned, for they betray man's unjustified clinging
to values as means, as if they were ends in themselves.

There are certain disvalues which imply disrespect of life in oneself as
well as in others. Begging importunately from all and sundry, which
leads to killing one's self‑respect, is[^216] looked upon by the Qur'an
as unbecoming a true believer.[^217] It forbids slandering, throwing
fault or sin on somebody who is innocent of it,[^218] and swelling one's
cheek out of pride at men.[^219]

### Scandal‑mongering and backbiting

Scandal‑mongering and backbiting are hateful deeds.[^220] The Qur'an
advises men and women not to laugh at, defame, be sarcastic to one
another or call one another by offensive nicknames, and not to be
suspicious, not to spy on others or speak ill of them behind their
backs.[^221] It deprecates the man who is ready with oaths, is a
slanderer going about with calumnies, is a transgressor beyond bounds,
or is deep in sin, violence, and cruelty.[^222]

### Things Momentary

Opposed to his natural urge for eternity, man sometimes through
ignorance seems to be enamoured of the life of the moment,[^223] which
tends to vanish[^224] and is mere play and amusement.[^225] It is no
good to be pleased and remain satisfied[^226] with the transitory things
of this world[^227] and the fleeting and temporal life[^228] that has a
span of but an hour of a day.[^229]

The true goal of man is eternity which is the home of peace,[^230]
satisfaction,[^231] security,[^232] and supreme achievement[^233] for
which man must, according to his nature,[^234] ever toil and
struggle.[^235]

### Lack of Unity

Against the value of unity there is the disvalue of the denial of the
unity of the Ultimate Reality (kufr) and the association of partners
with God (shirk) and likewise the disvalues of disunity, discord, and
disharmony in the life of the individual and society.

Those who turn back and disobey God and His Apostle[^236] deny God's
creative power, His purpose, and design,[^237] follow a part of the
revealed book and disregard the rest,[^238] accept some prophets and
deny others,[^239] are all deniers of the true unity of God.
Hair‑splitting in religious matters,[^240] failure to judge by the light
of divine revelation,[^241] indulgence in magic in order to sow seeds of
disunity among people,[^242] are all acts which tantamount to disbelief
in God.

God's unity implies that He alone deserves worship,[^243] a worship
which demands exclusive submission to His will,[^244] tinged and
informed with the highest emotional attachment.[^245]

Association of partners with God does not mean that, people deny God's
power of creation and control of world's affairs;[^246] where they err
is the belief that these partners may bring them nearer to God,[^247]
wrongly and foolishly ascribe to them a share in bestowing gifts, as for
example, the gifts of a goodly child,[^248] thus leading to lack of
consistency in their moral conduct and lack of exclusive loyalty towards
the highest ideal, which indeed is a form of most heinous sin[^249] and
the highest wrong‑doing[^250]

A form of associating partners with God is ancestor‑worship. If people
are invited to the path of righteousness, they refuse by saying: “Nay!
we shall follow the way of our fathers,” even if their fathers were
devoid of knowledge and guidance.[^251] Sometimes people succumb to
their personal ambitions and self‑importance which signifies their lack
of faith in the ultimate causality of God; implied in the belief in the
unity of God.

When some trouble or affliction comes to man he turns to God, but when
it is removed he forgets that he ever turned to him,[^252] and ascribes
its removal to others besides, sets up rivals unto Him a great
blasphemy[^253][^254] and sometimes thinks that it was his own skill and
knowledge which helped him in removing his difficulties.[^255]

The disvalues of discord and disunity are the result of the denial of
the unity of God.[^256] The unbelievers and those who associate partners
with God are always subject to fear and lack a sense of unity and
harmony.[^257] It is the devil that incites people to discord[^258] and,
therefore, the Qur'an very force­fully forbids people to be divided
among themselves,[^259] and looks upon dis­unity as the result of lack
of wisdom.[^260]

It denounces divisions and splits in religion[^261] and disagreements
among different sects and schisms through in­solent envy.[^262]
Similarly, all those acts which tend to spread mischief and tumult after
there have been peace and order are condemned because they tend to
create disorder, disunity, and disharmony in life.[^263]

### Inertia

Opposed to power, weakness is a disvalue. It is wrong to show weakness
in face of difficulties, to lose heart,[^264] to be weak in will,[^265]
to be weary and faint‑hearted,[^266] to despair or boast,[^267] to be
impatient and fret­fu1.[^268] It is forbidden to be afraid of men[^269]
or of Satan and his votaries.[^270]

There are certain disvalues which arise out of misuse of power. Warning
is given to those people who oppress men with wrong‑doing and insolently
transgress beyond bounds through the land, defying right and
justice.[^271] It is for­bidden to indulge in vain talk,[^272] to
exhibit fierceness,[^273] to be arrogant against God,[^274] for
arrogance blinds people to the truth,[^275] to swell one's cheek with
pride, or walk in insolence through the earth,[^276] for one cannot rend
the earth asunder or reach the mountains in height.[^277]

Arrogant and obstinate trans­gressors,[^278] vainglorious people,[^279]
those fond of self‑glory,[^280] people rebellious and wicked,[^281] and
vying with one another in pomp and gross rivalry,[^282] are held out as
examples of those who misuse their power.

Satan is condemned to everlasting punishment for abusing power and
becoming haughty.[^283] Moses was sent to Pharaoh because the latter had
become proud and arrogant.[^284] The people of 'Ad were punished because
they behaved arrogantly and thought themselves very powerful.[^285] The
Israelites slew their apostles because of pride.[^286] The hypocrites
turn away from truth out of arroganee.[^287] The Christians are
described as nearest in love to the Muslims because they are not
arrogant.[^288]

Some people try to cover their misuse of power under the cloak of
deter­minism,[^289] but the Qur'an repudiates this stand as totally
unrealistic.[^290] Man has the power to shape his destiny in the light
of the truth of revelation.[^291]

### Error

Opposed to truth or wisdom, error, conjecture, and fancy are all
disvalueas which the Qur'an at several places denounces as equivalent to
un­truth or lies[^292] and which do not lend support to an individual in
his moral life.[^293] Fancy and conjecture can avail nobody against
truth.[^294] It is forbidden to accept a report without ascertaining its
truth,[^295] to utter slander, intentionally forging falsehood[^296] and
to throw fault or sin on some­body who is innocent of it;[^297] for
these are all against the value of truth.

Indulgence in disputation,[^298] vain discourses;[^299] and
susceptibility to super­stitions[^300] are disvalues opposed to wisdom.
Those who do not try to save themselves from these are liable to be
always afraid of others,[^301] to be unable to distinguish truth from
falsehood, and right from wrong;[^302] their hearts always turn away
from the light of truth and wisdom[^303] towards depths of
darkness.[^304] Such are the people who have hearts wherewith they
understand not, eyes wherewith they see not, and ears wherewith they
hear not; in short, like cattle they lack truth and wisdom.[^305]

### Hypocrisy

Hypocrisy is another disvalue. A hypocrite is one who says with his
tongue what is not in his heart,[^306] who is distracted in mind, being
sincerely neither for one group nor for another.[^307] Hypocrites are
liars.[^308] They expect people to praise them for what they never
do,[^309] compete with one another in sin and rancour,[^310] and hold
secret counsels among themselves for iniquity, hosti­lity, and
disobedience.[^311]

Hypocrites‑men and women‑enjoin evil and forbid what is just,[^312] and
if by chance they come into possession of a position of authority, they
make mischief in the land, break ties of kinship,[^313] and yet claim to
be peace‑makers.[^314]

Showing off (riya') is also a disvalue. God does not love those who give
away even money in order to be seen doing so by others, for such men
have no faith in God and the Last Day.[^315] Such showing off cancels
the spirit of their charity.[^316] It is like sowing seeds on a hard,
barren rock on which there is little soil, and where heavy rain has left
nothing but a bare stone.[^317]

### Injustice

Opposed to the value of justice is the disvalue of injustice and
violation of the principle of the mean. It is forbidden by the Qur'an to
be influenced by people's vain desires and to deviate from the truth
while judging between them.[^318] It is also forbidden to distort
justice or decline to do justice[^319] or to withhold justice from
people merely because they are your enemies.[^320]

It would be perfectly unjust to oneself and to others to pile up
wealth,[^321] to bury gold and silver, and not to spend them in the
cause of God and righteous­ness.[^322] The Qur'an equally forbids as
violation of the principle of justice the squandering of wealth like a
spendthrift[^323] and recommends the middle way of prudence which is
neither extravagance nor niggardhness.[^324]

It advises one neither to make one's hand tied to one's neck nor stretch
it forth to its utmost reach so that one becomes blameworthy and
destitute.[^325] One should eat and drink but not waste by exeess[^326]
for that would be violating the prin­ciple of justice. Excess in any
form is forbidden whether in food[^327] or in religion.[^328]

Usury is forbidden, for it means devouring other people's substance
wrong­fully[^329] and involves injustice on both sides.[^330]

### Hatred and Unkindness

Against the value of love is the disvalue of hatred, harshness, or
unkindness to others. People are advised not to speak any word of
contempt to their parents,[^331] to orphans,[^332] and to beggars.[^333]
Believers are not to revile even those whore the unbelievers call upon
besides God.[^334] The Holy Prophet is described as safe from severity
and hard‑heartedness towards others.[^335]

Vice ‑ Against goodness the Qur'an denounces the disvalue of vice, i.
e., doing wrong and shameful deeds.[^336] It is Satan who commands
people to do what is evil and shameful.[^337] People are forbidden to
come near adultery, for it is a shameful deed and an evil, opening the
road to other evils.[^338] Similarly, wine and gambling involve great
sin,[^339] for they are the work of Satan.[^340]

The Qur’an forbids ‑ all shameful and evil deeds and uses a very
comprehensive term zulm to cover them all.[^341] Hypocrites and
unbelievers enjoin[^342] and plot evi1[^343] and hold secret counsels
for iniquity, evil, and rebellion[^344] and wrong­fully eat up other
people's property.[^345] The believers are advised, therefore, not to
help one another in sin and rancour.[^346]

The Qur'an refers to several Satanic tendencies in man,[^347] such as
ungrate­fulness,[^348] hastiness,[^349] impatience,[^350] despair, and
unbelief in times of adver­sity, and pride and conceit in times of
prosperity;[^351] quarrelsomeness,[^352] arrogance,[^353] greed of ever
more and yet more,[^354] niggardliness,[^355] transgres­sion of the
bounds of propriety,[^356] and false sense of self‑sufficiency.[^357]
These tendencies often lead to different forms of wrong‑doing and,
therefore, must be counteracted by all right‑thinking people.

Moral Discipline
----------------

To produce the attitude of moral righteousness (taqwa), the discipline
of prayer, fasting, zakat,[^358] and pilgrimage is enforced. People are
commanded to guard strictly their habit of prayers and stand before God
in a devout frame of mind,[^359] pay the zakat,[^360] spend in charity
secretly and openly[^361] ‑ a beautiful loan to God[^362] ‑ a bargain
that will never fail,[^363] in­volving a glad tidings for the
believers[^364] and a cause of prosperity[^365] and spiritual joy.[^366]

Those people who follow these principles are on the right path under the
true guidance of the Lord.[^367] They remove the stain of evil from the
people[^368] and help them refrain from shameful and unjust deeds.[^369]
It is the duty of all Muslims, as witnesses for mankind in general, to
hold fast to God.[^370] It is the practice of all believing people that
when God grants them power in the land; they enjoin the right and forbid
the wrong.[^371] All Muslims ought to follow these disciplinary
principles.[^372] Those who neglect them are bound to fall into the
snares of their passions.[^373]

Similarly, fasting is recommended as a discipline during the month of
Rama­dan in which the Qur'an was revealed as a guide to mankind and as
an em­bodiment of guidance and judgment between right and wrong.[^374]
It involves observance of certain limits and rules by all those who may
wish to become righteous (acquire taqwa).[^375] Performance of hajj is
symptomatic of a righteous life in which there should be no obscenity,
nor wickedness, nor wrangling, and the best provision for which is right
conduct, i. e., taqwa.[^376]

Repentance
----------

Though man is by nature after the pattern of God's nature[^377] and,
therefore, capable of approximating to the ideal embodied in the most
beautiful names,[^378] yet being prone to different weaknesses[^379] he
is often led to wrong his soul in spite of his best efforts to follow
moral discipline.[^380] Adam disobeyed God and thus was about to run
into harm and aggression,[^381] but as soon as he realized his mistake,
he repented and God accepted his repent­ance[^382] and promised that
whoever follows His guidance shall be free from grief and sorrow.[^383]

The Lord accepts repentance from His servants and for­gives the
sins[^384] of those who do evil in ignorance but repent soon
afterwards[^385] and are never obstinate in persisting in the wrong
intentionally.[^386] Even the thieves[^387] and those who had waged wars
against God[^388] are covered by the universal mercy and loving kindness
of God[^389] provided they repent and amend their conduct,[^390]
earnestly bring God to mind,[^391] hold fast to God, purify their
religion solely for God,[^392] and openly declare the Truth.[^393]

There is no scope, for pessimism and despair arising from the natural
weak­nesses of men in doing wrong to their sou1s,[^394] for God turns to
them that they might repent.[^395]

Turning to God in repentance and seeking of forgiveness from Him lead to
the grant by God to man of good and true enjoyment and abounding grace
in this life.[^396] He will rain bounties from the sky and add to
people's strength.[^397] To turn continually to God in repentance is the
sign of the true believer;[^398] and this attitude of mind is
strengthened by remembrance of God (dhikr), for it enables a man in most
difficult and odd situations to keep firm and steadfast[^399] and find
in it a source of deep satisfaction and mental equipoise.[^400]

Taqwa
-----

it is the whole pursuit of value and avoidance of disvalue in general
that is designated by the Qur'an as righteousness (taqwa). It is
de­pendent on and is the result of faith in God and adoration of
Him.[^401] The Qur'an is revealed solely to produce this attitude of
taqwa among people.[^402] It is the presence of this moral attitude
which saves people from destruction[^403] and it is this which helps
them maintain God's commands in their conjugal life,[^404] in
sacrifice,[^405] in different aspects of social life,[^406] and in
fulfilling faithfully their social obligations.[^407]

The motive which prompts people to adopt this moral attitude of taqwa is
the desire to win the pleasure of God,[^408] to gain nearness to
Him,[^409] and to seek His face[^410] or countenance[^411] implying that
their motive is not self­ interest but the seeking of good for the sake
of good,[^412] which benefits their own souls[^413] and which they seek
even at the sacrifice of life.[^414] The aim of such people is mainly a
desire for increase in self‑purification without any idea of winning
favour from anyone or expecting any reward whatsoever.[^415]

They will get a reward of the highest value[^416] and attain complete
satis­faction[^417] and prosperity[^418] ‑ the final attainment of the
Eternal Home,[^419] well‑pleasing unto God.[^420] These people resemble
a garden high and fertile, heavy rain falls on it and makes it yield a
double increase of harvest, and if it receives not heavy rain, light
moisture suffices it.[^421] For such people are the gardens in nearness
to their Lord, a result of the pleasure of God.[^422]

To be righteous (muttaqi) is to believe in God, and the Last Day, and
the angels, and the Books, and the messengers; to spend out of one's
substance, out of love for God, for kin, for orphans, for the needy, for
the wayfarer, for those who ask, for the ransom of slaves; to be
steadfast in prayers, and to pay the zakat; to fulfil the contracts
which have been made; and to be firm and patient in pain (or suffering),
adversity, and periods of danger. Such people as follow these are
possessed of true taqwa, i.e., righteousness.[^423]

And of the servants of God the most gracious are those who walk on the
earth in humility, and when the ignorant address them, they say,
“Peace”; those who spend the night in adoration of their Lord
prostrating and standing; those who, when they spend, are not
extravagant nor niggardly, but hold a just balance between these two
extremes; those who invoke not, with God, any other god, nor slay such
life as God has made sacred, except for just cause, nor commit
fornication; those who witness no falsehood, and, if they pass by
futility, they pass by it with honorable avoidance; those who, when they
are admonished with the signs of their Lord, do not show indifference to
them like the deaf or the blind; and those who pray, “Our Lord! give us
the grace to lead the righteous.”[^424]

The better and more lasting reward of the Lord is for those who believe
and put their trust in Him; those who avoid the greater crimes and
shameful deeds, and, even when they are angry, they for­give; those who
hearken to their Lord, and establish regular prayer; who conduct their
affairs by mutual consultation; who spend out of what God bestows on
them for sustenance; who, when an oppressive wrong is inflicted on them,
(are not cowed but) help and defend themselves; and those who recompense
injury with injury in degree equal thereto and, better still, forgive
and make reconciliation.

But indeed if any do help and defend themselves after a wrong is done to
them, against such there is no cause of blame. The blame is only against
those who oppress men with wrong‑doing and insolently transgress beyond
bounds through the land, defying right and justice; for such there will
be a grievous penalty. But indeed showing patience and forgiveness is an
exercise of courageous will and resolution in the conduct of
affairs.[^425]

There is yet a higher stage of moral achievement described as ihsan
which signifies performance of moral action in conformity with the moral
ideal with the added sense of deep loyalty to the cause of God, done in
the most graceful way that is motivated by a unique love for God.[^426]
Performance of righteous actions accompanied by a true faith is only a
stage in the moral life of man which, after several stages, gradually
matures into ihsan.[^427]

God is with those who perform good deeds and perform them with added
grace and beauty.[^428]

Those who sacrifice animals with a spirit of dedication have piety
(taqwa) no doubt, but those who thereby glorify God for His guidance,
acknowledging fully the extent of His bounties provided in abundance,
are the people who are characterized by ihsan.[^429]

In the life hereafter the morally upright will be in the midst of
gardens and springs[^430] wherein they will take spiritual enjoy­ment in
the things which their Lord gives as a reward for leading a life of
graceful righteousness.[^431]

The sincerely devoted people (muhsinin) are those who willingly suffer
thirst, fatigue, or hunger in the cause of God,[^432] or tread paths
which may raise the ire of the unbelievers, or receive injury from an
enemy;[^433] who despite all that do not conduct themselves in life as
to cause mischief on the earth but call on Him with fear and
longing;[^434] who spend of their substance in the cause of God, refrain
from evil, and are engaged in doing truly good deeds;[^435] who spend
freely whether in prosperity or in adversity; who restrain anger and
pardon all men;[^436] who are steadfast in patience[^437] and exercise
restraint;[^438] who establish regular prayer and pay the zakat and have
in their hearts the assurance of the hereafter;[^439] and who are always
ready to forgive people and overlook their misdeeds.[^440]

Almost all the prophets are included in this category[^441] which
signifies that the muhsinin are those who are not only on the right path
themselves,[^442] but in addition by their good ex­ample and magnetic
personality lead others to the way of righteousness and help in
establishing a social order based on peace, harmony, and security.[^443]
Com­plete power,[^444] wisdom and knowledge,[^445] true guidance from
the Lord, prosperity,[^446] rise in worldly position,[^447] power, and
knowledge[^448] are the by‑products of their life of graceful
righteousness (ihsan).

Their reward shall never be lost,[^449] for God is always with
them[^450] and loves them[^451] and will bestow on them the rank of
friendship as He did on Abraham.[^452] He who submits his whole self to
the will of God and moreover does it gracefully and with a spirit of
dedication (muhsin) has grasped indeed the most trustworthy
handhold,[^453] and enjoys the most beautiful position in religion for
he is follow­ing Abraham who was true in faith.[^454]

He will get his reward from his Lord and shall experience neither fear
nor grief.[^455] God is well pleased with those who followed in the
footsteps of the vanguard of Islam‑the first of those who forsook their
houses and of those who gave them aid‑in a spirit of devo­tion and
graceful loyalty as well as those who followed them, as they are all
with Him. For them God has prepared the garden of paradise, as their
eternal home of supreme felicity.[^456]

[^1]: Qur’an, II, 255; XL, 65.

[^2]: Ibid., II, 260; III, 156; VII, 1158; IX, 116; X, 56; XL, 68.

[^3]: Ibid., VIII, 24; XVI, 97.

[^4]: Ibid., V, 35.

[^5]: Ibid., II, 143.

[^6]: Ibid., VII, 32.

[^7]: Ibid., VII, 31.

[^8]: Ibid., LVII, 27.

[^9]: Ibid., XXVIII, 77.

[^10]: Ibid., XVII, 6.

[^11]: Ibid., LXXIV, 14.

[^12]: Ibid., III, 191; X, 5; XV. 85; XXI, 16.

[^13]: Ibid., XXIS, 64.

[^14]: Ibid., LXVII, 2.

[^15]: Ibid., VI, 98.

[^16]: Ibid., IV, 77.

[^17]: Ibid., IX, 38.

[^18]: Ibid., LXXXVII, 17.

[^19]: Ibid., IV, 77.

[^20]: Ibid., V, 122; XVIII, 31; XIX, 61‑63; XXXV, 33‑35; XXXVIII,
49‑52; XLIII, 68‑73.

[^21]: Ibid., XXXI, 28.

[^22]: Ibid., LXVII.

[^23]: Ibid., VII, 12.

[^24]: Ibid., IXVI, 8.

[^25]: Ibid., VI, 2.

[^26]: Ibid., XX, 120.

[^27]: Ibid., XXII, 23; XXXIX, 73‑75; LVII, 12; XCVIII, 8.

[^28]: Ibid., XCIX, 7‑8.

[^29]: Ibid., VIII, 53.

[^30]: Ibid., V, 20.

[^31]: Ibid., III, 81, 187; V, 8, 13, 15; VII, 172.

[^32]: Ibid., V, 44

[^33]: Ibid., VII, 42; X, 4; XIII, 29.

[^34]: Ibid., II, 131; IX, 112.

[^35]: Ibid., XXVI, 224‑26.

[^36]: Ibid., III, 167; IV, 81; XLVII, 11.

[^37]: Ibid., IX, 119.

[^38]: Ibid., II, 143.

[^39]: Ibid., VIII, 73.

[^40]: Ibid., XXX, 21.

[^41]: Ibid., II, 187.

[^42]: Ibid., IV, 19.

[^43]: Ibid., XLIX, 10.

[^44]: Ibid., XLVIII, 29.

[^45]: Ibid., II, 224.

[^46]: Ibid., IV, 114.

[^47]: Ibid., V, 3.

[^48]: Ibid., II, 83, 177, 215; IV, 36; XVII, 26.

[^49]: Ibid., V, 3, 9, 45.

[^50]: Ibid., V, 14.

[^51]: Ibid., IV, 149.

[^52]: Ibid., XIII, 22; XXVIII, 54.

[^53]: Ibid., II, 256.

[^54]: Ibid., XXII, 40.

[^55]: Ibid., III, 110.

[^56]: Ibid., II, 62; V, 72.

[^57]: Ibid., III, 64.

[^58]: Ibid., II; 213; IV, 1; VI, 98; X, 19; XXXIX, 6; XLIX, 13.

[^59]: Ibid., IV, 1; XXXIX, 6.

[^60]: Ibid., III, 195.

[^61]: Ibid., XVI, 132; XLIX, 13. In this respect the Oration delivered
by the Holy­Prophet during his Farewell Pilgrimage is illuminating. He
said: O People! your Lord is One and your father (i. e., Adam) is one;
you are all as sons of Adam brothers. There are no superiority for an
Arab over a non‑Arab and for a non‑Arab over an Arab, nor for a
red‑coloured over a black‑coloured and for a black‑skinned over a
red‑skinned except in piety. The noblest is he who is the most pious.

[^62]: Ibid., XXXIII, 72.

[^63]: Ibid., XV, 29; XXXVIII, 72.

[^64]: Ibid., II, 30.

[^65]: Ibid., XIV, 32‑33; XXXI, 20.

[^66]: Ibid., II, 34.

[^67]: Ibid., XVII, 70.

[^68]: Ibid., XVI, 78; XXXII, 9; IV, 33; LXVII, 23; LXXVI, 2‑3; XC, 8‑9.

[^69]: Ibid., XV, 10; LXXVI, 3.

[^70]: Ibid., VI, 164.

[^71]: Ibid., LXXIV, 55‑56; LXXXI, 28‑29.

[^72]: Ibid., II, 286.

[^73]: Ibid., LXXVI, 3.

[^74]: Ibid., XXX, 30.

[^75]: Ibid., LXXXIV, 19.

[^76]: Ibid., XL, 51; X1VII, 7.

[^77]: Ibid., LVII, 24.

[^78]: Ibid., II, 193; III, 104, 110; XIII, 21; XXII, 41.

[^79]: Ibid., XLII, 38.

[^80]: Ibid., XV, 36‑40.

[^81]: Ibid., XVI, 99.

[^82]: Ibid., II, 36.

[^83]: Ibid., XVI, 99.

[^84]: Ibid., III, 1.75.

[^85]: Ibid., III, 122.

[^86]: Ibid., VIII, 74‑75.

[^87]: Ibid., V, 38.

[^88]: Ibid., IX, 20, 31, 88.

[^89]: Ibid., XXII, 78.

[^90]: Ibid., VIII, 73.

[^91]: Ibid., V, 67.

[^92]: Ibid., XVI, 88.

[^93]: Ibid.. II, 190‑93.

[^94]: Ibid., XI, 115; XVI, 127; X1,.55; X1VI. 35; 1, 39; LXXIII, 10.

[^95]: Ibid., III, 186.

[^96]: Ibid., XI, 10‑11.

[^97]: Ibid., III, 146.

[^98]: Ibid., II, 249.

[^99]: Ibid., VIII, 2; IX, 51; XIV, 11.

[^100]: Ibid., XXII; 67‑68.

[^101]: Ibid., III, 159.

[^102]: Ibid., IV, 157; VI, 116, 148; X, 36; LIII, 28.

[^103]: Ibid., X, 36, 66.

[^104]: Ibid., VII, 176

[^105]: Ibid., LIX, 21.

[^106]: Ibid., VI, 98.

[^107]: Ibid., X, 24.

[^108]: Ibid., III, 191.

[^109]: Ibid., XII, 185.

[^110]: Ibid., III, 7, 18; VI, 105; XXII, 54, XXXIV, 6.

[^111]: Ibid., VI, 108.

[^112]: Ibid., XXII, 71.

[^113]: Ibid., XI, 14.

[^114]: Ibid., II; 269

[^115]: Ibid., XXII, 8; XXXI, 20

[^116]: Ibid., LVIII, 11.

[^117]: Ibid., XXXV, 28.

[^118]: Ibid., XXVII, 40.

[^119]: Ibid., XX, 114.

[^120]: Ibid., XVIII, 6.5.

[^121]: Ibid., II, 247.

[^122]: Ibid., XXVIII, 14.

[^123]: Ibid., XXI, 711.

[^124]: Ibid., XII, 68.

[^125]: Ibid., XII, 22.

[^126]: Ibid., XXVIII, 14.

[^127]: Ibid., VI, 75‑79.

[^128]: Ibid., XII, 37‑39.

[^129]: Ibid., VII, 29; XVI, 90; XLII, 1:1.

[^130]: Ibid., IV, 58.

[^131]: Ibid., V, 45.

[^132]: Ibid., IV, 13 .5.

[^133]: Ibid., V1, 115.

[^134]: Ibid., IVII, 25.

[^135]: Ibid., V; 3.

[^136]: Ibid., V, 9.

[^137]: Ibid., III, 17.

[^138]: Ibid., II, 177; XXIII, 8; LXV, 32.

[^139]: Ibid., V, 1.

[^140]: Ibid., IX, 4, 7.

[^141]: Ibid., VI, 152; IV, 9.

[^142]: Ibid., XXVI, 181‑83.

[^143]: Ibid., XI, 85.

[^144]: Ibid., II, 165.

[^145]: Ibid., VI, 151; XXIX, 8.

[^146]: Ibid., XXI, 14; XLVI, 15.

[^147]: Ibid., II, 83, 215; IV, 36; XVII, 26.

[^148]: Ibid., II, 177.

[^149]: Ibid., XC, 16.

[^150]: Ibid., IX, 61.

[^151]: Ibid., XXI, 107.

[^152]: Ibid., III, 159.

[^153]: Ibid., XX, 44.

[^154]: Ibid., XLVIII, 29.

[^155]: Ibid., VII, 199.

[^156]: Ibid., II, 28; IV, 144; V, 60.

[^157]: Ibid., II, 109.

[^158]: Ibid., XLII, 37.

[^159]: Ibid., XVI, 53; LIX, 23.

[^160]: Ibid., II, 158.

[^161]: Ibid., XXVIII, 77.

[^162]: Ibid., II, 195.

[^163]: Ibid., III, 114; XXIII, 61.

[^164]: Ibid., XXI, 90.

[^165]: Ibid., II, 148.

[^166]: Ibid., V, 51.

[^167]: Ibid., XXXVIII, 32.

[^168]: Ibid., IX, 88.

[^169]: Ibid., XV111, 2.

[^170]: Ibid., XXXV, 32.

[^171]: Ibid., XLI, 34.

[^172]: Ibid., VII, 180; XVII, 110; XX,

[^173]: Ibid., XXXVII, 125.

[^174]: Ibid., XXXII, 7.

[^175]: Ibid., XCV, 4.

[^176]: Ibid., LXIV, 3.

[^177]: Ibid., XXXIX, 23.

[^178]: Ibid., XXV, 33.

[^179]: Ibid., XXXLX, 55.

[^180]: Ibid., XII, 3.

[^181]: Ibid., IV, 69.

[^182]: Ibid., XVI, 125.

[^183]: Ibid., XII, 33; XVII, 53.

[^184]: Ibid., II, 195; V, 96.

[^185]: Ibid., IV, 62.

[^186]: Ibid., IV, 86.

[^187]: Ibid., XXIII, 96; XLI, 34.

[^188]: Ibid., XVII, 7.

[^189]: Ibid., XII, 18, 83.

[^190]: Ibid., XV, 85.

[^191]: Ibid., III, 172;. IX, 121; X, 26; XVI, 96, 97; XXIV, 38; XXIX,
7; XXXIX, 35, 70; XLVI, 16; LIII, 31

[^192]: Ibid., XVI, 30.

[^193]: Ibid., XXV, 24.

[^194]: Ibid., LXV, 3.

[^195]: Ibid., IV, 117.

[^196]: Ibid., VIII, 48.

[^197]: Ibid., IV, 119:

[^198]: Ibid., V, 94.

[^199]: Ibid., IV, 120.

[^200]: Ibid., XXIV, 21.

[^201]: 1BID., IV, 119.

[^202]: Ibid., XXXV, 6; XXXVI, 6.

[^203]: Ibid., II; 30.

[^204]: Ibid., V, 33.

[^205]: Ibid., VI, 151; XVII, 33.

[^206]: Ibid., VI, 131, 140; XVU, 33.

[^207]: Ibid., VI, 15; XVII, 31.

[^208]: Ibid., V, 35.

[^209]: Ibid., II, 191. Ibid., III, 139; IX, 40; XLI, 30.

[^210]: Ibid., XXXIX, 53.

[^211]: Ibid., II, 122.

[^212]: Ibid., IV, 89‑91.

[^213]: Ibid., III, 180; IV, 32; LVII, 24.

[^214]: Ibid., XVII, 29; XLVII, 38.

[^215]: Ibid., IV, 2‑3.

[^216]: Ibid., IX, 79; XXIV, 23: LX, 12; 1XVIII, 11-12.

[^217]: Ibid., AL, 273

[^218]: Ibid., IV, 112.

[^219]: Ibid., XXXI, 18.

[^220]: Ibid., XXIV, 18; CIV, 1.

[^221]: Ibid., XLIX, 11‑12,

[^222]: Ibid., LXVIII, 10-13.

[^223]: Ibid., X, 45

[^224]: Ibid., XVI, 96.

[^225]: Ibid., VI, 32

[^226]: Ibid., X, 7.

[^227]: Ibid., XVII, 18

[^228]: Ibid., LXXV, 20; LXXVI, 27.

[^229]: Ibid., X, 45.

[^230]: Ibid., X, 25.

[^231]: Ibid., XLIII, 70.

[^232]: Ibid., XLIV, 51.

[^233]: Ibid., XLIV, 57.

[^234]: Ibid., XE, 4.

[^235]: Ibid., LXXXIV, 6.

[^236]: Ibid., III, 32.

[^237]: Ibid., II, 28‑29.

[^238]: Ibid., II, 85.

[^239]: Ibid,, IV, 150.

[^240]: Ibid., V, 105.

[^241]: Ibid., V, 47.

[^242]: Ibid., 11, 102.

[^243]: Ibid., XVI, 51.

[^244]: Ibid., VII, 29.

[^245]: Ibid., II, 165.

[^246]: Ibid., X, 31; XXIII, 82‑89.

[^247]: Ibid., XXXIX, 3.

[^248]: Ibid., VII. 19.

[^249]: Ibid., IV, 48.

[^250]: Ibid.. XXXI, 13.

[^251]: Ibid., II, 170; V. 107.

[^252]: Ibid., X, 13.

[^253]: Ibid., XXX, 33.

[^254]: Ibid., XXXIX, 8.

[^255]: Ibid., XXXIX, 49.

[^256]: Ibid., LIX, 14.

[^257]: Ibid., II, 151; VIII, 65.

[^258]: Ibid., VII, 200; XLI, 36.

[^259]: Ibid., III, 103.

[^260]: Ibid., LIX, 14.

[^261]: Ibid., VI, 159; XXX, 32; XLII, 13.

[^262]: Ibid., XLII, 65; XLV, 17.

[^263]: Ibid., II, 191, 192, 205; VII, 85; XI, 85.

[^264]: Ibid., VIII, 46.

[^265]: Ibid., III; 146.

[^266]: Ibid., XLVII, 35.

[^267]: Ibid., LVII, 23.

[^268]: Ibid., LXX, 19, 21.

[^269]: Ibid., IV, 77.

[^270]: Ibid., III, 175.

[^271]: Ibid., XLII, 42.

[^272]: Ibid., XIX, 62; XXIII, 3; XXVII, 55.

[^273]: Ibid., X1VIII, 26.

[^274]: Ibid., XLIV, 19.

[^275]: Ibid., XXVII, 14; XXXV, 4.

[^276]: Ibid., XXXI, 18.

[^277]: Ibid., XXIII, 46.

[^278]: Ibid., XL, 35.

[^279]: Ibid., IV, 36; XVI, 23.

[^280]: Ibid., XXXVIII, 2.

[^281]: Ibid., XLIX, 7.

[^282]: Ibid., LVII, 20.

[^283]: Ibid., VII, 12; XXXVII, 74‑76.

[^284]: Ibid., XX, 24, 43.

[^285]: Ibid., XLI, 15.

[^286]: Ibid., II, 87.

[^287]: Ibid., LXIII, 5.

[^288]: Ibid., V, 85.

[^289]: Ibid., VI, 148; XVI, 33.

[^290]: Ibid., VI, 149.

[^291]: Ibid., II, 38.

[^292]: Ibid., VI, 148; X, 66.

[^293]: Ibid., IV, 157; VI, 116; LIII, 23.

[^294]: Ibid., X, 36; LIII, 28.

[^295]: Ibid., XLIX, 6.

[^296]: Ibid., LX, 12.

[^297]: Ibid., IV, 112.

[^298]: Ibid., XXIX, 46.

[^299]: Ibid., VI, 68.

[^300]: Ibid., V, 106; VI, 138‑41, 143‑44.

[^301]: Ibid., LIX, 13.

[^302]: Ibid.. IX, 81.

[^303]: Ibid., IX, 127.

[^304]: Ibid., XX1V, 40.

[^305]: Ibid., VII, 179.

[^306]: Ibid., II, 167; IV, 81; X1VII, 11.

[^307]: Ibid., IV, 143.

[^308]: Ibid., LIX, 11; 1XIII, 1.

[^309]: Ibid., III, 1 88.

[^310]: Ibid., V, 65.

[^311]: Ibid., LVII, 8.

[^312]: Ibid., IX, 67.

[^313]: Ibid., XLVII, 22.

[^314]: Ibid., II, 11.

[^315]: Ibid., IV, 38.

[^316]: Ibid., II, 264.

[^317]: Ibid., II, 263‑64

[^318]: Ibid., V, 51‑53.

[^319]: Ibid., IV, 135

[^320]: Ibid., V, 3, 9.

[^321]: Ibid., CIV, 2‑3.

[^322]: Ibid., IX, 34.

[^323]: Ibid., XVII, 26‑29; XXV, 67.

[^324]: Ibid., XXX, 67.

[^325]: Ibid., XVII, 29.

[^326]: Ibid., VII, 31.

[^327]: Ibid., V, 10.

[^328]: Ibid., IV, 171, V, 84.

[^329]: Ibid, IV, 161.

[^330]: Ibid., II, 279.

[^331]: Ibid., XVII, 23.

[^332]: Ibid., XCIII, 9.

[^333]: Ibid., XCIII, 10.

[^334]: Ibid., VI, 108.

[^335]: Ibid., III, 159.

[^336]: Ibid., III, 14, 110; XLI, 37; LIII, 32.

[^337]: Ibid., II, 189, 268; XXIV, 21.

[^338]: Ibid., XVII, 32.

[^339]: Ibid., II, 219.

[^340]: Ibid., V, 93.

[^341]: Ibid.,, VII, 28; XVI, 90.

[^342]: Ibid., IX, 67.

[^343]: Ibid., XXXV, 43.

[^344]: Ibid., IVIII, 8.

[^345]: Ibid., N, 188.

[^346]: Ibid., V, 3.

[^347]: Once the Holy Prophet said that every man has his Satan with
him. Some­one asked him if there was one with him as well. He replied:
yes, but I have made him a Muslim, i.e., made him submit to my control.

[^348]: Qur’an, VII, 10; XXXVI, 45‑47; LXXIV, 15‑25; C, 1‑8.

[^349]: ICE, XVI, 37; XVII, 11.

[^350]: Ibid., LXX, 19‑21.

[^351]: Ibid., XI, 9‑10; XVII, 83.

[^352]: Ibid., XVI, 4.

[^353]: Ibid., IXXV, 31‑40; XC, 5‑7.

[^354]: Ibid., LXXIV, 15.

[^355]: Ibid., XVII, 100.

[^356]: Ibid., XCV3, 6.

[^357]: Ibid., XCVI, 7.

[^358]: The term zakat is used for the state tax earmarked for the poor,
the needy, the wayfarer, the administrative staff employed for its
collection, those whose hearts are to be won over, for freeing slaves
and the heavily indebted, and for use in the path of god (Qur’an, IX,
60). Even if a state does not levy this tax or there is no state to levy
it, its payment direct to the classes mentioned above still remains
obligatory for every Muslim. Sadaqat is a term wider than zakat. It
covers both zakat and whatever is voluntarily given for charitable
purposes over and above zakat. Some people translate the word zakat as
compulsory charity, and other forms of sadaqat as voluntary charity.

[^359]: Ibid., II, 238.

[^360]: Ibid., XCVIII, 5.

[^361]: Ibid., XXV, 29.

[^362]: Ibid., LXXN, 20.

[^363]: Ibid., XXV, 29.

[^364]: Ibid., XXII, 34; XXVII, 2.

[^365]: Ibid., XXXI, 5.

[^366]: Ibid., XX, 139.

[^367]: Ibid., XXXI, 5; XCVII, 5.

[^368]: Ibid., XI, 114.

[^369]: Ibid., XXIX, 45.'

[^370]: Ibid., XXII, 78.

[^371]: Ibid., XXII, 41.

[^372]: Ibid., XXIV, 55.‑56.

[^373]: Ibid., XIX, 59.

[^374]: Ibid., II, 185.

[^375]: Ibid., II, 183, 187.

[^376]: Ibid., II, 197

[^377]: Ibid., XXX, 30.

[^378]: Ibid., VII, 180; XVII, 110; LIX, 24.

[^379]: Ibid., XIV, 34; XVII, 11, 83.

[^380]: ICE, VU 23; XI, 21, 101; XVI, 33

[^381]: Ibid., II, 35; VII, 19.

[^382]: Ibid., II, 37.

[^383]: Ibid., II, 38.

[^384]: Ibid., XLI, 25.

[^385]: Ibid., IV, 17; VI, 54; VII, 153; IX, 104; XVI, 119.

[^386]: Ibid., III, 135.

[^387]: Ibid., V, 42.

[^388]: Ibid., V, 36‑37.

[^389]: Ibid., XI, 90.

[^390]: Ibid., V, 42.

[^391]: Ibid., 131, 135.

[^392]: Ibid., IV, 136.

[^393]: Ibid., II, 160.

[^394]: Ibid., XXXLX, 53.

[^395]: Ibid., IX, 118.

[^396]: Ibid., XI, 3.

[^397]: Ibid., XI, 52.

[^398]: Ibid., IX, 112.

[^399]: Ibid., VIII, 45.

[^400]: Ibid., XIII, 28.

[^401]: Ibid., II, 21.

[^402]: Ibid., XX,,113;, XXXIX, 28.

[^403]: Ibid., XXVII, 53; XLI, 18.

[^404]: Ibid., II, 24; IV, 129.

[^405]: Ibid., V 30; XXII, 37.

[^406]: Ibid., II, 177.

[^407]: Ibid., XXV, 63‑74.

[^408]: Ibid., II, 207; IV, 114.

[^409]: Ibid., III, 13.

[^410]: Ibid., II, 272.

[^411]: Ibid., XIII, 22; XXX, 38; XCII, 18‑21.

[^412]: Ibid., LV, 60.

[^413]: Ibid., II, 272.

[^414]: Ibid., II, 207.

[^415]: Ibid., XCII, 18‑21.

[^416]: Ibid., IV, 114.

[^417]: Ibid., XCII, 21.

[^418]: Ibid., XXX, 38.

[^419]: Ibid., XIII, 22.

[^420]: Ibid., XXXIX, 28.

[^421]: Ibid., II, 265.

[^422]: Ibid., III, 15.

[^423]: Ibid., II, 177.

[^424]: Ibid., XXV, 63‑64; 67‑68, 72‑74.

[^425]: Ibid., XLII, 36‑43.

[^426]: In the Mishkat, there is a tradition which relates that a
stranger one day came to the Holy Prophet and asked him, among other
things, what ihsan is. The Holy Prophet replied, “Serve the cause of God
as if you are in His presence. If it is not possible to achieve this
stage, then think as if He is watching you do your duty.” This tradition
clearly emphasizes the attitude of deep loyalty tinged with an emotional
response of love towards God.

[^427]: Qur’an, V,.96.

[^428]: Ibid., XVI; 128.

[^429]: Ibid., XXII, 37.

[^430]: Ibid., LI, 15.

[^431]: Ibid., LI, 16.

[^432]: Ibid., XXIX, 69.

[^433]: Ibid., IX, 120.

[^434]: Ibid., VII, 56.

[^435]: Ibid., II; 195.

[^436]: Ibid., III, 134.

[^437]: Ibid., XI, 115; XII, 90.

[^438]: Ibid., XVI, 128

[^439]: Ibid., XXXI, 4.

[^440]: Ibid., V, 14.

[^441]: Ibid., VI, 84; XXXVII, 75, 80, 83, 105, 110, 120‑21, 130‑31.

[^442]: Ibid., VI, 84.

[^443]: Ibid., II, 193; III, 104, 110.

[^444]: Ibid., XII, 56.

[^445]: Ibid., XXVII, 14.

[^446]: Ibid., XXIX, 69; XXXI, 5.

[^447]: Ibid., II, 58; VII, 161.

[^448]: Ibid., XII, 22.

[^449]: Ibid., XI, 115; XII, 56.

[^450]: Ibid., XXIX, 69.

[^451]: Ibid., II, 195; III, 134, 145.

[^452]: Ibid., IV, 125.

[^453]: Ibid., XXXI, 22.

[^454]: Ibid., IV, 12 5.

[^455]: Ibid., II, 112.

[^456]: Ibid., IX, 100.


