Introduction
============

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

This world has not come into being on its own; on the contrary, it has a
wise and an intelligent creator, who has created the universe with
knowledge, power, intention and from the aspect of wisdom and He never
does anything that is aimless and vain.

Creation of man and the world also is not vain and aimless. Man has not
come into this world to live for a brief period of time, so that he may
eat, drink, fulfill his sensual desires and then die and get
annihilated. On the contrary, the wise Almighty Allah had a lofty aim in
the creation of man.

Man is created so that he may nurture his soul with faith, good deeds
and fine morals and to prepare for the beautiful and everlasting life of
the hereafter. Therefore man is not annihilated with death. Instead, he
is transferred from this world to the abode of the hereafter.

In that world, he sees the total consequences of his deed; the good and
the righteous persons would get good rewards for their deeds and along
with perfect and illuminated selves live in the everlasting Paradise
forever and enjoy the different bounties of their merciful Lord and the
oppressive and evil persons would also receive complete punishment
commensurate to their misdeeds.

Therefore, this world is the harvest field of the hereafter and a place
for building the self and developing spirituality; therefore one must
prepare the provisions for the hereafter in this world itself. At this
point, the following questions arise:

1. Is man needful of a perfect program and agenda in order to scale the
stages of spiritual perfection and everlasting success and happiness?

2. Is it possible for man to prepare this agenda on his own? Or he is in
need of the guidance of the creator of the world?

The reply to the first question is clear and it does not require any
explanation, because man lives in a society and he cannot life a life of
peace and comfort without the existence of a perfect and comprehensive
law. Therefore there a law is necessary to guarantee the rights of
others, prevention of oppressions and to maintain peace and order. Ideal
and spiritual life of man is also in need of a plan and agenda. A
program and agenda is also a must for the development and training of
self and to guarantee success in the hereafter. Therefore, there is no
doubt that man is in need of a perfect and a comprehensive agenda of
action in order to secure his success in world and hereafter.

As for the reply to the second question, it calls for additional
explanation and therefore the discussion of prophethood is unavoidable
and it is first of all necessary to discuss it in detail and only then
can we move forward. We shall discuss the topic of prophethood from two
aspects: General points related to the origin of prophethood, which is
also called as ‘General Prophethood’ and the second aspect is that of
messengership and points related especially to Messenger of Islam, which
is also termed as ‘Special Prophethood’.

This book will discuss the above topics in two different parts; one part
being exclusively with general prophethood and another related to the
prophethood of The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) and the description of his
proclamation as well as a sketch of his character and life history. It
is hoped that the study of this book would step towards understanding
the character of the prophets; especially that of Prophet Muhammad (S).

**Ibrahim Amini**  
 Qom, Summer 1383


