Two World Views
===============

How do you view the world? How do you consider man as a phenomenon? What
is your view with regard to man and the world? In reply to these
questions, two totally opposite views exist: the divine view and the
materialistic view: In other words: the religious world view and the
materialistic world view.

Materialistic world view
------------------------

The supporters of this type of view consider the world to be permanent
and existence to have come about without any aim or intention. In this
view, the world is a collection having no particular aim. On the
contrary, it is shaped from material elements tangled with each other
without any aim, and they all are vain and aimless. Within this great
collection, man is also an aimless and confused existence marching
towards annihilation. He does not have any motive and his end is
despair, darkness and annihilation. He does not have any refuge or hope
and he lives a life of darkness and horror.

The life of man is also according to the materialistic world view, vain
and aimless. There is no one to whom man is answerable, no being who may
be aware and higher to him and who may well know the good and bad of man
and recognizes his behavior and who punishes or rewards him. And no
absolute criterion exists to assess the deeds of man and his good and
bad character…

Religious world view
--------------------

In the religious world view, the present world is not permanent. On the
contrary, it is created and it is dependant. In this view, the world is
a creation, created on the basis of a minute accounting for continuity,
arrangement and special compatibility for a designated aim and the world
is dependant on the power of a powerful creator; forceful intention and
a wise being, who is also powerful and is giving it continuous support
and protection.

In the religious view, nothing in the world is vain and aimless. And
among all the beings, man is having an excellence and has a higher aim
that he pursues throughout his life. His end is not despair and
hopelessness; on the contrary, it is hope and eagerness. He is a being,
which cannot be annihilated; who is traveling in this temporal on his
way to the permanent world of the hereafter. In the religious world
view, man is answerable before his beneficent and merciful creator. He
is having a great answerability before his God, as He has created him
with free will and allotted duties to him.

Religious world view believes that man is having a creator who is seeing
and aware. He is the witness of all his actions all the time, and He
rewards the doers of good deeds and punishes the wrong doers.

World view of the prophets
--------------------------

The view of the prophets about man and the world is divine. Prophets
consider the worldly phenomena to be dependant and needful. They deem
them to be signs of the power and greatness of the knowing and powerful
creator. Prophets and their followers believe that the world is a
creation of the beneficent and merciful God and all goodness is from Him
and a policy connected to the world is in His hands. The world is not
futile and a plaything, on the contrary it is created for a special aim.

They also have a special view and opinion with regard to man and his
success. They consider him to be a respectful, exalted and a chosen
being, who is a compound of two aspects: a body, which is made of clay
and a soul, which is created from the ethereal and celestial world. That
is why he is a superior being, everlasting, trustful and trustworthy one
of the Lord and who is answerable to Him.

In this view, real success and perfection of man lies in recognition of
God, movement towards Him and satisfaction in His pleasure; and since
all power and goodness is only from Him, attention to Him leads to all
goodness and lofty human values.

The first words of the prophets called to the worship of God and His
oneness and negation of every type of polytheism. Prophets considered
worship of God and monotheism as the foundations of human values and
nobility and forgetting God and carelessness about the remembrance of
the Lord as the roots of all evils and attachment to other than God as
factors of destruction and misfortune.

Future of man and resurrection in the view of the prophets are perfectly
clear, full of hope and nice. Prophets believe that the righteous and
believing man will have a bright and comfortable future. He is traveling
from this world to the world of the hereafter, which is much more vast
and superior to this world and there he would see the final consequences
of his deeds.

That is why prophets were having such clear and definite belief with
regard to the world, man, success of man and his future; and they had
perfect faith in this lofty and true view of theirs.

Foundation of the Call of the Prophets
--------------------------------------

Foundation of the call of the prophets was this same world view and they
based their religion and code of law (Shariah) on it. The first sentence
of Prophet Nuh (a.s.) to his people was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْبُدُواْ اللَّهَ مَا لَكُم مِّنْ إِلَهٍ غَيْرُهُ إِنِّى أَخَافُ
عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…serve Allah, you have no god other than Him; surely I fear for you
the chastisement of a grievous day.” (7:59)***

The first words of Prophet Hud (a.s.) to his people were:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْبُدُواْ اللَّهَ مَالَكُمْ مِّنْ إِلَهٍ غَيْرُهُ إِنْ أَنْتُمْ
إِلَّا مُفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…serve Allah, you have no god other than He; you are nothing but
forgers (of lies).” (Surah Hud 11:50)***

The first statement of Prophet Salih (a.s.) to his people was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْبُدُواْ اللَّهَ مَا لَكُم مِّنْ إِلَهٍ غَيْرُهُ هُوَ أَنْشَأَكُم
مِّنْ الْأَرْضِ وَاسْتَعْمَرَكُمْ فِيهَا فَاسْتَغْفِرُوهُ ثُمَّ
تُوبُواْ إِلَيْهِ إِنَّ رَبّى قَرِيبٌ مُّجِيبٌ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O my people! serve Allah, you have no god other than He; He brought
you into being from the earth, and made you dwell in it, therefore ask
forgiveness of Him, then turn to Him; surely my Lord is Nigh,
Answering.” (11:61)***

Prophet Shuaib (a.s.) also, in the beginning of his prophethood, said to
the people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ يَقَوْمِ اعْبُدُواْ اللَّهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِّنْ اِلَهٍ غَيْرُهُ
وَلَا تَنقُصُواْ الْمِكْيَالَ وَالْمِيزَانَ إِنِّى أَرَيكُمْ بِخَيْرٍ
وَإِنِّى أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ مُّحِيطٍ / وَيَقَوْمِ
أَوْفُواْ الْمِكْيَالَ وَالْمِيزَانَ بِالْقِسْطِ وَلَاتَبْخَسُواْ
النَّاسَ أَشْيَآءَهُمْ وَلَا تَعْثَوْاْ فِى الْأَرْضِ مُفْسِدِينَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O my people! serve Allah, you have no god other than He, and do not
give short measure and weight: surely I see you in prosperity and surely
I fear for you the punishment of an all-encompassing day. And, O my
people! give full measure and weight fairly, and defraud not men their
things, and do not act corruptly in the land, making mischief.”
(4:84-85)***

Almighty Allah has said with regard to the messengership of Musa (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا مُوسَى‏ بَِايَتِنَا وَسُلْطَنٍ مُّبِينٍ‏ / إِلَى‏
فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلَإِيْهِ فَاتَّبَعُواْ أَمْرَ فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَآ أَمْرُ
فِرْعَوْنَ بِرَشِيدٍ / يَقْدُمُ قَوْمَهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَمَةِ
فَأَوْرَدَهُمُ النَّارَ وَبِئْسَ الْوِرْدُ الْمَوْرُودُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We sent Musa with Our communications and a clear
authority. To Firon and his chiefs, but they followed the bidding of
Firon, and Firon’s bidding was not right-directing. He shall lead his
people on the resurrection day, and bring them down to the fire; and
evil the place to which they are brought.” (4:96-98)***

In continuation of these verses, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَأْتِ لَا تَكَلَّمُ نَفْسٌ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ فَمِنْهُمْ
شَقِىٌّ وَسَعِيدٌ / فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ شَقُواْ فَفِى النَّارِ لَهُمْ
فِيهَا زَفِيرٌ وَشَهِيقٌ‏ / خَلِدِينَ فِيهَا مَادَامَتِ السَّمَوتُ
وَالْأَرْضُ إِلَّا مَا شَآءَ رَبُّكَ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ فَعَّالٌ لِّمَا
يُرِيدُ / وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ سُعِدُواْ فَفِى الْجَنَّةِ خَلِدِينَ
فِيهَا مَادَامَتِ السَّمَوتُ وَ الْأَرْضُ إِلَّا مَا شَآءَ رَبُّكَ
عَطَآءً غَيْرَ مَجْذُوذٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the day when it shall come, no soul shall speak except with His
permission, then (some) of them shall be unhappy and (others) happy. So
as to those who are unhappy, they shall be in the fire; for them shall
be sighing and groaning in it: Abiding therein so long as the heavens
and the earth endure, except as your Lord please; surely your Lord is
the mighty doer of what He intends. And as to those who are made happy,
they shall be in the garden, abiding in it as long as the heavens and
the earth endure, except as your Lord please; a gift which shall never
be cut off.” (11:105-108)***

If we look carefully, we would see that two basic pillars are present in
the call of all the prophets:

1. Worship of One God and 2. Future of man, his success or misfortune.
(Resurrection); therefore, faith in these two basics of monotheism and
resurrection shape the foundation of the call of the prophets.

The prophets, by establishing evidence and proof and by showing miracle,
call people to faith in these two basics motivating them to contemplate
and ponder on the secrets and mysteries of the world, awaken their
God-searching nature, so that they may worship God only.

And through their religious view, they may witness the signs of His
power in every corner of the world; that they may discover the aim of
the creation of man and have faith in the world after death and may be
thoughtful about their success or misfortune in future.

First of all, the prophets reformed the beliefs of the people with
regard to God and resurrection, as they are the complete basis of all
their deeds and behavior. After that they entrusted to them the heavenly
program and their code of divine laws. And in this way they called them
to goodness and reformation. But the faith, morals and manners of all
are according to one’s faith and belief.

Hence true faith lead to good deeds and puts forth beautiful blossoms.
And the result of corrupted and improper belief is nothing, but
destruction and injustice. Thus reformation of people requires the
reformation of their world view and beliefs. And the same method was
employed by the prophets.

Faith in God and Judgment Day strengthens the hearts of people so that
they may not struggle except on the path Almighty Allah and that they do
not accept the obedience of anyone other than Almighty Allah.

Prophets and unity of method and aim
------------------------------------

Throughout history thousands of prophets have come from Almighty Allah
for the guidance of man; some of them came with a special code of laws
and others were missionaries of the religion of the previous prophets.
Ultimately, the principle of heavenly religions and program of all the
prophets was one and the same. All of them invited man to one and the
same aim. Collectively, all the heavenly religions rest on the following
three fundamentals:

First: Recognition of one God, who has created the world and faith in
Him (monotheism);

Second: Belief in resurrection and the world of the hereafter and the
everlasting future of man (resurrection);

Third: Belief in prophets, unity of the way and their way and aims
(prophethood);

Prophets called man to accept these basic fundamentals and asked them so
that they may adopt the guiding program of religion into their lives and
that they should submit to the commands of the wise God. They should
base the program of their life only according to the program that
religion has chalked for them. All the prophets from Adam to the
Messenger of Allah (S) have called man to this same reality. They have
named this path that is chosen and liked by God for men as the ‘religion
of God’. It is only one religion and not more than that.

There is not the smallest difference between the principles and
generalities of the call of the prophets and each of them mentioned the
previous prophet with respect and honor and followed his methods and
message. In the same way, they gave glad tidings of the advent of the
coming prophet and informed their followers to have faith in him and
accept his call. Almighty Allah has also said in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللَّهُ مِيثَقَ الْنَّبِيِّينَ لَمَآ ءَاتَيْتُكُمْ مِّنْ
كِتَبٍ وَحِكْمَةٍ ثُمَّ جَآءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مُّصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنْصُرُنَّهُ قَالَ ءَأَقْرَرْتُمْ وَأَخَذْتُمْ
عَلَى‏ ذَلِكُمْ إِصْرِى قَالُواْ أَقْرَرْنَا قَالَ فَاشْهَدُواْ وَ
أَنَاْ مَعَكُم مِّنَ الْشَّهِدِينَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when Allah made a covenant through the prophets: Certainly what
I have given you of Book and wisdom- then an apostle comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
aid him. He said: Do you affirm and accept My compact in this (matter)?
They said: We do affirm. He said: Then bear witness, and I (too) am of
the bearers of witness with you.” (3:81)***

The Holy Quran says thus with regard to faith in prophets and the unity
of their way and aim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ ءَامَنّا بِاللَّهِ وَمَآ أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْنَا وَمَآ أُنْزِلَ عَلَى‏
إِبْرَ هِيمَ وَ إِسْمَعِيلَ وَ إِسْحَقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَالْأَسْبَاطِ
وَمَآ أُوتِىَ مُوسَى‏ وَ عِيْسَى‏ وَالْنَّبِيُّونَ‏مِنْ رَّبِّهِمْ لَا
نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِّنْهُمْ وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ‏ / وَمَن
يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الْإِسْلمِ دِيناً فَلَنْ يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ وَهُوَ فِى
الْأَخِرَةِ مِنَ الْخَسِرِينَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: We believe in Allah and what has been revealed to us, and what
was revealed to Ibrahim and Ismail and Ishaq and Yaqub and the tribes,
and what was given to Musa and Isa and to the prophets from their Lord;
we do not make any distinction between any of them, and to Him do we
submit. And whoever desires a religion other than Islam, it shall not be
accepted from him, and in the hereafter he shall be one of the losers.”
(3:84-85)***

Islam means submission to the command and religion of God. In this
meaning, all the prophets were ‘Muslims’ (those who submit), although
terminologically Islam is the last heavenly religion brought by Prophet
Muhammad (S) for mankind and Muslim is a follower of this faith.

Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) in his supplication to Almighty Allah prayed in
this way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَاجْعَلْنَا مُسْلِمَيْنِ لَكَ وَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِنَآ أُمَّةً
مُّسْلِمَةً لَّكَ وَأَرِنَا مَنَاسِكَنَا وَتُبْ عَلَيْنَآ إِنَّكَ
أَنْتَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ‏ / رَبَّنَا وَابْعَثْ فِيهِمْ رَسُولاً
مِّنْهُمْ يَتْلُواْ عَلَيْهِمْ ءَايَتِكَ وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَبَ
وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ‏ /
وَمَنْ يَرْغَبُ عَنْ مِّلَّةِ إِبْرَهِيمَ إلَّا مَنْ سَفِهَ نَفْسَهُ
وَلَقَدِ اصْطَفَيْنَهُ فِى الدُّنْيَا وَإِنَّهُ فِى الْأَخِرَةِ لَمِنَ
الصَّلِحِينَ‏ / إِذْ قَالَ لَهُ رَبُّهُ أَسْلِمْ قَالَ أَسْلَمْتُ
لِرَبِّ الْعَلَمِينَ‏ / وَوَصَّى‏ بِهَآ إِبرهيمُ بَنِيهِ وَيَعْقُوبُ
يَبَنِىَّ إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفَى‏ لَكُمْ الدِّينَ فَلاَ تَمُوتُنَّ
إِلاَّ وَأَنْتُمْ مُّسْلِمُونَ‏ / أَمْ كُنْتُمْ شُهَدَآءَ إِذْ حَضَرَ
يَعْقُوبَ الْمَوْتُ إِذْ قَالَ لِبَنِيهِ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ بَعْدِى
قَالُواْ نَعْبُدُ إِلَهَكَ وَإِلَهَ ءَابَآئِكَ إِبْرَهِيمَ وَ
إِسْمَعِيلَ وَإِسْحَقَ إِلَهاً وَحِداً وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord! and make us both submissive to Thee and (raise) from our
offspring a nation submitting to Thee, and show us our ways of devotion
and turn to us (mercifully), surely Thou art the Oft-returning (to
mercy), the Merciful. Our Lord! and raise up in them an*** ***Apostle
from among them who shall recite to them Thy communications and teach
them the Book and the wisdom, and purify them; surely Thou art the
Mighty, the Wise. And who forsakes the religion of Ibrahim but he who
makes himself a fool, and most certainly We chose him in this world, and
in the hereafter he is most surely among the righteous. When his Lord
said to him, Be a Muslim, he said: I submit myself to the Lord of the
worlds. And the same did Ibrahim enjoin on his sons and (so did) Yaqub.
O my sons! surely Allah has chosen for you (this) faith, therefore die
not unless you are Muslims. Nay! were you witnesses when death visited
Yaqub, when he said to his sons: What will you serve after me? They
said: We will serve your God and the God of your fathers, Ibrahim and
Ismail and Ishaq, one God only, and to Him do we submit.” (2:128-133)***

That is why Almighty Allah has introduced the prophets with one aim,
which is the same submission before Allah and those who are opposed to
their ways and manners are termed as foolish and ignorant, like in the
following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَسُولاً إِلَى‏ بَنِى إِسْرَ ءِِيلَ أَنِّى قَدْ جِئْتُكُمْ بَِايَةٍ
مِّنْ رَّبِّكُمْ أَنِّى أَخْلُقُ لَكُمْ مِّنَ الْطِّينِ كَهَيْئَةِ
الْطَّيْرِ فَأَنْفُخُ فِيهِ فَيَكُونُ طَيْراً بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ
وَأُبْرِئُ الْأَكْمَهَ وَالْأَبْرَصَ وَأُحْىِ الْمَوْتَى‏ بِإِذْنِ
اللَّهِ وَ أُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا تَأْكُلُونَ وَمَا تَدَّخِرُونَ فِى
بُيُوتِكُمْ إِنَّ فِى ذَ لِكَ لَأَيَةً لَّكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ
مُّؤْمِنِينَ‏ / وَمُصَدِّقاً لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَىَّ مِنَ الْتَّوْرَيةِ
وَلِأُحِلَّ لَكُمْ بَعْضَ الَّذِى حُرِّمَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَجِئْتُكُمْ
بَِايَةٍ مِّنْ رَّبِّكُمْ فَاتَّقُواْ اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ‏ / إِنَّ
اللَّهَ رَبِّى وَرَبُّكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوهُ هَذَا صِرَاطٌ مُّسْتَقِيمٌ‏ /
فَلَمَّآ أَحَسَّ عِيَسى‏ مِنْهُمُ الْكُفْرَ قَالَ مَنْ أَنْصَارِى
إِلىَ اللَّهِ قَالَ الْحَوَارِيُّونَ نَحْنُ أَنْصَارُ اللَّهِ
ءَاَمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَاشْهَدْ بِأَنَّا مُسْلِمُونَ‏ / رَبَّنَآ
ءَاَمَنَّا بِمَآ أَنْزَلْتَ وَاتَّبَعْنَا الْرَّسُولَ فَاكْتُبْنَا
مَعَ الْشَّهِدِينَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (make him) an apostle to the children of Israel: That I have
come to you with a sign from your Lord, that I determine for you out of
dust like the form of a bird, then I breathe into it and it becomes a
bird with Allah’s permission and I heal the blind and the leprous, and
bring the dead to life with Allah’s permission and I inform you of what
you should eat and what you should store in your houses; most surely
there is a sign in this for you, if you are believers. And a verifier of
that which is before me of the Taurat and that I may allow you part of
that which has been forbidden you, and I have come to you with a sign
from your Lord therefore be careful of (your duty to) Allah and obey me.
Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, therefore serve Him; this is the
right path. But when Isa perceived unbelief on their part, he said: Who
will be my helpers in Allah’s way? The disciples said: We are helpers
(in the way) of Allah: We believe in Allah and bear witness that we are
submitting ones. Our Lord! we believe in what Thou hast revealed and we
follow the apostle, so write us down with those who bear witness.”
(3:49-53)***

All divine prophets like teachers of the same school, are sent one after
another to call human beings to submission to religion of God and that
by their guidance, they may lead man to the path of perfection, which is
the same straight path. Religion and aim of the prophets was common and
all of them made efforts to gain the satisfaction of Almighty Allah and
His proximity. There was no difference between the heavenly religions of
the prophets, except in secondary laws of religions. And that too was
due to difference in conditions and circumstances as also the capacities
of people.

Circumstances, levels of understanding and capabilities of people were
not same during all ages, therefore the prophets spoke to the people in
accordance to the level of their understanding and gradually bestowed to
them perfection and maturity in understanding and awareness in accepting
the concepts of religion till prophethood reached to the last of the
prophets, Prophet Muhammad Mustafa (S). He was sent for the guidance of
people with such detailed and specific principles of faith that no
prophet before him had come with such details.

He came with a comprehensive set of laws and greatness of religion
cognition that his religion included all the modes of contemplation,
reasoning and research. And the religion that he brought was the last
and the most detailed code of law and faith that Almighty Allah has ever
sent for humanity. Almighty Allah has said with regard to the
comprehensiveness of the religion of Islam as compared to the previous
faith as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَرَعَ لَكُم مِّنَ الدِّينِ مَا وَصَّى‏ بِهِ نُوحاً وَالَّذِى
أَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَيْكَ وَمَا وَصَّيْنَا بِهِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَى‏
وَعِيسَى‏ أَنْ أَقِيمُواْ الدِّينَ وَلَا تَتَفَرَّقُواْ فِيهِ كَبُرَ
عَلَى الْمُشْرِكِينَ مَا تَدْعُوهُمْ إِلَيْهِ اللَّهُ يَجْتَبِى
إِلَيْهِ مَن يَشَآءُ وَيَهْدِى إِلَيْهِ مَن يُنِيبُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He has made plain to you of the religion what He enjoined upon Nuh
and that which We have revealed to you and that which We enjoined upon
Ibrahim and Musa and Isa that keep to obedience and be not divided
therein; hard to the unbelievers is that which you call them to; Allah
chooses for Himself whom He pleases, and guides to Himself him who turns
(to Him), frequently.” (42:13)***


