Quran, an Everlasting Miracle
=============================

The Holy Quran is the most important miracle of the Prophet of Islam and
the best proof of his prophethood. This great miracle is having
superiority on all the other miracles from the following aspects:

1. It is permanent and everlasting and it has been given into the charge
of man forever and they can witness the miracle of Quran throughout
history. As opposed to other miracles, which endure only for a limited
period of time.

2. It is also not limited from the aspect of space; it is under the
control of one and all in every period of time, so that he may realize
that it is a miracle, as opposed to other miracles that can be verified
in a particular place and only some people are able to witness them.

3. The Quran, in addition to the fact that it is a proof of prophethood,
is also a program of life and a guide to the right path, as opposed to
other miracles, which do not have such an excellence.

The Holy Quran is the word of God and a miracle in such a way that
others are incapable of presenting such a discourse. Quran introduces
itself to be a miracle and by way of challenge says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لَّئِنِ اجْتَمَعَتِ الْإِنسُ وَالْجِنُّ عَلَى‏ أَن يَأْتُواْ
بِمِثْلِ هَذَا الْقُرْءَانِ لَا يَأْتُونَ بِمِثْلِهِ وَلَوْ كَانَ
بَعْضُهُمْ لِبَعْضٍ ظَهِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: If men and jinn should combine together to bring the like of
this Quran, they could not bring the like of it, though some of them
were aiders of others.” (17:88)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَيهُ قُلْ فَأْتُواْ بِعَشْرِ سُوَرٍ مِّثْلِهِ
مُفْتَرَيَتٍ وَادْعُواْ مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتُم مِّن دُونِ اللَّهِ إِن
كُنْتُمْ صَدِقينَ / فَإِلَّمْ يَسْتَجِيبُواْ لَكُمْ فَاعْلَمُو اْ
أَنَّمَآ أُنزِلَ بِعِلْمِ اللَّهِ وَأَن لَّا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ فَهَلْ
أَنتُم مُّسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Or, do they say: He has forged it. Say: Then bring ten forged
chapters like it and call upon whom you can besides Allah, if you are
truthful. But if they do not answer you, then know that it is revealed
by Allah’s knowledge and that there is no god but He; will you then
submit?” (11:13-14)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ كُنْتُمْ فِى رَيْبٍ مِّمَّا نَزَّلْنَا عَلَى‏ عَبْدِنَا
فَأْتُواْ بِسُورَةٍ مِّنْ مِّثْلِهِ وَادْعُواْ شُهَدَآءَكُمْ مِّن
دُونِ اللَّهِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَدِقِينَ‏ / فَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلُواْ وَلَن
تَفْعَلُواْ فَاتَّقُواْ النَّارَ الَّتِى وَقُودُهَا النَّاسُ وَ
الْحِجَارَةُ أُعِدَّتْ لِلْكَفِرينَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if you are in doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our
servant, then produce a chapter like it and call on your witnesses
besides Allah if you are truthful. But if you do (it)*** ***not and
never shall you do (it), then be on your guard against the fire of which
men and stones are the fuel; it is prepared for the unbelievers.”
(2:23-24)***

In the above verses, Quran has been introduced as the miracle and proof
of the veracity of the claim of Prophet Muhammad (S) and it has openly
demanded from the people that if they have any doubt in the miracle of
the Quran or the messengership of The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S), they
should bring a like of it or ten chapters or at least one chapter.

If those who are inimical to Islam had the capacity to perform this
feat, they would have definitely taken up the challenge or at least
brought one chapter like that of Quran and presented it to the Holy
Prophet (S) and Muslims in order to render the prophethood of His
Eminence doubtful. This was the best method of confronting and defeating
Islam.

Therefore, if they had been able to perform this feat, they would have
prevented the spread of the influence of Islam and succeeded in
dispersing the new converts from the company of The Holy Prophet
Muhammad (S) and this also did not carry the bloodshed and difficulties
of fighting battles.

But it is not mentioned anywhere in history that they took up this
challenge of Quran and succeeded in it.

In any case, the challenge of the Quran is not restricted to the people
contemporary to the period of the Messenger of Allah (S), it is general
and addressed to all the people of every age and place; it has asked all
the intellectuals and litterateurs that if they have doubt in the
messengership of The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) they should bring a like
of this Quran or a chapter like it. But as the Quran predicted, they
have till date not been able to perform this feat. Enemies of Islam have
also written books in refutation of Quran and tried to insult it, but so
far no one has succeeded in writing a book like it.

In the words of Almighty Allah, there is a beautiful fluency and
attraction in it, which is not present in other books. It is from this
aspect that it has severely influenced the pure and enlightened
consciences. A large number of people in the early period of Islam were
attracted by hearing the verses of Quran and they accepted Islam because
of this. Numerous examples of such persons are mentioned in the history
of Islam. Such was the extent of the attraction of Quran that it even
confounded and attracted the enemies of Islam and even they had to
confess that it is extraordinary. Below we present some instances of
this:

Abul Fida writes: Walid Ibn Mughira came to the Messenger of Allah (S)
and the Prophet recited the Quran before him in such a way that he
became inclined to Islam. This information reached Abu Jahl and he came
to him and said: Uncle, your relatives intend to collect money for you.
What for, he asked. He replied: So that they may hand it over to you,
because you had gone to Muhammad to get something. Walid said: Quraish
know that I am the richest of all of them.

Abu Jahl said: So issue a statement that may reach your relatives and
they may come to know that you are a denier of Muhammad. Walid said:
What shall I say? By God, none of you is more learned than me about
poetry and Arab human and Jinn literature. By God, the Quran of Muhammad
does not resemble any of these. By God, the discourse of Muhammad has
sweetness, beauty and attraction; branches of the discourse of Muhammad
have fructified and his roots are being watered. His discourse is having
precedence over other discourses and no discourse is superior to his.

Abu Jahl said to Walid: Your kin will not be pleased with you unless you
make a statement with regard to this matter. He said: Give me some time
to consider it. After thinking about it for some time, he said: The
discourse of Muhammad is magical as it has the ability to bewitch
others.[^1]

Jabir Ibn Abdullah says: One day Quraish gathered and said: We should
procure a man, who is most learned of all in magic, soothsaying and
poetry and send to this man who has created dissension among us and who
talks ill of our religion, so that he may speak to him. All said: We do
not know of anyone better than Utbah Ibn Rabia. Therefore this
assignment was given to Utbah.

Utbah came to the Messenger of Allah (S) and asked: Who is better, you
or your father? The Messenger of Allah (S) did not give any reply. He
asked again: Who is better, you or Abdul Muttalib? Again the Messenger
of Allah (S) did not accord any reply. Utbah said: If you think they
were better than you, they worshipped the same idols that you talk ill
of; and if you consider yourself to be better than them, say something
that we might hear. By Allah, I have not seen any lamb more inauspicious
than you, you have created disunity among us and criticized our religion
and degraded us among the Arabs in such a way that they say: A magician
has appeared among Quraish and we fear him that he would cause war among
us and destroy all of us.

O man, if you want wealth, we can collect so much wealth for you that
you would become the richest of Quraish and if you are need of a spouse,
we can get you married to any lady you want.

At this moment the Holy Prophet (S) asked Utbah: Have you said all you
wanted to say? Yes. He said: Then listen:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنزِيلٌ مِّنَ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ‏ / كِتَابٌ فُصِّلَتْ آيَاتُهُ
قُرْآناً عَرَبِيّاً لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْلَمُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. 41.1. Ha Mim! A
revelation from the Beneficent, the Merciful God: A Book of which the
verses are made plain, an Arabic Quran for a people who know.”
(41:2-3)***

…till he came to the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ أَعْرَضُواْ فَقُلْ أَنذَرْتُكُمْ صَاعِقَةً مِّثْلَ صَاعِقَةِ
عَادٍ وَثَمُودَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But if they turn aside, then say: I have warned you of a scourge
like the scourge of Ad and Thamood.” (41:13)***

Utbah said: Enough, do you have anything else? No, he replied.

After this Utbah returned to Quraish and they asked him: What did you
do? He replied: I spoke to Muhammad. They asked: What did he say in
reply? Utbah said: By the one who established the Kaaba, I did not
understand anything from the discourse of Muhammad, except that he
threatened you with lightning as in the case of Aad and Thamud. They
asked: An Arab spoke to you and you did not understand him? He replied:
Yes, I did not understand anything, except the mention of lightning.[^2]

According to another narration, Utbah said: I have heard such a
discourse from this man that I have not heard anything like it from
anyone else.[^3]

According to yet another version, Utbah said: By Allah, I have not heard
such a discourse from anyone else so far, neither in poetry nor
soothsaying; O people of Quraish, leave this man to his own devices, his
discourse is having a great future. If Arabs accept it, it will be
sufficient for you and if he is able to conquer the Arabs, his kingdom
and honor would be your kingdom and honor and you would benefit from him
most of all. Quraish said in reply: Muhammad has bewitched you through
his tongue.[^4]

Aspects of the miracle of Quran
-------------------------------

Previously it was mentioned that Quran is a miracle and it is different
from human discourse. Friends and enemies have also confessed to this.
At this point, it is necessary to explain the causes of its
miraculousness. Scholar, theologians, litterateurs and commentators of
Quran have mentioned some aspects in this regard and we shall mention
some of them here:

A New Style
-----------

It is learnt from a close study of Quran that this great book is having
a fresh lightness and it is completely different from the style and
diction of other writings. Verses of Quran are not poetic couplets,
because it is not composed on poetic meters and also does not have
rhymes. Moreover, poetry is mostly imaginative and based on hyperbole,
whereas the verses of Quran are not so.

Although Quran is not a book of poetry, each of its verses are like
coherent couplets along with a special flow and style arranged in a
systematic way and between the end of every chapter there is a
particular symmetry and similarity which imparts appeal and beauty to
it. The verses do not have the meter of couplets, but they have
remarkable compatibility and appeal.

Quran is arranged as a soft prose, but it is different from other prose
in two ways:

**A.** It is at an elevated level from the aspect of eloquence and
clarity, selection of words and sentences. It has mentioned the most
complex points in an extremely easy and suitable words, which though
simple and sweet are also meaningful, whereas such a thing is not found
in other discourses. So much so that even the sermons, traditions and
supplications of the Holy Prophet (S) do not have such appeal. Although
Amirul Momineen (a.s.), was considered to be the most eloquent of the
Arabs and he became familiar with Quran during his childhood; he knew it
by heart and had written it with his hands, and his Nahjul Balagha is
considered as the most eloquent of the books; in spite of that it does
not have the same appeal and beauty of the Holy Quran. Verses of Quran
that occasionally appear within the sermons of Nahjul Balagha or
traditions shine like stars in the sky.

**B.** Matters of the Holy Quran have a special style and arrangement,
which is a remarkable difference with other books. In this heavenly
book, there are different subjects like knowing God, resurrection,
Judgment Day, accounting, Paradise and Hell, prophethood and stories,
effects of good and bad character, creation of the earth, sky, man,
animals, vegetation, sea, cloud, winds, rain and rules and regulations,
lawful and unlawful actions, worship acts, transactions, marriage and
divorce, penalties, retaliations and blood monies, advices and moral
lessons and many such topics.

Such topics and their like are spread throughout the Quran under various
topics. But it is not thus in other books, since every book deals only
with one particular topic and different topics related to the main
subject are discussed. Sometimes, some other topics are also discussed,
but some topics are also discussed separately. Such a book is in fact a
number of books each of which follows a single aim.

But Quran has not discussed only one subject; on the contrary, it has
not even discussed all the problems related to a number of different
subjects at one and the same place together. It has mentioned different
aspects in a scattered way; they are placed besides each other, but they
are not incoherent and asymmetrical; on the contrary they have a special
symmetry that keeps them connected to each other and which shapes the
verses and chapters. Different subjects of Quran are like different
priceless gems arranged in a special manner.

That is why the Holy Quran in the arrangement of its subject matter does
not resemble any of the books of morals, legal, anecdotal, scientific
knowledge, humanities, literature and history; but each of them is
connected to others and they are all harmonious. The aim of Quran
includes: The cognition of man, world, Almighty Allah, resurrection and
life after death and also calling man to worship the one God and
inviting him to fulfill the social and individual duties and
purification and training of the self from bad manners and morals,
development of the self by perfection of morals and finally, proximity
to God and wayfaring on the path of God.

Decisiveness in Discourse
-------------------------

Subject matter of the Quran is mentioned with clarity and decisiveness
in such a way that it has permeated into the depths of the soul of man
and the hearer feels that the speaker is witnessing reality and is
giving information from the unseen. It is from this aspect that the
prophecies of the Quran inspire hope and its threats are severely
pounding.

Contemplation on the verses of Quran polishes the soul of man and raises
him above the world of matter and makes him familiar with the unseen
world. Therefore, it is possible for the soul of man to witness
realities in these emotions, which their eyes cannot see. Appeal of the
verses of Quran is to such an extent that opponents of Islam labeled
them as magic.

Sometimes, by hearing them, they were so bewildered that automatically
they did not understand how to justify them. It was mentioned before
also that Utbah was so bewildered on hearing the verses of Surah
Fussilat that he expressed helplessness in justifying and explaining the
verses and in reply to Quraish said: “I did not understand anything,
except that he threatened with a lightning like the lightning of Aad and
Thamud.”

Fearing this same ideal appeal, the leaders of polytheism said to
people: Do not give ear to the words of Muhammad, because it is possible
that you would be deceived.

Ibn Athir writes: Tufayl Ibn Amr Doosi, who was a man from a noble
family and also an accomplished poet, says: I traveled to Mecca during
the period the Messenger of Allah (S) and stayed there for some time.
Some Quraish elders approached me and said: O Tufayl, you have come to
our city at a time when this man (The Holy Prophet Muhammad) is living
here.

He has cast us into hardships and has created discord among us. His
discourse, like magic and sorcery, causes separation between father and
son, wife and husband and brothers. Therefore, we fear that you might
also be deceived. So do not speak a word to Muhammad and do not give ear
to his talks.

Tufayl says: So much they emphasized this point that I became determined
that I would not hear the words of Muhammad or speak to him, and I also
stuffed cotton wool into my ears.

In the morning I went to the Holy Mosque and saw the Messenger of Allah
(S) reciting prayers near the Kaaba. I went nearer; Allah had intended
that his discourse would reach my ears. A beautiful discourse reached my
ears. I said to myself: May your mother mourn for you, you are a poet
and an intellectual and know well how to discriminate between good and
bad. Thus what restrains you from hearing the statements of this man? If
it is good and proper you should accept it and if it is evil and
invalid, you can leave it.

Tufayl says: I waited a little while till Muhammad departed to his
house, and then I followed him, when he entered the house, I also
entered. At that moment I said: O Muhammad, leaders of Quraish told me
this and that, but Allah intended that your discourse should reach my
ears. I heard your beautiful discourse, tell me what is your aim and
objective? So Muhammad presented Islam to me and recited the Quran. By
Allah, I had not heard any discourse more beautiful and a matter more
definite.[^5]

Therefore, if you also had been conversant with Arab literature and
interpretation of Quran, contemplated on the fresh style of its
arrangement of verses and selection of words and the lofty subjects that
Quran has chosen to express in those words and the construction of
sentences, you will also discover some amazing aspects of the elegance
of this heavenly book.

No Contradiction Between The Verses
-----------------------------------

Another sign of the miraculousness of Quran is that there is no
contradiction between its verses. Quran itself has highlighted this
point and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلَا يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْءَانَ وَلَوْ كَانَ مِنْ عِنْدِ غَيْرِ
اللَّهِ لَوَجَدَواْ فِيهِ اخْتِلَفاً كَثِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do they not then meditate on the Quran? And if it were from any
other than Allah, they would have found in it many a discrepancy.”
(4:82)***

The above verse has reprimanded and said: Why do you not contemplate on
the Quran so that you may understand that its verses have no
contradiction and that they are revealed from Almighty Allah, because
the discourse of man is not without contradiction.

Two kinds of contradictions are seen in books written by human beings
and none of them is present in Quran.

First: Contradictions related to subtlety, choice of words, style and
diction, observance of literary aspects, eloquence and clarity.

Since man is under constant change and perfection, as much as he writes
and practices, as much expert he becomes and as much his writing
improves and becomes more eloquent and beautiful. In the same way,
different personal conditions, mood, different incidents and conditions
of life, all of them affect the writing of a writer. Man in a condition
of health or illness, joy or indisposition, happiness or sorrow, feeling
of victory or defeat, exaltation or feeling of humiliation, cannot write
in the same way and each of them affect his writing and beauty of
discourse.

That is why if you study a book with attention you would realize that
its different sections are not same from the aspect of beauty and
elegance and the only book, which does not have such differences is the
Holy Quran; neither the chapters revealed first have any difference with
the last chapters nor the middle chapters and its verses.

The Holy Quran was revealed on the Prophet of Islam throughout a period
of twenty-three years, gradually in different space and time and in
different conditions, but in spite of this, no difference is seen in its
different sections from the aspect of eloquence and clarity or elegance
of discourse; this proves that Quran is the discourse of God, which is
not susceptible to change and development in His being or actions.

Second: Existence of incongruous and contradictory matter is certain in
the writing of human beings. If an unlettered author dictates for 23
years matter on various subjects and different topics, such a book would
without any doubt not be free of contractions.

It is possible for a writer to write something at one time and later as
a result of having changed his opinion about something may write to the
contrary; or it is possible that he might do this because of
forgetfulness or carelessness. Moreover it is possible that another
writer coming after him may refute his arguments and through innovative
arguments criticize him. In many instances it is seen that preceding
writers have written on different subjects using their evidences and
argumentations, but after a passage of time other writers have refuted
those theories through new methods.

History testifies that The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) did not attend any
school.[^6] In the Holy Quran also he is mentioned as the unlettered
prophet.[^7] All the verses and chapters of Quran were revealed to His
Eminence (S) in twenty-three years in various instances and in
fragments.

His Eminence did not write down the verses of Quran himself, on the
contrary he dictated them to others. He did not revise any of his
previous statements in any way. In spite of this, not the slightest
contradiction or incompatibility is seen in the verses of Quran.

Instances cannot arise in rules and regulations related to society,
rights and worship acts of Quran, which are not compatible to the
religious and moral basis of that heavenly book. Nothing appears in
problems related to morals, which is contradictory to the religious
basis. In the stories of Quran and the biographies of the prophets and
the past nations nothing is seen that is opposed to the fundamentals of
belief or morals.

As regards problems connected to nature, nothing is seen which is
opposed to the basics of thoughts. In points related to resurrection and
rewards and punishment of the hereafter there is nothing incompatible to
justice and perfection of Almighty Allah. With regard to points about
general and special prophethood nothing is mentioned which is opposed to
the principles of divine cognition.

Hence, although Quran has spoken about a number of different subjects,
all of them are organized and compatible and do not have the smallest
incompatibility between themselves. Therefore they cannot be a product
of human beings. On the contrary, it is the discourse of God revealed on
the heart of the Prophet of Islam and no one else can bring such a piece
of writing.

Information of the Unseen
-------------------------

The Holy Quran has informed about some events that were to occur in the
future and this itself is considered to be a miraculous aspect, because
it is not possible for ordinary human beings to get this knowledge.
Below we shall mention some predictions issued by the Holy Quran:

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الم / غُلِبَتِ الرُّومُ‏ / فِى أَدْنَى الْأَرْضِ وَهُم مِّن بَعْدِ
غَلَبِهِمْ سَيَغْلِبُونَ / فِى بِضْعِ سِنِينَ لِلَّهِ الْأَمْرُ مِن
قَبْلُ وَمِن بَعْدُ وَيَوْمَئِذٍ يَفْرَحُ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ / بِنَصْرِ
اللَّهِ يَنصُرُ مَن يَشَآءُ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ / وَعْدَ
اللَّهِ لَا يُخْلِفُ اللَّهُ وَعْدَهُ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ
لَايَعْلَمُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Alif Lam Mim. The Romans are vanquished, in a near land, and they,
after being vanquished, shall overcome, within a few years. Allah’s is
the command before and after; and on that day the believers shall
rejoice, with the help of Allah; He helps whom He pleases; and He is the
Mighty, the Merciful; (This is) Allah’s promise! Allah will not fail His
promise, but most people do not know. (30:1-6)***

From this verse, it can be concluded that in the early period of Islam,
defeat and hardships would befall the soldiers of Rome. This event
occurred near the land of Hijaz and the Arabs of the Arabian Peninsula,
especially the new converts to Islam, became very much disconcerted at
the defeat of the Romans. The above verse was revealed at that time
informing the Muslims that after this defeat, in a short period of less
than ten years, the Romans would overcome their enemies and believers
would become pleased with the help of God.

The prediction of Quran proved true and within that stipulated time the
Romans, who were the People of Book conquered Persia; believers were
also pleased by this victory.

It is necessary to mention about the political and administrative
conditions of the two great powers of that time (Rome and Iran) and the
clashes that they had with each other in order to fully understand this
important event of history:

Before the advent of Islam, two great imperial powers ruled in Asia and
the neighborhood of Arabian lands: One was Iran, which had a huge land
mass under its control, which was much larger than present Iran. Another
power was that of the Romans, whose kingdom stretched up to Egypt and
Syria.

These two powers were always engaged in a struggle of expansion of their
boundaries and power and were all the time in confrontation with each
other. Sometimes one of them considered his opponent as weak and
attacked him and seized some of his territory and wealth and plundered
those places. After some time the defeated party would regain its power
and then take up arms against the other and re-conquer the areas that
had been seized from it before. This conflict continued forever between
these two opponents.

Arabs of the surrounding areas were also not safe as a result of the
confrontation of the two adversaries. The capital of the rulers from the
family of Lakham in the city of Hira (near Kufa) who were under
overlordship of the Sasanid rulers, who had ruled for many years. Their
reign continued till around 602 A.D. At that time Khosrow Parvez decided
to annex their kingdom and join it to his dominion.[^8]

When a Sasanid king became aware that the Himyar king intends to secede
from the Sasanid domination, he sent a huge army in 598 A.D. to southern
Arabia, which was able to vanquish them after a severe fight and south
Arabia became a province of the Sasanid kingdom.[^9] On the other hand,
the Roman kingdoms also gave business to south Arabia and helped that
country in opposing their adversaries, because many Christians had
settled down in those territories.

That is why the people of the Arabian Peninsula were affected by the
victory or defeat of each of these two opponents. When the Sasanids
gained victory, the Christians of Arabia became despondent and the
polytheists were elated, since they considered the Iranians to be their
co-religionists as both of them were fire worshippers, so they
considered their victory as their own victory.

On the other hand, when the Romans were victorious, the Christians of
Arabia became elated, but the polytheists were aggrieved as they sensed
danger. Now we shall explain the main points:

The Prophet of Islam (S) was vested with the office of prophethood in
610 A.D. in Mecca. From 602 to 610 A.D. it was a very bad period for the
Roman power, because as result of civil disturbance and internal strife,
it had become absolutely weak. During this time Khosrow Parvez, the
Sasanid king discovered the weakness of the Roman Empire; so he took
advantage of the circumstances and launched fierce attack on his
opponent. These attacks began from 610 and continued till 619 A.D. The
strong Sasanid fighters gained remarkable victories one after another.

From 605 to 613 A.D. cities like: Dara, Aaamad, Adsaa, Nasirapolis,
Aleppo, Apaya and Damascus fell under the domination of the Sasanids.

Khosrow Parvez became arrogant as a result of his remarkable victories
and he declared a holy war against the Christians. Some Jew groups also
joined ranks with him. In the year 614 he attacked Jerusalem and killed
around 90000 Christians and plundered the city. He razed and burnt down
a number of churches. During these attacks they seized and brought to
Iran the crucifix that was considered by the Christians to be the
original and was the most venerated emblem of their faith. Parvez wrote
to Hercules the Roman Emperor:

From Khosrow Parvez, the greatest Lord and master of the rulers of the
earth to Hercules, a worthless servant who is ignorant of himself, you
say that you trust in God, but why did He did not save Jerusalem from my
hands?

In the year 616, Khosrow sent a huge army to Alexandria and in 619 he
conquered Egypt. His sent another army to Asia Minor and occupied
Chaldea in 617.[^10]

Rapid and wide ranging Sasanid victories were really remarkable from
different aspects. Some information of these victories reached the
people of Arabia who lived in the surrounding lands. The reaction of
Arabs to these reports used to be of two kinds: Polytheists used to be
elated at them, because they considered their victory as victory against
forces of monotheism. But Christians were aggrieved and they feared
their safety and peace.

Muslims of the early period of Islam who were very few in numbers, and
were usually persecuted and oppressed by polytheists, used to be
extremely wary of the rapid and remarkable victories of the Sasanids.
Moreover, they also feared that Arabia would also come under their
subjugation. Because the enemy has reached up to ‘Azrat’ which is
mentioned in Quran as ‘Adnal arz’ and they were extremely fearful of the
oncoming danger.

The above verse was revealed with regard to these circumstances and it
gave glad tidings to Muslims that in a period of less than ten years,
the soldiers of Rome would vanquish the Persians and the believers would
become elated at the divine help.

Ibn Athir writes: ‘Adnal Arz’ implies the land of Azrat since it is an
Arab land closest to Byzantine territories and the Romans in some
battles had retreated to this area. The Prophet of Islam and Muslims
were aggrieved at the victory of Persians over the Romans, since the
Romans were People of the Book and the infidels were pleased at these
victories and considered the Majus like their own selves. When this
verse was revealed, Abu Bakr laid a bet for a hundred camels with Ubayy
ibn Khalaf, although at that time betting was not unlawful.[^11]

Muslims became hopeful of the divine promise and began to count the days
for its realization. At last the promise of God was fulfilled and the
Romans gained victory over the Persians.

It is mentioned in history that the Roman Emperor, Hercules I was
extremely aggrieved at the defeat at the hands of Persians and decided
to strengthen his weak points and take serious steps to regain the
territories lost to their opponents. With this aim, he took reformative
steps and corrections and prepared his men to launch a severe and
widespread attack.

In 622 A.D. he sent a powerful naval force through the Black Sea in
Armenis to attack the Persians from the rear. The next year he attacked
Azerbaijan and plundered the birth place of Zoroaster and extinguished
their holy fire, which had been burning since ages. They recovered the
holy crucifix from the Persians and returned it to Jerusalem.[^12]

Although Romans were defeated at Azraat (Adnal Arz) in 613 A.D., they
continued repeated and formidable attacks on Persians till year 622 A.D.
when they were finally victorious. That is they gained victory in nine
years after their defeat as mentioned in the Holy Quran as “Within a few
years”. That is why the prediction of Quran when it said: second victory
of Romans would occur in a period of less than ten years after their
defeat, proved true. At that time, Christians and Muslims were elated at
the new victory of Romans over the Persians.

Realization of this divine promise is an evidence of the miraculous
aspect of Quran.[^13]

[^1]: Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya, Vol. 3, Pg. 78.

[^2]: Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya, Vol. 3, Pg. 80.

[^3]: Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya, Vol. 3, Pg. 82.

[^4]: Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya, Vol. 3, Pg. 82.

[^5]: Usud al-Ghaba, Vol. 3, Pg. 54.

[^6]: “And you did not recite before it any book, nor did you transcribe
one with your right hand, for then could those who say untrue things
have doubted.” (29:48)

[^7]: “Those who follow the Apostle-Prophet, the unlettered, whom they
find written down with them in the Taurat and the Injeel (who) enjoins
them good and forbids them evil, and makes lawful to them the good
things and makes unlawful to them impure things, and removes from them
their burden and the shackles which were upon them; so (as for) those
who believe in him and honor him and help him, and follow the light
which has been sent down with him, these it is that are the successful.”
(7:157)

[^8]: Tarikh Iran Az Salukian taa Furupashi daulat Sasani, Vol. 3, Pg.
263.

[^9]: Tarikh Iran Az Salukian taa Furupashi daulat Sasani, Vol. 3, Pg.
256.

[^10]: Will Durant, History of Civilization, Part I, Vol. 4, Pg. 181;
Tarikh Iran Az Salukian taa Furupashi daulat Sasani, Vol. 3, Pg.
264-265.

[^11]: Al-Kamil fit Tarikh, Vol. 1, Pg. 479.

[^12]: Tarikh Iran Az Salukian taa Furupashi daulat Sasani, Vol. 3, Pg.
266; Will Durant, History of Civilization, Part I, Vol. 4, Pg. 182.

[^13]: Historians of Islam like Tabari, Ibne Athir, Abul Fida and
others, and in the same way commentators of Quran are having unanimity
that the promise of the Holy Quran was finally fulfilled and the Romans
after their defeat were able to overpower the Persians and the gap
between this defeat and victory was less than ten years, but regretfully
the accurate time of defeat and victory is not recorded in history. In
Islamic sources, it is mentioned that the victory of Romans occurred
during the time of the Battle of Badr (2 A.H.) or at the time of Battle
of Hudaibiyah (6 A.H.), but both these times do not tally with the
prophecy of Quran because their defeat in 613 A.D. corresponds to the
third year of Hijra which is 13 and 16 years respectively from Battle of
Badr and Battle of Hudaibiyah. While the prophecy of Quran is that the
victory of the Romans would be in less than ten years. Hence, none of
these two dates tally with the prophecy of Quran, but what is mentioned
in the books of the history of Iran is absolutely accurate. And hence we
should accept that the victory of Romans occurred around the year 13
A.H.


