Muhammad, the Last Prophet
==========================

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) is the last of the divine prophets. After
His Eminence, no other prophet is going to be sent by God. The Prophet
of Islam, from the beginning of his mission, introduced himself as the
seal of the prophets and was accepted by the Muslims as such. The
subject of finality of prophethood in the Islamic milieu is considered
to be an important matter and it is not in need of evidence.

Finality is mentioned in the Holy Quran as well as books of traditions.
It is mentioned in Quran that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ مُحَمَّدٌ أَبَآ أَحَدٍ مِّن رِّجَالِكُمْ وَلَكِن رَّسُولَ
اللَّهِ وَخَاتَمَ النَّبِيِّينَ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ بِكُلِ‏ّ شَىْ‏ءٍ
عَلِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the Apostle
of Allah and the Last of the prophets; and Allah is cognizant of all
things.” (33:40)***

If the Arabic word of KH-T-M is recited with vowel ‘I’ on ‘T”, as some
reciters have done this, it would imply one who ends something; thus it
clearly shows that The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) is the last of the
prophets. But if it is recited with the vowel ‘A’ on ‘T’ it denotes a
thing with which something ends. Ring and seal are also called as such,
because they are placed at the end of a letter and indicate the end of
it. According to the second possibility also, it is concluded from the
verse that the Holy Prophet (S) is the last prophet, because he is
introduced as a seal, which has come at the end of the letter of
prophethood.

Therefore, no other prophet is to appear after him. Thus the finality of
the Prophet of Islam is nicely concluded from the above verse as the
Muslims of the early period of Islam also understood it in this meaning
and did not have any doubt in the finality of the prophethood of His
Eminence.

Other verses also exist in this regard, but there is no need to mention
them here.

A large number of traditions also exist with regard to finality of
prophethood and some of them are mentioned below:

Saad Ibn Abi Waqqas has narrated from his father that the Messenger of
Allah (S) said to Imam Ali (a.s.):

You are to me as Harun was to Musa (a.s.), except that there is no
prophet after me.[^1]

The above tradition is known as “the tradition of position” (Hadith
Manzila) and is recorded in Shia and Sunni books through various
channels and it proves that no other prophet is to come after the
Prophet of Islam.

It is narrated from Abu Huraira that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: I have been sent for all the people of
the world and prophethood has ended with me.[^2] Abu Amama has narrated
from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said:

O people, no prophet is to come after me and there is no nation (Ummah)
after you. So worship Allah, perform the five daily ritual prayers,
observe the fasts of the month of Ramadan, perform the Hajj of Kaaba and
pay the Zakat of your wealth, so that your selves are purified. Also
obey the ones who are vested with authority among you so that you may
enter Paradise.[^3]

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

Almighty Allah sent the Holy Prophet (S) at a time when no prophet
existed on the earth and there was a time gap between them and discord
had developed among the people. Thus by sending him, He ended
prophethood and revelation came to an end.[^4]

It is concluded from his tradition and others like it that The Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S) is the seal of prophets and that after him no other
prophet came and nor any prophet is going to come. It was also stated
previously that the Prophet of Islam, at the beginning of his mission,
introduced himself as the seal of prophets and all those who accepted
his prophethood they also accepted the finality of his prophethood.
Therefore no separate evidence is required to prove the finality of the
Prophet of Islam.

Question: What is the reason of the finality of prophethood? If people
are in need of a prophet and heavenly commands, this need existed at all
times and still exists. And if after the advent of Prophet of Islam this
need does not exist anymore, with regard to the past prophets also the
same possibility was there. Why one of them were not considered as the
seal of the prophets?

Reply: Some points are mentioned below:

1. Religion is a reality and a way and all heavenly religions are same
in that regard. Principles of religion are explained in brief as
follows:

First: Faith in God and His recognition. Second: Faith in resurrection
and life after death and the rewards and punishments of the hereafter.
Third: Faith in prophets. Fourth: Moral, worship and social duties and
responsibilities of human beings.

All the prophets and all heavenly religions are similar in this regard
and they called their followers to the same principles.

2. Although heavenly religions are similar in principles and
generalities, they are not same on an equal level; on the contrary from
the aspect of depth of religious cognition and intellectual matters, in
social rules and regulations, in the condition and kind of worship
rituals etc. they are very much different from each other. Religions
have gradually developed and spread through the ages. The mentioned
differences are effects of intellectual maturity and the level of
knowledge of the people and the changes and transformations that
occurred in the life of human beings.

Learning and intellectual capacity of the ancient people was definitely
not at the level of the present man. And from the aspect of individual
and social life also, the ancient man was in no way like the man of
today. Religious knowledge, laws of faith and other matters were also
sent by Almighty God to man through the channel of prophets in
accordance to the capability of man and they spoke to people according
their intellectual level. Therefore the Prophet of Islam (S) said:

We prophets have been commanded to speak to people in accordance with
their intellectual level.[^5]

Prophets through the ages, like loving parents held the hands of the
people with determination and took them through development step by step
till they reached the present level. Therefore as much man gained
intellectual maturity as much advanced religious concepts were presented
to him. And in the same way, if they were in need of more advanced rules
and regulations they were given as much advanced rules and regulations.

Such advancement continued through the ages under the supervision and
efforts of prophets till the time that the intellect and capacity of man
reached to a level that he could understand the most complex religious
concepts and knowledge; with this aim the Prophet of Islam was sent, so
that he may remove this need of man.

The Holy Quran through the Prophet of Islam was revealed for the people
so that it may convey to them the loftiest religious cognitions and
realities and not only for the people of that time; on the contrary, the
intellectuals of every age could benefit from it and they would never
become old.

The Holy Quran and the life history of the Prophet of Islam are two
religious and scientific heritages that are handed over to Muslims.

3. The Holy Prophet (S) also made another arrangement to protect the
knowledge of prophethood, laws of Islam and their application and that
was through the appointment of Imam. The Prophet of Islam, by the order
of Almighty Allah introduced the infallible Imams as reliable points of
reference in intellectual and religious matters and Quranic sciences and
considered their statements and manners as the final proof.

Therefore in this way also he entrusted the Muslims with numerous
traditions to guarantee the fulfillment of their needs.

4. Permission to deduce laws of Shariah from the Holy Quran, traditions
and life history of Infallibles (a.s.) as well as the application of
reason. Intellectuals and Islamic scholars in addition to the Holy Quran
have at their disposal another great treasure, which are traditions
through whom they can solve all the religious problems of man. In the
same way is deductions based on the valuable sources of Islam and
fulfillment of different needs of man throughout the changing times.

5. People of the time of the Prophet of Islam from the aspect of
intellect had reached such a level that they were eligible to have been
given the sciences of prophethood fully and that they can make efforts
to protect and propagate them.

Muslims of the early period of Islam possessed this capability that they
can protect their heavenly scripture and guard its writing from
interpolation and forgery and preserve it for the future generations. In
the same way, they had such intellectual maturity and possibilities that
they acquired hundreds of thousands of traditions regarding various
topics from the Holy Prophet (S) and the Infallible Imams (a.s.) and
guarded them in all circumstances.

Therefore it was at such a special time having so many possibilities,
that the Prophet of Islam was appointed as a prophet. He brought the
Quran and he conveyed to the people the most advanced religious concepts
and laws. He perfected the religion through Imamate and introduced the
infallible Imams as guardians of faith and those who were to continue
his path. With this program, the Islamic Ummah became self-sufficient
and it never became needful of a new prophet.

This is the philosophy of the finality of prophethood, but such
possibilities were not available for the past prophets and nations.

Permanence of the Laws Of Islam And The Changing Life Of Man
------------------------------------------------------------

Previously it was proved that the Prophet of Islam was the seal of the
prophets and after him no other prophet is to come. At this point, it is
possible that someone may pose frivolous objection and say: You consider
laws of Islam as solution of all problems at all times, whereas the fact
is that circumstances of man are always changing and new occurrences
appear requiring new laws of religion. On other words, how can you
justify the permanence of the laws of religion when the needs of life
continue to change all the time?

How can the laws and rules of Islam, which were revealed 1420 years ago
and were suitable for the life of the people of Arabian Peninsula, suit
the developed life of the man of today? Therefore the complex and
difficult life of today needs more advanced laws and rules. If man is in
need of heavenly laws, it would have been better if there had been a new
prophet in every age, so that he may bring a more perfect law as per the
new needs.

In reply to this objection, it can be said that the needs of the life of
man, which were the aim behind devising of laws and rules have two
aspects: Permanence and change: The permanent aspect is from the
creation and human nature and which originates from his natural
instincts and talents and all men at all times and places are similar in
this matter. For example, all human beings require nourishment, water,
clothes and a shelter. In fact these natural needs are applicable to all
human beings even though there might be great difference between them.

As a result of this need man requires different types of exchanges like:
buying and selling, rentals, liens and other transactions. Since human
beings live in a society, they are needful of the help and cooperation
of each other and even the civilized society is needful of right and
perfect laws so that their application may guarantee the rights of all
and that it may prevent oppression and excess.

Laws related to laborers and employers, ownership and its limits, sale
and purchase, rent, pledges, justice and testimony, penalties, blood
monies and retaliation etc. are shaped from these same natural needs.

Expression of sexual instincts also is a natural need and all human
beings are needful of it. It is the same natural need, which has brought
marriage and divorce into existence and which is the cause of
legislation of laws related to matrimony and mutual rights between
spouses, and between parents and children.

That is why the laws, which have come in the religious law of Islam, and
which follow the natural instincts and needs of man, are all permanent
and perpetual and they cannot have any problem with the finality of
prophethood of the Holy Prophet (S).

With regard to the changing needs of man it can be said that with
attention to the changing conditions of the world and ever-increasing
scientific and technological development, inventions of various tools
and gadgets of daily use, there will be suitable solutions and fresh
laws as religion is answerable for them and the holy religious law of
Islam saw two ways to solve this problem:

First method: Jurisprudence (Ijtihad): It was stated previously that
Islam is a valuable heritage of knowledge, religious cognition and laws
based on Quran and traditions that is left for Muslims. If the Islamic
jurisprudents with attention to the demands of every age contemplate and
research the sources of Islam, they can derive the appropriate solutions
of the new problems and convey them to the people and may take the
Islamic society on the path of progress along with different advanced
societies of the world.

The Islamic scholar should be aware of present conditions and place and
well versed with modern needs of the great human society; he should also
be having a wide view of the world and must be broad minded; he should
be able to find out the solution of new difficult problems from
self-sufficient religious sources of Islam and convey them to Muslims.
And in this way he proves to the world that laws of Islam can be
implemented in every time and place and they can guarantee the success
of the world and the hereafter of its followers.

Second method – discretions of the jurist: It is automatically proved
that governance is only according to rules and regulations of Islam. A
large part of rules and regulations of Shariah are related to
administration of society and political and social matters and their
enforcement, without the existence of a religious, committed and expert
ruler is not possible.

Muslim leaders have the responsibility to administer the Islamic
government under the limits of the laws of Shariah and by complete
application of the laws of Islam they can take it ahead of injustice and
moral and social corruption and maintain Islamic justice. For governance
of Islamic jurist it is a duty that he should make these arrangements in
all conditions and times.

Although some Islamic laws are devised with this same aim and by
applying them perfectly this aim can be achieved, but the jurist ruler
sometimes has to face extraordinary and difficult circumstances in
administering the territories of Islam as their solution requires
authorities and special qualities and such discretions have been devised
with foresight for Muslim rulers.

The Muslim ruler has permission to protect the principles and general
sources of Islam and in observing the exigencies of Islamic nation, to
frame rules and regulations and to use them in administration of the
country. Such rules and regulations are called as the rules of
governance.

The Holy Prophet (S) was having this power and he used them. After him
the same powers are given to the Infallible Imams (a.s.). Especially it
is the same law that Muslims are obliged to follow as per the orders of
the Prophet and the Holy Imams (a.s.) who are mentioned as “those vested
with authority” (Ulil Amr).

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِى الْأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you…” (4:59)***

According to a large number of traditions narrated in our sources, the
responsibility of governance during the period of the occultation of the
Infallible Imam is given to the just religious scholar who has
determination and is also well versed in administration and political
affairs. Such a jurist is introduced as an expert on human psychology
and who can take over the function of a leader and guardianship of
Muslim affairs.

Master of affairs of Muslims also in administration of Islamic countries
is having special powers of the Infallible Imams (a.s.) and he uses his
powers in administration of the country.

That is why an Islamic government under no circumstances, in emergency
of shortage, applies necessary rules and regulations, because in order
to solve political difficulties it either depends on jurisprudential
derivations (Ijtihaadaat) of the jurists who are conversant with the
current situation or uses its own special powers.

From that which is mentioned above, it is known that rules and
regulations of Islam can be everlasting and assure the success of man in
the world and the hereafter. That is why there is no doubt in the
finality of prophethood of the Prophet of Islam.

Why the Sending of Legislative Prophets Ended?
----------------------------------------------

It is possible that someone may raise other petty objections and say:
since we have accepted that after the advent of the Prophet of Islam we
do not have need of legislative prophets, we don’t accept that there is
no more need for missionary prophets also. The past prophets were of two
types: some were owners of a separate Shariah (Ulul Azm) and there were
some who only propagated the religion of these Ulul Azm prophets, which
was very effective and beneficial in the guidance of people. After the
Prophet of Islam also the existence of such prophets would have been
definitely beneficial; thus why were they not continued?

In reply, it can be said that the sending of prophets is there to
exhaust the argument under necessary circumstances. After the Prophet of
Islam such a need did not exist anymore, because man by that time had
matured in practical and theoretical intellect and knowledge and thus he
was now capable of guarding and propagating his religious and
intellectual heritage. Hence at that time religion was perfected and
became needless of a missionary.

Almighty Allah says in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ وَأَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ
نِعْمَتِى وَ رَضِيتُ‏لَكُمُ الْإِسْلَمَ دِيناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This day have those who disbelieve despaired of your religion, so
fear them not, and fear Me. This day have I perfected for you your
religion and completed My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a
religion…” (5:3)***

Islam has given the responsibility of guarding and propagating faith to
three groups of persons:

First: The Infallible Imam: Shia believe that after the Prophet of Islam
(S), the responsibility of guarding and propagating religion and
administration of Islamic nation is entrusted to the Infallible Imam.
During his lifetime, the Messenger of Allah (S) appointed Imam Ali
(a.s.) for this purpose and entrusted to him the necessary information
so that after him he may guard and promote the religion of Islam.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) also during his lifetime, fulfilled his duty and
as far as possible tried to defend religion and lead the nation and at
the time of his passing away appointed Imam Hasan (a.s.) in his place
and transferred the necessary information to him. After Imam Hasan
(a.s.), Imam Husain (a.s.) succeeded to Imamate and in this way every
Imam specified the next Imam. This continued till the time of Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.) in 255 A.H.

As a result of the efforts and struggles of the Infallible Imams (a.s.),
hundreds of thousands of sayings regarding various subjects were
bestowed to Muslims which remained for future generations and due to the
efforts of the Holy Imams (a.s.) thousands of intellectuals, Islamic
scholars and missionaries were trained.

The Eleventh Imam also, at the time of his passing away, appointed his
son, Hujjat Ibnul Hasan (a.s.) as the Imam in his place and transferred
to him the responsibility of protecting religion. The Twelfth Imam is in
occultation from that time till the present day and he is fulfilling his
duties in other ways, although every moment he is in anticipation of the
day when people would be fully ready for his Islamic revolution and the
rule of absolute justice and equity. At that time, he would spread Islam
to all corners of the world with a universal revolution and fill the
earth with justice and equity like it would have been filled with
injustice and oppression.

From what is mentioned above, it can be concluded that by the
legislation of the post of Imamate, there is no need of sending
missionary prophets who may propagate Islam, because this responsibility
is given over to the Infallible Imams.

Second: Jurists and scholars of religion: During the period of
Infallibles (a.s.) many intellectuals and scholars acquired knowledge of
Islamic laws and sciences and became ready to propagate them. The
Prophet of Islam (S) and Holy Imams (a.s.) made great efforts to nurture
such persons.

Regarding this, we have a large number of traditions and some of them
are mentioned below:

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

Scholars are the heirs of the prophets. Prophets do not leave behind any
material wealth; on the contrary, they leave traditions in inheritance.
Thus anyone who takes something from those traditions earns a great
advantage. Take care from whom you obtain your knowledge. Among us Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.) in every generation there exist just persons who refrain
from distortion of the extremists, deviation of the misguided and
interpretation of the ignorant.[^6]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

The scholars of my Ummah are like the prophets of Bani Israel.[^7]

In the same way, he said:

May Allah have mercy on my successors. He was asked: O Messenger of
Allah (S), who are your successors? He replied: One who revives my
practice and reminds people about it.[^8]

He also said:

The simile of the scholars on the earth is the simile of the stars on
the sky as people seek directions through them in darkness in land and
seas and if they disappear it is feared that those who are guided by
them would be lost.[^9]

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S) that
he said:

On Judgment Day, the ink of the scholars will weighed against the blood
of martyrs and the ink of the scholars will be found to be superior to
the blood of martyrs.[^10]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

For one who dies while being in pursuit of knowledge aimed at revival of
Islam, there is only a difference of one stage between him and the
prophets.[^11]

It can be concluded from these and similar traditions that the Holy
Prophet (S) has placed the responsibility of guiding the people upon the
religious scholars. In such a case there is no need of sending
missionary prophets.

Third: Human Intellect: One of the important aims of the prophets was
nurturing and perfection of intellects. The past prophets played a very
important role in this regard. Human intellects were gradually perfected
through the ages through the efforts of prophets till they reached
absolute maturity during the time of the Prophet of Islam (S).

The Prophet of Islam (S) also had a special quality with regard to
development and perfection of human intellect. He advised people that
they should use their intellects and be inquisitive to discover
realities and understand facts and that they should discriminate between
truth and falsehood through contemplation and should only accept the
truth.

In numerous verses, the Holy Quran had encouraged people to use
intellect and contemplation. In books of traditions also there are a
large number of traditions that praise intelligence and advise people to
gain knowledge and intelligence. The Prophet of Islam (S) and the Holy
Imams (a.s.) have mentioned the intellect to be a guide and a religious
evidence in identification of intellectual subjects and problems and
have asked them to use their intellect to identify the realities and to
follow them.

It can thus be concluded that after the advent of the Prophet of Islam
(S) there is no need of sending missionary prophets and that is why we
can say that Prophet of Islam (S) is the seal of the prophets and that
prophethood has ended with him.

[^1]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. 4, Pg. 1870.

[^2]: At-Tabaqatul Kubra, Vol. 1, Pg. 192.

[^3]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 1, Pg. 23.

[^4]: Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 129.

[^5]: Tohufful Uqul, Pg. 36.

[^6]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 32.

[^7]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 2, Pg. 21.

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 2, Pg. 25.

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 2, Pg. 25.

[^10]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 2, Pg. 16.

[^11]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 1, Pg. 184.


