Prophet Muhammad (S) before being conferred the office of prophethood
=====================================================================

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) was born on 17th Rabiul Awwal in the year
570 A.D. in Mecca.[^1]

His father was Abdullah and mother, Amina. His father passed away before
his birth and was buried in Medina. The Prophet came under the care of
his grandfather, Abdul Muttalib. Abdul Muttalib was a Quraish elder and
was very fond of Muhammad. Regarding him, he said: My son, Muhammad is
having a bright future.[^2]

At the age of five years The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) also lost his
mother, Amina and when he was hardly nine his grandfather, Abdul
Muttalib also departed for his heavenly abode. After the passing away of
Abdul Muttalib, his son, Abu Talib took over the responsibility of his
upbringing and care. This kind uncle cared for Muhammad like a real
father.

The Holy Prophet Muhammad, at the age of twenty-five years married
Khadija bint Khuwaylid, a noble and chaste lady of Quraish. She gave
birth to two sons, but they passed away a short time after birth. She
also had four daughters named: Zaynab, Ruqayyah, Ummu Kulthum and
Fatima.

It is learnt from history that The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) during his
childhood and youth was better than others of his age and it was
realized that he had an extraordinary personality.

Abu Talib says the following with regard to him:

When a part of the night had passed, I heard amazing statements from
Muhammad (S). He mentioned the name of God when he drank water or ate
his dinner. When he began eating, I heard from Muhammad: In the name of
Allah, the One. After eating, he remarked: Praise be to Allah in excess.
I was amazed at these acts. Sometimes, I came upon him suddenly and saw
effulgence over his head which continued up to the heavens. I never
heard any falsehood from Muhammad and he never committed any act of the
age of Ignorance. I never saw him laughing for no reason or playing with
children; he was never attracted to them. He liked solitude and
humility.[^3]

Ibn Abbas says: In the morning, when the sons of Abu Talib awoke from
sleep their eyes used to be dirty and sticky, but the eyes of Muhammad
used to be absolutely clean. In the morning, Abu Talib provided
breakfast to the children; they attacked the food competing with each
other but Muhammad did not take part in this. When Abu Talib noticed
this, he gave him food separately.[^4]

Abul Fida writes:

The Messenger of Allah (S) grew up under the care of Abu Talib. Almighty
Allah guarded him from committing the acts of the period of Ignorance
and other evil deeds, because He wanted to exalt his status so that he
may come out as the most excellent among his relatives with regard to
greatness, good nature, observance of manners of society, kindness to
neighbors, forbearance, trustworthiness and truthfulness. He never
committed any vile deed and did not cause harm to anyone. He never
entered into arguments and fights. All the praiseworthy qualities had
gathered in him in such a way that he was given the title of ‘Muhammad
Amin’.[^5]

Abul Fida writes:

In the beginning of revelation, the Holy Prophet (S) returned home
terrified and told his wife, Khadija: I am fearful about my own self.
Khadija comforted him saying: Glad tidings be to you that Almighty Allah
will not degrade you in any way. Because you are good to relatives; you
are truthful and share the difficulties of people; you help the poor and
are hospitable and you assist others in worldly matters.[^6]

Anas ibn Malik says:

Before prophethood, The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) earned the title of
Trustworthy (Amin) among the people as people had recognized his honesty
and justice.

Rabi ibn Khaitham says: During the period of Ignorance, people used to
refer to The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) in their disputes. Nadhr ibn
Harith told Quraish: When Muhammad (S) was a child you considered him
better than you with regard to truthfulness and honesty, but when he has
matured and is sent to you as the prophet of God, you allege that he is
a sorcerer. No, by Allah, he is not a magician.[^7]

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) was twenty years of age when he took part
in Hilful Fuzool – that is the oath of the valiant. Some well intending
Arab gentlemen had devised this committee to protect the rights of
oppressed and this was finalized at the house of Abdullah ibn Judan.
They took oath that as long as they were alive, they would protect those
who were oppressed and recover their rights from the usurpers. The Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S) said with regard to this:

I was present at the oath, which was taken in the house of Abdullah ibn
Judan; and I would not like to be given red-haired camels in exchange
for it; and even though Islam is established, if I am still called to
it, I would respond.[^8]

From such historical evidences, it can be concluded that The Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S), before declaration of prophethood was well known
for his nice behavior, honesty, truthfulness, forbearance, justice,
harmlessness and chastity.

As a result of this same fine behavior, people accepted his claim of
prophethood and brought faith upon him.

Religion of Muhammad (S) before being vested with the office of prophethood
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The question which arises at this juncture is that whether The Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S) believed in religion and Shariah before being
vested with the office of prophethood? And if he had faith; which
religion did he follow?

Before that it is necessary to mention that regretfully we don’t have
anything in history and Islamic sources which can clearly oppose this
matter, but it is possible to mention some points as historical
evidences. For example, Abul Fida writes:

It was the practice of the Messenger of Allah (S) that one month every
year he used to go the Cave of Hira and engage in worship there. Quraish
also performed this act during the period of Ignorance. They gave food
to every mendicant who came to their town. After the worship rituals,
before entering his house, he used to circumambulate the Kaaba.[^9]

Ghyath ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

The Holy Prophet, after coming to Medina performed the Hajj only once.
But he performed the Hajj rituals in Mecca along with his relatives a
number of times.[^10]

It is also mentioned that Muhammad (S) prayed the ritual prayer at the
age of four years.[^11]

His uncle, Abu Talib also described the childhood of Muhammad in the
same way: He recited ‘In the name of Allah’, before dinner and uttered
‘praise be to Allah’ after it.[^12]

From such descriptions that are mentioned about His Eminence, it can be
concluded that before being vested with the office of prophethood, he
used to perform worship rituals, perform the ritual prayer and spend a
month every year at the cave of Hira; he performed the rituals of Hajj,
circumambulated the Kaaba and recited ‘In the name of Allah’ before
eating; thus it can be seen that he was a religious person, who observed
worship rituals diligently.

Moreover, in the discussion of infallibility, it was proved that
prophets are immune from infidelity, polytheism and sins, throughout
their lives. Hence it should be said that the Prophet of Islam also
before his being vested with the office of prophethood was religious,
because infidelity and polytheism are not compatible with his
infallibility.

Quran has also absolutely negated deviation and infidelity for the Holy
Prophet (S) even before he was vested with the office of prophethood. It
even says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالنَّجْمِ إِذَا هَوَى‏ / مَا ضَلَّ صَاحِبُكُمْ وَمَا غَوَى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I swear by the star when it goes down. Your companion does not err,
nor does he go astray…” (53:1-2)***

Therefore there cannot be doubt about the religiosity of Muhammad before
his being vested with the office of prophethood.

After accepting his original religiosity now the question arises that
which religion was he following? Here a number of possibilities exist:

First possibility: He either followed the Shariah of Prophet Musa or
Prophet Isa (a.s.), since only these two heavenly religions existed in
the world and it was necessary for all to follow them. Thus Prophet
Muhammad (S) also before being vested with prophethood must have
followed one of these faiths.

But this possibility is invalid; because if he had been a Jew or a
Christian he would also have taken part in the rituals of their faith
and would have socialized with them; and this would have been recorded
in history; whereas such a thing is neither recorded in history nor the
Jews and Christians have claimed this.

Thus as you know from before, The Holy Prophet Muhammad believed in
rituals and worships which are from other than these two religions; like
Hajj, circumambulating the Kaaba, ritual prayer and Etekaf (seclusion)
in the Cave of Hira. On the basis of this, it can be concluded that he
was neither a Jew nor a Christian before his being vested with
prophethood.

Second possibility: That he was a follower of the Shariah of Prophet
Ibrahim (a.s.). In explanation of this point, it can be said that
Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) laid the foundation of monotheism and God worship
in Hijaz. His Shariah became famous in that area as Hanifiyya and it
spread among the people there. His son, Ismail also propagated that
Shariah. Arabs of that area, who were most probably descendants of
Prophet Ismail (a.s.) accepted the Shariah of their ancestor, Prophet
Ibrahim (a.s.) and they preserved it.

For a long time, the religion of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) was the
predominant religion of the people of Arabian Peninsula, but due to the
passage of time, laws, rules and worship rituals of that Hanif faith
were gradually forgotten and neglected and except for some special
rituals like Hajj, stay at Arafat, Mashar and Mina, animal sacrifice,
stoning of satans, circling the Kaaba, trotting between Safa and Marwa
and some other rituals.

On the contrary, by the passage of time polytheism dominated the beliefs
of the people and through wrong justification they considered some
things and persons as associates of God, and worshipped them. In spite
of these deviations, they considered themselves as the followers of the
religion of Ibrahim (a.s.).

Although there were some among them who were displeased with the present
situation and they realized the loss of the essence of the religion of
Ibrahim (a.s.) and of having fallen into deviation and sometimes they
even went so far as to adopt the laws and customs of religious worship
of the upright faith and purify them from nonsense. The following
historical examples prove this point:

Ibn Hisham writes:

On one of the festivals, when Quraish used to gather around an idol and
with absolute sincerity offer sacrifice to it four persons separated
from them, receded into a corner and spoke among themselves: We take
oath that we would keep our faith concealed from others. Those four were
as follows: Waraqa ibn Naufal, Abdullah ibn Jahash, Uthman ibn Huwairath
and Zaid ibn Umar. They said: By Allah, you know that your people do not
follow the right faith. They have adopted the wrong version of the faith
of your ancestor, Ibrahim (a.s.). What is the stone that they go around?
This idol neither hears nor sees, nor causes any harm or benefit. My
people! Select the right faith for yourself. After that they dispersed
in the land to revive the religion of Ibrahim (a.s.).[^13]

He also writes:

Zaid ibn Umar waited; came out of the religion of his relatives but he
did not join the religion of Jews and Christians. He kept away from idol
worship, abstained from carrion, blood and animals sacrificed to the
idols. He prohibited the killing of the child and said: I worship only
the God of Ibrahim (a.s.). Thus he condemned the religion of his
people.[^14]

It can be concluded from such reports that the ancestors of the Prophet
also followed the religion of Ibrahim (a.s.).

Asbagh ibn Nubatah says that he heard Amirul Momineen (a.s.) say:

By Allah, the father and grandfather of Abu Talib, and Hashim and Abd
Manaf never worshipped idols. He was asked: Then how did they worship?
He replied: They acted on the religion of Ibrahim (a.s.) and prayed
facing the Holy Kaaba.[^15]

On the basis of this, it can be realized that The Holy Prophet Muhammad
(S) followed the religion and Shariah of Ibrahim (a.s.) before his
prophethood. He was a monotheist and he opposed polytheism and idol
worship. He prayed the ritual prayer and performed the rituals of Hajj,
which are in fact the rituals of the religion of Ibrahim (a.s.). He was
fond of seclusion and remembrance of God and observed good manners and
morals.

It can be concluded from some traditional reports that The Holy Prophet
Muhammad (S), even before his ministry, was always having divine help in
recognizing the best morals and its demands.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says with regard to this:

From the time of his weaning, Allah had put a mighty angel with him to
take him along the path of high character and good behavior through day
and night.[^16]

Allamah Majlisi has written with regard to this:

It is narrated that some companions of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) asked
him about the interpretation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا مَنِ ارْتَضَى‏ مِن رَّسُولٍ فَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِن بَيْنِ
يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ رَصَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Except to him whom He chooses as an apostle; for surely He makes a
guard to march before him and after him.” (72:27)***

The Imam said:

Almighty Allah appoints angels on his prophets to guard them and help
them in propagating their message. He appointed a mighty angel since the
time of Muhammad’s infancy, to guard him and to guide him to good deeds
and praiseworthy morals and to restrain him from evil. It was this angel
who said: Peace be on you, O Muhammad, Messenger of Allah (S) when he
was not even given the ministry, the Prophet thought that this
salutation was from stones and the earth; but no matter how much he
searched, he could not find anything.[^17]

[^1]: Will Durant, History of Civilization, Part I, Vol. 4, Pg. 197.

[^2]: Manaqib Ibne Shahr Ashob, Vol. 1, Pg. 61.

[^3]: Manaqib Ibne Shahr Ashob, Vol. 1, Pg. 63.

[^4]: Abul Fida, Seerat Nabuwwa, Vol. 1, Pg. 242.

[^5]: Abul Fida, Seerat Nabuwwa, Vol. 1, Pg. 249.

[^6]: Abul Fida, Seerat Nabuwwa, Vol. 1, Pg. 394.

[^7]: Uyunul Athar, Vol. 2, Pg. 334.

[^8]: Abul Fida, Seerat Nabuwwa, Vol. 1, Pg. 257-262.

[^9]: Abul Fida, Seerat Nabuwwa, Vol. 1, Pg. 390.

[^10]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 8, Pg. 88.

[^11]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 15, Pg. 361.

[^12]: Manaqib Ibne Shahr Ashob, Vol. 1, Pg. 63.

[^13]: Ibne Hisham, Seerat Nabawiyya, Vol. 1, Pg. 237.

[^14]: Ibne Hisham, Seerat Nabawiyya, Vol. 1, Pg. 239.

[^15]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 15, Pg. 144.

[^16]: Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 194.

[^17]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 15, Pg. 361.


