Ministry of the Holy Prophet
============================

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) was appointed as a prophet on 27th Rajab
in the year 610 A.D. at the age of forty years.[^1] It is mentioned in
history that before his appointment also, he often used to see signs in
his sleep and wakefulness; he saw Jibraeel and heard his voice; so much
so that he sometimes addressed him as the Messenger of Allah (S).

Bulazari writes:

When Almighty Allah wanted to exalt the status of Muhammad (S) and to
begin his prophethood, it so happened that he came out of the town to
answer the call of nature and retired into the passes and caves and he
did not pass a single tree, but that it greeted him saying: Peace be on
you, O Messenger of Allah (S). Thus His Eminence looked here and there
but could see no one.[^2]

Sometimes during sleep and wakefulness, he used to see a person who said
to him: Peace be on you, O Messenger of Allah (S). He asked him: Who are
you? He replied: I am Jibraeel. Allah has sent me so that I may select
you for prophethood. The Messenger of Allah (S) witnessed such
incidents, but he did not speak about them to anyone.[^3]

Sometimes he mentioned the matter to his wife, Khadija and she told him
that she was hopeful that it would be as such.[^4]

Bulazari writes:

The first stage of revelation was a true dream. He never dreamed except
that it was clear to him like daylight. Thus he became inclined to
seclusion and retired to Hira Cave and remained there in seclusion,
worshipping his God. He stayed there in Etekaf for some nights. After
that he came back to Khadija and continued to lead his family life. Till
the time that in the Cave of Hira, he realized the truth and Jibraeel
spoke to him.[^5]

The life history of the Messenger of Allah (S) was such that every year
for a period of at least one month, he remained in the cave of Hira
engrossed in worship.[^6]

Ubaid ibn Umair says:

The Messenger of Allah (S) retired to the cave of Hira for a month every
year and remained there engrossed in worship. During those days he fed
the poor. When the period of his stay was over he returned to Mecca and
before entering his house circled the Kaaba seven or more times.[^7]

Hira is a tall mountain to the north of Mecca having elevations towards
Mina. Previously it was at a distance of one Farsakh from the city, but
today the city has expanded to reach within the vicinity of this
mountain. At the center of this mountain there is a cave having the
capacity to house three persons and this cave is called as the Cave of
Hira. It is the place of Etekaf and worship of Prophet Muhammad (S) and
the location of the descent of the angel of revelation. For months he
remained in sincere worship in this illuminated cave and day and night
was engrossed in the worship of the Lord of the worlds and spoke
confidentially to Him.

He sat on a rocky platform and spent hours in religious contemplation
and pondered on the amazing aspects of creation. He was amazed at the
stars that filled the beautiful sky of Mecca. He witnessed the beautiful
sunrise and sunset for this same place. He pondered on the amazing
aspects of human body, trees, vegetation, animals, mountains and plains,
oceans and the turbulent waves and prostrated before the greatness and
might of the God creator of the universe.

Sometimes he felt sorry for the ignorance of people in leaving the
creator of the world and taking up the worship of idols having no
specialty.

At other times he thought about the oppression of nobles and rich and
oppression of the deprived and troubles and he searched for its
solution. When he was aggrieved from all sides, he turned to Almighty
Allah and spoke to Him from the depths of his heart and sought His help
in solving the religious and social problems of man.

When the month of Etekaf came to an end, he returned to Mecca with a
satisfied and illuminated heart and a heart filled with contentment and
hope and after circling the Kaaba went home and continues living a
normal life.

The life of the Prophet of Islam till the age of forty passed in this
way and after that came the time of his ministry.

When the Messenger of Allah (S) was forty years of age, as per his
habit, he retired to the Cave of Hira for contemplation and worship.
This year he chose the month of Rajab for Etekaf. Contemplation and
worship of His Eminence, in this year was more and deeper than that of
the previous years. He prolonged his prostrations further and adopted
more sincerity in speaking to Almighty Allah directly; similarly his
contemplation was also deeper as if he was having completely different
surroundings. His religious emotion was charged and his being had become
illuminated with effulgence of his future ministry pulling him towards
the heights of ethereal luminosity.

Days and nights of Rajab passed in this way and along with it more
intense spiritual emotions overtook him and the soul of Prophet Muhammad
(S) became more and more prepared to establish a connection with the
unseen world and to receive divine revelations.

The 27th of Rajab arrived and The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) was immersed
in contemplation, when Jibraeel came down and announced: You are the
Messenger of Allah and you have been appointed to convey the message of
God.[^8]

Imam Hadi (a.s.) has recounted the incident of revelation as follows:

When the Messenger of Allah (S) returned from trade in Syria he
distributed all that he had earned on the way among the poor and needy.
He went to the cave of Hira every day and climbed its summit and saw the
signs of divine mercy and amazing wisdom of God. He looked at the earth
and the sky, the seas and wilderness and gained lessons from them. He
worshipped Almighty Allah as He deserves to be worshipped.

When he reached the age of forty, Almighty Allah made his heart as the
best and most obedient and humble of all the hearts; thus the doors of
heavens opened for him so that he may see them. He permitted the angels
to descend and Muhammad (S) looked at them. He sent down His mercy and
it surrounded everything from the Throne to the head of Muhammad. He saw
Jibraeel (the trustworthy spirit) come down to him in a halo of light.
Jibraeel held the arm of the Prophet and pressed it saying: O Muhammad,
read. He asked: What should I read? Jibraeel said: O Muhammad,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إقْرَأْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الَّذِى خَلَقَ / خَلَقَ الْإِنسَانَ مِن عَلَقٍ
/ اقْرَأْ وَ رَبُّكَ الْأَكْرَمُ / الَّذِى عَلَّمَ بِالْقَلَمِ /
عَلَّمَ الْإِنسَانَ مَا لَمْ يَعْلَمْ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Read in the name of your Lord Who created. He created man from a
clot. Read and your Lord is Most Honorable, Who taught (to write) with
the pen Taught man what he knew not.” (96:1-5)***

At that moment Jibraeel revealed to Muhammad (S) what he had brought
from Almighty Allah and returned to the heavens.

Muhammad (S) came down from Mount Hira while as a result of witnessing
the majesty of God he was in a trance-like condition. Seeing Jibraeel
and bearing the divine revelation weighed so much on Muhammad (S) that
he shook like a feverish person. He was in fact fearful of the fact that
Quraish would refute him and allege that he was insane. Whereas the
truth was that he was the most sensible and the most honored of the
people there. He was absolutely aloof of the Satan and the words and
deeds of insane persons.

Thus Almighty Allah intended to expand his breast and give peace to him.
Therefore the mountains, rocks, pebbles on which he walked, all saluted
him and said: Peace be on you, O Muhammad, Peace be on you, O the saint
of Allah, Peace be on you, O Messenger of Allah (S). Glad tidings be to
you that God has given you excellence and elegance and exalted you over
all the past and future men. Do not be aggrieved that Quraish would
label you as a madman, because one who is given excellence by Allah is
the one who is excellent in the real sense and one whom Allah has made
noble is the one who is noble in the real sense. Do not be discouraged
by the condemnation of Quraish and evil among the Arabs, Allah would
soon convey you to the loftiest position and the most honored rank.[^9]

On seeing Jibraeel and on receiving revelation, the complete being of
The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) became illuminated by a powerful faith and
a confident conscience and he returned home from mount Hira.

Ibn Shahr Ashob writes:

Muhammad (S) came home and the house was illuminated with his
effulgence. His wife, Khadija was amazed and she asked: What effulgence
is this? The Holy Prophet (S) replied: It is the effulgence of
prophethood. Say: I testify that there is no god, except Allah; Muhammad
is the messenger of Allah. Khadija asked: I have been aware of this
since a long time and she embraced Islam at that time.[^10]

There is difference of opinion among scholars with regard to the matter
that which was the first chapter to be revealed on the Messenger of
Allah (S). Most historians consider Surah Alaq to be the first in this
regard and the same point is mentioned in some traditions.

Ali ibn Sirri has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

The first chapter to be revealed on the Messenger of Allah (S) was this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إقْرَأْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الَّذِى خَلَقَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. Read in the name
of your Lord…” (96:1)***

And the last chapter was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا جَآءَ نَصْرُ اللَّهِ وَالْفَتْحُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When there comes the help of Allah…” (110:1)***[^11]

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 18, Pg. 189.

[^2]: Ansabul Ashraf, Vol. 1, Pg. 104.

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 18, Pg. 184.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 18, Pg. 194.

[^5]: Ansabul Ashraf, Vol. 1, Pg. 105.

[^6]: Seerat Ibne Hisham, Vol. 1, Pg. 251.

[^7]: Seerat Ibne Hisham, Vol. 1, Pg. 252.

[^8]: Story of the beginning of ministry and the first time Jibraeel
came down is mentioned in books of history in different ways. Some of
them do not befit the position of prophethood. That is why in reporting
this extraordinary incident we have relied only on traditions of Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) as they were more knowledgeable than others.

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 18, Pg. 205.

[^10]: Manaqib Aale Abi Talib, Vol. 1, Pg. 72.

[^11]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 628.


