Need for Prophethood
====================

Almighty Allah has created man in the best of the forms and bestowed
perfections for him and He has placed in his being, inclination to
perfection and power of movement towards it. Man, in the course of his
life and to guarantee the real success is in need of a program and guide
and without them he cannot reach his aimed perfection. Man alone cannot
recognize the program of life and the path of success and he does not
know how to apply them. On the contrary, he is needful of the creator of
the world and His prophets. Thus we conclude that it is necessary for
the Almighty God to send prophets to guide mankind.

We shall study this subject under two topics:

**First topic**: Study of the need of man for a program of life and the
special qualities of a successful program:

**Second topic**: Recognition of the compiler of the perfect program.

We shall explain the first topic under a few headings:

1. In logical sciences, it is proved that man is a compound of a body
and a soul, from the aspect of the body, he is like other material
things and is subject to change and movement; and from the aspect of the
soul he is considered as a part of the abstract world. But in this very
condition, each of them is related to another. Since the soul of man is
related to a material body, and is not solely an abstract thing; it is
having possibility of movement and desire for perfection. In the
beginning, he is a weak being, which progresses gradually and becomes
more and more perfect; but in all the stages there is only one reality
and not more.

2. On one side, man is placed on path of perfection and by nature he is
desirous of perfection and on the other hand, he is equipped with the
power of acquiring perfection, therefore it is possible for him to reach
perfection; hence there is no vain act in the system of God’s creation.
Since every material being can reach its possible perfection, man is
also not deprived of this great divine bounty and he can reach his
desired perfection; on the contrary Almighty Allah has prepared for him
the way to achieve this.

3. Man is having two kinds of lives: one of them is the life of the
world, which is related to his body; and the other is the spiritual and
inward life, related to his soul. As a result of this in accordance with
each of these two lives, he will either have perfection and success or
decline and misfortune.

Man is busy in the life of the world and it is possible that he might be
become unmindful of his spiritual life, but he is also having a real
life in his inner being, which in the end will either take him to
salvation and perfection of humanity or lead him to an everlasting
decline and evil resort.

Therefore, correct beliefs, good manners and good deeds, are means for
perfection of soul and inner success, because false beliefs, bad habits
and improper behaviors make a man deviate from the straight path and
take him to the valley of destruction and evil.

If man is on the straight path of perfection, the essence of his being
gains maturity and after traversing stages of perfection to his real
condition, which is the condition of luminosity and happiness, he scales
them. But if he sacrifices the spiritual perfections, good ethics and
excellent character on the altar of sensual and animal desires or in
shape of beastly infatuations, he would become deviated from the
straight path of humanity and fall into the ravine of destruction and
evil.

4. Just as there is perfect unity and attachment between the body and
soul of man, there is also a relationship between the life of the world
and spiritual life. And it is not possible to separate the two of them
and make each of them independent entities.

Good or bad deeds and character of man, without any doubt will have good
or bad effect on his self; since the qualities and capacities have
effect on the howness of incidence of acts. The spiritual and inner life
of man is the source of his beliefs, character and acts. Without correct
faith and performance of good deeds, he cannot reach his intended stage
of perfection and spiritual success, just as without purification of
self it is not possible to reform ones acts and to gain perfect good
sense.

5. Man lives in the society and derives all kinds of benefits from it
and also passes on benefits to them. But there are instances when a
person may not pass on the benefit or may trespass on the rights of
others; and this would make life in society very difficult. That is why
human society is needful of a perfect, precise and comprehensive set of
laws so that it can guarantee the rights of people and prevent the
trespassing on the rights of others.

Therefore, since man is having two dimensions of existence (body and
soul) and two kinds of life, which have perfect relationship with each
other, he is in need of a program and course of action to gain success
in both his lives; which has the success of the world as well as
everlasting success in the hereafter; in such a way that it neither
sacrifices the life of the hereafter on the life of the world and
neither does it gives up the spiritual life for the comfort of the life
of this world.

It is such a program, which is compiled according to the actual needs of
man and which leads man on the path of success and salvation and not on
an imaginative and hypothetical perfection. A program, which is based on
human excellence and perfection and which calls the attention of man for
growth of his ethereal soul and inclines him to the position of divine
proximity and thus he begins to consider the world as the harvest field
of the hereafter. In compilation and arrangement of these laws, real
benefits of all human beings are kept in view and narrow mindedness,
improper prejudice and groupism are avoided. Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ اسْتَجِيبُواْ لِلَّهِ وَلِلرَّسُولِ
إِذَا دَعَاكُمْ لِمَا يُحْيِيكُمْ وَ اعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَحُولُ
بَيْنَ الْمَرْءِ وَ قَلْبِهِ وَ أَنَّهُ إِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! answer (the call of) Allah and His Apostle when
he calls you to that which gives you life; and know that Allah
intervenes between man and his heart, and that to Him you shall be
gathered.” (8:24)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأَيُّهَا النَّاسُ قَدْ جَآءَكُمْ بُرْهَنٌ مِنْ رَّبِّكُمْ
وَأَنْزَلْنَآ إِلَيْكُمْ نُوراً مُّبِيْناً \* فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ
ءامَنُواْ بِاللَّهِ وَاعْتَصَمُواْ بِهِ فَسَيُدْخِلُهُمْ فِى رَحْمَةٍ
مِّنْهُ وَفَضْلٍ وَيَهْدِيهِمْ إِلَيْهِ صِرَ طاً مُّسْتَقِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O people! surely there has come to you manifest proof from your Lord
and We have sent to you clear light. Then as for those who believe in
Allah and hold fast by Him, He will cause them to enter into His mercy
and grace and guide them to Himself on a right path.” (4:174-175)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ الْنَّاسُ أُمَّةً وَ حِدَةً فَبَعَثَ اللَّهُ الْنَّبِيِّينَ
مُبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنْذِرِينَ وَأَنْزَلَ مَعَهُمُ الْكِتَبَ بِالْحَقِّ
لِيَحْكُمَ بَيْنَ الْنَّاسِ فِيمَا اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ وَمَا اخْتَلَفَ
فِيهِ إِلّا الَّذِينَ أُوتُوهُ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا جَآءَتْهُمُ
الْبَيِّنَتُ بَغْياً بَيْنَهُمْ فَهَدَى اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا
لِمَا اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ مِنَ الْحَقِّ بِإِذْنِهِ وَاللَّهُ يَهْدِى
مَنْ يَشَاءُ إِلى‏ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(All) people are a single nation; so Allah raised prophets as
bearers of good news and as warners, and He revealed with them the Book
with truth, that it might judge between people in that in which they
differed; and none but the very people who were given it differed about
it after clear arguments had come to them, revolting among themselves;
so Allah has guided by His will those who believe to the truth about
which they differed and Allah guides whom He pleases to the right path.”
(2:213)***

Compilation of the Program of Success
-------------------------------------

After we have become aware of conditions and specialties of a perfect
program, the question arises that who is supposed to design and compile
this program? Whether all human beings or intellectuals, intelligent
beings or reformers are capable of designing such a program?

With a little thought we can conclude that the reply to this is a
decisive ‘no’, because:

Firstly: One who can occupy this post of designing such a program should
have real cognition of man and he should be aware of the secrets and
subtleties of the body and ethereal soul of man and he should also have
knowledge about the aims and inclinations and the positive and negative
points of man and the demands of time and space and occurrence of
hardships as also their laws and effects; while the fact is that such a
person cannot be found among human beings.

Secondly: Even if we suppose that human law makers can design such a
program for administration of worldly matters of human beings, without
any doubt, they do not have sufficient awareness about the secrets and
mysteries of the ethereal soul of man, and the ideal needs and spiritual
life, from the deep relationship between the life of the world and the
inner life and also from the perfection of soul and causes of the
decline of man. That is why man himself cannot to design for himself a
perfect and complete program of life, and basically control the
spiritual life of man with attention to the development of ethereal soul
of human beings, which is beyond the scope of lawmakers of humanity.

That is why man is not capable to frame laws to guarantee peace and
prosperity of his worldly life and to design a program to assure success
of his life in hereafter. Thus the only one who can design a perfect and
compatible program and entrust it to man, is God, creator of the world
and man, who is perfectly aware of makeup and being of man, secrets and
subtleties and who is well aware of all his needs, aspirations and
inclinations.

It is Him alone who is aware of the real perfections of man and well
knows the causes of the exaltation and decline of the soul. It is only
the wise God, who sees the world of human beings equally, and all the
human beings are His creatures. He loves all and is desirous of their
success and salvation. He is never selfish, narrow minded and
prejudiced.

Yes, it is only God who can lay down the program to guarantee success of
the body and soul and world and the hereafter of man and entrust it to
His chosen prophets. It is Him that His unlimited grace has caused the
performance of this action and has not deprived the people from this
great divine bounty. It is God, who has provided causes for the
perfection for different types of material beings so that they may be
able to through their actions and efforts to reach their intended aim.
The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبُّنَا الَّذِى أَعْطَى‏ كُلَّ شَىْ‏ءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its creation, then guided it
(to its goal).” (20:50)***

A God, who created man with this greatness and in creation of his body
and soul placed thousands of secrets and mysteries and appointed the
material world at his disposal; it is not possible that He should become
oblivious of his success, real perfection and actual aim of his
existence and that he should not give him the capability reach this aim.

Through this is proved the need of prophets and their message. Almighty
Allah, in order to convey His message to man, selected some persons from
among them, so that He may through them send His programs and laws with
regard to their needs. Thus prophets are selected human beings who
convey the message of God and guide to success and perfection and warn
of the factors of decline and misfortune. Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَبَنِى ءَادَمَ إِمَّا يَأْتِيَنَّكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِّنكُمْ يَقُصُّونَ
عَلَيْكُمْ ءَايَتِى فَمَنِ اتَّقَى‏ وَأَصْلَحَ فَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ
وَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ‏ / وَ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بَِايَتِنَا و
اسْتَكْبَرُواْ عَنْهَآ أُوْلَئِكَ أصْحَبُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا
خَلِدُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O children of Adam! if there come to you apostles from among you
relating to you My communications, then whoever shall guard (against
evil) and act aright- they shall have no fear nor shall they grieve. And
(as for) those who reject Our communications and turn away from them
haughtily- these are the inmates of the fire, they shall abide in it.”
(7:35-36)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا نُرْسِلُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِلَّا مُبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنْذِرِينَ فَمَنْ
ءَامَنَ وَ أَصْلَحَ فَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ‏ /
وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بَِايَتِنَا يَمَسُّهُمُ الْعَذَابُ بِمَا
كَانُواْ يَفْسُقُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We send not messengers but as announcers of good news and givers
of warning, then whoever believes and acts aright, they shall have no
fear, nor shall they grieve. And (as for) those who reject Our
communications, chastisement shall afflict them because they
transgressed.” (6:48-49)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِى كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَّسُولاً أَنِ اعْبُدُواْ اللَّهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُواْ الطَّغُوتَ فَمِنْهُم مَّنْ هَدَى اللَّهُ وَمِنْهُم
مَّنْ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِ الضَّلَلَةُ فَسِيرُواْ فِى الْأَرْضِ
فَانظُرُواْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَقِبَةُ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We raised in every nation an apostle saying: Serve
Allah and shun the Shaitan. So there were some of them whom Allah guided
and there were others against whom error was due; therefore travel in
the land, then see what was the end of the rejecters.” (16:36)***


