Infallibility of the Prophets
=============================

Almighty Allah selected the prophets so that they may entrust the human
beings with laws and life-giving program of religion in a perfect way
without adding or subtracting anything. That they may show man the
straight path of perfection and divine proximity and it is one path and
not more. And also that they may help human beings on the path of
salvation and perfection; that they take up the responsibility of
guardianship and leadership of nation and implementation of divine laws
and development of excellence of man.

Responsibility of the prophets in this regard is explained in three
stages:

1. They receive laws and programs of religion through the channel of
revelation;

2. They convey the divine programs and messages to human beings;

3. They themselves act on the rules and regulations of religion and also
call people to divine religion through their words and deeds.

The aim of Almighty Allah in sending mortal prophets assures that they
should be infallible in these three stages; that is they should be
immune from mistakes, doubts and forgetfulness in receiving the divine
messages and conveying them to the people. In case they are not
infallible, how can they convey the life-giving program of religion
without any alteration and without any increase or decrease to people?

In that case would the aim of the wise God in sending the prophets be
achieved perfectly? Can people gain satisfaction and assurance that the
statements of the prophets are the same message of God and program of
religion? No, it is never in this way, on the contrary divine prophets
should be immune from errors, doubts and forgetfulness so that they may
be able to convey the programs of religion without any increase or
decrease and that they may guarantee the fulfillment of the aim of
Almighty Allah.

Prophets in the stage of acting on the laws of religion also must be
infallible; that is they should fulfill the duties and obligatory acts
and keep away from prohibited matters, sins and evil deeds. Because they
are perfect examples of religion and by their actions they call people
to good deeds and restrain them from evil deeds. If the prophets are not
infallible, how can they take up the responsibility of guiding the
humanity and how they can invite people to good deeds?

People do not trust one who is himself deviated and who is having
contradiction between his words and deeds; since they say: If he was
truthful and had believed in his own words, he would have acted
according to them. In that case most probably they would prefer to
follow their acts and not their words (supposing they were not in
consonance with their prophethood). Therefore Almighty Allah will never
send such a person as a prophet.

Hence the intellect of man testifies to the necessity of infallibility
of prophets and there is no need to quote more verses of Quran or
traditions to emphasize this matter. But in the coming pages we would
quote some of them by way of textual proofs.

Philosophy of Infallibility
---------------------------

In the past discussion we concluded that prophets are immune from sins,
mistakes and forgetfulness. Now the question arises that what is the
philosophy of infallibility? Why some people are infallible and why some
are not? Since all human beings are prone to commit mistakes, how can
some persons be immune from errors? What factor bestows to human beings
such a power and immunity that they can dominate their selfish desires
and don’t even think of committing sins? What is the real motive and aim
of this immunity?

According to our belief, infallibility is a quality of the soul and a
powerful inner capacity, which restrains the infallible from committing
sin and falling into doubt and other similar things. The factor and aim
of the existence of this quality is perfect faith, which is beyond the
stage of meaning and mental imagination and which has come into the
shape of a certainty and actual realization.

People who have reached to the lofty stages of knowing Almighty Allah
and have faith in resurrection and through the inner conscience have
witnessed the greatness and majesty of the Lord of the universe; and who
are aware of the effects of deeds, good manners as also the consequences
of following bad ethics and character are aloof from sins and
disobedience and with insight and from the aspect of choice and
intention, they were obedient to divine laws and control their selfish
desires and under no circumstances cross the divinely ordained limits of
servitude and submission.

On the other hand, the existence of this insight is a strong support,
which prevents them from committing mistakes and forgetfulness in
receiving divine revelation and in conveying them to the people. They
have realized the truth of divine messages and possess the treasures of
unseen knowledge. It is due to this same reason that they are immune
from mistakes and errors.

Since the existence of such a perfect and infallible man is necessary
for prophethood, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has arranged the system
of creation in such a way that when needed, such a person would be
available.

It is said that although the prophet is infallible and does not commit
any kind of sin, it is not that the capacity of committing sins has been
taken away from him. Instead, the prophet is also like other people; he
is capable enough to commit sins and has the choice to commit them; at
the most, under the influence of a strong faith and perfect insight,
which is placed in his being as a divine gift, by choice and intention
he gives up evil deeds and does not fall into divine disobedience.

Below we present some examples of strong evidences which prove that it
is necessary for divine prophets to be infallible:

Almighty Allah says in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَى‏ غَيْبِهِ أَحَداً / إِلَّا مَنِ
ارْتَضَى‏ مِن رَّسُولٍ فَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِن بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ
خَلْفِهِ رَصَداً / لِّيَعْلَمَ أَن قَدْ أَبْلَغُواْ رَسِالاَتِ
رَبِّهِمْ وَأَحَاطَ بَمَا لَدَيْهِمْ وَ أَحْصَى‏ كُلَّ شَىْ‏ءٍ عَدَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Knower of the unseen! so He does not reveal His secrets to any.
Except to him whom He chooses as an apostle; for surely He makes a guard
to march before him and after him. So that He may know that they have
truly delivered the messages of their Lord, and He encompasses what is
with them, and He records the number of all things.” (72:26-28)***

Allamah Tabatabai has written under the exegesis of this verse:

Apparently this verse shows that Almighty Allah has chosen the prophets
for divine revelation and also gave them a hidden power which accords
protection to them. It is that Almighty Allah has surrounded the
prophets in order to guard revelation from destruction and change which
Satan or others may undertake. This is due to the joining of prophethood
to the stage of manifestation. Similar to this verse is the verse in
which it is mentioned in the words of angels:

(And we do not descend but by the command of your Lord; (Know that) to
Him belongs whatever is before us and whatever is behind us and whatever
is between these, and your Lord is not forgetful.)

The verses prove that divine revelation from the beginning of revelation
till the time it reaches to the ears of man are in protection and are
guarded from every kind of alteration.[^1]

Also it has come in the same background that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ هَدَى اللَّهُ فَبِهُدَيهُمُ اقْتَدِهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“These are they whom Allah guided, therefore follow their guidance.”
(6:90)***

This proves the infallibility of the prophets; thus all of them are
guided and Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and (as for) him whom Allah makes err, there is no guide for him.”
(39:23)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يَهْدِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِن مُّضِلٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whom Allah guides, there is none that can lead him astray.”
(39:37)***

And He also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن يَهْدِ اللَّهُ فَهُوَ الْمُهْتَدِى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whomsoever Allah guides, he is the one who follows the right way.”
(7:178)***

Thus Almighty Allah has kept immune His guided ones from every deviated
and all kinds of deviations, which want to gain an upper hand on them.
That is He has kept them safe from every kind of disobedience since
disobedience is also a kind of misguidance.[^2]

[^1]: Al-Mizan, Vol. 2, Pg. 139.

[^2]: Al-Mizan, Vol. 2, Pg. 140.


