Methods to Recognize the Prophet
================================

The following methods may be employed in order to recognize true
prophets and to certify their claims:

1. Miracle: Asking for a miracle is the best and the most satisfactory
way to recognize the prophet. If the claimant of prophethood is in
possession of miracle or miracles to prove the veracity of his claim,
its existence is absolute proof like witnessing or a reliable and
definite report and hence his prophethood is proved.

2. Information given by Past Prophets: In case the previous prophet,
whose prophethood had been proved, gives information about the advent of
the prophet after himself and mentions his distinctive qualities
perfectly, the prophethood of the latter would also be proved as
happened in case of the Prophet of Islam. The past prophets gave glad
tidings of his arrival, which were recorded in their books. Quran has
mentioned this same point in the words of Prophet Isa (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ يَابَنِى إِسْرَآءِيلَ إِنِّى
رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُم مُّصَدِّقاً لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَىَّ مِنَ
التَّوْرَاةِ وَمُبَشِّراً بِرَسُولٍ يَأْتِى مِن بَعْدِى اسْمُهُ
أَحْمَدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when Isa son of Maryam said: O children of Israel! surely I am
the apostle of Allah to you, verifying that which is before me of the
Taurat and giving the good news of an Apostle who will come after me,
his name being Ahmad…” (61:6)***

3. Study of the text of the laws and programs of religion of the
prophet: If an intellectual or researcher studies in detail religious
cognitions, laws, rules and programs of religion and its different
dimensions without prejudice and evaluates them, he can discover the
value and comprehensiveness of that religion.

Whether the view of the laws of that religion are according to the
criterion of reason and its rules have really complied with the actual
needs of the society and that it defends individual rights and social
units of the community and observes social justice; and assures the
success of man in the world and the hereafter. And by observing its good
ethics, which advise its followers to keep away from bad manners etc. he
discovers the truthfulness and perfection of that religion and in this
way it supports and verifies the prophethood of the prophet.

At this point it is necessary to mention two points: Firstly: Such
minute research and indeed all aspects of reformation of people would be
limited and cannot become the responsibility of the people. Secondly: In
case of certainty, it can be relied upon only within limit of contexts
and testimonies, but it cannot be presented as decisive proof. In any
case, it does not make us needless of the proof of miracle.

4. Study of life, character and behavior of the claimant of prophethood:
If the claimant of prophethood is a person whose trustworthiness,
honesty and truthfulness is proved to others and there is no weak point
in his internal and external character and he practices what he
preaches, he would be supported and verified by the people with regard
to the claim of prophethood also. But this topic also would be
considered only as a confirmation and not an absolute proof and lawful
argument.


