Revelation
==========

According to the dictionary meaning, revelation is the conveying of a
message in a secret manner to another. In Islamic terminology it is
defined as the dialogue of Almighty Allah with the prophets. They were
claiming to have a special connection with God and that Almighty Allah
speaks to them and conveys His messages to the people through them. They
claimed that they can hear the statements of Almighty Allah and see
realities in the unseen world and that they have been appointed on
behalf of God so that they may convey His messages to the people.

Knowledge of the prophets is obtained through the channel of revelation
and it is absolutely opposed to our acquisition of knowledge. We have
three kinds of knowledge: Knowledge of senses, knowledge gained through
generalities and internal perceptions and realizations. Knowledge of
senses is obtained directly from the five senses.

The senses also have a role in the knowledge of generalities, because
their parts previously were realized through the channel of these
senses. After that the generalities are separated from them. The third
type is through the inner senses, like: the perception of pain, hunger,
thirst, happiness and sorrow. All our knowledge is obtained through the
channel of inner or outer senses directly or indirectly. But revelation
is not a part of any of them and is having no similarity to them.

Prophets witness the reality in the unseen world and hear the words of
God, but not with these eyes and ears. In this instance, knowledge is
transferred from Almighty Allah to the heart of the prophets through
revelation and at that moment it becomes apparent. Exactly opposed to it
is ordinary knowledge which in the beginning is obtained through senses
and in the end it enters ourselves and hearts. The Quran has also
interpreted revelation in this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ لَتَنزِيلُ رَبِ‏ّ الْعَالَمِينَ / نَزَلَ بِهِ الرُّوحُ
الْأَمِينُ / عَلَى‏ قَلْبِكَ لِتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُنذِرِينَ‏ / بِلِسَانٍ
عَرَبِىٍ‏ّ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most surely this is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds.
The Faithful Spirit has descended with it. Upon your heart that you may
be of the warners, In plain Arabic language.” (26:192-195)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَنْ كَانَ عَدُوّاً لِّجِبْرِيْلَ فإِنَّهُ نَزَّلَهُ عَلَى‏
قَلْبِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Whoever is the enemy of Jibraeel- for surely he revealed it to
your heart…” (Surah Baqarah 2:97)***

It is mentioned in Tafsir Ruhul Bayan that:

Whenever revelation descended on Prophet Muhammad (S), it first
descended upon his heart as he was extremely thirsty for it. At that
moment his heart absorbed it. Then he understood it through his heart
and heard it and this is in the meaning of coming down from a height and
this is the status of the special ones.[^1]

The late Allamah Tabatabai (q) has said: Heart denotes the self of man,
which has the power of perception, perhaps the reason why Quran has
mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَزَلَ بِهِ الرُّوحُ الْأَمِينُ / عَلَى‏ قَلْبِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Faithful Spirit has descended with it. Upon your heart…”
(26:193-194)***

And did not say: “upon you”, which indicates the comprehensiveness of
Quran from the side of the Holy Prophet (S) and also whatever he
received from the soul was his noble self without his conscious
perception having any interference in it.

Therefore, he hears whatever is revealed to him without the intervention
of his eyes and ears. Because if his seeing and hearing had been through
the apparent eyes and ears, everything he heard would be shared by
others; that is whatever he sees, people also see it, while the fact is
that traditional reports have refuted this meaning absolutely.[^2]

That is why, the knowledge of prophets, which is obtained through
revelation, is not like obtained knowledge learned through perception
and human thinking, on the contrary it is of a higher type, whose
essence is not clear to us. It is a type of secret and hidden
understanding and errors and doubts cannot enter it.

From some verses, it is learnt that revelation takes place in one of the
following three ways:

First method: Almighty Allah reveals matters directly on the heart of
the prophet.

Second method: Matters are sent down to another place and the prophet
obtains from there, like in the case of the conversation of Prophet Musa
(a.s.) at Mount Tur through the tree. The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّآ أَتَاهَا نُودِىَ مِن شَاطِىِ الْوَادِ الْأَيْمَنِ فِى
الْبُقْعَةِ الْمُبَارَكَةِ مِنَ الشَّجَرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when he came to it, a voice was uttered from the right side of
the valley in the blessed spot of the bush…” (28:30)***

Third method: Some points are revealed through the angel of revelation
(Jibraeel) on the heart of the prophet.

These three methods are mentioned in the Holy Quran when Almighty Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِبَشَرٍ أَن يُكَلِّمَهُ اللَّهُ إِلَّا وَحْياً أَوْ مِن
وَرَآىِ حِجَابٍ أَوْ يُرْسِلَ رَسُولًا فَيُوحِىَ بِإِذْنِهِ مَا
يَشَآءُ إِنَّهُ عَلِىٌّ حَكِيمٌ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And it is not for any mortal that Allah should speak to him except
by revelation or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger and
revealing by His permission what He pleases, Surely He is High, wise.”
(42:51)***

But it should be known that in every method, the dialogue is only with
Almighty Allah and that is why in most verses, revelation is related to
Almighty Allah, but through a medium of cause and effects, one of them
being Jibraeel.

Hence, these three methods of revelation should be interpreted in the
effect of psychological conditions of the prophet and various divine
emotions. In this case, sometimes the ethereal soul of the prophet rises
up to the position of Jibraeel and he hears the divine revelation from
him. But he does not see himself till he himself saw Jibraeel with his
eyes.

Sometimes the progress of his soul is to the limit that he hears the
speech of Almighty Allah at a designated place like a tree etc. In that
case also, his soul rises up such a level that he sees the medium and
hears the dialogue directly from Almighty Allah.

Allamah Tabatabai (q) has mentioned the same point when he says:

The proof of veil (Hijab) or the conveyer of the message at the time of
speaking does not use the medium of revelation, because revelation like
his other characters is not without a medium, only the pivot is the
attention of the one who is addressed. Thus if the prophet were to see
through which he is getting divine revelation, and through this medium
he veils the statement and message, which has come to him from Almighty
Allah; like the medium of angel, in that case revelation is on that
angel. Thus when the prophet looks at God, the revelation will be from
Almighty Allah. Although there is also a medium, but the prophet pays no
attention to it.[^3]

That is why revelation is a kind of a hidden and inner understanding and
perception, which the apparent and hidden perceptions and logical
prefaces have no intervention in. On the contrary, it is directly
inspired to the heart of the prophet. Since the self of the prophet has
reached to the highest level of humanity it has the capacity to obtain
such information; but revelation is not ordinary knowledge; it is an
extraordinary matter. Therefore people demand miracle from the prophets.
The latter also in order to prove the veracity of their claim, perform
miracles in situations that demand it.

[^1]: Tafsir Ruhul Bayan, Vol. 6, Pg. 306.

[^2]: Al-Mizan, Vol. 15, Pg. 345.

[^3]: Al-Mizan, Vol. 14, Pg. 150


