Introduction
============

The Book
--------

In 1984 I published a series known as \`The Laws of the *Shari'ah*'
which included booklets on *The Tendency of Rationalizing the Shari\`ah
Laws, Ijtihad, Taqlid, Taharat & Najasat, Wudu & Ghusl,* and *Khums*.
The books were very well received by the readers in various parts of the
world, *al-hamdu li ' l-lah.* Imam Mahdi Association of Bombay has
translated the first three booklets in Urdu and is using it as a text in
its study circle programs.

In 1987 when the time for the third printing of *Taharat & Najasat* and
*Wudu & Ghusl* came, I decided to combine the two into one. But while
combining, I thought of rewriting the two booklets and add some more
discussions in them. But the rewriting was put off because of my studies
and various other activities. Finally, this year Allah blessed me with
an opportunity to rewrite and finalize this book, and the result is what
you see in your hands.

The booklets *Taharat & Najasat* and Wudu & *Ghusl* were just simple
explanations of the rules of ritual purity in Islam. In this book, I
have extensively quoted the relevant Qur'anic verses and the *ahadith*.
Moreover, I have added two new discussions: a section on “Our Outlook
Towards the *Najasat*” which deals with an issue which is very important
for the Muslims living in a non-Muslim society, and a chapter “From
Ritual to Spiritual” which attempts to relate the ritual purification to
the spiritual purification.

This chapter is in response to a need which I observed in the Muslim
communities of various places with whom I have been working during the
last seven years. Fortunately, the rituals are practiced by many; but
unfortunately they are considered as just ritual and nothing more. I
think it is very essential for the Muslims to know how to utilize the
daily rituals of *taharat, wudu, ghusl* and *salat* for their spiritual
upliftment.

The new chapter could still be expanded by including the spiritual
significance of the daily prayers, an issue which I discussed in twelve
lectures during the Muharram of this year. But in this book I wanted to
confine myself to the spiritual purification that was relevant to the
ritual purifications. And so I left the other aspects of spiritualism
for some future work, *insha Allah.*

 I hope the readers will find this new chapter informative and useful;
and I would specially like to urge the leaders of the Muslim
organizations in the West to read this chapter and try to implement its
teachings in the way they think, behave and deal with the people.

The Sources of the Shari\`ah
----------------------------

This is a book of Islamic laws, known as the *shari\`ah.* The sources of
the Islamic laws are the Qur'an and the *sunnah. By* the *sunnah,* we
mean the sayings, actions and silent approval of the Prophet and the
*Ahlu 'l-bayt*.

The Qur'an describes the basic rules only and the *sunnah* elaborates
upon them. The Qur'an introduces the Prophet of Islam as *follows:*

***“He (Allah) raised up among the common people a Messenger from among
themselves to recite to them His revelations, to purify them, and to
teach them the Book and wisdom;” (62:2)***

***“And We have revealed to you (O Muhammad) the Reminder (i.e., the
Qur'an) so that you may clarify to the people what has been revealed to
them, and so that they may reflect.” (16:44)***

These two verses are enough to prove that Prophet Muhammad (peace be
upon him) was not just a \`mail-man' whose only job was to deliver the
Book to us. He was a teacher and a commentator of the Qur'an. Even his
actions are a source of guidance for us:

***“You have a good example in Allah's Messenger for whosoever hopes for
God and the last day, and remembers God oft.”(33:21)***

The obedience to the Prophet has been considered as the proof of loving
Allah:

***“Say (O Muhammad): \`If you love Allah, then follow me; (if you do
so,) Allah will love you and forgive for you your sins.”' (3:31)***

The Qur'an further says,

***“Whoever obeys the Messenger has surely obeyed Allah.” (4:80)***

The Muslims who lived during the Prophet's time had easy excess to his
*sunnah*. What about us who were born hundreds of years after the
Prophet's death? Well, the Muslims of the early days realized the
importance of the Prophet's *sunnah* and started preserving his sayings
in books of *hadith*. Even the actions of the Prophet, observed by the
companions, were preserved in writing. But this process of preserving
the *sunnah* of the Prophet was not immune from mistakes and even
forgery. Many sayings were invented and wrongfully attributed to the
Prophet during the early period of the Islamic history.  
 Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to find an authentic and, at the
same time, informed source for the *sunnah* of the Prophet. When you
look at the Muslims of the Prophet's days, you can find no one who may
be more knowledgeable, in­formed, reliable and closer to the Prophet
than the Ahlu ' l-bayt, the family of the Prophet. After all, it is the
Qur'an which testifies to their spiritual purity of highest category by
saying,

***“Verily Allah intends to purify you, 0 the Ahlu ' 1-bayt, a thorough
purification.” (33:33)***

Combine this verse about *Ahlu 'l-bayt*'s purity with the following:

***“It the holy Qur'an in a preserved tablet, none shall touch it but
the purified ones.” (56:79)***

This shows that the Ahlu '1-bayt could understand the Qur'an better than
any other follower of Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him). Allah says,

***“Say (0 Muhammad), \`I do not ask from you any reward (for bringing
the message to you) except to love my near ones.”' (42:23)***

See that it is Allah who is commanding His messenger to ask the people
to love his family. If they were not truthful, reliable, and worthy of
following, would Allah command us to love them?

These few verses are enough to show that the best commentators of the
Qur'an and the most authentic source for the Prophet's *sunnah* are the
Imams of *Ahlu 'l-bayt*. The Prophet himself said, “I am leaving among
you two worthy things. As long as you hold on to them both, you will
never be led astray after me. One of these two is greater than the
other: the Book of Allah (which is a rope hanging from the heaven to the
earth) and my descendants, my *Ahlu 'l-bayt*. These two things will not
separate from each other until they come to me at the (fountain of)
Kauthar (in the hereafter). Therefore, see how you recompense me by the
way you deal with them.”

This is not the place to discuss about the authenticity of this
*hadith*, but I will just quote Ibn Hajar al-Makki, a famous anti-Shi'ah
polemicist. After recording this above-mentioned *hadith* through many
companions who had heard it from the Prophet at various places and
times, Ibn Hajar says, “And there is no contradiction in this [numerous
reports] since there was nothing to prevent the Prophet from repeating
[this statement] in those various places because of the importance of
the holy Book and the pure Family.” [^1]1

We can conclude from these verses and the *hadith* mentioned above that
the Ahlu '1-bayt are the most authentic and the best source for the
*sunnah*, and therefore we prefer them to all other sources. Whenever we
quote a *hadith* from the Imams, it is not actually from themsel­ves,
instead it is the *hadith* of the Prophet which they had preserved as
the true successors of the last messenger of Allah. Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq
(as) says, “My *hadith* is the *hadith* of my father, the *hadith* of my
father is that of my grandfather, the *hadith* of my grandfather is that
of al ­Husayn [bin 'Ali], the *hadith* of al-Husayn is that of al-Hasan
[bin 'Ali], the *hadith* of al-Hasan is that of Amiru '1-mu'minin ['Ali
bin Abi Talib] (as), the *hadith* of Amiru '1-mu'minin is that of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), and the hadiith of the Messenger is a
statement of Allah, the Almighty, the Great.” [^2]2

Ijtihad & Taqlid
----------------

After the twelfth Imam al-Mahdi (as) went into occultation, the
responsibility of guiding the Shi\`ahs in the *shari'ah* matter came
upon the *mujtahids,* the religious scholars specializing in Islamic
laws. The *mujtahid*s derive the Islamic laws from the two sources
mentioned above. This may sound very simple, but it is not so. They do
not just open the Qur'an and the books of *hadith*, and start giving
fatwas. They must first of all come up with a methodology (discussed in
a subject known as *Usulu 'l* *fiqh).*

 In their methodology, they decide how to study the Qur'anic verses and
the *ahadith*. Should they take the literal meanings only? Have they to
find out which verse came first and which came second on a same issue?
Will the latter verse abrogate the former, or will it just put some
limitations on it? Is every *hadith* to be considered authentic? If not,
what are the means of verify­ing the authenticity of a given *hadith*?
If they come up on two authentic *ahadith* on a single issue which
contradict each other, then what should they do? If the Qur'an and the
sunnah are silent on an issue, what recourse should be followed? All
such problems have to be solved while designing the methodology of
*ijtihad*, and only then can a *mujtahid* correctly and responsibly
derive a law from the Qur'an and the sunnah.

It is obvious that not all have the ability or the time to specialize in
the *shari'ah* laws; and therefore, for such people it is necessary to
follow a *mujtahid* in the matters of the *shari'ah*. The laws on ritual
purity presented in this book can be followed by the followers of most
high-rank­ing *mujtahid*s of our time, in particular Ayatullah al-\`uzma
Sayyid Abu 'l-Qasim al-Musawi al-Khu'i and the late Ayatullah al-\`uzma
al-Imam Sayyid Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khumayni.

The differences, if any, among the present *mujtahid*s on the matters of
ritual purity are on the level of *makruh* and *mustahab,* but not on
the level of *wajib* and *haram.* Wherever the differences among the
*mujtahid*s are of extreme nature, I have given their opinions
separately.

The *ahadith* you find in this book have not been selected at random; I
have tried my best to ascertain their authenticity and acceptability
before using them. One reason for writing the relevant verses and
*ahadith* in the book was to make the readers familiar with some of the
sources which the *mujtahid*s use in reaching to their conclusions.
This, I believe, will also help in dispelling the idea voiced by some
misinformed people that the *shari'ah* laws are nothing but an invention
of the *\`ulama'.*

I hope this book proves useful to those who want to learn about Islam;
and I pray to Allah, *subhanahu wa ta\`a1a,* to accepted it as a small
contribution towards serving Islam from this most humble servant of His.
*Inna rabbi la Sami \`u ' d-du\`a.*

S. M. Rizvi
-----------

Richmond, B.C.  
 Rabi'u '1-Awwal 1410  
 October 1989 - Tel: (604) 278-3698

[^1]: Ibn Hajar al-Makki, as-Sawa'iqu '1-Muhriqah, chapter 11, section
1. For further reading on this issue, see Rizvi, S.S.A., Imamat; Sharafu
'd-Din, S.A.H., The Right Path; and Jafri, S.M.H., The Origins and Early
Development of Shi'a Islam.

[^2]: al-Kulayni, Usulu 'l-Kafi, book 2, chapter 17, hadith No. 14;
ash-Sha'rani, at-Tabaqatu 'l-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 28; Abu Nu'aym, Hilyatu
'l-Awliya', vol. 3, p. 193, 197


