II. Wudu
========

A. Introduction
---------------

*Wudu* and *ghusl* both are ritual ablutions; the former is a minor
ablution while the latter is a major ablution. In Islamic laws, the
*wudu* is considered a ritual act of wor­ship which is done with the
intention of seeking the pleasure of Allah.

The act of *wudu* consists of washing the face and the fore-arms, and
wiping the head and the feet. These six parts of human body -face, both
fore-arms, head and both feet are known as “the organs of *wudu*”.

*Wudu* by itself is always a recommendable act in Islamic rituals, but
it becomes obligatory in certain cir­cumstances. One of such
circumstances is the daily ritual prayers; and therefore it is important
for every Muslim to know the method of *wudu* and its rules.

The Qur'an says:

***“O you who believe! When you stand up for ritual prayer (sala), wash
your face and your hands up to the elbows, and wipe a part of your head
and your feet up to ankles.” (5:6)***

B. Manner of performing Wudu
----------------------------

The manner of performing *wudu* as explained below is based on the
Qur'an and the authentic *sunnah of* the holy Prophet as narrated by his
*Ahlu 'l-bayt* and his most reliable companions. The relevant verse *of*
the Qur'an and the *ahadith will* be discussed in section J.

*Wudu* is done in the following four stages :

### 1. Washing the face

After doing the *niyyat* [Intention], pour water over the face from the
top. Then using the right hand, wipe the face from the top to bottom, in
such a way that the water reaches all parts vertically from the
hair­line to chin, and every place horizontally within the reach *of*
the span *of* the hand from the middle-finger to the thumb.

It is not obligatory to wash the parts which do not come within the
middle-finger and the thumb; however, there is no harm in including
those parts to ensure that all the necessary parts have been washed.

It is not obligatory to wash the inside *of* the eyes, the lips, the
mouth, the nose, and the eyelids. *If* one has beard or mustache, it is
enough to wash the hair which are apparent; it is not necessary to make
the water reach the inside of the hair or to the skin. However, if the
hair are so sparse that they do not hide the skin, then one should make
the water reach the skin.

Bald person or those with receding hair-line should wash their face as
*if* the hair were growing normally. If someone's face is larger, or
smaller, than normal, then he should wash the part which comes within
his middle­ finger and the thumb.

### 2. Washing the fore-arms

Pour water over the right fore-arm from the elbow to the finger-tips;
and using the left hand, wipe the water over the arm to ensure that all
the necessary parts are washed. Then do the same with the left fore-arm.
The washing must be done from the elbows to the finger-tips and not vice
versa.

The water should be poured from a little above the elbow to ensure that
the whole fore-arm is covered. It is necessary to wash the fore-arms in
such a way that the water penetrates the hair, if any, and reaches the
skin.

The right fore-arm should be washed before the left.

### 3. Wiping of the head

Wiping of the head means to wipe a wet finger of the right hand from the
crown of the head to the hair-line. Wiping of the head can be performed
on any part of the quarter of the head which is over the fore-head.

The act of wiping can be done with one finger only, but it is
recommended to use three fingers together. The water must reach the root
of the hair. However, if the hair are so short that they cannot be
combed then it is enough to wipe the hair.

While wiping the head, your hand should not touch your fore-head;
otherwise, the water of the fore-head will mix with the wetness of your
hand, and this will render the act of wiping the right foot invalid.
Why? Because the act of wiping must be done with the wetness of the
hands only.

### 4. Wiping of the feet

Again using the wetness of the hands, wipe the right foot with the right
hand, and then the left foot with the left hand.

In wiping the feet, place the palm or the fingers of the hand on the
finger-tips of the foot and then wipe to the base of the ankle. One can
even wipe from the base of the ankle to the finger-tips. In wiping the
feet, your palms should wipe your feet; it is not enough to move your
feet against your palms.

C. Some general rules
---------------------

The face and the fore-arms: Enough care should be taken so that all the
necessary parts are washed; the *wudu* will become invalid if any part
(even though it be equal to a pin-point) is left out.

The wiping of the head and the feet: As mentioned earlier, the wiping
must be done with the wetness of the palms, i. e., after washing both
the fore-arms, one is not permitted to wet his hands with another \`new'
water. Likewise, the wiping will become invalid if the wetness of the
palms is mixed with the water from other organs of *wudu*.

What if the palms become dry before one can wipe the head or the feet?
In such a case, the palms can be made wet by the water from beard,
mustache, eye-brows or the other organs of *wudu*. What if the weather
is so hot that one's face and hands become dry immediately? In such a
case, one should do *tayammum* instead of *wudu*.

If it is not possible to wipe the head or feet with the palms due to
injury, etc., then the following organs may be used (in order of
preference): the upper part of the hands and the inner part of the
fore-arm.

Before starting the *wudu*, make sure that the front part of your head
and the top side of your feet are dry; otherwise your *wudu* will not
correct because the water on your head or feet is \`new' water. However,
slight wetness or dampness can do no harm to your *wudu* unless it is so
much that the wetness of palms, while wiping the head or feet, is
immediately mixed with it.

D. Recommendable acts of Wudu
-----------------------------

What you read above was concerning the obligatory *(wajib)* acts of
*wudu*. Now we shall describe the acts which are recommendable
*(mustahab, sunnat)* during the *wudu*.

**1.** Washing the hands two time before washing the face.

**2.** Gargling three times before washing the face.

**3.** Rinsing the nose three times before washing the face.

**4.** While washing the face and the fore-arms, it is recommended to
wash each part twice before proceeding to the next stage of the *wudu*.
One should realize that washing these organs of *wudu* once is
obligatory, while washing them twice is recommendable; but to wash them
for the third time is forbidden *(haram).* Determining the first or the
second washing depends on the intention of the individual himself. And
so, it is possible that a person may pour water on his right fore-arm
five times and wipe his left hand on it twice, and still count this
washing as the first one.

**5.** It is recommended for men to start washing their fore-arms from
the apparent side of the arms, and for the women to start washing their
fore-arms from the inner side.

**6.** Reciting the following du'as as taught by Imam 'Ali (a.s.) at
various stages of the *wudu*:

• at the beginning of the *wudu*:  
*Bis mil-lahi wa bil-lahi; wal hamdu lil-lahil lazi ja \`alal ma'a
tahilran wa lam yaj\`alhu najisa. =* [I am doing this *wudu*] in the
name of Allah and for the sake of Allah; all praise be to Allah who made
the water pure and did not make it impure.

• at the time of the washing the hands two times before washing the
face:  
*Allahummaj \`alni minat tawwabiyna, waj \`alni minal mutatah-hiriyn. =*
O Allah place me among those who ask for forgiveness and among those who
are pure.

• at the time of gargling:  
*Allahumma laqqini hujjaty yawma alqaka, wat liq lisani bi zikrik. =* O
Allah teach me the correct answer for the day I shall meet You and open
my tongue for Your praise.

• at the time of rinsing the nose.

*Allahumma la tuharrim 'alayya riyhal jannah, waj \`alni mim man
yashummu riyhaha wa rawhaha wa tiybaha. =* O Allah! Do not deprive me
from the smell of the Paradise, and place me among those who will sniff
its smell, its refreshments and per­fume.

• at the time of washing the face:  
*Allahumma bayyiz wajhiy yawma tusawwidul wujuh; wa la tusawwid wajhiy
yawma tubayyizul wujuh. =* O Allah ! Brighten my face on the day You
will disgrace the faces; and do not disgrace my face on the day You will
brighten the faces.

• at the time of the washing the right fore-arm:  
*Allahumma \`atiniy kitabi bi yaminiy, wal khulda fil jinani bi yasariy,
wa hasibniy hisaban yasira. =* O Allah! Place my scroll of deeds in my
right hand and (the certificate of) permanency in the Paradise on my
left; and do the reckoning of my account leniently.

• at the time of washing the left fore-arm:  
*Allahumma la tu \`tiniy kitabiy bi shimaliy, wa la min wara'i zahriy,
wa la taj'alha maghluqatan ila \`un­uqiy; wa a \`uzu* *bika min muqatta
\`atin niyran. =* O Allah! Do not place my scroll of deeds in my left
hand nor on my back; and do not make it strap around my neck. And I seek
refuge with You from the fierce fire.

• at the time of the wiping the head  
*Allahumma ghash-shiniy bi rahmatika wa barakatika wa \`afwika. =* O
Allah! Cover me with Your mercy, Your blessings and Your pardon.

• at the time of the wiping the feet:  
*Allahumma thab-bitniy \`alas sirati yawma tuzillu fiyhil aqdam; waj
\`al sa\`iy fi* *ma urziyka \`anniy; ya zul jalali wal ikram. =* O
Allah, keep me steadfast on my path on the day when the feet shall slip;
and make my efforts (in the way) that will please you -O the Master of
power and honor. [^1]31

E. A summary of Wudu
--------------------

The following is a summary of the *wudu*. The recom­mendable acts of
*wudu* are in italics.

**1.** Making the intention *(niyyat)* in one's mind.

**2.** *Washing the hands two times*

**3.** *Gargling three times*

**4***. Rinsing the nose three times.*

**5.** Washing the face first time *and then the second time.*

**6.** Washing the right fore-arm the first time *and then the second
time.*

**7.** Washing the left fore-arm the first time *and then the second
time.*

**8.** Wiping the head with one finger or *with three fingers together.*

**9.** Wiping the right foot with the right hand.

**10.** Wiping the left foot with the left hand.

F. The conditions for the validity of Wudu
------------------------------------------

The performance of *wudu* depends on certain condi­tions which are known
in Islamic laws as “the conditions for the validity of *wudu*”. These
conditions are ten in number: three are related to the water, three to
the person; and four to the act of *wudu* itself.

### i. The Water

**1.** The water must be *mutlaq. “Mutlaq”* means pure or unmixed; in
the present context, it refers to the liquid which is normally
considered by people as water. (It does not have to be pure chemically.)
The opposite of *mutlaq* is “muzaf' which refers to the water which is
not con­sidered pure by the people, e. g., orange juice.

**2.** The water must be *tahir* (ritually clean, not *najis*).

**3.** The water must be *mubah* (lawful), that is, you must be its
owner or you must have the permission to use it.

The *wudu* performed with mixed, *najis* or non-mubah water is invalid
even if it was done unknowingly. Likewise it is difficult to approve the
validity of the *wudu* performed with the water which was in an utensil
made of gold or silver.

### ii. The Person

**4.** *Niyyat : Niyyat* means intention As *wudu* is an act of ritual
worship *(\`ibadat),* it is necessary to perform it with *niyyat.
Niyyat,* in this context, means that one must have the intention to do
the *wudu* in obedience to the command of Allah. Sincerity is an
essential condition for *niyyat;* one should do *wudu* only for seeking
the pleasure of Allah and in obedience to His command. If someone
performs *wudu* for any other purpose, e.g., making him­self cool in
summer, then his *wudu* is invalid.

In *niyyat,* it is not necessary to utter the words; the mere intention
of doing the *wudu* in obedience to the command of Allah is enough; nor
is it necessary to mention that the *wudu* is *wajib* or *mustahab.*

**5.** The organs of *wudu* must be ritually clean (*tahir*) before
washing or wiping them.

Besides the ritual cleanliness *(raharat)* of the organs of *wudu*, they
must also be exposed. In other words, there should be nothing on them
which might prevent the water from reaching the skin. Special care
should be taken by women in case the lipstick, nail-polish, kohl, and
eye shadow are such that the water does not reach the skin. If the dirt
under the long nails is not more than normal, then it will not harm the
*wudu*.

**6.** Use of the water should not be harmful to the person who wants to
do *wudu*. If the person fears that he will become ill or his illness
will be prolonged by the use of cold water or warm water in *wudu*, then
he should do *tayammum*.

### iii. The Acts of Wudu:

**7.** The place where *wudu* is being performed must be *mubdh*
(lawful).

**8.** In normal situation, it is *wajib* for one to perform *wudu* by
himself, without the help of others. However, help in the preliminaries
such as fetching the water, pouring out the water, is allowed.

In case of disability because of illness, etc., someone else may help;
but in such a case, it is necessary for both, the helper and the helped,
to do the *niyyat.*

**9.** Correct Order *(tartib):* Every act in performing the *wudu* must
be done in the prescribed order: first the washing of the face, then of
the right fore-arm, and then of the left fore-arm, followed by the
wiping of the head, then of the right foot, and lastly of the left foot.

**10.** Continuity *(muwalat):* The acts of *wudu* must follow each
other so that, in normal weather, when each part is commenced the
previous parts are still wet.

G. The Nawaqiz of Wudu
----------------------

After having done the *wudu* once, for how long can a person be
considered to be in the state of ritual purity? Is a Muslim required to
do a separate *wudu* for each of his prayers, or is one *wudu*
sufficient for the whole day? Once a person has done *wudu*, he can
consider himself in the state of ritual purity until one of the
*nawaqiz* takes place. *Nawaqiz (pl.* of *naqiz)* means those things
which end the effectiveness of *wudu* and make it null and void
*(batil).*

The *nawaqiz* of *wudu* are ten. Six are related to the discharges which
take place from the sexual organs, and four are related to the factors
which cause temporary or permanent disability of the mind.

### i. The Discharges:

*(a) Common between man and women:*  
**1**. Urine (and semen).  
**2.** Stool.  
**3.** Farting.

*(b) In women only:*  
**4.** Menstruation.  
**5.** Irregular bleeding.  
**6.** Post-natal bleeding.

### ii. The Mental Disability Factors:

**7.** Sound sleep (in which one cannot hear anything).  
**8.** Drunkenness (from alcohol or drugs, etc.).  
**9.** Unconsciousness.  
**10.** Insanity.

These *nawaqiz* have been deduced from the following *ahadith* of the
Imams of *Ahlu 'l-bayt* (may peace be upon them): Zurarah bin A'yun
quotes from the fifth or sixth Imam as follows: “Nothing invalidates the
*wudu* except what comes out of both sides [of the sexual organs] or
sleep.” [^2]32

In another *hadith*, Zurarah asked both the fifth and the sixth Imams,
“What invalidates the *wudu*?” They answered, “Whatever comes out from
both of your lower organs like stool, urine, semen or wind; or the sleep
which prevents the functioning of the mind...” [^3]33

The first *six nawaqiz (i.* e., the discharges from the sexual organs)
can easily be deduced from these two narrations. Analyzing the last
sentence of the second *hadith* (“or sleep which prevents the
functioning of the mind”) proves that the sleep has been counted as one
of the *nawaqiz* because it prevents the functioning of the mind. This
gives a criterion in the hands of the *mujtahids* to extend the list to
include the other three things, i.e., insanity, unconsciousness and
drunkenness. The *hadith* has just mentioned sleeping because it is the
most obvious and common factor that causes \`disability' of the mind, of
course, temporarily.

It is needless to say that other than the ten things mentioned above,
nothing invalidates the *wudu*. Some Muslims think that if a person
touches his wife or his own private parts, his *wudu* becomes invalid.
This is not correct. The Imams of Ahlu '1-bayt, who are the most
reliable source for the *sunnah* of the Prophet and the best guides of
the Qur'an, have clearly explained that nothing else affects the *wudu*
in any way.

H. When does the wudu become wajib?
-----------------------------------

As mentioned earlier, performing the *wudu* is always a recommendable
deed, but it becomes obligatory *(wajib)* in certain circumstances.
There are five circumstances  
 under which *wudu* becomes obligatory; and whenever a Muslim finds
himself in any one these circumstances, he must do *wudu*.

The five circumstances are as follows:-

**1.** *For obligatory prayers, e.g., the five daily prayers.*

*Wudu* is not wajib for *sunnat* (recommended) prayers; but as the
prayers whether obligatory or recommended are invalid without *wudu*, so
we have to pray the *sunnat* prayers also with *wudu*. In other words,
if you do not do *wudu* for the sunnat prayer you will not have
sinned-al­though your prayer will be incorrect. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(a.s.) said, “There can be no prayer except with ritual ablution (i. e.
*wudu*).” [^4]34

*Salatu 'l-mayyit* (the ritual prayer said for the dead person before
the burial) is an exception to this rule; this obligatory prayer can be
performed even if one is in a state of ritual impurity.

**2.** *For the wajib circumambulation (tawaf) of the Ka\`bah in hajj.*
'Ali bin Ja\`far asked his father (the sixth Imam) about a person who
was doing the *tawaf* and then remembered that he had not done *wudu*.
Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “He should stop the tawaf and not
count (whatever he had done as valid). [^5]35

**3***. For touching the writings of the Qur' an.* The Qur'an is not
just a book, it is the revelation of God, it is the word of God, and
therefore it is sacred. Its sacredness demands that before you touch the
writing of the Qur'an, you must ritually purify yourself. Allah says,

***“None shall touch it except the purified ones.” (56:79)***

On basis of the extrinsic meaning of this verse and the *ahadith,* the
*muj*­*tahids* have reached the opinion that it is forbidden to  
 touch the writings of the Qur' an without being in the state of *wudu*.

However, this law of the *shari\`ah* should not become an excuse for not
reading the Qur'an. There is no harm in reading the Qur'an without doing
*wudu* provided one does not touch the writing of the holy book, i.e.,
just hold the cover or the border of the page. Once Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq
(a.s.) told his son Isma'il to read the Qur'an . Isma'il said, “I am not
in the state of *wudu*.” The Imam said, “Do not touch the writing, just
hold the paper and then read the book.” [^6]36

Likewise, there is no harm in touching the translations of the Qur'an,
because the translations do not qualify as the word of God. Neither is
it wajib to prevent the children from touching the writings of the
Qur'an unless such an act is considered a disrespect to the Sacred
Book-and this differs according to the culture and the society' in which
the Muslims live.

**4.** *For touching the names and the attributes of Allah.*  
 It is forbidden to touch the names and the attributes of Allah, in any
script, without being in the state of ritual purity *(wudu).*

By looking at the sacredness which the Prophets, the Imams of the *Ahlu
'l-bayt*  
 and also Fatimah (the daughter of the Prophet) have acquired due to
their being chosen by Allah, our *mujtahids* have recommended that the
names of these holy persons also should not be touched without *wudu*.

**5.** *For making promise, oath and vow* to stay in the state of ritual
purity (i.e., in *wudu*) for a certain period of time. If a person makes
such a promise or vow, then he must fulfill it when his conditions have
materialized. For example, someone says, “If I pass my exams, I will
stay with *wudu* for a whole day.” So if this person passes his exams,
then he must stay with *wudu* for one full day.

I. Wudu'u'l-Jabirah (Wudu On A Bandage)
---------------------------------------

*Jabirah* literally means a splint, but in the present context, it means
the material or the medicine used for bandaging a wound, etc. *Wudu' u '
l jabirah* means the *wudu* which is done on the bandage that has been
fixed on the organs of *wudu*.

Before writing about *wudu'u '1 jabirah,* it is neces­sary to mention
the following two points:

**(1)** If it is possible to wash the wound by taking off the bandage,
then one has to perform *wudu* as normally. If it is not possible to
take off the bandage, then it will suffice to completely wipe the hand
on the bandage.

**(2)** If someone has a wound which is not bandaged, and there is no
harm in washing it, then he should do *wudu* normally; but if it is not
possible to wash the wound, then the person has to wash only around the
wound as normal­ly. However, in the latter case, it is better to wipe
the hand on the wound and then place a piece of cloth on it and wipe the
hand over it.

It is needless to say that *wudu'u 'l 'jabirah is* relevant only in the
case where the use of water is not harmful for the person. If the use of
water is harmful, then one should do *tayammum*.

*Wudu' u ' 1 jabirah* can be done only in the following cases:

**1.** If the bandage is on a wound in which the skin is cut or torn. So
*wudu*'u *'l-jabirah* cannot be done on a bandage that has been fixed
only for pain or swelling - in such a case, one has either to do *wudu*
as normally if possible or to do *tayammum.*

**2.** If it is a splint for keeping a fractured limb in a proper
position.

**3.** If the bandage or the splint does not completely conceal any one
of the organs of *wudu*. So if the bandage or the splint is completely
conceal­ing any one of the organs of *wudu*, then the following
procedure should be followed:  
**(a)** if it is concealing a foot or both feet, then the person should
do *tayammum;*

**(b)** if it is concealing a fore-arm or face, then the person should
precautionarily do both *wudu' u l jabfrah* and *tayammum.*

The same applies to a case where all the organs of *wudu* are covered
with bandage.

J. Wudu in the Qur'an & the Sunnah
----------------------------------

As mentioned earlier, *wudu* is an act consisting of two stages (i)
washing the face and hands; and (ii) wiping a part of the head and feet.
This is clearly evident from the verse No. 6 of the suratu '1-Ma'idah:

***“O you who believe! When you stand up for prayer, (i) wash your face
and hands up to the elbows, (ii) and wipe a part of your head and your
feet up to the ankles.” (5:6)***

In this verse, two imperative forms have been used: (i) \`*faghsilu*”
which means “wash!”; and (ii)*”wamsuhu”* which means “wipe!”. It is
obvious that the first imperative form (“wash!”) refers to the two
objects which are “your face” *(wujuhukum*) and “your hands”
*(aydiyakum*); while the second imperative form refers to a two objects
which are “a part of your head” *(by' ru'usikum*) and “your feet”
(*arjulakum*).

The word "face" means the front portion of the head, comprising in man
the surface be­tween top of the forehead and the bottom of the chin, and
extending from ear to ear. In its legal definition, as ex­plained in the
*ahadith* of the Imams of Ahlu'1-bayt, it covers the surface of the face
vertically from the hair-line to the bottom of the chin, and
horizontally the parts which come within the reach of the span of the
hand from the middle-finger to the thumb. [^7]37

The word “hand” means the organ especially adapted for grasping, and
comprising the upper limb between the shoulder and the finger-tips. So
we see that from the linguistic point of view, the word “*yad*“ is
common between arm, fore-arm and hands.

When a word is commonly used in more than one mean­ing, it becomes
necessary for the speaker to provide an associate (or a context) to
specify the meaning. And thus we see the words *“ila '1-marafiq* up to
the elbow” in the verse; these words were necessary to specify the part
of the “hands“ which is to be included in *wudu*'.

Now we come to one of the main differences among the Shi\`ahs and the
Sunnis in the manner of performing *wudu*'. The Sunnis wash their
fore-arm from the finger­tips up to the elbows, and the Shi\`ahs wash
their fore-arm from the elbows to the finger-tips. As mentioned above
the words “up to the elbows“ do not tell us to wash from the finger-tips
to the elbow or vice verse; these words are there just to specify the
part of the “hands” which is to be included in *wudu*'.

Then how should we wash our fore-arm-from the elbow or from the
finger-tips? The answer of this problem is provided by the *sunnah.* One
of the responsibilities of the Prophet was to explain the details of,
and practically demonstrate how to follow, the laws explained in the
Qur'an. And, indeed, the most authentic way of learning the Prophet's
method of performing *wudu*' is through the *ahadith* of the Imams of
*Ahlu 'l-bayt* (the family of the Prophet). Zurarah bin A'yun narrates
the following *hadith*:  
 “Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said, \`Shouldn't I describe to you the
*wudu*' of the Messenger of Allah?' We said, \`Yes.' When the water was
brought, the Imam washed his hands, then he uncovered his fore-arms. He
dipped his right hand in the vessel ....then scooped it full with water
and poured it on his fore-head .... He let the water drop on to the end
of his beard and then he passed his hand on his face and fore-head once.

“Then he dipped his left hand (in the vessel), filled it up (with
water), poured it on his right elbow and then passed his palm on the
fore-arm until the water dripped to the finger-tips. Then he fully
scooped (the water) with his right hand, pour it on his left elbow and
then passed his palm on the fore-arm until the water dripped to the
finger-tips.

“Then he wiped the front part of his head and the apparent side of his
feet by the wetness of his left and right hands.” [^8]38

In another *hadith* Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) narrates the same
manner of performing *wudu*' which Arnim l-minin 'Ali had demonstrated
when a person inquired about the Prophet's manner of performing *wudu*'.
[^9]39

The imperative *“wamsahu* = wipe” means to directly wipe the hands, etc,
on something. When a word like “*wamsahu*“ is used alone in a transitive
form it denotes comprehensiveness and totality of the act; e.g.““ “would
mean “wipe all of your head.” But whenever this verb is followed by the
letter “*ba*” it denotes partiality e.g ““ would mean “wipe a *part* of
your head.” In the verse mentioned above ““ has been used with the
letter "*ba*” and thus the correct translation would be “wipe a part of
your head”.

Here again we come across another difference be­tween the Shi'ahs and
the Sunnis. The Sunnis wipe all of their head whereas the Shi'ahs wipe
only a part of their heads.

Which part of the head is to be wiped in *wudu*? The Qur'an is silent on
this; the *sunnah* has explained it. Many *ahadith* from the Imams of
*Ahlu 'l-bayt* have explained that “a part of the head” is “the front
part”.  
[^10]40

The word *“arjulakum*“ means “feet, leg”. To specify its meaning, it was
necessary to add the words *“ila ' 1-ka \`bayn* up to the ankles”. The
word *“ar-julakum” is* connected to *“bi ru'usikum* a part of your
heads” by the coordinate conjunction *“wa = and”*. And thus the sentence
would mean “wipe a part of your feet.”

Here again we come to two more differences among the Sunnis and the
Shi\`ahs. The Sunnis *wash* their *whole* feet in *wudu* whereas the
Shi\`ahs *wipe* only the *apparent side* of their feet up to the ankles.
As far as the Qur'an and the *ahadith* of the *Ahlu 'l-bayt* are
concerned, “wiping a part of your feet” is the only correct
interpretation of the verse of *wudu*. And this interpretation has also
been accepted by the famous Sunni scholar Imam Fakhru'd­ Din ar-Razi in
his *Tafsir al-Kabir.* [^11]41

The only basis for the Sunnis' point of view about “washing the feet”
are some \`*ahadith*' recorded in their books of tradition. These
adadith cannot be accepted because:

**Firstly,** they are contrary to the injunction of the Qur'an. And the
Prophet has said, “If a *hadith* is narrated to you from me, then put it
before the Book of Allah. If it is according to the Book of Allah, then
accept it; otherwise reject it.” [^12]42

**Secondly**, they are against the *sunnah* of the Prophet as explained
by the Imam of the *Ahlu 'l-bayt* who have been accepted as reliable by
all the Muslims. Even some companions of the Prophet have clearly stated
that it is wrong to ascribe the “washing of the feet” to the Prophet.
For example, the famous companion Abdullah ibn \`Abbas said, “Allah has
enjoined two washings and two wipings (in *wudu*). Don't you see that
when Allah mentions the *tayammum*, He places two wipings in place of
two washings (of face and hands) and leaves out the wipings (of head and
feet).” [^13]43

**Thirdly**, the *ahadith* of the Sunnis in this matter are
contradictory. Some *ahadith* mention “the washing of the feet” like
those of Humran quoted by Imam al-Bukhari [^14] and of Ibn \`Asim quoted
by Imam Muslim. While some other *ahadith* say that the Prophet “wiped
his feet” like that of \`Ibad bin Tamim which says that “I saw the
Prophet performing the *wudu*, and he wiped his feet.” This last
*hadith* has been recorded by *Ta'rikh* of al-Bukhari, *Musnad* of Ahmad
ibn Hanbal, *Sunan* of Ibn Abi Shaybah, and *Mu'jamu '1-Kabir* of
at-Tabarani; and all of its narrators are considered trustworthy. [^15]
And it is an accepted rule of the Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence
(*usulu' 1*-*fiqh)* that if there are contradictory *ahadith,* then
those which conform to the Qur'an are to be accepted and the others are
to be rejected.

Thus, we can conclude that the correct manner of performing the *wudu*,
according to the Qur'an and the authentic sunnah of the Prophet, is the
manner which has been explained by the Imams of *Ahlu 'l-bayt* .

[^1]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 282-3.

[^2]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 177

[^3]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 177

[^4]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, pp. 256, 483.

[^5]: Ibid, vol. 5, p. 444

[^6]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 269.

[^7]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 283-6 sections 17-19 of the chapter on wudu.

[^8]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 272

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 289.

[^11]: ar-Razi, Tafsir al-Kabir, vol. 3, p. 370.

[^12]: Ibid, p. 371.

[^13]: Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanzu '1-'Ummal, vol. 5, p. 103 (hadith no.
2213). Also see Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 1, p. 108.

[^14]: al-Bukhari, Sahih, vol. 1 (Beirut, Darul Arabia, n.d.) p. 113.

[^15]: al-'Asqalani, al-'Isabah, vol. 1, p. 193; see also his Tahdhib
at-Tahdhib.


