III. Ghusl
==========

A. Introduction
---------------

*Ghusl* is a major ablution as opposed to wudu which is a minor
ablution. In Islamic laws, *ghusl* is considered an act of worship; it
is an act of purifying oneself from the ritual impurity *(najasat)*
caused by sexual intercourse, discharge of semen or blood, and by
touching the dead body. The ritual bath given to a dead Muslim before
burial is also known as *ghusl*.

The *ghusl* for each of these causes has different names: Purification
from the impurity caused by sexual intercourse or discharge of semen is
known as *ghusl janabat.* Purification from the impurity caused by
menstruation is known as *ghusl hayd.* Purification from the impurity
caused by irregular bleeding is known as *ghusl istihadah.* Purification
from the impurity caused by post-natal bleeding is known as *ghusl
nifas.*

In Islamic laws, death is also considered a cause of ritual impurity of
a Muslim's body. Therefore, a dead Muslim has to be washed ritually
before the burial ceremony. Such a ritualistic bath for a dead Muslim is
known as *ghusl mayyit.* Touching a dead body, before the ritualistic
bath, also makes one impure *(najis).* Purifica­tion from this impurity
is known as *ghusl mass mayyit.*

In this chapter we shall explain the method and the general rules of
*ghusl*. In chapter 4, we shall discuss the rules of *ghusl* janabat.
The *ghusl*s related to women have been discussed extensively in my *The
Ritual Ablutions for Women (Taharatu ' n-Nisa' ).*

B. Manner of performing Ghusl
-----------------------------

Before explaining the rules of performing the *ghusl* it is necessary to
mention that all the *ghusl*s are performed in the same manner; the
difference is only in the niyyat of each *ghusl*. For example, for
purifying oneself from the ritual impurity of sexual intercourse, one
has to make the niyyat that \`he is doing *ghusl* janabat'.

*Ghusl* is a ritual bath; it involves washing of the whole body. There
are two methods of performing *ghusl*. One is known as *ghusl tartibi,*
and the other is known as *ghusl irtimasi.*

### 1. Ghusl Tartibi:

*“Ghusl tartibi”* means an ordinal bath, performed in three stages.

After washing away the najasat (e.g., semen or blood) from the body and
after niyyat, the body has to be washed in three stages: First, head
down to the neck; then the right side of the body from the shoulder down
to the foot; and lastly, the left side of the body.

Each part should be washed thoroughly in such a way that the water
reaches the skin. Special care should be taken while washing the head;
the hair should be combed (e.g., with your fingers) so that water
reached the hair roots. While washing the right side of the body, some
part of the left side must be washed too, and also, while washing the
left side of the body, some part of the right side must be washed.

### 2. Ghusl Irtimasi:

“*Ghusl* irtimasi” means a bath involving immersion of the whole body in
the water. It is needless to say that such a *ghusl* can only be done in
a body of water, e.g., a pool, river, lake or sea.

After washing away the semen or blood from the body and after niyyat,
the whole body should be completely immersed in the water all at once,
not gradually. One has to make sure that the water reaches all parts of
the body, including hair and the skin under it.

However, *ghusl* tartibi is preferred to *ghusl* irtimasi.

C. Recommendable acts of Ghusl
------------------------------

What has been mentioned above are the wajib acts of *ghusl*; here we
shall explain the things which are recom­mendable *(mustahab, sunnat)*
during the *ghusl*. These recommendable acts are five:

**1**. Washing both hands up to the elbows three times before the
*ghusl*.

**2.** Gargling three times.

**3.** Wiping the hands on the whole body to ensure that every part has
been thoroughly washed.

**4.** Combing the hair with the fingers to ensure that the water
reaches the hair-roots..

**5.** (For men only) Doing *istibra'* before *ghusl* janabat.
*Istibra',* in the present context, means “urinating.” The benefit of
*istibra':* If a liquid comes out of one's penis after completing the
*ghusl*, and he doubts whether it is semen or urine, then should he
repeat the *ghusl* or not? If he had done *istibra'* before the *ghusl*,
then he can assume that the liquid is urine -he will not have to repeat
the *ghusl*; he just has to do wudu for his salat. But, on the other
hand, if he had not done *istibra'* before the *ghusl*, then he has to
assume that it is the remnant of semen-he will have to do the *ghusl*
again.

\`Ubaydullah al-Halabi narrates that someone asked Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir (as) about a man who per­forms *ghusl* and then finds some
(doubtful) drops (on his penis) while he had already urinated before
performing the *ghusl*. (That is, should he consider the drops as urine
or semen?) The Imam said, “He will just have to do wudu (for his salat).
But if he had not passed urine before the *ghusl*, then he must repeat
the *ghusl*.” [^1]46

This rule of *istibra'* applies only to men. Sulayman bin Khalid asked
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) about a man who became ritually impure
because of sexual intercourse and then performed *ghusl* without
urinating. Then some drops came out of him. The Imam said, “He must
repeat the *ghusl*.” Sulayman: “What if similar drops come out of a
woman after she has performed *ghusl*?” The Imam said, “She does not
have to repeat the *ghusl*.” Sulayman: “What is the difference between
the two?” The Imam said, “(A woman does not have to repeat *ghusl*
janabat) because what comes out of her is certainly from the (remnants
of the) discharge of man.” [^2]47

D. A summary of Ghusl
---------------------

This is a summary of *ghusl*. The recommendable acts of *ghusl* are in
italics type-face.

**1.** Remove the najasat (semen, blood) from the body.

**2.** Niyyat.

**3.** *Wash the hands up to the elbows three time.*

**4*****.*** *Gargle three times.*

**5.** Wash the head down to the neck; *wipe your hand on the face and
neck, and comb the hair with your fingers.*

**6.** Wash the right side of your body from the shoulders down to the
feet; *include some part of the left side also. While washing, wipe the
body with your hand.*

**7.** Wash the left side of your body from the shoulders down to the
feet; *include some part of the right side also. While washing, wipe the
body with your hand.*

E. The conditions for the validity of Ghusl
-------------------------------------------

The validity of *ghusl* depends on certain conditions which are known as
“the conditions for the validity of *ghusl*”. These conditions are ten
in number: three condi­tions are related to the water, four are related
to the person and three to the act of *ghusl* itself.

**i. The Water:**

**1.** The water must be *mutlaq* (unmixed, pure).

**2.** The water must be *tahir* (ritually clean).

**3.** The water must be *mubah* (lawful). The details of these
conditions are same as the conditions of the water of wudu.

**ii. The Person:**

**4**. Niyyat.

**5.** All parts of the body must be clean from the impurity (e.g.,
semen, blood) before starting the *ghusl*.

**6.** Use of water should not be harmful to the person who wants to
perform *ghusl*.

**7.** The *ghusl* must be performed by the person him­self. (The
details are same as in wudu)

**iii. The Ghusl**

**8.** The place where *ghusl* is being performed must be *mubah*
(lawful).

**9.** The *ghusl* should be performed either in *tartibi* manner or in
*irtimasi* manner.

**10**. All parts of the body must be washed thoroughly as explained
above.

F. Some general rules
---------------------

**1.** If more than one *ghusl* become wajib on a person, e.g., janabat,
mass mayyit, etc., then one *ghusl* with the niyyat of all of them will
suffice. Zurarah bin A'yun quotes Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) as
follows: “When you perform *ghusl* (for example, after dawn), that one
*ghusl* suffices for the (*ghusl*s of) janabat, jum\`ah, \`Arafah, nahr,
halq, sacrifice and ziyarat. When various *ghusl*s become wajib upon you
then one *ghusl* will suf­fice ...And the same (rule) is for the woman;
one *ghusl* will suffice for her *ghusl* of janabat, ihram, jum'ah, and
her *ghusl* for *hayz* and *\`idd*.” [^3]48

**2.** All the *ghusl*s, except the *ghusl* for “medium *is­tihazah,”*
suffices the performer from wudu-provided none of the nawaqiz of wudu'
have taken place after the *ghusl*. So a person who has done *ghusl*
janabat, for example, can pray without doing wudu'. Zurarah quotes Imam
Ja'far as-Sadiq (a. s.) about the method of perform­ing *ghusl* janabat
as follows: “...there is no wudu, neither before it nor after it.”
[^4]49

**3.** If one of the nawaqiz of wudu' (e.g., passing of urine) takes
place during *ghusl* janabat, then one must perform the *ghusl* again,
and in such a case he is also recommended to do wudu' after the *ghusl*.
If one of the nawaqiz of wudu' takes place during the second *ghusl*,
then the *ghusl* will not be affected; but one has to do wudu after it
for salat..

**4.** If one of the causes which makes *ghusl* wajib takes place during
a *ghusl*, then there are two possibilities: (a) either the cause is
similar to the cause which necessitated the present *ghusl*, then one
has to perform the *ghusl* again; (b) or cause is dissimilar to the
cause of the present *ghusl*, then he should complete the *ghusl* and
then do another *ghusl*.

**5.** Before washing the right side of the body, if one doubts whether
or not he has washed the head and the neck, then he should start again
from the beginning. But if he doubts after commencing to wash the right
side, then he should disregard his doubt. While washing the left side of
the body if one doubts whether or not he has washed the right side, then
he should wash the right side and then wash the left.

**6.** *Ghuslu ' l-Jabirah:* If one has a bandage on his body, then how
should he or she do *ghusl*? Such a person will do *ghuslu ' 1 jabirah.
Ghusl* jabirah can be done by observing the rules men­tioned in *wudu'u
'l jabirah:* either one lifts the bandage and washes the wound normally,
or he washes only around the wound or over the bandage, etc.

[^1]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 517.

[^2]: Ibid, p. 482.

[^3]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 526.

[^4]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 515; also see p. 50


