IV. Ghusl Janabat
=================

A. Introduction
---------------

*“Janabat” is* a ritual impurity caused by the discharge of semen or by
sexual intercourse; and the person on whom *ghusl* *janabat* becomes
*wajib* is known as *“junub”.* The Qur'an says:

***“O you who believe! Do not go near prayers (salat) when you are ...
junub until you have washed yourselves. (4:43)***  
***O you who believe! When you stand up for prayers (salat) ... if you
are junub, then purify (yourselves).” (5:6)***

B. The causes of Ghusl Janabat
------------------------------

There are two causes of *janabat:*

**1.** **Discharge of semen.** It does not make any dif­ference whether
this discharge is while awake or in a wet-dream, slight or profuse,
intentionally or otherwise, in lawful way or unlawful (e.g.,
masturbation). In all these cases *ghusl janabat* becomes obligatory
*(wajib).*

If a liquid comes out from a man and he does not know whether or not it
is semen, then he should look for the following three signs: (1)
emission with passion; (2) spurting discharge; (3) feeling relaxed after
the discharge. If these signs are found together on him, then he should
consider the liquid as semen, otherwise not.

If a secretion is discharged from a woman, then it is precautionary
*wajib* for her to do *ghusl* *janabat* provided it came with sexual
passion *and* she felt relaxed after it. But if the secretion comes
without the sexual passion or without the feeling of relaxation after
the discharge, then it is not najis and therefore *ghusl* is not *wajib*
upon her.

**2. Sexual Intercourse.** It does not make any dif­ference whether the
intercourse was lawful or unlawful, and with or without discharge of
semen. In Islamic laws, sexual intercourse is defined as the penetration
of the glans into the vagina or anus of the woman. That is, for *ghusl*
*janabat* to become *wajib* it is not necessary that full penetration or
discharge of semen should take place.

In case of sexual intercourse, *ghusl* *janabat* becomes *wajib* on both
the man and the woman.

C. The things which are forbidden for a Junub
---------------------------------------------

There are certain things in Islam which are so sacred that a Muslim
cannot come into contact with them unless he or she is ritually pure and
clean. Based on this concept of sacredness, a *junub is* forbidden from
coming into contact, in various ways, with two of the most sacred things
in Islam: the Qur'an and the mosque.

The following four acts are haram for the *junub* before performing the
*ghusl*. Two are related to the Qur'an and the other two are related to
mosques.

**1.** *Touching the writing of the Qur'an,* the names and attributes of
Allah, the names of the Prophet, the Imams and Fatimah (the daughter of
the Prophet). This has already been explained on page 48 of this book.

**2.** *Reciting the verses of the Qur'an in which sajdah (prostration)
is wajib.* These verses are: verse 15 of chapter 32; verse 15 of chapter
41; verse 62 of chapter 53; and verse 19 of chapter 96. It is better not
to recite even a single verse from these chapters.

**3.** *Entering or staying in the mosque.* The Qur'an says,

***“O you who believe! ...Nor (are you allowed to enter the masjid) if
you are junub until you have washed yourself except passing through.”***
***(4:43)***

Based on this verse and relevant ahadith, the mujtahids have concluded
that a *junub* is totally forbidden from staying in the mosque.

Of course, as the verse says, one can pass through the mosques (by
entering from one door and leaving from the other). However, this
exception of passing through does not apply to the following places: the
Masjidu'l-Haram (the Sacred Mosque at Mecca), Masjidu'n-Nabi (the Mosque
of the Prophet at Medina), and shrines of the Imams-a junub cannot even
pass through them. Jamil asked Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (as) whether or not
a junub can sit in mosques? The Imam said, “No! But he may pass through
all of them except the Sacred Mosque (at Mecca) and the Prophet's Mosque
(at Medina).” [^1]

Bakr bin Muhammad narrates that once he and his friends were going
towards the house of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, when they met Abu Basir in
the way. When Abu Basir came to know that they were going to visit the
Imam, he joined them. As Bakr and his friends came to know later on, Abu
Basir was in the state of janabat at that time. When they entered the
house of the Imam and greeted him, the Imam looked towards Abu Basir and
said, “O Abu Basir! Do not you know that a junub person should not enter
the houses of the prophets?” [^2] Abu Basir himself has also narrated
this incident and quotes the Imam as follows: “Do not you know that a
junub should not enter the houses of the prophets and of their
children...” [^3]52

**4.** Leaving something in or taking it out from a mosque.

The following things are *makruh* (disliked) for the *junub*:  
 1. Eating and drinking is makruh for a *junub* except after doing
*wudu'* or gargling or rinsing the nose.  
 2. Reciting more than seven verses from the Qur'an. This applies to
other than the four chapters with *wajib* sajdah mentioned above.  
 3. Touching the cover of the Qur'an.  
 4. Sleeping except after doing *wudu'*.

D. The acts whose validity depend on Ghusl Janabat
--------------------------------------------------

**1.** Salat (prayers) except *salatu '1-mayyit* (the prayer for a dead
Muslim) which can be performed even in the state of *janabat*.

**2.** ***Wajib*** **tawaf** (the circumambulation of the Ka'bah in
hajj). Allah *says,*

***“And We assigned Ibrahim and Isma'il to purify My House for the
circumambulators (of the Ka\`bah)...” (2:125; 22:26)***

 It is not difficult to infer that if the House is to be cleaned and
purified for tawaf, then the people who will be doing the *tawaf* must
also be clean and pure. See also section H in *wudu*.

**3.** Fasting. If someone knowingly remains *junub* until dawn in
Ramadan, his fasting will become invalid (*batil*).

[^1]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 485

[^2]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 489.

[^3]: Ibid. p. 489-90.


