VI. From Ritual To Spiritual
============================

A. Introduction
---------------

One of the main distinctions of the present civilization is that
knowledge has become accessible to the ordinary people on an
unprecedented level. The trend of presenting things in a simplified and
lay-man's language, and the mass media had an important role to play in
this. The accessibility to knowledge has made the modern man more
inquisitive than ever about everything, including his religious rites
and rituals. In the great family of mankind, Muslim of the present day
has also acquired his share of this extra-inquisitiveness.

The inquisitive nature lures the present day Muslim to rationalize the
rites and rituals of Islam. This, indeed, is a good phenomenon because
it will increase his aware­ness about Islamic values, and make him more
firm in his religious life. But in his inquisitive journey in Islam, the
present day Muslim must broaden his horizon and should not look only for
material explanation of the Islamic rites and rituals because many such
acts are a gateway to the spiritual world of Islam, a world still
foreign to majority of the Muslims. Moreover, he must use the
appropriate vehicles to embark on such a journey-the Qur'an and the
*sunnah**.***

In this part of the book, I intend to study the ritual purity in order
to discover its relation to the spiritual purity.

B. The big question
-------------------

Do the rituals have anything to do with spiritual purification? The
answers to such question will reflect the mentality of majority of the
Muslims. When asked, “Why was *wudu* and *ghusl* made obligatory?” or
“Why are certain things consider *\`ayn najis* in Islam?” many people
will say that such laws were made so that we may remain clean, and that
Islam is a religion of cleanliness. This is the answer you get from
both, the simple-minded religious Muslims and also the Muslims with a
liberal outlook. Unfortunately, the insistence on this aspect of
*taharat* and *najasat* by the former provides ammunition to the liberal
view which says that such laws were made to keep the Arabs of the desert
clean and are therefore irrelevant to us.

I do not deny that Islam expects its followers to be physically clean,
that it is a religion of cleanliness, and that the rules of *taharat*
help in keeping oneself clean. Islam was, indeed, very successful in
promoting personal cleanliness not only when compared to the
seventh-cen­tury Arabia but even when compared to the personal hygiene
of the Europeans as late as the nineteenth century.

Will Durant writes, “Cleanliness, in the Middle Ages, was not next to
godliness. Early Christianity had denounced the Roman baths as wells of
perversion and promiscuity, and its general disapproval of the body had
put no premium on hygiene.” [^1] St. Benedict had said “to those that
are well, and especially to the young, bathing shall seldom be
permitted.” [^2] Another writer says, “Mediaeval books of etiquette
insist upon the washing of hands, face and teeth every morning, but not
upon bath­ing ...King John took a bath once every three weeks, and his
subjects presumably less often.” [^3] Describing the age of Reformation,
Durant says, “Social and individual hygiene hardly kept pace with the
advance of medicine.

Personal cleanliness was not a fetish; even the King of England bathed
only once a week and sometimes skipped.” [^4] The same historian, after
describing the dress­ing manners, writes, “How clean were the bodies
behind the frills? A sixteenth-century *Introduction pour lesjeunes
dames* spoke of women \`who had no care to keep themselves clean except
in those parts that may be seen, remaining filthy...under their'; and a
cynical proverb held that courtesans were the only women who washed more
than their face and hands. Perhaps cleanliness increased with
immorality, for as women offered more of themsel­ves to view or to many,
cleanliness enlarged its area.” [^5]58

Wright, in his interesting book *Clean and Decent,* says, “We may boast
in many ways of the Elizabethans, but we  
 find few references to bathing or washing in Shakespeare.” [^6] Going
on to the eighteenth-century, we find that a manual of etiquette advises
“wiping the face every morning with a white linen, but warns that it is
not so good to wash it in water...” [^7] In early nineteenth-cen­tury, a
doctor remarked that “most men resident in London and many ladies though
accustomed to wash their hands and faces daily, neglect washing their
bodies from year to year.' [^8]61

In 1812 the Common Council turned down a request from the Lord Mayor of
London for a mere shower-bath in the Mansion House “inasmuch as the want
thereof has never been complained of”, and if he wanted one, he might
provide a temporary one at his own expense. [^9] At Queen Victoria's
accession in 1837 there was no bathroom in Buckingham Palace. [^10] And
no wonder that during those days “saner opinion recognized that frequent
bathing must increase rheumatic fever and lung com­plaints ...one of the
Georgian Royal Dukes remarked that it was sweat, damn it, that kept a
man clean.” [^11] By the end of nineteenth and early twentieth century,
the fear of water began to give way, “though it was still thought
eccentric to bathe for any but medical reasons.” [^12]65

This brief survey of cleanliness and bathing in Europe shows that Islam
was successful in promoting personal hygiene when compared not just to
the Middle Ages but even to the late nineteenth and early twentieth
century. Will Durant writes, “One of the results of the Crusades was the
introduction into Europe of public steam bath in the Moslem style.”
[^13] Describing the Ottoman civilization, the same historian writes,
“Personal cleanliness was common. In Constantinople and other large
cities of the Ottoman Empire the public baths were built of marble and
attractively decorated. Some Christian saints had prided themselves on
avoiding water; the Moslem was required to make his ablutions before
entering the mosque or saying his prayers; in Islam cleanliness was
really next to godliness.” [^14]67

But to emphasize exclusively the physical aspect of the rules of
*taharat* is tantamount to ignore the multi-facet nature of the Islamic
rituals. The physical cleanliness is not the main reason underlying the
ritual ablutions. If Islam had prescribed *wudu* and *ghusl* for
physical clean­liness only, then why is it still necessary for a person
who has just got out of the shower to do *wudu* before saying the
Islamic prayer? If the ritual ablutions are just for physical
cleanliness, then why the *Tayammum*? *Tayammum* is a substitute for
*wudu* and *ghusl* when water is unavailable; but it is performed on
“dirt” or earth-and this in no way leads to physical cleanliness! These
ques­tions are enough to disqualify the exclusive nature of this point
of view.

C. The correct perspective
--------------------------

So what is the comprehensive rationale of the ritual ablutions like wudu
and ghusl? By studying the two verses of the Qur'an related to the
ritual ablutions, I have come to the conclusion that there are two
planes of purification: physical and spiritual. Although wudu and ghusl
are re­lated to physical purification but there is a more sublime reason
underlying these two ritual ablutions-they serve as a reminder to and
gateway of spiritual purification.

In suratu 'l-Baqarah, after talking about *ghusl* *hayz*, the Qur'an
says,

***“Surety Allah loves those who often turn to Him, and He also loves
those who cleanse them­selves.” (2:222)***

In another verse, after explaining the rules of *wudu* and *ghusl*, the
Qur' an says,

***“Allah does not desire to make any impediment for you; but He desires
to cleanse you, and that He may complete His blessings upon you; haply
you may be grateful.” (5:6)***

We find two different themes in both these verses: First: Allah loves
those who cleanse themselves, and that He desires to cleanse us. Second:
He wants to complete His blessings upon us, and that He loves those who
often turn towards Him. The first theme is related to the physical
cleanliness, while the second theme is related to the spiritual purity.

The verses of the first theme are very clear, they refer to cleanliness.
But what do the verses of the second theme mean? What is the meaning of
“often turning to Allah”? Turning to Allah implies that the person had
turned away from Allah. What does this mean? These are the questions
which I will discuss below.

In Islamic value system, the human soul is like a light bulb. If the
bulb is protected from dust and dirt, it will enlighten the area; but if
dust and dirt is allowed to accumulate on the bulb, then it will not be
able to il­luminate the area as much as before. Similarly, the human
soul has to be protected from spiritual \`dirt' and unclean­liness;
otherwise it will not be able to guide the person as rightly as before.

Allah, the Creator of mankind, describes the master­piece of His
creation in the following way:

***“By the sun and its morning brightness! By the moon when it follows
the sun! By the day when it illuminates (everything)! By the night when
it enshrouds the day! By the heaven and He who built it! By the earth
and He who extended it! And by the soul and He who perfected it! Then He
inspired it to understand what is good and what is evil. Prosperous is
he who purifies it, and failed is he who seduces it.” (91:1-10)***

After swearing by the most majestic signs of His creation, Allah says
that the pure human soul has the ability to understand what is right and
what is wrong provided it is purified and uncorrupted. This verse makes
it clear that the human soul, just like his body, is capable of becoming
spiritually impure and unclean. Imam 'Ali (as) has said, \`The human
soul is a precious jewel; whoever protects its, enhances its
(effectiveness), and whoever degrades its, decreases its
(effectiveness).” [^15]68

The impurities that can corrupt a human soul are collectively known as
“sins”. Accumulation of sins can indeed render the human soul
ineffective and, in Qur'anic expression, \`seize the heart'. Allah says,

***“Whatever (sins) they have committed has seized their heart.”
(83:14)***

By committing sins, not only is the soul of a Muslim seized but he also
spiritually turns away from Allah. Sins create a distance between God
and man.

Can a person rescue his soul from the seizing of the sins? Can a sinner
spiritually get closer to God? Yes, indeed, a sinful person can
spiritually return to Allah. Returning to Allah means repenting and
asking forgive­ness for your sins. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) has
explained this phenomenon as follows: “Each believer has a bright soul.
When he commits a sin, a dark dot appears on his bright soul. If he
repents, the dark dot will disappear. But if he persists in his sins,
the darkness will increase until it covers the entire soul-then the
person would never return towards goodness.” [^16]69

You can now easily understand that just as our bodies can become impure
by the physical *najasat*, our souls become impure by sins. To rid our
bodies of the physical *najasat*, we use water; similarly, to rid our
souls of the spiritual impurities, we use *tawbah. Tawbah literally*
means “to turn,” but it is used in Islamic terminology for “repentance”.
In other words, by doing *tawbah* a sinner “turns towards Allah in
repentance”..

And now it should be clear to you why I take the verse

***2:222 ( “Surely Allah loves those who often turn to Him*****”)**

as a reminder for the spiritual purification. Sins make the human soul
impure and takes him away from *God.*  
*Tawbah* purifies the human soul and brings him closer to God.

In short, the human soul is corruptible; it is corrupted by sins; the
corrupted soul can be purified by *tawbah. By* reminding us that He
loves those who do *tawbah* in the verse of ritual ablution, Allah is
trying to draw our atten­tion to the spiritual purification. In the
following section of this chapter, I will attempt to explain some of the
main elements of spiritual impurity, the way they corrupt the soul and
the method of purifying the soul from such spiritual impurities. All
this will be done by connecting the ritual purification to the spiritual
plane. I humbly pray to Allah, *subhanahu wa ta \`ala,* to help me in
this very pleasant but at the same time difficult task.

D. Connecting the ritual to the spiritual
-----------------------------------------

### 1. Disbelief - Kufr

One of the *najasat* is a *kafir,* an unbeliever. It is needless to say
that a ka.fir is considered *najis* not because of his physical state,
rather because of his spiritual state ­*kufr,* disbelief. By declaring
the *kafir* as *najis*, Islam wants to draw our attention to a terminal
spiritual disease known as *kufr*.

What is *kufr? Kufr* literally means a cover. In Islamic terminology, it
is mostly used for a person who dis­believes in God; and so *“kafir”*
means an unbeliever. By using the word *“kafir”* for an unbeliever,
Islam is imply­ing that the unbeliever is a person who covers or hides
the truth. What can be more true than God, the Creator?! It also means
that a *kafir* is a person whose soul has been completely covered by
darkness.

*Kufr* -the rejection of God- is such a strong spiritual disease that it
affects the entire body of the *kafir* and renders it *najis*. Even if a
*kafir* washes himself thoroughly hundred times and dresses up in very
clean clothes, still he will be considered ritually *najis*. Nothing can
cure this spiritual disease, nothing can purify the soul of a *kafir*
except Islam. And therefore, you see that the shari\`ah counts “Islam”
as one of the mutahhirat.

Can a spiritual phenomenon really have any effect on our physical body?
In the spiritual realm of the Islamic world-view it does. To make my
point more clear, I will give another example of a similar spiritual
phenomenon but of a positive kind. You have read in the first chapter of
this book that blood and corpse of a human being are considered *najis*
by the *skari\`ah. This is* a universal rule. But there is one exception
to this rule: The *shari\`ah* says that the blood and body of a martyr
is not *najis*. Martyr­dom is a convincing proof of the person's
readiness to sacrifice everything for Allah.

Martyrdom is a good deed of the highest quality, and it affects the
entire body of the martyr. And therefore, Islam says that the dead body
and even the blood of a martyr is tahir and pure. Not only the body and
blood, but even the earth of a martyr's grave and the grave itself are
affected and acquire sacredness! It for this reason that we have been
taught to pay tribute to the martyrs of Karbala by saying: “May my
parents be your ransom! You became pure and the earth in which you were
buried has also become pure.” [^17] And that is the reason why the
Shi'ah fiqh recommends that we do sajdah on the *turbah,* the tablet
made from the earth of Karbala.

In short, just as a good deed of highest quality like martyrdom affects
the body, the blood and even the grave of the martyr and makes them pure
and sacred, similarly the worst type of deed like *kufr* affects the
entire body of the *kafir* and makes it *najis*.

Why is *kufr* such an evil phenomenon? By rejecting the faith in God, a
*kafir* loses his own true identity. After rejecting God, this world
becomes the beginning and the end of a *kafir*'s life; with no faith in
the hereafter, he just works for this world. At this stage, if religious
values loose their influence, the *kafir* thinks of maximizing the
benefits of this world even at the expense of other human beings. And he
starts to believe only in his animal instincts and ignores his human
aspect. When a person reaches this stage, he starts judging his own
actions by those of the animals. For example, the law of the animal
world known as “the struggle for existence” and “the survival of the
fittest” becomes the foundation of the human world. Many anthropologists
and scientists study animal behavior and then not just explain but
justify the pervert human behavior. It is for such people that Allah
says,

***“They have minds but they do not understand with them,' they have
eyes but they do not see with them; they have ears but they do not hear
with them--they are like cattle, nay, rather they are more astray; they
are the heedless ones.” (7:179)***

Similarly, *shirk is* also considered a terminal spiritual disease.
*Shirk* (polytheism) means that a person ascribes partners to God. This
partners) could be a human being, an animal or a thing. In a way, a
*mushrik* (polytheist) is worst than a *kafir* because the latter just
rejects the concept of God while the former elevates the created beings
to the level of God. A man cannot further degrade himself than by bowing
to a fellow human being or an animal or a statue made by his own hands.
Allah says,

***“Verily Allah does not forgive the sin of shirk but He forgives
anything other than that.”*** **(4:48)**

By declaring the *kafir*s and the mushrikin as *najis*, Islam wants to
draw our attention to the importance and value of faith (*iman*). It is
an indirect way of saying that in Allah's view, bodily appearance and
cleanliness is not more valuable than the faith which is in the heart of
a believer. And it also tells us that if Islam is so strict about ritual
cleanliness, then how strict it would be about spiritual purification.

### 2. Arrogance - Takabbur

Another most destructive spiritual disease or \`*najasat*' is arrogance,
known in Arabic as *takabbur.* It is a mental state of a person who
thinks very highly himself and looks down upon others. An arrogant
person shows his pride by humiliating others. In Islamic value system,
arrogance has been condemned very strongly. But what has this to do with
*najasat* and *taharat*?

When I looked at the list of the *najasat*, two seemingly unrelated
things caught my attention. \`Semen and human corpse.' And I started to
think why has the Islamic *shari'ah* considered semen and human corpse
among the ritually *najis* things. Semen after all holds the seed of a
human being-the master-piece of Allah's creation. So why should it be
declared as *najis*? Why must a person purify himself after discharge of
semen? Why should a Muslim be considered *najis* after his death? Why
must we purify ourselves if we touched the dead Muslim before he is
given the ritual bath?

Some people might be tempted to look for scientific reasons for the
*najasat* of semen and corpse. I do not deny such possibilities, but my
thoughts led me to the con­clusion that in declaring semen and corpse as
*najis*, Islam is not passing a judgment on their physical aspect,
in­stead it is trying to drive home a very important moral message about
arrogance.

Let me explain myself by asking the following ques­tion: Is there any
relationship between \`semen' and \`corpse'? Yes, semen is the beginning
of human life and corpse is the end of it. In other words, a man starts
his life as a sperm and ends his life as a corpse.

When a person looks at this relationship and realizes that Islam has
considered his beginning and his end as *najis*, he must think twice
before being arrogant! If he remembers the ritual worth of his beginning
and end, he will never be infected by the spiritual disease of
ar­rogance, no matter how rich or how powerful he becomes. To me, semen
and a Muslim's corpse has been considered *najis* just to remind us of
our reality and to remind us that arrogance is not our right. And in
arriving at this con­clusion, I was inspired by the saying of Imam \`Ali
bin Abi Talib (as) which says, “I am surprised at man: his beginning is
a sperm and his end is a corpse, and between his beginning and his end
he is just a earner of waste-and still he is arrogant!” [^18]71

Arrogance is the prerogative of God. Prophet Muham­mad (peace be upon
him) said that Allah has said, “Ar­rogance is My robe and glory is My
dress; therefore, whoever tries to take any of these two from me, I will
put him in hell.” Allah says in the Qur'an,

***“Do not walk on the earth arrogantly, certainly you will never be
able to tear the earth open, nor compete with the mountains in height.”
(17:39)***

He also says,

**“Do** ***not turn your cheek away from the people in arrogance, and do
not walk on the earth arrogantly; God does not love any arrogant and
boastful person. Be modest in your walk, and lower your voice; surely
the most hideous of voices is that of the ass.”*** **(31:18-19)**

Arrogance can move its victim to many sins and crimes. Here I will just
mention two events from the Qur'an about arrogance and its result.

Those who are familiar with the story of Adam in the Qur'an know that
the first creature to disobey Allah's command was Shaytan. And the
motive of Shaytan's disobedience was arrogance. The Qur'an describes it
as follows:

***We created you, then We shaped you and then We said to the angels,
“Prostrate before Adam!” so they bowed themselves except Iblis (the
Shaytan), he was not among those who had bowed themselves. Allah said
(to the Shaytan), “What prevented you from bowing yourself when I
commanded you?” Iblis said, “I am better than him; You have created me
of fire, while You have*** ***created him of clay.” So Allah said, “Then
you get down from this (heavenly station), it is not for you to be
arrogant here. Get out! You are among the humiliated ones.”***
**(7:11-3)**

In another chapter, the Qur'an says,

***“All the angels bowed themselves to Adam except Iblis (the Shaytan)
who refused and was arrogant, and thus he became one of the unbelievers.
“(2:34)***

So according to the Qur'an, ar­rogance had so much blinded the Shaytan
that he forgot that his own so-called greatness of being created from
fire was given to him by the same God who was now commanding him to bow
to Adam.

Another example from the Qur'an is of an arrogant human being, Fir'awn.
The Qur'an describes his ar­rogance as follows:

***Have you received the story of Musa? When his Lord called to him in
the holy valley, Tuwa:*** ***“Go to Fir'awn; he has exceeded the limits.
And say to him, \`Have you the intention to purify yourself so that I
should guide you to your Lord, then you shall fear Him?”' (So Musa went
to Fir'awn and) showed him the great sign, but Fir'awn disbelieved and
rebelled, then he turned away hastily. Then Fir'awn gathered an assembly
of men and proclaimed that “I am your Most High Lord.” Therefore, God
seized him with punishment. (79:16)***

In these verses, one can see that Allah considers Fir'awn to be
spiritually impure and that is why Prophet Musa is told to ask him
whether he is prepared to purify himself or not. And then Allah
describes how Fir'awn arrogantly claimed that \`I am your Most High
Lord.' These verses are quite clear in stating that Fir'awn was
suffering from a spiritual impurity known as arrogance. Fir'awn was some
much overcome with arrogance that when his own magicians declared their
faith in the God of Musa and Harun, he said,

***“You have believed in Him before I gave you the permission?!”
(79:24)***

Look, what arrogance can do to a man!

But if a person always remembers that his beginning is a sperm and his
end is a corpse, and that both these have been considered as *najis* by
the *shari'ah*, then he will never be infected by the spiritual impurity
of arrogance. Such a person will not only remember his humility in front
of his Lord but will also refrain from humiliating other human beings,
no matter how \`low' they may be from material point of view.

Besides remembering the *najasat* of semen and corpse, other ways which
can help a person in fighting arrogance are the following: always being
first in greeting others, attending the congregational prayers and going
for the pilgrimage. Congregational prayers and the pilgrimage are
intensive training programs to make one realize that he or she is
nothing but a servant of Allah like thousands and millions of His other
servants who belong to different races, speak diverse languages and are
not necessarily in the same income bracket!

### 3. Respecting others' rights

Human beings have been created with various in­stincts. Most can be
broadly classified under \`desire' and \`anger,' also known as lower or
animal instincts. These feelings have not been created for nothing, they
are not to be suppressed. It is the \`anger' that prompts us to evade
danger and defend ourselves, and it is \`desire' that prompts us to look
for food. However, these instincts must be brought under control of our
reason or spirit which is also known as higher or human instinct. For
example, if one's desire is not restrained by reason, it will change
into greed and then that person would have no regard what­soever for the
feelings or rights of other human beings.

Imam 'Ali (as) said, “Allah has given to angels the power of reason but
not the (instincts of) desire and anger; and He has given to animals the
two instincts without the power of reasoning; but He has honored the
human being by giving the power of reason as well as the instincts of
desire and anger. If his anger and desire become subser­vient to the
command of his reason, then he will become better than the angels
because he reached that stage [of spiritual perfection] in spite of odds
which the angels never face.” (By “odds” means the desire and anger.)

But in order to control his \`animal' desire and keep it within the
restrain of reason, man needs to build his spiritual power. Education by
itself is not enough. Man needs to be constantly reminded about
respecting the rights of fellow human beings. And it is in this constant
reminding that Islam has been most successful than any other system of
life. Islam has used the daily rituals to reinforce some of the mast
important social and ethical principals in the minds of its followers.

This constant reminder has been done by the follow­ing rules of ritual
purity: (1) Washroom: It must be *mubah-*that is*,* you must be the
owner of the washroom or you must have the permission of the owner,
otherwise it is forbidden for you to fulfill your natural needs in that
place. (2) Water and place for *wudu*: it must be mubah. (3) Water and
place for *ghusl*: it must be mubah. (4) Earth for *Tayammum*: it must
be mubah and even the place where the earth is must also be mubah.
Similar laws can be found in the rules for the ritual daily prayers
about the dress in which you pray, the place where you pray, etc.

If a Muslim abides by these simple rules of daily routine, he will be
forced to make sure that his house, water, land, clothes, etc. is mubah
(lawful). This will not only reinforce the importance of respecting the
rights of other people, but will also affect the way a person makes his
living and the way he deals with others in business. He will have to
make sure that his income is not from unlawful sources, otherwise the
use of the washroom, his *wudu*, *ghusl* and daily prayers in his own
house will not be correct.

The Imams have always tried to teach us about the importance of
respecting the rights of others. Imam Zaynu 'l-\`Abidin (as) said, “By
He who has sent Muhammad as a prophet of truth! Even if the killer of my
father, Husayn bin 'Ali, entrusts me with the sword with which he killed
my father, I will surely return it back to him.” In another hadith, he
says, “Allah will forgive for the believers every sin and cleanse them
of it in the hereafter except two sins: not observing taqiyyah where it
should be observed and violating the rights of your brethren in faith.”

It is indeed unfortunate that in spite of such training programs in
Islam, Muslims in many countries show no sensitivity or respect for the
rights of their brethren in faith. The reason why some Muslims do not
gain the spiritual and moral benefit from the rituals is because they do
not connect such rituals to the spiritual and moral values. For them,
these are just rituals and nothing else. It is necessary for the Muslims
to connect the rituals of Islam to its spiritual, moral and social
principals, and only then will they be able to present themselves as the
ideal community in the present world. The system is already there, the
Muslims just need to understand it properly and utilize it more
effectively.

### 4. Thinking positively about others

Islam is not a religion in which only the relationship between God and
man is important, rather it is a religion which also gives great
importance to relationships be­tween human beings themselves. In Islam,
you cannot please God by fulfilling His rights and ignoring those of
other human beings.

The importance of respecting the rights of other human beings has been
very clearly presented in the Qur'an by combining salat with *zakat*. In
almost 80 verses, Allah has talked about “establishing the prayers and
paying the *zakat*.” Salat is the symbol of Allah's rights upon man and
*zakat* is the symbol of man's rights upon each other. One without the
other is an incomplete im­plementation of Islam, it will not guarantee
the salvation of man in the hereafter.

When we talk about the rights of other people, we mostly emphasize over
their material and physical rights. Respecting others' rights is mostly
taken by us to mean that we should refrain from physically harming
others or from violating their property rights. It is rarely understood
that not only should we restrain ourselves from physically harming other
or violating their material rights, rather we should also restrain our
minds from distrusting others without any reasonable cause. Islam
teaches us to always think positively about others.

When a person starts thinking positively about others, he will
automatically be saved from the immoral conse­quences of distrusting
other. By these consequences, I mean \`spying into characters of other
people' and \`back- biting'. Positive thinking should be our attitude
towards all human beings, but more so towards Muslims. After all,
Muslims are considered by Allah as brothers and sisters of each other.
And as brothers, they should trust and be positive about one another.
The Qur'an says:

***“Verily the believers are nothing but brothers (to each other) ...0
you who believe! Avoid most of the suspi­cious (thoughts about other
Muslims); for surely suspicion in some cases is a sin. And do not spy
(on each other). Nor should some of you backbite others. Does any one of
you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Surely you abhor it. So
fear (the punishment of) Allah. Surely Allah is Most-Forgiving and
Merci­ful.” (49:10-12)***

Suspicion leads to spying and spying in turn leads to backbiting.
Avoidance of suspicion helps in refraining from spying on others and
thus backbiting. Not only will such a person be saved from immoral
consequences of distrusting others, rather he will have more time for
self-criticism which is the first step of spiritual purifica­tion.

There is an interesting conversation recorded by \`Allamah at-Tabrasi
between Imam Zaynu '1-\`Abidin (as) and Muhammad bin Muslim az-Zuhri. It
seems that az-Zuhri was not getting along well with people. He came to
the Imam and complained about his circumstances. In the latter part of
their conversation, the Imam gave a very useful advice which deserves to
be remembered by each and every Muslim. The Imam said, “And if the
Satan, may the curse of Allah be upon him, makes you think that you have
a superiority over any one of the followers of the *qiblah,* then think
about that person: If he is elder than you, then say \`He has been ahead
of me in faith and good deeds, therefore he is better than me.' If he is
younger than you, then say, \`I have been ahead of him in disobedience
and sins, therefore he is better than me.' And if he is of your age,
then say, \`I am certain about my own sins but in doubt about his sins,
so why should I prefer doubt over certainty.' [^19] Read this hadith
again and think about it. See if you can follow this advice which,
indeed, deserves to be written in golden letters!

To show the importance of this moral principal, the *shari'ah* has
counted *ghaybatu 'l-Muslim* (the disap­pearance of a Muslim) as one of
the mutahhirat. You should consider as tahir the body or clothe of a
person who became *najis* in your presence just because he disap­peared
from your sight long enough for him to purify himself or his dress. Just
imagine how positive the *shari'ah* wants you to be! This is not a cage
of thinking positive because you know nothing negative about the person,
rather it is a case where you know for sure that the person or his dress
had become *najis*; still you are expected to think positively about
that person.

### 5. Sincerity in intention

In our own evaluation, we judge a person by his deeds. This is so
because we, as human beings, cannot know the motives of the doer. But
does Allah judge the people in the same way? No, on the day of judgment,
Allah will not judge by looking at the deed; He will judge by looking at
the motives. In Islamic value system, motive is as important as the deed
itself. Rather according to the Prophet, “Verily, the deeds are
(evaluated according to) the motives.” [^20]73

Islam teaches its followers to do good deeds for the sake of pleasing
Allah. Describing our purpose of life, Allah says,

***“I have not created ...the human being except so that they may
worship (Me).” (51:56)***

Obviously this verse does not mean that our purpose of creation is to do
nothing but perform ritual prayers. No, not at all. It actually means
that a Muslim's whole life should be an act of worship, that is, it
should be lived by obeying Allah. The best expression of this concept
can be found in the words. of a Prophet quoted in the Qur'an:

**“Verily my** ***prayers, my ritual actions, (in short) my life and***
**my** ***death are all for Allah, the Lord of the universe*****.”
(6:162)**

“A Muslim will never fall into the pitfall of polytheism (shirk), he
will never do anything with the motive of pleasing another god; but
there are some im­purities of thoughts which are called \`hidden
polytheism' against which he must vigilantly guard himself. For
ex­ample, when a person worships Allah, but at the same time likes the
people to know that he is worshipping God, then he is committing the sin
of \`hidden polytheism.' Such a deed is not done with pure intention, it
is polluted by the hidden polytheism, because the worshipper's intention
is riot pure, he wants to please two master with one act of worship: God
and \`the people'.

“Not only the ritual prayers, but all our actions should be based upon
the love of God. For example, while helping our less fortunate brethren,
we must remember that we are passing on the property of God to the
dependents of God. It should be done without any shade of worldly
motives. A help given with a worldly motive is a body without a soul. A
charity done with a desire to enhance one's social standing destroys the
fiber of that charity.” [^21] Allah says,

***“O you who believe! Do not nullify your charity by reproach and
injury (to the recipient), like the person who spends his wealth to show
it to the people...” (2:264)***

There is a famous anecdote of Bahlul. Once he saw that a big mosque was
being built. He went to the mosque site and asked the main contributor,
“Why are you build­ing this mosque?” The donor, “Bahlul! Isn't it
obvious that a mosque is built for sake of pleasing Allah? Why else
would one built a mosque?” Bahlul went away. He found a big concrete
block and wrote \`Masjid Bahlul' over it. At night time, he fixed this
concrete block over the main gate of the mosque. Next morning, he found
the donor very upset. The donor got hold of Bahlul and said, “How dare
you put your name over the mosque which is being built with my money and
contribution?! “Bahlul, “If you really are building this mosque for
pleasing Allah, then you should not be upset at all because even if the
people are misled by what has been written on the concrete block, surely
Allah is not going to be misled. He will know that you built the mosque.
So why are you angry?”

Doing a good deed with a pure intention is just the first step, to keep
that deed as a credit in your account with God is more difficult. Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (as) says, “To preserve the good deed (in your scroll
of deeds) is more difficult than doing it.” When asked to explain what
he meant, the Imam gave an example: “When a person helps his relative
and gives money for the sake of Allah who has no partner, it is recorded
that he did so secretly (for the sake of Allah); but if he mentions his
good deed (to someone), then it will be re-classified in the deeds which
he did openly. And if he mentions it again, then it will be classified
as a deed done for showing off to the people.”

One way which the shari\`ah has adopted to draw our attention to this
most important teaching of Islam is by making it part of the rituals
which we have to do on a daily basis. I am referring to the rules about
niyyat in *wudu*, *ghusl*, *Tayammum*, prayers, etc. These rules, as far
as I can understand, are not just for their own sake rather they serve
as a constant reminder that our motives should be pure in doing good
deeds. Remember, Allah does not look at the deed, He looks at the motive
and intention of the doer.

***“Verily Allah accepts (the good deeds) only from the pious people.”
(5:27)***

### 6. The Du'as during Wudu

I would like to end this chapter with a brief explana­tion on the
*du'as* mentioned in section \`D' of Chapter Two. If a person memorizes
these *du'as* and their mean­ings and recites them every time he or she
does *wudu*, I am sure it will have a profound effect on his or her
spirituality. These *du'as* in ritual ablution open one more window
towards the spiritual world of Islam.

The *du'a* at the beginning of *wudu* is a statement about the purity of
intention. The second *du'a* is a reminder that the ritual ablution is a
means to the purification of the soul.

The third *du'a* is telling us to be careful in how we use our tongue
and also reminds us of the questioning of the day of judgment. The
fourth *du'a* is a constant reminder of the destination for which we
have been created. The fifth *du'a* informs us that man can be honored
or dis­graced on the day of judgment and so we should work hard to be
honored and not disgraced. The sixth and seventh du\`as are reminding us
that if we want the scroll of our deeds in our right hands, then we must
be careful in our actions in this world. The eighth *du'a* teaches us
not to rely on ourselves only rather to ask Allah's help also. And,
finally, the ninth *du'a* is a reminder of the conditions of the day of
judgment.

Glossary
--------

**Wajib:** obligatory, necessary, incumbent. An act which must be
performed. A person will be rewarded for performing it and punished for
neglecting it, e.g., the daily prayers.

**Ihtiyat Wajib:** precautionary obligatory. Its significance is the
same as that of wajib with the difference that wherever a mujtahid says
that “it is precautionarily obligatory,” his followers have the option
of leaving his taqlid (following) in this particular problem and
following the fatwa of the second best mujtahid provided the second
mujtahid has a different opinion.

**Haram:** forbidden, prohibited. It is necessary to abstain from the
acts which are harm. If someone performs a harm act, he will be punished
either by the Islamic court or in the hereafter or both. For example,
stealing, eating pork.

**Sunnat** or **Mustahab**: recommended, desire-able, better. It refers
to the acts which are recommended but not wajib. If one neglects them,
he will not be punished; however, if one performs them, he will be
rewarded. For example, wash­ing the hands before *wudu*.

**Makruh:** reprehensible, disliked, and discouraged. It is used for the
acts which are disliked but not harm. If someone does a makruh act, he
will not be punished for it; however, if he refrains from it, then he
will be rewarded. For example, eating before *ghusl* *janabat*.

**Ja'iz, Halal, Mubah:** permitted, allowed, lawful, legal. The acts or
things which are permitted and lawful. There is no reward for performing
it nor any punishment for neglect­ing it. Mubah is exclusively used for
lawful things, not for permitted actions. An example, drinking tea.

**Mujtahid:** a religious scholar who is an expert of Islamic laws, the
*shari'ah*. Usually, it is used for the high ranking mujtahids whose
decrees are followed by the people.

**Marja**: The high ranking mujtahid is who is followed by the people.
Literally, it means the point of reference. The high ranking mujtahids
are called marja\` because they are the point of reference for the
people in the shari\`ah matters.

**Shari\`ah** or **Shari\`at**: Literally means, the way. In Is­lamic
terminology, it means the laws of Islam.

Bibliography
------------

The Qur'an.

\`Amili, Muhammad bin Hasan al-Hurr al-, *Wasa'ilu 'sh ­Shi'ah ila
Tahsil Masa'ili 'sh-Shari'ah. (20* volumes) Beirut: Dar Ihya at-Turath
al-\`Arabi, 1391 A.H.

Amudi, *Ghuraru ' I-Hikam.*

Ardabili, Ahmad bin Muhammad al-, *Zubdatu ' l-Bayan fi Ahkamu '
l-Qur'an.* Tehran: Matba'a al-Murtazawiyya, 1967.

\`Askari, Najmu 'd-Din al-, *al-Wudu fi 'l-Kitab wa 's-Sunnah.* Cairo:
Matbu'at an-Najah, n.d.

\`Asqalani, Ibn Hajar al-, *al-Isabah fi Tamizi 's-Sahabah.* Cal­cutta:
Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1853-88.

Bukhari, Muhammad bin Ismail al-, *Sahihu 'l-Bukhari.* Beirut: Daru
'1-\`Arabiyya, n.d.

Durant, Will, *The Story of Civilization. vol. 4 (The Age of Faith.)*
New York: Simon and Schuster,\_1950. vol. 6. *(The Reformation.)* New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1957.

Gharawi, Mirza 'Ali al-, *at-Tanqih fi* *Sharhi 'l-\`Urwati 'l­ Wuthqa
(taqriru ' l-bahth Ayatullah al-Khu'i).* Najaf: n.d.

Isfahani, Abu Nu'aym Ahmad al-, *Hilyatu 'l-Awliya'.* Beirut: 1967

Jafri, S. Husain M., *The Origins and Early Development of Shi \`a
Islam.* Qum: Ansariyan Publications, n.d.

Jannati, Muhammad Ibrahim al-, *Taharatu ' l-Kitabi fi* *Fatwa 's-Sayyid
al-Hakim.* Najaf: Matba'atu l'-Qaza, 1390 A.H.

Kadhimi, Fadil al-Jawed al-, *Masaliku ' l-Afham ila Ayati 'l-Ahkam.*
Tehran: Maktabah al-Murtazawiyya, n.d.

Khu'i, S. Abu 'l-Qasim al-Musawi al-, *Minhaju 's-Salihiyn.* (2 volumes)
Beirut: Daru 'z-Zahra', n.d. 26nd edition.

Khumayni, S. Ruhullah al-Musawi al-, *Tahriru 'l-Wasilah.* *(2* volumes)
Qum: Isma'iliyan, n.d.

Kulayni, Shaykh Muhammad ibn Ya'qub *al-Usul* *'I-Kafi.* Tehran: Wofis,
1978

Majlisi, Muhammad Baqir al-, *Biharu'l-Anwar.* New edition.  
 Tehran: n.d.

Mughniyya, Muhammad Jawed, *Fiqhu ' l-Imam Ja far as-*Sadiq. Beirut:
n.d.

Razi, Fakhru 'd-Din ar-, *at-Tafsir al-Kabir.* Cairo, 1357 A.H.

Rizvi, Sayyid S. Akhtar, *Imamat: the Vicegerency of the Prophet.*
Tehran: World Organization for Islamic Ser­vices, 1985.

*Inner Voice (collection of short articles on socio- ethical aspects of
Islam).* Qum: Dar Rahe Haq, 1980.

Sadr, S. Muhammad Baqir as-, *al-Fatawa'a 'l-Wadihah.* Najaf: Matba'atu
'l-Adab, n.d.

Saduq, Shaykh as-, *\`Ilalu 'sh-Shariya'.*

Tabarsi, Ahmad bin 'Ali at-, *al-Ihtijaj.* *(2* volumes) Najaf: Daru
'n-Nu'man, 1966.

Tabataba'i, S. Muhammad Husayn, *al-Mizan fi* *Tafsfri 'l- Qur'an*. (20
volumes) Tehran: Daru 'l-kutubi 'l-Is­lamiyya, 1397 A.H.

Wright, Lawrence, *Clean and Decent.* Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1960.

Yazdi, S. Muhammad Kazim at-Tabataba'i al-, *al-Urwatu 'l-Wuthqah.*
Tehran: Daru 'l-kutub al-Islamiyya, 1392 A.H.

[^1]: Durant, The Story of Civilization, vol. 4, p, 835.

[^2]: Wright, Clean and Decent, p. 24.

[^3]: Ibid, p. 39.

[^4]: Durant, Ibid, vol. 6, p. 244.

[^5]: Ibid, p. 768.

[^6]: Wright, Ibid, p. ?5.

[^7]: Wright, Ibid, p. 138.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Ibid, p. 139.

[^11]: Ibid, p. 138-9.

[^12]: Ibid, p. 158.

[^13]: Durant, Ibid, vol. 4, p. 835.

[^14]: Durant, Ibid, vol. 4, p. 712-3.

[^15]: al-Amudi, Ghuraru 'l-hikam, p. 226

[^16]: al-Majlisi, Biharu 'l-Anwar, vol. 73, p. 361.

[^17]: See “Ziyarat warithah” by Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (as) in Mafatihu
'l-Jinan of Shaykh 'Abbas al-Qummi.

[^18]: as-Saduq, \`Ilalu 'sh-Shariya\`, p. 101.

[^19]: at-Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj, vol. 2, p. 52

[^20]: ­Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 33-5.

[^21]: With minor changes from S.S.A. Rizvi's Inner Voice, p. 69.


