Introduction
============

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

Praise be to Allah - the Lord of the worlds and the best of blessings
and purest of greetings be on the one who was sent as His mercy to all
creatures, our master and guardian Abul Qasim Muhammad ibn Abdullah (S),
the last of prophets and messengers and on his immaculate progeny - the
leaders of guidance and lanterns in darkness, the Imams of the nation
and Saviors of mankind.

Allah has, by the grace of Muhammad (S) and his progeny (peace be on
them), favored me with the guidance to know the Truth beyond which there
is nothing except deviation. He made me taste the sweetness of the fruit
that had ripened in the six books[^1] - *Then I was Guided, To be with
the Truthful, Then ask the People of Remembrance (those who know), The
Shia are the People of the Sunna, Fear Allah, Know the Truth* - in order
to inform people of that concealed truth. As a consequence many truthful
people, who are always in search for the pure truth, turned to follow
the way of the immaculate Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and became Shia.

Such people cannot be counted. In fact, only Allah the Almighty knows
their real number:

***And none knows the hosts of your Lord but He Himself***. ***Qur’an,
74:31***

However, many letters that come to me in Paris and in Tunisia from all
over the world make me happy and hopeful that the deliverance of Allah
is imminent and that His promise is true. Thus, I quote this verse that
reads:

***Or do you think that you would enter the garden while yet the state
of those who have passed away before you has not come upon you; distress
and affliction befell them and they were shaken violently, so that the
Messenger and those who believed with him said: When will the help of
Allah come? Now surely the help of Allah is nigh***. ***Qur’an, 2:214***

Through the reading of these letters, I feel that goodness does not and
shall never stop at all. The truth prevails and it is not overcome.
Allah the Almighty says:

***Nay! We cast the truth against the falsehood, so that it breaks its
head, and lo! it vanishes***. ***Qur’an, 21:81***

Since it is Allah who casts the truth against the falsehood, I do not
and will never hesitate at all in announcing that what I believe is the
truth - until Allah judges between me and those fanatics who approve of
nothing except that which they have been accustomed to, even if it is
false and deny nothing except that which they have ignored even if it is
truth. Nevertheless, I pray Allah to endow them with guidance and
success, for it is He who guides whomever He likes to the Right Path.

And since I communicate with a great number of readers and researchers
through letters or direct reviews during the lectures that I give on
different occasions, I have found that some people see what I have
written (in my books) as the truth. Yet they often say: we are in no
need to provoke these problems that may be against the unity of Muslims
at a time when the West and the East have gathered together to do away
with the Muslims.

I see an acceptable logic and reasonable opinion in their saying because
they are trying their best to narrow the cycle of disagreement and to
unite the rows (of Muslims). Therefore, I have followed their request
obediently and accepted their advice with gratitude, calling to the mind
a saying of Ameerul Mo'minin (a.s.):

“*Let the most beloved of affairs to you be the most moderate in truth,
the most comprehensive in justice, and most thorough in the satisfaction
of the subjects, because the dissatisfaction of the public annuls the
satisfaction of the upper class and the dissatisfaction of the upper
class is forgiven by the satisfaction of the public*…”[^2]

For these reasons I have put before dear readers this book *‘All
solutions are with the Prophet’s Progeny’* in which I have tried my best
to avoid the sensitive issues that may provoke some people and then take
them away from truth, and thus the purpose of guiding them becomes in
vain.

In fact, I think that the provocative manner which provokes high souls,
on which I have depended upon in my previous books, has given fruitful
and wonderful results. Nevertheless, it is no problem for me to follow a
peaceful, lenient manner that may convince many more people, and here
the fruits become more delicious and more appetizing. Thus, I follow the
two manners together as shown in the Holy Qur’an which has followed the
manner of both reward and the warning - to take the greedy to the
Paradise and save the fearful from the Hell.

Since we cannot achieve the position of Imam Ali (a.s.) who did not
worship Allah out of the greed for His Paradise nor out of the fear of
His Fire and who even if the veil to Truth was removed from him, would
not have been any more certain than he always was, so we ask Allah the
Almighty to favor us with His mercy and join us with the righteous.

**Muhammad at-Tijani as-Sammawi**

[^1]: Earlier books written by the author

[^2]: Imam Ali’s message to Malik al-Ashtar when Imam Ali appointed him
as the Governor of Egypt


