The Shia in brief
=================

The talks about the Shia in the last years, especially after the victory
of the Islamic Revolution in Iran, have been so widespread. The western
information and its media spread everywhere in the world, focused on the
Iranian Shia, describing them as ‘the fool of Allah’ one time and
‘terrorists’ another time.

This included the Lebanese Shia as well after they had threatened the
American and western interests in Beirut. They were described as
‘excessive and extreme’. Not long after this, these descriptions were
ascribed to all the Shia in the world. In fact, they included the
Islamic movements everywhere in the world even if they were Sunni
movements having nothing to do with the Shia.

It does not matter to us what the western information and enemies of
Islam say or the false justifications and fabrications they follow, for
‘you may hope for the friendliness from every enemy, except the enemy of
your religion’. What does really concern us is that which some Muslims
say about the Shia. You hear from them wonders and wonders! It is too
odd that they do not have any evidence, clear proof or irrefutable
argument in their false accusations, but they only repeat what their
ancestors used to say without any analysis or verification.

In addition to the actual definition of Shiism we have mentioned in our
fourth book “*The Shia are the People of the Sunna*”, we see that we
must show the Muslims, who seek the mere truth and do not fear a blame
in the way of Allah, the sayings of Allah and His messenger (S) about
the Shia. Then, we shall be able to discuss the sayings of some
approving and disapproving scholars and thinkers.

The Shia in the Qur'an
----------------------

Allah the Almighty says:

***As for those who believe and do good - surely they are the best of
men***. ***Qur'an, 98:7***

Jalaluddeen as-Sayuti says in his commentary (tafsir) of the Qur'an
called *ad-Durr al-Manthur fit Tafsir al-Ma’thur*, “Abu Hurayra narrated
that the Prophet (S) said:

*Do you wonder at the position of the angels to Allah? I swear by Him,
in whose hand my soul is, that the position of a faithful servant to
Allah on the Day of Resurrection is greater than the position of an
angel. If you want, you can read this verse:*

***As for those who believe and do good, surely they are the best of
men.***

Aa’ishah narrated, “*Once, I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S), who is the
best of people to Allah*?’ He said: *O Aa’ishah, do you not read:*

***(As for) those who believe and do good, surely they are the best of
men)***?

Jabir ibn Abdullah narrated, “One day, we were with the Prophet (S) when
Ali (a.s.) came and then the Prophet said:

*(I swear) by Him, in whose hand my soul is, that this (Ali) and his
Shia (followers) shall be the winners on the Day of Resurrection.*

Then, this Verse was revealed:

***(As for) those who believe and do good - surely they are the best of
men***.

Whenever Ali (a.s.) came, the Prophet’s companions said, ‘The best of
men has come.’”

Abu Sa’eed narrated that the Prophet (S) said:

*Ali is the best of men.*

Ibn Abbas narrated, “When this verse was revealed

***As for) those who believe and do good - surely they are the best of
men***, the Messenger of Allah (S) said to Ali:

*Surely, you and your Shia (followers) shall on the Day of Resurrection
be pleased and be pleased with (by Allah).*

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “The Messenger of Allah (S) said to me:

*Have you not heard this saying of Allah:*

***As for) those who believe and do good, surely they are the best of
men***?

*These are you and your Shia, and your appointment and my appointment
shall be at the Pond (in Paradise). When nations shall come for
reckoning, you shall be called ‘ghurran muhajjaleen - honorable and
marked with lumosity.*

The Sunni scholars, who have mentioned this interpretation when
interpreting this verse, are too many. Besides Jalaluddeen as-Sayuti, we
can mention at-Tabari in his *Tafsir*, al-Hakim al-Hasakani in his
*Shawahid* *at-Tanzeel*, ash-Shawkani in *Fath* *al-Qadeer*, al-Aaloosi
in *Roohul* *Ma’ani* and al-Manawi in *Kunooz* *al-Haqa’iq*.

We can also mention al-Khawarizmi in his *al-Manaqib*, ibn as-Sabbagh
al-Maliki in *al-Fusool al-Muhimmah*, ibn Asakir in *Tareekh* *Damashq*,
ash-Shabalanji in *Noor* *al-Absar*, ibnul Jawzi in *Tathkiratul*
*Khawass*, al-Qandoozi al-Hanafi in *Yanabee’* *al-Mawaddah*,
al-Haythami in *Majma’* *az-Zawa’id*, al-Mutaqqi al-Hindi in *Kanzol*
*Ummal*, and ibn Hajar in *al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah*.

On this firm basis, researchers cannot be satisfied with the opinions,
which suppose that Shiism did not appear except after the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s.).

The Shia in the Prophet’s Sunna
-------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) many times talked about the Shia. Each time
he confirmed that the followers of Ali (a.s.) would be the winners,
because they supported the truth and kept away from and let down the
untruth. He also confirmed that the followers of Ali (a.s.) were the
followers of the Prophet (S) himself.

Here, we mention the following tradition that has been mentioned by Ibn
Hajar in as-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah and other Sunni scholars.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said to Ali:

*Are you not pleased that you shall be with me in the Paradise, and
al-Hasan, al-Husayn and our progeny after us, our wives after our
progeny and our Shia (followers) to our left and right sides?*[^1]

Many times, the Prophet (S) said about Ali (a.s.) and his followers:

*By Him, in whose hand my soul is, this (Ali) and his Shia are certainly
the winners on the Day of Resurrection.*[^2]

It is very natural that the Prophet (S) praised the followers of the
truth and distinguished them with a sign by which they would be known
throughout the ages, so that Muslims would know the suppressed truth and
be guided to it through the nearest way.

Because of the Prophet’s praise and continuous instructions, a group
from the best of his companions became adherents to Imam Ali (a.s.).
They were famous for their love and support to him after the death of
the Prophet (S). Among these great companions there were Salman
al-Farisi, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, Ammar ibn Yasir, Huthayfah ibn al-Yaman
and al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad. Thus, the word “*shia*” became a surname for
these men.

Dr. Mustafa Kamil ash-Shaybi mentions this fact in his book *‘The
Relation between Sufism and Shiism’*, and the same is mentioned by Abu
Hatim in his book *az-Zeenah* when saying, “The least name of a creed
that appeared in Islam was the “Shia” and this was a surname of four
companions who are Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, Ammar ibn Yasir, Salman
al-Farisi, and al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad.”

This shows clearly that the orientalists and some of Muslim researchers,
who had quoted from those orientalists, were not truthful when they said
that Shiism was a political phenomenon that came out as a result of the
circumstances after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.). It also clearly
demonstrates the falsehood of those who tried to attach Shiism to the
Persians. In fact, these people just reveal their own ignorance and
fanaticism.

How would these biased people justify the existence of Shiite states in
the Arab land in north Africa like Morocco and Tunisia and in the east
like Egypt and Halab (in Syria) centuries before the appearance of
Shiism in Persia? The state of the Idrisids (Adarisah) in Morocco was in
the second century of hegira and the state of the Fatimids was in
Tunisia at the end of the third century of hegira. The Fatimids also
ruled in Egypt in the middle of the third century of hegira. The Shiite
state of the Hamadanids ruled Halab (Syria) and Iraq in the fourth
century, whereas Iran turned to be Shia in the tenth century of hegira
at the hand of the Shah Ismael.

Those, who try in a way or another to attach Shiism to the Persians,
will never be able to prove that whatever they try to do.

As I have mentioned before in my book *‘Then I was guided’*, most of the
Sunni scholars and imams who were Persian, were not Shia! In fact, they
were very puritan and fanatic against the Shia and Shiism. Some
historians mention that the people of Persia used to abuse Imam Ali
(a.s.) on their minbars even after Umar ibn Abdul Aziz, the Umayyad
caliph, had prohibited it (the abusing of Imam Ali).[^3]

If we know that the first and most famous interpreter az-Zamakhshari was
Persian, the great traditionists al-Bukhari and Muslim were Persian, Abu
Haneefah the Greatest Imam, as called by the Sunni, was Persian, the
master and most famous of scholars Seebwayh was Persian, the master of
theologians Wasil ibn Ata’ was Persian, the master of linguists
al-Fayrooz Abadi the author of al-Qamus al-Muhit (Comprehensive
Dictionary) was Persian. Imam al-Ghazali, ar-Razi, Avicenna, and Ibn
Rushd all were Persian… and all of the mentioned above men were from the
scholars and heads of the Sunni, then would those fabricators and
agitators turn to reason and let alone the true scholars and researchers
conclude and arrive at the truth derived from the true history through
their reasons and not emotions and fanaticism?

[^1]: As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa by ibn Hajar, p. 96, 159.

[^2]: Al-Manaqib by al-Khawarizmi the Hanafite, p. 62.

[^3]: The Present Islamic World, vol. 1 p. 191, quoted from
al-Khawarizmi.


