Today, I have perfected for you your religion…
==============================================

Would that Muslims have turned Shia on that day!

Eid al-Ghadeer
--------------

Eid al-Ghadeer is the greatest and most important eid to Allah.

All Muslims in the east and the west of the earth celebrate two eids;
the first is the Eid al-Fitr after the end of Ramadan, and the second is
Eid al-Adhha immediately after performing the hajj.

Muslims, since the beginning until now, keep on celebrating these two
eids everywhere in the world. They call the first eid as ‘the minor eid’
and the other one as ‘the major eid’.

However and unfortunately, Muslims have disagreed on the third eid,
which is the greatest of all eids and called Eid al-Ghadeer. It is the
day when Allah the Almighty declared to have perfected the religion and
completed His favor on Muslims.

One, who studies history, can undoubtedly discover that this
disagreement has come out of the political situation of the *men of the
Saqifah* within the first moments after the Prophet’s death. They
permitted themselves to behave unlike the clear texts of Qur’an and
Prophet’s traditions[^1] and impose their will on Muslims by force.

Because of this, Imam Ali (a.s.), who had been appointed as the caliph
after the Prophet (S) according to many clear texts, was kept away from
caliphate and replaced by another one chosen by Quraysh[^2] based on
their desires and ambitions. Thus, this was the first relapse that
afflicted the Muslims soon after the death of their prophet, paving the
way for the quarrel of untruth against the truth and of jahiliyyah
(ignorance of the pre-Islamic era) against Islam.

There is no doubt that the following verse of Qur’an has a direct
relation with the Eid al-Ghadeer:

***And Muhammad is no more than a messenger; the messengers have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back
upon your heels?*** ***Qur'an, 3:144***

The Messenger of Allah (S) celebrated the Eid al-Ghadeer when Allah the
Almighty ordered him to appoint Ali (a.s.) as the caliph after him and
introduce him to the nation. The Messenger of Allah (S) called out,
“*Allahu Akbar*” when the present Muslims finished paying their homage
to Imam Ali (a.s.) and Gabriel came to the Prophet (S) revealing this
verse to him:

***This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed my
favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion***. ***Qur'an,
5:3***

The Prophet (S) said:

*Allah is Great. Praise be to Allah for perfecting the religion and
completing the blessing and the contentment of the Lord with the
guardianship of my brother and cousin*.

On the same day, the Prophet (a.s.) held a meeting to congratulate Imam
Ali (a.s.) and there was not one of the Muslim men and women present on
that day, who did not come to Imam Ali (a.s.) to congratulate him on
that guardianship.

However, it did not last long! Only two months after the celebration of
that great eid, the nation disavowed and denied the eid and the hero of
the eid, and chose someone else against the will of Allah claiming at
one time that Ali was too young and then at another time that the
Hashimites had already had the honor of the Prophethood and so they
should not get the position of caliphate as well. And, a third time it
was said that the people of Quraysh would not agree on the one who had
killed their heroes, defeated their brave knights, and crushed their
pride.

Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) had no guilt in all that at all, except that he
had sold his life for the contentment of Allah and sacrificed everything
he had for supporting the religion that his brother and cousin had
received from the heavens, never minding any blame in the way of Allah
and nothing of this worldly life’s vanities could turn his determination
away.

I cannot account Imam Ali’s virtues or show his qualities. I know
certainly that:

*If the sea were ink for the words of my Lord, the sea would surely be
consumed before the words of my Lord are exhausted*.

It sufficed him as pride and honor that Allah the Almighty had perfected
the religion with his imamate, completed His favor with his caliphate,
and been pleased with the Muslims who believed in his guardianship. And
it sufficed him as glory and virtue that the Messenger of Allah (S) had
made him as the Imam (Chief) of the pious, the master of Muslims, the
leader of the honorable and enlightened ones and the head of people in
religion.

I am in no need of showing a proof on the fact of the Eid al-Ghadeer or
proving the narrations and historical events on it, for the *ummah* has
agreed unanimously on the reality of this event , whether the Shia, who
celebrate it every year, or the Sunna who try to misinterpret it.

We have read the sayings of the celebrators as we have read the sayings
of the misinterpreters. We have read the sayings of the adherents, who
have understood from those texts, traditions, and celebrations that
imamate is a fundamental principle of the religion.

We have read the sayings of the dissenters who have misinterpreted the
texts as to be no more than a personal opinion that Muhammad adopted
about his cousin and husband of his daughter to endear him to the hearts
of haters and enviers.

After that, we know the situation of the adherent supporters who were
few, poor and disabled. And we also know the situations of the
disappointing opponents who were in great numbers, wealthy and arrogant.
Therefore, they violated the sanctity of the Prophet’s household,
beginning with the Chief of all women of the world - Fatima (a.s.). Then
they broke out many wars against Imam Ali (a.s.) - the master of all
guardians; al-Jamal, Siffin, and then an-Nahrawan were fought until at
last they assassinated him in the *mihrab* during his prayer. He
prostrated thereafter, to thank Allah for all that!

However, they were not satisfied with all this until, they killed the
two Masters of the youth of the Paradise - Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) with
poison and then Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) by sword in Kerbala along with his
family and loyal companions.

From all this, we know that the Eid al-Ghadeer was the trial for this
nation, which disagreed and was divided and separated like the Jews and
the Christians as the Prophet Muhammad (S) had predicted.[^3] We also
knew that the holy imamate, which is one of the fundamental principles
of religion, was suppressed and subdued. Its people had nothing to do,
except to be patient and submissive. This divine imamate was replaced
with false emirate that was “a slip away from whose evil Allah had kept
Islam and Muslims safe”.

Until after that time, the *tulaqa’* (prisoners set free) and the
profane wished for, but no one rode on the ship of rescue that Muhammad
(S) had made except for a very few loyal companions. The current of this
worldly life and the love of power swept away the rest of Muslims, who
turned their backs to the infallible Imams of guidance and followed
creeds they themselves invented. It had a proof neither in the Book of
Allah nor in the Sunna of His messenger.

This is, in brief about the event of Eid al-Ghadeer, the Hero of
al-Ghadeer, and the plot that was born after the Day of al-Ghadeer. For
more details, I suggest for readers to read my book ‘*To be with the
Truthful*’.

Today, we have to know that both the Sunni and the Shia are victims of
the false history or in fact, the victims of the plots and
transgressions that had been done by other than us. Surely, these are
the results of the crimes that our ancestors had committed, and Allah
knows that we are free from them. We are just followers and nor
heretics. We have been created on nature and our parents were the cause
of our being Shia or Sunni, guided or deviant.

We still have to know that the deviation, which has been ongoing for
fourteen centuries, cannot be reformed in a few years. Whoever believes
in this just deceives himself and wishes for the impossible.

It goes without saying that the infallible Imams (a.s), from Imam Ali
(a.s.) to Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), spared no any effort to unite
the nation and guide it to the right path. They sacrificed their lives
and the lives of their children to keep the Religion of Muhammad (S)
untouched, but most of people were unfaithful and resistant to the Truth
which they detested terribly.

We also have to know that efforts of faithful and truthful reformers
failed and the hope of unity was broken against the rock of the blind
fanaticism and offensive ignorance. Hills and mountains of nationalities
and races besides governments stood in the face of these hopes. Behind
all of these, there were and are those who were enemies to us, whose
friendliness could not be wished for. They were active since the
beginning of the Mission until today. They have spared no effort to put
out the Light of Allah. Besides these, there are many opportunists who
do not think except of their own benefits, which the unity of Muslims
seriously threatens.

In addition to all those, there is the cursed Iblis about whom Allah the
Almighty has said:

***He said: As Thou has caused me to remain disappointed I will
certainly lie in wait for them in Thy straight path***. ***Qur'an,
7:16***

We have to know too, that time has elapsed. Fourteen centuries have
passed while we have been sleeping, bewildered, drunken and confused.
The ornaments and embellishments of this life have intoxicated our
minds, and many incurable diseases have gnawed our bodies. In the same
time, our enemies worked and are still working day and night for
scientific and technological development.

It was due to this that they were able to colonize our countries, subdue
us, and suck our blood and treasures - claiming that we were
underdeveloped nations which should be developed, or that predatory
beasts must be tamed. They controlled every way and closed every door
before us. They began counting our breaths so that if anyone of us
sneezed, even one sneeze at the end of every century - they counted it
against him and asked him to prove the source of that flu, fearing
infection for their own selves, which might result in unpleasing
outcomes.

They took much from Islam and did according to it, whereas we turned
away from much of what Allah had ordered us to do. Here, there is no
need of more explanations and details, because “*a word is enough for a
wise man*”.

Today, we have woken up from our lethargy and have begun clapping and
dancing to the tunes of unity. Each one of us has claimed to be the hero
of this unity. We have imagined that this was a simple matter and that
we would unite the nation overnight by calling out some slogans and
holding some conferences.

Since I have opened my eyes towards this life, I have heard of “unity”.
In my first school I learned songs of unity whose meaning flowed with my
blood in my veins. I grew up and every day I dreamt of unity. Now, I am
more than fifty years of old, but I have not seen any sign or even ghost
of this unity.

After being desperate for the unity of Muslims, and even of the unity of
the Arabs, I was satisfied with a minor unity between two neighboring
countries. In the morning, I was very delighted for that unity and in
the evening of the same day that it was born, I wept for it. Two people
who were twins had nothing that separated them except that which was
called - “the government verdicts”.

By that time, I knew that the destinies of people was in the hands of a
few persons who controlled them as they liked; if they liked, they would
unite them, and if they liked something else, they would set them
against each other and throw them into wars, and then you would see the
same people who used to embrace each other, fight each other.

Since the enemies had power and dominance by which they could separate
people who were united for hundreds of years, suppress them and make
them dissipate in spite of their own power and influence. So certainly
they would not let Muslims, who had been suppressed for hundreds of
years, meet and unite to form a powerful entity that would endanger
their benefits and interests, even though these people were poor,
underdeveloped and under great debts.

Suppose that we were united - what would we get from this poverty and
underdevelopment? If we thought of driving the colonists away and
cutting the hand of the thieves, we must be prepared with enough power
and forces to repel the unjust and control the rioters. And how can we
do that while we still buy the arms and weapons, which are not used
except for killing Muslims and making citizens dread themselves?

If we advance one day, they will advance sixty years, and if we prepare
one force against them, they will prepare seventy! If we want to face
them in war, they will not trouble themselves much! They will incite our
brothers in nationality or religion against us, and then one will kill
another, while they will remain but delighted audiences clapping their
hands.

The Gulf war is not far! Only some soldiers were killed from them, but
hundreds of thousands of Muslims were buried alive. And the one, who
used to threatened to burn Israel yesterday and many stupid Arabs
believed him, came to burn his own people in the north and the south
with the Napalm. Even the mosques and holy shrines were not safe from
his evil mercenaries whom we saw coward and inactive towards
disbelievers, but against the Muslims - they were ravenous beasts.[^4]

The young Islamic Republic of Iran made every effort to unite the
Muslims and offered every sacrifice in this way. It paid a very heavy
price with the blood of its most loyal people. It resisted the west and
the east and faced an international blockade (sanction). Its leader died
while bemoaning the indifference of Muslims, as his grandfather the
leader of the pious (Imam Ali a.s.) had bemoaned before.

From the eternal sayings of Imam Khomeini (may Allah have mercy on him)
is this one, “*If every Muslim spits once, the Muslims shall make Israel
sink*.”

If Muslims are stingy with even one spit, so how is it expected that
they will sacrifice their properties and lives? Therefore, many of them
have friendly relations with Israel. So, do not look forward to unity, O
you the inattentive!

Is it unknown to you that fifty thousand Palestinians wait every day for
the mercy of Israel, and they hurry up every morning to work with
meanness and disgrace to gain the daily bread for themselves and their
families? If Israel closes its doors, these people shall die of hunger.
So where are their Muslim brothers whom Allah has enriched with His
favors to the extent that one emir of them receives income that is too
much more than the needs of those people who are obliged not to resist
or fight Israel, as long as they feel that Israel is the benefactor and
the cause of their livelihood.[^5]

Peace be on Ali (a.s.) who said:

*Poverty is about to be atheism. If poverty were a man, I certainly
would kill him.*

It is true that there is powerfulness in unity, but it is supposed that
there is power in every one of its elements. If all the elements of
unity are weak and sick, then in their unity there shall be but more
weakness and sickness. How is it possible for one, who is always busy
thinking of the hunger of his stomach and the sickness of his body, to
believe in unity?

About what shall I talk to you? Shall I talk to you about the children
who cannot find any weapon except the stones to resist, although all the
stones have been swept away? Perhaps, some of them look for a stone to
place it on his abdomen to suppress hunger!

What makes one laugh and cry at the same time is that you see some
drawlers try, with all their abilities, to convince us that the *Stone
Revolution* has troubled and shaken Israel. In fact, this is a mere
propaganda to justify the savage doings of Israel, that if one Israelite
soldier is wounded by those stones, tens of innocent children shall be
killed by machine guns and bombs.

So, where are the Arab countries that had united under the shade of the
Arab Assembly since tens of years and promised of liberating
Palestine?  
 Where are the Muslim countries that lead the Muslim World and claim to
liberate Jerusalem?

Have you seen even one of these countries offer help, assistance, or
arms to those children with stones (in Palestine) or the mujahidin who
face the bombs and missiles of the enemy without having any other arms
to reply with, except the stones? We have seen them in the Gulf War…we
have seen our Arab Muslim brothers take out their hidden arms and spend
millions from their wealth to overthrow the Iraqi government that in
return threatened to do away with the Israelite government, agents and
reactionaries!

However, the truth was that they were all plotting to do away with the
Shiite Revolution. And actually, the Iraqi regime remained as it was,
and so did Israel, the agents and the reactionaries, whereas the Shia
were buried alive and the rest of them were displaced in the deserts and
wild lands. Thousands of refugees are still living in camps under lowly
conditions they face from the Saudis and insults from the Wahabis.

I talk to you about the fate of Muslims in Afghanistan upon whom Allah
had bestowed victory. They came out fighting with each other and enmity
between their children and families, destroying their own houses with
their own hands, after being instigated by foreign, unfaithful
hands![^6]

I talk to you about the destiny of the Muslims in Yugoslavia where the
powers of atheism had gathered together to remove them all from Eastern
Europe. I talk to you about the Muslims in India, and about what I
myself have seen. Their dignities were often violated and always to the
extent that Alawid Muslim women were sold in the markets like animals.

I talk to you about the Muslims in Ethiopia, Somalia, Sudan, and all of
Africa who die of hunger in thousands every day, whereas the dogs and
cats in Europe enjoy all kinds of delicious food. The dignity and
holiness of Muslims are violated, whereas many societies for defending
and protecting animal rights are there and more are being founded.

Stop lying and deceit! Stop hypocrisy and misleading! If the people of
one country are not in accordance with each other, then how can we ask
the Muslims of different countries to unite?[^7]

The sayings are too many, but the doings are too little!

One look at the history that we lived since the war of 1948 up until the
Persian Gulf War would be enough. Victory was always with disbelievers.
Every time the share of Muslims was defeat, loss, lowliness and
disgrace. So take a lesson from the wrath of Allah, O people of
understanding!

Recently, we said that we would not negotiate with Israel and that which
was taken away by force, would not be taken back except by force. And
today, we run after Israel and beg it to give back to us our lands that
it had extorted from us. We entreat its close lovers to intercede for
us!

Our hearts have become tired and bored, and our minds confused and
submissive and now we believe neither in unity nor in the victory that
shall come one day!

Can it be believed that the emirs of the Gulf, the kings and the rulers
shall unite with the poor, the hungry and the destitute some day?

Yes, they unite in speech only! The testimony of “*there is no god but
Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (S)*” is just a
saying! Faith is just a saying, and even the prayer, zakat, fasting and
the hajj have all become sayings in sayings!

It is not difficult for an orator to say for example: “*our god is the
same, our prophet is the same, our Book is the same, and our qiblah is
the same; therefore, O Muslims, be united! Be united*!”

How easy it is to adopt a slogan saying “no Shiism, no Sunnism, but
Islamic unity”!

However, it has disappeared from the minds of all these people to live
the painful reality and face the naked truth with no cloak to mislead!

They have come to us in the last few years with a new opinion, as if it
was unknown to their ancestors and to the infallible Imams! They said it
should be prohibited to discuss the matters of history lest some of the
Muslims be provoked. They went too far in that, until they said that
there was no difference between the Shia and the Sunni except in the
branches of religion exactly as there is difference between the Sunni
sects themselves. They gave up the matter of imamate which to them is a
fundamental that is separate from the fundamentals of religion.

As a result of this new situation, minds have become frozen and have
stopped to search for the truth after their minds had been liberated
claiming that they (those claiming Muslims) should be united in order to
face the common enemy! These people have forgotten that our actual enemy
is hidden inside our selves, living inside our houses, and being brought
up by our eyes.

It is a wonder that when you talk to one of them about Marx and Lenin,
he becomes proud and blooms and he considers you as a learned man.
However, when you mention Imam Ali (a.s.) and the infallible Imams of
his progeny, he frowns and is depressed, and then accuses you of
defaming the Orthodox Caliphs. Worse than that is that when you argue
with him with clear evidences and proofs, then he pretends to adopt the
slogan of the Islamic Unity and accuses you of trying to divide the
Muslims.

After that, would we abuse those who call for the unity of beliefs
according to the Book of Allah and the pure Sunna of His messenger and
then accuse them of trying to divide the Muslims?

In fact, some *ulema* hide the truth willingly and when they are asked,
they do not answer fearing that they may be accused of striving against
the Islamic unity.

I think that the scientific research to get to the sought truth is not a
danger threatening the unity of Muslims, because it is not more than
provoking some people’s emotion - that shall disappear in the end when
truth is arrived at.

The danger and the worst of dangers is to keep the mouths shut, tongues
tied and prevent people from researching with frozen minds and keep them
away from the truth under the pretense of unity! This is the very thing
that the Baathist regime in Iraq did to separate between the Shia and
the Sunni. The talk about Shiism was prohibited lest the Sunni would
know the truth of the Shia.[^8]

It is the same thing like that which the first caliphs did when they
prohibited people from writing down or mentioning the traditions of the
Prophet (S). Therefore, the truth was hidden from most of Muslims who
did not know about the Eid al-Ghadeer and what happened on that Day,
which made the Jews and Christians say to them, “If this (Qur’anic)
verse was revealed about us, we would highly regard that day and take it
as eid even if only two people remained from us:

***This day I have perfected for you your religion and completed My
favor on you.*** ***Qur'an, 5:3***  
 The companions could not find an answer to that.

Some others have come to us relying on Imam Ali’s saying:

*I will submit as long as the affairs of Muslims are safe and when there
is no oppression except against me only.*

These people have forgotten that it was Imam Ali (a.s.) who revived the
event of al-Ghadeer after it had been buried and made to be forgotten.
He made thirty companions from those who had attended the day of
al-Ghadeer, bear witness and he invoked Allah against those who denied
it. Then, after him, his two sons (Imam al-Hasan a.s. and al-Husayn
a.s.) revived it during the season of the hajj before great masses of
Muslims. In this concern, Imam Ali (a.s.) said:

*Do not be revilers or cursers, but you say that their doings were so
and so, in order to be more effective in argument*.

We must take Imam Ali (a.s.) as our example and not take only one of his
sayings (“*I will submit…*”) and leave the others; that we believe in
some of the Book and disbelieve in some!

It is right that Imam Ali (a.s.) was willingly patient for the sake of
the welfare of Islam and Muslims, because he did exactly what he said.
He fought the breakers of covenants (nakitheen - in the battle of
al-Jamal), the unjust (qasiteen - who falsely sought arbitration in the
battle of Siffeen) and the renegades (mariqeen - in the battle of
an-Nahrawan), until he straightened the pillars of religion, provided
safety to all Muslims, and pardoned his enemies whenever the matter
concerned the oppression against him only.

Those who argue against us by Nahjul Balaghah, must believe in
everything in it, and not argue by what complies with their desires
only. If there is praise to someone unknown mentioned in Nahjul
Balaghah, they say: this is Imam Ali’s speech about our master Umar
al-Farouq. He praises and commends him!

Yet, if you say to them (that Imam Ali a.s.) has said, “*By Allah, ibn
Abi Quhafah (Abu Bakr) has dressed himself in it (assumed the caliphate)
and he knew well that my position to it was like the position of the
axis to the quern that flood flows down from and birds cannot ascend me
in flight*”, they say that this is the speech of ash-Shareef
ar-Radhy[^9] and not Ali’s. Yes, they love Ali (a.s.) and pray Allah to
be pleased with him when he is sincere to the caliphs and does not
disobey them.

These people forget that the self of Ali (a.s.) is like the self of
Muhammad (S) and the heart of Ali (a.s.) is like the heart of Muhammad
(S) from where Allah has kept away all impurity and purified with
thorough purification. Ali (a.s.) was a true copy of the Messenger of
Allah (S) whom Allah had described as “*on exalted standards of
character*” and that the hearts of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) had no place
for grudge or hatred.[^10]

For that, this was the Prophet (S) and that was the guardian - Muhammad
(S) was the warner and Ali (a.s.) was the guide. The first one fought
for the revelation and the second one fought for the interpretation. For
that, Allah chose him (Imam Ali a.s.) for imamate by which He perfected
the religion and completed the favor. As an honor to him, Allah crowned
him with the imamate on the day of the Major Eid (of al-Ghadeer).

Ali (a.s.), with his patience and loyalty, did not overlook his right
for even one day. You (Sunnis) have mentioned in your Sahihs that he did
not pay homage (to the caliph) for four months during which he argued
against them (the men of authority) with every proof and evidence, and
he said to Umar one day:

*Milk a milking that you shall have a half of it, and support him (Abu
Bakr) today, to recompense you tomorrow…*

*Muhammad is my brother and father-in-law…*

You also have narrated that he (Imam Ali a.s.) took out his wife Fatima
(a.s.) with him and they both frequented the meetings of the Ansar who
apologized, saying to her:

*O the beloved of the Messenger of Allah (S), if your husband and cousin
preceded us, we would not prefer anyone to him at all.*

Imam Ali (a.s.) said in reply:

*Would I leave the Messenger of Allah (S) without washing (ritually
before the burial) and go out disputing with the people for his
succession (caliphate)?*

Fatima (a.s.) said:

*Abu Hasan did not do except what he was required to do and they did not
do except what Allah shall judge them for.*

Did Ali (a.s.) not complain when burying his wife in the night by
addressing the Messenger of Allah (S) saying:

*Peace be on you O Messenger of Allah (S) and on your daughter who is
coming to be your neighbor. She shall tell you about the rising of your
Umma against me and the extorting of her right. So keep on asking her
and know from her what happened?*

Did Ali (a.s.) not refuse the caliphate when he was asked to follow the
way of the two previous caliphs in rule? Does this show that he accepted
and was pleased with what they did?

Did Ali (a.s.) not refuse the caliphate when people forced him to assume
it and did he not accept it when he made thirty men witness for him
about (the reality of) the event of al-Ghadeer and that the Messenger of
Allah (S) had appointed him on that day as the caliph over all Muslims,
until he said:

*Whoever does not consider Ali as his guardian, is not a Muslim?*

Thus, Imam Ali (a.s.) revived the Eid al-Ghadeer after it was about to
be buried forever. Nevertheless, most of Muslims do not know this and
they cannot believe in those events, claiming that the courage of Imam
Ali (a.s.) would not let him keep silent before his right.

I say to these people that the courage of Imam Ali (a.s.) was not
greater than the courage of the Messenger of Allah (S) about whom Imam
Ali (a.s.) said:

*When war became violent, we protected ourselves behind the back of the
Messenger of Allah (S).*

Nonetheless, the Messenger of Allah (S) kept silent and gave up his
right when he accepted all the conditions of the polytheists for the
welfare of Islam and Muslims, until one of his companions accused him of
being indifferent to the religion by saying to him:

*Are you really the Messenger of Allah (S)?*

It was the same situation when some ignorant ones accused Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.) of degrading the believers when he concluded a truce with
Mo’awiyya to spare the bloods of Muslims.

Thus, the Eid al-Ghadeer is the borderline between the truth and
falsehood. It stands between the perfecting of the religion and its
comprehensiveness with the Book of Allah and the Sunna of His Prophet
(S) on one hand and its imperfection and being in need of the *ijtihad*
of mujtahids on the other. It is between the completion of the favor and
its belonging to the grateful on one hand and the wrath of Allah on the
renouncers on the other hand. It is between the infallible imamate that
Allah has made among His loyal, pure servants and the usurped caliphate
that the *tulaqa’* (freed captives) and sinners had assumed.

When I remember the great martyr Sayyid Muhammad Baqir as-Sadr (may
Allah have mercy on him), I do not and shall never hesitate even for one
moment to announce the right of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). One day, he
(Martyr as-Sadr) said to his companions, “*When the letter of at-Teejani
came to me from Tunisia, telling that some of our Shia brothers had
celebrated the Eid al-Ghadeer for the first time there, I cried and
praised Allah that He had planted the seed of Shiism there*.”

The attendants understood then that the crying of Sayyid as-Sadr was
because of his delight that some believers had been guided at his hand.
However, with the passing of years, I have understood that his crying
was for the great injustice against Imam Ali (a.s.) and the pure progeny
of the Prophet (S), because the injustice against them was an injustice
against Islam and all Muslims. Sayyid as-Sadr had cried for most of the
Muslims who had not heard about the Eid al-Ghadeer and had not known
about its great value and importance near Allah the Almighty.

After this brief discussion about the Eid al-Ghadeer and its importance,
I have to show my opinion as to the sought solution for the unity of
Muslims. Anyhow, my opinion is not a personal one, but it is a following
of the texts of the Qur'an and the Prophet’s Sunna, because after these
two holy sources, my opinion and the opinions of all people shall be
just deviation and supposition, and surely, supposition is nothing
before the truth.

I think that the unity of Muslims shall not come true except when it is
built on a firm basis, the basis of the same beliefs and the clinging to
the firm rope of Allah, because the Prophet Muhammad (S) said:

*If they disagree in the religion, they shall become the party of
Iblis.*

The signs of the unity were declared by the Messenger of Allah (S) when
he said:

*I have left among you the Two Weighty things which if you keep to, you
shall never go astray after me at all; the Book of Allah and my
household, my family. The all-comprehensive, the all acquainted
(Gabriel) has told me that they will never separate until they will come
to me at the Pond (in the Paradise).*

So whoever, whether knowingly or unknowingly, keeps to them is from the
propagandists for the unity that the Messenger of Allah (S) had ordered
and whoever turns his back to them is from the propagandists for
separation and disagreement, which the Messenger of Allah (S) had
forbidden. If such a man claims that he is the leader of unity and
uniting, his claim is certainly false, as long as he follows other than
these Two Weighty things.

What one of scholars has said to me might reveal clearly the intentions
of the Sunni propagandists of unity, whom no Muslim doubts about their
love for the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). He said to me,”

I asked him, “What is our sign that you wait for?”

“We (the Sunni) cannot unite with you except by the appearance of your
sign. He said, “Al-Mahdi whom you claim to be alive and hidden. When he
comes to us, only then we can unite with you and know that you are
truthful.”

It is a painful conclusion, but it is inevitable, for this nation cannot
unite except by his (Imam al-Mahdi) appearance. Even if we suppose that
most of the Sunni shall return to the truth, there shall be some
obdurate people there until the Last Day.[^11]

It is necessary at the end of this brief discussion to remind of the
will of the leader of the *umma* and founder of the Islamic Republic
(Imam Khomeini may Allah have mercy on him) to close the way before
pretenders. He prohibited disputing between the Shia and the Sunni for
the sake of unity. He began his will by the tradition of *ath-Thaqalayn*
(two weighty things), and after explaining the tradition, he directly
said,

“*We must say that what had been afflicted on the two trusts of the
Prophet (S) by the tyrants afflicted the Muslim nation and in fact
entire humanity in a way that the pen is not able to express. We have to
mention at this point that the tradition of ath-Thaqalayn has been
mentioned by so many narrators (mutawatir tradition) and it is well
known among all Muslims. It has been mentioned in the main Sunni books
of Hadith, such as the six Sahihs and other books in different wordings
and in many places.*

*This Prophet’s tradition is an irrefutable argument over human beings
especially the Muslims with their different creeds. All the Muslims, on
whom the argument has been cast, have to undertake this responsibility.
If the ignorant have an excuse, the scholars of the different sects have
no excuse*.”

After Imam Khomeini had disclosed the stages of the plot against the
Book of Allah and the Immaculate Progeny (S) and showed that the tyrants
had made the Qur'an as a means to establish governments hostile to the
Qur'an, although the call of the Messenger of Allah (S) “*I have left
among you the Two Weighty Things*” was still resounding in their ears.
They tried their best through different plots and tricks to keep away
the true interpreters of the Qur'an and the real scholars of the
Prophet’s Hadith. He said,

“*We are proud that we are followers of the creed that strives to
release facts of the Holy Qur’an that all invite to the unity among all
Muslims, and, in fact among all human beings*.

*We are proud that we are followers of the creed that forms foundation
of the Messenger of Allah (S) by the command of Allah and the foundation
of Ameerul Mo'minin Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) - loyal servant who was
free from all ties and had been was ordered to liberate humanity from
enslavement and all kinds of fetters.*

*We are proud that the book* *Nahjul Balaghah, which is, after the
Qur'an, is the greatest course of material and moral life and the
greatest book for liberation of human beings. Its moral and
administrative teachings are the best way for deliverance from our
infallible Imam.*

*We are proud of our infallible Imams right from the Imam Ali (a.s.) to
the Saviour of humanity - Imam al-Mahdi (thousands of blessings and
peace on him) who by the power of Allah the All-Powerful is still alive
and watchful of all affairs.”*

Then he said in the end of his will, “*I ask from the Muslim nations
with all seriousness and all humility to take the infallible Imams as
their examples and not to listen to any one who misleads, opposes the
truth and the creed, and to know that any deviant step may form the
beginning of the decline of the creed and the government of the Divine
Justice.*

*…from that, they have not to be indifferent at all to the Friday
Prayer, congregational prayers, and the rituals of consolation of the
immaculate Imams (a.s.), especially the master of the wronged and
martyred Imam al-Husayn (a.s.).*

*…and to know that the teachings of the Imams (a.s.) serve to liven up
this great historical Islamic mission, and that the cursing against
those, who were unjust toward the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is all but a heroic,
public cry in the face of the unjust rulers throughout history and
forever. And you know that cursing the Umayyads (may Allah curse them)
and the talking about their injustice - though they have become extinct
and gone to the Hell - is but a cry in the face of all oppressors of the
world.*

*It is necessary to mention openly in the consolation, eulogies, and
elegies of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) the disasters of the oppressors’
oppression in every land and every time, including this very time. This
is the age of the oppression by the United States of America, the Soviet
Union and their followers among whom are the Aal Sa’ud (the rulers of
the Saudi dynasty) also - the betrayers of the Divine Sanctum, may the
curse of Allah, of His angels and of His messengers be on them. We must
mention their injustice openly accompanied with invoking curse against
them.*

*Let us all know that which lead to the unity of Muslims are these
rituals that keep intact the identity of Muslims, especially that of
Twelver Shia.*

*What I have to remind of is that my will does not concern the great
Iranian people only, but my will is for all Muslim peoples and all
wronged nations in the world with their different races and beliefs*.”

This is the will of the leader of the ummah. It is clear in showing the
necessity of openly mentioning the injustice of the unjust and cursing
them. Thus the claim of those, who claimed that Imam Khomeini had
prohibited that (unity), is a false claim without any proof at all.

In the end, I would like to say that all Muslims have to ride the Ship
of Safety (of the infallible Imams a.s.) if they seek the real unity. We
see that the Prophet Noah (S) made, by the command of his Lord, a small
ship which could not hold except a few believers, but the Prophet
Muhammad (S) prepared, by the command of his Lord, a large ship which
can hold the entire nation and all believers can ride on it. Certainly,
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) are not for the Shia only, but they are for all
mankind.

May Allah make us all successful in doing all that which has welfare for
all human beings and may He make us keep to the guardianship of Ameerul
Mo'minin Imam Ali (a.s.) and his infallible progeny. May Allah make you
and us celebrate the Eid al-Ghadeer again and again with glory and
victory!

The last of our prayer is that praise be to Allah the Lord of the
worlds, and blessing and peace be on the noblest of messengers our
master Muhammad and on his pure progeny.

[^1]: Besides that, they contradicted many occasions on which the
Prophet (a.s.) often declared and announced his successor clearly and
openly. Allama Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’iy, in his book ‘The Shia
in Islam’, p. 24, says, “It is impossible for the leader of a
revolution, and in its first days, not to assign one of his companions
as vizier or successor to him over the others, and not introduce him to
the most loyal of his close companions and supporters…or keep him away
from the responsibilities of vizierate and succession!!

[^2]: Quraysh was the biggest tribe in Mecca of great power and
authority.

[^3]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 4 p. 144, vol. 8 p. 151.

[^4]: From the book ‘The Secret File of the Gulf War’, p.138-139. In a
letter to the Iranian President Mr. Rafsanjani, the criminal Saddam
praised peace and showed that he had given up his conditions…in few
lines, this tyrant effaced the remembrance of hundreds of thousands of
Iraqis killed in the eight-year-war which was the bloodiest since the
Second World War!!! He adopted the slogan of “the way to Jerusalem
passes through Tehran”, and then he turned to occupy Kuwait and let his
armies kill, rob and violate the honors of women, and finally set fire
to the Kuwaiti oilfields. He issued a law to execute every one of his
armies who refused to rob from Kuwait. After all that, yet he was called
‘the Sword of the Arabs”!!! It is worth mentioning that the Iraqi, the
American and the third partner - the UN’s information service refrained
from announcing the true losses and damages caused by the allies in
their bombing on Iraq. In fact, that which was bombed in Iraq was the
public utilities, bridges, and hospitals. And now, the Iraqi people are
suffering terrible famine that more than four millions people are likely
to die and 75% of the newborn children are at risk of dying because of
malnutrition and absence of medical care. Moreover, the sanction shall
not be annulled except after destroying the weapons of the regime which
has been accumulated with the wealth and sweat of the Iraqi and Arab
people and after offering the Iraqi people in sacrifice to Israel for
its security and stability!!! (This book was published first in Arabic
in 1995)

[^5]: The media and journals mentioned that after the decree of
transferring the capital from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, a high official
from the Gulf countries visited the United States of America offering
six milliard dollars for the luxury of the American people!

[^6]: I saw in a video cassette some horrible scenes of maiming and
cutting of heads and burying the wounded in collective graves. I asked
the owner of this cassette, “What for is all this brutal grudge and
enmity?” He said, “These are innocent, peaceful old people, women,
children…killed just because they are Shia.” These horrible crimes were
committed by evil men under the leadership of Shah Mas’ud and Abd Rabb
ar-Rasool the wahabite, who would be glad to see Satan but not a single
Shia. He might even give a fatwa that the bloods and honors of the Shia
were violable. This attack was against a town called Afshar where about
eleven thousand peaceful civilians were killed. Their women were raped
and their properties were robbed. After killing the leader of the
Afghani Unity Party, martyr Abdul Ali al-Mazari, there was another
attack against innocent civilians where about thirteen thousands were
killed, their women were raped and their properties robbed. The Shia
form one fifth (if not one third) of the population and have historical
deep-rooted existence there. There is a holy shrine of one of the sons
of the great martyr Zayd bin Ali (may Allah have mercy on him) in
Jowzjan, now called Mazar Sharif. The situations of the Shia (of
Afghanistan) against the Umayyads, against the British colonists and
lately their participation with their brothers in forcing the Red Army
to leave Afghanistan, were and are so great that they cannot be ignored.
However, instead of being grateful to them and acknowledging their
creed, the others try to remove and do away with them and their beliefs!

[^7]: Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) said addressing the followers of the
Umayyads, “If you have no religion and you do not fear the Hereafter,
then be free in your worldly life and have regard to your lineages if
you are Arab as you claim!” We have refused to take off the black dress
of the reactionary religion that has taken us to underdevelopment and
darkness! Let us keep pace with the ages of development and progress.
The Iraqi regime said, “There is no place in this country except for
development and socialism.” Whenever religion was mentioned, it was
described as reactionary and was detested. The Iraqi regime adopted the
slogan of “One (united) Arab nation…”, but it divided Iraq into pieces,
and its army was divided. The then members of the government, the
members of the president’s family themselves, and now the president is
surrounded not by the Republican Guards, but by those who are more
loyal - Fedayeen of Saddam. This is an example of the Arab developed
socialist leader who would suppress the reactionary religion and unite
the Arab nation! He plotted and is still plotting against his own people
and neighbors. (We have said before that this is from a book first
published in Arabic in 1995 AD) The aim of the Iraqi army in the war of
1967A.D. was to overthrow the Jordanian regime. And in the year 1970,
the Black September, the Palestinians thought that Saddam and his army
tried to defend them against the massacre committed by King Husayn ibn
Talal of Jordan, but they were massacred within the sight and hearing of
all! Yes, they gathered together to fight against their Muslim neighbor
Iran, after they had been disciplined by the cudgel of the Shah! And
after that came the scenario of the invasion of Kuwait to pave the way
to coexist with the Zionists. As they took back Husni Mubarak to the
Arab line, they shall take Saddam back to it as well, and whoever
refuses shall be fought by them and with their new partner Israel,
because in that there is the glory of the Arabs and their progress
toward the eternal Arabic goals!!!

[^8]: Collective conversions to Shiism took place at the hands of some
ulema. For example, Allama al-Qazwini could convert about thirty
thousand people from the tribes of al-Jubour in Hillah (in Iraq). The
same took place at the hands of other ulema. Some tribes of nomadic
trends near Tikrit and Ramadi have a proverb saying, “May Allah afflict
you with like of affliction of the tribe of Aal Alwan who gave up the
religion of their fathers and became Shia!” There were many meetings
between the Shia and Sunni ulema during the struggle against the British
colonialism, the communist expansion, and the Iraqi Baath’s prevailing.
Among those ulema was the Martyr Abdul Aziz al-Badri whom the tyrannical
regime cut into pieces. Thus, the Baathist regime in Iraq followed a
hypocritical policy that his Masonic masters had trained him to. They
exploited Saddam’s ignorance, complexes, and nomadic nature that he had
inherited from the village of al-Oujah (in Tikrit) which was terribly
underdeveloped and nomadic, besides his vagrancy because of his uncle’s
bad and severe relation to his mother, besides his Jewish background and
gypsy life that was with no moral bonds, lawful marriage, or pledges…so
this nomad was worthier of not knowing the limits of Allah. He knew
neither Sunnism nor Shiism. He was just to carry out what he had been
ordered to do; therefore, he did not refrain from any crime or sin. He
accused the Shia of treason for foreign countries, disbelief and of
Persian origin. He accused me of his own guilt and ran away…and a
suspicious one may expose himself!!! Unfortunately, many Sunni people
responded to him (Saddam), especially those who broke into houses,
tortured, raped, and maimed innocent people with total rage to write
with Saddam that “there would be no Shia after today”. And due to their
jurisprudence, it is not permissible to disobey the ruler and turn away
from the group (congregation), and therefore they helped Saddam to do
whatever he liked. Certainly, this is the continuity of the fatwa of the
first (illegal) rulers of Muslims saying that it is not permissible to
disobey a ruler even if he is unjust. Certainly, this is a clear
rejection to the Prophet’s tradition saying that “Whoever of you sees a
wrongdoing let him repel it…”

[^9]: He is the compiler of Nahjul Balaghah.

[^10]: And the same is said about us his Shia! If we say that Imam Ali
(a.s.) is the gate of the (Prophet’s) city of knowledge. Their (the
other than the Shia) arguers cries out loudly that this fact does not
deny that this city has many gates. If we mention his great courage and
that it was he who put the cornerstone of Islam, they say to us - do you
want to invalidate all the history? How did the Muslims achieve all
those conquests and victories and… and…etc? This is if the argument is
quiet, but if there is injustice and oppression against the Shia, they
shall approve the setting of fire to Fatima’s house, the murdering of
Imam al-Husayn (a.s.), the persecution of the Alawids, creating of
al-Azhar University and Halab Sunnite, persecuting the seyyids from the
progeny of the Prophet (a.s..), the killing of the Iranian hajjis,
fighting and trying to do away with the Shia and their ulema in Iraq
like the descendants of the great religious authority Grand Ayatollah
Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakeem and the great thinker Ayatollah Sayyid Muhammad
Baqir as-Sadr (may Allah have mercy on him). This is if they have not
participated in the activities of the media or as soldiers in the
different armies of the tyrant (Saddam), because, for them, it is not
permissible to disobey the guardian of Muslim when he has not disobeyed
Allah yet!!! How I wonder at this! I do not know how the color of
disobedience would be for Yazid, al-Hajjaj, and Saddam!!! Yes, we invite
them to dialogues and discussions so that we do know the truth and its
people, but they invite us today to keep silent. The invitation that
they have accustomed us to is murdering and supporting the wrongdoers to
defend the rulers whether good or bad they are!

[^11]: You may stand with the enemies of the grandfathers of al-Mahdi
(a.s.), of his followers, and supporters, supporting (the oppressors)
and keeping silent before the injustice against them, or participating
with their killers, or being a voice and echo for them , or a mere
onlooker to be safe, imitating what you have inherited from the
ancestors! “(Abdullah) ibn Umar (ibn al-Khattab) blamed Imam al-Husayn
(a.s.) for marching to Kufa and for his rising against Yazid ibn
Mo’awiya and separating from the group (congregation of Muslims).” Refer
to al-Bidayah wen-Nihayah fit-Tareekh, vol. 8 p. 163. “And ibn Umar
secluded himself from the people of Medina when they renounced their
pledge to Yazid ibn Mo’awiya and ordered his children and family to keep
on their allegiance to him (Yazid) and not to follow the people of
Medina in renouncing him”……even though Yazid killed Imam al-Husayn ibn
Ali (a.s..), his children and companions, took his women as captives,
and roamed with the heads of the martyrs on spears…destroyed the Kaaba,
and violated Medina for three days by committing every kind of vices in
it! Ibid vol. 8 p. 218 As the Mufti of the Saudi royal palace (ibn Baz)
gives a fatwa that it is not permissible to eat from the meat of the
sacrifices of the Shia, for they (the Shia) are polytheists and
unfaithful and that it is not permissible to marry from them or marry
women to them, we see him welcome the foreign armies in Hijaz. There are
scenes where the American female soldiers use sunbaths freely (nude) and
he considers their safety being secured by Islam, since they are in the
land of Muslims, and he sees that peace with Israel is
recommendable…with the full obedience to the rulers of Aal Sa’ud
(Saudis)! Then, why do we not wait for Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) under a good
shade instead of this shade, so that Allah may hasten his reappearance
to spread justice and remove injustice?


