The Shia are the followers of the Sunna, but…
=============================================

We have known from the previous discussions that the Twelver Shia are
the true followers of the Prophet’s Sunna. This is a clear fact free
from any doubt for whoever studies the teachings of Islam in all its
beliefs, rulings and historical stages.

However, their enemies from “the Sunni”, whose origin and goals we have
known in the previous studies, defame the Shia. They criticize their
beliefs and deeds, evoke suspicions against them, doubt their religion
and sometimes fabricate false stories to defame and cause troubles and
make others detest and despise them.

One of these fabrications is the claim that (a Shia believes that)
Gabriel has betrayed the Trust and delivered the Mission to Muhammad
instead of Ali. The second one is the unreal story of Abdullah ibn
Saba’ - the Jewish as the founder of Shiism. A third one is that the
Shia have a special Qur'an called “*Mushaf Fatima*” other than the
Qur'an available among all Muslims, or that the Shia prepare a horse
every night at the door of the vault in Samarra’ (in Iraq) waiting for
al-Mahdi to ride that horse. They also claim that the Shia worship the
graves and consider the Imams as gods, and they prostrate for stones.
The worse of it is their claim that the Shia permit adultery and that
they (more than one) sleep with the same woman in the same night. They
fabricate many other lies against the Shia with not any bit of reality
or evidence.

Anyhow, there are some objections that the Sunni put forth in our
present time and make them as obstacles in the way of scientific
research and then block the way to arrive at the sought truth. Such
people when presenting such spurious arguments, which we shall discuss
later on, have never read them in books or heard them from traditions.
Yet, they swear that they have seen them with their own eyes and have
attended themselves. Therefore, this matter is too dangerous and serious
and it may have a negative effect on the scholars and researchers who
seek pure truth.

As we have accustomed readers to seek the truth and be neutral without
any fanaticism towards any creed or sect, following the Prophet’s
tradition which says, “*Say the truth even if it is against you*”. Also
Allah the Almighty does not feel shy away from the truth. So, we must
have a clear situation in this concern to be able say to the doers of
good among the Shia that they have done well and to the wrong doers
among them that they have done wrong and sinned. We do not fear in the
blaming of any blamers, for we just seek the contentment of Allah the
Almighty.

We must distinguish the fundamentals of Islam and that which is really
in the s*haria* from traditions, habits and personal conclusions. And as
we have been frank and daring in criticizing some companions of the
Prophet (S) for the violations they had committed, we also have to
criticize some Shia and not keep silent before their violations.

However, there is an important difference here. What the companions
changed and invented became parts of the religion, which changed the
rulings of Allah and His messenger, but what some of the Shia changed or
invented did not change any divine rulings, nor did any one of them say
it was obligatory; nevertheless, we must criticize it.

I shall discuss the most important points raised about these new
invented things (heresies) through which some others criticize and try
to falsify Shiism and ascribe to it different kinds of defects. Dear
reader, you yourself may suffer from them and not find a satisfying
answer that will assist you to face an opponent or convince yourself.

These new things in fact, are heresies fabricated against Shiism and
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) who always refused and refuted every heresy whatever
it was and whatever it adorned and called “*a good heresy*”. They, peace
be upon them, have often and always declared that they did not say or do
anything except according to the sayings and doings of their grandfather
the Messenger of Allah (S). Thus, everything that came out after the
infallible Imams (a.s.) are heresies - that harm and not benefit,
alienate and not attract, complicate and not make it easy. The learned
youth find in them a flaw in Shiism and may find it very difficult to
justify or refute them.

We mention here, for example, some of those heresies, which the Sunni
criticize the Shia for: the exaggeration in the rituals of consolation
in Ashura where some people beat themselves with chains, daggers, and
knives until they bleed, the disorder in offering the prayer and the
indifference to other praying people, smoking in mosques and places of
prayer, neglecting the Friday Prayer, and some other things that we
shall mention later on which prevent many people from getting to the
truth.


