The Shia and the Friday Prayer
==============================

The important matter which the Sunni raise and criticize the Shia for on
all occasions, is the matter of neglecting and not offering the Friday
Prayer. Some of them are so excessive in their view that they consider
the Shia as disbelievers for not offering the Friday Prayer, relying on
a Prophet’s tradition that says:

“*Whoever gives up the Friday (prayer) three times does turn his back to
Islam*.”

They also narrate another tradition that the Prophet (S) when once was
asked about someone who gave up the Friday Prayer, he said:

“*He shall be in the Fire*.”

Regarding the truth, we say that the Shia disagree among themselves on
the legality of the Friday Prayer during the age of the Occultation of
Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.). The Shia jurisprudents are of two opinions; some
say it is obligatory at all times, and others say it is not obligatory
unless all its conditions are available and one of its conditions is
that it must be offered under the rule of a just ruler.

Before I turned a Shia, I truly say that I too much approved of Sheikh
al-Khalisi who offered the Friday Prayer in the Mosque of Imam al-Kadhim
(a.s.) in Baghdad. Sometimes I traveled from Najaf or Karbala to
participate in the Friday Prayer there. At that time, I wondered at the
courage of Sheikh Mahdi al-Khalisi[^1] who did not care for the
criticism of some *ulema* who did not think that the Friday Prayer was
obligatory. He believed it was obligatory and he offered it in the best
way. I noticed at that time (in 1968 AD) the masses of people who
gathered in his mosque, showing him great reverence and respect.

I also wondered at those who criticized him for offering the Friday
Prayer. I said to myself, “How do these people defame an *alim*
(scholar) who, due to his *ijtihad*, offers the prayer that Allah the
Almighty has ordered it to be offered when He has said:

***O you who believe! when the call is made for prayer on Friday, then
hasten to the remembrance of Allah***… ***Qur’an 62:9***

I repeated this saying before some of those people, defending Sheikh
al-Khalisi and seeking for him different excuses and proofs. However,
some of them revealed what was inside their hearts. They said to me that
Sheikh al-Khalisi did not recite in the *azan* - “*the third witness*”.
I asked what “the third witness” was, and they said that it was, “*I
bear witness that Ali is the saint of Allah*”.

I spent that night asking myself if that is reason enough to criticize
and defame that man. I researched much in the books, and I read the
books of his (Sheikh Mahdi al-Khalisi) father, but I did not find
anything except true knowledge, piety and concern for the unity of
Muslims. This (concern about the unity of Muslims), some people
considered to be flattery of the Sunni.

However and despite the fact that some people tried to make me dislike
and keep myself away from him, whenever I visited al-Kadhimiyyah (in
Baghdad where Imam al-Khadim a.s. is buried), I offered the Friday
Prayer behind Sheikh al-Khalisi and listened to his sermons, from which
I benefited much. Whenever I sat with him and listened to his talks, I
liked him more. Still I remained reserved, justifying that the Shia knew
him more than I did.

On the other hand, I remained confused between the two *ijtihads*
(deductions) of which one said that the Friday Prayer was obligatory and
the other said it was not.

I said that I could not understand that, except when I would reach the
required degree of *ijtihad*. However, after the victory of the Islamic
Revolution in Iran and the establishment of the Islamic Republic there,
the Friday Prayer was offered since the first Friday after the victory.
And since then, the Islamic Republic has spared no effort for the sake
of the unity of Muslims. Then, I knew the value of Sheikh al-Khalisi and
became certain of his loyalty and the truth in his mission. I remain
until today with desire to see him, so that Allah may make me meet him
from a near distance as a happy occasion and Allah is powerful over
everything.

Anyhow, the Shia are until now on two thoughts; some offer the Friday
Prayer, and the others do not, waiting for the reappearance of Imam
al-Mahdi (may Allah hasten his reappearance).

I wish from the depth of my heart that the Friday Prayer is offered in
every village and town of the Muslim countries, for it evokes great
reward and has many benefits that only Allah the Glorified knows about.

In many lectures, I invited the Muslim colonies in the different
countries which I visited, to offer the Friday Prayer, taking the
Islamic Republic of Iran and its leader as their example and trying to
bring their hearts close to each other and make Muslims - Sunni and
Shia - love each other as a single united nation.

We pray to Allah, the Powerful to help us thank and worship Him well, as
is His due and to reconcile our hearts with each other to be true
brothers by His Grace, He is Hearing, Responding to the prayer.

[^1]: It is worth mentioning that once Sheikh Muhammad al-Khalisi, the
father of Sheikh Mahdi al-Khalisi, went to the religious authority
Sayyid al-Khoei in Najaf, talking with him about the matter of the
Friday Prayer, relying on this Qur’anic verse, O you who believe! when
the call is made for prayer on Friday, then hasten to the remembrance of
Allah…Qu’ran 62:9 Sayyid al-Khoei pondered for a while and then said to
him, “Who is the caller?” Sheikh Muhammad al-Khalisi could not answer
and he went back to Baghdad, keeping on offering the Friday Prayer
there. It has been mentioned that Abu Hanifa too thought that it should
not be offered except when available under a just ruler. Be it known
that it is now offered in the Islamic Republic of Iran that calls for
offering it in the other countries and in Syria. Sayyid Fadhlullah calls
for it in Lebanon. In fact, it is offered in Lebanon now. In any case
what kind of Friday Prayer is that which is offered under the authority
of an oppressive ruler - when the Friday Sermon is dictated under his
supervision, or when the imams of mosques are appointed according to his
desire and mood from among those who praise and glorify the regime and
its policies?!!


