Smoking in the places of prayer
===============================

How often is it that the Sunni criticize the Shia for smoking in the
mosques and say that it is an abominable doing from the deeds of the
Satan?

We can say that smoking is a common phenomenon among the Shia. When you
come into their mosques for the first time, you are shocked by that.[^1]

I remember that when I traveled to Holy Najaf for the first time, I was
shocked by this phenomenon. I found it odd and so I asked some of their
(the Shia) *ulema* about it. They gave answers which have not convinced
me until now. Some of them say that smoking is neither impermissible nor
disapproved because there is no (legal) text concerning it either from
the Prophet (S) or from the infallible Imams (a.s..) and that analogy is
not permissible to them. Some others say that they do not smoke in the
mosques, but only in *Husayniyyas* [^2] which are not from mosques.

As for the first answer, a Muslim cannot accept that everything about
which no religious text have been mentioned, is permissible, because the
texts are either general including all prohibited vices like this saying
of Allah:

***Say: My Lord has only prohibited indecencies, those of them that are
apparent as well as those that are concealed.*** ***Qur'an, 7:33***

Or special, in which something is mentioned by name, like these sayings
of Allah:

***…And go not nigh to adultery.*** ***Qur'an, 17:32***

***..And do not kill any one whom Allah has forbidden, except for a just
cause.*** ***Qur'an, 17:33***

***O you who believe! do not devour usury***. ***Qur'an, 3:130***

Or, the sayings of the Prophet (S):

*He, who cheats us, is not from us.*

*Whoever fabricates lies against me (as if I have said), let him take
his seat in the Fire.*

Cigarettes were not available at the time of the Prophet (S) and the
times of the infallible Imams (a.s.). Therefore, it is not possible to
have a religious text about smoking from Allah, His messenger or the
infallible Imams. It is the same as with regard to many impermissible
things available nowadays that are included by the general texts, such
as lottery, horseracing and modern games that cause many profits with no
effort.

Smoking can be included by this saying of Allah the Almighty:

***… and do not squander wastefully. Surely, the squanderers are the
fellows of the devils and the devil is ever ungrateful to his Lord***.
**Qur'an, 17:26-27**

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*Squandering is to spend even one dirham on what does not benefit you.*

*Is there squandering worse than to spend one’s money on things that are
harmful to his health and dangerous to his life?*

Smoking is also included by this saying of the Messenger of Allah (S):

*There should be no harm (against oneself) and no harming (against
others).*

Is there any harm worse than cancer, which has been proven by medicine
and sciences of today to affect smokers and do away with their lives?
Smoking is proven to cause dyspnea and that the nicotine in cigarettes
causes addiction, which a smoker can hardly get rid of.

Sociologists in the developed countries knew the dangers of smoking;
therefore, smoking was prohibited in the public halls, state centers,
airplanes, trains and other means of transport. Lastly, the British
government forbade smoking in the metro and the same was done by the
French government.

Modern medicine has proved that a smoker, in addition to harming
himself, harms others who sit with him in a place or in a vehicle during
a journey. Therefore, smokers are forbidden to smoke inside public
places and are forced to go out to smoke in the open air if they want to
smoke, as a kind of regard for others’ feelings and safety.

This is actually what the Prophet Muhammad (S) meant when he said:

*There should be no harm (to oneself) and no harming (against others).*

In fact, in this saying there is a prohibition for smokers not to smoke
even if they are alone, because a Muslim is prohibited from harming
himself, as he is prohibited from harming others.

Do you not see that Islam has prohibited suicide? Islam considers
suicide as one of the major sins. A Muslim is not free to harm even his
own body, because his body is a possession of Allah and a Muslim has no
right to do anything to his body except that which pleases Allah the
Glorified.

Nowadays, we hear that the developed countries prohibit drivers from
having alcohol while driving their vehicle, because it may cause a fatal
accident. In the same way as they prohibit smokers from smoking in
public places because they may harm others, we see them apply the rule
of “no harm to others” and they neglect the rule of “no harm to oneself”
in accordance with the law of FREEDOM which considers man to be free to
do to unto himself whatever he likes, as long as he keeps the condition
that he does not harm others.

Islam does not acknowledge this absolute freedom and does not permit man
to do anything to himself except what Allah has permitted within the
limits that the Sharia has determined for him. Therefore, Allah has
said:

***…and cast not yourselves to perdition with your own hands***
***Qur'an, 2: 195***

And, the Prophet (S) said, “*There should be no harm to oneself and no
harm to others*.”

If we supposedly agree with Muslim smokers, who say that there is no any
text which prohibits smoking, then we do not agree with them on allowing
smoking inside the mosques and other places of prayer, worship and
meeting of Muslims. Therefore, smokers must attend these places as
non-smokers.

Here comes the problem of their second answer when saying that smoking
is not practiced in mosques but in *Husayniyyas*. To define a
*Husayniyya* for those who do not know it, we say that a *Husayniyya* is
a building built by the Shia and entailed for Imam Husayn (a.s.) where
ceremonies of anniversaries of births and deaths of the infallible Imams
(a.s.) are held besides the anniversary of Ashura and the Eid al-Ghadir.
Other ceremonies of different occasions are also held in the
*Husayniyya*. These *Husayniyyas* are often furnished with precious
carpets and most of them have a mihrab of prayer.

If one of the Shia says that it is permissible to smoke inside a
*Husayniyya* because it is not a mosque, we say that this is a
confession that smoking is not permissible in mosques first of all.
Secondly, every place in which a prayer is offered is “a mosque”. When
we attend on any occasion in a *Husayniyya*, we find the meeting full of
remembrance of Allah and people praying to Him to send blessings on the
Prophet Muhammad and his progeny (peace be on them all), surrounded by
the angels who pray Allah to forgive the believers. So, is it nice to
pollute such meetings with bad smells that harm people besides the
angels?

I myself find it odd from the religious authorities of the Shia who
prohibit the playing with chess, but do not prohibit smoking, though
there is a great difference between the harms of each of them. And I
find it odd too that one of the grand authorities prohibits his
followers by *ijtihad*, from smoking tobacco as a way of resisting the
British companies that promote it, but does not prohibit it again, by
*ijtihad* too, to keep his followers safe from the fatal diseases and
the squandering that Allah detests much!!

I often criticized this state and discussed these matters with some of
*ulema*, but I did not find any one who had enough courage to prohibit
smoking,[^3] neither among the Shia nor among the Sunni.

Shahid Muhammad Baqir as-Sadr (may Allah have mercy on him) never did
smoke at all. When once I asked him about smoking, he said, “I do not
smoke and I advise every Muslim not to smoke.” However, I did not hear
from him the prohibition of smoking openly.

It is said that some *ulema* have prohibited smoking for the ones who
have never smoked and they want now to smoke and considered it
unapproved for smokers themselves. Some *ulema* consider it
impermissible, but they do not dare to announce openly for fear that
they may be accused of following analogy.

I want to say that the religious authorities have to give an open, clear
opinion about smoking without fearing the blame from any quarter. They
have to prohibit it even by their own *ijtihad*, as long as it causes
harms to smokers themselves and to others, besides the squandering and
waste that it results in.

Have we not agreed from the beginning that when a *mujtahid* is right in
his *fatwa*, he shall get two rewards, and if he is mistaken, he shall
get one reward on condition that there is no religious text from Allah
or His messenger on that matter concerned?

Let us suppose that there is no clear text on smoking and that it is not
included by this saying of Allah:

***..and do not squander wastefully..*** ***Qur'an, 17:26***

nor the saying of the Prophet (S), “*There should be no harm (against
oneself) and no harming (against others)*”, then the way is open before
the *ulema* and religious authorities to follow their *ijtihad* and
prohibit smoking because of the harms and fatal diseases it causes. When
the *ulema* and religious authorities choose to keep silent just because
people accept it - it is a really big problem.

Or, they may fear the reaction of smokers and so they do not give a
*fatwa* for the sake of being disapproved. Someone from them has tried
his best to convince me that smoking has many benefits and to disapprove
this is really a dangerous thing having a dangerous effect! It
encouraged a Muslim youth who knew this man, to keep on smoking.

At the same time we find that charitable societies and social
organizations in the atheist countries sparing no effort against smoking
and smokers, and preventing even its advertisement. They ask the
manufacturers of cigarettes to write on the packets of cigarettes the
word “SUICIDE” to encourage people to keep away from it. Yet we find in
the Islamic religious societies widely embarking on it and encouraging
others towards it. We even find women carrying packets of cigarettes
with them to places of worship and religious meetings.

When a child opens his eye to see his mother and father smoke, he is
likely to imitate them before he tries to follow the religious
authority. When such a child becomes a youth with love of smoking and
intoxicated with cigarettes, it will be very difficult to convince him
to give the habit up, particularly when he becomes an adult and he is
used to seeing his father smoke in places of worship.

If Muslims know how much monies they lose because of smoking and that it
has been a plot against them, they will be thunderstruck!

For example and in a simple mathematical operation, we can see the
danger of the situation. In the world today, there are one milliard
Muslims. If we suppose that only a fifth of them smoke, we shall find
two hundred millions smokers. And if we suppose that every smoker spends
one dollar a day, which is the least price of an ordinary packet of
cigarettes - and we do not talk about those who smoke two or three
packets a day nor those who spend two or three dollars on the expensive
brand of cigarettes - we shall find that two hundred million
(200,000,000) dollars are spent by Muslims on smoking every day, and
seventy-three million (73,000,000,000) dollars every year. Thus, Muslims
squander seventy-three million dollars on smoking every year to buy
fatal diseases.

If we add to that the amount which Muslims spend on the treatment from
the diseases caused by smoking itself, like cancer, infection of lungs,
angina pectoris, dental caries, pyorrhea, and others - the amount spent
is unimaginable, something that mind cannot believe easily.

If Muslims spare these amounts for ten years, they shall have a paradise
on the earth. There shall be no poor amongst them. They shall not need
to beg the atheists, and they shall definitely do away with poverty,
diseases and underdevelopment. They can with such monies, buy modern
technology and develop in all fields.

After this brief discussion, we want to say that Muslims have to
prohibit themselves from everything that harms and does not benefit
them. Even if there is no clear text on that, surely their religion
encourages and orders them to keep away from everything harmful and not
of use to them. Allah says in the Qur'an:

***…and (Allah) makes lawful to them the good things and makes unlawful
to them impure things***. ***Qur'an, 7:157***

The Messenger of Allah (S) forbade his companions from eating garlic on
Fridays, lest the people in the mosque would be hurt by its bad smell,
though garlic is permissible and it has many medical benefits.
Certainly, the smell of garlic cannot be compared to the smoke of
cigarettes that spreads everywhere, pollutes the space and bothers
others too much. Nevertheless, the Prophet (S) forbade the eating of
garlic on Fridays (for those who would mix with people) according to the
rule of “no harming to others”. Those, who eat garlic, get advantages
from it, but it is not liked for them to eat it when they want to mix
with others especially during the Friday Prayer, lest others be hurt by
its bad smell.

Moreover, only the bad smell of garlic may hurt others. It causes
neither diseases nor infections, unlike it is not with smoking. Yet, the
Prophet (S) forbade it. After this example, is there any lesson in that
for men of understanding?!

*Mujtahids* prohibit the playing with cards and chess, even if they are
used for amusement and not gambling and they prohibit amusing singing,
music and other things for which there is no any clear text about
neither in the Book of Allah nor in the Sunna of the Prophet. Could they
not then prohibit something that clearly causes harm and diseases for
Muslims?

But, if some Shia insists on permitting smoking and not prohibiting it,
then let them observe the feelings of non-smokers and observe the
sanctity of the places of worships, as their Sunni brothers do inside
their mosques. Would you try that individually?

If you come into a mosque of the Sunni while having a lit cigarette in
your hand, you shall be prevented and denied, and may be hurt by some of
them.

I can swear that Allah and His messenger hate smoking, because reason,
sound nature, and logic hate it.

This bad habit made many of the Sunni, who visited the countries of the
Shia, be alienated and go back to their countries, criticizing the Shia,
though they did not know anything about Shiism other than those bad
habits. Therefore, I always remind of Imam as-Sadiq’s saying to his
followers:

*Be propagandists for us by your deeds and not your sayings. Be a cause
of praise to us and not a cause of dispraise against us*.

How many doings one may see and alienate and then become displeased so
that afterwards he does not accept any invitation, even if it is true!
What is said about some of the Shia in this concern can be said about
some of the Sunni.

In the end, I say that reform is necessarily required, and returning to
the truth is a virtue. Let one not be deceived by saying: Can that which
has been corrupted throughout too many centuries be repaired?

Yes, it can be. If there is loyalty, and causes are available, the
nation shall be recovered from this chronic disease, even if it takes a
long time, by the power of Allah the Almighty.

[^1]: For the truth, we should say that this phenomenon cannot be seen
in the mosques in Iran.

[^2]: Holy places like mosques but do not have the same rulings and
conditions of mosques.

[^3]: From the ulema, who have given a fatwa on prohibiting smoking, is
Ayatollah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Fadhlullah, relying on this Qur’anic
verse that prohibits wine: They ask you about intoxicants and games of
chance. Say: in both of them there is a great sin and means of profit
for men, and their sin is greater than their profit Qu’ran 2:219 It is
understood that everything, whose sin (and harm) is more than its
benefit, is impermissible, and according to this rule, smoking is
impermissible too. Justifying it in this way, Ayatollah Sayyid
Fadhlullah has given a fatwa of “obligatory precaution”, because there
are many believers and ulema who have been addicted to smoking, and it
may be difficult for them, or they may suffer physical harm if they give
up smoking. As for mosques and those who frequent them, it may be
considered by a new Muslim, who has recently embraced Islam, in the west
as a kind of binding to his freedom; this is beside the bad treatment
that a smoker may face there. Perhaps out of ignorance, a smoker may be
invited negatively not to smoke there. It has been mentioned that once
Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn (peace be on them) saw an old man perform the
wudhu’ incorrectly. They did not scold him, but kindly said to him, “O
old man, would you please watch us both and say which of us performs the
wudhu’ correctly?” When they finished their wudhu’, the old man said,
“By Allah, the wudhu’ of both of you is better and more correct than
mine.” By this way, the old man corrected his wudhu’. Would that we
learn from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) the morals and etiquette of inviting
others to do something! In a very polite manner, we can invite the
youth, who have been attracted by the places of gambling, impermissible
amusement, and ill-educating cinemas, and who think that they enjoy
their freedoms, to follow the right path. In the same way and through
wisdom and goodly exhortation, we can invite our Sunni brothers who wear
gold, or who do not care for impurities to correct their behaviors.


