I bear witness that Ali is the Friend of Allah
==============================================

There remain some other criticisms that do not deserve defaming or
causing fear. These things, which are criticized unfairly by the Sunni
are mentioned among the Shia in the past and present, as recommended and
a cause of blessing, such as adding to the *azan*[^1] and *iqamah*[^2]
the saying - “I bear witness that Ali is the saint of Allah”.

All the Shia have agreed that this is not a basic part of the *azan* or
the *iqamah* and that it was available in the *azan* at the time of the
Prophet (S). They have agreed that considering it a basic part of the
*azan* or the *iqamah* invalidates both. This is the belief of the
*ulema* and religious authorities of the Shia.

As long as the truth is our goal, the sayings of Allah and His messenger
are our sayings and their contentment is our aim and intention. And as
long as we face criticism from some of our (Sunni) brothers, so we have
to approve of others what we approve from ourselves and find ugly in
ourselves what we find ugly of others.

We have criticized Umar ibn al-Khattab in our previous studies for
adding “*prayer is better than sleep*” to the *azan* and omitting “*come
on to the best of deeds*” from it, and said that it was impermissible
because it was a heresy that was not available at the time of the
Prophet (S). We were not convinced by their saying that “*prayer is
better than sleep*” was mentioned only in the *azan* of the Fajr (dawn)
Prayer and their justifying that at dawn, man would be in the best
moments of his sleep and rest; therefore, “*prayer is better than
sleep*” would be used to encourage him to give up his rest and get ready
for prayer.

It was nice speech, justifying and defending the matter, but we denied
it, because the clear texts would not submit to personal opinions and
desires. We said, “*Whatever the Messenger of Allah (S) (S) did not do
is heresy*.”

On this basis, we say to the Shia the same statement and argue against
them with the same argument. There should be no difference between these
and those.

Therefore, we confess that “*I bear witness that Ali is the saint of
Allah*” is extra in the *azan*, because the Messenger of Allah (S) did
not say or order it, nor did the infallible Imams (a.s.) do it. If they
really did it, we would find some proofs for it. If they did it, then it
would not be permissible for the ulema of the Shia and their religious
authorities to consider the *azan* and *iqamah* as null when this
statement is mentioned as an actual part of them (the *azan* and the
*iqamah*) as we have said before.

Fairness and justice require us to say the word of the truth and not to
deny the Sunni for something while we ourselves do the like. Allah says:

***What! do you enjoin men to be good and neglect your own souls while
you read the Book; have you then no sense?*** ***Qur'an, 2:44***

Once, one of the Shia said to me, “O my brother, do not mix between
“prayer is better than sleep” and “I bear witness that Ali is the saint
of Allah”!

I said, “Why? Prayer is really better than sleep, and Ali is really the
saint of Allah, but they are parts added later on and the Messenger of
Allah (S) did not do that.”

He said, “But the guardianship of Imam Ali (a.s.) has been revealed in
the Qur'an, and you yourself have acknowledged that in your book ‘Then I
was Guided’.”

I said, “So, the Messenger of Allah (S) was to be blamed, for he did not
make that in the *azan*!!!”

Not everything that has been revealed in the Qur'an is to be added to
the *azan* or *iqamah* and my acknowledgment that it has been revealed
in the Qur'an does not make it necessary to be added to the *azan* or
*iqamah*.

Is it right for one to recite for example, in the azan, “I bear witness
that there is no God but Allah, bear witness that Adam is the choice of
Allah, bear witness that Noah is the prophet of Allah, bear witness that
Abraham is the friend of Allah, bear witness that Moses is the spoken to
by Allah, bear witness that Jesus is the Holy Spirit of Allah, and I
bear witness that Muhammad is the beloved one of Allah”? All these facts
are true and they have come in the Qur'an.

However, we cannot recite that in the *azan*, because the Messenger of
Allah (S) has taught us to recite in the azan only the two witnesses “I
bear witness that there is no god but Allah, and I bear witness that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (S)”. We must abide by the saying of
Allah:

***…and, whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it and from whatever
he forbids you, keep back**.* ***Qur'an, 59:7***

It is true that some of the Shia *ulema* do not mention “I bear witness
that Ali is the saint of Allah” in the *azan* or the *iqamah*. I offered
prayers with some of them and did not hear them say so. That they might
mention it in their hearts, is something else. However, there are some
Shia who doubt the loyalty and faith of whoever does not mention this in
the *azan* or the *iqamah*.”

My opponent, praise be to Allah, was convinced. Still he said to me that
he could not give it up, because his tongue had been used to it since
his childhood.

I say this and I am certain that some of the Shia will not approve of
it, because man by his nature, is an enemy to what he ignores and the
satisfaction of all people is an unreachable goal.[^3]

As I have said before in this book, I do not flatter anyone nor do I
seek his satisfaction (with me) however high a position he has. I only
seek the satisfaction of my conscience through the satisfaction of
Allah, His messenger (S) and the infallible Imams (a.s.) - who are my
Imams and masters, at the head of whom is Imam Ali (a.s.).

In the depth of my soul, I am certain that Imam Ali (a.s.) would be
pleased with those, who try to guide people to the right path more than
he would be with some of his Shia and lovers, who bear witness in every
*azan* and *iqamah* that he is the saint of Allah, but they do not do
anything to guide people towards this guardianship (of Imam Ali) or to
prove the truth to them (people). In fact, they make people alienated
and unknowingly keep them from reaching the truth.

Would Imam Ali (a.s.) be pleased when we bear witness of his
guardianship and sainthood while we hold it as a big obstacle before
those who search for the truth? Certainly not!

I often argued with obstinate people in the best manner, but I found in
them a psychological obstacle that prevented them from keeping on with
the argument in order to get to the truth. I tried to destroy that
obstacle daring with a certain heart to keep on researching and getting
to the sought goal. Then, I found that the obstinate ones advanced
little by little with me and broke the psychological obstacles. Most of
the time and about eighty percent of them acknowledged the truth and
were guided to the guardianship of Ameerul Mo'minin Imam Ali (a.s.) and
the guardianship of the infallible Imams (a.s.) after him.

Once, I was in Poona and Jabalpur in India. I met there with a big group
of Sudanese students. In an evening gathering, I felt loyalty and true
intention to know the truth in them. Most of them objected to the
beliefs of the Shia concerning the matter of infallibility[^4] that they
(the Shia) proved for their imams. They also objected to the witness
that “*Imam Ali is the saint of Allah*” recited in the *azan*. They said
that the Shia were excessive and extravagant in their love to the imams.

I said to them, “O my brothers in Islam, I do not try to impose on you
the concept of “infallibility” and do not consider it the goal leading
to the truth, although I myself believe in it, but I shall avoid it
completely to prove to you that the Holy Qur’an and the Prophet’s Sunna
impose on every Muslim to be a Shia following the Messenger of Allah (S)
and his immaculate progeny (peace be on them).

You are not required to prove and believe in this infallibility in order
to get to the sought goal, which is the adherence to the saints of Allah
and His messenger (S) and to be free from the enemies of Allah and His
messenger (S). You are as well, not required to bear witness to Imam
Ali’s guardianship and sainthood in the *azan* and not required to
believe in all what the Shia narrate about Ali and his progeny that you
consider as excessive and extravagance.

Imam Ali (a.s.) is much greater than the need prove for him a virtue
that is considered as one of miracles and say that Allah the Almighty
has returned the sun to him because he missed the afternoon Prayer, or
the earth was shrunk for him to travel from Medina to Mada’in in order
to ritually wash Salman al-Farisi (after his death) and come back on the
same day, which was a distance of some month’s travel at that time.
These narrations are about miracles of the Unknown. A Muslim is free to
believe or not to believe in them, for these shall neither increase nor
decrease his faith.

However, we are required to believe that Imam Ali (a.s.) was the
successor of the Prophet (S) and the best of all people after him and
that the Prophet (S) had appointed him as his successor over the nation
after his death.

We have to prove that Ameerul Mo'minin Ali (a.s.) was the gate of the
city of the Prophet’s knowledge and there was no one more knowledgeable
than him at all in the entire nation. We have to prove that he was most
courageous of all companions and the most loyal of all of them in wars
and during difficulties. It was by his sword and courage that Islam
became strong and firm. We have to prove that he was the first to
believe in Islam, he was the most loyal in all the battles, and that he
sacrificed everything to preserve Islam after the Prophet (S) therefore,
following him is obligatory on every Muslim.

We have to prove that he was the only one who spared no effort to
enliven the Book of Allah and the Sunna of the Prophet when they were
about to be buried. We have to prove that he was the most ascetic to the
worldly life among all human beings and the nearest to Allah in all his
behaviors and actions. We have to prove that he was the most just and
fair of all people at all, and most pious to Allah, and that he fought
the *nakithin* - breakers of covenant - in the battle of al-Jamal-the
camel, the *qasitin* - the unjust - in the battle of Siffin and the
*mariqin* - renegades - in the battle of an-Nahrawan to preserve Islam
and Muslims.

We have to prove that Muhammad (S) was the first and Ali (a.s.) was the
second, and they were the best of Allah’s creation at all.

Yes! We have to prove all that from the Qur'an, the true Prophetic Sunna
and the true history and show clear evidences and convincing arguments
that are irrefutable.

But, if we repeat that Allah had created Muhammad and Ali one hundred
thousand years before He created Adam, and that all the prophets and
messengers prayed to Allah the Almighty by the right of Muhammad, Ali,
Fatima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, or that it has been written on the leg
of the Throne that “*Ali is the saint of Allah*”, it is something else
and it neither benefits nor take us to the sought goal.

We cannot convince others with these things, for which we do not have
any scientific proof. If we insist on proving the miracles, the
infallibility, or the guardianship of Ali (a.s.) - each side will insist
on his own situation and be fanatic as the Sunni who narrate on Abu Bakr
and Umar more than what the Shia narrate on Imam Ali (a.s.) and his
progeny. In this case, time shall be wasted in unfruitful disputes, and
the Sunni shall accuse the Shia of being extravagant in praise of their
Imams, and then the Shia shall accuse the Sunni of being extravagant in
praise of the three caliphs especially and to the companions in general.
Thus the dispute shall remain unfruitful.

O brothers, today, we are required to show clear arguments and
scientific proofs. I do not argue with you except by reasonable and
traditional proofs that have been proved by history, reality and what
all Muslims - Sunni and Shia - have agreed on. I pray Allah to guide us
all to the truth.”

After we had spent that night until the dawn in scientific argumentation
and logical discussion, most of them turned to the truth and longingly
read the book ‘*Then I was Guided*’. Two days later, they came to say
farewell to me before my travel while thanking Allah for guiding them to
His Right Path and wishing to know the beliefs of the Twelver Shia and
to read their books.

One of them came alone with me and I think he was the emir of the group
as they called him, and said after thanking me and offering compliments,
“I met with the Shia in Egypt, Sudan, and in India here, but no one of
them could convince me like what you did.”

I said, “The book ‘*Then I was Guided*’ convinced many researchers and
this is a favor of Allah to me, so I often praise and thank Him.”

He said, “I did not yet read your book, because I am busy with
examinations, and I do not read any book except when I am tranquil.”

I said, “Then, how were you convinced when you did not read the book*?*”

He said, “On that night when you began your talking by putting aside the
“infallibility”, “Ali is the saint of Allah”, and many other concepts
that the Shia adopt, I admired your talks, because you talked to people
with what they understood. If you kept to those concepts, the arguments
would be unfruitful and that night’s discussion would be in vain.
However, you knew the truth and could guide us to it. If you give a
lecture in Sudan before the university students, you will make them all
turn Shia by this way and method*.”*

I thanked him for his kind feelings and asked him to read the book
(‘*Then I was Guided’*) and send me his notes on it. We embraced each
other, while our hearts were beating with the love and loyalty to the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

[^1]: The azan in Islam is a means of announcing to people about the
time of prayer. It has no certain, inviolable text as the texts of the
Holy Qur'an, which cannot accept a decrease or increase even for one
letter. As for azan, the books of the Sunni sometimes mention that the
azan was not available and that Abdullah ibn Zayd al-Ansari heard it in
sleep and told it to the Prophet (S) who acknowledged and confirmed it.
Perhaps, this is what made the Caliph Umar, when he was sleeping and the
muezzin awaked him saying, “Prayer is better than sleep”, approved the
statement and ordered to add it to the azan. Bilal al-Habashi, the
Prophet’s muezzin, pronounced [sh] as [s] and he said “ass-hadu” instead
of “ash-hadu”. When some Muslims criticized this, the Prophet (S) said,
“The [s] of Bilal is [sh] near Allah.” Once, when I was in Sham (Syria),
I passed by the Umayyad Mosque at the time of the Isha’ Prayer and I
heard a collective azan recited in tones like oration. So, why all these
reactions when Ameerul Mo'minin Ali ibn Abi Talib is mentioned?! Let us
say it is a good heresy or bad heresy (as the Sunni believe), then what
for are all these reactions? However, they (the Sunni) are excessive in
this concern. They have fixed “prayer is better than sleep” and
considered it a part from the azan, but we (the Shia) do not say it is a
part from the azan, but only recommended. Azan is a means that announces
the prescribed time of prayer. As long as it is within the required
limits that have no excess and do not harm Islam and Muslims, there
shall be no serious problem.

[^2]: Iqamah is a recommended (not obligatory) part before the prayer.
It has the same wordings of the azan, but with a little difference.

[^3]: Heresy, as we have said before, is a thing, which is not from
religion. It is fixed and added to religion. “Prayer is better than
sleep” was added and considered as a part of the very azan, but as for
recommended things mentioned before or even through the azan, such as
“Say: praise be to Allah Who has not taken a wife nor a child” or
“blessing and peace be on you O Messenger of Allah (S)” besides “I bear
witness that Ali is the saint of Allah, or is the commander of the
believers” are mentioned as recommended. According to general evidence
the little statements of ordinary people (neither Allah nor the Prophet)
do not annul the azan, on condition that these things are not considered
as parts of the azan or the iqamah.

[^4]: Why do they (the Sunni) deny the infallibility of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.), whereas they themselves believe in the infallibility of all the
nation as to the matter of consensus, or the infallibility of all the
Prophet’s companions, and of the men of authority? Al-Fakhr ar-Razi says
in his Tafsir, “…and it has been proved that all those, whom Allah has
ordered to obey, must be infallible, and thus, it has been definitely
proved that “the men of authority” mentioned in this verse must be
infallible. Then we say: that the infallible ones are either entire
nation or some of the nation… those infallible ones meant by Allah’s
saying ‘men in authority’ must be the men in power from the imams
(rulers), and this makes it necessary that the consensus of the nation
is evident.” The interpretation of the Sura of an-Nisa’, verse 59, p.
144 in ar-Razi’a Tafsir It is not unknown that those men in power were
themselves who gave Mo’awiya ibn Abi Sufyan the authority (and
considered him a legal Wali) and his son Yazid the drunkard and the
killer of Imam Husayn son of Imam Ali (a.s.) and (killer of) seventeen
men from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)…and the results were all Mo’awiya and his
son’s crimes and vices, the rule of al-Waleed and other criminals from
the Umayyad dynasty, and then the allegiance to the Abbasids among whom
were Abul Abbas as-Saffah (slaughterer), Abu Ja’far al-Mansur (the
tyrant), and others. As for those in power who were pious, they were
either exiled, or forced to be neuter, though keeping silent at that
time would be a heavy burden. Then, why do they find the infallibility
of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) odd and unacceptable, whereas their
infallibility has been confirmed by many Qur’anic verses, Prophetic
traditions? On many occasions and situations, the Prophet (S) proved
this virtue for them and they were preferred to the whole nation after
the Prophet (S).


