Epilogue to the previous chapters
=================================

These were the most important objections and criticisms that the Sunni
often raise against the Twelver Shia. They deserve to be studied
impartially by every researcher and scholar who seeks the truth in
everything and does not have fear on the way of Allah about being blamed
and states the truth, however bitter it is, even if it is against him.

Today the learned youth of our Muslim nation no longer believe in
superstitions, false fables, and rumors that the media broadcast here
and there against the Shia to show them as groups of extremism and
terrorism, or “*the insane of Allah*” as they call them.

I have already discussed some mistakes practiced by ordinary Shia,
though these (mistakes) are not from the religion or from the
necessities that may make impermissible things permissible. They do not
cause but harms and disagreements among Muslims.

I have confirmed in my previous works and studies that I have published
among Muslims through clear evidences, that the Twelver Shia are the
most right of all the Muslim sects with respect to the beliefs and laws
of the religion, and that the Shiite sect is the saved one from among
all the Muslim sects by the will of Allah. This is not for anything, but
because they are truly adherent to the Two Weighty Things (the Book of
Allah and the Immaculate Prophet’s Progeny).

Nevertheless, this cannot prevent me from criticizing the Shia when I
find errors or slips in the conduct of some of them, for I believe that
“there is nothing other than the truth, except that it is untruth”.

Sometimes, a good doing may turn to be a bad doing if it exceeds the
usual. For example, once when I was invited for an Islamic conference in
the United States of America, some Muslims invited me to their houses to
be their guest as a kind of honor and respect. I accepted their
invitations unwillingly. Many others were invited me in my honor. Foods
and refreshments were unimaginable in excellence and sometimes they cost
thousands of dollars.

On the following day, or even the same day, I was invited by others and
the same things happened, as if they competed with each other. The same
invitees attended with me. I would not be excessive in saying that the
kinds of western and eastern foods served were more than ten in each
meal. Whatever guests ate - half of that food would be leftover without
doubt, to be thrown into the rubbish bin.[^1]

This habit has become a necessity for them. Whatever is said about the
Arabic generosity and the honoring of guest, and whatever some people
argue by means of this verse:

***Say: Who has prohibited the embellishment of Allah which He has
brought forth for His servants and the good provisions…*** ***Qur'an,
7:32,***

I shall not be satisfied and I will criticize that and try my best to
convince people of other than this.

Those, who take their evidence from the Qur'an on the permitting of good
provisions, forget or overlook this saying of Allah

***…and eat and drink and be not extravagant; surely He does not love
the extravagant***, ***Qur'an, 7:31.***

Or, this saying of the Prophet (S):

*We are a people who do not eat, except when we feel hungry, and when we
eat, we do not become fully satiated (do not eat much)*.

Where are we from the education of Imam Ali (a.s.) who has accustomed
himself to eating dry barley and who sealed his bag lest al-Hasan or
al-Husayn (peace be on them) wet his dry piece of bread with oil?

Do Muslims not feel shy today before their Lord that they sleep in silk
beds with stomachs full of all kinds of foods, whereas their Iraqi Shia
brothers die of hunger in the Saudi camps, not finding the simple means
of living?

I thank those who invited and honored me, but my duty requires me to
remind them of what is better, for reminding benefits of the faithful.
It is my duty to encourage them to do good for the sake of Allah, in the
way of Allah and not for fame and hypocrisy. Many wealthy Muslims, who
live the life of kings, become very stingy when they are asked to help
the poor and the needy, whereas they spend millions of dollars
recklessly on their lusts and desires.

The fact that makes you wonder too is that most of these wealthy people
had escaped with their faith from the oppression of unjust rulers and
emigrated to the United States of America or England while they had no
money in their pockets. Then Allah made them rich and they possessed
buildings, shops and millions of dollars. Thereafter, they behaved like
Th’alaba who came to the Prophet (S) complaining of his poverty and
asking the Prophet (S) to pray Allah for him to be rich as he wanted to
help the poor and the needy.

The Prophet (S) prayed Allah for him, and he became too wealthy. When
the Prophet (S) asked him to pay the zakat, he refused to pay anything.
Then, Allah revealed this verse about him:

***And there are those of them who made a covenant with Allah: if He
gives us out of His grace, we will certainly give alms and we will
certainly be of the good. But when He gave them out of His grace, they
became niggardly of it and they turned away, averse***. ***Qur'an,
9:75-76***

Certainly, there are wealthy people who spend their monies charitably in
the night and the day, openly and secretly, looking forward to the mercy
and contentment of their Lord. However, these people are few in
comparison to the majority who run after fame and refuse any charitable
doing.

You may see wealthy Muslims, whom Allah has given too much to be
trustees on it and to give from their wealth a share to the beggars and
the destitute. They perform the major hajj every year and the minor hajj
two or three times a year - and I am not being excessive when I say that
some of them have performed the hajj twenty times and the minor hajj
more than forty times. They show their pride of that openly before
people.

Such people from among the Shia are too many. They do not know the
actual amount of their wealth. They spend their times in the best
hotels, eat the most expensive meals, and travel in the first class
airplanes. After that, they go to visit the holy shrines of the
infallible imams (a.s.). When you see how they eat and what they throw
in their rubbish bins, you say with no hesitation that they are too far
away from the Islamic ethics and human morals.

It is true that the hajj is recommended after performing the first
obligatory one, but do these people not understand that Allah, first of
all orders them to help His poor people, the needy, orphans and the
oppressed? Has Allah the Almighty not said to them in His Book:

***It is not righteousness that you turn your faces towards the East and
the West, but righteousness is this that one should believe in Allah and
the last day and the angels and the Book and the prophets, and give away
wealth out of love for Him to the near of kin and the orphans and the
needy and the wayfarer and the beggars and for (the emancipation of) the
captives…***? ***Qur'an, 2: 177***

O Muslims, righteousness is not to go every year to perform the hajj or
to visit the holy shrines of saints…yes, the hajj is obligatory and
recommended and so is the *ziyara*, but to be a habit every year while
your brothers are dying of hunger - this is something that does not
please Allah at all.[^2]

Did the Messenger of Allah (S) not say?

*The nearest of you to Allah is most helpful among you to His people?*

Did he not say?

*Who sleeps his night satiated while his neighbor is hungry is out of
the covenant of Islam?*

Did your first Imam, Ali ibn Abi Talib, whom you pride on and follow,
not say?

*Surely, every led one has a leader (imam) whom he follows, and from the
light of whose knowledge he seeks light. Surely, your Imam (Ali) has
been satisfied from all his life with his two coarse garments, and from
his food with his two loaves…by Allah, I have never hoarded from your
world gold, nor have I saved from its booties anything…*

*….and if I wanted, I could follow the way to the pure honey, the
kernels of this wheat, and the textiles of this silk - but how far for
my fancy to overcome me, or my greed to lead me to choose between foods,
that there may be in Hijaz or Yamama one who cannot even wish for a loaf
of bread and one who has never been satisfied with food? Or, can I sleep
my night satiated, while around me there are hungry stomachs and very
thirsty lives!*

*…I was not created to be busy with good foods and pleasures like a tied
animal, whose concern is only its fodder, or a released one whose
business is seeking in rubbish…*

*O worldly life, be away from me! Your halter is on your wither (free to
do whatever it likes). I have sneaked away from your claws and escaped
from your traps, and avoided going into your slips.*

*Where are the generations, whom you incited with your plays? Where are
the nations, whom you fascinated with your adornments? Here they are
captives in the graves and hidden in the tombs…Be away from me! By
Allah, I do not submit to you so that you degrade me, and do not be mild
for you, so that you drive me (as you like)…*

*Blessed is a soul that offered its obligation for its Lord and was
patient in distress, gave up its sleeping in the night until slumber
overcame it, took the ground as its bed and its hand as a pillow, from
among people whose fear of the Hereafter made their eyes sleepless, and
whose bodies kept away from their beds, and whose lips always murmured
with the remembrance of their Lord, and whose sins were dispelled by
their long asking for forgiveness:*

***…those are Allah's party; surely the party of Allah are the
successful ones*** ***Qur'an, 58:22***

This speech[^3] is addressed to every Shia who takes Ali (a.s.) as his
imam after the Prophet (S).

As we have confirmed in our previous studies that the Shia are the true
Muslims who have kept to the Book and the Prophet’s progeny after the
Prophet (S). We must obey the commands of the Book and the immaculate
progeny (a.s.). They order us to glorify and sanctify the rites of
Allah, because it is from true piety.

Observing the rites of Allah includes observing of congregational
prayers inside and outside the mosques, the keeping to prayers in the
best way and keep the mosque sanctified, clean and unpolluted with
cigarettes smoke. Rather, mosques must be refreshed with good scents and
perfumes. Certainly, all these are the rites to be observed for
Allah.[^4]

How better it is for us to be ascetic towards many pleasures of this
life, not to squander our monies in what does not benefit us, and not to
be excessive in food and amusement while our faithful brothers are dying
of hunger! How better it is for us to think of serving the servants of
Allah and save them from deviation instead of performing the hajj forty
times and the minor hajj eighty times!

If these monies are spent on publishing and sending books as gifts to
the Muslim countries that do not know anything about the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) nor do they hear anything about the Shia except the fabrications.
They shall be effective means to make millions of deviated people, who
seek the truth, turn to the right path and the reward of this near Allah
shall be greater than the reward of a recommended hajj that one goes to
offer, wishing that Allah may forgive his sins of the last year. The
Prophet (S) said:

*The ink of scholars is better near Allah than the blood of martyrs.*

*Fear Allah by maintaining kinship, because it is better near Allah than
all prayers and fasting.*

How it is better for us to think of the future of Muslims in the world
who face a plot of annihilation in every place on the earth!

After all this and through my personal experiment of twenty-five years
the most of which was arguments and disputes with learned and unlearned
Sunni, I knew that overlooking some beliefs that are not from the
essence of Islam is the only way to get to the sought goal.

How many obstinate opponents, who never preferred anyone at all to Abu
Bakr and Umar, began after turning Shia to wish that Imam Ali (a.s.) had
fought and relieved Muslims from them? And, how many protestant deniers,
who denied the concept of “infallibility” and considered it as being
excessive from the Shia, believed in it after having turned Shia, more
than the Shia themselves?!

All that would lead to enmity and grudge if I insisted on the concept of
“infallibility” or “I bear witness that Ali is the saint of Allah” in
the *azan* or that “Ali is the best of all human beings and whoever
denies that is a disbeliever”.

I am sure that Muslims shall be near to each other and would be united
if both the Shia and the Sunni tried to overlook some of their beliefs
that are not from the fundamentals of the religion. If the Sunni gave up
their belief that all of the Prophet’s companions are totally fair, just
and honest, (and certainly this belief has nothing to do with the
religion), they would relieve their Shia brothers from their continuous
efforts to prove the opposite.

And if the Shia overlook “I bear witness that Ali is the saint of Allah”
which was not a part from the *azan* or the *iqamah* at the time of the
Messenger of Allah (S), they would relieve their Sunni brothers, who
criticize and accuse them of being extravagant and excessive, from
toiling for that.

Do Muslims, Shia and Sunni, not take a lesson from what the Messenger of
Allah (S) did on the day of Truce of al-Hudaybiyyah? He gave up many
things and did not oppose the polytheists in anything? He did so because
he knew that resisting them and not giving up some of his conditions
would be an obstacle in the way of guidance and the getting to the
truth.

They said to him, “*We do not acknowledge that you are the Messenger of
Allah (S). You are Muhammad son of Abdullah*.”

He said, “*Yes, I am Muhammad son of Abdullah. O Ali, do not write down
‘Muhammad the Messenger of Allah (S)*’.”

If one of the Shia says, “*How do we give up ‘Ali is the saint of Allah’
which is right and the truth and we remember that the Prophet (S) said
that ‘whoever keeps silent before the truth is a dumb devil*’?” We
respond that, just as Muhammad son of Abdullah (S) gave up his attribute
as the Messenger of Allah (S) before the polytheists in order to not
cause an obstacle between him and them and to invite them towards
guidance when he actually was the Messenger of Allah (S) whether the
polytheists accepted or denied that.

***And Allah is sufficient as a witness*** ***Qur'an, 58:22***

In the same way - “Ali is the saint of Allah” is also right and true,
whether people bear witness to that or not. Their witness does not add
anything to his value, nor does their denial decrease anything from his
virtues.”[^5]

The result of Muhammad’s concession in the al-Hudaybiyya Truce was so
great that no one of the companions had ever imagined. It was a great
victory after one year when groups after groups embraced Islam willingly
and without effort or fighting.

If you both (the Sunni and the Shia) take the Messenger of Allah (S) as
your example and you claim that you do according to the Book of Allah
and the Sunna of His messenger, then follow his (the Prophet) deeds, O
you men of understanding!

Allah the Almighty says:

***If you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not diminish aught of
your deeds; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful***. ***Qur'an, 49:14.***

[^1]: Yes! This has changed to be a habit and tradition. People pride
and compete with each other and the victim is the guest who compliments
to satisfy the host. Otherwise, the guest even if he is a scholar or a
thinker and attracts their attention to the offensiveness of this
practice, might not be invited anymore. So how about ordinary people?!
In this way, detestable social classes appear which look down on the
poor and prevent them from attending such invitations. (The rich are
invited and the poor are kept away). Its undesirable outcome is division
of people into different classes. Such invitations affect the mentality
of the guest (when he is a scholar or thinker) that he acknowledges
their conducts, or they pervert his thinking of caring for the right
affairs of Muslims to their own world and life. Unfortunately, an
example is one of the wealthy people in Iraq who was in such a reckless
state that he did not know how to spend his wealth, so that whatever he
did to it, it would not run out because of abundance. Saddam exiled him
out of Iraq and confiscated all his wealth and properties. In the place
of immigration, I heard a wealthy man saying, “I cannot be convinced the
Iraqi people suffer famine, except when they become like Indians who die
in the streets and then, the municipality personnel carry their corpses
altogether.” Surely, a Muslim cannot be a true Muslim except when he
follows the true Islam, imitates its high examples, and apply it in the
true way. A true Muslim must be a true faithful away from vanities,
wastefulness, dissipation, and worldly desires; otherwise, life shall be
beastly.

[^2]: The responsibility of changing the conducts of these people is on
the ulema and preachers that they may repent and return to the true path
of Islam and the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

[^3]: From the letter of Imam Ali (a.s.) to his governor on Basra,
Uthman ibn Hunayf al-Ansari, when he (Imam Ali) was informed that Uthman
was invited to a banquet and he accepted and went to it. Nahjol
Balagha - commentary by Muhammad Abdo, p. 558.

[^4]: It is noted in general that a praying person usually stands to
offer prayers with the clothes he usually wears, not caring whether they
are tidy and clean or not. The important thing is that they must be
ritually pure. People think that there is no problem for this with
Allah! But, if one of them wants to meet someone, he puts on the best of
his clothes, especially if that someone is an important personality.
Thus, is person whom one meets in life more important than Allah? One
does not perceive or think of this! Let each one of us think of this
matter - when one of us is inside his house wearing night clothes, he
does not let others (visitors) see him in that clothes, because this is
as a kind of insult to them. Should he offer the prayer in these clothes
so easily? We have to be aware of Whom we are standing before to offer
our prayer. We have to put in mind that Allah the Almighty is always
with us wherever we are and behave on this basis, …and He is with you
wherever you are… Qur'an, 57:4. We stand before Him all the time and
especially in the prayer. Therefore, we have to put on the best of our
clothes, using perfume, in order to appear in an acceptable state to
Him. After preparing our appearances, we have to purify our inwards to
be real travelers toward Allah the Glorified. It is not bad to pay
attention to the recommended things as to the prayer’s clothes and
etiquettes especially for women who may put on white clothes and…be in
the best shape that makes us actually feel that Allah is with us.

[^5]: We have confirmed before that no one of the Shiite ulema say that
“I bear witness that Ali is the saint of Allah” is a basic part of the
azan or the iqamah, and whoever calls it as a “good heresy” is totally
mistaken. It is but a witness that Imam Ali (a.s.) is the saint of Allah
and the commander of the believers, and a witness of the injustice he
suffered and the suppression of history against him, though he was the
establisher of the cornerstone of Islam after the Prophet (S) with his
knowledge and jihad. It is like the qualities of Talut mentioned in the
Holy Qur'an when the Israelites asked from their prophet to send for
them a king so that they would fight under his leadership. And their
prophet said to them: Surely Allah has raised Talut to be a king over
you. They said: How can he hold kingship over us while we have a greater
right to kingship than he does, and he has not been granted an abundance
of wealth? He said: Surely Allah has chosen him in preference to you,
and He has increased him abundantly in knowledge and physique, and Allah
grants His kingdom to whom He pleases, and Allah is Ample giving,
Knowing, Qur'an, 2:247. This is besides many other instances that this
and that has witnessed of (and the virtue is that which opponents
witness of). So why do we not actually take a strict situation against
heresies like the omitting of “Come on to the best of deeds” from the
azan by Umar ibn al-Khattab? It is related to Akrimah that he said,
“Once, I said to ibn Abbas, ‘Would you tell me why “come on to the best
of deeds” was omitted from the azan?” He said, ‘Umar wanted people not
to rely on prayer and give up jihad; therefore, he omitted that from the
azan.” Refer to Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 1 p. 524-525, as-Seera
al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 105, Sa’d as-Sa’oud, p. 100, Mizan al-I’tidal
by ath-Thahabi, vol. 1 p. 139, Lisan al-Mizan, vol. 1 p. 261, Nayl
al-Awtar by ash-Shawkani, vol. 2 p. 32, Kanzol Ummal, printed in the
margins of Musnad Ahmed, vol. 3 p. 276, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 4 p. 266,
ar-Rawdh an-Nadheer, vol. 2 p. 42. On the other side, Umar added to the
azan of the Fajr (dawn) Prayer “the prayer is better than sleep”. This
shows that Muslims do not wonder at this omission and the addition,
because the Sunni do not believe that the azan and the iqamah have been
legislated by Allah through His revelation to the Prophet (S), or that
the Prophet (S) has done it like the other rites and rulings that he
received from Allah the Almighty!!! They narrate that the azan was a
dream which one of the companion saw in his sleep after the Prophet (S)
had been confused (as they say) either to call people for the prayer by
the bell or by beating two pieces of wood against each other…Refer to
Sunan Abu Dawud, vol. 1 p. 335, as-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 93,
Sahih at-Termithi, vol. 1 p. 359, al-Muwatta’, vol. 1 and its
explanation by az-Zarqani, vol. 1 p. 120-125, Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 1
p. 390, Seera of Ibn Hisham, vol. 2 p. 154, al-Bidaya wen-Nihaya, vol. 3
p. 232, al-Mawahib al-Laduniyyah, vol. 1 p. 17, Muntakhab Kanzol Ummal,
printed in the margins of Musnad Ahmed, vol. 3 p. 273, Tabyeen
al-Haqa’iq by az-Zuray’ee, vol. 1 p. 9, ar-Rawdh al-Anaf, vol. 2 p. 285,
Hayat as-Sahaba (the lives of the companions), vol. 3 p. 131, Kanzol
Ummal, vol. 4 p. 263, Sunan ad-Darqutni, vol. 1 p. 241, and others.
Thus, the azan, for you (the Sunni), has not been legislated by Allah,
and you omit from and add to it, and even if you add to the azan of the
Noon Prayer the statement of “the prayer is better than lunch” it shall
be given legality by you and you shall approve it as you have approved
some things else, whereas you deny those who have consensually agreed
that the azan and the iqamah in their actual chapters had been revealed
to the Prophet (S) by Gabriel (a.s.). Yes, we all have to deny
everything that contradicts the real azan. Once, Muslims heard the
muezzin saying in the azan: “They say that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah (S)”. They were astonished and they denied that. They went to the
imam of the mosque objecting to him. He said to them, “I found no one to
announce the azan in the mosque; therefore, I hired a Jewish man to
announce it, and he does not believe in the prophethood of Muhammad
(S).” As for the mention of Imam Ali and the Ahlul Bayt (peace be on
them all), we do not say that it is a part of the azan, nor do we add it
instead of another basic part. We do not omit from or add fixed part to
the azan, which was revealed to the Prophet (S) by Gabriel in his sleep.
We believe that the revelation to the Prophet (S) in his sleep is like
the revelation to him in his wake state. However, they (the Sunni)
chanted the azan in tones and recited it in groups like anthems. They
omitted and added, since they believe that it (the azan) has not been
divinely legislated, but a vision of one of the companions. The Shia
unanimously say that the azan was a revelation from Allah, and
therefore, they believe that any omission or addition to it is not
permissible; otherwise, it is considered a man’s legislation against
Allah’s legislation, and this is impermissible among the Shia. This is
not that case in saying “I bear witness that Ali is the saint of Allah”,
because this is mentioned as generally recommended and to show our
adherence to the saint of Allah.


