The Shia and the Sunni refute the Wahabis
=========================================

As for the criticism, revilement, exaggeration and the accusation of
disbelief that the Wahabis raise against the Shia because they take the
Prophet (S) and his progeny - the infallible Imams (a.s.) - as means of
intercession between them and Allah and they visit the shrines of these
Imams and consider them as a source of blessing; this accusation is
something new that neither the Shia nor the Sunni knew before.

Muslims, since the time of the Prophet (S) until now, have kept and are
keeping on visiting and seeking blessings from holy places and
celebrating it in all the lands of Muslims. No one denied that, except
for the Wahabis who came up with their new doctrine in the fourteenth
century of hijra.

It was very natural for the Wahabis to contradict all Muslims in order
to appear as reformers and as people of monotheism on the one hand and
on the other hand, to justify their aversion and objection of Muslims to
their heresies.[^1]

Indeed, Muslims have never been tried as they have been tried by the
Wahabis in this century.[^2] It is so because of the following reasons:

Firstly, their mission is false, but they have dressed it in the garment
of the truth. They prohibit the beseeching Allah by the means of the
Prophet (S) and his progeny and punish for it, claiming that it is a
kind of polytheism where Allah says:

***Call not upon any one with Allah***. ***Qur'an, 72:18***.

And this is like the mission of the Kharijites who accused Imam Ali
(a.s.) of disbelief and said to him, “*The judgment is not yours, Ali,
but to Allah*.” He said:

It is a word of truth by which the untruth is sought.

It means that the saying of the Kharijites “the judgment is but to
Allah” was a word of truth, but the Kharijites intended falsehood by it
when they said, “the judgment is not yours, O Ali.” It is certain that
the judgment is for Allah alone and not for any human being, but Allah
the Almighty made His judgment appear at the hand of His messenger who
did not speak out of desire, and then at the hands of the Prophet’s
successors whom the Prophet (S) defined and appointed to judge among
people with the truth that he had legislated to them.

Surely, the legislative authority is Allah’s alone and does not belong
to anyone else and the executive authority is to people alternating with
one another. This is something natural that all reasonable people
understand. Then, how was it unknown by the Prophet’s companions to say,
“The judgment is not yours, O Ali”?

Imam Ali (a.s.) reveals to us that they knew the truth, but they wanted
the untruth by raising this doubt.

Allah the Almighty says in His Book:

***If you judge, judge between them with equity.*** ***Qur'an, 5:42***

***Surely, Allah commands you to give over trusts to their owners and
that when you judge between people you judge with justice….***
***Qur'an, 4:58***

***Surely, We have revealed the Book to you with the truth that you may
judge between people by means of that which Allah has taught you…***
***Qur'an, 4:105***

***O Dawud! Surely, We have made you a ruler in the land; so judge
between men with justice.*** ***Qur'an, 38:26***

***And that you should judge between them by what Allah has revealed,
and do not follow their desires.*** ***Qur'an, 5:49***

***But no! by your Lord! they do not believe (in reality) until they
make you a judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement among
them, and then do not find any straightness in their hearts as to what
you have decided and they submit with entire submission.*** ***Qur'an,
4:65***

***Surely We revealed the Torah in which was guidance and light; with it
the prophets …judged***. ***Qur'an, 5:44***.

After this and through these Qur’anic verses, it becomes clear to us
that the mission of the Kharijites was of truth but they did not want it
except through untruth and to raise sedition among naive people, who did
not know the actual objective of the Sharia.

The same can be said about the mission of the Wahabis. It is a mission
of truth, but they do not want it except through untruth with which they
deceive simple people, who do not know the actual objectives of the
Sharia. They claim that they alone are the true monotheists and the
others are polytheists because they call upon human beings with Allah.

It is true when they say, “Allah has said -

***The mosques are Allah’s; therefore, call not upon any one with
Allah.*** ***Qur'an, 72:18***

***Say: I only call upon my Lord, and I do not associate any one with
Him.*** ***Qur'an, 72: 20***

But they intend the untruth when they prohibit the supplicating to Allah
with intercession of the Prophet and his immaculate progeny (peace be on
them) and deceive people, claiming that this is a kind of polytheism.

It is clear that there is a difference between those who believe that
there are partners to Allah who benefit and harm, where they make a god
for everything - the god of goodness, the god of evil, the god of peace,
the god of war, the god of love…etc., and those who believe that Allah
is One and only with no partner, and that no one can repel His decree,
and that He has given them the right to call upon Him through the means
of His prophets and saints.

This is the difference between the two beliefs - polytheism and the
supplicating through intercession. This is the similarity between the
Kharijites and the Wahabis. The Kharijites said, “There is no judgment
but Allah’s” and the Wahabis said, “There is no supplication except
directly to Allah.” The Kharijites said, “The judgment is not yours, O
Ali”, and the Wahabis said, “The means is not yours, O Muhammad!”

In the two sayings there is untruth dressed up with truth. The judgment
is to Allah alone, but He has legislated for it for His people to judge
among themselves with truth and justice. The means to pray as well is to
Allah alone, but He has determined it for His people to take His
prophets and saints as a means to Him. This is clear in the Islamic
religion and all the previous religions too, since all the divine
religions are from one source. The religion near Allah is Islam.[^3]

All the Qur’anic verses that the Wahabis rely on in concluding their
proofs do not have any sense of prohibiting the supplication to Allah
through His loyal, righteous people. In fact, all these verses have been
revealed to refute the polytheists from men and the jinn, who fabricated
lies against Allah and worshipped many gods, thinking that those would
bring them closer to Allah.

The saying of the Wahabis is not applied to the Nation of Muhammad (S)
that is called “the nation of monotheism” and “the nation of faith”, for
this nation is free from polytheism. All Muslims recite day and night,
the *sura* of monotheism and faith:

***Say: He is Allah, the One. Allah is He on Whom all depend. He begets
not, nor was He begotten. And none is like Him. Qur’an 30:1-4***

The Prophet (S) referred to this fact by saying:

*I, by Allah, do not fear for you that you become polytheists after me,
but I fear for you that you may compete with each other for worldly
pleasures*.[^4]

This is irrefutable evidence that the Muslim nation is free from
polytheism, and it is a clear evidence that the nation would compete for
the worldly pleasures and authority. The nation would apostatize and
judge with other than that which had been revealed and that would lead
to oppression, lack of faith, and atheism but would not lead to
polytheism at all.

Allah the Almighty has fixed this fact in His Book when saying in the
Sura of al-Ma’idah:

***Whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they that are
the unbelievers. …and whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed,
those are they that are the unjust. …and whoever did not judge by what
Allah revealed, those are they that are the transgressors. Qur'an,
5:44-45, 47***

This is actually what has been happening in the Muslim nation after the
death of the Prophet (S) until today. They inserted in the Sharia what
was not from it; many positive rulings were added from personal opinion.
Thus they changed the rules of Allah. However, Allah does not say that
they are polytheists, but He says that they are unbelievers, unjust and
transgressors.

All of us know well that the presidents and kings of the Arab and Muslim
countries may rule with what is unlike the Book of Allah yet, we do not
call them polytheists because they believe in Allah alone with no
partner to Him and bear witness that Muhammad is His slave and
messenger. In fact, we do not consider even the Jews and the Christians,
who believe in the Torah and the Gospel, as polytheists when they
believe in the oneness of Allah and do not ascribe to Him a child.

Allah the Almighty says:

***How do they make you a judge and they have the Torah wherein is
Allah’s judgment? Yet they turn back after that, and these are not the
believers***, ***Qur'an, 5:43;***

And,

***And the followers of the Gospel should have judged by what Allah
revealed in it; and whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those
are they that are the transgressors***. ***Qur'an, 5:47***

Thus, the matter has become clear with no need for more details.

Secondly, the Wahabis have occupied the most sacred places for all
Muslims of all colors, races and countries. The Holy Mecca has the
Inviolable House of Allah to which Muslims from everywhere come to
perform one of the pillars of Islam - the hajj - every year, and they
are very eager and full of incomparable longing to circumambulate the
Kaaba, to stop at the *Inviolable Mish’ar*,[^5] run between the *Safa*
and the *Marwa*, and stop at *Arafa*.

All these places live inside the consciousness of every Muslim who
wishes to visit them even once throughout his life… and Medina where
there is the Holy Mosque of the Prophet (S) and his holy tomb inside it.
Besides there are other monuments that all Muslims sanctify - the
*mihrab* of the Prophet (S), his *minbar*, the pure yard (*rawdhah*),
the tombs of Abu Bakr and Umar, the *Baqee’* *Graveyard* that includes
the tombs of the Prophet’s companions and wives, the holy tombs of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and the worth visiting places that are highly regarded
by Muslims, like *Uhud* *Mountain*, the *Martyrs* *Graveyard*, the *Two*
*Qiblas* *Mosque* and *Qabaa’* *Mosque*.

The Wahabis trade on these rituals to the top, materially and morally.
They propagate their new doctrine with all means through gifting or
terrorizing, especially during the season of the hajj when millions of
Muslims gather together. They hold conferences and meetings, and their
agents spare no effort in propagating Wahabism by direct contact with
different sects, groups and individuals. Add to that all kinds of the
media, which are very effective on the hajjis who give up arguments and
disputes during the rituals of the hajj and retire to worship Allah
alone.

Thirdly, the vast wealth coming from petroleum, the mines of gold, and
the continuous economic activities refreshed by the masses of pilgrims
during the seasons of the hajj, the minor hajj and the rest of the year,
have helped Wahabism to spread everywhere in the world.

The Wahabis spend great monies on the imams of mosques, who are incited
by monies in all places in the world. They have built in every Arab and
Muslim capital a mosque or several mosques working day and night to
spread this new doctrine. They have established schools, colleges, and
universities graduating missionaries to propagate Wahabism throughout
the world, sparing no effort in turning people to this new creed.

They have established many press and foundations of publication and
distribution and financed more than one hundred daily, weekly, and
monthly magazines and newspapers. They spend millions of dollars on
mercenary writes to write for them what they like in assisting their
beliefs and considering the others as unbelievers. They publish millions
of copies of the Holy Qur’an and some books that assist their creed and
distribute them freely as gifts everywhere.

After the Gulf War and because people hated them, they began
distributing milk and dates among the visitors in Ramadan, and then
gifting them at airport with big bottles of *Zamzam* water written on
them “a gift from the servant of *Haramayn* – the two sanctums”, whereas
before, they prevented pilgrims from taking *Zamzam* water with them
onto airplanes.

Fourthly, the international relations the Wahabis have through their
firm relation with the United States of America, which has direct and
indirect influence on the Arab and Muslim countries, and in fact on the
entire world after the decline of the Soviet Union

It is known to everyone that the welfare of the United States of America
is assured and guarded in the east and the Gulf States by the Wahabis
especially after the fall of the Shah and the coming of the Islamic
Republic in Iran - that threatened to attack all the American interests
in the region.

It is known too to everyone of understanding that the Wahabis are as
much the right eye of the United State of America, as Israel is its left
eye; however it (the United States) takes everything from the Wahabis
and gives everything to Israel.

It takes from the Wahabis, because it spends great efforts in defending
them and guarding their Royal throne (of the Saudi family) and has made
its Intelligence Agency ready to reserve the Wahabi regime and do away
with all its opponents. It gives to Israel to assure the votes that are
controlled by the Jewish Lobby inside the United States and Europe.

This is another subject that requires an individual book to be written
about it, but what concerns us in this study is that the Wahabis through
their relation with the United States of America have come to be feared
in the Arab and Muslim countries and all over the world. While mosques
are closed after the prayers in some Arab and Muslim countries for fear
that some groups may use them as centers for propagation of their
beliefs and thoughts, we find that the mosques of the Wahabis are open
all the time for their propagandists to give lectures on what they like
for spreading their thoughts.

Wahabism has acquired this legality because of the great gifts, helps,
and loans given to those countries. Therefore, those poor countries
submit to the conditions of the Wahabis in permitting them to spread
their creed, and preventing the books and magazines that reveal their
plots.

This has happened even in France, the strong modern country that claims
it defends freedoms, human rights, and freedom of speech. It is France
itself that defended Salman Rushdi and adopted his book, but at the same
time, it prevented the book “*the History of Aal Sa’ud*” which reveals
the reality of Wahabism. The French government collected the copies of
this book from libraries, because the Saudi Kingdom saved France from
the economic collapse in 1984.

Then, Saudi Arabia gave to France seven hundred million dollars, and it
has been said to be much more than that. After that, hundreds of mosques
were built in Paris only to propagate Wahabism there, whereas the Ahlul
Bayt Center (a Shiite foundation) was closed under the pretense that it
had adopted excess and terrorism. The French police began pursuing
everyone following the line of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), while Wahabism and
its followers flourished there.

Add to that the league of the Islamic world that has been established by
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. It includes the Arab and Muslim presidents
and kings who have been under the Saudi influence.

This is just a small insight, but what is plotted behind the scenes is
known by Allah alone. Therefore, I often say that Muslims have never
seen a calamity worse than Wahabism.

[^1]: The tombs of the imams and saints are still visited in all the
lands of Muslims. In fact, new tombs were found during excavations that
made even secular and atheist governments to keep them safe with no
damage. An example is what happened to the regime in Iraq, when the
government with its different machinery and equipment failed to remove
those tombs after the happening of many miracles that forced the
government to give up the project or change its place. The same thing
took place in Lebanon and other places in the Muslim countries in the
world. In fact, when people see the miracle, they ascribe the tomb to a
prophet, a saint, or a descendant of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s,), until a
group of scientist come and prove who the identity of the person is in
the tomb. We have never heard in any place that people worshipped the
tomb. They honor those who have been buried in those tombs, because they
are our role models and means to Allah, and honoring them is from the
rites of Allah.

[^2]: Wahabism is ascribed to Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab…ibn Wahab
at-Tamimi. He was born in 1111 AH and died in 1207 AH. In his early
life, he studied at the hands of many ulema of Mecca and Medina who were
experts in deviation and misleading. His father often dispraised and
warned people against him, and so did his brother Sulayman ibn Abdul
Wahab, who denied him and wrote a book refuting him. He was fond of
reading about false claimants of prophethood such as Musaylama the Liar,
Sajah, al-Aswad al-Ansi, Tulayha al-Asadi, and others…! Refer to “The
Emirs of the Inviolable Country” by Sheikh Ahmad ibn Zayni Dahlan, and
“Kashful Irtiyab fee Ittiba’ Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab” by Sayyid Muhsin
al-Amin al-Aamili. Thus, he grew up deviant, doubtful, and spiteful. He
was just like Kemal Ataturk and many rulers of the Muslim countries who
claim that they are Muslims; however, they are directed by Freemasonry
and nursed by the world intelligence agencies. Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab
was fed by the British agent in Iraq. Mr. Hanfer has mentioned this in
his autobiography. He prepared and assisted him to achieve his ambition
in prevailing over Hijaz. He and his likes are worse than their
ancestors such as the Kharijites because the Kharijites had risen out of
ambiguity. On the other hand these people are mercenaries working for
the welfare of the enemies of Islam. It is natural that his misleading
mission did not incite any except the ignorant nomads, as it was with
Musaylama - the Liar and his group opposite to the true mission of the
Prophet (S) and his progeny and followers. Therefore, his mission of
deviance did not spread through conviction, but through treason, deceit,
invasion, oppression, suspicious treaties and breaking of covenants in
order to get to his satanic desires.

[^3]: The origin of the suspicion of Wahabis in their judgment that all
Muslims are polytheists and that their blood and properties are to be
violated - as they actually did in Mecca, Medina, Iraq and other places
of the Muslim lands - is because they (Wahabis) claim that those Muslims
worship graves when honoring, kissing and circumambulating them besides
building the domes and minarets over them and some things like that! In
fact, there are many Prophetic traditions narrated by the Shia and the
Sunni about seeking the intercession of the Prophet (S.) and other than
the Prophet (S.) in this worldly life and for worldly or afterlife
needs. Abdullah Ibn Abbas narrated that the Prophet (S) said, “No man
dies and forty men, who do not associate with Allah anything, carry out
his funerals except that Allah accepts their intercession for him.”
Refer to Sahih Muslim, Part of Intercession. Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin (may
Allah have mercy on him) comments (mockingly) on this tradition, saying,
“The forty men must be from the nomads of Najd (Wahabis) so that their
intercession would be accepted!” (Najd now is Saudi Arabia). In Sahih
Muslim, it has been mentioned from Aa’isha that the Prophet (S) said,
“No one dies and a group of people, who reach one hundred, offer the
prayer (of the dead) on him and who all intercede for him, except that
Allah accepts their intercession for him.” According to the thought of
the Wahabis, this must be a kind of polytheism, because, as they claim,
it contradicts this saying of Allah – …so invoke not any one along with
Allah. Qur’an 72:18 We seek the protection of Allah from this great
fabrication against His Holy Prophet (S)! There are many Prophet’s
traditions about intercession, and ulema say that there is no difference
between a dead and alive person. As-Samhudi ash-Shafi’iy, the alim of
Medina, says in his book al-Wafa bi-Akhbar al-Mustafa, vol. 2 p. 419,
quoting al-Hakim that Umar ibn al-Khattab narrated that the Prophet (S)
said, “When Adam committed the sin, he said, ‘O my Lord, I ask You by
the right of Muhammad that You but forgive me.’ Allah said, ‘O Adam, how
do you know Muhammad while I have not created him yet?’ Adam said, “O my
Lord, when You created me and inspired in me from Your Spirit, I raised
my head and saw on the posts of the Throne written “There is no god but
Allah, and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (S)…’ Allah the Almighty
said, ‘O Adam, you are right. Surely, he is the most beloved of all
creation to Me. Since you asked Me by his right, I forgive you. Were it
not for Muhammad, I would not create you.” He mentioned that this
tradition was mentioned by at-Tabarani, and by al-Bayhaqi through true
chain of narrators in his book Dala’il an-Nubuwwah. In other traditions,
it is mentioned that Adam and Noah supplicated to Allah by means of the
Five of the Aba (Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, peace
be on them all). About this matter, Imam Malik asked al-Mansur, “Why do
you turn away from him (the Prophet) while he is your means and the
means of your father Adam to Allah the Almighty?” As-Samiri al-Hanbali,
al-Kirmani al-Hanafi, and the Shafiite ulema believe in the supplication
by the means of the Prophet (a.s.) and believe in his intercession after
his death. Imam ash-Shafi’iy supplicated to Allah by means of the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) after their death. He supplicated to Allah by the means of
Imam Abu Haneefa , and he approved the supplication of the people of
Morocco by the means of Imam Malik after his death. Ahmed ibn Hanbal
supplicated to Allah by the means of ash-Shafi’iy and so on. These are
the ulema and jurisprudents of Islam, then, who are the rude nomads?!

[^4]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 7 p. 207.

[^5]: A place where one of the rituals of the hajj is performed.


