The companions seek the blessing of the Prophet’s hair
======================================================

It is worth mentioning to say that the deeds of the Prophet’s companions
are an argument against the Wahabis, because they believe that all the
companions are totally just and honest. They claim that they follow
them. They call themselves as Salafis meaning that they follow the
“pious ancients” and that all the companions were pious and righteous in
their view.

Al-Bukhari has mentioned in his Sahih that Malik ibn Ismaeel narrated
from Israel ibn Aasim from Ibn Sirin who said, “*Once, I said to
Ubaydah, ‘We have some of the Prophet’s hair. We have got it from Anas
or the family of Anas.’ He said, ‘If I have one hair from him, it shall
be more beloved to me than the world and all that is there in it’*.”[^1]

Al-Bukhari also mentioned a tradition narrated by Muhammad ibn Abd ur
Raheem from Sa’eed ibn Sulayman from Etad from ibn Sirin that Anas said,
“*When the Messenger of Allah (S) had his hair cut, Abu Talha was the
first one to take from his (the Prophet’s cut) hair*.”[^2]

Since Anas ibn Malik, the famous companion, kept the Prophet’s hair and
gave from it to his relatives and friends, and since a companion said,
“*If I have one hair from him, it shall be more beloved to me than the
world and all that is there in it*”, (I swear) by my life, this is the
clearest evidence that the companions sought blessing in the belongings
of the Prophet (S) and everything related to him. And, by my life, this
refutes the Wahabis who beat the hajjis who seek blessing in the
Prophet’s belongings.

In my book ‘*Then I was Guided*’, I have mentioned the nice story of the
Shia scholars who offered a copy of the Holy Qur'an wrapped in leather
as gift to the Saudi king at that time. The king kissed the Qur'an and
put it on his forehead as a kind of honoring. The Shia Scholar said to
the king, “Why did you kiss the leather and honor it?”

The king said, “When I kissed the leather, I intended to kiss what was
there inside the leather, which is the Holy Qur'an*.*”

The Shia scholar said, “And so do we! When we kiss the window of the
Prophet’s room (inside which he has been buried), we know that it is
iron, which neither benefits nor harms, but we mean what is beyond the
iron, and it is the Messenger of Allah (S*)*.”

[^1]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 1 p. 51.

[^2]: Ibid


