The Prophet admits seeking blessing and teaches it to his companions
====================================================================

Let no one be deceived by the sayings of those who deny - who say that
seeking blessing in things is a heresy invented by some companions or
some of their successors. They say that out of ignorance or fanaticism
to new Wahabism which is itself a heresy that accuses Muslims of
polytheism just due to a false doubt the Wahabis themselves have
created.

The Messenger of Allah (S) acknowledged on many occasion what his
companions did, seeking blessing in certain things and he recommended
them to do that. After that, the companions competed among themselves to
do it

Al-Bukhari in his Sahih has mentioned a tradition narrated by Adam from
Shu’bah from al-Hakam that Abu Juhayfah said, “*The Messenger of Allah
(S) went out with us at midday. He was brought some water and he
performed wudhu’ with it. People began taking from the remaining water
of his wudhu’ and wiping themselves with it. The Prophet (S) offered the
Noon Prayer in two rak’as and the Afternoon Prayer in two rak’as, and
there was a stick in front of him. Abu Musa said, ‘The Messenger of
Allah (S) called for a vessel of water with which he washed his hands
and face and ejected (from his mouth) in it and said to them (his
companions), ‘Drink from it and pour on your faces and necks.’*”[^1]

Al-Bukhari mentioned another tradition in his Sahih clearer than the
previous one. He mentioned that Abu Musa (may Allah have mercy on him)
said, “*Once, I was with the Prophet (S) while he was in al-Ja’rana (a
place) between Mecca and Medina, and Bilal was there with him. A nomad
came to the Prophet (S) and said to him, ‘Would you not carry out to me
what you have promised?’*

*The Prophet said, ‘Be delighted!’*

*The nomad said, ‘How much you said to me - be delighted (with good
news)!’*

*The Prophet (S) came to Abu Musa and Bilal while somehow angry, saying,
‘He rejected the good news. You both come to me!’*

*They came to him. He called for a vessel of water. He washed his hands
and face in it, and then rinsed out his mouth in it and said, ‘Drink
from it and pour on your faces and necks and wait for good news!’ They
took the vessel and did so. From behind a curtain, Umm Salama (the
Prophet’s wife) called out, ‘Leave some of it for your mother!’ And they
left some to her*.”[^2]

These true traditions on seeking blessing do not show that the Prophet
(S) approved of the matter, but rather it was he who ordered his
companions to do it after he had washed his hands and face and rinsed
out his mouth with the water. Then, he asked them to drink and pour on
their faces and necks from that water. He gave them good news that they
would receive goodness by the blessing of that water with which the
Prophet washed his hands, face, and mouth and Umm Salama (the Prophet’s
wife) asked to leave some of that water for her to be blessed with. So
where are the Wahabis from these facts? Or are there locks on their
hearts!

[^1]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 1 p. 55.

[^2]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 5 p. 103.


