Muhammad is a human not like other humans, but as corundum among gems
=====================================================================

Another time, we say to all people that the Prophet Muhammad (S) is the
best of all creatures and no one from the children of Adam can be
compared to him. He is the master of them all. Despite whatever may be
said about his human aspect, Allah has purified him from every impurity
and vice.

Traditionists have mentioned that he had qualities that no one from the
human beings ever had. The examples on that are too many; flies never
ever sat on him, a cloud always cast shadow over him, earth swallowed
all his excrements, the scent of musk emitted from his holy body was
such that Abu Bakr said when he was laid out dead, “*May my father and
mother die for you! How good you smell whether you are alive or dead*!”

When I read these traditions that I have already mentioned and believed
in their reliability, I understood from them what others might not
understand. I would not deny anyone to drink from the remainder of the
Prophet’s washing water, because the Prophet (S) is not like any other
human being; he is like corundum among other gems.

Which one of us may willingly drink from water with which someone else
has washed his hands, face and mouth? In addition to that, we fear that
microbes and diseases that may come from dirt and filth. Our souls
detest that, especially when we see with our eyes what is done to the
water.

Yet unless we have believed and are certain that the Prophet (S) has
been purified from all dirt, microbes, and bad smells and that his body
is pure and immaculate, we shall not perceive these traditions. And if
the loyal companions did not have that deep faith in these facts, they
would not compete with each other to drink the remainder of the used
water from Prophet’s washing, to an extent that they struggled for it.
In fact, the loyal companions knew the facts about the Prophet (S) that
others did not know. The remainder of the washing water in which the
Prophet (S) had washed his hands, face and mouth did not suffice for
them.

We shall mention here more than that which human souls can bear to heat.

Al-Bukhari has mentioned in his Sahih a long story from which we shall
take the theme that concerns our study. He said, *“…then Urwa began
glancing at the Prophet’s companions and he said, “By Allah, the
Messenger of Allah (S) did not expectorate, except that it (his extract)
fell in the hand of one of them (willingly) and he (a companion) rubbed
it to his face and skin. When he (the Prophet) ordered them, they
hurried to carry out his order, and when he performed the wudhu’, they
quarreled with each other to get (the remainder of the water of) his
wudhu’…*”[^1]

Al-Bukhari also mentioned a tradition narrated by Urwa that al-Musawwir
and Marwan which said that the Prophet (S) came out to them at the time
of Hudaybiyya… and he mentioned the tradition, “*the Messenger of Allah
(S) did not expectorate, except that it (his extract) fell in the hand
of one of them (willingly) and he rubbed it to his* *face* *and*
*skin*…”.[^2]

This leads us to say that the great companions (may Allah be pleased
with them) would not do that, unless the Prophet (S) kept silent when
they did it, or rather approved it for them.

There is no doubt that the companions saw charismata because of this
act, such as recovering health and soundness, goodness, prosperity and
cure of diseases; otherwise, they would not massage their faces and
skins with Prophet’s pituitrin.

To confirm what we say, we quote this tradition from Sahih al-Bukhari,
to show people the falsehood of Wahabism. The tradition reads, “*Once,
the Messenger of Allah (S) went out in the midday to the desert. He
performed wudhu’ and offered the Noon Prayer in two rak’as and the
Afternoon Prayer in two rak’as, and in front of him there was a
stick…Awn added that his father Abu Juhayfa said, “Passers passed behind
it (the stick). And then people got up and began taking his (the
Prophet) hands and massaging with them their faces. I took his hand and
put it on my face. It was colder than ice and better (in its scent) than
the scent* *of* *musk*.”[^3]

[^1]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 3 p. 180.

[^2]: Ibid., vol. 1 p. 66.

[^3]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 4 p. 165.


