This is the true Islam
======================

This was the title that I chose for the lecture I gave two years ago in
the mosque of my Sunni brothers in the city of San Francisco,
California, the United States of America. That day, there was a great
crowd of men and women from different nations and countries - people
from Africa, Turkey, Afghanistan, and Egypt attended the lecture and
most of them left satisfied after a free and purposeful debate.

An academic Egyptian, who had recently received his doctorate, objected
to me during the debate saying, “How could Shiism be the true Islam,
whereas the well-known thing is that the Sunni are the group with
Salvation on the Day of Resurrection as the ones who kept to the Qur’an
and the Sunna altogether, while the other sects were in deviation?”

Very calmly, I answered him and directed my speech to all present in
attendance, saying, “O brothers, I loyally swear that if I found one
group from the Sunni or other than them practicing their religion
according to a creed ascribed to Abu Bakr - I would say: Well blessed!
Abu Bakr was a great companion and he was one of the first Muslims. He
accompanied the Messenger of Allah (S), was the second of the two in the
cave, and was the first of the (four) orthodox caliphs. I would be
satisfied with that and be one of that sect.

And if I found a group of the Sunni practicing their religion according
to a creed ascribed to Umar ibn al-Khattab, I would say: Well blessed!
Our master Umar was a great companion. He was the Farouq, who
differentiated between the truth and falsehood, by whom Allah had
strengthened Islam. He was from the first Muslims, and he was the second
orthodox caliph. Then, I would be satisfied and would follow this group.

And if I found a group of the Sunni or any other than them practicing
their religion according to a creed ascribed to Uthman ibn Affan, I
would say: Well blessed! Our master Uthman was from the first
companions, and he was one of the two lights of whom angels felt shy. He
was the third of the orthodox caliphs, and it was he who had gathered
the Qur'an (in one written book). Then, I would be satisfied and follow
this creed.

However, I did not find any group of the Sunni, nor from other than them
claiming that they followed a creed belonging to one of these three
caliphs or any one of the first companions. On the other hand, I found
one group practicing their religion according to a creed ascribed to Ali
ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), and this group is the Twelver Shia.

The other sects of Muslims follow Abu Haneefah, Malik, ash-Shafi’ee, or
Ahmed ibn Hanbal. These scholars, in spite of their high positions,
great knowledge, and piety - had never accompanied the Messenger of
Allah (S) for even one day, nor had they seen him at all. They all lived
after the great sedition that spread over them from its darkness and
they all had been affected by its bad effects.[^1]

And if we divested Imam Ali (a.s.) of everything and did not acknowledge
any preference or virtue as due to him, even then he would always remain
the great companion and the first Muslim who spent all his life beside
the Messenger of Allah (S). So I adjure you all by Allah, that if you
gave up fanaticism and emotion, made reason your judge in order to
please your Lord before anything else and then to please your
conscience, whom would you choose to follow and obey?”

Most of them cried out, “Imam Ali (a.s.) is the worthiest to be
followed…”

I said, “What if I added to these reasons the traditions of the
Messenger of Allah (S) that have been mentioned by the Sunni in their
books of Hadith (Sahihs and Musnads), like the following ones:

*I am the City of knowledge and Ali is its gate.*

*Of whomever I am a guardian; here Ali is to be his guardian.*

*Ali is with the truth and the truth is with Ali. It turns with him
wherever he turns.*

*Ali to me is as Aaron was to Moses.*

*Ali explains to my nation what they shall disagree on after me.*

*Ali is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with Ali; they shall not
separate until they come to me at the Pond in Paradise.*

If Muslims know these facts after having acknowledged their reasons to
follow Imam Ali (a.s.) just for his companionship with the Prophet (S),
then no doubt shall remain that the true Islam is the Islam adopted by
the Twelver Shia who are also called *Refusers* (*rawafidh*) because
they refuse to follow anyone else other than Imam Ali (a.s.).”

After having given answers to the questions and discussing calmly
through the scientific, historical research, many in attendance came to
me - congratulated me and kissed me, and praised Allah, the Almighty for
the guidance. They asked me to give them all my books and to lead them
to some books of the Shia.

From among these people was the imam who managed the mosque. He was
crying while I was talking to him about the tragedy of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.). He was an Egyptian physician who loved the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) too
much. He said to me, “Be delighted my brother! I did not think that you
would convince us so easily. I was warned about you by some fanatic
persons who did not like you, but by the grace of Allah and by your
influential and truthful speech, you could affect their hearts…yes by
Allah!”

[^1]: Ibn Khaldun in his Muqaddimah (p. 411), shows the cause of the
difference between the first companions and the imams (of the Sunni) who
came later by saying, “The new events are not covered by the (religious)
texts, and for what is not clear in texts, it is required to turn to
other (texts) when there is similarity between them (events). And all
these things cause disagreement which necessarily takes place.” It is
clear that there came widespread dispersal of the companions and the
second generation that came after them in different countries and towns.
Some of them were appointed as judges or were in charge of giving
fatwas. It led to differences in their theories and ijtihad (personal
reasoning in giving a certain fatwa on a certain event). These
differences arose depending on the situation of the country they lived
in and the personality of the jurisprudent himself when facing different
questions. As a result, two schools came to light for them. First, the
School of Opinion that was famous among the Iraqis. The most prominent
one of this school were Abu Haneefah an-Nu’man ibn al-Munthir in Kufa
and his disciples and adherents. This school had some characteristics.
One, they used branchings and then violated them - even the imaginary
and abstract things. Therefore, they would often say, “what do you think
if it was so”, then they asked about a contradictory situation, and then
derived a ruling for that situation. Then, they turned the question over
and over - upside down considering all its possible aspects, until they
were called by the scholars of Hadith as Ara’aytiyyun (in Arabic, ‘…do
you think…’ is ‘a ra’ayta’). Secondly, they narrated and trusted in a
few traditions and only according to certain conditions. So, only a few
traditions were accepted by them, some of which were so excessive in
nature, that it was thought not to depend on Prophet’s traditions at
all. Their argument in this was that they suspected the narrators of
Hadith and there was much doubting in traditions about narrators. Second
was the School of Hadith whose characteristics were - one, they very
much disliked to ask about situations because the source for them was
Hadith, which was limited. They disliked giving personal opinion (on
these matters). They disliked being asked about an event except when it
had actually happened. They often criticized the Iraqis for their
discussion of possible situations. Secondly, they depended on all
traditions, even the weak ones. They were not strict about the
conditions for accepting traditions and they preferred this to the
giving of one’s opinion. Refer to Fajr (dawn of) al-Islam by Ahmed Amin,
p.243. The disagreement and dispute between the two schools was so
strong that they abused, reviled, and accused each other of impiety and
disbelief. In fact, some of them fabricated false traditions. It was
narrated from Abu Bakr and Umar that they approved and reproved the
acting according to Hadith. The same was narrated from ibn Mas’ud. Some
scholars overexerted themselves to reconcile the contradictory sayings
of the disputing schools. Therefore, the truth and honesty was not
observed and Allah the Almighty was not feared. For more details, refer
to the book Know the Truth, p. 96-98, and Fear Allah, p. 67-72, by the
author of this book.


