Wahabism has historical roots
=============================

If we go back to our history and look up its painful events, some of
those events shall attract our attention to reveal to us that Wahabism,
which we have known in this century, had ancient roots since the very
beginning of Islam. They were apparent at one time and hidden at
another. One time they appeared daringly, and at another they time hid
because of fear and dissimulation, until the time that Islam had
regressed and its pillars and great personalities were afflicted. Then
colonialism came to feed and strengthen this new thought.

The aim behind it was to destroy the sanctity of the Prophet Muhammad
(S). Muslims, due to the colonialists’ thoughts, sanctified two things -
the Qur'an and the Sunna. These are the two basic sources of the Islamic
Sharia that was targeted by them.

They know that the speech of Allah can never be changed and distorted,
because Allah, the Almighty has undertaken its preservation. But as for
the Prophet’s Sunna, it is liable to distortion and fabrication. In
fact, since the first day when the Prophet (S) left for the better
world, disagreement took place among Muslims on the Prophet’s Sunna.

However, the colonialists perceived that the scholars of the nation had
set right the Sunna and collected its true and reliable traditions and
put laws and rules to keep it safe from increase or decrease. Therefore,
they thought of a satanic trick that might help them do away with the
spiritual matters that were the most active factor in the life of
Muslims. It was that whenever Muslims gave up on these spiritualties
they would approach them step by step with unfaithful materialism, and
then they would become like the scum of a flood.

They looked for a Muslim man who had infinite ambition, and they
discovered Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab, to whom Wahabism is ascribed. They
inspired in him from their spirit and convinced him that he was the
savant of his age and that he had genius and intelligence that even the
orthodox caliphs did not have. They showed him the violations of the
caliphs against the clear texts of the Qur'an and the Prophetic Sunna,
especially the objection of Umar ibn al-Khattab to the Prophet (S)
during his life. They convinced him that Muhammad was a human being who
was fallible; that he committed many mistakes and that some people had
to correct him. This was a proof of his (the Prophet’s) weakness. They
aroused his greed to the rule and to prevail over Arabia first and then
all over the Arab and Muslim world.

Wahabism was established on these concepts - trying their best to
degrade the Prophet (S) and slighting his importance, until their
scholars openly said, “*The* *man* *has died*.” And their head said,
“*Muhammad is just a worn-out rope that neither does any benefit nor
harm, and my stick is better than him because it benefits and harms*.”

Sayings like that were said at the time of al-Hajjaj ibn Yousuf
ath-Thaqafi who himself said, “*Woe to them! They circumambulate a
worn-out rope. If they circumambulated the palace of Ameerul Mo'minin
Abdul Melik ibn Marwan, it would be of use to them*.”

In fact, nothing made al-Hajjaj and the vicious Umayyad rulers so
daring, except for the daring of Umar ibn al-Khattab who said in the
presence of the Prophet (S), “*The man (the Prophet) is raving. The Book
of Allah suffices you*.”

In this very impudent saying, there are all the meanings that the
Wahabis try their best to confirm and fix in the minds of people. They
say that Muhammad has died and is no longer but a part of history.
Whoever supplicates through his means is as if he worships him and makes
a partner in deity. This is not a new concept; it has a root in history.
Abu Bakr said openly before people, “*O people, whoever worshipped
Muhammad – so Muhammad has died, and whoever worshipped Allah, Allah is
alive and will never die.*”

What was the reason for Abu Bakr to say so while he certainly knew that
no one of Muslims worshipped Muhammad at all? Did Abu Bakr believe that
some Muslims actually worshipped Muhammad? If it was so, then why did
Muhammad keep silent before those people, or why he did not prevent or
scold them or even kill them?

I have been convinced that they (Abu Bakr, Umar…etc.) had the same
thoughts that the Wahabis have today. It means that they could not bear
to see people sanctify and honor the Prophet (S). It made them angry to
see people hurry and fight with each other to get the remainder of the
Prophet’s water of *wudhu’* to massage their faces and skins for
blessing and to be closer to Allah by loving him and his progeny. All
that created a reaction among the people of Quraysh who began hating
Muhammad (S) with no guilt being committed by him.

The chief of Quraysh Mo’awiya ibn Abi Sufyan revealed what was hidden in
their chests when al-Mughirah suggested to him, “*O Ameerul Mo'minin,
would that you be kind to your cousins of the Hashimites! By Allah,
nothing has remained with them that you may fear. And this may cause you
good mention.*”

Mo’awiya said, “*How far! The man of Taym*[^1] *ruled, wronged and did
what he did. By Allah, as soon as he died, his mention died with him.
People may remember him and just say: Abu Bakr. Then the man of
Adiy*[^2] *ruled for ten years. As soon as he died, his mention died
with him. People may remember him and say: Umar. Then our brother Uthman
ruled. He did what he did and people did to him what they did. As soon
as he died, his mention and what happened to him died with him. But the
man of Hashem;*[^3] *everyday his name is announced five times (I
witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (S)). So which mention
will last after this? May their mention be buried!*”[^4]

It was Wahabism in its prettiest clothes and clearest tongues. It
plotted yesterday and is trying now to execute the plot for today and
tomorrow.

They desired to put out the light of Allah with their mouths but Allah
will perfect His light, though the unbelievers may be averse***.***

[^1]: It was the name of Abu Bakr’s tribe.

[^2]: The name of Umar’s tribe.

[^3]: The tribe of the Prophet (s); Hashem was the great grandfather of
the Prophet.

[^4]: Mentioned by ibn Abil Hadeed in his book an-Nasa’ih al-Kafiyyah
leman Yatawalla Mo’awiya, quoted from at-Tabari and ibnul Atheer.


