Wahabism prohibits visiting of graves
=====================================

One of the heresies widespread in the present time is the prohibition of
visiting of graves by women. When a Muslim woman goes to perform the
hajj, they (Wahabis) do not permit her to visit the Baqee’ Graveyard or
any other graveyard there. The Wahabis prohibited this thing and still
prohibit it with no any evidence except fanaticism.

Muslim has mentioned in his Sahih, Chapter of Funerals, that Aa’isha
once asked the Prophet (S) what she should say if she visited
graveyards, and the Prophet (S) said, “*You say: Peace be on you, O
peaceful people! You are from the foremost and we, if Allah wills are
from the following and may Allah forgive the first and the last.*”

Al-Bukhari has mentioned in his Sahih that Anas ibn Malik said, “*One
day, the Prophet (S) passed by a woman crying at a grave. He said to
her, ‘Fear Allah and be patient!’ She said, ‘Be away from me! You have
not been afflicted as I have.’ She did not know him. It was said to her
that he was the Messenger of Allah (S). She came to his house and did
not find doorkeepers. She apologized to him that she did not know him
before. He said, ‘Patience is (required) but at the first shock*’.”[^1]

There are too many traditions about this subject in the books of the
Sunni and the Shia, but the Wahabis deny and pay no any attention to
them.

When I argued with one of the Wahabis about these traditions, he said to
me that they were abrogated. I said, “In fact, the prohibition is that
which was abrogated, because the Messenger of Allah (S) said, ‘I had
prohibited you from visiting the graves, but now you visit them, because
they remind you of death’.”

He said, “This tradition means men and not women.”

I said, “It has been proved in history and to the scholars from the
Sunni that Fatima az-Zahra’ (S) visited her father’s tomb every day, and
she cried there and said, ‘O father, calamities have been poured on me
that if they were poured on days, they would turn nights.’ It is well
known in history that Imam Ali (a.s.) built her a special house called
‘the house of sorrows’ where she spent most of her time weeping.”

He said, “If we suppose that this narration it true, it concerns Fatima
alone.”

Unfortunately, this blind fanaticism! How can a Muslim imagine that
Allah and His messenger prohibit woman from visiting the grave of her
father, mother, brother, husband, or child where she may pray Allah to
have mercy and forgive them and where she may grieve for them through
tears of mercy and remember death and afterlife like a man does?

This is an injustice against a woman which Allah never pleases to do or
does, neither does His messenger or any man of a sound reason.

[^1]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 2 p. 79, Chapt. Visiting of Graves,
Funerals.


