The Ahlul Bayt and a modern Muslim
==================================

The jobs of the present age have occupied most of man’s time and not
left for him any free time. In the age of the Mission - the first age of
Islam, jobs were limited in that a man was a farmer, a trader or a
manufacturer. These three jobs gave man enough free time to practice his
worships as he liked and at their specified times. When the time of
prayer came even if a Muslim was in the place of his work, he stopped
working to offer the prayer with a tranquil soul.

As for today where governments have employed most of people for assured
and defined salaries and for several hours, people are not allowed to
stop working in order to offer the prayer. A student, teacher, manager,
physician, nurse, worker, soldier, policeman, officials in companies,
factories, and mines, the guards of borders, officer in a weather
station or airport…etc. do not find free time to offer the prayer in its
five prescribed times.

I myself suffered this problem when I was a teacher. My soul was upset
and my conscience was confused as time did not permit me to offer the
prayer in its specified time. I often missed the *Dhuhr* (midday), *Asr*
(afternoon), and *Maghrib* (time of sunset) prayers especially during
winter. I often offered the four prayers (in addition to *Isha* -
evening Prayer) altogether in the night. Sometimes, I went back home
very tired so that I could not offer them, or I offered them in spite of
me.

I discovered that many Muslims gave up prayer for the reason that they
were psychologically stressed, hoping that chance might permit them to
offer this obligation later. Because of this, dislike came to some
people who saw that the prayer was like a nightmare, which affected
their ease. They began criticizing Islam of being a religion of fatigue,
difficulty and hardship, and saying that Christianity had relieved its
followers from many ties where they pray only one time a week; on Sunday
which is a holiday.

How often the missionaries struck the right cord before a Muslim youth,
claiming that their religion (Christianity) would keep pace with
civilization at all ages! They say that prayer once a week and fasting
(abstaining from eating meat only) for only three days in a year make
their religion a religion of love and peace.

How much did these propagandas attract the Muslim youth, who suffered,
in their early childhood from the pressure of parents to perform
*wudhu’* and prayer, to a terrible degree in some families?

You see that some parents, especially unlearned ones, want their
children to be exactly like Rabi’ah al-Adawiyyah[^1] if they are females
and like Ahmed al-Badawi if they are males. They wake them up before the
dawn and tire them with prayers. They watch them day and night, and
blame and punish them severely for everything. They beat them sometimes
just because they forget something. They send them to government schools
and burden them with duties, until they become boring, and then hate the
religion while they are not yet adolescent. I do not say except what I
have already seen. I saw many children from my relatives, who offered
the prayer under pressure; give up the prayer when the authority of
parents was no longer over them, or when they were far from the family
and its ties.

Many times, I tried to convince some parents from my relatives not to
beat or force their children to offer the prayer and that they must
treat them kindly and leniently, to endear the prayer to them and not to
make it as a nightmare to them, but I often faced their saying that the
Prophet (S) had said, “*Beat them (children) to offer the prayer when
they are seven years old (or ten years in some traditions)*”.

In this way, the Muslim youth lose their prayer and give up on their
religion, even if they do not follow the missionaries. In addition to
that, the television, games and many other things take the youth away
from the remembrance of Allah.

[^1]: An exemplar in faith and piety.


