This is the wudhu’
==================

As we have said before and in order to make it easy for Muslims, Allah
the Almighty has imposed *wudhu’* on Muslims before offering the prayer.
Allah says:

***O you who believe, when you rise up to prayer, wash your faces and
your hands as far as the elbows, and wipe your heads and your feet to
the ankles***. ***Qur'an, 5:6***

Then, *wudhu’* is to wash the face and two hands and to wipe the head
and the two feet. As we see, it is easy and accessible with no any
difficulty or hardship. If a Muslim is at home or traveling, in an
airport or a railway station, this *wudhu’* shall not embarrass him at
all; he just turns on the tap and washes his face and hands, and then he
turns off the tap and wipes his head and feet with the wet of his hands.
He may not take off his shoes except in the place of prayer if it is
near, and then he wipes his head and feet.

But, if the *wudhu’* is as described by (Sunni) jurisprudents who say:

• To wash the hands to the wrists three times

• To rinse out the mouth three times

• To wash the nose three times (by inhaling and ejecting out)

• To wash the face three times

• To wash the right hand three times and the left hand three times

• To wipe all the head

• To wipe the two ears

• To wash the right foot three times and then the left foot three times

This shall be of difficulty and hardship, especially to the youth when
they are in travel. It is difficult to wash the feet in winter and then
to wait until they dry in order to put on the socks.

What is important in this matter is that the school of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.), that do not rely on personal opinions nor on misinterpretation
before clear texts, acts according to the Holy Book and the pure Sunna
of Prophet. The *wudhu’* that the Shia follow is the *wudhu’* that Allah
has imposed on Muslims in the Holy Qur'an and it is the *wudhu’* that
the Messenger of Allah (S) and the infallible imams of his progeny did
practice.

May Allah have mercy on Abdullah ibn Abbas who often said, “*I do not
find in the Book of Allah except two washes and two wipes, but you
insist on following the rule of al-Hajjaj*.”

Muslims today, especially the learned youth, have to go back to the
right way of Islam with its simplicity and ease to make people love and
wish for the religion. How often the Prophet (S) announced before
Muslims, “*Make it easy and do not make it difficult! Do not make
(people) alienated from the religion!*” And he often said, “*Do not make
it difficult for yourselves, lest Allah makes it more difficult for you
as He did for the Children of Israel*.”

How many people, who escaped from the prayer because of *wudhu’* or they
offered the prayer but with *tayammum*[^1] for fear of water which
caused them prurigo in the hands and toes of the feet,[^2] recovered
soundness and became tranquil with the *wudhu’* of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.)!

[^1]: Ritual purification with sand, soil, or dust instead of wudhu’
when there is no water.

[^2]: In the school of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s..), one can practice tayammum
even if water is available when he fears from a disease, or what may
lead to or complicate a disease as narrated from Imam as-Sadiq, “…soil
is one of the two purifying things”.


