Temporary marriage and its importance
=====================================

One of the most dangerous problems that destroy human societies is the
problem of sex. As it is well known, sex is the basic factor that makes
life continue as willed by Allah the Almighty Who has made masculinity
and femininity in everything - man, animals, plants…etc.

Allah says:

***And of everything We have created pairs that you may be mindful.***
***Qur'an, 51:49***

***And Allah has made wives for you of your kind, and has given you
children and grandchildren from your wives***. ***Qur'an, 16:72***

In order that life continues, male and female must marry and produce
offspring. This is the norm of Allah in His creation. For marriage and
production, Allah has created this unruly instinct in man and woman
equally that each gender wishes and longs for and yearns to have sexual
intercourse with the other to satisfy his or her lust. In this way, an
ovum is pollinated by a sperm and a fetus is formed that develops until
it becomes adult to repeat the same role, and thus life continues.

***And He it is Who has created man from the water, then He has made for
him blood relationship and marriage relationship, and your Lord is
powerful***. ***Qur'an, 25:54***

The Islamic Sharia has put conditions and limits for this instinct in a
way that not all people may bear. Islam has prohibited sexual
intercourse, except by lawful marriage in order to preserve honor,
lineage, offspring and dignity of man.

The sexual lust may be awakened in a young boy and a young girl in their
early years when they are not more than ten years old. In the west,
these young boys and girls may practice sex easily and without limits
because the western peoples think it is a natural instinct, not having
any problem with this. Therefore, they encourage it and pave the way for
early mixing between boys and girls or that parents may practice sexual
intercourse before their children to make them be used to seeing their
parents naked, besides observing other behaviors that open wide the door
to adultery before young boys and girls. In many instances, a girl would
have lost her virginity before she is fourteen years old. This is very
common there; to a degree that when a man gets married to a woman and
finds her still a virgin, he is astonished and considers that woman to
be unnatural or savage.

For Muslims, the matter is totally different. There is no room for
uncovering private parts before children at all. There is no place for
mixing between males and females, except within certain limits
conditioned by the required veil of woman. Add to that the moral and
psychological education that children receive from parents, especially
girls from mothers. Thus, girls grow up with shyness and fear of sex,
bearing in mind that their virginity is the criterion of their chastity,
abstinence, honor and perfection of body.

Most of times, a young woman may come to the marital house while she
knows neither much nor little about sex, and perhaps the husband may be
so too. This is if they live in a Muslim society that follows the actual
laws of Islam, or we may say ‘the ideal Muslim society’ that seems to be
imaginary, because it is very difficult or somehow impossible to be
applied, as it is not possible to suppress this instinct in males or
females anyhow.

However if we try to ignore this instinct, we shall not be successful
most of times. When the genitals and glands of a male and a female
develop, they feel the desire to have sex. They shall practice sex in
one way or another, however much the parents try to watch over them.
There is no doubt that males and females shall find an opportunity to
meet, and in the least boys may practice sex with boys and girls with
girls. Certainly, this is a dangerous matter, having bad effects and
psychological diseases that may be a main reason for destroying the
family, which then leads to the corruption of entire society.

Western societies have exceeded all the limits in practicing sex, until
people there have become like animals in satisfying this unruly lust,
which is considered there as a conceded right of male and female and a
part of their freedom even if they are married and living with their
spouses. As they think, a husband has to regard the feelings of his wife
if she wants to satisfy her lust with whomever she likes, and a wife has
to regard the feelings of her husband if he wants to do the same with
any woman other than his wife.

However, in the Arab and Muslim societies, we are very immoderate in the
matter of sex to the extent that we have burdened our societies with
psychological complexes, sexual suppression, secret practices and
yearning for woman with fatal lust as that of animals.


