Temporary marriage and its benefits
===================================

Unfortunately, Muslims do not look at this marriage except by the eye of
criticism. They do not discuss except its negative points, which are
very little, and do not see its positive points which are very many.

In fact, everything has negative and positive points. As this kind of
marriage was not practiced since the time of Umar ibn al-Khattab, who
prohibited it with no any legal cause, so people consider it as adultery
and they look at it disgustingly. This does not mean that it is
disgusting, but because people have neither known nor practiced it.

It is like the offering of two prayers at one time, or like the *khums*,
or wiping the feet in *wudhu’*. Despite that they have been available in
the Holy Qur'an and despite that the Prophet (S) has practiced and
ordered Muslims to practice them, most of people are ignorant of them.
Muslims find them strange for nothing, but just because they are not
familiar with them in their daily life. You see that they do not find
adultery as strange as they find temporary marriage strange!

A young woman often tried to incite some young man to commit adultery
with her. When he refused and suggested that they should get married in
temporary marriage, she refused and said that she did not know this kind
of marriage.

If you argue about the matter of temporary marriage with Sunni scholars
and prove its legality with irrefutable proofs from al-Bukhari and
Muslim and when they are embarrassed before the evidences, they say that
this marriage is a kind of humiliation to woman. When you prove to them
the opposite, they begin talking nonsense and say: will you marry me
your sister or daughter in temporary marriage?

They speak with the mentality of domination over woman. They often say
that woman cannot marry herself (to someone by her will) and that her
marriage is in the hand of her guardian. They think that woman is like a
cow that is sold and bought, and that she has no right to choose her
husband. Indeed, this is the very humiliation to woman and not her
temporary marriage.

Temporary marriage is a mercy from Allah for woman and it is not a kind
of humiliation. She has the full right to refuse temporary marriage and
no one can ever force her to accept it. If they think that this kind of
marriage is humiliation to woman, then what do they say about polygamy
where another fellow wife or other fellow wives are brought home inspite
of her presence and without her agreement or willingness to participate
with her in everything; her husband, her house, and later on the
inheritance?

Is this worse or that when her husband gets married for a short period
(temporary marriage) to some woman who shall share with wife, besides
that this wife may not know anything at all about that marriage, which
shall end soon, and about that second wife, who shall leave back for her
own life?

We have said before that temporary marriage within its legal conditions
and limits is for the advantage of woman and not for her disadvantage.
As temporary marriage is not obligatory and as it cannot be imposed on
anyone, man or woman, against his or her will, so what for is all this
nonsense, defamation and accusation?

I am so sorry for this afflicted nation that claims the love to the
Prophet’s progeny (S), while it contradicts them in all rulings which
they narrated from their grandfather the Prophet Muhammad (S) and did
according to these rulings. Despite that Ja’fari School (Shiism), which
is the jurisprudence of Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), is taught in
al-Azhar University in Cairo, many people because of fanaticism, still
doubt it and doubt it belongs to Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.).

It is certain that the twelve infallible imams (a.s.), at the head of
whom is Imam Ali (a.s.), called among people for the legality of
temporary marriage and said that it was a mercy for people. Abdullah Ibn
Abbas, as well, often said to people that temporary marriage was lawful.
Muslims were divided into two parties; one of minority who followed and
did according to the doings of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), and the other one
of great majority who followed the caliphs (but not Imam Ali a.s.) and
companions.

Matters have remained until now as they were before; the followers of
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) see temporary marriage as lawful, and the
followers of the caliphs see it as unlawful.

After all and as we offer this study, we do not want to force anyone to
accept it. People are free to choose what they see as true, but we have
to uncover the hidden facts so that the truth becomes clear and shiny
before whoever intends and looks for it.

In our view, temporary marriage has many benefits:

If a male student and a female student, who live together throughout the
school year while they are in the age of intensity of sexual passion,
get married temporarily, they shall be in intimate companionship and
association even if they do not have sexual intercourse when they both
agree to this condition.

This may last for the period of their study, and after that, they can
decide either to separate, or conclude a contract of continuous marriage
if they want. In fact, the first marriage shall give the two spouses
more chance to know each other in the best way and shall be able to get
over all the obstacles that may face them in their continuous marital
life.

This marriage shall give them relief, peace and tranquility and make
them proceed with their studies easily. Their relation shall be lawful
and honest and shall make their consciences satisfied and pleased and
consequently Allah will be pleased with them. They shall be safe from
troubles and suspicious looks of other students, who when they know
about this marriage shall stop to trouble them.

On the other hand, if a female student moves from one young man to
another, having in her handbag tens of love letters from this and that
besides the contraceptives for fear of pregnancy and scandal and if
young men move from one girl to another to taste the honey of each one,
as bees tasting flowers, and play with the fates, futures and feelings
of those girls, paying no any attention to the honor, dignity, and
feelings of their families, and when those girls finish their studies
and return to their homes followed by suspicions and accusations that
shall cause them tens of complexes arising from the leaving of those
traitors who promise and after satisfying their desires, leave those
deflowered girls alone to be later on filled with rage and spite against
the society and to try avenge for themselves by every means - it shall
be found not strange by those pretending scholars!!!

A traveler, who travels for a long period away from his home and wife,
may be able to be patient (with his sexual desire), but if not, he has
to get married in temporary marriage to assure his ease, tranquility,
and faith. His wife may agree willingly when she knows that her husband
has followed the lawful way and kept away from unlawful ways. A wife
knows her husband well and shall prefer him to be in the house of an
honest and upright woman, who gets married to protect her honor and
honesty and make use of Allah’s mercy rather than to look for a
prostitute in a street every day who takes his money and gives him fatal
diseases after having slept with other men many times on the same day.
Surely, there is nothing of that in temporary marriage, as one from
among its conditions is that the woman having married in temporary
marriage has no right to remarry except after having undergone all the
*iddah* of her first marriage which is a period of two menstruations or
two months for a woman in menopause.

Temporary marriage can solve the problem of a spinster who has not
married for one reason or another. Islam permits her to satisfy her
desire in this lawful way.

Temporary marriage also solves the problem of a widow who does not want
to marry in continuous marriage for the sake of her children or any
other reason.

How often it happens in our Arabic societies that a beautiful woman
falls in love with a teenager or a young man in the age of her son. This
woman may sleep with this teenager and remain doing so secretly in
unlawful association. Temporary marriage makes their association lawful
and preserves their honor and dignity.

A woman, who is afraid to travel alone or that some countries may
prevent her from traveling except with a *non-mahram*, can conclude a
contract of temporary marriage just for the purpose of travel. Marriage
in this case can be without sexual intercourse.

A man, who has a female servant at home, is not permitted by Islam to
touch any part of her body or look at her while unveiled, and her full
veil may embarrass her when doing her job in the house and before her
master. This man can conclude a contract of temporary marriage between
his young son[^1] and the servant inasmuch as for the period of her
employment, and thus she becomes his daughter-in-law who is *mahram* to
him. In this way, there shall be no problem or embarrassment.

A young woman, who remains alone for hours in the house of a man for
learning special lessons or a foreign language, or any other reason, can
conclude a contract of temporary marriage with that man to avoid that
forbidden privacy, about which the Prophet (S) said, “*No man and a
woman are alone in privacy except that Satan becomes the third of
them*.” In this way, this privacy shall be lawful and the woman can put
off her hijab before her teacher or shake hands with him. However, she
can stipulate any condition she wants.

There are many other cases where temporary marriage becomes mercy for
people lest they commit sins, which may cause the society much
corruption and many physical and psychological diseases. Temporary
marriage, in many cases, is the only solution to save society from these
diseases and to preserve honors, lineages, dignities, and
nobilities.[^2]

***Say: Surely Allah does not enjoin indecency; do you say against Allah
what you do not know***. ***Qur'an, 7:28***

***Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good (to
others) and the giving to the kindred, and He forbids indecency and evil
and oppression; He admonishes you that you may be mindful***. ***Qur'an,
16:90***

[^1]: The boy may be no more than some years, and it is not intended in
such a marriage that the sexual intercourse happens, but it is just to
make lawful through this marriage what is unlawful without it. This does
not mean to make lawful what Allah has prohibited, for this is of
disbelief, but to follow what the Sharia may permit. Shaking hands with
a non-mahram woman is not lawful, but it becomes lawful after a legal
contract of marriage with that woman.

[^2]: When I was preparing a thesis for higher studies in one of the
Sunni colleges, I heard one of the female officials of the college
blaming a teacher why he did not visit her the last night where she had
prepared a gateau and been waiting for him. The teacher was trying to
apologize. I say: if there is no contract of continuous marriage or
temporary marriage, then what shall be the legal excuse for them to meet
and mix as man and woman?!!


