“Then I was Guided” is the Ahlul Bayt’s book
============================================

The Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) have well known charismata even in these days. How
often that we hear from here and there that some charismata have
happened to some of the Shia, or that they have seen some charismata
somewhere by virtue of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). It is not something
strange, for the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) are the infallible Imams of guidance,
leaders of people and suns in darkness.

Even if Umar ibn al-Khattab did not know the actual significance of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) in his time, he himself led us to their great position
with Allah when he prayed to Allah by means of al-Abbas, the Prophet’s
uncle, who was not of those from whom Allah had kept impurity away and
purified through thorough purifying.[^1]

Al-Abbas (Prophet’s uncle) was not of those upon whom Allah had ordained
blessings as He had ordained on His prophet. He was not of those for
whom Allah had imposed love on all Muslims. He was not of those whom to
Allah had bequeathed the knowledge of the Book. He was not of those whom
Allah had greeted in His Book when saying:

***“Peace be on Aal Yasin***,” ***Qur'an, 37:130***

He was not of the infallible imams for whom the Messenger of Allah (S)
had imposed on the nation, guidance to follow them and ride aboard their
ship. He was not of those who had inherited the knowledge of the Prophet
(S).

Nevertheless, Allah responded to Umar, because he beseeched Allah by
means of a relative of the Prophet (S). If he had beseeched Allah by
means of Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, he would have seen
greater wonders and the blessings of the heaven. The earth would have
come down to them, and they would have eaten from above their heads and
from under their feet.

What is important is that Umar revealed to us something very important
and he uncovered to us what was concealed. The fact is that kinship to
the Prophet (S) has charismata which can be ignored by no one. The
relatives of the Prophet (S) are those people who if they ask Allah, He
will respond to them immediately in everything. Therefore, when Umar saw
absence of rain and felt that there might be famine to threaten Muslims
with destruction, he resorted to the kinship of the Messenger of Allah
(S), and then it rained by the will of Allah to honor the kinship of the
Prophet (S).

Where are the Wahabis when they see these irrefutable proofs and where
are the Muslims who have kept themselves away from knowing the truth?

Sheikh Jallool al-Jaziri (may Allah have mercy on him) was one of the
*ulema* of Zaytoona (University) in Tunisia. By the favor of Allah, he
arrived at the truth and turned to be Shia. He wrote his last book in
which he discussed the event of al-Ghadir and paid homage to Ameerul
Mo'minin Imam Ali (a.s.), the virtues of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), and
their charismata. He told me that once Tunis faced lack of rain and
famine until all people were about to die. The people of Tunis offered
the prayer for rain many times, but the sky abstained from giving them
even a drop.

When the lands became too dry, people went complaining to one of the
righteous, who was Allama Sheikh Ibrahim ar-Riyahi, and asked him to
pray to Allah so that He might respond to him. The Sheikh said to them,
“Gather with me one hundred men from the *Ashraf*,[^2] so that I will
offer the prayer for rain with them.” One hundred *Sharifs* came to him,
and before finishing the prayer, and though it was very hot, the sky
rained heavily. It rained for three days and all valleys overflowed
until people were afraid of drowning.[^3]

When I was guided to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), thanks be to Allah, and
wrote my first book ‘*Then I was Guided*’, I did not imagine that it
would receive all this reception and fame.

By the way, it would be not useless to mention here an anecdote that my
dear friend and great scholar Dr. As’ad Ali, who was a great man of
letters, once told me when I visited him in his house in Mazza in
Damascus. As we were talking, among a group of his disciples and
friends, he reminded me of something that delighted me too much. He
said, “I read your book ‘Then I was Guided*’* and know its secret.”

I asked with astonishment, “What is the secret of the book?”

He said, “When you came in to visit our master (Imam) Musa al-Kadhim (S)
and said, ‘O Allah, have mercy on him if he is from the righteous’, he
did according to the saying of Allah

***“And when you are greeted with a greeting, greet with a better
(greeting) than it or return it”*** ***Qur'an, 4:86***

And, he greeted you better than your greeting to him. When you greeted
him, saying, ‘O Allah have mercy on him’, he greeted you with better
than your greeting, saying, ‘O Allah, guide him (to the right path)!’ So
Allah responded to him and guided you, and after that came this book,
and this was the secret of its success.”

This is a fact which I have believed in and it has entered deep into my
heart. I have believed that the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) were the secret behind
the success of the book without doubt. I met no one who showed to me
other than his admiration of the book. The book has been published more
than twenty times and translated into seventeen languages in the world.
Thousands of Muslims everywhere in the world were guided to the truth by
this book, especially in Africa where there were no Shia and Muslims
lived there without sectarian backgrounds.[^4]

[^1]: The Prophet (S) and his progeny who were the ones referred to by
the Qur’anic verse of Purification.

[^2]: Ashraf in Tunisia are the sharifs or sayyids who are the
descendants of the Prophet Muhammad (S) via Ali and Fatima (peace be on
them).

[^3]: Sheikh Jallool al-Jaziri mentioned in his book “al-Fawa’id
al-Fakhira Lezad ad-Dunya wel Aakhira - the excellent benefits for the
provision of this life and the afterlife”, p. 78, quoting Tarikh
(history of) ibn Dhayyaf that once when the epidemic (plague) spread in
Tunisia, the ulema met in the Zeytoonah Mosque and decided to gather
forty sharifs who all had the name Muhammad and to pray Allah to save
them from that plague. They gathered the forty men by whose means Allah
saved people and the plague vanished.

[^4]: In Iraq and Iran, people narrate many true stories about the
charismata of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) that have actually taken place. The
visitors, students, and scholars from India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and
other places, who have visited or come to study and live near the
shrines of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and been blessed by their holy tombs,
also narrate such stories.


