Keeping to religion in the past and the present
===============================================

It is well known that Islam, with which the Prophet Muhammad (S) had
been sent by Allah, is the last of religions in the matter of Divine
Legislation. Allah the Almighty says:

***Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the
Messenger of Allah (S) and the Last of the prophets…*** ***Qur'an,
33:40***

Since Muhammad (S) is the last of the prophets and messengers and his
Book is the last of the Books revealed by Allah, so there shall be no
Divine Book after the Holy Qur'an. Islam is the basic religion to which
all the divine religions have been fused. Allah says:

***He it is Who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the true
religion so that He may make it prevail over all the religions; and
Allah is enough for a witness***. ***Qur'an, 48:28***

After the advent of Muhammad (S) as prophet, it has become obligatory on
all human beings to turn from the previous religions whether Judaism,
Christianity, or any other religion and embrace Islam to worship Allah
the Almighty according to the Sharia of Muhammad (S), because Allah will
not accept any religion other than Islam since then. Allah says:

***And whoever seeks a religion other than Islam, it shall not be
accepted from him, and in the hereafter, he shall be one of the
losers***. ***Qur'an, 3:85***

We understand from this that the Jews and the Christians however much
they claim that their laws and legislations are true and that they
follow the Prophet Moses (S) or the Prophet Jesus Christ (S), the
reality requires that they must follow the Prophet Muhammad (S) since
the moment Allah sent him as a messenger. A Christian has no right to
say that he wants to remain on his religion, nor does a Jew.

The fact is that Muhammad (S) was sent as a prophet to all mankind and
as a mercy to all people with their different races and beliefs. This
does not mean that we condemn the previous divine religions, but Allah
the Almighty knew that His people had distorted His laws. They made
lawful what was unlawful and unlawful what was lawful for the sake of
their own desires. Therefore, they went astray and made those who came
after them go astray.

So the advent of Muhammad (S) the last of the prophets was a mercy to
all mankind in order to allow them to restore themselves again and go
back to the truth so that they would win the Paradise. However, most of
people detest the truth. Desires, fancies and fanaticisms play with them
and devils occupy them so that they become excessive in their deviation.

Allah says in this concern:

***Those who disbelieved from among the followers of the Book and the
polytheists could not have separated (from the faithful) until there had
come to them the clear evidence; a messenger from Allah, reciting pure
pages, wherein are all the right ordinances. And those who were given
the Book did not become divided except after clear evidence had come to
them***. ***Quran*** ***98:1-4***

It is also not sufficient that a Jew or a Christian says, ‘I believe in
Muhammad, but I will remain on my religion’, as I myself have heard from
some Arab Christians. We say to such people that Allah does not accept
from them except when they actually follow him. Allah says in this
concern:

***Those who follow the Messenger-Prophet, who can neither read nor
write, whom they find written down with them in the Torah and the Gospel
(who) enjoins them good and forbids them evil, and makes lawful to them
the good things and makes unlawful to them impure things, and removes
from them their burden and the shackles which were upon them; so (as
for) those who believe in him and honor him and help him, and follow the
light which has been sent down with him, these it is that are the
successful***. ***Quran*** ***7:157***

This invitation from Allah the Almighty was not limited to the Jews and
the Christians, all of whom represented “the People of the Book”, but it
included all human beings with no exception.

Allah the Almighty says:

***Say: O people! surely I am the Messenger of Allah (S) to you all, of
Him Whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, there is no god
but He; He brings to life and causes to die; therefore believe in Allah
and His messenger, the Prophet, who can neither read nor write, who
believes in Allah and His words, and you follow him so that you may walk
in the right way***. ***Quran*** ***7:158***

The Holy Qur'an is too clear in stating the obligation of following the
Prophet (S) and not just believing in his prophethood. This is the
wisdom of Allah in sending the messengers. We have never heard in all
the history of humankind that Allah has sent a messenger to say to
people: remain on your religion which you have inherited from the
messenger that had come before me.[^1]

All of the prophets have called for belief in all the messengers of
Allah, so that no one might harm their prophethood or be excessive about
their real position and give them the position of a deity.

Allah the Almighty says:

***The messenger believes in what has been revealed to him from his Lord
and (so do) the believers; they all believe in Allah and His angels and
His books and His messengers; We make no difference between any of His
messengers; and they say: We hear and obey, our Lord! Thy forgiveness
(do we crave), and to Thee is the eventual course***. ***Qur'an,
2:285***

If we know that Islam is the last religion that Allah the Almighty has
endowed His faithful people with, so its laws and rulings are valid for
every time and every place, because there is no prophet to come after
Prophet Muhammad (S) and no divine book to come after the Holy Qur'an
according to this saying of Allah:

***This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My
favor on you and chosen for*** ***you Islam as a religion***. ***Qur'an,
5:3***

However, some Muslims, if not most of them, do not abide by the laws and
rulings of Islam. They claim that these are difficult to carry out and
that most (ordinary) people are unable to carry them out.

Some others, who are learned people, say that it is necessary to develop
the rulings according to the requirements of the modern life. They see
*ijtihad*[^2] to be necessary in everything and claim that *ijtihad* is
one of the virtues of Islam and one of its prides. These learned people
may influence the minds of many young students, especially as they
pretend that they love Islam too much and are too careful to apply its
rulings.

These people justify the underdevelopment and deterioration of Muslims
as they have not developed their religion from where it had been
established fifteen centuries ago at a time where there was no means of
transport except for mules and donkeys.

These people say that as for today we live in the age of rockets - whose
speed exceeds the speed of sound, telephone, fax, and computer - through
which man can contact with any place in the world within a few seconds.
So we cannot remain looking at the Qur'an with that superficial sight
where we judge against a thief by cutting his hand or a criminal by
cutting his head by the sword…they often say so and have odd
philosophies in this regard.

Once, I was talking with a university professor about this. In my talk
with him, I said that the Messenger of Allah (S) has said:

*There is no magnanimous young man except (like) Ali, and no sword
except Dhul Faqar.”*

He laughed at me and said, “O doctor, do not say like this again. It was
valid at the time of the Prophet (S) when the sword had a role in
winning the battles and it was the only weapon which the heroes had
pride for in their poems. Now we are in the age of the machine guns that
shoots seventy bullets in a second and the jet fighter that can destroy
an entire city in few minutes. In fact, we are in the age of the atomic
and nuclear bombs that can destroy a continent in some moments. Are you
ignorant of all this and are you still talking about the sword and the
courage of Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib?”

I said, “This does not refute that or contradict it, and every occasion
has its own context. Do you not see that when Allah talked about
weapons, He included in one word all means of destruction when He said
in brief:

***And prepare against them what force you can and horses tied at the
frontier***. ***Qur'an, 8:60***

Thus, the Qur'an connected what military means the people at the time of
the Prophet (S) had to win battles with what the people of this time
have. So, this statement of Qur’an -

***‘And prepare against them what force you can.’,***

can be understood by everyone according to the language of their time.
The source and meaning of “***force***” is the same to the all, and this
is like the saying of Allah:

***…and We have made the iron, wherein is great violence and advantages
to men…*** ***Qur'an, 57:25***

Therefore, all weapons, whether the simple ones like the sword or spears
or the developed ones like tanks, machine guns, and bombs are defined as
means of “violence”. Similarly, all means of ease and comfort such as
cars, airplanes, ships, televisions, and others are defined as
“advantages to people”. Glory be to Allah Who has created iron and made
it of use for people and taught them what they did not know.

Thus, the Holy Qur'an is in the hands of all kinds of people that every
generation can understand it by the language of its age. And as for your
saying “we cannot look at the Qur'an with a superficial view - that we
judge against a thief by cutting his hand or a criminal by cutting his
head by the sword”, if you try to replace the laws of Allah with manmade
laws whose makers claim that they are more beneficent and merciful to
people than their Creator is to them, then this can never be acceptable.
It is undoubtedly clear disbelief.

And, if by “development” you mean the development of the means of
execution against a criminal or the means of cutting a thief’s hand,
this can be discussed, because these are minor things that the Islamic
Legislation did not concentrate on. Rather it concentrated on abiding to
laws by carrying out the sentences determined by Allah the Almighty
concerning “retribution”. Allah says:

***O you who believe! retaliation is prescribed for you…And there is
life for you in (the law of) retaliation, O men of understanding, that
you may guard yourselves against evil***. ***Qur'an, 2:178-179***

As for cutting the hand of a thief by a sword, a cleaver, or a modern
tool, the legal ruler (judge) or the religious authority can give his
opinion in the matter (by deriving it through the legal proofs).

What is important dear Sir, is that we do not replace the laws of Allah
by the so-called positive laws that were agreed to by the European
systems that have abrogated the death sentence against criminals however
extreme their crimes were.

Allah says:

***And there is life for you in (the law of) retaliation, O men of
understanding…*** ***Qur'an, 2:178-179***

The meaning of the saying of Allah here is that if we abrogate the laws
of Allah and abolish the law of retaliation, our life shall be without
safety and security and the criminals shall corrupt everything. Then,
life shall become like hell with no goodness or peace.

This university professor debated saying, “Evil is not to be treated
with evil. Statistics has proven that some of those who were sentenced
to death for the accusation of a crime were innocent.”

I said, “With my respect to you professor, but by your saying “evil is
not to be treated with evil” you have made yourself more aware than
Allah the Creator of everything and this is not your right. And as for
your saying that some of those, who were sentenced to death, were
innocent, this is another matter. To your knowledge, I say that Islam
does not punish just for suspicion or accusation, but after evidence,
witnesses and confession.”

The debate came to no use, because each one of us clung to what we
believed to be right.[^3]

It would be better thus to end this section with what Imam Ali (a.s.)
has said about the Prophet Muhammad (S) and about Islam. He said:

*He (Allah) has sent him with the shining light, the clear proof, the
right method, and the guiding Book. His family is the best of families
and his tree is the best of trees; its branches are straight with its
fruits hanging loose. His birth was in Mecca and his immigration was in
the Good City where his mention was high and his call reached too far.
He has sent him with a sufficient argument, curative breach and
preventive invitation (that prevented every corruption of the
pre-Islamic age)*.

*He (Allah) has declared through him - the Prophet (S) - the unknown
laws, suppressed through him the irrelevant heresies and explained
through him the decisive judgments. So whoever seeks a religion other
than Islam, his misery becomes certain, his firm hold is broken, his
fall becomes great and his end comes to eternal sadness and severe
torment*…[^4]

This is exactly as what has been declared by the Holy Qur'an:

***And whoever desires a religion other than Islam, it shall not be
accepted from him, and in the hereafter he shall be one of the
losers***. ***Qur'an, 3:85***

I think that after this explanation, no argument or excuse shall remain
for those who flatter their Jewish and Christian friends and say to
them: We and you are on the truth as long as we all believe in one God
Who has sent Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad and if we are different as to
the prophets, we have agreed on the One Who has sent them to us.

Allah says:

***Say: Do you dispute with us about Allah, and He is our Lord and your
Lord, and we shall have our deeds and you shall have your deed and we
are sincere to Him. Nay! do you say that Abraham and Ishmael and Jacob
and the Tribes were Jews or Christians? Say: Are you better knowing or
Allah? And who is more unjust than he who conceals a testimony that he
has from Allah? And Allah is not at all heedless of what you do***.
***Qur'an, 2:139-140***

[^1]: Therefore, the Jews turned out to be racists by not accepting any
as leader except those whose blood was Jewish. Thus, they gathered
together their dispersed lot claiming that they were “the chosen people
of Allah” and any other than them were not human. This was on the basis
of Torah that was lost and ruined after the Babylonian Captivity at the
hands of the Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar who occupied Jerusalem in
the year 586 BC. The Jews, who were not killed, remained captives in
Babylon until the year 457 BC when they could go back to Palestine by
the assistance of Cyrus the great king of Persia. After their returned
to Palestine, a man called Ezra collected and reformed the books of the
Old Testaments, which is the Torah of today. From this, we know that
between the loss of the Torah and its recollection, there were more than
125 years. During this period, most of the memorizers of the Torah had
been killed or died in prison where they were forbidden to practice any
religious activity. Therefore, the Torah had to have human
interventions. So it is now full of fables, contradictions, untruths,
distorted events and unrealities…etc. The same thing happened to
Christianity; the four Bibles were not written down at the time of Jesus
Christ (a.s.). The oldest one, which is “The Gospel of Mark”, was
written down forty years later in Rome. Therefore, it was subject to
distortion like the Torah at the time of Augustine who mixed between
idolatry and the statements of the Bible. The idolatry on which the
idolaters of India, China, and old Egypt agreed on such as, the belief
in Trinity and the ascribing of vices to the prophets (a.s.) and even to
Jesus Christ (a.s.) influenced this. Moreover, they annulled the main
purpose of all religions, which is to guide the human beings, when they
claimed that Jesus Christ (a.s.) had redeemed the criminals and sinners,
so there was no necessity for any guidance after him or to send other
prophets. For more details, refer to “The School Journey” and “The
Guidance to the Religion of al-Mustafa” by Sheikh Muhammad Jawad
al-Balaghi.

[^2]: Using of one’s (usually a mujtahid) effort to form a judgment on
questions concerning the Sharia and religious affairs.

[^3]: The likes of this professor are those who have westernized and
live with the complex of the yielding before the masses of iron and
bricks amassed even if by stealing and assassinating other people or
even entire humankind. The Nazis, for example, since they felt that they
had some arms, adopted the slogan of “the Aryan race”. Under this banner
of racism, they destroyed civilizations and killed tens and millions of
people in two destructive wars within time frame of no more than a
quarter of a century. And the allies were not better than them. They
invaded the different nations as colonists and tore those nations into
pieces in order to be able to rule them and control their treasures and
resources. In this way, they built their false civilization on bloods,
sweat, and efforts of the suppressed peoples. In the same way as the
Nazi model, the American tyranny succeeded in blackmailing different
countries and adopting the illegitimate child “Israel”. It secretly and
openly brought up and assisted it by all means until it became a pit of
the worst criminals and blood-suckers in the world. Whereas, Ali ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.) had come to enliven the humanity inside a man following the
true Mohammedan Islam and saying, “A strong man is weak before me until
I take the right from him, and the weak is strong to me until I take
back the right for him.” He liberated man when he fought against the
enemies of humanity. He said to Malik al-Ashtar when appointing him as
the governor over Egypt, “…and do not be as predatory beast over
them…for people are of two kinds; either your brother in religion or
your equal in creation.” He also said, “Do not be a slave to another
while Allah has created you free.” So man whatever he is - black, poor,
or weak – all walk under the banner of Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) that
carries the high values of liberation and human rights. On the other
hand some people become mean and weak before technology which is
possessed by the traders of wars and the suckers of peoples’ bloods.

[^4]: Nahjul Balaghah, sermon 159.


