The political problems created by civilization
==============================================

When the Messenger of Allah (S) ordered his companions to emigrate, he
said to them, “*Go to Abyssinia, for there is a king near whom no one is
treated unjustly at all*.” He did not give them passports, nor did he
request visas for them from the government of Abyssinia, nor were they
forced to change the currency that was available there.

All these procedures were not known or followed at that time, but the
land of Allah was vast. When a man’s own country became constrained to
him, he rode on his mount and intended the mercy of his Lord. Wherever
he went, he found what he sought with no inspectors to watch his coming
and going. No custom-houses would ask him to pay customs and taxes or
send him back if he had no documents of vaccination or ask him to show
the documents for possession of his mount, in case it might have been
stolen or the dues of the road had not been paid.

Yes civilization, or may we say that managing greater masses of human
beings has required for these procedures. The earth has been divided
into nations, and then into many countries. Every country or all people
who speak the same language made a government and every government took
a special flag, marked its borders in the land and the sea and put
guards at the borders so that no one unwanted could enter their country.

When the number of people increased more and more and one became greedy
for what the other had - they exploited each other and colonized each
other. Revolutions and crimes increased. The developed societies were
obliged to define every citizen. Therefore, newborn children and dead
people were counted. Every person had his/her own birth document,
identity card and passport. The borders were controlled so that no one
from one country would enter another except after getting the permission
of that country and agreeing to abide by the conditions imposed by that
country.

I, like many other young Muslims, when my country became limited to me,
tried to immigrate to another country, but I found that all the doors
were closed before me, especially that of the Arab and Muslim countries.

I was very confused when I recited this saying of Allah:

***Surely (as for) those whom the angels cause to die while they are
unjust to their souls, they shall say: In what state were you? They
shall say: We were weak in the earth. They shall say: Was not Allah's
earth spacious, so that you should have migrated therein? So these it is
whose abode is hell, and it is an evil resort.*** ***Qur'an, 4:97***

I said then to myself that the earth is Allah’s without doubt, but the
servants of Allah have possessed it, divided it among themselves and not
permitted it for others.

If I tried to find an excuse for the non-Muslim countries like France,
England, Germany, or the United States of America, in this context, I
might find one, but what would be the excuse for the Arab and Muslim
countries?

And if I tried to find an excuse for the Arab and Muslim countries that
they had submitted to the international system for the sake of
reciprocating, then what would be the excuse for the rulers of Mecca and
Medina who imposed on Muslims visas for going to perform the hajj and
umrah besides the taxes that must be paid to enter this land?

I also was confused when I recited this saying of Allah:

***Surely (as for) those who disbelieve, and hinder (men) from Allah's
way and from the Sacred Mosque which We have made equally for all men,
(for) the dweller therein and (for) the visitor…*** ***Qur'an, 22:25***

If the inviolable Mosque (the Kaaba) that Allah has made as safe and
sanctuary for all people, the residents and non-residents, now becomes a
property of a certain country that permits some and prevents others from
visiting it, then we must review our Islam, Qur'an, and all concepts!

I remained for a long time confused between different thoughts and
obsessions that at some times I talked with my Lord saying: “O my Lord,
You have said and Your saying is the truth:

***Was not Allah's earth vast, so that you should have migrated
therein?*** ***Qur'an, 4:97***

You have also said:

***And proclaim among people the Pilgrimage: they will come to you on
foot and on every lean camel, coming from every remote path.***
***Qur'an, 22:27***

Yet at present Your vast land has been prevented from entry by people
and Your House has been possessed and its gate has been closed, so what
do we do then?

One day, while I was reading some sermons of Imam Ali (a.s.) in Nahjul
Balaghah when he talked about the Qur'an, one statement attracted my
attention and I reread it many times. I found in it what I sought for a
long time. It was the only answer that solved the riddle and removed my
obsessions.

Imam Ali (a.s.) said in the first sermon when talking about the Book of
Allah, *“…and between a thing that is obligatory at its time and that
shall be null in its future*…” I understood from this speech that such
verses Qur’an, which were possible at the time of the Prophet (S) would
not be possible in the future because of the prevailing of the unjust
and the tyranny of disbelievers.

Thus, if someone shall say to his Lord on the Day of Resurrection: ‘I
was disabled on earth’, Allah the Almighty - Who is aware of all things,
will know that this man is from late people. So Allah will not say to
him: your abode is Hell and it is an evil resort!

And if someone shall say to his Lord on the Day of Punishment: ‘I was
prevented from going to perform the pilgrimage to Your Inviolable
House’, it shall be said to him: ‘I had said to you that if you *can*
afford the journey to it. So your excuse is accepted, and the one who
prevented you from that, is responsible for it.’

May peace be upon you O my Master on the day that you were born, on the
day when you died and on the day when you shall be restored to life.[^1]

[^1]: While the Zionists have occupied Palestine and Jerusalem, most of
the Muslim countries have been occupied by the agents and officials of
the international Freemasonry. One of these countries is Hijaz - I mean
Saudi Arabia. I went from Iraq and Jordan to Saudi Arabia to perform the
hajj. I saw with my eyes how an applicant for hajj was treated in the
medical centers and the passport control departments, until he reached
the airport of Jeddah. I remained there for seven hours until some
people slept there itself and many others spoke loudly. This
inconvenience was besides the bad and rough treatment by the airport
officials and the impolite policemen towards all hajjis. As if they
wanted to say - we are rich and in no need of you. Hasten to the hot
tents and deserts! It would be expected that these places would be
planted with trees and flowers. They would have comfortable buildings
and services for the hajjis. There would be laws and systems to manage
the affairs and ease of the hajjis from their (hajjis) own monies!
However, these monies, in addition to good shares of petrol, go to
increase the welfare of the American people and the Zionists and to
support the French franc!


