Publisher's Word
================

"…ALLAH ONLY DESIRES TO KEEP AWAY FROM YOU UNCLEANNESS, O PEOPLE OF THE
HOUSE,…" Holy Qur'an (33:33)

"And We desired to bestow a favor on those who were deemed weak in the
land, and to make them Imams, and to make them the heirs," Holy Qur'an
(28:5)

All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds, Who sent His
Prophet, Muhammad bin Abdullah al-Mustafa (s.a.w.), as a Mercy to the
Worlds. Praise be to Allah, the Most Generous, Who also gave to mankind,
the Guides, who would continue to keep us on the Straight Path after the
death of the Seal of the Prophets (s.a.w.).

This idea of guidance is called Imamate, and without adherence to it,
one has no hope to gain Divine Satisfaction for any of his prayers or
deeds in this world, and no reward in the hereafter.

Why is Imamate so important that if we do not believe in the Guides and
follow them we cannot hope for life after death? Imam Ali (a.s.) is
referred to in the Holy Qur'an many times. All of these references are
positive, praising, and respectful. How could it be that the final word
of Allah, Almighty, praises this Imam, and yet for centuries he was
cursed on the minbars of the mosques throughout the Muslim empire?

The answer to these questions can be found by any sincere researcher
with an open heart who earnestly wishes to know. As for the Muslims,
they have been misguided to the point that only through Allah's
intervention can they throw off their useless and evil alliances and
affiliations of the past which will only lead them to a place where
repentance will do them no good.

May Allah, for the sake of His Prophets and Imams, bring them out of
the darkness they have fallen into because of treachery, ignorance,
greed, jealousy and pride.

This book, which you now hold in your hands, is such a small and weak
attempt to explain the person of Amir al- Mu'minin Imam Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.) that only volumes of work could begin to do him justice.
And the whole question surrounding this great man is grounded in exactly
that one word "Justice".

A note of importance is the difference in the meanings of Imam and
Caliph. The Imams refer exclusively to Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and
his sons Imam Hasan and Imam Hussein (a.s.) and the nine sons descended
from Imam Hussein (a.s.). They were chosen by Allah, the Almighty and
were not selected by the people.

Whereas the caliphs were elected to their offices in a political role.
Unfortunately, Islam does not divide politics from other parts of life
including religion and since the elected ones were not always qualified
to interpret the religious aspects of their rule, many deviations have
occurred and continue to occur in the Muslim community. With this in
mind, the position of Imam Ali (a.s.) becomes all the more esteemed as
you will find in the reading of this small book.

Islamic history is probably one of the most colorful, intriguing,
mysterious and brilliant records of all. As Muslims, or those who are
interested in Islam, we find that to have a clear understanding of the
fundamentals of the religion we must know its history. For no other
religion is steeped in so many mysterious happenings that brought about
innovations in thc precepts taught by its Prophet (s.a.w.) and at such a
rapid pace.

When studying and researching Islamic history, no name or personality
is more discussed than that of Amir Al-Mu'minin Imam Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.). So much has been said of him, in truth and in falsehood, that we
can become quite confused over this one personality and the implications
of the mark he left on history.

Western writers have admired him and written many word about him.
Eastern writers have revered him. In some places he is erroneously
worshipped. Islamic writers have tried to present a clear picture of him
and the historical facts that surrounded him from his birth to his
death. Much dialogue between the different sects of Islam has taken
place about him. Still we have only been able to touch the "'tip of the
iceberg" when speaking about Imam Ali (a.s.).

At the time of the death of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), Imam Ali's
(a.s.) position became one of controversy and self-imposed isolation. He
was selected by Allah and nominated by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) at a
place called Ghadir Khum to take up the reins of leadership after the
Prophet (s.a.w.). More than 100,000 Muslims witnessed this selection and
nomination and gave their allegiance to him at that time and place.
Still, it was nearly 25 years before he could take his rightful
position. He ruled for less than 5 years before he met martyrdom at the
hands of a paid assassin. At 63 years of age his earthly light was
extinguished and his heavenly light shone once again.

His singular distinction is that he was the Imam and Caliph of the
Muslims. His descendants were Imams, guiding the Muslims in religious
matters, but none were able to truly take the political position of
Caliph during their lifetimes. When it looked as though they might
become such by popular choice, they were brutally assassinated except
for the last of them, Imam Mahdi (a.s.), on whom we await.

In Part Two of the Biography of Imam Ali (a.s.), in the series of
biographies of the Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), we will cover the Imamate and
Caliphate of Amir Al-Mu'minin Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.). His wisdom
was unmatched and not overlooked during the rule of the first three
caliphs as we illustrated in Part One. As caliph, all of the finer
points of his knowledge and ability came to the forefront and his rule
was marked with sternness in the face of the enemy and gentleness in the
face of the oppressed, kindness toward the orphans and poor, generosity
toward the needy, honor toward his responsibility, and love toward his
children. He was all and everything as no ruler after him could
achieve.

We have implored Imam Ali (a.s.) to help us in the task of relating his
story to those who do not know him at all, and to those who deny him
justice. May Allah, the Most Merciful, help us all.

We bear witness that there is no god but Allah, the One, and that
Muhammad bin Abdullah (s.a.w.) is His Prophet and that Imam Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.) is His Vicegerent. We ask Allah, Most Beneficent, to send
our greetings to the Messenger of Allah and Amir al- Mu'minin Imam Ali
bin Abi Talib.

We pray to Allah, Most High, for His assistance in this work. With
Allah comes success.


**PART ONE**

"O Ali, you were the first among the believers to believe, you were the
first among the Muslims to embrace Islam, and you are to me like Aaron
to Moses."\*

Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\*Al-Muhib Al-Tabari, Dhakhair Al-'Oqba, Cairo ed , 1356 A. H , p 58,
quoting Umar bin al- Khattab.

**INTRODUCTION**

"No one has ever suffered from his people as I have."(1)

Imam Ali (a.s.)

No great person of history has endured injustice and selfishness as
much as Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) did during his lifetime and even after
his departure from this world.

His life was full of feats and glory, yet injustice was poured on him
and continued after his death. For a long time after his martyrdom, he
was deprived of the simplest rights, such as having his biography and
unique place in history written fairly and truthfully. For many
generations, after the departure of the Imam, the Islamic ummah (nation)
was subjected to unprecedented deceitfulness, so that it might forget
Imam Ali (a.s.) and his effective role in pioneering the Islamic
movement towards greatness and glory. If they could not forget him, they
were subjected to a distorted and misleading portrait of him.

It suffices to know that for decades the oratory pulpits-then the most
important means of education and disseminating information in the Muslim
world--were used to abusing Imam Ali (a.s.) and his unique part in
history. Such perniciousness was motivated by the enemies of Islam and
to avenge the idolators killed in the Battle of Badr.

Friday Prayer Sermons, for example, during the Umayyads, used to start
with cursing Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) in such words which even
history declined to write on its pages.(2)

This act of heresy effectively defaced the character of Imam Ali
(a.s.). it devised and backed by certain forces and regimes and taken up
by mercenary narrators, traditionists, court historians and the like.

Yet, despite the pervasive attempts to defy truth with fabrications and
falsifications, nobody, whosoever, could prevent the reality from
emerging through the clouds of conspiracy owing to the heroic nature of
Islam. The duration of lies and deceit became short-lived together with
the evil plot that invented then.

Thus, the groups of mercenaries, with their hired pens, who tried to
twist Imam Ali's (a.s.) biography according to their own desires,
interests, and mischievous aims, miscalculated their devious intentions.
They were ignorant of the fact that truth cannot be concealed forever;
that "the foam passes away the scum onto the banks."

Al-Balagh Foundation--with the help of Allah and within the scope of
its undertaking to spread original Islamic thought; and to place the
facts of its history before the Muslim ummah in order to remove the
camouflage of obscurity-- presents in this book a study on the life of
Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and his fundamental role in the
construction of Islam and its glorious past.

The study is in three sections of two volumes. The first is a brief
biography of Amir Al-Mu'minin (the Commander of the Faithful) (a.s.)
during the life of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) and during the era of
the first three caliphs.

The second part of the study concerns itself with the period during
which Imam Ali (a.s.) undertook the leadership of the Muslims. We have
tried to cover his heroic and noble attitudes in the fields of politics,
administration, economics, society and issues of war and peace. The
third part, published in volume two, outlines the prominent features of
the personality of Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.), covering his closeness to
Allah, and to the people around him, and his ideological, informative
and intellectual offerings to the Islamic ummah and, in fact, the whole
of mankind.

We ask Allah's direction, support, guidance and help in order to devote
all our energies and true possibilities of belief to the arena of the
current ideological conflict between Islamic ummah and its bitter
enemies, until the great Islamic religion prevails. He is the Hearer,
the Responder.


Al-Balagh Foundation


**The Rising Of The Dawn**

On Friday, the 13th of the blessed month of Rajab, 12 years before the
ordainment of Muhammad (s.a.w ) as Allah's Messenger, Fatimah bint Asad
felt that she was about to give birth to her child. She came to the
Sacred Ka'bah and began to circumambulate praying as she walked, "O
Allah! I believe in You and in the messengers and the scriptures You
have sent. I believe in what has been said by my grandfather, Abraham
(a.s.) who built the Ancient House (the Ka'bah). So, for the sake of the
builder of this House, and for the sake of the child in my womb, I
implore You to make my labor easy "(3)

Fatimah bint Asad leaned against the wall of the Ka'bah to rest.
Miraculously, the wall opened. Fatimah bin Asad entered and the wall
closed behind her. 'Abbas bin 'Abd al-Muttalib, the Prophet's (s.a.w.)
uncle witnessed this miracle. He and his companions rushed to the gate
of the Sacred House, which was locked, and tried in vain to open it.
Understanding that the Divine was at work there, he and his companions
ceased to interfere. The news of this incident soon spread throughout
Mecca.

Imam Ali (a.s.) was born within the Ka'bah with his eyes closed and his
body in humble prostration before the Almighty Allah. Fatimah stayed in
the Ka'bah for three days and as the fourth day approached, she stepped
out, carrying her baby in her arms. She found the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
waiting to receive the newly-born child in his anxious arms. Then the
Holy Prophet recited the Adhan and Eqamah in the ears of the baby.

Imam Ali's (a.s.) birth inside the honored Ka'bah is unique in the
history of the world. Neither a prophet nor a saint was ever blessed
with such an honor.(4) It is an undisputed historical fact recognised by
all historians that the Holy Ka'bah is the birthplace of Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.). Glad tidings were brought to Abu Talib and his household.
Upon their arrival at the Sacred House they saw Muhammad al-Mustafa
(s.a.w.) there with the child in his arms.(5) He carried the baby Ali to
the house of Abu Talib, where he, himself was brought up.

A great banquet was prepared, slaughtering many animals, in honor of
the blessed new-born child.(6)

The party was attended by a crowd of people. They offered their
congratulations, spent hours of merriment expressing their high feelings
towards their chieftain, the sheikh of Al-Abtah, and towards his blessed
child.

Days passed quickly as the blessed child grew up in the arms of his
parents and his cousin, Muhammad (s.a.w.), who used to frequent his
uncle's house, where he had formerly tasted the warmth of affection, and
drank from the fountains of sincerity and loyalty during the years of
his childhood and youth.

Muhammad (s.a.w.) continued to frequent his uncle's house, although he
was now a married man, living with his wife, Khadijah, in their own
house. He cherished Ali and surrounded him with affection and care,
speaking to him tenderly, rocking his cradle or carrying him in his
arms.


**THE PATRONAGE OF THE MESSENGER OF' ALLAH**

Six years passed after Ali's birth. The Quraish (Muhammad's tribe)
suffered from an acute economic crisis which had a heavy effect on Abu
Talib, who had to support a large family, as well as a host of poor
people who used to come to him as a prominent figure in the community at
Mecca. Could the "Chosen One" (s.a.w.) and Bani Hashim (his family)
accept such a hard situation for their leader?

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) went to his uncle, Al-Abbas bin
Abdul-Muttalib, the wealthiest of the Bani Hashim, and said, "O uncle!
your brother, Abu Talib, sustains a large family, and the people are
badly afflicted by the situation. So, let us go to him to lighten his
hammad though he to be sustained by us."(7)

The proposal from Al-Mustafa (the Chosen One) (s.a.w.) was gladly
accepted by his uncle, Al-Abbas, and they both hurried to Abu Talib and
talked him into accepting the suggestion.

Abu Talib said, "If you let me have Aqil and Talib, I will let you do
as you see fit..."(8)

Al-Abbas took Ja'far, and Muhammad (s.a.w.) took Ali (a.s.), then six
years old.(9)

Having chosen Ali (a.s.), the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said: "I have
chosen whom Allah had chosen for me above you - Ali." (10) Thus, Ali
(a.s.), from his early childhood, lived under the patronage of Muhammad
(s.a.w.), grew up under his care and drank from the fountains of his
affection and tenderness. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) brought him up
as his Lord had taught him. He never separated from him until he joined
the Almighty .


**A PRODUCT OF THE PROPHETIC RAISING**

Imam Ali (a.s.) referred to the vast dimensions of the education he
received at the hands of his guide, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) in
one of his speeches known by the title " Al-Qasi'ah" (censure):

"...you know what my relations with the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) were.
From the very beginning of my life, he loved me and I loved him. He took
me in his lap when I was a baby and thence I was always with him. He
often kept me embraced to his heart. He used to lay me next to him. We
used to be so close to each other that I felt the warmth of his body and
smelled the fragrance of his odor. When I was a baby, he fed me with his
hands, often chewing hard bits for me. He never found me lying nor weak
and wavering. From the time of his (the Prophet (s.a.w.)) infancy, Allah
had appointed the greatest of His angels to always be with him, and His
Arch Angel was leading him towards exemplary qualities and high moral
values, and I followed him (s.a.w.) step by step as a baby camel follows
its mother.

Daily he used to place before me a fresh standard of efficiency and
used to order me . to follow it. Every year he used to stay in a grotto
of the Hara' for some time, and nobody used to be with him but I. None
could then see or hear him but I. During those days Islam was the
religion of only the Prophet and his wife, Khadijah. I was the third of
the trio. Nobody else in this world had accepted Islam. Even then I used
to see the divine light of revelation and prophethood and smell the
heavenly fragrance of prophethood."(11)

In his own words, this text reveals how Imam Ali (a.s.), during his
childhood, was treated by the Messenger (s.a.w.) with care, tenderness
and self-denial. The Prophet went to the extent of chewing morsels of
food and putting them in Ali's mouth, holding him in his arms and
treating him as though he were his own beloved son.

During his boyhood and youth, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) exerted
his efforts to form Ali's personality. He used to instruct him to do as
he did, to follow his wake. Every day the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
would demonstrate a new example of high morality for Ali to follow, step
by step, as is described in his speech.

Therefore, it is a mistake not to believe that Ali (a.s.) was initially
and purposely chosen to come as an illustration of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) in his thought, attitudes and diverse aspects of his
conduct, even in his way of walking.(12)

Imam Ali (a.s.) was so pure in spirit and straightforward in morality,
according to the education he received from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.), that many shadows of the hidden future were lighted before
him. He says: "...When the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) received the first
revelation, Satan lamented so loudly that I asked the Holy Prophet: Who
is lamenting and why? He replied, 'It is Satan who has given up hopes of
acquiring complete sway over human minds. In his disappointment, he is
lamenting over the chance lost. Verily Ali, you also hear whatever I
hear, and you see whatever I see, only you are not a prophet. But you
are my wazir (minister), successor and helper, and you will always hold
the truth and justice."(13)

The path which he walked, in the proximity of Allah, the Exalted, to
obey His commands and to enact His Messenger's practice, qualified him
to be a minister to prophethood--the post that is entrusted only to
those who already covered a long distance towards the peak of virtue and
the fear of God. It was only the prophethood's calling that separated
him from the Prophet (s.a.w.). So he deserved and rightly ascended to
the ministerial platform. Thus was Imam Ali (a.s.)!

**UNDER THE SHADE OF REVELATION**

Although Imam Ali (a.s.) lived in the custody of his father and
brothers for six tender years, with a prominent role played by the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) in attendance, it became a complete task of
rearing him and educating him when the responsibility fell to the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) from his sixth year. As already mentioned, it was then
that he moved to the Prophet's house because of the financial crisis
which befell his father, Abu Talib.

Since that early age, Imam Ali (a.s.) lived with the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.). It was there that he spent his teens and adolesence during
which he was a close observer of all the developments that happened in
the life of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).

So, Imam Ali's (a.s.) education was not an ordinary one, nor one which
a normal child receives from his father, or elder brothers. The training
and instruction he received was very special and it suffices to know
that he followed Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) like his shadow, even during
periods of exclusive privacy inside the Hara' grotto where the mental
and spiritual developments were witnessed through which Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.) was passing.

Imam Ali (a.s.), remembering those momentus days, during a decisive
period of his life, recalls "...Every year he used to stay in a grotto
of Hira' Mountain for some time, and nobody would be with him but
I..."(14) Yes, it was only Imam Ali (a.s.) who witnessed the tremendous
spiritual change which had been ripening in the soul of Al-Mustafa
(s.a.w.), until the blessed Divine revelation shined forward upon him.

Owing to the far-reaching extent of the spiritual and moral level to
which his soul had attained, Imam Ali (a.s.) deeply felt the revolution
that had taken place in the unseen world, where Satan had been defeated,
after losing hope of being worshipped by hearing the final message
revealed to the Seal of the Prophets (s.a.w.). He had seen the
preliminary signs of prophethood personified in no one less than his
tutor and guide, when the light of deliverance shone, and the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.) received the first Divine Communique entrusting him
with his mission for mankind:

"Read: In the name of your Lord Who created. Created man from a clot.
Read: And your Lord is the Most Bounteous, Who teaches by the pen,
teaches man that which he knew not."


