The First Believer
==================

Having received the first Divine Communique concerning carrying the
Message, Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) returned home and informed Imam Ali
(a.s.) about it.(15) Imam Ali (a.s.) received him with complete
certainty and belief, and so did Khadijah, his great and supportive
wife. Thus, sprang the first nucleus of the society of believers on the
earth.

It is particularly poignant, that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) never
invited Imam Ali (a.s.) to Islam as he did others later on, because he
was already a Muslim by God-granted nature. He was never polluted with
the permissiveness of the Ignorant Era, and was never involved in any of
its debased practices. As it is related: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
informed Imam Ali (a.s.) of his Message and Call and he immediately
believed in the truthfulness of the Final Message, and offered to
receive and carry out the Messenger's orders. That was why he was given
the attribute of: 'Karramallahu wajhah'. May Allah grant him honor. This
is amazing in the light of the fact that Imam Ali (a.s.) was still a
mere boy of ten at the time!

Imam Ali (a.s.) had been prepared, as we said, to follow the Messenger,
since the Prophet (s.a.w.) himself had built his personality and
character and fixed its foundations on high moral and virtues.

Nothing new is added by saying that Imam Ali (a.s.) was not taken by
surprise at hearing about the Blessed Message, because, as we know, he
lived under the patronage and trust of the Al-Mustafa (s.a.w.) who would
worship his Lord, the Exalted, and was far removed from the misconcepts,
misconducts and irrational behavior which prevailed during the
pre-Islamic era, prior to the revelation of the first Sura (chapter) of
the Qur'an...(16)

Imam Ali (a.s.) knew about the Messenger of Allah's (s.a.w.) worship
and practices, as well as his ascendent mental and spiritual changes. He
used to worship with him, follow him and do as he did, even at a tender
age.

No sooner had the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) told him about the Divine
call than he responded to it with all his heart and body and without
being surprised. The only new departure was the practical way of
applying the Message and the degree of responsibility to be shouldered,
as the details of the Divine religion were revealed.

On entrusting the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) with the Divine task of
carrying out his blessed call, he was told to begin with his household.
Ibn Hisham, in his 'Sirah' says: "...Then the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) began relating about Allah's bounty- -the Prophethood and
secretly communicating it to those of his household whom he trusted
most..." (17)

Thus, he talked to Imam Ali (a.s.) and Khadijah about his Message and
later on to Zaid bin Harithah. No one except these, and some others of
his close household, knew about it.

Imam Ali bin Hussein (a.s.), in a speech about the Islam of his father,
Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), said: "....and he believed in Allah, the
Exalted, and in His Messenger. He preceded the others in Islam and in
reciting prayers by a three year interval."(18)

On his early acceptance, Imam Ali (a.s.) himself said:

"...I was the third of the trio (The Prophet, Khadijah and himself).
Nobody else in this world had accepted Islam. I would even see the
divine light of revelation and message and smell the heavenly fragrance
of prophethood..." Having passed the stage of calling his close
household, the Message came to the stage of calling potential
individuals whom the Prophet (s.a.w.) believed would be responsive to
his call. So, a number of people embraced Islam. They were mostly the
youth of Mecca, the deprived and oppressed. They met to recite the
Glorious Qur'an and to obtain information about the preachings of the
religion of Allah, the Exalted. At that time, it was an underground
movement.

**THE FIRST AMONG THE CALLERS TO ISLAM**

He, Allah, the Exalted, told His Messenger to invite other members of
his tribe, Bani Hashim, so as to widen the circle of the Message: "And
warn your tribe of near kindred. And lower your wing (in kindness) unto
those believers who follow you. And if they disobey you, say: Lo! I am
innocent of what you do." Holy Qur'an (26:214.216)

On receiving, from his Exalted Lord, the command to warn his nearest
kin, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) ordered Imam Ali (a.s.) to invite
them to a banquet. They came to the Prophet's house, forty in number.
After dinner, the Messenger told them:

"O Bani Abd Al-Muttalib! Allah has sent me to all creation, and to you
in particular. He said. 'And warn your tribe of near kindred'. So, I ask
you to say two phrases, light on the tongue, heavy in the scales, by
which you will master the Arabs and the Ajams (non-Arabs), the nations
will follow you and by them you will enter Paradise, and will be saved
from Hell: to bear witness that there is no god save Allah, and that I
am the Messenger of Allah. Whoever responds to this and supports me to
carry it out will be my brother, vicegerent, helper, inheritor and
successor..."(19)

While Abu Lahab criticised and warned the Messenger (s.a.w.) against
carrying on his mission, on the other hand, Abu Talib offered his
support and said to the Messenger (s.a.w.): "GO ahead with Your errand!
By God I will never stop protecting and defending you."(20) At this
time, Ali bin Abi Talib, the youngest of them all, stood up and said, "O
Messenger of Allah! I will back you up in this matter." The Messenger
(s.a.w.) told him to sit down. But seeing nobody else responded, he
stood once again and offered his readiness to serve him, but the
Messenger (s.a.w.) told him again to sit down.

The Messenger repeated his words. Still nobody responded, except Imam
Ali (a.s.) whose voice was raised once again in answer to the call,
announcing his full support to the cause. It was his firm commitment and
strong faith that broke their silence. Since, for the third time there
was no response except from Imam Ali (a.s.), the Messenger (s.a.w.)
turned to him and said: "Sit down. You are my brother, vicegerent,
minister, inheritor, and successor after me."(21)

The group stood up to leave and somewhat sarcastically addressed Abu
Talib, saying: "Congratulations on accepting the religion of your nephew
who made your son commander over you!"(22)

**CONFRONTING DISBELIEVERS**

After tribal members refused the invitation, the Divine Mission entered
a delicate stage of confrontation. The first ones to lead the conflict
were Abu Lahab and his wife, who started encountering the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) and planting difficulties in his way, in an attempt to
force him to change his mind and give up his blessed task. But the call
of Allah, the Exalted, advanced, clearing its way through society in the
Age of Ignorance. The invitation to embrace Islam moved from privacy to
generality. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) stood in the Sacred House
(Ka'bah in Mecca) and loudly proclaimed to the people that he was
Allah's Messenger sent to them...(23)

The success of extending the invitation was to increase the number of
believers, many of which were young and came from all walks of the
Meccan society. The growth in numbers had a great impact on the attitude
of the disbelievers, who resorted to terrorist tactics.

Each tribe, as well as every family, began a compaign to outcast
believers from among their members, torturing them and trying to
suppress their faith.(24) But those who were resolute and had a strong
belief in the message of Truth and Guidance, pronounced by the voice of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), were resilient inside their souls and
thirsty to do good and be emancipated.

The brutality of physical torture to which the believers were subject
became such that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) ordered them to migrate
to Habashah (Ethiopia), under the leadership of Ja'far bin Abi Talib,
who was 10 years older than his brother, Imam Ali (a.s.). Ja'far's
sagacity was effective in foiling the plans of Quraish who tried to
instigate the King of Habashah to move against the emigrants and expel
them from his country.(25)


**ABU TALIB'S CONFRONTING

THE ENEMIES OF THE MESSAGE**

Although the Quraish confronted the forerunners of believers with
violence and oppression, they were unable to harm the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.), as the leader of the movement and the carrier of the Message.
They knew that Abu Talib, the Sheikh of Abtah, would not let them commit
any sort of terror against the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) himself.

Abu Talib commanded very much respect and influence, not only among the
Bani Hashim, but from all other Meccan tribes. He was a stalwart for the
mission and stood like a high wall in the face of its enemies from the
rise of its glowing dawn. The Quraish knew this very well and therefore
adapted methods of discussions, bargaining and inducing: negotiating
with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), himself, about his mission and
guidance, or with Abu Talib for him to give up his support. They offered
wealth and power to Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) to abdicate his divine
mission and at the same time, tried to talk Abu Talib over, asking him
to use his influence with the Prophet to persuade him to give up his
task. They even threatened him and warned him of severe conflict between
him and the Quraish if he did not stop supporting Muhammad (s.a.w.).

But Abu Talib persisted in staying on the Messenger's side and in
defending him, notwithstanding what great sacrifices might lie ahead of
him.

**ABU TALIB, WITH THE MESSENGER OF ALLAH, IN THE BLOCKADE**

When all efforts failed and the Quraish despaired of getting Muhammad
(s.a.w.) to forsake his mission, their leaders held an urgent meeting in
"Dar Al-Nadwah" , the house of Qusay bin Kilab, where they would meet to
consult about decisive events in their lives. The final result was to
boycott the Bani Hashim and whoever chose to identify themselves with
them. They decided to isolate them through an economic and social
blockade, which meant that no one should deal with the Bani Hashim and
their followers in matters of buying and selling and in marriage. This
agreement bore the signatures of forty of the Quraish's chiefs.

To protect themselves against the assaults of the Quraish, the Bani
Hashim, on a command from their head, Abu Talib, entered the "shi'b" of
Abi Talib (a mountain pass). They were thus no longer able to enter
Mecca, except in the two seasons of pilgrimage: Umrah and Hajj, during
the months of Rajab and Dhulhijjah respectively. As the situation
aggravated between the Bani Hashim and Quraish, Abu Talib strengthened
the guard on the Shi'b, lest the Quraish might carry out a surprise
offensive.

The Bani Hashim, including the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) and Imam Ali
bin Abi Talib (a.s.), endured this situation for three years--some say:
four years--suffering a hard life of poverty and deprivation such as to
bring grief and bleeding to the heart. The extent of this test was added
to by the Quraish intensifying their siege to the limits, of either
cutting off all provision, or doubling prices so that friends of Bani
Hashim might not be able to purchase them. Thus, the Bani Hashim
suffered a real famine, and it is recorded that their children's cries
of hunger could be heard from a far distance.

After the elapse of these three heavy and painful years, the Messenger
(s.a.w.) told his uncle, Abu Talib, that the Quraish's boycott pact,
with its injustices, had been eaten up, except the phrase "In Your Name,
O God!" Abu Talib hurried to the Quraish and said: "My nephew has told
me that your paper has been eaten up by moths, except the name of Allah.
So, if he is right, you are to spare him the evil of your decision, but
if he is wrong, I will hand him over to you..."

"You are fair enough," they agreed. The paper was brought and opened.
It was eaten up as he had said. A decisive dispute followed. Then the
paper was torn to pieces, the boycott cancelled and the siege
lifted.(26) This miraculous defeat of the boycott had its great effect
in gaining more and more supporters and sympathizers to the Message in
Mecca.

Such were the sacrifices of the family of Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.)
in the way of Allah. While Imam Ali (a.s.) was the first to answer the
call to Truth and remained foremost a fighter in the Islamic front all
his life, his father sacrificed even his social prestige amongst the
Quraish and tasted bitter calamities to uphold the Message of Allah, the
Most High. He was, in fact, the protecting shield for the Messenger
(s.a.w.) and his mission, despite the fact of holding such a social
position in that tribal society that all men dreamed of.

Ja'far bin Abi Talib, Imam Ali's (a.s.) brother, inaugurated his life
in Islam by leading the procession of the first emigration of Muslims to
Habashah. Then it was crowned by his martyrdom in the Battle of Mu'tah,
when he became known as "the Flying Ja'far", the one who flies with the
angels in Paradise, as the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) had
proclaimed.(27)

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) loved him very much. When Ja'far
returned to Madinah from Habashah--which coincided with the day of
liberating Khaibar--the Messenger (s.a.w.) hugged him and kissed his
forehead, saying "...I do not know with which I should be more pleased:
with Ja'far's return or the conquest of Khaibar!"(28)

**TO DAR AL-SALAM**

The death of Abu Talib was a calamity for Islam. The severe conflict
between the blessed Divine Call and ignorance and disbelief was
continuing and the painful event grieved the Prophet (s.a.w.). He knew
that Quraish would accelerate its campaign against his Mission, and
against his person in particular.

The Quraish, which used to fear Abu Talib in his prestigious social
capacity, now had less obstacles to interfere with their desires after
his death. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) had lost his strong and
persistent support. In the same year he also received another severe
blow with the death of his loyal wife, Khadijah. He thus called that
year "The Year of Sorrows."

Abu Talib's death was so important to the progress of the historical
Divine Call that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said: "The Quraish kept
away from me until Abu Talib died."(29)

The Quraish duly did increase their attacks on the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) and the early believers. So, the Messenger (s.a.w.) looked to
somewhere other than Mecca, in which they might settle, and where the
tree of Guidance might grow. He started his search contacting tribes and
informing the people dwelling around Mecca about his cause. He visited
Ta'if and spoke with the heads of the tribes there but none of their
socially distinguished chiefs responded to him. Nevertheless, he did not
let despair creep into his heart. He continued offering his message to
the people outside Mecca.

On the occasion of hajj he met a number of people of "Yathrib"
(Madinah). He talked to them about his mission and they accepted Allah's
invitation. They returned home carrying with them the Word of Allah to
their people.

Twelve men of Yathrib came and swore allegiance to the Messenger
(s.a.w.). They undertook to carry the Message. The Messenger (s.a.w.)
sent Mas'ab bin Umair with them to teach them the laws of the religion
of Allah, to educate them of His Message, and to teach them the Glorious
Qur'an. He stayed with them for a year. A considerable number accepted
the blessed Call and embraced Islam. During the next hajj, a large
delegation of them came to Mecca, led by Mas'ab bin Umair. They joined
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), and swore to assist him if he emigrated
to their town.

Allah's command came enjoining the Muslims to emigrate. So, the
processions of the Muslims emigrants started to move towards their new
residence, leaving behind their wealth, property and relatives.

While Islam was entering a new stage in its steady advance, the heads
of the Quraish gathered in their "Dar Al-Nadwah" to consult about the
Messenger (s.a.w.). They decided to collectively assassinate him. Each
tribe would send one of its men to carry out the assassination at night,
thus laying the blame of the proposed murder on no one tribe.

Arch Angel Gabriel (a.s.), however, disclosed to the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) the intent of the plot the Quraish had planned: "And when those
who disbelieve plot against you (O Muhammad) to wound you fatally, or to
kill you, or to drive you forth; they plot, but Allah (also) plots, and
Allah is the best of plotters."

Holy Qur'an (8:30)

**DECOY FOR THE MESSENGER**

Gabriel (a.s.) told the Messenger (s.a.w.) that Allah en joined that he
should also emigrate to Madinah. When darkness spread, the conspirators
hurried to besiege the house of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) so as to
prevent his escape. Here came another role for Imam Ali (a.s.).

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) told Imam Ali (a.s.) about all that was
transpiring. He asked him to sleep in his bed and cover himself with the
Prophet's (s.a.w.) garment. Imam Ali (a.s.) asked if by doing so the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) would be safe. The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) confirmed that he would. Imam Ali (a.s.) without further
comment agreed to act as a decoy.

Then the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) left the house, and, passing
through the besiegers, he recited: "And We have set a bar before them
and a bar behind them, and (thus) have covered them so that they see
not." Holy Qur'an (36:9)

Indeed, none of the disbelievers saw him. At daybreak the conspirators
broke into the house of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) to commit their
crime. When they entered the Holy Prophet's chamber, Imam Ali (a.s.)
jumped out of the bed, shouting at them: "What do you want?" "Where is
Muhammad?" they asked.

"Did you appoint me to watch him?" he replied. "Didn't you say you
would expel him from your town? Now he has left you..."(30)

Their plot was foiled and (hey left the house in failure. It occurred
to them to search for the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), and track him
through the mountains and valleys. For this purpose they took Abu Karz
with them. Abu Karz was an expert tracker and he managed to trace the
Messenger's tracks up to a grotto at Mount Thowr. He told them that
Muhammad (s.a.w.) had ended there, and, if he was not there, he must
have flown away, or dived into the earth.(31)

Allah, the Exalted, had sent a spider which immediately spread its web
over the entrance of the grotto. The conspirators did not think that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) could be behind flimsy threads it had woven.
Thus, they were misled. Then, under the protection of the dark night,
Imam Ali (a.s.) and Hind bin Abu Halah, hurried to the grotto to see the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).(32)

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) discussed with Imam Ali (a.s.) what he
should do during his emigration to Madinah. He told Imam Ali (a.s.) to
stay behind in Mecca to hand the deposits of the people back to them,
and then to join him in Madinah, bringing with him Fatimah al-Zahra'
(a.s.) and the rest of the women of his household.

**WAITING IN QUBA**

After a few days walk, the convoy arrived at "Quba" where the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.) called on Kulthum bin Hadm, one of the heads of Bani
Amru bin Awf.(33) There he built the "Mosque of Quba," while waiting for
Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.).(34) He dictated a letter asking Imam Ali
(a.s.) to join him. The letter was carried by Abu Waqid al-Laithi.

Imam Ali (a.s.) had already carried out what the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) had told him to do before his emigration. He had returned the
deposits which had been entrusted to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.). He
had the howdahs ready to carry the women, Fatimah bint Muhammad (a.s.),
Fatimah bint Asad, Fatimah bint Hamzah and Fatimah bint Zubair. Thus the
caravan was called the "Caravan of the Four Fatimahs."

Then he ordered some of the believers to leave the town at night, while
he, the women and Abu Waqid al-Laithi, travelled boldly during the
daytime.(35)

Within a few days the convoy arrived in Quba. The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) received them. He embraced Imam Ali (a.s.) and wept for the
pains and the hardships they had to suffer. Imam Ali (a.s.) had walked
over the hot sands of the desert to reach the Holy Prophet. His feet
were swollen and bloodied...then the Holy Prophet prayed for him. This
produced instaneous relief.(36)

On Friday, 16th of Rabi'i, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) left Quba for
Madinah. Quba lies two miles (approx. 3.2 kms) south of Madinah. The
Holy Prophet's (s.a.w.) caravan was enthusiastically received by the
people in many districts through which they passed. The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) arrived at a place where his mosque was afterwards
built.

There, the Messenger's (s.a.w.) mount halted. The Messenger (s.a.w.)
dismounted, and went with Abu Ayub Ansari (may Allah be pleased with
him) as his guest. Later, he called for a mosque to be built on the spot
where his camel had halted, together with rooms for his household. His
room was built next to A'ishah's. (37)


