Tasks After Emigration
======================

Madinah entered a new era of its history with the arrival of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.). There he erected the pillars of the realm
of the Qur'an, and fortified it so as to be a lighthouse radiating the
beacon of Truth to all horizons, and dispersing the dense darkness of
the Age of Ignorance (Jahiliyah).

After the higrah (emigration), the Mission transformed into a state
providing much means of protection and might. This did not imply that an
end had come to the enemy's menace and plots to extinguish the light of
Islam however. On the contrary, the forces of ignorance, with their
diverse aspects, resolved to wage war against Islam and its state. Many
tribes entered the arena against Islam and the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.), as they realized that their very existence was endangered by
this religion and code of life. Now that Islam had organized into a
state, with a governing head and an army for defense, it was catering to
its needs and carrying out its objectives. it was more a threat the ever
to the idol worshippers' dominance over the lands of Arabia.

Therefore, the post emigration period placed before the Muslims wider
and more important tasks such as strengthening the state and guarding
it, building a society and consolidating it, repelling the enemy,
spreading the message of Islam and its unique way of life.

The nature of the struggle changed from being a struggle among
individuals and tribes, or the nobility and unarmed commoners who
possessed nothing but their religion and faith in Allah, to an organized
military conflict between forces brought together by common interests
and desires, even if temporarily on the one side, and the great blossom
of Islam as the danger which would destroy their very existence on the
other This military conflict exploded in an unprecedented way in
history.

It suffices to know that the state, built on the Qur'an, witnessed,
within the ten years that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) spent in
Madinah, dozens of military operations, defensive and offensive wars, in
which the Muslims made numerous sacrifices and faced all kinds of
difficulties. But, at last, the existence of Arab Ignorance was
overcome, and the state of Islam prevailed over the whole Arab
Peninsula.

Going over the history of those crucial early years of the Final
Message, we realize that the role of Imam Ali bin Abi) was unsurpassed.
In all the wars Islam fought against Talib (a.s., its enemies, Imam Ali
(a.s.) was always the victor, not merely through taking part in the
excursions in person, but by his sacrifices and bravery which surpassed
all others. His combat skills and feats of daring were so well known
that many of the enemy would not face him, knowingly, on the
battlefield.

It is worthwhile to refer to some of the battles fought by the Islamic
forces in those days and Imam Ali's (a.s.) specific role in each of
them.

**1. THE BATTLE OF BADR:**

Badr lies 200 miles from Mecca and 80 miles from Madinah. It was the
site of the first battle fought by the forces of the Islamic state. The
Muslims were outnumbered by 3:1 by an army of Meccans led by Abu Jahl.
In the winter of 2 A.H. (after higrah) his army was proceeding toward
Madinah when the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) sent out his forces of 313
to prevent bloodshed inside the city limits.

The provisions of the Muslims was scanty. Three or four men had to
share one camel, taking turns riding. The standard bearer of this small
courageous band was Imam Ali (a.s.).(38) There was a single horseman--
Miqdad bin Aswad Kindi. Some of the Muslims were armed only with sticks
made from palm trees.

Warfare in those days was quite different than what we know today.
Before the general battle began, a number of duels were fought between
the leading warriors Of each side. When the Muslims reached the fertile
vale of Badr, a favorite watering place and camping ground on the
caravan route, three stations northwards from Mecca, the Prophet ordered
a halt, taking suitable positions near a stream of fresh water, to await
the arrival of the infidel army On the next day, Friday, the 17th of
Ramadhan, the enemy blowing their trupets, approached the Muslims.(39)

Three of the infidel warriors, Utbah, the father-in-law of Abu Sufyan,
his brother, Shaibah, and Al-Walid came out of the ranks and arrogantly
challenged the Muslims. Three Ansars of Madinah immediately stepped out
to accept the challenge. The Meccans were outraged and refused to fight
the Ansars saying: "We have not come all this way to cross arms with the
Madinites, against whom we bear no grudge. We challenge the people of
Mecca who have the courage to defy us."

Upon hearing this Imam Ali (a.s.) and Ubaidah, both cousins of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), and Hamzah, his uncle, responded to the
challenge. Sir Thomas Bodley (1545-1613), the English diplomat and
founder of the Bodleian Library, says: "At the taunt of the Quraishites,
Ali dashed out of the Muslim ranks glittering in breastplate and helmet.
He was soon followed by Ubaidah bin al-Harith, a paternal cousin of
Muhammad, and Hamzah who wore an ostrich feather in his cuirass. The
three companions were thus closely related to Muhammad and fulfilled the
Quraish demand for Hashimite blood!"

Col. Bodley continues, "The three duels were as rapid as they were
murderous. Hamzah killed Shaibah, while Ali killed Al-Walid. Ubaidah was
mortally wounded, but before he fell, Ali and Hamzah were able to come
to his rescue. Hamzah hurled himself at Utbah, and with a sweep of his
sword cut off his head. In a few minutes three of Mecca's most important
warriors had been sent to find out the truth about the hell which
Muhammad had promised them!"

"Three more Meccans ventured forward from Abu Jahl's army to challenge
Imam Ali (a.s.) and Hamzah. They too went down before the sword of
Islam. A further three were dealt the same fate. In a moment of
hesitation, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) sent his soldiers charging
into a general attack."(40)

The Muslims invoked Allah to help them and give them victory over their
enemy. Allah, the Exalted, responded by supplying them with angels:
"When you sought aid from your Lord, so He answered you: I will assist
you with a thousand of the angels following one another." Holy Qur'an
(8:9)

The line of Quraish wavered and a number of their bravest and noblest
fell; they took to flight ignominiously. in their haste to escape they
threw away their armour and abandoned their transport animals with all
their camp and equipment. The battle ended with the death of seventy of
the unbelievers, almost half of them killed by Imam Ali (a.s.)
alone.(41)

**2. THE BATTLE OF UHUD:**

Thirteen months later, the Messenger Of Allah (s.a.w.), had given the
standard of the Muhajirin (the emigrants) to Imam Ali (a.s.) once again.
This time at Uhud. It was the 7th of Shawwal in the year 3 A.H. Again
the soldiers of Islam faced the treacherous Quraish of Mecca.

The Quraish, led by Abu Sufyan, advanced in the form of a crescent and
the right wing of their cavalry was led by Khalid bin Walid, a notorious
warrior. Abu Amru, a Meccan champion, stepping forward with his fifty
archers, showered arrows towards the Muslims who retaliated promptly.
Thus the fight began. The Meccan archers withdrew and their standard
bearer, Talha bin Abi Talha, coming forth, challenged the Muslims. Imam
Ali (a.s.) stepped forward and struck off one of his legs. He fell and
another champion hoisted the standard. He was killed by Hamzah. A third
now took the standard and was slain by Imam Ali (a.s.) Thus nine or ten
standard bearers fell, one after the other, by Imam Ali's (a.s.) sword
alone.

It is narrated by many authorities that when Imam Ali (a.s.) struck off
the leg Talha, as he fell to the ground his lower garment became
loosened and fell off. Instead of finishing him off, Imam Ali (a.s.)
turned away from him and the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) questioned him
about his behavior he said that the man was nude and entreated for the
sake of Allah to spare his life.(42)

Imam Ali (a.s.) and Hamzah, the champions of Badr, unsparingly dealing
out death, worked havoc among the enemy. Hamza, however, while duelling
with Saba bin Abd-al-Uzzah, a Meccan champion, was treacherously speared
from behind by Wahshi, an Ethiopian slave, who lurked behind a rock for
this very purpose, having been promised his freedom by Hind, the wife of
Abu Sufyan. She was present at the battle and looking for revenge for
the death of her father and brother slain by Imam Ali and Hamzah in the
battle of Badr.

Imam Ali (a.s.) and two other Muslim champions charged the enemy. The
force of the charge broke the enemy's ranks, they wavered and Imam Ali
(a.s.) and his aides gained the enemy camp. The Meccans turned and fled,
leaving their camp to the Muslims who at once proceeded to appropriate
it.

It appeared victory was on the Muslims' side. But the warriors whom the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) had ordered to cover them from the back at
Mount Uhud, seeing defeat of the disbelievers and urged by their greed,
left their posts to get their portion of the booty. This gave a golden
opportunity to Khalid bin Walid, to mount an attack on the Muslims'
rear. The situation turned against the Muslims and in favor of the
disbelievers. The Muslims lost many of their best. The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) himself was wounded in the face. A rumor began that the
Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) had been killed.

The Muslims were checked. They found themselves surrounded by the
Meccans, fearing the death of their leader, confused and off-guard.
Discipline could not be restored. Some were saying that Muhammad would
not have been killed had he been a true Prophet, others were talking
about seeking pardon from Abu Sufyan and taking refuge with him. The
following verses were revealed about these 'Muslims':

"And Muhammad is no more than a Prophet; the Prophets have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed, will you turn back
upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he will by no
means do harm to Allah in the least; and Allah will reward the
grateful." Holy Qur'an (3: 143)

"O you who believe! if you obey those who disbelieve, they will turn
you back upon your heels, so you will turn back losers. "Holy Qur'an
(3:148)

"Remember when you ran off precipitately on the heights and looked not
back any of you, while the Prophet was calling you from the rear! So He
has inflicted on you with anguish after anguish, that you might not
grieve at what you lose, nor at what befell you; and Allah is Aware of
what you do." Holy Qur'an (3:152)

These verses refer to the behavior and conduct of the majority of the
Muslims at the battle of Uhud. An enquiry into the details as to who is
Who in Islam with reference to the reports about the conduct of the
companions in the several defensive battles fought to save Islam and the
Muslims, would disclose as to the legitimacy of the claim to
companionship of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) of many of those who later
on, with selfish motives managed to become the leaders of the Muslims
and consequently misled them also in religious matters.(43) Of course,
many true believers resolved to fight for their sincere belief even
though their beloved prophet might be dead. Their thirst for martyrdom
was quenched.

Now the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) was deserted by his main force,
only Imam Ali (a.s.), Abu Dajjanah and Sahl bin Hunaif surrounded the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) to defend him from attack by the forces of Abu
Sufyan. Imam Ali (a.s.) was fighting hard to save the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) and Islam. His gallantry was such that he was praised by Arch
Angel Gabriel (a.s.) whose voice was heard saying:

"There is no (victorious) youth save Ali! There is no sword (weapon of
success) except the 'Dhulfiqar'! (the sword of Imam Ali (a.s.)) (44)

Imam Ali (a.s.) received sixteen wounds in this battle, four of which
were so serious that he was falling down from his horse. On each
occasion a beautiful youth took hold of him, lifted him up to his saddle
and soothed him by saying: "Go on fighting, O hero! Allah and His
Prophet appreciate your services." This was none other than Gabriel the
Evangel (a.s.), who praised Imam Ali (a.s.) to the Prophet of Allah
(s.a.w.) for his zeal and ardent devotion to him at the time when all
others had deserted him. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) told Gabriel
(a.s.):

"No wonder! Ali comes from me and I myself come from him." Whereupon
Gabriel (a.s.) remarked that he also came from both of them. (All were
created from the same Light.)(45)

On finding out that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) was only wounded
and not killed, the Muslims began to rally around him. The Meccans,
having no courage to rout them, contented themselves with the honor of
snatching back the victory from the Muhammad (s.a.w.); and left the
field after mangling and mutilating the bodies of the Muslims. Halting
at Rowha, 8 miles from Uhud, Abu Sufyan felt uneasy at the utter
fruitlessness of his campaign having taken the biggest loss of men, and
began to contemplate a raid on Madinah. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.),
suspecting some treachery, resolved on immediate action and pursued them
the next morning as far as Hamra al-Asad. He was informed that the
Meccans, receiving intelligence of his advance, had already taken their
road homeward.

**3. THE BATTLE OF AHZAB (THE ALLIES):**

Again in the month of Shawwal, two years later in 5 A.H., another great
war was on the rise. The Jews allied themselves with the unbelievers of
Mecca led by Abu Sufyan, the Bedouin tribes of Ghatafan, Solaim, Bani
Qais and Bani Asad as well as the Jews of Kaibar to destroy Islam and
its Prophet in a final escapade.

This battle is historical in its nature and an example of the excellent
defensive capabilities of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.). it is known
also as the Battle of Khandaq (ditch or trench) because of the
innovative strategy of digging a trench fifteen feet wide and as deep
along the undefended north-west edge of the city. The enemy soon
approached and were struck dumb with astonishment. This mode of defence
was unknown to the Arabs, and they were at a loss to understand how to
overcome this obstacle so they laid seige.

Madinah was besieged by 10,000 idolators (46) from diverse clans. Banu
Quraidah severed their peace agreement with the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) and joined the ranks of the unbelievers. Thus, the balance of
forces changed in favor of the enemy. The Muslims were deeply
frightened. The Qur'an describes them saying:

"When they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when
the eyes turned dull and the hearts rose up to the throats, and you
began to think diverse thoughts concerning Allah." Holy Qur'an (33:10)

More than a fortnight elapsed, when a party of the besiegers' horsemen
found the narrowest and weakest guarded part of the ditch. Amru bin Abd
Wid, Nawfal bin Abdullah and Dzarar bin Al-Khattab, led by Ikrimah bin
Abu Jahl, spurring their horses leaped forward towards the Muslims and
challenged them to single combat.

Amru bin Abd Wid, on horseback, strolled conceitedly on the other side
of the trench, taunting the Muslims and taking pride in his heroic
deeds. He, then, shouted: "Is there anyone among you who will challenge
me in a single combat?" Imam Ali (a.s.) asked the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) to permit him to accept the challenge, but the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) said: "Sit down. It is Amru."

Abd Wid repeated his challenge debasing the Muslims and mocking them,
saying: "Where is your Paradise to which you allege to go if you were
killed? So, why don't you send me a man accepting my challenge?" As none
of the Muslims showed willingness to accept his challenge, Imam Ali
(a.s.) repeated his request: "I am for him, O Messenger of Allah!" The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) again declined saying:

"Sit down, it is Amru!" Imam Ali (a.s.) showed little respect for Amru
and others like him, and said, "What if he is Amru!". At this stage the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) agreed to let him go. He gave Ali (a.s.) his
own sword, Dhulfiqar, dressed him with his own armor, and put his own
turban on his head, and then he said,

"O Lord! this is my brother and cousin. So, my Lord, do not let me
alone. You are the best of inheritors!"(47) Ali went to the battle-field
and talked to Amru, saying:

"you had made a promise to God that no man of the Quraish would give
you two courses without you choosing one of them." "Indeed," replied
Amru, "What is that""

"I summon you to Allah, His Messenger and to Islam," Imam Ali (a.s.)
said.

"I have no need of that,", he answered.

"Then I summon you to fight, said Imam Ali (a.s.).

"Go back,", he told him, "There was great friendship between me and
your father, and I do not like to kill you." "But, by Allah, I like to
kill you."

Amru became angry and darted at Imam Ali (a.s.), who faced him boldly,
as usual, and killed him. The voice of Imam Ali (a.s.) was heard
heralding "Allahu Akbar" (Allah is the Greatest!) which indicated
victory.(48)

When Imam Ali (a.s.) returned from the battlefield, the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) received him and said:

"The fighting of Ali bin Abi Talib with Amru bin Abd Wid is greater in
measure than the actions of my people until the Day of
Resurrection."(49) After the killing of Amru bin Abd Wid, Imam Ali
(a.s.) had the gap in the trench which Amru had breached blocked, and
took his post at that point(50) with the intention of confronting anyone
who might try to cross the trench. Otherwise, the army of the
disbelievers, with their thousands, would have invaded Madinah and
beaten the Muslims.

Thus, Imam Ali's (a.s.) heroism in the Battle of Ahzab was the most
decisive factor in victory for the Muslims, and in defeating the army of
the disbelievers. The death of Amru struck terror in the hearts of the
enemy and they began to abandon the fight group by group. Soon Abu
Sufyan, as well, had to retreat.

The crushing defeat suffered by the unbelievers in the Battle of Ahzab
at the hands of Imam Ali (a.s.) so shattered their power and pride that
they never afterwards thought of advancing towards Medinah with any
sinister design. This battle also showed them beyond doubt that with a
selfless supporter, and a dauntless warrior like Imam Ali (a.s.) to
protect the Holy Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) and his Mission, Islam had
come to stay.(51)

Following the Battle of Ahzab, several minor wars took place in which
the reputation of Imam Ali (a.s.) gained great notoriety and fear in the
hearts of anyone who opposed him. Many great warriors would refuse to
face him on the battlefield and sometimes Imam Ali (a.s.) in order to
put an end to a battle would disguise himself or move stealthily at
night so that the enemy would not recognise him. The battles of Banu
Quraidah, Banu Mustalaeq and Fadak are some of these.

**4. THE BATTLE OF KHAIBAR:**

Khaibar is situated about 100 miles to the north east of Medinah, and
means, literally, a fortified place. The Jews of Khaibar constituted a
serious threat to the Muslims. The Jews who had lost their fights
against the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) had slowly and imperceptibly
collected in the vicinity of this fort and had begun to incite their
brethen to wage war against the Muslims.

The valley surrounding Khaibar was considered as one of the most
fertile of the desert oases and its great gardens of date palms were
most jealously guarded by the various Jewish tribes whose territory it
was. The Jews of Khaibar were considered the bravest warriors, and they
posed a most powerful challenge to the supremacy of Islam. The valley of
Khaibar was studded with fortresses strongly situated on rocky hillocks,
which numbered about ten. Many of these strongholds were considered
impregnable.(52)

The Jews, counting on their large numbers and upon their valor as well
as their strongholds, resolved to resist. When the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) heard of this he set out with 1,400 Muslims to face them. The
Jews, about 10,000 strong, all armored, collected themselves in their
forts. But, when besieged in any of their citadels, they could not
resist very long and eventually evacuated it after one or two sorties.
The Muslims advanced fighting and subduing the forts until the last one
appeared to be invulnerable.

The Jews rallied around their chief, the king of their nation, Kinanah
bin Al-Rab. He lived in this strongly fortified citadel of Khaibar named
Al-Qamus, built on a steep rock and considered totally unapproachable.
Three times the Muslim army returned unsuccessful from this fort.
Ultimately, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) made his famous announcement
which marks one of the most brilliant additions in the laurels of Imam
Ali (a.s.).

Realising that the Muslim leaders present there were unable to subdue
this last fort which occupied the key position for the Jews, the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), pointing to the banner of the Muslim army,
announced:

"Tomorrow I shall hand over this banner to a man who attacks
relentlessly and never flees away; he loves Allah and His Prophet and
Allah and His Prophet love him, and he would not return until Allah
grants him victory."(53)

This announcement kindled a desire in the heart of every Muslim present
to be the man who was "beloved of God and His Prophet." The most
covetous for this unique honor was Sa'd bin Waqqas and Umar bin Khattab.
No one thought of Imam Ali (a.s.), the cousin and Vicegerent of the
Prophet. The hero of all previous wars was suffering badly from sore
eyes and could not see anything.

Imam Ali (a.s.), who had been left behind in Medinah because of his
illness, could not remain there and despite his loss of sight, left for
Khaibar reaching there just on the eve of this great day.

The longed for morning dawned, but the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
appeared not to take notice of anyone. When he broke the silence he
asked for Imam Ali (a.s.) and all, in one voice, answered that he was at
a considerable distance and was suffering badly from sore eyes so that
he was utterly unable to see. The Prophet commanded them to bring Imam
Ali (a.s.) to him. On being informed of the Prophet's (s.a.w.) call,
Imam Ali (a.s.) presented himself to the Prophet (s.a.w.) led by Selma
bin Akuas he himself could not see his way.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), taking Imam Ali's (a.s.) head into his
lap, applied the saliva of his mouth to his eyes and prayed for his
recovery. Instantaneously, his eyes became so clear as if he had never
suffered from the disease. It is said that throughout his life he never
had any more trouble with his eyes again.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) handed over the banner to Imam Ali
(a.s.), armed him with Dhulfiqar, and thus designated him as the man
whom Allah and His Prophet loved. He directed him to lead the assault
and to fight until the Jews submitted. Imam Ali (a.s.) with his force
scrambled up the stony rock in front of the fortress and planted the
banner over its top resolving never to recede until the citadel was
taken.

The Jews sallied forth to drive down the assailants. A Jewish priest
asked Imam Ali (a.s.) his name which he gave as Ali bin Abi Talib or
Haidar (the name his mother gave him).The priest, hearing the name,
warned his men that the assailant would not withdraw without capturing
the citadel. However, Harith, a Jewish champion, who had vigorously
repulsed the previous attacks, stepped forward and killed several of the
Muslims. Imam Ali (a.s.) advanced and killed Harith in hand to hand
combat. The brother of Harith was a gigantic man with a huge form. He
was unequalled in valor among the Jews. To revenge the death of his
brother he came out covered from his neck to his waist with a double
coat of mail wearing a helmet for protection against the stroke of a
scimitar. He had a huge gird on both his sides and brandished a big
spear with tripleforked sharp pointed heads.

Stepping forward from the Jewish lines he challenged his adversaries to
single combat.

"I am Marhab," he cried, "as all Khaibar knows, the greatest warrior in
the world." None among the Muslims would dare to go forward to confront
him. Imam Ali (a.s.) himself advanced wearing a scarlet vest covered
with a breastplate of steel saying: "I am he whom his mother named
Haidar, a lion of the wilderness; I weigh my foes in a gigantic
balance." Imam Ali's word were not meaningless. He knew, through
inspiration, that Marhab had lately dreamt of a rugged lion tearing him
to pieces; so he reminded Marhab of the dream.

The words had their effect. As they closed in on each other, Marhab
made a thrust at Imam Ali (a.s.) with his three-pronged lance. Imam Ali
(a.s.) warded off the strike and before Marhab could recover, he dealt
him a blow with Dhulfiqar which divided his buckler, passed through his
helmet right down to his chest severing him in half. He fell lifeless to
the ground and the winner announced his victory in his usual manner of
shouting, "Allahu Akbar".

The Muslims rushed forward in a body, seven of the Jews' most
distinguished warriors fell by Imam Ali's (a.s.) sword. The Jews
retreated into the citadel with the Muslims hotly in pursuit. In the
heat of the battle, a Jew dealt a blow on Imam Ali's (a.s.) arm knocking
down his shield which another Jew ran away with. Imam Ali (a.s.), being
enraged, performed superhuman feats of prowess, he jumped over a trench,
approached the iron gate of the fortress, wrenched if off its hinges and
used it as a buckler for the remained of the battle.

Abu Rafe, one of those who stormed the fort with Imam Ali (a.s.),
testified that after the war he examined the gate and tried with seven
other person to turn it over but the attempt failed. The citadel was
captured and the victory was decisive. The Jews lost 93 men, while on 19
Muslims were martyred throughout the campaign.

According to Suyuti in "Tarikh al-Khulafa", Imam Ali (a.s.) held the
gate in one hand, making his companions stand on the flat gate, went on
placing them across the ditch by a movement of his hand. Suyuti adds
that later the gate could not be moved by 80 persons! (54) After the
victory, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) received Imam Ali (a.s.) with a
warm embrace and a kiss on the brow. He said:

"Ali, had I not been afraid that the Muslims would start regarding you
as the Christians regard Jesus, I would have said things about you which
would have made the Muslims venerate you and to consider the dust of
your feet as something worth venerating; but it will suffice to say that
you are from me and I am from you; you will inherit me and I will
inherit you; you are to me what Aaron was to Moses; you will fight for
my causes, you will be nearest to me on the Day of Judgement; you will
be next to me at the Fountain of Kawthar; enmity against you is enmity
against me; a war against you is a war against me; your friendship is my
friendship; to be at peace with you is to be at peace with me; your
flesh is my flesh; your blood is my blood; who obeys you obeys me; truth
is on your tongue, in your heart and in your mind. You have as much
faith in Allah as I have. You are a door to me. As per the order of
Allah, I give you these tidings that your friends will be rewarded in
Heaven and your enemies are doomed for Hell."(55)

The terms of surrender of the Jews of Khaibar have been recorded as
such: The inhabitants were free to leave the country after giving up
their whole property to the victors, each one taking a camel load of
food stuffs with him. Concealment of valuables was deemed an infraction
of the conditions and the violator was subject to capital punishment.
People preferring to live in the country might occupy and reside in the
houses possessed by them and might also cultivate the land they
occupied; but no immoveable property was to be owned by them, they being
treated as tenants bound to cede half of their products to the conqueror
who could put them in exile at his will and pleasure.

**5. IN THE BATTLE OF HUNAIN:**

It seems that the month of Shawwal was the month for wars. Again in
this month in the year 8 A.H. the Battle of Hunain took place. The
tribes of Banu Hawazin and Banu Thaqeef who lived outside of Mecca had
remained outside of the growing state of Islam. They began mobilising
their forces to attach the Muslims and had collected an army of 20,000.
The Muslims marched out to meet them with 12,000 forces. The unbelievers
hid themselves in the hilly area of Hunain between Ta'if and Mecca and
the Muslims reached there in the early morning when the unbelievers gave
them a surprise attack from their hiding places.

The Muslims, taken unprepared lost all courage and great confusion
followed in their ranks. They began to run away. Nobody remained with
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) except Imam Ali (a.s.),(56) Al Abbas and
some of Ahlul-Bait (the close relatives of the Messenger (s.a.w.)).
Their steadfastness brought victory after the Muslims were urged on by
their example to return to the battlefield.

These are a few examples of the heroic and miraculous achievements of
Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) recorded before the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.), his leader, in the most critical moments of the early days of
Islam.(57)

Imam Ali (a.s.) took part in all the wars faced by the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) except the Battle of Tabuk(58), where he did not
participate in obedience to the Messenger's (s.a.w.) order. In all these
wars he played the largest role, not counting those which he had led
himself. Any researcher looking into the life of Imam Ali (a.s.),
especially concerning his battles, will be spell-bound at his unrivalled
bravery and the beneficial sacrifices he made. Yet heroism, as a mere
attribute, was not the most prominent characteristic of his leading
example for the sake of Allah (Jihad), though it was strategically
employed and remains a feature of Imam Ali's (a.s.) personality. The
most important aspect of his heroism was concerning his faithfulness to
Allah and his sacrifice for Him.

Ali's faith in Allah was the only motive behind his great episodes of
heroism which the history of Islam has recorded in its most illuminated
pages, the like of which it has not been reproduced about anyone else.

Many of the elite Arab rulers, not to speak of the ordinary people,
have at times shown, in many military situations, weakness and defeat,
yet as far as Imam Ali (a.s.) is concerned, history records nothing on
his account but resistance and triumph in all circumstances regardless
of whether others remained to help him or deserted him at any stage of
the battle. This is a fact which can be explained only through the
merits which Imam Ali (a.s.) had been endowed with: true faith, seeking
Allah's help and depending on Him, serving Him alone, and being
indifferent to anything except Him, big or small. Further, Imam Ali bin
Abi Talib (a.s.) enjoyed superior valor and resolution and was fearless
and sublime.


