Part Two : Introduction
=======================

In this part of our study of the life of Amir Al-Mu'minin Imam Ali bin
Abi Talib (a.s.) we shall concentrate on looking at a more delicate
period of his role after the death of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).
This is the period of his Caliphate, undertaking the nation's direct
leadership in diverse aspects of Islamic life.

This time is distinguished by events of utmost importance, especially
in the fields of thought, society and politics, as we shall see. Islamic
history, within the five years of Imam Ali's (a.s.) rule over the
Muslims, witnessed two kinds of events: The first concerns those high
values which he registered in the records of history of humanity. The
values which distinguished the virtuous policy adopted by him in
administering Allah's great laws and regulations, in their complete
forms, with no falsifications, no intemperance, and no
false-resolutions, in all aspects of life.

The second concerns the political reactions of some people which have
also been recorded by Islamic history. In this section, you will read a
chapter about Amir Al-Mu'minin (a.s.) striving to bring back the organs
of the state to their real responsibilities of protecting the Message of
Allah, the Exalted, of establishing its limitations in life, and of
offering whatever advice and directives which lead to a man's happiness
by building his personality and fortifying it.

You will also learn of Imam Ali's (a.s.) role in confronting the
Nakithun (those who broke their allegiances to him), the Qasitun (those
who deviated), and the Mariqun (those who missed the truth of the
religion).

During this part of his life, Imam Amir Al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.), erected
monuments of social justice, which he personified in actual social
reality by his humane practices in strict adherence to the laws of
Allah, the Most High. We invoke Allah, the Exalted, to help our Islamic
nation in their practical life through complete adherence to the Book of
Allah and the traditions of His generous Messenger (s.a.w.) as had been
incarnated in Imam Ali Abi Talib (a.s.).


Al-Balagh Foundation

**THE IMAM AND THE CALIPH**

After the death of Uthman bin Affan, the nation unanimously turned to
Imam Ali (a.s.) and gave him the pledge of allegiance as caliph. They
were overwhelmed with a wave of affection towards him. However, Imam Ali
(a.s.) rejected them saying: "Let me alone, and go in search of someone
else.."(100)

Imam Ali (a.s.) refused to be a captive of emotions, as it was probable
that the hatred of some people against Uthman was responsible for
kindling similar feelings towards him, as well as aggravating the trend
against him. Imam Ali (a.s.) wanted voluntary acceptance of his Imamate.
Furthermore, Imam Ali (a.s.) was not of those who could be induced by
post and position and thus, be responsive to the people as soon as they
rushed to him. The whole caliphate did not have the worth of the wing of
a mosquito to him. Actually the entire earthy world, in his sight,
equalled not more than "a goat's sneeze," as he put it. Leadership is
worthless if it does enable one to establish right and abolish wrong.

Therefore, he did not respond, at first, to the pressure of the people.
He wanted to subject them to a test to make sure that they had the
capacity to receive his programs and take to his plans, should he accept
the rule.

So, despite the fact that the sacred capital, the "Illuminated Madinah"
insisted on choosing him and expressed its persistence in actual
demonstrations and crowded gatherings, so much so that the desire became
unanimous, he was not pressed to accept hastily. At last, finding the
people still persisting in pledging their allegiance to him, he accepted
the caliphate on certain conditions, which had to be wholeheartedly
agreed to. Spelling out what he needed in his mission, he demanded:

"...Remember that if I accept your caliphate I shall make you follow
the religion according to my own rulings and judgements. I shall not
accept suggestions from anyone, nor will I bother about the
discontentment and anger of dissatisfied persons..."(101)

The whole nation responded by hurrying to announce their submission to
his conditions, extending their hands, and pledging their allegiance and
obedience to him. So, Imam Ali (a.s.) agreed to face fully his
responsibilities of leading the Islamic nation, thought and practice.
The first task was to remove all forms of deviation which had grown into
Islamic life, and to bring the nation back to the original Divine
course. To attain this he had to act according to a strict and
comprehensive program, and to have others to act correctly in
implementing it. It was a task where his government had many problems to
confront, especially in political and economic fields:

**1. Political Field:**

Imam Ali (a.s.) defined the attributes of governors and government
officials whom Islam recommends to manage the affairs of the Islamic
nation. These definitions were clearly set out in his communiqu√© which
he issued:

"....O people! you must understand and realize that so far as the
protection of properties, rights and honor of the Muslim world, the
propagation and preservation of Muslim laws and guardianship of Muslim
finances are concerned, an ignorant person, a miser, a tyrant, a man who
accepts bribes or one who has forsaken the principles of equity and
justice should not be entrusted with the ruling of a Muslim state.

"A miserly person will covet the wealth of those he rules; an ignorant
one will misguide them; a tyrant will oppress and tyrranize them; one
who is not afraid of rapidly changing times and policies will, to the
detriment of the cause of Islam, keep on forming unholy alliances with
one nation after the other; a corrupt ruler, who is open to bribery,
will violate rights, and will not dispense justice, and the one who has
given up the traditions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) will be responsible
for the destruction of Islamic ideals and doctrine."(102)

Under this clear and objective determination of the attributes of the
officials acceptable to Islam, Amir Al-Mu'minin Imam Ali (a.s.) began to
dismiss some of the governors from their posts in different parts of the
Islamic state. Had he compromised, as some wanted him to do, subsequent
Muslim generations would not have recognized the true picture of the
Islamic religion for which Allah had sent His great Messenger
(s.a.w.).

**2. Economic Field:**

Simultaneously with reforming the political system, Imam Ali (a.s.)
started to revolutionize the economy of the state. No sooner had he
begun his rule, than he cancelled the method of distributing wealth
which had formerly been followed. He replaced the discriminate way of
distributing money by a system based on equity as practiced by the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).

So, all forms of discrimination in dividing the money among the people,
was cancelled by the Imam (a.s.) stressing that fearing Allah, priority
in embracing Islam, fighting for the sake of Islam, or companionship
with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), were not matters which gave their
owners any sort of distinction in this world. Reward from Allah would be
theirs in the Hereafter. Whoever had priority in these attributes, would
receive his reward from Allah. But, here in this world, all people are
equal in their financial rights in respect to the law and in their
duties. His ideas about justice are stated in one of his speeches:

"...Any man from the Muhajirin and the Ansar, who had kept company with
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), seeing that he had priority over the
others just because of that, should remember that the reward of this
merit would be awarded him by Allah in the Hereafter...

"Any one who responds to Allah and to His Messenger, believes in our
religion, embraces it, prays with his face towards Ka'bah, deserves the
rights of Islam and accepts its limits. So you are servants of Allah,
and money is Allah's. It is to be distributed among you equally, with no
one having any distinction over the other, as the pious ones will
tomorrow have the best of rewards and highest results. Allah did not
ordain any reward for the pious in this world. What Allah has is much
better for the righteous..."(103)

In this way Imam Ali (a.s.) incarnated the concept of equity, giving
allowances to all persons who enjoy the right of being Muslim citizens,
without any discrimination on any grounds.

These are some of the features of the reformative process led by Amir
Al-Mu'minin Imam Ali (a.s.) in different fields of Islamic life--
financial, administrative and governmental.

**Program Of Reformation**

Imam Ali (a.s.) laid his general plan of reformation, with most of his
attention given to reforming the administration, economy and government
as we said.

Through this immense undertaking, Amir Al-Mu'minin (a.s.) pioneered a
new course, the nation attained many great achievements in the interests
of the people and their progress in general. Below we refer to some o-f
these achievements. First: He established a system of governors and
officials qualified to administer the rudder of Islamic life. They were
individuals ideal in their spiritual, intellectual and committal
standards, like Uthman bin Hanif, Muhammad bin Abi Bakr and Malik
Al-Ashtar.

Although those individuals were excellent examples of men, at the
highest level of fitness, thought, action and ability in administration
and leadership, Imam Ali (a.s.) furnished them with guiding advice and
instructive plans, helping them with the practical aspects of ruling and
in their relations with different sectors of the people whom they were
to govern.

He enjoined his governors to advise the servants of Allah, spreading
justice among them, treating them with leniency and kindness, brushing
aside all aspects of haughtiness that high positions may create in man,
steering influential people from affecting social life contrary to the
course of Islamic justice, and offering pieces of advice required to
spread justice and establish truth among the people.

His advice was clearly laid out as in the following examples:

"Treat them with respect. Be kind and considerate to them...Meet them
with a smiling face. Be fair, just and impartial in your dealings so
that even influential persons may not dare take advantage of your
leniency, and the uninfluential and poor may not be disappointed in your
justice and dealings. Remember that Allah, the Exalted, is going to take
account of your sins, major and minor, O creatures Of Allah, from the
path of Islamic justice, influencing his judgements, or sins, it will be
because of your being unjust, and it He forgives you, it will be because
of His great mercy and compassion..."(104)

"Treat people pleasantly and kindly, welcome them to your audience and
company, do not be harsh in issuing and enforcing your orders, do not
lose your temper, because this weakness is always a good opening for
Satan to find its way into your mind. Always keep this in mind that the
thing which takes you nearer to Allah will carry you away from Hell, and
the thing which drives you away from Allah will drive you towards
Hell."(105)

These extracts of Imam Ali's (a.s.) instructions were to be followed by
his governors in their practical life also.

It goes without saying that Imam Ali (a.s.), despite his insistent
keenness on selecting the most efficient and God fearing persons, was
also keen on knowing their methods of treating people while in their
posts. For this purpose he engaged a system of supervisors, through
whose eyes he could see how loyal and obedient they were in carrying out
the principles of Islamic justice. Whoever made a mistake or faltered,
Imam Ali (a.s.) would quickly set his conduct right, by correcting and
educating offenders or by threatening or even deposing those
responsible. Here is part of his procedure in this respect:

Uthman bin Hanif, his governor of Basra, once accepted an invitation
from a rich man in Basra. When Imam Ali (a.s.) heard of this, he was
afraid that such affairs might distract his governor and divert him from
the path of Islamic justice, influencing his judgements, or encourage
him to be tyrannical in his treatment of the people. He wrote to him:

"O Ibn Hanif! I have received information that a per son of Basra
invited you to a dinner and you immediately accepted the invitation, and
very sumptuous meals were served there. The finest varieties of viands
were placed before you on large plates and you enjoyed them. I a m sorry
to hear the news. I never expected that you would accept the invitation
of a person who invites big officers and rich people, and from whose
doors poor persons and hungry paupers are rudely turned away. Look
carefully into the things which you eat. If there is even a shadow of
doubt of their being obtained unlawfully then throw them away. Only eat
such things about which you are perfectly certain that they are obtained
in an honest, lawful and virtuous way.

"You must know, bin Hanif, that for everyone who follows a religion,
there is a leader and a guide from whom the follower learns the canons
of that religion and the ways of leading a pious life. Now look to your
Imam and leader. In this world he has satisfied himself, and is content
with, two old, torn and course garments and two loaves of bread. I know
that is too hard a life for you to adopt, but at least try to help me
with piety, strife, chasteness and unerringness..."(106)

He wrote to Masqala Al-Shaibani, the governor of Ardskir Kharra:

"..I have received certain information about you. If you had actually
done it, then you have verily displeased Allah, and have disobeyed your
Imam. I am given to understand that you are lavishly distributing state
treasury- which has been gathered by Muslims' spears and horses, and for
which their blood has been shed--among the bedouins of your own clan.

"I swear by Allah, Who split the seed and creates the soul, that if
this accusation against you proves correct, then you will verily
humiliate yourself in my eyes and will verily be light to me in weight.
So, do not belittle the right of Allah, and do not mend your world by
ruining your religion, or you will be one of those who have the most
losing deeds...." (107)

He also wrote to one of his agents:

"Information about you has come to my knowledge. If you have done it,
then you have angered your Lord, disobeyed your Imam, and disgraced your
honesty. It has come to me that you have taken possession of land,
seized what is under your feet, and eaten what is in your hand. So,
immediately send me your account, and be ware that the Lord's reckoning
is far more severe than any of man's."(108) As Imam Ali (a.s.) used to
make plans for governors and give them his guiding advice, he acted
likewise to assist his army officers, pointing out signs to them on
their way, and what they had to do when facing the enemy.

Imam Ali (a.s.) also used to tell them not to be tyrannical, not to
start any war, not to lose their temper, and to remain patient. At the
beginning they should always take the defensive. When the enemy
transgresses, then they will have to stop the aggression. If, then,
Allah granted them victory, they were not to be taken by the ecstasy of
triumph over the enemy and chase their soldiers running away from the
battlefield without weapons to defend themselves with. They could not
kill the wounded, nor insult the women, even if they were so.

Here are some of his instructions to his officers:

"Do not take the initiative to begin the battle; let them begin it,
because by the favor of Allah you are on the side of truth and justice.
Leave them until they begin their hostilities, and then you are at
liberty to start fighting. Their keenness to begin a battle will be
another proof of your sincere belief in the orders of Allah. If Allah
favors you with your success and their defeat, then do not kill the
deserter, do not finish the wounded, do not excite the women by injuring
them, even when they insult your women and curse your
commanders..."(109)

"...My duty towards you is not to keep from you any secret except those
of war, not to hide from you any affair except in judgement, not to
delay any of your rights later than its due, and not to cut it below its
prescribed limit. You will, to me, be equal in the truth. If I achieve
this, Allah will bestow His blessings upon you, and you will have to
obey me, not to recoil from the call, not to fall back from
righteousness, and to wade through difficulties to reach the
truth..."(110)

Owing to the importance of the tax-collecting system in the Islamic
state, general rights in private property form an important factor in
Islamic economy The right of the community to private possession
provides a large source of helping the Islamic state to meet its great
expenditures in social, military and other fields of general life.

Because of this importance, Imam Ali (a.s.) showed great interest, not
in collecting as much money as possible, but having the system follow
the Islamic course of justice, which the Imam (a.s.) idealized in the
life of the people. He was extremely anxious to educate tax-collectors
to strictly adhere to justness, virtue, nobility, and to respect their
responsibility. Their duty, to the Imam, was not just to levy money for
the sake of money.

They had to adhere to the right in fairly treating the people and
implementing the justness of Islam to those whom they encountered. They
were not to cause anger among the people, not to maltreat them, not to
beat anyone for a Dirham, for example, and they might not trespass on
the property of any Muslim or non-Muslim who enjoys being subject of the
Islamic State. They might also not sell a man's clothes or his animals
in order to levy taxes. None of the collectors had the right to reproach
anyone, nor to levy more than was allowed. They might not look down at
people but had to greet them with kindness and to treat them with
leniency. Here is another example of his teachings in this respect:

"Treat tax-payers with equity and justice, and consider their wishes
with patience and kindness, because you are the treasurer of the
authority. Do not force anyone to forsake his requirements and go
without his necessities. In collecting taxes do not sell their winter
and summer clothing, their slave or such of their animals which are of
service to them. Do not resort to whipping for a Dirham, and do not
touch their property, be they Muslims or non-Muslims..."(111)

"Do not give up fearing Allah alone Who has no partner. Do not frighten
any Muslim, and do not go past him with reluctance. Do not take from him
more than what is due to Allah from his property. When you reach their
quarter stay at their water-place, and do not get near their houses.
Then go to them with dignity and prestige till you come among them, then
wish them peace, and refrain not from paying them compliments. Then say:
O servants of Allah! I have been sent to you by the Caliph to collect
from you the dues of Allah; so, are there any of Allah's dues in your
property which you may pay to His Caliph?"(112)

Second: Incarnating the Islamic plan of social justice in its most
explicit picture and most minute details. Imam Ali (a.s.) took the most
reformative steps in order to implement the most complete illustration
of social justice according to detailed Islamic concepts.

The Islamic society, with all its sectors, had witnessed the foremost
justice during the days of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.). Hereunder,
are some examples of that radiant historical experience of the Islamic
nation:

**A. Clemency in Attendance**

Diverse sectors of the nation witnessed different sorts of attendance
to their affairs, in being treated with kindness and care and ensuring
equality among all the subjects of the Islamic state. This is
personified in the following extracts: "The wealth is Allah's, and it is
to be equally distributed among you, with no priority to anyone of you."
"...By Allah, I will verily be fair with the wronged against the one who
wronged him. I will certainly drag the wrong-doer by his 'nose ring'
until I bring him to the source of the truth, even if he is
reluctant."(113)

Furthermore, the nation, as a whole, led by Amir Al Mu'minin (a.s.),
witnessed full examples of administering its affairs and caring for its
welfare, in realizing its strength and happiness.

Here are some of these examples: Hakam is quoted to have said:

"I saw Ali when water-skins full of honey were brought to him. He
summoned the orphans and said to them: ‚ÄòTaste and lick,‚Äô as much as I
wished I were an orphan. Then he distributed them among the people. One
water-skin remains. He ordered it to be distributed among those present
in the mosque (114)

Harun bin Antara citing Zadan, says:

"I was once accompanying Qanbar, Ali's servant. Re came to Ali and said
to him: 'Come, O Amir Al-Mu'minin, come with me, I have a thing hidden
for you.' ‚ÄòWhat is it, boy?‚Äô Ali asked. 'Come with me,' answered he. Ali
went home with him. There we found a sack with cups full of gold and
silver. Re said: 'O Amir Al- Mu'minin, I know you would leave nothing
unless you distribute it, so I kept this for you.' ‚ÄòWoe to you!‚Äô said
Ali, 'You wanted to bring a great fire into my house!' Then he drew his
sword and cut the sack into pieces and the gold scattered on the earth.
Re called to the people and told them to distribute it among themselves
in portions. Then he went to the public treasury and distributed what
was therein, until there remained only some needles and sticks. Re said,
'Let these be distributed, too,'..."(115)

Hakam further said: "Ali divided the pomegranates among the people, and
the share of their mosque was seven pomegranates. So he said: 'O people,
we receive things which seam plenty to look at, but we find them little
after distribution. We have distributed everything we received.' He also
received plates of silver. He broken them in pieces and distributed them
among us."

Ali bin Rabi'a says: "bin Al-Tayah came to Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and
said to him: 'O Amir Al-Mu'minin, the treasury is full of the 'Yellow
and White' [gold and silver].' Allah is greater!" Ali said and stood up
leaning on bin Al-Taih's hand. He entered the treasury, then the people
were called in, and he gave out whatever was there, while saying: "O
White and Yellow, seduce other than me!‚Äô As there remained nothing in
it, he ordered it to be sprinkled with water, then he performed two
Rak'ahs of prayer."

Owing to his anxious attempts to remove the heaviness of poverty and
injustice from the people, he kept rigidly to his program throughout his
caliphate as described in the following extracts:

"...If I had so wanted I could have very easily found ways and means to
provide for myself the purest and clearest honey, the best variety of
wheat and the finest silk clothes. But my desire can never overcome me,
nor can greediness persuade me to select the choicest victuals, when in
Hijaz and Yemen there may be people who have no hope of obtaining a loaf
of bread and who have never satisfied their hunger, nor can I sleep with
a heavy stomach when around me there are people with hungry stomachs and
thirsty livers! Am I to be content with being addressed as Amir Al-
Mu'minin without sharing with them the calamities of life, or setting
for them an example of bearing up bereavements of living?"(116)

B. Strict Supervision of the Market

Imam Ali (a.s.) was keen on seeing economic justice dominating all
aspects of life. For this purpose he laid a plan to monitor the market
in respect to buying, selling and the quality of the goods offered for
sale, so as to prevent shortfalls, price fluctuations and cheating. Imam
Al-Baqir (a.s.) said:

"Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) used to pass through, one by one, the markets
of Kufa every morning with his two-tailed whip on his shoulder. It was
called "Al-Sabibah". He used to stop at each market and call out:

'O merchants! Offer the best, receive the blessing of being easy, get
nearer to the buyers, adorn yourselves with patience, refrain from lying
and swearing, be away from wrong doing, be fair with those wronged, keep
away from usury, give full measure and full weight, in justice, belittle
not peoples' goods, and make not mischief to cause corruption in the
earth'..."(117)

Abu Al-Nawwar says: "I saw Imam Ali (a.s.) stop at a tailor's and tell
him: 'O tailor! strengthen the string, take care of the seams, make the
stitches short. As I heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) say: 'The
treacherous tailor is brought, on the Day of Resurrection, with a shirt
and a cloak of his bad tailoring so that he is disgraced before all
witnesses.' Then he said to the tailor: 'O tailor, beware of the
remnants and leftovers, as t he owner of the dress has more right to
them'..."(118)

In these ways Imam Ali (a.s.) incarnated the Islamic plan of social
justice in the best possible way. He treated the people with kindness
and love, living with their hopes and pains until they reaped the most
wonderous fruits of justice in their history as it was in the days of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).

**C. Self-Denial**

Imam Ali (a.s.) adopted the policy of self-denial for the sake of the
nation, by way of true forsaking of whatever covetous people greedily
look for such as wealth, pleasures and delights of life.

Amir Al-Mu'minin (a.s.) lived in a modest house similar to those in
which the poor lived. He used to, both before and during his caliphate,
eat the barley which his wife or he himself used to grind. He wore the
coarsest and the plainest of clothes. His unchangeable principle in this
was: "...Your Imam is content, in this world, with two coarse old
garments and two loaves of bread...I swear by Allah that, from this
world of yours, I have neither amassed gold, nor have I gathered wealth;
nor have I changed these coarse and old garments for new ones, nor have
I owned of this land even a span (of the hand), nor have I taken from it
more than sustaining food. It is [your world], in my eye, lower and more
trivial than a bitter gallnut."(119)

We may also observe this policy of the Imam (a.s.) towards himself
through the following incidences:

Harun bin Antara records that his father said, "I entered Al-Khawarnaq
where I saw Ali bin Abi Talib wearing worn-out velvet in the winter
season. I said: 'O Amir Al-Mu'minin! Allah has granted you and your
family a share in this wealth, and yet you do this to yourself!‚Äô

He said: 'By Allah I would not lessen your dues. This is the same
velvet which I brought with me from Madinah."(120) One day Asim bin
Ziyad [justifying his indifference to worldly pleasures] addressed the
Imam (a.s.) and said: "Look at your own dress how coarse it is, and to
your own food how meagre it is!" Imam Ali (a.s.) replied him:

"Woe to you! I am not like you. Allah has made it incumbent upon just
Imams to keep themselves on the level of the poorest of men, so that
they may not feel too deeply the pains of poverty."(121)

Suwaid bin Ghaflah recalls: "One day I called upon Imam Ali (a.s.) at
his house. There I saw nothing except an old mat on which he was
sitting. I said: O Amir Al-Mu'minin, you are the King of the Muslims,
and you control the public treasury, yet you receive your guests in a
house which has only this mat!

He said: 'O Suwaid, why should a house be furnished in this transient
world when we have to move to the permanent house to which we have moved
our belongings and to which we are moving presently?"(122).

Imam Ali (a.s.) went to the market to sell his sword in order to buy an
apron at a time when he was Amir Al-Mu'minin, the leader of the Islamic
nation, to whom is levied money from all parts of the Islamic world. In
this respect Abu Raja' says:

"Imam Ali (a.s.) brought his sword to the market and called: 'Who buys
this from me? By Allah Who has Ali's soul in His hand, I would not have
sold it had I got the value of an apron!' I said to him: 'I will sell
you an apron on credit until you receive your due,' and I gave him an
apron on credit. When he received his due he paid me the value of the
apron."(123)

Imam Ali (a.s.) took nothing from the public treasury, so that when he
leaves a town he leaves it with only what he had brought with him from
Madinah--his saddled camel and his servant. Bakr bin Isa says: "Imam Ali
(a.s.) used to say: 'O people of Kufa, if I left your town with more
than my camel, saddle and servant, then I would be a traitor."

His expenditure used to be sent to him from his proceeds in Yanbu' in
Madinah, which he spent to feed the people with bread and meat, while he
ate the bread soaked in fat.

He was very keen on following the example of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) in his justness and abstinence. In this respect Aqaba bin
Alqama says: "I called on Imam Ali (a.s.) one day. I saw him eating dry
bread and sour milk whose sourness hurt me. I exclaimed, 'O Amir
Al-Mu'minin, do you eat this?' 'O Abul Janub,' he replied, 'the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) used to eat drier than this and wear coarser
than this (pointing to his dress), so, if I do not do what he used to
do, I am afraid I will not be able to catch up with him."(124)

Abdullah bin Husain bin Hasan (a.s.) says: "Imam Ali (a.s.), during the
days of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), emancipated 1,000 slaves out of
his working wages and the sweat of his forehead. He became caliph, and
wealth came to him, yet dates remained his dessert, and coarse cloth was
his dress."(125)

Umar bin Qais, on the authority of Sufyan AI-Thawri, says: "Imam Ali
(a.s.) was seen wearing a patchy garment on and was reproached for that.
He said: "This causes the heart to submit, and the faithful to
follow."(126)

His deep abstinence and self-denial for the sake of Allah are quite
explicit in his words: "...Look at me. I have patched my dress so often
that I feel ashamed to hand it over for anymore patches. Somebody
suggested to me to throw it away, but I told him, 'Be gone! do not try
to tempt me, because those who bear hardships in this life will pass
happy days in the Hereafter."(127)

These were some of Imam Ali's (a.s.) ways which he set as examples for
the faithful to follow. They represent aspects of Islamic justice
personified in Imam Ali (a.s.), living among the people and exemplifying
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).

D. Equalizing His Family With Others

The standards which Imam Ali (a.s.) applied to his family and relatives
were very close to those which he applied to himself, only less severe.
They were based on equalizing them with other citizens in their rights
and duties. Yet, what they bore for the sake of protecting the Message
and its progress was much more than the rights they received.

Imam Ali (a.s.) was keen on treating his relatives, in respect to their
rights, as if they were ordinary people. He never gave them more than
their dues, and never distinguished them with privileges. He treated
them as to educate and train them to follow his wake and at times,
showed severity with some of his relatives so that they might take to
the line he drew for them.

**A Muslim of the Hana narrates:**

"When Imam Ali (a.s.) finished with 'The Owners of the Camel' [the
Battle of Basrah], he returned to Kufa, entered Beit al-Mal [the public
treasury] and said: 'O wealth tempt someone else.' Then he divided it
among us. A daughter of Hasan or Husain (a.s.) came in and picked up
some of it. The Imam (a.s.) ran after her, opened her fist, and took it
out. We said: 'O Amir Al-Mu'minin, she has a right to it.' He said,
'When her father takes his due, let him give her whatever he
likes."(128)

Harun bin Sa'id narrates: "Abdullah bin Ja'far bin Abi Talib said to
Imam Ali (a.s.): 'O Amir Al-Mu'minin, will you have them give me some
help or expenditure, as, by Allah, I have nothing to spend, unless I
sell my beast on which I ride!' The Imam said. 'No, by Allah! I can find
nothing for you except that you may order your uncle [ Imam Ali (a.s.)
himself] to steal and give it to you'..."(129)

One day Aqil bin Abi Talib, who was blind, came to his brother, Imam
Ali (a.s.) asking for a Sa' [measure equal to four times the quantity of
corn that fills two hands of a man of moderate size] of wheat, more than
his due from Beit al-Mal, and he kept repeating his demand. Imam Ali
(a.s.) wanted to give him a good lesson: so he heated a piece of iron on
the fire, then brought it near him. Aqil recoiled in fear. Imam Ali
(a.s.) then said to him, "O Aqil, you groan from a piece of iron heated
by a creature for his sport, whereas you are dragging me towards a fire
kindled by the Almighty for his wrath! You moan from fear of being hurt,
so why shouldn't I moan from the kindled Fire?"(130)

Abu Sadiq, quoting Imam Ali (a.s.), said: "He married Layla. She hung
some curtains for him, but he pulled them down, saying: 'It suffices
Ali's folk what they have [to answer for]."(131) Hasan bin Salih bin Hay
said: "It came to me that Imam Ali (a.s.) married a woman who arranged a
decorated room for him. But he refused to enter it."(132)

Kilab bin Ali Al-Amiri said: "When Imam Ali (a.s.) married my aunt, she
was sent to him riding on an ass with a velvet covering and a basket
hanging behind."(133)

Such examples of how Imam Ali (a.s.) used to treat his family and
relatives show he never neglected any of the rights of the Muslims for
the interests of his own folk. He, actually, tried to teach them how to
ascend to his level of self-denial and abstinence in the way of Allah,
and for the sake of the Muslim community.

His method was quite explicit. There was no vagueness and he was
unaffected by any sort of emotion or compromise. He said; "By Allah I
prefer to pass a sleepless night on prickly thorns, or be dragged in
fetters, rather than meet my Lord and His Messenger on the Day of
Resurrection as one who had wronged some of His servants, or who had
usurped some treasures. Why should I wrong others for the benefit of a
self which shortly decays and lies, for a long period, in the
grave?"(134)

This way of life adopted by Imam Ali (a.s.) represents a further aspect
of the general social justice which he was very keen on embodying in the
living practice of the life of the people.


