Policy of Reaction
==================

Owing to the distinguished men of the Quraish being used to enjoying a
whole array of privileges and advantages, it was hard for them to accept
Imam Ali's (a.s.) policy of equality of rights as Allah enjoined.
Al-Zubair bin Awam and Talha bin Ubaidullah disapproved of this policy
of Imam Ali (a.s.), as it deviated from what so far had been customary.
Imam Ali (a.s.) asked them: ''That is it that you so disapprove of in me
that you seek other than me?"

They said: "you made our share of allowance the same as the others; you
made us equal to those who are not like us regarding the booty bestowed
upon us by Allah through our swords and spears, and which we charged our
horses and men, upon which our mission was established, and which we
took by force from those who reluctantly look at Islam."(135)

The Imam (a.s.) replied to them: "You complain of such minor affairs,
and neglect major things [done for you]. Can you tell me of an instance
of my depriving you of your rights or of a single thing that was your
due, but I withheld it from you, or of a single case brought before me
for judgement but I failed to give a just decision, or of a situation in
which I gave an incorrect decree?

"By Allah I never craved for the caliphate or authority. All of you
invited me to accept it, and when I accepted, I looked into the Book of
Allah and to what we had been ordered to do, and I followed it, as well
as the traditions of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), and I exemplified
it. In following those I never needed your opinion, nor the opinion of
anybody else. Nor was there a judgement which I knew not so as to need
your consultation or other Muslims. Had there been such a need I would
have turned not away from you or from the others.

"As to what you say about equal distribution of wealth, I should say it
is not my opinion which I follow, nor is it a desire of mine to control.
It is what I and you found the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) doing. There,
too, I needed no help from you, since Allah had already ordained its
dividends.

Therefore, neither you nor anyone else are justified in blaming me for
this. May Allah guide our hearts and yours to the truth and grant us
patience. May Allah have mercy upon him who, when he sees the truth,
helps it to spread, who, when he sees inequity, rejects it, and who
rightly backs his companion."(136)

In this way, concepts and starting points were diverse. Imam Ali (a.s.)
started from what Allah, the Exalted, and His Messenger (s.a.w.) enjoin,
whereas his opponents start from what their own interests revealed to
them. So huge was the difference between aiming at carrying out the
teachings of the Message and caring for the interests of the whole
nation, and thc materialistic position which sees only private
interests.

**Mu'awiyah's Attitude:**

No sooner had the news spread of Imam Ali's acceptance of the caliphate
and of his undertaking the task of leading the nation, than Mu'awiyah
bin Abi Sufyan, filled with fear, announced his opposition. Mu'awiyah
had received a letter from bin Al- As, telling him about the situation
in the capital of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.): From Amr bin Al-As to
Mu'wiyah bin Abi Sufyan. Do whatever you want to, as Ali bin Abi Talib
has peeled off you whatever you have, like a branch peeled of its
bark."(137)

At the same time Imam Ali (a.s.) wrote to Mu'awiyah summoning him. But
Mu'awiyah neither went to him nor replied to his letter.(138) Three
months after Uthman's murder, and Imam Ali's caliphate began, Mu'awiyah
raised the claim of avenging Uthman's blood to use as a pretext to rebel
against his Imam.

He started with hanging Uthman's bloody shirt and a few hairs of his
beard, with dried blood on them in the Damascus Mosque. He began to
incite the people of Al-Sham to rise and take Uthman's revenge from his
murderers. He sent an envoy to the Imam, who arrived in Madinah and
started wandering through its lanes, showing the people a sealed letter
with the words "From Mu'awiyah to Ali". Such unbecoming behavior by the
envoy provoked thc people's surprise, revealing that the sender did not
bear any reeling of respect for the Imam.

When Imam Ali (a.s.) opened the letter, he found it blank with nothing
written in it. He asked the envoy about the matter. The envoy demanded
to be spared if he told the truth. Assured of his safety, he said: "I
left behind me people who say: We would not be contented except by
revenge." Imam Ali (a.s.) asked: "Whom from?"

The man replied: "The people say: From Ali's neck. I have left 60,000
old men weeping under Uthman's shirt, spread for them on thc pulpit of
Damascus Mosque, with the fingers of his wife, Na'ilah, hung on it."
Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "Do they want Uthman's blood from me [Do they
accuse me of his murder]? Allah knows I am innocent of Uthman's
blood..."(139) He then ordered the envoy to leave, secured in his
passage. Afterwards, Imam Ali (a.s.) began gathering his army to counter
plans laid by Mu'awiyah in al-Sham.

Background of Avenging Uthman:

Before going any further, it is perhaps better to establish whether the
parties in Al -Sham and Basrah were truthful in their demand of avenging
thc third caliph. This question, which imposes itself on both the writer
and the reader, can be answered by referring to the attitudes of those
parties during the period of the revolt which led to the murder of
Uthman.

Mu'awiyah knew the details of what was happening against the caliph in
Madinah. The caliph, himself, was sieged by the people and asked for
Mu'awiyah's help who actually did not help him, but sent an army
instead, headed by Yazid bin Asad al- Qasri, whom he ordered: "When you
reach Dhi Khushub--a region outside Madinah--stay there and do not leave
it. Do not say that the present see what the absent cannot see. It is I
who am present, and it is you who are absent."(140)

Al-Qasri stayed where Mu'awiyah had told him. When Uthman was killed,
Mu'awiyah summoned the army back to al-Sham.

This shows Mu'awiyah's attitude towards Uthman bin Affan during the
latter's rule. So, his brandishing of the banner of avenging the murder
of the caliph was but a means merely to stir up the sympathy of the
people and to muster supporters. His real motive lay in his disapproval
of Imam Ali's (a.s.) reformative policy which injured the interests of
the social elite in one way or the other, particularly the wealth, power
and authority that Mu'awiyah had gained during the reign of Uthman and
his own desire for the caliphate.

On the other hand, Imam Ali (a.s.) announced his attitude toward the
caliph's murder, saying:

"...By Allah, the murderers of Uthman would not have escaped if Allah
had not willed it, as when He wills something, He will attain it."(141)
His attitude further set out his position through a letter he sent to
Mu'awiyah, in which he said:

"...You have said so much about the murderers of Caliph Uthman. Join
the people in what they did [allegiance]. I, then, shall pass my
judgement according to the tenets of the Book of Allah. But what you
want now is but a trick..."(142)

**The Imamâ€™s Attitude During the Crisis**

To give further insight, it is necessary to mention, Imam Ali's (a.s.)
attitude during the crisis to which the Caliphate had been subjected ill
Uthman's days. When the people revolted against Caliph Uthman, Imam Ali
(a.s.) tried to convince him of the necessity of reform and there were
discussions between them in this respect. Imam Ali (a.s.), among other
things, told him:

"...I beseech you in the name of Allah not to let yourself be the
murdered leader, because it is said that in this nation a leader will be
killed, opening the door of bloodshed until the Day of Resurrection. He
will cast doubts on their affairs, mislead them into trial so that they
will not be able to distinguish between right and wrong, and, blame each
other for these calamities. They will find themselves engulfed by
sorrows and sufferings. So, fairly an old and experienced man as you
are, do not become a pack animal to Marwan who drags you to where he
likes."(143)

Uthman then requested: " Ask these people to give me time so that I may
compensate them and undo the wrong done to them."(144) Thereupon Imam
Ali (a.s.) said: "There can be no postponement for what is going on here
in Madinah. As to the other places, the time for your orders to reach
there will be grace enough."(145)

The caliph said: "Yes, but get me three day's...grace for what is
here."

Imam Ali (a.s.) went out to the people and told them about the Caliph's
promise, and wrote an agreement between them and the Caliph, and had it
attested to by a number of noteables of the Muhajirin and the
Ansar.(146)

But, as the Caliph could not keep his word, the situation deteriorated
once again. It became even more aggravated when Egyptian Mujahidin laid
their hands on a letter sent by Uthman to his agent in Egypt, ordering
him to punish the leaders of the Egyptian revolutionaries by putting
them to death, and to punish the discontented by putting them behind
bars.(147)

The Caliph was, therefore, besieged by both the discontented and those
who coveted the caliphate. They even prevented drinking water from
reaching him.

Then he sought the help of Imam Ali (a.s.), who hurried to his rescue.
Pushing Talha and the others aside, he brought him water to drink.(148)
The siege lasted for forty days. One day the people asked Imam Ali
(a.s.) to let them perform their prayers behind him as their Imam. He
refused. Talha took over the lead.

These are some aspects of the attitude of Imam Ali (a.s.) toward
Uthman. Yet, his noble positions in defending the Caliph did not mean
that Imam Ali (a.s.) was pleased with the Caliph's financial and
administrative policies.(149) Rather, he thought that Uthman's murder
would endanger the nation, since it would result in tearing the Islamic
ranks into pieces by the enemies of the Muslims. Which has actually
happened!

**THE BATTLE OF BASRA**

Talha and Al-Zubair were at the head of those who disapproved of
Uthman's policy. In fact, they were also at the head of the people who
gave the oath of allegiance to Imam Ali (a.s.) after the death of
Uthman. Yet they were not happy with the reformative movement led by
Imam Ali (a.s.) in Islamic life. They started preparations for rebellion
against the Imam (a.s.) and stirred the Muslims against him. The result
was a calamity that caused the nation grave losses.

Imam Ali (a.s.) exerted great effort to avoid the conflict. Nothing was
spared in offering his advice to them and he placed on their shoulders
full responsibility of the war if it broke out.

He said to them:

"...you, Talha and you, Zubair, you know that I did not want the people
until they wanted me, and I did not accept their allegiance till they
forced me to, and you were at the head of those who hurried to pledge
allegiance to me. You did not accept that by force, nor for a present
purpose. O Zubair, you, champion of the Quraish; and you, Talha, the
leader of the Muhajirin, it would have been easier for you both to
prevent it before joining it than to avoid it after giving your
allegiance. It is Banu Uthman who may avenge him, whereas you are two
men of the Muhajirin, You have brought your mother Ummul Mu'minin,
A'ishah, the wife of the Prophet (s.a.w.) out of her house, whereas
Allah had commanded her not to leave it."(150)

In Basra, Imam Ali (a.s.) continued to give his advice to prevent
bloodshed, He even sent envoys to the Nakithun [those who broke their
allegiance] inviting them to peace and reconciliation.

He also met Al-Zubair and reminded him of certain incidents which had
happened to them during the life of the Prophet (s.a.w.), He asked him:
"What caused you to do this, O Zubair?" "To avenge Uthman," replied
Zubair.

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "If you are to be fair with yourself, it is you
and your companions who killed him. I beseech you, O Zubair, do you not
remember the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) asking you: 'O Zubair, do you
love Ali?' and you replied: 'Why?â€™ He then said to you: 'Verily you will
not? Isn't he my cousin. injustly go against him?â€™"

"O yes, this did happen," replied Zubair.

Imam Ali (a.s.) then said: "I beseech you to remember the day when the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) returned from Banu Awf, and you were
accompanying him, and he was holding your hand. I received him and
greeted him. He smiled at me and I smiled at him. You said: 'Ali bin Abi
Talib never gives up his pride.' He (s.a.w.) said to you: 'Slow down,
Zubair! Ali is not proud. Verily you will one day unfairly rise against
him.'"

"O yes," replied Al-Zubair, "but I forgot it. Now that you have
reminded me, I would give it up."(151) Consequently, Zubair decided to
retire from public life. But his son, Abdullah, accused him of cowardice
for doing so. Thus, the situation exploded and war was waged between the
two camps.

**His Humanistic Attitude:
**
Imam Ali (a.s.), nevertheless, kept his patience, tolerance and high
humane spirit. He, thus addressed his army--after all his efforts to
amend the situation were unsuccessful when war broke out--asking them to
adorn themselves with the high morals which Allah, the Exalted,
commanded them to do while in war:

"O people, I adjure you by Allah that you may not kill the one who
turns his back on the battlefield; you may not finish one wounded; you
may not deem captivity lawful; and you may not seize weapons nor
property."(152) Through this, he announced the Islamic regulations to be
practiced against the rebels. Then he invoked his Lord, the Most High,
taking refuge in Him against the trial caused by the Nakithun, declaring
it to be rejected by him before Allah, the Great and Most High.

Raising his hands high in invocation, he said: "O Allah! Talha and
Al-Zubair have willingly shaken hands with me. Then they openly waged
war against me. O Allah! Spare me their evil by whatever means or way
that You will.(153) The fight ended with a crushing victory achieved by
the Imam's army. Imam Ali (a.s.) proclaimed a general amnesty to all
those who fought against him:

"...No injured one may be killed; no one fleeing may be chased, and no
deserter may be stabbed. Whoever drops his weapon is safe, and whoever
closes his door is secure. No seizure of women and property may be
regarded lawful. Whatever utensils [the enemy] brought to the war may be
seized, but whatever else is for their heirs. No slave leaving the camp
may be pursued. Whatever there is of animals and weapons is yours. You
may not have the mother of a child--the maid who gave birth to a male or
female. Heritage is to be according to the law of Allah. Any woman whose
husband is killed may wait for four months and ten days, [before
marrying again]."

Somebody asked him: "Their blood is lawful to us but not their women
[to marry]. How is that?"

Imam Ali (a.s.) replied: "That is the way with the Muslims."(154)

But some of his soldiers wished to get more booty than those defined by
the Imam (a.s.). A man stood up and said: "O Amir Al-Mu'minin, by Allah
you did not divide equitably, nor did you act justly among the
subjects!"

Imam Ali (a.s.) asked him: "Oh, how?" The man replied: "Because you
distributed what was in the camp, but you left out the wealth, women and
children." Imam Ali (a.s.), then began to explain the philosophy of his
humane attitude:

"O brother of Bakr [tribe], you are a man of weak thinking. Do you not
know that we do not accuse the young of the crime committed by the old?
These people had their properties before separation, and they married as
adults, and they were born in a natural way. So, you may only have what
there is in their camp. As to what is in their houses is for the
heritage of their children. If anyone of them transgressed against us,
we would take him for his crime. But if he refrained, we would not
burden him with someone else's guilt.

"O brother of Bakr, I judged in this respect, as the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) did in respect to the people of Mecca. He distributed what was
in the camp and touched nothing else. I followed in his wake.

"O brother of Bakr, do you not know that what is on the battlefield is
lawful, but what is in the distribution (emigration) land is not lawful
except according to a right."(155)

These are some of the unique humane acts following the command of Allah
and in accordance with His laws, which Amir al-Mu'minin Imam Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.) applied in dealing with his defeated opponents. In his
attitude you will find no trace of emotion, hastiness or vengeance. It
was this attitude from which Imam Ali (a.s.) embodied the rules of
Allah, and no one could embody the laws of Allah among the people better
than Imam Ali (a.s.).

Imam Ali (a.s.) continued his humane measures in respect to the
Nakithun, at the same time showing the noblest and the truest of
feelings towards those deceived. He tried his best to mend the crack and
divisions by unifying the ummah and preserving its dignity.

**THE BATTLE OF SIFFIN**

After victory in the Battle of Basra, Imam Ali (a.s.) returned, with
his army to Kufa to reinforce his troops, and then to go on to Al-Sham
to liquidate the opposition led by Mu'awiyah bin Abi Sufyan.

Imam Ali (a.s.) started his march with his army heading for Al-Sham.
But the enemy received news about his move, and decided to meet the
Islamic advance- on the way. The two armies confronted one another near
the Euphrates River. Imam Ali (a.s.) resumed his efforts to set things
right through peaceful ways. He sent a three-member delegation to
Mu'awiyah asking him to fear Allah, preserve the unity of the Muslim
ranks and join the unanimity of the nation:

"Go to this man and call him to Allah, to obedience and to unanimity.
Probably Allah may guide him, and the ranks of the nation may come
together."(156)

The delegation met the head of the opposition and told him about the
intentions of the Imam (a.s.), presented him the way of Allah and warned
him against the consequences of his misdeeds. But Mu'awiyah stuck to his
position, saying: "Go away, I have no reply except the sword."(157)

Mu'awiyah's defiant position nevertheless did not affect Imam Ali's
(a.s.) tolerance and patience, nor did it cause him to be hasty in
starting an attack as he wanted to prevent bloodshed and to preserve the
lives of the nation.

This humanistic attitude adhered to by the Imam (a.s.) only increased
the obstinacy of the opposition, and they tried to block Imam Ali's
(a.s.) army from getting access to the waters of the river. They moved
troops to strategic positions along the banks of the river to stop the
Imam's army from reaching it.

Although water was vital for the army, Imam Ali (a.s.) did not lose his
patience. He sent a message to Mu'awiyah telling him: "We came here for
something other than water. Had we got to it before you, we would not
have forbidden it to you." Mu'awiyah's reply was: "By God, not even a
drop till you die of thirst!"(158)

This compelled Imam Ali (a.s.) to resort to force to get water for his
army, as the only alternative left before him. Consequently, he moved a
division of soldiers to break the blockade and Mu'awiyah's army received
a crushing defeat. The river came under the control of the Imam's army,
yet, he allowed Mu'awiyah's army access to the river whenever they
liked. In doing so he incarnated one of the fundamental moralities of
Islam in this respect.

How great and noble a warrier Imam Ali (a.s.) was, and what a big heart
he had!

As the Imam (a.s.) was greatly concerned about preventing the shedding
of Muslim blood, guarding dissension and avoiding disunity, he
challenged Mu'awiyah to fight him in single combat, where the winner
would be regarded as the leader of the nation: "O Mu'awiyah! What should
the people kill each other for? Come, fight me and leave the people
alone. The victor will have the rule."(159)

Mu'awiyah, fearing defeat, resorted to start the battle with all his
forces. The tactics of Imam Ali (a.s.) were not to lose his
self-control, and trying to keep the fight within the range of
individual combat.(160)

But his attempts at limiting the conflict could not repair the damage
of Mu'awiyah, and full scale war broke out that lasted two weeks.

Just when there appeared signs of victory in favor of Imam Ali's side,
the enemy, realizing that they were on the verge of defeat, resorted to
stave off their inevitable tute and raised copies of the Holy Qur'an on
top of their spears and swords [denoting that they were Muslims and
ready to accept the judgement of the Qur'an]. This proved to be a
deceitful trick to essentially change the general trend of the battle,
as the raising of the Qur'an by Mu'awiyah's soldiers had an effective
impact on the Imam's camp and presently, many groups of his army came to
him demanding a halt to the fighting. There was much gossip and
thousands indicated they wanted an amnesty.

Imam Ali (a.s.) immediately knew it was a trick, and tried to explain
its purpose to the people, telling them it was only meant to stop
victory coming. But many were fooled by the move and did not lend a
responsive ear to the Imam's repeated calls to come to their senses.
Some of them even used a threatening tone with the Imam (a.s.).(161)

At last it was decided to send Ash'ath bin Qais to Mu'awiyah to ask him
what he meant by raising the Qur'an. The enemy sent Mu'awiyah's demand
for an arbitrated settlement.

This only brought about Act Two of the tragedy as one of the mob chose
Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari to represent the camp of Imam Ali (a.s.), while
Mu'awiyah chose bin Al-As, The Imam (a.s.) did not accept the selection
of Al-Ash'ari for such an errand, as Al-Ash'ari had argued against Imam
Ali (a.s.) being a caliph after Uthman (162) --sharing the opinion of
some others who kept away from the Imam (a.s.). Instead he used to en
courage the people not to support Imam Ali (a.s.), which had forced the
Imam to depose him from his post as governor of Kufa.(163)

Imam Ali (a.s.) preferred Abdullah bin Abbas to be the representative
of his camp in the arbitration, but was pressed by the mob's insistence
on their choice of Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari. The Imam (a.s.) told them about
his weak-mindedness, in addition to his ideological trends and attitude
toward the Imam's government.

"You disobeyed me at the beginning [referring to their demand to stop
the fight and accept arbitration], so, do not disobey me now. I do not
see that you should appoint Abu Musa to arbitrate. He is too
feebleminded to be able to face Amr and his tricks."(164) However, they
refused to listen.

The development of events suggest they did not happen unintentionally.
The raising of the Qur'an was no coincidence and its timing meant there
was coordination between Mu'awiyah and his agents inside the Imam's
army, with whom he must have had close connections. No sooner had the
Qur'an been raised, than those agents in Imam Ali's (a.s.) army
responded by raising their voices demanding a cease-fire, playing on
people's tiredness of fighting and desire for peace. Then they imposed
arbitration on him, as well as choosing their own representative.

It is impossible not to think that that rebellious movement within the
Imam's army, as described by the historians, was a plot preplanned by
Mu'awiyah.

The result of the arbitration, needless to say, and as Imam Ali (a.s.)
had predicted, was in favor of Mu'awiyah, with the resulting situation
gradually moving to his interest.

**THE BATTLE OF NAHRAWAN**

After the arbitration incident, Imam Ali (a.s.) returned with his army
to Kufa. There he, surprisingly, heard that a group of his army,
numbering some 4,000 had announced their rebellion against him. They
refused to enter the town with him and went onto "Haroura" where they
took their positions.

It may be noted that the majority of those who rose against Imam Ali
(a.s.) were the very same group which forced him to accept arbitration
in the Siffin Battle.(165)

This group justified its uprising against the Imam Ali (a.s.) by
saying: "No authority except Allah's," and "We do not accept to have men
rule in the religion of Allah. Allah had sentenced Mu'awiyah and his
followers to death, unless they accept our judgement against them. It
had been a slip and a sin on our part to accept the two arbitrators. We
hereby repented to our Lord and set back. You too, [O Ali], do as we
did, or else we shall repudiate you."(166)

Imam Ali (a.s.) explained to them that Islamic ethics demand that when
one gives one's word one should keep it. He had given his word for a
one-year truce as agreed between the two camps. He said to them: "Woe to
you! Do you want me to break my word after having given consent and
pledge? Do you not know that Allah says: 'Fulfill the covenent of Allah
when you have covenented, and break not your oaths after the assertion
of them, and you have made Allah surety over you. Lo! Allah knows what
you do.'"(167)

The opposition, however, disregarded Imam Ali's (a.s.) directions and
stuck to their stance. The danger aggravated even more when further
discontented people joined them. They started overtly accusing all those
who followed Imam Ali (a.s.), and indeed the Imam (a.s.) himself, of
polytheism, and deemed the shedding of their blood as lawful.

Imam Ali (a.s.) initially did not intend to encounter them, so as to
grant them a chance to consider seriously what they were doing and
possibly to come back to the right path so that he could completely
devote himself to resuming the fight against the rebels in Al-Sham. The
arbitration had failed after the second meeting between the arbitors, as
Amr bin Al-As had tricked Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari.

However, a real internal danger to the Imam's government began to form.
The dissenters started to kill innocent people and threaten security.
They even killed the respected companion of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.),
Abdullah bin Khabab and ripped open his wife's stomach, though she was
pregnant and about to deliver her child. They also killed women of the
Tay tribe.

On hearing these developments, Amir Al Mu'minin (a.s.) sent Al-Harith
bin Murra Al-Abdi to them on a fact-finding mission, but they killed
him, too.(168)

Hearing this, the Imam (a.s.) returned from Al-Anbar-where he was
massing his troops for a second combat with Mu'awiyah in Al-Sham. When
he and his troops neared their place, he again tried whatever he could
to amend the situation without shedding blood. To this end, he requested
them to hand over to him the killers of Abdullah bin Khabab, Al-Harith
Al-Abdi and others, in which case he would leave them alone. They
answered: "We all killed them.'" Imam Ali (a.s.) then sent the notable
companion of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), Qais bin Sa'd, to advise them
and warn them against their foolish attitude. He asked them to give up
the unlawful belief that they had the right to shed the blood of Muslims
and accuse them of infidelity.(169)

The Imam (a.s.) continued his rational argument and humane attitude. He
sent to them Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, who, after finishing his advice to
them, raised his voice, saying:

"Whoever is not guilty of murder and joins this banner will be safe.
Whoever goes to Kufa, or to Mada'in, will be safe. No one of you is
wanted, except those who killed our brothers."(170)

This appeal largely succeeded and they began to leave, until their
numbers fell from twelve thousand to only four thousand.

But those who remained attacked the Imam's army. Imam Ali (a.s.) had
ordered his men not to start the fight unless they were set upon. So,
when the "Khawarij" began the conflict, the army of Imam Ali (a.s.)
surrounded them and the banner of truth was victorious.

This was the Battle of Nahrawan, which exterminated the movement of
those whom the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) had formerly described as
"al-Mariqun". According to Abu Sa'id al-Khidri: "I heard the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.) saying: 'There will rise from this nation a group who
will dart from the religion as an arrow darts from a bow."'(171)


