His Works
=========

I do not think that I will be able in this research to do justice in
recording all the rich aspects of the intellectual life of Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), but I will try my best to provide a quick and clear
idea about the intellectual output presented by the Imam for mankind in
various fields of knowledge. Thus, we would be able from a distance to
conduct a complete definition of the aspects of the portrait in which we
can view the life style of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), having finished
researching its historical side.

Ibn Khaldun Doubts Imams' Knowledge
-----------------------------------

Some historians doubted the scholarship of the Imams, let alone their
scholarly superiority, basing their doubts on the claim that had they
been truly scholars, their books would have been made available to the
public as is the case with all other scholars.

Anyone who considers the revolution of Imam Husain (a.s.) against Yazid
as a mistake committed by the Imam (a.s.) and a gross miscalculation
cannot be expected to refrain from making such a statement which we
cannot attribute to ignorance or lack of the ability to know, but it is
nothing other than the cloud of sectarian prejudice which stood as a
curtain between him and seeing the events, issues, and their reflections
as they really were. The "fair-minded" historian is asked to tell us
about the books authored by the sahaba and their works from whom he
derived the principles and precepts of the creed of the Prophet (S), or
even the works of the*tabi'in* whom he regards as the second class that
is knowledgeable of the issues of the*shari'a* , custodians of its
structure.

He may seek his excuse by saying that the narratives of*hadith* and news
of events narrated through them are suitable as a criterion for judging
the extent of their knowledge. This is actually how we, too, defend our
Imams, for the legacy they have left us in various fields of knowledge
and which is narrated about them is sufficient to acquaint us with the
extent of their knowledge and even superiority over others. Is it really
possible that Ibn Khaldun did not review such legacy of*ahadith* which
reached us through them and recorded by scholars and thinkers and upon
which the structure of their school of thought, in which a large section
of the nation believes, stood? We doubt it; nay, we may even be
positively sure about the unrealistic nature of such an odd question
especially since Ibn Khaldun is one of the most knowledgeable, most
highly intellectual, and most mature writers.

Imams and the Persecution of Rulers
-----------------------------------

The Imams were tested during various periods of their lives by pressing
crises due to the trespassing of oppressive rulers on their civil
liberties. They pursued their followers and sincere adherents,
straitening on them in various aspects of their everyday life, so much
so that the word*rafidi* came to represent in the eyes of the rulers the
final indictment of anyone proven to be "guilty" of its context, a
believer in its background.

Because of that, the chance was lost for many of those who sought
knowledge to derive from that leading fountainhead, and the chance to
find the scholarly solutions for the intellectual problems because of
which they

were disturbing their minds. Despite all these pressures and violent
trespassing, mankind is not intellectually deprived of a great deal of
intellectual masterpieces which the Imams (a.s.) dictated to their
students and disciples in various aspects of scholarship.

Some of those students used to give jailers whatever they demanded so
that they might agree to carry written questions to the jailed Imam
(a.s.) and bring them back his answers thereto, out of their desire to
benefit from the presence of the Imam (a.s.), and due to their desire to
be faithful to the trust of scholarship, and in order to protect it from
the labyrinths of doubt.

The biography of the jailed Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.) bears witness to
that according to those who quoted him. Historians and biographers of
Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) do in fact mention some books authored by the Imam
(a.s.) besides his narration of*hadith* and issues which he dictated to
those who asked him and to his close companions who used to frequently
question him about the types of knowledge which they could not
understand. To positively identify these books as authored by the Imam
(a.s.) may require a convincing evidence which we may not sometimes
have.

Al-Fiqh al-Radawi
-----------------

Among those books is Al-*Fiqh* al-Radawi which was for quite some time
the subject of debate among scholars, for there are among them those who
considered it to be authored by the Imam (a.s.), relied on it, and
established their arguments on such a basis, such as the Majlisis,
Sayyid Bahr al-Uloom, the author of*Al-Hadaiq* , Shaikh al-Nawari, and
others. But the large number of scholars of verification conceded that
it could not have been said for sure that it was authored by Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) because of the lack of sufficient evidence in addition
to their doubt, or the lack of conviction, of the arguments brought
forth by those who considered it one of the Imam's works.

The fact that it was not at all common knowledge that that book was
authored by the Imam (a.s.) prior to the late time of the Majlisis, in
addition to the lack of knowledge of scholars before their time of any
information about such an authorship, all of that negates the belief
that it was attributed to or personally authored by the Imam (a.s.).
There was no reason why that book would not have been famous during the
life-time of the Imam (a.s.) especially since the knowledge of the Imam
(a.s.) was very well known to everyone, so much so that when he
narrated*hadith* to the scholars of Nishapur, more than twenty thousand
scribes wrote it down there and then, besides others, as scholars
of*hadith* tell us.

### How the Book Appeared

###

The story how this book appeared says that a group of the residents of
Qum brought a copy with them to Mecca where the ruler-judge (qadi-amir)
Sayyid Husain al-Isfahani saw it and testified to its being authored by
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and made a copy of it for himself which he brought to
Isfahan. There he showed it to the first (senior) Majlisi who likewise
was sure it was authored by the Imam (a.s.) and so was his son the
second (junior) Majlisi, and he quoted the*ahadith* it contained in the
volumes of his book*Bihar al-*

*Anwar* , making the book one of his own book's references, and this is
how its fame spread.

In his Introduction to*Bihar al-Anwar* , al-Majlisi writes, "I was told
about the book*Fiqh ar-Ridha’* by the virtuous traditionist the
ruler-judge Husayn, may God be Gracious unto his soul, after coming to
Isfahan. He said to me, \`It happened that during the time when I was
neighboring the House of God, a group of the residents of Qum visited me
while performing their*hajj* and they had with them an old book the date
of its writing agreed with the date during which ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) was
alive.'" Then al-Majlisi continues to say, "I heard my father saying
that it was in the handwriting of ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), and a large number
of dignitaries testified to the same."

Sayyid Husayn al-Isfahani said: "Through those evidences, I came to know
that it was indeed authored by the Imam (a.s.); therefore, I too the
book and made a copy of it and corrected my copy by comparing it with
the original, then my father took my copy and made yet another copy of
it and compared the copy with the original, and most of its statements
agree with what is mentioned by al-Saduq Abu Ja’far ibn Babawayh in his
book Man la Yahdaruhu al Faqih without giving credit to the book, and in
agreement with what his father states in his letter to him. A large
number of*ahkam* which our fellows have mentioned and whose source is
unknown are mentioned in it."

### Doubting the Accuracy of Rendering it to the Imam

###

What makes us doubt the attribution is that Shaikh al-Saduq, who took
pains in documenting all the legacies of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and who
researched him in his book*'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’* , and in others, did
not mention that he had authored such a book. Also, other scholars who
came after him, be it residents of Qum or others, did not mention
anything about it, and Sayyid al-Isfahani did not say anything about
those pilgrims from Qum who showed him the book as to how they acquired
the book, and who the person who was telling its story was.

It is also unusual that the book should remain obscure for such a long
period of time in the hands of some residents of Qum without any of the
city's scholars or traditionists getting to have a look at it, although
those scholars were known not to leave anything small or big without
writing it down in order to safeguard it against loss.

There are three possibilities regarding the book:

1. That it is authored by the Imam (a.s.) on the account of evidences in
it which give that impression such as his statement at its beginning,
"Abdullah Ali ibn Musa ar-Ridha’ says...," and "... one of our own
customs, we people of the Ahl al-Bayt." In its chapter on zakat, it
states, "It is narrated about my father the scholar..." In its chapter
on usury, it states, "My father ordered me and I obeyed." In the chapter
on*hajj* , it states: "My father said that Asma daughter of Amees..." It
also says, "... my father from my grandfather from his father said: \`I
saw Ali ibn al-Husayn walking without running.'" It also contains: "I
heard the scholar. I heard him say..." "Scholar" is the title of Imam
al-Kazim (a.s.), up to the end of such statements which give the
impression that the book was his, that he was its author, and they may
be the

evidences which encouraged many scholars to be positively sure that the
book was written by the Imam (a.s.), and to act accordingly.

2. That it was authored by the man's father, whose name happens to be
Ali ibn Musa. He authored it for his son al-Saduq, and it is a
compilation of narratives which came through Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.). This
view was tolerated by some scholars, but the word "ar-Ridha’ (a.s.)" in
the title of the book negates the possibility of its being authored by
him except this may be the fault of those who made copies of the book
and of the scribes since the complete name of the Imam (a.s.) comes to
mind.

3. That it was compiled by Ibn Babawayh, or someone else, which he
compiled on behalf of the Imam (a.s.) and in which he recorded the
traditions which were narrated about Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and
classified them in a way which gives the impression that he was an
author for the Imam (a.s.) since the traditions about him are actually
his own with only one difference: references of those traditions were
eliminated. This may be the best possibility since other possibilities
do not say anything about why the book's subject-matters were classified
the way they are.

### Views of Some Scholars About the Book

###

Our master mentor Imam al-Khoi has stated that, "It is not proven that
it is ar-Ridha’'s*fiqh* by narration, but it contains evidences which
point out to its being a collection of fatawa of some ulema, and due to
the agreement of most of its contents to the letter Ibn Babawayh wrote
to his son1 ; had it been otherwise, al-Saduq would have had to acquaint
us with it."

The verifier (muhaqqiq) Mirza Abdullah al-Afandi, in his book*Riyad
al-'Ulema* , is positive about the book being the same letter referred
to above, adding that the reason for the occurrence of the Imam's name
in it is due to the fact that both men share the same first and second
names, and this is why it is attributed to the Imam (a.s.).

Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr wrote a dissertation about the lack of evidence
(that it was the Imam's), saying in his authorization to Shaikh Agha
Bazrag of Tehran that it is the same book authored by Ibn Abu 'Azaqir
better known as al-Shalmaghani. Anyhow, attributing the book to the Imam
(a.s.) is doubtful enough to almost a firm belief that the book was not
authored by him. But the book, although we disagree with our master
mentor, may God prolong his shade, in his description of it as a
collection of fatawa of some ulema, is no less than a narration whose
narrator is anonymous; therefore, we cannot attribute it to the Imam
(a.s.) and accept it as a reference to rely upon for issuing religious
verdicts or to know what is Islamically unlawful.

Al-Risala al-Dahabiyya fil Tibb
-------------------------------

Among such books is*Al-Risala al-Dahabiyya fil Tibb* (the gold medical
dissertation) for which sources are counted reaching sometimes to
Muhammad ibn Jumhoor, and sometimes to al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali
who was accepted as trustworthy by al-Najjashi who described him as
"highly esteemed and trustworthy; he narrated one text about ar-Ridha’
(a.s.)," which could be "the gold medical dissertation."

It is possible that the dissertation's fame among scholars, and their
consensus in various centuries that the Imam (a.s.) was its author, and
that

nobody doubted such an authorship, are enough proofs leading the
researcher to comfortably and almost positively conclude that it was
indeed from the intellectual output of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) himself.

### Dissertation Was Authored by the Imam

###

Despite all of this, we see no reason to doubt that it was authored by
the Imam if we apply the criterion generally applied to derive
legislative verdicts (*ahkam* ), or to be familiar with the principles
of the creed (*usool* ), for in that case there are conditions which are
not required here; otherwise, doubt would have necessitated the
attribution of authorship to a large number of books due to the lack of
a method which would assure us of the reliability of such an
attribution. Yet the fame which many verifiers consider as a means
towards confirmation can by itself prove to us the accuracy of
attributing this dissertation to the Imam (a.s.).

If it is proven for us that al-Najjashi meant this same gold
dissertation when he was quoting al-Nawfali saying that he narrated one
text from ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), the knot would surely be untied. What
supports this assumption about al-Najjashi is that some scholars have
said that the library of allama al-'Askari in Samarra (Iraq) contains a
copy of a manuscript dealing with the medical knowledge of Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) narrated by Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Muhammad
al-Nawfali2 , provided there is no other copy by al-Nawfali in which he
quotes the Imam (a.s.) other than this dissertation; otherwise, we would
be confused and we would not be able to reasonably understand why
al-Najjashi did not provide sufficient details about the books which he
attributed to their respective authors or narrators, or at least
indicate their titles!

This dissertation is one of the most precious pieces of Islamic legacy
dealing with the science of medicine. This inclusive, scientific and
invaluable dissertation is a summary of a number of medical sciences
such as anatomy, biology, physiology, pathology and the science of
health care. It provided most of the knowledge related to the science of
protective medicine, nutrition, chemistry, and a large portion of other
sciences as well.

The Imam (a.s.) sent this dissertation to the caliph al-Ma’mun around
the year 201 A.H. when medicine was a primitive science and its research
was not conducted scientifically but based on practice alone rather than
on scientific discoveries, and when the science of bacteriology was not
discovered yet, nor was there any significant knowledge of nutritional
supplements such as vitamins, or other significant medical discoveries
for fighting microbes such as penicillin, streptomycin, oromycin, etc.

On the surface, the dissertation seemed to be very simple in order to be
in line with the mentality of that time, but it is quite deep and
complicated in its implications and it needs a scientific study and
lengthy researches to unveil its secrets and uncover its treasures, and
it should be compared with modern scientific facts.3

### Al-Ma’mun Evaluated Dissertation

###

Al-Ma’mun was very pleased to receive that dissertation and he expressed
how much he cherished it by ordering to have it written down in

gold and to be deposited at his "depository of wisdom," thus its name
"the gold dissertation."

In praising it, al-Ma’mun said, "I have reviewed the dissertation of my
learned cousin, the loved and virtuous one, the logical physician, which
deals with the betterment of the body, the conduct of bathing, the
balance of nutrition, and I found it very well organized and one of the
best blessings. I carefully studied it, reviewed and contemplated upon
it, till its wisdom manifested itself to me, and its benefits became
obvious, and it found its place in my heart, so I learned it by heart
and I understood it by my mind, for I found it to be a most precious
item to post, a great treasure, and a most useful item, so I ordered it
to be written in gold due to its being precious, and I deposited it at
the depository of wisdom after I had it copied down by the descendants
of Hashim, the youths of the nation. Bodies become healthy by balanced
diets, and life becomes possible by overcoming disease, and through life
wisdom is achieved, and through wisdom Paradise is won, and it is worthy
of being safeguarded and treasured, and an object of value and esteem
and a reliable physician and a counselor to refer to and a substance of
knowledge in its injunctions and prohibitions.

"Because it came out of the house of those who derive their knowledge
from the knowledge of the Chosen One (S), the missive of the prophets,
the proofs of successors to the prophets, the manners of scholars, the
cure to the hearts and the sick from among the people of ignorance and
blindness..., may God be pleased with them, bless and be merciful to
them, the first of them and the last, the young and the old, I showed it
to the elite among my closest train who are known for their wisdom,
knowledge of medicine, authors of books, those who are counted among the
people of knowledge and described with wisdom, and each one of them
lauded it and thought highly of it, elevated it with esteem and
appreciated it in order to be fair to its author, submitting to him,
believing in the wisdom he included therein."4

### Al-Ma’mun Asked the Imam to Write It

###

The story of this dissertation is that al-Ma’mun had a very inquisitive
mind eager for knowledge, fond of obtaining more of it. During one of
his scientific debates, a group of physicians and philosophers in
Nishapur, including Yohanna (John) ibn Masawayh the physician, Jibraeel
(Gabriel) ibn Bakhtishoo' the physician, Salih ibn Salhama the Indian
philosopher, in addition to others, had gathered. Discussion turned to
medicine and how in it the bodies are improved.

Al-Ma’mun and his attendants were involved in a very lengthy discussion
of the subject, and how God created the human body and the contradictory
things in it, the four elements, the harms and benefits of various types
of food, while the Imam (a.s.) kept silent and did not take part in any
of that. Al-Ma’mun, therefore, said to him, "What do you have to say, O
father of al-Hasan, in today's subject of our discussion?" Abul-Hasan
(a.s.) said, "I have of this the knowledge of what I have personally
tested and came to know about its accuracy by experience and by the
passage of time in addition to what I was told by my ancestors of what
nobody can afford to be ignorant of nor excused for leaving out. I shall
compile that with an equal share of what everyone need know."

Al-Ma’mun then rushed to Balkh and Abul-Hasan (a.s.) did not accompany
him; therefore, al-Ma’mun sent him from there a letter asking him to
fulfill his promise and make that compilation, so ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) wrote
him saying:

*"In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful; My reliance is
upon Allah*

I have received the letter of the commander of the faithful regarding
what he ordered me about acquainting him with what is needed of matters
I have tested and heard about foods and drinks, medicines, venesection,
blood letting, bathing, poisons, what should be avoided, and other
things which manage the health of the body, and I explained what is
needed to be done regarding one's own body, and God is the One Who gives
success."

After that he initiates the dissertation.

### Commentaries on the Dissertation

###

A good number of scholars attempted to write commentaries on the
dissertation; here is a partial listing of some of them:

1.*Tarjamat al-Alawi lil Tibb al-Radawi* by Sayyid Diaud-Din Abul-Rida
Fadlallah ibn Ali al-Rawandi (d. 548 A.H.).

2.*Tarjamat al-Dhahabiyya* by mawla Faydallah 'Usarah al-Tasatturi who
was an authority on medicine and astrology during the regime of Fath-Ali
Khan. This book was written under the cover of secrecy in about 107 A.H.
A handwritten copy of the manuscript dated 1133 A.H. is available at
Mishkat Library of the Tehran University.

3.*Tarjamat al-Dhahabiyya* by Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi. It is available
at the private library of the late Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr in Kazimiyya
(Iraq).

4.*'Afiyat al-Bariyya fi Sharh al-Dhahabiyya* by Mirza Muhammad Hadi son
of Mirza Muhammad Salih al-Shirazi. It was authored during the regime of
Sultan Husayn al-Safawi. It is in handwritten manuscript form and it is
available at the Sayyid Husayn al-Hamadani Library, Najaf al-Ashraf
(Iraq).

5.*Sharh Tibb ar-Ridha’* by mawla Muhammad Sharif al-Khatoonabadi. He
authored it around 1120 A.H.

6.*Tarjamat al-Dhahabiyya* by Sayyid Shamsud-Din Muhammad ibn Muhammad
Badi' al-Radawi al-Mashhadi. It was finished in 1155 A.H., and it is
available at the Shaikh Muhammad Ali Akbar al-Nahawandi library in
Khurasan (Iran).

7.*Sharh Tibb ar-Ridha’* by Sayyid Abdallah al-Shubbar who died in 1242
A.H. Shaikh al-Nawari mentioned that he saw that copy himself.

8.*Sharh Tibb ar-Ridha’* by mawla Muhammad ibn al-*Hajj* Muhammad Hasan
al-Mashhadi who taught at Mashhad and died in 1257 A.H.

9.*Sharh Tibb ar-Ridha’* by mawla Nawrooz Ali al-Bastami.

10*Al-Mahmoodiyya* by al-*Hajj* Kazim al-Moosawi al-Zanjani who died in
1292 A.H. It is in manuscript form and it is available with the author's
grandsons.

There are others besides these scholars who explained and commented on
it, revealing what is hidden of its secrets and obscure treasures.
Probably the latest person who explained it and conducted a comparative
study between

its theory and the latest modern scientific discoveries is Dr.
Abdul-Sahib Zaini in the "*Multaqa al-'Asrayn* " series.

Sahifat ar-Ridha’
-----------------

Among those works is*Sahifat ar-Ridha’* which deals with*fiqh* .
Apparently, it is not confirmed by our famous scholars although the
author of*Mustadrak al-Wasail* described it as "among the well-known
books which is relied upon and which no other book, before it or after
it, is more esteemed or reliable," and we do not know how realistic some
of the judgment issued by the author of this Mustadrak about such an
evaluation are. What is unusual is that al-Majlisi, in his*Muqaddimat
al-Bihar* , stated that despite its fame, it is on the level of a
lecture rather than a musnad.

Al-Saheefa's Musnads
--------------------

But Sayyid al-Amin, in his A'yan mentions an isnad (ascription) related
to it alone from Shaikh Abdul-Wasi' al-Yamani al-Zaydi for the copy
brought by the said Shaikh from Yemen and published in Damascus. Also,
some of its copies contain its ascription to Abu Ali al-Tibrisi, but
Shaikh al-Majlisi says that he does not know anything about that.

*Al-Mustadrak* states: "The esteemed Mirza Abdallah al-Afandi, in
his*Riyad al-'Ulema* , has compiled all its sources and said, \`Among
that is a copy of this Saheefa which I saw at the town of Ardabil, and
its sanad was...,' and he goes on to indicate its sanad after that. But
the ascription he mentioned is debatable in as far as his narrators are
concerned, and what we opt for regarding the dissertation is that its
authenticity is not verified and is not suitable in its context for
deciding about*ahkam* . Suffices us the fact that great scholars and
verifiers of past centuries refused to acknowledge its authenticity,
refusing also to believe it was authored by the Imam (a.s.); therefore,
we have no excuse if we include it among the works of the Imam (a.s.)
and his scholarly production.

Mahd al-Islam
-------------

Among other works attributed to the Imam (a.s.) is the book titled*Mahd
al-Islam wa Shara'i ad-Din* which is referred to by al-Saduq in
his*Uyoon* from al-Fadl ibn Shathan, but he did not indicate that it was
written in response to al-Ma’mun's request.5

### Doubting Its Attribution To The Imam

###

What appears to us after scrutinizing the list of its ascription is that
we cannot rely on its attribution to the Imam simply because some of its
narrators are not held reliable. Yet even the style of this dissertation
is shaky, with disturbed expressions intermingled in it. this gives us
the impression that it is highly unlikely that the Imam (a.s.) dictated
it despite its inclusion of some*ahkam* the upholding to which is not
considered obligatory in our school of thought such as making obligatory
the qunoot in all five daily prayers, the obligation of sending
blessings unto the Prophet (S), i.e.*salawat* , at all places, at
sneezing, sacrificial animals, etc., and the obligation of*takbir*
during the Eid al-Fitr prayers after five*salawat* , during the Eid
al-Adha after ten*salawat* , and at Mina after fifteen*salawat* , that a
woman whose menstrual period continues for eighteen days must not say

the daily prayers, but if she became clean before then, she could say
them, and if she is not clean till after eighteen days, she would bathe
and say her daily prayers and does whatever a woman does during her
period.

In his second narrative, he adds to the first one saying, "And he stated
in it that the small sins of prophets are forgiven," which is
contradictory with the Imam (a.s.) declaring that they are infallible
and do not commit small or big sins.

All of this strengthens our belief that the dissertation was not
authored or dictated by the Imam (a.s.), but it contains a nullification
of the caliphate of al-Ma’mun and other preceding caliphs, calling them
misguided and ones who forsook righteousness and guidance, clearly
confining the true Imamate to the Twelve Imams (a.s.).

The dissertation also contains a violation of the principle of taqiyya
and of its curtain which was upheld by the Imams during their lengthy
history. This adds more doubt in the accuracy of the attribution of the
dissertation to the Imam (a.s.). What we think to be quite possible is
that the dissertation may have been a collection of fatawa (verdicts) of
one scholar and his views regarding doctrinal and legislative issues.
The lack of order of the dissertation's style and organization in
listing subject-matters and their sequence, in addition to the fact that
some of its*ahkam* are simply in disagreement with the established ones,
all this leads us to and confirms this possibility.

Ajwibat Masail Ibn Sinan
------------------------

(Or "Answers to ibn Sinan's Queries") What may be described as works by
the Imam (a.s.) are his answers to questions put forth to him by Ibn
Sinan. But this cannot be described as a book authored by the Imam
(a.s.); otherwise, the collection of his answers to the questions of
many others, which deal with various fields of knowledge and
scholarship, must be described likewise.

'Ilal Ibn Shathan
-----------------

Also, the (Imam's answers to) ailments about which Ibn Shathan had asked
him cannot be considered as a book he authored, as some scholars
concluded, since they were organized by Ibn Shathan himself though they
were derived from the knowledge of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and his answers
to the questions about ailments.

For this reason, we find Ibn Shathan presenting those ailments in a
problem and a solution format, and we do not know whether the texts he
mentioned were the exact answers of the Imam (a.s.) verbatim or not, for
it is quite possible that he presented them in his own personal style
while maintaining the essence of the idea which the Imam (a.s.)
presented in his answer, which we think was the case.

Summary
-------

From what we have discussed honestly and frankly regarding the
authenticity of the books which were attributed to have been authored by
the Imam (a.s.), it becomes clear that the only book which we dare to
describe

as authored by the Imam (a.s.) is*Al-Risala al-Dhahabiyya fil Tibb*
which he wrote in response to caliph al-Ma’mun's request.

This does not mean at all that the other books attributed to him did not
carry views and theories which he had dictated to those who questioned
him about this and that, or to those who were seeking his supreme
fountainhead of knowledge, and our discussion is only in form, not in
context and substance.

### Notes

###

[^1]: Al-Muhadarat fi al-Fiqh al-Ja’fari by al-Sayyid al-Shahroodi,
"Report on Imam al-Khoi's Lecture," Vol. 1, p. 7

[^2]: Tibb ar-Ridha’ ("Medicine of ar-Ridha’"), "Multaqa al-'Asrayn"
series, issue number 2, p. 130

[^3]: Ibid., pp. 19-20

[^4]: A'yan al-Shi'a, Vol. 4, pp. 2, 143 and 144

[^5]: Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 121
