Altercations
============

On various occasions, al-Ma’mun tried to force Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.)
into the arena of complex debates with various groups and creeds. He
used to conduct scientific and intellectual sessions to which he invited
giant thinkers, leading scientists, the atheists of the century, and
debaters whose scientific might was feared and before the stubbornness
of whose complex arguments the evidence was muted and due to the
fierceness of whose doubt the proof was weakened.

In all such debates, the Imam would come out victorious over his
opponents due to the tremendous power of knowledge he possessed without
forcing himself into the sophistry of arguments to which some might have
resorted in order to demolish the structure of his opponent's argument
and weaken his ability to provide evidence. Rather, he depended in his
debate upon honest arguments in order to prove right to be right, his
miraculous ability of conviction, and his calm stylistic method.

Al-Nawfali Warns the Imam
-------------------------

Al-Nawfali tried to warn the Imam against attempting to deal with the
debates of such people when the Imam asked him why al-Ma’mun had invited
him to debate them, for al-Ma’mun had asked the Catholic archbishop, the
High Rabbi, leading Sabians, the Hindu high priest, followers of
Zoroaster, Nestus the Roman medical scientist, and a group of orators,
to enter into a scientific debate with Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.). He sent
Yasir the servant to the Imam to tell him about the time when the debate
would start, requesting him to attend. When Yasir went out and
al-Nawfali was alone with the Imam, the Imam (a.s.) turned to him and
asked him in the form of a dialogue, "O Nawfali! You are an Iraqi, and
the heart of an Iraqi is not severe; so, what can you gain from causing
your cousin to require us to meet with disbelievers and rhetoricians?"

Al-Nawfali answered, "May my life be sacrificed for yours! He wants to
put you to test, and he loves to know how much knowledge you possess. He
has, indeed, built his assumption on a shaky foundation, and doomed, by
God, what he has built." He asked, "And what has he built?" He answered,
"Scholars of*kalam* and innovators are opposite of the scholars. A
scholar does not deny the undeniable, whereas rhetoricians and
polytheists are people who deny and try to prove what is not true. If
you argue with them and tell them that God is One, they would say,
\`Prove His Oneness,' and if you say that Muhammad (S) is the Messenger
of God, they would say, \`Confirm his Message,' then they would press
their lies on a person while he tries to disprove their lies, and they
would continue to prove that he is mistaken till he abandons his
argument; so, beware of them, may my life be sacrificed for you."

He smiled and asked, "O Nawfali! Do you fear that they will disprove my
argument?" He answered, "No, by God! I have never worried about you, and
I hope God will enable you to have the upper hand over them." The Imam
asked again, "O Nawfali! Would you like to know when al-Ma’mun will feel
regretful?"

He answered, "Yes." He said, "When he hears me argue with the people of
the Torah quoting their own Torah, with the people of the Gospel (Bible)
quoting their own Gospel, with the people of the Psalms quoting their
own Psalms, with Zoroastrians arguing in their Persian language, with
the Romans in their own Latin, and with rhetoricians using their very
rhetoric. So, if I closed all the avenues of argument in the face of
each arguing party and disproved his claim, making him renounce his
statement from its onset and referring to my own statement, then
al-Ma’mun would know that he would not achieve what he aspires. It is
then that he will feel regretful;*We are God's, and Unto Him is our
return* ."

Thus does the Imam show that he was taking lightly and was not concerned
about such persons whom al-Ma’mun wished to gather together against him
trying to embarrass him with their falsification and arguments which he
hoped might close for the Imam (a.s.) all the avenues of argument. When
the session starts and the Imam (a.s.) is invited to join it, discussion
starts and the Imam (a.s.) starts his debate with the Catholics, making
the Bible his reference to prove his own defense of the Unity of God and
disprove the Godhead of Christ (a.s.) by those who regarded him as a god
besides God.

Then he follows with a magnificent discussion proving that the Bible in
circulation today is not the same which God had revealed to Christ
(a.s.) and that it is authored by some of the disciples of Jesus (a.s.)
who are the authors of the four gospels, depending in his argument on
the fact that the details presented by each one of them stand in
flagrant contradiction with those of the other. The Catholic archbishop
slipped into an obvious self-contradiction; for he on one hand
sanctified the authors of the four gospels and held them above lying
while, on the other hand, he admitted to the Imam that they did tell
lies about Christ (a.s.).

Then the Imam (a.s.) goes to debate the High Rabbi, scholar of the Jews,
to prove the prophethood of Prophet Muhammad (S) from the previously
revealed divine testaments, after which he follows with a very logical
debate. Having argued with him that one of the requirements of a Prophet
was to perform something all other creation are unable to perform, he
asked him about the reason why they, the Jews, refrained from believing
into the miracles of all prophets other than Moses (a.s.) son of Imran
(Amram), and the High Rabbi answered him saying, "We cannot admit the
prophethood of any who professes prophethood except after bringing us
knowledge similar to that brought by Moses." Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) said to
him, "Then how come you admitted the prophethood of other prophets who
preceded Moses (a.s.) who did not split the sea, nor cleave the stones
so that twelve springs would gush forth from it, nor took their hands
out shining white as Moses did, nor did they turn a cane into a snake?!"
It was then that the High Rabbi overcame his stubbornness, submitted to
the argument, and admitted that any supernatural act beyond human
capacity was indeed a proof of prophethood.

The Imam (a.s.) asked him then about the reason why they did not believe
in the prophethood of Jesus (a.s.) despite the fact that he brought
forth miracles beyond human capacity such as bringing the dead back to

life, healing those who were born blind and the lepers, and about the
reason why they did not believe in the prophethood of Muhammad (S)
despite his bringing an extra-ordinary miracle, that is, the Holy Qur'an
while he was neither a scholar nor a writer. The High Rabbi had no
answer at all.

Then came the turn of the Zoroastrian high priest whom the Imam debated
depending on the priest's belief in the prophethood of Zoroaster. The
Zoroastrian tells the Imam that Zoroaster brought them what no other man
had ever brought them before. "We did not see him," he continues, "but
the stories of our ancestors told us that he legalized for us what no
other person before made legal; so, we followed him." The Imam asked,
"You believed in the stories which came to you about him, so you
followed him, didn't you?" "Yes," he answered. The Imam (a.s.) said,
"This is the case with all other nations. Stories came to them about
what the prophets had accomplished, what Moses (a.s.), Jesus (a.s.), and
Muhammad (S) had all brought them, so why did you not believe in any of
these prophets, having believed in Zoroaster through the stories that
came to you about him saying that he brought forth what others did not?"

Imam's Debate With the Sabian
-----------------------------

The Zoroastrian high priest had no more to say. The Imam then turned to
the debate's witnesses, having finished debating with the chief
representatives of those creeds, asking anyone else to go ahead and put
forth any question he had, everyone abstained from doing so. It was then
that Imran the Sabian, who was one of the most distinguished scholars of
the science of*kalam* of his time, approached the Imam (a.s.) and asked
him how he could prove the existence of the Creator, and the discussion
between them delved into the deepest depths of this complex question,
while the Imam answered the man's questions through obvious scientific
facts in a gloriously simple way.

Among the questions Imran asked was: "Master! Was the Being known to
Himself by His Own Self?" The Imam said, "Knowledge is acquired by
something which would negate its opposite, and so that the thing itself
would be existing through what it is negated about it, without the
existence of anything which contradicts its existence so that a need
arises to negate that thing about itself by defining what is known about
it. Do you understand, O Imran?" He said, "Yes, by God, master! Tell me,
then, by what means did He come to know what He knew, by a pronoun or by
something else?"

The Imam (a.s.) said, "If it had been by a pronoun, would He then find
anyway not to establish for that pronoun a limit where knowledge ends?"
Imran answered, "Yes, He will have to find such way." The Imam then
asked him, "Then what is that pronoun?" Imran could not provide any
answer. The Imam (a.s.) said, "Is it alright if I ask you about the
pronoun and you define it by another pronoun? If you answer in the
affirmative, then you would make both your claim and statement void. O
Imran! Ought you not come to know that the One cannot be described by a
pronoun, and would not be described except by a verb, by deed, by
action, and He cannot be expected to be parts and kinds like human
beings?"

Then Imran asked him, "Master! The knowledge I have says that the being
is changed in his essence by his action of creating..." The Imam (a.s.)
said, "Does your statement, O Imran, mean that the being does not in any
way change its essence except when it affects its own essence in a way
which changes it? O Imran! Can you say that the fire changes its own
self, or that the heat burns itself, or have you seen anyone seeing his
own vision?" Imran said, "No, I have not seen that; could you please
tell me, master, is it in that in the creation, or is it the nature of
creation in it?"

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, O Imran, He is above all of that; He is not
in the creation, nor is the creation in Him; He is elevated above that,
and bad indeed is your knowledge about Him, and no might except in God.
Tell me about the mirror: are you in it or is it in you? If neither one
of you is in the other, then how did you come to see your own self's
reflection in it?" Imran said, "Through the light between myself and
itself." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Can you see of that light more than what
you can see with your own eyes?"

He answered, "Yes." The Imam (a.s.) said to him, "Then show it to us..."
It was then that the man was too baffled to say a word. The Imam (a.s.)
said, "I do not see the light except leading you and the mirror to come
to know each without being in either one of you. There are many such
examples which the ignorant simply cannot observe, and God Has the
greatest example."

Thus did the Imam face the challenge of Imran the Sabian's doubting
method, demolishing its structure and dispelling the ambiguity of the
complex doubts which he could not understand till vision became clear to
him. The Imam (a.s.) did not determine an evidence except after building
it with simple easy to understand proofs out of the everyday life of man
in order not to leave any way for the opponent to doubt after
transforming a most complex theory into an easy and commonsense idea,
all of that by employing a very beautiful and miraculous style.

Debating al-Maroozi
-------------------

In another session, al-Ma’mun invited him to debate Sulayman al-Maroozi,
Khurasan's scientist in*kalam* , and the debate between them dealt with
some significant topics which were being debated then by scholars of the
science of*kalam* , and the starting-point of the discussion was the
issue of*badaa* . The Imam (a.s.) explained its sound meaning,
indicating that the Sublime and Dear God had innermost knowledge which
nobody but He knew, and that was the source of*badaa* and knowledge
which He taught His angels and Prophets.

To explain it in a way which would remove all confusion and ambiguity,
we can say about*badaa* is that God makes manifest that His Will is
linked to an advantage which necessitates it, and the apparent reality
is that His Will is hinging on what is opposite to it. Then He after
that makes manifest His actual Will when the advantage is satisfied from
all aspects and the reasons for which it was not previously manifested
are removed, and it appears to the creation as if God willed to abandon
His first Will, hence it is in the view of creation, not in the reality
of Will,*badaa* .

This is the theory of*badaa* in its simple logical context which Imamis
(Shi'as) uphold and which some people misunderstood and misinterpreted,

giving it a wrong meaning which necessitated attributing ignorance (!!!)
to the Almighty God and an excuse to wage an unfair campaign of
defamation against Imami Shi'as by their opponents from among the
followers of other sects.

Imam Proves Badaa
-----------------

The Imam (a.s.) has proven the accuracy of*badaa* in which Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.) believe by first quoting the Holy Qur'an, for God Almighty said,
"So leave them alone, for you shall not be blamed for that,"1 meaning
thereby that He intends to annihilate them, then the Almighty, according
to the*badaa* theory, He has said, "So remind, for reminding may avail
the believers,"2 which indicates a shift from the first decision as
observed from studying the context of both verses.

Second, he tries to prove it by traditions narrated from his forefathers
from the Messenger of God (S) who said: "God sent his*wahi* to one of
His prophets to inform him that he would die on a particular day, and
when that prophet was told so, he pleaded God, the King, while on his
bed, saying, \`Lord! Postpone my demise till I see my son growing up to
carry out my will,' till he fell from his bed, whereupon God sent
his*wahi* again to the same prophet to inform him that He decided to
postpone it."

It is apparent that*badaa* in the meaning which we indicated requires no
alarm whatsoever and it does not justify waging a campaign of defamation
to those who believe in it.

Eternity Versus Transience of the Will
--------------------------------------

The same discussion led to discussing the will's eternity and
transience, and the Imam (a.s.) stood to disprove the theory which
called for the eternity of the will, proving its being transient by
revealing its own self-contradiction, removing the confusion which may
occupy anyone's mind in its regard.

Will, as the Imam (a.s.) says, is one of the actions of the Almighty. It
is not one of His attributes; therefore, it is transient, not perpetual,
since an action is a form of event, and the deed cannot be identical to
the doer, so the will cannot be identical to the willing person. Will is
not like hearing or seeing or knowing as al-Maroozi tried to prove,
because it does not make sense, the Imam says, to say that He wanted
Himself. Does He want to be "something," or does He want to be Alive,
Seeing, Hearing, or Able? If this is according to His Will, it would
require the impossible which is the change occurring to the self, for
the meaning then would be that He wanted Himself to be something which
was not... Sublime is God greatly above all of this.

Thus did the debates between the Imam and al-Maroozi occur frequently
about the eternity of the will versus its transience about relevant
matters.

Al-Maroozi's Argumentativeness
------------------------------

In his debates with the Imam, al-Maroozi kept arguing and coming back to
the same point from which he had started his argument in an inflexible
argumentative manner. While accepting that to desire something (to
"will", to wish) is a verb, he goes back to deny that and claim that it
is an adjective, and he may admit something and say something else.

The Imam asks him, "O Abu Sulayman! Can you tell me if the will is a
verb or not?" He says, "Yes, it is a verb." He asks, "Is it causative,
since verbs are?" "It is not a verb," comes the answer. The Imam (a.s.)
asks, "Is there any with Him who is eternal?" Sulayman answers, "Willing
is doing." He says, "O Sulayman! This is the same which you criticized
Dirar and his followers about for saying that everything God Almighty
has created in His heavens and earth, ocean or land, dog or pig, monkey,
human, or an animal, is God's will, and that God's will gives life and
takes life away, and it goes here or drinks from there, marries, enjoys
food, commits immoral acts, disbelieves and commits*shirk* ..."

Sulayman said, "It is like hearing, seeing, or knowing; that is, it is
an adjective, an attribute." Having abstained from providing an answer
to the Imam's question, Sulayman goes back to the beginning of the
argument regarding whether the will is an adjective, an attribute, or a
verb, but the Imam nevertheless repeats his argument with him by
following another route different from the one he took first, which
indicates how commonsense the idea seems to him and his ability to prove
it however he willed.

Imam's Style in Debating
------------------------

The debate continues between them in the same calm manner in which the
Imam (a.s.) coins his questions, which is the most magnificent method of
debate. In his way of providing answers, the Imam never blocks the way
before his opponent to continue the debate; rather, he leaves him
completely free to debate in whatever manner he wishes through his
questions till he brings him to a dead-end where he cannot proceed
anymore just to go back seeking another route which the Imam himself
wants him to seek out of his own will and after his own conviction.

Al-Ma’mun Rebukes al-Maroozi for Fumbling About
-----------------------------------------------

But Sulayman kept fumbling about in his answers to the Imam's questions
after the Imam had closed before him all avenues of his argument, and
al-Ma’mun was quick to notice his fumbling about which indicated
Sulayman's loss, so he rebuked him and criticized him. It is reported
that during the debate, when ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) asked him to continue his
questions, he said, "Will is one of His attributes." The Imam said, "How
many times has it been said that it is one of His attributes, so is it a
new attribute, or has it always been so?" Sulayman said, "New." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "*Allahu Akbar!* You are telling me that His attribute is
new! Had it been one of His attributes, and an eternal one, then He
willed and He created as long as His will and His creation are
eternal...! This means it is an attribute of someone who did not know
what he did! God is Elevated above this..."

Sulayman said, "Things are not a will, and He did not will anything."
Here the Imam said, "You have hissed, O Sulayman! He did and He created
as long as His will and His creation are eternal...?! This is the
attribute of someone who does not know what he did! Elevated is God
above all of that." Sulayman, turning to al-Ma’mun, then said, "Master!
I have already informed him that it is like hearing and seeing and
knowing." Al-Ma’mun said, "Woe unto you, Sulayman! How you have erred
and how often you

have repeated yourself! Stop it and take another route, for you seem to
be unable to provide any answer better than that."

The debate continues after that till Sulayman's tongue is tied,
whereupon al-Ma’mun says, "O Sulayman! This is the most learned
descendant of Hashim," and the session disperses.

Imam Debates Ali ibn al-Jahm
----------------------------

The Imam (a.s.) conducted a very magnificent debate with Ali al-Jahm
dealing with the infallibility of prophets in which he explained in a
very beautiful way the actual meaning of some verses which may on the
surface give the impression to the contrary.

Interpreting the Holy Qur'an According to One's Opinion
-------------------------------------------------------

The Imam (a.s.) started his discussion with Ali ibn al-Jahm by
criticizing him and those who interpreted the Book of God according to
their own viewpoint, stating that he and those have to refer to those
whom God endowed with the faculty of knowledge and understanding in
order to learn the actual and accurate interpretation of its verses
according to the sacred verse which says, "And none knows its
interpretation except God and those deeply grounded in knowledge."3

Interpreting Verses Whose Superficial Meaning Suggests Prophet's Fallibility
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Then the Imam (a.s.) started explaining the verses whose superficial
meaning indicates the fallibility of and possibility of sinning by
prophets. He indicated that Adam's transgression took place while he was
in Paradise, not on earth, and the infallibility in question is earthly,
and that he did not commit any act as long as he lived on earth which
contradicted his infallibility as proven by the sacred verse: "God did
indeed choose Adam and Noah, the family of Abraham, and the family of
Imran above all people."4

As regarding the verse which states: "And remember Zun-nun when he
departed in wrath; he imagined that We had no power over him, but he
cried through the depths of darkness, \`There is no god but Thou! Glory
to Thee; I was indeed wrong,'"5 what is meant by "he imagined that We
had no power over him" is that he realized that God was not going to
sustain him." Had he thought that God was unable to overpower him, he
would have then committed*kufr* (disbelief) and he would have also
committed 'isyan, transgression.

As regarding the verse "And (with passion) did she desire him, and he
would have desired her,"6 the case regarding what the wife of al-'Aziz
wanted, and what Yousuf (a.s.) desired to do, are two different things,
for she wanted to commit a sin while he desired to kill her if she
forced him; therefore, God saved him from the deed of killing her and
its terrible consequences, and saved her from her own wishful desire to
commit a sin.

As regarding David, his statement that the defendant had committed
injustice by asking for the goat, it was an error only within the
framework of the case, and it took place before he had asked the
defendant about his defense against the plaintiff's claim, and it is not
a transgression, for God

corrected for him his decision by bringing him the example of the two
kings. As regarding his marriage with the widow of Oorya, which was
regarded by people at that time as a sin and criticized him for it, it
was done for the sake of effecting a legislative interest whereby David
wanted to shatter the then prevalent custom of a widow not getting
married after the death of her husband.

It is similar to what happened to the Prophet with Zainab daughter of
Jahsh, wife of Zayd ibn Haritha who had been adopted by the Prophet (S),
for the Prophet, by marrying Zainab after granting her divorce from
Zayd, wanted to shatter the pre-Islamic custom whereby a man would not
be permitted to marry the former wife of someone he had adopted as is
clear in the text of the Holy Qur'an. The Prophet (S) was apprehensive
of the criticism of the hypocrites of his action, so the Almighty
addressed him by saying, "Do not fear people; it is more fitting that
you should fear God,"7 since it was God Who ordered him to marry her as
we understand from the verse, "Then when Zayd had dissolved (his
marriage) with her, with the necessary (formality), We joined her in
marriage to thee in order that (henceforth) there may be no difficulty
to the believers in (the matter of) marrying the wives of their adopted
sons, when the latter have dissolved with the necessary (formality,
their marriage) with them, and God's command must be fulfilled."8

By providing such glorious knowledge of the exegesis of sacred Qur'anic
verses, and by giving such honest interpretations which safeguard the
integrity of the context, the Imam (a.s.) used to dispel the unusual
confusion of those who did not have a deep actual understanding of the
Glorious Book of God.

An Artificial Argument
----------------------

In his book Al-'Iqd al-Farid, Ibn Abd Rabbih al-Andalusi recorded a
debate on the subject of Imamate between the Imam and the caliph
al-Ma’mun which seems to be stamped with artificiality, and we think it
is possible that some fanatics among those who deviated from the line of
the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) had fabricated it, for he stated the following in
his book:

"Al-Ma’mun said to Ali ibn Musa, \`Why do you claim it (Imamate) for
your own selves?' He answered, \`Due to Ali and Fatima (a.s.) being near
in kin to the Messenger of God (S).' Al-Ma’mun said, \`If it is only a
matter of kinship, then the Messenger of God (S) had left behind him
those who were closer in kinship to him than Ali or any of his
relatives, and if you mean the kinship of Fatima (a.s.) to the Messenger
of God (S), then the matter (Imamate) after her should have belonged to
al-Hasan and al-Husayn (a.s.) whose right was confiscated by Ali even
while they were still alive, taking control of what was not his.' Ali
ibn Musa could not provide an answer."9

Let us record the following regarding this quotation:

The Imam did not claim his right to caliphate only on account of his
kinship to the Prophet (S) but rather on account of the clear statements
made by the Prophet (S) emphasizing that he was to be the caliph after
him, in addition to the personal qualifications Imam Ali (a.s.) had had
which distinguished him above the rest of sahaba.

The concept of caliphate according to Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) is that it is
decreed according to a divine text, not dictated due to factors of
kinship, politics, etc. God is the One Who chooses, and His choice is
voiced by His Prophet, whoever He sees to be most fit to safeguard the
Message and the interest of the nation, as we explained when we quoted
Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) discussing the subject of Imamate. The claim of
those who said that they deserved caliphate due to their kinship to the
Prophet (S) is similar to the claim of those who said that the muhajirun
(immigrants) were more qualified than the ansar (supporters of Medina)
due to the nearness of the first party to the Messenger of God (S).

The Imam, if this story is true at all, would not have been unable, as
the story suggests, to answer al-Ma’mun's objection that there are among
the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) those who have more priority than Ali (a.s.) or
any of his relative, an apparent reference to his grandfather al-Abbas
ibn Abdul-Muttalib, to it.

It was al-Abbas himself who approached the Imam requesting him to
stretch his hand to him so that he would swear the oath of allegiance to
him when he felt that the fate looked ominous and that the environment
was threatening of a revolt, but the Imam refused to accept such an oath
privately; rather, he preferred that such an oath be sworn to him in
public and before eye witnesses after finishing the funeral rites of the
corpse of the Messenger of God (S) which was still lying in state
waiting to be bathed. If you suppose that al-Abbas had any right to
caliphate, he would then have relinquished it.

As regarding al-Hasan and al-Husayn, they were then very young, and
neither wilayat nor wisayat can be enforced on caliphate till they were
old enough, for caliphate is a post which permits no wisayat at all;
therefore, the issue of caliphate was confined to Ali (a.s.) alone.

This is our argument if we suppose that caliphate is a matter decided
due to kinship to the Prophet (S).

But if we say that it is decreed by a divine decree, these proofs will
not be relevant.

But the fact that al-Ma’mun's way of thinking regarding the issue of
caliphate, and his views with which he confronted the faqihs in his
debates with them, as the author of Al-'Iqd al-Farid himself mentions,
proving that caliphate was the legitimate right of only Ali rather than
anyone else among the sahaba, this fact itself convinces us that this
fabricated dialogue quoted above was written by some fanatic followers
of other sects.

These are some debates and discussions of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) which
were narrated about him in which he debated some scholars of*kalam* of
his time which we wanted to indicate here briefly in order to give the
reader a general idea about the style employed by the Imams among the
Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) in their debates and discussions with others, so that
the reader may live the free democratic environment which dominated that
period of time in its intellectual and scientific spheres.

### Notes

###

[^1]: Al-Thariya:54

[^2]: Al Thariyat:55

[^3]: Aali Imran:7

[^4]: Aali Imran:33

[^5]: Al Anbiyaa:87

[^6]: Yousuf:24

[^7]: Al Ahzab:37

[^8]: Al Ahzab:37

[^9]: Al-'Iqd al-Farid, Vol. 2, p. 285 and also Vol. 5, p. 103
