His Distinctions and Characteristics
====================================

Lineage
-------

He is Ali son of Musa son of Ja’far son of Muhammad son of Ali son of
al-Husayn son of Ali son of Abu Talib (a.s.), eighth in the series of
the Imams belonging to the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.). His birthplace is Medina,
and his resting place is Toos (Iran).

Birth and Demise
----------------

Historians disagree a great deal about the year of his birth and even in
determining the month as well, and they also disagree about determining
the year and the month of his death. Their disagreements are not
confined to the limit of a short span of time but they may be five years
apart, and the disagreement is so confusing that it is very difficult to
determine clearly such matters; however, we shall point out the
statements recorded in this regard without favoring any of them due to
the lack of purpose of such favoring which naturally requires research
and investigation and a proof for selecting what seems to be the most
accurate.

He was born in Medina on Friday, or Thursday, Dhul-Hijja 11, or
Dhul-Qi'da, or Rabi'ul-Awwal, of the Hijri year 148 or the year 153. He
died on Friday, or Monday, near the end of the month of Safar, or the
17th of Safar, or Ramadan 21, or Jumada I 18, or Dhul-Qi'da 23, or the
end of Dhul-Qi'da, of the year 202 or 203 or 206. In his*'Uyoon Akhbar
ar-Ridha’* , al-Saduq states: "What is accurate is that he died on the
13th of Ramadan, on a Friday, in the year 203."

What is most likely is that his death took place in the year 203 as
stated by al-Saduq. It is the same year in which al-Ma’mun marched
towards Iraq. To say that he died in 206 is not to agree with the truth
because al-Ma’mun marched towards Baghdad in the year 204, and the Imam
died while he was heading in the same direction.

His Mother
----------

There is a great deal of dispute regarding the name of his mother. Some
say she was called al-Khayzaran; others say she was Arwi and that her
nickname was "the blonde of Nubia," while others say she was Najma and
her nickname was "Ummul-Baneen." Others say she was called Sekan the
Nubian; still others say she was called Takattam as may be proven from
the poetry in his praise which said:

The best in self and parenthood,

In offspring and in ancestry,

Is Ali al-Muaddam,

Eighth in series of the knowledgeable

and the clement,

An Imam descending from the Proof of God,

that is Takattam.

Offspring
---------

Disputes exist also regarding the number of his offspring and their
names. A group of scholars say that they were five sons and one
daughter,

and that they were: Muhammad al-Qani', al-Hasan, Ja’far, Ibrahim,
al-Husayn, and 'Ayesha.

Sabt ibn al-Jawzi, in his work*Tadhkiratul-Khawass* , says that the sons
were only four, dropping the name of Husayn from the list. Al-Mufid
inclines to believe that the Imam did not have any son other than Imam
Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s.), and Ibn Shahr Ashoob emphatically states so,
and so does al-Tibrisi in his*A'lam al-Wara. Al-'Udad al-Qawiyya* states
that he had two sons, Muhammad and Musa, and that he did not have any
other offspring. In his claim, he is supported by*Qurb al-Asnad* in
which the author says that al-Bazanti asked ar-Ridha’, "For years I have
been asking you who your successor is and you keep telling me that it is
your son even when you had no son at all, but since God has now blessed
you with two sons, which one of them is he?"*'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’*
indicates that he had a daughter named Fatima.

We are not in the process of investigating, researching and pinpointing
with accuracy the number of his offspring and their names, but what
seems to be more reasonable is what al-Mufid states. What is established
as a fact with us is that Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s.) was his son; as
regarding his other sons, nobody seems to be able to prove any facts
regarding them, and God knows best.

Personality and Characteristics
-------------------------------

Generally speaking, an Imam enjoys a unique personality and distinctive
characteristics, in as far as Shi'a followers of the Imams are
concerned; therefore, he is not permitted to do what others are, such as
falling into error, or getting confused about a matter. Rather,
infallibility is essential in him since he conveys on behalf of the
Prophet (S) what seems to others to be obscure of the Message and its
intricacies.

Just as we proved the infallibility of the Prophet (S), we, by the same
token, prove infallibility for the Imam as well with one exception: the
Imam conveys on behalf of the Prophet (S), whereas the Prophet conveys
on behalf of the Almighty God. The wisdom in this argument is that
should falling into error be accepted and expected from the Prophet (S)
or the Imam, then doubt will result regarding the reliability of what
they convey to people of juristic rules and regulations and other such
matters since they are liable to err in their judgment or get confused
about a particular issue.

Although the believers are not held accountable for doing what they are
not supposed to be doing due to such error of judgment, the assumption
of the error of judgment itself collides with the very wisdom behind the
reason why prophets were sent to people at all which is to clarify to
people, according to the way God Almighty intended them to, without any
error or confusion, what His Will is.

The topic of infallibility is a vast one the discussion of which has no
room here and which requires a dedicated research I may be able one day
to tackle. What I have to clarify here is that Imamate is characterized
by certain distinctive aspects such as infallibility which we cannot
discuss by itself with others except after both parties agree on the
basis from which it emerged; otherwise, our case would be like one who
discusses the necessity

of performing the ritual prayers (salat) with someone who does not
believe in the message of the Prophet (S).

The basic point upon which we have first and foremost to agree is the
definition of general Imamate, then the distinctions it requires and,
finally, the proofs which testify to these distinctions. It is only then
that disagreeing parties can conduct a reasonable discussion. Having
been convinced by unequivocal proofs of such infallibility, and having
seen the Twelve Imams (a.s.) to be fully qualified to be the only ones
in whom such infallibility could be observed, we became fully convinced
of their unshakable superiority over all others, and that they were the
ones adorned with absolute human perfection.

An Imam, according to this viewpoint, has got to be the most learned
among people and the most aware of the general needs of people such as
knowledge or other necessities of life, and that he has to be the most
pious, the most ascetic, the most perfect in personal conduct and norms
of behavior. In other words, in order to be qualified for Imamate, one
has to be superior to everyone else in all aspects of perfection and its
requirements which all raise him to his position of leadership. On this
basis, the character of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), who is one of these
Twelve Imams, becomes clearly distinctive due to its merits. But this is
not the limit of the scope of this research; rather, we shall attempt to
research his personality and the qualities which distinguished him from
all others by our sifting into the legacy history has preserved for us
of his conduct while still alive, and from the stances taken by the men
of knowledge and by contemporary caliphs towards him.

Government's Attitude Towards the Imam
--------------------------------------

The attitude of the then rulers towards Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and the
other Imams may provide us with a clear view of the distinctions which
raised their personalities to the zenith. And it is essential to explain
the phenomenon of the government's attitude towards them which
manifested itself in the surveillance imposed upon them rather than upon
other distinguished dignitaries or chiefs of the Alawides, monitoring
their movements and counting their steps in all their social and
personal encounters. What we can mention here to explain this phenomenon
are the following reasons:

1) The belief of a large number of Muslims in their Imamate and in their
being the most worthy of the caliphate, and their conviction that all
other caliphs are considered usurpers of authority, trespassers upon the
rights ordained by God to others. This is why the politicians of the
time considered them their competitors whose mere presence increased the
dangers surrounding them and jeopardized the security of the very
existence of their government structure.

2) Their being the magnet which attracted leading scholars and thinkers
who shrank in their presence despite their intellectual advancement and
distinction in the fields of the arts and knowledge and despite their
genius and intellectual prowess. This caused the caliphs to feel a
stronger animosity towards them and be more grudgeful towards them due
to the public

fascination by them and to their attempts to be close to them and to
being emotionally distant from the center of the government.

3) Their being the better alternative from the public's political
standpoint to take charge of the responsibilities of government, bear
its burdens, carry out its obligations and doing all of that most
efficiently. This frightened the rulers and made the obscure future seem
to their eyes even more so.

4) The vicious incitements about them by their opponents who bore
animosity towards them and who wished thereby their elimination, and the
tell-tales of even some of their own kin whose judgment was blinded by
jealousy, so they kept fabricating stories and attributing them to those
Imams and telling them to the rulers who were pleased to hear them since
they became outlets to the grudge they felt towards those Imams and, at
the same time, found in them the pretexts for annihilating and harassing
them and in the end a justification to put an end to their lives and rid
themselves of the complex they were suffering from due to their
existence.

By these and by others can we explain the phenomenon of the rulers
pursuing them and desperately trying to alienate them from the stage of
events affecting the nation in order to secure a distance from the ghost
of competition which could haunt them had they permitted the Imams to do
as they pleased. Thus can we understand the general characteristics of
the significant distinctions the personalities of those Imams enjoyed in
all sectors of the society in its various centers of activity and in its
various aspirations; otherwise, how do you explain this phenomenon, and
why should those rulers pay the Imams so much attention?

His Knowledge
-------------

He inherited the knowledge of his grandfather the Messenger of God (S),
thus becoming its pioneering fountainhead that quenched the thirst of
those who were thirsty for knowledge. History narrates a great deal of
his scholarly stances and intellectual discourses in which he achieved
victory over those who opposed the Divine Message, excelling in various
branches of scholarship with which he provided the seekers of knowledge
and the thinkers of the time.

Imam Musa a-Kazim (a.s.) is reported to have often said to his sons:
"Ali ibn Musa, your brother, is the learned scholar of the Descendants
of Muhammad (S); therefore, you may ask him about your religion, and
memorize what he tells you for I have heard my father Ja’far ibn
Muhammad more than once saying, \`The learned scholar of the family of
Muhammad is in your loins. How I wish I had met him, for he is named
after the Commander of the Faithful Ali (a.s.).'"

Ibrahim ibn al-Abbas al-Suli is reported to have said: "I never saw
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) unable to provide the answer to any question he
received, nor have I ever seen any contemporary of his more learned than
he was. Al-Ma’mun used to put him to test by asking him about almost
everything, and he always provided him with the answer, and his answer
and example was always derived from the Holy Qur'an."

Rajaa ibn Abul-Dahhak, who was commissioned by al-Ma’mun to escort
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) to his court, said: "By God! I never saw anyone more
pious than him nor more often remembering God at all times nor more
fearful of

God, the Exalted. People approached him whenever they knew he was
present in their area, asking him questions regarding their faith and
its aspects, and he would answer them and narrate a great deal
of*hadith* from his father who quoted his forefathers till Ali (a.s.)
who quoted the Messenger of God (S). When I arrived at al-Ma’mun's
court, the latter asked me about his behavior during the trip and I told
him what I observed about him during the night and during the day, while
riding and while halting; so, he said: \`Yes, O son of al-Dahhak! This
is the best man on the face of earth, the most learned, and the most
pious.'"1 .

Al-Hakim is quoted in*Tarikh Nishapur* as saying that the Imam (a.s.)
used to issue religious verdicts when he was a little more then twenty
years old. In Ibn Maja's Sunan, in the chapter on "Summary Of
Cultivating Perfection," he is described as "the master of Banu Hashim,
and al-Ma’mun used to hold him in high esteem and surround him with
utmost respect, and he even made him his successor and secured the oath
of allegiance for him."

Al-Ma’mun said this once in response to Banu Hashim: "As regarding your
reaction to the selection by al-Ma’mun of Abul-Hasan ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) as
his successor, be reminded that al-Ma’mun did not make such a selection
except upon being fully aware of its implications, knowing that there is
no one on the face of earth who is more distinguished, more virtuous,
more pious, more ascetic, more acceptable to the elite as well as to the
commoners, or more God-fearing, than he (ar-Ridha’, A.S.) is."2 .

Abul-Salt al-Harawi is quoted saying: "I never saw anyone more
knowledgeable than Ali ibn Musa ar-Ridha’ (a.s.). Every scholar who met
him admitted the same. Al-Ma’mun gathered once a large number of
theologians, jurists and orators and he (ar-Ridha’, A.S.) surpassed each
and every one of them in his own respective branch of knowledge, so much
so that the loser admitted his loss and the superiority of the winner
over him."3 .

He is also quoted saying: "I have heard Ali ibn Musa ar-Ridha’ (a.s.)
saying, \`I used to take my place at the theological center and the
number of the learned scholars at Medina was quite large, yet when a
question over-taxed the mind of one of those scholars, he and the rest
would point at me, and they would send me their queries, and I would
answer them all."4 .

In his discourse regarding the issue of succession, al-Ma’mun said: "I
do not know any man on the face of earth who is more suited (to be heir
to the throne) than this man."5 .

Al-Manaqib records the following: "When people disputed regarding
Abul-Hasan ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), Muhammad ibn 'Isa al-Yaqtini said, \`I have
collected as many as eighteen thousand of his answers to questions put
forth to him.' A group of critics, including Abu Bakr the orator in
his*Tarikh* and al-Tha'labi in his*tafsir* and al-Sam'ani in his
dissertation and in al-Mu'tazz in his work, in addition to others, have
all quoted*hadith* from him."6 .

After an intellectual discourse with al-Ma’mun, Ali ibn al-Jahm said:
"Al-Ma’mun stood up to perform the prayers ritual and took Muhammad ibn
Ja’far, who was present there, by the hand, and I followed both of them.
He asked him: \`What do you think of your nephew?' He answered, \`A
learned scholar although we never saw him being tutored by any learned
man.' Al-Ma’mun said: \`This nephew of yours is a member of the family
of the

Prophet (S) about whom the Prophet (S) said: \`The virtuous among my
descendants and the elite among my progeny are the most thoughtful when
young, the most learned when adult; therefore, do not teach them for
they are more learned than you are, nor will they ever take you out of
guidance, nor lead you into misguidance.'"7 .

Ibn al-Athir writes: "He (al-Ma’mun) discerned the descendants of Banu
al-Abbas and Banu Ali and did not find anyone more than him (ar-Ridha’,
A.S.) in accomplishments, piety and knowledge."8 .

We do not need the testimony of anyone to convince us of the distinction
enjoyed by Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) due to his knowledge over all others.
Suffices us to review the books of*hadith* which are filled with his
statements and dictation in various arts which every individual,
regardless of the loftiness of his degree of knowledge, became dwarfed
upon meeting him, feeling his inferiority and the superiority of Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.).

Ethical and Humane Conduct
--------------------------

Good manners constitute a significant part of one's personality. They
unveil the innermost nature of the individual, highlighting the extent
of its purity of origin when it translates belief into action. The Imam
was characterized by a most noble personality which won him the love of
the commoners as well as the elite, by extraordinary humanity derived
from the spirit of the Message itself one of whose custodians he himself
was, a person who safeguarded it and inherited its innermost secrets.

Ibrahim ibn al-Abbas al-Suli is quoted saying: "I never saw Abul-Hasan
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) angering anyone by something he said, nor did I ever
see him interrupting anyone, nor refusing to do someone a favor he was
able to do, nor did he ever stretch his legs before an audience, nor
leaned upon something while his companion did not, nor did he ever call
any of his servants or attendants a bad name, nor did I ever see him
spit or burst into laughter; rather, his laughter was just a smile. When
he was ready to eat and he sat to be served, he seated with him all his
attendants, including the doorman and the groom." He adds, "Do not,
therefore, believe anyone who claims that he saw someone else enjoying
such accomplishments."9 .

A guest once kept entertaining him part of the night when the lamp
started fading and the guest stretched his hand to fix it, but
Abul-Hasan (a.s.) swiftly checked him and fixed it himself, saying, "We
are folks who do not let their guest tend on them."10 .

Al-Manaqib states that ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) once went to the public
bath-house and someone asked him to give him a massage, so he kept
giving the man a massage till someone recognized him and told that
person who that dignitary was. The man felt extremely embarrassed; he
apologized to the Imam (a.s.) and gave him a massage.11 .

Muhammad ibn al-Fadl narrates the following anecdote regarding the
Imam's simple personality. He says:

"Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), on the occasion of Eidul-Fitr, said to one of his
attendants, \`May God accept your good deeds and ours,' then he stood up
and left. On the occasion of Eidul-Adha, he said to the same man, \`May
God accept our good deeds and yours.' I asked him, \`O son of the
Messenger of God! You said something to this man on the occasion of
Eidul-Fitr and

something else on the occasion of Eidul-Adha; why?' He answered: \`I
pleaded God to accept his good deeds and ours because his action was
similar to mine and I combined it with mine in my plea, whereas I
pleaded God to accept our good deeds and his because we are capable of
offering the ceremonial sacrifice while he is not; so, our action is
different from his.'"12 .

Thus does Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) become in total harmony with his message
in the area of ethics, personifying the latter into action derived from
the spirit of the message whereby he ascends to the summit of human
perfection, rising thereby to the shores of the individual's own real
greatness. It is through this and similar means that the sincerity of
faith and loftiness and dignity of the self are recognized.

Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) defines for us the Islamic theory as the rules
which govern the actual dealings of man with his brother man from which
we can achieve the inspiration that Islam abolishes the then class
distinctions among individuals and groups in the areas of public rights
and the safeguarding of man's dignity, and that the difference which we
must recognize regarding these areas is the difference between one who
obeys God and one who does not.

A man once said to the Imam: "By God! There is nobody on the face of
earth who is more honorable than your forefathers." The Imam responded
by saying: "Their piety secured their honor, and their obedience of God
made them fortunate."13 .

Another man said to him: "By God! You are the best of all people!" He
said to him: "Do not swear so. Better than me is one who is more
obedient to God and more pious. By God! The following verse was never
abrogated: \`And We have made you nations and tribes so that you may
know each other; verily the best of you in God's sight is the most
pious.'"14 .

Abul-Salt once asked him: "O son of the Messenger of God! What do you
say about something people have been criticizing you for?" He asked:
"What is it?" He said: "They claim that you call people your slaves." He
said: "God! Creator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the hidden
and the manifest! I invoke Thee to testify that I have never said so,
nor did I ever hear that any of my forefathers had said so! God! You are
the Knower of the many injustices this nation has committed against us,
and this is just one of them..." Then he came to Abul-Salt and said: "O
Abdul-Salam! If all people, as some claim, are our slaves, who did we
buy them from?" Abul-Salt answered: "You are right, O son of the
Messenger of God..." Then the Imam said: "O Abdul-Salam! Do you deny the
right which God has allotted for us to be charged with the authority as
others deny?" He said: "God forbid! I do acknowledge such right."15 .

The Imam here denies such an allegation about him and his forefathers
and rejects the vicious accusation which their enemies use against him
to tarnish his image, considering it one of the many injustices
committed against the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.). Rather, he and the Household
of the Prophet (S) consider people to be equal in their general
obligations except in the right of government which God ordained to be
theirs solely, for others have no right to claim it for themselves. With
the exception of the right to obey God in its most pristine implications
which raised their status in the sight of

God and man, all are the slaves of God. They share the same parents and
worship the same God.

Abdullah ibn al-Salt quotes a man from Balkh saying: "I accompanied
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) during his trip to Khurasan. One day he ordered
preparations for his meal to which he invited all his attendants, blacks
and non-blacks, so I said: \`May my life be sacrificed for yours! Maybe
these should have a separate eating arrangement.' He said: \`God
Almighty is One; the father (Adam) and the mother (Eve) are the same,
and people are rewarded according to their deeds.'"16 .

The Imam does not see any difference between him and his servants and
attendants except in the degree of good deeds; other than that, all
distinctions are void when the matter is related to common obligations
in which all individuals are equal, for each one of them is created by
the same God, and each has the same father, Adam, who was created of
dust.

When we see the Imam sitting at the table surrounded by his servants,
his doorman, and his groom, he is thus teaching the nation a lesson in
virtuous humanity which believes in the dignity of man in order to
demonstrate the theory of Islam in practice showing the nature of
behavior man should undertake in his conduct towards his brother man.
The loftiness of status and the elevation of career must not necessitate
that a man of a less status or one whose career is less coveted should
be despised or made to feel inferior to his brother man even if he is a
servant.

This is so in order to eliminate the complex class distinctions which
widen the gap between the members of the society whose energies would
then be split into opposing parties torn by grudge and consumed by
hatred.

Islam enacted the law of equality among the members of the society in
the areas of general obligations in order to emancipate man's dignity
from class obligations which dominated the way of life during the
pre-Islamic era and were adopted by nations of old. God Almighty has
said: "The best of you in the eyes of God is the one who is most
pious."17 The Prophet (S) said: "All of you descended from Adam, and
Adam was created of dust." He also said: "No Arab can be held superior
to a non-Arab except through superiority of his degree of piety."

Ibrahim ibn al-Abbas al-Suli is quoted saying: "I heard Ali ibn Musa
ar-Ridha’ saying, \`I swear by emancipation--and whenever I swore by it,
I would emancipate one of my slaves till I emancipated each and every
one of them--that I do not see myself as better than that (and he
pointed to a black slave of his who remained in his service) on account
of my kinship to the Messenger of God (S) except if I do a good deed
which would render me better.'"18 .

Thus does the Imam define for us the good Islamic conduct of
safeguarding the dignity of man and the elimination of all class
distinctions except the distinction of good deeds. He, peace be upon
him, does not view his kinship to the Prophet (S) as providing him with
a distinction over a black slave except if such kinship is combined with
good deeds which render the doer distinction and superiority. Yasir, one
of his servants, said once: "Abul-Hasan said to us once: \`If I leave
the table before you do, while you are still eating, do not leave on my
account till you are through.' It may

happen that he calls upon some of us to his service and he is told that
they are eating, whereupon he says: \`Leave them to finish their meal
first.'" Nadir, another servant, says: "Abul-Hasan did not require us to
do anything for him except if we had finished eating our meal."19 .

These are samples of his actual conduct and humanity which he inherited
as a fragrant legacy the perfume of which is goodness and mercy from his
grandfather the greatest Prophet (S) who crowned his message with the
banner of good conduct when he said: "I have been sent to perfect the
code of good conduct." Such was that genuine humane legacy from whose
spirit nations derive their strength and upon which they build the
pillars of their glory and through which they secure the continuation of
their very existence.

His Conduct Regarding His Appearance
------------------------------------

There is no doubt that, generally speaking, the Imams (a.s.) were more
distant than anyone else from the alluring wares of this vanishing
world, and most distant from its ornamentations and allurements. But the
concept of asceticism according to them was not limited to wearing
modest coarse clothes or eating very simple food. Rather, its limits
extended beyond that, for the ascetic person is the one who does not
allow the pleasures of this world to take control over him without being
able to take control of them, one who does not see this world as the
ultimate goal he seeks; rather, when it comes towards him, the believer
is entitled to enjoy its good things, and when it forsakes him, he
contends himself that God's rewards are more lasting.

Al-Aabi is quoted in*Nathr al-Durar* as saying:

"A group of sufis visited ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) when he was in Khurasan, and
they said to him, \`The commander of the faithful looked into the
authority God Almighty entrusted to him, and he found you, members of
the Prophet's Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), to be the most deserving of all people
to be the leaders.

Then he discerned you, members of the Prophet's Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), and
he found yourself the most worthy of leading the people, so he decided
to entrust such leadership to you. The nation is in need of one who
wears coarse clothes, eats the most simple food, rides the donkey and
visits the sick.' Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) was first leaning, then he adjusted
the way he was sitting and said: \`Joseph (Yousuf) was a Prophet who
used to wear silk mantles brocaded with gold. He sat on the thrones of
the Pharaohs and ruled.

An Imam is required to be just and fair; when he says something, he says
the truth, and when he passes a judgment, he judges equitably, and when
he promises something, he fulfills his promise. God did not forbid (an
Imam) from wearing a particular type of clothes or eating a particular
type of food.' Then he recited the Qur'anic verse: \`Say: Who has
forbidden the beautiful (gifts) of God which He has produced for His
servants, and the good things, clean and pure (which He has provided)
for sustenance?'"20 .

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) was asked once about his view regarding musk. He
answered: "My father ordered musk to be made for him in a ben tree in
the amount of seven hundred dirhams. Al-Fadl ibn Sahl wrote him saying
that people criticized him for that. He wrote back: \`O Fadl! Have you
not come

to know that Joseph (Yousuf), who was a Prophet, used to wear silk
clothes brocaded with gold, and that he used to sit on gilded thrones,
and that all of that did not decrease any of his wisdom?' Then he
ordered a galia moschata (perfume of musk and ambergris) to be made for
him in the amount of four thousand dirhams.'"21 .

Thus does the Imam prove that the outward appearance of asceticism has
nothing to do with true asceticism; rather, it may even be a fake
whereby someone tries to attract the attention of others. This is why
Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and other Imams did not see anything wrong with
meeting the public with an appearance of luxury in what they put on or
ate as long as it did not collide with the reality of asceticism which
is the building of the self from within to renounce the world and its
allurement and regard it as a vanishing display with a short span of
life.

This does not forbid the believer from enjoying its pleasures in the way
which God made permissible. God did not create the good things in this
world for the disbeliever to enjoy while depriving the believers there
from. Rather, God considers the believer to be more worthy of such
enjoyment when he submits himself to God and expends it in His Path.

Ibn Abbas tells us the following about Imam ar-Ridha’'s ascetic conduct:
"Ar-Ridha’ used to sit on a leaf mat during the summer and on a straw
sack during the winter; he used to put on coarse clothes, but when he
went out to meet the public, he put on his very best."22 So, when he is
by himself, away from public life, his soul finds harmony with denying
what is fake, that is, the decorations and allurements of this life. But
when he goes out to meet people, he puts on his best for them following
their own nature of holding the appearances of this world as
significant, enjoying its good things. This realistically ascetic
conduct of the Imam provides us with a glorious example of the truth
regarding the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) and their pure view of life which is
free from any disturbing fake or pretense.

Clemency and Tolerance
----------------------

Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.) had recommended his son ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) to
be the Imam after him, making him his own deputy in faring with his
wealth, women, sons and the mothers of his sons, without permitting any
of his other sons to fare with anything after him, and he wrote his will
indicating so and sealed it with his own seal, invoking the Wrath of God
upon anyone who would unlawfully break the seal after having secured the
testimony of a number of his own household and followers. But the
brothers of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) disputed with their brother regarding
their father's will and what he had left for them. According to al-Kafi,
Yazid ibn Salit is quoted saying:

"Abu Umran al-Talhi was the judge at Medina when his (ar-Ridha’'s)
brothers presented him as their opponent in their dispute. Al-Abbas ibn
Musa said: \`May God bring through you reconciliation and happiness. At
the bottom of this written statement there is a treasure and a jewel and
he (ar-Ridha’) wishes to keep it away from us and take it all to
himself, and our father entrusted everything to him, leaving us
helpless. Had I not checked myself, I would have told you so before a
crowd of people.' Ibrahim ibn Muhammad, who was one of the witnesses of
the will, jumped at him and

said: \`Then you by God would be telling something we do not accept to
be coming even from you, and we will hold you as a liar, and you will be
among us blamed and despised, nicknamed by the young and the old as a
liar.

Your father knew you best if there was any good in you and your father
knew you inside and out, and he could not trust you to guard two pieces
of dates.' Then his uncle Ishaq ibn Ja’far jumped at him and pulled him
by the robe saying, \`You are a silly, weakling, and a fool; add these
to your previous faults,' and he was supported in his view by all
others. Abu Umran, the judge, said to Ali, \`Stand up, O father of
al-Hasan! Suffices me today the curse your father had invoked, and your
father was quite generous with you.

No! By God! Nobody knows a son better than his father. No! By God! Your
father was neither weak in his intellect nor shallow in his view.'
Al-Abbas said to the judge, \`May God bring conciliation through you!
Please remove the seal and read the contents.' Abu Umran said, \`No, I
shall not remove it; suffices me today the curse your father invoked.'
Al-Abbas said, \`I shall remove it.' He said, \`That is up to you.' So
al-Abbas removed the seal and the contents spelled out their exclusion
and the inclusion only of Ali, and an order that they all, whether they
liked it or not, were to listen to and obey Imam Ali ar-Ridha’ (a.s.).
In short, the removal of the seal spelled their destruction, scandal and
humiliation, whereas Ali remained the winner.

"Ali then turned to al-Abbas and said: \`Brother! I know that what made
you do what you did is the fact that you have fines and debts to pay.
Sa'id! Go ahead and take an account of their debts, then pay their dues
on their own behalf. After that take out their zakat and clear their
name. By God! I shall never abandon your assistance and I shall never
cut my ties from you as long as I walk on this earth; so, you may say
whatever you please.'

"Al-Abbas said: \`Do not give us anything other than what rightfully
belongs to us, and what you hold of our own is even more.' He said:
\`You may say anything you want to say, for the offer is yours; if you
do good deeds, you shall be rewarded by God, and if you commit a bad
deed, God is Most Forgiving, Merciful. By God! You know very well that
today I have no son nor heir except you; so, if I keep anything which
belongs to you from you or save what you think to belong to you, it
shall always remain yours and will always be returned to you. By God! I
have never owned anything since your father, may God be pleased with
him, passed away except that I relinquished it to you as you have seen.'

"Al-Abbas leaped and said: \`By God it is not so! Nor God has given you
authority over us..., but..., but it is our father's jealousy and he
willed a will which God does not accept from him nor from you, and you
know very well that I know Safwan ibn Yahya, the Sabiri seller at Kufa.
If I ever get there, I shall strangle him and you with him.'

"Ali said: \`There is no power or will except by the Will of God, the
Sublime, the Great... Brothers! God knows that I desire nothing other
than your happiness and well-being. God! If you know that I love their
well-being, and that I want nothing but good for them, that I do not
severe my ties with them, that I am kind to them, concerned about their
affairs day and night..., then grant me good rewards for it. But if I am
contrariwise, then I

invoke You, Knower of the unknown, to grant me the rewards of my
intentions: good for good and evil for evil. Lord! Bring them to the
path of righteousness, and make life good for them, and keep the snares
of the devil away from us and from them, and assist them to be able to
worship Thee, and help them see Thy guidance. As for me, brother, I
desire nothing other than your happiness, working hard for your own
well-being, and God is my Witness.'

"To this, al-Abbas said: \`How well I know your mastery over words! And
there is no mud with me for your spade!'"23 .

With these rude words al-Abbas ended his argument with his brother, Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), despite the fact that the Imam was very kind and
clement in his argument with him, without articulating any unkind word,
that it was already established that right was on the side of the Imam,
and that their own transgression dragged him into such a situation which
did not befit his lofty status. This, indeed, is indicative of a great
deal of clemency and tolerance towards an unlimited aggression.

Although al-Abbas discarded the norms of good manners in his
confrontation with his brother by articulating disrespectful words and
by committing a sin against his own father Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.)
by accusing him of being jealous and biased, which causes the other
party to be on the offensive, or at least would push him away from a
balanced temper, this is not an artificial show of clemency and
tolerance from the Imam (a.s.); rather, it is derived from the spirit of
genuine goodness and love whereby he and the other Imams were
characterized when others challenged them.

On the other hand, the Imam (a.s.) tries to cause others to adorn
themselves with the same trait of clemency and tolerance upon being
wronged as an element of good relationship among them, justifying this
by saying that it increases the dignity of man, for clemency and
tolerance, when the ability to deal equal blows and effect equal
retribution express the power of anger in man and his control over his
rash temper upon being challenged, this causes others to respect and
venerate such a person especially when that person shoulders the
responsibilities of authority. Al-Aabi says:

"A man sentenced to be beheaded was brought to al-Ma’mun while ar-Ridha’
(a.s.) was among his train. Al-Ma’mun asked him: \`Father of al-Hasan!
What is your view?' He said: \`All I can say is that God only increases
the dignity of those whose good will causes them to forgive.' He,
therefore, forgave the man."24

Swiftness of Response
---------------------

Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) was endowed with a readiness to respond coupled
with the strength of argument and oratory to which extra-ordinary
expressions freely submitted without making the over-all meaning too
difficult to comprehend. His arguments with the heads of other
religions, with foremost writers, and with atheists in which he
outwitted them with his clear argument and decisive arguments, all
provide us with a glorious indication that he used to enjoy the ability
to provide a ready answer and a speed in intellectual reasoning.

This is why learned scholars held him in high esteem and hesitated to
challenge him to debate in any field of knowledge as actually happened
after

his arguments with the highest authorities of other religions at a
meeting al-Ma’mun arranged at his court and the audience were
tongue-tied when he challenged them to put for discussion whatever came
to their minds.

His Patience and Perseverance
-----------------------------

The patience and perseverance of the Imam manifest themselves clearly
when he had to face psychological and emotional crises. When he went to
say his farewell at the Ka'ba, Mecca, upon being ordered by al-Ma’mun to
be present at his court in Khurasan, he was faced with an emotional
situation involving his only son Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Jawad,
but he maintained with an iron will his self-control, solacing himself
with a patient heart, submitting to God's Will and Decree.

Umayya ibn Ali states: "I was sitting with Abul-Hasan (a.s.) at Mecca
during the year in which he performed the*hajj* prior to his trip to
Khurasan, and Abu Ja’far was with him when he was bidding the House
(Ka'ba) good-bye. Having finished his tawaf, he went to the maqam and
said his prayers there. Abu Ja’far, accompanied by Muaffaq, was making
his tawaf, till he reached the Stone. There he sat and he prolonged his
sitting there. Muaffaq said to him: \`May my life be sacrificed for
yours! It is time you stood up.'

He answered: \`I do not wish to leave this place at all except by the
Will of God,' and grief could easily be seen clouding over his face.
Muaffaq approached Abul-Hasan and said to him: \`May my life be
sacrificed for yours! Abu Ja’far is sitting by the Stone unwilling to
leave,' so Abul-Hasan stood up, came to Abu Ja’far and said: \`Stand up,
my loved one.' But his son said: \`I do not wish to leave this place...'
He said: \`Do stand up, O my loved one.' After a while, he said to his
father: \`How can I stand up seeing that you have already said your
farewell at the House never to return again?' He said: \`Do stand up, my
loved one.' He stood up and left with his father."

The Imam (a.s.) patiently put up with numerous norms of persecution and
injustice inflicted upon him during the reign of (Harun) al-Rashid
starting with the tragedy of his father, passing by the tragedies to
which the Alawides were subjected, and ending with the unfair
instigations to al-Rashid by the Imam's opponents to kill him and
eliminate him.

The strength of the patience and perseverance of the Imam become
manifest when we examine the thinly veiled political persecution from
which he suffered during al-Ma’mun's reign especially after the latter
appointed him as his heir to the throne, fully knowing that al-Ma’mun
was not sincere in his intention but rather enacted a political act in
which al-Ma’mun played the major role solely to provide security to the
shaky foundations of his regime due to the storming events the outcome
of which was reflected upon the issue of who would succeed him on the
throne.

The extent of the suffering of the Imam, the degree of his bitterness
and agony, and the amount of grief and sorrow which filled his heart due
to the treatment meted to him by the government, can be assessed; yet he
buried all of that in the depth of his mind with mute patience and
perseverance. Yasir, his servant, said once: "Whenever ar-Ridha’ (a.s.)
returned home on Friday from the mosque, with his face sweating and
stained by blowing dust, he would raise his hands and invoke God saying,
\`God! If the only

way I am relieved from my distress is by death, then I invoke Thee to
hasten its hour.'"

Suffices to assess the extent of his patience and perseverance to simply
be aware of the fact that although he was God's Argument over His
creation, he was powerless to do anything while seeing right being
abandoned and wrong upheld.

Generosity
----------

In a dialogue with al-Bazanti, the Imam said: "Anyone who receives a
boon is in danger: He has to carry out God's commandments in its regard.
By God! Whenever God blesses me with something, I continue to be in
extreme apprehension till (and here he made a motion with his hand) I
take out some of it and spend it in the way God has ordained in its
regard." Al-Bazanti asked him: "May my life be sacrificed for yours!
You, in your status of high esteem, fear that much?" He answered: "Yes,
indeed! And I praise my Creator for the blessings He bestowed upon
me."25 .

The Imam's generosity and thoughtfulness emanate out of this good aspect
of his conviction which depends on the principle of letting others share
in the wealth with which God blesses him, and in what blessings and
favors He bestows upon him. God's rights in this context are the shares
of the needy and the poor in this world whose ability to earn a decent
living was hampered by either severe employment conditions, or
disability to work due to old age, or because of being left stranded
away from their original home, in addition to others who were forced by
the necessities of life to stretch their hands to others for help.

To ask others is humiliating, for it shatters the dignity of the person
who is stretching his hand asking and by his psychological appeal to the
breath of humanity in the person he is asking. In this story, the Imam
guides us to realize a magnificent fact about the human psychology, that
is, to give is not a favor someone does to someone else begging him for
help; rather, it is his way of thanking God for the blessings with which
He blessed him. The person who is blessed is in danger until he takes
out of it the rights in it which are God's.

The Imam's method in giving is derived from such an angle of the human
nature. Eleisha ibn Hamza says: "I was once talking to ar-Ridha’ (a.s.)
when a large crowd of people assembled to ask him about what is
permissible in Islam and what is not. A man as tall as Adam came to him
and said: \`Assalamo Alaikom, O Son of the Messenger of God! I am a man
who loves you, your fathers and grandfathers, and I have just been on my
way to perform the pilgrimage when I discovered that I had lost
everything with me and now I do not have anything enough even for a leg
of the trip. If you will, please help me with the expense of going back
home, and I am a recipient of God's blessing (i.e. well to do).

As soon as I reach there, I will give to the poor as much as you will
give me, for I do not qualify to be a recipient of alms.' He said to
him: \`Sit, may God be merciful to you,' then he kept talking to people
till they dispersed except that man, Sulaiman al-Ja’fari, Khuthai'ama
and myself. Then he (ar-Ridha’) said: \`Do you permit me to enter (the
room)?' Sulaiman said to him: \`May God advance your endeavor.'26 So he
entered the room and stayed for

about an hour after which he came out and closed the door behind him,
stretched his hand above the door and said: \`Where is the man from
Khurasan?' The man answered: \`Here I am!' He said: \`Take these two
hundred dinars, use them for your preparations for the trip; may God
bring you blessings thereby, and do not spend an equal amount to it on
my behalf, and leave the room in a way that I do not see you and you do
not see me,' then he left.

Sulaiman then said: \`May my life be sacrificed for yours! You have made
quite a generous offer, but why did you hide your face?' He answered:
\`I did so for fear of seeing the humiliation on the face of the man due
to my assistance for him. Have you not heard the*hadith* of the
Messenger of God (S) in which he said: \`The one who hides a good deeds
receives rewards equal to performing the pilgrimage seventy times; one
who announces his sin is humiliated, while one who hides it is
forgiven'? Have you heard the saying of the example of the first case:
Whenever I approach him, one day, with a plea, I return home and my
dignity is still with me. For he hides himself from the person who
appeals to him when he gives him something so that he does not see the
humiliation on his face, and so that the pleading person retains his
dignity when he does not see the face of the benevolent one who is
giving him?"

He asks him to leave without seeing him in order to safeguard himself
against feeling as having the upper hand over the pleading person, and
in order to relieve the pleading person from having to show his
gratitude to him.

While in Khurasan, he once distributed his entire wealth to the poor on
the day of Arafat, so al-Fadl ibn Sahl said to him: "Now you are
bankrupt!" he said: "On the contrary! I am now wealthier than ever. Do
not consider trading my wealth for God's rewards and pleasure as
bankruptcy."27 .

He does not give others in order to buy their affection or friendship;
rather, he considers giving with generosity as a good trait whereby man
gets nearer to his Maker by including His servants in the wealth with
which He blessed him. This is the difference between his method of
giving and the method of others. Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Nawbakhti is quoted
saying:

"A man passed by Abul-Hasan and begged him to give him according to the
extent of his kindness. He said: \`I cannot afford that.' So he said:
\`Then give me according to mine,' whereupon he ordered his servant to
give the man two hundred dinars."28 .

The reason why the Imam abstained from giving the man according to the
extent of his own kindness, as the man asked him the first time, is
probably due to the fact that he simply did not have as much money as he
liked to give. As regarding his own affection towards the poor and the
indigent, and his way of looking after them, Mu'ammar ibn Khallad
narrates this anecdote:

"Whenever Abul-Hasan ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) was about to eat his meal, he
would bring a large platter and select the choicest food on the table
and put on it, then he would order it to be given away to the poor.
After that he would recite the following verse: \`But he hath made no
haste on the path that is steep.'29 After that he would say: \`God, the
Exalted and the Sublime,

knows that not everyone has the ability to free a slave, nevertheless He
found means for them to achieve Paradise (by feeding others).'"30 .

Thus does the Imam sense the weight of deprivation under which the poor
moan and suffer; therefore, he shares his best food with them in
response to the call of humanity and kindness and in harmony with the
spirit of the message with which God entrusted him.

Al-Bazanti tells the story of a letter Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) wrote to
his son Imam Abu Ja’far (a.s.) which personifies the generosity and
spirit of giving deeply rooted in the hearts of the Prophet's Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.); he says: "I read the letter of Abul-Hasan Imam ar-Ridha’
(a.s.) to Abu Ja’far which said: \`O Abu Ja’far! I have heard that when
you ride, the servants take you out of the city through its small gate.

This is due to their being miser so that nobody asks you for something.
I plead you by the right I have upon you that every time you enter into
or get out of the city, you should do so through its large gate, and
when you ride, take gold and silver with you, and every time you are
asked, you should give. If any of your uncles asks you for something,
you should give him no less than fifty dinars, and you yourself may
determine the maximum amount you would like to give; and if any of your
aunts asks you for something, do not give her less than twenty-five
dinars, and it is up to you to determine the maximum amount. I only
desire that God raises your status; therefore, keep giving away and do
not fear that the Lord of the Throne will ever throw you into
poverty.'"31

Equity
------

The Imam (a.s.) did not have the chance to rule for any period of time
so that we may discuss his practical style of government, but we can
still be acquainted with that through reviewing his statements to some
of his followers who very much desired that the Imam should shoulder the
responsibilities of caliphate. Muhammad ibn Abu 'Abada asked him once:
"Why did you delay executing the order of the commander of the faithful
and why did you refuse to oblige?"

He said: "Be careful, O father of Hasan! The matter is not so." He added
saying that the Imam noticed that he was crossed, so he said: "What's in
it for you anyway? Should I, as you presume, become what you wish me to
become, and you are as close to me then as you are right now, you would
certainly be responsible for paying your dues and, in my eyes, there
would be no difference between you and anyone else."

He, peace be upon him, clarifies the matter, and that there is no use to
accept the caliph's offer since government will never actually be under
his control. And when he notices the bitterness on the face of the
person who asked him why he hesitated to accept the caliph's offer, he
reminds him of his method of government should it at all be in his
hands, summarizing it thus: Nobody shall have any distinction over other
citizens according to the dictates of the equitable government set up by
Islamic*Shari'a* regardless of class or any other distinctions such as
favoritism, friendship or support; rather, all subjects are equal in the
rights they enjoy without any bias to one in preference over another, or
any bias against one in order to please another.

The Imam's way of explaining his method of government is actually an
outspoken way of criticizing the ruling methods followed then the
foundations of which were not based on justice and equity but on special
interests which guarantee for the ruler and his followers the continuity
of his government and authority. The wealth, lives, possessions and
everything else under the government's control was all subject to the
whims and desires of the oppressive ruler and his train, distant from
the principles of justice and the norms of equality secured by the
Islamic message as embedded within its humanitarian method of
legislation.

Method of Educating the Public

The Imams (a.s.) played a significant role in the area of educating the
public, setting examples in educating through the example of one's own
conduct; therefore, their methods of education were not confined merely
to spreading awareness through the spoken word but went beyond that to
enforcing a strict practical censorship over actions to observe the
defects and shortcomings of conduct in the life of others. Here we
present three examples of the norms of conduct of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.)
each dealing with one aspect of man's practical life:

Yasir, one of his servants, narrates that the Imam's attendants were
eating some fruit one day and they were throwing away a good portion of
it uneaten. Abul-Hasan (a.s.) said to them: "Praise be to God! If you
have eaten to your fill, there are many who have not; so, you should
feed them of it instead."32 .

In this incident, the Imam points out to the reality of wanton living
which we observe in our life. When we feel that we have achieved full
satisfaction of something, be it food or anything else, we do not try to
satisfy the need of others for it, but we may even try to spoil it in
one way or another without realizing the crime towards humanity implied
in an action like that.

Sulaiman ibn Ja’far al-Ju'fi is quoted saying: "I was in the company of
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) trying to take care of some personal business of my own
and I wanted to go home. He said to me, \`Come with me and spend the
night over my house.' So I went with him and he entered his house
shortly before sunset. He noticed that his attendants were working with
clay, probably mending stables, and there was a black man among them. He
asked them, \`What is this man doing with you?'

They said: \`He is helping us, and we will pay him something.' He asked,
\`Did you come to an agreement with him regarding his wages?' They said,
\`No. He will accept whatever we pay him.' He, thereupon, started
whipping them and showing signs of extreme anger. I said to him, \`May
my life be sacrificed for yours! Why are you so angry?' He said: \`I
have forbidden them so many times from doing something like that and
ordered them not to employ anyone before coming to an agreement with him
regarding his wages.

You know that nobody would work for you without an agreed upon wage. If
you do not, and then you pay him three times as much as you first
intended to pay him, he would still think that you underpaid him. But if
you agree on the wage, he will praise you for fulfilling your promise
and paying

him according to your agreement, and then if you give him a little bit
more, he would recognize that and notice that you increased his pay."33
.

Here the Imam tries to point out a significant point related to the
system of labor whereby each of the employer and the employee safeguards
his rights. Often, disputes erupt about determining the wage the
employee deserves in the absence of a prior agreement between the
employer and the employee regarding a set wage. By determining and
agreeing upon a set wage, each party safeguards its own right without
finding a reason to dispute. An increase, though small, in the wage will
surely cause the employee to feel grateful and thankful to his employer.

Al-Bazanti is quoted saying:

"Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) had one of his donkeys sent to convey me to his
residence, so I came to the town and stayed with a dignitary for a part
of the night, and we both had our supper together, then he ordered my
bed to be prepared. A Tiberian pillow, a Caesarian sheet, and a Marw
blanket were brought to me. Having eaten my supper, he asked me, \`Would
you like to retire?' I said, \`Yes, may my life be sacrificed for
yours.' So he put the sheet and the blanket over me and said, \`May God
make you sleep in good health,' and we were on the rooftop.

When he went down, I told myself that I had achieved a status with that
man nobody else had attained before. It was then when I heard someone
calling my name, but I did not recognize the voice till one of his
(ar-Ridha’'s) servants came to me. He said: \`Come meet my master;' so I
went down and he came towards me, asked me for my hand to shake and he
shook it with a squeeze, saying, \`The Commander of the Faithful, God's
peace be upon him, came once to visit Sa'sa'a ibn Sawhan, and when it
was time to leave, he advised Sa'sa'a not to boast about his visit to
him but to look after himself instead for he seemed to be about to
depart from this world and that worldly hopes do not do a dying man any
good, and he greeted him a great deal as he bid him good-bye.'"34

In the above anecdote, the Imam (a.s.) points out the significance of
realistic spiritual upbringing which is not influenced by external
appearances nor is deceived by artificial psychological fantasies, for
the reason why others pay attention and show concern may be solely due
to seeking their self-interest, or maybe due to a sincere affection, or
to any other reason, without any of these reasons being linked to the
reality of the self and its significance.

The Imam tries to push us to avoid being deceived by anything which
would push us away from contemplating upon our real world to which our
destiny is tied, and we have to be subjective in our outlooks, assessing
our realities without being influenced by casual external factors.

Reluctance to Cooperate With the Rulers
---------------------------------------

The Imams (a.s.) did not for even one day admit any legitimacy to their
contemporary governments, be it Umayyad or Abbaside, due to the fact
that those governments were far away from the pristine Islamic system of
government and to their deviation, in spirit and in conduct, from the
most simple principles and rules of human justice. Executions,
deportations, confiscations of properties, transgressions, according to
them, all did no

hold them legally accountable, nor did they constitute a departure from
the principles of creed and equity as long as they in the end served to
strengthen and secure the foundations of their governments.

Anyone who appreciates his divine responsibility would try as hard as
possible to stay away from participating in shouldering the
responsibilities of such governments or making the latter's job easier,
for this would mean his own recognition of their legitimacy and his own
admission of their right to exist.

Yes; if the objective of his participation is to alleviate, as much as
he can, their injustice and transgression to which innocent believers
may be subjected, and to minimize the danger of their ethical and social
iniquities which distance the nation from the achievement of an
exemplary realization of its mission--if this is the objective, then
such participation may be necessitated by one's own persistent faith,
and upon this premise did the Imams refrain from encouraging any of
their followers from working for such governments for that would mean
assisting the aggressor and strengthening his stance.

The only exception was the case when the religion's interest dictated
it. In the latter case, they used to encourage some of their influential
followers to take part in the government and be employed by it as was
the case of Ali ibn Yaqteen who tried several times to resign from his
post at the court of Harun al-Rashid, but Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.)
used to encourage him to stay due to the fact that his stay meant
removing injustices from many believers and the fending of some of the
corruption committed by others.

We can clearly be acquainted with this negative stance of Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.) towards their rulers by examining what al-Hasan ibn al-Husayn
al-Anbari tells us about Imam Abul-Hasan ar-Ridha’ (a.s.). He says: "I
continued writing him for fourteen years asking his permission that I
accept a job in the service of the sultan. At the conclusion of the last
letter I wrote him I stated the fact that I was fearing for my life
because the sultan was accusing me of being a*Rafidi* and that he did
not doubt that the reason why I declined from working for him was due to
my being a*Rafidi* .

So Abul-Hasan wrote me saying, \`I have comprehended the contents of
your letters and what you stated regarding your apprehension about your
life's safety. If you know that should you accept the job, you would
behave according to the commands of the Messenger of God (S) and your
assistants and clerks would be followers of your faith, and if you use
the gain you receive to help needy believers till you become their
equal, then one deed will offset another; otherwise, do not.'"35 .

The Imam (a.s.) preconditions for his permission to work for the
government that there should be a religious interest which decreases the
damage done by the nature of the job; otherwise, it would mean a
psychological and factual separation from the pristine principles of
Islam and its precepts and an attachment to the corrupt world in which
those rulers were living.

How could the Imam ever approve the principle of cooperating with those
who played Muslim caliphs and deliberately watered down the divine
content of the Islamic message by their and behavioral transgressions
which

demolished the psychological and spiritual borders separating the nation
from the realization of the sins and pitfalls of such transgressions?
Theirs were gatherings in which wine was served, entertainers
entertained, singers sang, dancers danced, filling the palaces of
Umayyad and Abbaside caliphs with immorality. One of them was insolent
enough to invite one of those Imams (a.s.) to participate in his
drinking orgy as was the case of al-Mutawakkil with Imam Ali al-Hadi
(a.s.) which unveils to us the extent of corruption and the extremity of
moral decay of the Abbaside caliphate.

It is quite possible that those rulers were aware of the negative
attitude of the Imams towards them and their corrupt government systems.
We find them, as the anecdote above proves, doubting the loyalty of the
individuals who refused to cooperate with them, charging them
with*Rafidi* sm due to the negative stance adopted by their Imams
towards the conduct of those rulers.

Islamic caliphate suffered the tragedy of a humiliating deviation from
Islam and a moral decay during the Umayyad and Abbaside dynasties which
helped the wide dissemination of corruption and moral decay among
various sectors of the*ummah* . What sort of Muslim caliphs were those
whose eyes could not sleep except after listening to the music played by
their male and female singers, whose nightly meetings were not complete
without the presence of wine and immorality?

What type of Islamic reality is this in which a group like that has the
full say? How can anyone expect the Imams (a.s.), who were the careful
custodians of rights and whose responsibility was to safeguard such
rights, to permit themselves and their followers to bear any
responsibility in a government led by individuals whose hands were
polluted with sins and accustomed to sinning?

The negative stance of the Imams was an obvious call for the nation to
be aware of its Islamic mission and principles, a loud cry to wake it up
from its slumber to witness the corrupt reality lived by such Islamic
"caliphs" due to the reckless and corrupt behavior of those rulers and
their followers who were at the helm of leading the nation.

These are some of the characteristics and qualities which provide us
with some of the outlines of the portrait of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), and
the picture presented here is not complete in its pristine components
which represent the actual context for it, for such a task requires the
researcher to rise to grasp the Imam's loftiness which is impossible to
attain by any writer, and nobody can ever describe it no matter how hard
he tries.

### Notes

###

[^1]: 'Uyoon Akhbar al-Rida’, Vol. 2, pp. 180-183.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 49, p. 211, as quoted by Ibn Maskawayhi's
book Nadeem al-Tareef.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 49, p. 100. It is narrated from al-Hakim by
Abu Abdullah, the hafiz of Naishapur.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Al Irshad by al-Mufid, p. 291.

[^6]: Manaqib Aali Abi Talib, Vol. 4, p. 300.

[^7]: Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 1, p. 203.

[^8]: Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 5, p. 183.

[^9]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 184.

[^10]: Al Kafi, Vol. 6, p. 203.

[^11]: Al Manaqib, Vol. 4, p. 362.

[^12]: Al Kafi, Vol. 4, p. 81.

[^13]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 226.

[^14]: Al Hujurat:13.

[^15]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 174.

[^16]: Al Kafi, Vol. 4, p. 23.

[^17]: Al Hujurat:13.

[^18]: Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 237.

[^19]: Al Kafi, Vol. 6, p. 298.

[^20]: Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 3, p. 147; Surat Al A'raaf:32.

[^21]: Al Kafi, Vol. 6, p. 516.

[^22]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 178.

[^23]: Al Kafi, Vol. 1, pp. 316-319.

[^24]: Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 3, p. 143.

[^25]: Al Kafi, Vol. 3, p. 502.

[^26]: Al Kafi, Vol. 4, p. 24.

[^27]: Al Manaqib, Vol. 4, p. 361.

[^28]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 360.

[^29]: Al Balad:11.

[^30]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 264.

[^31]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 8.

[^32]: Al Kafi, Vol. 6, p. 297.

[^33]: Al Kafi, Vol. 5, p. 288.

[^34]: Qurb al-Isnad, p. 222, and Al Kharaij wal Jaraih, p. 237, with a
slight textual variation.

[^35]: Al Kafi, Vol. 5, p. 111.
