Imam and the Waqfis
===================

Immediately after the demise of his father, Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) was
tried by an acute calamity which deepened the tragedy of losing his
father. On one hand, he was suffering from the attempts of the rulers
and their supporters at his life and, on the other hand, he was
painfully and bitterly witnessing the horrible division which caused
dissension among his father's followers. It was caused by the promotion
of an invented idea which called for the Imamate to be terminated with
Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.), claiming that he did not actually die but
was still alive, that he was the Qa'im (Mahdi) of the Progeny of
Muhammad (S), that his absence was similar to the absence of Musa ibn
'Imran (Moses son of Amram), and that, accordingly, the Imamate should
not transfer to his son Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.).

Pioneers of Waqfism
-------------------

The first to promote this idea were few men who were among the most
distinguished followers of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.) such as Ali ibn
Abu Hamza al-Bataini, Ziyad ibn Marwan al-Qandi, and Uthman ibn Isa
al-Ruwasi. These three persons are considered the first to invent this
"sect," openly claimed to be its adherents, and invited others to
promote it.

Objectives of the Waqfis
------------------------

This new "sectarian" trend did not result from a pure belief and a mere
conviction; rather, it was prompted by materialistic and worldly desires
which affected the thinking of its inventors and caused them to deviate
from the Right Path. Those individuals tried to find excuses for their
falling into such "sect" by narrating narratives they had heard from
Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) without being actually familiar with their
implications, nor did they accurately comprehend their contexts either.
This may be deliberate especially since Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.),
while still alive, had explained to them their actual implications.

For example, Al-Ghaiba quotes al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan saying: "I said to
Abul-Hasan Musa (a.s.): \`Can I ask you a question?' He answered, \`You
must rather ask your own Imam.' I inquired, \`What do you mean? I do not
know of any Imam other than your own self.' He said: \`He is my son Ali
to whom I gave my title (of Imam).' I said: \`Master! Please help me
save myself from Hellfire! Abu Abdullah (a.s.) had said that you
yourself are the Qaim, the caretaker of this issue.' He said: \`Was I
not?' Then he added, \`O Hasan! No Imam preaches to a nation except when
he is their Qaim; so, when he leaves them (dies), his successor will be
the Qaim and the Hujja (Proof) till he too leaves. We (the Imams) are
all Qaims; therefore, from now on, redirect all your dealings to my son
Ali, for by God I swear twice that I did not do that but God did out of
His love for him.'"1 .

This narrative reveals to us the reality behind the confusion in which
those who deviated by Waqfism were swept. It also proves that the theory
of Waqfism was not born after the demise of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.)
but was alive even during the time of Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) according to
the narration of events which could not be explained even by their
narrators. In this narrative, the Imam tries to explain to these
individuals their

misunderstanding of those implications and their erroneous
interpretation thereof in a way upon whose premise the Waqfis establish
their claim.

Imam Denounces Waqfism
----------------------

The Imam did his best to emphasize the error of that concept and its
collision with reality by continuously stating that the Imamate after
his demise would be the responsibility of his son Ali, and he even made
a number of his followers and family testify to that. For example,
Haider ibn Ayyub says: "We were in Medina at Qaba where we used to meet
Muhammad ibn Zaid ibn Ali. He came to us one day much later than
anticipated, so we asked him what caused him to be so late.

He said, \`Abu Ibrahim invited seventeen men of us, all descendants of
Ali and Fatima, God's blessings be upon both of them, and he required us
to bear witness to his will and testimony that his son Ali would be his
successor and representative during the remainder of his own life and
after his demise, and that the issue was in effect since then.' Then
Muhammad ibn Zaid said, \`By God, O Haider! He has today tied the knot
of Imamate for him, and the Shi'as will accept him as the Imam after his
father's demise.'"2 .

Abdullah ibn al-Harith said: "Abu Ibrahim called us to his presence and
we responded. He said, \`Do you know why I have gathered you all here?'
We answered in the negative. He said, \`Bear witness that this Ali, my
son, is my regent, executor of my will, and my successor after me;
whoever entrusted me with something, let him take it back from him, and
whoever insisted on seeking audience with me, let him obtain his written
approval for that.'"3

Abdul-Rahman ibn al-*Hajj* aj is quoted saying that Abul-Hasan Musa ibn
Ja’far (a.s.) had nominated his son Ali for the Imamate and wrote a
statement to this effect in the presence of sixty witnesses from among
the most distinguished dignitaries of Medina.4 .

In these clear texts, and in others, he is seen emphasizing his
nomination of his son as the Imam and, at the same time, he is declaring
that his death was imminent, thus in advance falsifying the claim of the
Waqfis.

Advocates of Waqfism Reveal Their Own Nature
--------------------------------------------

There are many narratives narrated by some advocates and inventors of
Waqfism which clearly prove to us their false claims. For example, Ziyad
ibn Marwan al-Qandi narrates the following:

"Once I visited Abu Ibrahim and his son Ali was with him. He said to me,
\`O Ziyad! His (son's) statements are as good as mine, his speech is
like my speech, and his instructions are as binding as mine.'"5 .

Ahmed ibn Muhammad al-Maithami, a Waqfi, says: "Muhammad ibn Isma'il ibn
al-Fadl al-Hashimi told me the following: \`I visited Abul-Hasan Musa
ibn Ja’far (a.s.) and he was suffering from an acute illness. I asked
him: \`If the matter regarding which I pray God that it would not happen
(Imam's death) comes to pass, who shall we follow?' He said: \`My son
Ali; his writing is as though I wrote it, and he is my regent and
successor after me.'"6 .

Ghannam ibn al-Qasim is quoted saying: "Mansour ibn Younus Barzaj told
me that he had visited Abul-Hasan, that is, Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.), and

he said to him, \`Have you come to know what new undertaking I have
undertaken today?' He answered in the negative, so the Imam said, \`I
have appointed my son Ali as my regent and successor after me; so, enter
his room and congratulate him and tell him that I ordered you to do so.'
So he entered his room and congratulated him and informed him that his
father had ordered him to do so, yet Mansour reneged after that, and he
even confiscated the funds (of Muslims) entrusted to him."7 .

What is most significant in this narrative is the Imam's initiation of
the dialogue with Mansour to tell him about his successor, then his
ordering him to enter his son's room to congratulate him and to tell him
that he was doing so because his father ordered him to. What the Imam
wanted to accomplish by doing all of that was to make a practical point
for the record against Mansour by making him recognize the Imamate of
his son after him in a way which does not permit him at all to preach
Waqfism except if he reneged as actually happened after that.

Imam Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) Warns the Waqfis
--------------------------------------------

There is another stance for the Imam which is not without an exciting
moment involving one of the main advocates of Waqfism. His stance was
like a clear warning to those who created the controversy of this "sect"
and promoted it; al-Bataini states:

"I said to Abul-Hasan, \`Your father had informed us of his successor,
and we wish you could inform us of yours.' So he took my hand and shook
it, then he recited the verse: \`God will not mislead people after He
had guided them, in order that He may make clear to them what to fear
(and avoid)'."8 .

The recitation of that verse came almost like a prophecy about the
future of what that person and his friends would do and how they would
fall into the slippery paths of misguidance; therefore, he shakes his
hand and recites a verse which predicted that those folks' deviation
would take place after proof had been made manifest against them. The
Imam, as a matter of fact, refers clearly to the Waqfi movement after
him and even reads the epitaph of the faith of those who advocate
Waqfism in a narrative narrated by Muhammad ibn Sanan who says:

"I visited Abul-Hasan one year before he was conveyed to Iraq, and his
son was with him. He called upon me to be attentive, and I responded.
Then he said, \`There will be a movement this year..., but do not let it
bother you.' Then he lowered his head contemplating, picking the ground,
then he raised his head and recited the verse, \`God leads the
oppressors astray and does what He pleases.'9 I said, \`And what is
that, may my life be sacrificed for yours?' He said, \`Anyone who denies
the right of this son of mine and refuses to recognize his Imamate after
me will be equal to one who denied the right of Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.)
and did not recognize his Imamate after Muhammad (S).' So I understood
that he was implying that his death was near, and that he was appointing
his son as his successor."10 .

Materialistic Objectives of Waqfis
----------------------------------

History tells us that those who invented the dissension of this "sect"
were chief officers of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.) and keepers of the
funds collected for him from his Shi'a followers. When he died, Ali ibn
Abu

Hamza al-Bataini had with him as much as thirty thousand dinars; Ziyad
ibn Marwan al-Qandi had seventy thousand dinars, and Uthman ibn Isa
al-Ruwasi had thirty thousand dinars and six concubines.

They did not relish the idea of delivering these funds to his son and
executor of his will after him; therefore, they invented the trick of
denying the death of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.), claiming that he was
still alive, and that they would not hand those funds except to him upon
his return. Ahmed ibn Hammad said: "One of the officers, Uthman ibn Isa,
was staying in Egypt, and he had with him a great deal of wealth and six
concubines.

So Abul-Hasan ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) wrote him demanding the delivery of the
concubines and the money, but he wrote him back saying that his father
did not die. He (ar-Ridha’) wrote again saying, "He died, and we have
distributed his legacy; the news about his death is correct, and there
are eye witnesses to that.' Yet he (Uthman) wrote back saying, \`If your
father is not dead, then you have no right to claim what is his, and if
he did die, as you say, then he never ordered me to give anything to
you, and I have emancipated the concubines and married them.'"

According to the version of his letter as recorded in*Al-Ghayba* , he
wrote, "Your father did not die; rather, he is still alive and in
charge, and anyone who says that he died is on the wrong track."11 .

Both Ali ibn Abu Hamza al-Bataini and Ziyad al-Qandi tried to resist the
Imam's attempt to pursue them and reject his demand that they should
deliver the funds by denying that they had had any money that belonged
to his father with them, but Younus ibn Abdul-Rahman, whom they both
tried to allure with money to join their call for Waqfism, revealed to
us their crime of theft and confiscation of his Imam's funds; he said:

"Abu Ibrahim died and each of his chief executive officers had a great
deal of money with him, and this is the reason why they claimed Waqfism,
that is, their own desire to keep the money for themselves. Ziyad
al-Qandi had seventy thousand dinars and Ali ibn Abu Hamza al-Bataini
had thirty thousand dinars. Having seen all of that and come to realize
the truth behind it and to know what I knew of the dilemma of Abul-Hasan
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), I encouraged people to support him, so both men asked
me to meet them and asked me: \`Why are you doing that? If you want
wealth, we can make you wealthy,' and they offered ten thousand dinars
for me if I accepted, and they told me to change my mind, but I refused
and I said to them, \`We all have been narrating one particular*hadith*
from the Truthful Imams that, \`When innovations in religion are
promoted, let the learned person promote his knowledge disproving them,
and if he does not, the light of*Iman* will be taken away from him;' so,
I would not abandon the*Jihad* in the Way of God at any rate.' For this
reason, they opposed me and concealed enmity towards me."12 .

Imam Reveals the Real Motives of the Waqfis
-------------------------------------------

In one of his letters to al-Bazanti, the Imam (a.s.) reveals the truth
behind these individuals' call for Waqfism; he says:

"As regarding Ibn al-Sarraj, the reason why he called upon people to
disobey us and not to be loyal to us is that he confiscated funds which
my father al-Hasan had entrusted to him before he died, and he argued
about it

with me and refused to give it back even when all others did so and
delivered to me all items entrusted to them. But when my father al-Hasan
passed away, he took the opportunity of the disobedience of Ali ibn Abu
Hamza and his friends to me and claimed he felt sick. By my life, he was
not sick at all, but he wanted an excuse for confiscating the money and
running away with it.

As regarding Ibn Abu Hamza, he is a man who adopted an interpretation of
one*hadith* which he himself invented, and he did not do a good job at
his interpretation for he did not have enough knowledge to digest his
own invention, but he passed it on to people anyway and he fell into the
trap which he did not know he had set for himself; so, he hated to prove
himself a liar while trying to disprove what he himself had claimed
through*ahadith* which he interpreted without knowledge thereof, and he
realized that if he did not make sure to represent my forefathers as
truthful, he would not be certain whether what he had heard about
al-Sufiani and others was true or not.

He, therefore, told people that what my forefathers had said did not
disprove any of his claims, but his knowledge was short of comprehending
the implications of the*ahadith* my forefathers had narrated and the
truth related to them; so, he caused dissension or at least put some
doubt in people's minds about what he was narrating, and in the end he
fell into a pitfall he thought he was trying to avoid..."13 .

The fact that the Imam (a.s.) did not mention the money incentive as
being the major factor which caused al-Bataini and his friends to
profess Waqfism does not prove its absence, for the Imam (a.s.) was
dealing with refuting these individuals' claims and proving their
arguments wrong. As regarding Ibn al-Sarraj, since the man did not claim
an excuse of his own, his own confiscation of the funds during the
life-time of the Imam's father was the subject of the Imam's criticism.

A Leading Waqfi Confesses
-------------------------

What leads us to believe that the Waqfis did not establish their claim
of Waqfism on a concrete reality, and that Waqfism was invented merely
to satisfy the desire for a materialistic gain, is the story of the
confession of one of the leaders of Waqfis at the time of his death. He
admitted the horror of his sin of confiscating the money and not
delivering it to Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.).

Al-Toosi's work*Al-Ghayba* quotes al-Husayn ibn Fadal saying, "I used to
see an old man from Baghdad at the house of my uncle Ali ibn al-Husayn
ibn Fadal, and he used to tease him quite often. He said to him one day,
\`There is nobody worse than you, Shi'a folks (or you*Rafidi* s,
according to another version of the story).' My uncle said to him, \`Why
so, may God curse you?!' He said: \`I am married to the daughter of
Ahmed ibn Abu Bishr al-Sarraj who, before breathing his last, told me
that he had with him ten thousand dinars which actually belonged to
(Imam) Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.), and that he did not deliver it to his son
after him and testified that the man had not died yet.

Then he pleaded us saying, \`For the sake of God, save my skin from the
Fire and deliver it to ar-Ridha’! Please do so for the sake of God!' By
God,

we did not deliver a bit of it to him, and we left the man being burnt
in Hellfire!'"14 .

Waqfism Spreads and Gains Momentum
----------------------------------

These individuals fooled a select group from among the followers of the
Imam (a.s.) and convinced them to believe, through casting doubts and
suspicions, in Waqfism, so they finally fell to it and embraced the
innovation. Among them were Abdul-Rahman ibn al-*Hajj* aj, Rifa'a ibn
Musa, Younus ibn Ya'qoob, Jameel ibn Darraj, Hammad ibn Isa, Ahmed ibn
Muhammad ibn Abu Naseer, al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Washsha, and other
dignitaries who used to be companions of the Prophet's Progeny.

But they came back to their senses, recognized the Imamate of ar-Ridha’
(a.s.), and abandoned Waqfism. Others whose adherence to Waqfism was
bought with a lot of money did not listen to any argument and preferred
to uphold their beliefs and died wronging their own souls such as Hamza
ibn Bazee' who was described by Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) as the "wretch."

Ibrahim ibn Yahya ibn Abul-Ballad is quoted saying: "Ar-Ridha’ once
inquired, \`What did this wretch Hamza ibn Bazee' do?' I said that he
became an old man. He said, \`He claims that my father is still alive!
Today, they all doubt their own claim, but tomorrow they will die
atheists.' Safwan said that he told himself he understood what the Imam
(a.s.) meant by saying that they were doubtful, but he did not
understand his reference to atheism.

After a short while, Safwan continues, one of their men was reported to
have said at the time of his death that he disbelieved in the God of his
Imam (meaning Imam Musa ibn Ja’far, A.S.). Safwan said, \`This is the
interpretation of the (Imam's)*hadith* .'"15 Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.),
indeed, suffered a great deal while fighting them and refuting their
false beliefs, unveiling their real intentions and disclosing their
reality before the public so that no weaklings would be duped by them.

Confusion of Some Waqfis
------------------------

What is interesting is that after the demise of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far
(a.s.), some of those folks called for the Imamate of his son Ahmed; so,
when the latter accompanied Abul-Saraya during Ibn Tabataba's uprising
against the Abbaside regime, they disproved of his action and reverted
to believe in Waqfism rather than submitting to the belief in the
Imamate of his son ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) as the successor of his father.
Muhammad ibn Ahmed ibn Aseed said:

"After the demise of Abul-Hasan, Ibrahim and Isma'il sons of Abul-Asmal
suggested to go and visit his son Ahmed, which they did, spending quite
some time with him. When Abul-Saraya went out (to fight the Abbasides),
Ahmed ibn Abul-Hasan joined him; so, we approached Ibrahim and Isma'il
and said to them, \`This man has just joined Abul-Saraya; so, what is
your view in the matter?' He said that both men found his behavior
unacceptable, and they discontinued supporting him and said,
\`Abul-Hasan is alive! We remain following the belief of Waqfism,' and I
think that this man (meaning Isma'il) died doubtful."16 .

This dissension continued for a long time during which the disputes and
disagreements between them and the ones on the Right Path were at their

peak till God caused the false beliefs to disintegrate and become
extinct due to the fact that they were not based on firm durable
foundations.

### Notes

###

[^1]: Al Ghayba by Shaikh al-Toosi, p. 29.

[^2]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 1, p. 28.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 27.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 28.

[^5]: Al Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 381; also al-Mufid's Irthaa, p. 286.

[^6]: Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 1, p. 20.

[^7]: Al-Kashi's Rijal, p. 398.

[^8]: Al-'Ayyashi's Tafsir, Vol. 2, p. 115 of Surat al Tawba, verse 115.

[^9]: Ibrahim:27.

[^10]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 1, p. 32.

[^11]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 1, p. 113 and also Shaikh
al-Toosi's Al Ghayba, p. 47.

[^12]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 1, p. 112.

[^13]: Qurb al-Irshad, p. 206.

[^14]: Shaikh al-Toosi's Al Ghayba, p. 48.

[^15]: Shaikh al-Toosi's Al Ghayba, p. 50.

[^16]: Al-Kashi's Rijal, p. 400.
