Imam's Role in Eliminating al-Fadl ibn Sahl
===========================================

Al-Ma’mun granted al-Fadl the nucleus of power and his complete personal
confidence when he permitted him to fare with all government issues,
vesting upon him the responsibility of all state affairs without
doubting even a little bit his loyalty and readiness to consume himself
while safeguarding him and his throne.

Al-Fadl, on the other hand, made very good use of that confidence and
generous award for the enhancement of his own status. He took hold of
the reins of government and surrounded al-Ma’mun with a curtain of
deception, completely isolating him from the reality of the general
political situation, acting on his own according to the dictates of his
own interest as an absolute ruler single-handedly issuing decisions
suitable to strengthen his own position.

Al-Fadl Controls the Government
-------------------------------

With the talent of cunning and conniving, al-Fadl was able to control
the sentiments of the leaders and heads who made up the governing
apparatus, forcing upon them his own power and awe without anyone being
able to go beyond the limits al-Fadl had defined for him, for the price
would then be the loss of his job and maybe his life as well.

The only person whom he could not control nor influence was Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) who was closely watching the suspicious movements of
al-Fadl, trying from a distance to warn al-Ma’mun against the sure
danger awaiting him due to the actions of al-Fadl and his supporters,
but al-Ma’mun did not want to show any sign of mistrust of the man who
saved his power and returned his usurped throne to him after the winds
of dissension emanating from Baghdad almost eliminated him and his
government.

Al-Fadl Tests al-Ma’mun's Attitude Towards Him
----------------------------------------------

Al-Fadl was not completely unaware of the secret warnings to al-Ma’mun
regarding his suspicious movements and what political gains he aspired
to achieve in order to satisfy his aspirations and ambitions for which
he had prepared plans with sure results.

Al-Fadl may have been contented with the strength of his own position
and the invulnerability of the plans he had prepared to secure the
safety of his status, without imagining that al-Ma’mun might one day
consider eliminating him. In Khurasan, he controlled all the centers of
power by winning the support of the leaders and chiefs there. In Iraq,
he was able through his cunning to depose Tahir ibn al-Husayn from the
post of leadership after he had subdued Baghdad to his control when
al-Ma’mun instructed al-Fadl to depose Tahir and banish him to Riqqa and
install his own brother al-Hasan ibn Sahl in his place, and al-Ma’mun
immediately responded favorably to that.

Such a swift positive response from al-Ma’mun was a clear signal to
al-Fadl that he was the only man who monopolized control over the center
of power and who could control al-Ma’mun's mind regarding how to run the
government, and that the whisperings which started being circulated
inside closed halls suggesting a change in al-Ma’mun's heart towards
al-Fadl were completely far away from the truth.

Ambiguity of al-Ma’mun's Handling of al-Fadl
--------------------------------------------

We cannot understand the secret in the continuation of such a loose
stance of al-Ma’mun towards al-Fadl and whether it was due to a secret
plan al-Ma’mun had prepared to trap al-Fadl and get rid of him after
going beyond reasonable limits in his control over the running of the
general administration of the government. Was that the outcome of the
element of trust in al-Fadl's actions and the complete confidence in his
loyalty after all the sacrifices he had offered in order to bring
authority back to him?

In fact, al-Ma’muns's political insight and genius, and his alert
awareness of events, make us doubt the second portion of this rhetorical
question, for al-Ma’mun was not a naive person who tried hard to freeze
himself and practically isolate himself from government, while his
minister had a free hand to do whatever he wished and whatever his own
ambitions dictated to him.

Elimination of Harthama
-----------------------

No matter what the reason was, there are historical evidences asserting
to us the fact that al-Ma’mun was not reserved in adopting some
suggestions inspired by al-Fadl. For example, Harthama was one of the
leaders who did a very good job in creating a military atmosphere
conducive to al-Ma’mun's government and in securing its foundations.

At the same time, he was one of those who were critical of the policies
of al-Fadl and his brother al-Hasan ibn Sahl. Like other leaders, he did
not appreciate such an extravagant norm of conduct adopted by al-Hasan
ibn Sahl in his dealing with other leaders and chiefs and, in his view,
that was according to instructions from his brother al-Fadl and to a
plan agreed upon by both of them. For this reason, he decided to speak
his mind to al-Ma’mun and to acquaint him with the disturbing situation
clouding the government and with the failure of the extravagant policy
adopted by al-Fadl and his brother.

Al-Fadl Incites About Harthama
------------------------------

Al-Fadl, possibly because of his intelligence and cunning, sensed the
intriguing intentions of Harthama and that he was determined to incite
the caliph against him and his brother, or maybe he came to know about
that from his own watchdogs and informants whom he chose to monitor the
movements of the leaders and chiefs and to inform him of their news;
after all, it was only natural that al-Fadl should have an intelligence
system to guarantee internal security. The result is that in order to
foil the man's attempt, al-Fadl asked al-Ma’mun to order Harthama to go
to Syria and Hijaz, but Harthama was more stubborn than al-Fadl had
expected. Ibn Khaldun narrates the following in his*Tarikh* :

"Having finished with Abul-Saraya, Harthama returned, and al-Hasan ibn
Sahl was in Madain and he did not go to visit him there. He went from
'Aqr Qoob to Nahrawan heading towards Khurasan just to be faced with a
barrage of letters from al-Ma’mun ordering him to go to Syria and Hijaz,
but he insisted instead on meeting him, remembering how he used to
provide him and his father with counsel, with the objective to acquaint
him with the schemes of al-Fadl ibn Sahl who was deliberately hiding
news from

him, about the worry of the public because of that, and because of his
extravagance, and also about his stay in Khurasan. Al-Fadl came to know
about that, and he incited al-Ma’mun about him, claiming that the man
had given a post to Abul-Saraya because he was among his soldiers, and
that he had deliberately gone against his instructions expressed in the
letters he had sent him. To forgive him, al-Fadl went on, would be to
encourage others to do likewise.

Al-Ma’mun became angry and waited to see him. When he reached Marw, he
ordered the drums to be beaten so that nobody could hide the news of his
arrival from al-Ma’mun. When al-Ma’mun inquired about the beating of
those drums, he was told that Harthama had arrived roaring and snarling,
so he ordered him to see him at his court. Al-Ma’mun said to him,
\`Harthama...! You have antagonized the Alawides! By the life of
Abul-Saraya, had it been up to you to annihilate all of them, you would
have done just that.' When he started to apologize, he was not given a
moment to say anything; instead, al-Ma’mun ordered him to be kicked in
the stomach, to have his nose cut, and to be dragged to prison where he
sent someone to kill him."1

Analysis of Harthama's Stance
-----------------------------

We do not claim that Harthama was a loyalist, and that he was indeed
trying to save the government from collapsing by inciting against
al-Fadl and his brother. His motive, rather, may have been the wave of
terror among the leaders and chiefs regarding the horrible fate which
threatened their positions and influence as a result of deposing Tahir
ibn al-Husayn and excluding him from prominent government positions and
the appointment of al-Hasan ibn Sahl on the affairs of Iraq, according
to the suggestion of al-Fadl to al-Ma’mun. That provided us with an
accurate specimen of the selfish nature of al-Fadl's policy which he
used to apply towards those who showed strength in their military or
political stances so that both he and his brother would remain the
stronger pole round which the government revolved.

Harthama aimed by his incitement to protect his position which he
rightfully deserved due to his sincere services to the government, but
al-Fadl was successful in instigating al-Ma’mun against him before he
arrived there, and the rest is what you have just heard.

Leaders Move to Eliminate al-Fadl
---------------------------------

Harthama's defeat before al-Fadl was a strong factor behind a swift move
undertaken by the leaders who were expecting for themselves a fate
similar to that of Harthama and Tahir ibn al-Husayn, but none of them
alone possessed enough courage to disclose this dangerous situation the
state was going through to al-Ma’mun due to al-Fadl's behavior.

Imam as Savior
--------------

The only hope those leaders had had to save the deteriorating situation
was to request Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) to disclose the reality of the
situation to al-Ma’mun since he was the only one who could not be harmed
by al-Fadl nor could anyone incite al-Ma’mun against him. Ibn Khaldun
writes:

"When these discords took place in Iraq because of al-Hasan ibn Sahl,
and due to people's resentment of his and his brother's excessive
influence over al-Ma’mun, then the nomination of Ali ibn Musa ar-Ridha’
(a.s.) and the transfer of the caliphate from the Abbasides, al-Fadl ibn
Sahl was concealing all of that from al-Ma’mun, and he was going to
extremes in such concealment, for fear al-Ma’mun might change his heart
about him and his brother.

When Harthama came, he knew that he was going to tell al-Ma’mun about
all of that, and that al-Ma’mun trusted the advice of Harthama; so, he
perfected his incitement against him with al-Ma’mun till he made him
change his mind about the man and kill him, and he did not even listen
to what he wanted to say; therefore, the displeasure of the Shi'as there
as well as of the residents of Baghdad increased against him, and
dissensions became widespread.

The commanders of al-Ma’mun's army started talking about it, but they
could not inform him of it, so they approached Ali ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and
asked him to convey the matter to al-Ma’mun. And so it was. He informed
him of the rioting and killing in Iraq and that people criticized him
for the favorite status of al-Fadl and al-Hasan, and for his
(ar-Ridha’'s) nomination. Al-Ma’mun asked, \`Who else besides you knows
all of that?' He said, \`Yahya ibn Ma'ad, Abdul-Aziz ibn Imran and other
prominent army leaders.' So he called them to him, and they did not
reveal anything except after he had pledged for them their own security,
and they told him exactly what ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) had already told him."2

Tabari provides us with a clear and more precise picture of Imam
ar-Ridha’'s situation; he says:

"It was rumored that Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad the Alawide
told al-Ma’mun about the dissension and inter-killing among people, that
since the assassination of his brother, al-Fadl was concealing the news
from him, that his own family and the public criticized him for certain
reasons and said he was a bewildered madman, and that since they saw
that he was doing all of that, they swore the oath of allegiance to his
uncle Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi as the caliph.

Al-Ma’mun said, \`They did not swear the oath of allegiance to him;
rather, they accepted him as a governor ruling them in the way al-Fadl
had instructed him.' He informed him that al-Fadl had indeed lied to him
and that he cheated him as well, adding, \`The war between Ibrahim and
al-Hasan ibn Sahl is raging; people criticize him for the status you
gave him (al-Fadl) and his brother, and they criticize your nomination
of myself as your successor.' He asked, \`Who else in my army is aware
of that?' He said, \`Yahya ibn Ma'ad, Abdul-Aziz ibn Imran, and a number
of prominent military commanders.' So he called them to his court, and
they were Yahya ibn Ma'ad, Abdul-Aziz ibn Imran and Musa and Ali ibn Abu
Sa'id who was son of al-Fadl's sister, and Khalaf the Egyptian, and he
asked them about what he had heard, but they refused to tell him
anything unless he guaranteed their safety against the threat revenge of
al-Fadl ibn Sahl. He guaranteed that for them, and he wrote each one of
them a statement in his own handwriting to that effect.

Then they told him about the discords among his subjects, about the
deliberate misinformation he heard from al-Fadl regarding Harthama, and
that Tahir ibn al-Husayn had done an excellent job serving him and
opened many lands to his government and strengthened his caliphate, and
when he accomplished all of that, he was rewarded by banishment to Riqqa
where he was not permitted to receive funds from anyone, till his
authority was weakened and his troops mutinied, that had his caliphate
been in Baghdad, he would have had a better control and nobody would
have dared to mislead him as al-Hasan ibn Sahl had, that the land from
one end to the other was shaking under his feet, that Tahir ibn
al-Husayn had been forgotten that year since the murder of Muhammad in
Riqqa without being utilized in these wars while someone who was a lot
less qualified was in charge..."3

Al-Ma’mun is Convinced of the Gravity of the Situation
------------------------------------------------------

The picture now was turned upside down in the eyes of al-Ma’mun, but he
did not try to change his conduct with al-Fadl because the latter was in
charge of the government base in both Khurasan and Baghdad. In Khurasan,
the psychological war which he waged by deposing Tahir ibn al-Husayn and
by having Harthama murdered quenched the desire among the leaders and
chiefs for mutiny, pushing them to yield to his wishes and expectations
after having felt that al-Ma’mun represented no more than a magic wand
in the hands of al-Fadl. As regarding Baghdad, it was in the grip of his
brother al-Hasan ibn Sahl who was considered the right hand of al-Fadl
and the big stick whereby he threatened al-Ma’mun.

Al-Fadl Seeks Revenge Against Instigators
-----------------------------------------

As regarding those men who exposed to al-Ma’mun the reality of al-Fadl's
conduct and the dangers it implied, they were terrified when al-Fadl
tore down the assurances of and were written by al-Ma’mun guaranteeing
their safety against his wrath and revenge upon coming to know about
their incitement and their support of what Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) had
said about him. Tabari says:

"When that became certain to al-Ma’mun, he ordered preparations to go to
Baghdad, and when al-Fadl ibn Sahl came to know about those
preparations, he came to know only about some of them, so he
interrogated them and even whipped and jailed some of them and pulled
the hair out of the beards of others, so Ali ibn Musa came to his court
and told him what had happened to those men and reminded him of his
assurances to them, and he answered him by saying that he was only
tolerating."4

This historical text clearly tells us about the extent to which
al-Ma’mun went in avoiding a headlong collision with al-Fadl or letting
him know that anyone had incited him against al-Fadl, especially since
he came to know that he was harming the leaders who were pressured by
him to speak the truth about al-Fadl, giving them written assurances
that al-Fadl would not harm them. This text also tells us that al-Ma’mun
was the one who planned the assassination of al-Fadl which took place
later as some assassins admitted to al-Ma’mun face to face.

Al-Ma’mun Pretends to be a Star Gazer
-------------------------------------

It is interesting that chance should play a major role in the execution
of al-Ma’mun's plan to eliminate al-Fadl, and it may even have been a
deliberate "chance" arranged by al-Ma’mun himself, and we do not think
that is unlikely.

While on his way to Baghdad, al-Fadl, who was in the company of
al-Ma’mun, received a letter from his brother al-Hasan ibn Sahl in which
he said, "I have looked in the changing of this year according to the
calculation of the stars and I found out that you will in such and such
month, on a Wednesday, taste the pain of red-hot iron and of the burning
fire, and I am of the view that you should today go in the company of
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and the commander of the faithful to the bath-house to
take a bath and then pour blood over your body so that the ill luck of
this omen leaves you." Al-Fadl, therefore, sent a letter to al-Ma’mun
asking him to go with him to the bath-house, and to request Abul-Hasan
(a.s.) to join them too.

### Imam Refuses to Go to the Bath-House and Gives a Warning

###

Al-Ma’mun wrote a letter in that meaning to ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), and
Abul-Hasan wrote him back saying that he would not enter the bath-house
the next day, nor would he recommend that the commander of the faithful
should enter it either, nor even al-Fadl. But al-Ma’mun repeated his
request twice, and Abul-Hasan wrote him again saying, "I shall not enter
the bath-house tomorrow for I saw in a vision the Messenger of God (S)
last night telling me not to enter the bath-house tomorrow; therefore, I
do not advise the commander of the faithful nor al-Fadl to enter the
bath-house tomorrow," whereupon al-Ma’mun wrote him saying, "You have,
master, said the truth, and so has the Messenger of God (S); I shall not
enter the bath-house tomorrow, and al-Fadl knows best what he does..."5

### Al-Fadl is Murdered

###

Finally, al-Fadl entered the bath-house just to be received by the
swords of the assassins as the letter he had received from his brother
al-Hasan ibn Sahl had predicted.

We do not think it is unlikely that that letter was prepared by
al-Ma’mun imitating the style of the man's brother, al-Hasan, in order
to avoid being accused of murdering al-Fadl. It is also possible that
al-Ma’mun wished to get rid of both al-Fadl and Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) by
that method of mysterious assassination, but the Imam (a.s.) was alert
in the face of al-Ma’mun's cunning and scheming and he resisted the
insistence of al-Ma’mun in entering the bath-house with him and with
al-Fadl by tact and caution. The last paragraph of the anecdote tells us
clearly that the letter was a plot by al-Ma’mun to kill both al-Fadl and
the Imam (a.s.); otherwise, why did al-Ma’mun abstain from warning
al-Fadl against entering the bath-house although the Imam (a.s.) had
asked him to do just that?

### Assasins are Close Friends of al-Ma’mun

###

What provides evidence is the fact that those who killed al-Fadl were
among the closest courtiers and train of al-Ma’mun and, according to one
story, they later on faced al-Ma’mun with their accusation that he was
the one who asked them to do it. Al-Tabari says:

"When he reached Sarkhas, a group of men assaulted al-Fadl ibn Sahl at
the bath-house and struck him with their swords till he was dead, and
that was on a Friday two nights before the end of Sha'ban in the year
202 A.H. They were arrested and it became clear that those who
assassinated al-Fadl were among al-Ma’mun's closest courtiers and they
were four in number: Ghalib al-Mas'oodi the black man, Qistantine
(Constantine) the Roman, Faraj al-Daylami, and Muaffaq of Sicily; they
killed him and he was sixty years old and they ran away. Al-Ma’mun
posted a reward of ten thousand dinars for anyone who would bring them
to him, and they were brought to him by al-Abbas ibn Haitham ibn
Bazar-Jamhar al-Daynuri, and they said to al-Ma’mun, \`But you ordered
us to kill him!' He ordered them to be killed.

It is also said that when those who killed al-Fadl were arrested,
al-Ma’mun interrogated them, and some of them said that Ali ibn Abu
Sa'id the son of al-Fadl's sister had dispatched them, while others
among them denied that, and he ordered their execution. After that he
ordered Abdul-Aiz ibn Imran, Ali, Musa, and Khalaf, to be brought to
him, and he interrogated them. They denied having any knowledge of the
matter, but he did not believe them and ordered their execution too,
sending their heads to al-Hasan ibn Sahl in Wasit as a trophy and
informing him about his own pain because of the tragedy of the murder of
al-Fadl and that he appointed him in his place."6

Thus did al-Ma’mun get rid of the strongest power base within his
government which threatened his authority and his fate, leaving only one
obstacle in his way to guarantee to uproot the rebellion in Baghdad by
dealing with its root causes which included the presence of Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) who, according to the Abbasides, was a difficult knot
they could not be loyal to al-Ma’mun except if he untied it, for its
presence meant the end of the Abbaside rule and the beginning of the
Alawide rule.

### Imam's Motives for Causing the Elimination of al-Fadl

###

The reason which caused the Imam (a.s.) to involve himself in the
horribly violent struggle which was raging between al-Fadl and the army
commanders was the desire to safeguard the strength of the then Islamic
entity and to distance it from the elements of disintegration and
collapse which might cause its outside enemy to consider assaulting it
and might push him to conduct hot adventures whose dear price would be
paid by the Muslims.

Through his far sight, the Imam (a.s.) saw that al-Fadl's un-loyal
policy would certainly cause something like that in addition to what was
being committed of iniquities, oppression and transgression from whose
perils the Muslims were suffering, while the Imam (a.s.) viewed himself
as being responsible to do something in the face of such an
irresponsible behavior. There was no method whereby the Imam (a.s.)
could have limited such conduct except by acquainting al-Ma’mun with the
situation as it actually was and to uncover for him al-Fadl's cheating
card.

The Imam (a.s.) had made that clear for us in a discussion he made with
al-Ma’mun in which he said, "O commander of the faithful! Fear God in
your treatment of Muhammad's nation. God did not grant you such
government and preferred you over others for it so that you might ignore
the

rights of the Muslims and hand such a responsibility over to someone
else who would rule them contrary to what God has ordained..."7

The Imam (a.s.) was not concerned about a status or a post as much as he
was concerned about maintaining the unity of the Muslims, about their
strength and their collective power before the enemy which watched them
within or without their ranks, as much as he was concerned about
promoting social justice among the circles of the Muslims and lifting
the nightmare of oppression from them.

For these reasons, we find him suggesting to al-Ma’mun that it was
necessary to contain and put an end to dissensions, and that that would
be possible only by dealing with their causes among which his own
regency which was not in the best interest of the government, or that
the causes which had necessitated them may have served their purpose
already, for the post did not mean anything to the Imam (a.s.) as long
as it collided with the supreme Islamic interest.

From here, we can see the Imam (a.s.) refusing the principle of sharing
the responsibilities of the government upon becoming the regent, but he
did not refuse to be an advisor counseling from a distance. That was
only because he did not want to have a share in bearing the burdens of
the oppression and the sins which he was not going to accept to be
committed in his name as a member of the ruling system. But he was not
unable of carrying the responsibility of offering advice and counsel
when doing so would result in removing oppression and eliminating the
danger of weakening the Muslims or disuniting them.

All of this did not contradict the Imam's attitude regarding the
illegitimacy of the government because of its being based on the
usurpation of authority from its rightful owners, for the issue in the
eyes of the Imam (a.s.) was not an issue of government but of the
interest of Islam and the safeguarding of the unity of the Muslims in
the face of the evils of adventurers and grudging people. This is what
distinguishes the Imam (a.s.) from others. He could not possibly
sacrifice the interest of Islam in order to maintain a post of
influence. During various epochs, the Imams (a.s.) put up with their
contemporary governments despite their belief in their illegitimacy only
for the sake of looking after and maintaining the interests of the
Muslims.

### Notes

###

[^1]: Ibn Khaldun, Vol. 3, p. 245

[^2]: Ibn Khaldun, Vol. 3, p. 249

[^3]: Tabari, Vol. 8, p. 564

[^4]: Tabari, Vol. 8, p. 565

[^5]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 491, and Al-Irshad, p. 294

[^6]: Tabari, Vol. 8, p. 565. Ibn Khaldun mentions a similar story in
Vol. 3, p. 250, of his work

[^7]: Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 6, p. 159
