Ayatullah Shaykh Ja’far Shustari (R.A.)
=======================================

The eminent philosopher and jurist, Marhum Ayatullah Shaykh Ja'far
Shustari is the author of the important book of **Maqtal: “Khasais
al-Husainiyyah”, meaning “The Attributes of Husain's Movement”.** He
relates the following incident about his meeting with our 3rd Imam, Imam
Husain (A.S.):

“When I completed my studies at the Hawza of Najaf and returned to my
home in Shustar, I found that there was a need to make the people more
aware of the teachings of the Qur'an and Islam in general. As a first
step, I decided to start giving public lectures every Friday. When the
month of Ramadhan came, I continued with my lecturing. I would take
Tafsir-e Safi (of Mulla Muhsin Fayz Kashani) with me and teach from it.
I would always end my talk with a few words of *masaib* of Imam Husain
(A.S.) from the book **“Rawdhatu'l Shuhada” (“The Garden of the
Martyrs”)** because, as the popular saying goes, every food requires
salt, and the salt of any religious lecture is the remembrance of the
tragedy of Kerbala.

However, no matter how much I tried, I could not recite the masaib of
Imam Husain (A.S.) i.e. the tragedy of Kerbala on the *mimbar/pulpit*
without reading from the book. As a result, it did not have that much
effect on the people. In any case, I persisted in this manner for a
whole year. The following year, when the month of Muharram arrived, I
said to myself, *“How long will I have to carry on reciting the masaib
from a book? When will I manage to recite from memory?”* I knew that I
had to find a way out of this undesirable situation, but no matter how
much I tried, I could not manage to find a solution. I began to
constantly worry about it and one day, exhausted after thinking about
the same matter, I fell asleep.

That day, I dreamt that I was on the plains of Kerbala, and that too, at
the time when Imam Husain (A.S.)'s caravan was there. I entered the camp
and greeted that holy and radiant personality. The Imam (A.S.) seated me
next to himself and then said to Hazarat Habib bin Mazahir, “Habib!
Shaykh Ja'far is our guest, and a guest must always be made welcome. It
is true that there is no water in the camp, but there is some flour and
oil - so go and prepare some food for our guest.”

At the words of Imam (A.S.), Habib bin Mazahir rose up at once and after
sometime, returned and placed some food in front of me. I will never
forget that there was a spoon in the dish of food as well. I had eaten
only a few spoonfuls of that heavenly food when I woke up. I found that
because of the blessing of that *ziyarat* of Imam Husain (A.S.) and *his
kindness to me*, I had been inspired with a special knowledge about the
family of the Prophet (SWW), including many facts and subtle details of
their lives, which was not known to anybody else before this.”

His valuable book, **“Khasais al-Husainiyyah”,** contains many such
details and inferences which is probably from the knowledge he received
as a result of his meeting with the Imam Husain (A.S.), and which was
not previously known to anyone else.

Taken from: **“Khasais al-Husainiyyah”** p. 8, as quoted in **“Karamat
wa Hikayate Ashiqane Khuda” - “Miracles and Anecdotes of the Close
Servants of Allah”.** Translated AJ/141105.


