Shaykh Abbas-e-Qummi (R.A.)
===========================

**The writer of the Traditions of Ahlu'l Bayt (AS)**

Shaykh Abbas-e Qummi is the author of the indispensable book of du'as,
called **Mafatih-al-Jinan,** (Keys to the Heavens). He was an expert in
*hadith*, and for this reason, he is famously known as **Muhaddith-e
Qummi**. Amongst his many other works, **Manazil-e Akhira** and
**Safinatul-Bihar** are well-known.

He was a man of great piety and a sincere lover of the Prophet (SWWS)
and his progeny (AS). Such was his faith and conviction, that one day,
when his son was very ill, he took a glass of water, and after mixing
the water with his finger, he gave it to his son to drink, saying,
“Drink this my son, you will soon be better, because with this hand I
have written many *ahadith* (traditions) of the Ahlu'l Bayt (AS).”

One of the senior scholars of Najaf once said to Shaykh Abbas-e-Qummi,
“My foot is constantly hurting me - please pray for me.” The Shaykh
replied, “If I say I will pray for you, it is possible that my prayer
may not be answered if I have uttered something sinful in the past.
However, I will pass my hand over your foot, because with this hand I
have written many *ahadith* of the Ahlu'l Bayt (AS) and Insha'Allah Imam
Sadiq (AS) will effect a cure for you.” He rubbed his hand over the
scholar's foot and the pain left him immediately.

When he began to compile the **Mafatih,** some scholars of Qum advised
him to use his vast knowledge to write explanatory notes on some of the
complicated books, like **Kifayah** and **Makasib** of Shaykh al-Ansari,
instead. “Are you just sitting writing a book of du'as?” they asked. He
replied, “I will continue writing the **Mafatih,** and I have dedicated
its reward to the soul of Fatima Zahra (AS), and, with her blessings, it
will become **Mafatih-al-Jinan** - keys to the gardens of Paradise.”

One day he was sitting contemplating in the graveyard of
*Wadi-as-Salaam* in Najaf - where many great personalities are buried.
He saw that some people had just buried a man. Suddenly, for a brief
moment, the veils were lifted from before his eyes and he saw angels
descending from the heavens with whips of fire with which they began to
strike the dead man. He started to scream and shriek in pain, but none
of the mourners heard or saw anything unusual; there was a man sitting
near the grave reciting Qur'an and another was distributing dates and
fruits, and another was weeping, but none saw what was happening to that
man. However, the terrible sight that the Shaykh saw in those brief
moments made him ill for one whole week.

Source: **“Karamat wa Hikayate Ashiqane Khuda” - “Miracles and Anecdotes
of the Close Servants of Allah”,** pp 61-64. Translated AJ/231105


