Sayyid Ali Qadhi Tabatabai (R.A.)
=================================

**A great Scholar and ‘Arif,** **Teacher of Ayt. Khui, Ayt. Behjast,
Allamah Tabatabai and many other Ulema**

Marhum Qadhi was a scholar of the highest calibre in Najaf in the last
century. He taught **akhlaq, aqaaid and 'irfan,** and was also well
versed in **falsafah and fiqh.** Many great scholars of the previous
generation were his students. He had a special status and piety, which
enabled him to perform many miraculous acts, some of which his students
have described. *One of the teachers at* *the Hawza in Najaf reports:*

“I had heard much about the wondrous abilities of Marhum Qadhi, but I
doubted whether the stories were actually true or not, until one day,
when I met him outside the mosque of Kufa. I greeted him and we spoke
together for a few moments. When we reached the entrance of the mosque
of Kufa, (which was facing the open desert), we sat outside facing the
*qiblah* in the shade of one of the walls of the mosque, for some rest,
before we entering the mosque.

We began a discussion and Marhum Qadhi related some matters about the
secrets and signs of Allah swt, the definition of *tawhid*, the
importance of pondering deeply on this subject and the fact that this is
the true and the only purpose of man's creation. The talk continued
until the call for prayers came.

As he spoke, I thought to myself, “Truly, we are all confused and
totally unaware of the actual reality of our creation. How shameful will
it be if our lives end in this manner? What he says is so true, and if
we do not take benefit from it, then woe to us!”

Suddenly, I saw a large snake came out of its lair and began to slide
next to the wall of the mosque, coming towards us. There were many
snakes in that region, and people would often see them, but they did not
usually attack anyone. However, this snake came right next to us, really
frightening me. I noticed that immediately Marhum Qadhi pointed at it
(the snake) and said, “*mut, bi idhnillah”* - i.e. “*die, by the
permission of Allah!”* To my utter surprise, I saw that the snake
immediately withered away and died. Then without even pausing for a
moment, he concluded his comments and then we stood up to attend the
prayers.

Marhum Qadhi recited his prayers in the mosque and then retired to a
side room where he used to engage in worship. I also performed some
*a*'*mal*, and then decided to return to Najaf. Before I left, a thought
passed in my mind, “was the snake truly dead or had this man somehow
tricked me, as some magicians do?” I decided to go and examine the snake
to see if it was actually dead. I went out and saw that it was exactly
in the same place, dead & dried up. I pushed it to check - it did not
move. I became ashamed of my doubts and returned to the mosque to
continue with prayers, but I could not concentrate.

Marhum Qadhi remained in his room for some time engrossed in his
worship, and then came out and left the mosque. I also came out and we
met again. As soon as he saw me, he turned to me and with a smile said,
“Well sir, you tested me, you tested me!”

*Allamah Tabatabai, the author of* **Tafsir al-Mizan,** *reports the
following, about his teacher:*

“My brother (Allamah Mohamed Hasan Ilahi) had sent a question to our
teacher, Agha Qadhi through one of his students that, “The carpet of
Prophet Sulayman (A.S.) on which he sat with his entire court and
travelled from the east to the west; was it a physical thing,
manufactured from some components, or was it a miracle of Allah that had
nothing to do with any physical object?” Marhum Qadhi replied to the
student, “I do not know the answer. However, one of the creatures who
was alive at the time of Prophet Sulayman (A.S.), and who participated
in these journeys, is still alive. I will go and ask him.”

Marhum Qadhi set off for an area, which was mountainous. When he reached
a particular mountain, a creature who resembled a human being came out,
and they began to talk with one another. The student, who had
accompanied Marhum Qadhi, could not understand anything of their
conversation, but when Marhum Qadhi returned, he said, “He (the creature
from the mountain) says that it was from the miracles of Allah swt,
(through wind currents which Hazarat Sulayman (A.S.) was allowed to
control) and there was no apparent physical apparatus involved at all.”

This was Marhum Qadhi, who not only was able perform miracles like
Prophets, but was also able to communicate with ancient creatures in
their own languages. May Allah swt's peace and blessings be on him and
on all our Ulema, (Ameen).

Source: **“Karamat wa Hikayate Ashiqane Khuda” - “Miracles and Anecdotes
of the Close Servants of Allah”,** p40 & **“Mehr-e-Tabaan”** - **“The
Radiant Sun”,** p373. Translated AJ/301105.

Marhum Qadhi was a scholar of the highest calibre in Najaf in the last
century. He taught **akhlaq, aqaaid and 'irfan,** and was also well
versed in **falsafah and fiqh.** Many great scholars of the previous
generation were his students. He had a special status and piety, which
enabled him to perform many miraculous acts.

Brief Biography
---------------

Ayatullah Sayyid Mirza Ali Tabatabai, famously known as **Qadhi**
(1285 - 1366 AH) was born in Tabriz in Iran. He completed his basic
*hawza* studies in his hometown, and then at the age of 28, migrated to
Najaf to learn from the great masters who taught him in the shadow of
the *haram* of Imam Ali (A.S.).

In time, Sayyid Qadhi excelled in **fiqh, usul, hadith, tafsir** and
**akhlaq** and distinguished himself as one of the most sought-after
instructors in Najaf, especially in the fields of **akhlaq** and
**'irfan.** He wrote several books, including a partially completed
*tafsir* of the Qur'an, which is a commentary up to verse 91 of Surah
al-An'am. Several of the top ranking *'ulama* and *maraje* of the last
generation were his students, including: **Grand Ayatullah Behjat** (may
Allah prolong his life), **Grand Ayatullah Zanjani** (may Allah prolong
his life), **Grand Ayatullah Khui** (R.A.)**,** **Grand Ayatullah Najafi
Mar'ashi** (R.A.)**, Grand Ayatullah Hadi Milani** (R.A.), **Allamah
Tabatabai** (R.A.), **Shahide Mehrab Ayatullah Dasteghayb** (R.A.),
**Sayyid Hashim Haddad** (R.A.) and many others.

His Extraordinary Abilities
---------------------------

Marhum Qadhi was a man of exceptional abilities - many times his
illustrious students would describe their memories of the wondrous acts
they witnessed in his blessed presence. The contemporary scholar and
student of Ayatullah Khui, **Ustad Fatimi Niya,** relates the following
incident:

In the days when Ayatullah Qadhi was in Najaf, Ayatullah Khui came to
him and requested, *“I would like you to instruct me in some matters.”*
He (Ayt. Khui) probably meant **'irfan** and **Divine gnosis** and
**Spiritual Exercises.** Agha Qadhi gave him some special spiritual
instructions which Ayatullah Khui faithfully followed.

Then one night in the blessed Month of Ramadhan, Ayt. Khui visited his
illustrious teacher, Ayt. Qadhi, who showed him (Ayt. Khui) a vision of
his future. Suddenly, Ayt. Khui saw a man who resembled himself, appear
in front of him; the man slowly began to age until his beard turned
white. He saw the man teaching students of *hawza* at the highest level
in the Masjid-e Hindi in Najaf. He saw him beginning to issue edicts
(*fatawa*) and then saw that his treatise of fiqh (*risalaye amaliyyah*)
was printed. After a long time he heard the loudspeakers in the mosque
of Kufa announce, “The grand Ayatullah al-Khui has passed away”.[^1]
When the vision was over, Ayt. Qadhi turned to Ayt. Khui and said,
**“This was your life, from now till your death. You have a good future;
now you may go.”**

**Ayatullah Nasiri Dawlat Abadi** [^2] relates that his teacher, Marhum
**Ayatullah Shaykh Abbas Quchani** narrated the following incident to
him:

In Najaf al-Ashraf, we used to have special sittings with Marhum Qadhi.
Usually the participants would inform each other about the gatherings
and we all used to know one another. In one such gathering, I suddenly
saw a young Sayyid enter the room. Marhum Qadhi interrupted his
discussion with us and showed great respect to the young Sayyid who had
just entered and then said to him, **“Agha Sayyid Ruhullah! Do not
hesitate to stand firm against the tyrant rulers and unjust governments.
You must resist them, you must oppose their ignorance!”**

This was a time when there was not even a whisper about any revolution
in Iran. Marhum Quchani used to say, **“We were all very surprised that
day at this conversation, but after many years, when the Islamic
revolution happened, we understood what Marhum Qadhi had been referring
to on that day and why he had shown such great respect to Ayatullah
Khumayni.”**

Ayatullah Khumayni would often remember this great scholar. He once
said, “When it came to (understanding) the deep and lofty meanings of
*tawhid*, Qadhi was a mountain.”

Source: **“Karamaat-e Ma'nawi” - “Spiritual Miracles”** p9 &10.
Translated AJ/071205.

[^1]: Interestingly, Ayatullah al-Khui was in Kufa when he passed away.

[^2]: This elderly scholar still leads prayer at the Kamar zarrin mosque
in Isfahan, and conducts akhlaq classes at this mosque on Sundays.


