Ayatullah Shaykh Muhammad Taqi Bahlool (R.A.)
=============================================

Short Biography
---------------

Shaykh Muhammad Taqi Bahlool was an unusually gifted scholar and a
famous orator of the present era. Behind his small stature, simple dress
and modest manners, there was a talented, eloquent and pious individual,
who never hesitated in speaking the truth as well as defending it. .

He was born in 1908 in Khurasan. His father was a *mujtahid*, and he
ensured that his son received the best education and the correct
training from his early years. Thus, **Shaykh Bahlool memorised the
Qur'an at the tender age of 8 years, and even at this young age, one
would see him giving lectures from the pulpit.**

He finished his preliminary Hawza studies under his father, and then
came to Qum, where his teachers were *the Grand Ayatullah Aakhund, Mulla
Ali Ma'sumi* and *Grand Ayatullah Mar'ashi Najafi*. Later he also
studied in Najaf under *Grand Ayatullah Abu'l Hasan Isfahani.* This last
illustrious teacher told him to use his talents to enter politics and
participate in the resistance movement against the dangerous policies of
Shah Razakhan, the Shah of Iran.

**After completing his studies, Shaykh Bahlool returned to Iran where he
became a powerful voice against anti-Islamic policies of the government
of the day.** The government was alarmed and worried at his popularity
and as a result, put him in the prison. For defending the truth, **he
spent 13 long years of his youthful life in prison.** He was released
from the prison in a miraculous way.

After his release from the prison, he spent sometime in Egypt and Syria,
familiarising himself with the current situation, before returning to
Iran. He was very active in the run up to the Islamic Revolution.

He left this world just about 4 months ago, at a ripe age of over 100
years. Ulema and Islamic Scholars throughout the world, led by Ayatullah
Khamenai paid a glowing tribute to his brilliant life and work. We pray
to Allah swt to Grant the Marhum the choicest place in the proximity of
Ma'sumeen (A.S.).

Anecdote
--------

In the eyes of Shaykh Bahlool, Salatu'l Layl (i.e. Namaze Shab) had a
special prestigious place. He often used to say that “**in Salatu'l
Layl, there lies the benefit of this world and the hereafter.** When I
urge you all never to miss its recital, I have a personal proof of its
benefit”.

This is one of the incidents he has narrated regarding his habit of
regularly praying Salatu'l Layl: He says, “In my student days when I was
in *Madressa-e- Faydhiyyah in Qum,* it was a very difficult time and we
had very little money, even for our basic necessities.

One year, in which the night of 15th Sha'ban coincided with the coldest
days of winter, the weather in Qum was so cold that even water would
turn into ice in a few moments. That night I had gone for a Majlis,
which had been arranged in honour of our 12th Imam, Imam al-Mahdi
(A.S.).

When I returned, the doors of the Madressa were already locked. The
doors of the Haram were also closed. The night was also bitterly cold.
However, because of my unfailing habit of reciting Salatu'l Layl
regularly, I stood next to the outside door of the Haram, and began to
pray in the open.

No sooner had I finished my prayers, I saw that a pilgrim who was
speaking in Turkish had come to the doors. He asked me when the Haram
would open. I said, 'it would open in about one to two hours'. Hearing
this, he said, “Because my friends are waiting for me, I cannot wait
that long. But please do me a favour. Take these candles for me, and
place them wherever it is dark in the Haram, and light them on my
behalf.” Before I could say anything, he gave me those candles and a bag
of money as a gift and then he quickly departed.

I took the candles and the money he gave me as a gift. When I counted
the money, I saw that it was 500 Tumans, which was a considerable sum in
those days.

**I thought for a long time that why would a pilgrim give such a large
gift to an unknown person like me. However, later** **on** **it dawned
on me that this must be a divine plan by Allah swt and the barakat of
regularly praying Salatu'l Layl.**

That money helped me solve many of the difficulties I was facing at the
time. And indeed, this is only one small example of the benefit of
Salatu'l Layl, both in this world and Insha'Allah in the next.”

Source: **“Karamat-e Ma'nawi” - “Spiritual Miracles”** p. 33. Translated
AJ/141205


