The Transmission of this Sermon
===============================

It is documented that this sermon is a portion of a letter which Imam
‘Ali (a.s.) wrote after ‘Umro ‘As took over the reins of the rule of
Egypt after the martyrdom of Muhammad b. Abi Bakr. In that letter, the
Imam (a.s.) related the painful events which transpired after the
passing away of the Noble Prophet (S). The Imam (a.s.) ordered that his
letter be read publically so that the masses would know what transpired
and so that the satanic whispers which were prevalent in the community
at that time would not impact the people.

It is not improbable to believe that the Imam (a.s.) spoke the words in
this sermon [which we will be reviewing] more than once - the first time
being after The Battle of Jamal – the war in which ‘A’ysha played the
principle role as one of the leaders in that major act of sedition; and
that he repeated his words in another lengthy letter which he wrote.

Ibn al-Jawzi has stated:

The scholars of biography *(sirah)* have related that when ‘Ali, peace
be upon him, had concluded The Battle of Jamal, he ascended the pulpit
in Baŝrah (Iraq) and delivered this sermon. In reality, his words point
to the instigations for The Battle of Jamal and the misdeeds of ‘A’ysha
.[^1]

As for those who have narrated this sermon before Sayyid al-Raďi the
list includes Abu Talib al-Makki in his book, *Quwwatul Qulub*; the late
Shaykh al-Kulayni in volume five of *Furu’ al-Kafi*; Ibrahim b. Hilal
al-Thaqafi in his book *al-Gharat*; Ibne Qutyabah in his book *al-Imamah
wal Siyasah*; and al-Tabari in his book *al-Mustarshid* (with some
variations) – this list of references has been derived from *Masadir
Nahjul Balaghah*, vol. 2, pg. 86.

\*\*\*

Amongst the commentators on the text of *Nahjul Balaghah* – specifically
the contemporary writers – much has been said in regards to the
explanation of this sermon, and it is for this reason that we begin with
the following introduction to ensure that the discussions in regards to
this sermon are made clear.

During the course of history, the character of the woman has gone
through much discussion and many extreme things have been stated as pass
judgement on women. Sometimes their status as a human being has been
diminished, and at other times, their very nature of being considered a
human being has been called into doubt![^2]

At other times they had been thought of as being nothing more than a
mere slave; in other instances, they were considered as the superior sex
and the concept of ‘female domination’ of society was brought forth as
the ideal notion! In regards to each of these views, it can be said that
all of these extreme interpretations have had immense repercussions on
one another.

In today’s society, especially in the Western societies, or those who
emulate “The West” and claim to follow democracy, we see the same sorts
of discussions in regards to women.

During election times, politicians realized that they needed to gain the
vote of the women, as men and women tend to vote in similar patterns; in
addition, the capitalist system heavily required that women enter the
workplace - especially considering the fact that most often, women are
paid less than men and are given less opportunities than men to excel in
the work environment. As well, the entire system of marketing and
advertising which makes up a large part of the political and economic
propaganda also requires the use of women [to market and sell their
products].

It is due to all of these reasons that in their speeches, various
nations continuously “defend” women’s rights and do their utmost to
elevate the character of women; however in their practical actions, we
don’t see any attempt in sincerely and honestly working to elevate their
honour and status; thus the women of today have been caught up in many
levels of frustration and disappointment – the same things which they
were also deprived of in the past.

This same thing can also be seen when you wade through the religious
texts in which some groups maintained women’s rights as merely slogans
to promote and defended them due to some act of pretension; they
interpreted the religious texts in such a way as to paint a picture that
a majority of the women would relate to and would – albeit in a
dishonest way – show the women as having some predisposition [which they
do not possess].

\*\*\*

The sermon narrated above and other similar limited statements which are
contained in *Nahjul Balaghah* have not remained un-touched from being
discussed and commented upon.

Sometimes, the chain of narrators *(sanad)* has been called into
question, and sometimes the explanation of the text has been discussed
such that the smallest amount of filth of weakness can be attributed to
women. Another one of the plots has been to go to an extreme (in
discussing this sermon) such that some state that women in general are
the complete totality of deficiencies and incompetency!

However, in the midst of this discussion, there are two things which we
cannot deny – the first is that this sermon was delivered **after** The
Battle of Jamal and we know that the person who was at the centre of
that war was the wife of the Noble Prophet (S) - ‘A’ysha who had been
encouraged by two companions of the Prophet (S) - namely Talha and
Zubayr and in an unprecedented move entered the battlefield, resulting
in the spilling of the blood of many innocent and uninformed
individuals. Some scholars state that the number of people killed in
this one battle exceeded 17,000!

Indeed it is true that after the army of ‘A’ysha , Talha and Zubayr lost
the war, this wife of the Prophet expressed her remorse (at what she had
done), and that the Commander of the Faithful ‘Al i (a.s.), simply due
to the respect [which he had for] the Prophet (S) honourably returned
her back to Madina, however the ill-effects which this war left on the
Muslim society will remain forever in the annals of history.

The second point which must be mentioned is that in many of the verses
of the Qur’an we see that humanity on a whole has been condemned – for
example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ خُلِقَ هَلُوعًا ۝ إِذَا مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ جَزُوعًا
۝ وَإِذَا مَسَّهُ الْخَيْرُ مَنُوعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed man has been created covetous: anxious when an ill befalls him
and grudging when good comes his way**.*[^3]

In another place in the Qur’an we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...إِنَّهُ كَانَ ظَلُوماً جَهُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…Indeed he (the human being) is most unjust and senseless.***[^4]

In yet another place in the Qur’an we read that the human being is one
whose rejection of the bounties of God is transparent and apparent for
everyone to see:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الإِنْسَانَ لَكَفُورٌ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Man is indeed a manifest ingrate.***[^5]

In one more place, the human being has been considered as a creation
that anytime a blessing reaches him, he goes into a state of rebellion:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الإِنْسَانَ لَيَطْغَى أَنْ رَآهُ اسْتَغْنَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed man becomes rebellious, when he considers himself without
need.***[^6]

There are many more such verses as well in the Qur’an.

Without a doubt the human being is not, within his nature, to be a
*manifest ingrate*, nor is he *most unfair and senseless*, nor is he
*rebellious*. Rather, apparently what is meant here is that these verses
are talking about human beings who have – willingly – not gone under the
training and nurturing of the Divinely appointed leaders, and just like
plants, allow themselves to grow on their own. They do not have a guide,
nor do they have anyone to help them wake up from their spiritual
slumber, and thus they are caught up in their own whims and desires.

It is for this reason that in the Qur’an there is praise for those
people who possess God-consciousness and submit to the orders of Allah,
and principally [the existence of] humanity themselves have been
introduced as the ultimate purpose behind the creation of the universe:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَرَّمْنَا بَنِي آدَمَ وَحَمَلْنَاهُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ
وَالْبَحْرِ وَرَزَقْنَاهُمْ مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَفَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَى
كَثِيرٍ مِمَّنْ خَلَقْنَا تَفْضِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Certainly We have honoured the Children of Adam, and carried them
over land and sea, and provided them with all the good things, and given
them an advantage over many of those whom We have created with a
complete preference.***[^7]

When we speak about the female gender as well, we see that the same
rules apply (as mentioned above in these verses of the Qur’an).

Amongst women, there are those who are noble such that it is even
difficult to find men who have reached their calibre; but the opposite
of this is also true that there are many women who have gone astray and
are the source of many of the societal evils.

\*\*\*

By keeping this introduction in mind, let us now begin the
interpretation and clarification of the sermon mentioned (about the
“deficiencies in women”) and at the end of our discussion, we will bring
up some final points in this regards.

Just as we noted above, the Imam (a.s.) delivered this sermon after The
Battle of Jamal and it was meant to be a warning for all of the Muslims,
so that they would not fall into such a painful predicament in the
future.

The Imam (a.s.) started off by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَعَاشِرَ النَّاسِ إِنَّ النِّسَاءَ نَوَاقِصُ الْإِيمَانِ نَوَاقِصُ
الْحُظُوظِ نَوَاقِصُ الْعُقُولِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O’ people! Women are ‘deficient’ in faith, ‘deficient’ in shares, and
‘deficient’ in intelligence.*

He then went on to explain the reasons behind each of these three forms
of ‘deficiency’ and states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا نُقْصَانُ إِيمَانِهِنَّ فَقُعُودُهُنَّ عَنِ الصَّلَاةِ وَ
الصِّيَامِ فِي أَيَّامِ حَيْضِهِنَّ وَ أَمَّا نُقْصَانُ عُقُولِهِنَّ
فَشَهَادَةُ امْرَأَتَيْنِ كَشَهَادَةِ الرَّجُلِ الْوَاحِدِ وَ أَمَّا
نُقْصَانُ حُظُوظِهِنَّ فَمَوَارِيثُهُنَّ عَلَى الْأَنْصَافِ مِنْ
مَوَارِيثِ الرِّجَالِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As regards to the ‘deficiency’ in their faith, it is their abstention
from prayers and fasting during their menstrual period. As regards to
their ‘deficiency’ in their intelligence it is because the evidence of
two women is equal to that of one man. As for the ‘deficiency’ of their
shares it is because their share in inheritance is half of that of men*.

There is no doubt that these three forms of ‘deficiency’ have their own
understandings. If Allah has removed the responsibility of praying and
fasting from women during their monthly menstruation period, then it is
because during the time of their menstruation, they enter into an
“almost-ill” period in which they require rest and they are not in a
position to engage in acts of worship.

If the testimony of two women is equivalent to one man than it is due to
the fact that the sentiments and emotions of a woman often overpower
them and they may give testimony in favour of one and to the determinant
of another merely based on their emotions.

A woman’s portion of the inheritance is half of that of a man only in
certain circumstances when children and wives are inheriting from the
man; whereas in relation to inheriting from a father and mother – in
many instances – the inheritance (of a man and woman) are the same and
also in regards to the inheritance of brothers and sisters and their
children – their inheritance is also similar. In order words: a woman –
as a mother or sister – in many instances, takes an equal share of
inheritance as a man.

Another reason why sometimes the man gets double the share of
inheritance than the woman is due to the fact that the financial
maintenance and all of the woman’s daily requirements are the
responsibility of the men (in her life) and not only does the woman not
have to spend her own money on the maintenance of her children, but in
fact her husband must provide all of her requirements, even if a large
amount of money comes to her by way of inheritance or anything else.

Therefore, all of these differences (between the genders) which Islam
has brought have been carefully calculated (and there are logical
reasons behind each one of them).

However one thing which we cannot deny is that in every case, a woman
and man are not equal from all aspects and those who propagate the claim
of them being ‘completely equal’ or have, as recently spoken about the
woman being greater than a man merely proclaim this belief of theirs -
however their actions are completely different!

We find no President of a country who can state that men and women are
completely equal and who would, when appointing his cabinet ministers
for the various departments, appoint an equal amount of women and men in
his government [simply based on their gender]; and also the Secretary
General of an organization, when he is appointing individuals to various
posts in the committees, normally do not appoint people merely based on
their gender and not look to ensure that they have an equal amount of
either gender on the cabinet – this does not occur even in the ‘Western
world’, nor in the secular countries!

That which is closer to the truth and is far removed from all forms of
ostentation is that: With all of the abilities that God has given to the
two genders, we can easily understand and deal amongst them with justice
so that each of these two are able to blossom within their own God-given
abilities and with their created talents and powers which are within
them, that they themselves and their society on a whole can make use of
them. This is the best way that we can describe the issue, and as we
continue on and go into our discussion on the finer points, God willing,
we will offer a more-in-depth commentary on this issue.

At the end of the sermon, the Imam (a.s.) brings a short conclusion and
states that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاتَّقُوا شِرَارَ النِّسَآءِ وَ كُونُوا مِنْ خِيَارِهِنَّ عَلَى
حَذَرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*So beware of the evils of women. Be on your guard even from those of
them who are (reportedly) good.*

He concludes his sermon and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَا تُطِيعُوهُنَّ فِي الْمَعْرُوفِ حَتَّى لَا يَطْمَعْنَ فِي
الْمُنْكَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not obey them even in good things so that they may not attract you
to the evil things.*

It is clear that the meaning of ‘not obeying women even in good things’
does not mean that if they encourage towards good actions such as the
prayers (*ŝalat*), fasting, justice and goodness that we are to disobey
them; rather it means that we must not unconditionally follow them. In
other words, ‘goodness’ must be performed because it is good, and not
because one’s spouse has commanded it to be done, such that one becomes
bold and they think that they now can order you to do bad things and
that they will be obeyed.

Even though the wordings in *Nahjul Balaghah* in this section are not
specifically directed to one’s wife and all women in general have been
included in the discussion, however it is clear that such an issue would
usually occur more so within the context of a husband and wife
relationship.

Therefore, what has been mentioned in this sermon - and also keeping in
mind the verses of the Qur’an which speak on the obligation to *enjoin
the good and forbid the evil*, and the necessity to accept that from
others - applies to men and women alike, and the meaning of this sermon
is not that one needs to ignore the performance of good deeds! Rather,
the meaning of this sermon is that one’s actions must not be done
through unconditional obedience (of another person).

In any case, those women with true faith, awareness, intellect and
dedication (to the faith of Islam) are definitely exempt from this
ruling; those women whose pleasure lies in Allah’s pleasure; whose anger
is the anger of Allah - such as Fatima al-Zahra (a.s.) - whose commands
were nothing other than advising towards goodness and righteousness, and
who constantly sought to attain the pleasure and closeness of the
Creator.

This point is also clear that when it is said: ‘be careful of even the
good ones amongst them’ that “good” is a relative term and is not
absolute, as one should not only not be on the lookout for those who
possess ‘absolute goodness’, rather one must accept such a person’s
advice and consider their council as being worth something. It is for
this reason that in the history of Islam, we see men who gave great
importance to the suggestions of their wives.

In some of the verses of the Qur’an we see that asking women for advice
has actually been considered as a noble trait. For example in regards to
weaning a child off of his mother’s milk, we read the following in
Suratul Baqarah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْوَالِدَاتُ يُرْضِعْنَ أَوْلاَدَهُنَّ حَوْلَيْنِ كَامِلَيْنِ
لِمَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يُتِمَّ الرَّضَاعَةَ... فَإِنْ أَرَادَا فِصَالاً
عَنْ تَرَاضٍ مِنْهُمَا وَتَشَاوُرٍ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِمَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Mothers shall suckle their children for two full years — that for
such as desire to complete the suckling … And if the couple desire to
wean, with mutual consent and consultation, there will be no sin upon
them…***[^8]

[^1]: Note that what Ibn al-Jawzi has stated and that which Sayyid
al-Raďi have stated in regards to the delivery of this sermon differ
from one another.

[^2]: Refer to the following passes of the Old and New Testament
(Bible) - [added by the translator]: Burn The Daughter: “And the
daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing the whore, she
profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire.” (Leviticus 21:9)
Cut Off Her Hand: “When men strive together one with another and the
wife of the one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand
of him that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by
the secrets: then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not pity
her.” (Deuteronomy 25:11-12) Female Births Get Penalty: “Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, If a woman have conceived seed, and born a
man child: then she shall be unclean seven days; according to the days
of the separation for her infirmity shall she be unclean.” (Leviticus
12:2) … “But if she bear a maid (female) child, then she shall be
unclean two weeks, as in her separation: and she shall continue in the
blood of her purifying threescore and six days.” (Leviticus 12:5) Female
Inferiority: “But I would have you know, that the head of every man is
Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is
God.” (I Corinthians 11:3) Female Inferiority: “For the man is not of
the woman; but the woman of the man. Neither was the man created for the
woman; but the woman for the man.” (I Corinthians 11:8-9) Jesus Will
Kill Children: “Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and they that commit
adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their
deeds. And I will kill her children with death; and all the churches
shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts: and I will
give unto every one of you according to your works.” (Revelation
2:22-23) Kill The Witches: “Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.
Whoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death. He that
sacrificeth unto any god, save to the LORD only, he shall be utterly
destroyed.” (Exodus 22:18-20) Rape My Daughter: “Behold, here is my
daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them I will bring out now, and
humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth good unto you: but unto
this man do not so vile a thing. But the men would not hearken to him:
so the man took his concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they
knew her, and abused her all the night until the morning: and when the
day began to spring, they let her go.” (Judges 19:24-25) Silence The
Woman: “Let the women learn in silence with all subjection. But I suffer
not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in
silence. For Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived,
but the woman being deceived was in the transgression.” (I Timothy
2:11-14) Stone The Woman: “If a man be found lying with a woman married
to a husband, and a man find her in the city, and lie with her;”
(Deuteronomy 22:22) Stone The Woman: “Then ye shall bring them both out
unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with stones that
they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the city; and the
man, because he hath humbled his neighbour’s wife: so thou shalt put
away evil from among you.” (Deuteronomy 22:24) Wives, Submit Yourselves:
“Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For
the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the
church: and he is the saviour of the body. Therefore as the church is
subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands in
everything.” (Ephesians 5:22-24) Women Shall Not Speak: “Let your women
keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted unto them to
speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also saith the
law. And if they will learn anything, let them ask their husbands at
home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church.” (I
Corinthians 14:34-35) Women’s Sorrow: “Unto the woman he said, I will
greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt
bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he
shall rule over thee.” (Genesis 3:16) Rip Up Pregnant Women: “Samaria
shall become desolate; for she hath rebelled against her God: they shall
fall by the sword: their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their
women with child shall be ripped up.” (Hosea 13:16) The Wicked Woman -
Part 1: “Give me any plague, but the plague of the heart: and any
wickedness, but the wickedness of a woman.” (Eccles. 25:13) The Wicked
Woman - Part 2: “Of the woman came the beginning of sin, and through her
we all die.” (Eccles. 25:22) The Wicked Woman - Part 3: “If she go not
as thou wouldest have her, cut her off from thy flesh, and give her a
bill of divorce, and let her go.” (Eccles. 25: 26) The Wicked Woman -
Part 4: “The whoredom of a woman may be known in her haughty looks and
eyelids. If thy daughter be shameless, keep her in straitly, lest she
abuse herself through overmuch liberty.” (Eccles. 26:9-10) The Wicked
Woman - Part 5: “A silent and loving woman is a gift of the Lord: and
there is nothing so much worth as a mind well instructed. A shamefaced
and faithful woman is a double grace, and her continent mind cannot be
valued.” (Eccles. 26:14-15) The Wicked Woman - Part 6: “A shameless
woman shall be counted as a dog; but she that is shamefaced will fear
the Lord.” (Eccles.26:25) The Wicked Woman - Part 7: “For from garments
cometh a moth, and from women wickedness. Better is the churlishness of
a man than a courteous woman, a woman, I say, which bringeth shame and
reproach.” (Eccles. 42:13-14)

[^3]: Al-Qur’an, Suratul Ma’arij (75), 19-21

[^4]: Al-Qur’an, Suratul Ahzab (33), 72

[^5]: Al-Qur’an, Suratul Zukhruf (43), 15

[^6]: Al-Qur’an, Suratul ‘Alaq (96), 6-7

[^7]: Al-Qur’an, Suratul Isra’ (17), 70

[^8]: Al-Qur’an, Suratul Baqarah (2), verse 233


