The Significance & the Status of the Glorious Quran
===================================================

**The Value of the Qur'an in the Eyes of the Muslims**

The Qur'an Contains a Pattern of a Complete Way of Life for Man. The
religion of Islam is superior to any other in that it guarantees
happiness in man's life. For Muslims, Islam is a belief system with
moral and practical laws that have their source in the Qur'an. God, may
He be exalted, says: "Indeed this Qur'an guides to the path which is
clearer and straighter than any other" (XVII:9).

He also says:

"We have revealed to you the book which clarifies every matter" (XVI
:89) .

These references exemplify the numerous Qur'anic verses (ayat) which
mention the principles of religious belief, moral virtues and a general
legal system governing all aspects of human behavior. A consideration of
the following topics will enable one to understand that the Qur'an
provides a comprehensive programme of activity for man's life.

Man has no other aim in life but the pursuit of happiness and pleasure,
which manifests itself in much the same way as love of ease or wealth.
Although some individuals seem to reject this happiness, for example, by
ending their lives in suicide, or by turning away from a life of
leisure, they too, in their own way, confirm this principle of
happiness; for, in seeking an end to their life or of material pleasure,
they are still asserting their own personal choice of what happiness
means to them.

Human actions, therefore, are directed largely by the prospects of
happiness and prosperity offered by a certain idea, whether that idea be
true or false. Man's activity in life is guided by a specific plan or
programme. This fact is self-evident, even though it is sometimes
concealed by its very apparentness.

Man acts according to his will and desires; he also weighs the
necessity of a task before undertaking it. In this he is promoted by an
inherent scientific law, which is to say that he performs a task for
"himself" in fulfilling needs which he perceives are necessary. There
is, therefore, a direct link between the objective of a task and its
execution.

Any action undertaken by man, whether it be eating, sleeping or
walking, occupies its own specific place and demands its own particular
efforts. Yet an action is implemented according to an inherent law, the
general concept of which is stored in man's perception and is recalled
by motions associated with that action.

This notion holds true whether or not one is obliged to undertake the
action or whether or not the circumstances are favourable. Every man, in
respect of his own actions, is as the state in relation to its
individual citizens, whose activity is controlled by specific laws,
customs and behavior. Just as the active forces in a state are obliged
to adapt their actions according to certain laws, so is the social
activity of a community composed of the actions of each individual.

If this were not the case, the different components of society would
fall apart and be destroyed in anarchy in the shortest time imaginable.
If a society is religious, its government will reflect that religion; if
it is secular, it will be regulated by a corresponding code of law. If a
society is uncivilized and barbaric, a code of behavior imposed by a
tyrant will appear; otherwise, the conflict of various belief-systems
within such a society will produce lawlessness.

Thus man, as an individual element of society, has no option but to
possess and pursue a goal. He is guided in the pursuit of his goal by
the path which corresponds to it and by the rules which must necessarily
accompany his programme of activity. The Qur'an affirms this idea when
it says that: "every man has a goal to which he is turning, so compete
with each other in good action" (II:148)

In the usage of the Qur'an, the word din (1) is basically applied to a
way, a pattern of living, and neither the believer nor the non-believer
is without a path, be it prophetic or man-made. God, may He be exalted,
describes the enemies of the divine din (religion) as those:

"who prevent others from the path of God and would have it crooked"
(VII:45)

This verse shows that the term Sabil Allah - the path of God - used in
the verse refers to the din of fitra - the inherent pattern of life
intended by God for man).

It also indicates that even those who do not believe in God implement
His din, albeit in a deviated form; this deviation, which becomes their
din, is also encompassed in God's programme. The best and firmest path
in life for man is the one which is dictated by his innate being and not
by the sentiments of any individual or society.

A close examination of any part of creation reveals that, from its very
inception, it is guided by an innate purpose towards fulfilling its
nature along the most appropriate and shortest path; every aspect of
each part of creation is equipped to do so, acting as a blueprint for
defining the nature of its existence.

Indeed all of creation, be it animate or inanimate, is made up in this
manner. As an example, we may say that a green-tipped shoot, emerging
from a single grain in the earth, is "aware" of its future existence as
a plant which will yield an ear of wheat. By means of its inherent
characteristics, the shoot acquires various mineral elements for its
growth from the soil and changes, day by day, in form and strength until
it becomes a fully-matured grain-bearing plant - and so comes to the end
of its natural cycle.

Similarly, if we investigate the life-cycle of the walnut tree, we
observe that it too is "aware", from the very beginning, of its own
specific purpose in life, namely, to grow into a big walnut tree. It
reaches this goal by developing according to its own distinct inherent
characteristics; it does not, for example, follow the path of the
wheat-plant in fulfilling its goal just as the wheat-plant does not
follow the life pattern of the walnut tree.

Since every created object which makes up the visible world is subject
to this same general law, there is no reason to doubt that man, as a
species of creation, is not. Indeed his physical capabilities are the
best proof of this rule; like the rest of creation, they allow him to
realize his purpose, and ultimate happiness, in life. Thus, we observe
that man, in fact, guides himself to happiness and well-being merely by
applying the fundamental laws inherent in his own nature. This law is
confirmed by God in the Qur'an, through His Prophet Moses, when he
says:

"Our Lord is He who gave everything its nature, then guided it"
(XX:50)

It is further explained in LXXXVII:2-3 as:

"He who created and fashioned in balanced proportion and He who
measures and guides"

As to the creation and the nature of man, the Qur'an says:

"By the soul and Him who fashioned it and then inspired it with wrong
action and fear of God; he is truly successful who causes it to grow and
purifies it and he is a failure who corrupts and destroys it" (XCI:7-l0)
God enjoins upon man the duty to "strive towards a sincere application
of the din," (that is, the fitrah of God, or the natural code of
behavior upon which He has created mankind), since "there is no changing
(the laws of) the creation of God" (XXX 30)

He also says that:

"In truth, the only deen recognized by God is Islam" (III: l9) Here,
Islam means submission, the method of submission to these very laws. The
Qur'an further warns that: "the actions of the man who chooses a din
other than Islam will not be accepted" (III:85)

The gist of the above verses, and other references on the same subject,
is that God has guided every creature - be it man, beast or vegetable -
to a state of well-being and self-fulfilment appropriate to its
individual make-up.

Thus the appropriate path for man lies in the adoption of personal and
social laws particular to his own fitrah (or innate nature), and in
avoiding people who have become "denaturalized" by following their own
notions or passions. It is clearly underlined that fitrah, far from
denying man's feelings and passions, accords each its proper due and
allows man's conflicting spiritual and material needs to be fulfilled in
a harmonious fashion.

Thus, we may conclude that the intellect aql should rule man in matters
pertaining to individual or personal decisions, rather than his
feelings. Similarly, truth and justice should govern society and not the
whim of a tyrant or even the will of a majority, if that be contrary to
a society's true benefit.

From this we may conclude that only God is empowered to make laws,
since the only laws useful to man are those which are made according to
his inherent nature. It also follows that man's needs, arising from his
outward circumstance and his inner reality, are fulfilled only by
obeying God's instructions (or laws). These needs may arise through
events beyond man's control or as a result of the natural demands of his
body. Both are encompassed in the plan of life that God has designated
for man. For, as the Qur'an says, the "decision rests with God only,"
(XII:40,67)

which is to say that there is no governance (of man or society, of the
inner or the outer) except that of God. Without a specific creational
plan, based on the innate disposition of man, life would be fruitless
and without meaning. We may understand this only through belief in God
and a knowledge of his Unity, as explained in the Qur'an.

From here we may proceed to an understanding of the Day of Judgment,
when man is rewarded or punished according to his deeds. Thereafter, we
may arrive at a knowledge of the prophets and of prophetic teachings,
since man cannot be judged without being first instructed in the matter
of obedience and disobedience.

These three fundamental teachings are considered to be the roots of the
Islamic way of life. To these we may add the fundamentals of good
character and morals which a true believer must possess, and which are a
necessary extension of the three basic beliefs mentioned above. The laws
governing daily activity not only guarantee man's happiness and moral
character but, more importantly, increase his understanding of these
beliefs and of the fundamentals of Islam.

It is clear that a thief, a traitor, a squanderer or a libertine do not
possess the quality of innocence; nor can a miser, who hoards money, be
called a generous person. Similarly, some- one who never prays or
remembers God cannot be called a believer in God and the Last Day, nor
be described as His servant.

From this we may conclude that good character flourishes when joined to
a pattern of correct actions; morals are to be found in the man whose
beliefs are in harmony with these fundamentals. A proud man cannot be
expected to believe in God nor be humble in respect to the Divine; nor
can the man, who has never understood the meaning of humanity, justice,
mercy or compassion, believe in the Day of Rising and the Judgment.
Chapter XXXV:10 speaks of the relationship between a sincere system of
belief and a fitting character:

"Pure speech rises up to Him and He raises up good deeds still further"
. In chapter XXX:IO we learn again of this relationship between belief
and action:

"Then evil was the consequence of those who do wrong action because
they denied the signs of Allah and they made a mock of them"

To summarize, the Qur'an is composed of the following Islamic
fundamentals which together form an interlocking whole: a primary system
of belief in the Unity of God, Prophethood and the Day of Reckoning,
accompanied by a second group of beliefs, namely, belief in the Tablet,
the Pen (which delineates the sequence of cosmic events), the rule of
destiny and the decree (without implying pre-determination), the angels,
the throne of the Creator, and, finally, in the creation of the sky, the
earth and everything between them.

Thereafter, we observe that man's well-being lies in his character
being in harmony with these principles. The shariah, namely the laws and
code of behavior explained in the Qur'an and commented upon in every
detail by the model of the Prophet's life, is the means whereby a man
may practise these principles.

At this point we should add that the Prophet's family are his chosen
heirs and are entrusted with the task of exemplifying and explaining
further the prophetic message and the shariah after the Prophet's death.
The Prophet himself has shown that the tradition, hadith, known as the
hadith (2) al-thaqalayn which all sects of Islam accept, refers
specifically to this matter of succession.


