Supplement
==========

That is why true believers, when reciting the holy verse
/bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim/, at the beginning of their affairs,
detach their hearts from everything else and rely only upon Allah, and
seek help only from Him, because He is the only One Whose Mercy is
All-Encompassing' and no creature is deprived of it.

Another fact that can also be understood from / bism-il-lah / is that
Allah's acts are based on Mercy, and, punishment has an exceptional
aspect which will not be fulfilled unless there are some exact, clear
reasons for it.

When we recite the supplication entitled, Jaushan Kabir ', Section 20
thus : " O'Lord, Whose Mercy surpasses His Wrath... " the above point
becomes clear.

Human beings should attach importance to mercy and affection and behave
accordingly in their daily lives and use violence and harshness only for
those times when it is clearly warranted.

We conclude this discussion with a tradition, rich in meaning, from the
holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.), who, when commenting on the many different
kinds of His All-Encompassing Mercy, said : " Verily, there are one
hundred mercies belonging to Allah, from which, He has sent down to the
Earth only one and distributed that one among His creatures. All the
mercy and affection they have, issue from it. He, the Merciful, withheld
the other 99 for Himself to show mercy upon His servants on the Day of
Resurrection ". (19)

--------------- pg 44 ---------------

" (All) praise is (only) Allah's, the Lord of the Worlds " Commentary :
The World is Full of His Mercy After reciting the phrase /
bism-il-lah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim /, to begin the Sura, our first duty is
to bring to mind the Great Creator and Cherisher of the world of being,
and His endless bounties which have surrounded us thoroughly. In doing
so, it is both a guide ' for us to observe the existence of Providence
and a motive ' for showing our servitude and worship to Him.

It is a motive' because any man, after receiving a gift, wishes to know
its giver at once, in order to show his gratitude and thankfulness to
him. This quality is in man's innate disposition prompting him to
manifest his acknowledgment of Him.

This same quality in man, in discussing the theological motives of the
necessity of expressing thankfulness to the Bestower ', according to
what man's nature and rationale leads him to, is considered one of those
motives.

And it is a guide' to knowing the Lord and His bounties, because the
best and the most direct way towards the acknowledgment of the Origin is
the study of the secrets of creation, especially, the existence of the
bounties of life as related to human beings.

Therefore, perhaps, it is for these two reasons that Sura Al-Fatihah,
alongside /bism-il-lah/, begins thus: " (All) praise is (only) Allah's,
the Lord of the Worlds ".

Or, in other words, the verse " (All) praise is (only) Allah's, the
Lord of the Worlds " points to both the Unity of Divine Essence, and the
Unity of Divine Attributes and Acts.

Originally, qualifying Allah (s.w.t.), here, with the phrase
/rabb-il-alamin/ (the Lord of the Worlds) is, in fact, mentioning the
reason after stating the claim. It seems that someone has asked why all
praise is (only) Allah's, and the response is that it is for the reason
that He is the Lord of the Worlds'.

This is one of the characteristics of Allah. In another occurrence, the
Holy Qur'an says: " He Who has made every thing which He has created
most good ...," (Sura As-Sajdah, No. 32, verse 7).

And again, in Sura Hud, No. 11, verse 6, it says: " There is no moving
creature on the earth but its sustenance depends on Allah... ". It is,
also, clearly understood from the word /al-hamd/, praise ', used in this
verse, that Allah has created all these bounties and benefits,
basically, by His Choice and His Will.

It is interesting to note that by stating the phrase, (All) praise is
(only) Allah's ', it is not only helpful to use it for the commencement
of affairs, but, as the Qur'an teaches us, it is also used as a
conclusion, like in Sura Yunus, No. 10, verse 10, about the good-doers
in Heaven, it says: "(This will be) their cry therein: Glory to Thee, O
God! ' And peace' will be their greeting therein! And the close of their
cry will be:

Surely, the Praise is Allah's, the Lord of the Worlds! ' ". Virtue of
the Verse Concerning the virtue of this Holy verse, there is a narration
from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) which says that in a tradition from the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.), he has said: " When a believing servant says The Praise is
(only) Allah's, the Lord of the Worlds ', such a praise that befits Him
and His Rank, the angels are unable to record it.

They will be asked by Allah why they did not record the reward of the
phrase which the believing servant stated. Then, in response to their
not recording the reward, they will ask how it is that they could even
understand and estimate the high standard of saying such a phrase which
contains the praise befitting and deserving only to Him. Allah, the
Exalted, will tell them that they should record the phrase and it would
be for Him to endow the servant with the reward of the praise as
befitting Him ". (20) The word /rabb/ originally means the owner of
something who proceeds to train and improve it '.

This word is absolutely applied to Allah, alone, and if it is applied,
in Arabic, for other than Him, it is certainly used in a possessive
form, as / rabb-ud-dar / the owner of the house ', or / rabb-us-safinah
/ the owner of the ship '. In any case, the word, itself, conveys the
meaning of training '.

There is another idea mentioned in Majma-ul-Bayan that says:

" /rabb/ means: an important person whose orders are obeyed '."
However, it is probable that both meanings refer to the same origin. The
term /alamin/ is the plural form of /alam/ the world' and we cite it,
here, with the meaning of a collection of different creatures with
common characteristics or a common time and place'.For example, we say:
the world of Man, the world of animals, and the world of plants, or,we
say:the world of the East and the world of the West, or: the world of
today and the world of yesterday. Therefore, when /alam/, which has a
plural sense by itself, is used in a plural form, it refers to the
universe'.

The writer of the Al-Manar Commentary says that it is narrated from
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that he has said /alamin/ means peoples', only. Then,
the writer adds that the term is used in the Qur'an with the same
meaning; for example: "...That it may be an admonition to all peoples ",
(Sura Al-Furqan, No. 25, verse 1).

(21) It is true that the term /alamin/ in many occurrences, in the
Qur'an, is used with the meaning of peoples', but, sometimes, it is also
used with a broader scope of meaning which envelops other creatures; for
instance:" Then Praise be to Allah, Lord of the heavens and Lord of the
earth, ŸêLord and Cherisher of all the worlds! ", (Sura Al-Jathiyah, No.
45, verse 36). And, also,like: " Pharaoh said: And what is the Lord and
Cherisher of the Worlds ? ' (Moses) said: The Lord and Cherisher of the
heavens and the earth, and all between them ...", (Sura Ash-Shuara, No.
26, verses 23,24).

It is interesting that in a narration from Hadrat Ali (a.s.), Saduq has
cited in the book Uyun-ul-Akhbar', that he (a.s.), commenting on the
verse, has said: " (The phrase) /rabb-il-alamin/ refers to all creatures
whether they are inanimate or living ". (22) There is, of course, no
contradiction between these traditions, because, although the meaning of
the term /alamin/ is very vast, Man is the most significant being among
all creatures of the world, so, he is sometimes especially considered
the central point of them, and other creatures are dependent upon him
and in his shadow.

Therefore, when, in the tradition of the Imam (a.s.), the term is
rendered into peoples ', the reason is that the main purpose of
creation, in this great gathering of beings, is Man.

This point is, also, interesting that some have introduced two forms of
/alam/ the world': the great world' (macrocosm) and the lesser world'
(microcosm) by which they refer to Man as the lesser world', because the
entity of a person alone, is a collection of different powers which
govern the great world'.

In fact,man' is a sample of the whole world. So Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali
(a.s.) in one of his poems, addressing Man, says: " You think that you
are a small body, while (you should know that) you contain the great
world' (macrocosm) inside you."(23) One of the factors that causes us to
emphasize the vast meaning of / alam / the world', is that the term has
occurred after the phrase /al-hamd-u-lil-lah/, in which we devote all
the praise to Allah, only, and, then, we reason our statement with
/rabb-il-alamin/ The Lord of the Worlds '. We say the praise is only
Allah's, because all perfections, all bounties and all blessings, in
this world, belong to Him, the Lord, the Cherisher.

--------------- pg 47 ---------------

" The Beneficent, The Merciful " Commentary : The meaning of
/ar-rahman/ the Beneficent ' and /ar-rahim/ the Merciful ', together
with their broad sense of meaning and the difference between them, was
explained at length while commenting on /bism-il-lah/, the repetition of
which is not required.

A point that should be added to the commentary, here, regarding
ar-Rahman' and ar-Rahim', is that these two attributes, which are the
most significant attributes of Allah, are repeated at least 30 times,
every day, in our (5) daily prayers; (twice in Sura Al-Fatihah, and once
in the Sura we recite after it). In this way, we praise Allah sixty
times as being Mereiful ' each day.

This, indeed, is a lesson taught to all human beings more than anything
else that they should try to acquire this attribute, and practice it in
their daily lives and activities. Moreover, it points to the fact that
if we count ourselves among the true, obedient servants of Allah, we
should not follow or imitate the manner in which tyrant slave owners use
against their servants when dealing with our servants.

The history of slavery indicates that the tyrant owners used to treat
their slaves in horrifyingly cruel ways. For example, if a slave moved a
little slow in performing services, he would receive harsh punishments:
i.e. be whipped, put in chains or fetters, fastened to a mill-stone and
forced to turn it, instructed to work in mines, imprisoned in deep,
dark, wet holes and, if his faults were greater, he would be hanged.
Another reference in the history of slavery also shows that condemned
slaves were put in wild animal cages. If the slave succeeded in staying
alive, another animal would be let in on him.

These are some examples of the conduct of some owners with their
slaves. But, Allah, the Lord of the Worlds, has mentioned repeatedly, in
the Holy Qur'an, that Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Most Merciful to the
servants who are repentant of their disobedience to Him. For example:
Sura Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 53 says: " Say: O' My servants who have
transgressed against their souls! Despair not of the Mercy of Allah: for
Allah forgives all sins, for He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful' ".

Therefore, the terms ar-Rahman' (the Beneficent) and ar-Rahim' (the
Merciful) used after the phrase /rabb-il-alamin/ the Lord of the Worlds'
refer to the idea that, He, with the absolute Power He has, is yet
Merciful to all His creatures. This quality, which Allah possesses,
attracts His servants to Him and they eagerly say:

ar-Rahman-ir-Rahim', (the Beneficent, the Merciful).

It is here that one's attention is drawn to the fact that the behaviour
of Allah, the Exalted, toward His creatures is, by far, different from
that of masters toward their servants, in particular, during the
horrible period of slavery. Therefore, belief in Allah ' is the first of
the five principles of Islam.

--------------- pg 49 ---------------

" Master of the Day of Judgement." Commentary : Faith in the
Resurrection ', the Second Principle In this verse, attention is paid to
the second important principle in Islam, i.e. Resurrection and the
Hereafter when it says:

" Master of the Day of Judgement ".

Thus, the focus of the idea of the Origin and End, which is the main
foundation of all ethical and social improvements in Man, reaches the
peak of perfection.

It is noteworthy, here, that the mastership of Allah, or His Ownership,
is pointed out, which illustrates His Sovereignty and Domination over
everything and everyone on that Day, when all human beings will attend
that Great Court for reckoning, before their real and genuine Master.
They will see all their deeds and even their thoughts present without
there being aught less than the original or anything forgotten.

They will even have to accept their share of responsibility for any
customs for which they have merely been the founders of, not necessarily
the doers of them.

Allah's Ownership, on that Day, is not similar to our imaginary
ownership of that which belongs to us from the things of this world. His
Ownership, regarding the world of existence, is the real ownership. It
is the special dependence of creatures on the Lord and their being in
need of Him. If the flow of His blessings ceased even for a single
moment, it would cause them to perish altogether.

In other words, this ownership is the consequence of His Creatorship
and Divinity. He, Who creates beings, gives them life every moment and
cherishes them, protects them and guides them, is the real master of all
creatures. As a matter of fact, He is the only Ruler of all powers in
the world of existence. There is no doubt that Allah is The Lord of the
Worlds '.

The question to be raised here is this : Is not Allah the Absolute
Owner of this world ? ' versus our statement to this effect that He is
the Master of the Day of Judgement '. The answer to this question lies
in the fact that the Ownership of Allah ', though it comprises both
worlds, enjoys further manifestation in the Hereafter.

This is because all material ties and imaginary ownerships are cut off
(in the Hereafter), and no one has anything of his or her own on That
Day. Even intercession, if ever achieved, is by Allah's command, as the
Qur'an says about the Reckoning Day: " The Day on which no soul shall
have aught for (another) soul, and the command That Day shall be
(wholly) Allah's ", (Sura Al-Infitar, No. 82, verse 19).

In other words, occasions arise, in this world, when one helps another
through his or her speech, money, power, advocates, plans, designs, and
so on. On That Day (the Hereafter), however, certainly not a single
trace of such affairs will exist. Therefore, when people are asked: "
Whose will be the Domination This Day ?...", they answer: "... that of
Allah, the One, the Almighty! ", (Sura Al-Mu'min, No. 40, verse 16).
This is also an answer to those who reject the idea that when Allah is
the Owner of everything why, then, He is called the Master of the Day of
Judgement '.

Man, with no belief in the Hereafter and the Day of Reckoning, would
have the potential to be the most immoral of beings, the biggest tyrant
committing the worst and the most hideous crimes, for, in his view,
there is not any one to question or punish him if he is clever enough
not to get caught and, with such characteristics, sometimes, it would be
so terrible or impossible for other fellow-creatures to continue their
lives in this world. Therefore, faith in life after death and the Day of
Judgement, which is an essential part of Islam, like prayer, is very
helpful in controlling men against committing sins.


