Supplement 2
============

Emphasizing the Ownership of Allah on the Day of Judgement has this
effect, too, that it stands against the disbelief of disbelievers in the
Hereafter. It is understood from the verses of the Holy Qur'an that
Faith in Allah has been a common belief even among disbelievers in the
Age of Ignorance.

Sura Luqman, No. 31, verse 25 says about them: " If thou ask them, who
it is that created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say:
Allah '...", while they did not accept the speech of the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) about the Resurrection: " The Unbelievers say (in ridicule):
Shall we point to you a man that will tell you, when ye are all
scattered to pieces in disintegration, that ye shall (then be raised) in
a New creation ? " " Has he invented a falsehood against Allah, or has a
spirit (seized) him ?...", (Sura Saba, No. 34, verses 7,8).

A tradition about Imam Sajjad (a.s.) says: " When Ali-ibn-il-Husayn
(a.s.) began reciting Master of the Day of Judgement', he repeated it so
many times that he was at the point of losing his life ". (24) The
phrase / yaum-id-din /, is repeated more than ten times in the Qur'an,
exclusively with the meaning of the Hereafter': " And what makes you
know what the Day of Reckoning is ? " " Again, what makes you know what
the Day of Reckoning is ? " " The Day on which no soul shall have aught
for (another) soul, and the command that Day shall be (wholly) Allah's
", (Sura Al-Infitar, No. 82, verses 17-19).

The phrase /yaum-id-din/ is used in the sense of the Day of Judgement
', for That Day ' is the day of rewards; and /din/ in Arabic philology
means: reward, recompense'. The most evident procedure fulfilled in the
Hereafter is the procedure of paying rewards or inflicting punishments.
On That Day, the curtains will be removed and the deeds of all will be
reckoned, precisely, and everyone shall reap the fruit of his own
actions, be they good or evil.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said in a tradition that the Day of Judgement is The
Reckoning Day '. (25) It is also noteworthy to mention that some
commentators believe that Resurrection' is called /yaum-ud-din/ because
on That Day,everyone is recompensed for his own religion, if he has
followed it accordingly.

--------------- pg 52 ---------------

" Thee (alone) do we worship and of Thee (only) do we seek help."
Commentary : Man in the Presence of Allah Here, this verse is a start
for a servant to plea and ask his needs from Allah. In fact, from here
on, the tone of the statements changes.

The former verses were the praise and attributes of Allah, and the
statement of Faith in His Pure Unity, consisting of a confession to the
belief in the Day of Resurrection. But, from this verse on, it seems
that the servant, with that firm foundation of Belief in the knowledge
of Allah, sees himself in front of Him, the Pure Essence. He addresses
Him and speaks, firstly, about his own worship for Him and, then, about
His help which he seeks from Him. Thus he says:

" Thee (alone) do we worship and of Thee (only) do we seek help." In
other words, when the concepts of the former verses settle in one's
soul, and his entire entity is enlightened with the Light of Allah, the
Cherisher of the Worlds, and when he recognizes His General Mercy ' and
Specific Mercy ', the individual transforms into a complete person from
the point of belief ' and Faith '.

The prime fruit of this deep belief in monotheism, for a person, in one
respect, is to be a pure true servant of Allah, free from any idol and
idolatry, far from tyrants and lusts; and, on the other hand, to seek
help only from His Pure Essence.

In fact, the former verses state the Unity of Essence and Attributes,
while, here, the statement is regarding the Unity of Worship and Unity
of Acts.

Unity of Worship ' means that we acknowledge no person or thing worthy
of worship other than Allah, Whose commands alone do we obey and Whose
laws only do we follow, avoiding any kind of servitude and submission to
other than Him, the Pure Essence.

Unity of Acts ' means that we clearly recognize Him as the only real
Author of Causes ' in the world. It does not mean that we would refuse
the world of cause ' and be neglectful of searching for the causes of
things, but it means that we would believe that any effect from any
cause is under His command. It is He Who has given heat to fire, light
to the sun, and vivacity to water.

The outcome of this belief is that one relies on Allah alone, and knows
that all authority and power are His only. In his view, other than Him
is powerless, mortal and perishable.

Allah is the only Essence to be relied on and worshipped. It is only He
Who is deserving of man's reliance for everything.

This kind of thought and belief sets man apart from any one or any
thing else and joins him only to Allah. He obeys Allah even when he
pursues after the world of ways and means ', i.e. he sees the Power of
Allah, the Cause of causes, in control of the means.

This belief elevates the soul of man so high and the scope of his
thought so broad that it reaches eternity and becomes free from any
limited circumstances, in so far as, Hadrat Amir-ul-Mu'mineen, the
Master of the Virtuous, Ali (a.s.), regarding Allah, says: " I worship
you neither for the fear of the Fire (of Your Hell) nor for the desire
of Your Paradise, but I found You fit for worshipping and I worshipped
You."

(26) Explanation : Allah : the Only Site of Reliance According to the
Arabic literature, when the object of the verb precedes its subject, in
that language, the meaning of exclusiveness is understood, and, here,
the word / iyyaka / Thou ' has preceded the words / nabud / we worship'
and / nastain / we seek help ' which indicates exclusiveness in which
its result is the very Unity of Worship and Unity of Acts that were
explained before. Even in our own worship, we need His help for which we
must ask Him. We may be involved in self-conceit, deviation, hypocrisy
and similar things, which destroy our worshipping and servitude totally.
Then, in all affairs and activities, our full attention should be
exclusively on Allah, the Exalted.

In other words, this, in itself, is one of the stages of monotheism, a
high stage of it, which is rendered into monotheism in speculation'.
That is, one should always and in all circumstances, think of Allah
only. He should rely exclusively on Allah. He should fear nothing but
Allah; and he should trust Allah only. He should see nothing save Allah;
he should want nothing save Allah; and he should love none save Allah.
As the Qur'an says: " Allah has not made for any man two hearts in his
(one) body... ", (Sura Al-Ahzab, No. 33, verse 4).

The Social Aspect of Worship The pronoun we', which is in the plural
form, used in terms / nabud / we worship ' and / nastain / we seek help
', and in the next verses, shows that worship, especially prayer, is
based on plural' and community.

The servant must consider himself among the community even when he is
standing in front of Allah for invocation, much less during his other
daily activities.

Thus, from the point of view of the Qur'an, any individualism,
solitariness, and the like are not accepted in Islam. Particularly, the
ritual prayer, from the prayer call: /hayya alas-salat/ hasten to the
prayer', which is an invitation to initiate prayer, to Sura Al-Hamd at
the beginning of the prayer, and the term /assalamu alaykum.../ peace be
on you all...' at the end of the prayer, all are statements of
verification to the concept that this worship basically has a social
aspect; viz,it ought to be performed as a congregational prayer.

It is true that the prayer performed individually is also accepted in
Islam, but personal worship is considered as the secondary degree. We
Ask Allah for Help in Confronting Forces We have to confront different
forces in this world, both the forces in nature and our innate, or
inborn natural forces. To be able to challenge with these destructive,
misleading factors, we need to be helped. Hence, we shelter under the
protective umbrella of Allah.

We get up every morning and repeat the verse / ' iyyaka nabudu wa '
iyyaka nastain / (Thee (alone) do we worship and of Thee (only) we seek
help) to confess our servitude to Allah and to ask His Pure Essence help
to make us successful in this great challenge. We do the same in the
evening before we go to bed. We get up in the morning with His
remembrance, and we go to bed in the evening with His remembrance, and
each time we ask help from His Pure Essence. What an excellent state
this is for the person who is in this stage of Faith! He never bows to
any tyrant. He never loses himself for the attraction of material gain,
and as the Qur'an reveals about the Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.),
saying:

"... Truly, my prayer and my service of sacrifice, my life and my
death, are (all) for the Cherisher of the Worlds ", (Sura Al-Anam No. 6,
verse 162).

Therefore, the recitation of this Holy Sura may provide the solution to
all problems in our lives. It has plenty of properties which can bring
us to safety. An example is from a narration cited by one of the
companions of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.). He said that in one of the
battles, he was with the Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.).

When the fight became difficult, he (p.b.u.h.) lifted his head and
said: " O' Master of the Day of Judgement! Thee (alone) do we worship
and of Thee (only) we seek help ". At that moment the army of enemies
was defeated and (many of them) were killed while the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
and Muslims won.(27) It is stated in another narration: " When a
difficulty arises for a believing servant, and he recites this Holy
verse, it will become easy for him". (28)


--------------- pg 55 ---------------

" Guide us (O' Lord) on the Straight Path." Commentary : After
confessing his obedience and servitude to Allah, reaching the state of
worship, and asking for help from Him, the first thing that the servant
seeks is His guidance to the Straight Path ', the path of the righteous,
the path of Justice, and the path of Faith and good deeds.

So, he asks the Lord, Who has bestowed on him all of these bounties, to
give him the bounty of guidance', too.

Such a man, in the above stated condition, is a believing one who is
acquainted with the Lordship of his Lord, but it is possible, too, that
suddenly he would cease to receive this bounty because of some component
of wickedness, and, consequently, he would stray from the Right Path.
Therefore, he must ask his Lord, at least ten times a day, to protect
him from any kind of aberration.

Moreover, this Straight Path ', which is the very Divine creed, has
some stages. All people are not on the same level of spiritual
preparedness necessary for attaining these stages. Whatever stages a
person attains, there are still some higher stages above them that a
believing servant might ask Allah to guide him to reach.

Here, a question arises: " Why must we always ask Allah for guidance to
the Straight Path', as if we are being misguided ? ".

Besides, supposing the statement is true about us, the ordinary
believers, but what about the holy Prophet and sinless Imams (p.b.u.th.)
who were the examples of complete human beings ? In answer to this
question, we may say :

Firstly, the fact is that Man is liable to deviate from the Right Path
with each step that he takes as he is walking along the path of
guidance. So, he should rely on Allah and ask Him to keep him firm on
the Straight Path'.

We must not forget that our existence, our being, and all the bounties
which always come to us, are from His Origin. To clarify the matter, we
cite a simple example :

All creatures, including human beings, (from one point of view)
resemble an electric lamp. We see that the light of a lamp, when it is
on, appears to be constant and monotonous. The reason is that the
electrical current flows constantly from a generator to the lamp. The
generator continuously produces some new electrical power, a part of
which reaches the lamp by some connective wires. Our being is similar to
the lamp.

Although it appears as a sustained being, it is, in fact, a continually
renewed being that flows ceaselessly to us from the Original Being, the
Bountiful Creator.

Therefore, as the continually new being reaches us, we need constant
new guidance, too. It is natural that if something wrong or some
barriers manifest themselves in our spiritual connective wires with
Allah; the vices, injustice, wrong doings, etc., will disrupt our
connection with the Origin of guidance. At that moment, we may deviate
from the Straight Path '.

We ask Allah that these barriers be removed and not obstruct our way
that we may remain steadfast along the Straight Path '. Secondly,
receiving guidance' is the same as travelling the path of development'
along which man can gradually promote from lower degrees to higher and
higher ones.

We also know that the path of development is endless and continues
towards infinity'.

So, it is no wonder that even the prophets and sinless Imams
(p.b.u.th.) ask Allah to guide them to the Straight Path ', because the
Absolute Perfection is Allah and all of us, without any exception, are
on the path of perfection, then it is acceptable that they, too, ask Him
for higher promotions.


