Harmonisation of Its Themes
===========================

The speech or writing of a person, however skillful or eloquent he may
be, will not be uniform in all conditions and circumstances. In
particular, the works which appear in the days of any author's first
writings are very different from the works which come after many years
and as the result of much experience and repeated practice; the later
works are almost always better.

But the Qur'an, in that it was sent down in the course of 23 years, and
in that it was revealed in various circumstances and like a long flowing
river passed over various stoney places, rapids, narrows, valleys and
plains, and witnessed many amazing events, it remained forever, like a
spring, clear and fresh.

The unity and harmony of the themes and the style and expression of the
Qur'an are a source for wonder. We see this wonder reach its apex, and
notice in the contents of the Qur'an that many different subjects are
dealt with, but the style and unity of expression remain constant.

It is clear that if someone, when he reached a stage of mastery over a
special subject, shows what he can do, he may display brilliance, but if
he undertakes something in another branch of which he is not a master,
he will not produce any distinctive work. But the Qur'an shines to an
amazing degree in every area.

Scientific Wonders in the Qur'an Although the first and basic aim of
the Qur'an, according to what it says itself, is only to guide man to
the great road of contentment and prosperity in the life of this world,
the world of man, but on the way, in pursuing this aim, it expresses
many truths from human knowledge in the natural sciences, in physiology
and astronomy. And this is itself another great sign of the wonder of
the Qur'an.

For the Prophet, according to the definite testimony of history, had
never studied, grew up in an environment completely devoid of human
knowledge and science (except literature), and was far from the centers
of science of those days - Greece, Rome and Iran. Now let us see some
indications of this wonder.

1. Meteorology is a very new science. The knowledge of former people
about the phenomena of clouds, wind, rain and snow did not go beyond
conjecture and what they could see, and, generally speaking, it had an
air of imaginativeness and chance and was never established on a
scientific basis.

Captains and farmers both had their signs and indications for
forecasting wind and rain, but they did not really understand these
phenomena.

Thus things went on for thousands of years, till, in the 17th century
A.D., the thermometer, and in the 19th century the telegraph, and,
gradually, other things necessary for meteorology were invented and
discovered. In their turn, scientists settled down to research, till, in
the first half of the 20th century, the Norwegian scientist, Byerkness,
succeeded in discovering the general laws of the formation and movements
of clouds and the occurrence of storms and rains in all places.

After him, the extent of discoveries in this science, as in other
areas, progressed: the rain-bearing properties of clouds, how rain is
released from them, the formation and occurrence of hail, matters
relating to thunderbolts and thunder and lightening and storms in
tropical areas, air currents near the surface of the earth, and other
matters, till knowledge reached extensive limits.

But fifteen centuries ago, when the Qur'an told about the winds and the
rain and other phenomena, it was right when it told us about the latest,
newest discoveries of meteorology.

For example, it has now been proved that it is possible for a cloud to
reach saturation point but to yield no rain, and for it to be just
microscopic particles tiny enough to hang suspended in the air and not
to fall and cause rain; however, by means of invisible particles of salt
which are blown by the wind from the surface of the sea it will rain.

Or, something more important; the humidity in the air gathers round the
crystallised snow flakes which lie at high altitudes and which are
scattered by the wind. Eventually small drops and the first rain unite
together, and, as a result of mixing and colliding together in the wind,
they gradually become bigger and bigger, and because of their own
relatively heavy weight fall from the massed clouds. This is what the
Qur'an made clear 15 centuries ago:

"And We send winds for making fruitful, and then We send down water
from the sky, thus We give it unto you to drink of it." (XV;22)

2. Until the invention of the aircraft and the possibility of
high-altitude flying, man's knowledge and experience did not encompass
needles of ice beyond the clouds. Till then no one knew that mountains
of ice-needles existed in the sky above man's heads. But the Qur'an is
very clear when it says:

"He sendeth down from the sky, from mountains therein, hail..."
(XXIV;43)

3. Living things in other worlds. Man, with the help of his knowledge
of space, has set foot on the moon, but the matter of the existence of
living things on other worlds has not proceeded beyond theory, and we
can say that, from many signs, only it is possible that there are living
things such as animals or man on some other planets and stars. But the
Qur'an declares unambiguously:

"And of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and of
what He hath spread out in both of them of animate beings, and for their
gathering together when He willeth, He is All-PowerfuL" (XLII;29)

4. In Surah 36, verse 36, we have:

"Glory be to He Who created all the pairs of what the earth produces,
and of themselves, and of what they know not."

And in Surah 20, verse 53, we read:

"And He sent down water out of the sky, and therewith We have brought
forth various pairs of plants."

In times when man's knowledge did not permit the respected interpreters
of the Qur'an to know that plants and growing things came in pairs and
couples, they interpreted and observed pairing in classes, species or by
form and matter or other philosophical terms which do not exist in the
pages of the Qur'an. But today, on the basis of new research, it has
been discovered that not only are men and animals created in pairs, but
other living things also. One of the most amazing phenomena in the world
is the pairing and fertilizations of plants, which is all explained in
natural science books.


**The Qur'an Makes a Challenge**

Not only from the point of view of eloquence, but also, as we have
seen, in the fields of human ideas and society, and for all levels of
understanding, the Qur'an is a miracle. For rhetoricians it has its
eloquence, for philosophers its wisdom, and for scientists its different
kinds of knowledge. For all these reasons the Qur'an addresses all
people and says: "If you say this book is the word of man, bring its
like and its equal."

"Say: 'If man and jinn banded together to produce the like of this
Qur'an, they would never produce its like, not though they back one
another." (XVII;88)

"Or do they say: 'He has forged it.'? Say: 'Then bring you ten surahs
the like of it, forged; and call upon whom you are able, apart from
Allah, if you speak truly. ' Then if they do not answer you, know that
it has been sent down with Allah's knowledge, and that there is no god
but He." (XI;13-14)

"and if you are in doubt about what We have sent down on Our servant,
then bring a Surah like it." (II;23)

But we see from the testimony of history from then till now no one has
had the courage to do this and produce its like. Of course, during the
time of Muhammad (S.A.) and after his death, some Arabs, like
Musailemah, Sajah and Ibn Abi'l-'Awja', planned to challenge it but they
were not able, and eventually confessed to their incapacity.

In the time of the Prophet (S.A.), the enemies of Islam, who used the
most awful means in their work, torturing the Muslims, laying economic
boycotts on them, plotting to kill Muhammad (S.A.), and so forth, had no
one who could do a simple thing like bringing one surah like the
Qur'an.

In the present day, too, those who spend millions of dollars trying to
destroy Islam would certainly attack it in this inexpensive and easy way
(bringing a surah like the Qur'an) if they could. If they had been able
to do that up to now, it would have been a victory for them and the end
of Islam and the news would have been blown on all the trumpets of the
world's newsmen.

In the end it is necessary to remind ourselves that if we get to know
the Qur'an, or get to know it better and put its great, magnificent and
precise project into action, greatness will be ours, and more. The huge
edifice of our, the Muslims, greatness collapsed when we stopped putting
the commands of this heavenly book into practice.

So we fell down, we were satisfied only with the name of Islam. Our
departed greatness will return when we leave this crooked way and,
starting again, become new Muslims and put the Qur'an at the top of the
sights of our hearts and our wisdom, and make it an example for life, as
the Prophet said: "When calamities encompass you like the darkness of
the night, reach for the Qur'an." (Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 599) (The
Roots of Religion, p. 136-146).


