Protection From Any Alteration
==============================

The transmission of the Qur'an, from the day of its revelation up to
the present day, is flawless. The chapters and verses have been in
constant use amongst Muslims and have been passed on perfectly intact
from one generation to the other. The Qur'an we know today is the same
Qur'an which was revealed to the Prophet some fourteen centuries ago.

The Qur'an does not stand in need of historical proof for its identity
or authenticity, (although history too confirms its validity). Since a
book which claims to be the actual unalterable word of God and attests
to this in its own text, does not need to resort to others to prove its
authenticity. The clearest proof that the Qur'an we have with us today
is the same that was revealed to the Prophet and that no alteration has
taken place in its text is that very superiority which the Qur'an
claimed for itself at the time of its revelation and which still
exists.

The Qur'an says that it is a book of light and guidance, a book which
shows man the truth and reality of existence; it says that it explains
all things, that is, everything necessary for man to live in accordance
with his own natural character; it says that it is the word of God and
challenges man and jinn to produce similar words;

-it invites them to find someone like the Prophet, who could neither
read nor write and grew up in an age of ignorance as an orphan without
instruction; the Qur'an challenges them to find any inconsistency in its
method, Sciences, or laws, such as one might find in any ordinary book.
They obviously cannot for the superiority of the Qur'an remains after
its revelation.

Likewise, the guidance for man contained in the Qur'an is still valid;
it still expounds a complete world view which is in accord with the
purest of intellectual proofs and is the source of man's well being in
this world and in the next. By the benevolence and care shown by the
Creator for His creation in the Book, it still invites man to belief.

The Qur'an cares for the needs of man by giving him a vision of reality
based on Divine Unity. All knowledge and belief spring from this view of
reality. At no point does the Qur'an fail to explain in the most
comprehensive fashion the reality of this oneness. It devotes much
attention to explaining the behavior and transactions expected of the
individual in society and shows how correct action is that which accords
with the natural character and capability (fitrah) of man.

The Qur'an leaves the detailed description of man's behaviour to the
Prophet whose daily life was an example of how man was to apply what was
contained in the Qur'an. Together the Book of God and the example (or
Sunnah) of the Prophet delineated an astoundingly comprehensive
life-pattern for man, namely, the way of living in tune with the reality
which is Islam.

The Qur'an deals precisely with all aspects of individual and social
life and, despite having been revealed in another age, does not contain
the slightest inconsistency or in- compatibility even today. It
describes a din, a comprehensive way of life, whose programme of living
is beyond the imagination of the world's most capable lawyers and
sociologists.

The miracle of the Qur'an has in it clarity and eloquence, rooted, as
it is, in the language of a nation famed for the purity and power of its
language. The Qur'an is a miraculous sun whose light shines far brighter
than the finest poetry of the time, indeed of any age. During the
Islamic conquests of the first century after Hijra, the resulting
admixing of non-Arabic words with the Arabic lessened the purity of
Arabic language used in the Qur'an causing it to disappear from the
every-day speech of the people.

The Qur'an does not merely challenge man by the use of its language but
also by the depth of its meaning. Those familiar with the Arabic
language (both prose and verse writings) are reduced to silence and
astonishment when they attempt to describe it. The Qur'an is neither
poetry nor prose but rather seems to draw qualities from both; it is
more attractive and dazzling than poetry and clearer and more flowing
than prose.

A single verse or phrase from the Qur'an is more illuminating, more
penetrating, and more profound than the complete speech of most eloquent
speakers. The profundity of meaning in the Qur'an remains as miraculous
as ever; its complex structure of beliefs, morals and laws stands as
proof that the Qur'an is the word of God.

Man, and in particular someone who was born and raised in circumstances
similar to those of the Prophet, could never have created such a system;
the Qur'an is a harmonious whole despite having been revealed during
twenty-three years in greatly varying circumstances. God Himself
confirms that the Qur'an has been preserved from change; in chapter XV:9
He says, "Indeed We, even We, reveal the Reminder and indeed We are
truly its guardian," and in chapter (XLI:41-42)

He says, 'for indeed it is an unassailable Book. Falsehood cannot come
to it from before or behind it. (It is) a revelation from the Wise, the
Praise one." Only a divine Book could remain preserved for fourteen
centuries in a world where the enemies of truth and of Islam are
numerous. \* \* \* (Allamah Tabatabai, The Qur'an in Islam, p.
101-103)


**The Glorious Qur'an and exegesis (Tafsir)**

The Science of Qur'anic Commentary and the Different Groups of
Commentators After the death of the Prophet a group of his companions,
including Ubayy ibn Ka'b, 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud, Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah
al-Ansarl, Abu Sa'ld al-Khudrl, 'Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, 'Abd Allah ibn
'Umar, Anas, Abu Hurayrah, Abu Musa, and, above all, the famous 'Abd
Allah ibn 'Abbas, were occupied with the Science of Commentary. Just as
they had heard the Prophet explaining the meanings of the verses, they
would transmit it orally to other trustworthy persons.

The traditions specifically concerned with the subject of Qur'anic
verses number over two hundred and forty; many were transmitted through
weak chains of transmission and the texts of some have been rejected as
incorrect or forged. Sometimes the transmission would include
commentaries based on personal judgments rather than on a narration of
the actual sayings, hadiths, from the Prophet.

The later Sunni commentators considered this kind of commentary as part
of the body of Sayings of The Prophet, since the companions were learned
in the science of Qur'anic commentary. They argued that these companions
had aquired their knowledge of this science from the Prophet himself and
that it was unlikely they would say anything which they themselves had
invented.

There is, however, no absolute proof for their reasoning. A large
proportion of these sayings, or traditions, about the reasons and
historical circumstances of the revelation of verses do not possess an
acceptable chain of narration. It should be noted that many of the
narrators like Ka'b al-Akhbar, were learned companions who had belonged
to the Jewish faith before accepting Islam. Moreover, it should not be
overlooked that Ibn 'Abbas usually expressed the meanings of verses in
poetry.

In one of his narrations over two hundred questions of Nafi' ibn
al-Azraq are replied to in the form of poetry; al-Suyutl in his book,
al-Itqan, related one hundred and ninety of these questions. It is
evident, therefore, that many of the narrations made by the commentators
amongst the companions cannot be counted as actual narrations from the
Prophet himself; therefore, such additional material related by the
companions must be rejected.

The second group of commentators were the companions of the followers
(tabi'un), who were the students of the companions. Amongst them we find
Mujahid, Sa'ld ibn Jubayr, 'Ikrimah and Dahhak. Also from this group
were Hasan al-Basri, 'Ata' ibn Abi Rabah,, 'Ata' ibn Abi Muslim, Abu
al-'Aliyah, Muhammad ibn Ka'b al-Qurazl, Qatadah, 'Atiyah, Zayd ibn
Aslam, Ta'us al-Yamam." The third group were comprised of the students
of the second group, namely, Rabi' ibn Anas, 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Zayd ibn
Aslam, Abu Salih al-Kalbi and others.

The tabi'un sometimes narrated the commentary on a verse as a tradition
of the Prophet or of the companions and, sometimes, they explained its
meaning without attributing a narrator to the source, this they did
especially when there was any doubt as to the identity of the narrator.
The later commentators treat these narrations as traditions of the
Prophet, but count them as mawquf in their science of the levels of
hadiths (that is as a tradition whose chain of narration does not reach
back to the Prophet) .

The fourth group comprised the first compilers of commentaries, like
Sufyan ibn 'Uyaynah, Wah' ibn al-Jarrah, Shuban al-Hajjaj and 'Abd ibn
Humayd; others from this group include Ibn Jarir al-Tabarl, the author
of the famous Qur'anic Commentary. This group recorded the sayings of
the companions and the followers of the companions with a chain of
narrators in their works of commentary; they avoided expressing personal
opinions except, perhaps, Ibn Jarir al-Tabarl who sometimes expressed
his views by indicating his preference when discus- sing two similar
traditions.

The basis of the work of later groups may be traced to this group. The
fifth group omitted the chain of narrators in their writings and
contented themselves with a simple relation of the text of the
traditions. Some scholars regard these commentators as the source of
varying views in the commentaries by connecting many traditions to a
companion or a follower without verifying their validity or mentioning
their chain of narration.

Consequently, confusion has arisen allowing many false traditions to
enter the body of traditions, thus undermining the reputation of this
section of hadith literature. Careful examination of the chains of
transmission of the traditions leaves one in doubt as to the extent of
the deceitful additions and false testimonies. Many conflicting
traditions can be traced to one companion or follower and many
traditions, which are complete fabrications, may be found amongst this
body of narrations.

Thus reasons for the revelation of a particular verse, including the
abrogating and abrogated verses, do not seem to ac- cord with the actual
order of the verses.

No more than one or two of the traditions are found to be acceptable
when submitted to such an examination. It is for this reason that Imam
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who himself was born before this generation of
narrators, said, "Three things have no sound base: military virtues,
bloody battles and the traditions pertaining to Qur'anic commentary."

Imam al-Shafi' relates that only about one hundred traditions from Ibn
'Abbas have been confirmed as valid. The sixth group consists of those
commentators who appeared after the growth and development of the
various Islamic Sciences and each undertook the study of Qur'anic
commentary according to his specialization: al-Zajjaj studied the
subject from the grammatical point of view; al-Wahidi and Abu Hayyan'
investigated the verses by studying the inflection of the verbs, the
vowels and the diacritical points.

There is also commentary on the rhetoric and eloquence of the verses by
al-Zamakhsharii in his work entitled al- Kashshaf. There is a
theological discussion in the "Grand Commentary" of Fakhr al-Dm al-Razi.
The gnosis of Ibn al-'Arabi and 'Abd al-Razzaq al-Kashanl treated in
their commentaries. Other narrators, like al-Tha'lab, record the history
of transmission of the traditions. Some commentators, among them
al-Qurtubl, concentrate on aspects of fiqh (jurisprudence).

There also exists a number-of commentaries composed of many of these
sciences, such as Ruh al-Bayan by Shaykh Isma'il Haqql, Ruh. al-ma'ani
by Shihab al Din Mahmud al-Alusl al-Baghdadl Chara'ib al-Qur'an by Nizam
al-Din al-Nisaburi. This group rendered a great service to the Science
of Qur'anic commentary in that it brought the Science out of a state of
stagnation (characteristic of the fifth group before it), and developed
it into a Science of precise investigation and theory.

However, if one were to examine closely the precision of this group's
research, one would see. that much of its Qur'anic commentary imposes
its theories onto the Qur'an rather than allowing the content of the
verses to speak for themselves. \* \* \*


**The Methods Used by the Shi'ite Cmmentators and their Different
Groupings**

All the groups mentioned above are Sunni commentators. Their method,
used in the earliest commentaries of this period, was based on ijtihad,
that is, the reports of the companions and the followers of the
companions were examined according to certain rules in order to reach an
acceptable understanding of the text.

This resulted in varying opinions amongst those making ijtihad and
caused disorder, contradiction and, even, fabrication to enter into the
body of the traditions. The method employed by the Shi'ite commentators,
however, was different, with the result that the patterning of the
groups was also different.

The Shi'ite commentators in their study of a verse of the Qur'an,
viewed the explanation given by the Prophet as proof of the meaning of
the verse, they did not accept the saying of the companions, or the
followers, as indisputable proof that the tradition was from the
Prophet. The Shiite commentators only recognized as valid an unbroken
chain of narration from the Prophet and through members of his family.
Accordingly, in using and transmitting the verses concerning Qur'anic
commentary, they restricted themselves to the use of traditions
transmitted by the Prophet and by the Imams of the Prophet's family.
This has given rise to the following groups:

The first group comprises those who have learned these traditions from
the Prophet and from the Imams of the Prophet's family, studying and
recording them according to their own method but not in any particular
order. Among them we may mention such scholars as Zararah, Muhammad ibn
Muslim, Ma'ruf and Jarir who were companions of the fifth and sixth
Imams.

The second group comprises the first compilers of the commentaries,
like Furat ibn Ibrahim al-Kufi, Abu Hamzah al-Thumali, Muhammad
al-'Ayyashi, 'Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi and al-Nu'mani who lived between
the second and fourth centuries after HiUrah. The method of this group
was similar to that of the fourth Sunni group of Commentators.

Thus, they avoided any kind of ijtihad or passing of judgment. We
should remember that the Imams of the Prophet's family were living
amongst Muslims and available for questioning (on matters of commentary,
for example) for a period of almost three hundred years. Thus the first
groups were not divided chronologically but rather according to their
relationship with the Imams. There are very few who recorded the
tradition without a chain of transmission.

As an example, we should mention one of the students of al-'Ayyashi who
omitted to record the chains of transmission. It was his work, instead
of the original of al-'Ayyashi which came into common use. The third
group comprises masters of various sciences, like al-Sharif al-Radl who
provided a commentary concerned with Qur'anic language and Shaykh
al-Tusl who wrote a commentary and analysis on metaphysical matters.

Included, too, is Sadr al-DIn al-Shirazl's philosophic work, al-Maybudi
al-Kunabadl's gnostic commentary and 'Abd 'Ah al-Huwayzl's commentary
Nur al-thaqalayn.

Hashim al-Bahrani composed the commentary al-Burhan' and al-Fayd
al-Kashani compiled the work known as al-Safi. There were others who
brought together many different themes to their commentaries, like
Shaykh al-Tabarsi who in his Majma' al-bayan researches different fields
of language, grammar, Qur'an recitation, gnosis of death, after-life and
paradise, and knowledge of the traditions.

(Allamah Tabatabai, The Qur'an in Islam, p. 47-51)


**About the interpretation and cammentators
The Qur'an Possesses Revelation and Exegesis**

We shall discuss the word, exegesis, ta'wil, in relation to three
Qur'anic verses. Firstly, in the verses concerning the implicit
mutashabih and the explicit verses:

"But those in whose hearts is doubt pursue, in truth, that which is
allegorical talking dissension by seeking to explain it. None knows its
explanation except God" (III:7) Secondly, the verses, In truth we have
brought them a scripture which we expound with knowledge, a guidance and
a mercy for a people who believe. Do they await anything but the
fulfillment of it.

(Here the word ta'wil is used connoting the appearance or clarification
of meaning).

"On the day when the fulfillment of it comes, those who are forgetful
of it will say: the messenger of our Lord brought the truth."(VII
:52-53) Thirdly, the verse And this Qur'an is not such as could ever be
invented . . . but they denied that, the knowledge of which they could
not encompass and the interpretation (ta'wil of which had not yet come
to them. Even so it was that those before them deny. Then [X:37-39].see
what was the consequence in the wrongdoers.

In conclusion, we should note that the word exegesis ta'wil comes from
the word awl, meaning a return. As such, ta'wil indicates that
particular meaning towards which the verse is directed. The meaning of
revelation tanzil, as opposed to ta'wil, is clear or according to the
obvious meaning of the words as they were revealed.


