The Meaning of Exegesis, According To the Commentators and Scholars
===================================================================

There is considerable disagreement as to the meaning of exegesis,
ta'wil, and it is possible to count more than ten different views. There
are, however, two views which have gained general acceptance. The first
is that of the early generation of scholars who used the word exegesis,
ta'wil, as a synonym for commentary, or tafstr.

According to this view, all Qur'anic verses are open to ta'wil although
according to the verse, "nobody knows its interpretation (ta'wil) except
God," it is the implicit verses whose interpretation (ta'wil) is known
only to God. For this reason, a number of the early scholars said that
the implicit verses are those with muqatt'ah-letters at the beginning of
the chapter since they are the only verses in the Qur'an whose meaning
is not known to everyone.

This interpretation has been demonstrated in the previous section as
being incorrect, a view which is shared by certain of the late scholars.
They argued that since there is a way of finding out the meaning of any
verse, particularly since the muqattah-letters are obviously not in the
same classification as the implicit verses then the distinction between
the two (muqatta'ah and implicit, mutashabih) is clear.

Secondly, the view of the later scholars is that exegesis refers to the
meaning of a verse beyond its literal meaning and that not all verses
have exegesis; rather only the implicit, whose ultimate meaning is known
only to God. The verses in question here are those which refer to the
human qualities of coming, going, sitting, satisfaction, anger and
sorrow apparently attributed to God and, also, those verses which
apparently ascribe faults to the messengers and Prophets of God (when in
reality they are infallible).

The view that the word exegesis refers to a meaning other than the
apparent one has become quite accepted. Moreover, within the divergence
of opinion amongst scholars, exegesis has come to mean "to transfer" the
apparent meaning of a verse to a different meaning by means of a proof
called ta'wil; this method is not without obvious inconsistencies.
Although this view has gained considerable acceptance, it is incorrect
and cannot be applied to the Qur'anic verses for the following reasons.
Firstly, the verses:

Do they await anything but the fulfilment of it [VII:53]

and:

but they denied that, the knowledge of which they could not encompass
and the interpretation of which had not yet come to them (X:39) indicate
that the whole Qur'an has exegesis, not just the implicit verses as
claimed by this group of scholars. Secondly, implied in this view is
that there are Qur'anic verses whose real meaning is ambiguous and
hidden from the people, only God knowing their real meaning.

However, a book which declares itself as challenging and excelling in
its linguistic brilliance could hardly be described as eloquent if it
failed to transmit the meaning of its own words. Thirdly, if we accept
this view, then the validity of the Qur'an comes under question since,
according to the verse, Why do they not reflect upon the Qur'an, if it
where from other than God they would have found in it many
inconsistencies.

One of the proofs that the Qur'an is not the speech of man is that,
despite having been revealed in widely varying and difficult
circumstances, there is no inconsistency in it, neither in its literal
meaning nor in its inner meaning, and any initial inconsistency
disappears upon reflection. If it is believed that a number of the
implicit verses disagree with the sound, or muhkam, or explicit, verses
this disagreement may be resolved by explaining that what is intended is
not the literal meaning but rather another meaning known only to God.

However, this explanation will never prove that the Qur'an is "not the
speech of man." If by exegesis we change any inconsistency in the
explicit, or sound (muhkam), verses to another meaning beyond the
literal, it is clear that we may also do this for the speech and writing
of man. Fourthly, there is no proof that exegesis indicates a meaning
other than the literal one and that, in the Qur'anic verses which
mention the word exegesis, the literal meaning is not intended.

On three occasions in the story of Joseph, the interpretation of his
dream9 is called ta'wil (exegesis). It is clear that the interpretation
of a dream is not fundamentally different from the actual appearance of
the dream; rather, it is the interpretation of what is portrayed in a
particular form in the dream.

Thus Joseph saw his father, mother and brother falling to the ground in
the form of the sun, the moon and the stars. Likewise, the king of Egypt
saw the seven-year drought in the form of seven lean cows eating the
seven fat cows and also, the seven green ears of corn and the seven dry
ears.

Similarly, the dreams of Joseph's two fellow-inmates in the prison: one
saw himself pouring wine for the king (in the form of the first pressing
of wine), while the second saw himself crucified (in the form of birds
eating from the bread basket on his head). The dream of the king of
Egypt is related in the same chapter, verse 43 and its interpretation,
from Joseph, in verses 47-49 when he says:

you will sow seven years as usual, but what ever you reap leave it in
the ear, all except a little which you will eat. Then after that will
come a year when people will have plenteous crops and then they will
press (meaning wine and oil).

The dream of Joseph's fellow-inmates in the prison occurs in verse 36
of the same chapter. One of the two young men says to Joseph:

"I dreamt that I was carrying upon my head bread which the birds were
eating. "

The interpretation of the dream is related by Joseph in verse 41:

"O my two fellow-prisoners! As for one of you he will pour out wine for
his Lord to drink and as for the other, he will be crucified so that the
birds will eat from his head. "

In a similar fashion, God relates the story of Moses and Khidr in the
chapter "The Cave" [XVIII:71-82]. Khidr made a hole in the boats;
thereafter, killed a boy and, finally, straightened a leaning wall.
After each event, Moses protested and Khidr explained the meaning and
reality of each action which he had carried out on the orders of God;
this he referred to as ta'wil. Thus it is clear that the reality of the
event and the dream-picture which portrayed the event-to-be are
basically the same: the ta'wil, or interpretation, does not have a
meaning other than the apparent one. Likewise God says, talking about
weights and measures:

Fill the measure when you measure and weigh with a right balance, that
is proper and better in the end," (that is, more fitting in the final
determination of the Day of Reckoning) [XVII:35].

It is clear that the word ta'wil used here in respect to the measuring
and weighing refers to fair dealing in business practices. Thus the
ta'wil used in this way is not different from the literal meaning of the
words "measuring" and "weighing"; it merely deepens and extends the
significance of the mundane to include a spiritual dimension. This
spiritual dimension is of significance for the believer who has in mind
the reckoning of the final day together with his own day-to-day
reckoning in the affairs of trade. In another verse God again uses the
word ta'wil:

and if you have any dispute concerning any matter, refer it to God and
the messenger ...that is better and more fitting in the end (IV:59)

It is clear that the meaning of ta'wil and the referring of the dispute
to God and His messenger is to establish the unity of Society and to
show how each action or event in a community has a spiritual
significance. Thus, the ta'wil refers to a tangible ordinary reality and
is not in opposition to the actual text in the verses which refers to
the dispute.

In all, there are sixteen occasions in the Qur'an in which the word
ta'wil is used but on no occasion does it have a meaning other than the
literal text. We may say, therefore, that the word ta'wil is used to
extend the idea expressed to include a further meaning which, (as will
be made clear in the next section), is still in accordance with the
actual word ta'wil occurring in the verse.

Thus, in the light of these examples, there is no reason why we should
take the word ta'wil in the verse about the explicit muhkam, and
implicit, mutashaibih, meanings to indicate "a meaning basically other
than the apparent meaning.


