Supplement
==========

That philosophy was admittedly only a set of conjectures - unencumbered
with any test or proof; but the Muslim philosophers felt no remorse in
treating its views on the system of skies, orbits, natural elements and
other related subjects as the absolute truth with which the exegesis of
the Qur'an had to conform.

The Sufis kept their eyes fixed on esoteric aspects of creation; they
were too occupied with their inner world to look at the outer one. Their
tunnel-like vision prevented them from looking at the things in their
true perspective. Their love of esoteric made them look for inner
interpretations of the verses; without any regard to their manifest and
clear meanings. It encouraged the people to base their explanations on
poetic expressions and to use anything to prove anything.

The condition became so bad that the verses were explained on the-basis
of the numerical values of their words; letters were divided into bright
and dark ones and the explanations were based on that division. Building
castle in the air, wasn't it? Obviously, the Qur'an was not revealed to
guide the Sufis only; nor had it ad- dressed itself to only those who
knew the numerical values of the letters (with all its ramifications);
nor were its realities based on astrological calculations. Of course,
there are traditions narrated from the Prophet and the Imams of
Ahlul-Bayt (A.S.) saying for example:

"Verily the Qur'an has an exterior and an interior, and its interior
has an interior upto seven (or according to a version, seventy)
interiors..". But the Prophet and the Imams gave importance to its
exterior as much as to its interior; they were as much concerned with
its revelation as they were with its interpretation.

We shall explain in the beginning of the third chapter, "The Family of
'Imran", that "interpretation" is not a meaning against the manifest
meaning of the verse. Such an interpretation should more correctly be
called "misinterpretation". This meaning of the word, "interpretation",
came in vogue in the Muslim circles long after the revelation of the
Qur'an and the spread of Islam. What the Qur'an means by the word,
"interpretation", is some- thing other than the meaning and the
significance.

In recent times, a new method of exegesis has become fashionable. Some
people, supposedly Muslims, who were deeply influenced by the natural
sciences (which are based on observations and tests) and the social ones
(that rely on induction), followed the materialists of Europe or the
pragmatists.

Under the influence of those anti-Islamic theories, they declared that
the religion's realities cannot go against scientific knowledge; one
should not believe except that which is perceived by any one of the five
senses; nothing exists except the matter and its properties.

What the religion claims to exist, but which the sciences reject-like
The Throne, The Chair, The Tablet and The Pen-should be interpreted in a
way that conforms with the science; as for those things which the
science is silent about, like the resurrection etc., they should be
brought within the purview of the laws of matter;

the pillars upon which the divine religious laws are based-like
revelation, angel, Satan, prophet- hood, apostleship, imamah (Imamate)
etc.-are spiritual things, and the spirit is a development of the
matter, or let us say, a property of the matter; legislation of those
laws is manifestation of a special social genius, who ordains them after
healthy and fruitful contemplations, in order to establish a good and
pro- gressive society.

They have further said: One cannot have confidence in the traditions,
because many are spurious; only those traditions may be relied upon
which are in conformity with the Book. As for the Book itself, one
should not explain it in the light of the old philosophy and theories,
because they were not based on observations and tests-they were just a
sort of mental exercise which has been totally discredited now by the
modern science.

The best, rather the only, way is to explain the Qur'an with the help
of other Qur'anic verses-except where the science has asserted something
which is relevant to it. This, in short, is what they have written, or
what necessarily follows from their total reliance on tests and
observations.

We are not concerned here with the question whether their scientific
principles and philosophic dicta can be accepted as the foundation of
the Qur'an's exegesis. But it should be pointed out here that the
objection which they have leveled against the ancient exegetes -that
theirs was only an adaptation and not the explanation- is equally true
about their own method; they too say that the Qur'an and its realities
must be made to conform with the scientific theories.

If not so, then why do they insist that the academic theories should be
treated as true foundations of exegesis from which no deviation could be
allowed? This method improves nothing on the discredited method of the
ancients. If you look at all the above-mentioned ways of exegesis, you
will find that all of them suffer from a most serious defect:

They impose the results of academic or philosophic arguments on the
Qur'anic meanings; they make the Qur'an conform with an extraneous idea.
In this way, explanation turns into adaptation, realities of the Qur'an
are explained away as allegories and its manifest meanings are
sacrificed for so-called "interpretations". As we mentioned in the
beginning, the Qur'an introduces itself as the guidance for the worlds
(3:96); the manifest light (4:174), and the explanation of every thing
(16:89).

But these people, contrary to those Qur'anic declarations, make it to
be guided by extraneous factors, to be illuminated by some outside
theories, and to be explained by something other than itself! What is
that "something else"? What authority has it got? And if there is any
difference in various explanations of a verse and indeed there are most
serious differences-which mediator should the Qur'an refer to?

What is the root-cause of the differences in the Qur'an's explanations?
It could not happen because of any difference in the meaning of a word,
phrase or sentence.

The Qur'an has been sent down in plain Arabic; and no Arab (or
Arabic-knowing non-Arab) can experience any difficulty in understanding
it. Also, there is not a single verse (out of more than six thousand)
which is enigmatic, obscure or abstruse in its import; nor is there a
single sentence that keeps the mind wandering in search of its
meaning.

After all, the Qur'an is admittedly the most eloquent speech, and it is
one of the essential ingredients of eloquence that the talk should be
free from obscurity and abstruseness. Even those verses that are counted
among the "ambiguous" ones, have no ambiguity in their meanings;
whatever the ambiguity, it is in identification of the particular thing
or individual from among the group to which that meaning refers.

This statement needs some elaborations:- In this life we are surrounded
by matter; even our senses and faculties are closely related to it. This
familiarity with matter and material things has influenced our mode of
thinking. When we hear a word or a sentence, our mind races to its
material meaning.

When we hear, for example, the words, life, knowledge, power, hearing,
sight, speech, will, pleasure, anger, creation and order, we at once
think of the material manifestations of their meanings. Likewise, when
we hear the words, heaven, earth, tablet, pen, throne, chair, angel and
his wings, and Satan and his tribe and army, the first things that come
into our minds are their material manifestations. Likewise, when we hear
the sentences, "Allah created the universe", "Allah did this", "Allah
knew it", "Allah intended it" or "intends it", we look at these actions
in frame of "time", because we are used to connect every verb with a
tense. In the same way, when we hear the verses:

and with Us is more yet (50:35), . . . We would have made it from
before Ourselves (21:17), . . . and that which is with Allah is best. .
. (62:11), . . . and to Him you shall be brought back (2:28, etc.).

we attach with the divine presence the concept of " place", because in
our minds the two ideas are inseparable. Also, on reading the verses:
And when We intend to destroy a town (17 :16), And We intend to bestow a
favour . . . (28: 5), And Allah intends ease for you (2:185), we think
that the "intention" has the same meaning in every sentence, as is the
case with our own intention and will.

In this way, we jump to the familiar (which most often is material)
meaning of every word. And it is but natural. Man has made words to
fulfill his social need of mutual intercourse; and society in its turn
was established to fulfil the man's material needs. Not unexpectedly,
the words became symbols of the things which men were connected with and
which helped them in their material progress.

But we should not forget that the material things are constantly
changing and developing with the development of expertise. Man gave the
name, lamp, to a certain receptacle in which he put a wick and a little
fat that fed the lighted wick which illuminated the place in darkness.

That apparatus kept changing until now it has become the electric bulb
of various types; and except the name "lamp" not a single component of
the original lamp can be found in it. Likewise, there is no resemblance
in the balance of old times and the modern scales -especially if we
compare the old apparatus with the modern equipment for weighing and
measuring heat, electirc-current's flow and blood-pressure.

And the armaments of old days and the ones invented within our own
times have nothing in common, except the name. The named things have
changed so much that not a single component of the original can be found
in them; yet the name has not changed. It shows that the basic element
that allows the use of a name for a thing is not the shape of that
thing, but its purpose and benefit. Man, imprisoned as he is within his
habitat and habit, often fails to see this reality.

That is why al-Hashawiyyah and those who believe that God has a body
interpret the Qur'anic verses and phrases within the fame-work of the
matter and the nature. But in fact they are stuck with their habit and
usage, and not to the exterior of the Qur'an and the traditions. Even in
the literal meanings of the Qur'an we find ample evidence that relying
on the habit and usage in explanation of the divine speech would cause
confusion and anomaly. For example, Allah says:

Nothing is like a likeness of Him (42:11); Visions comprehended Him
not, and He comprehends (all) visions; and He is the Knower of
subtilities, the Aware (6:73); glory be to Him above what they ascribe
(to Him) (23:91; 37:159).

These verses manifestly show that what we are accustomed to cannot be
ascribed to Allah. It was this reality that convinced many people that
they should not explain the Qur'anic words by identifying them with
their usual and common meanings. Going a step further, they sought the
help of logical and philosophical arguments to avoid wrong deductions.
This gave a foot-hold to academic reasoning in explaining the Qur'an and
identifying the individual person or thing meant by a word. Such
discussions can be of two kinds:

i) The exegete takes a problem emanating from a Qur'anic statement,
looks at it from academic and philosophical point of view, weighs the
pros and cons and with the help of the philosophy, science and logic
decides what the true answer should be. Thereafter, he takes the verse
and fits it anyhow on that answer which, he thinks, is right. The Muslim
philosophers and theologians usually followed this method; but, as
mentioned earlier, the Qur'an does not approve of it.

ii) The exegete explains the verse with the help of other relevant
verses, meditating on them together-and meditation has been forcefully
urged upon by the Qur'an itself-and identifies the individual person or
thing by its particulars and attributes mentioned in the verse. No doubt
this is the only correct method of exegesis. Allah has said:

and We have revealed the Book to you explaining clearly everything
(16:89).

Is it possible for such a book not to explain its own self? Also He has
described the Qur'an in these words:

a guidance for mankind and clear evidence of guidance and
discrimination (between wrong) (2:185);

and He has also said:

and We have sent down to you a manifest light (4:174).

The Qur'an is, accordingly, a guidance, an evidence, a discrimination
between right and wrong and a manifest light for the people to guide
them aright and help them in all their needs. Is it imaginable that it
would not guide them aright in its own matter, while it is their most
important need? Again Allah says:

And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly guide
them onto Our ways (29:69).

Which striving is greater than the endeavour to understand His Book?
And which way is more straight than the Qur'an? Verses of this meaning
are very numerous, and we shall discuss them in detail in the beginning
of the third chapter, The Family of 'Imran. Allah taught the Qur'an to
His Prophet and appointed him as the teacher of the Book:

The Faithful Spirit has descended with it upon your heart that you may
be of the warners, in plain Arabic language (26 :193-4);

and We have revealed to you the Reminder that you may make clear to men
what has been revealed to them, and that haply they may reflect ( 16:
44);... an Apostle ... who recites to them His communications and
purifies them, and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom (62:2).

And the Prophet appointed his progeny to carry on this work after him.
It is clear from his unanimously accepted tradition:

I am leaving behind among you two precious things; as long as you hold
fast to them you will never go astray after me: The Book of Allah and my
progeny, my family members; and these two shall never separate from each
other until they reach me (on) the reservoir.

And Allah has confirmed, in the following two verses, this declaration
of the Prophet that his progeny had the real know- ledge of the Book:

Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanliness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying(33:33);

Most surely it is an honoured Qur'an, in a Book that is hidden; None do
touch it save the purified ones (56 :77-79).

And the Prophet and the Imams from his progeny always used this second
method for explaining the Qur'an, as may be seen in the traditions that
have been narrated from them on exegesis, some of which will be quoted
in this book in appropriate places. One cannot find a single instance in
their traditions where they might have taken help of an academic theory
or philosophical postulate for explaining a verse.

The Prophet has said in a sermon: "Therefore, when mischiefs come to
confuse you like the segments of darkened night, then hold fast to the
Qur'an; as it is the intercessor whose intercession shall be granted;
and a credible advocate; and whoever keeps it before him, it will lead
him to the Garden; and whoever keeps it behind, it will drive him to the
Fire; and it is the guide that guides to the best path; and it is a book
in which there is explanation,

particularization and recapitulation; and it is a decisive (world), and
not a joke; and there is for it a manifest (meaning) and an esoteric
(one); thus its apparent (meaning) is firm, and its esoteric (one) is
knowledge; its exterior is elegant and its interior deep; it has (many)
boundaries, and its boundaries have (many) boundaries; its wonders shall
not cease, and its (unexpected marvels shall not be old. There are in it
the lamps of guidance and the beacon of wisdom, and guide to knowledge
for him who knows the attributes.

Therefore, one should extend his sight; and should let his eyes reach
the attribute; so that one who is in perdition may get deliverance, and
one who is entangled may get free; because meditation is the life of the
heart of the one who sees, as the one having a light (easily) walks in
darkness; therefore, you must seek good deliverance and (that) with
little waiting .

'Ali (a.s.) said, inter alia, speaking about the Qur'an in a sermon:
"Its one part speaks with the other, and one portion testifies about the
other."

This is the straight path and the right way which was used by the true
teachers of the-Qur'an and its guides, may Allah's blessings be on them
all! We shall write, under various headings, what Allah has helped us to
understand from the honoured verses, by the above- mentioned method. We
have not based the explanations on any philosophical theory, academic
idea or mystical revelation.

We have not put into it any outside matter except a fine literary point
on which depends the understanding of Arabic eloquence, or a
self-evident or practical premises which can be understood by one and
all.


