Reading Through the Glorious Quran Noor Al-qur'an
=================================================

**Sura Al-Fatihah**

In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful Contents of the Sura
The Holy phraseIn The Name of Allah,The Beneficent,The Merciful' /
bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim / is, in fact, mentioned both at the
onset of the Qur'an and at the beginning of every Sura, except Sura 9,
(Sura Taubah - Repentance).

And, since the purpose of Allah's Word, i.e. the whole Qur'an, is to
guide people; as Sura Al-Ma'idah, No. 5, verses 15-16 say : "...Indeed,
there has come to you a light and a clear Book from Allah ", " With it
Allah guideth him who follows His pleasure to the ways of peace and
safety ..."; therefore, this guidance, being a grant and a fundamental
principle, begins with Allah's Holy Name.

This Sura, among all Suras of the Qur'an, has an extraordinary radiance
which originates from the following merits : 1. The Tone of the Sura :
This Sura, The Opening, in comparison with other Suras of the Qur'an
regarding its tone and melody, has a particular style which is clearly
different and extraordinary.

The other Suras contain instructions from Allah, Who gives commands and
admonishments to His servants, but, in this Sura, His words are uttered
on behalf of the servants. In other words, in this Sura, Allah has
taught His servants how to supplicate and speak to Him, simply and
without a mediator.

2. Al-Fatihah, the Basis of the Qur'an :

It is narrated that the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) has said : " By the
One, in Whose hand is my soul, Allah has not sent down a similar Sura to
this Sura (Al-Fatihah), neither in the Turah, nor in the Gospel, nor in
the Psalms, nor even in the Qur'an, and it is Umm-ul-Kitab "; (1) which
means that it is the basis and origin of all excellence.

In fact, besides referring to the Resurrection, this Sura presents
facts concerning the Unity of the Divine Essence, Unity of Attributes,
Unity of Divine Acts, and Unity of Worship. It is the essence of the
whole meaning of the Qur'an.

It is narrated from Hadrat Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) that :

" All secrets of Allah are in Divine Books; and the contents of all
those Divine Books are comprised in the Qur'an;and what is found in the
Qur'an is condensed in Sura Al-Fatihah, and what is in Al-Fatihah is
gathered in /bismillah /, and what is in / bismillah / is concentrated
in /b/, (the first letter of Bism-il-lah ' )..."

(2) Based on the entirety of great commentators' statements, it is
understood that this tradition indicates clearly the importance of both
the Holy Qur'an and /bismillah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim/ in which science and
knowledge, from the beginning to the end, is comprised. The interpreter
and elucidator of these sciences is the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.), and
after him there are his true vicegerents including Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali
(a.s.). (3) 3. Al-Fatihah, Magnificent Honour of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
:

Sura Al-Fatihah, more so than the other Suras in the Holy Qur'an, was
revealed to the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) as a great bounty. It stands on
a par with the whole Qur'an. The seven verses in the Sura sum up the
whole Qur'an : " And We have bestowed upon thee the Seven Oft-repeated
(verses) and the Grand Qur'an ", ( Sura Al-Hijr, No. 15, verse 87 ).

This meaning is also referred to in a narration from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen
Ali (a.s.) quoting the Prophet's (p.b.u.h.) tradition who said :"
Verily, Allah, the Exalted, has bestowed (His) favours on me
particularly for The Opening ' (Al-Fatihah) and has positioned it on a
par with the whole Grand Qur'an, and surely Fatihat-ul-Kitab (the
Opening of the Qur'an) is the dearest (item) in the treasures of the
Arsh, (Throne of Heaven) ". (4) 4. The Importance of its Recitation :

The recitation of this Sura, because of its extreme importance, is
frequently emphasized in Islamic traditions and narrations.

As for its virtue, it is narrated from the holy Prophet(p.b.u.h.) that:
" The reward of any Muslim who recites the Sura Opening ', is like that
of a person who has recited two thirds of the Qur'an, and so much reward
would he receive as if he has given every believing Muslim, man or
woman, a free will offering ". (5) 5. The Titles of the Sura :

There are ten titles given to this Sura, as taken from Islamic
narrations and commentary books, thus: Fatihat-ul-Kitab, Umm-ul-Kitab,
Umm-ul-Qur'an, Sab-ul-Mathani, Al-Wafiyah, Al-Kafiyah, Ash-Shafiyah,
Al-Asas, As-Salat, and Al-Hamd. (6)

--------------- pg 36 ---------------

\* \* \* Sura Al-Fatihah (The Opening) No. 1 (Verses 1-7)

1. " In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful."
2. " (All) praise is (only) Allah's, the Lord of the Worlds."
3. " The Beneficent, The Merciful."
4. " Master of the Day of Judgement."
5. " Thee (alone) do we worship and of Thee (only) do we seek help."
6. " Guide us (O' Lord) on the Straight Path."
7. " The path of those upon whom Thou hast bestowed Thy bounties,
not (the path) of those inflicted with Thy wrath, nor (of those) gone
astray."


--------------- pg 37 ---------------

1. " In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful." Commentary
:

It is a custom among most people of the world to recite the name of one
of their great and very beloved personalities that the worthiness of
their work might be elevated. That is, they relate that work to that
personality from the very beginning of their endeavour.

Among all beings, the One Who is eternal is only Allah, and, therefore,
everything and every activity should begin with His Holy Name. It should
be enveloped in His Light, and help should be always asked only from
Him. So, in the first verse of the Qur'an, we recite
Bism-illah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim', ( In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent,
The Merciful ).

This action should not be done only with the tongue, but it should be
done truly and meaningfully, because this kind of connection with Him
sets work in the right direction and keeps it far from any deviation.
For this very reason, such a work will certainly be successful and
blessed.

The holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.), in a tradition, has said : " Any important
work that begins without mentioning / bismillah /, will remain invalid.
" (7) After narrating this tradition, Hadrat Aeir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali
(a.s.) added: " For every action that a person wants to do, he/she
should recite / bismillah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim /, which means that he/she
begins the action with the Name of Allah, and every action that begins
with the Name of Allah is blessed. " (8) On the excellence and
importance of / bism-il-lah /, it is narrated from Ali-ibn-Musa-r-Rida
(a.s.), who has said thus: "

(The holy phrase) Bism-il-lah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim' is closer to the
Exalted Name of Allah' than the pupil is to the white of the eye ". (9)
Again, Ibn-Abbas narrates from the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) thus:

"As soon as a teacher tells a child to say
Bism-il-lah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim' and the child says it, Allah records
immunity (from fire) for the child,his or her parents and the teacher".
(10) Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said: " No Holy Book ever came down from
heaven but that it began with Bism-il-lah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim' ". (11) In
Khisal' by Shaykh Saduq it is cited that Imam Baqir (a.s.) has said:
"... When we begin an action, great or small, it is appropriate to
recite /bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim/ and that action may be blessed
". (12) In short, the stability and permanence of an action is due to
this very relation to Allah.

The phrase / bism-il-lah / at the start of the Sura, teaches us to seek
the help of Allah from His pure perfect Essence when we begin any
action. That is why Allah, the Exalted, in the first verses revealed to
the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) instructed him to ِ initiating the
proclamation of Islam ِ perform this great task with the Name of Allah:
" Proclaim in the Name of your Lord...",( Sura Al-Alaq, No.96, verse 1
); and the words of Noah (a.s.) to his followers, at the time of the
Flood are: " So he said: Embark ye on the Ark, in the Name of Allah,
whether it moves or be at rest! ... " ( Sura Hud, No. 11, verse 41 ).

Again, Soloman's letter to the Queen of Sheba begins, thus: " It is
from Soloman, and is (as follows):In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent,
The Merciful' ", ( Sura An-Naml, No. 27, verse 30 ).

Based on the same principle, all of the Suras of the Holy Qur'an,
(except Sura At-Taubah, No. 9) begin with /bism-il-lah/ (13)in order to
pursue the essential aim of guiding man and leading him to prosperity
with success, far from getting a taste of defeat.

In any event, when we begin our work with reliance upon the Supreme
Power of Allah, Whose Power is above all power, we feel, psychologically
speaking, far more powerful; therefore, we may be more confident. We may
try more, be more persevering, and more courageous in challenging with
difficulties, more hopeful, and, similarly, our intentions and the
essence of our actions may be more purified. At the time of beginning
any affair, reciting the Name of Allah is the secret to its success.

To whatever extent we further explain this verse, it will still be seen
insufficient, because, according to a narration, Hadrat Ali (a.s.),
regarding the commentary of the verse, talked to Ibn-Abbas from the
beginning of a night until the next morning, but it was only for the
commentary of /b/, the first letter of
/bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim/.

(14) \* \* \* Explanation : Is the Phrase Bism-il-lah' a Part of Each
Sura ? Almost all Islamic scholars unanimously hold the opinion that /
bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim/ is, as was stated before, a part of Sura
Al-Fatihah and, also, of the other Suras of the Qur'an (except Sura
At-Taubah, No. 9). In essence, the inclusion of /bism-il-lah/ at the
beginning of all Suras of the Holy Qur'an, except the above mentioned
one,is a vital piece of evidence bearing witness to this very fact, and
the belief is so firm that no change has been made in the Qur'an and
nothing has been added to it since it was revealed to the Prophet of
Islam (p.b.u.h.).

Muawiyat-ibn-Ammar, one of the companions of Imam Sadiq (a.s.), said
that he had asked the Imam whether he should say
/bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim / at the beginning of Sura Al-Fatihah
when he stood for prayer, and he (a.s.) replied: " Yes ". He had
questioned him (a.s.), again, as to if he should recite /bism-il-lah/
when Sura Al-Fatihah ended and before reciting the next Sura.

Then, Imam Sadiq (a.s.), again, answered: " Yes ". (15) Dar Qutni, a
Muslim learned researcher, according to a sound document, narrates from
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) that someone asked him (a.s.):" What is
As-Sab-al-Mathani (Seven Verses)?" " It is Sura Al-Hamd ",he (a.s.)
answered. The man said: " Sura Al-Hamd consists of six verses ". He
(a.s.) replied: " Bism-illah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim ' is also one verse. "

(16) Moreover, Muslims have always preserved the practice of reciting /
bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim / at the beginning of every Sura ( except
Sura 9 ) when reciting the Holy Qur'an, and it has been proven, on
numerous accounts, that the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) used to recite it,
too.

It has been said that Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) was asked to say
whether / bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim / was a part of Sura
Al-Fatihah. He (a.s.) answered: " Yes, the Messenger of Allah used to
recite it and considered it one verse (of the verses) of the Sura, and
he said that Fatihat-ul-Kitab (The Opening) is the same as
Sab-al-Mathani ' (seven verses) "

(17) Allah, the Most Inclusive Name of God The term / ism / in the
phrase / bism-il-lah /, as men of letters in Arabic literature say, is
originally derived from / sumuww / with the meaning of height,
elevation'. The reason why any noun' is called by an appellation ' is
that after choosing to call a noun' by the particular given name' (ism),
the hidden meaning of the expression appears, and the sense of the name'
is elevated, therefore forsaking meaninglessness.

In the phrase / bism-il-lah /, the word Allah is the most complete and
comprehensive name among the Lord's many names. This is because each of
Allah's names, which are found in the Holy Qur'an, as well as in other
Islamic sources, truly reflects one particular aspect of Allah's
Attributes. In other words, the only name that refers to all of His
Attributes of Glory and Beauty, is Allah. That is why other names are
often used as modifiers for the word Allah'.

For example, " Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful",(Sura Al-Baqarah,
No. 2,verse 226), refers to Allah's forgiveness; " ...Allah heareth and
knoweth all things ", (No. 2, verse 227) shows His being well-acquainted
with what is audible and what comes to pass, respectively; " And Allah
sees well all that you do", (Sura Al-Hujurat, No. 49, verse 18) states
that He has information on every thing that is done by anyone; " Surely
Allah is He Who gives (all) sustenance, the Lord of Power, steadfast
(for ever) ", (Sura Ath-Thariyat, No. 51, verse 58) points to His giving
sustenance to all creatures and, at the same time, discloses that He is
powerful and firm in His actions.

And, finally, Sura Al-Hashr, No. 59, verses 23,24 reveals some other
Attributes of Allah. The terms Creator ' and Evolver ' are suggestive of
His creativeness and inventiveness, and Bestower of Forms ' indicates
His giving shapes: " Allah is He, than Whom there is no other god;ِthe
Sovereign, the Holy One, the Source of Peace (and Perfection), the
Guardian of Faith, the Preserver of Safety, the Exalted in Might, the
Irresistible, the Supreme (in creating all creatures)... ."

He is Allah, the Creator, the Evolver, the Bestower of Forms, to Him
belong the Most Beautiful Names... ." Another piece of evidence which is
a clear indication that this Name, Allah, is all-inclusive is that the
acceptance of Faith, in Islam, is possible only by reciting the
sentence: / la ilaha illalah / " There is no god, but Allah "; and each
of the other phrases such as: All-Knowing ' or Creator ', or Bestower of
Sustenance ', and the like, alone, is not sufficient enough to proclaim
as evidence of Monotheism in Islam.

And, that is why in religions other than Islam, the God of Muslims is
referred to as Allah ', because it is only Muslims who use Allah ' to
refer to what they do worship. \* \* \* Allah's General and Specific
Mercy:

The words ar-Rahman' (The Beneficent) and ar-Rahim' (The Merciful) are
adjectives, both derived from ar-Rahmah' (Mercy).

The former word, the Beneficent, as it is popularly recognized among
some commentators, refers to the General Mercy of Allah which is
bestowed upon all creatures, among them are the believers and the
disbelievers, good-doers and evildoers. And, as we can see, the Divine
bounties of life are distributed everywhere and all human beings enjoy
the endless merits therein. This is their sustenance. They draw it out
of the abundant blessings encompassing the whole world of existence.

The word ar-Rahim' (The Merciful) refers to that Specific Mercy that is
endowed upon the believing, obedient servants alone. The believers,
because of their true belief, good actions, and faithful active
obedience, deserve this special, exclusive mercy, of which the
disbelievers are deprived.

The particular fact ratifying this topic is that the word Rahman is
always used in the Qur'an with the meaning of an infinite form of mercy,
which is a sign of its generality, while the word Rahim is sometimes
used with the meaning of a finite form, which is a sign of its
specificity such as: "... And He is full of Mercy to the Believers ",
(Sura Al-Ahzab, No. 33, verse 43). And it is sometimes used in an
infinite form such as in Sura Al-Fatihah.

A narration from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: " Allah is the God of all
things and is Beneficent to all His creatures, and He is Merciful,
especially to the believers." (18) Therefore, at the moment that we
initiate any action, when we begin with the Name of Allah, we must seek
His Mercy, General and Specific Mercy, both.

It is interesting to note that this power, which has a broad concept
much the same as gravitational pull, and has the ability to draw hearts
closer together, is the very Attribute of Mercy. This Attribute of Mercy
is the very means by which men can attain a close relationship with the
Creator, also.


