Introduction
============

***In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful***

The unity of the Islamic nation is, undoubtedly, a pleasant, idealistic
and desirable concept that has been advised and emphasized in the
original documents of Islam: the Qur’an and the narrations
[*hadith*s]*.*

Like many other words such as science [*‘ilm*], Imamate, caliphate,
wisdom [*hikmah*], and piety, the meaning of the word *hadith* has
gradually changed and deviated to the extent that now it may mean
something quite different from what it was originally meant to convey.

Approximation [*taqrib*] i.e., closeness of the Islamic sects, denotes
the following ideas, whether we desire it or not:

a. Keeping silent in the presence of opponents, and refusing to engage
in any scholarly debate with them.

b. Believing that every religion is right.

c. Accepting that the followers of *Imamiyyah* school of thought are not
the only people who will be saved in the hereafter.

d. Saying there is a need to review some of the points in the Shi‘ah
doctrine and those in the religious texts.

e. Agreeing that various Muslim schools of thought stem from the
independent judgements of the *‘ulama’*, viz. their *ijtihad*.

f. Confirming all the Companions [*sahabah*] as righteous.

Those who hold the above ideas say that “Right” cannot be monopolized by
any specific group because it is distributed among all the sects with
each entitled to a share. The dictum “the saved group” cannot apply to
one particular sect; all ideological differences stem from some sort of
desirable personal judgment, viz. *ijtihad*, made on the basis of
religious texts. We, the Shi‘ah, should, therefore, avoid calling other
ideologies “false” or “deviated”. Where there is a difference of
opinion, we should remain silent and accept that others are also right.

We should not call them “malicious” or “those who devise a secret plan”;
the Shi‘ah community should forget all feelings of enmity towards
opponents, because these feelings are utterly undesirable. They say that
there is no disagreement between our doctrines and great juridical
pillars; the disagreement on Imamate is merely a difference of
applicability. Those who claim the above, say, “We do not reject the
idea of Imamate, and we have religious proof as to who should occupy the
rank of Imamate and Caliphate. Yet, there is no use arguing over the
issue of succession to the Prophet (S) these days; it does not concern
us what others did or did not.

But as we understand it, our texts take approximation to mean:

a. Creating a peaceful symbiosis among the Islamic sects and schools of
thought.

b. Ensuring tension-free social relations.

c. Reducing tensions in order to prevent any sedition, social and
religious unrest, maintain a peaceful and secure life, and
simultaneously safeguard inter-sectarian beliefs and religious
conventions.

d. Avoiding any sensitive issue that might harm the religious or worldly
affairs of the Shi‘ah community.

These will certainly help protect Islam and not be grist to the enemies’
mill. When we take for granted the fact that there are differences of
opinion among Muslims, we do not imply that we consent to tensions and
disruptions within the Islamic society, because such occurrences will
serve the interest of the enemies of Islam. Difference of opinions and
occurrence of clashes are two separate issues. It is tension along with
strife, and not the ideological differences discussed in an entirely
scholarly framework that harms the social relations of Muslims.

When I first came to know Dr. ‘Isam through the internet and witnessed
his discussion with the biased Wahhabi ‘Uthman al-Khamis, I was
fascinated by his method. His serene and solemn voice and his polite and
systematic dialogue made his particular manner of discussion more
interesting.

Sometime later I discovered that Dr. ‘Isam himself used to be a biased
Wahhabi, conducting anti-Shi‘ah activities in Yemen and Saudi Arabia,
but with God’s favor, later on, converted to Shi‘ism. He now attempts to
debate with his former co-religionists. He also has a book, *al-Minhaj
al-Jadid wa’l-Sahih fi’l-Hiwar ma‘a’l-Wahhabiyyin*, on ways and methods
of conducting discussions with Wahhabis. It was through a friend that I
came to know Dr. ‘Isam, and *A Strife-free* *Dialogue* commenced its
documentation after a few sessions of in-depth discussions with him.

The author mainly aims to establish a suitable method of communication
with Wahhabis to familiarize them with Shi‘ism, and to prepare a proper
ground for their conversion to the school of thought of the Household of
the Prophet, peace be upon them.

Also, he believes that a group of the Wahhabis—those who are not makers
of mischief or mercenaries of the colonialists—will adhere to the truth
once they know it, just as he did.

By approximation and closeness of the Islamic sects, Dr. ‘Isam means a
gradual progression towards understanding, consequent removal of tension
and hope for a global Shi‘ism. The present book is in fact a prologue to
his detailed book *Rihlati min al-Wahhabiyyah il’l-Ithna ‘Ashariyyah.*

The present book is not a word-by-word translation of the book
*al-Minhaj al-Jadid*; rather, it is both a translation and an edition
done under the supervision of the author himself. The following are
examples of the editing carried out:

a. Some repetitive points were deleted.

b. Some long sentences were summarized.

c. Modifications were made to fit the book in the culture of Persian
native speakers.

d. Long and lengthy footnotes were moved and included in the text.

e. Key words suitable to the writer’s intention were chosen. For
example, certain words and phrases such as “understanding” and “peaceful
symbiosis” were used instead of “approximation” or *taqrib* so as to
avoid ambiguity. All this was done after the writer was consulted.

The writer has, throughout the book, used the phrase “*Madhhab al-Ithna
‘Ashariyyah*” demanding that the same should be used. He believes that
Wahhabis are less sensitive to this phrase. Besides, the words “Shi‘ism”
and “Shi‘ah” are wider in scope, and cover other sects that the
Imamiyyah consider rejected. In rendering the text into Persian, I have,
however, used “Shi‘ism”, “Shi‘ah”, “Imamiyyah”, “Imami Shi‘ism” and
“Twelver Shi‘ism” to introduce a variety of terms; however, I would like
to say that I have always meant the “*Ithna ‘Ashari Madhhab*” and
“*Twelver Shi‘ah*”*.*

May God’s blessing be on the one who follows guidance when he finds it.

Qum, 2003
*Cultural Affairs Department*
Ahl al-Bayt (*‘a*) World Assembly


