How to Present the Imamiyyah School of Thought to the Wahhabis
==============================================================

In the book “*Rihlati min al-Wahhabiyyah ila al-Ithna ‘Ashariyyah*”, I
explained the reason as to why I left Wahhabism even though I used to
lead prayers in a Wahhabi mosque myself. In the present book, however, I
attempt to clarify the facts and peculiarities of the Twelver Shi‘ah,
Imamiyyah, in a manner that will set a Wahhabi’s confused mind right,
and give him a clear understanding of the Imamiyyah faith. So long as
the confusions are not settled, any discussion with the Wahhabis will be
barren.

The Imamyyiah faith, I believe, should be introduced to a Wahhabi at
three essential levels, duly sequenced. If done otherwise it will be
impossible to treat his mental perplexity or make him understand the
relevant facts and peculiarities.

The Wahhabis should also understand that because they have not heeded
the three immediately-linked stages (explained below), they have drifted
away from the method which the Sunnis follow when investigating the
Imamiyyah school. This, in turn, has resulted in an entirely different
image from the one the Sunni forerunners had of Shi‘ism.

The present research gains further importance because no scientific
framework has yet been offered for the proper method of discussion with
the Wahhabis nor has there been one to show why their approach differs
from the one the Sunnis followed when confronting other Islamic schools
with whom they had sharp differences.

I have no doubt, however, that differences stem from the dissimilarity
inherent in these two approaches. There is evidently a close link
between the method that the Wahhabis advocate and their conception of
the Imamiyyah. Therefore, the application of a non-scientific
procedure—one containing invisible errors—will result in a distortion
and falsification of the Imamiyyah’s real beliefs.

We cannot grasp how important research methodology is in depicting and
presenting the realities of Shi‘ism, unless we take up a scientific
method that contrasts the Sunnis’ conception of the Shi‘ahs with that of
the Wahhabis.

It is apt for an objective researcher examining the Imamiyyah school of
thought to make a distinction between the school itself and the
erroneous methods that lead to the misunderstanding of the realities of
Shi‘ism. We ought to remember that these two are different. This is the
point where “the proper method of doing research on the Imamiyyah school
of thought” acquires value.

Our method of framing the peculiarities of the Imamiyyah Shi‘ism will
move through three stages, the immediate pacing of which ought to be
observed if we desire to keep away from the pitfalls into which Wahhabis
have fallen while displaying the Shi‘ah peculiarities. The three stages
that ought to be followed are:

Stage one: an understanding of the Imamiyyah’s link
---------------------------------------------------

In this stage we examine the reasons why the Wahhabis stick to their
study of the Imamiyyah’s origin, and the mistake they make in
identifying the Imamiyyah with the extremists, the *Ghulat*. The two
major factors contributing to the above mistakes are:

1. The Wahhabis’ lack of knowledge;

2. The Wahhabi’s method of study.

The first factor itself stems from three other causes:

a) Not understanding what *Ghulat* means;

b) Not understanding what the Twelver Shi‘ism means;

c) Being unaware of the Immayyiah’s position towards the *Ghulat.*

The second factor, too, stems from two causes:

a) The Wahhabis’ mode of thinking;

b) The Wahhabi’s with the Sunnis’ approach of treating the Twelver
Shi‘ism.

Stage two: a meticulous understanding of the Imamiyyah faith
------------------------------------------------------------

The four significant facts to be analyzed here are:

1. Divinity and Prophethood as the Imamiyyah views them;

2. The reality of the *shari‘ah* and religious injunctions from the
Imamiyyah’s viewpoint;

3. The reality of the goals of the Imamiyyah faith;

4. The purport of some common expressions used by the Imamiyyah.

Stage three: the Imamiyyah’s roots
----------------------------------

The points to be studied here are:

1 The Shi‘ah’s source of Jurisprudence;

2. Successorship to the Prophet (S); Imamate;

3. The Imamiyyah’s identity;

4. Advent of the Imamiyyah: source and causes.

Having finished these three stages, the reader shall enter the final
stage and begin investigating the particularities of the Imamiyyah.

### Particularities of the Imamiyyah

These particularities, though a part of stage two, are knowingly raised
at this stage since they are the last points the Wahhabis can understand
in regard to Shi‘ism. There are three particularities which consist of
the following:

1. A positive Twelver Shi‘ah believes in the members of the Household of
the Prophet [*Ahl-al-Bayt (‘a)*];

2. The Imamiyyah’s realistic view on the Companions of the Prophet (S);

3. The Imamiyyah’s views concerning the Twelfth Imam’s (*‘a*)
occultation.

These are the procedures to conduct research on the Imamiyyah. The
methods and their strict sequencing, I repeat, is a must when presenting
the Twelver Shi‘ah faith to the Wahhabis.[^1]

The pyramid I have sketched below lucidly expounds all the earlier
stages. The pyramid clearly shows our method of introducing Shi‘ism; it
also requires us to go through the first stage, i.e. the Shi‘ah link,
before the second one. Stage one is where we attempt to cure the disease
of identifying Shi‘ism with the *Ghulat*. The first stage has been
placed at the top to emphasize its importance. Any miscalculation will
bring a downfall. Stage one is what the Wahhabis always have before
their eyes.

### The Imamiyyah Pyramid

A reconsideration of the pyramid highlights the stage of secondary
importance, ranked next to the peak, i.e. a careful examination of the
Imamiyyah faith. This stage should not be displaced: it should not come
before the peak nor should it be presented after the third stage.

Then comes stage three, i.e. the roots of the Imamiyyah, the third in
importance. Each stage is inclusive of facts that need to be examined in
their proper places.

The final stage is the particularities of the Imamiyyah. This denotes
that a thorough understanding of the traits and particular features of
the Imamiyyah faith is dependent on a survey of the previous stages.
This pyramid shows the hierarchy of importance.

We have placed our first stage of discussion at the peak to remind the
reader of the strong influence it has over other levels, and “the
reality of divinity and prophethood as viewed by the Imamiyyah” at the
head of the second level to explain that an understanding of other
realities is subject to a thorough and correct understanding of this
very fact. This is the stage insisting on a clear separation of the rank
of divinity from that of serving God, and the different plane the
creatures occupy from the station of the Creator.

The point to be made here is that “the reality of the Imamate” and “the
occultation of the twelfth Imam (*‘a*)” are two issues admittedly
transcending the position they have been placed at in the pyramid. This
is because my past experience with the Wahhabism has taught me that a
Wahhabi is unable to comprehend these two realities, unless he passes
through the previous stage of study. As long as he has not, he will not
easily understand these delicate truths. This explanation will bar the
illusion that I may have desired to downgrade the two issues of the
Imamate and the Occultation of the twelfth Imam (*‘a*).

The vertical lines joining the peak and the base denote that there is a
close link between the various stages of investigation and the existing
realities, that each layer is generated by the one before it, and that
there is a need to conduct a step-by-step research.

The stages depicted above are coherent, pointing to the indivisibility
of the Imamiyyah beliefs and realities signifying that the investigator
should take all the Imamiyyah realities as a coherent, unified whole,
made up of identical constituents.

The realities and the particularities should never be studied
individually—separated from other facts—otherwise it will be impossible
to appreciate the grand and angular spirit this coherent system
embodies. Perhaps the perilous error the Wahhabis commit when
investigating the Shi‘ism is that they place the Shi‘ah belief system
and realities in isolation.

The pyramid also exhibits a succession and a sequence of the topics of
discussion. That is, each stage is both a prelude to the next debate and
a conclusion of the preceding one, somehow denoting that only belief in
the first reality results in a belief in the second reality.

The horizontal lines of the pyramid also signal that each stage requires
a comprehensive study, and it should not be mingled with the one
following it. We cannot expect to enter the second stage and arrive at a
proper understanding after having made an imperfect study of the
previous level.

The sharp peak and the broad base of the pyramid reminds us that a
mistake, or a slip, expands and broadens in scope as it progresses,
however slight it may be at the beginning.

[^1]: This is the scheme I have worked out in order for the Wahhābīs to
acquire a sound knowledge of the Shī‘ism. My previous experience with
Wahhābism clearly showed me that unless the disease of identifying the
Shī‘ism with Ghulāt is cured and the issues of divinity, Prophecy,
sharī‘ah (precepts of religion), Shī‘ah sources of jurisprudence, the
occultation of the Twelfth Imām (‘a) are made clear meticulously and in
detail, it will be impossible for a Wahhābī to appreciate the reality of
the Prophet’s (S) succession and the Imamate. This is why I placed
“Imamate” and “Occultation” in the final stage. This explanation will
bar the illusion that I may have downgraded the issues of the Imamate
and Occultation.


